pmcNucleic Acids ResNucleic Acids Res4narnarNucleic Acids Research0305-10481362-4962Oxford University PressPMC13122177PMC13122177.113122177131221774204923910.1093/nar/gkag375gkag3751Genome Integrity, Repair and ReplicationAcademicSubjects/SCI00010Emergence and evolution of chimeric pseudogenes (φgenes) contribute to genetic and functional diversity of the human genome
JadhavAmruta R
BRIC-National Centre for Cell Science, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Ganeshkhind, Pune 411007, India – ]. Evolving genomes undergo countless subtle and catastrophic events that drive natural selection in stabilizing (favoring a phenotype), directional (broadening the phenotype spectrum to acquire new adaptive traits), or diversifying (promoting reproductive isolation and speciation) ways [ , ]. Sub- or neo-functionalization through the emergence of novel genes and gene families sharing sequence or domain homology with ancestral genes shapes selection processes [ – ]. Conversely, negative/purifying selection removes non-beneficial sequences and is important in maintaining the reproductive isolation of newly emerged species and preventing them from merging back with the parental species after divergence. Thus, de novo sequences under purifying selection may persist under relaxed constraints, evolve to gain functional potential, or confer selective advantages in speciation [ , ].
Although humans and other primates share high genetic similarity, ∼2% of the genome differs between lineages [ ]. This modest divergence accounts for marked phenotypic differences, including bipedalism, metabolic and immune adaptations, muscle composition, eye pigmentation, brain expansion (notably the cerebellum, neocortex, and white matter), hairlessness, high sweat gland density, and variable skin pigmentation balancing UV exposure with folate and vitamin D preservation [ – ]. Species divergence relies heavily on gene duplication, which can result in pseudogenization [ – ]. Numerous human-specific pseudogenes (φgenes) have been identified and were long thought to be non-functional due to disabling mutations; however, recent evidence shows they can contribute diverse cellular functions through novel non-coding or coding roles [ – ].
In our previous work [ ], we identified chimeric transcripts (CTs) in TCGA ovarian tumor RNA-seq data with significant sequence homology to φgenes in NCBI BLASTn (n = 103) and Ensembl BLAST (n = 42). Although the initial catalogue was derived from TCGA ovarian cancer RNA-seq datasets, only those CTs that were also detectable in normal human tissues were retained for downstream analyses, thereby excluding cancer-restricted transcriptional events for this study. To ensure authentic gene fusions, we selected CTs with ≥21 bp flanking the fusion junction, yielding 9 (NCBI) and 9 (Ensembl) candidates, with 9 unique CTs retained for further analysis (Table  ; a and b;  ; Methods). Here, we extend this analysis to reveal direct intron fusions and insertion of intervening sequences between exons of two parental genes, indicating novel CT formation mechanisms. Our findings suggest that de novo chimeric φgene expression is driven by the 5′ parent promoter and stabilized by the 3′ partner, restoring partial or modified function. Functional analysis of ANAPC1P2 identifies vA-202 as a cncRNA. Under γ-irradiation stress vA-202 acts as a lncRNA by binding PICT-1 to stabilize p53, while it also encodes a partial ANAPC1 protein isoform potentially involved in translational regulation. Furthermore, knockdown of another candidate, HYDIN2, resulted in impaired neuronal differentiation in NT2 cells, highlighting the regulatory and functional relevance of these chimeric φgenes in cellular homeostasis and lineage commitment.
 

## Materials and methods

## Sequence analyses
In our previous work [ ], we identified 4437 CTs in TCGA ovarian tumor RNA-seq data, of which a subset of 136 CTs displayed sequence similarity (>50% BLAST) to reported φgenes on Ensembl or NCBI databases (103 from NCBI and 42 from Ensembl, with 9 overlapping entries). The present study was focused on this subset starting from applying a higher stringency threshold of >95% query coverage and percent identity to prioritize high-confidence candidates suitable for experimental validation. This reduced the dataset to 55 CTs (29 from NCBI and 31 from Ensembl, including 5 overlaps). Subsequently, manual curation was performed to further refine the dataset. CTs aligning with sequences where annotations of both parental genes were indicative of being low-confidence (exclusively as RP or AC identifiers) were excluded. In addition, transcripts with similar entries (e.g. multiple CTs mapping to the same φgene with only minor sequence variations) or from read-through transcription events were removed. For the latter, the genomic positions of parental genes were verified using the Ensembl database to determine chromosomal adjacency. Finally, sequences flanking both sides of the fusion junction were examined, and only those exhibiting 100% homology over at least 21 bp on either side were retained. This filtering yielded 15 high-confidence CTs (9 from NCBI and 9 from Ensembl GRCh38.p14, with 3 overlapping entries). Final experimental validation using primers spanning the fusion point to perform polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by Sanger sequencing of amplicons was achieved for 9 of the 15 CTs screened in the biological samples. Of the nine identified CTs, four mosaic forms with intergenic insertions and multi-fragment architectures were excluded due to their complex genomic organization, which prevented unambiguous parental assignment and reliable evolutionary analysis within the scope of this study.
For mapping out the chimeric introns generated during segmental duplications and gene fusions, intronic sequences flanking the identified chimeric junctions were extracted from Ensembl genome assemblies (GRCh37 and GRCh38.p14) and aligned against their corresponding parental introns using BLAST.
Segmental duplications of parental genes were identified using a combination of minimap2 [ ] and LASTZ [ ], leveraging their complementary sensitivity to long and short sequence alignments, respectively. Minimap2 was run with a k-mer size of 14 nucleotides (nt) and a window size of 25 nt to align parental gene sequences against the whole-genome assemblies of Homo sapiens and four closest related primate species (Gorilla gorilla, Pan troglodytes, Pan paniscus, and Pongo abelii). To further detect shorter or fragmented duplications, LASTZ alignments were performed in a gene-versus-chromosome manner using a seed size of 14 of 22 (22-nt k-mers allow up to 8 mismatches) and a step size of 100 nt, enabling coverage across entire chromosomes. LASTZ output was filtered to retain alignments with >0.5% query coverage and >90% sequence identity and further stratified as forward and reverse strand alignments (plus or minus, respectively). In cases where closely spaced alignment fragments were split by the algorithm, alignments were manually chained to reconstruct contiguous duplicated segments. All genomic and chromosomal FASTA files were obtained from Ensembl release 115. Splice site strength and fidelity were evaluated using Spliceator 2.0 (http://www.lbgi.fr/spliceator/). Transcript variant data was sourced from the Ensembl archives (https://www.ensembl.org/info/website/archives/index.html). The merged Ensembl/Havana gene annotations were utilized to compare transcript variants across different versions.

## Determination of conserved sequences
Evolutionary conservation of parental genes was assessed using GenTree focusing specifically on vertebrate-specific lineage conservation. To investigate the conservation of the specific parental exons, introns involved in the fusion events, and chimeric fusion point sequences, these were queried against the genomic and transcriptomic databases of 23 vertebrate species (including human, chimp, orangutan, gibbon, rhesus, marmoset, rabbit, guinea pig, rat, mouse, horse, dog, cow, elephant, opossum, platypus, chicken, zebra finch, lizard, frog, stickleback, tetraodon, and zebrafish) using NCBI BLASTn.

## Cell culture and functional assays
The HGSC cell lines A4, A2, and G1M2, derived from patient ascites, along with 10 human lymphoblastoid (LBL) cell lines from peripheral blood, 10 human primary skin fibroblast (SF) cultures, and 5 ovarian normal stromal (ON) cultures were previously established in our laboratory. Additional cell lines, including OVCAR3, OVCAR4, A2780, MDCK, OAW42, MEF, CV1, IOSE364, FT282, Drosophila S2 cells, OV90, OVMZ6, OVCA420, PEO14, OVCA432, CAOV3, HEK293T, human normal dermal fibroblasts (HNDF), HUVEC, normal mouse dermal fibroblasts (NMDF), human neural stem cells (HNSC), and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and HMVEC-L were obtained from various sources. Culture protocols followed per previous reports [ ].
Cells were cultured in their respective complete media and harvested at 80% confluency for use in experiments. All cell lines were authenticated by short tandem repeat (STR) profiling and confirmed to be mycoplasma-free by testing at the NCCS Cell Repository. The NCCS Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC) (tissue samples for primary culture—skin and peripheral blood) and Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBSC) approved all experiments that were conducted in accordance with the law and institutional guidelines.
Cell cycle analysis was carried out using Propidium Iodide (Invitrogen™, #P1304MP) and RNase A (Thermo Scientific™, #EN0531). Briefly, 1*105 cells of all cell derivatives were seeded in six-well plates; synchronization was achieved through serum starvation for 24 h. Cells were harvested on Days 0, 7, and 14; suspensions were washed with 1× PBS, fixed with 70% ethanol, and further subjected to FACS acquisition. Apoptosis assays were performed with cell suspensions at mentioned time points, washed, and resuspended in 1× binding buffer, followed by staining with Annexin V-FITC for 15 min. Data were acquired using FITC and PE channels on BD FACSCanto™ II system, and FlowJo_V10 software was used for data analysis.
Five thousand cells of all cell derivatives were seeded in a 96-well plate and stained with MTT (Sigma, M5655-100MG, 5 mg/ml) at specific time points (24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h) as described previously [ ], with and without RA induction. For Clonogenicity assay, RA-induced and uninduced cell derivatives were harvested and seeded in six-well plate (1000/well). After incubation for 10 days, colonies were fixed and stained with crystal violet as described earlier. For Spheroid assay, 5000 cells/well were seeded in 24-well low-attachment plate and grown in serum-free media. Images were captured on Olympus FV3000 microscope; ImageJ software was used for further analyses. In the wound healing assay, 30 000 cells per well were seeded in 24-well plates. After 24 h, a scratch was made at the center of each well. Images were captured every 4 h, and wound closure was quantified using ImageJ. For γ-irradiation, cells were exposed to 8.5 Gy and Drosophila to 700 Gy using a γ-irradiation chamber.
For RA-induced neuronal differentiation of all cell derivatives of NT2, cells were seeded in six-well plates (40 000/well) and cultured in medium supplemented with 10 μM all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA; Sigma–Aldrich, #R2625) for 21 days to induce differentiation, as described earlier [ ]. Media were replaced every 4th day, and cell pellets were collected in replicates at various time points (Days 0, 7, 14, 21 after RA treatment) for further analysis.

## Oligo design, RNA isolation, cDNA synthesis, PCR, real-time PCR, and Sanger sequencing
Oligos for amplification around the fusion point were designed using GeneRunner software (Ver.5.1.01) and synthesized by Sigma–Aldrich (25 nM; sequences available upon request). RNA extraction from cell lines and primary cultures performed using TRIzol reagent (RNAiso Plus TAKARA, 9108) was followed by complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis and quantification (DeNovix spectrophotometer). PCR amplification was performed with TaKaRa DNA Polymerase (#R050B); amplified products were resolved on a 1.8% agarose gel (Sigma–Aldrich, #A9539-100G), and resulting bands were excised and purified using the QIAEX II Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen #20021, #20051). 5′/3′ RACE kit (TAKARA, Cat. No. 634858) was used for synthesis of cDNA synthesis and RACE PCR. Full-length confirmation PCR was performed using cDNA from the HGSC cell line (synthesized using TAKARA-RR037A) with TaKaRa DNA Polymerase (#R050B). Sanger sequencing of purified amplicons was conducted at the NCCS Sequencing Facility, and sequence data were analyzed using SnapGene Viewer. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was conducted on a CFX96 Touch Deep Well Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad) using TB Green® Premix Ex Taq™ (Tli RNase H Plus) SYBR Green Master Mix. Reactions included 1 pMol of primer mix and 100 ng cDNA. GAPDH was used as the endogenous normalization control. Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) was performed using the QX200 Droplet Digital PCR System with EvaGreen Supermix (QX200™ ddPCR™ EvaGreen Supermix, #1864033) and oligonucleotide-based chemistry.

## Subcellular fractionation
Cells were cultured in 150 mm dishes and harvested at ∼80% confluency by scraping. Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractionation, followed by RNA/protein extraction, was performed using the PARIS™ Kit (Invitrogen, Cat. No. AM1921). cDNA synthesis was followed by qPCR using primers for Malat1 and RnR to assess nuclear and cytoplasmic purity, and RMND5A-ANAPC1 BP to localize vA202. For irradiation experiments, cells were exposed to 8.5 Gy immediately prior to harvesting.

## Cloning and transfections
5′ and 3′ fragments were cloned into pRACE vector using infusion HD cloning kit (TAKARA, Cat. No. 639648). Both 5′ and 3′ fragments had same overlaps post-Gibson cloning. For assembly of 5′ and 3′ clones, Infusion HD_R primer was designed to amplify 3′ RACE fragment and aid full-length cloning.
Insert and vector DNA fragments (pUAST and pGL3) were enzymatically digested using restriction endonucleases appropriate for each cloning strategy. For the full-length and Δ constructs (Δ1 and Δ2) in pUAST, KpnI-HF (NEB, #R3142S) and NotI (NEB, #R0189S) were employed; Δ UP (upstream region) was achieved using NdeI (NEB, #R0111S) and BglII (NEB, #R0144S); Δ TATA promoter using SbfI-HF (NEB, #R3642S) and BglII. For insertion of RMND5A and ANAPC1 sequences into the pGL3 vector, digestion was performed using KpnI and HindIII (NEB, #R0104S). For overexpression cloning of vA-202, the pLKO.CMV was used. To clone protein ORF into the p3xFlag vector, XbaI and BamHI were used, while the corresponding UTR region was cloned using HindIII and BamHI. All ligation reactions were carried out using T4 DNA ligase (TAKARA, #2011B) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
shRNA oligonucleotide sequences against fusion point were designed using the RNAi Consortium (TRC) public portal hosted by the Broad Institute (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/). Forward and reverse oligonucleotides were reconstituted to a final concentration of 0.1 nmol/μl. For annealing, a 25 μl reaction mixture was prepared containing 11.25 μl of each oligonucleotide and 2.5 μl of 10× annealing buffer (NEB Buffer 2/reconstituted with 1 M NaCl + 100 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4). The mixture was heated in boiling water, allowed to gradually cool to room temperature to facilitate duplex formation, and diluted 1:100 in 0.5× annealing buffer. One microliter of this mixture with 10–20 ng linearized pLKO.1-TRC vector T4 DNA ligase (TAKARA, #2011B) was used in a 20 μl ligation reaction. Recombinant constructs were subsequently transformed into chemically competent DH5α cells. Plasmid DNA was extracted using the Nucleospin Plasmid Isolation Kit (MACHEREY-NAGEL, #740588.250). Sequences encoding shRNAs were confirmed by Sanger DNA sequencing using U6 promoter-specific primer.
Lentiviral particles were generated and concentrated using HEK293T cells and LentiX concentrator. CV1/OVCAR3/NT2 cells were transduced with the lentiviral particles in the presence of Polybrene (Sigma–Aldrich, #TR-1003) and selected using puromycin (Gibco™, #A1113803) at final concentrations of 8 μg/ml, 0.6 μg/ml, and 0.8 μg/ml, respectively. Transfection of Drosophila S2 cells was performed using Effectene Transfection Reagent per following the manufacturer’s instructions (QIAGEN, #301425). Luciferase reporter assays were performed using the Dual-Glo™ Luciferase Assay System per manufacturer’s protocol (Promega, #E2920).

## Immunofluorescence staining
Twenty thousand cells/coverslip (CV1 EV, CV1 RA OE, OVCAR3 EV, and OVCAR3 KD) were seeded, irradiated with 8.5 Gy, and fixed at various time points using 2% paraformaldehyde. Prior to immunostaining, the coverslips were washed twice with PBS. Permeabilization was performed using 0.025% Triton-X-100 in PBS (10 min), followed by three PBS washes. Blocking was done with 10% bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS for H2AX (CST phospho-histone H2A.X-Ser139-20E3, rabbit mAb #9718), pATM (CST phospho-ATM-Ser1981-D25E5, rabbit mAb #13050), pChk1 (CST-phospho-Chk1-Ser345-133D3, rabbit mAb #2348), APC1 (Invitrogen-Cat #PA5-83639) and Flag M2 (Sigma, F1804), and with 5% goat serum containing 0.03% Triton-X-100 for p53 (CST phospho-p53-Ser15-16G8, Mouse mAb #9286), and MDM2 (Anti-MDM2 Antibody, clone SMP14, mouse mAb #MAB3776) for 10 min. For PICT-1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat. No. sc-517088) and NPM1 (Abcam, Cat. No. ab37659), blocking was done using 10% goat serum. Primary antibodies were diluted in antibody dilution buffer (3% BSA for H2AX, pATM, and pChk1; 0.3% BSA in 5% goat serum with 0.03% Triton X-100 for p53 and MDM2; 3% goat serum for PICT-1 and NPM1) and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. After three PBS washes, secondary antibodies (anti-mouse Alexa 488/anti-rabbit Alexa-488/anti-rabbit Alexa 647, prepared in the respective antibody dilution buffer) were added and incubated for 45 min at room temperature (RT). The coverslips were washed, stained with Hoechst, and mounted on slides (VECTASHIELD® Antifade Mounting Medium #H-1000-10). Imaging was performed using an Olympus FV3000, and analysis was done with CellSens software. Intensity analysis was conducted using ImageJ (Fiji).

## Western blotting
Proteins were extracted using RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with 1× protease inhibitor cocktail. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer, sheared twice using an insulin syringe, and incubated on ice for 20–30 min. Lysates were centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined using the Bio-Rad DC protein assay kit. A total of 30 µg protein per sample was loaded per lane for sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS–PAGE). Membranes were blocked in 5% BSA or 3% milk for 1 h at RT and incubated overnight at 4°C with the following primary antibodies (1:1000 dilution in 5% BSA unless otherwise stated): phospho-ATR (CST #2853), phospho-Chk2 (CST #2197), PICT1 (CST #73225), β-tubulin (CST #sc-166729), anti-FLAG (Sigma #F1804, diluted in 3% milk), and APC1 (Invitrogen #PA5-83323, #PA5-83639). Membranes were then incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:5000 in TBST) for 2 h at RT. SuperSignal™ West Femto (Thermo Scientific #34094) was used to develop the blot.

## 
In vitro transcription, dot blotting, RNA pull-down, and MS data analysis
Biotin-labeled RNA was synthesized using the MEGAscript™ T7 Transcription Kit (Invitrogen, Cat. No. AM1334) with Biotin-14-CTP (Invitrogen, Cat. No. 19519016). For in vitro transcription, 20 µl reactions were prepared containing 1 µl nuclease-free water, 2 µl ATP, 1.5 µl CTP, 3 µl Biotin-14-CTP, 2 µl GTP, 2 µl UTP, 2 µl 10× reaction buffer, 2 µl enzyme mix, and template RNA (1000 ng). Reactions were incubated at 37°C for 7 h and then treated with 20 µl TURBO DNase I at 37°C for 20 min. RNA was precipitated by adding 10 µl nuclease-free water and 30 µl LiCl, incubated at −20°C for 2 h, collected by centrifugation at 13 000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C, washed with 75% ethanol, and resuspended in 20 µl nuclease-free water. RNA concentration and purity were determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer, and samples were stored at −80°C until use.
RNA (2–4 µl in water; ∼1 µg per spot) was spotted onto a membrane with sufficient spacing and crosslinked twice at 1200 J using a UV Stratalinker. The membrane was blocked in PBS (pH 7.4) containing 10% SDS and 1 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) for 20 min at RT with gentle shaking. It was then incubated with streptavidin-HRP (1:500 in blocking buffer) for 15 min at RT, followed by sequential washes: twice with Wash Buffer 1 (PBS + 10% SDS), twice with Wash Buffer 2 (PBS + 1% SDS), and twice with Wash Buffer 3 (PBS + 0.1% SDS), each for 10 min at RT. Signal was developed using SuperSignal™ West Femto chemiluminescent substrate (Thermo Scientific, #34094).
For RNA pull-down assays, 100 µl of cell lysate (400 µg protein) was incubated with 1 µg of biotinylated RNA, 5 µl 100× protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC), 5 µl RNaseOUT, 250 µl 2× TENT buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 0.5% Tween-20), and 140 µl IP lysis buffer (25 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 5% glycerol). The mixture was rotated at 4°C for 2 h (6 rpm). Streptavidin beads were washed thrice with PBST (PBS + 0.1% Tween-20) and kept on ice until use. The pre-incubated protein–RNA complexes were added to the beads and rotated again at 4°C for 2 h. Beads were magnetically separated, washed five times with PBST and twice with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate in fresh tubes. Bound complexes were eluted in 50 µl of 0.1% RapiGest with 5 mM DTT at 60°C for 30 min with intermittent vortexing. The eluate was clarified by magnetic separation and buffer exchanged using a 3 kDa MWCO spin column. The final elute was zip-tipped and submitted for mass spectrometry analysis.

## Immunoprecipitation and elution of APC1/MP1-interacting proteins
OVCAR3 cells from four 150 mm culture dishes were harvested by scraping, washed with ice-cold 1× PBS (pH 7.4), and pelleted by centrifugation at 700 × g for 15 min at 10°C. The cell pellet was lysed in 250 µl NETN buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8, 5 mM EDTA, 250 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40) supplemented with 1× nuclease, phosphatase, and protease inhibitors. Lysates were incubated on ice for 20 min with intermittent vortexing every 5 min, followed by a final 1 min vortex. Samples were centrifuged at 16 000 × g for 20 min at 10°C, and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined using Bio-Rad DC protein assay kit. Lysates were pre-cleared with 25 µl Dynabeads™ Protein G magnetic beads (Invitrogen #10003D) for 1 h at 4°C. For antibody conjugation, 50 µl Dynabeads were washed three times with 500 µl PBS-T and incubated with 2 µg of anti-APC1/Flag antibody or rabbit IgG (negative control) in 500 µl PBS for 4 h at 4°C with gentle mixing. Excess unbound antibody was removed by washing the beads three times with PBS-T. Pre-cleared lysates were incubated with antibody-conjugated or control IgG-conjugated beads overnight (∼16 h) at 4°C on a rotator. Beads were washed three times with 500 µl PBS-T, once with 100 mM ice-cold ammonium bicarbonate. To elute bound proteins, 50 µl of 0.1% RapiGest with 5 mM DTT was added to the beads and incubated at 60°C for 30 min with vortexing every 5 min. Beads were then magnetically separated, and the eluate containing APC1/altAPC1-flag and its interacting proteins was transferred to a fresh tube. Samples were processed for MS as mentioned earlier.

## Proteomic data analysis using MaxQuant and Perseus
Raw mass spectrometry data acquired on an Orbitrap instrument were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.17.0) with default settings. Peptide and protein identification was performed against the UniProt human reference proteome, with trypsin/P specificity allowing up to two missed cleavages. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled (minimum ratio count = 1), and the “match between runs” feature was applied to improve identification across runs.
The resulting proteinGroups.txt file was analyzed in Perseus (v1.6.14.0). Reverse hits, contaminants, and proteins identified only by site were removed. LFQ intensities were log₂-transformed, and proteins quantified in at least two of three replicates in at least one condition were retained.
Statistical analyses were performed in Perseus to identify differentially abundant proteins. Proteins detected in control samples were excluded (only-beads for RNA pull-down; only-beads and IgG for APC1 IP; only-beads and out-competition controls for MP1-Flag IP). The remaining proteins were considered experiment-specific interactors. Differentially expressed proteins in whole-cell proteomics were defined using thresholds of log₂ fold change ≥ 1.2, –log₁₀(P value) ≥ 1.3 (P ≤ .05), and a false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.05.

## Prediction of coding potential (ORFs and Kozak sequence) and evolutionary selection (GC content and Ka/Ks ratios)
Canonical parent protein sequences were obtained from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org/). Putative proteins were predicted from CT sequences across all six reading frames using Expasy translation tool (https://web.expasy.org/translate/). Coding potential of transcripts was assessed using the Coding Potential Calculator 2.0 (CPC2) (https://cpc2.gao-lab.org/). Transcripts with a coding probability greater than 0.6 were classified as protein-coding. To identify potential Kozak sequences, the ATGpr tool (http://atgpr.dbcls.jp/) was utilized. Open reading frames (ORFs) were considered putative if they exhibited a reliability score exceeding 0.1, including a stop codon, and had a minimum length of 10 codons.
GC content was calculated using a GC content calculator (https://en.vectorbuilder.com/tool/gc-content-calculator.html). Full-length transcript sequences of chimeric φgenes, their parental genes, and single-parent φgenes were used as input to assess and compare GC content across genes. Evolutionary selection pressures between parental genes and their φgenes were assessed using initially, the ParaAT tool (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/tools/paraat) to construct protein-coding DNA alignments from inputs including CDS and protein/peptide/amino acid sequences for the corresponding proteins (as FASTA files) and a list of parental and chimeric proteins (CSV file). This output was provided as input to the KaKs_Calculator (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/tools/kaks), which applies maximum likelihood method of model selection/model averaging to Ka, Ks values, and their ratio (ω) in addition to a P-value (Fisher’s test). Ka/Ks < 1 indicates purifying selection, Ka/Ks = 1 represents neutral selection, while Ka/Ks > 1 suggests positive selection).

## Transgenic Drosophila line generation, γ-irradiation, and survival assay
Transgenic Drosophila lines were generated by microinjection of pUAST-ANAPC1P2 construct into w[1118] embryos (WellGenetics, Taipei). Eight UAS-ANAPC1P2 transgenic lines were established using this method. Fly morphology was examined (Nikon SMZ18), and transgene expression was confirmed by qPCR of cDNA from total RNA. For irradiation assays, 1–3-day-old transgenic and control flies were exposed to 700 Gy ionizing radiation, and survival was monitored daily.

## Predictions of protein structure and function
The Alphafold server (https://alphafoldserver.com) was used to model structures of parental and chimeric proteins. CIF files were loaded into ChimeraX (https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimerax/) for visualization, and structures were downloaded as coordinate PDB files. Superimposition of parent and chimeric proteins was done using the “Matchmaker” feature in ChimeraX. The protein structure comparison service PDBeFold (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/msd-srv/ssm/) was used for comparison of parent and chimeric protein structures. DeepLoc2.1 (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/DeepLoc-2.1/) was used to predict subcellular localization and the associated membrane type of eukaryotic proteins, with a cutoff probability of 0.6. Interpro (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used for identification of functional domains.

## Sequence-based RNA adenosine methylation site predictor analysis (SRAMP)
The SRAMP tool (http://www.cuilab.cn/sramp/) was used to predict m6A modification sites in RNA sequences. SRAMP assigns a prediction score for each potential m6A site sequence. These scores are classified into confidence levels: very high (99%), high (95%), moderate (90%), and low (85%), based on specificity from cross-validation tests. Scores were obtained for chimeric and single-parent φgene mRNA sequences from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and Ensembl38 (GRCh38.p14) and analyzed in mature mRNA mode. Predicted m6A marks were used to compare the frequency of m6A modifications on 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) between chimeric and single-parent φgene sequences.

## RNA sequencing and data analysis
Total RNA from three biological replicates of HYDIN2 knockdown (KD), vA202 KD, and one empty vector (EV) control each was used for poly(A)-selected stranded mRNA library preparation and sequencing by MedGenome Labs Ltd. Libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq X Plus, generating ∼60 million paired-end reads per sample (2 × 150 bp). Read quality was assessed using FastQC v0.11.9 and summarized with MultiQC v1.21. Reads were aligned to the human genome GRCh38/hg38 (GENCODE v42) using STAR v2.7.11b, and gene-level counts were generated with featureCounts v2.0.6. Differential expression analysis was performed using DESeq2, with P-values adjusted using the Benjamini Hochberg method. Genes with adjusted P-value <.05 and log2 fold change > 1 were considered significantly differentially expressed. Functional enrichment analysis was performed using GSEA v2023.2 and ClueGO v2.5.10 in Cytoscape v3.9.1.

## Statistical analysis
Unless otherwise mentioned, all experiments were conducted in triplicates (n = 3, for both experimental and biological replicates). Data visualization and statistical analysis (paired t-test) were carried out using GraphPad Prism software (version 8.4.2, 67). Statistical significance was defined as *P < .05, **P < .01, ***P < .001, and ****P < .0001. Standard deviation is represented as error bars.

## Results

## Intron fusions direct the emergence of chimeric φgenes that generate CTs
Expression of 9 of the 15 high-confidence CTs was supported by amplification and Sanger sequencing across a panel of cell lines, which confirmed their chimeric configuration and revealed additional variations ( c). These 9 CTs were expressed at variable frequencies across tumors, warranting further investigation (Fig. ; Methods). To trace the emergence of corresponding chimeric φgenes, we analyzed sequence conservation between each chimera and its parent genes across 23 vertebrate species (Methods). While most parent genes were highly conserved and originated early in vertebrate evolution, GATSL1 and TRIM43 emerged more recently through gene duplication events (Fig. ) [ ]. Analysis of the specific parent exons flanking the fusion points showed that these sequences appeared at later branchpoints even in otherwise deeply conserved genes, with CT expression detected exclusively in humans ( ; ). For instance, although GKAP1 and KIF27 are highly conserved (branchpoint 0), their specific exons implicated in chimera formation arose at branchpoints 4 and 8, respectively, whereas the chimeric ENSG00000290924 (GKAP1–KIF27) emerged at branchpoint 13, restricted to humans. Strikingly, intron and flanking exon sequences involved in these fusions often co-emerged at the same evolutionary branchpoint, supporting a model where intron fragmentation and fusion may lead to the genesis of a φgene ( d;  ; ). Although intron–exon continuums for some chimeric φgenes were detectable in earlier hominoids (e.g. gorilla), expression of all these chimeric φgenes was human-specific.
 Detailed analysis of the intervening introns revealed two distinct rearrangement types (Fig. – ): (i) simple fusions of parental intron sequences, validated by amplification and Sanger sequencing (HYDIN2, GTF2IP4, ANAPC1P2, ENSG00000290924, PI4KAP2; Fig. –ii; e); and (ii) complex, mosaic structures involving intergenic insertions (EMBP1, SNX29P1), de novo incorporation of unrelated gene fragments (FRG1HP), or intronization of exonic regions combined with intergenic insertions (PMS2P5; Fig. –iii). The five φgenes formed by simple intron fusions were prioritized for further evolutionary and genomic characterization. Examination of splice sites indicated significant conservation, allowing us to rule out altered splicing as the primary mechanism for CT formation. ( ). Given that gene duplication and divergence contribute to genome expansion and functional diversification [ ], we explored whether chimeric φgenes generated by simple intron fusions participate in such processes. Several φgenes showed partial duplications of parental gene sequences with varying degrees of overlap; however, all, including chimeric variants, are currently annotated as single-parent φgenes (typically the 3′ parent; Fig. ; Table ). Most φgenes cluster in tandem near their parental loci, while some (e.g. GTF2I, HYDIN) transpose to other chromosomes. These findings establish intron fusion as one of the key drivers of chimeric φgene formation, with human-specific expression suggesting recent evolutionary origins.

## Segmental duplication-derived chimeric φgenes rely on proximal promoter elements for post-duplication expression
Segmental duplications are a major force driving gene evolution in hominoids, giving rise to lineage-specific φgenes (e.g. hominoid- or human-specific) and facilitating adaptive innovation. Although existing databases report multiple duplications for each parental gene, our analysis focused on identifying larger (>5 kb) and evolutionarily significant duplications across hominoids. We observed that parental genes have undergone different partial duplications across hominoid genomes. Notably, chimeric φgenes were detected exclusively in humans in all five cases examined (Fig.  and  ;  a, b, c; ). The RMND5A and ANAPC1 φgenes are located on human chromosome 2, which originated from the fusion of ancestral primate chromosomes 2a and 2b. This fusion involved extensive restructuring of telomeric sequences at 2q13–2q14.1, the region harboring ANAPC1 φgenes. While RMND5A shows no evidence of hominoid-specific duplications, ANAPC1 has undergone multiple duplications in orangutan, gorilla, chimpanzee, and humans. To date, ANAPC1P1–P6 are annotated, and two additional copies (ANAPC1P7–P8) were identified here based on sequence homology ( c).
 We next examined molecular regulators governing φgene expression and stability. Analysis of 5′ upstream regulatory elements (UCSC Genome Browser) revealed promoter-like elements associated with activation marks (H3K27Ac; H3K4me1/me3), CpG islands, FANTOM5 reads, ReMap density, and TSS; some marks localized within/near the first exon of the 5′ parent gene ( a, b, c). Associations of these promoter-like features were enriched for chimeric over single-parent φgenes, except GTF2IP18 and GTF2IP20 (Fig. and a, b, c). Activation of some single-parent φgenes (GTF2IP5, 7, 9, 13, 14, 23) relies on sharing proximal promoters of adjacent genes; e.g. ANAPC1P1 and ANAPC1P4 share CD8B and CYTOR promoters, respectively ( b, c, d-i, d-ii). Segmental duplications creating φgenes likely include duplicated regulatory elements; the first exon of GTF2IP20 displays promoter marks, unlike partially duplicated GTF2IP10, 2, and 3. Further, the presence of slightly higher enrichment of m6A methylation marks throughout chimeric φgene sequences may enhance their stability and expression compared to single-parent φgenes (Fig.  ; e and f).
Expression profiles (GTEx) indicated chimeric φgenes exhibit a correlation between high expression and regulatory mark enrichment across tissues, distinct from parent genes. Single-parent φgenes with enriched regulatory marks displayed medium-to-high expression, while φgenes lacking these marks displayed low-to-no expression (Fig. ). Further integrative analysis of chromatin states and transcriptional activity demonstrated that chimeric φgenes and their corresponding parental genes frequently co-cluster based on shared regulatory elements and expression patterns (Fig. ). In conclusion, chimeric φgenes exhibit extensive 5′ and 3′ regulatory mark enrichment correlating with their elevated expression and evolutionary retention relative to single-parent φgenes.

## vA-202 is a novel CT transcribed from ANAPC1P2
To explore the regulatory and phenotypic impact of chimeric φgenes, we examined ANAPC1P2, a candidate displaying distinct expression in our dataset. Annotation of ANAPC1P2 has undergone several revisions on Ensembl GRch37/38.p14 (https://www.ensembl.org). Initially reported as φgene AC125232.1 (2016) and its overlapping RNA gene AC125232.2 (2019), these were later assigned as ANAPC1P2 φgene and ANAPC1P2 RNA gene, respectively (2021; a). The ANAPC1P2 RNA gene (ENSG00000285793) comprises 14 exons and their intervening sequences and was considered the reference gene for this study. A deeper examination of its sequence revealed the following details, the 5′ terminal harbors two de novo exons (Exons 1 & 2); Exons 3 & 4 and their intervening sequence originate from RMND5A; Intron 4–5 is chimeric (fusion of RMND5A Intron 2 with ANAPC1 Intron 24, Exons 5–13 and their intervening sequences originate from ANAPC1), and 3′ terminal Exon 14 represents de novo sequences (Fig. ).
 Ten transcript variants of ANAPC1P2 are reported, all predicted as biotype lncRNA (Ensembl GRCh38.p14; a); 7 of these are chimeric and harbor the fusion point identified by us. To elucidate the specific transcript being expressed, we performed RACE (Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends) in a normal ovarian epithelial cell line, IOSE364 (Fig. - ). The resulting transcript displayed high homology with the transcript ANAPC1P2-202, including its novel Exon 11; since it harbored unique 5′ terminal sequences as compared with parent gene (RMND5A) and ANAPC1P2-202, we assigned this transcript as vANAPC1P2-202 (vA-202; Fig. -ii). 3′ RACE also identified an additional variant that we termed as vA-202-intron insertion (vA2-202-II; 170-base Intron 9–10 of ANAPC1). 5′ and 3′ RACE amplicons were individually cloned into pRACE vector, and a modified Gibson cloning protocol was used to generate the entire transcript sequences, which were validated by the presence of the fusion point (Fig. ; b-i, b-ii; Methods).
Tissue-specific expression profiling of both variants across 50 different cell lines revealed their expression to be restricted exclusively to human tissues and cell lines, which agrees with our earlier analysis of ANAPC1P2 being a young gene in evolution (Fig. ). Since vA-202-II displayed relatively lower expression in all cell lines, all further investigations were focused on vA-202. Absolute quantification revealed expression of vA-202 being highest in OVCAR3, followed by IOSE364, GM4SF, and GM1LBL cell lines, while expression levels of parental genes were quite similar (Fig.  ). Probing its subcellular localization displayed nuclear enrichment of the transcript in normal ovarian cells, while equal nuclear–cytoplasmic distribution was evident in cancer cells that may potentially assign additional role(s) in transformation (Fig. ).

## 
ANAPC1P2 exhibits constitutive autonomous expression and is further induced upon γ-irradiation
The exclusive, human-specific association of vA-202 provided a unique opportunity to explore its cellular effects through ectopic expression in other species. In line with this, we generated a transgenic Drosophila melanogaster line expressing the vA-202 construct. To our surprise, ANAPC1P2 expression occurred independently of GAL4 induction despite being cloned downstream of a UAS-GAL4-TATA promoter (Fig. - and a-ii). Consistent with this observation, ANAPC1P2 expression in Drosophila S2 cells was also independent of GAL4, indicating a possibility of intrinsic regulatory elements driving its expression. To rule out leaky expression from the vector backbone, we assessed the expression of an unrelated gene, Eya, cloned into the same construct, which did not show GAL4-independent expression (Fig. - and b-ii). A series of 5′ deletion constructs confirmed that a 1177 bp upstream region contributes to promoter activity (Fig. and  ). Complementary luciferase assays in mammalian cells demonstrated that both chimeric segments (RMND5A: 1–636 bp; ANAPC1: 637–2225 bp) could drive expression, albeit weaker than the EF1α promoter (Fig.  ). Transcription start site prediction further identified two putative TSSs within the ANAPC1P2 sequence (Promoter 2.0; Zhu et al. 2020) (Fig. ). Collectively, these findings indicate that ANAPC1P2 harbors intrinsic regulatory elements capable of driving GAL4-independent transcription, although additional trans-acting factors may contribute to its expression in mammalian cells.
 These transgenic lines did not show any alteration in phenotype under normal conditions. The absence of basal phenotypic effects suggested the need to identify a suitable context to assess the functional impact of vA-202 expression specifically under stress conditions, independent of developmental or organismal defects. As GTEx expression data identified AC125232.1 levels to be highest in sun-exposed skin tissue, which is chronically challenged by environmental DNA damage (Figs and  ), we used γ-irradiation as a controlled DNA damage-inducing stress in Drosophila, enabling functional assessment of vA-202 functions at the whole-organism level. This data, however, does not have any evolutionary relevance. While transgenic flies revealed no overt phenotypic abnormalities (body length and wing morphology; Fig. - , f-ii, g-i, g-ii), upon γ-irradiation, these flies showed a marked induction of vA-202 expression and significantly reduced survival in both males and females compared with their respective controls (Fig. , , ). These effects were consistent across eight independent transgenic lines, indicating insertion site independence (Fig. ). Collectively, these results hint toward the critical involvement of vA-202 in DDR, contributing to the maintenance of genomic stability.
 To investigate this phenomenon in detail, we generated overexpressing and knockdown models of vA-202. CV1-OE cells that expressed high intrinsic levels were thus established (CV1—African green monkey fibroblast cell line; a), alongside its knockdown in OVCAR3 cells (OVCAR3-KD; b). Subcellular localization of CV1-OE cells indicated the transcript to be predominantly expressed in the nucleus (consistent with non-transformed IOSE364 and FT282 cells; Fig. _inset). While neither cell derivative displayed any drastic morphological changes or marked functional influences on proliferation and migration, cell cycle profiles were altered wherein CV1-OE displayed slightly increased G0/G1 with reduced G2/M phases; OVCAR3-KD presented reduced sub-G0, G0/G1, enhanced G2/M, and reduced colony formation (Fig. , , ; c, d, e). This indicates that vA-202 is not likely to perturb normal steady-state growth but may contribute to cell cycle checkpoint activation in transformed cells. These differences between the two states may be associated with differential subcellular enrichment to drive consequences. In exploring these consequences at a molecular level, transcriptomic profiling of OVCAR3-KD cells revealed a pronounced enrichment of genes involved in stress response pathways, indicating a cellular response to genomic or environmental perturbation along with other key processes such as cell cycle regulation, DNA damage sensing and repair, and apoptosis (Fig. - and ). A deeper exploration using Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) highlighted significant activation of pathways including the G2/M cell cycle checkpoint, p53-mediated stress responses, mitotic spindle organization, DNA repair mechanisms, and UV-induced damage response, suggesting a coordinated activation of genome integrity maintenance systems. In contrast, DAVID analysis of downregulated genes indicated enrichment in pathways related to extracellular matrix (ECM) organization, metal ion transport, and synaptic signaling (Fig. -ii and f). Together, these findings suggest the involvement of vA-202 in several cellular functions, including negative regulation of stress responses and protecting against genotoxic stress, which align well with reduced G2/M on overexpression and a general role in maintenance of tissue integrity and homeostasis ( g).
To further investigate the possible cues regulating vA-202, we exposed an ovarian cancer cell line (A4) to various stress conditions, including γ-irradiation, treatment with chemotherapeutic agents (paclitaxel, carboplatin, and curcumin), TGF-β stimulation, and hypoxia. This identified γ-irradiation to significantly enhance expression of vA-202, which in CV1-OE and OVCAR3 cells (both with enhanced levels of vA-202) not only indicated surged expression for up to 24 h post-irradiation, but also an increased localization of vA-202 into the nucleus (Fig.  , , ). These findings suggest that vA-202 functions as a novel, human-specific, stress-inducible transcript that regulates cell cycle checkpoints, especially G2/M, which assigns it a regulatory role in genomic surveillance.

## vA-202 triggers apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in response to γ-irradiation-induced DNA damage by modulating γ-H2AX–pATM–p53 axis
We further explored the above postulated role of vA-202 following γ-irradiation in modulating the DNA damage response (DDR) by examining the molecular cascade of events likely to be triggered ( a). Initially focusing on assessing the extent and persistence of DNA damage, we identified significantly higher number and intensity of γ-H2AX foci in CV1-OE cells as compared with controls across multiple time points, indicating DNA damage, particularly double-strand breaks (DSBs). This response was reversed in OVCAR3-KD cells that displayed significantly lower γ-H2AX expression following γ-irradiation that gradually increased over the next 6 h (Fig. - , - and b-i, b-ii, b-iii). DSB immediately triggered downstream ATM signaling, and although phosphorylation of ATR and CHK1/2 remained unaltered, an increased frequency of p53-expressing cells with high-intensity foci was observed; conversely, OVCAR3-KD cells displayed decreased pATM and p53 intensity at the two time points assessed (Fig. -ii, a-iii, b-ii, b-iii and c-i, c-ii, d-i, d-ii, e-i, e-ii). Notably, ATM phosphorylation was induced rapidly following irradiation across all cell types at early time points, indicating intact DSB sensing, whereas differences in γ-H2AX and p53 intensity were more pronounced, suggesting that vA-202 primarily influences downstream DDR signal amplification rather than ATM activation itself.
 Further assessing the biological consequences of the heightened DDR in CV1-OE cells, a marked G0/G1 phase arrest with increased apoptotic cell death and significantly reduced cell proliferation were noted, while in stark contrast, OVCAR3-KD cells displayed G2/M phase arrest with reduced apoptosis and enhanced proliferation post-irradiation arrest (Fig. - , c-ii, d-i, d-ii, e-i, e-ii and  f, g, h). These features were consistent with molecular changes, including upregulation of PUMA, NOXA, BAX, and BCL2L1 (pro-apoptotic effectors) and downregulation of BCL-XL (an anti-apoptotic marker) following γ-irradiation of CV1-OE cells, while OVCAR3-KD cells lncRNA exhibited an opposite expression pattern. (Fig. ). Together, these findings suggest a critical regulatory role for vA-202 in maintaining genomic integrity through DDR and/or p53-dependent checkpoint activation by triggering early cell cycle blockade through G0/G1 arrest that allows for DNA repair or cell apoptosis by sensitization of cells to genotoxic stress if damage is irreparable. This facilitates the selective elimination of damaged cells and restricts duplication of damaged genomes to attenuate DDR.

## vA-202 interacts with PICT-1 to induce apoptosis post-DNA damage
Toward a mechanistic, functional understanding of vA-202, we synthesized a biotinylated full-length RNA probe to elucidate its interacting protein partners through RNA pull-down, which were further identified through mass spectrometry-based analyses ( a–e and ). Given the earlier indications of an involvement of vA-202 in DDR, we specifically interrogated this dataset for proteins associated with apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, DNA damage/repair, and p53 signaling (Fig. and f). This targeted analysis yielded several high-confidence candidates, of which NOP53 (that encodes the protein PICT-1), MRPL14, and CSNK2A1 were most pronounced, as they are known to be involved in such functions. Of particular interest was NOP53/PICT-1, a known tumor suppressor with established roles in DDR specifically in stabilization and activation of p53 via the pATM pathway following ionizing radiation ( f) [ ]. Revalidation of the specific and reproducible interaction between vA-202 and PICT-1 on genotoxic stress imposed by γ-irradiation of OVCAR3 and CV1-OE cells by RNA pull-down and western blot analysis indicated a possible role of vA-202 in modulating PICT-1 signaling in the DDR (Fig. ). Examination of the level of expression of PICT-1 in CV1-OE cells revealed a marked decrease in total PICT-1 protein levels at 15 min following γ-irradiation and no recovery until 1 h as compared with EV control cells, indicating sustained suppression of PICT-1 by vA-202 (Fig. and  – ). Complementing these observations, PICT-1 degradation following irradiation was delayed in OVCAR3-KD cells relative to control cells at the 15-min time point, suggesting that loss of vA-202 impairs a timely turnover of PICT-1 (Fig. and d-ii). This was further validated through subcellular localization studies that affirmed reduced nucleolar levels of PICT-1 expression without redistribution to the nucleoplasm or cytoplasm in CV1-OE cells, and a distinct contrast of higher levels of PICT-1 retained within the nucleolus at 15 min post-irradiation in OVCAR3-KD cells as compared to controls, indicating that vA-202 limits the redistribution and degradation (turnover) kinetics of PICT-1 from the nucleolus during the early DDR (Fig. and  and g). The transient increase in DSBs observed at early time points in vA-202 overexpressing cells likely reflects altered early DDR kinetics, potentially due to premature loss of nucleolar PICT-1 that may delay initial DSB repair and bias the response toward p53-dependent apoptotic signaling [ ].
 PICT-1 preserves nucleolar integrity and regulates the p53–MDM2 pathway by sequestering RPL11 under basal conditions [ ]. Following γ-irradiation, reduced MDM2 levels in CV1-OE cells suggest that loss of PICT-1 promotes MDM2 destabilization and p53 accumulation, whereas OVCAR3-KD cells retaining nucleolar PICT-1 maintain MDM2 expression. Thus, loss of PICT-1 indirectly destabilizes MDM2, enhancing p53 stability under DNA damage (Fig. , – , h–ii and h).
We also examined this RNA pull-down data in the context of autonomous expression of vA202 and identified five SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling components as interactors of vA-202 (SMARCA4, SMARCB1, SMARCC1, SMARCC2, and SMARCE1); besides, proteins involved in histone modification and transcriptional activation (WDR5, CARM1, PRMT1, PRMT5, RBBP4, RBBP7, and LOXL2) ( ). These interactions suggest that vA-202 may recruit chromatin remodeling and histone-modifying complexes to its locus, promoting a transcriptionally permissive environment that supports its own expression.

## Knockdown of HYDIN2 perturbs neuronal differentiation in NT2 cells
Next, toward phenotypic assessment of chimeric φgenes, we selected HYDIN2 for further analysis, given that structural variations at its human locus (1q21.1 microduplications) are linked to neurodevelopmental disorders such as macrocephaly, developmental delays, intellectual disability, and psychiatric conditions [ ]. Profiling revealed ∼10-fold higher HYDIN2 expression in NT2 cells as compared with other cell lines (Fig.  and a). Knockdown (KD) in NT2 cells ( b) and subsequent RNA-seq (KD versus empty vector control) identified differentially expressed genes, amongst which ANAPC1P2 (another φgene) notably displayed a five-fold upregulation in KD cells (validated by qPCR, Fig. ; c; ). Pathway analysis of other upregulated genes showed enrichment in proximal-distal axis specification, forebrain regionalization, neuronal development/differentiation, lipid metabolism, and HDL particle remodeling, while downregulated processes included fundamental cellular functions, response to retinoic acid (RA), and negative regulation of neurogenesis (Fig.  and d and e). Loss of HYDIN2 may thus indirectly alter the transcriptional and post-transcriptional landscape, permitting derepression of other φgenes. Further, altered expressions of EPHA3 and WNT10B therefore are likely to alter RA signal integration and differentiation state rather than a reversal of intrinsic proliferative defects ( f). Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis revealed that differentially abundant proteins were enriched for factors involved in RNA processing, ribosome biogenesis, and ribonucleoprotein complexes, suggesting altered downstream nuclear RNA-associated regulatory processes ( g-i, g-ii and ). Consistent with these transcriptional changes, HYDIN2 expression was enriched in the nuclear fraction (Fig.  ). Pathway enrichment analysis further identified significant overrepresentation of proteins associated with neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disease-related pathways (Fig. ), suggesting HYDIN2 might modulate core cellular and neurodevelopmental functions.
 Given the perturbed RA response, we assessed RA-mediated neuronal differentiation in NT2 cells. Without RA, KD cells proliferated slower than controls; RA induction equalized proliferation rates until Day 5 (Fig.  ). Cell cycle analysis post-RA showed significantly more KD cells in G0/G1 at Days 7/14 and accumulation in G2/M by Day 21 versus controls (Fig.  ). This aligned with downregulated proliferation genes in RNA-seq and altered Cyclin D profiles ( h). KD cells also formed fewer/smaller adherent colonies without RA; RA abolished colony formation in all groups (Fig.  and i). Steady-state KD cells failed to form organized spheroids, but RA generated significantly larger KD spheroids than controls (Fig.  and j).
Steady-state KD cells expressed less self-renewal markers (Sox2, Oct4, and Nanog). RA induction increased neuronal markers (β3-tubulin and MAP2) in KD cells versus controls, peaking at Day 14 but declining sharply by Day 21 (Figs.  and  ). Coupled with G2/M arrest at Day 21, this indicated impaired neuronal maturation. Despite this, KD cells showed lower early apoptosis frequencies at days 7/14/21 post-RA, with downregulated pro-apoptotic genes (BAX) and elevated BCL2 (Fig. and k and l), suggesting resistance to apoptosis. RA induction completely abolished ANAPC1P2 expression (Fig.  ).
Collectively, these findings support a subtle regulatory role for HYDIN2 in cell cycle progression, cellular organization, balancing self-renewal/apoptosis, and ensuring proper RA-mediated neuronal maturation.

## φgenes may harbor sORFs that potentially can generate novel proteins
To explore if the species- and tissue-specific expression of chimeric φgenes suggest possible acquisition of cellular functions through generation of functional protein(s), we mapped intact ORFs in the CTs and predicted high coding potential (CPC scores >0.9, Kozak scores >0.1) in chimeric and few single-φgene ORFs ( a). Interestingly, most of these maintain the same reading frame as that of the 3′ parent protein, while a few encode for entirely novel sequences ( ).
The PI4KAP2 ORF encodes a truncated PI4KA isoform lacking residues 1429–1707, resulting in conformational changes at the N-terminus and near the deletion site, with partial C-terminal similarity ( b and c;  a). These alterations likely underlie its reported loss of kinase activity and suggest a potential antagonistic role toward PI4KA [ ]. The HYDIN2 ORF is predicted to encode a structurally divergent, cytoplasmic, soluble protein relative to the full-length HYDIN ( d and b). The φgene ENSG000000290924 (KIF27) encodes a 129-aa protein that retains KIF27’s helical core but incorporates three unique β-sheets forming two distinct catalytic pockets, implying acquisition of novel ligand-binding capabilities ( e and c). Among GTF2I-derived φgenes, GTF2IP1-ORF encodes a truncated, soluble nuclear protein with homology to GTF2-like repeats, possibly acting as a transcriptional regulator or decoy. In contrast, GTF2IP4-ORF likely produces a structurally novel protein with distinct functions ( f and d).
Further calculating the Ka/Ks ratios (ω) for their coding regions to associate the expression of chimeric φgenes to be evolving under selective adaptation, or acquiring lineage-specific functions, indicated four of five chimeric φgenes (ANAPC1P2, HYDIN2, PI4KAP2, ENSG00000290924) showed evidence of purifying selection, while GTF2IP4 is indicated to be under positive selection ( g).
Our findings so far suggest that vA-202 primarily acts as an lncRNA. However, our sequence-based prediction suggested the presence of protein-coding ORF. Additionally, Reactome pathway analysis of vA-202 interactors identified by RNA pull-down revealed that the top 26 enriched pathways were predominantly associated with RNA metabolism and translation (Fig. ). Subcellular fractionation further demonstrated a substantial cytoplasmic localization of vA-202 in OVCAR3 cells. Moreover, full-length characterization confirmed the presence of a poly(A) tail, suggesting enhanced cytoplasmic stability. This additional evidence led us to investigate its protein-coding capacity. According to our predictions, the ANAPC1P2 ORF encodes a soluble protein retaining partial PC-repeat domains found in ANAPC1, a key regulator of the cell cycle; we hereafter refer to this protein as MP1 ( h and Fig.  ). To experimentally evaluate the translation of MP1, we cloned the ORF as well as UTR-ORF with an N-terminal FLAG tag and assessed its expression in OVCAR3 cells (OVCAR3-MP1) by transient transfection (Fig. ). Western blotting and immunostaining confirmed the protein, while additional probing for a shared epitope between MP1 and canonical ANAPC1 using western revealed two distinct bands corresponding to expected molecular sizes of both proteins (Fig. , e, f, g).
 Co-localization studies revealed a marked reduction in cytoplasmic ANAPC1 levels in OVCAR3-MP1 cells, indicating a potential regulatory or competitive interaction (Fig. , , ). Consistently, subcellular localization analyses showed partial cytoplasmic overlap of MP1 with ANAPC1 (Fig.  ). Given that ANAPC1 is involved in cell cycle, we assessed if total levels of ANAPC1 and MP1 show any correlation in different cell cycle phases. Cell-cycle synchronization at G1/S and G2/M phases showed no phase-specific enrichment of either protein (Fig. - , h-ii and a-i, a-ii, b-i, b-ii), suggesting additional ANAPC1 functions beyond mitosis that may involve MP1.
To investigate MP1 function, transient FLAG-MP1 expression followed by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry was performed ( c, d and ). Parallel endogenous pulldowns with ANAPC1-specific antibodies—one recognizing ANAPC1 alone and another recognizing both ANAPC1 and MP1—were performed, with appropriate controls, and analyzed by mass spectrometry. After stringent filtering, we identified 64 ANAPC1-specific, 200 shared (ANAPC1 + MP1), and 33 MP1-specific high-confidence interactors. ClueGO analysis revealed that ANAPC1-associated proteins were enriched in cell cycle and ubiquitination pathways consistent with APC/C function, while MP1 interactors were enriched in translation, ribosome biogenesis, and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathways. ( a, b, c, d-i, d-ii). These results indicate that, while MP1 is encoded from a ANAPC1P2 transcript annotated as a lncRNA, it likely exerts independent functions in translational regulation, distinct from ANAPC1.
Collectively, these findings highlight that chimeric ORFs can give rise to translated proteins that either diverge from their parental counterparts or modulate their function through competitive or regulatory interactions. This expands the functional landscape of φgenes and underscores their relevance in cellular signaling and proteome complexity.

## Discussion
Several chimeric φgenes identified in our earlier study arise through complex segmental duplications (SDs) and intronic sequence rearrangements or fusions. This represents a novel mechanism, as CTs were previously thought to originate primarily from retrotransposition, higher-order chromatin reorganization within topologically associated domains (TADs) [ – ], aberrant splicing, or transcriptional readthrough. Notably, five of the identified chimeric φgenes contain direct intron fusions and are present exclusively in humans. Human-specific genes arising through duplication and regulatory repurposing, such as SRGAP2C, ARHGAP11B, and NOTCH2NL, exemplify how structural variation can generate lineage-restricted transcriptional units without requiring de novo gene emergence [ , ]. In line with this paradigm, the chimeric φgene loci described here exhibit epigenetic features characteristic of active regulatory elements, largely derived from the 5′ parental gene, suggesting inheritance or co-option of ancestral regulatory architecture. These elements may function as promoters driving φgene transcription or as enhancers influencing neighboring gene expression. Our findings suggest that ANAPC1P2 contains intrinsic regulatory elements capable of driving its own expression that may additionally rely on interactions with chromatin remodeling and activation machinery, including SWI/SNF complex components and histone-modifying proteins. Notably, these interactions were identified in human cells; any mechanistic parallels to Drosophila melanogaster remain speculative and will require further investigation.
Further, we identified vA-202 as a human-specific lncRNA that is strongly induced by γ-irradiation. vA-202 is primarily nuclear and upregulated alongside DDR markers, including γ-H2AX, ATM, and p53. Overexpression of vA-202 amplifies the DDR, leading to G0/G1 cell cycle arrest, apoptosis, and reduced proliferation, while its knockdown diminishes DDR signaling and increases resistance to irradiation. These results indicate that vA-202 plays a functional role in mediating the cellular response to genotoxic stress. Our data suggest that vA-202 modulates PICT-1–MDM2–p53 axis, promoting p53 activation and apoptosis as a quality control mechanism to eliminate cells with irreparable DNA damage. Notably, the integration of vA-202, a rapidly evolving, species-specific lncRNA, into a conserved DDR pathway exemplifies how newly emerged non-coding elements can augment ancient regulatory networks. We also explored the role of HYDIN2, a human-specific paralog of HYDIN at the 1q21.1 locus, shaped by SDs and chromatin reorganization. HYDIN2 shows enriched expression in the brain and regulates pathways related to neurodevelopment and regionalization. Intriguingly, HYDIN2 depletion led to upregulation of several φgenes, including ANAPC1P2, suggesting that HYDIN2 depletion perturbs the regulatory network governing φgene expression. This alteration may reflect broader transcriptional or post-transcriptional reprogramming rather than direct targeting of φgenes by HYDIN2. We therefore interpret φgene upregulation as a secondary consequence of disrupted RNA regulatory homeostasis, although the precise molecular mechanisms remain to be elucidated [ – ].
Further, recent developments in ribosome profiling and mass spectrometry have demonstrated that a subset of φgenes are not only transcribed but also translated to generate small, previously uncharacterized proteins [ – ]. Consistent with these observations, the five chimeric φgenes identified in our study were predicted to harbor ORFs with the potential to generate truncated, chimeric, or sub-proteins retaining functional domains of their ancestral counterparts. Such φgene-derived proteins may exert dominant-negative, decoy, or gain-of-function effects, thereby providing a route for functional exaptation and the acquisition of novel regulatory or cellular roles. This possibility is exemplified by ANAPC1P2, which is predicted to encode a truncated form of ANAPC1, potentially enabling partial domain retention and functional interference with the parental protein. Together, these findings expand the functional landscape of φgenes and underscore their relevance not only at the transcriptional level but also as contributors to cellular signaling and proteome complexity.

## Supplementary Material
gkag375_Supplemental_Files

## Acknowledgements
We sincerely thank Prof. Judith Clements (Translational Research Institute, Australia) for the generous gift of cell lines OVCA420, OVCA432, and CAOV3; Dr S. Mok (MD Anderson Cancer Center, TX) for OV90; Prof. V. Magdalen (Klinische Forschergruppe der Frauenklinik, TU München) for OVMZ6; Dr Pritha Ray (Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research & Education in Cancer, Tata Memorial Centre) for IOSE364; Dr Ramray Bhat (Indian Institute of Science) for FT282; Dr Majumdar and late Dr Shiras (NCCS) for providing S2 and HEK293T, respectively. We thank Dr Majumdar (NCCS) for generously allowing us to use his lab, instruments, and consumables to carry out Drosophila experiments and for providing the Eya-GAL4 pUAST control construct. The efforts of Meghna Killaru (GKAP-KIF27, EMB-TRIM43, BANP-RUNDC2A, RP4-HYDIN), Mrunal Desai (PMS2P2-POLR2J3), Ankita More (HIC2-PI4KA), and Vartika Khanchandani (RMND5A-ANAPC1) in validating fusion point sequences are gratefully acknowledged. We extend our thanks to Swarali Gogate for her contributions to standardization of NT2 cell differentiation. The support rendered by NCCS Cell Repository in providing cell lines, culture media, and STR profiling services is appreciated. We also thank the NCCS flow cytometry, bioimaging, and sequencing core facilities for their support in data collection. The graphical abstract was created using BioRender (https://biorender.com/brnezne). Additional illustrations were created using BioRender, with links provided in the figure legends. All experiments were approved by the NCCS Institutional Ethics Committee (IEC) and Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBSC) and were conducted in accordance with institutional guidelines and applicable laws.

Author contributions: A.R.J., S.S., Y.L.K.: Contributed equally toward data curation, experimentation, analysis, data interpretation, writing—original draft, and editing; K.H.: Experimentation, data analysis; K.T.: Experimentation, data analysis; S.P.: Data analysis; A.V.: Experimentation; G.C.: Experimentation; A.M.M.: Experimentation; S.A.B.: Conceptualization, methodology, supervision, data analysis and interpretation, project administration, manuscript writing, editing, and finalization.

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data is available at NAR online.

## Conflict of interest
None declared.

## Funding
This work was supported by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), India (extramural funds-BT/PR44676/MED/30/2399/2022) and intramural grants from BRIC-National Centre for Cell Science (BRIC-NCCS) Pune, India. The open access charges are supported by BRIC-NCCS, Pune. Research fellowships availed are as follows: A.R.J. intramural grants from BRIC-NCCS, S.S. from DBT, India, Y.L.K. from the University Grant Commission (UGC), India; S.P. received project fellowship through extramural funds from DBT, India (BT/PR44676/MED/30/2399/2022).

## Data availability
The RNA sequencing datasets supporting the conclusions of this article are available in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository (GSE298099, GSE311331). Proteomics datasets are available on PRIDE database under the accession numbers PXD070150, PXD070186, and PXD074698.