pmcNucleic Acids ResNucleic Acids Res4narnarNucleic Acids Research0305-10481362-4962Oxford University PressPMC12390760PMC12390760.112390760123907604086705010.1093/nar/gkaf800gkaf8001AcademicSubjects/SCI00010RNA and RNA-protein complexesNuclear Argonaute:miRNA complexes recognize target sequences within chromatin-associated RNA and silence gene expression
HofmanCristina R
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas TX 75390, United StatesHuJiaxin
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas TX 75390, United StatesBrylRut
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas TX 75390, United Stateshttps://orcid.org/0009-0001-2072-591XTseVictor
UT Southwestern Medical Center, Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, 6001 Forest Park Road, Dallas TX 75390, United Stateshttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8973-493XCoreyDavid R ]. Argonaute (AGO) protein is loaded with a microRNA (miRNA) or synthetic duplex RNA to form the miRNA-induced silencing complex (miRISC). In the cytoplasm, miRISC acts as a programmable regulatory factor, with the small RNA facilitating recognition of an RNA target by Watson–Crick base pairing. The AGO protein protects the small RNA, promotes binding to target messenger RNA (mRNA), and silences these targets through either enzymatic cleavage or recruitment of additional proteins for translational repression and transcript degradation [ ]. The diversity of synthetic RNAs is essentially infinite and there are hundreds of well validated miRNAs in human cells, suggesting the potential to target almost any accessible cellular RNA.
In mammalian cells, regulation by miRNAs is generally associated with the silencing of genes in the cytoplasm. However, miRNAs [ ] and protein factors like AGO proteins [ ] are also present and functional in mammalian cell nuclei. Exogenous synthetic RNAs have been shown to modulate transcription [ ] and splicing [ ]. Endogenous miRNAs have been found to control transcription [ , ], splicing [ , ], silence mobile transposons in quiescent cells [ ], and influence gene expression in spermatogenic cells through association with meiotic chromatin [ ]. In other organisms, including Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Arabidopsis thaliana, endogenous RISC has roles in regulation of chromatin dynamics [ ] in addition to its role in transcriptional regulation. While these studies suggest the potential for diverse and robust nuclear regulation in mammalian cells, the full biological impact of nuclear miRNAs and their potential for modulating gene expression remains to be understood.
While miRNAs have hundreds of potential targets inside human cells [ ] and may produce many statistically significant effects on gene expression, target identification is rarely a simple task [ , ]. Our previous work found that AGO binding in a gene 3′-untranslated region (3′-UTR) alone does not always lead to repression [ ]. Other studies have shown that many individual miRNAs are not essential for viability or development [ , ]. These findings suggest that commonly used methods of target identification, including genetic manipulation of miRNAs or CLIP to identify AGO binding sites, may produce false positive results, fail to identify promising candidates, and may not completely consider the biology underlying the interactions. While bioinformatic target predictions can be used to identify seed sequence complementarity, analysis must take into account evolving definitions about the identity of functional miRNAs [ , ]. Ultimately, the identity and impact of regulatory miRNAs likely varies among cell types and finding the biologically significant miRNA:target interactions among the many potential interactions can be like finding a needle in a haystack [ ].
Fortunately, contemporary experimental tools allow higher confidence identification of some miRNA:target interactions. While previous work largely relied on genetic manipulation and microarrays [ , , ], advances in crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) allow us to identify experimentally identify AGO2 binding sites [ ]. More specialized CLIP techniques even allow for the identification of specific miRNA:mRNA interactions [ , ]. While beneficial advances, these techniques have limitations and offer no guarantee that they will identify all biologically relevant control points for miRNAs. However, in tandem, they offer powerful tools for prioritizing potential miRNA targets for experimental validation.
In this report, we use chimeric Enhanced Crosslinking Immunoprecipitation (eCLIP) [ ] to obtain complementary datasets that define potential miRNA targets in HCT116 human colorectal cancer cells. These data identify high mobility group AT-Hook 2 (HMGA2) as the best candidate for miRNA-mediated regulation. We demonstrate that recognition of the HMGA2 3′-untranslated region begins when the RNA is associated with chromatin and can also be detected throughout cell nuclei and the cytoplasm. Gene silencing can be observed in the nucleus. For HMGA2, however, changes in transcription and splicing are not observed. These data suggest that the journey of miRNA-mediated recognition and silencing can begin in mammalian cell nuclei and chromatin.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
Wild-type HCT116, DROSHA−/−, NLS–AGO2, and HT-29 cells were cultured in McCoy’s 5A medium supplemented with 10% FBS. HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS. All cells were grown at 37°C in 5% CO2 and passed when 70%–80% confluent.

## Preparation of cytoplasm, nucleus, nucleoplasm, and chromatin extracts
Cells were seeded at 2.5 × 106 cells per dish into 150 mm dishes and supplemented with 60 ml of fresh media on day 2 after seeding. Cells were harvested 3 days after seeding with trypsin. Subcellular fractionation to isolate cytoplasm and nucleus extracts were as previously described and isolation of cytoplasm, nucleoplasm, and chromatin extracts was as previously described with modifications [ , , ]. Samples were kept on ice and ice-cold buffers were used. Briefly, harvested cells were pelleted and washed with Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS). Cells were pelleted and lysed with hypotonic lysis buffer (HLB) (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 2.5% NP-40, and 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)). Nuclei were pelleted and the supernatant was collected as the cytoplasmic fraction. Nuclei were washed a total of six times with HLB. After washing, the nuclei were lysed with modified Wuarin-Schibler buffer (MWS) (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.0, 4 mM EDTA, 0.3 M NaCl, 1 M urea, and 1% NP-40). Chromatin was pelleted and supernatant was collected as the nucleoplasm fraction. Chromatin was washed twice with MWS and lysed by sonication in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 120 mM NaCl, 0.05% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT).

## Western blot analysis
Proteins were separated on 4%–20% gradient Mini-PROTEAN® TGXTM precast gels (Bio-Rad). After gel electrophoresis, proteins were wet transferred to nitrocellulose membrane (0.45 μM, GE Healthcare Life Sciences) at 100 V for 90 min. Membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 5% milk in 1× PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20. Blocked membranes were incubated with the primary antibodies in blocking buffer at 4°C on rocking platform overnight: anti-AGO1 1:1000 (Cell Signaling, #5053), anti-AGO2 1:2000 (Fujifilm Wako, 015-22031), anti-AGO3 1:1000 (Cell Signaling, #5054), anti-AGO4 1:1000 (Cell Signaling, #6913), anti-TNRC6A 1:5000 (A302-329A, Bethyl), anti-Drosha 1:500 (Cell Signaling, #3364), anti-Dicer (Cell Signaling, #3363), anti-Calnexin 1:5000 (Cell Signaling, #2433), anti-β-tubulin 1:5000 (Sigma–Aldrich, T5201), SP1 1:5000 (Cell Signaling, #5931), and Histone H3 1:20K (Cell Signaling, #2650). After primary antibody incubation, membranes were washed 3× for 10 min at room temperature with 1× PBS + 0.05% Tween-20 (PBST 0.05%) and then incubated for 1 h at room temperature with respective secondary antibodies in blocking buffer. Membranes were washed again 3× 15 min in PBST 0.05%. Washed membranes were soaked with HRP substrate according to manufacturer’s recommendations (SuperSignal™ West Pico Chemiluminescent substrate, Thermo Scientific) and exposed to films. The films were scanned, and bands were quantified using ImageJ software.

## Chimeric eCLIP (miR-eCLIP)
Cells were seeded in 150 mm dishes and grown until 80%–90% confluent. Cells were then UV-crosslinked on ice at 254 nm (400 mJ/cm2). Cells were collected or fractionated as described above. Prior to storage, cell pellets and lysates were flash frozen.
For miR-eCLIP experiments, the standard eCLIP protocol [ ] was modified to enable chimeric ligation of miRNA and mRNA [ ]. Studies were performed by Eclipse Bioinnovations Inc. (San Diego, www.eclipsebio.com). Cells were then lysed in 1000 μl of eCLIP lysis mix and sonicated (QSonica Q800R2) for 5 min, 30 s on/30 s off with an energy setting of 75% amplitude. The chromatin fractions from UV crosslinked cells were lysed in 1000 μl of eCLIP lysis mix and sonicated (QSonica Q800R2) for 17 min, 30 s on/30 s off with an energy setting of 75% amplitude. The cytoplasmic fractions from UV crosslinked cells were sonicated (QSonica Q800R2) for 5 min, 30 s on/30 s off with an energy setting of 75% amplitude and diluted in 2× volume of 1.5× eCLIP lysis buffer. Equivalent amounts of sample lysates were digested with RNase-I (Ambion). A primary mouse monoclonal AGO2/EIF2C2 antibody (sc-53521, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was incubated for 1 h with magnetic beads pre-coupled to the secondary antibody (M-280 Sheep Anti-Mouse IgG Dynabeads, Thermo Fisher 11202D) and added to the homogenized lysate for overnight immunoprecipitation at 4°C. Following overnight IP, 2% of the sample was taken as the paired size-matched input with the remainder magnetically separated and washed with eCLIP high stringency wash buffers. The chromatin samples were subjected to DNase treatment (TURBO DNase Thermo Fisher) followed by eCLIP high stringency wash step. Chimeric ligation was then performed on-bead at room temperature for 1 h with T4 RNA ligase (NEB). IP samples were then dephosphorylated with alkaline phosphatase (FastAP, Thermo Fisher) and T4 PNK (NEB), and an RNA adapter was ligated to the 3′ ends. IP and input samples were cut from the membrane at the AGO2 protein band size to 75 kDa above. Western blot was visualized using anti-AGO2 primary antibody (50683-RP02, SinoBiological) at a 1:4000 dilution, with TrueBlot anti-rabbit secondary antibody (18-8816-31, Rockland) at 1:8000 dilution. RNA adapter ligation, reverse transcription, DNA adapter ligation, and PCR amplification were performed as previously described.
After sequencing, samples were processed with Eclipsebio’s proprietary analysis pipeline (v1). Unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) were pruned from read sequences using umi_tools (v1.1.1). Next, 3′ adapters were trimmed from reads using cutadapt (v3.2). Reads were then mapped to a custom database of repetitive elements and rRNA sequences. All nonrepeat mapped reads were mapped to the hg38 genome using STAR (v2.7.7a). PCR duplicates were removed using umi_tools (v1.1.1). AGO2 eCLIP peaks were identified within eCLIP samples using the peak caller CLIPper (v2.0.1). For each peak, IP versus input fold enrichments and P-values were calculated.
miRNAs from miRBase (v22.1) were “reverse mapped” to any reads that did not map to repetitive elements or the genome using bowtie (v1.2.3). The miRNA portion of each read was then trimmed, and the remainder of the read was mapped to the genome using STAR (v2.7.7a). PCR duplicates were resolved using umi_tools (v1.1.1), and miRNA target clusters were identified using CLIPper (v2.0.1). Each cluster was annotated with the names of miRNAs responsible for that target. Peaks were annotated using transcript information from GENCODE v41 with the following priority hierarchy to define the final annotation of overlapping features: protein coding transcript (CDS, UTRs, and intron), followed by noncoding transcripts (exon and intron).

## Transfection of miRNA inhibitors and mimics
miRNA mimics were ordered from IDT. The miRCURY LNA™ miRNA inhibitors were purchased from QIAGEN. All transfections used Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen). Cells were seeded into six-well plates 24 h before transfection, at 300 K cells per well for wild-type HCT116 cells and 450 K for DROSHA-/- cells. At the next day, 50 nM of miRNA mimics or inhibitors were transfected into cells as previously described [ ]. Twenty-four hours later, cells were replaced with full culture media. Cells were harvest for quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) (48 h) after transfection. Full sequence information for miRNA inhibitors and mimics are listed in .

## RT-qPCR
Total RNA was extracted from cells using TRIzol reagent. Reverse transcription was performed using high-capacity reverse transcription kit (Applied Biosystems) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Two micrograms of total RNA was used per 20 μl of reaction mixture. qPCR was performed on a CFX96 Touch real-time PCR system (Bio-Rad) using iTaq SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad). PCR reactions were done in triplicates at 55°C for 2 min, 95°C for 3 min, 95°C for 30 s, and 60°C for 30 s for 40 cycles in an optical 96-well plate. The primers used are listed in . Data were normalized relative to the level of an internal control gene RPL19. Statistical testing was performed using Student’s t-test relative to negative control samples.

## RNAPII ChIP-qPCR
Cells were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde at RT for 10 min and crosslinking was quenched with glycine. Cells were then harvested by scraping in PBS. Cells were pelleted and nuclei were isolated with HLB (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 2.5% NP-40, and 0.5 mM DTT) and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.4, 120 mM NaCl, 0.05% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, and 1 mM DTT). Samples were sonicated for 20 min (30 s on, 30 s off, 50% amplitude, Qsonica Q800R3). Nuclear lysate was precleared, then incubated overnight with RNAPII antibody (05-623, Millipore Sigma, 3 μg) or normal mouse IgG (12-371, Millipore Sigma) in immunoprecipitation buffer. After antibody–protein–DNA complex was recovered with 80 μl of protein G Dynabeads (Invitrogen) for 2 h, the beads were washed with low salt, high salt, LiCl, and TE buffers (1 ml each, 5 min at 4°C). The complex was eluted twice with 250 μl of elution buffer (1% SDS, 0.1 M NaHCO3) at RT. Cross-linking was reversed by adding NaCl to a final concentration of 200 mM and heating at 65°C for 2 h. Protein was digested by incubating with proteinase K at 42°C for 50 min, followed by phenol–chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. Samples were dissolved in nuclease free water and analyzed by qPCR. Primer sets used are listed in .

## Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) splicing assay
A qPCR splicing assay for the HMGA2 gene was developed by adapting methods as described [ ]. A qPCR splicing assay was also developed for the TBP gene as an internal qPCR control. Exon–exon junction spanning primers were designed to have optimal target specificity, melting temperatures, and amplicon size. These primer sets were validated to amplify regions of interest in silico. Melt curve analysis for each primer set also demonstrates robust amplification. Each primer set used in the HMGA2 and TBP qPCR splicing assay is shown in . All primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies.
Twenty nanograms of complementary DNA (cDNA) corresponding to a given experimental condition was used as a qPCR template for the iTaq™ Universal SYBR® Green Supermix reaction (Bio-Rad Laboratories) following the manufacturer’s instructions. All reactions were set-up in 384-well qPCR plates and were run on a CFX384 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System, followed by preliminary data analysis done in the CFX Maestro Software. As described in Harvey et al. (2021), each exon inclusion:skipping ratio was calculated using the formula: 2−ΔCt, where ΔCt = (Ct corresponding to the inclusion mRNA isoform – Ct corresponding to the skipping mRNA isoform) from the same sample.
Statistical significance in differences between experimental conditions was determined using two-way grouped analysis of variance (ANOVA), and Tukey’s post-hoc multiple comparisons test. All statistical tests were performed in GraphPad Prism 10. Values were determined to be statistically significant if the calculated P-value was below an α value of ≤ 0.05.

## Results

## miRNA-associated protein factors in the chromatin fraction
Previous work has detected miRNA-associated proteins and miRNAs in mammalian cell nuclei [ , , , , ] and demonstrated their ability to modulate gene splicing and transcription [ , ]. While these data imply that regulation could occur in association with chromatin, direct observation of chromatin-bound AGO or miRNA species has been complicated by competing demands during purification. Isolation of chromatin must be stringent enough to exclude cytoplasm and nucleoplasm but not so stringent as to wash away chromatin-associated AGO protein, AGO:target RNA complexes, and AGO:miRNA complexes. To address these challenges, we chose to optimize conditions for the isolation of cytoplasm and nuclear fractions in HCT116 colorectal cancer-derived cells.
We focus on HCT116 cells because we possess CRISPR–Cas9-knockout cell lines lacking critical miRNA-associated protein factors and a CRISPR–Cas9-knockin AGO2-nuclear localization signal line (AGO2-NLS). Starting from published subcellular fractionation protocols [ , , ], we systematically optimized pH, detergent percentage, and salt concentration of our fractionation buffers to identify conditions that prioritized separation of nucleoplasm and chromatin, while maintaining maximum protein content in the chromatin lysate. Following subcellular fractionation, we observed AGO2 protein in the chromatin fraction and confirmed the purity of the fractions using protein markers for the cytoplasm (β-tubulin), nucleoplasm (SP1), endoplasmic reticulum (calnexin), and chromatin (Histone H3) by western analysis (Fig. – ).
 There are four AGO protein paralogs in mammalian cells (AGO1–4) with AGO2 being the most abundant in the HCT116 cells used in these studies [ ]. AGO2 [ ], and to a lesser extent AGO3 [ ], possess the ability to catalyze the cleavage of RNA substrates. AGO1-4 bind miRNAs similarly [ ]. Previous quantitative experiments found that in HCT116 cells, AGO expression follows the trend of AGO2 > AGO1>>AGO2 > AGO4 [ ]. Following fractionation into cytoplasm, nucleoplasm and chromatin subcellular fractions, we found that AGO1–4 are present in all compartments of the cells and are associated with the chromatin fraction (Fig. ). Because the western analysis uses different anti-AGO antibodies to detect each AGO variant, the relative amounts of the AGO variants cannot be determined from the western analysis.
Drosha and Dicer are the RNase III enzymes which catalyze the production of mature miRNAs and function in the nucleus and cytoplasm, respectively. We found that Drosha is mainly present in chromatin, while Dicer is present in the cytoplasm and chromatin (Fig. ), consistent with previous results [ , , ].
Human GW182 or trinucleotide repeat containing protein 6A (TNRC6A) is a scaffolding protein that interacts with AGO2 and facilitates miRNA-mediated degradation of transcripts [ ]. This scaffolding function contributes to cooperative binding of multiple AGO complexes and bridges interactions with other functional proteins.
Our data show that human TNRC6A is present in all compartments of the cell, including chromatin (Fig. ), suggesting that it is available to act as a scaffold to promote complex formation with other proteins. We note that our gel loading involves equal protein, not equal cell equivalents. Our analysis is designed to evaluate purity and does not represent the absolute levels of TNRC6A or other proteins in the different chromatin, nucleoplasm, or cytoplasm relative to one another. We have not attempted to optimize recovery of cytoplasmic proteins since our focus is on chromatin and our results do not imply that there is more TNRC6A in cell nuclei relative to cytoplasm. We and others have reported previously nuclear TNRC6A [ , , , , ] and used mass spectrometry to characterize its interacting protein partners in nuclear lysate [ , ]. Similar uncertainty due to protocols being optimized for purity rather than quantitative recovery applies to the relative nuclear localization of Dicer and the AGO variants.
We used our NLS–AGO2 HCT116 cells to provide us with an alternative method for examining the nuclear interactions of AGO2 by chimeric eCLIP that is independent of subcellular fractionation. This NLS–AGO2 cell line has a nuclear localization sequence added to the N-terminus of the endogenous locus of the AGO2 gene. This construct avoids overexpression, but forces endogenous AGO2 to localize to the nucleus [ ] and chromatin (Fig. ). Therefore, immunoprecipitation using an anti-AGO2 antibody will isolate nuclear AGO2:RNA interactions without the need for a prior subcellular fractionation step, providing a complementary strategy for examining nuclear associations.

## Scheme for chimeric eCLIP
Interactions between miRNAs and cellular RNA targets can be predicted by computation. However, it can be difficult to sort through the many different predicted targets. To increase the likelihood that time-consuming experimental validation is focused on the most promising targets, it is useful to complement computational analysis with physical methods that detect sites where physical interactions between miRNAs, AGO proteins, and RNA targets occur.
We chose to use AGO2 chimeric enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (chimeric eCLIP) to identify these physical interactions between miRISC and its RNA targets [ ] (Fig. ). eCLIP employs UV crosslinking prior to harvesting cells, allowing for detection of interactions that occur within intact, living cells. Cellular fractions are then obtained and an anti-AGO2 antibody is used to pull down the protein:RNA complex. To increase the likelihood of detecting direct miRNA–RNA target interactions, the immunoprecipitation is followed by a ligation step that connects a miRNA to its mRNA target.
 The ligation step that joins miRNA and RNA target is not efficient and yields two groups of RNA products following digestion of the AGO2 protein. miRNA–mRNA pairs where the ligation was successful will be chimeric, with a linker connecting them. These chimeric reads identify direct miRNA binding to targets—information that establishes interactions with high confidence. The remaining reads, a much larger portion, will remain nonchimeric and identify RNAs that associate with AGO2 (Fig. ).
Both nonchimeric and chimeric reads are derived from the same sample, representing parts of the whole regarding AGO2 binding. Chimeric reads identify direct miRNA:target interactions while nonchimeric reads identify AGO2 bound RNAs. Nonchimeric binding events are inferred to be mediated by a miRNA, but the specific miRNA must be predicted based primarily on sequence information. A miRNA:target interaction that is determined from nonchimeric reads is less certain evidence for miRNA:RNA recognition. There are, however, more nonchimeric reads, providing a deeper pool of candidate gene targets. Together, chimeric and nonchimeric offer a wide pool of insight into AGO2 binding that can be used for prioritization of genes for experimental validation.
To gain insight into whether functional targets for miRNAs could be identified in chromatin, we performed anti-AGO2 chimeric eCLIP experiments in duplicate in four different sample types. These included whole cell lysate, isolated cytoplasm lysate, and isolated chromatin lysate from wild-type HCT116 cells. We also evaluated whole cell lysate from NLS–AGO2 cells to observe whole nucleus AGO2 interactions without the need for subcellular fractionation ( and ).

## Chimeric eCLIP:RNA target regions and miRNAs
Both total (∼56–62 million) and final nonchimeric (9.5–16.6 million) reads were similar in every sample regardless of whether the original was whole cell, cytoplasm, whole nucleus, or chromatin ( ). In all samples, the number of chimeric reads was much lower than the number of nonchimeric reads because the generation of chimeric reads involves a ligation step that limits the efficiency of detection of the ligation step that allows generation of chimeric reads. Lower detection of chimeric reads is consistent with prior results using other methods that report ligation efficiencies ranging from 1.5% to 5% [ ]. Chimeric reads were at least 10-fold lower in the chromatin sample (∼14 000 reads) relative to whole cell (∼100 000 reads), cytoplasm (∼170 000 reads), and nuclear (75 000 reads) samples.
For cytoplasmic RNA, most nonchimeric reads were associated with recognition within the 3′-untranslated region (3′-UTR) (Fig. and  ). By contrast in the nucleus and chromatin fraction, most peaks are observed within intronic RNA, likely because of the much greater fraction of intronic RNA present prior to splicing and nuclear export. Chimeric AGO2 peaks in the cytoplasm were mainly found within the 3′-UTR (Fig. and  ), like the nonchimeric binding peaks. By contrast to the similar results in cytoplasm for nonchimeric and chimeric AGO2 peaks, data from nuclei and chromatin showed a shift to binding within the 3′-UTR (Fig. and  ).
Why would chimeric reads in the chromatin or nuclear fractions cluster within 3′-UTRs whereas nonchimeric reads cluster within introns? We hypothesize that the greater percentage of chimeric reads within the 3′-UTR in nucleus or chromatin (Fig. and  ) is due to miRNA:AGO2:3′-UTR complexes being stronger and hence more detectable by the relatively less efficient chimeric eCLIP. In addition, many intronic RNAs will likely be present at lower concentrations than well expressed mature mRNAs like HMGA2.
The chimeric reads also contain information about the specific miRNAs mediating target RNA recognition (Fig. ). Using the reads for the top 20 miRNAs in the chimeric reads from whole cell wild-type HCT116 eCLIP samples, we found that eight miRNA families make up ∼50% of the total reads. In the cytoplasm and nucleus, these eight miRNA families account for 46.5% and 51.6% of the chimeric miRNA reads (Fig. ). The number of chimeric peaks in the chromatin fraction was too small to draw conclusions about the broader distribution of miRNAs (but was adequate to identify individual targets, see below).

## Prioritizing genes for experimental analysis
To facilitate experimental validation, we prioritized genes that (i) had >5 chimeric AGO2 peaks in the 3′-UTR in either the cytoplasm, whole nucleus, or chromatin or at least one chimeric peak in all samples (cytoplasm, nucleus, and chromatin) and (ii) had altered expression in wild-type versus DROSHA-/- cells. Drosha protein is the most upstream enzyme in the miRNA biogenesis pathway. Knockout of the protein leads to depletion of most mature miRNAs [ ] and gene expression changes would suggest a potential miRNA-mediated effect on gene expression. From this prioritization, we chose five genes for experimental analysis, HMGA2, MYC, ZFP36, ZP36L1, and TNFRSF12A ( ). All these genes have at least one chimeric peak in their 3′-UTR in the cytoplasm and nucleus and HMGA2, MYC, and TNFRSF12A have chimeric peaks detected in chromatin. Each gene also has nonchimeric AGO2 peaks within their 3′-UTRs of varying strengths ( ). The DROSHA-/- cells were used for comparative analysis relative to wild-type HCT116 cells to evaluate the effects of removing most miRNAs from HCT116 cells.
Of these gene candidates, high mobility group AT-Hook 2 (HMGA2) was the most compelling. Both nonchimeric and chimeric AGO2 peaks were detected in the 3′-UTR of HMGA2 in the cytoplasm, nucleus and chromatin (Fig. , – and ), and HMGA2 expression in DROSHA-/- cells was upregulated relative to wild-type (Fig. ). Together, these data suggest a potential de-repression of miRNA-mediated silencing and is consistent with canonical gene silencing mechanisms.
 

## HMGA2, a model for miRNA-mediated recognition
miRNA-mediated gene silencing is most effective when multiple miRNAs bind at adjacent sites [ ]. Binding of multiple miRNAs in proximity to one another permits cooperative interactions through the scaffolding protein TNRC6 which can bind up to three AGO proteins at one time. This allows TNRC6 to bridge three AGO:miRNA complexes and stabilize their binding to target mRNA [ ].
For example, within the 3′-UTR of HMGA2, chimeric eCLIP detected >20 miRNA binding peaks in the cytoplasm (Fig. and  ) and 8 miRNA binding peaks in the nucleus and chromatin (Fig. and C, and  ). Of these binding peaks, we observed four binding sites for the let-7 family of miRNAs using whole cell, nuclear or cytoplasmic anti-AGO2 chimeric eCLIP (Fig. and B, and  and and B), and three binding sites by chimeric eCLIP of chromatin (Fig. and  and D). Comparative analysis suggests that the let-7 seed sequence at these binding sites are well-conserved ( ).
The involvement of let-7 is consistent with previous computational and experimental analyses implicating let-7 in the regulation of HMGA2 expression in other cancer-derived cell lines [ ]. The let-7 family is one of the more prevalent miRNAs detected by chimeric eCLIP (Fig. ). The combination of compelling chimeric eCLIP data and data implicating let-7 in the control of HMGA2 in other cell types led us to focus on exploring the let-7/HMGA2 axis as a model for understanding the contributions of nuclear and cytoplasmic interactions to gene silencing.

## HMGA2, a model for miRNA-mediated gene regulation
To find experimental support for the role of let-7 family miRNAs in the regulation of HMGA2 gene expression in HCT116 cells, we used complementary methods for probing miRNA-mediated regulation using RNA isolated from HCT116 whole cell lysate. As mentioned, Drosha is the protein responsible for production of most mature miRNAs and its knockout leads to the depletion of most mature miRNAs in HCT116 cells [ ]. Measurement of HMGA2 levels by qPCR showed that, relative to WT HCT116, the HMGA2 transcript is upregulated, >10-fold in DROSHA-/- cells (Fig. ).
Western analysis of protein levels revealed no detectable expression of HMGA2 protein in wild-type HCT116 cells, even after long exposure of film after blotting (Fig. ). Expression of HMGA2 protein was increased in DROSHA-/- HCT116 cells. This result is impressive evidence of the power of miRNA-mediated silencing to control protein expression even more stringently than RNA expression.
While analysis of the DROSHA-/- cells confirmed that miRNAs are involved in HMGA2 regulation, we next wanted to determine whether the let-7 family of miRNAs that we had identified through eCLIP play a direct role in this regulation. Duplex RNAs that mimic the sequence of let-7 would be expected to also mimic the ability of let-7 to repress gene expression [ ]. To test this hypothesis, we used DROSHA-/- HCT116 cells that lack endogenous expression of let-7 miRNAs [ ]. Following transfection of a let-7a mimic, HMGA2 expression was decreased relative to a noncomplementary control duplex, a miR-27 mimic, or a mismatched duplex based on the let-7a sequence (Fig. ). We also observed that HMGA2 protein expression follows the same trend (Fig. ). The ability of let-7a mimics to suppress HMGA2 expression suggests that let-7 family miRNAs play a dominant role in regulation even though there are predicted binding sites for other miRNAs.
Synthetic oligonucleotides that are complementary to miRNAs (miRNA inhibitors or antimiRs) can block the action of miRNAs and reverse their control of gene expression [ ]. To test the effect of let-7 miRNAs on HMGA2 expression, we used a let-7 miRNA family inhibitor that selectively blocks activity of the let-7 family members in wild-type HCT116 cells. Transfection of the let-7 family miRNA inhibitor increased HMGA2 expression (Fig. ), while a miRNA inhibitor targeting the miR-29 family or a noncomplementary control had no effect on HMGA2 expression (Fig. ). Together, these results further support that the let-7 family of miRNAs play a direct role in the regulation of HMGA2
expression.
TNRC6 is a scaffolding protein that interacts with AGO2 and is critical for miRNA-mediated inhibition of translation [ ]. AGO2 also retains catalytic activity that does not require TNRC6 when the guide RNA and target RNA are perfectly complementary [ , ]. To separate these two potential pathways of miRNA-mediated silencing, we chose to use our TNRC6AB-/- cells to examine the necessity of the TNRC6 paralogs for HMGA2 silencing. TNRC6 has 3 paralogs, and in the TNRC6AB-/- cell line, TNRC6C protein expression is upregulated [ ]. As a result, testing the effects of reducing expression of TNRC6A, TNRCB and TNRC6C is best accomplished by introducing an siRNA designed to reduce TNRC6C into TNRC6AB-/- cells.
When we transfected miRNA inhibitor targeting the let-7 family into TNRC6AB-/- cells (elevated TNRC6C expression, not a TNRC6 family knockout), we observed increased HMGA2 expression, consistent with residual let-7 mediated gene silencing (Fig. ). When TNRC6C was also silenced using an siRNA, HMGA2 expression returned to control level, consistent with the TNRC6 paralogs acting together to contribute to miRNA-mediated regulation of HMGA2. These data are consistent with previous work suggesting that the TNRC6 paralogs can compensate for one another and loss of all three is necessary to observe their full impact [ , ].
When a let-7a mimic was transfected into TNRC6AB-/- cells, we observed a decrease in HMGA2 expression, consistent enhanced silencing by the synthetic miRNA. When TNRC6C was also silenced, addition of the let-7a mimic had no significant effect on gene expression (Fig. ). While not definitive with regards to mechanism, our data modulating let-7 activity in TNRC6 deficient cells is consistent with the conclusion that HMGA2 silencing may occur through a mechanism dependent on the TNRC6 family of proteins, like the canonical miRNA-mediated mechanism of translational repression.

## Regulation of other candidate genes
We also examined the potential for miRNA-mediated regulation of our other candidate genes, MYC, ZFP36, ZFP36L1, and TNFRSF12A. For TNFRSF12A, we observed nonchimeric and chimeric AGO2 binding in the 3′-UTR and binding by miR-19 in the cytoplasm, whole nucleus, and chromatin ( and  ), and these binding sites are evolutionarily well conserved ( ). Transfection of miR-19a miRNA mimics in a DROSHA-/- background led to silencing of the TNFRSF12A mature transcript in whole cell, cytoplasm and nucleus ( and F), but had no impact on the pre-mRNA ( and G). While not as in depth as HMGA2, TNFRSF12A is an additional example of a gene candidate identified through chimeric eCLIP that seems to be regulated by miRNAs.
For MYC, we observed nonchimeric AGO2 association and chimeric let-7 reads within the MYC 3′-UTR ( and  ). The let-7 seed sequence binding sites were relatively well conserved ( ). However, despite this evidence for AGO2 association, MYC expression was decreased in DROSHA-/- cells—a result opposite to what would be expected by canonical miRNA-mediated regulation ( and  ).
We observed no direct let-7 mediated impact on MYC gene expression. In DROSHA-/- cells, the transfection of let-7a mimics had no significant impact on the expression of MYC mRNA ( ). In wild-type cells, addition of let-7 family miRNA inhibitors had no significant effect on MYC expression in cell cytoplasm or nuclei ( and E). We observed a similar lack of correlation between AGO2 chimeric and nonchimeric binding and regulation of gene expression at the paralog ZFP36 and ZFP36L1 loci ( – ). Taken together, these data indicate that the presence of chimeric reads within a gene is no guarantee of observable biological regulation by candidate miRNAs.

## let-7 regulates HMGA2 RNA levels in cell nuclei
After establishing an experimental foundation to support let-7 mediated regulation of HMGA2 expression in whole cell lysate (Figs   and  ), we investigated whether the observed strong recognition of the HMGA2 3′-UTR by let-7 within the nucleus and chromatin (Fig. and C) contributes to the regulation of HMGA2 silencing. To test this hypothesis, we performed subcellular fractionation and evaluated nuclear and cytoplasmic levels of HMGA2 in DROSHA-/- cells. We also tested the impact of miRNA inhibitors and miRNA mimics on HMGA2 mRNA expression in the cytoplasm and nucleus. For comparison, we fractionated untreated WT and DROSHA-/- HCT116 cells and evaluated HMGA2 expression in both the nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions.
First, we examined the impact on HMGA2 expression in the cytoplasm, the canonical site of miRNA-mediated silencing. We observed that HMGA2 expression was increased in the cytoplasm of DROSHA-/- cells relative to wild-type (Fig. ). Inhibition of the let-7 family of miRNAs led to an increase in HMGA2 expression (Fig. ), and addition of a let-7a miRNA mimic reduced expression of HMGA2 in DROSHA-/- cells (Fig. ). As in whole cell, the silencing of HMGA2 in the cytoplasm was dependent on the presence of the TNRC6 paralogs (Fig. ). These results suggest that in the cytoplasm, HMGA2 is silenced through miRNA-mediated recognition of its 3′-UTR by let-7 miRNA loaded miRISC and subsequent translational repression, consistent with the canonical mechanism for cytoplasmic gene silencing by miRNAs.
 Our examination of the nuclear fraction revealed similar miRNA-mediated regulation of gene expression. In the nuclear fraction of DROSHA-/- the expression of HMGA2 was increased relative to WT (Fig. ). Transfection of let-7 family miRNA inhibitors led to an increase in HMGA2 expression (Fig. ) while transfection of a let-7a miRNA mimic in DROSHA-/- cells led to a decrease in expression (Fig. ). Further, silencing of HMGA2 in the nucleus was dependent on the TNRC6 paralogs, like in the cytoplasm (Fig. ). These observations support the hypothesis that binding of AGO2:miRNA complexes within chromatin-associated RNA and nuclear RNA may also contribute to the silencing of HMGA2.
To determine whether let-7 mediated inhibition of HMGA2 expression in cell nuclei is observed in other cells, we evaluated HT29 and HeLa cells. The expression of HMGA2 in HT29 and HeLa cells is lower than in HCT116 cells ( ). Despite the difference in expression levels, let-7 mediated regulation was similar. Addition of let-7 family miRNA inhibitors led to an increase in HMGA2 expression in whole cell ( and D), cytoplasm, and nucleus ( and E).

## HMGA2 expression is not controlled at the level of transcription or splicing
Previous studies from our laboratory and others had demonstrated that synthetic duplex RNAs can control gene transcription and gene splicing [ ]. These previous regulatory duplex RNAs, however, did not target the 3′-UTR. For regulating transcription, the duplex RNAs were complementary to noncoding RNAs that overlap the 5′ or 3′ terminus of target mRNAs [ , ]. For gene splicing, they were targeted near intron/exon junctions and splicing regulatory elements [ ]. While the regulatory region within HMGA2 3′-UTR is different from these previous studies, the precedent for regulating transcription or splicing led us to explore the potential for changes in HMGA2 transcription and splicing.
To test the hypothesis that let-7 miRNAs may regulate the HMGA2 transcript through modulation of transcription, we first examined the pre-mRNA transcript expression levels. In DROSHA-/- cells, we observed an increase in the HMGA2 pre-mRNA level (Fig. and  and B). While these data are consistent with a miRNA-mediated effect of HMGA2 transcription, they do not indicate that the effect is specific to an interaction at the HMGA2 gene.
 To evaluate the potential for a specific let-7-mediated control of HMGA2 expression, we used let-7 family miRNA inhibitors or let-7a mimics. Following transfection of let-7 miRNA family inhibitors in WT (Fig. , and  and D) or let-7a miRNA mimics in DROSHA-/- cells (Fig. C and  and F), we observed no significant change in the level of HMGA2 pre-mRNA.
Finally, we performed RNAPII ChIP-qPCR to measure the recruitment of RNA polymerase II to the HMGA2 promoter. Relative to WT, we observed no change in the recruitment of RNAPII to the HMGA2 promoter in the DROSHA-/- cells (Fig. and  ). Taken together, these data are consistent with the conclusion that indirect effects of miRNAs may increase HMGA2 transcription, but do not suggest a significant impact from let-7 binding to chromatin-associated RNA.
Alternatively, a change in HMGA2 expression could also be driven by changes in pre-mRNA splicing. To test this hypothesis, we designed a locus-wide qPCR splicing assay to measure how often a given HMGA2 exon is included in spliced mRNA compared to how often it is skipped (Fig. ). Primers designed to span exon-exon junctions allow for the specific detection of mRNA isoforms that include or skip a given HMGA2 exon ( ). Each exon’s inclusion:skipping ratio, normalized to the expression of the full-length mRNA, is therefore representative of an exon’s splicing efficiency.
 We first applied this assay to understand how loss of mature miRNAs in the DROSHA-/- cells might affect HMGA2 gene splicing. Relative to WT HCT116 cells, we observed that the splicing efficiency of each HMGA2 exon is similar in the DROSHA-/- and wild-type cells (Fig. ). To further test the hypothesis that let-7 miRNAs may regulate HMGA2 gene splicing, we repeated the same splicing assay using DROSHA-/- cells transfected with either a let-7a mimic or a noncomplementary (CM) control. We observed only minor differences in splicing efficiency relative to the CM control (Fig. ). A similar qPCR splicing assay done in parallel targeting the reference gene TBP, an internal control for each experimental condition presented, demonstrates that miRNA-mediated splicing modulation of HMGA2 by let-7a is sequence specific ( ). Our data do not support the conclusion that let-7 binding has a major effect on splicing within HMGA2 mRNA.

## Discussion

## Cytoplasmic and nuclear miRNA-mediated regulation of gene expression
Complexes between AGO and RNA are programmable recognition elements. AGO protein protects the RNA (either endogenous miRNA or synthetic designed duplex RNA) and facilitates target recognition. The small RNA component directs the complex to target sequences. While the canonical targets for miRNAs are within the 3′-UTRs of cytoplasmic RNAs [ ], there is no theoretical reason why sites outside the 3′-UTR cannot be targeted, including targets within mammalian cell nuclei.
Synthetic duplex RNAs can complex with AGO to control gene transcription [ ] and regulate gene splicing [ ]. AGO:RNA complexes complementary to the disease-associated repeat RNAs of Friedreich’s Ataxia [ , ], Fuchs Dystrophy [ , ], and C9orf72-related ALS [ ] can block R-loop formation or protein association. Localization of AGO protein to cell nuclei when cells are grown to high confluence can de-repress cytoplasmic miRNA targets [ ].
While these reports are intriguing and suggest versatile mechanisms for nuclear miRNAs and their regulation, most work has focused on the action of synthetic, designed RNAs. The unanswered question is whether the robust impacts of designed duplex RNAs in cell nuclei are reflected in widespread, biologically significant effects on the regulation of cellular gene expression by miRNAs. Our results have identified the potential for miRNAs to bind chromatin-associated RNA and silence endogenous nuclear targets.
Previous work from our laboratory [ , ] and from Sarshad et al. [ ] revealed that protein factors involved in the miRNA pathway were present and formed complexes in cell nuclei. Here, we confirm that chimeric eCLIP is a robust methodology for understanding the details of miRNA-mediated gene regulation, that AGO2:miRNA complexes assemble on chromatin, and that canonical miRNA-mediated gene silencing in the cytoplasm may be supplemented by gene silencing in cell nuclei. As chimeric eCLIP and other analytical techniques become more powerful, and as other cellular systems are investigated, it is possible that a broader role for biological regulation by nuclear miRNAs might become apparent. These potential roles for nuclear miRNAs may reveal new insights into endogenous processes and new starting points for the design of therapeutic agents that target RNA.

## Identification HMGA2:let-7 regulation using anti-AGO2 chimeric eCLIP
Identifying suspected interactions through seed sequence complementarity between miRNAs and RNA targets can be accomplished with computational analysis. Computational analysis, however, will identify many potential sites for biological regulation. The challenge is to identify methods that prioritize sites that are most likely to be significant for cellular regulation to justify the experimental effort necessary for rigorous validation.
To meet our criteria as a “high priority target,” a site was required to meet the following criteria: (i) nonchimeric AGO2 peak density, (ii) at least five chimeric AGO2 peaks in one fraction or at least one chimeric AGO2 peak in all fractions, (iii) the miRNAs revealed by chimeric eCLIP belong to well-expressed miRNA families, and (iv) a significant change in the expression of target genes in wild type versus DROSHA-/- cells.
Our chimeric eCLIP data revealed few genes that met these criteria ( ). Further experimental validation showed that one of these candidates (Fig. –  and  – ), HMGA2, was a strong candidate for direct repression by miRNAs in HCT116 cells. Regulation by let-7 family miRNAs was supported by data showing rescued gene silencing in DROSHA-/- cells following let-7a miRNA mimic transfection (Fig. and D), increased expression upon addition of let-7 family miRNA inhibitors (Fig. ), and modulation in HMGA2 expression by inhibitors and mimics following knockout and knockdown of the TNRC6 paralogs (Fig. ).
While let-7 family miRNAs have been characterized as a regulator of HMGA2 in other cell types [ ], it is a good example of the power of chimeric eCLIP for prioritizing candidates. A PubMed search of “miRNA” and HCT116 reveals over 1300 publications. Chimeric eCLIP identified HMGA2 as a priority candidate for experimental validation in HCT116 cells, even though many reports implicated other miRNAs and other gene targets. Several of these publications implicate HMGA2 as a target, but to our knowledge none discuss let-7 as partner. Other publications discuss let-7, but do not focus on HMGA2.
In contrast to the diversity of results found in the literature, chimeric eCLIP unambiguously identified nonchimeric AGO2 association and chimeric binding peaks in the HMGA2 3′-UTR in multiple subcellular fractions. These chimeric binding interactions were predominately found to involve let-7 family miRNAs, one of the most abundant miRNA families in HCT116 cells. Our experimental data (Figs and  ) validated the priority assigned to HMGA2 by the chimeric eCLIP data.

## Nuclear recognition and regulation
Our replicate chimeric eCLIP data using chromatin from wild-type HCT116 cells reveals binding of AGO2 and chromatin-associated RNA throughout the transcriptome. While most nonchimeric reads are within introns, most chimeric reads and the most promising candidate interactions are within 3′-UTRs. The distribution of chimeric reads to the 3′-UTR, even in our nuclear datasets, likely reflects the strength of binding of AGO2:miRNA complexes to target 3′-UTRs. Our data from HCT116 AGO2–NLS cells where AGO2 is almost exclusively nuclear show similar distribution of binding for miRNA:AGO2 complexes. Our replicate data from HCT116 cytoplasm is also similar.
Our data identified HMGA2 and a handful of other genes as prime candidates for miRNA-mediated recognition of chromatin-associated RNA. Experimental validation revealed that nuclear HMGA2 is regulated directly by miRNAs in HCT116 cells (Fig. ). Recognition begins when HMGA2 mRNA is associated with chromatin (Fig. ), but this binding does not affect transcription or splicing (Figs and  ).
While beyond the scope of this report, we are investigating the molecular mechanism of miRNA-mediated regulation of HMGA2 expression in cell nuclei. It is possible that the mechanism shares similarities with the known cytoplasmic mechanism miRNA-mediated translational repression. Previous work from our laboratory and others have demonstrated the association of members of the CCR4–NOT complex with AGO2 and TNRC6A in the nucleus by mass spectrometry and subsequently confirmed these associations by reciprocal immunoprecipitations of individual proteins [ , ]. The similarity of protein complexes supports the hypothesis that the mechanisms of regulation will also be similar. Both mechanisms, cytoplasmic and nuclear, may contribute to the efficiency of miRNA-mediated gene silencing.

## Chimeric eCLIP: strengths, limitations, and innovation
Strengths: Chimeric eCLIP is a valuable approach for rapidly and unambiguously identifying miRNA:RNA target interactions that may be biologically relevant. Chimeric eCLIP was reproducible between replicate chimeric experiments done at different times. The complementary chimeric and nonchimeric data affords high confidence that the data reflects cellular interactions that may be biologically relevant.
The ability of chimeric eCLIP to provide data necessary for decisive candidate identification makes it a powerful approach to finding regulatory miRNA/target pairs in different cell types or tissues. Better prioritization of candidates is important because experimental validation is time-consuming. Ambiguous sequence results can lead to wasted effort or, even worse, misleading conclusions.
Limitations: Like all methods, chimeric eCLIP has limitations. One limitation more reflects the complexity of miRNA regulation than a shortcoming of the technology. Strong chimeric eCLIP data does not prove the existence of miRNA-mediated regulation. For example, we observe compelling evidence of AGO2 and let-7 binding at the MYC gene but obtained no experimental evidence supporting miRNA-mediated gene regulation ( ). The associations revealed by chimeric eCLIP data may reflect real interactions between miRNAs and RNA targets, but some interactions may not be efficient enough to produce significant repression of the target genes. That hypothesis would explain why we observe strong AGO2:let7 association within the MYC 3′-UTR but were unable to obtain experimental evidence for on-target regulation of MYC expression by let-7.
Another limitation reflects the boundaries of the current technology. Well-expressed targets will be detected better than targets that are less well expressed. Transcripts that are not well expressed, are unstable, or are not accessible may not be detected with confidence or may not be detected at all. The power of sequencing will be directed absorbed by the highest expressed, most accessible transcripts.
Compounding this shortcoming, the need for a ligation step makes detection of chimeric reads relatively inefficient, further emphasizing recognition of well-expressed transcripts. Rather than detecting millions of reads like nonchimeric anti-AGO2 eCLIP, our chimeric eCLIP detected only tens of thousands of chimeric reads and may miss biologically important interactions. Those reads were adequate to detect the recognition of HMGA2 and a relatively small number of other genes, but we may be missing interactions with less expressed RNAs. For example, we are interested in the potential for binding to intronic RNA but may be missing less abundant target sequences within intronic RNA that affect splicing. We may also be missing targets within promoter RNAs that affect transcription.
Need for innovation: Technical innovation will be necessary to improve chimeric eCLIP and overcome these limitations. Methods are being developed that focus the power of chimeric eCLIP on specific genes, allowing much deeper insights at loci when miRNA-mediated control is suspected [ ]. These methods may be especially important for investigating relatively lowly abundant sequences associated with chromatin, especially intronic sequences.
Specifically, we have a longstanding interest in probing the potential for endogenous miRNAs to regulate gene transcription and splicing. Our chimeric eCLIP reads did not reveal association of miRNAs within intronic or other noncoding RNAs, and our analysis at the HMGA2 locus did not implicate regulation of transcription or splicing. One explanation is that these noncoding targets may be expressed at low levels too low for identification by chimeric eCLIP. Improved methods for targeted chimeric eCLIP [ ] may alleviate this problem. Our nonchimeric data, however, revealed potential sites for interactions between AGO2 and introns and we are investigating these as candidate sites that may contribute to the regulation of splicing.
Alternatively, as we and others have shown, miRNAs and associated protein factors can shift within the cell depending on environmental conditions [ ,  ,  ,  ]. miRNA-mediated regulation may become both observable and biologically important under a special set of cell growth of physiological conditions. Methods like chimeric eCLIP may be more productive when to be applied to those conditions where miRNA-mediated regulation is strongest.

## Conclusions
We observe that AGO2:miRNA complexes co-purify with chromatin in mammalian cells. miRNA-mediated gene silencing can occur in cell nuclei. While our data focusing on miRNA-mediated regulation of HMGA2 expression offer a compelling model, the biological relevance of the binding of miRNAs to chromatin-associated RNAs and the molecular mechanism of gene repression will require additional research.
The most obvious associations between miRNAs and their targets in the chromatin fraction or whole nucleus occur within the 3′-UTR. That recognition within the 3′-UTR by let-7 is responsible for remarkably efficient regulation of HMGA2 protein expression (Fig. and D). While previous studies have shown that nuclear RNAs can regulate splicing or transcription and we observe recognition of chromatin-associated RNA, we do not observe miRNA-mediated control of either process at the HMGA2 loci. More powerful, improved protocols for chimeric eCLIP or similarly innovative methods will be needed to better test the hypothesis that biologically active miRNAs can function by targeting intronic, promoter, or other less expressed RNAs.
Chimeric eCLIP is a powerful method for prioritizing gene candidates for miRNA-mediated regulation that merits wide use in studies that aim to identify miRNA:RNA target pairings. The data was robust and internally consistent, providing confident identification of major sites for binding by AGO2:miRNA complexes that justifies the time-consuming experimental validation necessary to link miRNA recognition to on-target regulation of a specific gene. While not all targets will be identified, the methodology optimizes the likelihood that at least some outstanding candidates will be defined. The identification of nuclear and cytoplasmic RNA targets for miRNA and how recognition in both compartments cooperate to shape gene regulation may impact the understanding of human cell biology and drug discovery.

## Supplementary Material
gkaf800_Supplemental_File

## Acknowledgements
We thank our colleagues from EclipseBio for providing text describing chimeric eCLIP methodology

Author contributions: D.R.C. helped write the manuscript, design experiments, and analyze data. C.H., J.H. R.B, and V.T. designed experiments, performed experiments, analyzed experiments, and helped write the manuscript.

## Supplementary data

Supplementary data is available at NAR online.

## Conflict of interest
D.R.C. is an Executive Editor for NAR and has not made any editorial decisions related to the peer review of this paper.

## Funding
This study was supported by R35GM118103 (to D.R.C.) from the National Institutes of Health and the Welch Foundation (I-2184 to D.R.C.). D.R.C. is the Rusty Kelley Professor of Biomedical Science. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by NIH GM118103.

## Data availability
All data described are contained within the article, the Supplementary Data, or have been deposited in public databases under the accession number GSE297116.