319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC110568441105684411056844NIHMS19809013839394610.1016/j.celrep.2024.113816Serine/arginine-rich splicing factor 7 promotes the type I interferon response by activating Irf7 transcription
ScottHaley M SmithMackenzie H ColemanAja K ArmijoKaitlyn S ChapmanMorgan J ApostaloSummer L WagnerAllison R WatsonRobert O PatrickKristin L 1Department of Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, Texas A&M Health, College of Medicine, Bryan, TX 77807, USA2These authors contributed equally3X (formerly Twitter): @The_PW_Lab4Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, H.M.S., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; data curation, H.M.S. and K.L.P.; formal analysis, H.M.S., M.H.S., A.K.C., K.S.A., and M.J.C.; funding acquisition, H.M.S., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; investigation, H.M.S., M.H.S., A.K.C., K.S.A., M.J.C., and S.L.A.; methodology, H.M.S., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; project administration, H.M.S., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; resources, A.R.W., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; software, H.M.S., M.H.S., and A.K.C.; supervision, H.M.S., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; validation, H.M.S., M.H.S., A.K.C., K.S.A., and M.J.C.; visualization, H.M.S., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; writing – original draft, H.M.S., R.O.W., and K.L.P.; writing – review & editing, H.M.S., M.H.S., A.K.C., K.S.A., M.J.C., R.O.W., and K.L.P.
*Correspondence: kpatrick03@tamu.edu
22220244331138161138162942024This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Tight regulation of macrophage immune gene expression is required to fight infection without risking harmful inflammation. The contribution of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) to shaping the macrophage response to pathogens remains poorly understood. Transcriptomic analysis reveals that a member of the serine/arginine-rich (SR) family of mRNA processing factors, SRSF7, is required for optimal expression of a cohort of interferon-stimulated genes in macrophages. Using genetic and biochemical assays, we discover that in addition to its canonical role in regulating alternative splicing, SRSF7 drives transcription of interferon regulatory transcription factor 7 (IRF7) to promote antiviral immunity. At the Irf7 promoter, SRSF7 maximizes STAT1 transcription factor binding and RNA polymerase II elongation via cooperation with the H4K20me1 histone methyltransferase KMT5a (SET8). These studies define a role for an SR protein in activating transcription and reveal an RBP-chromatin network that orchestrates macrophage antiviral gene expression.

## Graphical abstract

 

## In brief
There is a growing appreciation for splicing factors activating transcription of genes. Here, Scott et al. implicate serine-arginine splicing factor 7 (SRSF7) in facilitating transcription of the antiviral transcription factor Irf7. By engaging with nascent Irf7 transcripts at the Irf7 genomic locus, SRSF7 promotes deposition of H4K20me1 by KMT5a and enables recruitment of STAT1 to the Irf7 promoter.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2024 Mar 26.

## INTRODUCTION
Macrophages (MΦs) are innate immune cells that serve as the body’s first line of defense against pathogens. They express a panoply of pattern recognition receptors that detect pathogen- and damage-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs and DAMPs, respectively) and transmit these “danger signals” to the nucleus through complex signal transduction cascades. Generally, these pathogen sensing cascades terminate with phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of specialized immune transcription factors like nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), interferon (IFN) regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3), and IRF7. Because these transcription factors exert control over hundreds of genes with massive inflammatory potential, misregulation of these factors can have severe consequences for the host (e.g., cytokine storm, chronic inflammation, and autoimmunity). While the mechanisms that dictate post-translational control of innate immune transcription factors—via phosphorylation, dimerization, and nuclear translocation—are well established, – how cells fine-tune expression of these master regulators at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels is less well understood.
A growing literature has built a strong case for RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) shaping the transcriptomes of specialized cells like MΦs. SR (serine/arginine-rich) proteins are a 12+ member family of RBPs that are broadly defined as regulators of alternative splicing (AS). By virtue of distinct RNA recognition motifs (RRMs), SRs bind to unique exonic splicing enhancers to help direct the spliceosome to cis-splicing signals in target transcripts. While best known for their role in pre-mRNA splicing, SRs can participate in virtually any step of RNA processing, from transcription all the way to translation. In immune cells, SRSF1 is required for regulatory T cell homeostasis and function, and several SR proteins have been implicated in T cell development via AS of CD45. – We recently implicated SRSF6 in maintaining mitochondrial homeostasis and antiviral immunity in MΦs by controlling AS of the pro-apoptotic factor BAX. 
Intriguingly, differential phosphorylation of SR proteins has been reported in MΦs infected with intracellular pathogens like the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans. As phosphorylation of SR proteins regulates their localization and function, – these studies suggest that functionalization of SR proteins occurs downstream of pattern recognition receptor engagement. We hypothesized that SR proteins with the capacity for differential phosphorylation downstream of pathogen sensing play privileged roles in tuning the MΦ response to pathogens. Indeed, we found that stable knockdown of several SR proteins in RAW 264.7 MΦ-like cells (RAW MΦs) profoundly alters the MΦ transcriptome. Loss of one of these proteins, SRSF7, generated some particularly interesting phenotypes. SRSF7 (formerly known as 9G8) is a canonical member of the SR protein family. It encodes an RRM and an eponymic SR domain. It is the only SR family protein to also encode a CCHC-type Zn knuckle domain, which is thought to contribute to its RNA-binding specificity. – To date, SRSF7 function is best studied in the context of controlling its own expression levels via poison cassette exon inclusion, in regulating mRNA export, and in AS. Importantly, altered expression of SRSF7 is associated with a variety of human cancers. – 
We report that SRSF7 plays a role in antiviral innate immunity by controlling the transcription of IFN responsive factor 7 (Irf7), a critical player in activating the type I IFN response. Specifically, we demonstrate that SRSF7 helps recruit signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) to the Irf7 promoter and enables pSer2 RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) elongation. SRSF7 accomplishes this through association with the histone methyltransferase KMT5a (also known as SET8), which deposits H4K20me1 at the Irf7 promoter following lipopolysaccharide (LPS) treatment and maximizes STAT1 association. By revealing a complex regulatory network at the Irf7 promoter that controls homeostatic and pathogen-induced type I IFN signaling, our work identifies an unexpected mechanism through which SR proteins can orchestrate MΦ innate immune gene expression and dictate infection outcomes.

## RESULTS

## SRSF7-dependent AS is independent of MΦ activation state
As pathogen sensing has been previously linked to differential phosphorylation of SRSF7, we were motivated to examine how MΦ activation might impact the function of this splicing factor. To test the hypothesis that AS events might be distinct between resting and activated MΦs, signifying functionalization of SRSF7, we generated two Srsf7 knockdown (KD) cell lines by transducing RAW MΦs with lentivirus containing short hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs designed against the Srsf7 3ʹ UTR and selected these cell lines (Srsf7 KD #1 and Srsf7 KD #2) alongside a scramble (SCR) control ( and ). Of note, we consistently measure more efficient KD of SRSF7 at both the RNA and protein levels using shRNA #2. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed comparing SCR and Srsf7 KD #2 in two conditions: untreated or infected with the gram-negative bacterial pathogen Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (4 h post-infection). Salmonella induces robust innate immune responses in MΦs though Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), which activates NF-κB downstream of the MyD88 adapter and IRF3/IRF7 downstream of TRIF. Quantification of AS changes between SCR and Srsf7 KD #2 in each condition was carried out using MAJIQ (Modeling Alternative Junction Inclusion Quantification). Consistent with SRSF7’s designation as a splicing factor and previous studies implicating it in AS of specific pre-mRNAs, , we identified 1,857 total SRSF7-dependent AS events in untreated RAW MΦs and 1,909 SRSF7-dependent events in Salmonella-infected RAW MΦs (4 h post-infection) ( ) (p < 0.05; >10% percent spliced in [PSI]) ( ). Most changes were at the level of exon skipping. Of the 964 genes subject to SRSF7-dependent AS in untreated MΦs and the 993 genes in Salmonella-infected MΦs, 493 of these genes overlapped ( ). Interestingly, only a handful of SRSF7-dependent AS changes occurred in genes that were also differentially expressed in Srsf7 KD MΦs ( ). These data begin to suggest that SRSF7 can regulate the MΦ transcriptome in a splicing-independent fashion and that SRSF7 may control distinct AS events in resting vs. Salmonella-infected MΦs.
 In light of this latter finding, we set out to investigate how SRSF7 might mediate distinct AS events in the two MΦ states. Qiagen Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of SRSF7-dependent AS genes in untreated and Salmonella-infected MΦs identified enrichment of AS genes in a variety of cellular pathways that were both shared (circadian clock, regulation of lipid metabolism, and RHO GTPase cycle) and distinct between the two conditions ( ). Notably, only one pathway (interleukin-3 [IL-3], IL-5, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor signaling) directly related to the MΦ response to infection was enriched for AS genes in Salmonella-infected Srsf7 KD MΦs.
To take a closer look at specific genes whose AS might be condition dependent, we prioritized a set of genes with the most significant SRSF7-dependent AS changes (>20% PSI; confidence threshold 0.95) in each condition (untreated and +Salmonella) ( ). Manual annotation of these 36 genes did not reveal significant enrichment for any functional category, and none of the top AS events occurred in genes with characterized roles in the MΦ innate immune response ( ).
We then set out to confirm one of these “condition-specific” AS events: SRSF7-dependent exon 6 skipping in Dcun1d2 (Ensembl transcript ID: ENSMUST00000045366.10), a gene associated with Cullin neddylation. MAJIQ measured significant enrichment of this exon-skipping event in both untreated and Salmonella-infected Srsf7 KD MΦs (ΔPSI 39.2% in untreated and 43.4% +Salmonella) ( ). We confirmed this via semi-quantitative RT-PCR using RNA isolated from uninfected MΦs and MΦs treated with LPS. LPS activates TLR4 in MΦs in a manner analogous to Salmonella infection but provides tighter kinetic control experimentally. Although it is possible that Salmonella confers some TLR4-independent control over MΦ AS, in our experience, LPS treatment generally recapitulates gene expression changes induced by Salmonella at these early time points. Consistent with our MAJIQ analysis, Dcun1d2 exon 6 skipping was significantly higher in Srsf7 KD MΦs in both conditions ( ).
Next, we looked at an SRSF7-dependent AS event that, computationally, only reached our significance threshold in Salmonella-infected MΦs: alternative 3ʹ splice site (SS) usage in exon 3 of the Mphosph9 gene (Ensembl transcript ID: ENSMUST00000184951.8), which encodes an M-phase phosphoprotein (ΔPSI −35.7%; ). By RT-PCR, we confirmed that this event occurs preferentially in Srsf7 KD MΦs ( ), but we also measured preferential alternative 3ʹ SS usage in untreated Srsf7 KD MΦs. Similarly, SRSF7-dependent inclusion of exon 8 in Gripap1 (Ensembl Transcript ID: ENSMUST00000065932.14) ( ) and inclusion of exon 35 in Dop1a (Ensembl transcript ID: ENSMUST00000190957.7) ( ) only met our threshold in untreated and +Salmonella conditions, respectively, but could be detected in both MΦ states by RT-PCR ( and ). Although these data argue that SRSF7 mediates the same AS events in MΦs regardless of TLR4 activation, it is important to note that AS transcripts may be underrepresented in our data. We are only looking at a single time point post-Salmonella infection, and active decay pathways in these cells are likely turning over poison exon-containing transcripts. Still, with this caveat in mind, we can generally conclude that SRSF7’s control of AS in independent of MΦ activation and its targets are not enriched for innate immune genes.

## SRSF7 is a positive regulator of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in MΦs
In addition to the AS events reported in , we measured hundreds of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in untreated and Salmonella-infected Srsf7 KD RAW MΦs compared to SCR controls ( ; ). In untreated MΦs, Srsf7 KD impacted expression of genes in pathways related to translation regulation (EIF2 signaling and regulation of eIF4 and p70S6K signaling) and phagosome maturation ( ). We also noted DEG enrichment in “communication between innate and adaptive immune cells,” which hints at loss of SRSF7 dysregulating innate immune gene expression even in the absence of a stimulus. In Salmonella-infected MΦs, DEGs related to innate immunity were highly enriched ( ). We noted particular enrichment of DEGs involved in the type I IFN response, a ubiquitous antiviral response characterized by expression of IFN-α/β and ISGs. , In MΦs, the type I IFN response is activated by the transcription factors IRF3 and IRF7 in response to several immune agonists including LPS/Salmonella infection, cytosolic double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), and cytosolic dsRNA. , , 
 For ISGs that are appreciably expressed in resting MΦs, , e.g., Apol9a, Apol9b, Ifit3, and Ifi202b, Srsf7 KD decreased their abundance in both untreated and +Salmonella conditions ( , bottom left quadrant). Genes like Mx1, Zbp1, and Ifi209, which are virtually undetectable in resting cells, were only differentially expressed in Salmonella-infected samples ( , lower y axis). Importantly, we observed no evidence for intron retention or AS in these or other differentially expressed ISGs via the Integrated Genomics Viewer (IGV) ( ), Sashimi plots ( ), or MAJIQ analysis ( ).
Enumeration of colony-forming units did not reveal any differences in bacterial burdens between SCR and Srsf7 KD RAW MΦs over a 22 h infection time course, arguing against defects in internalization or replication contributing to a failure to induce ISGs in Srsf7 KD MΦs ( ). To determine if SRSF7’s ability to promote ISG expression was unique to Salmonella infection, we measured ISG expression in SCR and Srsf7 KD MΦs by RT-qPCR in untreated cells ( ), as well as after LPS treatment (4 h, 100 ng/mL; ); dsDNA transfection (4h, 1 μg ISD; and ), which activates type I IFN gene expression downstream of cGAS; and Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection (4 and 8 h, MOI = 5; , , and ), which also stimulates cGAS. In all cases, loss of Srsf7 led to impaired induction of Zbp1 and Ifit3 expression. Over an 8 h time course of LPS treatment, lower Zbp1 transcript levels correlated with lower protein accumulation ( ), suggesting that failure to fully upregulate ISG expression in Srsf7 KD MΦs is likely to functionally impact the innate immune response to infection. This phenotype was not unique to RAW MΦs, as small interfering RNA (siRNA) KD of SRSF7 in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), a cell type commonly used for studies of type I IFN signaling, also resulted in a failure to fully induce ISGs upon LPS stimulation ( and ).
To test whether SRSF7 is a bona fide player in activating antiviral immunity in MΦs, we infected SCR and Srsf7 KD MΦs with vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) (MOI = 0.1), a negative-strand RNA virus that stimulates type I IFN responses via TLR3 and RIG-I and is extremely sensitive to ISG expression. , We measured an increase in VSV replication in Srsf7 KD MΦs, measured by RT-qPCR of two VSV genes, Vsvg and Vsvm ( ), that was concomitant with depressed ISG transcript induction over a 12 h time course of VSV infection ( ). We did not detect SRSF7-dependent differences in Il1b expression in response to VSV infection, arguing against a role for SRSF7 in controlling innate gene expression downstream of NF-κB ( ). Together, these data identify SRSF7 as a positive regulator of the type I IFN response in MΦs and suggest that the mechanism of SRSF7-dependent ISG expression occurs at one or more nodes where the TLR4, cGAS, and RIG-I cascades converge.

## SRSF7 promotes expression of the transcription factor IRF7
Given that loss of SRSF7 results in a failure to fully induce many ISGs, we hypothesized that SRSF7 may directly regulate a signaling protein or transcription factor. To pinpoint where in the type I IFN signaling response SRSF7 acts, we treated Srsf7 KD or SCR RAW MΦs with LPS and measured secretion of IFN-β/α over a 6 h time course via an ISRE-luciferase reporter cell line. , 
Srsf7 KD MΦs produced significantly less IFN-β/α compared to SCR controls at all time points measured ( ). We next asked if impaired ISG expression in Srsf7 KD MΦs could be rescued if Srsf7 KD and SCR control cells received equal amounts of recombinant IFN-β. We found that even post-treatment of IFN-β, which activates ISG expression by binding to IFNAR and engaging JAK/STAT cascades, Srsf7 KD MΦs fail to express ISGs like Ifi202b and Zbp1 to the same level as SCR controls at both the transcript ( and ) and protein levels ( ). These results suggest that loss of SRSF7 impacts a node in the type I IFN response that is engaged upstream and downstream of IFNAR and that low IFN-β production is not the sole driver of ISG defects in Srsf7 KD MΦs.
 We then asked if altered signaling downstream of TLR4 could explain defective ISG expression in Srsf7 KD RAW MΦs. We treated Srsf7 KD and SCR RAW MΦs with LPS and measured phosphorylation of the transcription factor IRF3 (activated downstream of TLR4-TRIF signaling) and STAT1 (activated downstream of IFNAR) over a 6 h time course. We did not measure significant changes in phosphorylation of IRF3 at S396 or phosphorylation of STAT1 at Y701 ( and ), effectively ruling out defective signal transduction as the culprit for dampened ISG expression in Srsf7 KD MΦs.
Next, we entertained the possibility that SRSF7 is required for the expression of one or more transcription factors needed to activate the type I IFN response downstream of pattern recognition receptor and/or IFNAR engagement. To test this, we generated a list of transcription factors associated with MΦ innate immunity in the STAT, IRF, and NF-κB families and asked how expression of each was impacted by loss of SRSF7. While expression of most transcription factors was unaffected, we observed a significant defect in Irf7 expression in Srsf7 KD RAW MΦs at baseline and after Salmonella infection ( and ). Visualization of Irf7 gene expression data on the IGV highlights fewer Irf7 exonic reads in Srsf7 KD (teal) compared to SCR (black) RAW MΦs in both conditions ( ).
IRF7 is a master regulator of antiviral type I IFN responses. Unlike other positive regulators of the IFN response (IRF1, IRF3, IRF5), IRF7 itself is an ISG, and its expression is greatly enhanced by type I IFN signaling and IFNAR engagement. Although basal levels of IRF7 vary between immune cell types, several studies have implicated IRF7 in priming early responses in MΦs downstream of LPS. , , , We can readily measure IRF7 transcript and protein in resting wild-type RAW MΦs ( and ), confirming their utility for studies of IRF7 expression in untreated and activated states.
To better appreciate the kinetics of SRSF7-dependent control of Irf7 expression, we treated Srsf7 KD and SCR control RAW MΦs with LPS and measured Irf7 transcript and protein over a 12 h time course. Levels of Irf7 mRNA were significantly lower in Srsf7 KD RAW MΦs at every time point queried ( and ). IRF7 protein levels were lower in Srsf7 KD RAW MΦs at 0 and 4 h ( ), but at later time points post-LPS (8 and 12 h), IRF7 protein levels in Srsf7 KD MΦs rebounded. These data support a role for SRSF7 in early amplification of Irf7 expression and suggest a compensatory mechanism at later time points, perhaps via stabilization of IRF7 protein. 
Srsf7 KD RAW MΦs also expressed less of the Irf7 transcript during M. tuberculosis ( ) and VSV infection ( ), as did MEFs ( ) and bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) ( ) transfected with Srsf7 siRNA (+LPS 4 h). Together, these data uncover a role for SRSF7 in controlling Irf7 transcript and protein levels in multiple cell types.

## IRF7 controls tonic and induced expression of ISGs in RAW MΦs
Our findings argue that loss of ISG expression in Srsf7 KD cells stems primarily from dampened levels of IRF7. However, as most literature points to a role for IRF7 in activated immune cells, we were initially cautious to attribute basal ISG phenotypes in Srsf7 KD MΦs to IRF7. To better understand how IRF7 controls type I IFN responses in resting and activated RAW MΦs, we generated Irf7 KO RAW MΦs using CRISPR-Cas9 editing with a gRNA designed to target Irf7 exon 3 and negative control cells expressing a GFP-specific (non-targeting) gRNA. Two clonally expanded Irf7 KO cell lines and a GFP gRNA control cell line were selected, and loss of IRF7 protein was confirmed by immunoblot ( ). RNA-seq measured differential expression of 896 transcripts (>1.5 fold change; p < 0.05) in untreated Irf7 KO vs. control cells and 1,575 genes in Irf7 KO MΦs at 4 h post-LPS treatment ( ; ). We confirmed significant downregulation of Zbp1 and Ifnb1 in untreated IRF7 KOs by RT-qPCR ( ). Pathway analysis (BioPlanet Pathway Enrichment Analysis ) verified that type I IFN-related pathways were impacted by loss of IRF7 in both untreated and LPS-treated conditions ( ). Consistent with our hypothesis that SRSF7 controls ISG expression in an IRF7-dependent fashion, we measured approximately 25% overlap between downregulated genes in Irf7 KOs and Srsf7 KDs. Save for two predicted genes (Gm38414 and Gm29340), all shared genes are ISGs ( and ). By demonstrating that IRF7 plays a critical role in activating ISG expression in resting and activated MΦs, these data support our hypothesis that SRSF7 promotes antiviral immunity in MΦs by controlling expression of IRF7.

## SRSF7 overexpression is sufficient to drive IRF7 and ISG expression
If SRSF7 is involved in activating Irf7 transcription, then overexpression of SRSF7 should be sufficient to drive Irf7 expression. To test this idea, we generated doxycycline (DOX)-inducible RAW MΦ cell lines that express 3×FLAG-SRSF7 or 3×FLAG-GFP. To ensure comparable levels of 3×FLAG-GFP and 3×FLAG-SRSF7 protein expression and to best mimic endogenous levels of SRSF7, we tested and optimized treatment times, deciding on 2 h +DOX for 3×FLAG-GFP and 22 h +DOX for 3×FLAG-SRSF7 ( ). Notably, we found that expression of SRSF7 alone was sufficient to increase the abundance of Irf7 mRNA ( ) and IRF7 protein ( ) in otherwise unstimulated RAW MΦs. DOX-inducible expression of 3×FLAG-SRSF7 was also sufficient to drive expression of additional genes in the untreated RAW MΦ IRF7 transcriptional regulon (Xaf1, Irak2, and Isg20 [ and ]), lending further support to our hypothesis that SRSF7 controls ISG expression at the level of IRF7. While overexpression of 3×FLAG-SRSF7 had a less pronounced impact on IRF7 transcript and protein expression after LPS stimulation ( and ), we measured a significant increase in Irf7 and Ifit3 transcript levels in 3×FLAG-SRSF7-expressing cells upon infection with M. tuberculosis ( ). We suspect that this discrepancy reflects differences in the “strength of signal,” whereby SRSF7 overexpression is insufficient to hyperinduce Irf7 expression if MΦs have already activated its maximal expression.
 

## SRSF7 promotes STAT1 association and RNAPII elongation at the Irf7 promoter
Having linked reduced IRF7 levels to type I IFN defects in Srsf7 KD MΦs ( ) and demonstrated that SRSF7 overexpression is sufficient to promote Irf7 expression ( ), we set out to determine the mechanism through which SRSF7 controls Irf7 expression. Earlier work has implicated SR proteins in coupling transcription and splicing, and SRs can control transcription by interacting with histone tails – or by directly mediating transcriptional elongation via pTEFb. To begin to investigate a role for SRSF7 in activating Irf7 transcription, we designed tiling primers at the promoter region of Irf7 (100 bp amplicons, roughly 100 bp apart from each other) and two additional ISGs (Zbp1 and Ifit3) ( ) and performed chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR for pSer2 RNAPII in Srsf7 KD and SCR MΦs at 4 h post-LPS treatment. Consistent with a transcriptional defect, we observed noticeably lower levels of pSer2 RNAPII around the Irf7 transcription start site and through the gene body ( , teal). pSer2 RNAPII levels were not significantly altered at Ifit3 ( ). We next asked if RNAPII elongation defects resulted from a failure to recruit or retain transcription factors like STAT1 to these gene promoters. pY701 STAT1 ChIP at Irf7 revealed a dramatic loss of STAT1 signal in Srsf7 KD MΦs ( ), whereas pY701 STAT1 levels at Zbp1 were unaffected by loss of SRSF7 ( ). Overexpression of 3×FLAG-SRSF7 was sufficient to recruit significant levels of pY701 STAT1 to the Irf7 promoter in untreated MΦs ( ), in accordance with our data that overexpression of 3×FLAG-SRSF7 upregulates Irf7 transcript and protein expression in the absence of an immune stimulus ( and ).
 Having linked STAT1 binding and RNAPII elongation at the Irf7 promoter to SRSF7, we next asked whether SRSF7 carries out this function by directly associating with the Irf7 genomic locus. Lacking ChIP-grade antibodies for SRSF7, we performed anti-FLAG ChIP at Irf7 for 3×FLAG-SRSF7 and 3×FLAG-GFP as a control. Consistent with a direct role for SRSF7 in facilitating STAT1 recruitment and RNAPII elongation, we observed significant enrichment of 3×FLAG-SRSF7 at Irf7 in both untreated ( ) and LPS-treated MΦs (4 h) ( ), with no SRSF7 enrichment at Ifit3 or Zbp1 ( and ). Importantly, association of SRSF7 with the Irf7 promoter was RNA dependent ( ), suggesting that recognition of the nascent Irf7 transcript contributes to recruitment of SRSF7 to the Irf7 gene locus. Crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP), coupled with RT-qPCR, confirmed that 3×FLAG-SRSF7 binds to Irf7 transcripts, with maximal binding detected around the second exon of the Irf7 5ʹ UTR ( ).
As recent work has linked splicing of first exons to promoting transcription of many mammalian genes, we asked whether we could detect altered Irf7 intron retention in Srsf7 KD MΦs. Alterations in Irf7 splicing were not readily apparent in our RNA-seq data ( ), but intron retention is notoriously difficult to detect via bulk RNA-seq. Therefore, we employed semi-quantitative RT-PCR to directly assess splicing of each of the 9 introns annotated in the canonical Irf7 transcript (ENMUST00000026571.11). We measured a modest increase in retention of introns 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Srsf7 KD MΦs compared to SCR controls in untreated and LPS-treated conditions ( and ). While later introns showed signs of retention, their splicing was not reliant on SRSF7 ( ). Collectively, these data hint at co-transcriptional intron recognition and removal as part of the mechanism through which SRSF7 promotes Irf7 transcription.

## SRSF7 cooperates with the H4K20me1 histone methyltransferase KMT5a/SET8 to promote Irf7 transcription
Having demonstrated that SRSF7 is brought to the Irf7 genomic locus in an RNA-dependent fashion and having linked SRSF7 to STAT1 recruitment, we sought to better understand the molecular mechanisms through which SRSF7 sets up a pro-transcription milieu at the Irf7 promoter. To begin to investigate additional SRSF7-associating factors, we generated RAW MΦ cell lines stably expressing 3×FLAG-SRSF1, 3×FLAG-SRSF3, 3×FLAG-SRSF6, and 3×FLAG-SRSF9, in addition to the previously described 3×FLAG-SRSF7 and 3×FLAG-GFP cell lines. We performed a series of IP experiments followed by mass spectrometry to identify peptides enriched in each pull-down (false discovery rate 1%; ). After manually filtering these lists, removing background/contaminants that were pulled down by 3×FLAG-GFP, we identified protein binding partners that were shared between SRSF7 and other SR protein family members ( ) or were unique to SRSF7 ( ). Of proteins with SRSF7-specific interacting peptides, we focused our attention on factors previously implicated in chromatin remodeling and became interested in the protein KMT5a/SET8. KMT5a is the sole histone methyltransferase responsible for depositing monomethylation at H4K20. H4K20me1 levels are linked to the cell cycle, and during mitosis, H4K20me1 mediates chromatin condensation. Several studies report enrichment of H4K20me1 at actively transcribed genes , and it has been implicated in facilitating RNAPII escape from promoter-proximal regions. We confirmed interaction between 3×FLAG-SRSF7 and KMT5a in MΦs by IP/immunoblot, using antibodies against endogenous KMT5a ( ). We also found that 3×FLAG-SRSF7 can pull down histone H4 and H4K20me1 in an RNA-dependent fashion ( ). Based on these data, it is likely that SRSF7 associates with enzymes like KMT5a and its substrate histones by virtue of the RNAs it binds co-transcriptionally (e.g., Irf7).
 To begin to implicate KMT5a in mediating Irf7 expression, we knocked it down via siRNA transfection in RAW MΦs, alongside a non-targeting control ( ). We found that loss of KMT5a dampens Irf7 transcript levels and those of downstream ISGs, phenocopying Srsf7 KD ( ). Expression of inflammatory genes outside the Irf7 regulon, like Tnf, was not impacted by loss of KMT5a ( ), hinting at a privileged role for KMT5a in modulating the type I IFN response. We observed similar phenotypes in BMDMs ( , , , and ). Consistent with loss of KMT5a phenocopying Srsf7 KD, we saw a significant decrease in STAT1 accumulation at the Irf7 promoter in Kmt5a KD RAW MΦs ( ). Lastly, we sought to implicate the histone mark deposited by KMT5a, H4K20me1, in activating Irf7 expression. Using ChIP, we measured enrichment of H4K20me1 (compared to an immunoglobulin G isotype control IP) in untreated RAW MΦs and 4 h post-LPS treatment. At the Irf7 promoter, we observed higher levels of H4K20me1 following LPS treatment compared to untreated cells ( ), suggesting that deposition of this mark may be enhanced by MΦ activation. Together, these data support a model whereby association between SRSF7 and KMT5a confers tight control over the chromatin landscape at the Irf7 promoter, which is required to maximize STAT1 recruitment and promote RNAPII elongation.

## DISCUSSION
Because of their potential to activate large gene regulons, cells need to exert tight control over transcription factors themselves. This is particularly true for transcription factors that activate inflammatory immune gene expression, and these factors are subject to multiple layers of post-translational regulation (e.g., cytoplasmic sequestration, phosphorylation, proteasomal degradation). – Here, we describe a role for the splicing regulatory protein SRSF7 in stimulating the type I IFN response by activating transcription of the Irf7 gene. We demonstrate that enrichment of SRSF7 at the Irf7 promoter facilitates recruitment of the transcription factor STAT1 and promotes RNAPII elongation. We believe that SRSF7 is brought to the Irf7 genomic locus through interaction with nascent Irf7 transcripts. There, it helps establish a pro-transcription chromatin landscape by associating with the H4K20me1 methyltransferase KMT5a. By controlling IRF7 abundance, SRSF7 plays a privileged role in regulating antiviral innate immune responses in MΦs.
A major finding of this study relates to the ability of SRSF7—a canonical RBP—to promote transcription of Irf7. Over the past two decades, the idea that transcription and RNA processing occur in a linear, stepwise fashion has been repeatedly challenged. It is now accepted that many steps in RNA processing (i.e., capping, pre-mRNA splicing, RNA editing) occur co-transcriptionally while nascent transcripts are still bound to RNAPII. Accordingly, splicing can influence transcription, and transcription can impact splicing. Several studies have linked SR proteins to RNAPII dynamics and co-transcriptional splicing. SRSF2, for example, releases the cyclin-dependent kinase pTEFb from an inhibitory 7SK-containing complex to relieve stalled polymerase at promoters, and SRSF3 regulates exon inclusion via interactions with the C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNAPII. Our data suggest an analogous role for SRSF7 in mediating transcription factor binding and RNAPII elongation at the Irf7 promoter, likely via its ability to recognize sequences in early Irf7 exons. We show that SRSF7 CLIPs to Irf7, with enhanced binding around exon 2 in the transcript’s 5ʹ UTR. The reported consensus sequence for SRSF7 is GA(C/U)GA(C/U), and SRSF7 was shown to bind UGA(C/U) C sequences in its own pre-mRNA to regulate poison cassette exon inclusion. We can detect several potential SRSF7 binding sites in Irf7 exon 2 with the sequence UGACC. Thus, we propose that SRSF7 associates with the Irf7 genomic locus by virtue of co-transcriptional binding at or around exon 2 in the Irf7 pre-mRNA. Bound to nascent Irf7, SRSF7 can associate with factors like KMT5a to help establish a chromatin milieu that encourages recruitment of STAT1 and triggers the release of RNAPII from the promoter. Notably, the impact of SRSF7 in facilitating STAT1 recruitment to the Irf7 promoter is independent of total pSTAT1 levels in the cell (which are not impacted by loss of SRSF7 [ ]). This result argues that this distinct SRSF7-dependent regulatory node is at play at the Irf7 promoter, even when pY701 STAT1 is abundant. It also argues that Irf7 has evolved a unique requirement for a factor like SRSF7, perhaps to overcome RNAPII promoter stalling, which is known to occur at the genes of transcription factors and stimulus-responsive genes in Drosophila and mammals. – 
In addition to linking SRSF7 to Irf7 expression, our studies revealed an unexpected role for SRSF7 and IRF7 in controlling tonic type I IFN expression in untreated RAW MΦs ( ). These observations challenge the paradigm that IRF7 needs to be upregulated before it can contribute to type I IFN responses. Indeed, differences in ISG expression were more robust in untreated IRF7 KO RAW MΦs than after LPS stimulation ( ; ). This result argues that in resting MΦs, IRF7 is critical for maintaining homeostatic type I IFN expression but that both IRF3 and IRF7 contribute following pattern recognition receptor engagement. To date, the role for IRF7 in maintaining tonic type I IFN signaling has not been fully explored. Interestingly, our RNA-seq data point to a specific regulon of ISGs that is particularly sensitive to loss of IRF7 at baseline ( and ). Among the most downregulated genes in resting Irf7 KO MΦs are several encoding guanylate-binding proteins and members of the oligoadenylate synthetase family. Regulated expression of these factors at baseline may reflect their role in directly mediating antiviral and antibacterial killing, with expression of these ISGs in resting cells providing an early advantage upon infection. By demonstrating a role for IRF7 in maintaining tonic levels of these and other ISGs, our results hint at additional roles for IRF7 in cellular homeostasis and disease that have not been appreciated to date.
Consistent with this idea, growing evidence suggests that IRF7 expression in immune cells is subject to multiple levels of control mediated by RBPs. Both mouse and human IRF7 genes encode very small introns (<100 nt), an unusual adaptation in mammalian genomes. Regulated IRF7 intron retention has been reported in THP-1 cells, wherein intron 2 is efficiently removed upon monocyte-to-MΦ differentiation but not in resting monocytes. In response to treatment with tumor necrosis factor α and IFN-α, as well as polyI:C transfection, regulated removal of IRF7 intron 4 has been reported and was shown to be controlled by BUD13, an RBP that is enriched on Irf7 transcripts in BMDMs. Such regulation is proposed to provide innate cells a way to limit the inappropriate expression of genes with high inflammatory potential like IRF7 while leaving cells poised to upregulate these genes when certain signals are received. In identifying a role for SRSF7 in regulating transcriptional activation of Irf7, likely via interacting with exons in the Irf7 nascent transcript, our work adds to this canon and argues that RBPs play an outsized role in controlling the abundance of this critical transcription factor.

## Limitations of the study
As we rely on MΦ cell lines and cultured BMDMs for these studies, it is difficult to conclude how this SRSF7-STAT1-IRF7 circuit works in vivo. We also do not know how SRSF7 functions in non-MΦ immune cells like dendritic cells, which rely heavily on IRF7 to induce type I IFN expression. Defining the nature of the interaction between SRSF7 and KMT5a will require additional experimentation. Although it is possible that a direct protein-protein interaction between the two factors exists, it is more likely that an additional factor (perhaps the CTD of RNAPII or a CTD-interacting protein) acts as a bridge to bring SRSF7 and KMT5a together.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Information and reagent requests should be directed to the lead contact, Kristin Patrick (kpatrick03@tamu.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Bulk RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO (accession numbers #GSE254517 and #GSE137603) and are publicly available at time of publication. Source data will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
This study did not generate original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze data in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL DETAILS

## Cell culture
RAW 264.7 macrophage-like cells (RAW MΦs) (TIB-71 ATCC) (originally isolated from male BALB/c mice), L929 ISRE, 
Irf7 KO RAW MΦs (this paper), and Lenti-X cells (TaKaRa Bio) were cultured at 37°C with a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in complete media containing high glucose, DMEM (ThermoFisher) with 10% FBS (Millipore) and 0.2% HEPES (Thermo Fisher). Bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) were differentiated from bone marrow cells isolated by washing mouse femurs with 10 mL DMEM 1 mM sodium pyruvate. Cells were centrifuged for 5 min at 400 rcf and resuspended in BMDM media (DMEM, 20% FBS (Millipore), 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Lonza), and 10% MCSF conditioned media. Bone marrow cells were counted and plated at 5×106 cells per 15 cm non-tissue culture treated dishes in 30 mL complete BMDM media. Cells were fed with an additional 15 mL of BMDM media on day 3. Cells were harvested on day 7 with 1x PBS EDTA (Lonza).

## S. enterica (ser. Typhimurium) infections
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (SL1344) was obtained from Dr. Denise Monack, Stanford. S. Typhimurium were streaked out on LB agar plates and incubated at 37°C overnight.
RAW MΦs were seeded in 12-well tissue culture-treated plates at a density of 7×105 cells/well, and cultures of S. Typhimurium were grown at 37°C in LB broth containing 0.3M NaCl 16h prior to infection. Bacterial cultures were diluted 1:20 3h prior to infection to reach mid-log phase OD600 0.6–0.8. Mid-log phase bacteria were washed 3x with PBS and pelleted at 5,000 rpm for 3 min. Bacteria were then added to DMEM (Hyclone) with 10% FBS (Sigma) and 2% HEPES (Hyclone) at an MOI of 5 for transcripts and MOI of 1 for replication. Infected cells were spun at 1,000 rpm for 5 min then incubated for 10 min at 37°C prior to gentamycin washes adding fresh media. At indicated times post infection, cells were harvested with TRIzol for RNA isolation described below.

## M. tuberculosis in vitro infections
Erdman strain was used for all M. tuberculosis (Mtb) infections as well as Mtb luxBCADE a luciferase expressing strain. Low passage lab stocks were thawed for each experiment to ensure virulence was preserved. Mtb was cultured in roller bottles at 37°C in Middlebrook 7H9 broth (BD Biosciences) supplemented with 10% OADC (BD Biosciences), 0.5% glycerol (Fisher), and 0.1% Tween-80 (Fisher). All work with Mtb was performed under Biosafety Level 3 containment using procedures approved by the Texas A&M University Institutional Biosafety Committee. To prepare the inoculum, bacteria were grown to mid-log phase (OD 0.6–0.8), spun at low speed (500 rcf) to remove clumps, and then pelleted and washed twice with PBS. Resuspended bacteria were sonicated and spun at low speed again to further remove clumps. Mtb was then diluted in DMEM plus 10% horse serum (Gibco) and added to cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 for RNA and protein analysis or a MOI of 1 for bacterial growth assays. The day before the infection, RAW MΦs were plated on 12-well tissue culture–treated plates at a density of 3×105 cells/well and allowed to rest overnight. Inoculated cells were spun for 10 min at 1,000 rcf to synchronize infection, washed twice with PBS, and then incubated in fresh media. RNA was harvested from infected cells using 0.25 mL TRIzol reagent at each time point.

## Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) infections
Recombinant Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV; Indiana serotype) containing a GFP reporter cloned downstream of the VSV G-glycoprotein (VSV-G/GFP) was obtained from Dr. John Rose at Yale School of Medicine though Dr. A. Phillip West at Texas A&M College of Medicine. RAW MΦs were seeded in 12-well tissue culture-treated plates at a density of 7×105 cells/well 16h before infection. The next day cells were infected with VSV-GFP virus at an MOI of 0.1 in serum-free DMEM (Hyclone). After 1h incubation, supernatant was removed, and fresh DMEM plus 10% FBS (Millipore) was added to each well. At indicated times post infection, cells were harvested with TRIzol for RNA isolation described below.

## Mouse husbandry and isolation of primary cells
C57BL6/J (Stock #00064) were initially purchased from Jackson Laboratory and maintained with filial breeding. All mice used in experiments were compared to age- and sex-matched controls. Mice used to generate BMDMs were males between 10 and 16 weeks old. Embryos used to make primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were 14.5 days postcoitum. All animals were housed, bred, and studied at Texas A&M Health Science Center under approved Institutional Care and Use Committee guidelines. All experiments for this study were reviewed and approved by the Texas A&M University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (AUP# 2019-0083). MEFs were isolated from embryos. Briefly, embryos were dissected from yolk sacs, washed two times with cold 1x PBS, decapitated, and stripped of peritoneal contents. Headless embryos were disaggregated in cold 0.05% trypsin-EDTA (Lonza) and incubated on ice for 20 min, followed by incubation at 37°C for an additional 20 min. Cells were then DNase treated with 4mL disaggregation media (DMEM, 10% FBS, 100 μg/mL DNase I (Worthington)) for 20 min at 37°C. Isolated supernatants were spun down at 1000 rpm for 5 min. Cells were resuspended in complete MEF media (DMEM, 10% FBS, 1 mM sodium pyruvate), and plated in 15 cm tissue culture-treated dishes 1 dish per embryo in 25 mL of media. MEFs were expanded for 2–3 days before harvest with 0.05% trypsin-EDTA (Lonza).

## METHOD DETAILS

## shRNA knockdowns
For RAW MΦs stably expressing scramble knockdown and Srsf7 knockdown, Lenti-X cells were transfected with a pSICO scramble non-targeting shRNA construct or pSICO Srsf7 shRNA constructs using Polyjet (SignaGen Laboratories). Virus was collected 24 and 48h post transfection and used to transduce RAW MΦs. After 48h, media was supplemented with Hygromycin (Invitrogen) to select for cells containing the shRNA plasmid.

## siRNA knockdowns in MEFs
Knockdown of mRNA transcripts was performed by plating 3×106 MEFs in 10 cm plates and rested overnight. The following day complete media was replaced with 5 mL fresh complete media 30 min prior to transfection. Cells were transfected using Fugene SI reagent 10 μM of siRNA stock against either Srsf7 (ThermoFisher, s105011) or negative control, Silencer Select Negative Control #1 (4390843). Cells were incubated for 48h in transfection media at 37°C with 5% CO2 prior to downstream experiments.

## siRNA knockdowns in RAW MΦs and BMDMs
The day prior to transfection, 6×105 cells were seeded into 12-well plates. The day of transfection, 30nM of siRNA against Srsf7 (ThermoFisher, s105011), against Kmt5a/Setd8 (ThermoFisher, s85986) or negative control, Silencer Select Negative Control #1 (4390843) were mixed with 3 μL of LipoRNAiMAX (13778150, Thermo Fisher Scientific), incubated for 10 min at room temperature, and then added into wells with 500 μL plain DMEM. Transfection proceeded for 6h and then wells were replenished with complete media.

## Tetracycline inducible cell line generation
For generation of tetracycline inducible RAW MΦs, pLenti CMV rtTA3 Blast (Addgene w756-1) stably expressing clonal RAW MΦs were transduced with pLenti CMV Puro DEST (Addgene w118-1) constructs containing 3xFL-GFP or 3xFL-SRSF7. After 48h, cells were selected through addition of puromycin (Invivogen). 1 mg/mL doxycycline (Sigma-Aldrich) treatment was used to activate construct expression.

## CLIP (UV crosslinking immunoprecipitation)
9×106 RAW MΦs were seeded in 15 cm tissue culture-treated plates and rested overnight. The next day cells were treated with 1 mg/mL doxycycline for 24h (3xFL-GFP) or 2h (3xFL-GFP). Cells were washed with PBS and UV treated at 2000 μJ ×100 with a UVstratalinker1800. Cell pellets were lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer with Pierce EDTA free protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific, A32965) for 15 min and sonicated 3x for 10 min 30 s on/off (Biorupter). Lysates were treated with 200 ng/mL RNaseA (Invitrogen, AM2271) and 1 U/mL RQ1 DNase (Promega, M6101) and then incubated on 3XFLAG beads (Sigma Aldrich, F2426) for 3 h rotating at 4°C. Bound FLAG was eluted 3xusing 20 μL 5xFLAG peptide (Sigma Aldrich, F4799) by vortexing continuously for 15 min. Protein samples were collected and separated as described below and RNA was isolated using ethanol precipitation.

## Agonist treatments
7.5×105 RAW MΦs were plated on 12-well tissue-culture treated plates for >16h before cellular stimulation assays. Cells were treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from E. coli (Invivogen) at 100 ng/mL, or ISD (IDT, annealed in house) at 1 μg/mL, or IFN-β (PBL Assay Science) at 200 I/U per mL for time points indicated. Cells were collected for RNA isolation using TRIzol.

## Srsf7 KD mRNA sequencing and analysis
As reported in, differential expression analysis was performed using CLC Genomics Workbench. Relative transcript expression was calculated by counting Reads Per Kilobase of exon model per Million mapped reads (RPKM). Statistical significance was determined by the EDGE test via CLC Genomics Workbench. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were selected as those with p value threshold <0.05. Critical pathways affected by SR protein KD compared to control RAW MΦs were analyzed by canonical pathway analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software from QIAGEN Bioinformatics.

## Irf7 KO mRNA RNA-seq and analysis
RNA-seq analysis was performed on control GFP KO or Irf7 KO1 RAW MΦs in biological triplicate of each cell line. Data were analyzed by ROSALIND (https://rosalind.bio/). Briefly, reads were trimmed using cutadapt and quality scores were assessed using FastQC. Reads were aligned to the Mus musculus genome build GRCm39 using STAR. Individual sample reads were quantified using HTseq and normalized via Relative Log Expression (RLE) using DESeq2 R library.

## Alternative splicing analysis
As reported in Wagner, Scott, West et al., Modeling Alternative Junction Inclusion Quantification (MAJIQ) and the Voila visualization package were used to model alternative splicing events with default parameters described in. Junction-spanning reads were used to construct splice graphs for transcripts by using the RefSeq annotation supplemented with de novo (junctions not in the RefSeq transcriptome database but had sufficient evidence in the RNA-seq data) detected junctions. Resulting splice graphs were analyzed for all identified local splice variations (LSVs). MAJIQ quantified expected percent spliced in (PSI) value in control and KD samples for each LSV. LSV-containing genes were filtered for highest confidence changes (one or more junctions had at least a 95% probability of expected dPSI of >10% between control and KD).

## RNA isolation and qPCR
For transcript analysis, cells and tissue were harvested in TRIzol and RNA was isolated using Direct-zol RNA Miniprep kits (Zymo Research) with 1h DNase treatment. cDNA was synthesized with iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad). RT-qPCR was performed using Power-Up SYBR Green Master Mix (Thermo Fisher) using a Quant Studio Flex6 (Applied Biosystems). Samples were run in triplicate wells in a 384-well plate.

## Semi-quantitative RT-qPCR
cDNA was synthesized by iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad) and Q5 High Fidelity 2X Master Mix (New England Biolabs) was used for PCR amplification using targeted primers. Samples were run on 2% agarose EtBr gel, imaged on LiCOR Odyssey Fc Dual-Mode Imaging System, and bands were quantified.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation
6×106 RAW MΦs or BMDMs were seeded in a 10 cm dish, and 16h later stimulated for the indicated time. After stimulation cells were scraped, transferred to a 50 mL conical and fixed with 1% (v/v) formaldehyde for 10 min with gentle shaking. Formaldehyde was quenched with 0.125 M glycine for 5 min. Cells were pelleted and washed 1x with PBS, and then cells were lysed in 1 mL of ChIP lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40 and 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris-HCl, and protease/phosphatase inhibitor (added immediately before lysis) pH 7.5). Lysates were flash frozen, or ChIP proceeded by sonicating with for 40 min (30 s on/off 10 min cycles) in a Bioruptor UCD-200 (Diagenode). Lysates were cleared and 10% taken for input samples. In +RNase ChIPs, total lysate was treated with 20 μg/ml RNase (ThermoFisher) for 15 min at room temperature prior to IP. 2 μg of the anti-pSer2 RNAPII (Active Motif), 2 μg of isotype control (IgG, Cell Signaling), 5 μL Y701 STAT1 (Cell Signaling), or 2 μg H4K20me1 (Invitrogen) were incubated overnight at 4°C with rotation. The following day, beads (sheep anti-rabbit IgG Dynabeads M-280, or protein G agarose) were washed 3x in ChIP buffer, blocked for 30 min with 100 μg salmon sperm DNA (Invitrogen) and 0.5 mg BSA, and washed once more with ChIP lysis buffer. Blocked beads were incubated with cleared chromatin immunocomplexes for 1h at 4°C with rotation. Beads were washed five times with ChIP buffer and then eluted with 250 μL of elution buffer (1% SDS and 0.1 M NaHCO3) at 65°C for 15 mins. Crosslinks were reversed by adding 0.4 M NaCl for overnight at 55°C. The next day, 2 μL of RNase A (10 mg/mL, ThermoFisher) and 2 μL proteinase K (20 mg/mL, ThermoFisher) were added to the samples and incubated for 1h at 55°C while shaking. Samples were then subjected to Genomic Clean up and Concentrator (Zymo) to extract DNA. Purified input and IP DNA were analyzed by qPCR using primers specific for the promoter region of target genes. Results were normalized to input. Data are presented as fold enrichment relative to intergenic control (Active Motif mouse negative control primer set 1), normalized to the 5ʹ-most primer set at each gene. Anti-Flag ChIPs were performed as above, except cleared lysates were added to blocked (as above) M2 anti-3xFLAG beads.

## Protein immunoprecipitation
1×106 doxycycline-inducible 3xFL-GFP or 3xFL-SRSF7 RAW MΦs were plated in a 15 cm dish. The next day, cells were induced to express constructs of interest for 24 (GFP) or 2h (SRSF7). Then, cells were scraped and pelleted by centrifuging at 3,000 x g for 5 min. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (150 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.075% NP-40, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Lysates were cleared of cellular debris and nuclei by spinning at 7,000 x g for 10 min. 10% of the cleared lysate was saved as input mixed with 4x protein sample loading buffer and 1 mM DTT and boiled for 5 min. The remaining cell lysate was incubated with 30 μL of prewashed antibody-conjugated beads/resin (FLAG, EZview Red anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel, Sigma-Aldrich) for 1h at 4°C with rotation. Beads were washed three times with 1 mL of wash buffer (150 mM Tris [pH 7.5], 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.05% NP-40), and proteins were eluted with an excess of FLAG peptide (Sigma) resuspended in lysis buffer plus 1% NP-40. Western blots were probed with anti-FLAG (1:5000), anti-H4 (1:1000), anti-H4K20me1 (1:1000), or anti-KMT5a/SETD8 (1:1000) antibodies in TBST +5% BSA corresponding Li-COR secondary antibodies (1:10,000), and imaged with a Li-COR Odyssey Fc imager.

## CRISPR/Cas9 KO of Irf7
Guide RNAs were generated to target the 3rd exon of Irf7 using the Broad online tool (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gppx/crispick/public) and synthesized by IDT. Primers were cloned into digested vector by phosphorylating, annealing, and ligating primers into LentiGuide-Puro (Addgene, plasmid 52963). Lentivirus with sgRNAs were used to transduce RAW MΦs stably expressing FL-Cas9 (Addgene, plasmid 52962). After selection with 5 μg/mL puromycin, knockout efficiency was analyzed by amplifying a 300 bp region of genomic DNA around exon 3, sequencing, and TIDE analysis. The two best, most efficient sgRNA populations were clonally selected and expanded. Knockout was validated by immunoblot.

## Protein quantification by immunoblot
Cells were washed with PBS and lysed in 1x RIPA buffer with protease and phosphatase EDTA free inhibitors (Thermo Scientific), with the addition of 1 U/ml Benzonase (Millipore) to degrade genomic DNA. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE on Any kD mini-PROTEAN TGX precast gels (Bio-Rad) and transferred to 0.45μm nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare). Membranes were blocked for 1h at RT in TBS +5% BSA and blots were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies listed in the . Membranes were washed 3 × 5 min in PBS/Tween 20 and incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies (LI-COR) for 1h at RT prior to imaging on a Li-COR Odyssey Fc Dual-Mode Imaging System.
 For mass spectrometry analysis of SRSF-interacting proteins, RAW 264.7 macrophages expressing 3xFLAG-GFP, 3xFLAG-SRSF1, SRSF3, SRSF6, SRSF7, or SRSF9 were lysed in 5% 1M Tris at pH 7.4, 3% NaCl, 0.2% 0.5M EDTA, and 0.8% 20% NP40. Flag resin (Sigma: F2426) was washed using buffer containing 5% 1M Tris at pH 7.4, 3% NaCl, and 0.2% 0.5M EDTA. 1000 mL of the cleared lysate was added to the resin and inverted for 2h at 4°C. The resin was washed three times with 1000 μL of IP wash containing 5% 1M Tris at pH 7.4, 3% NaCl, 0.2% 0.5M EDTA, and 0.5% 20% NP40. Samples were eluted three times at room temperature for 15 min each using 25X 3x FLAG peptide (Sigma) diluted to 5X with lysis buffer without detergent. IP efficiency was verified by immunoblot (using mouse monoclonal anti-flag M2 antibody) and silver stain analysis. Peptide identification proteomic analysis was carried out by the Texas A&M Protein Chemistry Lab using a Thermo Scientific LTQ XL Linear Ion Trap Mass Spectrometer. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analysis of data was performed using GraphPad Prism software. Two-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests were used for statistical analyses, and unless otherwise noted, all results are representative of at least three biological samples (mean ± SEM (n = 3 per group)).

## Supplementary Material
12345

## Highlights
The splicing factor SRSF7 is needed for a robust antiviral response in macrophages
SRSF7 licenses expression of the antiviral transcription factor Irf7
SRSF7 promotes STAT1 binding and RNAPII elongation at the Irf7 promoter
With KMT5a, SRSF7 helps establish a pro-transcription chromatin landscape at Irf7

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like the thank members of Patrick and Watson labs for critical reading of the manuscript and invaluable feedback. Thanks to the Genomic and RNA Profiling Core (GARP) at Baylor College of Medicine for Irf7 KO library preparation and RNA-seq. Funding was provided by NIH/NIGMS to K.L.P. (R35GM133720), NIH/NIAID to R.O.W. and K.L.P. (R01AI155621), and NIH/NIGMS to H.M.S. (F31GM143893).

## Footnotes
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.113816.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
12345

## Data Availability Statement
Bulk RNA-seq data have been deposited at GEO (accession numbers #GSE254517 and #GSE137603) and are publicly available at time of publication. Source data will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
This study did not generate original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze data in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.