3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1134219911342199113421993918443810.1016/j.isci.2024.110102Miniaturized Fab’ imaging probe derived from a clinical antibody: Characterization and imaging in CRISPRi-attenuated mammary tumor models
GuptaSuresh PalRahul SchmidtEric J KrishnamoorthyMurali LeporatiAnita KumarAnand TN BogdanovAlexeiJr 1Department of Radiology, UMASS Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA2Mike Toth Head and Neck Cancer Research Center, Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA, USA3A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA4Cancer Center and Chemical Biology Interface Program, UMASS Chan Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA∗Corresponding author alexei.bogdanov@umassmed.edu
5Lead contact
24520242781101021101022382024© 2024 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Summary
Clinical imaging-assisted oncosurgical navigation requires cancer-specific miniaturized optical imaging probes. We report a near-infrared (NIR) Fab’-based epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-specific probe carrying 3 NIR fluorophores (Fab’-800CW), which retained high-affinity binding to EGFR ectodomain (equilibrium KDE = 1 nM). Fab’-800CW showed a robust 4-times gain of fluorescence intensity (FI) and a 20% lifetime (FLT) increase under the conditions mimicking intracellular degradation. The probe was tested by using triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines obtained by applying CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) effect of EGFR-targeting sgRNA and dCas9-KRAB chimera coexpression in MDA-MB-231 cells (WT cells). FI imaging in cell culture proved a 50% EGFR expression attenuation by CRISPRi. FI imaging in animals harboring attenuated or WT TNBC tumors with ex vivo corroboration identified differences between WT and CRISPRi tumors FI at 30 min post injection. Our results suggest the feasibility of EGFR expression imaging using a Fab’-based probe relevant for imaging-guided cancer surgery.
Subject areas: Surgery, Medical imaging, Cancer

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Both fluorescence intensity and lifetime increase after fragmentation of the Fab’ NIR probe
•Fluorescence lifetime contrast increases upon internalization of Fab’ NIR probe
•CRISPRi yielded two times lower EGFR expression in triple-negative breast cancer cells
•Fab’ probe showed the feasibility of CRISPRi effect imaging in vivo at an early time point

Surgery; Medical imaging; Cancer.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Oct 26; Revised 2024 Mar 28; Accepted 2024 May 22; Collection date 2024 Aug 16.

## Introduction
The development of both improved optical imaging probes and novel realistic models of cancer currently are among the most important goals of translational cancer research and it is driven, in part, by the needs of more accurate optical imaging–guided surgical resection of tumors. Fluorescence-based approaches are especially attractive due to molecular specificity of optical imaging combined with the lack of exposure to ionizing radiation, which may be integrated with surgical suite modalities for non-contact monitoring of tissue fluorescence. , , , 
We previously demonstrated that imaging signal amplification in both planar and 3D tomographic imaging setups may be successfully used for imaging cell-surface targets, which are critically important in precision oncology. , , Some signal amplification strategies rely on enzyme-mediated signal generation occurring via oligomerization and retention of paramagnetic and fluorescent imaging quasi-substrates in the target tissues. , , , Alternatively, optical imaging signal is generated due to the intracellular enzymatic conversion of poorly fluorescent quenched macromolecular precursors (imaging substrates , as well as reactive activity probes , ) into fluorescent products that emit low energy (near-infrared, NIR) photons. This has important practical implications because these photons are less prone to absorption and scattering in vivo. , Importantly, NIR fluorophores, which are currently used in clinical trials, , , can be linked to cancer specific antibodies enabling specific cancer cell imaging with optical signal amplification. , 
Exogenous macromolecular optical imaging substrates (targeted or non-targeted) are internalized by live mammalian cells via endocytosis or pinocytosis and undergo degradation by the enzymes of the endolysosomal compartment. The resultant products not only display fluorescence intensity (FI) exceeding that of the initial substrate but may also result in significantly longer fluorescence lifetimes (FLT) of linked fluorophores. , , The advantages of FLT time domain mode of imaging both in vitro and in vivo , , include proportionality to the quantum yield and FLT independence of the fluorophore concentration at constant temperature. Furthermore, the transition from short FLT of intact labeled macromolecule to fragmented state is associated with rapid FLT increase with the rate greatly exceeding the FI increase rate and resultant excellent FLT contrast. The last aspect is important for clinical translation because in clinically relevant situations imaging procedures should be performed without the need of long waiting periods between injection and image acquisition. For successful FLT imaging of cancer-specific antigens an imaging probe should have proven specificity and a capability of generating appropriate imaging contrast shortly after injection. Here we sought to pursue the following goals: (1) to develop a miniaturized NIR imaging probe derived from a therapeutic antibody by using orthogonal chemical reactions involving clinically translatable NIR fluorophores; (2) to test whether both FI and FLT of the probe change under conditions mimicking intracellular degradation; and (3) to obtain morphologically similar orthotopic mammary tumor models with diverse levels of relevant therapeutic target expression using CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) technique for in vivo testing of developed probe at early time points after systemic administration.

## Results

## IRDye 800CW-conjugated Fab’
We used clinically available recombinant IgG (cetuximab) to generate miniaturized EGF receptor-specific probes. The synthesis involved the initial production of cetuximab F(ab’)2 fragment and followed the steps shown in A. We performed a standard pepsinolysis of cetuximab IgG at pH 4 with optimization of reaction time followed by SEC-HPLC purification, which lead to high-purity F(ab’)2 ( B, lane 2). Further selective reduction of the hinge-region disulfide (cystine) bonds in the presence of 2-mercaptoethylamine (2-MEA) resulted in Fab’ fragments carrying free thiols. The latter underwent facile covalent modification with IRDye 800 CW maleimide in the absence of oxygen. The treatment of reduced Fab’ with IRDye 800CW maleimide resulted in a fluorescent product with only trace amounts of Fab’ dimers present ( B). Though we anticipated the presence of two free SH groups per each Fab’ molecule, linking of IRDye 800 CW maleimide resulted in one 800CW residue per Fab’ fragment on the average (Fab’-M-800CW).
 The obtained Fab’-M-800CW conjugate was subjected to further modification with IRDye 800CW N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) ester ( A), which gave a product with a total of 3 NIR fluorophores per Fab’ as determined by specific absorbance of IRDye 800CW. After final HPLC purification the Fab’ dimers as well as trace amounts of F(ab’)2 were separated giving the final NIR labeled imaging probe, i.e., Fab’-800CW ( D, lane 7). The results of further characterization of the probe by using Biacore-chip based assay, mass spectrometry (MS) of deglycosylated and reduced light chains (Lc), as well as Fd chain (the product of IgG heavy chain pepsinolysis) are summarized in . The affinity of Fab’-800CW to recombinant human EGFR ectodomain was compared to control N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) - modified Fab’, as well as Cetuximab IgG. The comparison showed that the apparent KD values reflecting EGFR antigen binding affinity of control Fab’ and IgG single binding domain were similar (5.1 ± 1.5 vs. 4.9 ± 1.1 nM). The apparent KD of Fab’-800CW was somewhat lower at 3.3 ± 0.5 nM ( ) and this value reflected slower association and dissociation under the conditions of chip assay. As expected, the equilibrium KD of IgG characterizing true affinity of the whole molecule was approximately 5-times higher than that of KD of Fab’-800CW due to 10-times slower dissociation of IgG in comparison to monovalent Fab’.
 The optical properties Fab’-800CW were further compared to maleimide-functionalized Fab’-M-800CW by recording absorbance and fluorescence spectra ( C and 1D). Normalized absorbance spectra of Fab’-800CW showed an 8–10% increase of optical density in the range of 675–725 nm. This spectral change is consistent with the blue-shifted H-dimers/aggregates formation, which are more likely to form in solutions of Fab’-800CW, which carry several IRDye 800CW residues linked to the same Fab’ molecule. Optical density measurements suggested that orthogonal Fab’ modification reactions resulted in linking 3 molecules of 800CW to Fab’. The comparison of FI spectra of Fab’-800CW before and after complete pepsinolysis at pH < 2 ( D) showed that additional modification with IRDye 800CW NHS ester enables a robust increase of FI after complete pepsinolysis: the 2-step conjugation of three 800CW fluorophores per Fab’ resulted in a NIR FI increase of 3.9–4.1-times vs. 1.9–2.1 increase of FI in the case of Fab’-M-800CW. Additional LC-MS characterization of deglycosylated and reduced Fab’ chains supported the conclusion regarding 800CW conjugation stoichiometry since Lc of Fab’-800CW was found to carry one residue of the dye while Fd fragment of heavy IgG chain contained two residues ( ).
Stability of Fab’-800CW in plasma was assayed by incubating the probe in whole mouse plasma for 30 and 120 min at 37°C, i.e., over the time periods relevant for early time point imaging in animal models of cancer at concentrations corresponding to the initial concentration in blood (1 μM). NIR imaging analysis of the samples on SDS-PAGE gels after incubation showed that stability of Fab’-800CW was similar to IgG-800CW ( A) and did not change over a period of 2 h. The total fraction of 800CW-labeled fragments ranged between 6.4 and 7.5% of total fluorescence in both cases as determined by quantitative gel fluorescence analysis. Due to partial quenching and resultant blue-shifting Fab’-800CW probe showed blue-shifted fluorescence (yellow color on overlay of 700 and 800 nm channel images on A). Probe degradation assays performed by using trypsin (T), pepsin (P) and GSH (G)-treated samples of purified 50 nM Fab’-800CW solutions ( B) showed that the probe was mostly resistant to trypsinolysis at 0.5 h with very minor fragmentation and only a small 10–18% increase of FI. Trypsinolysis resulted in a modest increase of average FLT by 60 ps ( C). In contrast to trypsinolysis, pepsin treatment resulted in fragmentation ( B, lane P) and lead to a robust increase of average FLT by 130 ps, i.e., from 0.43 ± 0.01 to 0.56 ± 0.01 ns in intact and pepsin-treated Fab’-800CW samples, respectively, C (pseudocolor image) with a strong increase of FI ( C, lower image). Large excess of reduced glutathione (GSH) corresponding to the estimated intracellular concentration (7 mM, ) resulted in Fab’-800CW reduction to light and heavy chain fragments ( B, lane G) and produced strong increase in both average FLT by 120 ps and FI (a 170% increase), C. Further analysis of protease-mediated fragmentation was performed by treating of Fab’-800CW probe with 6–10 U of human recombinant papain-like cysteine proteases, i.e., cathepsins K,L,B,S. Cathepsins K and B degraded about 50% of the probe in 30 min at 37°C due to the presence of corresponding endopeptidase cleavage sites (i.e., X(S/G)PGX and XRVVX preferred amino acid sequence specific cleavage sites, respectively ) of Cetuximab’s light chain amino acid sequence as well as in N-terminal domains of the heavy chain (see , Supplementary information).
 

## Engineering and isolation of TNBC cells with attenuated EGFR expression
To generate cell lines expressing lower number of EGF receptors per cell than in parent TNBC MDA-MB-231 (WT) cells, we explored the use of stable expression of a combination of S. pyogenes (Sp) dCas9 endonuclease-KRAB repressor fusion protein, i.e., a catalytically inactive Sp Cas9 double mutant fused with a C-terminal Krüppel associated box (KRAB) domain, , and sgRNAs targeting EGFR gene. The analysis of human EGFR gene sequence revealed two promising targets for CRISPR interference in the 5′-flanking regions of the gene at −134 and −58 positions upstream of initiator codon and one target downstream of the GC-rich EGFR gene promoter ( A). These sgRNA-target DNA sequences (labeled as sgRNA2.1 and sgRNA3) are flanked with Sp dCas9-specific protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) on the non-target DNA strand. In addition, a single 20 nt sequence within the Exon II DNA sequence on (−) strand that could also be potentially targeted by dCas9/sgRNA complex was identified in a relative proximity of both EGFR promoter and intron-I containing a downstream enhancer sequence ( , sgRNA1.1). Further, we performed transfection of wild-type MDA-MB-231 cells (WT) TNBC cells in the presence of a vector carrying a fragment encoding dCas9-KRAB positioned under the control of EF1a promoter and puromycin resistance (Puror) cassette. Initial experiment using WT expressing a more potent dCas9 repressor-dCas9-KRAB-MeCP2 after transfecting with pLH sgRNA-coding vectors did not yield stable clones. In contrast, expression of dCas9-KRAB and sgRNA1.1 (or sgRNA2.1, but not sgRNA3) in WT cells resulted in desired down-regulation in viable cells. As shown in (B and D, red fluorescence - AF647-labeled anti-EGFR mAb conjugate staining) CRISPRi-attenuated cells showed lower level of EGFR expression than in WT cells. This became apparent upon comparing relative FI of sgRNA2.1-expressing cells (shown in as a representative example of EGFR attenuation) and WT cells by using FACS analysis ( F and 3G). The levels of CRISPRi-unaffected PD-L1 expression (green fluorescence, C–3E) in both populations of sgRNA2.1 vector-transfected cells that expressed EGFR at high and low levels ( G) were similar to the WT levels ( F).
 Flow cytometry of cells isolated by using anti-EGFR Fab’ sorting showed that EGFR-low expressing populations of both established cell lines co-expressing Sp dCas9-KRAB and sgRNA (named T2.1 and T2.2, respectively) comprised approximately 35% of total cells, with 65% of remaining cells displaying approximately 30% lower levels of EGFR-specific fluorescence than WT cells.

## Quantitation of CRISPRi effect in EGFR-attenuated cell lines
The effect of CRISPRi downregulation of EGFR expression was characterized by performing Northern and Western blotting of total RNA and protein lysates, respectively ( H and 3I). The expression of EGFR mRNA in cell-isolated total RNA samples, which underwent testing by using a riboprobe with 100% complementarity to human EGFR mRNA, was compared by using total RNA isolated from WT, T1.1, T2.1 and mouse EMT6 tumor cell line. The complementarity of riboprobe to mouse EGFR mRNA sequence was 87%. Quantitation of total hybridized riboprobe signal showed that while human/mouse ratios in WT and T1.1 were similar, in T2.1 cells the ratio was 1.6 times lower (p < 0.05, J). Western blotting with anti-human EGFR antibodies using cell protein lysates of WT, T1.1, and T2.1 cell lines showed that T2.1 cells expressed noticeably less EGFR corresponding to approximately 58% of GAPDH-normalized WT EGFR expression levels (p < 0.05), I. Since EGFR expression in T2.1 cell was significantly lower both at the level of EGFR transcripts and EGFR protein than in T1.1 cells, we chose to use T2.1 CRISPRi-attenuated EGFR expressing cell line in the most of further experiments.

## Binding and processing of EGFR imaging probes by WT and CRISPRi - attenuated cell lines
Probe uptake tests were performed in cell culture of WT and T2.1 cells using the same range of Fab’-conjugated IRDye 800CW concentrations (0.4–100 nM). In the cell monolayer experiment Fab’-800CW was incubated in complete cell culture medium for 30 min resulting in the concentration-dependent FI of the wells with washed and lysed cells ( A, inset) reflecting the presence of cell-bound and internalized fluorophores. WT cells had approximately 2.2-times higher FI than T2.1 cells in the studied range of concentrations ( A), and in both cases the addition of a 5-fold excess of anti-EGFR F(ab’)2 resulted in a roughly 10-fold decrease in FI ( A, open symbols). In the presence of the endocytosis inhibitor (NEM) at near-saturating concentrations of Fab’-800CW (100 nM 800CW), there was less of the T2.1 cell-surface associated Fab’-800CW probe (77.8 ± 2.5%) than in the case of WT cells (90.7 ± 4.1%, p < 0.05) after a 30 min incubation ( A, inset). The extension of incubation time beyond the short-term, i.e., for up to 1.5 h ( B), more closely reflects the time course of probe uptake by live cells. Note that cell uptake data shown in B is expressed in pmoles of Fab’-800CW probe binding/internalization per million of cells. Binding and internalization kinetics showed that the uptake of the probes by the cells was rapid and did not show any significant increase (p > 0.05) over the initial period of 1.5 h.
 The uptake of the probes by WT and CRISPRi in vitro by individual live cells (T2.1 and T1.1) was further analyzed by quantitative analysis of NIR fluorescence microscopy images acquired at two time points, i.e., 30 min corresponding to early probe binding and uptake phase ( C), and at 16 h (when probe internalization predominated), which was evidenced by high perinuclear and intra-nuclear FI ( C). The measurements of background- and noise-adjusted imaging signal averaged using 50–80 individual cells showed that the differences between the WT and CRISPRi cell groups were highly significant (p < 0.01) with approximately 2-times higher binding/uptake by WT cells observed at the early time point (30 min). The differences between SNR measured using WT and CRISPRi-attenuated cells were undetectable at 16 h.
While binding/uptake of Fab’-800CW probe by WT cells was clearly higher than in T2.1 cells ( A and 4B), the measured average NIR fluorescent signal in lysed cells is a result of multiple emitting populations of fluorophore with various average lifetimes. Fluorescence lifetime microscopy (FLIM) was performed using the cells fixed at approximately the same time points as for FI imaging ( ). In general, during the initial internalization of the Fab’-800CW probe it redistributed from the surface to the endolysosomal compartment with the concomitant increase of FLT by 0.15–0.2 ns in both cell types. WT cells showed shorter FLT at 0.5 h in contrast to the T2.1 cells and had at least two populations of intracellular vesicles displaying shorter (0.3 ns) or longer (0.7 ns) lifetimes of the fluorophore. In both cell types the internalization of Fab’-800CW probe was evident at 16–18 h. At 18 h in WT cell culture there was mixed endolysosomal and nuclear fluorescence with predominantly longer FLT (0.8 ns). Unlike WT cells, their CRISPRi counterparts showed more rapid uptake and internalization of Fab’-800CW at the early (0.5 h) time point followed by probe redistribution to the nuclei, which displayed longer FLT (0.8–0.85 ns) at 18 h ( , arrows).
 

## In vivo imaging of WT and EGFR CRISPRi tumor xenografts
Further, we determined whether Fab’-800CW imaging probe accumulation could be detected in experimental TNBC tumors in vivo at early time points after IV injection of 1.2 nmol Fab’-800CW/animal (approximately 3.6 nmol 800CW/animal), and whether imaging signal generated because of Fab’-800CW probe accumulation in WT and CRISPRi-attenuated tumors reflected the differences in EGFR expression. The FI NIR imaging of tumor xenografts developed after WT or T2.1 cell orthotopic implantation into the mammary fat pad of athymic (nu/nu) mice was performed to obtain mean voxel intensity ratio calculated by analyzing standard constant-wave 2D FI images with tumor- and muscle placed ROIs. Analysis of these ROI ratios suggested that tumor FI, which exceeded background levels by a factor of 2 in both groups of animals, did not reveal significant differences between two groups including the endpoint imaging performed at 24 h ( A, p > 0.05). The NIR signal was detectable in the tumors beyond the initial 0.5 h time point and lasted at least for 24 h with tumor/background ratios improving over time ( C and 6D).
 However, on CT-guided reconstructed 3D images of the same animals the total tumor fluorescence exhibited statistically significant differences (p = 0.015) between the T2.1 and WT groups at the early time point of 30 min post injection ( B). The mean FI of T2.1 tumors was lower by a factor of 2 in comparison to the WT tumors. Moreover, cross-section images of reconstructed volumes showed that FI of WT tumors could reach the level of at least an order of magnitude higher than FI of T2.1 tumors at the endpoint ( E and 6F).

## Comparative qRT-PCR analysis of EGFR mRNA expression in cells and tumors
In vivo FI imaging data reflect the combination effect of (1) Fab’-800CW probe delivery to the tumor, (2) the binding to cells, and (3) the uptake by the cells of tumor microenvironment and resultant increase of FI due to fluorescence dequenching. Therefore, FI imaging results should depend in part on the levels of EGFR expression in vivo. We assessed these levels by performing comparisons of EGFR transcripts expression in each representative excised tumor of the WT and T2.1 (EGFR attenuated) animal groups. In both groups qRT-PCR analysis showed that for pairwise comparisons (12 pairs of animals), the majority of T2.1 tumors had lower normalized EGFR qRT-PCR signal than WT counterparts ( A; the ratio was lower than 0.95). Quantitative RT-PCR data acquired by using WT and T2.1 tumor cells confirmed the results of Western blotting of cell lysates (shown in H), with normalized ratio of EGFR RT-PCR signals equal to 2.6 ± 0.2 (WT/T2.1, mean ± SD), B. In contrast, the same ratio determined for tumor-isolated total RNA was approximately 2 times lower (1.1 ± 0.1, p < 0.01), suggesting the presence of near-equal levels of EGFR transcripts in both types of tumors. Furthermore, the comparison of the ratios of EGFR RT-PCR signals determined in tumors vs. WT cancer cells showed that WT tumors expressed only 60% of EGFR transcripts present in WT cells. The difference of the means of qRT-PCR EGFR signals in WT and T2.1 tumors did not reach the level of statistical significance (p = 0.07), while T2.1 tumors contained 1.4 times more EGFR transcripts than T2.1 cells ( B).
 

## Immunofluorescent and FLIM analysis of frozen tumor sections
Detailed characterization of WT and T2.1 tumor morphology ( A–8D) was performed by anti-EGFR and anti-CD31 antibody staining of thin sections to reveal the EGFR-positive tumor tissue and to estimate vascular density on the margin and within the whole tumor sections, respectively. Numerous CD31-positive blood vessels were detected at all tumor margins in both groups of animals. Image analysis of WT tumor sections ( A and 8B) revealed a well-developed blood supply with vascular density of 191 ± 87 vessels/mm2. In contrast, only 84 ± 27 vessels/mm2 were present across T2.1 tumor sections ( C and 8D), i.e., approximately 2-times lower than in the case of WT tumors. The average total area occupied by blood vessels per section showed very high variability, but the area with CD31-positive staining was higher on the average in the case of WT tumors - 9.6% (range: 5.5–13.5%) vs. 3.4% (range: 2.5–4.2%) in T2.1 tumors. This result indicated that T2.1 xenografts were on the average 3 times less vascularized.
 Visualization of Fab’-800CW probe distribution within tumor sections of both animal groups was further performed by using a sensitive FLIM approach. Specific average fluorescence lifetime mapped over the total area of the WT tumors was longer than in T2.1 counterparts and approximately 0.2 ns longer than FLT of free (non-bound) Fab’-800CW, pointing to potential differences in binding, uptake, and processing of the probe by T2.1 vs. WT tumor cells as well as tumor-supporting stroma. The areas of tumor sections with longest fluorescence lifetimes - in the range of 0.9–1 ns in the case of WT and in the range of 0.5–0.6 ns in T2.1 tumor sections ( E and 8F) corresponded to vascularized regions. Additional higher resolution NIR microscopy showed perivascular accumulation of the probe in the same perivascular areas where CD31-positive endothelial cells were also identified ( ).

## Discussion
Image-guided cancer surgery aided with a clinically approved antibody toolkit has the potential to drastically improve clinical outcomes due to improved accuracy of detecting residual cancer. Emerging evidence supports the development of intraoperative imaging probes that (1) detect their intended target shortly after systemic administration and (2) generate both FI and fluorescence lifetime contrast to take advantage of quantitative differences between imaging probe accumulation patterns in the tumors and in normal tissue. The advances in recombinant antibody-based cancer therapies continue to aid in developing of antibody-derived imaging probes for imaging-guided surgical procedures. Unfortunately, clinically available NIR fluorescent cancer-specific IgGs such as FDA-approved NIR dye labeled monoclonal antibodies , , commonly yield low tumor/background ratios. Their use also requires long waiting times until the desired tumor fluorescence is achieved. Protein engineering enabled the development of a wide variety of high affinity ligands such as antibody mimics and fragments varying in size and valency. , These smaller recombinant proteins or IgG fragments (e.g., Fab and scFav fusion proteins, reviewed in ) diffuse into the tumor more readily and may penetrate tumor tissue more rapidly as demonstrated previously in an ectopic cancer model. According to classic simulations based on clinical blood plasma concentration profiles, in contrast to full-size IgG, much smaller Fab fragments should be capable to diffuse into deeper sites inside the tumors and achieve higher tumor concentrations than bivalent IgG or F(ab')2 fragment at early times post injection. The use of smaller imaging probes is underscored by clinical needs: early tumor-specific imaging in clinical setting would be highly desirable and serves as the major motivation for miniaturized probe development. The feasibility of shortening the imaging time window down to 10 h in a subcutaneous tumor model was previously demonstrated by using a recombinant anti-EGFR Fav-based enzymatically labeled fusion protein. Probe optimization studies comparing side-by-side intact humanized IgG vs. IgG fragments labeled with NIR dyes suggest that experimental tumors could be imaged earlier, but at lower peak FI, by using antibody fragments (e.g., anti-HER3 ) instead of a full-size IgG. 
Furthermore, applying time domain fluorescence lifetime imaging instead of constant wave excitation for FI imaging may yield major improvements in intraoperative cancer imaging. FLT is not affected by fluorophore concentration and excitation light intensity variations. , , The increase of NIR fluorophore FLT in human tumors is diagnostic of the presence of residual cancer cells and enables FLT-based differentiation of tumors and normal surrounding tissue (muscle) due to the difference between average tumor (0.70 ± 0.01 ns) and muscle (0.62 ± 0.01) FLT (p < 0.05). This statistically significant difference, measured by FLT imaging after 800CW-linked anti-EGFR probe injection, was sufficient for improving visualization of tumor margins, which is critically important for improving surgery outcomes in cancer patients. 
Unlike Fab fragments of IgG, the use of Fab’ in imaging has not yet been widely pursued. Meanwhile Fab’ fragments can be readily synthesized by using multiple IgG subclasses. , Moreover, Fab’ fragments carry both cysteine thiols and N-ε amino groups of lysines, which can be used for orthogonal chemical modification. In this work we obtained Fab’-based NIR imaging probe labeled with multiple IRDye 800CW residues. These monovalent EGFR-specific Fab’ NIR probes had about 3 times lower mass than the full-size IgG while their affinity (expressed as effective KD) to EGFR ectodomain was preserved and comparable to KD values of EGFR-specific single chain scFv, single domain camelid antibody and nanobody that range between 4 and 40 nM. Two important in vitro observations supported further experiments involving Fab’- 800CW: (1) enzymatic degradation of Fab’-800CW imaging probe resulted in a 4-fold increase of FI and a 20% increase of average FLT of Fab’-conjugated IRDye 800CW fluorophores; (2) GSH mimicking an intracellular reducing environment produced significant increases of both FLT and FI. To assess quantitative differences between fluorescent signals in cells with various EGFR expression levels, we achieved EGFR expression attenuation by using CRISPRi technique. Standard MDA-MB-231 TNBC (WT) cell line with known EGF receptor expression (approximately 1.105 receptors/cell ) afforded an excellent target for CRISPRi since EGFR gene transcription is upregulated but not amplified in these cells. Because Fab’-800CW probe is monovalent, the binding and uptake in CRISPRi-attenuated cells is a function of receptor number rather than a combination of receptor number and receptor cell surface density/clustering affecting IgG binding/uptake. As expected, CRISPRi-attenuation of EGFR resulted in profound differences in FI between T2.1 cells and WT in vitro that were observed at early time periods during the co-incubation ( ). Both FLIM and FI imaging of cells revealed more rapid internalization of Fab’-800CW in T2.1 cells than WT cells, indicating potential compensatory response to CRISPRi-attenuation of EGFR expression levels.
Further noninvasive in vivo imaging of EGFR-mediated probe uptake in the WT and CRISPRi tumors demonstrated that the difference between total mean WT vs. T2.1 tumor fluorescence observed early on (30 min) after the IV injection of the Fab’-800CW probe was transient ( ). Total relative levels of EGFR gene expression in WT and T2.1 tumors exhibited tendencies that were opposite to those observed in respective cell lines ( ). This finding confirmed less pronounced impact of CRISPRi on EGFR expression in vivo, even though most tumors in T2.1 group expressed less EGFR than the WT tumor group. The most plausible cause of higher FI of WT group observed early on after the IV injection is the presence of approximately 2-times higher density of blood vessels in the WT tumor group ( ), with large surface area enabling more efficient transport of the imaging probe into the tissue. Large blood vessel wall area supports more avid early permeation (or “percolation” ) of Fab’-800CW into the tissue from the blood pool resulting in quantifiable differences revealed by optical image reconstruction obtained at 30 min after injection ( B).
Thus, our study explored an interdisciplinary approach focused on a novel miniaturized fluorescent probe developed by using clinically available antibody for enabling imaging-guided cancer surgery. The probe changes its fluorescent properties after fragmentation in cancer cells overexpressing the target receptor (EGFR). By using CRISPR interference technique we engineered TNBC cell lines with targeted attenuation of EGFR and demonstrated that the levels of cell fluorescence correlated with EGFR attenuation. Importantly, CRISPRi resulted in differential effects on fluorescence lifetime of the internalized probe, which in further imaging experiments demonstrated the feasibility of EGFR detection at an early point in vivo. Early time point imaging using clinically available antibody fragments potentially represents a substantial improvement achieved by adopting streamlined techniques of fluorescent imaging probe synthesis.
In conclusion, the results of our work indicate that: 1) orthogonal conjugation of NIR dyes to Fab’ fragments results in a partially quenched, high-affinity probe, which produces higher FI and longer FLT upon enzymatic degradation and GSH reduction; 2) CRISPRi of EGFR in TNBC cell line resulted in attenuated EGFR expression; 3) in vivo NIR imaging by using anti-EGFR Fab’-800CW probe allowed FI imaging of WT and CRISPRi-attenuated experimental tumors at an early time point after systemic administration. Finally, fluorescence lifetime imaging of cells and tumor tissue suggested that internalized and fragmented anti-EGFR Fab’-800CW probe enhances FLT contrast. This finding is essential for developing future high-contrast imaging of receptor-mediated uptake based on FLT rather than FI during optically guided surgery of solid tumors. It is expected that multi-fluorophore probe-assisted, imaging-guided surgery would benefit from dual mode of fluorescence imaging, i.e., with both intensity- and lifetime contrast, the latter being actively developed into a clinical imaging modality.

## Limitations of the study
There are several limitations to this study. While our work demonstrates facile synthesis of Fab’-based imaging probes which were effective in determining quantitative differences between the levels of EGFR expression in WT and CRISPRi attenuated cells, a wider panel of clinically available iso- and hetero-specific clinically available antibodies will have to be tested to select candidates with the best imaging characteristics for any given cancer-specific target. Certain limitation lies also in the need to perform a more detailed assessment of the degree to which the developed imaging probes retain specificity in the biological milieu. There were also limitations in the ability of CRISPRi to produce cell lines with desirable levels of stable attenuated expression of the target gene.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
All requests for resources and additional inquiries related to reagents should be directed to and will be handled by the lead contact: Alexei Bogdanov (alexei.bogdanov@umassmed.edu).

## Materials availability
Synthetic steps and Fab’ probe characterization are included in . Additional probe characterization data and microscopy are provided in the . Cell lines, antibodies and other biochemicals were acquired from commercial sources and are listed in the . New generated materials of this study are available upon request and MTA agreement.

## Data and code availability

•Data: Original in vivo fluorescence intensity data have been deposited at Mendeley and are publicly available as of the date of publication. The DOI is listed in the . Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
•Code: No new code was generated in the process of this study.
•Additional information: Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Cell line
Human triple-negative mammary adenocarcinoma MDA-MB 231 cell line (ATCC HTB-26) was obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured according to the provided instructions.

## Animal model
J:NU mice (n = 6/group, age: 5–6 weeks, sex: female, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor ME) were used for orthotopic mammary tumor propagation in vivo according to the protocol approved by The UMASS Chan Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, IACUC protocol ID PROTO202200032.

## Method details

## F(ab’)2 and IRDye 800CW-labeled Fab’ preparation and characterization
F(ab’)2 fragment using pepsin cleavage of the anti-EGFR chimeric monoclonal antibody (Cetuximab, ChiIgG1, Erbitux 2 mg/mL, Merck Group) was performed essentially as described in Shazeeb et al. F(ab’)2 was purified using Superdex200 columns (10 × 300 mm, Cytiva) eluted with 0.1 M ammonium acetate, pH 7.0. F(ab’)2 was concentrated to 3 mg/mL (27 μM) on Vivaspin 4 50,000 MWCO ultrafiltration concentrators (Sartorius) and transferred into degassed and nitrogen-saturated 25 mM HEPES, 20 mM sodium tetraborate, 0.1 M NaCl (HBS-B) buffer containing 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.0. Stock solution of 2-aminoethanthiol (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to F(ab’)2 to achieve final concentration of 50 mM, flushed with argon and incubated at 37C for 2 h. Reduced F(ab’)2 (∼54 μM Fab’) was purified on Bio-Spin 6 mini-columns (Bio-Rad) equilibrated with degassed HBS-B, pH 7 as described by the manufacturer and IRDye 800CW maleimide (Li-Cor) was added to final concentration of 100 μM under argon and incubated for 12 h in the dark. To obtain Fab’ with blocked thiols the Fab’ fragment was modified with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM, 100 μM) using NEM instead of IRDye 800CW maleimide under the same conditions described above.
After adjusting pH to 8 using 1M sodium bicarbonate IRDye 800CW N-hydroxysuccinimide ester (5.2 mM in DMSO, Li-Cor) was added to final concentration of 150 μM and incubation continued for another 4 h. Purification of Fab’-800CW from free IRDye 800CW was achieved on Bio-Spin 30 mini-columns (Bio-Rad). Final purification was achieved by using Superdex200 columns as described above and the fractions containing pure Fab’-800CW probe were concentrated using 30,000 MWCO membrane concentrators (Amicon Ultra-4, EMD-Millipore). The purity was verified by 4–15% gradient SDS-PAGE. Routine concentration measurements were performed assuming extinction coefficients of Fab’ (m.w. 55 kD) to be ε 0.1%
280 nm = 1.54, ε 280 nm = 72800 M−1 cm−1 (ProtParam tool ) and IRDye 800CW ε 780 nm = 270,000 M−1 cm−1.
Anti-EGFR Fab’-AF647 was prepared using F(ab’)2 reduction as described above by using Alexa Fluor 647 maleimide (ThermoFisher) modification of reduced and purified Fab’ fragments. Labeled conjugates were stored at −20°C in HBS-B,50% glycerol, pH 7.
Biacore SPR (Cytiva) assays were performed by using recombinant EGFR ectodomain (Acro Biosystems) immobilized on the CM5 chip (Cytiva) by using water-soluble carbodiimide at 4 different concentrations: 50 μg/mL, 25 μg/mL, 12.5 μg/mL, and 6.25 μg/mL (approximately 500–62.5 nM). After immobilization, each antibody was titrated at 8 concentrations: 64, 32, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1 and 0.5 nM. The run included 300 s contact time with the analyte, 900 s dissociation time with a flow rate of 10 μL/min, 2 regeneration steps with 10 mM glycine, pH 2.5 for 10 s, flow rate 10 μL/min. The sensograms were analyzed using manufacturer-provided software using 1:1 binding model to calculate apparent KD values. Kinetic constants (kA, kD) were determined using a chip channel with single concentration of immobilized EGFR (62.5 nM for conjugation).
Mass spectrometry analysis of samples was performed after deglycosylation and TCEP reduction. Two μg (0.1 μg/mL in water) of each sample were de-glycosylated by mixing with 4μL of Rapid PNGaseF buffer (5X) (New England Biolabs, NEB) and 1μL of Rapid PNGaseF (NEB) in a total volume of 20 μL, and incubating for 10 min at 50°C. One μL of each diluted sample (0.1 μg/μL), with and without PNGaseF were treated with 0.1 mM TCEP, and injected into the column (BioResolve RP mAB, (2.1 × 100 mm, 2.7 μm particle size) of LC-MS system (Waters Acquity UPLC coupled to Waters Synapt G2-Si QToF (Positive ESI), Waters and analyzed by using a gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in water. Each resultant LC peak was deconvoluted using the MaxEnt1 software (Waters). The range 20,000 to 35,000; 45000–55000 and 90000–110000 was used for output masses with the Uniform Gaussian damage model, employing a 1 Da width at half height, iterated to convergence.

## Proteolysis and stability of IRDye 800CW labeled Fab’ antibody fragment
Complete proteolysis of Fab’ was accomplished by treating of IRDye 800CW labeled proteins with pepsin A solution (3.5 μg/mL final concentration, Worthington Biochemical Corp) in 0.1 sodium acetate, pH 2 and incubating for 3 h at 37°C. Fluorescent spectra of digested and intact conjugates were recorded in DPBS/methanol (1:1) to decrease weak interactions between IRDye 800CW residues. Treatment of 10 μL of 50 nM solutions of IRDye 800CW labeled Fab’ antibody fragment with human recombinant cathepsins (B, K, L and S, 2–3 U of human recombinant catalytically active enzymes/sample, BioVision/AbCam) was performed in 20 μL 25 mM Mes, 50 mM KH2PO4, pH 5.5 for 2 h at 37°C. Trypsinolysis was performed by using 5 μg trypsin (typeIX-S, 14 U/μg, Sigma-Aldrich) as described above. Treatment with 7 mM reduced glutathione (GSH, Sigma-Aldrich) or 0.1 mM TCEP (Thermo-Fisher) was performed in DPBS, pH 7.0 and reaction was stopped by adding 5 mM N-ethylmaleimide. The samples were analyzed using SDS-PAGE (4–15% gradient) and quantified after imaging on Odyssey DLx Imager (Li-Cor Corp).

## Cell culture
MDA-MB 231 (wild-type, WT) cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC HTB-26). Cells were maintained in Lebovitz’s L-15 media (Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone), penicillin (100 IU/mL), and streptomycin (50 μg/mL). Cells were subcultured 2 days before nucleofection and were ∼80% confluent on the day of transfection. Stable clones of cells transfected with CRISPRi system were maintained in 10%FCS, Lebovitz’s L-15, or 10%FCS DMEM in the presence of puromycin and hygromycin as described below.

## Vectors for CRISPRi and sgRNA
dCas9-KRAB vector Applied Biological Materials Inc. (ABM: Cat #K203) and dCas9-KRAB-MeCP2, Addgene (#110821, ) were maintained in Stbl3 E.Coli (Invitrogen Cat #C7373-03) sgRNA sequences were designed by using human mRNA for precursor of EGFR sequence (GenBank: X00588.1) as FASTA target for Synthego’s CRISPR design tool (https://www.synthego.com/products/bioinformatics/crispr-design-tool) for SpCas9 NGG protospacer adjacent motif (PAM). Forward and reverse oligonucleotides for 3 sgRNAs (2 for (+) DNA strand and 1 for (−) DNA strand within DNA sequence flanking Exon I and within Exon II of EGFR sequence (see A).
Three pairs of fwd and rev oligonucleotides containing 5′ and 3′ overhangs:
sgRNA1.1 target DNA sequence:
5′ ACCGGAGTAACAAGCTCACGCAGT 3′ 98(+)
5′ AAACACTGCGTGAGCTTGTTACTC 3′
sgRNA2.1 target DNA sequence:
5′ ACCGCGGACGACAGGCCACCTCGT 3′ 134( -)
5′ AAACACGAGGTGGCCTGTCGTCCG 3′
sgRNA3 target DNA sequence:
5′ ACCGCAATACTGGACGGAGTCAGG 3′ 58 (−)
5′ AAACCCTGACTCCGTCCAGTATTG 3′
were synthesized, annealed, treated with BbsI, and cloned into pLH-spsgRNA2 vector (Addgene #64114 37). Reaction mixes were transformed into the Stbl3 competent cells. Qiagen Plasmid Miniprep kits were used for isolating plasmids from ampicillin-selected colonies and the inserts were verified by sequencing using pLKO.1-Rseq primer.

## Cell transfection
Cells were harvested with TryPLE Express reagent (Gibco Cat # 12605010). 1. 106 cells were sedimented, the supernatant was removed, and the cells were resuspended in 0.1 mL of ISM Chica buffer. 2 μg of dCas9-KRAB vector in 5uL of TE buffer were added to the cells with mixing. Cells were electroporated using Nucleofector 2b (Lonza) in sterile 0.2-cm cuvettes (Mirus Biotech) using X-13 mode. After transfection, cells were resuspended in 1 mL of pre-warmed 20% FCS L-15 medium. In 48 h cells electroporated with dCas9-KRAB vector were selected using puromycin (0.5 μg/mL, determined by using dose-response curve) to obtain stably transfected clones. Cells were propagated for about 2 weeks before performing nucleoporation with pLH-spsgRNA2 containing T1.1,T 2.1 or T3.1 sgRNA inserts.
dCas9-KRAB-MeCP2 vectors or control dCas9-3xGFP plasmid (Addgene were co-transfected in MDA-MB-231 cells together with pLH-spsgRNA2 vectors. All cells transfected with pLH-spsgRNA2 were grown in the presence of hygromycin (500 μg/mL) for selecting positive clones.

## FACS analysis
Cells were harvested using TryPLE Express reagent, washed by centrifugation, and the cell pellet was resuspended in ice-cold 1%BSA in DPBS, pH 7.4 at 5.106 cells/mL. For fluorescent staining cells, 100 μL of cell suspension was transferred to 1.5 mL centrifuge tubes, primary pre-labeled antibodies (anti-EGFR- F(ab’)2-AF 647 and/or anti-PD-L1-AF 488 (#D8T4X, Cell Signaling Tech.) were added at final concentration of 0.5–2 μg/mL to the tubes. The cells were incubated for 30 min at 4°C in dark and then washed 3 times by centrifugation. For routine analysis cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 min before FACS using FACSCelesta (Beckton-Dickinson) and the cell sorting was performed using 5.106 live cells labeled with anti-EGFR Fab’-AF647 antibody fragment (3–4 μg/mL) on a FACSAria IIu cell sorter (Beckton-Dickinson). Cells were sorted to obtain 4 subpopulations from the lowest to the highest fluorescence intensity corresponding to EGFR expression on the surface of transfected cells. Two populations with the lowest intensity (P1 and P2) of MDA-MB 231 dCas9 KRAB-T1.1 and MDA-MB 231 dCas9 KRAB-T2.1 were expanded via cell culture in the presence of hygromycin/puromycin and used for subsequent experiments.

## Cell culture experiments
Fluorescence microscopy experiments were performed by growing WT and CRISPRi-attenuated MDA-MB 231 cells on glass coverslips to 75–80% confluency. Live cells were labeled directly with the Alexa Fluor 488, 647 or IRDye 800CW conjugated primary antibodies or their fragments for 30 min or 16 h (overnight) diluted 1:200-1:400 in 5%FCS FluoroBrite DMEM (Thermo-Fisher) supplemented with 25 mM HEPES, 4 mM glutamine and penicillin/streptomycin, pH 7.4. Cells were washed, fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde for 10 min and mounted in Vectashield (Vector labs) containing DAPI. Non-stained cells or cells incubated with the non-specific mouse IgG labeled with the corresponding fluorophore were used in control experiments. Bingeing and uptake of IRDye-labeled conjugates was investigated by plating cells in 12-well plates and incubating with anti-EGFR Fab’-800CW conjugate diluted in 5%FCS in FluoroBrite DMEM in the concentration range of 100–0.1 nM 800CW linked to Fab’ or corresponding concentration of fluorescent labeled conjugate. In control wells to block endocytosis (probe internalization) the cells were pre-treated with 1 mM N-ethylmaleimide in complete medium for 2 min prior to adding the diluted probe. Plate-attached cells were incubated with IRDye 800CW-labeled conjugates for 0.25–1.5 h at 37°C with mixing in the dark. To test the specificity of cell binding a 5--fold excess of non-labeled Fab’2 cetuximab fragment was added to the incubation medium together with Fab’-800CW probe. Upon completion of incubation at various time points the cells were washed 2× with 5%FCS/FluoroBrite DMEM, 3x with DPBS and lysed by adding 0.2 mL of LysisB. Plates were sealed and cell lysates were treated by ultrasound in a sonication bath (2 min, RT, max power). Lysates were transferred to the wells of Greiner black 96-well plates with transparent wells containing 50 μL methanol/well and fluorescence intensity (800 nm emission) was read using Odyssey DLx Imager (Li-Cor Corp) and calibrated using IRDye 800CW standards diluted in the same buffer/methanol. Protein concentration was determined in each well by using Pierce detergent-compatible Bradford assay (Thermo-Fisher) and the uptake was normalized by cell lysate standards (50-300.105 cells/50 μL).
Western blotting experiments were performed by transferring SDS-PAGE (4–15% gradient) resolved cell lysates (5-10 μg total cell lysate/lane) obtained by lysing cells in the presence of LysisB (1%Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 10% glycerol, 10 mM HEPES, 0.1 M NaCl, pH 7.0 containing cOmplete EDTA-free Protease inhibitor cocktail, Millipore-Sigma). EGFR was identified on the blots by using F(ab’)2-HRP conjugate with subsequent detection of cell-bound peroxidase activity. Alternatively, anti-EGF Receptor (D38B1) XP Rabbit mAb (#4267, Cell signaling Technology), anti-GAPDH antibody (mAb 6C5, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were used for detection essentially as described in Taghian et al. Membranes were incubated with secondary goat anti-rabbit alkaline phosphatase conjugate (Sigma) diluted at 1:1500 in 0.1xTBS-B. Membranes were developed using NBT-BCIP solution (Sigma-Aldrich) diluted in 2 mM MgCl2 in TBS, pH 9.5. Signals were analyzed as integrated intensities using Fiji/ImageJ software (NIH).

## RNA probe design, synthesis, and Northern blotting
WT MDA-MB 231 cells were harvested at near 80% confluency and total RNA was extracted using Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit (Cat. # 74104). First cDNA strand was synthesized using Maxima First Strand cDNA Kit with dsDNAse (Thermo Scientific Cat #K1671), DNA template was amplified by PCR using GoTaq Colorless Master Mix (Promega M 7132) using the following primer sequences: primer pair 1–5′ CCAGGAGGTGGCTGGTTATG 3’ (forward) and 5′ CTGTATTTGCCCTCGGGGTT 3’ (reverse), primer pair 2–5′ AAACACCGCAGCATGTCAAG 3’ (forward), 5′ ACAGTTGGGCCTGGATGAAC 3’ (reverse). The resultant DNA templates (0.612 kb or 1.531 kb, respectively) were purified using 1% agarose gel EF, DNA bands were excised and isolated by using High Pure PCR Product Purification Kit (Roche). For cloning of the purified DNA templates, pGEM-T Easy Vector System (Promega) was used by following the manufacturer’s instructions. A 3:1 M ratio of the control insert DNA to the vector was used for the ligation and JM9 competent cells were transformed using the resultant plasmid and ampicillin/IPTG/X-Gal selection. Five blue colonies containing the insert (lacZ α-peptide sequence is disrupted by cloning into the pGEM-T Easy vector multiple cloning site) were picked, expanded, and purified plasmids were sequenced to check the orientation the inserts. The plasmids were linearized using suitable restriction enzymes (NEB Nco1-HF Cat. #R3193S or Sal1 Cat. #R3138S) and DIG-labeled riboprobe was synthesized using Promega Riboprobe synthesis kit (P1460) following the manufacturer’s instructions. For synthesis of DIG labeled riboprobe, DIG-11 UTP Roche (Cat # 11209256910) was added at a ratio of 35:65 to unlabeled UTP in the Riboprobe synthesis mix. MDA-MB 231WT and EGFR CRISPRi cell lines T1.1 and T2.1 cells were grown in DMEM/10% FBS in the presence of hygromycin (500 μg/ml) and puromycin (0.5ug/ml). Total RNA was isolated using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) as described in manufacturer’s instructions. Isolated RNAs were aliquoted and stored at −80C. For Northern blot analysis 2.0 μg of total RNA isolated from each cell line was electrophoresed on a 1% agarose gel containing 2 M formaldehyde. RNA from the gel were transferred to a nylon membrane (Hybond XL, Amersham). RNA was UV-cross-linked to the membrane and transferred to hybridization bottle and 3–5 mL of pre warmed hybridization solution (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, ULTRAhyb Ultrasensitive Hybridization Buffer, Cat. No. AM8670). After a 30 min pre-hybridization buffer was replaced with the hybridization buffer containing digoxigenin-labeled RNA probe (50 ng/mL) and hybridized overnight at 68°C. The blots were washed 2 × 5 min in 2X SSC, 0.1% SDS and then 2 × 15 min in 0.1X SSC, 0.1% SDS at 68°C under constant agitation. After hybridization and stringency washes the membrane was rinsed briefly with maleic acid washing buffer containing 0.3% (v/v) Tween 20. Membrane was blocked for 30 min in 1.0% blocking solution in maleic acid buffer followed by incubation in 150 mU/mL of anti-DIG AP-antibody conjugate in blocking buffer for 30 min. The membrane was washed 2 × 15 min in washing buffer followed by 2–5 min equilibration in 0.1M Tris/NaCl pH 9.5 detection buffer. The membrane was placed in a development folder, covered with 0.25M CPD Star substrate (Invitrogen Cat #T2146) and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. Excess liquid was removed, and the edges were heat sealed. The damp membrane was incubated at 37°C for 10 min. The membrane was imaged using Bio-Rad ChemiDoc MP Imaging System.

## Fluorescence microscopy
Imaging of cells and tumor sections was performed by using DM8 Fluorescent microscope fitted with SOLAnIR Light Engine (Leica), or TE2000-U inverted microscope (Nikon) equipped with a dual 100W Dia-illuminator/M780L3-C5(780 nm), 170 mW collimated LED (ThorLabs) light sources. In some experiments the samples were subjected to FLIM as described below.

## Fluorescence lifetime microscopy (FLIM)
Stellaris 8 Falcon FLIM confocal system (Leica) for NIR FLIM in time-domain time-correlated single photon counting mode was used essentially as described in Pal et al. at 730-nm excitation with 750-nm notch filter with HyD R detection (770-850-nm) with 4-line repetitions/averages. A 10×, 0.4 NA objective was used for image collection and digital images with 512 × 512 pixels (2.275 μm/pixel) per frame. All samples ( and frozen sections) were fixed for 10 min in 4% formaldehyde in 25 mM HEPES/HBSS, pH 7.4, washed in HBSS and mounted in SlowFade Glass (Thermo-Fisher).

## Widefield Fluorescence lifetime TD imaging
A custom-built time domain (TD) fluorescence imaging system was used for in vitro imaging. The TD imaging system consisted of a portable cart with a pulsed laser source (EXR-20, SuperK Varia, NKT Photonics, repetition rate: 80 MHz; tuning range: 400–850 nm) providing 770 ± 30-nm excitation. The excitation light was delivered to the sample using a multimode fiber (Thorlabs, Newton, New Jersey, United States) connected to a digital micromirror device (DMD), and fluorescence emission was collected in the reflectance mode using an 835 ± 70-nm band-pass filter (AVR Optics). TD fluorescence images were captured using a gated intensifier (Picostar, LaVision) and a CCD camera (LaVision, Picostar, 500 V gain, 0.1 to 1 s integration time, 256 × 344 pixels after 4 × 4 hardware binning). Imaging was performed with a 500 V gain, 500 ps gate width, and 150 ps steps for a total duration of approximately 6 ns per laser duty cycle of 12.5 ns.

## Mouse model
Tumor growth and mouse imaging was performed according to UMASS Chan IACUC approved animal protocol. Wild-type MDA-MB-231 and T2.1 cells were grown culture to sub-confluent density, treated with TryPLE Express reagent and implanted in serum-free medium containing 10% Matrigel (Beckton-Dickinson) into mammary abdominal fat pad. It took 48 ± 12 days for both control (WT) and attenuated (T2.1) mammary TNBC tumors to reach the volume of 0.6–1.0 cm3. Randomized animals (female J:NU mice, The Jackson Laboratory Stock 007850, 5–6 weeks, n = 6/group) were injected with 800CW labeled cetuximab Fab’ at the dose of 60–65 μg/mouse (1.2 nmol/mouse, 3.6 nmol 800CW, approximately 180 nmol 800CW/kg) in 0.15 mL of sterile DPBS. Intravenous injections were followed by FI imaging (IVIS Spectrum/CT (PerkinElmer), at 0.5, 3 and 24 h) using a xenon lamp or 750 nm laser diode excitation sources. The animals were subjected to imaging using in 2D mode with 1.2.104-2.0.104 photon counts collected over 0.5–1 s. Manually drawn ROI analysis was used in quantifying average photon counts for comparing various time points. Animals were additionally imaged in 3D image acquisition mode to obtain CT-corrected maximum intensity projection (MIP) images. These images were analyzed using volume-rendered ROIs.

## RNA extraction and qRT-PCR analysis
Extraction of total RNA from the tissue samples (n = 4/group) was performed in 0.15 mL of 1× proteinase K digestion buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0; 1 mM CaCl2, 0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate) containing 500 μg/mL proteinase K. Samples were suspended in the buffer by vortexing and incubated at 55°C for 3 h in a water bath. One mL TRIzol (Thermo-Fisher) was added, incubated for 5–10 min and extraction with 0.2 mL chloroform was performed. Total RNA was precipitated from water phase at −20°C in the presence of glycogen, washed with 100% ethanol, air-dried at room temperature, and then dissolved in RNAse-free water. The extracted RNA was used immediately to synthesize cDNA or stored at −80°C for later use. First strand cDNA was synthesized using the HiFi 1st Strand cDNA synthesis kit (101
Bio.com) following the manufacturers protocol. The newly synthesized cDNA was stored at −20C. Exon junction spanning primers (EGFR forward primer 5′-CCCCCTGACTCCGTCCAGTA-3′, reverse primer: 5′-CTCGTGCCTTGGCAAACTTTC-3’; GAPDH forward primer: 5′- GACAGTCAGCCGCATCTTCT-3′, reverse primer 5′-TTAAAAGCAGCCCTGGTGAC-3′) were generated using Primer-Blast (NCBI-NIH) with specificity checking against rodent genomes database. qPCR was performed using Bio-Rad 1000 series Thermal cycler (Bio-Rad). 20-μL reactions were conducted in triplicates, containing 0.4 μM of each primer in a 96 well plate using Ultra SYBR Green qPCR master mix (2×, with ROX 1, 101 Bio.com). Cycling conditions were as follows: 95°C for 10 min initial denaturation, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation (95°C for 15 s), annealing (55°C for 30 s) and extension (70°C for 30 s).

## Histology and immunohistochemistry
Tumors were excised post euthanasia, rinsed in ice-cold saline and embedded in OCT by snap-freezing immediately post resection. Thin frozen sections (8 μm thick) were fixed in acetone (−20°C). After washing in TBS (50 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) sections were blocked using 5% calf serum in TBS for 1 h. A mixture of primary antibodies (InVivoMAb anti-human PD-L1 (B7-H1, BioXCell) custom labeled with digoxigenin NHS essentially as described in Shazeeb et al., and anti-CD31/PECAM-1 (MEC 13.3, Santa Cruz) diluted at 1:100 in 5% calf serum in TBS) was applied onto the sections and incubated for 2 h at RT. Control sections were incubated in the presence of an excess of non-labeled Cetuximab (0.2 mg/mL final concentration) with other primary antibodies omitted. Sections were washed 5× in 5% calf serum in TBS and incubated in the presence of a mixture of Cetuximab-AF647 (1.5 μg/mL), anti-rat IgG2a-AF488 (SouthernBiotech, diluted 1:50) and Cy3-labeled anti-digoxigenin Fab (Millipore-Sigma, concentration – 0.5 μg/mL) in 5% calf serum in TBS for 1 h. Sections were washed 5× in 5% calf serum in TBS, fixed in 4% formaldehyde in DPBS, pH 7.5 for 10 min and mounted using Vectashield with DAPI (Vector Labs).

## Quantification and Statistical analysis
The differences between the means of the blotting signals, SNR values reflecting imaging probe uptake values by individual cells vs. background were compared by using by Student’s t test with Welch’s correction (data normal distribution, no equal variances assumed). Tumor:background imaging signal ratios were compared between the groups of animals using non-parametric Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test. P of 0.05 was assumed significant for all tests.

## Acknowledgments
NIH grants: This work was supported in part by NIH grants 2R01 EB000858 (to A.B.). R01 CA211084 (A.T.N.K.), R01 CA260857 (A.T.N.K.). We acknowledge the assistance of Shruti Choudhary (Sr. Research Scientist), UMASS Chan Small Molecule Screening, and Mass Spectrometry Facilities.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, A.B. and A.T.N.K.; Methodology, A.B., S.G., E.S., M.K., and A.L.; Investigation, A.B., S.G., and A.T.N.K.; Writing – Original Draft, A.B.; Writing – Review and Editing, A.B., S.G., R.P., E.S., A.T.N.K., M.K., and A.L.; Funding Acquisition, A.B. and A.T.N.K.; Resources, A.B. and A.T.N.K.; Supervision, A.B. and A.T.N.K.

## Declaration of interests
A.T.N.K. and R.P. are co-inventors of a pending US Patent application issued to The General Hospital Corporation. The patent might be the subject of a licensing agreement in the future. The authors declare no other competing interests.

Published: May 24, 2024

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2024.110102.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1‒S3

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1‒S3

## Data Availability Statement

•Data: Original in vivo fluorescence intensity data have been deposited at Mendeley and are publicly available as of the date of publication. The DOI is listed in the . Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the upon request.
•Code: No new code was generated in the process of this study.
•Additional information: Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.