319nihpaDevelopmental cellDev CellPMC126668631266686312666863NIHMS21169994111876910.1016/j.devcel.2025.09.017Cell-type-specific RNA polymerase II activity maps in intact tissues provide a gateway to mammalian gene regulatory mechanisms in vivo
ChovatiyaGopal HuangSean Y WangAlex B VersluisPhilip BaiChris K DeBerardineMichael LiaoYu-Ching RayJudhajeet OzerAbdullah LisJohn T TumbarTudorita 1Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA2Present address: Broad Institute of MIT & Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA3Present address: Department of Biology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27710, USA4Present address: Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA5Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
G.C. and T.T. designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript. G.C. generated mice, developed and performed PReCIS-seq experiments and analysis, and all ChIP-seq and RNA-seq experiments. S.Y.H. helped with experiments, computational analysis, figures, and writing the manuscript. A.B.W. performed ex vivo PRO-seq. M.D. contributed to computational analysis. P.V. performed radioactive experiments. C.K.B. generated the embryo data and assisted with statistical analyses. Y.-C.L. performed transposable elements analysis and assisted with CUT&RUN experiments. J.R. contributed to targeting vector design and ChIP. A.O. contributed to enhancer analysis. G.C., J.T.L., and T.T. analyzed and interpreted all data. G.C., S.Y.H., and T.T. prepared the figures. J.T.L. and S.Y.H. edited the manuscript.
*Correspondence: tt252@cornell.edu
20102025612434434–451.e82122025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Dev CellPrevious version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on October 18, 2024: "A lineage-specific nascent RNA assay unveils principles of gene regulation in tissue biology".

## SUMMARY
Accessing ongoing RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) activity in specific cell types within intact tissue is critical to reveal regulatory mechanisms of development. We developed precision run-on in cell-type-specific in vivo system followed by sequencing (PReCIS-seq), a method combining Cre-inducible GFP tagging of endogenous RNA Pol II with transcriptional run-on and GFP immunoprecipitation, to map transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II genome-wide in targeted cell types of mouse tissues. Applied to keratinocytes within intact skin, PReCIS-seq demonstrates that transcriptionally activated functions of biological transitions generally employ both RNA Pol II promoter-recruitment and promoter-proximal pause-release mechanisms. A global RNA Pol II regulatory polarization features extreme pausing levels at cellular safeguarding vs. lineage identity genes across development and homeostasis. This polarization is associated with distinct proximal-promoter structures, distinguishing high-paused genes with restricted RNA Pol II pause-release from low-paused genes undergoing rapid RNA Pol II firing into productive elongation. PReCIS-seq also identifies active enhancers based on divergent transcription. This approach enables high-resolution, cell-type-specific analysis of RNA Pol II dynamics in intact tissues across mammalian development, homeostasis, and disease.

## In brief
Chovatiya et al. developed PReCIS-seq, an in vivo approach that maps transcriptionally engaged RNA polymerase II in Cre-targeted cells within intact mouse tissues, without cell isolation. They report a polarized RNA Pol II pausing pattern, attenuated at lineage identity genes and heightened at cellular safeguarding genes, associated with distinct promoter-proximal architectures.

## Graphical Abstract

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2026 Feb 11.

## INTRODUCTION
Tissue biology is driven by cell-type- and stage-specific transcription programs difficult to recapitulate ex vivo, outside the intact-tissue environment. RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol II) executes these programs by establishing specific global patterns of transcription engagement on genes and active enhancer elements. Cell culture studies identified two major RNA Pol II regulatory steps: (1) initiation, or RNA Pol II promoter-recruitment, and (2) elongation, or RNA Pol II pause-release into the gene body from a promoter-proximal region ∼30–60 bp downstream of the transcription start site (TSS), where transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II can be stably paused. , These steps are essential for tissue development, as demonstrated by the targeted loss of pioneer transcription factors (TFs), which promote RNA Pol II promoter-recruitment, and negative elongation factor (NELF), which halts RNA Pol II pause-release. , While RNA Pol II promoter-proximal pausing might poise genes for rapid activation during cell differentiation, signaling, and cell cycle, – how accurately ex vivo studies recapitulate the regulatory landscape of RNA Pol II activity in the intact-tissue microenvironment is unclear. Despites decades of work, the field currently lacks an approach to capture high-precision quantitative maps of transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II on promoter-proximal regions, genes bodies, and enhancers in specific cell types of intact mammalian tissues in vivo.
Previous technological efforts to map cell-type-specific RNA Pol II activity include a single-cell nascent transcriptomics method that only modestly captured actively transcribing RNA Pol II from gene bodies. However, determining RNA Pol II pausing levels requires accurate quantitative measurements of RNA Pol II engagement on both promoter-proximal and gene body regions, and due to sensitivity issues require bulk assays. On the other hand, previous metabolic labeling-based bulk assays for intact tissue primarily captured mature mRNA transcripts produced within hours of transcription. , This provides information about recent transcription activity but cannot detect transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II, required for probing promoter-proximal pausing and enhancers detected as divergently transcribing elements. , 
Precision nuclear run-on sequencing (PRO-seq) assay is a global transcriptional run-on methodology in which biotin-labeled ribonucleotides are incorporated into nascent RNA by transcriptionally engaged polymerases. Followed by streptavidin pull-down of the nascent RNA and mapping to the genome, this approach provides base-pair resolution maps of ongoing transcription. It accurately captures RNA Pol II pausing at promoter-proximal regions and divergent transcription on active enhancers. , Previously applied to whole tissues and tumors containing multiple cell types with distinct transcriptional programs, accessing a cell-type-specific nascent transcriptome requires tissue dissociation and cell isolation, removing RNA Pol II regulation by tissue microenvironments. Thus, the RNA Pol II regulatory landscape of a specific lineage in its intact-tissue environment remains unknown due to the lack of a sensitive and robust intact-tissue approach.
Here, we developed precision run-on in cell-type-specific in vivo system followed by sequencing (PReCIS-seq), a derivative of PRO-seq with added cell-type specificity in intact tissue. We created a knockin mouse model that enabled Cre-LoxP-driven GFP tagging of the endogenous RNA Pol II (RNA Pol II-GFP) in a targeted cell type. The homozygous knockin mouse is normal, demonstrating that GFP tagging preserves RNA Pol II function. Using transcription run-on followed by anti-GFP native chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and nascent RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), we captured genome-wide maps of transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II in a specific cell type of an intact mammalian tissue. Using the Keratin14-Cre (K14-Cre) targeted lineage of keratinocytes as a case study, we map global RNA Pol II activity across in vivo stages of development and homeostasis and ex vivo conditions. Isolating cells from the tissue microenvironment significantly changed the RNA Pol II regulatory landscapes, highlighting the relevance of our in vivo approach.
We demonstrate that promoter-recruitment and pause-release mechanisms are broadly employed by transcriptionally regulated functions during adult tissue biological transitions. We uncover a global polarized pattern of RNA Pol II activity (e.g., high pausing/low expression vs. low pausing/high expression) that is stable throughout development and homeostasis at gene sets that define two essential tissue functions: cellular safeguarding and lineage identity. Extreme RNA Pol II activity associates with distinct promoter architectures harboring two classes of TF motifs, distinctly positioned relative to the TSS. Our work provides a platform to dissect cell-type-specific RNA Pol II regulatory mechanisms operating in intact-tissue microenvironments to govern mammalian tissue biology, offering new entry points into the molecular basis of human disease.

## DESIGN
To map transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II in specific cell types, we first tested PRO-seq on keratinocytes enzymatically dissociated from mouse skin and isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). This involves incubations at 37°C and 4°C and requires ∼500,000 cells, which can be hard to attain when populations of interests are small. Just 60 minutes of cell suspension on ice degraded newly synthesized nascent RNAs, compromising the validity of the approach. To circumvent these technical hurdles and to maintain the physiological state of cells in their tissue microenvironment, we developed PReCIS-seq.
We engineered a mouse model where cell-type-specific Cre activity adds GFP to the 3′ end of the endogenous second largest subunit of RNA Pol II (Polr2b), resulting in the RPB2-GFP fusion protein (RNA Pol II-GFP) ( , , and ; see ). Since Cre drivers of different cell types are widely available, our method can be applied broadly to different cell types and mouse tissues. Next, we used the K14-Cre driver to induce the RNA Pol II-GFP tagging exclusively in keratinocytes within intact skin. The transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II-GFP of keratinocytes was enriched from total skin chromatin by immuno-precipitation with anti-GFP (αGFP) ( ).
 To preserve in vivo RNA Pol II transcription engagement patterns, we immediately snapped froze the tissue, followed by chromatin isolation, DNA fragmentation, and PRO-seq: transcription run-on with biotin-ribonucleotides to label nascent RNAs ( and ). Next, αGFP ChIP pulls down complexes of RNA Pol II-GFP along with the associated nascent RNAs only from Cre-targeted cells, excluding all other cell types ( ). Then, a streptavidin pull-down of biotin-labeled nascent RNAs is followed by strand-specific RNA library generation, sequencing, and genome-wide mapping of nascent transcripts ( ). We named this method PReCIS-seq: it integrates PRO-seq with αGFP immunoprecipitation of Cre-inducible cell-type-specific RNA Pol II-GFP, enabling mapping transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II in specific cell types of complex intact tissues ( ).

## RESULTS

## PReCIS-seq maps cell-type-specific genome-wide RNA Pol II activity in intact mouse tissue
To generate Cre-inducible RNA Pol II-GFP mice for cell-type-specific RNA Pol II activity mapping in intact tissue, we targeted the endogenous Polr2b locus in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), creating the Polr2bf/f-GFP allele ( , , and ). Using mESCs we confirmed RNA Pol II-GFP fusion protein inducibility by Cre expression ( and ) and functionality by ChIP-seq ( – ). Next, we generated homozygous Polr2bf/f-GFP mice carrying K14-Cre (Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre) to target the keratinocyte lineage in the mouse skin. Mice were viable and fertile with normal skin and hair follicles, and they showed stage- and keratinocyte-specific RNA Pol II-GFP in skin sections ( , , and – ). Thus, the RNA Pol II-GFP fusion protein, which replaced the wild-type endogenous RNA Pol II, is active and performs its essential functions. Consistently, αGFP pull-down from adult mouse back skin and conventional ChIP-seq strongly enriched known keratinocyte-specific genes. In contrast, commercial αPol II antibody pulled down chromatin from all skin cell types, including keratinocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial, and immune cells, as expected ( – ). Thus, RNA Pol II-GFP tagging enables cell-type-specific chromatin enrichment without tissue dissociation.
Next, PReCIS-seq of back skin at a resting (telogen) or a growth stage (anagen) with increased keratinocyte proliferation ( ) provided genome-wide nascent transcriptomic data ( – ). To validate keratinocyte-specific enrichment, we employed published single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data of whole skin. From distinct cell-clusters, we identified cell-type-specific gene sets for keratinocytes, mesenchymal, endothelial, and immune cells ( and ; ). , Indeed, αGFP pull-down revealed strong RNA Pol II enrichment around the TSS of keratinocyte-specific genes (n = 52) but not at genes specific to other skin cell types ( and ; ), validating our approach. As expected, αPol II pull-down and input control detected nascent transcripts from all skin cell types ( and ; ). Examples of keratinocyte-specific genes (i.e., Krt14 and Trp63) show enrichment in the αGFP pull-down, while a non-keratinocyte, immune-specific gene (i.e., Cd74) was depleted in the αGFP pull-down but enriched in input and αPol II pull-down ( ). These results validate selective enrichment of keratinocyte-specific nascent transcripts from intact mouse skin.
Thus, PReCIS-seq provides high-resolution RNA Pol II transcriptional-engagement data of a specific cell type in its natural tissue microenvironment, without tissue dissociation and cell isolation.

## RNA Pol II broadly employs promoter recruitment and pause-release during tissue transition
The extent to which RNA Pol II activity relies on promoter recruitment vs. promoter-proximal pause-release during biological transitions in specific cell types of mammalian tissues in vivo is unclear. Current models suggest that pause-release is preferentially employed by “elite” functions, such as cell cycle, signaling and differentiation. , , , We investigate which cellular functions preferentially utilize these regulatory mechanisms using the telogen-to-anagen transition as a case study.
The relative contributions of RNA Pol II promoter-recruitment and pause-release to gene activation can be inferred from high-resolution nascent transcription data, as demonstrated by PRO-seq studies. – , At each stage, we compute the pausing index (PI), defined as the ratio of normalized promoter-proximal counts (PPCs) to gene body counts (GBCs). PI changes between two stages reveal the predominant regulatory mechanism at individual genes: a stable PI implies regulation primarily through promoter recruitment, while a decrease in PI indicates regulation via pause-release ( ). – , 
 PReCIS-seq of biological replicates revealed consistent and reproducible differences in nascent transcription between telogen and anagen ( ). Genome-wide analyses showed similar distributions of PI, PPC, and GBC between stages, suggesting that global RNA Pol II activity remains relatively constant ( ; ; ). To identify genes activated during the telogen-anagen transition, we utilized DESeq2 which identified 186 transcriptionally induced genes with over 2-fold increase in GBC. Of these, 21% (n = 39) exhibited increased RNA Pol II pause-release (PI fold change [FC] < −2), whereas 79% (n = 147) showed increased RNA Pol II promoter recruitment (PI ∼ constant) ( and ).
Function-based analysis of these genes revealed enrichment in cell cycle and signaling pathways ( and – ; ), consistent with the increased proliferation at the transition. Notably, HOMER motif analysis of 1 kb promoter regions showed that cell-cycle genes regulated via promoter recruitment—but not pause-release—were enriched for motifs of TFs known to control cell-cycle progression ( ; ). – Several Shh-signaling genes were also upregulated at anagen, as expected from previous functional studies, and employed both RNA Pol II regulatory mechanisms ( ). Contrary to prevailing views, pause-release was not restricted to elite functions. Instead, it was broadly utilized across multiple cellular processes, including signaling, cell cycle, DNA repair, metabolism, and all other transcriptionally regulated categories ( ). These findings, corroborated by analysis of a second adult tissue transition marked by Shh-CreERT2 (described later), illuminate the regulatory logic of RNA Pol II control in specific cell types within intact adult tissue microenvironments and point to the broad relevance of pause-release in vivo (see ).

## RNA Pol II is low-paused at lineage identity genes and high-paused at cellular safeguarding genes
Next, we systematically investigated the global RNA Pol II regulatory landscape of the keratinocyte lineage in intact tissue. Prior cell culture and Drosophila studies have suggested that genes of cell cycle, signaling, development, and differentiation exhibit the highest RNA Pol II pausing, which would “poise” them for rapid activation. – 
We began by analyzing PReCIS-seq data at telogen—the predominant physiological state of adult mouse skin. We manually curated six keratinocyte-expressed gene sets with well-known biological roles (see ): (1) keratinocyte identity, (2) development, (3) signaling, (4) metabolism, (5) cell cycle, and (6) cytoskeleton ( ). Remarkably, keratinocyte identity genes, but not general housekeeping genes, were uniquely characterized by high expression (GBC) and very low pausing (PI) ( ).
 Next, unbiased genome-wide analysis revealed that gene body expression (GBC) correlated positively with promoter-proximal RNA Pol II density (PPC), but negatively with PI ( and ). Among expressed genes (n = 10,132), we classified three major RNA Pol II pausing levels: 13% (n = 1,336) low-paused (R1), 79% (n = 7,979) mid-paused (R2), and 8% (n = 817) high-paused (R3); an additional set of 413 genes showed high pausing but were transcriptionally silent (R4) ( ; ; ). Gene Ontology (GO) analysis on the four gene groups (R1–R4) ( ; ) showed that RNA Pol II pausing levels are functionally stratified across gene categories.
Clustering the top 45 enriched GO terms using a binary cut method revealed three major functional classes corresponding to the low-, mid-, and high-paused groups, and a fourth for the unexpressed high-paused group ( and ). Unexpectedly, the most highly paused genes (R3 and R4) were enriched for autophagy, ubiquitin-mediated protein catabolism, and DNA repair—functions related to cellular safeguarding ( and ). Contrary to expectations, cell cycle and signaling genes were not the most high-paused and fell within the mid-paused group (R2), alongside housekeeping processes such as ribosome biogenesis, RNA processing, and metabolism. Finally, the lowest-paused genes (R1) were enriched for skin development and epidermal differentiation and showed minimal pausing ( and ). Five functional gene categories derived from the top GO terms of each group validated these findings ( ).
This genome-wide view of lineage-specific RNA Pol II regulation within intact tissue revealed cellular safeguarding genes as the most highly paused in vivo, potentially poised for rapid activation, whereas lineage identity genes exhibited minimal pausing, enabling efficient RNA Pol II elongation (see ).

## Global dynamics of RNA Pol II activity in development, homeostasis, and ex vivo
The data so far reveal global functional polarization of RNA Pol II activity in the lineage with high-paused/lowly expressed (poised) genes encoding cellular safeguarding functions while low-paused/highly expressed genes marked lineage identity genes. This finding deviates from previous studies, , , , prompting us to ask whether this RNA Pol II activity pattern is unique to the adult tissue resting phase in vivo.
Thus, we compared RNA Pol II pausing at the resting stage (postnatal day [P]21) with three additional in vivo stages—tissue growth (P24), development (embryonic day [E]16.5), and newborn (NB) skin—and two ex vivo conditions using freshly isolated or cultured NB keratinocytes (see ). While global gene expression (GBC) was comparable across conditions, promoter-proximal RNA Pol II occupancy (PPC) and pausing (PI) varied significantly ( ; and ). To enable comparisons across conditions, we plotted GBC and PI for representative gene categories relative to genome-wide distributions ( – and – ). For specific gene categories, pairwise statistical analysis revealed significant changes in pausing and expression across conditions ( and ). Several functional gene sets, such as metabolism and ribosome biogenesis, largely retained pausing levels across all conditions ( , , and – ). In contrast, high pausing at autophagy and protein catabolism genes persisted across in vivo conditions but were markedly reduced ex vivo ( – ). The most high-paused genes ex vivo were instead associated with signaling, oxidative stress, and cell cycle ( ), recapitulating earlier cell culture observations. , , , These data were consistent with GO analysis of genes that strongly change RNA Pol II pausing status when keratinocytes are isolated from NB skin ( ). Notably, lineage identity genes remained the lowest-paused group in all conditions ( , – , and ; ). summarizes the functional categories with the highest and lowest pausing across conditions.
 In summary, RNA Pol II activity polarization around lineage identity vs. cellular safeguarding (autophagy, protein catabolism, DNA repair) genes remains stable across development and homeostasis despite cellular maturation and diversification. Notably, isolating cells from their tissue microenvironment markedly disrupts this global RNA Pol II landscape (see ).

## Enhancer proximity is associated with expression but not RNA Pol II pausing level
PReCIS-seq data from intact tissue shows that certain gene sets maintain stable RNA Pol II activity—high-paused/low expression or low-paused/high expression—across development and homeostasis. This suggests that strong regulatory mechanisms sustain these patterns across cell generations. RNA Pol II activity is influenced by regulatory DNA elements containing TF-binding sites—enhancers (distal) and promoters (proximal)—which can be active or inactive. Both active enhancers and promoters are detectable as divergently transcribed elements in nascent RNA data. – In fact, enhancer RNA expression and divergent transcription are more reliable indicators of active enhancers than histone marks. – Therefore, we employed PReCIS-seq to identify enhancers and ask if their TSS proximity correlates with distinct RNA Pol II activity patterns.
Indeed, PReCIS-seq data revealed distal elements with divergent transcription patterns consistent with active enhancers ( ). Using discriminative regulatory-element detection from GRO-seq (dREG) analysis on NB intact-skin data, we found 4,151 distal, divergently transcribed regions after excluding annotated promoters ( and ; ; ). These dREGs significantly overlapped ENCODE-defined candidate cis-regulatory elements (cCREs), which are based on specific histone marks and chromatin accessibility and include distal and proximal enhancer-like sites ( ; ). Identified dREGs also showed strong H3K27ac enrichment in our cleavage under targets and release using nuclease (CUT&RUN) data ( and ) and high chromatin accessibility in a published assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) dataset from NB keratinocytes, supporting these dREGs as active enhancers. Thus, PReCIS-seq reliably detects active enhancers in a specific lineage of intact tissue. Importantly, enhancer proximity was strongly associated with gene body transcription but showed minimal correlation with promoter-proximal pausing ( ; ).
 

## Distinct proximal-promoter structures associated with extreme RNA Pol II pausing levels
We next asked whether distinct TF motifs were associated with enhancers or promoters of high- and low-paused genes. HOMER analysis of NB intact-skin PReCIS-seq revealed no significant TF enrichment at the nearest enhancers of any gene group analyzed. In contrast, high-paused gene promoters displayed higher GC content ( ), and higher chromatin accessibility compared with low-paused promoters ( ), as expected. , In addition, we found enrichment of distinct TF motifs at the two promoter sets across all in vivo stages ( and ; ), and TF motif localization relative to the TSS differed notably between high- and low-paused promoters. Motifs enriched in high-paused genes were consistently positioned just upstream of the TSS ( and ), whereas motifs associated with low-paused genes were broadly distributed both upstream and downstream of the TSS, including over the canonical RNA Pol II pause site ( and ). Importantly, these TF localization patterns consistently distinguished high- and low-paused promoters across all four developmental stages analyzed ( and ).
 Notably, the TATA-box was the only motif consistently associated with low-paused genes, while NRF and KLF motifs marked high-paused promoters across all stages ( ). To validate the occupancy of these sequence-specific TFs, we performed CUT&RUN on keratinocytes rapidly isolated from NB skin (see ). We profiled NRF1 and KLF3, representatives of distinct TF families, that were robustly expressed in PReCIS-seq, bulk RNA-seq, and scRNA-seq , , datasets ( – ). CUT&RUN confirmed enrichment of both TFs around the TSSs of high-paused genes, coinciding with regions of open chromatin defined by ATAC-seq ( and ).
Thus, RNA Pol II pausing is associated with distinct promoter-proximal DNA architectures, defined by GC content, TF motif composition and their precise positioning around the TSS (see ).

## Technical and future considerations for PReCIS-seq studies
To benchmark PReCIS-seq, we first compared it with αGFP ChIP-seq in skin tissue from the same Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre line. Since both assays avoid tissue dissociation, they preserve native RNA Pol II occupancy. Gene-level signals correlated well ( ), and PReCIS-seq high-paused genes showed mid-to-high pausing by ChIP-seq ( ), indicating general agreement. However, only 23% of PReCIS-seq high-paused genes were deemed high-paused in ChIP-seq while 59% were mid-paused ( ). This is expected given ChIP-seq’s (1) higher background, (2) lower resolution ( ), and (3) inability to distinguish sense from antisense signal at overlapping genes, divergent promoters ( and ), and enhancers ( and )—all advantages of PRO-seq-based methods such as PReCIS-seq.
 We next compared PReCIS-seq with RNAVelocity, which we adapted to bulk RNA-seq from keratinocytes at the telogen-anagen transition. RNAVelocity infers nascent transcription through the ratio of unspliced:spliced mRNAs. Using the velocyto package, we identified genes with increased unspliced transcripts at the transition and compared them to PReCIS-seq upregulated genes. The comparison shows general agreement between RNAVelocity and PReCIS-seq signals ( ), but RNAVelocity missed many genes detected by PReCIS-seq ( – ). Specifically, RNA velocity analyses assume that unspliced and spliced RNAs are exclusively nascent or mature, respectively, but the prevalence of co-transcriptional splicing would lead to misclassification of transcripts ( ).
We then briefly explored potential applications of PReCIS-seq. Comparing nascent transcription (PReCIS-seq) with steady-state mRNA levels (RNA-seq) can help assess the relative contributions of transcription and mRNA stability to gene expression. We compared stage-matched (P21) PReCIS-seq with bulk RNA-seq from FACS-isolated GFP+ keratinocytes from Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre mice ( ). PReCIS-seq gene body signal correlated moderately with bulk RNA-seq counts, independent of gene length ( and ). Notably, ∼5% of expressed genes showed poor correlation between nascent and total RNA levels, suggesting post-transcriptional regulation in specific functional categories such as “extracellular matrix” and “cell fate commitment” ( and ).
Regulatory factors of RNA Pol II pausing and pause-release have been extensively investigated across multiple systems using PRO-seq signals , , and as a PRO-seq derivative, PReCIS-seq is expected to recapitulate these findings. To test this, we examined BRD4—a key RNA Pol II pause-release factor. We performed BRD4 CUT&RUN in keratinocytes isolated from NB skin via a rapid dissociation protocol ( ). We observed BRD4 enrichment at high-paused promoters defined in intact tissue ( ), consistent with the observed pause-release of this gene set under ex vivo conditions ( and ). Interestingly, low-paused genes, which do not undergo significant changes in pause-release at the in vivo to ex vivo transition ( and ), showed minimal BRD4 occupancy ( ). This suggests that the constitutive rapid transition to elongation at low-paused genes may be BRD4 independent or the BRD4 association is very transient.
PReCIS-seq also enables high-resolution mapping of RNA Pol II on transposable elements (TEs), repetitive genomic sequences that constitute a large fraction of the mouse genome. Comparing PReCIS-seq and bulk RNA-seq, we identified 123 TE subfamilies whose transcripts may be relatively stable but are lowly transcribed ( – ). In this class, RLTR4_MM-int (MLV) mediates keratinocyte communication with the skin exogenous microbiota, and PReCIS-seq defines its TSS through detection of divergent transcription ( ), providing an example of the value of using PReCIS-seq to study TE transcriptional regulation. On the other hand, 141 TE subfamilies detected preferentially by PReCIS-seq but poorly in RNA-seq likely define high RNA instability and accurately define true transcriptional activity of these TEs ( , , and ). At individual loci, PReCIS-seq revealed instances of transcriptional readthrough downstream of nearby genes ( ) and spurious TE activation within intergenic regions ( ). Together, these findings underscore the utility of PReCIS-seq for detecting and studying transcriptional regulation of TEs within specific lineages of intact tissues.
PReCIS-seq is broadly applicable to other cell types and tissues using appropriate Cre drivers. To test its sensitivity, we used Shh-CreERT2 to label a subset of hair follicle matrix progenitors and its immediate derivatives that represented only ∼1% of the total skin at P35 (full anagen) ( and ; ). PReCIS-seq reliably profiled this rare population and identified 1,766 genes upregulated in the Shh lineage at full anagen ( and – ). Of these, over 28% (n = 498) displayed a progressive decrease in PI from telogen to early anagen to full anagen ( , , , and ), indicating regulation by pause-release. These pause-release upregulated genes contributed broadly to the functional categories activated during this transition ( ), similar to our observations at the telogen-to-anagen transition ( ). Together, these findings underscore the power of PReCIS-seq to map RNA Pol II regulation even in rare cell populations within complex intact mammalian tissues.

## DISCUSSION
RNA Pol II regulatory mechanisms govern cell-type-specific transcription programs in mammalian development, tissue homeostasis, and disease. , , , , Here, we generated mouse genetic tools and employed PRO-seq to develop a base-pair-resolution method (PReCIS-seq) enabling genome-wide mapping of transcriptionally engaged RNA Pol II in specific cell types within intact mouse tissue ( ).
Previously, PRO-seq studies have characterized global RNA Pol II dynamics in cultured cells , , , , , and bulk tissues and tumors, but equivalent data from specific cell types within the intact-tissue microenvironment are lacking. Importantly, we show that tissue dissociation itself significantly disrupts the global RNA Pol II landscape. Previous lineage-specific intact-tissue approaches lacked either the time resolution or sensitivity needed to detect RNA Pol II activity at promoter-proximal regions or enhancers. , PReCIS-seq overcomes these limitations by bypassing tissue dissociation and combining PRO-seq with cell-type specificity in intact tissue, uncovering promoter-proximal RNA Pol II pausing, nascent transcription across the genome, and RNA Pol II engagement at active enhancers ( ). Its application to the keratinocyte lineage and hair follicle matrix cells—two distinct populations within a resilient mouse tissue—highlights its power to dissect transcriptional regulation in vivo.
By profiling keratinocytes and hair matrix progenitors in intact skin in development and adult homeostasis, we generated RNA Pol II activity maps of a mammalian lineage in its native tissue environment. We found that ∼75% of genes activated during the two tissue transitions examined rely primarily on RNA Pol II promoter recruitment, likely mediated by initiating TFs upstream of the TSS. In contrast, ∼25% of activated genes utilize RNA Pol II pause-release and these genes span most biological functions upregulated at both transitions. This deviates from the prevailing view that pause-release governs primarily elite genes specialized in functions such as signaling or cell cycle , , , , and instead shows it also regulates core functions such as DNA repair, metabolism, autophagy, protein catabolism, and ribosome biogenesis. Our findings provide a foundation to explore the contribution of RNA Pol II pause-release mechanisms in a wider context of tissue biology.
Perhaps the most fascinating discovery is that genes with extreme and opposing RNA Pol II activity states stably coalescence around two essential tissue functions: “cellular safeguarding” vs. “lineage identity.” This global RNA Pol II activity polarization—marked by high pausing/low expression vs. low pausing/high expression—is maintained in the lineage from early development through adult homeostasis, despite increasing lineage complexity and diversification of cell states over time ( ). At one end, cellular safeguarding genes involved in DNA repair, autophagy, and ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolism show extremely high RNA Pol II pausing, appearing poised for rapid activation ( ). In contrast, ex vivo studies often implicate signaling, cell cycle, and oxidative stress genes as the most highly paused (this study, Bandiera et al., Williams et al., and Abuhashem et al. ), likely reflecting stress responses of cells isolated from their natural tissue environment that globally shift the RNA Pol II pausing status. Indeed, we show that cellular safeguarding genes undergo pause-release ex vivo upon tissue dissociation, consistent with the roles of these genes in acute stress responses. – 
Cellular safeguarding is critical throughout life, protecting tissues from environmental insults including UV radiation, heat shock, oxidative stress, hypoxia, and nutrient deprivation. – In the skin, UV exposure represents a classic challenge, with keratinocytes depending on DNA repair and autophagy for survival. , Following UV insult, transcription temporarily shuts down to prevent interference with DNA repair. Yet, genes preloaded with paused RNA Pol II can be rapidly reactivated, as demonstrated for heat shock genes. Thus, RNA Pol II pausing may act as a molecular standby, enabling quick transcriptional re-engagement when safeguarding functions are urgently needed.
At the opposite end of the RNA Pol II activity map are lineage identity genes, marked by minimal RNA Pol II pausing and high expression, suggesting rapid RNA Pol II release into elongation ( ). Although some developmental genes can display high pausing status as clearly shown by earlier work in Drosophila, lineage-specific genes have reportedly low pausing even in embryonic stem cells before activation. Thus, our results raise the possibility that pausing of essential tissue-function genes is hardwired early in development and maintained throughout life.
How is this stable RNA Pol II regulatory pattern at essential tissue functions achieved across cell divisions throughout an animal’s life? While numerous general factors such as NELF, DSIF, pTEFb, the +1 nucleosome, histone modifications, and general TFs modulate pausing, , – these lack sequence specificity and cannot explain the specific gene sets pausing patterns we observe. Emerging evidence suggests that certain sequence-specific TFs, including GAF and HSF1 in Drosophila and c-Myc or p53 in mammals, may directly influence promoter-proximal pause-release. Our data support this notion, suggesting two distinct promoter-proximal architectures associated with high and low pausing that include specific TFs and their distinct positioning relative to TSS, echoing an earlier study performed in Drosophila. We identify broad classes of TF motifs that distinguish the low- and high-paused gene classes. Whether these TFs recruit pausing machinery or prime promoters for rapid pause-release upon stimulation remains unclear. While some motifs were stage specific, KLF and NRF motifs were consistently enriched at high-paused promoters across all stages. Furthermore, we found the TATA-box motif to be strongly associated with low-paused genes enriched in keratinocyte lineage identity functions. The presence of TATA-box on their promoters is in agreement with previous associations of this motif with lineage-specific genes. , The distinct promoter architectures of high- vs. low-paused genes likely support stable transcriptional programs that maintain essential tissue-specific functions, such as lineage identity and cellular safeguarding, across an animal’s lifespan ( ).
In conclusion, we developed mouse genetic tools and a platform—PReCIS-seq—for precise, genome-wide mapping of ongoing RNA Pol II activity at genes and enhancers in specific cell types within intact mouse tissues. Together with our biological findings, this approach opens avenues for investigating the mechanisms governing gene expression during mammalian development, homeostasis, and disease.

## Limitations of the study
First, PReCIS-seq relies on replacing endogenous RNA Pol II with a GFP-tagged version in specific cell types, limiting its application to those cell types in which RNA Pol II turnover occurs within the temporal window being studied after Cre induction. Second, PReCIS-seq is applicable only to those cell types for which Cre drivers are available, but these already abound in the mouse. Lastly, future improvements, including the integration of click-chemistry-based methods, may shorten PReCIS-seq’s library preparation steps and further enhance efficiency.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the , Tudorita Tumbar (tt252@cornell.edu).

## Materials availability
The transgenic mouse line generated in this study is available from the with a completed materials transfer agreement.

## Data and code availability
ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, PReCIS-seq, and CUT&RUN data have been deposited at GEO as GSE278914 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. All raw data for western blots and gels in figures were deposited at Mendeley Data: https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/zxtm9tmcw7/1.
This paper analyzes existing, publicly available data accessible at GEO: GSE214441, GEO: GSE154579, GEO: GSE153596, and GEO: GSE197024.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Animals
Mice were housed in individually ventilated cages under pathogen-free conditions. Animals had free access to food and water and were kept in a 12h light-dark cycle. The Polr2bf/f-GFP knock-in mice were generated in this study. The K14-Cre mice were gifted from Dr. Elaine Fuchs’ laboratory. The Shh-CreERT2 mice was obtained from the Jackson laboratory. The Polr2bf/f-GFP knock-in mice were crossed with K14-Cre and Shh-CreERT2 mice to generate Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre and Polr2bf/f-GFP; Shh-CreERT2 strains. Cre-positive Polr2bf/f-GFP; Shh-CreERT2 mice were treated with 100μg/g tamoxifen (sigma) dissolved in corn oil at PD27 and skin tissue were harvested at PD35, All sequencing experiments had at least one male and one female sample. All mouse work was performed in accordance with the Cornell University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines (protocol no. 2007–0125).

## Primary cultures
Mouse skin keratinocytes were isolated from the newborn pups (PD 0.5). Briefly, pups were washed with 70% ethanol followed by PBS followed by decapitation and skin tissue removal. To separate the epidermis from the dermis, skin was incubated in cold Dispase at 4°C for overnight. The next day, the epidermis was separated from the dermis and incubated with 1% trypsin for 30 minutes at 4°C to prepare single cell suspensions. 20 to 30 million freshly isolated keratinocytes were either processed for PRO-seq library preparation as described previously or cultured in vitro in low calcium (0.05 mM) containing E-media on irradiated mouse fibroblasts at 37°C and then processed for PRO-seq library construction. For the CUT&RUN experiments, newborn skin samples were incubated in Dispase at 4°C for 30 minutes, followed by trypsinization for 10 minutes at RT.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Construction of the vector targeting endogenous Polr2b locus in mouse ES cells
To generate a conditional GFP-tagged RNA Polymerase II (Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre) mouse line, we employed the CRISPR-Cas9 system to modify the 3’-end of the endogenous Polr2b gene, which encodes the second largest subunit of the RNA Polymerase II complex (RPB2). The targeting vector was designed as follows to replace the endogenous exon 25 with floxed exon 25, followed by the exon 25 fused GFP and 3x-FLAG. Precisely, a 4107 bp long targeting construct was designed that consists of a 635 bp long 5’ homology arm followed by 1st LoxP site in the middle of intron 24, exon 25, a rabbit β-globin polyadenylation terminator signal (RBPA), 2nd LoxP site immediately after RBPA, partial intron 24, exon 25, linker sequence, 1st FRT site, linker, EGFP, 2nd FRT, linker, 3x FLAG with stop codon, and 1022 bp long 3’ homology arm from 3’ UTR of Polr2b gene. The targeting construct was partially synthesized by GenScript (www.genscript.com) and cloned in-house into pUC19. Next, guide RNA (gRNA) sequences targeting upstream and downstream of exon 25 were inserted into the pDG459 plasmid containing Cas9. The sequence of gRNAs used are as follows: 5’-AGCGGGCAACGAATCATCTG-3’ and 5’-GTTTAGCTGCCAGAAGTTCA-3’.

## Electroporation of targeting construct and gRNA-Cas9 plasmid in mouse ES cells
The targeting construct along with gRNA containing pDG459 plasmids were electroporated in V6.5 mouse ES cells by the Stem Cell and Transgenic Core Facility at Cornell University. The V6.5 mouse ES cells were grown to ∼70% confluence on irradiated feeders in standard mouse ES cell medium containing LIF. Electroporation was performed using a Bio-Rad Gene Pulser II. 8×10^6 cells were electroporated in a 4mm cuvette with 25μg of targeting construct and pDG459 plasmid, at exponential program at 300V and 250uf resistance. Cells were briefly pipetted up and down after electroporation and replated onto 100mm gelatinized TC dishes. Initial selection was performed with the addition of 5 μg/ml puromycin to the culture medium for 48 hours, and then cells were cultured until individual clones could be manually picked (10 days). Picked clones were split into duplicate 96-well dishes for screening and cryopreservation.

## Screening of clones and validation of GFP tagged RNA Pol II expression in mouse ESCs
The ES cells clones were first screened for the presence of GFP sequence in the genome using the 5’-AAGCTGACCCTGAAGTT CATCTGC-3’ and 5’-CTTGTAGTTGCCGTCGTCCTTGAA-3’ primers followed by using junction spanning primers as shown in . The primers used for 5’ junction screening were 5F 5’-TGGGAAACCTGCTCGCTGTAT-3’, and 5R 5’-ATCTCAGTGGT ATTTGTGAGCCAG-3’, and for 3’ junction were 3F 5’-ACTACAAAGACCATGACGGTGA-3’, and 3R 5’-TTCCGCGGCAGCCA AAATTA-3’. Further, the entire integrated targeting construct insert in mouse ES cell genome was PCR amplified using different combinations of primers and verified by Sanger sequencing. To ensure Cre-inducible expression of RPB2-GFP fusion protein, selected clone (F8) of mouse ES cells were transfected with a modified Cre expressing plasmid under EF1a (EFS) promoter in pSECC vector (Addgene plasmid # 60820), followed by selection of positive clones under neomycin and puromycin. The selected clones were further expanded and used for validation of GFP expression by confocal microscopy, FACS, and western blotting.

## Generation of RNA Pol II-GFP knock in mouse line and genotyping
Positive clone F8 identified by screening was then recovered and expanded for ES cell microinjection. ES cells were microinjected into blastocyst stage embryos harvested from B6(Cg)-Tyrc-2J/J albino mice, and then transferred into pseudopregnant recipient females. ES cell incorporation into chimeras (F8 chimeras) was judged by coat color, and chimeras were bred to determine germline transmission. Offspring of F8 chimeras (knock-in line) were used to establish the Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre mouse line. The following primers were used for genotyping of Pol II-GFP mice.
WT For 5’-GCCAGAAGTTCATGGTCAGATAC-3’ GFP For 5’-CATGGACGAGCTGTACAAGGC-3’
Common Rev 5’-CGACAGCTATAACCCTGCTCTTG-3’
The expected PCR product size for WT allele is 262 bp and for transgenic KI allele is 406 bp.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
Dorsal skin tissue of Polr2bf/f-GFP and Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre mice were collected at PD21 and flash-frozen in liquid N2, followed by dry pulverization of frozen tissue through a cell crusher (https://cellcrusher.com/tissuepulverizer/). Samples were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde, quenched with 125 mM glycine, and washed with ice cold PBS with protease inhibitors (ThermoFisher, A32965). After pelleting, samples were resuspended in ice-cold swelling buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.1% NP40, 5 mM NaF, 2 mM Na2VO4, 1 mM PMSF, 1X PIC) and dounced with both tight and loose pestle for 20 times on ice, followed by filtering through a 70 μm filter. After centrifugation (1,000xg 10 min 4°C), samples were resuspended in sonication buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 140 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1 % Na-Deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 5mM NaF, 2 mM Na2VO4, 1mM PMSF, 1X PIC) and fragmented using Bioruptor at high setting for 30 second ON + 30 second OFF pulses for a total of 30 minutes. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation (10,000xg 15 min 4°C). For pulldown, each sample was divided into three equal volumes followed by addition of 10 μL of Rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling, #2729), Mouse monoclonal anti-Pol II 8WG16 (Abcam, ab817), or Rabbit polyclonal anti-GFP (Abcam, ab290) antibodies and incubated overnight at 4°C with end-to-end rotation. Next, the samples were incubated with Dynabeads-Protein A (ThermoFisher 10002D) for 4 hours at 4°C. Samples were then washed with sonication buffer, high salt wash buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1 % Na-Deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS), LiCl wash buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.5% Na-Deoxycholate), and TE buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.01% Tween-20). Samples were eluted by resuspending beads in elution buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1% SDS) and thermomixed at 65°C for 30 minutes. Sample cross-linking was reversed by incubation with NaCl, EDTA and proteinase K (160 mM, 5mM, 200 μg/mL respectively) overnight at 65°C. DNA was purified through phenol/chloroform extraction and precipitated using ethanol, sodium acetate, and glycoblue followed by centrifugation. The DNA pellets were then air dried and resuspended in TE buffer containing RNase cocktail (ThermoFisher, AM2286). DNA concentration was measured using the Qubit HS dsDNA kit (ThermoFisher, Q33238). DNA libraries were constructed by Tn5 tagmentation. Briefly, primer A 5′-TCGTCGGCAGCGTCAGATGTGTATAAGAGA CAG-3′ or primer B 5′-GTCTCGTGGGCTCGGAGATGTGTATAAGAGACAG-3′ was annealed to Tn5-rev oligo 5′-[phos]CTGTCT CTTATACACATCT-3′. Transposons were assembled using Tn5 and primers A and B in DF buffer (100 mM HEPES, pH 7.2, 200 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT, 0.2% Triton X-100, 20% glycerol). Tagmented DNA was PCR amplified and purified with AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, A63880) and quality checked by running on 6% Native PAGE gels and Fragment Analyzer. The ChIP DNA libraries were sequenced with Illumina NextSeq500, 2×37 bp, paired end, at BRC Genomics facility at Cornell University. Mouse ES cells were ChIP-seq profiled similarly, except chromatin were isolated from cultured ES cells instead of frozen skin tissue.

## Analysis of ChIP-seq data
ChIP-seq reads were first trimmed with cutadapt (v1.18), then mapped to the mouse reference genome mm10 with Bowtie2 (v2.3.5). The BAM files were then converted to RPM normalized bigWig format and visualized using Integrated Genome Viewer (IGV). The correlation analysis was performed using plotCorrelation from deepTools (v3.5.5). Heatmap and profile plots of read signal across genes were generated using the plotHeatmap and plotProfile functions from deepTools. The epithelial cell-type specific genes were obtained from the HAIR-GEL after filtering out non-keratinocyte genes based on their known expression pattern (cell-type specificity checked using protein atlas - https://www.proteinatlas.org).

## PReCIS-seq methodology

## Chromatin isolation from flash frozen tissue
Back skin tissue was flash frozen immediately after harvest from the mouse followed by dry pulverization using a cell crusher. Tissue samples were resuspended in ice cold swelling buffer with RNase inhibitors including SUPERase (ThermoFisher AM2696), Protector (Sigma-Aldrich, 3335402001) and RNasin™ Plus (Promega, N2615) RNase inhibitors. The samples were dounced twice both with tight and loose pestle, filtered (100-μm and 70 μm strainers) and centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C. After removal of the supernatant, samples were incubated in 30 mL NUN buffer (20 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7.5, 300 mM NaCl, 1 M Urea, 7.5 mM Mgcl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, SUPERase, Protector, RNasin™ Plus) on ice for 30 minutes with intermittent vortexing. The samples were then centrifuged at 4500 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. The chromatin pellets were washed with ice-cold 50 mM Tris pH 7.5 (with RNase and protease inhibitors), and re-pelleted.

## Chromatin fragmentation and nascent RNA labelling by run-on reaction
Following chromatin isolation, each sample was fragmented with DNase I (ThermoFisher, EN0523) at 37°C with gentle mixing for 8 minutes. For run-on, samples were incubated with pre-warmed 2x run-on mix (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 5 mM MgCl2, 300 mM KCl, 1 mM DTT, 1% sarkosyl, 40 μM biotin-CTP/UTP, 40 μM non-biotin-ATP/GTP with RNase and protease inhibitors) at 37 °C for 8 minutes with gentle mixing. The run-on reaction was diluted with a 10x dilution of ice-cold ChIP binding buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 1x PIC, SUPERase In, Protector RNase Inhibitor, RNasin™ Plus) and centrifugation. The supernatant was pre-cleared using Dynabeads Protein A (ThermoFisher, 10002D), then incubated with 150μL of GFP coupled Protein A beads for 2 hours at 4°C with rotation. After incubation, the beads were washed with ChIP binding buffer, Wash Buffer 1 (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40, 0.1 % SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 1x PIC, SUPERase In, Protector RNase Inhibitor), Wash Buffer 2 (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40, 0.1 % SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 1x PIC, SUPERase In, Protector RNase Inhibitor), and Wash Buffer 3 (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, SUPERase and Protector RNase Inhibitor).

## Isolation of nascent transcripts from the chromatin immunoprecipitated complexes
Isolation of nascent transcripts and library preparation steps were followed as previously described for PRO-seq assay. Briefly, after thorough washing, nascent RNA was extracted from bead bound complexes using TRIzol (ThermoFisher, 15596026) and chloroform followed by centrifugation. TRIzol LS (ThermoFisher, 10296028) was used for input samples. Nascent RNA was precipitated with isopropanol and glycoblue. Input RNA was precipitated using 75% ethanol, resuspended in DEPC water, and passed through P30 gel columns (Bio-Rad, #7326250). Base hydrolysis, a standard step to fragment nascent RNAs in the conventional PRO-seq protocol, was omitted here as the size distribution of nascent RNAs was already in the appropriate range for generating libraries. Then, input RNA was conjugated to Streptavidin C1 beads (ThermoFisher 65001) and washed with high (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 2 M NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100) and low (5 mM Trix-Cl pH 7.5, 0.1% Triton X-100) salt wash buffers. TRIzol was added to the dried beads. Starting this point onward, the treatments were applied to both input and nascent RNA samples. Chloroform was added to all samples, mixed, and samples were spun down. The top aqueous layer was collected, and RNA was precipitated with 100% ethanol and glycoblue as described above.

## 3’ Adapter ligation
To ligate 3’ adapters, RNA pellets were dissolved in 3’ adapter solution followed by heat denaturation at 65°C for 30 seconds and snap cooling on ice. 3’ adapters were ligated to the nascent RNA using T4 RNA Ligase I (NEB, M0437M). To remove non-ligated 3’ adapters, nascent RNAs were captured on Streptavidin beads, followed by washing with the high and low salt wash buffers.

## On-bead 5’ de-capping, hydroxyl repair and adapter ligation
5’ de-capping was carried out by first resuspending beads with nascent RNA in RppH reaction mix (10x ThermoPol buffer (NEB, B9004S), RppH (NEB, M0356S), SUPERase-In RNase Inhibitor) and incubating at 37°C for 45 minutes on thermomixer at 500 rpm. Following de-capping, 5’ hydroxyl repair was conducted using T4 PNK (NEB, M0201L) at 37°C for one hour on thermomixer at 500 rpm. To ligate 5’ RNA adapters, the beads were washed in C1 binding buffer and dissolved in the 5’ adapter solution. The beads were then heat denatured at 65°C for 30 seconds and snap cooled on ice. 5’ adapters were ligated to the nascent RNA using T4 RNA Ligase I (NEB, M0437M) in 10 μL reaction volume and 5 μM final 5’-adapter concentration. To extract nascent RNA, all samples were washed in high and low salt buffer before isolation with TRIzol and chloroform, and precipitation with ethanol and glycoblue.

## Reverse-transcription and amplification
After centrifugation and air drying, RNA pellets were resuspended in a dNTP and reverse primer mix before denaturation at 65°C for 5 minutes and snap cooling. Then, reverse transcription was performed with Maxima RT enzyme (ThermoFisher, EP0752) with the following cycle settings: 15 minutes at 45°C, 40 minutes at 50°C, 10 minutes at 55°C, 15 minutes at 70°C. Samples were then test amplified and visualized on an 8% PAGE gel. Final amplification was performed through 13 cycles. Post-amplification DNA was purified with MinElute columns (Qiagen, 28004) and 1.5x AMPure XP beads. Library quality and size were checked using fragment analyzer and sequenced with NovaSeq 6000 (NovoGene Inc, CA, USA) with 2×150bp paired-end settings. RP1 and RPI-n primers are from Illumina small RNA TruSeq design (Oligonucleotide sequences © 2015 Illumina, Inc. All rights reserved).

## Extraction of region-specific counts
For PReCIS-seq libraries, adapters were trimmed using fastp (v0.23.2). After trimming, reads were mapped to mouse rDNA using bowtie2 (v2.4.4) to deplete nascent rRNA and to determine the fraction of total reads that map to rDNA. Then, the rRNA-depleted reads were mapped to the GRCm39 genome using STAR (v2.7.10b) and UMI duplicate reads were removed by using umi_tools (v 1.1.2). Deduplicated, mapped reads were processed from bam files to CPM-normalized bigwig files using samtools. The region-specific counts for promoter-proximal and gene body regions were obtained using BRGenomics R package. 

## Classification of expressed and unexpressed genes of PReCIS-seq data
To categorize genes into expressed and unexpressed categories based on PReCIS-seq signal in , the expression cut off was determined by i) background expression levels of 174 non-epithelial (mesenchymal, endothelial and immune) genes (mean + SD) (background expression data for these genes are provided as ), ii) background expression levels on multiple un-annotated ∼100 kb long non-gene regions, and iii) data distribution in scattered plot.

## Motif Analysis for upregulated cell cycle and DNA repair genes
Motif enrichment analysis on promoters of cell cycle and DNA repair genes was performed using findMotifs.pl from HOMER software. Known motifs ranging from 8–12bp from 1kb upstream to 100bp downstream of TSSs were considered for enrichment analysis. Enriched motifs were sorted based on q-value significance, visualized using ggseqlogo and ggplot2 packages in R.

## RNA-seq of FACS purified RNA Pol II-GFP+ keratinocytes
Dorsal skin of Polr2bf/f-GFP; K14-Cre mice were collected at postnatal day (PD)21. A small piece of skin tissue was flash frozen (for RNA isolation from the whole skin tissue) and rest of the skin tissue was enzymatically digested using collagenase-trypsin method, as previously described. After preparing the single-cell suspension, dead cells were stained with Propidium Iodide (PI). Live GFP+ keratinocytes were FACS-purified and directly collected in TRIzol LS. Total RNAs were isolated following the manufacturer’s protocol with the following additions: after the first phase separation, additional chloroform extraction step of the aqueous layer in Phase-lock Gel heavy tubes (Quanta Biosciences); addition of 1ul Glycoblue (ThermoFisher) immediately prior to isopropanol precipitation; two washes of the RNA pellet with 75% ethanol. Quality of each sample was confirmed by measuring RNA concentration using Qubit RNA HS kit (ThermoFisher) and by determining RNA integrity with Fragment Analyzer (Agilent). Ribosomal RNA was subtracted by hybridization from total RNA samples using the NEBNext rRNA Depletion Kit (New England Biolabs). TruSeq-barcoded RNAseq libraries were generated with the NEBNext Ultra II RNA Library Prep Kit (New England Biolabs) and libraries were sequenced on a NovaSeq with 2×150bp paired-end settings. Read preprocessing and alignment were performed using fastp (v0.23.2) and STAR (v2.7.10b). Adapters were trimmed using fastp (v0.23.2). Reads were mapped to the GRCm39 genome using STAR (v2.7.10b). Exon specific counts matrix was generated using featureCounts function from Rsubread (v2.14.2) followed by RPKM normalization for comparisons with nascent RNA-seq data.

## Immunofluorescence staining
Immunofluorescence staining (IF) was performed following a standard protocol as described previously. Briefly, OCT-embedded samples were cryosectioned and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 minutes at room temperature (RT) followed by blocking in normal goat and donkey serum for 1 hour at RT. Blocking solution was then aspirated and samples were incubated with rabbit polyclonal Ki67 antibody (1:1000, Abcam, ab15580) and chicken polyclonal GFP antibody (1:100, Abcam, ab13970) for overnight at 4 °C. Next day, sections were washed with PBST and incubated with Alexa594-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit (Abcam, ab150076), or FITC-conjugated donkey anti-chicken secondary antibodies (Abcam, ab63507), and DAPI for one hour at RT. Then, the samples were washed and mounted with antifade and stored in −80°C before imaging. IF imaging was done using a fluorescent microscope (Leica DMI6000B) and digitally imaged using a fluorescence microscope camera (Leica K5) and the Leica Application Suite X software (v3.7.222383).

## Western blotting
Proteins were isolated from cultured mouse ESCs or flash frozen mouse back skin tissue. Briefly, frozen tissues were dry pulverized using cell crusher (https://cellcrusher.com/tissuepulverizer/), followed by lysis in the ice-cold RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, R0278) containing protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific A32965). Lysates were briefly sonicated and centrifuged at 16,000 RPM for 30 minutes at 4°C. Clear supernatant was collected and analyzed through SDS PAGE. Following antibodies were used to detect GFP tagged RPB2 and β-actin: (1:500, 50430–2-AP, Proteintech) and (1:10,000, MAB1501, Millipore), respectively.

## Single cell data analysis
All datasets used in the single-cell RNA-seq analysis were obtained from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The scRNA-seq of the following stages were obtained from GEO: E16.5 (GEO GSE214441), newborn (GEO GSE154579), and P21 (GEO GSE153596). The count matrices were generated using 10x Genomics Cell Ranger v.8.0.1. Downstream data analysis was performed in R using the Seurat package version 5.1.0. Cells that had between 500 and 5000 genes detected and had under 10% of the UMIs mapped to mitochondrial genes were retained for further analysis. After merging all samples, the transcript counts were log-normalized, and the data were integrated using Harmony. Genes enriched in each cell-type (cluster) were obtained by ‘FindAllMarkers’ function using the Wilcox Rank Sum test.

## Cell-type specific and functional gene sets curation
To generate cell-type specific gene lists, in addition to well-known cell-type specific markers like Krt14 and Krt10 for keratinocytes, and Pecam1 and Cdh5 for endothelial cells, we also obtained cell-type-enriched genes from previously published single-cell RNA-seq datasets of whole skin ( and ). Genes enriched in keratinocytes, mesenchymal, endothelial and immune clusters were deemed “cell-type specific genes” for the respective cell-type and used for enrichment analysis for PReCIS-seq data in . For functional gene categories, we obtained gene sets from publicly available resources such as KEGG (cell cycle - https://esbl.nhlbi.nih.gov/Signaling-Pathways/Cell-Cycle/, signaling - https://esbl.nhlbi.nih.gov/Signaling-Pathways/) as well as by literature searches.

## Gene ontology analysis and sorting of top unique GO terms
Gene ontology analysis of different gene groups were performed using clusterProfiler package (v4.10.1) with gene annotations org. Mm.eg.db (v3.18.0) database in R (v 4.3.3). The GO analysis results were sorted by adjusted p-value for further filtration of the significant GO terms. Top 25 GO-terms from each group were used for clustering of similar GO-terms and their comprehensive representation in . The clustering and summarization were performed using binary cut method through simplifyEnrichment package (v1.12.0) in R. To sort out top (significant) unique GO terms of low and high-paused genes for all six conditions ( and ), top unique GO terms were selected sequentially based on significance such that two unique GO terms have less than 70% overlap in genes.

## Enhancer analysis and motif search
dREG elements were identified from the PReCIS-seq data of newborn keratinocyte using mm39 mapped bigwig files (plus and minus strands) and dREG, which were then merged using BedTools (v2.26.0). Mouse cCRE data (v4) was downloaded from ENCODE Portal. The mm10 coordinates of cCREs were converted to mm39 genome using liftOver program. Gene coordinates were derived from GENCODE mm39 GTF file, where all unique transcripts were selected. To filter candidate dREG enhancers, dREG elements that are over 500bp away from TSS of any GENCODE transcript are selected using BedTools intersect (v2.26.0). This resulted in 5132 candidate dREG enhancers ( ).
Mouse newborn keratinocyte ATAC-seq data were downloaded from GEO Database (GSE197024). Heatmap and Metagene profiles of PReCIS-seq and ATAC-seq data were plotted using computeMatrix, plotProfile, and plotHeatmap functions from DeepTools (v3.5.2). In the heatmaps, dREG elements were aligned with their right boundaries (end with the higher genomic coordinate) and sorted based on element length. Data from 800 bp upstream and 200 bp downstream from the right boundary were plotted. Dashed lines represent the dREG element boundaries. All data in heatmap were plotted with the same dREG element order. Overlaps between dREG elements and cCREs were identified using BedTools intersect (v2.26.0). BedTools closest (v2.26.0) tool was used to determine the distance between dREG elements and gene TSSs.
Motif enrichment analysis on 300bp around gene TSS was performed using findMotifs.pl from Homer. The locations of individual enriched motifs were identified using annotatePeaks.pl in 10bp bins and plotted either individually or combined. Combined plots were generated to obtain pattern of motif localization around TSS. For that, value of total sites was scaled to have the maximum of 1 for each motif after combining both gene groups. Mean of scaled total sites per bin of all enriched motifs was calculated and plotted together.

## CUT&RUN assay and data analysis
CUT&RUN experiments for H3K27ac, NRF1, KLF3, and BRD4 were performed on freshly isolated newborn keratinocytes using the CUTANA™ CUT&RUN Kit Version 4 (EpiCypher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Antibodies used for CUT&RUN include: H3K27ac (Active Motif, 39134), and Atlas Antibodies for NRF1 (HPA029329), KLF3 (HPA065054), BRD4 (HPA061646). Libraries were prepared with the NEBNext® Ultra™ II DNA Library Prep Kit (NEB, E7645) and multiplexed using NEBNext® Multiplex Oligos for Illumina (Index Primers Set 1). Sequencing was performed on a NovaSeq 6000 platform (NovoGene Inc, CA, USA) with 2×150 bp paired-end reads. Raw sequencing data quality was checked using FastQC, followed by adapter trimming using Cutadapt (minimum read length: 20 bp; minimum adapter overlap: 10 bp). Trimmed reads were aligned to the mouse genome (mm39) with Bowtie2 in end-to-end very-sensitive mode. IP samples were normalized against background (input) controls using bamCompare (deepTools) with CPM normalization, followed by subtracting background from IP signals (bin size: 10 bp; minimum mapping quality: 30). Cleaned bedGraph files were sorted and converted to bigWig format using bedGraphToBigWig, and the resulting bigWig files were used for further analyses. Mean CUT&RUN signals of select regions were calculated using bedtools map (-o mean) on cleaned bedGraph files.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Statistical analyses were performed using R (v4.3.3). The RNA-seq and PReCIS-seq data were generated using two biological replicates for each method, one from a male mouse and one from a female mouse. To calculate the significance between two gene groups, unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test or ANOVA test were used, as appropriate, and multiple testing correction was done by the Benjamini method. For the analysis of genes groups distributions across conditions, the assessment of changes in distribution of specific gene group as compared to rest of the genes across four conditions (Embryo (E16.5), newborn, cultured, and adult keratinocytes) in multivariate framework of gene expression (gene body counts, Log2 of GB) and pausing index (Log2 of PI) was performed using the MANOVA.RM package, which doesn’t assume normality or equal variance of variables between conditions. The MANOVA.wide function considers interactions between gene groups and conditions and tests whether the mean vectors of Log2 of GB and Log2 of PI differ significantly between conditions.
Pairwise comparisons of log2 PI means of different gene groups between two specific conditions were performed by calculating the contrast of group-adjusted means between the two conditions using the contrast function in the emmeans package (v1.10.3) in R. To calculate the difference in change of log2 PI of two different gene groups, a contrast of contrasts (generated from the previous step) was performed, also using emmeans. In the dot plots, contrast (or contrast of contrast) p-values were -log10 transformed and used for dot size scaling while contrast (or contrast of contrast) estimates were used to indicate the magnitude/direction of log2 PI change.
To calculate the significance of mean distances of nearest enhancers between two categories, a one-way ANOVA was first performed using the aov function in R to determine if there exists a significant difference of means between all categories. Post-hoc mean significance comparisons between two categories were then carried out using two-sample t-tests using the t-test function in R.

## Supplementary Material
MMC5MMC3MMC7MMC2MMC1MMC6MMC4MMC8SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2025.09.017.

 

## Highlights
PReCIS-seq reveals cell-type-specific RNA Pol II regulatory mechanisms in intact tissue
RNA Pol II recruitment and pause-release cooperate at homeostatic transitions in vivo
Extreme RNA Pol II pausing levels stably define lineage identity and safeguarding genes
Extreme RNA Pol II pausing levels associate with distinct promoter-proximal structures

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Christian Abratte and Rob Munroe from the Cornell University Transgenic Core Facility for their help with generation of the knockin mice; Andrew Siefert from Cornell Statistical Consulting Unit for help with statistical analysis of gene dispersion presented in and ; and Cedric Feschotte for help with mapping transposable elements to the genome. This work was supported by NIH/NIAMS grants R01AR070157, R01AR081021, R01AR073806 to T.T.; Empire State Stem Cell Fund through New York State Department of Health contract # C30293GG training grant to G.C.; and NIH grant RM1GM139738 to J.T.L. and A.O. Cartoon figures were created with the BioRender online platform (www.biorender.com).

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
DECLARATION OF GENERATIVE AI AND AI-ASSISTED TECHNOLOGIES IN THE WRITING PROCESS
During the preparation of this work the authors used ChatGPT at the final stage in order to improve grammar and readability. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
MMC5MMC3MMC7MMC2MMC1MMC6MMC4MMC8

## Data Availability Statement
ChIP-seq, RNA-seq, PReCIS-seq, and CUT&RUN data have been deposited at GEO as GSE278914 and are publicly available as of the date of publication. All raw data for western blots and gels in figures were deposited at Mendeley Data: https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/zxtm9tmcw7/1.
This paper analyzes existing, publicly available data accessible at GEO: GSE214441, GEO: GSE154579, GEO: GSE153596, and GEO: GSE197024.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.