445elsevierwtCellCellPMC3629564362956436295642337434210.1016/j.cell.2012.12.023Direct Competition between hnRNP C and U2AF65 Protects the Transcriptome from the Exonization of Alu Elements
ZarnackKathi KönigJulian TajnikMojca MartincorenaIñigo EustermannSebastian StévantIsabelle ReyesAlejandro AndersSimon LuscombeNicholas M UleJernej 1European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 1SD, UK2MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK3Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Vrazov trg 2, SI-1104 Ljubljana, Slovenia4EMBL, Genome Biology Unit, Meyerhofstraße 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany5UCL Genetics Institute, Department of Genetics, Environment and Evolution, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK6Cancer Research UK London Research Institute, 44 Lincoln’s Inn Fields, London WC2A 3LY, UK7Okinawa Institute for Science and Technology Graduate University, 1919-1 Tancha, Onna-son, Kunigami-gun, Okinawa 904-0495, Japan∗Corresponding author nicholas.luscombe@ucl.ac.uk
∗∗Corresponding author jule@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk
8These authors contributed equally to this work
31120131523453453–4661842013© 2013 ELL & Excerpta Medica.Open Access under CC BY 3.0 license

## Summary
There are ∼650,000 Alu elements in transcribed regions of the human genome. These elements contain cryptic splice sites, so they are in constant danger of aberrant incorporation into mature transcripts. Despite posing a major threat to transcriptome integrity, little is known about the molecular mechanisms preventing their inclusion. Here, we present a mechanism for protecting the human transcriptome from the aberrant exonization of transposable elements. Quantitative iCLIP data show that the RNA-binding protein hnRNP C competes with the splicing factor U2AF65 at many genuine and cryptic splice sites. Loss of hnRNP C leads to formation of previously suppressed Alu exons, which severely disrupt transcript function. Minigene experiments explain disease-associated mutations in Alu elements that hamper hnRNP C binding. Thus, by preventing U2AF65 binding to Alu elements, hnRNP C plays a critical role as a genome-wide sentinel protecting the transcriptome. The findings have important implications for human evolution and disease.

## Graphical Abstract
 

## Highlights
► Quantitative iCLIP reveals genome-wide competition of hnRNP C and U2AF65 ► hnRNP C is a global repressor of aberrant exonization of thousands of Alu elements ► Disease-associated mutations in Alu elements hinder hnRNP C-dependent repression ► Selection reinforces strong hnRNP C binding to contain Alu exonization

The RNA-binding protein hnRNP C prevents the formation of aberrant Alu exons by blocking the binding of the splicing factor U2AF65 to potential Alu splice sites. Breakdown of this system leads to expression of thousands of harmful exons and to human disease.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfnois-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2012 May 25; Revised 2012 Sep 22; Accepted 2012 Dec 12.

## Introduction
Most eukaryotic primary transcripts consist of short exons and very long introns. This exon-intron structure provides important opportunities for proteome diversity and evolution. The selective usage of exons through alternative splicing is a major source of proteome diversity in higher organisms ( ). Furthermore, the long intronic regions facilitate the creation of new protein functionalities through exon shuffling by nonallelic recombination between different genes ( ; ).
The complex gene structure means that nascent transcripts must be carefully processed before they can be used. In particular, the precise removal of introns in the splicing reaction demands the complex interplay between a multitude of trans-acting factors and cis-regulatory splicing signals in the premessenger RNA (pre-mRNA) molecule. Among the former, a multisubunit complex called the spliceosome catalyzes intron excision and exon joining at splice sites ( ). Among the latter, the GU and AG dinucleotides, flanked by additional sequence elements, define intron-exon boundaries at the 5′ and 3′ splice sites. The most prominent flanking element is a sequence rich in uridines and cytidines, known as the polypyrimidine tract, which is located immediately upstream of the 3′ splice site, and is required for binding of the U2 auxiliary factor 65 (U2AF65). Binding of U2AF65 is essential for recruiting the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) U2, a component of the spliceosome, and thus comprises a major regulatory event during 3′ splice-site recognition ( ).
Although the splicing reaction is carried out with very high precision, the cis-acting signals that mediate spliceosome binding show limited sequence constraint. As a result, pre-mRNAs harbor a large number of potential splice sites with very similar sequences to true splice sites, but that are not used under normal conditions. Importantly, these cryptic splice sites can act as a source of new exons during evolution. On the other hand, uncontrolled recognition of cryptic splice sites can have deleterious consequences for the cell if it creates aberrant transcripts, and the inclusion of cryptic exons has been implicated in various diseases ( ; ; ). It is therefore imperative for the cell to tightly control the accessibility of such signals to the splicing machinery.
Candidates for masking cryptic splice sites are the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins C1/C2 (referred to as hnRNP C). hnRNP C is abundant in the nucleus and associates with all nascent transcripts ( ; ). It forms hnRNP particles, which have been described to compact large regions of pre-mRNA and have been implicated in the regulation of alternative splicing ( ; ). In order to investigate the function of hnRNP C on a genomic scale, we previously developed a technique called individual-nucleotide resolution UV-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) ( , ). Using iCLIP, we characterized the transcriptome-wide binding pattern of hnRNP C at an unprecedented resolution and discovered that hnRNP C represses alternative exons by binding next to the splice sites ( ). However, the mechanism by which this repression is achieved, and its importance in repressing cryptic exons, remained unclear.
Here, we introduce iCLIP as a high-resolution, quantitative technique that enables us to measure how the competition between hnRNP C and the core splicing factor U2AF65 regulates the inclusion of alternative exons on a genomic scale. Notably, we show that hnRNP C blocks U2AF65 from cryptic 3′ splice sites, thereby preventing the aberrant expression of cryptic exons. Finally, we dissect how the differences in sequence specificities of hnRNP C and U2AF65 enable the splicing machinery to discriminate cryptic splice sites from genuine exons, and reveal the importance of hnRNP C for maintaining transcriptome integrity and preventing disease.

## Results

## hnRNP C and U2AF65 Bind at 3′ Splice Sites
To investigate the detailed molecular function of hnRNP C, we first explored the potential for iCLIP to provide quantitative measurements of protein-RNA interactions. With an optimized protocol, we identified a total of 14 million unique hnRNP C crosslink events in untreated HeLa cells, which cluster into 438,360 binding sites ( and A available online). This represents a 22-fold increase in crosslink events compared with our previously published data ( ). The greatly increased complexity of the new data set allowed us to rank binding sites by their normalized occupancy, and to estimate the strength of hnRNP C-RNA associations. We find that the strongest binding sites reside at continuous uridine tracts (U-tracts) of nine or more uridines ( B, bottom). Overall, hnRNP C binds to more than 10% of all U-tracts of nine or more uridines in the human transcriptome, underlining the importance of U-tract length in determining hnRNP C binding to pre-mRNAs ( B, top).
 hnRNP C shows widespread binding across introns ( and A). In addition to this broad pattern, the protein shows specific binding to the polypyrimidine tracts of alternative exons that it represses ( C; repressed exons determined from RNA-sequencing [RNA-seq] data, see below). To explore the effects of this binding, we performed iCLIP experiments with the splicing factor U2AF65 that associates with polypyrimidine tracts to enable exon inclusion ( A and S2B). This yielded a total of 12 million crosslink events, corresponding to 518,794 binding sites ( ). The replicate data sets revealed very consistent binding locations and normalized occupancies within each site, indicating the high reproducibility of the quantitative information contained within the iCLIP data ( A).
 In contrast to the extended binding pattern of hnRNP C, U2AF65 displays more restricted binding, with a strong preference for the regions directly upstream of 3′ splice sites ( , A, and S1D). We detect U2AF65 binding at 58% of all actively used 3′ splice sites in HeLa cells, underlining its crucial role in splice-site recognition. Intriguingly, U2AF65 binding at the 3′ splice sites of all exons ( D) coincides with the peak of hnRNP C binding at repressed exons ( C), suggesting that the two proteins might compete for pre-mRNA binding.

## hnRNP C Competes with U2AF65 Binding
To assess competition between hnRNP C and U2AF65, we performed U2AF65 iCLIP experiments in HNRNPC knockdown HeLa cells ( A and S2B). Independent HNRNPC knockdowns with two different siRNAs affected neither U2AF65 protein levels nor the protein’s general ability to bind RNA ( A and S2C). The experiments in the knockdown cells produced 15 million highly reproducible crosslink events; combined with the data from the control samples, this yielded a total of 1.1 million U2AF65-binding sites ( ). To compare differences in U2AF65 binding between conditions, we corrected for changes in transcript levels by normalizing the numbers of crosslink events. The changes in U2AF65 binding in the two independent HNRNPC knockdowns were highly correlated, allowing us to combine both data sets for the remaining analyses (referred to as KD; r = 0.545, Pearson’s product-moment correlation; B).
Loss of hnRNP C has a dramatic impact on U2AF65 binding: thousands of sites display increased U2AF65 occupancy, with over 3,000 sites showing at least 4-fold increases ( C). Importantly, these changes are largest at sites that directly overlap with hnRNP C binding (p value < 10−16, Student’s t test; A), suggesting that U2AF65 gains access to sites that are normally occupied by hnRNP C. In particular, 1,698 (51%) of the ∼3,000 most upregulated sites coincide with an hnRNP-C-binding site ( B; p value < 10−15 compared with unchanged sites, Fisher’s exact test). Significantly, the changes in U2AF65 occupancies increase with the strength of hnRNP C binding ( A), in line with the characteristics of competitive binding. Moreover, only 4% or 7% of binding sites with decreased or unchanged U2AF65 occupancy coincide with hnRNP C binding, respectively. These results indicate that hnRNP C blocks U2AF65 from a large number of binding sites in the transcriptome.
 A number of hnRNP proteins, including hnRNP H ( ), PTB (hnRNP I; ), and hnRNP A1 ( ), have previously been described to compete with, or proofread, U2AF65 binding. To test whether these and other RNA-binding proteins function together with hnRNP C, we examined published binding data for seven hnRNP proteins (hnRNP A1, A2B1, F, H, M, U, and PTB; ; ). We also included TIA1, TIAL, and TDP-43, which recognize U-rich motifs ( ; ). TIA1, TIAL, TDP-43, and PTB, but none of the other proteins, display noticeable crosslinking at loci containing both U2AF65 and hnRNP C binding ( C). We tested whether their presence affects competitive binding by assessing the changes in U2AF65 occupancies in the HNRNPC knockdown. As expected, most of the increase in U2AF65 binding (at sites overlapping with hnRNP C) can be explained by the loss of hnRNP C alone (84%; D). Sites additionally containing TIA1, TIAL, or TDP-43 binding show a slightly bigger increase. In contrast, sites overlapping with PTB show a reduced shift ( D), suggesting that PTB and hnRNP C might act redundantly. However, because we observe these combinatorial effects only at a minor fraction of sites (16% of all shared U2AF65-hnRNP-C-binding sites; E), we conclude that hnRNP C alone is sufficient to compete with U2AF65 in the majority of cases.
A key feature of the competition between hnRNP C and U2AF65 is their overlapping, but differing, sequence specificity: both proteins bind uridines, but U2AF65 can also recognize cytidines ( F; ; ; ; ; ). A comparison of pentameric sequences within binding sites shows that U2AF65 associates with diverse uridine- and cytidine-containing pentamers, contrasting hnRNP C’s selective preference for continuous uridines ( G and D). In the HNRNPC knockdown, we observe a specific increase in U2AF65 binding only to the uridine pentamer ( G), indicating that U-tracts that are otherwise protected by hnRNP C become accessible. Consistently, the biggest changes in U2AF65 binding occur at long U-tracts ( E). These observations suggest that the competition between the two proteins occurs at a specific subset of U2AF65-binding sites, namely at long U-tracts, which constitute prime hnRNP-C-binding sites.

## hnRNP C Blocks U2AF65 from Continuous U-Tracts In Vitro
To test whether the competition is direct, we performed in vitro UV-crosslinking assays ( ). For this, we used a recombinant full-length hnRNP C1 protein and a fragment of U2AF65 containing the first two RRM domains (U2AF65RRM12), which was previously shown to retain the binding characteristics of the full-length protein ( ). We first tested the binding of both proteins individually to two RNA oligonucleotides, resembling a high-affinity hnRNP-C-binding site (U10), as well as a modified version carrying two cytidines at positions 3 and 8. Whereas U2AF65RRM12 shows comparable binding to both RNAs, hnRNP C1 binding is drastically impaired by the two interspersed cytidines ( G and S3H), in line with the divergent sequence preferences of the two proteins.
We next assessed the direct competition between both proteins by adding increasing concentrations of hnRNP C1 to the U2AF65RRM12-binding reaction. U2AF65RRM12 binding to the U10 RNA decreases with increasing amounts of hnRNP C1 and is almost completely abolished at equimolar concentrations ( H). Conversely, U2AF65RRM12 binding to the cytidine-containing RNA remains largely unaffected in the presence of hnRNP C1. These results demonstrate that hnRNP C alone is sufficient to displace U2AF65 from continuous U-tracts. Notably, this competition is alleviated by interspersed cytidines, allowing strong U2AF65 binding in the presence of hnRNP C.

## The hnRNP C-U2AF65 Competition Leads to Exon Repression
Our iCLIP and in vitro binding data demonstrate that hnRNP C blocks U2AF65 from a large number of binding sites. To investigate how this competition influences splicing, we performed RNA-seq experiments using the same two HNRNPC knockdowns as well as control HeLa cells ( ). We first monitored changes in gene expression using the DESeq software, identifying 4,880 and 4,875 genes that showed significant differential expression in KD1 and KD2, respectively (adjusted p value < 0.01). Using Cufflinks, we then determined transcript structures de novo to detect all expressed exons in the knockdown and control samples ( ). We identified changes in splicing patterns using the DEXSeq software ( ) and observed a good correlation in splicing changes between both knockdowns; this indicates that the changes arise as a consequence of hnRNP C depletion rather than off-target effects of the siRNAs used (r = 0.567, Pearson’s product-moment correlation; A). By combining the knockdown data sets, we obtained a high-confidence set of 3,052 differentially expressed exons, including 1,807 and 1,245 that are repressed and enhanced by hnRNP C, respectively ( ; B).
 A total of 289 (16%) repressed exons harbor an hnRNP-C-binding site less than 30 nucleotides upstream of their 3′ splice site (14-fold enrichment compared with all other exons; p value < 10−15, Fisher’s exact test), compared with only 1%–2% of enhanced or unchanged exons. Using an RNA map depicting changes in U2AF65 binding, we find a clear 3-fold increase in U2AF65 occupancy upon HNRNPC knockdown at exons that are bound and repressed by hnRNP C ( I). In dramatic contrast, exons that are either not regulated or not bound by hnRNP C display no change in U2AF65 binding ( I). We conclude that competition with U2AF65 constitutes the mechanism of hnRNP-C-mediated repression of exons with proximal hnRNP C binding, whereas the remaining exons might be regulated via distal hnRNP-C-binding sites or other effects that do not alter U2AF65 binding. An example of a competitive event at the 3′ splice site can be seen at the alternative exon of the CD55 gene: HNRNPC knockdown leads to a strong increase in U2AF65 binding, accompanied by significantly elevated exon inclusion ( C). In summary, these observations indicate that hnRNP C represses alternative exons by directly interfering with U2AF65 recognition.

## hnRNP C Prevents the Aberrant Exonization of Alu Elements
The observations so far have explained the function of hnRNP C at known alternative exons; however, it is clear that the vast majority of hnRNP C binding occurs at “deep” intronic regions without exon annotations ( A). Strikingly, we find that hnRNP C binding in these regions also blocks U2AF65 activity: in fact, 75% of the U2AF65-binding sites that display strongest competition with hnRNP C are located more than 200 nucleotides away from any Ensembl-annotated exon ( F), suggesting that hnRNP C prevents recognition of cryptic splicing signals. This is confirmed in the RNA-seq data, which show that 41% of hnRNP-C-repressed exons do not overlap with existing annotations in the Ensembl database ( ). This indicates that hnRNP C prevents the aberrant inclusion of cryptic exons that are normally excluded from transcripts.
A major source of cryptic exons are Alu elements. They are the most abundant transposable elements in the human genome, present in over 50% of all introns ( ). They contain two arms separated by a poly(A) linker sequence and followed by a poly(A) tail. When integrated into genes in the antisense orientation, the poly(A) sequences are transcribed as U-tracts (referred to as the upstream and the linker U-tract) that can serve as polypyrimidine tracts to promote recognition of the cryptic splice sites that exist within the Alu elements ( ). During primate evolution, many Alu elements evolved into genuine exons in a process called “exonization.” Among them is the Ensembl-annotated Alu exon in the CD55 gene, whose inclusion is clearly regulated via competition between hnRNP C and U2AF65 ( C).
Our RNA-seq data document the presence of a large number of Alu-derived exons. In addition to 585 Ensembl-annotated Alu exons, we find 1,318 cryptic exons that originated from Alu elements, yielding a total of 1,903 Alu exons for further analysis ( ). hnRNP C depletion leads to a dramatic global increase in Alu exon inclusion ( A and C): we detect a total of 1,023 upregulated Alu exons that are either identified by the DEXSeq software (361 exons) or display a more than 2-fold change in at least one knockdown (662 exons; B and C; ). We used these two thresholds because many Alu exons are expressed at low levels, leading to lower statistical power for the DEXSeq analysis.
 We confirmed the splicing changes by semiquantitative RT-PCR, validating 39 out of 43 (91%) DEXSeq-called Alu exons and 16 out of 20 (80%) Alu exons with more than 2-fold change ( C; ; ). We conclude that more than 1,000 Alu exons show a considerable increase in inclusion upon hnRNP C depletion ( B). Most Alu exons are barely detectable in the control samples ( C), emphasizing how efficiently they are suppressed under normal conditions. In contrast, these same exons display up to 90% inclusion in the knockdown. Together, these results demonstrate that hnRNP C safeguards the transcriptome from aberrant and potentially detrimental expression of cryptic exons, most particularly those originating from Alu elements.
Finally, we tested whether the repression of Alu exons is specific to hnRNP C. Among ten other RNA-binding proteins tested, TDP-43 and TIAL show most binding to Alu elements (7.2% and 3.4% of binding sites, respectively; D), but far less than hnRNP C (25%; see below). We also tested the inclusion of four cryptic and four Ensembl-annotated Alu exons upon depletion of TDP-43, TIA1/TIAL, as well as hnRNP A1 and PTB/nPTB. None of these knockdowns triggers exonization of the cryptic Alu exons ( E; C). For the Ensembl-annotated Alu exons, we find some regulation by all proteins. However, all of these changes are small compared to the impact of hnRNP C depletion, and we cannot exclude indirect effects; for instance, TIA1/TIAL knockdown was previously described to alter the splicing pattern of HNRNPC ( ). In summary, we conclude that the suppression of Alu exons is specifically and primarily achieved by hnRNP C.

## The U-Tracts Facilitate Strong hnRNP C Binding to Alu Elements
The impact of hnRNP C function extends far beyond the 1,000 Alu exons that we detect as repressed by hnRNP C. hnRNP C binds extensively to antisense Alu elements in the transcriptome: we detect binding to 72,625 intronic antisense Alu elements, comprising 21% of all antisense Alu elements in the transcriptome (compared with only 0.03% of sense Alu elements). In fact, 25% of all hnRNP-C-binding sites occur within intronic Alu elements, underlining that repression of Alu exonization is a major role of hnRNP C. Within the Alu elements, hnRNP C recognizes the upstream and linker U-tracts, where its binding coincides with cryptic Alu exons originating from both arms ( F, D, and S4E). Together, these observations suggest that the long continuous U-tracts of the Alu elements attract strong hnRNP C binding and serve as a critical interface to control Alu exonization.
We further assessed the importance of the U-tracts in Alu elements by performing an evolutionary analysis measuring the strength of selection. Compared with unexonized Alu elements, Alu elements that give rise to hnRNP-C-repressed exons show a remarkable tendency to preserve and even lengthen U-tracts ( G). This indicates that stronger hnRNP C binding and hence stronger repression of cryptic Alu exons provided a substantial fitness benefit during primate evolution, and that accidental Alu exonization imposes a significant cost to survival. In contrast, a separate comparison with 81 established Alu exons, which are included in control cells and do not change in the HNRNPC knockdown, reveals a trend toward shorter U-tracts and mutations that weaken hnRNP-C-binding ( A–S5C). These observations indicate that there is overwhelming selection pressure to repress aberrant Alu exonization through hnRNP C binding, and that this is relieved in only a very small subset of Alu elements that become genuine exons.
 

## The Competition between hnRNP C and U2AF65 Controls Alu Exonization
To investigate whether hnRNP C interferes with U2AF65 binding to cryptic exons, we compared binding patterns in the knockdown and control samples. We find a 3.3-fold increase in U2AF65 binding at the 3′ splice sites of Alu exons in the HNRNPC knockdown ( A). This effect is specific for the Alu exons, because downstream control exons remain unaffected ( B and D). This indicates that hnRNP C efficiently blocks U2AF65 from Alu elements.
 To confirm that the integrity of the U-tract is important for hnRNP-C-based repression of Alu exons, we generated a minigene containing the Ensembl-annotated Alu exon within the CD55 gene (Figures and A). Based on our in vitro UV-crosslinking assays, we hypothesized that mutations disrupting the U-tract but preserving the polypyrimidine tract would weaken hnRNP C binding and hence increase exon inclusion. We find that two point mutations in the upstream U-tract are sufficient to elevate inclusion levels in the presence of hnRNP C ( ), confirming that high-affinity hnRNP C binding is critical for efficient competition with U2AF65. Consistent with our previous observation that hnRNP C binding occurs on both sides of regulated exons ( ), introduction of additional mutations in the downstream linker U-tract further increases exon inclusion and almost completely abolishes hnRNP C-dependent regulation.
 To test the effects of similar mutations in cryptic Alu exons, we generated another minigene containing the intronic Alu element in the NUP133 gene that exonizes upon HNRNPC knockdown ( A). As observed for CD55, introduction of three point mutations in the upstream U-tract is sufficient to promote Alu exonization, and two additional mutations in the linker U-tract completely abolish hnRNP C repression ( ). In summary, these experiments demonstrate that the competition between hnRNP C and U2AF65 controls Alu exonization, and that weakening hnRNP C binding is sufficient to promote exon inclusion.
 

## Mutations Disrupting hnRNP-C-Dependent Repression of Alu Exons Can Cause Disease
Erroneous Alu exon inclusion has been implicated in various diseases ( ). For instance, exonization of an intronic Alu element in the PTS gene has been associated with hyperphenylalaninemia ( ): deletion of the upstream U-tract leads to Alu exon inclusion from a downstream, cytidine-rich polypyrimidine tract. We observe strong hnRNP C binding at this U-tract, and exonization of the Alu element in the HNRNPC knockdown ( A; A). We designed a PTS minigene to test whether the disease mutation disrupts the ability of hnRNP C to repress this Alu exon ( A). As expected, there is almost no Alu exon inclusion in the control HeLa cells, while HNRNPC knockdown leads to a strong increase in aberrant exonization ( B and 6C). As previously described ( ), introduction of the disease-associated mutation increases the aberrant exon inclusion in the control samples. Importantly, we show that hnRNP C depletion does not produce any additional effect ( B and 6C). This suggests that hnRNP-C-dependent repression is completely abolished by the clinically relevant mutation. These experiments demonstrate that hnRNP C binding is crucial for preventing the unwanted exonization of this Alu element under normal conditions.
 We also assessed the broader protective function of hnRNP C in maintaining transcriptome integrity. Almost 80% of the Alu exons in our RNA-seq data are predicted to introduce frameshifts or stop codons that will strongly impair the function of the 1,572 genes containing them. Once included in processed transcripts, these Alu elements are likely to impair the function of the final protein product and could target the respective transcripts into the nonsense-mediated decay pathway ( ). In line with Alu exon-induced transcript degradation, we observe a correlation between Alu exon inclusion and downregulation of the corresponding transcripts in the HNRNPC knockdown ( D and F). hnRNP C’s importance is further underlined by the observation that the affected transcripts are implicated in a broad range of cellular functions ( ). For instance, hnRNP C represses Alu exons in BAX, VHL, RAD52, and HELLS, which encode proteins with key functions during development and disease.

## Discussion
A growing catalog of genome-wide CLIP studies continues to generate fascinating insights into the diverse functions of RNA-binding proteins. Combining these data with additional functional information allows us to interpret the consequences of RNA binding in diverse cellular processes, including alternative splicing, 3′ end processing, and translation ( ; ; , ; ; ; ).
In this study, we developed the iCLIP approach a step further: the refined technique allowed us not only to discover many protein-RNA interactions, but also to quantify the relative strengths of these associations under different conditions. This enabled the quantitative measurement of competitive binding between two RNA-binding proteins on a transcriptome-wide scale. Specifically, our study combines experimental and computational genomic approaches to describe a general mechanism for regulating splicing via competitive RNA binding, uncover a safeguarding mechanism for transcriptome integrity, and provide insights into Alu-derived exon evolution.

## How Competitive Binding Determines the Splicing Outcome
Many splicing decisions are made in the early phases of spliceosome assembly ( ). An important checkpoint is the binding of U2AF65 to the polypyrimidine tract, which is targeted by multiple regulators ( ). U2AF65 has a broad binding specificity for motifs comprising both uridines and cytidines, leading to recognition of a very heterogeneous spectrum of polypyrimidine tracts ( ). hnRNP C’s comparatively strict specificity for U-tracts allows hnRNP C to selectively compete with U2AF65 on a subset of sites, most prominently at cryptic splice sites within Alu elements (see below). U2AF65’s degenerate specificity also opens the possibility of competitive binding with other regulators at defined subsets of sites. Accordingly, many splicing factors apart from hnRNP C are recruited to specific sets of polypyrimidine tracts to regulate downstream exons ( ; ; ; ), and some of these were shown to modulate U2AF65 binding. For instance, competitive binding by PTB to the β-tropomyosin transcript is associated with reduced U2AF65 binding and decreased exon 6 inclusion ( ). Similarly, hnRNP A/B proteins prevent U2AF65 binding to an alternative splice site in HIV-1 pre-mRNA by polymerizing across the polypyrimidine tract ( ). These observations underline the crucial role of the polypyrimidine tract as a regulatory hub, which enables the interplay of multiple regulators with the splicing machinery.

## hnRNP C Prevents Spurious U2AF65 Recognition of Cryptic Splice Sites
Perhaps the most striking result of the study is that hnRNP C binds to more than 70,000 Alu elements, and that the absence of hnRNP C gives rise to more than a thousand cryptic Alu exons. hnRNP C prevents exonization of the Alu elements by strongly binding to their U-tracts. Indeed, our minigene experiments suggest that hnRNP C’s competition with U2AF65 at U-tracts upstream of 3′ splice sites constitutes a major mechanism of Alu exon repression ( ). In addition to the effect at 3′ splice sites, we also detected hnRNP C binding to U-tracts downstream of 5′ splice sites. Here, hnRNP C might interfere with binding of TIA1 and TIAL, which were previously described to enhance 5′ splice-site usage in Alu exons ( ; ). In addition, simultaneous binding to both U-tracts might aid the formation of stable hnRNP particles ( ; ), which would in turn reinforce hnRNP C’s capacity to compete with U2AF65 and other splicing factors.
 Alu exon repression is specific for hnRNP C. In particular, we could exclude an involvement of hnRNP A1, which was previously shown to proofread U2AF binding ( ). This is not unexpected, because hnRNP A1 proofreading relies on the absence of an AG dinucleotide in the 3′ splice site, which is commonly present downstream of U-tracts in Alu elements. Similarly, depletion of other regulators like TIA1, TIAL, TDP-43, and PTB did not trigger the inclusion of cryptic Alu exons.

## Deleterious Consequences of Aberrant Alu Exonization in the Absence of hnRNP C
The increasing number of reported Alu-associated disorders illustrates that the enormous amounts of Alu elements pose a serious threat to the normal function of human cells ( ; ). Diseases like congenital cataracts facial dysmorphism neuropathy syndrome are caused by the inclusion of intronic Alu elements that severely disrupt the transcript structure, thereby affecting the function of the resulting protein ( ). Indeed, a recent study estimated that 11 of 78 documented genetic diseases involving cryptic exons are associated with mutations in Alu elements ( ). Although some studies have previously suggested the involvement of trans-acting factors ( ; ; ), the mechanisms by which cells protect against spurious exonization of Alu elements has remained unknown until now.
Our study establishes that one of hnRNP C’s principal functions is to protect the human transcriptome from aberrant Alu exonization. It is important to note that our current analysis of 2,000 Alu exons most likely underestimates the full scale of aberrant exonization in the absence of hnRNP C; this is because Alu elements are notoriously difficult to detect by current RNA-seq methods ( ). Furthermore, although the present study focuses on Alu elements because they represent the largest family of retrotransposons in the human genome, we suggest that hnRNP C might be important for suppressing retrotransposon-derived exons in general. Their poly(A) tails, and hence U-tracts when in antisense orientation, are required for efficient retrotransposition ( ; ). In summary, we propose that hnRNP C plays a critical role in preserving human health by safeguarding transcriptome integrity against the detrimental effects of spurious exonization.

## hnRNP-C-Mediated Repression May Also Facilitate Evolutionary Innovation
More than 650,000 Alu elements reside within the transcribed regions of the human genome. Although we have stressed the threat posed by the loss of hnRNP C repression, many studies have highlighted the potential for Alu exonization to introduce genomic variation and evolutionary innovations ( ; ; ; ). A well-studied example is the inclusion of the Alu exon in the CD55 gene, which is regulated by hnRNP C and converts the encoded protein from a membrane-bound to a secreted version ( ). Genuine Alu-derived exons are estimated to contribute 5% of all internal alternative exons: they are particularly enriched among recently acquired exons ( ; ; ) and are present in half of the human-specific genes, underlining their likely involvement in genome evolution and species-specific adaptation ( ; ; ).
While the evolutionary potential of Alu exonization has attracted considerable interest ( ), the sudden incorporation of Alu elements into mature transcripts is likely to be deleterious in the vast majority of cases. In this context, the role of hnRNP C as a global suppressor may have important implications for evolutionary adaptation: in the presence of hnRNP C, Alu elements are repressed instead of being removed from the genome through selection, allowing them to evolve near-neutrally for longer evolutionary times. Cryptic Alu exons that are deleterious will remain suppressed; however if an exon becomes less deleterious by chance, selection against exonization will be considerably reduced. Mutations to the U-tracts that change the balance of binding between hnRNP C and splicing factors may allow low levels of “leaky” exonization, which allows even stronger evolutionary testing by selection. This could also be achieved by recruitment of additional factors that stabilize spliceosome binding and counteract hnRNP C interference, thereby circumventing the need to completely remove long U-tracts. Sequential mutations would thus enable an incremental exonization process, which could eventually lead to loss of hnRNP-C-dependent repression if an exon becomes functional and provides adaptive potential ( ).
In conclusion, we propose that hnRNP C plays a critical role in protecting the transcriptome from the harmful effects of aberrant Alu exonization, while stabilizing a large reservoir of Alu elements in the human genome to facilitate the evolutionary exploration of new functions. The hnRNP-C-mediated regulation of Alu exonization has important implications for the evolution of the human genome and disease progression.

## Experimental Procedures

## RNA-Seq Analyses
RNA-seq libraries were sequenced on an Illumina GA-2 (72 cycles, paired end) and mapped to the human genome hg19 using TopHat ( ; ).

## iCLIP Experiments
iCLIP experiments were performed as described in using monoclonal mouse antibody (4F4) from Santa Cruz (sc-32308) for hnRNP C and a monoclonal mouse antibody (MC3) from Sigma (U4758) for U2AF65 ( and ). A summary of major steps can be found in the legends of A and S2B.

## HNRNPC Knockdown
Knockdown of HNRNPC in HeLa cells was achieved with hnRNP C Stealth Select RNAi siRNAs HSS179304 and HSS179305 as well as control siRNA Stealth RNAi siRNA Negative Control (Invitrogen).

## Expression of Recombinant Proteins
Recombinant glutathione S transferase (GST)-tagged full-length hnRNP C1 and His-tagged U2AF65RRM12 comprising residues 148–342 were purified from Escherichia coli BL21-CodonPlus(DE3)-RP cells (Stratagene).

## De Novo Exon Prediction and Classification
Exon coordinates were predicted using Cufflinks ( ) followed by several quality filters ( ). Alu exons were defined as exons with at least one splice site within an antisense Alu element (taken from RepBase; ) that was supported by at least one junction-spanning read.

## Calculation of RBP Occupancy and Differential Binding
To correct RBP occupancy for changes in gene expression, we normalized each binding site to the total amount of crosslinking within the respective gene. Differential binding of U2AF65 was assessed using the log2-transformed ratio of normalized occupancies (KD/Ctrl). To allow direct comparison of U2AF65 binding from HNRNPC knockdown and control samples, we corrected the occupancies for the different iCLIP library sizes using DESeq ( ).
Further experimental and computational methods are described in .
Extended Experimental Procedures

## Cell Culture
HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin and cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2.

## Knockdown of HNRNPC and Minigene Reporter Transfections
For the knockdown of HNRNPC, HeLa cells were plated at concentration of 105 cells/well in a 6-well cluster plate in 2 ml of growth medium. 24 hr after the plating (when confluency reached around 20%), cultures were independently transfected using two different hnRNP C Stealth Select RNAi siRNAs (KD1 and KD2 refer to siRNAs HSS179304 and HSS179305 from Invitrogen, respectively) at a final concentration of 5 nM. Both siRNAs were transfected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Using the same procedure, we used Stealth RNAi siRNA Negative Control (Invitrogen) for the control experiments.
We performed Western analyses using hnRNP C-, U2AF65- and GAPDH-specific antibodies (monoclonal mouse hnRNP C antibody [4F4] from Santa Cruz, sc-32308; monoclonal mouse U2AF65 antibody [MC3] from Sigma, U4758; polyclonal rabbit U2AF65 antibody [H-300] from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, sc-48804; monoclonal rabbit GAPDH antibody [14c10] from Cell Signaling, 2118).
Following HNRNPC knockdown transfections, half an hour later cells were separately co-transfected with 400 ng of minigene plasmid using PolyFect reagent (QIAGEN), as recommended by the manufacturer. 48 hr after transfections, we collected cells and extracted total RNA using RNeasy Plus Mini kits (QIAGEN) for further analyses. All transfection experiments were performed in triplicates.

## Knockdown of other RNA-Binding Proteins
The knockdown of TDP-43 and the double knockdown of TIA1/TIAL in HeLa cells were performed as described earlier ( ; ). RNA prepared from PTB/nPTB double knockdown and control HeLa cells according to was a kind gift from Miguel Coelho and Chris Smith (University Cambridge). The HNRNPA1 knockdown in HeLa cells was performed as described earlier ( ) replacing Lipofectamine 2000 with Lipofectamin RNAimax (Invitrogen).

## iCLIP Experiments
The method individual-nucleotide resolution UV-crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) allows the genome-wide identification of nucleotides that have been UV-crosslinked to the RNA-binding protein of interest (‘crosslink sites’). All iCLIP experiments were performed as described in . A summary of major steps of the protocol can be found in the legend of A and S2B.
For immunoprecipitation, we used a monoclonal mouse antibody (4F4) from Santa Cruz (sc-32308) for hnRNP C and a monoclonal mouse antibody (MC3) from Sigma (U4758) for U2AF65. In case of U2AF65, iCLIP experiments were performed 48 hr upon transfection with the hnRNP C-specific or control siRNAs (see above).
For hnRNP C, we obtained a total of 14 million unique crosslink events from two replicate iCLIP experiments from untreated HeLa cells ( ). For U2AF65, we performed two replicate iCLIP experiments from HeLa cells that were either treated with siRNA1 (KD1) or a mock siRNA (Ctrl) and one iCLIP replicate from HeLa cells treated with siRNA2 (KD2). These experiments identified a total of 27 million U2AF65 crosslink events, including 12 million crosslink events from control HeLa cells and 15 million from HNRNPC knockdown experiments ( ).

## Expression of Recombinant hnRNP C1 and U2AF65RRM12
For expression of full-length hnRNP C1 as a GST fusion protein, a fragment encoding the full-length protein was amplified using PCR from IMAGE clone 6187512 (BC103758) and subcloned into a pGEX-6P-1 vector (GE Healthcare) using BamHI and XhoI restriction sites. The plasmid containing the open reading frame for the N-terminally His-tagged U2AF65 fragment comprising residues 148-342 (U2AF65RRM12) was a generous gift from the Sattler group (TU Muenchen, Germany; ).
Plasmid DNA was transformed into E. coli BL21-CodonPlus(DE3)-RP cells (Stratagene). Freshly transformed cells were cultured in LB medium, containing 30 μg/ml chloramphenicol and 100 μg/ml ampicillin (hnRNP C1 expression) or 30 μg/ml kanamycin (U2AF65 expression). Proteins were expressed over night at 20°C after induction with 0.25 mM IPTG. Protein purification was carried out at 4°C throughout.
For hnRNP C1 purification, harvested cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 1 M NaCl, 12.5% (w/v) sucrose and 1 mM DTT) containing EDTA-free Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and lysed by sonication. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation and the supernatant incubated with Glutathione-Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare), equilibrated in wash buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM DTT and EDTA-free Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). Protein-bound beads were washed thoroughly with wash buffer and equilibrated into cleavage buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 250 mM NaCl, and 1 mM DTT). The GST fusion protein was cleaved from the Glutathione-Sepharose beads by GST-tagged Precision Protease (GE Healthcare), leaving vector-derived residues Gly-Pro-Leu-Gly-Ser at the N-terminus of the protein.
U2AF65RRM12 was purified essentially as described in . Harvested cells were resuspended in Ni-NTA binding buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 5% (v/v) Glycerol and 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100) containing EDTA-free Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and lysed by sonication. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation and the protein was purified by using a 5 ml Ni-NTA HisTrap HP column (GE Healthcare) eluting with a linear imidazole gradient. The protein was equilibrated into 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 5% (v/v) Glycerol and 1 mM DTT, and the N-terminal His-tag was cleaved by TEV protease, leaving vector-derived residues Gly-Ala-Met N-terminal of U2AF65 residues 148-342. Uncleaved protein, cleaved His-tag as well as His-tagged TEV protease were removed by repeating the Ni-NTA affinity purification and collecting cleaved U2AF65RRM12 in the flow-through. Purified hnRNP C1 and U2AF65RRM12 were concentrated using Vivaspin 2 columns (MWCO 3000Da, Sartorius).

## In Vitro UV Crosslinking Assays
Binding reactions were carried out in binding buffer (10 mM Tris pH7.4; 100 mM KCl; 2.5 mM MgCl2) that we adopted from replacing HEPES-KOH for Tris-Buffer. 10% of the RNA oligonucleotides (U10 and U2CU4CU2; Sigma) were radioactively labeled using PNK, and unincorporated γ-32P-ATP (Hartman) was removed using G-25 columns (GE Healthcare). RNA oligonucleotides were used at a final concentration of 100 nM, with protein concentrations as indicated in the figures. Binding reactions (20 μl) were incubated for 15 min at 30°C before the samples were UV crosslinked with 150 mJ/cm2 in a Stratalinker 2400 at 254 nm. Finally, the samples were analyzed on NuPAGE Bis-Tris gels (4%–12%; MES running buffer; Invitrogen) that were first exposed to an autoradiography film (Fujifilm) and then stained with Coomassie to control protein loading.

## RNA-Seq Analyses
We performed RNA-seq experiments on two replicate samples from each HNRNPC knockdown (KD1 and KD2) as well as from control HeLa cells. Library preparation was preformed according to the mRNA Sequencing Sample Preparation Guide (Illumina, part # 1004898 REV. D). Reagents were taken from the Illumina sample preparation kit (Illumina, CAT # RS-930-1001). Knockdown and control samples were sequenced together in one flowcell on one and two lanes, respectively. The reads from the two lanes of each control samples were combined for all analyses.

## High-Throughput Sequencing and Genomic Mapping
High-throughput sequencing of iCLIP and RNA-seq cDNA libraries was performed on an Illumina GA-2 (run length 54 nt for iCLIP and 72 nt for RNA-seq). The iCLIP libraries contained a 4-nt experimental barcode plus a 5-nt random barcode, which allowed multiplexing and the removal of PCR duplicates, respectively ( ). We obtained a total of 240 million 72-nt paired-end sequence reads for RNA-seq and 77 million reads for iCLIP ( ). All genomic analyses were performed using the human genome version hg19/NCBI37 with annotations taken from Ensembl (version 60; ). The RNA-seq data are available from ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) under the accession number E-MTAB-1147.
The iCLIP data were mapped using Bowtie ( ) and further processed as described previously ( ). It is important to note that all iCLIP data sets showed comparable qualities and were mapped with the same parameters, since any mapping inconsistencies could lead to artifactual increases or decreases in the observed binding frequencies. Raw read sequences as well as processed data files are available from ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) under the accession number E-MTAB-1371.
For assessing the genomic distribution of iCLIP crosslink nucleotides, we used the following hierarchy: ncRNA > 3′ UTR > 5′ UTR > exon > intron > antisense > intergenic ( A). Introns were further subdivided into the regions 200 nucleotides before and after exons and “deep-intronic” positions more than 200 nucleotides away from any annotated exon.
The RNA-seq data were mapped using the splice-aware alignment algorithm TopHat version 1.1.4 ( ) based on the following parameters: tophat -num-threads 8 -mate-inner-dist 200 -solexa-quals -min-isoform-fraction 0 -coverage-search -segment-mismatches 1. More than 80% of all RNA-seq reads mapped uniquely to the human genome ( ), and 83% of these mapped as part of perfect read pairs.

## De Novo Exon Prediction and Classification
In order to predict exons from our RNA-seq data, we ran Cufflinks (version 0.9.3, -min-isoform-fraction 0 to allow detection of weakly included exons; ) on the collapsed reads from all control and HNRNPC knockdown samples and then extracted the exons of all predicted transcripts. In order to minimize noise due to erroneous or highly overlapping annotations, we kept only exons that (a) were predicted as part of multi-exon transcripts, (b) were supported by at least one junction-spanning read, and (c) had a size of at least 25 bp and no more than 10 kb. Finally, overlapping exons that started/ended less than 25 bp from each other were merged into one exon using the outer exon boundaries. Applying these filters, Cufflinks predicted a total of 178,029 exons (reported as ‘Total’ in ), including 16,143 exons that did not overlap with any exon in the Ensembl database and thus represented good candidates for cryptic exons. We used Ensembl gene annotations to assign the exons to gene models. Exons that directly overlapped with an Ensembl gene or that were part of a predicted Cufflinks gene model that overlapped with only one Ensembl gene were assigned to that gene. We discarded exons that overlapped with more than one Ensembl gene. Applying this procedure, Cufflinks-predicted exons could be associated with 14,091 Ensembl genes. For the alternative splicing analyses using DEXSeq, we further restricted the set to exons that did not overlap with any other annotated exon (“Non-overlapping” in ).
To identify Alu exons, we searched for Cufflinks-predicted exons that contained at least one splice site within an antisense Alu element (taken from RepBase; see below). The Alu-derived splice site had to be supported by at least one junction-spanning read in our collapsed RNA-seq data. Following this definition, Cufflinks exon predicted a total 2,085 Alu exons ( ). 1,376 of these were predicted to introduce a frameshift, and 472, 610, and 797 harbored a stop codon in one, two and all three frames, respectively. Combining this evidence, 1,655 (79%) of the Alu exons were predicted to disrupt the respective transcript upon inclusion. 1,903 of the Alu exons did not overlap with any other exon prediction (nonoverlapping) and were thus used for all following analyses, including 1,318 Alu exons that did not overlap with any Ensembl annotation. We notice that some Alu exons are expressed at negligible levels in the control sample; however given that they remain unannotated and they are largely undetectable in our RNA-seq data, they are unlikely to play an important role under normal conditions. We further identified a control set of 81 established Alu exons that show substantial inclusion already in control HeLa cells and that do no longer underlie hnRNP C regulation (Alu exons harboring a total of at least 50 reads in our RNA-seq samples and showing a fold change < 1.5 [KD/ctrl]).

## Gene Ontology Analysis of Alu Exon-Containing Genes
We used the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) Classification System ( ) to identify the GO Biological Processes associated with the 1,572 genes containing the Alu exons detected in our RNA-seq analyses ( ).

## Alignments of Alu Elements
We used Alu element annotations based on RepeatMasker predictions ( ) taken from RepBase ( ). Based on Ensembl gene annotations, the total of 1,194,727 predicted Alu elements were classified into ‘sense’ (located on the same strand as the overlapping gene; 282,706), ‘antisense’ (located on the opposite strand to the overlapping gene; 342,016), ‘ambiguous’ (overlapping with genes on both strands; 35,216) and ‘intergenic’ (not overlapping with any annotated gene; 534,789). Assessing hnRNP C binding to the Alu elements, we found that 72,625 of Alu elements in antisense orientation (21%) and 79 of Alu elements in sense orientation (0.03%) overlapped with an hnRNP-C-binding site (3,957/11% of ambiguous and 10,187/2% of intergenic).
Our RNA-seq data show exonization (see below) of 1,875 Alu elements in antisense orientation (compared to 182 Alu elements in sense orientation that harbor the splice site of an exon). In order to map the splice-site positions back to the Alu consensus sequence, we used PRANK-F (with default parameters for noncoding DNA sequences; ) to align the predicted Alu elements to the consensus sequence taken from RepBase ( ). To maximize the reliability of the alignments and to simplify the interpretation of the results, we restricted the analysis to full-length Alu elements in the human genome. In particular, we aligned the canonical Alu sequence to the 856,791 Alu elements in the human genome whose length was within ± 15% of the length of the canonical Alu consensus sequence. To improve the quality of the alignments we used multiple sequence alignment instead of pairwise alignment, aligning the sequences in 21,969 groups of 40 sequences. Based on the alignments, each genomic position within the Alu element was assigned to a nucleotide position within the consensus sequence. This mapping was then used to assess the position of Alu exons, the usage of 3′ and 5′ splice sites ( F, D, and S4E; only exons where both splice sites are supported by junction-spanning reads were taken into account) and the binding of hnRNP C on the Alu consensus ( F).

## Evolutionary Analyses
The detection of selection signatures in this context is challenging for several reasons. First, even if Alu elements are likely to evolve almost neutrally, the evolutionary divergence among paralogous copies is limited given their relatively recent expansion. Second, any analysis should consider that the insertion/deletion rate of U-tracts is likely to be much higher than the mutation rate of more complex flanking sequences, owing to processes such as polymerase slippage ( ). Third, different types of mutations (point mutations, insertions and deletions) may lead to analogous changes in the length of continuous U-tracts, and so they may have similar phenotypic consequences. Thus, to account for these limitations, we compared the frequency of unusually short and unusually long U-tracts in hnRNP C-regulated Alu elements with these frequencies in a matched set of nonexonized control exons (nonexonized intronic Alu elements from the same transcripts as the regulated set).
We restricted this analysis to Alu exons arising from the most commonly used 3′ splice sites (corresponding to the enlarged sequence windows shown in E) and further separated them according to the location of the 3′ splice site in the first or second arm of the Alu element. This yielded 956 and 333 Alu elements with exonization from the first and second arm, respectively. G depicts the ratio between: (a) the fraction of U-tracts longer than a given length in each set and (b) the corresponding fraction in its own reference set of nonexonized antisense Alu elements within the same genes (29,712 and 11,509 Alu elements, respectively). Significance was assessed using Pearson’s chi-square test (or Fisher’s exact test when one or more values in the contingency table are below five). As a control, we also show these ratios for nonexonized Alu elements of all other genes (gray line).

## Analyses of Differential Gene Expression/Splicing
Analyses of differential gene expression were performed using DESeq ( ) based on Ensembl gene annotations (version 60; ). We identified 4,880 and 4,875 genes that showed significant differential expression in KD1 and KD2, respectively (adjusted p value < 0.01). Since the obtained fold change values showed strong correlation between both knockdowns (r = 0.635, Pearson’s product-moment correlation), we combined the results of both knockdowns using the conditional thresholding approach described below. This yielded a high-confidence set of 4,636 genes showing differential regulation, including 1,981 upregulated and 2,655 downregulated genes.
Differential splicing was determined using DEXSeq ( ) based on Cufflinks-predicted, nonoverlapping exons, where reads could be assigned unambiguously. This approach identified 3,452 and 1,197 significantly differentially spliced exons in KD1 and KD2, respectively (adjusted p value < 0.05). Since detected splicing changes were strongly correlated between both knockdowns (r = 0.57, Pearson’s product-moment correlation; A), we combined the results from both knockdowns using the conditional thresholding approach described below. This identified a high-confidence set of 3,052 exons that were differentially regulated in both knockdowns, including 1,807 upregulated and 1,245 downregulated exons ( B and ). We refer to these exons as being repressed and enhanced by hnRNP C, respectively.
For both methods, we used information from all three sample types (Ctrl, KD1 and KD2) to determine the variance between biological replicates which was then used in the individual comparisons (e.g., Ctrl versus KD1). In order to integrate the data obtained from the two different HNRNPC knockdowns (KD1 and KD2), we conceived a conditional thresholding approach that was applied to assess differential gene expression (based on DESeq results) as well as differential exon usage (based on DEXSeq results). To obtain a collapsed set of differentially expressed genes/exons, we required each gene/exon to obtain a p value < 0.01 in at least one of the knockdowns and at least p value < 0.05 in the second knockdown.

## Characterization of RBP-Binding Sites
In order to identify hnRNP C binding sites, we applied a peak-finding algorithm that identified clusters of crosslink nucleotides with significant enrichment of crosslink events relative to the local environment ( ). For hnRNP C, we used a flank size of 10 nt to either side to define significant clusters with FDR < 5% on the combined replicates from untreated HeLa cells. This yielded a total of 438,360 binding sites, 78% of which were supported by both replicates. In order to assess hnRNP C binding to U-tracts, we obtained the coordinates of all continuous tracts of three or more uridines in the transcriptome and determined the length of the longest overlapping tract for each binding site.
In order to identify U2AF65-binding sites, we used a flank size of 5 nt with FDR < 5%, since U2AF65 shows much more focused binding than hnRNP C. The cluster definition was performed on the collapsed data from the control and both HNRNPC knockdown experiments, yielding a total of 518,794 significant binding sites ( ). 59% of these binding sites were supported by both replicates from control HeLa cells, and the number of crosslink events within the binding site was highly correlated between the replicates ( A).
Overlaying U2AF65 binding with Ensembl exon annotations, we found U2AF65-binding sites in the last 50 nt upstream of 35% of all 3′ splice sites (76,055 out of 219,864 unique 3′ splice sites of all Ensembl-annotated exons), corresponding to 58% of all 3′ splice sites that we detected in HeLa cells under the studied conditions (71,918 out of 123,063 3′ splice sites that are supported by at least two junction-spanning reads in our collapsed RNA-seq data), underlining the prominent role of U2AF65 in 3′ splice-site recognition.

## Calculation of RBP Occupancy and Differential Binding
To correct for changes in gene expression, we normalized the number of crosslink events within each cluster to the total amount of crosslinking on the respective gene. Based on the significant binding sites that we obtained from our FDR approach, we first counted the number of crosslink events within each binding site for each sample type. The raw counts of the biological replicates were used to assess the reproducibility between replicates ( A) as well as between the two different HNRNPC knockdowns ( B) and then summed up. Since the measured occupancy depends not only on the affinity of the RBP for a given site, but also on the expression level of the whole transcript, we normalized the crosslink events within the binding sites to the total count within the respective gene (based on Ensembl gene annotations). To this end, we filtered for binding sites that located within and did not overlap with more than one annotated gene. We then obtained a total gene-wide count as the sum of crosslink events in binding sites within the gene boundaries. Finally, we calculated the normalized occupancy by dividing the sum of crosslink events within each binding site by the total count of the respective gene and the gene length. Since hnRNP C shows very broad widespread binding, we restricted the occupancy calculation to a 11-nt window centered around the nucleotide with most crosslink events within each binding site.
In order to assess differential binding of U2AF65 upon HNRNPC knockdown, we used the log2-transformed ratio of normalized occupancies (KD / Ctrl). Since the detected changes were highly correlated between both HNRNPC knockdowns (r = 0.545, Pearson’s product-moment correlation; B), we combined the data sets generated from both knockdowns for the remaining analyses (referred to as KD).
Using a stringent fold change threshold, we identified 3,353 and 2,147 binding sites with at least four-fold increased or decreased U2AF65 binding upon HNRNPC knockdown, respectively. We defined a control set of 110,515 unchanged U2AF65-binding sites (log2(fold change KD / Ctrl) | < 0.1). We found overlapping hnRNP-C-binding sites for 1,698 (51%), 90 (4.2%) and 8,004 (7.2%) of U2AF65 binding sites with at least four-fold increased or decreased or unchanged U2AF65 occupancy in the HNRNPC knockdown.
To allow comparison of U2AF65 binding from HNRNPC knockdown and control samples, we corrected the occupancies for the different iCLIP library sizes. To achieve this, we used DESeq ( ) to calculate the size factors of both conditions based on the occupancy values of all U2AF65-binding sites. We then applied to size factor to correct the values from the HNRNPC knockdown as they are shown in I, , and D.

## Analyses of Publicly Available Binding Data for Other RBPs
We examined the publicly available data on binding sites of ten other RNA-binding proteins, including CLIP-seq data for hnRNP A1 (1,956 binding sites), A2B1 (10,193), F (18,950), H (33,201), M (4,437), U (17,174; all data from HEK293 cells, ) and PTB (51,389; data from HeLa cells, ) as well as iCLIP data for TIA1 (39,545), TIAL (95,516; all data from HeLa cells, ) and TDP-43 (95,999; data from hES cells, ).
To address the involvement of other RBPs in the hnRNP C-U2AF65 competition, we searched for overlapping RBP-binding sites within a window of 100 nt on either side of the summit of U2AF65-binding sites that overlap with hnRNP C. To allow direct comparison in C, we normalized the frequency of overlapping clusters of a given RBP to the mean background frequency of the same RBP in two 10-nt windows 90 nucleotides up- and downstream of the U2AF65 summit position.

## Construction of Minigene Plasmids and Site-Directed Mutagenesis
As template for minigene constructions and site-directed mutagenesis, we used PCR to amplify the respective regions from genomic DNA using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (NEB) to avoid the introduction of undesired point mutations. Sequencing of all constructs verified that control and mutated minigene plasmids were identical except for the mutated sites. All minigene constructs are based on the expression vector pcDNA3 (Invitrogen).
For the CD55 wild-type reporter minigene (CD55_wt), we reduced the size of the intronic region downstream of the Alu element by two subsequent PCR steps using the oligonucleotides CD55_wt_F1 with CD55_wt_R1 and CD55_wt_F2 with CD55_wt_R2 oligonucleotides (see for oligonucleotide sequences). The product was cut with NotI and XbaI and ligated into pcDNA3 opened with the same restriction enzymes. For the mutated CD55 minigenes, specific mutations in the U-tracts of the Alu element were introduced through PCR on CD55_wt with the following oligonucleotides: CD55_3mut_R with CD55_wt_F1 and CD55_3mut_F with CD55_wt_R2 for mutating the upstream U-tract; CD55_5mut_R with CD55_wt_F1 and CD55_5mut_F with CD55_wt_R2 for mutating the linker U-tract. After a final PCR with the outer oligonucleotides, the products were ligated as NotI/XbaI fragments into pcDNA3, resulting in plasmids CD55_3mut and CD55_5mut, respectively. The CD55 minigene combining mutations in both U-tracts was created by digesting both mutated plasmids with PstI and NotI, gel-purifying the fragments containing the mutated U-tract and then ligating these together.
For the NUP133 wild-type reporter minigene (NUP133_wt), the respective region was amplified from human genomic DNA using oligonucleotides NUP133_wt_F and NUP133_wt_R. The PCR product was cut with BamHI and EcoRI and ligated into pcDNA3 opened with the same restriction enzymes. Mutations in the upstream U-tract of the Alu element (NUP133_3mut) were introduced through PCR with the oligonucleotides NUP133_wt_F with NUP133_3mut_R and NUP133_wt_R with NUP133_3mut_F on SmaI-linearized NUP133_wt plasmid DNA. After a third PCR with the outer oligonucleotides, the product was cut with BamHI and EcoRI and inserted into pcDNA3. Using the same approach, the plasmid NUP133_5mut with mutations in the linker U-tract was created using the oligonucleotides NUP133_5mut_F and NUP133_5mut_R. To combine both U-tract mutations into NUP133_3mut+5mut, we introduced the mutations into the linker U-tract into NUP133_3mut using NUP133_5mut_F and NUP133_5mut_R combined with the corresponding outer oligonucleotides. The product was cut using BamHI and EcoRI and ligated into pcDNA3.
For the PTS wild-type reporter minigene (PTS_wt), the respective region was amplified from human genomic DNA using oligonucleotides PTS_wt_F and PTS_wt_R. The product was cut with NotI and XbaI and ligated into pcDNA3. For the mutated minigene (PTS_disease), the disease-associated deletion was introduced by PCR on PTS_wt using oligonucleotides PTS_disease_F and PTS_disease_R. After the final PCR using the outer oligonucleotides, the product was cut with NotI and XbaI and ligated into pcDNA3.

## RT-PCR Reporter Minigene Assays
We used quantitative RT-PCR to measure exon inclusion levels from the minigene constructs in control and HNRNPC knockdown HeLa cells ( , , and ). For visualization of the PCR products and quantification of individual splicing isoforms, we used a QIAxcel capillary gel electrophoresis system (QIAGEN). Following RNA extraction, 500 ng of total RNA was reverse transcribed using the RevertAid Premium First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas).
For the PTS minigenes ( ), quantitative RT-PCR amplification was performed using IMMOLASE DNA Polymerase (Bioline) under the following conditions: 95°C for 10 min, 35 cycles of [95°C for 10 s, 55°C for 10 s, 72°C for 30 s], then finally 72°C for 2 min. In order to amplify only cDNAs derived from the PTS minigenes, we combined a vector-specific with a PTS-specific oligonucleotide (Vector_F with PTS_R, respectively; ). For the CD55 minigenes ( ), we combined the same vector-specific oligonucleotide with the CD55-specific oligonucleotide CD55_R ( ) and performed 40 PCR cycles (as described above) to increase signal intensity.
Due to the larger PCR product sizes from the NUP133 minigenes ( ), we used Phusion High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (NEB) with the vector-specific and the NUP133-specific oligonucleotides Vector_R and NUP133_F, respectively ( ), under the following amplification conditions: 98°C for 10 s, 32 cycles of [98°C for 1 s, 55°C for 5 s, 72°C for 30 s], and then 72°C for an additional minute. The PCR products were desalted by ethanol precipitation before quantification.

## RT-PCR Quantification of Endogenous Alu Exons and Control Exons
In order to validate the splicing changes of Alu exons identified from our RNA-seq data ( and ), total RNA extracted from HeLa cells was reverse transcribed using the RevertAid Premium First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas). We then performed quantitative RT-PCR measurements using IMMOLASE DNA Polymerase (Bioline) under following conditions: 95°C for 10 min, 35 cycles of [95°C for 10 s, 55°C for 10 s, 72°C for 30 s] and then finally 72°C for 2 min. For each Alu exon, we used oligonucleotides annealing to both neighboring constitutive exons ( ). A QIAxcel capillary gel electrophoresis system was used to visualize the PCR products and quantify each isoform. All measurements were performed in triplicates. We could validate significant splicing changes in the HNRNPC knockdown in 55 out of the 63 (87%) tested Alu exons. Among these, we confirmed significant hnRNP C regulation of 16 out of 20 tested Alu exons that were not called by DEXSeq ( ).
To investigate the involvement of other RBPs in Alu exon repression, we investigated the inclusion of four cryptic Alu exons (HELLS, KIAA1432, MBD3 and PEX14) and four Ensembl-annotated Alu exons (CD55, MTO1, ZFX and WRN; and E) in RBP knockdown and control samples as described above. To verify efficient knockdown, we also quantified the inclusion of one known target exons for each RBP: PPP3CB for hnRNP A1 ( ), MRPS18C for TIA/TIAL ( ), POLDIP3 for TDP-43 ( ) and ANXA7 for PTB ( ; and C).

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank all members of the Ule and Luscombe laboratories for assistance and discussion, in particular Zhen Wang and Miha Modic for sharing RNA samples from TIA1/TIAL and TDP-43 knockdown cells. We thank Tomaž Curk, Gregor Rot, and Črt Gorup for their work on the iCount pipeline, as well as James Hadfield for high-throughput sequencing. We are grateful for materials, data, and advice provided by Chris Smith, Miguel Coelho, Miriam Llorian, Wing-Fung (Wilfred) Wu, Michael Sattler, Yun Zhang, Frédéric Allain, Zuzana Cienikova, Gene Yeo, Stephanie Huelga, Gil Ast, Galit Lev-Maor, Noa Sela, Juan Valcárcel, Joao Tavanez, and Gautier Koscielny. This work was supported by the European Research Council (grant 206726-CLIP) and the Medical Research Council (grant U105185858) (to J.U.), an EMBL EIPOD fellowship (to K.Z.), and a Long-term Human Frontiers Science Program fellowship (to J.K.).

Published: January 31, 2013

## Footnotes
Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures, six figures, five tables, and one data file and can be found with this article online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2012.12.023.

## Contributor Information
Nicholas M. Luscombe, Email: nicholas.luscombe@ucl.ac.uk.
Jernej Ule, Email: jule@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.

## Accession Numbers
The ArrayExpress accession numbers for the RNA-seq and iCLIP data are E-MTAB-1147 and E-MTAB-1371, respectively.

## Supplemental Information

## Document S1. Tables S1 and S2

## Table S3. Validation of Alu Exon Changes Using RT-PCR, Related to Figure 3 and Data S1
(A and B) Validation of Alu exons that were called as differentially regulated using DEXSeq and conditional thresholding (A, Data S1A) or that are more than 2-fold upregulated in the RNA-seq data (B, Data S1B). The percent PCR change in each HNRNPC knockdown was calculated as the difference of average percent inclusion in knockdown minus wt (Figure 3C). Information on both validated and nonvalidated exons are given.
(C) Primer sequences for RT-PCR quantifications of known target exons of TDP-43, TIA/TIAL, PTB/nPTB, and hnRNP A1 (Data S1C).

## Table S4. Gene Ontology Analysis of the 1,572 Genes Containing Alu Exons, Related to Extended Experimental Procedures
Gene Ontology Biological Processes identified using the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) Classification System. All categories with at least ten members are listed. See also “Gene Ontology Analysis of Alu Exon-Containing Genes” in Extended Experimental Procedures.

## Table S5. Information on Oligonucleotides, Related to Figures 5, 6, and S6
(A) Oligonucleotides used for reverse transcription (RT) in iCLIP experiments. RT primers were phosphorylated at the 5′ end. Barcode sequences are given for each replicate experiment, consisting of the replicate-specific barcode (nucleotides 4–7) and the random barcode indicated by N for any nucleotide.
(B) Oligonucleotides used for cloning of minigene reporter plasmids (see Extended Experimental Procedures).
(C) Oligonucleotides used for RT-PCR quantifications of the minigene reporter constructs (Figures 5, 6 and S6).

## Data S1. RT-PCR Analyses of RNA-Seq-Predicted Changes in Alu Exon Inclusion, Related to Figure 3 and Table S3
(A) We could validate 39 out of 43 tested Alu exons that show increased inclusion in the HNRNPC knockdown according to our DEXSeq analysis. Validations were performed by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR triplicate experiments from HNRNPC knockdown (KD1 and KD2) and control (Ctrl) HeLa cells. The gel view of capillary electrophoresis of the PCR products (left) and the signal quantification (bar diagram on the right) are shown for each validated exon. The sizes of the quantified fragments including (in) or excluding (ex) the Alu exon are marked on the right of the gel image (Table S3). Bar diagrams on the right depict the mean inclusion level under each condition. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean from three replicate experiments. The significance level (Student’s t test) of the detected splicing changes relative to control is indicated above the bars as follows: n.s., nonsignificant; ∗ p value < 0.05; ∗∗ p value < 0.001; ∗∗∗ p value < 0.0001.
(B) We could validate 16 out of 20 tested Alu exons that show a more than two-fold increase in inclusion in the RNA-seq data of at least one of the HNRNPC knockdowns (Table S3). Validations were performed and presented as in (A).
(C) Control RT-PCR experiments analyzing splicing changes of exons that are known to be regulated by TIA1/TIAL, PTB, hnRNP A1 and TDP-43 (see Table S3C). Experiments were performed in triplicates using the two HNRNPC knockdowns (KD1 and KD2), a TIA1/TIAL double knockdown, a PTB/nPTB double knockdown, individual knockdowns for HNRNPA1 and TDP-43 (all labeled as KD with the respective gene(s) indicated above) as well as control (Ctrl) HeLa cells. The gel view of capillary electrophoresis of the PCR products (right) and the signal quantification (bar diagram on the left) are shown for each exon. The sizes of the quantified fragments including (in) or excluding (ex) the regulated alternative exon are marked on the right of the gel image (Table S3). Bar diagrams on the right depict the mean inclusion (gray) and exclusion (white) level under each condition. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean from three replicate experiments. The significance level (Student’s t test) of the detected splicing changes relative to control is indicated as in (A).

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information

## References
 

## Supplemental References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Tables S1 and S2

## Table S3. Validation of Alu Exon Changes Using RT-PCR, Related to Figure 3 and Data S1
(A and B) Validation of Alu exons that were called as differentially regulated using DEXSeq and conditional thresholding (A, Data S1A) or that are more than 2-fold upregulated in the RNA-seq data (B, Data S1B). The percent PCR change in each HNRNPC knockdown was calculated as the difference of average percent inclusion in knockdown minus wt (Figure 3C). Information on both validated and nonvalidated exons are given.
(C) Primer sequences for RT-PCR quantifications of known target exons of TDP-43, TIA/TIAL, PTB/nPTB, and hnRNP A1 (Data S1C).

## Table S4. Gene Ontology Analysis of the 1,572 Genes Containing Alu Exons, Related to Extended Experimental Procedures
Gene Ontology Biological Processes identified using the PANTHER (Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships) Classification System. All categories with at least ten members are listed. See also “Gene Ontology Analysis of Alu Exon-Containing Genes” in Extended Experimental Procedures.

## Table S5. Information on Oligonucleotides, Related to Figures 5, 6, and S6
(A) Oligonucleotides used for reverse transcription (RT) in iCLIP experiments. RT primers were phosphorylated at the 5′ end. Barcode sequences are given for each replicate experiment, consisting of the replicate-specific barcode (nucleotides 4–7) and the random barcode indicated by N for any nucleotide.
(B) Oligonucleotides used for cloning of minigene reporter plasmids (see Extended Experimental Procedures).
(C) Oligonucleotides used for RT-PCR quantifications of the minigene reporter constructs (Figures 5, 6 and S6).

## Data S1. RT-PCR Analyses of RNA-Seq-Predicted Changes in Alu Exon Inclusion, Related to Figure 3 and Table S3
(A) We could validate 39 out of 43 tested Alu exons that show increased inclusion in the HNRNPC knockdown according to our DEXSeq analysis. Validations were performed by reverse transcription (RT)-PCR triplicate experiments from HNRNPC knockdown (KD1 and KD2) and control (Ctrl) HeLa cells. The gel view of capillary electrophoresis of the PCR products (left) and the signal quantification (bar diagram on the right) are shown for each validated exon. The sizes of the quantified fragments including (in) or excluding (ex) the Alu exon are marked on the right of the gel image (Table S3). Bar diagrams on the right depict the mean inclusion level under each condition. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean from three replicate experiments. The significance level (Student’s t test) of the detected splicing changes relative to control is indicated above the bars as follows: n.s., nonsignificant; ∗ p value < 0.05; ∗∗ p value < 0.001; ∗∗∗ p value < 0.0001.
(B) We could validate 16 out of 20 tested Alu exons that show a more than two-fold increase in inclusion in the RNA-seq data of at least one of the HNRNPC knockdowns (Table S3). Validations were performed and presented as in (A).
(C) Control RT-PCR experiments analyzing splicing changes of exons that are known to be regulated by TIA1/TIAL, PTB, hnRNP A1 and TDP-43 (see Table S3C). Experiments were performed in triplicates using the two HNRNPC knockdowns (KD1 and KD2), a TIA1/TIAL double knockdown, a PTB/nPTB double knockdown, individual knockdowns for HNRNPA1 and TDP-43 (all labeled as KD with the respective gene(s) indicated above) as well as control (Ctrl) HeLa cells. The gel view of capillary electrophoresis of the PCR products (right) and the signal quantification (bar diagram on the left) are shown for each exon. The sizes of the quantified fragments including (in) or excluding (ex) the regulated alternative exon are marked on the right of the gel image (Table S3). Bar diagrams on the right depict the mean inclusion (gray) and exclusion (white) level under each condition. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean from three replicate experiments. The significance level (Student’s t test) of the detected splicing changes relative to control is indicated as in (A).

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information