Life Sci AllianceLife Sci Alliance3573lifesciall101728869lsaLife Science Alliance2575-1077Life Science Alliance LLCPMC7772782PMC7772782.1777278277727823337613210.26508/lsa.202000825LSA-2020-008251Research ArticleResearch Articles1126The RNA-binding profile of the splicing factor SRSF6 in immortalized human pancreatic β-cells
SRSF6 in human pancreatic β-cellshttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2897-5646AlvelosMaria Inês SutandyFX Reymond https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9749-6441Juan-MateuJonàs https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2200-4761ColliMaikel Luis https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2232-1329BuschAnke LopesMiguel CastelaÂngela https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1565-654XAartsma-RusAnnemieke https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9398-5421KönigJulian https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3527-3378ZarnackKathi ; ). More than 95% of human multi-exon genes experience AS, generating two or more different isoforms per gene ( ; ; ). AS is regulated by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and their interactions with core spliceosomal components ( ; ). RBPs bind to pre-mRNA binding sites that act as splicing-regulatory elements either enhancing or repressing the recognition of consensus splicing sequences and spliceosome assembly, thereby determining the final splicing outcome. The function of RBPs as enhancers or repressors of splicing often depends on the positioning of their binding sites relative to the regulated splice sites ( ). Moreover, different RBPs may work in cooperation or antagonistically to regulate overlapping sets of AS events ( ; ; ). Mutations in regulatory factors, both spliceosomal components and RBPs, or in pre-mRNA sequences can lead to splicing dysregulation. Splicing alterations have been extensively studied in multiple tissues and splicing dysregulation has been increasingly recognized as a molecular mechanism associated with multiple human diseases ( ; ; ).
Diabetes is a chronic metabolic dysfunction characterized by deterioration and loss of the insulin-producing pancreatic β-cells, resulting in hyperglycemia and long-term complications ( ; ). The two main forms of diabetes are type 1 (T1D) and type 2 (T2D) diabetes; they are triggered by different mechanisms, that is, autoimmunity in T1D and metabolic stressors in T2D, but in both cases genetic and environmental interactions prompt the failure and/or loss of the insulin-producing pancreatic β-cells leading to chronic hyperglycemia ( ; ; ). Of note, many of the susceptibility genes for diabetes act at the β-cell level, and risk single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) affect both coding and noncoding regions ( ; ; ). Transcriptome analysis indicates that dysregulated splicing is one of the mechanisms that contribute to pancreatic β-cell dysfunction and death in diabetes ( ). Indeed, exposure of human β-cells to pro-inflammatory cytokines or the metabolic stressor palmitate, in vitro models of β-cell stress in T1D or T2D, respectively, induce major changes in the AS repertoire, affecting the splicing of key genes for β-cell function and survival ( ; ; ). Nevertheless, knowledge on the role of AS in pancreatic β-cell dysfunction and death in diabetes is still in its infancy (reviewed in and ).
We have previously shown that down-regulation of GLIS3, a susceptibility gene for T1D and T2D development that is also causal for monogenic forms of the disease ( ; ; ), decreases the expression of the splicing factor serine and arginine rich 6 splicing factor (SRSF6, also known as SRp55), a serine/arginine (SR) protein family member ( ; ). SR proteins are a highly conserved family of splicing regulators, with a central role in both constitutive and AS ( ; ). They are ubiquitously expressed but regulate splicing in a cell type- and concentration-dependent manner, by contributing to splice site selection ( ; ; ). SRSF6 has been described as a proto-oncogene and its aberrant expression contributes to skin, lung, breast, and colorectal cancer ( ; ; ; ; ). SRSF6 is highly expressed in both the pancreatic β-cell line EndoC-βH1 and in human islets of Langerhans, and its down-regulation has a major impact on β-cell function and survival ( ). By performing RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) following SRSF6 knockdown (KD) in EndoC-βH1 cells, we have previously shown that SRSF6 modulates the splicing of genes involved in different biological processes, such as β-cell survival, insulin secretion, and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling ( ). Thus, SRSF6 down-regulation leads to the generation of alternatively spliced isoforms that promote EndoC-βH1 cell and primary human islet cell dysfunction and death ( ). These experiments, however, did not allow us to discriminate between direct and indirect effects of SRSF6 on the target transcripts.
In the present study, we integrated transcriptome-wide SRSF6 binding maps from individual-nucleotide resolution UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP) with SRSF6-associated AS profiles to identify the mechanisms of SRSF6-mediated splicing regulation in the human pancreatic β-cell line EndoC-βH1. This combined approach unveiled how SRSF6 specifically recognizes its binding sites and promotes exon inclusion, thereby regulating the splicing of diabetes susceptibility genes. These findings disclose a novel layer of regulation in the genetic predisposition to diabetes.

## Results

## Optimized conditions for SRSF6 iCLIP in the human β-cell line EndoC-βH1
To presently apply individual-nucleotide UV cross-linking and immunoprecipitation (iCLIP), we first adapted the conditions for EndoC-βH1 cells. The EndoC-βH1 cell line is an established in vitro model that resembles human islet β-cells in terms of gene expression, functionality and metabolic properties ( ; ). SRSF6 gene expression in EndoC-βH1 cells was comparable with HeLa and HEK293 cells ( ). We confirmed the specificity of the primary antibody in EndoC-βH1 cells by comparing it to a SRSF6 knockdown (KD) using a previously validated siRNA which leads to ≥50% SRSF6 depletion at mRNA and protein level ( ). Western blot analysis confirmed the detection of only one band in wild-type cells which was diminished by SRSF6 KD ( ). Next, we optimized the UV cross-linking conditions. HeLa cells were used as a positive control. In both cell lines, the exposure to UV light (254 nm, 150 mJ/cm2) induced the appearance of cross-linked SRSF6–RNA complexes ( , lane 1 and 3). A control treatment with high RNase concentration confirmed the presence of a single band, underlining the specificity of the immunoprecipitation ( , lane 2, ) However, we retrieved considerably less cross-linked material from EndoC-βH1 cells compared with the same amount of HeLa cells. Doubling the UV energy improved the yield from EndoC-βH1 cells ( , lane 5), this approach being more effective than increasing the number of irradiated cells ( , lane 4) or a combination of both ( , lane 6). Based on these results, we performed the subsequent iCLIP experiments using 8 × 106 cells and a UV irradiation energy of 300 mJ/cm2 ( ).
 

## SRSF6 shows sequence-specific binding on thousands of protein-coding genes
To map the binding of SRSF6 in human pancreatic β-cells, we performed iCLIP for SRSF6 from EndoC-βH1 cells in four independent replicates ( ). We obtained a total of 68,449,054 cross-link events for SRSF6. These cumulated into 185,266 reproducible binding sites that were assigned to 8,533 genes. 93% of the binding sites occurred in protein-coding genes ( ). The bound genes were associated with a broad range of different functionalities, including DNA repair, RNA splicing and cell cycle progression ( ). Within the transcript, we observed a similar fraction of SRSF6 binding sites in introns (48%) and coding sequences (CDS, 40%; ). In relatin to the relative size of these regions, this documented a strong preference for SRSF6 binding in exons ( , bottom), as exemplified in the CCDC50 gene ( ).
To investigate the RNA binding preferences of SRSF6, we analyzed the sequence composition in a 49-nt window around SRSF6 binding sites. We found that binding sites in CDS frequently displayed AG-rich pentamers, most prominently GAAGA, AGAAG, and AAGAA ( ). In contrast, SRSF6 binding sites in introns were dominated by uridine-rich pentamers, most predominantly UUUUU, possibly reflecting the sequence composition in introns and the UV cross-linking bias inherent for iCLIP experiments (characterized in detail in and ). Consistently, UUUUU was most enriched at binding site centers, whereas the AG-rich pentamers accumulated up- and downstream ( , , and ). Metaprofiles revealed a rising frequency of AAGAA and GAAGA from up to 100-nt upstream, which sharply dropped ∼25-nt downstream of the SRSF6 binding sites, indicating that SRSF6 precisely positions towards the end of the pentamer-enriched region ( ).
 Common to most pentamers that clustered up- and downstream of the SRSF6 binding sites was the triplet GAA ( ). In support of a direct role of this triplet, a higher number of GAA triplets associated with stronger SRSF6 binding, starting from two up to seven or more GAAs ( ). A similar trend could not be observed for the reverse complement triplet UUC. Consistently, UUC triplets were less frequently observed in SRSF6 binding sites compared to GAA ( ). More precisely, at least two GAA triplets had to occur in direct succession to impart strong SRSF6 binding, whereas gaps of one or more nucleotides between the triplets were not tolerated ( ). This was also supported by a motif enrichment analysis using DREME ( ), which detected a GAA-rich consensus motif at 25,148 SRSF6 binding sites (19%; and ). Altogether, we conclude that SRSF6 preferentially binds to GAA-rich consensus motifs in CDS and positions at the end of motif-enriched regions.

## AS is coupled to SRSF6 positioning on cassette exons (CEs)
To evaluate the association between the SRSF6 binding and AS, we integrated the SRSF6 iCLIP with our published RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data from EndoC-βH1 cells upon SRSF6 KD ( ) which were presently re-analyzed as described in the Materials and Methods section. In agreement with our previous analysis ( ), we observed that SRSF6 KD mainly resulted in CE skipping, with 975 and 237 CE showing significantly increased skipping and inclusion, respectively (false discovery rate < 0.05, absolute Δ percent spliced-in [|ΔPSI|] > 0.05) ( and Table S1). The predominant directionality of the splicing changes pointed to the fact that SRSF6 generally drives exon inclusion ( ; ). The splice sites of these exons were slightly weaker than at other exons in the same transcripts, indicating that splice site strength influences SRSF6 regulation ( ). Most AS events harbored one or more SRSF6 binding sites in the alternatively spliced region, indicating that they may include direct targets of SRSF6 regulation ( ).
Table S1 Significantly changed cassette exons after SRSF6 KD in EndoC-βH1.

 In order to address the positioning of SRSF6, we generated metaprofiles of cross-link events on the up- and down-regulated exons (“RNA splicing map”). To avoid biases in the iCLIP signal that arise from differences in wild-type inclusion levels, we sampled two PSI-matched background sets of randomly selected exons with a comparable PSI distribution in wild-type EndoC-βH1 cells ( ). In line with SRSF6’s role as a global splicing regulator, we observed substantial SRSF6 binding across all exons, extending into the immediately flanking intronic regions close to both splice sites ( ). Of note, this binding was significantly increased on the regulated exons, with distinct patterns on down- and up-regulated exons. Consistent with a direct enhancer function, exons with decreased inclusion upon SRSF6 KD displayed more SRSF6 binding on the regulated exons ( and ). Inversely, exons with increased inclusion featured massive binding in the flanking constitutive exons, suggesting that reinforcing the flanking exons can facilitate alternative exon skipping ( and ). In support of this notion, up-regulation was predominantly seen for alternative exons, whereas down-regulation showed an almost equally strong effect on exons that are constitutively spliced under normal conditions ( ).
 In essence, our findings suggest that SRSF6 regulates AS in a position-dependent manner. As described for other SR proteins ( ; ), binding within the alternative exon results in increased recognition, whereas strong binding to the flanking exons can reduce alternative exon inclusion.

## SRSF6-mediated AS reshapes the EndoC-βH1 cell transcriptome
We have previously shown that in parallel to AS, SRSF6 KD impacted on gene expression ( ). A reanalysis of differentially expressed genes and a general overlay with AS changes upon SRSF6 KD showed no evidence for a direct association between both types of regulatory events, for instance via nonsense-mediated mRNA decay ( and Table S2). This indicated that rather than triggering global down-regulation, SRSF6-mediated AS may serve to specifically adapt transcripts and hence the encoded protein isoforms. Among the genes that were affected by differential expression, we detected the genes for many other splicing regulators ( ). These included SRSF4 which was significantly up-regulated upon SRSF6 KD, harbored a SRSF6-regulated AS event and showed strong SRSF6 binding along the complete transcript ( ). A cross-regulation between SR proteins and other splicing factors has been previously described ( ; ; ; ) and could affect the observed splicing effects due to partial compensation.
Table S2 Genes modified by SRSF6 depletion in EndoC-βH1 cells.

 

## SRSF6 regulates several susceptibility genes for type 1 and type 2 diabetes
We previously found that SRSF6 regulated AS of many genes involved in central β-cell functions, such as insulin secretion, evidencing its role as key splicing regulator for β-cells and thus suggesting a link to diabetes ( ). We, therefore, overlaid our data to a list of T1D and T2D susceptibility genes compiled from ImmunoBase (www.immunobase.org, accessed November, 2018), a genome-wide association studies (GWAS) catalog (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/, accessed November, 2018) and two recent publications ( ; ). Intersection with our SRSF6 targets yielded five T1D susceptibility genes and 17 T2D susceptibility genes, including one shared between both sets, which harbored at least one significant CE with an SRSF6 binding site (out of 102 and 330, respectively; ). Among the affected T1D susceptibility genes, BCAR1, CENPO, and CDK2 displayed significant CE down-regulation upon SRSF6 KD, whereas LMO7 and ITGB3BP harbored one and two CEs, respectively, with increased inclusion ( ). At four of six affected exons, the associated SRSF6 binding sites harbored the GAA-rich consensus motif ( ), which we found to confer strong SRSF6 binding ( ).
 Using semiquantitative RT-PCR, we tested the AS changes in independent experiments with EndoC-βH1 cells under control and SRSF6 KD conditions. We successfully validated the splicing changes in seven out of nine (78%) selected CEs ( ). For the remaining two exons, in one case we could only amplify a single band, precluding any AS affects, whereas in the other case, there was no significant difference between conditions ( ). The validated exons included all affected CEs in T1D susceptibility genes (LMO7, ITGB3BP, CDK2, and CENPO), two in T2D susceptibility genes (RBM6 and STARD10), and one gene associated with both T1D and T2D (BCAR1) ( ). The splicing change affecting the T2D candidate gene INSR had already been validated in our previous study ( ).
 Considering gene expression, further T1D and T2D susceptibility genes were affected in addition to the observed AS changes after SRSF6 KD ( ). Several proteins encoded by the affected genes reside in a conjoint protein–protein interaction (PPI) network ( ). Via direct PPIs, they were further linked to additional susceptibility genes, namely CDKN1B, IRS1, INS, TCF12, and CCND1, suggesting a functional network of proteins encoded by susceptibility genes that could be affected by SRSF6.
 Taking into account that SRSF6 was initially found as a downstream target of the diabetes candidate gene GLIS3 in the rat cell line Ins1E ( ), we tested for this association in human cells. Using RNA-seq data of pancreatic tissue samples from healthy individuals in the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) database (n = 127 pancreatic tissue samples, GTEx version 8) (https://gtexportal.org/home/, accessed on 09 May, 2020), we found a strong positive correlation between GLIS3 and SRSF6 gene expression ( ). Because an association with the splicing events could not be assessed in the GTEx data due to low signal for individual junctions, we depleted GLIS3 in EndoC-βH1 cells using previously validated siRNAs ( ) ( ). As previously described by us ( ; ), GLIS3 depletion resulted in increased apoptosis, accompanied by a significant down-regulation of SRSF6 mRNA expression ( ). Importantly, GLIS3 depletion also triggered the expected splicing changes in the LMO7 and ITGB3BP transcripts ( ). Three of the remaining genes (CENPO, CDK2, and RBM6) showed a trend in the expected direction, probably reflecting the milder SRSF6 mRNA level reduction upon GLIS3 depletion as compared with the direct SRSF6 KD ( ). For STARD10, there was a significant splicing modification but in the opposite direction from the one induced by SRSF6 KD ( ). Finally, BCAR1 showed only one band, precluding detectable splicing modification ( ). As a whole, these observations support, at least in part, the hypothesis that the splicing regulator SRSF6 acts downstream of the diabetes candidate gene GLIS3. GLIS3, however, has a broad impact on β-cell phenotype and survival ( ; ; ; ), which most probably goes beyond its effects on SRSF6 regulation.
 Altogether, we found that SRSF6 acts downstream of GLIS3 and affects the expression of multiple T1D and T2D susceptibility genes via AS changes and/or differential gene expression. The functional impact of these susceptibility genes deserves further molecular studies.

## Antisense oligonucleotides allow to reverse the SRSF6 KD effect on LMO7 splicing
Among the genes with SRSF6-regulated AS and direct SRSF6 binding, the T1D susceptibility gene LMO7 was particularly interesting. LMO7 is located on 13q22 and harbors an intronic SNP (rs539514) that is significantly associated with T1D ( ). In our RNA-seq data, we found that inclusion of exon 10 (ENST00000341547) went up by more than 20% upon SRSF6 KD in the EndoC-βH1 cells ( and ). Importantly, the same splicing change could be triggered by treatment with the pro-inflammatory cytokines IL1β and IFNγ ( ), which mimic in vitro some of the pro-inflammatory conditions observed in islets of Langerhans from T1D patients . This coincided with an up-regulation in LMO7 expression seen in published RNA-seq data ( ), which we similarly detected after SRSF6 KD ( and ). Mirroring the global SRSF6 regulatory profile ( ), the LMO7 transcript displayed strong SRSF6 binding on the flanking exons, most prominent on the upstream constitutive exon 9 ( ). This indicated that SRSF6 kept down the inclusion of exon 10 under normal conditions by reinforcing the flanking exons. The repression was then lost upon SRSF6 KD.
 To test whether AS can be modulated in EndoC-βH1 cells, we explored the application of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs). The aim was to shift the splicing of LMO7 exon 10 towards exon skipping, thereby restoring its splicing pattern to the basal levels. To achieve this, we designed two ASOs that blocked the 3′ and 5′ splice sites of LMO7 exon 10 (ASO-5ss and ASO-3ss, respectively; and Table S3). An ASO sequence that had no homology in the human genome was used as a negative control (ASO-Ctrl) ( ). All designed ASOs contained 2′-O-methyl RNA nucleosides and a full-length phosphorothioate backbone to improve their uptake and half-life, by increasing their intracellular stability against enzymatic degradation ( ). The ASOs were transfected into EndoC-βH1 cells at three different concentrations (10, 50 and 200 μM; ). Importantly, ASO treatment triggered LMO7 exon 10 skipping, and increasing the ASO concentration, particularly of ASO-5ss, augmented this effect, reaching a decrease in inclusion of 30–40% at 200 μM. A similar trend was observed for ASO-3ss, although it did not reach significance. To test whether the effect persisted in presence of SRSF6 KD, we co-transfected the ASOs with siCTL or siSRSF6. Whereas SRSF6 KD moderately increased exon inclusion, the co-transfection with ASOs significantly potentiated LMO exon 10 skipping ( ). This underlined that the designed ASOs were able to bind pre-mRNA sequences before splicing, thus preventing the recognition and thereby promoting the removal of exon 10 from the mature mRNA molecule. Together, these results indicate that ASOs can be applied in human β-cells to modulate AS, thereby offering means to counteract the dysregulation of splicing factors induced by pro-inflammatory cytokines.
Table S3 Sequence of the antisense oligonucleotides (AONs).

## Discussion
GLIS3, a susceptibility gene for T1D and T2D and monogenic forms of the disease ( ; ; ), decreases the expression of the splicing regulator SRSF6, and we have previously shown that SRSF6 inhibition hampers human β-cell function and viability ( ).
Here, we investigated the mechanisms of splicing regulation by the splicing factor SRSF6 in the human pancreatic β-cell line EndoC-βH1 and its impact on diabetes susceptibility genes. Using iCLIP, we identified more than 185,000 SRSF6 binding sites in nearly 9,000 genes from EndoC-βH1 cells. As previously described ( ; ), and in line with its splice enhancer function, SRSF6 showed a strong preference for exons, predominantly in the CDS. In many cases, binding extended beyond the exon-intron boundaries, additionally covering the splice site regions. Similarly, other SR proteins modulate splicing by binding to an intronic splicing enhancer ( ), or branch-point sequences ( ; ; ). Finally, the observed secondary binding to 5′ and 3′ UTRs may reflect non-splicing-related functions of SRSF6, such as regulation of mRNA stability, export or translation, as it has been observed for other SR proteins ( ; ; ).
Based on previous analysis ( ; ; ; ; ), SRSF6 and other SR proteins recognize short, 4–8 nt long, degenerate sequences. In the present study, we substantially refined the current knowledge about SRSF6’s RNA binding specificity. Using in-depth sequence analyses, we found that SRSF6 binds to repetitions of two or more GAA triplets which should not be interrupted by other nucleotides. The motif enrichment around binding sites extended up to 100 nt and binding strength progressively grew with increasing number of triplets, suggesting that multiple SRSF6 proteins may assemble on a given exon to reach effective splicing enhancement. Alternatively, the repetition of motifs could favor the binding of additional SR proteins or other RBPs recognizing the same motifs. The second scenario may confer selective advantage for the recognition of degenerative motifs to ensure exon inclusion, also by offering the possibility for compensatory regulatory mechanisms among SR proteins ( ).
Of note, the SRSF6 consensus motif found in our study differs from previously reported motifs that were obtained in other cell types using SELEX (systematic evolution of ligands by experimental enrichment) and RNA immunoprecipitation experiments ( ; ; ; ). It does, however, precisely fit to the consensus motif that was more recently derived from SRSF6 iCLIP experiments in mouse cells ( ). Moreover, our GAA-rich consensus motif is more similar to sequences previously shown to function as binding sites for SRSF1, SRSF4, and SRSF7 ( ; ; , ). Together, these observations suggest that the RNA sequence specificity of SRSF6 in vivo is considerably different from what was previously reported based on in vitro SELEX experiments. Importantly, SR protein motifs are commonly used for the in silico prediction of exonic splicing enhancers which is used for mechanistic studies but also for the characterization of SNPs or somatic variants in human diseases ( ; ; ). Our findings therefore have important implications for the interpretation of such variants and their putative role on splicing regulation.
We previously reported that SRSF6 regulates a network of AS events in pancreatic β-cells which impact on key processes like β-cell survival and insulin secretion ( ). Importantly, by integrating the re-analyzed data with the present iCLIP data we demonstrate that most of the observed AS events are associated with direct binding by SRSF6. Moreover, as previously described for other splicing factors ( ; ; ), we show that SRSF6 exhibits a context- and position-dependent mode of splicing regulation. We carefully controlled this analysis for abundance differences of the exons, ensuring that our observations reflect genuine regulatory RNA binding profiles rather than intrinsic biases which commonly impair a direct comparison of up- and down-regulated exons ( ). We observed increased SRSF6 binding within the exons that are down-regulated upon SRSF6 KD, supporting that the binding of SRSF6 mainly contributes to exon inclusion. This is in line with early in vitro studies reporting that SR proteins bind pre-mRNAs mainly at intronic splicing enhancers and exonic splicing enhancers and recruit spliceosomal components to the neighboring splice sites ( ). To date, the precise mechanism by which SR proteins favor splice site recognition remains debatable. It has been described that SRSF1 assists the recruitment of the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) component U1-70K, thus facilitating donor site recognition ( ; ). Moreover, similar to other SR proteins ( ), SRSF6 binding at neighboring splice sites may potentiate the recruitment of U1 snRNP and U2 auxiliary factor 2 (U2AF) to the 5′ and 3′ splice sites, respectively, of the regulated exons ( ). Alternatively, SRSF6 binding may interfere with the binding of negative regulators, such as heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNP) ( ; ; ). Although some of the down-regulated exons had weaker splice sites compared with neighboring exons, we also observed a considerable number of constitutive exons, suggesting that SRSF6 binding can equally reinforce the splicing of constitutive and alternative exons ( ; ). Surprisingly, more than 200 exons went up upon SRSF6 KD, suggesting that their inclusion is normally attenuated by SRSF6. These up-regulated exons displayed strong SRSF6 binding on the flanking constitutive exons and were themselves enriched for alternative exons with weaker splice sites. Together, these observations suggested that SRSF6 can hamper the inclusion of weak exons by reinforcing the neighboring exons. A similar scenario has been described for other splicing-regulatory proteins ( ; ). A possible mechanism would be an increased splicing efficiency or faster splicing of the neighboring exons, which has been previously shown to repress alternative exons ( ; ; ). A prime example for this regulatory RNA binding profile is LMO7 exon 10 (see below).
We observed that SRSF6 KD influences the expression of many other splicing regulators, including other SR and hnRNP proteins. Similar to, for example, SRSF1 ( ), this effect on splicing factors and other RNA-related pathways highlights the potential role of SR proteins in maintaining RBP expression homeostasis, possibly through post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism such as AS coupled with nonsense-mediated mRNA decay ( ; ; ; ). As a whole, the present and previous findings suggest an interplay between SR proteins and other splicing regulators to ultimately determine the splicing outcome.
In the pancreatic β-cells, SRSF6 expression is regulated by the diabetes susceptibility gene GLIS3 ( ), which encodes an important transcription factor for β-cell development and maintenance of the differentiated phenotype ( ; ; ). SNPs that lower GLIS3 expression increase the risk of both T1D and T2D ( ; ; ; ; ), whereas inactivating mutations in the gene itself cause severe neonatal diabetes ( ; ; ). In contrast to many other putative T1D risk loci, the GLIS3-associated risk is not shared with other autoimmune diseases, emphasizing its effects at the β-cell level ( ), probably by augmenting β-cell susceptibility to immune and metabolic stressors ( ; ). Interestingly, the pro-apoptotic impact of GLIS3 inhibition in pancreatic β-cells is mediated at least in part via down-regulation of SRSF6 and consequent changes on transcripts that exert a crucial role on β-cell function and survival ( ; ). These observations suggest the possibility of a crosstalk between diabetes susceptibility genes and splicing factors. To test this hypothesis, we specifically looked for SRSF6-regulated splicing events with associated binding sites in a compiled list of more than 400 T1D and T2D susceptibility genes. We found that SRSF6 KD significantly affected 28 AS events in well-documented diabetes susceptibility genes (five T1D susceptibility genes, and 17 T2D susceptibility genes) ( ; ; ). Although still deserving detailed molecular analyses about their functional effect in β-cells, these susceptibility genes are generally predicted to mediated gene–environment interactions in diabetes. Our results thereby suggest that SRSF6 regulation can influence the architecture of the disease.
Splicing-modulating molecules such as ASOs have been developed to remodel disease-causing AS switches, with some of these molecules being in advanced stages of clinical trial or even in clinical practice ( ; ; ). Structurally, ASOs are single-stranded oligonucleotides of 15–25-nt length, that are usually chemically modified to facilitate their intracellular stability. However, despite their widespread usage in other cell models, pancreatic β-cells have been described as particularly refractory to ASO internalization ( ). As a proof of concept for the potential of ASOs in pancreatic β-cells, we focused on the T1D candidate gene LMO7 because it harbors an intronic SNP (rs539514) that is highly associated with T1D ( ). Whereas the role of LMO7 in pancreatic β-cells remains unknown, in other cell types it is related to PPIs at focal adhesion and adherens junctions, regulation of actin dynamics, and transcriptional regulation ( ; ; ). Notably, we found that SRSF6 KD up-regulated the inclusion of exon 10 in the LMO7 gene. Therefore, ASOs targeting the 3′ and 5′ splice sites may hamper the binding of spliceosomal components, thus preventing exon recognition and promoting exon exclusion. Importantly, we demonstrate that ASOs targeting the 5′ splice site significantly reduced inclusion of LMO7 exon 10. Together, our results suggest that splicing modulation by ASOs may be a promising approach for the future modulation of genes with potential impact on β-cell survival and function.
In summary, we identified the RNA binding profiles of SRSF6 in the human pancreatic β-cell line EndoC-βH1. Moreover, we showed that SRSF6, which is regulated by the diabetes candidate gene GLIS3, modulates the splicing of other diabetes susceptibility genes, suggesting the presence of an AS-regulated network with a putative impact on diabetes risk. The functional impact of the observed splicing modification will require future functional validation. We also demonstrated the possibility of modulating these events in EndoC-βH1 cells by specific ASOs. It will be of interest to investigate whether similar AS-related networks are present in other immune-mediated and/or genetically determined diseases.

## Materials and Methods

## Culture of human cells, gene silencing, and cytokine treatment
The human pancreatic β-cell line EndoC-βH1 was kindly provided by Dr R Scharfmann (Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France) ( ). EndoC-βH1 cells were cultured in DMEM containing 5.6 mmol/l glucose (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 2% BSA fraction V, fatty acid free (Roche), 50 μmol/l 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mmol/l nicotinamide (Calbiochem), 5.5 μg/ml transferrin (Sigma-Aldrich), 6.7 ng/ml selenite (Sigma-Aldrich), 100 U/ml penicillin + 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Lonza) in matrigel–fibronectin–coated plates ( ). HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM with 4.5 g/l D-glucose, enriched with 10% FBS and 100 U/ml penicillin + 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Lonza).
EndoC-βH1 were transfected with siRNA targeting SRSF6 as described previously ( ); Allstars Negative Control siRNA (QIAGEN) was used as a negative control (siCTL). The siRNA sequences are listed in Table S4.
Table S4 List of siRNAs used.

To test the effect of pro-inflammatory cytokines, EndoC-βH1 were exposed to the human cytokines interleukin-1β (50 U/ml; R&D Systems) and interferon-γ (1,000 U/ml; Peprotech) for 48 h, as previously described ( ).

## Cell viability
The percentage of viable EndoC-βH1 cells was assessed using fluorescence microscopy after 20 min incubation with the DNA-binding dyes Hoechst 33342 (5 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) and propidium iodide (5 mg/ml; Sigma-Aldrich), as described ( ). Viability was evaluated by two independent observers, one of them unaware of sample identity. Results are expressed as percentage of apoptosis, calculated as number of apoptotic cells/total number of cells.

## Western blot
Total protein extracts were obtained from EndoC-βH1 using Laemmli buffer, and separated on 8% SDS–PAGE. The nitrocellulose membranes were probed using specific primary antibodies, anti-SRSF6 (Anti-SRSF6/SRP55 [aa250-300] LS-C290327; LifeSpan Bioscience) diluted 1:1,000, anti-α-Tubulin (T5168; Sigma-Aldrich) diluted 1:5,000, in 1× TBST (Tris-buffered saline, 0.1% Tween 20) with 5% nonfat dry milk. After overnight incubation with the primary antibodies at 4°C, the membranes were probed for 1 h at room temperature with peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (listed in Table S5). Detection of immunoreactive bands was performed using chemiluminescent substrate (SuperSignal West Femto, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a Bio-Rad chemi DocTM XRS+ system (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The densitometric values were obtained by ImageLab software (Bio-Rad Laboratories) quantification and corrected against α-Tubulin as loading control, after background subtraction.
Table S5 List of primary and secondary antibodies used.

## iCLIP library preparation
iCLIP libraries were prepared based on a previously described protocol ( ; ). Because of low replication rate of EndoC-βH1 cells, iCLIP cross-link conditions were first optimized in HeLa cells, and HeLa cells were then used as positive control ( and ). The iCLIP libraries were prepared from four replicates of ∼8 × 106 EndoC-βH1 ( ). The cells were UV-irradiated with 254 nm UV with 300 mJ/cm2 to induce cross-linking between SRSF6 and the interacting RNAs ( ). Partial RNase digestion was performed by adding 2 U of RNase I (Ambion) to the sample lysates. The SRSF6–RNA complexes were immunoprecipitated with a specific anti-SRSF6 antibody (Anti-SRSF6/SRP55 [aa250-300] LS-C290327, LifeSpan Bioscience). The prepared iCLIP libraries were sequenced as 75-nt single-end reads on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 sequencing system. Sample barcodes used in this experiment are listed in Table S6.
Table S6 Summary of SRSF6 iCLIP experiments in EndoC-βH1 cells.

## iCLIP data processing
Initial quality checks were applied to all reads before and after quality filtering using FastQC (version 0.11.5, available online at: https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) ( ). Reads were filtered based on the sequencing qualities (Phred score) of the barcode region. Reads with more than one position with a sequencing quality <20 in the sample barcode (position 4–7) or with any position having a sequencing quality <17 in the random barcode regions (positions 1–3 and 8–9) were removed. Remaining reads were kept for further analysis and de-multiplexed based on the sample barcode (positions 4–7 of the reads) with no allowed mismatches using Flexbar (version 3.0.0) ( ). Sample barcodes are available in Table S6. Remaining adapter sequences (AGATCGGAAGAGCGGTTCAG) were trimmed from the right end of the reads using Flexbar ( ), requiring an overlap of read and adapter of at least 1-nt and allowing one mismatch in 10-nt. Barcode regions (first 9-nt) were trimmed off at the left end of the reads and added to the read names, such as that barcode information was kept for downstream analysis. Reads shorter than 15-nt after adapter and barcode trimming were discarded. Trimmed reads were then mapped to the human genome (assembly version GRCh38) ( ) using STAR (version 2.5.2b) ( ) with two mismatches allowed and turned off soft-clipping on the 5′ end (the bases in the 5′ of the read were part of the alignment). Only uniquely mapped reads were kept for further analysis. Duplicate reads were marked using the dedup function of the bamUtils tool suit (http://github.com/statgen/bamUtil). Marked duplicates with identical random barcodes were removed as they were considered technical duplicates, whereas biological duplicates showing distinct random barcodes were kept for further analysis.

## Binding site definition
Processed read counts from all four replicates were merged into a single file for each strand and subjected to a peak calling step using PureCLIP (version 1.0.0) ( ) with default parameters. The resulting single nucleotide-wide significant cross-link sites were filtered to remove the sites with the 5% lowest PureCLIP scores. All remaining sites were merged into 9-nt-wide non-overlapping binding regions as described in .
In brief, this was performed by clustering all significant cross-link sites closer than 8-nt into regions. Resulting regions that were shorter than 3-nt were removed. Equal-sized binding sites were achieved by either extending regions shorter than 9-nt, or by iteratively splitting up regions larger than 9-nt. In both cases, the binding site center was defined by the position with the highest number of cross-link events (peak summit). We also required each binding site to contain at least two positions covered with significant cross-link sites from the initial PureCLIP analysis. Next, reproducibility was established by requiring support of at least three of four replicates for each binding site, meaning that the binding site harbored more cross-link events from the replicate-specific threshold. This threshold was set to the 20% quantile of the distribution of cross-link events in all binding sites for the given replicate. This procedure yielded a total of 185,266 binding sites.

## Genomic distribution of SRSF6 binding sites
Gene and transcript annotations were obtained from GENCODE (release 29), and filtered for gene support (≤2) and transcript support level (≤3). Binding sites were overlaid with the filtered annotations, and overlapping annotations were removed. Of note, the latter filter excluded most SRSF6 binding sites in the T2D susceptibility gene STARD10, including those in the region of the regulated alternative exon. For all following analysis, only binding sites overlapping a single protein-coding gene were retained. On transcript level, a binding site was assigned to one of the four regions: intron, CDS, 3′ UTR, or 5′ UTR. Overlaps with multiple different transcript regions were resolved by applying a majority vote followed by a hierarchical rule, selecting intron > CDS > 3′ UTR > 5′ UTR. For , the number of binding sites was normalized by the summed lengths of the respective bound transcript regions. Following this procedure, a total of 160,320 binding sites in 8,533 genes could be assigned to a unique transcription region and they were used for all subsequent analyses.

## Motif definition
The local sequence content around SRSF6 binding sites was assessed by counting pentamer frequencies for 5,000 randomly sampled SRSF6 binding sites from each transcript region considered. Counts were obtained for the 9-nt binding site itself, as well as the 20-nt flanking regions up- and downstream. In , we compared the mean count of each pentamer for each window between binding sites in introns and CDS. For positional profiles ( ), overlapping pentamers were count on all nucleotides in the windows and divided by total number of considered binding sites. Heat maps in and were obtained from k-means clustering with three centroids of frequency profiles for top 300 pentamers with highest frequency in SRSF6 binding sites in the CDS. To dissect the binding sequence further, the number of GAA versus UUC triplets was counted in the 49-nt-wide windows and compared with the respective PureCLIP score ( ). All counting operations were performed with the Biostrings package in R ( ).
The de novo motif search was performed using DREME (version 5.1.1, http://meme-suite.org/tools/dreme) ( ) on 201-nt-long sequence windows on SRSF6 binding sites in all transcript regions as input. The motif in corresponds to the second hit, preceded by a U-rich motif. For , the position weight matrix of the DREME motif in was taken as input to search again in all 201-nt windows using FIMO ( ).

## RNA sequencing and data processing
The five independent RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) experiments of EndoC-βH1 cells exposed to control (siCTL) or SRSF6 KD (siSRSF6) used in the present study were previously published by our group ( ) (available at Gene Expression Omnibus [GEO] under accession number GSE98485). For the present study, the five paired RNA-seq replicates were re-analyzed as described herein. Initial sequence quality of the reads was monitored with FastQC (version 0.11.5) ( ). Adapter sequences were removed from all 3′ ends and all resulting reads were subjected to a window-based quality trimming using Flexbar ( ) with default parameters (version 2.17.2). Reads were mapped with STAR (version 2.5.3a) ( ) to the human genome (GRCh38) with GENCODE gene annotations release 29 ( ). Thereby soft-clipping was enabled, but no multimapping reads were allowed with a maximum of two mismatches. All downstream analyses were performed using the human genome version GRCh38 with GENCODE gene annotations release 29.

## Differential expression analysis
Differential expression analysis was performed in R using DESeq2 (version 1.22.2) ( ). Mapped reads were counted in annotated exons using genomicAlignments (version 1.18.1) in “union” mode. The resulting count matrix was filtered for genes with at least 10 reads and the DESeq2 model was fitted with the formula “design ≅ pair + condition,” to account for the paired arrangement of control and KD samples. Genes were considered significant if passing below an adjusted P-value < 0.001 (Benjamini-Hochberg correction), yielding a total of 4,126 differentially expressed genes. An additional filter on the absolute log2-transformed fold-change (|LFC| > 1) resulted in 106 differentially expressed genes. Genes encoding for splicing regulators were identified based on association with the Gene Ontology term GO:0008380 “RNA splicing” ( ).

## AS analysis
AS analysis was performed using rMATS-turbo (version 4.0.1) ( ) with default parameters, only specifying read type, read length and strand specificity (-t paired, --readLength 98, and --libType fr-unstranded). Because rMATS requires all reads to have the same length, we re-processed all reads to a fixed length of 98-nt after removing adapter sequences using Flexbar ( ). Mapping was again performed with STAR ( ) using the same settings as described above, but without soft-clipping. Based on our previous study ( ), we determined that CE events represent >50% of the events affected by SRSF6 silencing. Thus, in the present study only CE events, identified based on junction-spanning reads, were considered for further analyses. An alternative splice event was considered significant if passing below a false discovery rate < 0.05. Potential hits were further filtered by the absolute change in their “percent spliced-in” (PSI) value (|ΔPSI| > 0.05) as well as a log2-transformed sum of junction-spanning reads supporting the event >5 (mean between replicates). This process yielded 1,212 significantly alternatively spliced exons.
Exon types were annotated using the software Exon Ontology ( ) (http://fasterdb.ens-lyon.fr/ExonOntology/) ( ). The strengths of 3′ and 5′ splice sites of regulated and non-regulated exons ( ) were calculated based on the maximum entropy model using the sequence analysis software MaxEntScan ( ). Non-regulated exons from the same transcripts of the regulated exons were considered for comparison.
For the overlap of SRSF6-regulated CEs and SRSF6 binding ( ), all binding sites in the alternatively spliced region were taken into account. This was defined as the window from −100-nt of the 5′ splice site of the upstream constitutive exon until +100-nt of the 3′ splice site of the downstream constitutive exon.

## SRSF6 RNA splicing maps
Significantly alternatively spliced exons were grouped by their decreased or increased inclusion based on their ΔPSI values. The 5′ and 3′ splice sites of the regulated and the flanking up- and downstream exons were used as reference point to span a symmetric window of 200-nt. On each nucleotide position in each window, all exons with at least one cross-link event at this position were counted and divided by the total number of exons. The resulting relative SRSF6 cross-link frequency is shown in .
A common problem when integrating orthogonal data with alternatively spliced exons are the differences in the base inclusion level between exons. For example, an exon with increased inclusion upon SRSF6 KD must show less inclusion in the control situation and thus will show fewer iCLIP cross-link counts ( ). To deal with this, we compiled a PSI-matched background set as reference for the exons with decreased inclusion, and a second PSI-matched background set for the exons with increased inclusion. These were chosen to match in their distribution of PSI values in control conditions. As a starting point, we used all exons not included in the two significant sets (total background). For each set, we calculated the distribution of PSI values, split it into 5% quantiles and then transferred the quantile boundaries to randomly pick an adjusted background set from the total background. The adjusted background set was subjected to a repeated subsampling approach, such that a PSI-matched background set of equal size as the regulated set was picked 50 times ( ). For each iteration, the relative SRSF6 cross-link frequency was calculated in the same way as described above. We then used the mean and SD of binding profiles on the 50 PSI-matched background sets to calculate a positional z-score as well as a P-value.

## Functional annotation and susceptibility genes
Functional enrichment analysis was performed with clusterProfiler ( ) for Gene Ontology. The genes identified by RNA-seq in control or after SRSF6 KD with normalized read counts >1 were considered as expressed and therefore used as background. The standard parameters were applied, and an adjusted P-value < 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
T1D and T2D susceptibility genes were identified from ImmunoBase (www.immunobase.org, accessed on November, 2018), GWAS catalog (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/, accessed November, 2018), and ( ; ). This yielded a total of 102 T1D and 330 T2D susceptibility genes.

## PPI network
The Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes version 11.0 (STRING; https://string-db.org/) was used to identify PPI networks ( ). The merged list of T1D and T2D susceptibility genes with significant AS events and/or a significant differential expression (with |LFC| > 1) were used as input (n = 29). Only interactions supported by direct experiments were taken into account. A median confidence score >0.4 was considered relevant. The PPI network was further modified in Adobe Illustrator for color coding ( ).

## Retrieval of Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) data sets
The gene read counts of the RNA-Seq GTEx version 8 data set (GTEx_Analysis_2017-06-05_v8_RNASeQCv1.1.9_gene_tpm.gct.gz) and the respective information about the exon-exon junction read counts (GTEx_Analysis_2017-06-05_v8_STARv2.5.3a_junctions.gct.gz) were downloaded from the GTEx Portal (https://gtexportal.org/home/datasets, on 09 May, 2020).

## Transfection of antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs)
The sequence of the antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) (Eurogentec) molecules used in this study are shown in Table S3. All ASOs contained 2′-O-methyl RNA nucleosides and a full-length phosphorothioate backbone. The ASOs were diluted to a final concentration of 200 μM in sterile Tris–EDTA (TE) buffer solution (Promega) and stored at −80°C. EndoC-βH1 cells were transfected for 6 h with 50 μM of each AOS using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. An ASO with a scrambled sequence that has no homology in the human genome was used as a negative control ( ). The cells were harvested 48 h after transfection. The concentration of the ASOs was assessed with a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (NanoDrop ND-1000; Thermo Fisher Scientific).

## mRNA extraction, quantitative PCR, and validation of splicing events by RT-PCR
Poly(A)+ mRNA was isolated using the Dynabeads mRNA DIRECT Kit (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The mRNA molecules were recovered in Tris–HCl elution solution and reverse-transcribed using the Reverse Transcriptase Core kit (Eurogentec), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The quantitative PCR amplification was conducted using IQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad) using Rotor-Gene Q (QIAGEN). The PCR product concentration was calculated as copies per μl using the standard curve method ( ), and the gene expression was corrected for the reference gene encoding β-actin. The primers used are listed in Table S7. The observed AS events were validated by RT-PCR using specifically designed primers annealing to the flanking constitutive exons (Table S7). The RT-PCR was conducted using the RedTaq DNA polymerase (Bioline) following the manufacturer’s instructions. PCR products were analyzed using the LabChip electrophoretic Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer system and the DNA 1000 LabChip kit (Agilent Technologies). The molarity of each PCR band corresponding to a specific splice variant was quantified using the 2100 Expert Software (Agilent Technologies), and used to calculate the percentage of inclusion of the target CE (% inclusion = molarity bigger amplicon/(molarity bigger amplicon + molarity smaller amplicon) × 100).
Table S7 Sequences of primers used for splicing analyses and quantitative RT-PCR.

## Statistical analysis
Data are shown as means ± SEM. Significant differences between experimental conditions were determined by paired t test or by ANOVA followed by Bonferroni correction as indicated. P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistical tools used for the analysis of iCLIP and RNA-seq are described above.

## Data Availability
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data of EndoC-βH1 cells were previously published ( ) and are available at GEO under accession number GSE98485. SRSF6 iCLIP data have been deposited at GEO under accession number GSE150172. The computational code for the binding site definition, the motif analysis, the AS analysis, and the RNA splicing maps are available with this manuscript (Supplemental Data 1).
Supplemental Data 1.The script files contain the custom code to: (1) define reproducible binding sites from the SRSF6 iCLIP data (BindingSiteDefinition.R), (2) analyze the motif content around SRSF6 binding sites (MotifDefinition.R), (3) filter the rMATS output for significantly alternatively spliced exons (AsEventDefinition.R), (4) count crosslink events around regulated exons and draw the RNA splicing map (RnaMap.R). Each script has an associated function script with the required function definitions.

## Supplementary Material

## Reviewer comments

## Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Isabelle Millard, Anyishaï Musuaya, Nathalie Pachera, Cai Ying, and Manon Depessemier (ULB Center for Diabetes Research) for providing excellent technical support. The authors would like to thank Dr Michaela Müller-McNicoll and all members of the Zarnack and Eizirk groups for fruitful discussions. Funding information: DL Eizirik is funded by Welbio/FRFS (no WELBIO-CR-2019C-04), Belgium; by the Brussels Region (INNOVIRIS BRIDGE grant DiaType), the Innovative Medicines Initiative 2 Joint Undertaking under grant agreement numbers 115797 (INNODIA) and 945268 (INNODIA HARVEST); these Joint Undertakings receive support from the Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program and “EFPIA” (European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries Associations), “JDRF” (Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation), “The Leona M and Harry B Helmsley Charitable Trust”), and the Dutch Diabetes Research Foundation (project Innovate2CureType1, DDRF; no. 2018.10.002). MI Alvelos was supported by Fonds pour la Formation a la Recherche dans l’Industrie et dans l’Agriculture (FRIA) fellowship from the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS) (reference no. 26410496), and COST: European Cooperation in Science & Technology (COST Action BM1207—Networking towards clinical application of antisense-mediated exon skipping; COST Action CA17103—Delivery of Antisense RNA Therapeutics). K Zarnack is funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG, SFB 902 – B13).

## Author Contributions
MI Alvelos: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, validation, investigation, visualization, methodology, and writing—original draft, review, and editing.
M Brüggemann: data curation, software, formal analysis, validation, investigation, visualization, methodology, and writing—original draft, review, and editing.
FXR Sutandy: formal analysis, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
J Juan-Mateu: conceptualization, investigation, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
ML Colli: data curation, investigation, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
A Busch: data curation, software, formal analysis, and writing—review and editing.
M Lopes: formal analysis and writing—review and editing.
Â Castela: validation, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
A Aartsma-Rus: methodology and writing—review and editing.
J König: resources, formal analysis, funding acquisition, methodology, and writing—review and editing.
K Zarnack: conceptualization, resources, data curation, software, formal analysis, supervision, validation, investigation, visualization, methodology, and writing—original draft, review, and editing.
DL Eizirik: conceptualization, resources, data curation, software, formal analysis, supervision, funding acquisition, validation, investigation, visualization, methodology, project administration, and writing—original draft, review, and editing.

## Conflict of Interest Statement
A Aartsma-Rus discloses being employed by Leiden University Medical Center (LUMC) which has patents on exon skipping technology, some of which has been licensed to BioMarin and subsequently sublicensed to Sarepta. As co-inventor of some of these patents A Aartsma-Rus is entitled to a share of royalties. A Aartsma-Rus further discloses being ad hoc consultant for PTC Therapeutics, Sarepta Therapeutics, CRISPR Therapeutics, Summit PLC, Alpha Anomeric, BioMarin Pharmaceuticals Inc., Eisai, Astra Zeneca, Santhera, Audentes, Global Guidepoint and GLG consultancy, Grunenthal, Wave, and BioClinica, having been a member of the Duchenne Network Steering Committee (BioMarin) and being a member of the scientific advisory boards of ProQR, hybridize therapeutics, silence therapeutics, Sarepta therapeutics, and Philae Pharmaceuticals. Remuneration for these activities is paid to LUMC. LUMC also received speaker honoraria from PTC Therapeutics and BioMarin Pharmaceuticals and funding for contract research from Italpharmaco and Alpha Anomeric. Project funding is received from Sarepta Therapeutics. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests.