349plospathPLoS PathogensPLoS PathogPLOSPMC8362953836295383629533434321210.1371/journal.ppat.1009812Mouse papillomavirus type 1 (MmuPV1) DNA is frequently integrated in benign tumors by microhomology-mediated end-joining
YuLuluConceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing MajerciakVladimirData curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing XueXiang-YangData curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation UberoiAayushiData curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing LobanovAlexeiFormal analysis, Methodology, Software, Visualization, Writing – review & editing ChenXiongfongFormal analysis, Methodology, Software, Visualization CamMaggieFormal analysis, Methodology, Software HughesStephen HFormal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Writing – review & editing LambertPaul FConceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing ZhengZhi-MingConceptualization, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing RodenRichard BSEditor 1HIV Dynamics and Replication Program, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, United States of America2McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America3CCR Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America4Johns Hopkins University, UNITED STATESThe authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
✉* E-mail: zhengt@exchange.nih.gov
382021178e1009812e10098121482021This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

## Abstract
MmuPV1 is a useful model for studying papillomavirus-induced tumorigenesis. We used RNA-seq to look for chimeric RNAs that map to both MmuPV1 and host genomes. In tumor tissues, a higher proportion of total viral reads were virus-host chimeric junction reads (CJRs) (1.9‰ - 7‰) than in tumor-free tissues (0.6‰ - 1.3‰): most CJRs mapped to the viral E2/E4 region. Although most of the MmuPV1 integration sites were mapped to intergenic regions and introns throughout the mouse genome, integrations were seen more than once in several genes: Malat1, Krt1, Krt10, Fabp5, Pard3, and Grip1; these data were confirmed by rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE)-Single Molecule Real-Time (SMRT)-seq or targeted DNA-seq. Microhomology sequences were frequently seen at host-virus DNA junctions. MmuPV1 infection and integration affected the expression of host genes. We found that factors for DNA double-stranded break repair and microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ), such as H2ax, Fen1, DNA polymerase Polθ, Cdk1, and Plk1, exhibited a step-wise increase and Mdc1 a decrease in expression in MmuPV1-infected tissues and MmuPV1 tumors relative to normal tissues. Increased expression of mitotic kinases CDK1 and PLK1 appears to be correlated with CtIP phosphorylation in MmuPV1 tumors, suggesting a role for MMEJ-mediated DNA joining in the MmuPV1 integration events that are associated with MmuPV1-induced progression of tumors.

## Author summary
Persistent high-risk HPV infection leads viral DNA integration into the host genome and promotes viral carcinogenesis. We have been using the MmuPV1 mouse-infection model to study papillomavirus tumorigenesis and asked whether MmuPV1 DNA also integrates into the genomes of infected mouse cells. Strikingly, we found that MmuPV1 integration into the infected host genome, like high-risk HPV infections, is very common and the mapped integration sites were distributed on all of the mouse chromosomes. Consistently, we identified microhomology sequences in the range of 2–10 nts always at the integration junction regions. We further verified the MMEJ-mediated viral DNA integration in tumor tissues during MmuPV1 infection and a step-wise increase in the expression of the DNA repair MMEJ host factors from normal tissues, to tumor-free MmuPV1 infected tissues, and then to MmuPV1 tumors. Our observations provide the first evidence of MmuPV1 integration in virus-infected cells and a conceptual advance of how papillomavirus DNA integration contributes to the development of papillomavirus-associated precancers to cancers.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 May 5; Accepted 2021 Jul 19; Collection date 2021 Aug.

## Introduction
Papillomavirus genomes replicate as extrachromosomal DNA circles in the nucleus; integration of the viral DNA into the host genome is a dead end for the virus. This is in contrast to retroviruses, like HIV, for which integration of a DNA copy of the viral genome into the host genome is a critical step in the viral replication cycle that has important implications for the persistence of the HIV during successful anti-viral therapy [ , ]. Human papillomaviruses (HPV) is the main cause of cervical cancer [ ] and numerous studies have shown that integrated HPV DNA is present in many HPV-related cancer tissues, including cervical cancer [ , ], head and neck cancer [ , ] and oropharyngeal cancer [ ]. Although papillomaviruses do not deliberately integrate their genomes, integrated HPV DNA was shown to be present in HPV18 positive cervical cancer cell lines in 1985 [ ]. The number of integrated HPV copies correlates with the severity of cervical lesions [ , ] and is a biomarker for disease progression. In the integrated copies of HPV DNA in tumor samples, the break sites in the viral genome are commonly found in the E1 and E2 genes [ , ]. Loss of E2 expression from the integrated DNA leads to increased expression of the viral oncoproteins E6 and E7 that are essential for the proliferation and survival of HPV-related cancer cells [ – ]. Thus, the fact that HPV DNAs found in tumors are often integrated in E1 and E2 represents a selection for forms of integrated HPV DNA that can help transform the host cell, and is not caused by a propensity for HPV DNA to break and/or integrate in specific regions. Integrated HPV DNA can be found in many places in the host genome. HPV integration can affect the expression of the MYC oncogene [ , ] or form a viral-cellular super-enhancer that promotes viral oncogene expression [ ], although the latter event is uncommon. The mechanisms that are involved in the integration of HPV DNA into the host genome remains unclear. However, high-risk HPV infection induces a DNA damage response that is important for viral DNA replication, but causes host genomic instability [ – ]. Microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ) is a double-stand break (DSB) repair mechanism that uses short regions of homologous DNA sequences (> = 1 bp) for error-prone end-joining [ – ]. MMEJ has been found in the integration sites of several pathologic viruses, including adeno-associated virus, Merkel cell polyomavirus (MCV) and papillomavirus [ , , , ].
Papillomaviruses are species-specific, which makes it difficult to study HPV integration because there is no good animal model. Mice can be infected with mouse papillomavirus type 1 or Mus musculus papillomavirus 1 (MmuPV1) in both mucosal and cutaneous sites [ – ]. MmuPV1 is transmissible through blood [ ] and sexual contact [ ] and induces warts that are similar to pre-cancerous stages caused by HPV infections in humans. Like HPV infections, MmuPV1 infections can cause cancer [ , ], making it a good model for human cancer studies [ , ]. However, there are no published reports on MmuPV1 integration. We asked if MmuPV1 DNA integrates into the genomes of infected mouse cells and if MmuPV1 integration is similar to the HPV DNA integration.
Both DNA-based and RNA-based assays have their advantages and limitations in studying HPV and MmuPV1 DNA integration events. Theoretically, DNA-based assays are capable of detecting all of the viral-host junctions, but the throughput and the sensitivity of the assays are limited [ ]. RNA-based assays are more sensitive than the DNA-based assays but only detect integrated viral DNA if the region that contains the viral DNA is transcribed; integration sites that are transcriptionally silent are missed. If the host-virus RNA chimera is spliced, the exact junction site can be lost. Integrated viral DNA was first analyzed by PCR-based methods, such as Detection of Integrated Papillomavirus Sequences by ligation-mediated PCR (DIPS-PCR) and Amplification of Papillomavirus Oncogene and Transcripts (APOT) [ , ]; however, whole genome DNA sequencing (WGS) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) using the Illumina platform are now more widely used. RNA-seq is more sensitive than WGS because active genes express multiple copies of their RNA transcripts. The Illumina platform produces millions of short reads (75 bp-150 bp). In contrast, single-molecule sequencing technology (SMRT-seq) [ ] (Pacific Biosciences (PacBio)) produces longer reads (up to >50 kb) that allow better mapping, although the throughput is lower and the number of reads is smaller. In the current study, we combined RNA-seq, SMRT-seq and targeted DNA-seq to detect MmuPV1 integration sites in MmuPV1-infected tissues and tumors. We provide direct evidence that the viral DNA is integrated in cells infected by MmuPV1.

## Results

## RNA-seq analysis of integrated MmuPV1 DNA in MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues
Persistent MmuPV1 infection induces papillomas (warts), which are benign tumors. shows a benign tumor with an inner stromal layer, an intermediate layer of hyperplastic and koilocytotic keratinocytes, and an outer layer of terminally differentiated and cornified cells. The life cycle of MmuPV1 is similar to the life cycle of all other papillomaviruses and is tightly linked to keratinocyte differentiation. The viral early genes (E2, E6 and E7) are expressed in the undifferentiated cells and the viral late genes (L1 and L2) are expressed only in highly differentiated cells in the outer layer ( ) of the tumor with atypical epidermal hyperplasia, koilocytes and hyperkeratosis ( ).
 We used RNA-seq analysis to search for MmuPV1 integration sites, in both the viral and mouse genomes, in nine MmuPV1-infection-induced tumors (warts) and three tumor-free MmuPV-1-infected tissues [ ]. We defined two types of paired-end reads as virus-host chimeric reads: chimeric paired reads and chimeric junction reads (CJRs) ( ). The proportion of virus-host chimeric reads is much higher in tumor tissues (1.9‰ - 7‰ of total viral reads) than in infected, tumor-free tissues (0.6‰ - 1.3‰ of total viral reads) ( ). For example, although tumor tissue sample #5 had a slightly lower number of viral reads (949,720 reads) than non-tumor tissue sample #10 (971,642 reads), the proportion of its virus-host chimeric reads was 10 times higher in the tumor tissue (6.4‰) than in the tumor-free tissue (0.6‰). This result is consistent with reports that, for high-risk HPV, high levels of integrated DNA correlates with the grade of cervical lesions [ , ].
 If the E2 gene is disrupted by HPV integration, the expression of the viral oncogenes E6 and E7 is increased because transcriptional suppression by E2 is lost [ ]. When RNA-seq was used to map the virus-host CJRs to MmuPV1 genome, the majority of the CJRs were within the E2 gene and the overlapping E4 gene ( ). We previously showed that when MmuPV1-specific RNAs were mapped on the viral genome, there was a marked reduction in the RNA reads that mapped to the E2/E4 region of the viral genome in warts [ ]. We speculated that there were fewer RNAs that map to this region because this region is frequently interrupted in integrated copies of the viral genome. The E2/E4 region is part of the 5’ non-coding region for L1 mRNA [ ]. Thus, if integration of the viral genome disrupts this region, the expression of L1 RNA and L1 protein would be blocked.
We mapped all virus-host CJRs identified by RNA-seq to the mouse genome. After excluding the 86 CJRs that were derived from RNA splicing, we identified 14,159 CJRs from nine tumors and 295 CJRs from tumor-free tissues. The mapped integration sites were distributed on all of the mouse chromosomes ( ), with the RNA CJRs mapping more frequently to the promoter, UTR and exon regions and less frequently to the intergenic regions, relative to the fractions these regions represent in the mouse genome ( ). There were multiple integrations in Malat1, Flg, Krt1, Dsp, Krt10, Hrnr, and Rn7sk ( and ).

## Verification of RNA-seq integration site data by RACE-SMRT-seq
To confirm the presence of integration sites in the host genes with multiple MmuPV1 integration sites identified by RNA-seq, we performed 5’ rapid amplification of cDNA ends (5’ RACE) using total RNA (1 μg) extracted from the tumor sample #6 and 3’ RACE using total RNA (1 μg) extracted from the pooled tumor samples #2, #4 and #6, followed by Single Molecule Real-Time sequencing (SMRT-seq) (Figs and ). SMRT-seq of the MmuPV1-specific primer-derived 5’ and 3’ RACE products yielded 280 and 694 clustered chimeric long reads, respectively. We mapped these clustered virus-host chimeric long reads, respectively, to 97 and 529 annotated mouse genes ( and Tables). Fewer long reads were recovered because SMRT-seq produced fewer reads (~40,000) than RNA-seq (~100 million). As expected, most of the chimeric junctions (breakpoints) in the long reads mapped to the E2/E4 region of the MmuPV1 genome ( ). Genes that had multiple integration sites in the SMRT-seq analysis were Krt10, Krt6, Malat1 and Dsp ( ). Using RACE-SMRT-seq, we were able to verify MmuPV1 integrations in more than 73% of the top 15 genes (11/15) that were identified by RNA-seq ( ). The lengths of these genes ranged from 0.3 kb—87.6 kb.
 The Krt10 gene was one of the genes in which multiple integrations were identified in MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues by both RNA-seq and RACE-SMRT-seq. As shown in , in the viral DNAs that were integrated into exon 1 of Krt10, the viral genome was linearized within E2 region (also see Figs and ). The chimeric full-length viral-Krt10 transcripts detected by a specific viral primer are represented in , showing the three chimeric RNAs transcribed from the Krt10 promoter that were detected by 5’ RACE-SMRT-seq and the three chimeric RNAs that were transcribed from the viral promoters that were detected by 3’ RACE-SMRT-seq ( and Tables). Using the MmuPV1-Krt10 full-length transcript C8112 as a template, we were able to map the RNA-seq generated short reads, including the short CJRs, to this template ( ). The data clearly show that MmuPV1 integrations in the Krt10 exon 1 region can be mapped using high-throughput technologies.

## Targeted DNA-seq of MmuPV1 DNA integration sites
We performed targeted DNA-seq to identify additional MmuPV1 integration sites. DNA was prepared from MmuPV1-induced tumor (ear and muzzle) and MmuPV1-infected, tumor-free (ear) tissues from the same mouse #2 ( ) to avoid animal to animal variation. We showed, using ddPCR, that there were 6,630 and 34,853 copies of the viral genome per cell in ear tumor and muzzle tumor, respectively, and 2,547 viral genome copies per cell in a tumor-free ear tissue ( ). We used gel electrophoresis to separate the extrachromosomal viral DNA from the chromosomal DNA ( , gel panel). The chromosomal DNA that was recovered from the gel was fragmented by shearing, end-repaired, and dA-tailed before being ligated to a double-stranded 3’ oligo adaptor containing a 3’ T overhang. The viral-host chimeric fragments were selectively amplified using an adaptor-specific primer in combination with one of three forward, MmuPV1-specific, E2 primers designed based on our RNA-seq results (see flowchart). This approach allowed us to selectively detect one of the two junctions for each of the integrated MmuPV1 DNAs that were broken in E2. As expected from viral genome copy number results ( ), DNA-seq using the same amount of DNA for each sample showed that there were two times more virus-host DNA CJRs (7,007 CJRs) in the MmuPV1 ear tumor than that (2,753 CJRs) in MmuPV1-infected, tumor-free ear ( ). However, we only detected 4,593 DNA CJRs in the muzzle tumor despite the fact that this tumor tissue had 34,853 copies of the viral genome per cell, suggesting there were many more extrachromosomal viral DNA copies in the muzzle tumor than in the ear tumor tissue. As expected from the RNA-seq analysis data and our targeted DNA-seq strategy, most of the DNA CJRs amplified were mapped to the viral E2/E4 region, only a small number of CJRs were from the L2 region ( ) downstream of E2. The targeted DNA-seq amplification was able to pick up integration sites in L2 because L2 is near E2.
 Mapping the CJRs from all three samples to the mouse genome showed that integrated MmuPV1 DNA was widely distributed throughout the genome ( ). We found ~93% of the MmuPV1 integration sites were present in intergenic and intronic regions of the mouse genome. Although only 4% of the integration sites were in the coding exons, this is more than was expected (P<0.001) ( ) because the coding regions make up only ~2.6% of the genome (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/GCF_000001635.20/). In the intergenic regions, there appear to be more than the expected number of viral integration sites in the long interspersed nuclear elements (LINEs) ( ) (P<0.01), which is similar to what has been reported for HPV integration [ ]. Among 1,209 host genes with CJRs identified by targeted DNA-seq, we found virus-host RNA CJRs in 231 (19.1%) by RNA-seq ( and ). Among the top 15 of 100 genes ( ) with multiple MmuPV1 integration sites identified by targeted DNA-seq, we identified, by RNA-seq, expressed chimeric RNA transcripts in nine (60%) ( ).
Among the 1,048 host genes with ≥ 2 DNA CJRs, 569 were identified from ear tumors, 282 from muzzle tumors, and 197 from MmuPV1-infected, tumor-free ears ( and ). We obtained, from an MmuPV1 induced ear tumor, 487 more genes with MmuPV1 integrations than were obtained from the MmuPV1-infected, tumor-free ear. There were 40 genes in which we detected MmuPV1 integrations in both ear and muzzle tumors but not in the tumor-free tissue ( ), which suggests that there might have been post-integration selection for the cells with MmuPV1 integration in these genes.
 

## MmuPV1 integration can affect the expression of the host genes
Although RNA-seq has been used to profile the differential expression of host genes in MmuPV1-infected cells, it was difficult to directly determine the effects of MmuPV1 integration on host gene expression because the populations of infected cells with MmuPV1 DNA integrations are very heterogeneous and some fraction of the MmuPV1-infected cells in the papilloma tissues may not have any integrated MmuPV1 DNA. On the other hand, majority of the integrated MmuPV1 DNA that was integrated in the intergenic regions ( ) were not transcribed ( ). This is presumably due to the lack of a nearby host promoter in the intergenic regions. The MmuPV1 DNAs that are integrated in genes are much more likely to be detected in the chimeric RNA analyses. We analyzed the relative expression of the 40 genes with MmuPV1 integrations identified by targeted DNA-seq from two different tumor sites from the same animal ( ). We first compared the RNA-seq data from three ear tumors ( , samples #1, #4 and #7) and three MmuPV1-infected, tumor-free ears (samples #10, #11 and #12) from the same 3 animals ( ), and then tumor ear (sample #4) vs tumor-free ear (sample #11) from the mouse #2 ( ). We found that there was a significant (P<0.05) differential expression (≥ 1.4 or ≤ -1.4-fold, RPKM ≥ 0.5) of 8 genes in the ear tumors, of which one (Cln8) had a viral DNA integrated in a 6-kb terminal exon and was upregulated. Seven genes (Pdzrn3, Csf2rb, Dmd, Plekha5, Camta1, Gpc6 and Rasgrf2) which had viral DNA integrated in their introns were downregulated ( ). We also found RNA CJRs that involved the Cln8, Pdzrn3, Camta1 and Plekha5 genes ( ), but did not find CJRs for Csf2rb, Dmd, Gpc6 and Rasgrf2.
We found multiple MmuPV1 integration sites in genes that were either highly expressed or weakly expressed ( and ). For example, the Malat1 and Krt10 genes had hundreds to thousands of detectable RNA reads and the Par-3 family cell polarity regulator or partitioning defective 3 homolog (Pard3) and glutamate receptor interacting protein 1 (Grip1) had only a few (<20) detectable RNA reads. We were unable to detect a change in the expression of these host genes when the tumor samples were compared to tumor-free, MmuPV1-infected tissues.
 We also analyzed the expression of Krt10 and Fabp5, two highly expressed genes that had multiple MmuPV1 integration sites in tumor tissues and performed RNA ISH using RNAscope technology. We found that there was a reduction of both Krt10 and Fabp5 RNA levels in the MmuPV1-induced tail tumors 21 days after viral infection. This reduction was associated with a high level of viral E6/E7 RNA compared with the tumor-free areas that had little or no viral E6/E7 RNA ( ). Quantitative analysis done by hybridization to the Krt10 and Fabp5 RNAs showed that there was a 41.4% reduction of Krt10 and 38% reduction of Fabp5 in the regions of the tumors that expressed E6/E7 compared to the adjacent normal tissues that did not express E6/E7 ( , bar graphs). These data suggest that the reduction in the levels of Krt10 and Fabp5 RNAs is a consequence of the loss of cellular differentiation and is not direct consequence of viral DNA integration.
The Pard3 and Grip1 genes were expressed at low levels; however, we were able to recover MmuPV1 integration sites in these genes by both RNA-seq and targeted DNA-seq ( and and Tables). Pard3 controls cell polarity and plays an important role in epithelial cell tumorigenesis [ ]. Grip1 is an adaptor protein composed of seven PDZ domains that participates diverse protein-protein interactions [ ]. Using siRNAs to knock down the expression of Pard3 and Grip1 in mouse primary keratinocytes significantly promoted cell proliferation ( ). Knocking down Pard3 had a greater effect than knocking down Grip1. Flow cytometry shows that knockdown of Pard3 and Grip1 was associated with an increase in cell cycle transition ( ). We found that knockdown of Pard3 reduced the number of cells in G0/G1 and increased cell number of entering G2/M, whereas knockdown of Grip1 accelerated the transition from G0/G1 to S ( ).

## Identification of microhomology sequences at MmuPV1 integration sites
Microhomology sequences (MHS) are present at aberrant HIV-1 integration sites that were not mediated by integrase (IN) [ – ] and at the integration sites of adeno-associated virus, papillomavirus and MCV [ , , ]. We analyzed the virus-host junction sequences by both RNA-seq and targeted DNA-seq by comparing the sequences of the MmuPV1 genome and the mouse genome. As discussed earlier, the CJRs identified by RNA-seq in which the junctions were mediated by virus-host RNA splicing were excluded from the analysis. We found MHS in the range of 2–10 nts at the junction region of most of the CJRs. MHS, the defining hallmark of microhomology-mediated end-jointing (MMEJ) [ , ], were significantly enriched in both data sets ( ). As shown in , MmuPV1 MHS of 4 nts were found for Krt10, 5 nts for Malat1 and Grip1 in the virus-host junctions identified by RNA-seq.
 We used nested RT-PCR to confirm the MHS in the chimeric junctions of MmuPV1-Krt10 transcripts in tumor tissues based on the position of CJRs identified by RNA-seq. As shown in , RT-PCR, using primer pairs for Krt10 in combination with MmuPV1, we detected a chimeric MmuPV1-Krt10 RNA of the expected size from total RNA extracted from a MmuPV1 tumor tissue ( gel panel, lane 3), but not a negative control Gapdh RNA ( gel panel, lane 2). Sequencing of the purified RT-PCR amplicons confirmed the MHS of 4 nts in the RNA junction of chimeric Krt10-MmuPV1 transcripts ( , right chromatogram).

## Altered expression of the DNA repair factors H2ax, Fen1, Cdk1, Plk1, Polθ, Mdc1, and phosphorylation of H2AX and CtIP in MmuPV1 infection-induced tumors
Papillomavirus infection activates the host DNA damage response [ , ]. Many DNA repair factors contribute to MMEJ in mammalian and yeast cells [ , – ]. To determine whether the expression of the host factors involved in MRN (MRE11-RAD50-NBS1)-CtIP-dependent MMEJ might be altered during MmuPV1 infection and papilloma induction, we analyzed two separate RNA-seq datasets [ , ] to determine if there was an increase in the expression of DNA repair genes, particularly in the 21 genes involved in MMEJ [ ] in MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues compared to the MmuPV1-infected tumor-free or normal control tissues ( ). We found that there was, in MmuPV1-induced tumors, increased RNA levels for the DNA double-strand break (DSB) responder H2ax (1.7-fold) [ , ], flap endonuclease 1 (Fen1, 1.6-fold) [ , ], two mitotic kinases Cdk1 (1.5-fold) and Plk1 (1.3 -fold), and DNA polymerase theta (Polθ, 1.5-fold) [ – ], but there was a decrease in the expression of a CtIP inhibitor, mediator of DNA damage checkpoint 1 (Mdc1, -1.4-fold) [ ] ( ). The increase in the levels of expression in these genes was greater in the MmuPV1-induced tumors than in the MmuPV1-infected tumor-free tissues ( ). We verified the increased RNA expression of MMEJ-related H2ax, Fen1, Cdk1, Plk1, and Polθ and decreased RNA expression of Mdc1 in the MmuPV1 tumor tissues by real-time RT-qPCR ( ). We also verified the increased phosphorylation of H2AX protein at S139 (also called γH2AX) and the increased expression of total FEN1 protein in the two MmuPV1 tumor tissues (samples 1 and 4 in ) relative to the two tumor-free tissues (samples 10 and 12 in ) ( ).
 CtIP and FEN1 are important factors in the MMEJ-mediated DSB repair pathway that mediate DNA end-repair in ways that permit microhomology mediated end-joining [ – ]. Cdk1 and Plk1 are two protein kinases that are responsible for the phosphorylation and activation of CtIP [ , ]. Thus, the increased Cdk1 and Plk1 expression in MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues may promote the expression and phosphorylation of CtIP. Immunoblot assays were performed for CtIP on two MmuPV1 ear tumor tissues (samples 1 and 4 in ) and two MmuPV1-infected, tumor-free ear tissues (samples 10 and 12 in ). There was an increase in the amount of CtIP protein in the two MmuPV1 tumor tissues relative to the two tumor-free tissues ( ). CtIP that was phosphorylated at S327 was found only in two MmuPV1 ear tumors, but not in two tumor-free ear tissues ( ). These data suggest that the increased expression of Cdk1 and Plk1 in the tumor ears could be responsible for the increased phosphorylation of CtIP [ ].

## Discussion
The MmuPV1-infected mouse can be used as a model of human papillomavirus pathogenesis [ , , ]. Cutaneous, mucosal and blood infections of mice with MmuPV1 lead to the development of benign papillomas (warts) and to high-grade precancerous lesions and carcinomas [ , , ]. We found that MmuPV1 integration is common in MmuPV1-induced tumors in the infected mouse ear, tail, and muzzle. Like integrated HPV DNA [ , ], integrated MmuPV1 were often linearized in the region of the E2 gene ( ). This is likely to be the result of post-integration selection on the growth of the cells and not preferential integration in this region of the viral genome. Linearization of the MmuPV1 genome in E2 prevents the expression of the normal MmuPV1 early transcripts by displacing a poly-A signal that is used for viral early RNAs.
We found that MmuPV1 DNA could be inserted in many places in the host genome, although we did not determine what fraction of cells in the tumor have integrated viral DNA. The majority of the host genome is either intergenic or intronic, and, as expected, we found MmuPV1 DNA was frequently integrated in the intergenic and intronic regions. There are also integrations in repeat sequences. Only a small fraction (4%) of the integrated MmuPV1 DNA was found in coding exons; however, coding exons comprise only ~2.6% of the mouse genome. Although MmuPV1 DNA was frequently integrated in intergenic regions, only a small fraction of the MmuPV1 DNA that was integrated in intergenic regions was expressed (Figs and ). This is probably due to fact that there are no host promoters in the intergenic regions. For the integrated MmuPV1 DNAs that were linearized in the E2 region, expression of the viral sequences would require a poly-A signal be provided by the adjacent host sequences [ ].
Using RNA-seq and RACE-SMRT-seq, we have identified multiple MmuPV1 integration sites in a group of genes whose lengths ranged from 0.3 kb to 87.6 kb ( ). These genes include both highly expressed and poorly expressed genes. It was difficult to determine the relative levels of expression for these genes by RNA-seq analysis in the MmuPV1 tumor and non-tumor tissues because the tissues were intermingled. However, by using RNA ISH (RNAscope technology), we showed that there was reduced expression of Krt10 and Fabp5 in MmuPV1 tumor tissues. We think that the decreased expression of these two genes was a consequence of the virus inhibiting differentiation, a hallmark of papillomavirus-induced lesions, and was not directly related to the places MmuPV1 DNA was integrated.
MMEJ is a Ku-independent, Polθ-dependent, DNA DSB repair pathway [ , – ] that could be involved aberrant IN-independent HIV-1 integration [ – ] and adeno-associated virus, papillomavirus and MCV integration[ , , , ]. We showed that a majority of the virus-host junctions bear 2–10 nts of MHS between MmuPV1 and host DNA. By RT-PCR, we also identified these MHS in the MmuPV1-Krt10 RNA transcripts in a MmuPV1 tumor tissue. Our data show that, in this respect, MmuPV1 and HPV integrations are similar [ , ].
Five steps (end resection, annealing of the MHS, flap removal, fill-in synthesis and ligation) and more than ten host factors are involved in MMEJ. The first step for MMEJ is a limited resection of the ends of the DSB by host nucleases, which exposes the microhomologous sequences [ , ]. The host nucleases CtIP and FEN1 are two of the factors that generate a 3’ overhang, setting the stage for Polθ-mediated MMEJ [ , , , , – ]. To be active, CtIP needs to be phosphorylated at S327, S723 and T859 by three host serine/threonine protein kinases: CDK1, Aurora A, and PLK1 [ , , ]. We found that MmuPV1 tumors displayed the increased levels of both Fen1 RNA and protein and had higher levels of both Cdk1 and Plk1 RNA when compared to MmuPV1-infected tissues that had not become tumors. Increased CtIP expression and S327 phosphorylation were found only in MmuPV1 tumor tissues, not in MmuPV1-infected tumor-free tissues. A recent report indicated that CtIP phosphorylation at S327 by CDK1/Aurora A triggers CtIP binding to PLK1 which facilitates PLK1 phosphorylation of CtIP at S723, thereby initiating the end resection [ ].
The initial MmuPV1 DNA integrations must take place in infected but still normal tissues. Thus, the increased expression of the MMEJ host factors would not have played a role in the initiating events. However, the amount of integrated viral DNA is higher in the tumor tissues and there are step-wise increases in the expression of these host genes from normal tissues, to tumor-free MmuPV1 infected tissues, and then to MmuPV1 tumors ( ). This increase might play a role in the increased levels of viral DNA integration in tumors ( ).
Whether MmuPV1 infection contributes to the DNA break/damage of the viral and host genomes that leads to viral DNA integration remains to be investigated. We found that increased expression of γH2AX, a sensitive molecular marker of DNA damage [ , ], was detected only in MmuPV1-induced tumor, but not from MmuPV1-infected, tumor-free tissues. If viral factors are involved, the roles they play are not defined. Integration of viral DNA would be facilitated by the very high levels of viral DNA that are present in the infected cells with increased expression of DNA repair factors. Papillomavirus E7 in cell cultures is known to activate the expression of both ATM-and ATR-mediated DNA damage genes whose expression is critical for viral DNA replication [ , ]. E7 in normal human foreskin keratinocytes induces mitotic defects and host genome instability with increased γH2AX expression [ – ], presumably by promoting host DNA replication and increased both homologous recombination and MMEJ of a GFP reporter DNA with DSBs in U2OS cells [ ], an osteosarcoma cell line that does not support papillomavirus infection.
Here we propose a model of how MmuPV1infection may lead to viral integration and tumorigenesis ( ). In this model, MmuPV1 infection of host keratinocytes induces a DNA damage response that is important for viral DNA replication and also triggers instability of both viral and host genome, probably through the actions of E7 and/or other viral and host proteins. If the viral genome is linearized, it could be accidently inserted into any nicked or damaged region of the host genome, most commonly by the MMEJ-mediated DNA repair pathway. Although viral DNA integration is a rare event during virus infection and a dead end for productive MmuPV1 infection, integrated copies of MmuPV1 DNA accumulate in the host genome as a function of time following MmuPV1 infection. The increase in integrated viral DNA is accompanied by increased expression of H2ax, Fen1, Cdk1, Plk1, and Polθ and CtIP phosphorylation. This increase in the amount of integrated MmuPV1 DNA promotes tumor formation. High levels of integrated viral DNA through the linearized E2 region causes an increase in the expression of the viral oncogenes [ – ] which leads to clonal expansion of the cells, tumor progression, and ultimately to cancer.
 

## Materials and methods

## Ethic statements
All procedures that involved animals and their maintenance were conducted in accordance with protocols approved by the University of Wisconsin Medical School Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC, Protocol number: M02478). Mice were housed at McArdle Laboratory Animal Care Unit in strict accordance with guidelines approved by the Association for Assessment of Laboratory Animal Care (AALAC), at the University of Wisconsin Medical School.

## MmuPV1 mouse model and sample collection
A description of the MmuPV1 mouse model was previously reported [ ]. Briefly, three immunodeficient athymic BALB/c FoxN1nu/nu female mice (6–8 weeks old) were infected with a fixed amount of MmuPV1 (108 viral genome equivalents (VGE) per infection site) after scarifying skin of the tail, ear, and muzzle. The wart tissues from the three anatomical sites (ear, tail and muzzle) were collected from each animal after six months or at a specified time post-infection. The samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for RNA/DNA/protein isolation. Papilloma tissues were also excised, fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (5 μm thick) were prepared for H&E staining and subsequent analyses.

## Total RNA sequencing and bioinformatics
RNAs extracted from mouse tissues using the TriPure reagent (Roche, #11667165001) were treated with the TURBO DNA-free Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #AM1907) to eliminate any residual of DNA. cDNA libraries were constructed following the Illumina Stranded Total RNA protocol (Illumina, #RS-122-2201) and sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 2500 with 2×125 nts modality and a depth of 100 million reads per sample. The reads were trimmed using cutadapt v 1.16 (DOI:10.14806/ej.17.1.200) to filter out the low quality reads and remove adaptor sequences. Quality control was performed using the FastQC (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk) package and reads were checked for contamination with FastqScreen v 0.9.3 (https://doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.15931.2). cDNA sequences were matched to the sequences in MmuPV1 (NC_014326) and the mouse genome (GRCm38-mm10) and the reads were aligned using STAR v 2.5.2b aligner package [ ]. Paired-end reads are two reads derived from the same cDNA fragment with one read from the adapter ligated to the end of the fragment that corresponds to the 5’ end of the RNA and the other from the adapter ligated to the end of the fragment that corresponds to 3’ end of the RNA. The paired-end reads that perfectly aligned with only the MmuPV1 or the mouse genome were removed, and the remaining “chimeric reads” were analyzed. We identified two types of chimeric reads: chimeric paired reads and chimeric junction reads. The chimeric paired reads are the paired-end reads in which one read is fully aligned to MmuPV1 genome (as defined by aligner), while the other read is perfectly aligned to mouse genome. This suggests that there is an integration junction between the two reads. A chimeric junction read (CJR) is a read that is partially aligned to the both MmuPV1 and mouse genomes for at least 20 nts. Although a small fraction of the host/virus RNA junctions derive from splicing events, we have excluded those in which the junctions were created by splicing from the data we present (see ). Microhomology calculations were based on the number of overlapped nucleotides identified by STAR between virus and host sequences at the junctions of chimeric reads (the integration site junction reads). Raw data and the analyzed RNA-seq data supporting the findings in this study have been deposited in the NCBI GEO database (the accession #: GSE163537).

## Rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) and single molecule real-time sequencing (SMRT-seq)
The Smart RACE cDNA amplification kit (Clontech, #634858) was used, following the manufacturer’s instructions, to perform 5′ /3’ RACE assays with 1 μg/reaction of total RNA as the template. The primers used in the assays are listed in . The 5’ RACE products were sequenced by SMRT-seq using PacBio Iso-seq technology (Pacific Biosciences). The 3’ RACE products were size selected using BluePippin (Sage science, MA) to remove products smaller than 1500-bp. The details of SMRT-seq were described previously [ ].
PacBio SMRT-seq Analysis Package (smrtpipe.py v2.0, with default settings) was used to process the sequence data into circular consensus sequences (CCS) that were used for further analyses. The CCS reads were aligned to MmuPV1 genome (NC_014326) and mouse genome (GRCm38-mm10) by STAR-long (STARlong—runMode alignReads \—readNameSeparator space \—outFilterMultimapScoreRange 1 \—outFilterMismatchNmax 2000 \—winAnchorMultimapNmax 200 \—coreGapNoncan -20 \—scoreGapGCAG -4 \—scoreGapATAC -8 \—scoreDelBase -1 \—scoreDelOpen -1 \—scoreInsOpen -1 \—scoreInsBase -1 \—seedSearchLmax 30 \—seedSearchStartLmax 50 \—seedPerReadNmax 100000 \—seedPerWindowNmax 1000 \—alignTranscriptsPerReadNmax 100000 \—alignTranscriptsPerWindowNmax 10000 \—alignEndsType Local) after removing the adapter sequences, poly (A) tails, and the artificial chimeras. The clustering step was then performed using hierarchical n*log(n) alignment and iterative cluster merging to cluster similar isoforms together. The chimeric transcripts are defined as CCS reads with at least 50 bp aligned to the mouse genome and at least 100 bp aligned to MmuPV1 genome.

## Mouse genomic DNA extraction and droplet digital PCR (ddPCR)
Mouse tissues were digested with proteinase K at 50°C overnight and the genomic DNA was precipitated with ethanol in the presence of sodium chloride. The DNA concentration was measured by Nanodrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
The number of MmuPV1 DNA copies per cell in the infected mouse tissues was determined by ddPCR. Three genomic DNA samples were prepared from MmuPV1-infected mouse tissues and one control genomic DNA sample was prepared from a normal mouse tissue free from MmuPV1 infection. All of the DNA samples were diluted each to 10 ng/μl with a low-EDTA TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, pH = 8.0). The mouse transferrin receptor Tfrc gene was used as an internal reference gene to determine the input cell number that was used for viral DNA copy number determinations. Briefly, mouse genomic DNAs from MmuPV1-infected tissues were diluted 1:500 in control DNA. Each sample of approximately 10 ng of diluted genomic DNA was used, in duplicate 20-μl ddPCR reactions containing the primers and probes for the MmuPV1 ( ) and Tfrc (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #4458366). Droplet generation (BioRad QX200) and PCR (BioRad T100) were performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (BioRad). The cycling protocol started with a 95°C enzyme activation step for 10 min and followed by 40 cycles of a two-step cycling (94°C for 30 seconds and 60°C for 30 seconds at ramping rate of 2°C/sec). The final extension time was 10 min at 98°C. BioRad QuantaSoft 1.5.38.1118 was used to process the data. The cell number in the samples was estimated as one-half of the Tfrc copy number because each cell has 2 copies of the Tfrc gene. After normalizing the data, the mean MmuPV1 DNA copy number per cell was calculated for each sample from the duplicate ddPCR reactions.

## Targeted DNA sequencing (DNA-seq)
One microgram of genomic DNA was fractionated by gel electrophoresis to remove the majority of the episomal viral genomic DNA (the size of the genome is ~8 kb). The host DNA was recovered and sheared into 300–500 bp long fragments using a Covaris M220 Focused-ultrasonicator (Covaris). The fragmented DNAs (~500 ng) were end repaired and dA-tailed using the NEBNext Ultra Ligation kit (NEB, #E7445) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A partially double stranded linker (5’-GTAATACGACTCACTATAGCGCTGCGCTTAAGCGACT-3’, 5’–PO4-GTCGCTTAAGCGCAG-3’-C6) with a 3’ T overhang was ligated to the genomic DNA fragments using the NEB Quick Ligation Kit (NEB, M2200). Virus-specific primers (Pr2976/Pr3277/Pr3742) were designed based on RNA-seq results and were used to selectively amplify the integration site junctions. Two rounds of 20 PCR cycles were conducted to enrich the integration junctions in the sequencing libraries using the Phusion High-Fidelity PCR Kit (NEB, #E0553). Paired-end sequencing using the 150-bp modality was performed on the HiSeq3000 sequencer according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina). Reads were preprocessed in a same way as described in “Total RNA sequencing” and aligned to the chimeric mouse-virus genome using STAR v 2.5.2b with the following parameters: “—outFilterIntronMotifs RemoveNoncanonicalUnannotated—outSAMstrandField None—outFilterType BySJout—outFilterMultimapNmax 20—alignSJoverhangMin 8—alignSJDBoverhangMin 1—outFilterMismatchNmax 999—outFilterMismatchNoverLmax 0.3—alignIntronMin 20—alignIntronMax 1000000—alignMatesGapMax 1000000—clip3pAdapterSeq -—readFilesIn R1.trim.fastq.gz R2.trim.fastq.gz—readFilesCommand zcat—runThreadN 32—outFileNamePrefix OutputName—outSAMtype BAM Unsorted—chimSegmentMin 20”. Once “chimeric junction reads” and “chimeric paired reads” were identified an additional alignment was performed using the default parameters to filter out poorly mapped reads. Raw data and the analyzed targeted DNA-seq data supporting the findings in this study have been deposited in the NCBI GEO database (accession #: GSE163681).

## Computational analyses of the MmuPV1 integration sites in DNA repeat regions and identification of microhomologous sequences (MHS)
To ask if there are MmuPV1 integration sites in repeat regions in the mouse genome we looked for MmuPV1 in the following repeat elements: LINEs, SINEs, LTR elements, satellite, and simple repeats, which respectively comprise 21.2%,13.4%, 8.7%, 2.6%, and 1.5% of the mouse genome (http://www.repeatmasker.org/species/mm.html) [ ]. The fractions served as a measure of the amounts of the DNA in each type of repeat which could be compared with the frequency of the MmuPV1 integrations observed in these repeat regions in the mouse genome. The significance of the data was determined using a chi-squared test. The significance of the data in multiple comparisons was adjusted using the Bonferroni correction.
The microhomologies at the virus-host chimeric junctions were determined using STAR v 2.5.2b. The expected frequencies at which MHS would arise at the junctions was calculated as 0.25(length of MH unit). The significance of the data was determined using a chi-squared test and the significance of the data in multiple comparisons was adjusted using the Bonferroni correction.

## RNAscope in situ hybridization (ISH)
The in situ detection of viral and host transcripts was performed as described [ ]. Briefly, MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues were fixed using 10% formalin in PBS (pH 6.8–7.2) for 20 h at room temperature, dehydrated, and embedded in paraffin. The tissues were cut into 5 μm sections using a microtome. RNA in situ hybridization (RNA-ISH) was performed using RNAscope technology (Advanced Cell Diagnostics or ACD, Newark, CA) with RNAscope 2.5 HD detection reagents—BROWN (ACD, # 322310) for single staining or RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Detection Reagents V2 (ACD, # 323110) for florescence dual staining as recommended by the manufacturer. To remove the signal from viral genomic DNA, all tissue sections were rehydrated, digested first with RNAscope Protease Plus for 30 min, and then with 20 units of DNase I (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #EN0521, diluted in 1 × reaction buffer with MgCl2) for 30 min at 40°C. The single-plex RNAscope assay uses an antisense probe to detect the specific RNA; the standard probes are referred to as channel 1 probes. MmuPV1 L1 probe (ACD, #473278) for channel 1 was used for single (brown) staining. For dual staining, one of the probes can be in channel 1, but the second probe must be specifically designed by ACD for use in the dual staining approach (a “channel 2” probe). In the current study, a MmuPV1 E6E7 (ACD, #409771-C2) probe was created for channel 2 staining and was mixed at 1:50 dilution with a mouse Krt10 (ACD, #457901) or Fabp5 (ACD, #504331) probe for channel 1 before hybridization. The signal was detected using the TSA Fluorescein Evaluation Kit (Perkin Elmer, # NEL760001KT) and scanned at 20× resolution using an Aperio CS2 Digital Pathology Scanner (Leica Biosystem). The intensities of the hybridized RNA signals in the tumor tissue, relative to normal tissue surrounding the tumor, were quantified by using ImageJ software (https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/).

## Cell culture and siRNA knockdown
Primary mouse keratinocytes from newborn C57Bl/6NCr mouse were cultivated as described [ ] in the presence of Rho kinase inhibitor Y-27632 (Enzo Life Sciences, #ALX-270-333). SMARTpool human siRNAs targeting Pard3 (#M-040036-01-0005) and Grip1(#M-064716-00-0005) were purchased from Dharmacon. Non-targeting control siRNA (Dharmacon, # D-001210-01) served as a non-specific siRNA negative control. Mouse keratinocytes plated without the Rho kinase inhibitor Y-27632 [ ] were transfected twice with each siRNA (40 nM) at an interval of 24 h using the LipoJet In Vitro Transfection Kit (Ver. II) (SignaGen Laboratories, #SL100468). Total protein and total RNA extracts were prepared 24 h after the second siRNA transfection.

## Cell proliferation and flow cytometry
For the cell proliferation assays, the dehydrogenase activities in living cells were measured using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) from Dojindo Molecular Technologies. Briefly, mouse primary keratinocytes were incubated with 10% WST (water-soluble tetrazolium salt)-8 in culture medium for 1 h at 37°C, and the absorbance at 450 nm of the cell culture medium (measured in six repeats) was used to calculate the relative cell viability.
For the cell cycle distribution analysis, 1.5 million cells were fixed with 70% ethanol at 4°C overnight, washed with PBS, and then incubated in PBS containing 200 ug/ml RNase A (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #P3566), 20 μg/ml propidium iodide (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #EN0531), and 0.1% Triton X-100 (Promega, #H5142) at room temperature for 30 min. Cell cycle distribution was determined by flow cytometry using LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences). The data were analyzed by FlowJo software (FlowJo).

## RT-PCR and RT-qPCR
Total RNA was extracted using the TriPure reagent (Roche, #11667165001), treated with DNase TURBO (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #AM1907), and converted to cDNA using MuLV reverse transcriptase and random hexamers. PCR amplification was performed with AmpliTaq (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the primers listed in . RT-qPCR was carried out using TaqMan Gene Expression Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #4369016) with gene-specific probes of Cdk1(#Mm00772472_m1), Plk1(#Mm00440924_m1), Fen1 (#Mm01700195_m1), Polθ (#Mm01170059_m1), Mdc1(#Mm01273851_g1), or H2ax (Mm00515990_s1).

## Western blot and antibodies
For primary mouse keratinocytes, total protein was prepared from 2 million cells by directly lysing the cells in 200 μl of 2× SDS protein sample buffer containing 5% 2- mercaptoethanol (2-ME). Mouse tissues were dissected and homogenized in RIPA buffer (500 μl/10 mg tissues; Boston BioProducts, #BP-115X) with the addition of cocktail of protease inhibitors for chymotrypsin, thermolysin, papain, pronase, pancreatic extract, trypsin (Roche, #04693159001) and phosphatase inhibitors (sodium fluoride, sodium orthovanadate, sodium pyrophosphate and β-glycerophosphate) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #78420). 24 μl of the lysate was then mixed with 6 μl 4× SDS-loading buffer with addition of 2-ME, heat denatured at 95°C for 10 minutes, and loaded onto a NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4–12% gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After electrophoresis in 1× MOPS SDS buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, # NP0001), the fractionated proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and blocked for 1 h with 5% skimmed milk in 1× TBS (Tris-buffered saline) containing 0.05% Tween-20 (TTBS). The primary antibody diluted in TTBS and incubated with the membrane overnight at 4°C followed by 1 h at room temperature incubation. After washing the membrane three times with 1× TTBS buffer, the membranes were then incubated with an appropriate peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody diluted in 2% milk/TTBS. After extensive washes with 1× TTBS, the bound antibody on the membrane was detected with SuperSignal West Pico (Thermo Fisher Scientific, # 34080), visualized and captured by an ImageLab system (Bio-Rad).
The following antibodies were used for Western blotting: anti-Pard3 (Abcam, #ab191204), anti-Grip1(Abcam, #ab226201), anti-GAPDH (Cell Signaling, #14C10), anti-beta tubulin (Sigma-Aldrich, #T5201), anti-CtIP (Cell Signaling, #D76F7), anti-phospho-CtIP (Thermo Fisher Scientific, #PA5-37337), anti-FEN1 (Cell Signaling, #82354), and anti-phospho-H2AX (Cell Signaling, #9718) were used as primary antibodies. Goat anti-rabbit IgG (whole molecule)–peroxidase antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, #A0545) and goat anti-mouse IgG (Fc specific)–peroxidase antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, #A2554) were used as secondary antibodies.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## SMRT-seq analyses of MmuPV1 integration sites in mouse tumor tissues.
A and B, 5′ RACE products (A) and 3′ RACE products (B) of MmuPV1 transcripts were identified using different MmuPV1-specific primers on total RNA isolated from MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues. All the products from 5′ RACE were analyzed by SMRT-seq to identify chimeric virus-host RNA transcripts (A). After removing the major viral polyadenylation products derived from transcription of MmuPV1 episomal DNA (red rectangles), the remaining 3′ RACE products (B) were analyzed by SMRT-seq for chimeric virus-host RNA transcripts. C and D, Distribution of integration breakpoints across the MmuPV1 genome identified by 5′ RACE (C)- and 3′ RACE (D)-SMRT-seq. E and F, Top10 host genes with MmuPV1 integrated DNA as detected by 5′ RACE (E)- and 3′ RACE (F)-SMRT-seq.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Distribution of DNA CJRs in the interspersed repeats in the mouse genome.
A, DNA CJRs from MmuPV1 tumor and non-tumor (control) tissues were identified by targeted DNA-seq. MmuPV1 copy number per cell was determined by ddPCR from 10 ng of genomic DNA using the mouse Tfrc gene as an internal control. B, Expected and observed CJRs in different interspersed repeats in the mouse genome identified by targeted DNA-seq. Repeat data for the mm10 genome was downloaded from repeatmasker.org website (Repeat Library 20140131). "intersectBed" command from bedtools (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033) package was used to identify the virus-host junctions that mapped to known repeat regions. **, P<0.01 by a chi-squared test.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Possible functions for host genes in the response to MmuPV1 infection, integration, and tumorigenesis.
A, Flow cytometry analysis of mouse keratinocytes with reduced expression of Pard3 and Grip1 after gene-specific siRNA treatment. The mouse primary keratinocytes were transfected twice with 40 nM of siRNA (si-Pard3, Si-Grip1 or si-NS) at a 24 h interval. Cells were fixed 24 h after the second siRNA knockdown (KD) and analyzed by flow cytometry in triplicate. PI, propidium iodide. B, Bar graphs show the cell cycle distribution after two rounds of siRNA KD of Pard3 and Grip1 expression. Data are the mean ± SD (n = 3). * P<0.05 by paired, two-tailed Student’s t test.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Top 100 genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by RNA-seq analyses.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Mapping of 5’ RACE-SMRT-seq clustered reads.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Mapping of 3’ RACE-SMRT-seq clustered reads.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## 231 mouse genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by both RNA-seq and Targeted DNA-seq.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## Top 100 genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by targeted DNA-seq.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Table

## Genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by targeted DNA-seq in MmuPV1-induced tumors of the ear and muzzle and MmuPV1-infected tumor-free ear tissues.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Table

## Differentially expressed genes in three ear tumor samples (S1/S4/S7) and three non-tumor ear samples (S10/S11/S12).
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Table

## Relative RNA expression of 40 tumor-specific genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by targeted DNA-seq in ear tissues.
Data were from RNA-seq analysis.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Table

## Altered expression of host genes involved in MMEJ in MmuPV1 tumor and nontumor tissues identified by two separate RNA-seq analyses.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S10 Table

## DNA oligoes used in the study.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Alison McBride of NIAID for providing mouse keratinocytes for this work. We thank Binghui Shen at City of Hope National Medical Center for his critical comments on host factors in MMEJ, Baktiar Karim of Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research for his pathology expertise, Xiaolin Wu and David Sun of Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research for their ddPCR analysis.

## Data Availability
NCBI GEO database Accession# GSE163537 for mouse tissue RNA-seq and accession# GSE163681 for targeted mouse tissue DNA-seq.

## Funding Statement
ZMZ was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Institute, and the Center for Cancer Research (ZIASC010357). PL was supported by the National Institutes of Health grants (CA022443, CA210807, CA228543 and DE026787). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## References
 

PLoS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1009812.r001Decision Letter 0
RodenRichard BSAssociate EditorMcBrideAlison ASection Editor© 2021 Roden, McBrideThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 Jun 2021

Dear Dr. Zheng,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Mouse papillomavirus type 1 (MmuPV1) DNA is frequently integrated in benign tumors by microhomology-mediated end-joining" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important topic. Based on the reviews, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, providing that you modify the manuscript according to the review recommendations.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 30 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to all review comments, and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Richard BS Roden
Associate Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Alison McBride
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: Manuscript: PPATHOGENS-D-21-00964 Title: Mouse papillomavirus type 1 (MmuPV1) DNA is frequently integrated in benign tumors
by microhomology-mediated end-joining.
Authors: Lulu Yu, Vladimir Majerciak, Xiang-Yang Xue, Aayushi Uberoi, Alexei Lobanov, Xiongfong Chen, Maggie Cam, Stephen H. Hughes, Paul F. Lambert, and Zhi-Ming
Zheng.
This manuscript describes novel findings in the MmuPV1 mouse infection model to determine whether this virus infection can lead to viral integration that would lead to malignant progression, and further delineate additional mechanisms to explain the observations that MmuPV-1 infections can progress to malignancy. At present, the MmuPV1 model has shown clear evidence for malignant progression, but much of the current literature has focused on early infections and a mechanism for the malignant phenotype is lacking. The current study provides a comprehensive and mechanistic model for the potential for viral integration by demonstrating that even in the early stages of benign infections, there is evidence of viral transcripts that are spliced to host genetic elements. These events would increase the statistical likelihood that viral integration is possible in this model and that MmuPV1 could be categorized as a member of the PVs that demonstrate malignant potential in the natural host.
The study is a powerful and comprehensive documentation of these rare but potentially clinically significant integration events and set the stage for more in-depth analyses of HPV infections from more benign HPV types.
Some items for consideration:
1. The Abstract has several abbreviations that would benefit from expansion (or a list of abbreviations if not already in place).
2. The observation that integration events are observed early in infection is particularly novel as histological and current virological assays would identify MmuPV1 early infections as benign and that most viral DNA are episomal. Intriguingly, these studies also indicate that such relatively rare integration events are ongoing during the disease progression and are a novel explanation as to how HPV integration can lead to cancer (increased survival advantage of rare cells with integrated events). More importantly, such events may be ongoing in infections with other HPV types that are less carcinogenic, and this could also set the stage for cancer development due to the ongoing host-cell “insults”. These findings are worthy of a future in depth study of HPV lesions from more benign HPV types (particularly the various skin HPV types) that are suggested to be a co-factor in non-melanoma skin cancer despite the difficulty of detecting integrated HPV DNA in tumor tissues.
Reviewer #2: MmuPV1 serves as a valuable mouse model for papillomavirus infection in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent animals. This paper reports integration sites/frequency after experimental MmuPV1 infection of BALB/c FoxN1nu/nu mice (immunodeficient). Mice were typically infected for 6M to allow wart formation. Using RNA-seq, RACE-SMRT-seq, and/or targeted DNA-seq they describe integration, consistent with a Microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ) mechanism. They provide interesting correlative data regarding increased integration and infection/neoplasia and host MMEJ factors that are increased following infection/integration, and speculate (with good discussion) regarding the mechanisms behind the observed phenomena. Integration often resulted in disruption of E2, which would be expected to cause a selective advantage of those integrants if they integrate near a usable host polyadenylation signal to enable expression of early viral genes.
The science is sound and the paper is well written and clear. The work is important, laying the ground for testable hypothesis moving forward, and very appropriate for this journal. A few concerns/issues are outlined below, which if addressed would strengthen the paper in my opinion.
Concerns/Issues:
1. The data in Figure 7. While the data show modest upregulation of these factors at the transcriptional level, their effects would be exerted at the protein level. Validation of this data by western blot would strengthen the conclusions from this data.
2. Figure 2b- the table indicates that there were ~1.3M viral reads for the mouse 1 infected ear, and ~972K viral reads for the control ear (uninfected) from the same animal. This seems like way too many viral reads from an uninfected control ear, can this be explained? Was there transmission from primary infections to these "uninfected" sites during those 6M? If so why weren't there any warts in these "uninfected" sites? (or were there?). Did any warts appear in uninfected sites during the experimental infections?
3. Line 389-390: "There were multiple integrations in Malat1, Flg, Krt1, Dsp, Krt10, Hmr and Rn7sk (Fig. 2E, Supplementary Table S2)." Are these the only genes with multiple integrations from this data? Table S2 seems to suggest many genes had multiple integrations, unless I'm confused?
4. Line 462-463: "although the DNA CJRs from these genes did not have the same junction sequences
that were identified in the RNA CRJs." Why is this? Additional discussion about these discrepancies is needed.
5. Similar to #2 above, RNA-seq library prep can lead to sequencing artifacts (as recently highlighted witht he whole SARS-CoV-2 integration debacle, and papers like PMID 33980601 refuting that shoddy work). This work would be improved with a thorough discussion of these technical issues, and what was done here to prevent or recognize artifactual sequencing data.
6. Figure 1A- please indicate/confirm this was a 6m infection in the text, figure and/or legend. It is unclear from reading the results text on line 352.
7. Are homologous sequences in the range of 2-3 nt really long enough to be classified as "microhomology"? These seem too short. Perhaps a comment about this or some citation of literature discussing this would improve. If the 2/3 nt data are removed does it affect the conclusions?
Reviewer #3: Mouse papillomavirus type 1 (MmuPV1) DNA is frequently integrated in benign tumors
by microhomology-mediated end-joining
The authors investigated integration of the murine papillomavirus MmuPV1 into the genome of
BALB/c FoxN1nu/nu mice at three skin sites known to be susceptible to MmuPV1-induced papilloma formation (tail, muzzle, ear). They provide evidence that the viral DNA is integrated in infected cells, particularly in benign skin papillomas. This topic is of utmost interest to the papillomavirus field and the findings presented herein are novel. The manuscript is well written, contain important data and the experiments are sound and well performed.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: None
Reviewer #2: see above- western blots to validate findings in Figure 7. Additional analysis if 2nt or 3nt "microhomology" data are removed (unless these are indeed considered valid nt lengths for MMEJ mechanisms)
Reviewer #3: none required
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: See above
Reviewer #2: see above, point 6.
Reviewer #3: Minor comments/questions:
1. By RNA-seq analysis the proportion of virus-host chimeric reads were much higher in n=9 MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues (1.9-7) compared to n=3 MmuPV-1-infected tumor-free skin (0.6-1,3). Are the results statistically significant?
2. The numbers of integrated mucosal high-risk HPV copies correlate with severity of cervical disease and progression. MmuPV1 infection led to development of SCCs in ear skin (ref 39). Did the authors have a chance to look into integration sites in MmuPV1-induced SCCs or their premalignant precursors on ear skin? Do they think that higher levels of integrated virus may correlate with increasing malignancy in virus-induced skin cancer, similar to the cervix?
3. When did the authors harvest the papillomas, the latest 6 months post-infection? As immunodeficient FoxN1 nude mice were used, it is unlikely that the papillomas will regress. Do the authors expect more (new) genes affected by integration in the aging mouse, e.g genes responsible for cancer growth and development, after 1 or 2 years.
4. Could the authors please state the number of animals analyzed in the Material and Methods section.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
Figure Files:
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.
Data Requirements:
Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.
Reproducibility:
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
References:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
PLoS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1009812.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
382021178e1009812e1009812Collection date 2021 Aug.

13 Jul 2021

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers-LLY.docx
Click here for additional data file.
PLoS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1009812.r003Decision Letter 1
RodenRichard BSAssociate EditorMcBrideAlison ASection Editor© 2021 Roden, McBrideThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
19 Jul 2021

Dear Dr. Zheng,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Mouse papillomavirus type 1 (MmuPV1) DNA is frequently integrated in benign tumors by microhomology-mediated end-joining' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Richard BS Roden
Associate Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Alison McBride
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
PLoS PathogensPLoS Pathog10.1371/journal.ppat.1009812.r004Acceptance letter
RodenRichard BSAssociate EditorMcBrideAlison ASection Editor© 2021 Roden, McBrideThis is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
28 Jul 2021

Dear Dr. Zheng,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Mouse papillomavirus type 1 (MmuPV1) DNA is frequently integrated in benign tumors by microhomology-mediated end-joining," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Kasturi Haldar
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens
​orcid.org/0000-0001-5065-158X
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1 Fig

## SMRT-seq analyses of MmuPV1 integration sites in mouse tumor tissues.
A and B, 5′ RACE products (A) and 3′ RACE products (B) of MmuPV1 transcripts were identified using different MmuPV1-specific primers on total RNA isolated from MmuPV1-induced tumor tissues. All the products from 5′ RACE were analyzed by SMRT-seq to identify chimeric virus-host RNA transcripts (A). After removing the major viral polyadenylation products derived from transcription of MmuPV1 episomal DNA (red rectangles), the remaining 3′ RACE products (B) were analyzed by SMRT-seq for chimeric virus-host RNA transcripts. C and D, Distribution of integration breakpoints across the MmuPV1 genome identified by 5′ RACE (C)- and 3′ RACE (D)-SMRT-seq. E and F, Top10 host genes with MmuPV1 integrated DNA as detected by 5′ RACE (E)- and 3′ RACE (F)-SMRT-seq.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Distribution of DNA CJRs in the interspersed repeats in the mouse genome.
A, DNA CJRs from MmuPV1 tumor and non-tumor (control) tissues were identified by targeted DNA-seq. MmuPV1 copy number per cell was determined by ddPCR from 10 ng of genomic DNA using the mouse Tfrc gene as an internal control. B, Expected and observed CJRs in different interspersed repeats in the mouse genome identified by targeted DNA-seq. Repeat data for the mm10 genome was downloaded from repeatmasker.org website (Repeat Library 20140131). "intersectBed" command from bedtools (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033) package was used to identify the virus-host junctions that mapped to known repeat regions. **, P<0.01 by a chi-squared test.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Possible functions for host genes in the response to MmuPV1 infection, integration, and tumorigenesis.
A, Flow cytometry analysis of mouse keratinocytes with reduced expression of Pard3 and Grip1 after gene-specific siRNA treatment. The mouse primary keratinocytes were transfected twice with 40 nM of siRNA (si-Pard3, Si-Grip1 or si-NS) at a 24 h interval. Cells were fixed 24 h after the second siRNA knockdown (KD) and analyzed by flow cytometry in triplicate. PI, propidium iodide. B, Bar graphs show the cell cycle distribution after two rounds of siRNA KD of Pard3 and Grip1 expression. Data are the mean ± SD (n = 3). * P<0.05 by paired, two-tailed Student’s t test.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Top 100 genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by RNA-seq analyses.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Mapping of 5’ RACE-SMRT-seq clustered reads.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## Mapping of 3’ RACE-SMRT-seq clustered reads.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## 231 mouse genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by both RNA-seq and Targeted DNA-seq.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Table

## Top 100 genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by targeted DNA-seq.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Table

## Genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by targeted DNA-seq in MmuPV1-induced tumors of the ear and muzzle and MmuPV1-infected tumor-free ear tissues.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Table

## Differentially expressed genes in three ear tumor samples (S1/S4/S7) and three non-tumor ear samples (S10/S11/S12).
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S8 Table

## Relative RNA expression of 40 tumor-specific genes with MmuPV1 integration sites identified by targeted DNA-seq in ear tissues.
Data were from RNA-seq analysis.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S9 Table

## Altered expression of host genes involved in MMEJ in MmuPV1 tumor and nontumor tissues identified by two separate RNA-seq analyses.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S10 Table

## DNA oligoes used in the study.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers-LLY.docx
Click here for additional data file.

## Data Availability Statement
NCBI GEO database Accession# GSE163537 for mouse tissue RNA-seq and accession# GSE163681 for targeted mouse tissue DNA-seq.