pmcJ Eur Acad Dermatol VenereolJ Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol379blackwellopenJDVJournal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology0926-99591468-3083pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC12843854PMC12843854.112843854128438544069898110.1111/jdv.20833JDV20833JEADV-2024-3696.R21Original ArticleOriginal Article and Systematic ReviewHair and NailsStatement from the frontal fibrosing alopecia international expert alliance: SOFFIA 2024
SOFFIA 2024Meah et al.MeahNekmahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9466-6337 nekma.meah@gmail.comLiJanehttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7150-4052 WallDmitrihttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0107-4488 YorkKatherinehttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2905-4494 BhoyrulBevinhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1123-6882 BokhariLaitahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-4522-2611 CoulthardLachlan AsfourLeilahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0049-8377 AbrahamLeonardo Spagnolhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9165-6026 Asz‐SigallDanielhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1848-5686 BergfeldWilma F. BetzRegina C.https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5024-3623 Blume‐PeytaviUlrikehttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3528-3752 CallenderValeriehttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1297-5270 ChitreddyVijayahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0273-9592 CombaliaAndreahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0583-9000 CotsarelisGeorgehttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3534-9408 CraiglowBrittanyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8970-7691 DhuratRachita DlovaNcozahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2425-3905 DonovanJeffhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8623-2974 DoroshkevichAndreihttps://orcid.org/0009-0009-8093-7269 EismanSamanthahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0111-6403 FarrantPaulhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9695-0884 GadzhigoroevaAidahttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0489-0576 GreenJack GrimaltRamonhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7204-8626 HarriesMatthewhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-0563-8690 HordinskyMariahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-7790-3895 IrvineAlan D.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9048-2044 JolliffeVictoriahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-1255-3812 KaiumovSpartakhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5846-2887 KingBretthttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4576-4616 KossardStevenhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9607-5925 LeeJoyce LeeWon‐Soohttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7198-1334 LortkipanidzeNinohttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7547-1171 McMichaelAmyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5342-2181 Atanaskova MesinkovskaNatashahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2705-7002 MessengerAndrewhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1424-8069 MirmiraniParadihttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-8627-2995 OlsenElise OrlowSeth J.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2548-7380 OvcharenkoYuliyahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2412-2251 PiracciniBianca Mariahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6537-9689 PirmezRodrigohttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-5644-4351 RakowskaAdrianahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6117-3704 ReygagnePascalhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-6062-2122 RobertsJanet RudnickaLidiahttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-8308-1023 Saceda‐CorraloDavidhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6315-5462 ShapiroJerry SharmaPoojahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5070-3722 SilyukTatianahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9118-2396 SuchonwanitPoonkiathttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9723-0563 TakwaleAnitahttps://orcid.org/0009-0004-0329-3205 TostiAntonellahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-5516-4043 VisserW. I.https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2701-4632 Vañó‐GalvánSergiohttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-2773-7494 VogtAnnikahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9134-8413 WadeMartinhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-0376-448X YipLeonahttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-7120-6610 ZlotogorskiAbrahamhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-4818-3785 ZhouChenghttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4091-4777 SinclairRodneyhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6751-1428 

1

Mersey and West Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust
St Helens
UK

2

Manchester University, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health
Manchester
UK

3

Department of Medicine (Dermatology)
St Vincent's Hospital Melbourne, the University of Melbourne
Fitzroy
Victoria
Australia

4

The Skin Health Institute
Carlton
Victoria
Australia

5

Department of Dermatology, Box Hill Hospital
Eastern Health
Box Hill
Victoria
Australia

6

Hair Restoration Blackrock
Dublin
Ireland

7

National and International Skin Registry Solutions (NISR), Charles Institute of Dermatology
University College Dublin
Dublin
Ireland

8

The Mater Misericordiae University Hospital
Dublin
Ireland

9

Beachside Specialist Group
Noosa Heads
Australia

10

Sinclair Dermatology
Melbourne
Australia

11

Salford Royal Foundation Trust, Northern Care Alliance
Manchester
UK

12

Trichology Unit
Hospital Regional da Asa Norte
Brasilia
Brazil

13

Programa de Pós Graduação Em Ciências Médicas (PPGCM)
Universidade de Brasília (UnB)
Brasilia
Brazil

14

Trichology Clinic, Dermatology Department
Dr Manuel Gea Gonzalez General Hospital
Mexico City
Mexico

15

Cleveland Clinic Main Campus
Cleveland
Ohio
USA

16

Institute of Human Genetics
University of Bonn, Medical Faculty & University Hospital Bonn
Bonn
Germany

17

Department of Dermatology, Venerology and Allergology, Clinical Research Center for Hair and Skin Science
Charité‐Universitaetsmedizin Berlin
Berlin
Germany

18

Howard University College of Medicine
Washington, DC
USA

19

Callender Dermatology & Cosmetic Center
Glenn Dale
Maryland
USA

20

Dermatology Department
Hospital Clinic de Barcelona
Barcelona
Spain

21

Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia
Pennsylvania
USA

22

Yale Department of Dermatology
New Haven
Connecticut
USA

23

Department of Dermatology
LTM Medical College & Hospital Sion
Mumbai
India

24

Chief Specialist and HOD Department of Dermatology
NRMSOM, UKZN
Durban
South Africa

25

Dean and Head School of Clinical Medicine
University of KwaZulu Natal
Durban
South Africa

26

Department of Dermatology
University of British Columbia
Vancouver
British Columbia
Canada

27

Donovan Hair Clinic
Whistler
British Columbia
Canada

28

Hair Treatment and Transplantation Center
Saint Petersburg
Russian Federation

29

Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals NHS Trust
Brighton
UK

30

Scientific & Practical Center Dermatolovenereology and Cosmetology of the Moscow City Health Department
Moscow
Russian Federation

31

Institute of Beautiful Hairs
Moscow
Russia

32

St.Vincent's Hospital, Skin Health Institute
Melbourne
Victoria
Australia

33

Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut
Universitat Internacional de Catalunya
Sant Cugat del Vallès (Barcelona)
Spain

34

Salford Royal Hospital, Northern Care Alliance NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre
Manchester
UK

35

Centre for Dermatology Research, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health
University of Manchester & NIHR Biomedical Research Centre
Manchester
UK

36

Department of Dermatology
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis
Minnesota
USA

37

Clinical Medicine
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin 2
Ireland

38

Centre for Cell Biology and Cutaneous Research
Blizard Institute
London
UK

39

Nautilus Clinic and Education Centre
Saint Petersburg
Russian Federation

40

Yale School of Medicine
New Haven
Connecticut
USA

41

Director Kossard/ Laverty Dermatopathologists
Macquarie Park
New South Wales
Australia

42

National Skin Centre
Singapore

43

Department of Dermatology
Yonsei Wonju University
Wonju
Korea

44

David Tvildiani Medical University
Head of Department of Dermatology and Venereology
Tbilisi
Georgia

45

Department of Dermatology
Wake Forest School of Medicine
Winston‐Salem
North Carolina
USA

46

Department of Dermatology
University of California, Irvine
Irvine
California
USA

47

University of Sheffield
Sheffield
UK

48

Kaiser Permanente Vallejo, Department of Dermatology
Vallejo
California
USA

49

Duke Dermatology Clinic
Durham
North Carolina
USA

50

The Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology
New York University School of Medicine
New York
New York
USA

51

Department of Pediatrics
New York University Medical Center
New York
New York
USA

52

Department of Infectious Diseases and Clinical Immunology of the V.N. Karazin KharkivNational University
Kharkiv
Ukraine

53

Dermatology Unit
IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero‐Universitaria di Bologna
Bologna
Italy

54

Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences
University of Bologna
Bologna
Italy

55

Instituto de Dermatologia Professor Rubem David Azulay, Santa Casa da Misericórdia Do Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro
Brazil

56

Department of Dermatology
Medical University of Warsaw
Warsaw
Poland

57

Directeur du Centre de santé Sabouraud
Hopital Saint Louis
Paris
France

58

Northwest Dermatology Institute
Portland
Oregon
USA

59

Dermatology Department
Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal
Madrid
Spain

60

IRYCIS, Universidad de Alcalá
Madrid
Spain

61

Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital
Mahidol University
Bangkok
Thailand

62

Department of Dermatology
Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust
UK

63

Dr. Phillip Frost Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery
University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine
Coral Gables
Florida
USA

64

Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
Stellenbosch University
Cape Town
South Africa

65

Director of Hair Disorders Unit and #TricoHRC Research Group
Madrid
Spain

66

The London Skin and Hair Clinic
London
UK

67

Skin Partners Specialist Dermatologists
Brisbane
Australia

68

Department of Dermatology, Hadassah Medical Center
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, the Faculty of Medicine
Jerusalem
Israel

69

Department of Dermatology
Peking University People's Hospital
Beijing
China

70

Department of Medicine
University of Melbourne
Melbourne
Victoria
Australia

*
Correspondence

Nekma Meah, Mersey and West Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, St Helens WA9 3DA, UK.
Email: nekma.meah@gmail.com

23720252202640250607210.1111/jdv.v40.2210223
27112024
1262025
270120262801202628012026© 2025 The Author(s). Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract

## Background
As the incidence of frontal fibrosing alopecia (FFA) continues to rise, there is a need for an optimal treatment algorithm for FFA.

## Objectives
To produce an international consensus statement on the treatment modalities and prognostic indicators of FFA.

## Methods
Sixty‐nine hair experts from six continents were invited to participate in a three‐round Delphi process. The final stage was held as a virtual meeting facilitated via Zoom. The consensus threshold was set at ≥66%.

## Results
Of 365 questions, expert consensus was achieved in 204 (56%) questions following completion of the three rounds. Three additional questions were included at the final meeting. The category with the strongest consensus agreement was disease monitoring (9; 100%). Questions pertaining to physical therapies achieved the least category consensus (15; 40%), followed by systemic therapy (45; 43%).

## Limitations
The study lacked sufficient representation from Africa and South America.

## Conclusions
SOFFIA highlights areas of agreement and disagreement among experts. Robust research is warranted to provide evidence‐based treatment recommendations.

Optimal treatment for frontal fibrosing alopecia (FFA) remains contentious. An international expert panel agreed that highly/ultra‐potent topical steroids were the preferred first‐line topical therapy. Preferred systemic therapies were 5‐alpha reductase inhibitors, followed by hydroxychloroquine. Low‐dose isotretinoin was the preferred treatment for facial papules, and intralesional corticosteroids for FFA‐induced eyebrow alopecia. 

consensusDelphifrontal fibrosing alopeciatherapeutic guideline
National and International Skin Registry solutions (NISR)10.13039/100010157

Australsaian Hair & Wool Research Society
eDelphi software This paper describes international consensus findings on treatments, parameters for disease monitoring and prognostic indicators for FFA from hair experts. While there remains a clear need for robust treatments for FFA, management can undoubtedly be challenging. Herein we provide guidance regarding existing and emerging therapies. 

## METHODS

## Expert panel selection
Sixty‐nine dermatologists with recognized expertise in hair and scalp disorders were invited to participate in the statement from the frontal fibrosing alopecia international expert alliance (SOFFIA). Most experts had contributed to previous alopecia‐related Delphis. Individual recommendations from colleagues regarding expertise in FFA were also considered. Importantly, global diversity and representation from the International Federation of Hair Research Societies (IFHRS) were prioritized.

## Delphi survey
FFA was identified as a Delphi topic from an expert group poll. Experts submitted FFA treatment and prognosis‐related questions that contributed to a preliminary questionnaire created by a core panel of six dermatologists (JL, NM, DW, BB, KY and RS) and one research scientist. Two further expert panels undertook further revisions.

## Delphi process
The Delphi process facilitates the development of numerous core outcome and diagnostic criteria , , , , , and is ideal where representation is required from geographically disparate participants.
Convergence of opinion through iterative rounds is facilitated anonymously, as each round enables revision of responses in the context of non‐identifiable group voting.
SOFFIA involved two questionnaire rounds followed by a final Zoom meeting. Participants were instructed that questions pertained to female FFA patients. All questions utilized a five‐point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree; 2 = disagree; 3 = neither agree nor disagree; 4 = agree; 5 = strongly agree; or ‘not applicable’). For Round 3 only, a three‐point scale (‘agree’, ‘disagree’ or ‘neither agree nor disagree’) was adopted. Participants were permitted to comment for all rounds. Anonymized comments for each question were viewable by all participants for all rounds and enabled submission of additional questions for Round 3 discussion. Live voting at the third round was permitted using PollEV software. 

## Consensus threshold
Consensus threshold, based on prior eDelphi precedence, was set at ≥66% participant agreement (scores 4–5) or disagreement (scores 1–2), while a score of 3 was considered indeterminate. The consensus threshold for SOFFIA was selected taking into account the contentiousness of FFA among experts.
Questions achieving consensus or considered low probability of achieving consensus (≤33%) were excluded from the next round.

## RESULTS

## Expert panel
Of the 69 FFA experts invited, 61 (88%) completed Round 1, 58 (84%) Round 2 and 42 (61%) attended the virtual Zoom meeting on 11 December 2020. Twenty‐six (43%) work in public (+/−academic institutions) and private practice, 17 (28%) exclusively in private and 14 (23%) exclusively in public practice. Participants were from Europe (27; 44%), Asia (5; 8%), Australia (6; 10%), North America (16; 26%), South America (2; 3%) and Africa (3; 5%). Two experts did not state their country of practice. Years of clinical experience were not captured.

## Delphi rounds
Figure  summarizes the SOFFIA Delphi process. Overall, 365 questions related to treatment modalities, disease monitoring and prognostic indicators for FFA. Expert consensus was achieved in 204 questions (56%); with 66 questions achieving consensus after Round 1, 68 after Round 2 and 70 after Round 3 (Table  ). Three additional questions were submitted for Round 3.
 Three hundred and forty‐six questions related specifically to FFA treatment: topical therapy, intralesional treatment, systemic therapies, physical therapies and initiation, discontinuation and usefulness of therapy. Table  summarizes the level of evidence for treatments (OCEBM criteria). 

Questions regarding regrowth were included. ‘Regrowth’ in the context of FFA refers to either viability of the inflamed FFA hair follicle or regrowth of other hairs, for example, co‐existing androgenetic alopecia. , 

## CONSENSUS OUTCOMES
Key: CA—consensus agreement; CD—consensus disagreement; NC—no consensus; AC—approaching consensus. Statements close to consensus termed: approaching consensus (AC) from Round 3 were also included, defined as * ≥ 50% <60%, ** ≥ 60% < 66%.

## Topical and intralesional therapies
Expert consensus for topical and intralesional treatments is summarized in Table  .
 

## Systemic therapies
One hundred and four questions were related to systemic treatment. Expert consensus was reached in 45 (43%).

## Immune modulation

## Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ)
Hydroxychloroquine is effective for symptom control and halting disease progression but does not promote hair regrowth. It is optimally dosed at 5 mg/kg/day and indicated in patients with moderate–severe disease (Physician Global Assessment), clinical signs of activity (e.g. peripilar scaling/ erythema), irrespective of a positive hair pull test. It is also indicated in progressive hair loss (e.g. on serial photography) even in the absence of visible scalp inflammation. It is not indicated in all patients routinely.

## Systemic corticosteroids
Systemic corticosteroids are an effective treatment option for FFA, but use should be limited.
The optimal dosing of prednisolone equivalent was not determined. However, there was expert agreement that it was not <0.25 mg/kg daily nor 1 mg/kg daily. AC for 0.5 mg/kg daily*.
The duration of treatment with systemic corticosteroids before weaning was not determined; however, there was agreement that it should not be before 1 or 2 weeks.

## Antibiotics
Doxycycline 100 mg once daily or mino cycline 50 mg twice daily are effective treatment option.

## Antihistamines
Oral antihistamines are generally not an effective treatment option for FFA.

## Naltrexone
There was no consensus for naltrexone effectiveness and dosing.

## Steroid sparing therapies
Steroid sparing therapies are considered in patients with active progressive disease.

## Ciclosporin
Ciclosporin is an effective treatment option for FFA and is optimally dosed at 3 mg/kg/day.

## Methotrexate (MTX)
There was no consensus for MTX as an effective treatment option. If prescribed, optimal dosing of 15 mg weekly was agreed, not 25 mg nor 30 mg weekly (AC 10 mg**, 20 mg* weekly).

## Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
There was no consensus for MMF as an effective treatment option. If prescribed, it should not be dosed below 1 g/day (AC 2–3 g/day*).

## Janus kinase inhibitors (ruxolitinib, tofacitinib)
There was no consensus for JAKi effectiveness and dosing.

## Hormonal modulation

## 5‐alpha reductase inhibitors
5‐alpha reductase inhibitors (5ARIs) are effective treatments for FFA, regardless of co‐existent androgenetic alopecia. They halt disease progression/induce remission but do not promote hair regrowth. 5ARI may be considered in patients with clinical signs of activity (e.g. peripilar scaling/ erythema). They may be considered in patients with progressive hair loss (e.g. on serial photography) even in the absence of visible scalp inflammation. 5ARI should not be reserved only for FFA patients with concomitant androgenetic alopecia. Finasteride is optimally dosed at 2.5 mg daily, not 1, 1.25, 2, 3 and 4 mg daily. (AC 5 mg* daily). Dutasteride is optimally dosed at 0.5 mg daily, not 0.5 mg weekly.

## Flutamide, Bicalutamide, Spironolactone
There was no consensus for effectiveness and dosing.

## Others

## Retinoids
Isotretinoin is an effective treatment option. The optimal dosing is 0.25 mg/kg/day, not 0.5 nor 1 mg/ kg/day (AC <0.25 mg/kg/day*). There was no consensus for acitretin effectiveness and dosing.

## Pioglitazone
There was no consensus for pioglitazone's effectiveness and dosing.

## Minoxidil
Oral minoxidil is an effective treatment option. It is most effective as an adjunct when used in combination with other treatments.

## Physical therapies
Thirty‐eight questions related to physical therapies. Expert consensus was reached in 15 (40%).

## Surgical

## Hair transplantation (HT)
Hair transplantation can be considered in patients with FFA if the disease is inactive. The optimal timing is after ≥24 months of inactivity. There was consensus disagreement for inactivity of 6 months duration (AC after 12 months of inactivity**). It can be considered in the absence of symptoms, perifollicular erythema/ follicular hyperkeratosis and positive hair pull test. Hair transplantation should not be considered based on the absence of progressive hair loss on serial photography alone, regardless of other signs. It should not be considered if signs of activity are present, even if performed while continuing medical therapy. HT may reactivate disease, and patients should be counselled accordingly. Typically, HT results in loss of >50% of the transplanted hairs >5 years post‐operatively* (AC). FFA HT patients should be maintained on medical therapy indefinitely.

## Hairline lowering surgery
This can be considered in patients with FFA if the disease is inactive. It is optimally timed following >24 months of inactivity. There was a CD for inactivity of 6 months duration.

## Micro needling
There was no expert consensus in this category.

## Laser and light
There was NC for any questions regarding laser and light therapy in FFA. AC: Fractional ablative CO2 laser is not an effective treatment option for FFA*.

## Usefulness of therapy
In this section, experts selected useful therapies in FFA (Table  ). Expert consensus was reached in 26 of 55 questions (47%).
 

## Cosmetic camouflage and counselling
Eight questions featured in this category. Expert consensus was reached in 5 (63%).
Cosmetic camouflage should be discussed with all patients. Patients should be counselled not to avoid using sunscreen completely and not to selectively avoid chemical or physical sunscreens. Counselling advice to use alternative modes of sun protection, for example, hat. AC: to avoid sunscreen use on the forehead/ eyebrow region**.

## Treatment initiation and potential discontinuation
Fifty‐six questions related to this category. Expert consensus was reached in 34 (61%).
Objective monitoring is appropriate for asymptomatic patients with a good history of stability.
Consider treatment at the time of diagnosis, even if signs of clinical inflammation are absent. FFA treatment regimen to include topical and systemic therapy if no contraindications (Table  ), AC: not necessarily routinely include an intralesional agent**. FFA patients require aggressive (i.e. systemic) treatment, but this should be dependent on, and tailored to, patient factors (expectations of impact on QoL).
Active treatment is expected to improve patient outcomes. In general, combination treatment is more effective than monotherapy.
Treatment should be trialled for 6 months (AC up to 12 months**; CD 3, 18, 24, >24 months) before determining effectiveness (i.e. if ineffective at that stage consider cessation).
Treatment discontinuation may be considered where FFA is inactive after 24 months (CD 3, 6 months or never) with 5ARI therapy (finasteride/dutasteride), 12 months (CD 3, 6, 18, 24 months or never) with anti‐malarial therapy (hydroxychloroquine), 6 months (CD 3, 24 months or never) with ciclosporin, 6 months (CD 3 months or never) with retinoids.
While it was agreed that treatment with MTX or MMF should not be continued indefinitely, there was no agreement for the specific timing of treatment discontinuation in women with inactive FFA. However, there was CD regarding stopping MTX/MMF prematurely, that is, after only 3 months of disease inactivity (inactivity for this period indicating disease remission.) and discontinuing MMF after prolonged disease inactivity, that is, after 2 years.

## Disease monitoring
Nine questions featured in this category. Expert consensus was reached in all 9 (100%).
Acceptable objective measures of improvement include the following: Frontal Fibrosing Alopecia Severity Index FFASI, Frontal Fibrosing Alopecia Severity Score FFASS, serial measurement of the frontal hairline, , serial photography, trichoscopy and video‐trichoscopy.
Reliable measures of ongoing activity include the presence of symptoms, clinical inflammation (e.g. peripilar scaling/erythema) and a positive anagen hair pull test.

## Prognostic factors and natural disease course
Eighteen questions featured in this category. Expert consensus was reached in 12 (67%).
Factors affecting prognosis include the presence of symptoms, clinical inflammation (peripilar scaling/erythema), a positive anagen hair pull test, facial papules, non‐scalp involvement (axillary, pubic and body hair loss [The authors acknowledge that axillary and pubic hair loss can also occur with physiological ageing]), diffuse FFA pattern and pseudo‐ophiasis FFA pattern.

## Disease course
The tendency is for slow progression then spontaneous stabilization. Disease reactivation may occur after treatment withdrawal following a period of stabilization. Treatment has the potential to achieve hair regrowth on the eyebrows. AC: treatment has the potential to achieve regrowth on the scalp **.

## PREFERRED TREATMENT
Experts were asked to list in order their choice of first, second‐ and third‐line treatment for FFA.
The most common systemic agent utilized by the expert group was 5ARIs followed by hydroxychloroquine (Figure  ). The most frequent topical/physical modality used as first‐line treatment, alone or in combination with a systemic agent, was topical corticosteroids followed closely by intralesional corticosteroids (Figure  ).
 

## 
FFA eyebrow alopecia
Intralesional corticosteroids were most commonly reported as the preferred treatment for FFA‐induced eyebrow alopecia, followed by topical calcineurin inhibitors (Figure  ).

## 
FFA facial papules
Oral isotretinoin was most commonly reported as the preferred treatment for FFA‐induced facial papules, followed by topical retinoids (Figure  ).

## DISCUSSION
SOFFIA, one of the largest eDelphi consensus exercises to date, explores diverse FFA treatment options. The goal of management in FFA is to arrest disease progression, reduce inflammation, control symptoms and manage expectations. The permanent hair loss with FFA prompted consensus that topical and systemic therapy is commenced early, even in the absence of overt clinical inflammation and in seemingly stable patients. Although hair regrowth can occur in exceptional cases, especially if treatment is initiated early, the expert group concurred that hair growth is typically not to be expected. 

5ARIs were considered effective for FFA (finasteride 2.5 daily or dutasteride 0.5 mg daily) and the preferred first‐line systemic treatment. This corroborates with existing studies demonstrating effectiveness and disease stabilization as mono/combination therapy. , While limited data raised breast cancer risk concern, a recent large‐scale, confounder‐adjusted study of 1000 patients confirmed no evidence of an association between finasteride use and male breast cancer. 

Low‐dose oral minoxidil (LDOM) is increasingly being used in many alopecias at doses up to 2.5 mg/day, and consensus agreement was reached for LDOM as an adjunct in FFA and a useful therapy (Table  ). Although the exact mechanism is incompletely understood, reversal of miniaturization with anagen prolongation, optimizing overall hair density, may contribute in FFA. This is particularly true for FFA patients with co‐existing androgenetic alopecia.
Systemic corticosteroids were considered an effective treatment in rapidly progressive frontal fibrosing alopecia (RPFFA). While considered to be useful (Table  ) in unstable inflammatory disease, optimal dosing was not agreed upon, though there was agreement that high‐dose therapy (1 mg/kg/day) and very low‐dose therapy (<0.25 mg/kg/day) were both inappropriate. The consensus trend was towards 0.5 mg/kg/day, gradually tapered. Importantly, experts deemed this to be a short‐term measure, not a long‐standing maintenance treatment.
Hair transplantation suitability is of significant interest to FFA patients. Acknowledging limited data, the group agreed that with careful selection, counselling, disease stability for at least 2 years and continuation of medical therapy to prevent koebnerization/disease reactivation, transplantation may be an option. 

With up to 90% of FFA patients reporting eyebrow loss, preceding scalp alopecia in 39% of cases, site‐specific treatment is important. , , Consensus agreement and limited data suggest regrowth potential with some therapies. , , Intralesional corticosteroids were the most frequent expert‐selected therapy for this site (36; 29%); administered as intralesional triamcinolone 2.5 mg/mL every 6–8 weeks (Figure  ). Topical calcineurin inhibitors were also considered effective (23;18%).
In line with SOFFIA findings, low‐dose oral isotretinoin has been shown to improve facial papules in FFA and may also benefit the hairline. 

The use of validated measures of disease activity, such as the FFASI and FFASS, was recommended, though it was acknowledged practicality may preclude use in all clinical settings. Serial photography and serial measurements , were also considered reliable methods of disease monitoring.
SOFFIA findings indicate that cautious attempts to cease systemic therapy can be made if disease remission is confidently established or if there are drug safety concerns prohibiting long‐term use. Longer durations of disease inactivity were recommended for 5ARIs and antimalarial therapy, but nephrotoxicity and hypertension should limit ciclosporin treatment duration. Limited data likely contributed to a lack of consensus regarding JAKi (e.g. tofacitinib, ruxolitinib) therapy in FFA.
Though a strength of the study was global representation, limited availability of therapies in some countries (e.g. lymecycline is unavailable in Australia) prohibited voting by all members for certain therapies. Given the COVID‐19 restrictions, forty‐two (61%) experts participated in the final stage of the Delphi process. Further limitations included disproportionately low representation from South America (3%) and Africa (5%), restricted capacity to assess all therapies in detail, for example, apremilast, not capturing experts' years of clinical practice, the effect of COVID‐19 on data collection and consensus threshold of ≥66%. While quality treatment data are currently lacking (Table  ), SOFFIA identifies the pressing need for more robust evidence‐based treatments for FFA.

## CONCLUSIONS
SOFFIA provides a unique opportunity to draw on the expertise of geographically disparate clinicians; minimising peer influence to provide consensus, where possible, on contentious/debated treatments in FFA, while acknowledging that local factors, for example, availability of services will ultimately impact decision‐making. Overall, topical steroids were the preferred first‐line topical therapy. Preferred systemic treatments were 5ARIs, followed by hydroxychloroquine. Multiple factors can affect FFA prognosis, including the presence of symptoms, facial papules and non‐scalp involvement.
The findings from SOFFIA provide a framework for the development of local guidelines for FFA. Figure  is a summary of the consensus points on management.
 

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Nekma Meah: conceptualization, data acquisition, analysis, drafting the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Jane Li: conceptualization, data acquisition, analysis, drafting the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Dmitri Wall: conceptualization, data acquisition, analysis, drafting and critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of the final manuscript. Katherine York: conceptualization, data acquisition, analysis, drafting and critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Bevin Bhoyrul: conceptualization, data acquisition, analysis, drafting and critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Laita Bokhari: conceptualization, data acquisition, analysis, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Lachlan Coulthard: conceptualization, data acquisition, analysis, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Leila Asfour: data acquisition, analysis, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Leonardo Spagnol Abraham: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Daniel Asz‐Sigall: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Wilma F Bergfeld: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Regina C. Betz: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Ulrike Blume‐Peytavi: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Valerie Callender: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Vijaya Chitreddy: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Andrea Combalia: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. George Cotsarelis: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Brittany Craiglow: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Rachita Dhurat: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Ncoza Dlova: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Jeff Donovan: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Andrei Doroshkevich: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Samantha Eisman: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Paul Farrant: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Aida Gadzhigoroeva: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of the final manuscript. Jack Green: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Ramon Grimalt: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Matthew Harries: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Maria Hordinsky: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Alan D. Irvine: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Victoria Jolliffe: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Spartak Kaiumov: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Brett King: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Steven Kossard: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Joyce Lee: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Won‐Soo Lee: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Nino Lortkipanidze: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Amy McMichael: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Natasha Atanaskova Mesinkovska: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Andrew Messenger: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Paradi Mirmirani, data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Elise Olsen: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Seth J. Orlow: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Yuliya Ovcharenko: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Bianca Maria Piraccini: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Rodrigo Pirmez: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Adriana Rakowska: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Pascal Reygagne: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Janet Roberts: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Lidia Rudnicka: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. David Saceda‐Corralo: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Jerry Shapiro: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Pooja Sharma: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Tatiana Silyuk: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Poonkiat Suchonwanit: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Anita Takwale: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Antonella Tosti: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. W I Visser: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Sergio Vañó‐Galván: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Annika Vogt: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Martin Wade: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Leona Yip: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Abraham Zlotogorski: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of the final manuscript. Cheng Zhou: data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of final manuscript. Rodney Sinclair: conceptualization, data acquisition, critical review of the article for intellectual content, approval of the final manuscript, supervision.

## FUNDING INFORMATION
National and International Skin Registry solutions (NISR) for facilitating videoconferencing facilities. Australasian Hair and Wool Research Society for funding of the eDelphi software. MH is supported by the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR203308).

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
Nekma Meah: Eli‐Lilly –Honoraria, Dermal—Honoraria, Pfizer—Honoraria/Consultancy/Advisory Board. Sunpharm (Advisory Board). Dmitri Wall: Has received honoraria for consultancy from Pfizer, Eli‐Lillyand Bristol Myers Squibb, has received speaker fees from L'Oreal and Almirall, and received support from AbbVie to attend conferences. He has consulted for Sun Pharma. He is a shareholder in Samson Clinical. He is an employee of National and International Skin Registry Solutions (NISR) and a director of Hair Restoration Blackrock. He is a Steering Committee member of the Global Registry of Alopecia Areata Disease Severity and Treatment Safety (GRASS) International and PI of GRASS Ireland. Bevin Bhoyrul: Advisory board for L'Oréal Australia. Principal investigator: Amgen. Laita Bokhari, Lachlan Coulthard, Leila Asfour: none. Leonardo Spagnol Abraham: Vichy Laboratoires and GSK—speaker; Pfizer—speaker/advisory board; –investigator—Johnson & Johnson; CEO–Trichology Club. Daniel Asz‐Sigall: none. Wilma F Bergfeld, Lilly (investigator); Pfizer (investigator); AbbVie (investigator). Regina C. Betz: a consultant for Pfizer. Ulrike Blume‐Peytavi: a speaker and/or consultant and/or investigator and/or has received research funding from AbbVie, Adaran, Allmiral, Bayer Health Care, Ameryt, Boots Healthcare, Cantabria Labs, Cassiopeia, CeraVe, Dermocosmétique Vichy, Eli Lilly, FomF, Galderma Laboratorium GmbH, GSK, Infectopharm, Johnson & Johnson, Laboratoires Bailleuil, Legacy, Leo Pharma, Novartis, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Sanofi Regeneron and Sun Pharmaceutical. Valerie Callender: Acne store (Consultant), Abbvie/Allergen (Researcher), Aerolase (Consultant), Arcutis (Consultant/Speaker), Avava (Researcher), Avita medical (Consultant) Beiersdorf (Consultant), Cutera (consultant), Dermavant (Consultant), Eli Lilly (Consultant/Researcher/Speaker), Galderma (Researcher), Incyte (consultant/Researcher), Juenes Aesthetics (Consultant), Loreal Aesthetics (Consultant/Researcher), Ortho Derm (Consultant), I Know Skincare (Researcher), Janssen (Researcher), Pfizer (Researcher/Consultant), Prollineum (Researcher), Skinbetter Science(researcher), Skin Ceuticals (consultant), Symatèse (Researcher), Teoxane (Researcher), Uptodate(Royalties). Vijaya Chitreddy: none. Andrea Combalia: speaker and/or consultant and/or investigator and/or has received research funding from Lilly, Pfizer, Takeda, Kyowa. George Cotsarelis: none. Brittany Craiglow (BC): has received honoraria and/or fees from AbbVie, Arcutis, BiologicsMD, Dermavant, Incyte, Eli Lilly, LEO Pharma, Glaxo Smith Klein, Novartis, Pfizer, Regeneron, Sanofi‐Genzyme and Sun Pharmaceuticals. Rachita Dhurat, Ncoza Dlova: none. Jeff Donovan: Honoraria—Pfizer Vichy. Royalties—Up to Date. Andrei Doroshkevich: none. Samantha Eisman: investigator in clinical trials and/or affiliated with (Presentations/Promotional work/Advisory boards) for AbbVie, Arena Pharmaceutical, Boston Pharmaceuticals, Botanix, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Celldex Therapeutics, Dermaliq Therapeutics, Dermira, Eli Lilly and Company, Evelo Biosciences, Hope Medicine, Immunic Therapeutics, Janssen, Kobiolabs, Kymab, LEO Pharma, L'oreal, Nektar Therapeutics, Novartis, Pfizer Inc., Regeneron, Sanofi, Suzhou Connect Biopharmaceuticals, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, TEVA Pharmaceuticals, Tigermed and Zai Lab. I am the treasurer and board member of the Australian Hair and Wool Research Society (2019 to present). Paul Farrant: principal investigator for Pfizer, AbbVie, Soterios in commercial alopecia areata research and paid speaker for Pfizer and Vichy. Aida Gadzhigoroeva, Ramon Grimalt: none. Matthew Harries: served as a speaker for Pfizer (paid to institution); the principal investigator on the Soterios (Manentia UK) clinical trial for alopecia areata, the AA‐UP (AbbVie) clinical trial and an alopecia areata clinical trial (Sanofi); has held consultancy roles for AbbVie, Eli Lilly and Pfizer (paid to his institution); has served as an expert member/contributor for the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; has received grants from Alopecia UK, British Skin Foundation and UCB; is the programme lead for the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre Inflammatory Hair Diseases and the British Association of Dermatologists Alopecia Areata National Guideline 2024; and is supported by the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR203308). Maria Hordinsky: Board of Directors: American Academy of Dermatology and the scarring Alopecia Foundation (unpaid). Alan D. Irvine: Fees from AbbVie, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Benevolent AI, Arena, Novartis, Regeneron, Sanofi, Leo Pharma, Janssen, OM Pharma, Moon lake and Almirall. President of international Eczema Council. Victoria Jolliffe, Steven Kossard, Joyce Lee, Won‐Soo Lee, Nino Lortkipanidze: none. Amy McMichael: Grants/Research: Concert, Procter and Gamble, Incyte and Revian. Consulting: Lilly, Janssen, Pfizer, Arcutis, Almirall, AbbVie, Cerave, Galderma, Bristol Meyers Squibb, Sanofi Regeneron, Sun Pharma, UCB, Pelage, Procter and Gamble, Revian, Johnson & Johnson, L'oreal and Leo. Royalties: Informa/Taylor and Francis and McGraw Hill. Natasha Atanaskova Mesinkovska: Consultant/Honoraria: AbbVie, Biologics MD, Lilly, Pfizer, Merck, Sun Pharma, Loreal, Nutrafol. Speaker: Lilly and Pfizer. Andrew Messenger: Samson Clinical. Paradi Mirmirani: Amgen (Investigator)—Grants/Research Grants. Cicatricial Alopecia Research Foundation (Advisory Board)—no compensation. Eli Lilly and Company—Investigator (Grants/Research Grants). Incyte Corporation—Investigator—(Grants/Research Grants). National Alopecia Areata Foundation—Clinical Research Advisory Council—No Compensation. NeoGenesis—Consultant—Fees. Pfizer—Grants/Research Grants/ Advisory Board. Springer Science—Royalties. Sun Pharmaceuticals (Concert Pharmaceuticals)—Grants/Research Grants/ Advisory Board. UpToDate—Royalties. Elise Olsen: Eli Lilly (consulting fees); Scarring Alopecia Foundation BOD (unpaid). Seth J. Orlow: I serve on the Board of Almirall Srl and R2 Technologies and as an Advisor to Evommune and Pharus Advisors. Yuliya Ovcharenko: speaker and/or consultant and/or investigator for Vichy Dercos, Pfizer, FotoFinder and Tricopat. Bianca Maria Piraccini: Pierre Fabre Ducray (Consultant/Honoraria), Difa Cooper Cantabria. Labs (Consultant/Honoraria), Dercos‐L'Oreal Paris (Consultant/Honoraria), ISDIN (Consultant/Honoraria), Legacy Healthcare (Consultant/Honoraria), Eli Lilly(Consultant/Honoraria), Pfizer (Consultant/Honoraria). Dr. Rodrigo Pirmez received fees from Aché, Pfizer, Eli Lilly, Darrow, Vichy, GlaxoSmithKline and Tricholab. Adriana Rakowska: none. Pascal Reygagne: speaker or investigator or member of a board for AbbVie, BMS, Cosmétique active, Ducray, Legacy Healthcare, Lilly, L'Oréal recherche, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre Dermatologie, Sun Pharma and Vichy. Janet Roberts: none. Lidia Rudnicka: invited medical lectures for Leo Pharma, Pfizer, L'Oreal, Sanofi and Eli Lilly; advisory board: Leo Pharma, Janssen Pharmaceutical Companies, Novartis, Pfizer and UCB. David Saceda‐Corralo: COI investigator in clinical trials and/or affiliated with (presentations/advisory boards) for Eli Lilly and Company, L'Oreal, Pfizer Inc., ISDIN, Cantabria Labs. Vice president of the Spanish Hair Research Society (2023 to present). Jerry Shapiro: Pfizer (investigator and consultant). Lilly (consultant and medical advisory board). Pooja Sharma, Tatiana Silyuk, Poonkiat Suchonwanit: none. Anita Takwale: educational speaker fees from Pfizer, Sanofi, L'Oreal and Vichy. Antonella Tosti: Consultant DS Laboratories, Almirall, Tirthy Madison, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Myovant, Bristol Myers Squibb, Ortho Dermatologics and Sun Pharmaceuticals. W I Visser: received honoraria from Pfizer, Eli Lilly, AbbVie, Novartis, Sanofi and Galderma. Involved in clinical trials with AbbVie. Sergio Vañó‐Galván: AbbVie Speaker Fees; Cantabria Labs Advisory Board Fees; Fotofinder Speaker Fees; Lilly ICOS LLC Advisory Board Fees; L'Oréal France Advisory Board Fees; Pfizer Inc. Advisory Board Fees; Pierre Fabre Dermatologie Speaker Fees. Chair or Member of a Council, Committee, Task Force, Ad Hoc Task Force or Work Group; Candidate for Office or am a member of the Board of Directors; Editor of the Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology or Dermatology World. Annika Vogt: Honoraria Bayer, Derma@Home, Infectopharm, Sanofi, UCB Pharma GmbH, Pfizer, Amryt. Board Member Work Group for Pediatric Dermatology, Chair, Vice‐Chair Position. Martin Wade: None. Leona Yip: KOL/consultant for L'Oreal, Galderma, Leo Pharma, Eli Lilly, Pfizer. Abraham Zlotogorski: Investigator for Eli Lilly and Company, and consultant for Pfizer. Rodney Sinclair: Pharmaceutical advisory board Eli Lilly and Company, Pfizer Inc., Leo Pharmaceutical, AbbVie. Speaker bureau Pfizer, AbbVie, Novartis. Glaxo Smith Kline, Eli Lilly. Principal investigator in clinical trials for AbbVie, Aerotech, Akesobio, Amgen, Arcutis, Arena, Ascend, AstraZeneca, Bayer AG, Biotherapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myer Squibb, Celgene, Coherus BioSciences, Connect, Demira, Dermaliq, Eli Lilly and Company, Galderma, Glaxo Smith Kline, F. Hoffman–La Roche, Incyte, Janssen, MedImmune, Merck and Co, Merck Sharpe & Dohme, Novartis, Oncobiologics, Pfizer, Principia, Regeneron, Roche, Reistone Biopharma, Samson Clinical, Sanofi‐Genzyme, Samson Clinical, Sun Pharma, UCB, Valeant and Zai Labs. President of the Australasian Hair and Wool Research Society, Vice President of the International Society of Dermatology, Vice President of The International Academy of Dermatology. Board member Australian Society of Dermatology research. Assistant Editor, Australian Journal of Dermatology. Dr. Sinclair is the Director and Founder of Samson Medical Pty Ltd. which holds patents on the use of oral minoxidil to treat hair loss disorders; is on the Pharmaceutical advisory board of Eli Lilly, Pfizer Inc. and Leo Pharmaceutical; is on the Speaker bureau of AbbVie, Novartis, Glaxo Smith Kline; is a principal investigator in clinical trials for Amgen, Novartis, Arcutis Biotherapeutics, Aerotech, Merck and Co, Celgene, Coherus BioSciences, Janssen, Regeneron, MedImmune, Glaxo Smith Kline, Samson Clinical, Boehringer Ingelheim, Oncobiologics, Roche, Ascend, Dermira, AstraZeneca, Akesobio, Reistone Biopharma, UCB Biopharma, Sanofi, Connect, Arena, Sun Pharma, Bristol Myer Squibb, Botanix Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Eli Lilly, Zai Pharmaceuticals, Jiangsu Hengrui Medicine, Leo Pharma, AbbVie, AstraZeneca and Galderma. The other authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## ETHICAL APPROVAL
Not applicable.

## ETHICS STATEMENT
Written informed patient consent has been obtained for the clinical image for SOFFIA. We are committed to conducting research with integrity, transparency and respect for all participants, following the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki and applicable ethical guidelines. The results presented are aimed at contributing to the broader understanding of the topic, without compromising the rights and welfare of any individuals.

## Supporting information

Table S1.

Table S2.

Figure S1.

Figure S2.

Figure S3.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.