pmcCell Rep MedCell Rep Med3954cellrepsmedCell Reports Medicine2666-3791ElsevierPMC12490225PMC12490225.112490225124902254075249210.1016/j.xcrm.2025.102261S2666-3791(25)00334-91022611ReviewCardiometabolic disease and cardio-oncology: Insights from iPSC models and tissue engineering
KojicAna MoslehiJavid KyBonnie WuJoseph C.joewu@stanford.edu 1Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA2Section of Cardio-Oncology and Immunology and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA, USA3Thalheimer Center for Cardio-Oncology, Abramson Cancer Center and Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA4Greenstone Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA, USA∗Corresponding author joewu@stanford.edu1692025018202569498186102261010820250310202503102025© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Heart disease and cancer share common risk factors, genetic predispositions, and metabolic and inflammatory components. Metabolic reprogramming can drive disease progression in both, with cardiometabolic syndrome—marked by obesity, insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, and hypertension—contributing to cancer development. Studies link around 20% of cancer cases to obesity, while elevated glucose and triglyceride levels increase the risk of liver, thyroid, and respiratory cancers. Beyond treatment-related cardiotoxicity, cancer patients often have pre-existing cardiovascular disease (CVD) at diagnosis, highlighting their bidirectional relationship. Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) offer a powerful platform to study these links at a personalized level. iPSC models help explore shared molecular mechanisms, metabolic dysregulation, inflammation, and cardiotoxicity. This review examines emerging themes in cardio-oncology and cardio-metabolism, emphasizing how iPSC-based approaches can reveal disease connections and inform new therapies.

## Graphical abstract
 
Kojic et al. explore the intersection of cardio-oncology and cardiometabolic disease. Using iPSC-based models, they highlight shared mechanisms such as metabolic reprogramming and inflammation, offering insights into cancer therapy-induced cardiotoxicity and pre-existing CVD. This review underscores the need for integrative strategies targeting both cancer and cardiovascular health.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes

## Introduction
Although heart disease and cancer are two distinct diseases, they share significant similarities, from epidemiologic risk factors to shared biologic pathways. As a result, understanding the fundamental mechanisms central to the relationship between cancer and cardiovascular disease (CVD) has garnered growing interest in recent years, resulting in a rapidly evolving body of research and recognition that metabolic reprogramming in both conditions offers common clues into their disease development and progression.
Abdominal obesity, insulin-resistant glucose metabolism, dyslipidemia, and increased blood pressure—conditions clustered under the cardiometabolic syndrome—have been recognized as contributors to the development and progression of specific cancer types. Large-scale studies examining the risk of cancer in obese individuals have found a significant association between obesity and cancer-related mortality, estimating that excess weight directly contributes to around 20% of all cancer cases. Furthermore, elevated glucose levels are associated with increased risks of liver, gallbladder, respiratory, and thyroid cancers, while elevated triglyceride levels in both men and women heighten the overall risk of cancer. 
In addition to the well-documented increases in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality among cancer survivors due to cardiotoxic cancer therapies, there is evidence that patients with cancer also have higher prevalence of heart disease at the time of diagnosis, even before treatment. For example, a study on Dutch breast cancer patients revealed that coronary artery calcium scores were higher in cancer patients compared to matched controls. Similarly, men with prostate cancer undergoing androgen deprivation therapy were shown to have a higher burden of CVD and associated risk factors, including hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and pre-existing cardiac conditions. , Moreover, several cohort studies have reported an increased prevalence of metabolic syndrome in cancer patients. 
These findings highlight the intricate interplay between CVD and cancer, underscoring the need for further research to elucidate their shared mechanisms. Patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) provide a promising platform for studying these complex interactions and uncovering novel insights. In this review, we will highlight emerging themes in the fields of cardio-oncology and cardio-metabolism and their interplay, with a specific focus on how patient-specific iPSCs can offer unique insights into common themes spanning both disciplines. We begin by outlining the shared cardiometabolic mechanisms that contribute to the co-occurrence of cancer and CVD, before examining how cancer therapies further exacerbate this vulnerability through cardiotoxic effects.

## Shared mechanisms in cardiometabolic disease and cancer
Cardiometabolic disease is a broad term that encompasses conditions arising from the interplay between metabolic dysfunction and cardiovascular risk. These diseases are often rooted in cardiometabolic syndrome, which is characterized by factors such as insulin resistance, obesity, dyslipidemia, and hypertension. Together, these interconnected conditions significantly contribute to the global burden of CVD morbidity and mortality. 
Cardiometabolic syndrome affects a significant proportion of the global population, with prevalence estimates ranging from 20% to 40% in adults, depending on the region and criteria used for diagnosis. In the United States, approximately one-third of adults are estimated to have cardiometabolic syndrome, with higher rates observed in older age groups, individuals with obesity, and certain ethnic populations. The increasing prevalence of obesity and sedentary lifestyles worldwide also contributes to a parallel rise in cardiometabolic syndrome, making it a growing public health concern. 
The pathogenesis of cardiometabolic syndrome is multifactorial and involves a complex interplay among genetic, environmental, and behavioral factors. Central to its development is insulin resistance, which disrupts glucose metabolism and promotes compensatory hyperinsulinemia. This in turn contributes to dyslipidemia, which is characterized by elevated triglycerides, low high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol; and an increase in small, dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles. Obesity, particularly visceral adiposity, plays a pivotal role by releasing pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukins (ILs), which drive systemic inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. Hormonal imbalances, such as elevated cortisol levels due to chronic stress, contribute to visceral fat deposition, insulin resistance, and hypertension. Adipose tissue, particularly visceral fat, functions as an active endocrine organ by secreting adipokines such as leptin, adiponectin, and resistin. Imbalances in these adipokines contribute to insulin resistance, chronic inflammation, and impaired lipid metabolism. Leptin resistance leads to a lack of satiety in obese patients that increases food intake, whereas lower levels of adiponectin found in obesity exacerbate inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. Hypertension in cardiometabolic syndrome is driven by the activation of the sympathetic nervous system and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), both of which contribute to increased vascular tone and fluid retention. Additionally, impaired vascular reactivity due to endothelial dysfunction disrupts blood pressure regulation, further promoting hypertension. , 
Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress further amplify metabolic and cardiovascular abnormalities through impaired energy metabolism and lipid accumulation, creating a feedback loop that amplifies disease progression. Genetic and epigenetic factors also play critical roles, influencing insulin sensitivity and susceptibility to metabolic dysregulation. For instance, polymorphisms in genes such as PPARG and FTO are associated with impaired lipid metabolism and obesity, respectively, whereas mutations in APOE and PCSK9, respectively, influence cholesterol levels and cardiovascular risk. , , Variants in ACE and AGT contribute to hypertension by dysregulating the RAAS, thus exacerbating vascular dysfunction. On the epigenetic front, DNA methylation of insulin receptor signaling genes like IRS1 and histone modifications affects inflammatory pathways by driving systemic metabolic disturbances. Additionally, microRNAs such as miR-33 and miR-122 regulate cholesterol metabolism and hepatic lipid storage, further linking these mechanisms to the pathogenesis of cardiometabolic syndrome. Together, these mechanisms link metabolic dysfunction to endothelial injury, arrhythmias, and tumor progression, creating a shared pathophysiological landscape.

## Shared risk factors for CVD and cancer
CVD and cancer are often found in the same patients and can complicate each condition’s pathology. Multiple mechanisms have been proposed to explain their comorbidity, including shared environmental risks (e.g., obesity, smoking, and sedentary lifestyle), inflammation, and shared genetic variants ( ). , 
Complex interactions between immune cells, inflammatory cytokines, and reactive oxygen species (ROSs) in the tumor microenvironment activate a range of inflammatory pathways. Inflammation is a key pathological hallmark of CVDs, and chronic inflammation and oxidative stress are underlying mechanisms of both CVD and cancer development and progression. , There are several gene mutations connected with tumors and CVDs that are associated with inflammatory responses. DNMT3A is a DNA methyltransferase that regulates hematopoiesis epigenetically and serves as a tumor suppressor gene. TET2 is a transcription regulator and tumor suppressor that catalyzes the oxidation of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. DNMT3A and TET2 mutations and aberrant expression in tumors and heart disease are associated with an inflammatory response. , They are involved in chromatin organization and modification and gene expression. During immune responses, these two genes are involved in macrophage activation and cytokine secretion and regulate their extent. In a mouse model of chronic ischemic heart failure (HF), Tet2 deficiency in hematopoietic and myeloid cells heightens cardiac remodeling and increases IL-1β secretion. Selective inhibition of NLR family pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activator prevents the development of HF. The reduction of DNMT3A and TET2 expression in macrophages causes mitochondrial DNA damage and promotes the activation of interferon-stimulated genes in neighboring cells, which eventually leads to CVD development. The role of epigenetic regulators such as DNMT3A and TET2 in CVD was largely uncovered through studies of clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP). CHIP refers to the age-related expansion of hematopoietic clones harboring somatic mutations, most commonly in DNMT3A, TET2, and ASXL1, in individuals without overt hematologic malignancy. Initially linked to increased cancer risk, CHIP has since been recognized as a strong, independent risk factor for atherosclerosis, HF, and ischemic events, primarily due to the pro-inflammatory phenotype of mutant myeloid cells. This discovery has reshaped our understanding of how somatic mutations in the hematopoietic system can propagate systemic inflammation and drive both cardiovascular and oncologic pathology, offering a unifying mechanism at the intersection of these diseases.
Genetic variants in genes encoding proteins involved in the WNT signaling pathway, dual-specificity tyrosine phosphorylation-regulated kinase (DYRK) protein kinase family, JAK2, TTN, and TET2, among others, are linked to the development of both cancer and CVD. The WNT/β-catenin pathway regulates DNA repair, cell proliferation, and survival, playing crucial roles in both cancer and CVD. The downregulation of WNT downstream regulator SRY-related high-mobility group box (SOX) increases cell proliferation and tumorigenesis in several cancers. SOX also interacts with the Notch signaling pathway and has been identified as a novel risk gene for pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in congenital heart disease and idiopathic or familial PAH. 
The DYRK family, a subfamily of mitogen-activated protein kinases, has two isoforms: DYRK1A and DYRK1B. DYRK1A phosphorylates the TNF receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) that activates the non-canonical nuclear factor κB (NF-kB) signaling pathways, leading to the development of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). In an myocardial infarction (MI) mouse model, DYRK1A knockdown was found to induce cardiomyocyte (CM) cell-cycle activation and upregulation of proliferation-related genes. This was accompanied by increased H3K4me3 and H3K27ac epigenetic modifications, highlighting DYRK1A’s role in cardiac repair. Conversely, DYRK1B gene regulates the expression of mitochondria electron chain complex, oxidative phosphorylation, and energy production. When overexpressed in cancers, DYRK1B mediates cancer cell proliferation and chemoresistance by regulating G0/G1-S phase transition and expression of antioxidant genes. In HF, DYRK1B is upregulated and impairs mitochondrial bioenergetics by directly binding to the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), increasing its phosphorylation, nuclear accumulation, and downregulation of PGC-1α. BRCA1/2 mutations are widely recognized for their association with hereditary breast and ovarian cancers and also linked to CVD. BRCA1/2 regulates DNA damage repair, and their loss can lead to genomic instability and cancer susceptibility. Some evidence suggests that BRCA1/2 mutations increase susceptibility to myocardial injury following radiotherapy or chemotherapy. , 
Identifying shared molecular targets could pave the way for a one-hit therapeutic that would reduce both cancer progression and detrimental cardiac consequences. Furthermore, informed genetic testing could enable tailored targeted treatment for cancer patients, thus allowing early prevention of cardiotoxicities and CVDs through patient-specific treatment strategies ( ).

## Metabolism in cardiac and cancer cells
CMs and cancer cells share the capacity to maintain crucial cellular functions during extended periods of stress, including high demands of ATP and macromolecule synthesis (e.g., of proteins, lipids, and nucleotides). Primary catabolic demands of the CMs are met predominantly by using fatty acids, which provide a continuous supply of ATP for contractile activities through oxidation. , Various forms of stress, including increased physical activity, changes in nutrient composition, and reduced oxygen supply, can challenge cardiac metabolism to cause a mismatch between ATP demand and oxidative processes. In the failing heart, cardiac metabolism switches from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis. This helps maintain cardiac contractile function but also creates a metabolic profile similar to that of a tumor cell. With HF progression, amino acid and ketone body utilization increase relative to that of fatty acids and carbohydrates. , These switches affect energy expenditure, with specific substrates acting as signaling factors. Ketone bodies can function as an external signal, binding to surface proteins to promote epigenetic modification by increasing histone lysine acetylation. Excess glucose is directed to the hexosamine pathway, which can result in increased O-linked-β-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) modifications on peptides. However, ketone bodies can also function as “fuel” for cancer cell metabolism.
In the heart, metabolic changes are directly linked to organ dysfunction or preservation, whereas metabolic remodeling in tumors serves the acquisition and maintenance of malignancy. Tumor metabolic phenotypes are found to be heterogeneous, dynamic, and flexible, evolving with tumor progression from locally invasive to metastatic cancer. , , Metabolic remodeling in tumor cells is driven by oncogenes (e.g., KRAS, TP53, MYC, etc.) that accommodate increased demands for nutrients to support proliferation. , , , One of the mechanisms by which oncogenes can modulate tumor metabolism is by directly affecting the transcription of glycolytic enzymes. MYC modulates the expression of glucose transporter SLC2A1, monocarboxylate transporter (MCT)1 and MCT2, and several glycolytic enzymes. This can further create a metabolism shift from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis known as the “Warburg effect,” especially during nutrient deprivation. , This shift is reflective of the metabolic shift that follows HF. 

## Cancer metabolism and cardiac dysfunction: Systemic crosstalk
The metabolic dysregulation of cancer cells can extend beyond the tumor environment to cause systemic or localized consequences, including cardiac dysfunction. , Some evidence comes from variants in genes encoding metabolic enzymes that can lead to cancers, with potential systemic repercussions. Somatic mutations of IDH1 and IDH2 (isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2) are found in several cancer types, which can lead to excessive accumulation of the oncometabolite D2-hydroxyglutarate (D2-HG) in cancer cells and the bloodstream. , D2-HG inhibits α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, which in turns promotes epigenetic modifications and tumor growth. The excess circulating D2-HG further impairs oxidative metabolism by inhibiting α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenases and lowering ATP production and tissue function. , Cardiac and immune cell function are the most significantly affected, leading to T cell inhibition and reduced left ventricular function. , Alongside D2-HG, the accumulation of L2-hydroxyglutarate (L2-HG) in bodily fluids (a genetic disease categorized as 2-hydroxyglutaric acidurias) can lead to cardiomyopathies and neurological disorders. Besides IDH1 and IDH2 mutations, variants in D2HGDH (mitochondrial D2-HG dehydrogenase), L2HGDH (mitochondrial L2-HG dehydrogenase), and SLC25A1 (mitochondrial tricarboxylate transporter) can have same consequences on D2-HG and L2-HG levels. Loss-of-function variants in D2HGDH and L2HGDH cause an accumulation of D2-HG and L2-HG because they cannot be converted to α-ketoglutarate, which leads to an impairment in endogenous enzymatic systems and increased risk for developing cardiomyopathies. In adult mice, the global induction of D2-HG and L2-HG plasma level increases resulted in dilated cardiomyopathy, muscular dystrophy, and white matter abnormalities. The harvested hearts from these mice had accumulated glycogen and smaller and fewer mitochondria compared to healthy mice hearths. The implantation of tumor xenografts carrying IDH2 variants resulted in the same cardiac abnormalities. 
Loss-of-function mutations in VHL (von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor gene) are further examples of how metabolic reprogramming can facilitate the development of both cancer and cardiac disfunction. VHL encodes an E3-ubiquitin ligase that targets hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) and hypoxia-inducible factor 2α (HIF2α) for degradation. VHL mutations lead to a loss of function of the VHL E3-ubiquitin ligase, stabilizing HIF1α and HIF2α, driving the expression of genes required for hypoxia response. These genes include angiogenic growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), and metabolism-related proteins (glucose transporter 1), thus changing the metabolic phenotype of the tumor. Clinically, von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, caused by germline mutations in VHL, predisposes patients to vascular tumors (e.g., retinal angiomas, cerebellar hemangioblastoma, and renal carcinomas) and can lead to polycythemia and cardiopulmonary abnormalities in patients. During exercise, affected patients experienced early and severe phosphocreatine depletion and acidosis in skeletal muscles, high accumulation of lactate in the blood, and reduced exercise capacity. , Similar phenotypes are seen in transgenic mice, including increased glycolysis and decreased phosphocreatine-to-ATP ratio, indicating impaired mitochondrial function. Case studies describe additional metabolic dysfunctions, such as altered lipid metabolism, mitochondrial respiration deficits, and uncoupled oxygen consumption. Belzutifan, a HIF2α inhibitor, has demonstrated therapeutic benefit in reversing some cardiopulmonary phenotypes in VHL patients, highlighting a potential metabolic intervention point. , Together, these findings underscore the genotype-phenotype link between VHL mutation, cancer predisposition, and cardiac-metabolic remodeling. 
Succinate accumulation as a result of impaired succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) function in a variety of cancers has been linked with severe myopathies and dilated cardiomyopathies in several case reports, but this has yet to be replicated in larger studies. SDH forms complex II of the mitochondrial electron transport chain and variants in any of the genes comprising the complex (SDHA, SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD) predispose individuals to a variety of tumors. , , , , SDH couples the oxidation of succinate to fumarate in the Krebs cycle, leading to the transfer of electrons to the acceptor ubiquinone in the electron transport chain. Variants associated with lower enzymatic function result in succinate accumulation in the mitochondria. Succinate is an oncometabolite that drives genome-wide hypermethylation and activation of transcription factors. Increased plasma succinate levels are associated with CVDs, increased inflammation, and ischemia reperfusion injury. Preclinical studies suggest that succinate release from cancer cells activates an immune response and cellular signaling via succinate receptor 1, but further studies are needed to describe cardiometabolic phenotypes that are associated with elevated levels of succinate. 

## Cardiometabolic syndrome and cancer
Patients affected by both diabetes and obesity have increased blood glucose levels, altered abundance and composition of plasma lipids, disrupted insulin regulation, and upregulated inflammatory cytokines levels, all of which are risk factors for cancer development and progression. By comparison, cancer is a systemic disease that affects the cardiovascular system though the release of small molecules, immune cell activity modulation, and metastatic lesions.
Recent studies have examined the association between metabolic syndrome as a whole and the risk of cancer development. High glucose levels are associated with an increased risk of liver, gallbladder, respiratory and thyroid cancers, and myeloma in men. In women, it was associated with increased risk of developing pancreas, bladder, cervical, and stomach cancers. Colon, respiratory tract, kidney, and thyroid cancers are linked to triglycerides, whereas hypertension is associated with multiple cancers in both men and women. , As a systemic disease, metabolic syndrome is associated with many physiological changes, including insulin resistance, hyperinsulinemia, increased visceral adiposity, increased estrogen, altered levels of adipokines, and increased levels of inflammatory cytokines, all of which can alter cancer function, metabolism, and development. 
High levels of insulin and insulin resistance, negative consequences of high glucose blood levels, and β cell compensatory mechanisms are critical to the pathogenesis of the metabolic syndrome. Increased insulin synthesis leads to accumulation of C-peptide, which is cleaved from immature proinsulin form to create insulin, as well as hepatic growth hormone-mediated synthesis of insulin growth factor (IGF)-1. High levels of insulin, C-peptide, and IGF-1 are associated with the development and progression of breast, prostate, colorectal, and lung cancers. , Animal and in vitro studies have demonstrated that IGF-1 and insulin stimulate cancer cell proliferation. In animals, endogenous hyperinsulinemia potentiates mammary tumor growth and metastasis. In mice, increased circulation levels of IGF-1 promote the growth and metastasis of colon cancer. , , 
Proliferative tumor cells are known to prefer glucose as their energy source, and many overexpress glucose transporters, GLUT1, GLUT3, and GLUT4. In mouse models of hyperglycemia, skin and mammary tumors were found to be more aggressive, with mice also exhibiting insulinemia and increased inflammatory markers. By comparison, in a hyperglycemia model with insulin deficiency, there was no increase in the carcinogenic properties of the mammary tumor, suggesting that increased glucose levels play a role in tumor progression together with hyperinsulinemia, inflammation, and adipokines. Although several epidemiological studies have shown an association between hyperglycemia and increased risk of pancreatic, endometrial, and urinary cancers among others, the reduction of hyperglycemia in individuals with type 2 diabetes has not shown a clear connection with a decrease in cancer risk development. , 
Changes in lipid levels, specifically low HDL cholesterol, high LDL cholesterol, and increased triglycerides, are hallmarks off the metabolic syndrome and are associated with a number of tumors. Specifically, cholesterol has a central role in androgen- and estrogen-driven tumors. Cholesterol content in tumor cells is elevated, thanks to increased absorption from the circulation and de novo tumor synthesis, which promotes proliferation and protects cells from apoptosis. In prostate cancer, increased cholesterol is used for androgen synthesis through the expression of enzyme CYP17A. The synthesized androgens in turn promote the prostate cancer progression. In mammary tumors, elevated cholesterol activates promote proliferation by activating the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway. Additionally, hydroxylated derivatives of cholesterol can activate estrogen receptors, promoting estrogen-induced gene expression and tumorigenesis in breast and ovarian cancers. 
Obesity can be understood as a state of chronic inflammation in which adipocytes increase in size and are surrounded by elevated numbers of macrophages. The infiltrated adipose tissue macrophages secrete inflammatory cytokines, including IL-6 and TNF-α. Increased levels of Il-6 promote the pathogenesis of hepatocellular carcinoma and ovarian, prostate, and breast cancers and are associated with androgen deprivation therapy resistance and more aggressive forms of prostate cancer. Additionally, Il-6 has been shown to promote breast cancer metastasis by inducing endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition, which enhances tumor cell invasiveness and migration. TNF-α plays a dual role in cancer, promoting tumor progression and metastasis by fostering inflammation and angiogenesis, while also exhibiting anti-tumor effects by inducing apoptosis under certain conditions. It was also associated with more aggressive forms of prostate cancer and increased aromatase expression in breast adipose tissue, leading to increased estrogen levels and tumor progression. , 
These observations underscore the complex interplay between metabolic dysfunction and tumor biology, where shared molecular mechanisms such as inflammation, insulin resistance, and lipid dysregulation drive both cardiometabolic syndrome and cancer progression, providing new insights into their intertwined pathophysiology.

## Cardio-oncology: Mechanism of cardiotoxicity in cancer therapy
Recent advances in cancer therapies have markedly improved patient prognosis and survival, but they have also revealed a spectrum of cardiovascular and metabolic toxicities. The emergence of cardio-oncology reflects a growing need to understand and manage these therapy-induced effects. This field combines cardiology, oncology, and molecular medicine to investigate how anticancer treatments disrupt cardiovascular function, through both direct toxicity and indirect systemic effects, and to develop monitoring and intervention strategies. These efforts integrate imaging, biomarker screening (e.g., troponin and N-terminal pro–B-type natriuretic peptide [NT-proBNP]), and longitudinal follow-up with mechanistic studies that identify vulnerable pathways such as HER2 signaling, mitochondrial metabolism, and DNA damage repair. 
Many anticancer therapies converge on a few critical injury pathways despite targeting diverse molecular processes in tumors. Mitochondrial dysfunction is one such common thread. Anthracyclines, including doxorubicin and daunorubicin, were among the first agents recognized for their cardiotoxicity, traditionally linked to ROS production. More recent data, however, implicate topoisomerase IIβ-mediated DNA damage, disruption of mitochondrial integrity, and suppression of CM proliferation ( ). These mechanisms highlight the multifactorial nature of anthracycline toxicity and inform ongoing efforts to reduce cardiac injury through dose management, liposomal formulations, and cardioprotective agents like dexrazoxane. 
Similar injury patterns emerge with proteasome inhibitors and kinase inhibitors. Bortezomib, a first-generation proteasome inhibitor used in hematologic malignancies, has been associated with mitochondrial damage, oxidative stress, and impaired cardiac energetics ( ). The second-generation inhibitor carfilzomib causes more pronounced vascular toxicity, likely through endothelial dysfunction. , Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), a diverse class that targets various oncogenic kinases, also affect cardiac and vascular tissues. These agents may interfere with contractile signaling, calcium handling, and vascular tone, leading to clinical manifestations such as hypertension, QT prolongation, and HF ( ). , , While newer covalent TKIs offer improved specificity, off-target cardiac effects remain a concern, emphasizing the need for cardiovascular risk assessment and monitoring during treatment. , , , , 
Immunotherapies have introduced a distinct spectrum of cardiotoxic effects, often driven by immune-mediated inflammation ( ). Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), such as PD-1 and CTLA-4 antibodies, have revolutionized oncology but in rare cases can also induce life-threatening myocarditis, pericarditis, or arrhythmias. , These toxicities are believed to result from T cell-driven immune activation against CMs. , , , Although the incidence is low, mortality is high, necessitating early detection and prompt immunosuppressive treatment. , , Likewise, chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy can trigger cytokine release syndrome (CRS), leading to systemic inflammation, myocardial dysfunction, and endothelial injury. , Elevated levels of IL-6 are central in this process and have guided the use of IL-6 inhibitors such as tocilizumab to mitigate CRS-related cardiac injury. , , 
Even molecularly targeted therapies designed for high precision can affect cardiac tissue. Trastuzumab, a HER2-targeted monoclonal antibody, disrupts signaling pathways critical for CM survival and homeostasis. Although trastuzumab-induced cardiotoxicity is often reversible, it requires close surveillance, particularly in patients receiving concurrent anthracyclines. Other targeted therapies, such as IDH1 and IDH2 inhibitors used in metabolic subtypes of leukemia and glioma, have shown unexpected cardiac effects such as corrected QT interval (QTc) prolongation, underscoring the broader principle that cardiac risk is not limited to “classical” cardiotoxic agents. , 
As these examples illustrate, the mechanisms of therapy-induced cardiotoxicity span DNA damage, oxidative stress, mitochondrial injury, inflammatory responses, endothelial dysfunction, and off-target kinase inhibition. Despite progress in understanding these pathways, considerable variability remains in patient responses. Some individuals develop severe cardiotoxicity while others tolerate treatment with minimal complications. This disparity highlights the importance of patient-specific factors—including genetic predisposition, comorbidities like diabetes or hypertension, and differential drug metabolism—in shaping individual risk profiles.
A growing body of evidence also suggests that many anticancer therapies perturb systemic metabolic homeostasis, beyond their direct cardiac effects. This is particularly significant in patients with pre-existing cardiometabolic disease, who may be more susceptible to therapy-induced stress. As cardio-oncology continues to evolve, a key priority is to integrate these overlapping layers of toxicity—cardiac, vascular, and metabolic—into a cohesive model that informs prevention, monitoring, and therapeutic adaptation.

## Metabolic effect of anticancer therapies
A variety of anticancer therapies has been shown to lead to the development of CVDs through different mechanisms, including direct cardiotoxicity, effects on vasculature, and immune system and metabolic perturbations. , Traditional anticancer therapies like anthracyclines and radiation have been long associated with cardiotoxicities through direct cell death and metabolic sequelae. Anthracyclines can lead to impairments of mitochondrial biogenesis and iron metabolism as well as affect transcription factors that regulate metabolism, including HIF. With improved anticancer therapies and development of new targeted compound, including TKIs, more diverse types of metabolic dysregulation have been associated with cardiotoxicities. Small-molecule inhibitors of VEGF and PDGF receptors developed for the treatment of many forms of cancer are associated with hypertension, mild cardiomyopathy, and hypoglycemia. , , Intense efforts have been made in the past decade to develop novel cancer therapies targeting tumor metabolism and its microenvironment. Ivosidenib and enasidenib are IDH1 and IDH2 inhibitors, respectively, that have been approved for the treatment of relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia and IDH1- or IDH2-positive gliomas, cholangiocarcinoma, and chondrosarcoma. , Despite their targeted effect, early signs of prolongation of QTc have been detected in treated patients. Immunotherapies (e.g., antibodies, ICIs, bispecific T cell engagers, cell-based therapies, etc.) have revolutionized anticancer treatments; however, adverse effects of these therapies remain difficult challenges. ICIs can cause inflammation toxicities, myocarditis, and metabolic toxicities like diabetes. , Cellular therapies can result in CRS that leads to severe hypertension, vascular leak, and systemic metabolic perturbations. , , , These dual cardiac and systemic effects underscore the importance of using integrative models that reflect both metabolic and cardiovascular vulnerabilities in cancer patients.

## The role of iPSC models in cardio-oncology and cardiometabolic research
Cardiometabolic disease and their complications are a major contributor to global morbidity and mortality. As of 2022, over 10% of the global population is affected by diabetes. , While much is known about population-level risk factors for cardiometabolic disease such as lifestyle, education, and access to care, the specific factors driving an individual’s disease remain less well understood. Advances in cancer treatment have significantly improved survival rates while also leading to an increase in therapy-induced cardiotoxicities, including HF, arrhythmias, and vascular dysfunction. While population-level risk factors for cardiotoxicity are well documented, predicting individual susceptibility and understanding their underlying mechanisms remain major challenges. 
iPSC technology stands as an innovative approach at the intersection of these two fields, providing a powerful tool to study the mechanisms of disease development and progression, mechanism of toxicity, cell interaction within a disease context, risk factor assessment, and personalized care to create a versatile platform for patient-specific drug discovery and validation. iPSCs are derived from an individual’s (patient or healthy) somatic cells (e.g., fibroblasts [FBs] from skin biopsies, peripheral blood mononuclear cells [PBMCs] , etc.) through the introduction of Yamanaka pluripotency factors . The derived iPSCs are characterized by a high proliferative rate and pluripotency in addition to recapitulating the genomic background of the individual from which they were derived. iPSCs solve the difficulty of deriving sufficient numbers or high-quality primary cells from multiple organs (including cardiac tissue), allowing the production of targeted cell types matching the unique genetic background of individual patients. Years of research have led to the development of robust protocols for the derivation of many cell types by recapitulating their developmental pathway ( ). 
In the context of cardio-oncology and cardiometabolic disease, iPSC-derived cells have allowed the expansion of in vitro research ( ). iPSC-derived CMs, cardiac fibroblasts (CFs), and endothelial cells (ECs) are used to model cardiotoxicity induced by anticancer drugs, effects of diabetes and other metabolic diseases on cardiac function, changes in endothelial function following immune response, and genetic basis of disease susceptibility and development. Assessing the cardiac safety of drugs, including the cardiotoxicity of anticancer therapies, is difficult with traditional models such as hERG overexpression in HEK cells or mouse models due to their limited comparability to the adult human heart (i.e., lack of ion channels and contractile machinery expression in HEK cells/heart size and beat rate and gene expression differences between humans and small animals). , iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes (iPSC-CMs) offer a more physiologically relevant alternative, as they better recapitulate the complex signaling, metabolic, and electrical properties of the human heart. With their high-throughput potential, non-invasive nature, and ability to exhibit key cardiac features, iPSC-CMs play a critical role in disease modeling and drug development, particularly in evaluating adverse drug effects. iPSCs have been used to investigate the metabolic signature, genetic background, and molecular basis of doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. iPSC-CMs derived from patients treated with doxorubicin who exhibited cardiotoxicity, and iPSC-CMs from treated patients without toxicity reactions, were found to recapitulate the same pattern of drug response in vitro. iPSC-CMs from patients with cardiotoxicity demonstrated decreased cell viability, altered mitochondria function, increased ROS production, and altered calcium handling compared to cells derived from patients who had no cardiotoxicity. Patient-derived iPSC-CMs were also used to determine the role of genome-wide association study-detected doxorubicin cardiotoxicity susceptibility variants in retinoic acid receptor gamma (RARG) and doxorubicin cardioprotective variants in SLC28A3. iPSCs were also used in a high-throughput editing screening to reveal a novel cardioprotective single-nucleotide polymorphism in SLC28A3. The same iPSC-CMs were further used in a drug screening effort that yielded an SLC inhibitor that protects against doxorubicin cardiotoxicity. A study investigating the cardiotoxicity of 21 Food and Drug Administration-approved TKIs using iPSC-CMs derived from 11 healthy individuals and 2 patients receiving TKI treatment led to the development of a “cardiac safety index” as a metric to screen cardiotoxic TKIs. This index is based on the TKI concentration that is required to cause problems in viability, contractile function, and signaling in the derived CMs. The study also uncovered a novel cardioprotective insulin/IGF signaling response to VEGF pathway-targeting TKIs. 
iPSC-derived cells are being used to model and explore genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying cardiometabolic disease ( ). Using iPSC-derived atrial CMs, researchers have linked obesity-related atrial fibrillation with increased oxidative stress through NADPH oxidase 2 (NOX2) activity. iPSC-derived endothelial cells (iPSC-ECs) were instrumental in connecting obesity, nitric oxide levels, inflammation, and their effect on obesity-related vascular impairments. Cardiac dysfunction in diabetes was connected to low levels of USP28, which was confirmed, and the mechanism was described using iPSC-CMs. The study showed that USP28 expression stabilized peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARα) through de-ubiquitination and subsequent Mfn2 transcription, preventing the formation of mitochondrial defects. iPSC-derived hepatocytes and macrophages have also been used to model inflammation-induced hepatic insulin resistance, further confirming TNF-α and IL-1β as mediators in the process. In addition to cardiac models, iPSC-derived hypothalamic neurons from obese patients were used to investigate central mechanisms of metabolic dysregulation. The iPSC-derived neurons recapitulate dysregulated respiratory function; stress pathway activation; and dysregulation of ghrelin-leptin signaling, axonal guidance, and glutamate receptors, all of which are obesogenic signatures. In another study, iPSC-derived hypothalamic neurons were used to determine the mechanism by which novel loss-of-function variants in Bassoon Presynaptic Cytomatrix proteins are linked to obesity, type 2 diabetes, and fatty liver disease through neurodegenerative pathways. These models help connect neuroendocrine regulation with systemic metabolic disease, a major shared risk factor for both CVD and cancer.
The utility of iPSCs as a source of patient-specific cells has been expanded further toward regenerative medicine. iPSCs enable high-quality and large-scale production of various cell types, as sources for tissue transplantation and regenerative therapies. Because iPSCs are genetically identical to the patient from whom they are derived, the risk of tissue rejection and detrimental immune response to foreign cells can be minimized. In the context of cardiometabolic diseases, one of the most promising applications of iPSCs is the production of pancreatic β cells. For individuals with diabetes caused by insulin deficiency, the introduction of healthy, functional β cells capable of producing insulin represents a groundbreaking therapeutic approach. Another cell therapy avenue being researched is transplantation of brown adipose cells to increase energy expenditure and treat obesity. 
It is important to note that currently available iPSC-CMs exhibit phenotypic plasticity during their in vitro lifespan in terms of variations in morphology, gene expression, physiology, and pharmacological sensitivity, which can influence their responses to environmental stimuli. Moreover, iPSC-CMs are considered immature, resembling CMs from the first trimester of fetal development. They are smaller in size and more rounded in shape compared to the rod-shaped primary CMs, have lower mitochondrial content, and rely predominantly on glycolysis as an energy source rather than fatty acid oxidation. Additionally, they display less organized sarcomeres, lack T-tubules, and exhibit altered contraction and electrical properties due to fetal gene expression patterns. To address these limitations, significant efforts are underway toward developing maturation protocols for iPSC-CMs, including small-molecule-based cocktails and 3D tissue assembly approaches. , 

## Tissue engineering approaches for cardio-oncology and cardiometabolic diseases
Building on advancements in iPSC-based disease modeling, tissue engineering approaches offer complementary and physiologically relevant tools for studying cardio-oncology and cardiometabolic diseases. By combining iPSCs with biomaterials, 3D scaffolds, and bioprinting technologies, tissue engineering can be used to recreate tissue-like heart and vascular microenvironments. These engineered tissues not only enhance the accuracy of disease modeling but also address some of the challenges associated with iPSC-derived models, such as cellular immaturity. Additionally, they provide dynamic systems for studying drug responses, mechanical stress, and cell-cell interactions under physiologically relevant conditions. , 
3D self-assembling cell masses known as organoids were first developed in 2011 by embedding mouse embryonic stem cells into hydrogel and guiding them through differentiation into polarized cortical brain tissue. Since then, organoids resembling brain, liver, gut, kidney, and heart, among others, have been developed and explored. By assembling iPSCs into 3D structures and initiating differentiation, the cells tend to differentiate through developmental trajectories resembling those in vivo. These organoids have a complex 3D architecture and contain many cellular types that are found in the in vivo organ they represent. Further development in organoid production has also led to the development of chimeric organoids (intestinal and nervous system connections), recapitulating the organs’ interactions observed in the body. The necessity for the inclusion of multiple cell types in the formation of organoids is additionally highlighted in the context of cardiac organoids. While most tissue bioengineering efforts are geared toward creating the appropriate microenvironment for the organization, maturation, form, and function of CMs, accurate recapitulation of the cardiac niche also requires inclusion of additional cell types present in the heart (CFs, ECs, etc.). For instance, the integration of ECs not only helps with enhancing the viability and function of CMs but also with newer protocols can lead to organoid vascularization. , Vascularized cardiac models have value for the study of coronary disease, infarction, and vascular drug effects. The addition of CFs into the 3D cardiac models allows for the integration of mechanical stimuli induced by the extracellular environment, making the modeling of electrophysiological changes and impairment observed during fibrosis feasible. 
While the use of organoids is already established for modeling organ-specific disease, their expansion in multiorgan and metabolic disease has garnered growing interest in recent years. iPSC-derived pancreatic-like organoids are being developed for diabetes modeling, drug testing, and transplantation therapy. Efforts are devoted toward developing islet-like organoids that do not produce any non-pancreatic-islet cell types but secrete the full spectrum of hormones to improve their accuracy and utility. Liver organoids are routinely applied to study nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and were used to confirm the role of several polymorphisms connected to NAFLD. Some of the latest studies used liver organoids in which NAFLD was induced, identifying several compounds that reversed the lipid accumulation. Additionally, these studies have uncovered the mechanism by which NAFLD polymorphisms are generated and potential genetic variants that could lower the efficacy of the discovered drugs. Vascularized adipocyte organoids have also been developed, but their use in modeling human metabolic disease like obesity is limited and awaits further refinement. Several iterations and protocols have been developed for the production of cardiac organoids, including ones that are vascularized and chambered. These are used to model cardiac development, congenital heart disease, and drug cardiotoxicity screenings. Cardiac organoids were recently shown to more accurately recapitulate 3D tissue-level responses to doxorubicin compared to 2D methods, including fibrotic effects and decreased contractile function. While cardiac organoids are a highly improved 3D tissue representation of the heart, they currently lack key maturation elements such as CM elongation, structural organization, unidirectional force production, synchronized electrical activity, and mature metabolic profiles, which are critical features found in engineered heart tissues (EHTs). 
EHTs consist of hydrogels and cardiac cells (CMs, ECs, and FBs in defined ratios) that are cast into molds with elastomeric pillars. Years of improvement and protocol development led to the formation of iPSC-derived EHTs that have mature cell properties, including dense cellular networks, organized ultrastructure including M-bands and connexins, improved calcium handing, and increased electrophysiological activity following electrical stimulation. Thanks to these properties, EHTs highly resemble adult heart tissue, making them ideal for more accurate drug testing and disease and toxicity modeling. A recent study tested the effect of sulforaphane, used for neurological disease and cancer treatment, on iPSC-derived EHTs. The results found that acute and chronic sulforaphane exposure reduced contractility of the EHTs and perturbed sarcomere organization and mitochondria function. This confirmed EHT’s utility in testing drug safety and potential cardiac consequences of drug exposure evaluation. However, EHT production is time consuming and costly, so alternative systems are required. Scaffold-free microtissues lack maturation and predictive potential found in EHTs, but they can be produced in large scales, to facilitate drug screening efforts. Current efforts are focused on the development of miniature EHTs that can combine advantages of both systems. , 
Taken together, iPSCs and their advanced 3D models have already demonstrated their utility in modeling complex diseases, metabolic dysregulation, and drug toxicity. By providing a human-based research and testing platform, they generate promising therapeutic avenues as a direct source for regenerative treatments, drug discovery, and personalized medicine ( ).

## Clinical implications and future directions
As cancer therapies continue to extend survival, patients are increasingly facing long-term cardiovascular consequences—not only from the treatments themselves but also from cancer-related inflammation and metabolic disruption. This is especially true for individuals with underlying cardiometabolic disease, who may experience synergistic effects on cardiac function. In this context, cardio-oncology must evolve beyond reactive management toward a proactive, integrative approach. Preventative strategies targeting metabolic risk factors (e.g., statins, glycemic control, etc.) hold promise for improving both cancer and cardiovascular outcomes. These considerations set the stage for translational efforts, including dietary interventions and patient-specific iPSC-based strategies, to optimize therapy and minimize harm.
Several lines of evidence support the central role of metabolism in the development of both CVD and cancer. Targeting specific metabolic signatures—whether through direct enzyme inhibition or dietary modulation—can influence tumor growth, improve therapy tolerance, and reduce cancer-associated cardiovascular risk. These efforts are exemplified by the clinical use of IDH1/2 inhibitors. Additionally, preclinical studies have shown that intermittent fasting can delay tumorigenesis and reduce growth factor signaling, offering another potential avenue for systemic metabolic intervention.
Furthermore, the investigation into how risk factors for both cancer and CVD such as obesity, diabetes, and dyslipidemia might provide new avenues for systemic solutions to both diseases through dietary interventions. Fasting has been shown to have positive effects on cancer prevention and treatment in mice. Just 1 day of fasting per week delays tumorigenesis in p53-deficient mice, with other effects including decreased plasma levels of glucose, insulin, and insulin-like growth factor 1. Periods of fasting are also followed by high cellular proliferation, characterized by cellular repair pathway activation and driven by the replenishment of growth factors during refeeding that can reverse atrophic cellular remodeling.
iPSC technologies offer a versatile and powerful platform for accurately modeling CVDs, metabolic disorders, cancer, and their complex interactions. By providing an essentially unlimited supply of targeted cell types derived from either healthy controls or patients, these models enable the recapitulation of disease-specific phenotypes influenced by genetic and environmental factors. As an accessible, precise, and highly adaptable system, iPSCs can enable groundbreaking discoveries in disease mechanisms and toxicity progression while also facilitating the development of effective therapeutic strategies.
iPSCs’ ability to reflect the unique genetic background of the individual from which they are derived positions them as a cornerstone for advancing personalized precision medicine. In cardio-oncology, iPSCs provide a robust platform to assess individual responses to anticancer therapies, enabling the identification of treatment combinations that maximize tumor suppression while minimizing detrimental side effects. This approach holds immense promise for tailoring treatments to the unique needs of each patient with transformative implications for improving outcomes in cancer survivors, who face heightened risks of developing CVD.
To fully realize the potential of these technologies, cross-disciplinary research integrating cardio-oncology, oncology, and cardio-metabolism is essential. Such collaboration can bridge the critical gap between molecular studies and clinical applications, leveraging patient-derived samples for mechanistic insights and risk stratification, and promote the development of novel therapeutic strategies. Ultimately, this integrated approach promises the advent of a new paradigm to transform patient care, by effectively treating both cancer progression and its cardiovascular consequences.

## Acknowledgments
The graphical abstract was created using BioRender (https://BioRender.com/i37p923). The authors would like to acknowledge funding relevant to this manuscript: R01HL148272 (B.K.); AHA Strategically Focused Research Network in Cardio-Oncology
869105, 849569, and K24 HL167127 (B.K.); R01 HL141466, R01 HL155990, R01 HL160688, and R01 HL156021 (J.M.); R01 HL141851, R01 H150693, R01 HL171102, R01 HL176822, and U01 AI183953 (J.C.W.); and P01 HL141084 (J.M. and J.C.W.).

## Declaration of interests
J.M. has served as a consultant to Arcus, AskBio, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Deciphera, ImmunoCore, Innovent Bio, Nektar, Novartis, Shattuck Labs, Sobi, and Takeda. J.C.W. is a co-founder and scientific advisory board member of Greenstone Biosciences.