3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1198321911983219119832194022441810.1021/acsomega.4c02927Role of Phytonutrients
in the Prevention and Treatment
of Chronic Diseases: A Concrete Review
TufailTabussam FatimaSmeea Bader Ul AinHuma IkramAli NoreenSana RebezovMaksim AL-FargaAmmar SalehRashad ShariatiMohammad Ali †School
of Food and Biological Engineering, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, 212013, China‡University
Institute of Diet and Nutritional Sciences, The University of Lahore, Lahore, 54000, Pakistan§Department
of Scientific Research, V. M. Gorbatov Federal
Research Center for Food Systems, 26 Talalikhin Str., Moscow 109316, Russia∥Faculty
of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Ural
State Agrarian University, 42 Karl Liebknecht str., Yekaterinburg, 620075, Russia⊥Department
of Biotechnology, Toraighyrov University, 64 Lomov Str., Pavlodar, 140008, Kazakhstan#Department
of Biochemistry, College of Sciences, University
of Jeddah, Jeddah, 21577, KSA7Medical Microbiology
Department, Faculty of Science, IBB University, IBB, Yemen8Kazakh
Research
Institute of Processing and Food Industry (Semey Branch), Semey 071410, Kazakhstan*Rashad.Saleh@ibbuniv.edu.ye.
*tabussam.tufail@dnsc.uol.edu.pk.
273202510131272412724–127551142025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Delving into the intricate role of phytonutrients is
paramount
to effectively preventing and treating chronic diseases. Phytonutrients
are “plant-based nutrients” that positively affect human
health. Phytonutrients perform primary therapeutic functions in the
management and treatment of various diseases. It is reported that
different types of pathogenesis occur due to the excessive production
of oxidants (reactive nitrogen species and reactive oxygen species).
The literature shows that a higher intake of fruits, vegetables, and
other plant-based food is inversely related to treating different
chronic diseases. Due to many phytonutrients (antioxidants) in fruits,
vegetables, and other medicinal plants, they are considered major
therapeutic agents for various diseases. The main purpose of this
review is to summarize the major phytonutrients involved in preventing
and treating diseases. Fourteen major phytonutrients are discussed
in this review, such as polyphenols, anthocyanin, resveratrol, phytosterol
(stigmasterol), flavonoids, isoflavonoids, limonoids, terpenoids,
carotenoids, lycopene, quercetin, phytoestrogens, glucosinolates,
and probiotics, which are well-known for their beneficial effects
on the human body and treatment of different pathological conditions.
It is concluded that phytonutrients play a major role in the prevention
and treatment of diabetes mellitus, obesity, hypertension, cardiovascular
disorders, other types of cancers, neurological disorders, age-related
diseases, and inflammatory disorders and are also involved in various
biological activities.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Mar 27; Accepted 2025 Feb 12; Revised 2025 Feb 9; Collection date 2025 Apr 8.

## Introduction
Chronic diseases are multifaceted challenges,
but a promising
solution lies in the realm of phytonutrients. These natural compounds,
found abundantly in plants, play a pivotal role in preventing and
treating chronic illnesses. , Phytonutrients encompass
a diverse array of compounds, including flavonoids, carotenoids, polyphenols,
and more, each with unique health benefits. Flavonoids, for instance,
possess potent antioxidant properties that combat oxidative stress,
reducing the risk of heart disease and cancer. Carotenoids such as beta-carotene bolster immune function and promote
eye health. Meanwhile, polyphenols found in foods like green tea and
berries exhibit anti-inflammatory and anticancer properties. Understanding the role of these phytonutrients
is essential in crafting effective dietary and therapeutic strategies
for chronic disease management. Incorporating a variety of plant-based
foods into one’s diet can provide a rich source of these compounds,
offering a holistic approach to improving health and mitigating the
burden of chronic diseases. 
Major
nutrients present in food are macronutrients (protein, carbohydrate,
and fats) and micronutrients (minerals and vitamins) that perform
important functions in maintaining human health. Some biologically
active components in the food, known as phytochemicals or phytonutrients,
also play a necessary role in human health. Phytonutrients are plant-based nutrients, also known as phytochemicals,
which have important positive effects on human health. They support
the health and regular functioning of the human body and increase
life span. Phytonutrients perform major therapeutic functions in the
management and treatment of various diseases. Various types of uninvestigated
species of plants are also other sources of nutrients and biologically
active phytochemicals with different healthful effects. , These plant-based phytochemicals work as an attractant for pollination
and protect from pests and insects’ assaults and also protect
from different stresses like ultraviolet radiation. Moreover, phytochemicals involved in the aroma, flavor,
and color of the plants are also identified as having promising nutritional
value and being good for human health. These phytochemicals are present
in our daily diet by consuming vegetables, fruits, grains, legumes,
beans, nuts, tea, herbs and coffee. Mainly,
phytonutrients are terms that deal with different types of plant-based
compounds or nutrients. They play important therapeutic functions,
for example, antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic
activities. The tradition of treating
different disorders through various medicinal plants is older than
civilization. Multiple studies have demonstrated
a clear correlation between the higher intake of plant-derived products
and reduced risk of chronic diseases and mortality. Phytonutrients
serve as antioxidants carrying out protective functions in the body. , 
Phytonutrients are essential secondary metabolites, and these
nutrients are also related to the different classes of the phytochemicals.
Various major classes of phytochemicals have tremendous health benefits,
for example, carotenoids, anthocyanins, flavonoids and isoflavonoids,
lignins and neolignans, diarylalkanoids, polyphenols, tannins, phenolic
acids and sterols. , However, phytonutrients such
as polyphenols, phytoestrogen, glucosinolates, and carotenoids are
not as essential as macro- and micronutrients. Still, they are beneficial
for preventing and treating chronic diseases and keeping our body
fit. Various highly nutritious fruits have many phytonutrients and
micronutrients, such as grapes, guava, amla, and kokum. The health
of young adults and antioxidant status can be improved through the
usual intake of these fruit-based drinks. The high variety of phytonutrient consumption depends mostly on
the availability and affordability of healthful plant products. A
research project has estimated that the balanced French diet contains
7 phytonutrients that effectively meet the requirements of both macronutrients
and micronutrients. Furthermore, this diet is beneficial for maintaining
optimal health. More than 25,000 phytonutrients
are determined from plant-based food products such as carotenoids,
flavonoids, anthocyanins, phenolic acid, polyphenols, sterols, and
terpenes. Phytonutrients’ major beneficial functions stem from
inherent antioxidative properties. , Polyphenols,
flavonoids, isoflavones, carotenoids, phenolic acids, stilbenoids,
coumarins, indoles, lignin, catechins, organosulfur, anthraquinones,
procyanidins, isothiocyanates, ginsenosides, saponins, phenylpropanoids,
etc. are the most common phytochemicals. , 
The literature shows that a higher intake of fruits, vegetables
and other plant-based food is inversely related to treating different
chronic diseases and is responsible for the health benefits. In recent years, there has been a growing use
of phytonutrients and nutraceuticals for the purpose of preserving
immunological health. , It is observed that the parameters
of antioxidant levels are reduced in patients with diabetes mellitus.
According to different studies, phytochemicals are recommended to
improve and overcome insulin sensitivity due to the phytochemical
antioxidant level and free radical scavenging activities. , To address the complexities of diabetes, a range of photoactive
substances such as flavonoids and propenylphenols are employed. , Phytonutrients are used for the antimicrobial effect, antioxidative
effect, modulation of hormone metabolism and detoxification enzymes
to reduce platelet aggregation and stimulation of the immune system. Phytochemicals can detoxify substances that
are carcinogenic, are antimutagenic, and have strong chemoprotective
properties. , 
The antioxidants and phytonutrient’s
dietary sources may
positively and healthfully affect managing oxidative stress, neurological
diseases, cardiovascular disorders, and cancer. Flavonoids, phenolic
acids, and carotenoids are usually present in plant-based food items.
These phytonutrients have powerful antioxidant characteristics and
save cells from further harm, decreasing the hazard of CVD and Alzheimer’s
disease. Mostly obesity depends on physical inactivity and dietary
intake, and the risk of obesity is reduced by using plant-derived
dietary sources because it alters the lipid composition and metabolism. , Taking a healthy diet high in antioxidants and anti-inflammatory
phytonutrients primarily prevents neurodegenerative disorders, which
is one of the least expensive and most healthful solutions to overcome
these kinds of problems. Phytochemicals
and polyunsaturated fatty acids obtained from walnuts have numerous
health benefits and mainly play a role in the betterment of brain
functioning. Amaranth seeds and quinoa
seeds have many health benefits, specifically in the reduction of
oxidative stress-related problems such as cancer, diabetes, obesity,
and cardiovascular disorders. The health benefits of amaranth and
quinoa seed depend on the composition of their phytonutrients and
the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities of the lipophilic
(for example, fatty acids, carotenoids and tocopherols) and hydrophilic
(for example, betacyanins and phenolic) nutrients. , Gastrointestinal disorders such as dyspepsia, irritable bowel syndrome,
and functional constipation have been increasingly common in the past
several years. Consuming biologically active dietary ingredients,
such as phytochemicals and probiotics, has been shown in recent research
to be effective in the treatment of the aforementioned conditions. , The objectives of this review are to comprehensively assess existing
scientific literature on the role of phytonutrients in preventing
and treating chronic diseases, evaluate the mechanisms by which phytonutrients
impact health, assess their efficacy in lowering the risk of chronic
diseases, and provide concrete recommendations for their incorporation
into dietary and therapeutic strategies.

## Major Phytonutrients and Their Health Benefits

## Polyphenols
The structures of various phytochemicals
are presented in . Polyphenol is the most critical and very well-known phytonutrient.
 It is a secondary metabolite with
various unique bioactive characteristics
that make it highly recommended for the positive health effects of
plants and humans. Polyphenols are different compounds with respect
to their structure but are necessary for the various functions in
plants and provide the organoleptic and nutritional characteristics
to plant-based foods. These polyphenols play a vital role in the betterment
of the human body. , These are the naturally occurring
components formed in plants with different chemical structures and
features, eliciting powerful antioxidative properties. Polyphenols
have two phenyl rings and one or more hydroxyl substituents. The intake of Mediterranean or Asian diets has
significant health effects due to the presence of many polyphenols
in these diets. There is a relationship between the plant polyphenols
and homeostatic systems of a cell which have protests, metabolic and
redox equilibrium and inflammatory responses, establishing the different
health effects. , presents the bioactive constituents from
different food sources and their functions in the human body.
 Polyphenols are a group of different phytonutrients
with several
health benefits. Other groups of polyphenols are divided according
to the number of phenolic rings. Flavonoids are subclassified into
many flavones, isoflavones, flavanols/catechins, flavonols/flavan
3 oil, anthocyanidins or anthocyanins, and chalcones. Non-flavonoids
polyphenols are subclassified as stibenes, coumarins, tannins, benzophenones,
diferuloylmethanes, secoriridoids and phenolic acids etc. , Polyphenols, including phenolic acids, can be found in a wide range
of foods such as cereals, legumes, fruits, vegetables, chocolates,
and beverages like tea, coffee, and wine, as well as in foods like
artichokes, wheat flour, onions, apples, kiwis, berries, citrus fruits,
and tropical fruits. − Polyphenols-rich foods and their extracts are useful
and inversely related to the prevention and treatment of various diseases
such as metabolic syndrome and some components, different types of
cancers, cardiovascular disorders, and neurodegenerative diseases
and are useful for their antioxidant and chemopreventive functions. , Different polyphenol compounds are utilized to prevent and stop
the development and prognosis of cancer; for example, green tea has
the polyphenols epigallocatechin 3 O gallate, resveratrol and curcumin. , Polyphenols also work as therapeutic agents in various autoimmune
diseases. , The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory functions
of polyphenols have advanced our knowledge in managing gut microbiota. Various studies of plants and plant extracts
have shown that polyphenols have powerful beneficial health effects
in the prevention and management of several chronic diseases such
as inflammation, CVDs, neurological diseases, and cancers. As shown in , polyphenols are classified into two groups:
flavonoid and non-flavonoid molecules. 
 

## Resveratrol
Resveratrol is a notable polyphenolic stilbene. It plays positive health effects against different
pathways such as angiogenesis, apoptosis, oxidative stress, inflammation
and mitochondrial stress. , NADPH oxidase mediated
formation of reactive oxygen species through lowering activities and
oxidase expression is inhibited by resveratrol. Resveratrol decreases
the generation of mitochondrial superoxide by stimulating the biogenesis
of mitochondria. On the other hand, resveratrol also prevents or inhibits
the production of superoxide from the uncoupled endothelial NO2 synthase. It also increases the regulation of tetra-hydro
biopterin synthesizing enzyme GTP cyclopyrrolone I (GTPCH-I). Stilbene sources are grapes and wines. Dark
chocolate, berries, apples, tomatoes, pistachios and peanuts also
have minor amounts. Other sources of
resveratrol are jackfruits, cacao, blackberries, cranberries and grapes. Various in vitro and animal studies also defined
the role of resveratrol in the prevention of breast cancer, prostate
cancer, colon cancer, and lung cancer. Resveratrol is also adopted
as a therapeutic support in cancer treatments, for example, radiotherapy. Resveratrol is a phytonutrient which works as
an antioxidant, antiaging, antidiabetic, antiobesity, anticancer,
neuroprotective, antiatherosclerotic and cardioprotective agent. It also plays an effective role in inflammatory
diseases and neurodegenerative diseases. Resveratrol has enhanced exercise performance, increased insulin
sensitivity, and mimicked the effects of calorie restriction. It also
lowers body fat by upregulating the mobilization of lipids in adipose
tissues and preventing abiogenesis. , 

## Flavonoids
Flavonoids make up one of the most prominent
nutrient families known. From different studies, more than 6000 family
members have been reported. The word flavonoids is derived from the
Latin word flavus, which means yellow, because of their color-related
properties. Flavonoid is a class of phytonutrients. Flavonoids are naturally necessary polyphenolic compounds,
and the flavan nucleus characterizes them. Most common phytonutrients
are present in plant-based beverages, fruits, and vegetables. These
are dietary compounds that help in the improvement of human health
and prevent different disorders. Flavonoids are indispensable compounds
used in cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, medicine, and
other industries. Flavonoids are the
compound of polyphenols and are subclassified into six main groups
such as flavanones, isoflavonoids, flavones, flavonols, flavanols,
and anthocyanidins present in various plants. The main dietary sources
of the flavonoids are plant-based foods like vegetables, fruits, plant-based
drinks such as wine, green tea and cocoa-derived products. These are biologically active compounds. Flavonoids-rich
foods are grapes, berries, cherries, citrus fruits, artichokes, onions,
cowpeas, soybeans, blackens, oregano, parsley and tea. All of the bioactivities depend on the type
of flavonoid, its bioavailability, and its mode of action. These medicinal
phytonutrients have significant bioactivities and effects for several
chronic diseases. , Flavonoids are the largest class
of secondary metabolites that perform major beneficial healthful functions
in humans, which include free radical scavenging abilities, antioxidative
properties, antiatherosclerotic and anticancer activities, and hepatoprotective
and cardiopreventive functions. Therefore, flavonoids are the center
of attention in healthcare and pharmacological activity. They play a healthy role as antidiabetic, antidegranulating,
antiplatelet, anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory, antitumor, antibacterial,
antifungal, antitubercular, antitrypanosomal, and immunomodulatory
activities and aldehyde oxidase and influenza virus neuraminidase
inhibition. So, flavonoids are the best
and most promising phytonutrients for effectively preventing and treating
various diseases. 

## Isoflavonoids
Isoflavones are natural flavonoids mainly
present in the diet of the East Asian population. Their structure
can exert nonsteroidal estrogen activities on the cells of humans.
According to researchers worldwide, positive results are found in
clinical and epidemiological studies. These phytonutrients are present in various food products, such
as vegetables and legumes, such as red and white clover, soy, beans,
and alfalfa. The most significantly known isoflavone dietary sources
in humans are soy and different soy-based products. For some years, various evidence-based researchers have
claimed that isoflavonoids either are dietary or come from medicinal
plants. They perform a major role in managing type 2 diabetes mellitus
because their various metabolically positive health effects are also
associated with diabetes. Bioflavonoids have the ability down-regulate
the progression of long run diabetic complications such as neuropathy,
nephropathy, retinopathy and cardiovascular disorders. , Daidzein, glycitein, and genistein are soybean isoflavones and have
exceptional health benefits. Isoflavonoids are also good anti-inflammatory
agents. They also inhibit cell division in Staphylococcus
aureus and helps in the treatment of salivary gland problems,
which occurred due to estrogen deficiency. The mineral content of
bones increases due to daidzein and genistein, so they protect from
bone loss. For neck and head cancer, genistein is the preventive chemical
agent. As an alternative therapy for
hormonal disorders, isoflavones act as chemoprotective agents. They
are also therapeutic for different types of cancers, such as prostate
and breast cancer, and they play beneficial functions in treating
cardiovascular disorders, menopausal symptoms and osteoporosis. 

## Anthocyanins
Anthocyanins are a class of water-soluble
flavonoids and a secondary metabolite. Anthocyanin and proanthocyanins play important biological activities
like antioxidative activities. These are also widely spread in the
plant kingdom. These compounds are found
in several different color plants, such as purple, blue and red grains,
vegetables and fruits. Anthocyanin is
a natural pigment responsible for the blue and red colors of various
vegetables, fruits, and grains. Due to its large distribution in plant-based
foods, the dietary intake of anthocyanins is higher than that of other
flavonoids. The properties of anthocyanins
and their color stability depend on the temperature, solvent, pH,
and other environmental factors. These are the bioactive components
and anthocyanin intake benefits to human health due to their antioxidant
properties. The antioxidative properties
of anthocyanins in food are good. , Studies show
that blueberries are rich in anthocyanins, which will decrease the
peak postprandial glucose level in humans. To prevent and treat different chronic disorders, anthocyanins are
consumed because of their antioxidative, antiapoptotic, and anti-inflammatory
effects. Anthocyanins are the most commonly known nutraceuticals for
enhancing health benefits by managing oxidative stress, inflammatory
diseases and age-related problems. Several
findings indicate anthocyanin’s properties in treating different
types of cancer, allergies and osteoporosis. , Moreover, they also target different molecules in the signaling
transduction and management of metabolic syndrome-related disorders
like cardiovascular diseases, obesity, diabetes and fatty liver disorders,
as mentioned in . Anthocyanins also have healthful effects
like antimicrobial activities, regulating blood pressure, decreasing
cancer cell proliferation, and preventing tumor cell formation. Oral blackcurrant intake has a promising impact
on patients of open-angle glaucoma and is also effective for antiglaucoma
drugs. On the other hand, anthocyanins-rich bilberry extracts have
beneficial effects on vision during retinal inflammation. , 
 

## Quercetin
Quercetin belongs to the class of flavonols.
It is a very important flavonoid. Bioactive compounds are useful in
the most important flavonoid pharmaceutical industries and medicine.
It is found in many food items, for example black tea, green tea,
red wine, onions and broccoli. Apples,
wines, and onions have a rich amount of quercetin. It is also present
in different plant species, e.g., pepper, reddish, fennel, coriander,
and tea. Quercetin has health-promoting properties against several
disorders, such as cancer, diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disorders,
neurological disorders, asthma, allergies and atopic diseases. This class of flavonoids is an active compound
for managing hypertension, vascular diseases, and inflammatory problems.
Quercetin also treats major heart-related disorders such as the endothelium
independent vasodilator effect, inhibition of LDL oxidation, and decreasing
adhesion molecules and other inflammatory markers. It has a beneficial
effect on NO2 and endothelial function in conditions of
oxidative stress and is also protective against neuronal inflammatory
and oxidative damage and platelet antiaggregate effects. It is a dietary compound that gives potential
health benefits and is an alternative medicine for breast cancer. Quercetin is also used to treat atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disorders, as it has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
characteristics and involves lowering lipids in the blood and also
affects endothelium-dependent vasodilation. 

## Carotenoids
Carotenoids are broadly found as natural
phytonutrients. Various studies were conducted on compounds like lutein,
beta-carotene and lycopene, which are involved in the management of
human health and beta-carotene, lutein, violaxanthin, spermidine and
zeaxanthin in the photosynthetic processes of plants and bacteria. Many researchers’ classification of
carotenoids and their effect on human health are also explained. The
most known carotenoids are zeaxanthin, lutein, lycopene, canthaxanthin,
astaxanthin and beta carotene. In the
leaves of all plants, neoxanthin, lutein, violaxanthin, and beta carotene
are present. Carotenoids are also present in the petals of flowers
and fruits containing specific chloroplast carotenoids and other derivative
compounds, such as lycopene and capsanthin. The dietary sources of
the carotenoids are green leafy vegetables like broccoli, spinach,
brussels sprouts, kale, arugula, and lettuce. Moreover, these compounds
are also present in carrots, tomatoes, squash, peppers, sweet potatoes,
citrus fruits, seeds, mushrooms, and other plants. They are also found
in herbs like basil and parsley. − The mechanism of action
of the carotenoids is not well-defined, but it has been linked with
the antioxidative capacity of carotenoids. It works against reactive
oxygen species, inhibiting free radicals and carotenoids and also
modulating gene expression. These dietary components accumulate in
the liver and other organs. Retinoids
and carotenoids have different bioactive properties, such as downregulating
tumor cells’ growth, induction of apoptosis and antioxidative
properties. Primarily giving an antioxidants
effect, individual carotenoids also work through different mechanisms;
for example, lutein or zeaxanthin has macular eye pigment, and beta
carotene has the function of pro-vitamin A. Lutein gives a beneficial
effect on age-related macular eye disorders and cataracts. Foods rich
in lutein have adequate consumption recommendations, which will help
promote awareness in the local public. Different evidence is also
available about the carotenoids’ healthful effects on the eyes.
They also help promote cognitive abilities and help prevent cancer
and cardiovascular disorders. Carotenoids
play an essential role in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disorders
and other neurodegenerative problems. 

## Lycopene
Lycopene is a naturally present pigment of
carotenoids. Its dietary consumption is recommended throughout life
due to its health-promoting characteristics. Lycopene plays different
beneficial roles in human health, as it involves stimulation to modulate
the growth of cells and expression of connexin 43. Lycopene also
provides protection to DNA, lipids and proteins from oxidative damage,
IGF1 or IGF binding protein blood levels also intermediate in the
inflammatory and immune processes. Lycopene
is a carotenoid noncyclic component present in tomatoes. It is the
most responsive in vitro free radical scavenger of all of the carotenoids.
Lycopene enhances the levels of glutathione and enhances the activities
of the antioxidative enzymes, for example, glutathione peroxidases,
catalase, and superoxide dismutase. Lycopene protects lipids, DNA
and other macromolecules due to its antioxidative characteristics. Dietary lycopene and its supplementation are
helpful in the prevention and management of different chronic disorders
such as cardiovascular disease, asthma and cancers. It also effectively treats oxidative-stress-mediated malfunctions,
diabetes (T2DM), cardiovascular-related complications, and inflammatory
problems. Lycopene gives good results in managing skin and bone diseases
and neural, hepatic, and reproductive disorders. It is majorly present
in tomatoes and tomato-derived food products. Guava, pink grapefruits, and melons are all natural sources
of lycopene. Its bioavailability is affected due to cooking. Its bioavailability
is high in heat treated in comparison to natural products. Most consumed are tomatoes, watermelons, papaya,
guava and grapefruit. , 

## Terpenoids
Terpenoids are the natural phytonutrients
in different green plants and food products. Various preclinical and
clinical studies suggest that these phytonutrients have important
pharmacological activities. Some natural
sources of terpenes are ethanol extract and oregano essential oil. Terpenoids were used in pharmaceuticals, cosmetics,
and the food industry as a raw material. Terpenoids are used as antibacterial,
antimalarial, antitumor, antiviral, and anti-inflammatory agents.
They also increase transdermal absorption and manage diabetes and
cardiovascular diseases. Terpenoids
also have some other therapeutic characteristics that make them important
in the medical field, such as antimicrobial, chemotherapeutic and
immune modulatory effects. A detailed
review is also available, which concluded the industrially best antimicrobial
bioactivities and mechanism of action for three types of nutraceutical
plants: terpenoids, for example, carnosic acid; thiols, for example,
allicin; and polyphenols, for example, quercetin. These are the important
constituents of plant̀s’ essential oils with positive
antimicrobial effects. The mentioned phytochemicals are mainly present
in vegetables and fruits and, importantly, are used in food preservation
as microbial growth inhibitors. 

## Limonoids
These compounds are the group of oxygenated
triterpenoids in the plant families of Meliaceae and Rutaceae. Limonoids
attracted people’s attention and were considered problematic
for the citrus fruit industries because of their bitter properties,
through the biochemical transformation of the tasteless limonoid aglycone
precursor into the bitter one. , Citrus fruit limonoids
are tetranortriterpenoid phytonutrients present in lemons, grapefruits,
oranges, and all other citrus fruits. These phytonutrients have antioxidative,
anti-inflammatory, antitumor, antineurological diseases, immune-modulatory,
antibacterial, anti-insect, antiviral, etc activities. Limonoids are the smaller number of plant families,
exhibiting a larger range of health-promoting, disease preventing
and medicinal properties. 

## Stigmasterol (Phytosterol)
Phytosterols play a prominent
role in pharmaceuticals, nutrition, food and cosmetics. Phytosterols are natural plant cell membranes
and have great value in the food industry because they lower the level
of low-density lipoproteins and cholesterol in human blood. These
are plant-derived bioactive metabolites and act as anti-inflammatory
and antidiabetic agents and have cholesterol-lowering abilities. In different studies, the effect of foods rich
in sterols or stanols and the effect of sterol or stanol supplements
on the management of the serum concentration of LDL are very well
characterized. On the other hand, they also show beneficial and useful
effects on nonlipid problems, such as inflammatory and coagulation
parameters, endothelial role and oxidative stress markers, etc. All
these functions of phytosterols and stanols make them more attractive
and an alternative for dietary intake to prevent the CVDs, mainly
in low- or medium-risk populations. Nowadays,
phytosterols are also used to fortify and enrich various food products.
Phytosterols are easily oxidized as unsaturated fatty acids and cholesterol.
To overcome the drawbacks which are associated with the use of phytosterols,
microencapsulation is beneficial for food fortification. 

## Phytoestrogens
Phytoestrogens are a plant-based compound,
and their structure is similar to that of 17 beta-estradiol. Majorly,
four phenolic components are characterized as phytoestrogens: stilbene,
lignin, coumestan, and isoflavones. Some certain types of functional
food are known as phytoestrogens and nonsteroidal compounds. These
compounds are derived from the metabolic activities of precursors
present in plants. These secondary metabolites produce biological
responses by mimicry/modulating the action of endogenous estrogen. , Beta estrogen is a basic female sex hormone structurally similar
to E2 and allows the phytoestrogens to produce anti-oestrogenic effects
through binding with the estrogen receptors. Decreasing the hazard
of menopausal symptoms, such as osteoporosis and hot flashes, also
reduces the risk of diabetes, obesity, CVDs, metabolic disorders,
neurological disorders, and different types of cancers, like breast
cancer, bowel cancer, prostate cancer and other cancers. Generally, phytoestrogen is considered weak
estrogen compared to estradiol, and phytoestrogen is needed in higher
amounts than estradiol to give similar biological activities. Polyphenolic
phytoestrogens include compounds known as isoflavones, which occur
as glucoconjugates of daidzein, glycitein, and genistein. All the
phytoestrogens and metabolites have a minimum of one aromatic ring. All over the world, soy and soy products plus
legumes are considered a part of a healthy lifestyle. So, phytoestrogens
are a regular part of daily life. Phytoestrogens’ activities
depend on the microbiome. Their metabolites have powerful estrogenic
functions compared to the naturally occurring substances and due to
the differences in the microbiomes. There is more difference in the
useful effects of phytoestrogens in individuals. Dietary estrogens are consumed from plants, such as green
beans, chickpeas, soy, flaxseeds, etc., or plant-derived food products,
such as soy-based food, dairy products, etc. 

## Glucosinolates
Glucosinolates are bioactive secondary
metabolites with various nutritional benefits. , Glucosinolates are compounds from the brassicaceae plant family, such as mustard, horse radish, cabbage, broccoli,
cauliflower and rapeseeds. Naturally
found glucosinolates are also known as thioglucosides in cruciferous
plants like cabbage, oil seed crops, herbage like brassica kale, and
condiments like mustard seeds. More
than 120 types of glucosinolates are present in cruciferous plants.
The content and chemical structure may affect the beneficial nutritional
effects on human health. There are also some cases in which GSLs are
associated with toxic effects. Mainly, toxic effects are related to
hypertrophy of the thyroid glands and induction of goiter. GSLs are
biologically active compounds with important health effects on the
different types of cancers and carcinogenesis activities and in the
intact form after its enzymatic or nonenzymatic transformation in
the indole and isothiocyanates compounds. Glucosinolates (GSLs) protect from neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes
mellitus, CVDs, and various inflammatory problems. 

## Probiotics
Probiotics are a live microbial culture;
they increase the useful effects of the gut microflora to enhance
the quality of the health of humans. They are an emerging field of
interest with high growth potential in the dairy food industry. Food
supplements of probiotics also have great interest in the field. Several
yeasts, molds, and bacteria can be used as a probiotic. A commonly
used microorganism is lactic acid bacteria. These lactic acid bacteria
are involved in the fermentation of different dairy products, foods
and beverages and produce lactic acid as an end product of fermentation. , Fermented vegetables and fermented fruits are known as prebiotics
and are among the sources of probiotics. They are rich in antioxidative
properties and give beneficial health effects to humans. From the perspective of cholesterol in dairy
product probiotics in developed countries and due to the economic
condition of developing countries, research is now diverted to nondairy
probiotics. From the research, rapidly emerging nondairy probiotics-based
food products are legumes, cereals, vegetables, and fruits. All of
these alternative dairy probiotic sources are cheap and have increased
phytochemicals or phytonutrients. Alternative nondairy sources also
decrease the hazard of cholesterol diseases in lactose-intolerant
persons. Fermented potatoes and their
beverages are advantageous for vegetarians who have allergies to dairy
products. Probiotics are also involved in the management of the metabolism
of hosts. Probiotics are good to use due to their antimicrobial properties.
They also reduce GIT infection, improve the metabolism of lactose
intolerant people, control serum cholesterol, have antidiarrheal activities
and improve IBS symptoms, and have anticarcinogenic properties. The major phytonutrients, their food sources,
and their health benefits are presented in .
 

## Phytonutrients Involved in the Prevention and Treatment of Various
Diseases

## Antidiabetic Phytonutrients
Diabetes Mellitus is a
metabolic disorder in which a continuous increase in the blood glucose
level occurs, known as “hyperglycemia”. Diabetes mellitus is classified into two main
types: type 1 diabetes mellitus and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Type
2 diabetes mellitus has the highest prevalence rate (>85%). Diabetes
mellitus can cause both microvascular end-point complications, such
as neuropathy, nephropathy and retinopathy, and macrovascular end
point complications, which are peripheral vascular disorders, ischemic
heart disorders and stroke. Type 1 diabetes mellitus etiology is not
completely understood. According to the studies, the prevalence of
diabetes mellitus in 2017 was 435 million people globally, and it
is expected that the prevalence of diabetes will rise to 629 million
people by 2045. Type 2 diabetes mellitus
is rapidly increasing in developing countries, and its prevalence
rate depends on the degree of urbanization and is according to the
urban and rural habitat. In a few ethnic groups, such as South Asians
and other Asian plus Africans, they may develop diabetes earlier and
at a lower BMI as compared to whites. They had abdominal obesity and
also leading diabetes phase from the prediabetes. , 
Phytochemicals can act as an antidiabetic and must be utilized
according to their recommended dosages. Some diabetes-treated phytonutrients
include resveratrol, lycopene, quercetin, thymoquinone, and biguanides.
But the proper formulation and clinical trials of these phytochemicals
are still in progress. Most determined findings focus on the specific
aspect of different biochemical pathways including antioxidation,
increasing glucose utilization, antiglycation, induction of insulin
production, etc. Detailed research on the biochemical, functional
and immunological factors of phytonutrients indicating their safety
and efficacy in managing diabetes is reported. The mediterranean diet’s components (vegetables,
fruits, olive oil, tree nuts, and fatty fish) serve as functional
foods due to their nutraceutical contents such as terpenoids, polyphenols,
flavonoids, sterol, pigments, alkaloids, and unsaturated fatty acids.
Studies in diabetic and high-risk patients using polyphenols in the
Mediterranean diet, which is rich in herbages, for example, green
tea, coffee, black tea and yerba mate, show well know clinical positive
effects on the management of metabolic conditions, microvascular activities,
cholesterol-lowering, fasting glucose lowering, antioxidative activities,
and anti-inflammatory activities. 
According to a study, diabetes mellitus type 2 depends on the person’s
lifestyle. Intake of vegetables may prevent diabetes, and this is
dependent on the selection of vegetables and the consumed amount of
phytonutrients, minerals, vitamins and dietary fibers. Flavonoid is a biologically active compound
with antidiabetic effects and various health benefits in all citrus
fruits. There have been in vivo and in vitro studies on the potential
antidiabetic action molecular mechanism of citrus fruit flavonoids.
Flavonoids involve the relation of the biomarkers of glucose control,
renal and hepatic functions, lipid profile, and antioxidant enzymes
and also modulate the signaling pathways in association with glucose
intake and insulin sensitivity, which mainly contribute to the pathogenesis
of diabetes. , 
Large amounts of phytochemicals,
peptides, and proteins are present
in legumes. Biologically active components are found to lower the
risk of noncommunicable diseases like diabetes and obesity. , Polyphenols are antidiabetic phytonutrients in dietary sources such
as tea, coffee, red wine, cocoa, guava, whortleberry, grapes, propolis,
olive oil, and chocolates. These food sources have positive effects
by increasing glucose metabolism, decreasing insulin resistance and
HbA1c level, and improving vascular functions in diabetic patients. Polyphenols are also present in plant-based
beverages, mainly apples, citrus fruits, plums, berries, and broccoli.
Flavanones such as hesperidin in citrus fruits, flavonols (quercetin
in the apple, tea, and onions), flavanols in tea, cocoa, broad beans
and apples, anthocyanins in berries, and hydroxycinnamates (coffee
and many fruits) are common polyphenols. Despite extensive research,
the exact mechanism of action of polyphenols in humans is not well-known.
However, some important evidence was also found that they are involved
in carbohydrate digestion and nitric oxide metabolism, and oxidative
enzymes are good for healing effects. Various human and animal studies have been reported, indicating
that polyphenols are involved in reducing hyperglycemia and improving
insulin sensitivity and its secretions. Different emerging evidence
also shows that polyphenols from the diet influence blood glucose
at various levels to manage diabetic complications. , 
Different studies and clinical trials indicate that resveratrol
also benefits diabetes mellitus patients. Resveratrol’s food sources are grapes, berries, peanuts,
and wine. But it is more abundantly present in the grape’s
skin and seeds. Resveratrol is considered a well-tolerated and well-known
phytonutrient that helps in the prevention of diabetes and related
complications. It also is involved in inflammation, oxidative stress,
neurodegeneration, aging, cancers and glycation. This bioactive nutrient, through the intake of fruits and
vegetables, has positive effects such as anti-inflammatory, antioxidant,
and electrolyte properties. It also has functional properties, for
example, low glycemic load and energy density. Intake of lycopene is directly related to the peripheral
antioxidant level among type 3 diabetes patients. Fasting plasma glucose
and HbA1c level are reduced due to the increase in the consumption
of lycopene. Lycopene is involved in managing the pathophysiology
of diabetes and oxidative stress. Oxidative
stress in the liver due to diabetes is controlled by enhancing the
managed hepatic malondialdehyde, plasma alpha-tocopherol levels, and
erythrocyte superoxide dismutase. On the other hand, this diabetes-induced
oxidative stress is manifested by decreasing the hepatic glutathione
level and catalase activity. Intake of soybeans and whole wheat both
have positive effects on the intake treatment of oxidative stress. Intake of legumes and beans is associated with
reducing noncommunicable diseases because legumes or pulses contain
large amounts of antioxidants, dietary fibers, minerals and phenolics. , 
Among the critical pathways involved in diabetes management,
AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) plays a pivotal role in regulating the energy
balance and glucose metabolism, especially during physical activity.
When cellular energy levels are depleted, AMPK is activated, initiating
processes that help restore energy equilibrium, such as enhancing
glucose uptake and promoting fatty acid breakdown. Unlike the insulin
signaling pathway—which relies on insulin secretion to activate
a cascade of molecular events leading to increased glucose absorption—AMPK
functions independently of insulin, offering an alternative mechanism
to improve glucose tolerance and overall metabolic function. Exercise serves as a significant activator
of AMPK, further contributing to its importance in diabetes management.
Muscle contractions during physical activity stimulate AMPK, which
improves insulin sensitivity and glucose uptake by facilitating the
movement of the glucose transporter type 4 (Glut4) to the cell surface.
This also stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis, enhancing energy production
and further supporting metabolic regulation. Moreover, elevated calcium
levels during muscle contraction activate additional pathways, such
as calcium- and calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (CaMKs), which
further amplify glucose metabolism. A key downstream effect of AMPK
activation is the regulation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator (PGC)-1α, which is essential for
mitochondrial biogenesis and energy metabolism. PGC-1α interacts
with various transcription factors to support muscle fiber adaptation,
shifting energy production from glycolysis to more efficient oxidative
processes ( ).
 

## Antiobesity Phytonutrients
In the contemporary world,
appropriate food choices and physical inactivity are the leading preconditions
for abnormal weight gain or obesity. Obesity is a chronic disorder and the main public health problem.
Mediocre inflammation is a major underlying cause of obesity and obesity-related
metabolic diseases. Majorly, adipose tissues are involved in systematic
inflammation. According to different studies, inflammation related
to obesity commonly starts from gut problems such as changes in the
microbiome profile and intestinal bacteria. Irrespective of ethnicity, socioeconomic status, or geographical
locality, the rate of obesity is higher in both genders and all ages.
The prevalence rate of obesity is high in women and the older population.
In epidemiological studies, BMI is commonly used to characterize overweight
and obesity levels. According to the
research of the World Health Advisory Group, overweight and obesity
are a worldwide common public health problem. The overweight and obese
population is more than the underweight population. According to a
study in 2016, 40% females and 39% males aged 18 years and above,
accounting for almost 2 billion adults, were overweight. There were
15% females and 11% males, more than 1/2 billion people, who were
obese globally. Over the past 4 decades, both obesity and overweight
have shown a remarkable increase.
Severe epidemic burden obesity
is related to several disorders, for example, diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, metabolic-related fatty liver disorder and even COVID-19. Obesity/overweight increases the risk of associated
disorders like dyslipidemia, T2DM, arterial hypertension, coronary
heart disease, gallbladder lithiasis, ovarian polcytosis, arthropathy,
cerebral vasculopathy, sleep apnea syndrome and some neoplasms. shows the mechanism of action of phytonutrients to prevent
obesity. In the normal mechanism, dietary lipids convert into triglycerides
after entering the human body, and then up to 70% hydrolysis occurs
by the pancreatic lipase in the small intestine, and then it is converted
into the MGs and FFAs. Then due to mixed micelles, resynthesis of
TGs occurs, and again, adipose cells are synthesized and stored in
the body and cause obesity. So, to prevent obesity, phytonutrients
are used (plant products) to inhibit pancreatic lipase activity. 
Intake of fats and lipids is directly
related to obesity and associated
disorders. According to different in vivo and in vitro studies, various
biologically active phytonutrients in different fats and oils (phytosterol,
phenolic compounds, and tocopherols) are significant in obesity management.
Due to this reason, this present review focuses on biologically active
components found in oils and their involvement in obesity management. Resveratrol is another phytonutrient that helps
in anti-inflammatory and antioxidant action and gives beneficial effects
in the prevention and development of many disorders, including obesity.
Quercetin is abundant in flavonoids in different fruits, vegetables,
tea and wine. It is a main representative
of the flavonoid subclass of flavonols. Quercetin is a flavonol present in red onions, apples, green tea,
etc. 
Phytonutrients having antiobesity
effects are carotenoids, anthocyanins,
chlorophyll, etc. It is also evidenced that states or nations consuming
the lowest fruits and vegetables have the highest rate of obesity.
Higher phytonutrient consumption and improved body composition are
strongly correlated. Overall dietary quality makes more difference,
but the phytonutrients or phytochemicals give key benefits. According to human trials, obesity and polyphenols
such as curcumin, quercetin, resveratrol, and some polyphenolic extracts
are interlinked. The healthful and positive effects of polyphenols
are dependent on their bioavailability and amount consumed. Polyphenols
involve inhibiting adipose cell differentiation, stimulating beta-oxidation
and counteracting oxidative stress. Tea,
coffee, cocoa, onions, broccoli, apples, berries, plums, and citrus
fruits have plant polyphenols. Chlorogenic acid, quercetin, resveratrol,
curcumin, and epigallocatechin 3 gallate are polyphenols that are
extensively studied because of their health benefits. Tea is a beverage
that is most extensively consumed and prepared from the leaves of Camellia sinensis. Tea contains different alkaloids, flavonoids,
theanine and phenolics, which have antioxidative properties, are beneficial
for health, and have antiobesity properties. 
Anthocyanins are natural phytonutrients found in foods which
play
an important part in attenuating obesity and decreasing the adipose
tissues and weight. Anthocyanin is involved
in antiobesity functions by several mechanisms, and biosynthesis of
anthocyanins in various microorganisms also has extensive uses as
mentioned in . Various mechanisms involved in regulating lipid metabolism also
inhibit the absorption of lipids/fats, enhancing energy expenditure,
decreasing intake of food and regulating gut microbiota. Anthocyanins have healthy effects on obesity-associated
inflammation and metabolic disorders. A variety of anthocyanins such
as delphinidins, pelargonidins, cyanidins, malvidins, petunidin, and
peonidins are present in different food items, for example, blueberry,
mulberry, cherry, chokeberry, black elderberry, black currant, jaboticaba
peel, black soybeans, and red cabbage micro green. All these are reported
to change both inflammatory and metabolic markers in human and animal
cells. Different research confirms that
the intake of foods rich in anthocyanins improved obesity, which is
related to the disposition of the gut microbiota and inflammation
in the adipose tissues. Anthocyanin intake prevents healthy humans
from obesity, helps in the maintenance or decreasing of the body weight
of obese person, also promotes metabolism and improves energy balance. 
BMI (body mass index) and waist circumference
are decreased through
the intake of green tea and coffee due to catechins. Most of the published data shows that foods and food fortification
with natural polyphenols and phenolic acid compounds are healthy and
good for maintaining lack of obesity. The healthy dietary pattern of a Mediterranean-style diet is encouraged
due to its antioxidant nutraceuticals, such as polyphenols. Quercetin,
oleuropein, resveratrol, hydroxytyrosol, and hydroxycinnamic derivatives
are well-known due to their anti-inflammatory and antioxidative activities.
It also exerts antiobesity properties. Dietary polyphenols in the
Mediterranean diet involve deregulation of NADPH, metabolic inflammation
and oxidase (NOX) and NF-κB-mediated oxidative stress. 
Flavonoids are the natural, biologically
active antiobesity compounds
which may perform any effect in functional food or antiobesity drugs
without side effects. Flavonoids directly stop weight gain through
their bioactive metabolites with the help of different pathways. The antiobesity effects of phytonutrients are
started by the regulation of different mechanisms or pathways such
as lipid intake, absorption, and expenditure of energy, decreased
lipogenesis and increasing lipolysis, and proliferation and differentiation
of preadipocytes, as shown in . 
 Studies indicate that the consumption of flavonoids
plays an essential
part in protection against oxidative damage and also helps with biochemical
and pharmacological functions in managing human health. Some other research reports also tell us that
citrus fruits’ flavonoids, nobiletin and naringenin protect
humans against obesity and metabolic disorders. Flavonoids reduce the fat mass and body weight of the
body, lowering the plasma triglycerides or cholesterol levels. This
process can be observed through various pathways or mechanisms such
as decreasing the food intake and absorption of fats or lipids, modulation
of lipid metabolism, and enhancing the energy expenditure or regulation
of the gut microbiota profile. Some
medication-based analyses have also determined that the gut microbiome
mediates the positive effect of stilbene and flavonoids, approximately
11%, for preventing obesity. Pomegranate
juice has more antioxidant capacity, polyphenols, flavonoids, tannins,
and anthocyanins. Healthful phytonutrients in pomegranate juice are
directly related to good human health. 

## Phytonutrients Involved in Managing Hypertension
Hypertension
is a very common disease. Approximately 1 billion adults are affected
worldwide. Hypertension is a very significant
risk factor for diseases such as stroke, ischemic heart disease, other
cardiovascular diseases, dementia, and chronic kidney disorder. According
to the studies, in 2015, almost 8.5 million deaths were reported due
to systolic blood pressure >115 mmHg; from this, 88% of the population
was from low-income and middle-income countries. Some variations in the levels of different risk factors,
such as low potassium, increased sodium intake, obesity, physical
inactivity, alcohol intake and unhealthy diet, were involved in the
prevalence. There is a higher risk of
developing hypertension and cardiovascular diseases depending on a
diet high in sodium, refined carbohydrates, fat content, energy-dense
foods, and added sugars and a diet low in vegetables and fruits. 
High blood pressure is a more prevalent
problem in Pakistan. 18% of adults under the age of 45 and 33% above
the age of 45 are the targeted population of hypertension. Watermelon
seed has a sufficient amount of phytonutrients (saponins, polyphenols,
flavonoids, and alkaloids) and cations (calcium, potassium, and magnesium).
It has an antihypertensive effect because of its antioxidant, vasodilatory
and antiangiotensin converting enzyme properties. Recently, phytonutrient food sources have been good for
treating high blood pressure. The endothelium is a key compound that
modulates the contractility of vessels and thus affects the basal
tone and blood pressure. According to
epidemiological studies, the Mediterranean diet is related to a great
quality of life because the presence of a higher number of vegetables
and fruits in the MD has a high number of polyphenols. Rich food sources
of polyphenols are grapes and grape-derived products. Pomegranate,
tomatoes, soy, tea and cocoa are involved in lowering blood pressure
in hypertension patients. Some polyphenols
are good for hypertension: isoflavones, flavones, flavanones, flavonols,
flavan-3-ols, anthocyanins, and proanthocyanin’s. Dietary consumption
of polyphenols-rich foods, beverages and herbs helps improve vascular
health and decrease the risk of high blood pressure. Another study is found in which it is stated that polyphenol
foods, including cocoa and green tea rich in flavan-3-ols, berries
rich in anthocyanins, soy products rich in isoflavones, and almond
and pistachios rich in the hydroxycinnamic acids, also are beneficial
for the improvement of hypertension. Increased polyphenol chocolate is also beneficial for treating the
triglyceride levels in patients with hypertension and diabetes. It
also lowers the blood pressure and fasting blood sugar without affecting
inflammatory markers, weight and insulin resistance/glycemic control. Flavonols, flavanols, flavones, and flavanones
help modulate the blood pressure by restoring endothelium functions
directly by (NOS) affecting the nitric oxide levels and indirectly
by another mechanism. In animal and human studies, quercetin has the
most appropriate blood pressure lowering effect irrespective of duration,
dose and disease status. Resveratrol
is also a polyphenol and acts as an antioxidant and antihypertensive. 

## Phytonutrients Involved in Managing Cardiovascular Diseases
The cardiovascular system contains the heart and its blood vessels.
Various types of problems arise within the Cardiovascular system,
such as conduction abnormalities, rheumatic heart diseases, and endocarditis.
Cardiovascular disorders are also recognized as heart diseases. These
4 entities are named: cerebrovascular disease, coronary artery disease,
coronary heart disease, aortic atherosclerosis, and peripheral artery
disease. Coronary artery diseases occur due to the reduction in myocardial
perfusion, which causes angina due to ischemia and leads to myocardial
infarction or heart failure. Modifiable
cardiovascular risk factors are diabetes mellitus, cigarette smoking,
hypertension, and lipid/fat abnormalities, these risk factor hypertension
are mainly related to the strong evidence of cause and high prevalence
of exposure. Different studies also reported that higher blood pressure
is a significant risk for atrial fibrillation, heart failure, aortic
syndrome, heart valve diseases, coronary heart disease, stroke, dementia
and chronic kidney disorder. 
There
is a complex relationship between diet and health, and some strategies
to prevent or treat chronic disorders. Globally CVD is also a major
cause of death and different disabilities. Several studies suggest
the Mediterranean dietary pattern, which is rich in vegetables and
fruits and acts as a cardioprotective due to the presence of a higher
number of phytonutrients and biologically active compounds, for example,
vitamins, minerals, unsaturated fatty acids, fiber, phytosterols,
and polyphenols. All these mentioned substances act as an anti-inflammatory,
antithrombotic and antioxidative effect. All plant-based food products are very healthful, for example, vegetables,
fruits, nuts, flaxseeds, beans, dietary fiber, whole grains, peas,
and the vegan diet are involved in the management of cardiovascular
health. Plant based foods decrease LDL-C levels and also reduce the
risk of cardiovascular disorders. Cardiovascular risk markers are
triglyceride, total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol. 
According to an experiment, dietary quinoa’s
effect is positive
after intake for 30 days in 22 students of 18 to 45 years. 42.2%
were found to have low blood pressure and a 40.7% decrease in weight.
Amarnath oil is also helpful for reducing triglyceride, total cholesterol,
low-density lipoprotein, and VLDL in humans, when taking 18 mL/day
for almost 3 weeks. Quinoa seeds mainly
have beta carotene, and amaranth seeds have carotenoids, commonly
lutein and zeaxanthin. Both these seeds also contain good-quality
lutein, tocopherols and polyunsaturated fatty acids, Vitamin A, B, E, and K, minerals including phosphorus,
magnesium, and potassium, phenolic acids and flavonoids, plant sterol,
and other phytonutrients such as lignin’s and bound phytochemicals
present in all the types of corns. Different types of corn consist
of different phytonutrient levels like flavonoids and carotenoids.
Yellow corn is rich in carotenoids, with more than 823 μg per
100 g of DW corn having beta carotene 4%, beta-cryptoxanthin 3%, lutein
50%, zeaxanthin 40%, and alpha-carotene 2%. Purple, blue, and red
corn increased the anthocyanidins’ concentration of more than
325 mg/100 g DW corn, including peonidin derivatives of 15 to 20%,
cyaniding derivatives 75–90% and pelargonidin derivatives 5
to 10%. Amylose corn is rich in amylose and has more than 70% of all
carbohydrates. , 
Beetroot phytonutrients
such as polyphenols, organic acids, batnin,
and saponins can inhibit or reduce gastrointestinal digestion, and
also a hypothesis is rising that beetroot has a cardioprotective effect
due to the combination of nitrite or nitrate and biologically active
substances, which will reduce the production of the (ROS) reactive
oxygen species and modulation of gene expression. In vivo, in vitro
and clinical trials reported that beetroot nitrate and its phytonutrients
have excellent and supportive therapeutic effects on cardiovascular
diseases. Another study is conducted
in which bitter apricot seeds were consumed for 42 days daily to check
their effect on the cardiac system. Bitter apricot seeds also have
a large number of phytonutrients in them. The focus of this study
was to check the LDL cholesterol levels in CVDs patients. In the results,
it is declared that it effects positively the modified lipoprotein
profile in the group of elevated cholesterol. 
Phytonutrients are also present in whole-grain barley.
The phytonutrients
in whole-grain barley are flavonoids, phenolic acids, folate, phytosterols,
tocols, and lignans. The mentioned phytochemicals are helpful due
to their cholesterol-reducing abilities, their antiproliferative and
antioxidant activities, and their effectiveness in reducing the risk
of certain disorders. So, we can say that a large amount of barley
is good for health. Oxidative stress
is involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Due to the consumption
of food rich in dietary antioxidants, for example, different types
of nuts are involved improving the biomarkers associated with oxidative
stress and participating in the management of atherosclerosis. Nuts
also have phytonutrients such as polyphenols and vitamin E, which
prevent primary and secondary cardiovascular disorders. Different biologically active dietary products
have phytonutrients, specifically carotenoids, which play antioxidative
effects and decrease the markers of oxidative stress. Carotenoids
are very healthful and beneficial for preventing chronic disorders
like cardiovascular problems by lowering inflammatory responses. Some studies demonstrate that cardiovascular
diseases are inversely related to the blood concentration of antioxidants
(carotenoids, vitamin C and vitamin E). 
Findings indicate that the catechins, proanthocyanins, and
anthocyanins
present in cocoa are effective for lowering blood pressure. And monacolins
or red yeast rice also act positively to lower cholesterol. Seaweed also has polyphenols, and it performs
the key role in managing different cardiovascular diseases. Polyphenols are commonly found in fruits, vegetables,
and beverages, and all of these sources are good for cardiac fibrosis
and other cardiovascular disorders. Different studies show that polyphenol
produces antifibrotic and (MI) myocardial protective effects through
regulating the oxidative stress, inflammation and fibrotic molecular
signals. Another example is apple due
to the presence of different polyphenols in it. Apple’s polyphenols
are related to the reduction of cardiovascular diseases. Quantification
and phenolic profile analysis indicate that the polyphenolic extract
of apple peels has an increased quantity of total flavonoids and phenolic
compared to the polyphenol apple fleshes. 
Polyphenolics antioxidative ability prevents atherosclerosis,
LDL
oxidation, vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation, endothelial
dysfunction, macrophages/T lymphocytes, inflammatory processes by
the monocytes, and platelet aggregation. Polyphenols decrease reactive
oxygen species’ generation by inhibiting the oxidases. This
involves suppressing VSMC proliferation and migration, lowering the
generation of the superoxide, and stopping OxLDL formation. They
also decrease platelet aggregation and help to improve mitochondrial
oxidative stress. Through the intake of polyphenol phytonutrients,
diabetes, high blood pressure, and obesity and hyperlipidemia development
become reduced. To maintain human health,
a vegetable diet has preventive effects. Majorly brassica vegetables
play a role in reducing the risk of chronic disorders, mainly cardiovascular
diseases. Glucosinolates and isothiocyanates are phytonutrients that
are mostly present in the cruciferous family of vegetables. These
are the antioxidants mainly contributing to the cardiovascular system
protection. Phytosterols are non-nutritive
components and are good for health due to their cholesterol-lowering
properties, mainly present in plant-based food items. They are classified
into two groups, plant stanols and plant sterols. Various clinical
trials indicate that 2 g phytosterols/day gives the LDL-C lowering
efficacy 8–10%. Various studies also determine that the phytosterols
are inversely related to the LDL-C reduction. 

## Phytonutrients Involved in Managing Different Types of Cancer
The condition of abnormal growth of cells with the power to invade
and metastasize into other parts of the body is recognized as cancer.
Various factors are involved in the initiation of cancer cells. Cancer
cell initiation includes gene alterations that mediate the body’s
normal function to reverse/suppress the initiation phase of carcinogenesis
and to prevent the invasion of the premalignant cells through natural,
biological and synthetic chemo-preventive agents. Several epidemiological studies demonstrate that dietary
food rich in biologically active components is associated with a lower
incidence of various cancer types. Research about the effect of biologically
active compounds on the epigenome is spreading widely, with the target
of regulation of epigenetic gene expression mechanisms like genomic
DNA methylation. It is evident that
the different phytonutrients we can eat from plant products can inhibit
specific carcinogenesis stages. Various findings also reported that
phytonutrients can act as a chemopreventive for human cancers. Phytonutrients
are chemopreventive for the infection of the cell cycle and initiation,
proliferation, and inhibition of apoptosis. Daily intake of phytonutrients
is very helpful as a chemopreventive. 
The risk of cancer and other chronic disorders is decreased
due to the consumption of a higher number of fruits, vegetables, and
whole grains. Plant-derived food product’s anticancer activities
are associated with the action of phytonutrients. A potential anticancer
mechanism of phytonutrients is the regulation of cellular signal transduction
pathways, and that is why they affect the behavior of cancer cells
like invasion, apoptosis, and proliferation. Due to their anticancer
capacity, phytonutrients focus on the various cell signaling pathways
at several levels, such as protein activation, intercellular messaging,
and transcriptional/post-transcription regulation. By 2030, it is expected that there will be an increase
in the number of 23.6 million new cases of cancers, according to the
statistics of the American Cancer Society. It is necessary to evaluate
different cancer preventive measures due to the higher risk of severity.
Studies also show that dietary polyphenols and other phytonutrients
have the characteristics of modifying epigenetic mechanisms, which
involve the modulation of expression of the genes and resultantly
lead to cancer regulation. Natural phytochemicals,
such as polyphenols, are organic chemicals that have phenol units
in their structures. Polyphenols have antitumor characteristics, but
under the in vivo conditions, the half-life of polyphenols is short
and they have very low bioavailability. This natural chemical means
phytochemicals are very helpful for chemoprevention and oncotherapy. 
The meta-analysis of 143 prospective
studies indicates that isoflavones
and flavonoids are significantly related to lower risk of stomach,
lung, breast, and colorectal cancers. Case-control studies also revealed
that the individual or the total classes of flavonoids are related
to breast cancer, lung cancer, aero-digestive tract cancer and colorectal
cancer and isoflavones are associated with lung cancer, breast cancer,
ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer and colorectal cancer. Flavonoid is the most researched subclass of
flavonoids with cancer hazards. Studies also demonstrate that flavonoid
consumption is rarely linked to lowering cancer risk. Still, isoflavones
in soy and soy-based foods can decrease the danger of prostate, breast,
and colorectal cancers in Asian peoples. Results are dependent on
the assessment of polyphenol consumption, and the food frequency questionnaire
and polyphenol food composition can measure it. Sometimes nutritional
biomarkers have been used to estimate the relation between polyphenol
consumption and cancer. Another article
also demonstrates that isoflavonoids such as genistein, glycitein
and daidzein are the most studied, showing good anticancer properties
and activities focusing on invasion-associated proteins such as MMP-9,
MMP-2 and EMT. That is why the isoflavonoids are used in invasive
cancer as chemotherapeutics. Phytonutrients
present in foods give a chemo-preventive effect on colon and rectum
cancers through the regulation of various markers and signaling pathways,
and the gut microbiome also performs a role as an effect in colorectal
cancer onset and progression. So, any dietary change in it may be
involved in colorectal cancer occurrence. Various studies have displayed
the key function of growth factors and their signaling process in
colorectal cancer pathogenesis. Alkaloids
are bioactive compounds that are also known as anticancer agents.
Alkaloids are found to enhance cytotoxicity, modulate the survival
pathways, induce DNA damage, promote apoptotic cell death, enhance
caspase activity, cause the arrest of the cell cycle, and suppress
the NF-kB pathways as mentioned in .
 By targeting various molecular pathways, alkaloids
have protective
effects on breast cancer. Alkaloids increase the levels of ROS (reactive
oxygen species) in breast cancer and cause DNA damage. Several naturally occurring phytonutrients
can act as a therapeutic agent for breast cancer; phytonutrients affecting
the proliferation of estrogen independent and dependent cells of breast
cancer potentially affect the population through breast cancer stem
cells, while various compounds are limited due to their bioavailability.
So, it is important to formulate or refine these phytonutrients to
treat the hormone-refractory breast tumors effectively. Curcumin is a naturally present polyphenol
phytonutrient obtained from turmeric rhizome. It gives a yellow color
to turmeric. Different studies demonstrate that curcumin has ideal
and excellent cancer therapy properties. Curcumin acts as an anticarcinogenic,
antioxidant, antiproliferative, antimetastatic, anti-inflammatory,
antiangiogenic, radio protective, apoptotic and chemosensitizing agent. There is an increase in public interest in
different strategies to prevent cancers. Cancer is steadily increasing
globally with escalating problems with drug resistance. For the many types of cancers, cisplatin based
therapeutic regimes are commonly used. Most of the time, resistance
to cisplatin develops in patients and leads to treatment failure.
Phytonutrients or phytochemicals are plant-based nutrients that enhance
cisplatin’s anticancer ability or activity with minor side
effects. Some well-known phytonutrients like curcumin increase the
efficacy of cisplatin but, on the other hand, also reduce the toxicity
induced through cisplatin. Besides this, the exact underlying mechanism
of action is still unclear. 
The
mixture of different phytonutrients with several bioactivities
found in whole foods may have synergistic and additive effects on
the carcinogenesis. Practically and clinically, it is necessary to
compare the effect of the mixture of phytochemicals with the isolated
phytochemicals present in the plant derived food items. Phytoestrogens and their derivatives are also
effective for cancer prevention through the inhibition of estrogen
synthesis and metabolism, which may lead to antimetastatic, antiangiogenic
and epigenetic effects. Phytoestrogens
play a key role in cancer prevention and treatment. Chemoprevention
is a process in which we control, repress, overturn, and prevent the
premalignancy before the occurrence of cancer invasion by using specified
synthetic chemical agents and natural products. Numerous naturally
present food items have protective effects on different types of
cancer. Examples are cereal, grains, nuts, spices, herbs, vegetable,
fruits, beverages and medicinal plants and several phytonutrients,
including flavonoids, carotenoids, phenolics, and nitrogen-containing
and organ sulfur compounds. 
GLSs
(glucosinolates) are the secondary metabolites occurring in
plant foods and have useful anticarcinogenic effects. Glucosinolates
could be converted into different breakdown products based on plant
tissue damage and through the gut microbiotas. Glucosinolates’
bioactivities are associated with the breakdown products rather than
the glycosylates themselves. Phytosterol
is also a useful phytochemical, which decreases the risk of cancer
by 20%. Phytosterol affects the hosts and produces the antitumor response
by enhancing the immune response of cancer recognition, also affecting
hormone-dependent endocrine tumors or cancer and via the modulation
of sterol biosynthesis. Phytosterol has characteristics which will
stop the growth of tumor cells by decreasing the progression of cell
cycling, induction of apoptosis and inhibition of tumor cell metastasis. 

## Neurodegenerative Diseases and Phytonutrients
In neurodegenerative
disorders, progressive loss of neurons occurs, which is linked with
the deposition of proteins, indicating the change in physiochemical
characteristics in the brain and peripheral organs. Neurodegenerative
diseases are classified (molecular) based on proteins. Protein is
commonly involved in the neurodegenerative diseases pathogenesis,
namely TAR DNA binding protein 43 kDa, prion protein, tau protein,
alpha synuclein, amyloid beta and fused in sarcoma protein. Commonly known neurodegenerative disorders
are Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, Lewy bodies’
dementia, front temporal dementia and its variants, corticobasal degeneration,
progressive supranuclear palsy, Huntington’s disease and multiple
system atrophy. Some neurodegenerative
disorders such as multiple sclerosis, motoneuron, Parkinson’s
disorder, Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disorder
and human prion are not curable and the emotional control and deterioration
in social communication and social behavior characterize all these. Parkinson’s disease is the most known
neurogenerative problem in males compared to females and increases
in people aged 60 or above. Commonly seen symptoms are shaking at
rest, bradykinesia, stiffness and postural instability. Alzheimer’s is a subtype of dementia;
in this illness, gradual loss of memory occurs, which leads to reduction
of behavioral functions like thinking, language skills and memory. Huntington’s disorder is an inherited
disorder that occurs due to the autosomal dominant trait. In this
disease obsessive compulsive disorder, psychosis, cognitive impairment,
depression and abnormal movements occur. 
In Alzheimer’s disease, mitochondrial involvement
is helpful for improving clinical properties such as low oxygen and
glucose in the brain metabolism, which is also supported by the various
molecular and microscopic findings, which include the altered mitochondrial
morphology, impaired mitochondrial DNA, and abnormal respiratory chain
functions. Mitochondrial dysfunction and amyloid pathology are both
directionally correlated. Mitochondria have more remarkable function
in Parkinson’s disorder. Through
oxidative damage of the neurons, amyloid beta participates in developing
AD’s. Phytonutrients such as saponins, isoflavones, and proanthocyanin’s
genistein inhibit amyloid beta induced neurotoxicity. Bananas have important pharmaceutical and nutraceutical
values due to the presence of polyphenols, flavonoids and phenol in
their flesh and peels. In the pulses/legumes,
phenolic phytonutrients are present such as proanthocyanins, flavanols,
flavanols, isoflavones, and hydroxycinnamic acids, and a major non-phenol
phytonutrient is saponins. Legumes are beneficial for the neurodegenerative
disorder due to the presence of biologically active phytonutrients. Numerous studies indicate that resveratrol
acts as an anti-inflammatory, antioxidative, and neuroprotective.
In Alzheimer’s disease patients, resveratrol reduces the aggregation
and toxicity of Aβ peptides in the hippocampus, promotes neurogenesis,
and prevents hippocampal damage. The antioxidant activity of resveratrol
plays a significant role in the differentiation of neurons by activating
SIRT1 (silent information regulator-1). Silent information redulator-1
plays a key role in the differentiation and growth of the neurons
and is also involved in the prevention of the apoptotic death of the
mentioned neurons by deacetylating and repressing the p53 activity,
but the exact mechanisms is still unclear. 
The many changes in lifestyle along with the increased consumption
of junk drinks, fast foods and ready to eat foods are giving an overloaded
oxidative stress, which causes weakening of the defense mechanism
for the removal of free oxygen radicals by destroying the antioxidants.
Neurodegenerative disorders and oxidative stress pathogenesis occur
due to the imbalance between the preoxidant and antioxidants levels.
If the pro-oxidant levels are higher, then NDD pathogenesis will occur. , , Epicatechin and catechin flavonols
are most abundantly present in grape juice and seeds. Grape juice
is helpful in the inhibition of the glutamate excitotoxicity, which
is implicated majorly in the pathology of neurological disorders like
Alzheimer’s disease and Huntington’s disease. Orange fruits, juice, and drink have carotenoids,
which are helpful in the prevention of neurodegenerative diseases.
Carotenoids stop the onset of neurodegenerative diseases by mechanisms
such as an increase in the regulation of the antioxidant enzyme system
and regulate the amyloid oligomer induced signaling and antioxidant
capacity through reactive oxygen species quenching. Organic sulfur and isocyanate derivatives significantly
affect various diseases, specifically neurodegenerative diseases.
Garlic has the sulfur derivative S-allyl cysteine as a major component
of garlic extract with neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory potential.
Olive oil is also a main part of the Mediterranean diet. Neurodegenerative
diseases are preventable mainly using antioxidants such as vitamin
C and Vitamin E, polyphenols, and flavonoids. Antioxidants are effective
for human health because they can also decrease aging by fighting
free radicals. , 
Polysaccharides are important
phytonutrients, and various studies
give details about their benefits. They are also effective in treating
several pathological conditions like neurological disorders. Sixteen
out of 21 types of plant-based polysaccharides show the neuroprotective
effect. Various in vitro and in vivo studies explain that the polysaccharide-rich
extracts give the neuroprotective effects by promoting the neurite
outgrowth, PI3K/Akt, Nrf2/HO-1, NF-Κb and MAPK signaling pathways,
as mentioned in . 
 Oxidative stress is involved in the pathogenesis
of neurodegenerative
disorders like Parkinson’s disease. Quercetin is a bioflavonoid
present in vegetables and fruits, also having antioxidative properties.
But the underlying mechanism has not been well-known until now. Quercetin
is a therapeutic agent for neurodegenerative diseases, which are induced
by oxidative stress. Several classes
of polyphenols such as phenolic acids, phenolic alcohols, flavonoids,
stilbenes, and lignans will focus on the toll like receptor (TLR)
signaling pathway. Moreover, some of the polyphenols suppress the
overexpression of the inflammatory regulator by the intervention in
the TLR/NF-Kb/STAT signaling pathways; others will decrease the neuronal
apoptosis through modulating TLR4/NF-Kb/MyD88 pathways in macrophages
or microglia. Activation of the TLR signaling modulation through natural
sources will give positive and effective therapeutic effects on the
neurodegenerative diseases. Studies
indicate the powerful link between the polyphenol’s intake
and lower development of neurological diseases. Polyphenols are very useful and healthy phytonutrients
for the prevention and treatment of different pathological disorders
like neurodegenerative disorders. Polyphenols food sources include
tea, coffee, vegetables, and fruits. Almost all the polyphenols are
neuroprotective because they reduce oxidative stress, inflammation,
and protein fibrillation and enhance cognitive functions. They also reduce the risk of brain disorders.
The brain controls the hypothalamus pituitary gonad axis secretion
of estrogen. Estrogen therapy is also effective for neurodegenerative
disorders. The neuroprotective effects of the phytoestrogens are associated
with their antioxidant characteristics and interaction with estrogen. 

## Anti-aging Phytonutrients
Aging is a biological process
characterized by the continuous reduction in cellular function and
by decreased tissue renewal ability, and it will lead to less capability
to counteract the stressors of the environment. The aging process
could be controlled through various heterogeneous mechanisms including
environmental, genetic, and epigenetic factors. , According to clinical and biological perspectives, skin undergoes
two processes. Intrinsic aging of the skin is the first process that
indicates aging in chronological terms and affects the same process
by which all other internal organ aging occurs. Extrinsic aging of
the skin is the second process due to external risk factors such as
smoking, sleep deprivation, pollution, environmental factors, chronic
exposure to the sun and to ultraviolet radiation, and inappropriate
nutritional intake. Studies suggest that phytonutrients acting as
an antioxidant, for example, tocopherols, carotenoids, flavonoids,
different vitamins like vitamin A, Vitamin C, Vitamin E and Vitamin
D, some proteins, omega 3 fatty acids and lactobacilli agents, are
helpful in the promotion of the skin’s health and beauty. Aging causes various and multiple changes in
biological processes such as nutrient sensing, metabolism of energy,
and decreased cellular proliferation, and it causes cellular senescence.
Through the multiple bioactivities of the polyphenol phytonutrient,
resveratrol is considered to lower the negative effects of aging. 
The human body depends on the different
aging defense mechanisms to reduce damage through pronging aggressors.
This kind of protective mechanism may be compromised and leads to
accelerated aging. We identified that
the phytonutrients present in tomatoes regulate the expression of
ultraviolet inducible genes (ICAM-I, MMP-1, HO-1 etc.), which act
as biomarkers for skin health. Phytonutrients
act as antiaging components. Moreover, detailed studies of epicatechin,
curcumin, resveratrol and quercetin reported new phytochemicals for
aging; for example, amino acid L-theanine is isolated from green tea,
and lignans arctigenin and matairesinol are isolated from the Arctium laoopa seeds. According
to research, 4 capsules per day were consumed for 8 weeks. Each daily
dose contains 30 mg of resveratrol, 1000 mg of DHA plus EPA from the
ultrapure fish oil, 100 mg of alpha lipoic acid, 75 mg of quercetin,
30 mg of Coenzymes Q10, 5 mg of lycopene, 1 mg of astaxanthin, 4 mg
of lutein, 50 mg of d-limonene, 1000 IU of vitamin D3 and 200 mg of
citrus bioflavonoids. Intake of these 4 capsules daily for 8 weeks
will positively affect the aging defense mechanism. It will protect
from skin damage due to ultraviolet radiation and improve skin health. Another study was conducted to analyze the
phytonutrient constituents, nutrient composition, and antioxidative
properties of dried rose petals. The secondary metabolite phytonutrients
present in dried rose petal power solvent extracts are flavonoids,
phenols, alkaloids, glycosides, saponins, tannins, carbohydrates,
terpenoids, and steroids. Rose power has the good quality of phytochemicals
and antioxidative activities. 
Different phenolic compounds, carotenoids and ascorbic acid are
present in the various plants and have the ability to give protection
to the skin from ultraviolet radiation, lower the oxidative stress
and inflammation and affect the different signaling pathways or mechanisms. Beta carotene is helpful in the prevention
of night blindness and age associated macular degeneration. It also
maintains the health of the skin, nails, hair, gums, teeth, bones,
and glands. Beta carotene is present in various food items such as
yellow, green, and orange vegetables and fruits, for example, broccoli,
kale, squash, carrots, spinach, cantaloupe, apricot, sweet potatoes,
and peaches. Zeaxanthin and lutein are also protective for cataracts
and age related macular. Zeaxanthin and lutein are found in green
pea, green turnip, spinach, broccoli, kale, and collard greens. Carotenoids are a group of phytonutrients that
are very helpful for skin health. They increase the skin’s
resistance against UV-rays’ B-induced erythema (sunburn). Oral intake of polyphenols and carotenoids
is recommended to produce the photoprotective effects. Combination
of polyphenols and carotenoids is more beneficial for the skin cells. Intake of fruits and vegetables rich in beta
carotene has more light protective positive effects, and intake of
beta carotene for 12 weeks daily leads to decreased ultraviolet induced
erythema. Astaxanthin from the carotenoid
is also protective against cellular alternation caused by ultraviolet
radiation. Lycopene is also a carotenoid red pigment and a phytonutrient
component present in red vegetables and fruits such as tomatoes, red
carrots, watermelons and papaya. Another
study demonstrated that the intake of whole fruits or extracts of
stems and seeds containing phytonutrients will enhance skin health.
Phytonutrient rich foods help reduce DNA damage by increasing its
repair, act as a sunblock/sunscreen, decrease inflammation and oxidative
stress and promote the skin barrier functions. Polyphenols in green tea, grape seed proanthocyanins, silimarine,
resveratrol, and genistein are great for good skin health. These polyphenols
are also beneficial in managing skin cancer. The Mediterranean diet is also full of antioxidants and phytonutrients
in vegetables and fruits. It has a very low risk of various age-related
diseases. It was also demonstrated that the phytochemicals present
in the Mediterranean diet increase the healthful effects. 
Various products are present in nutricosmetics
and cosmeceuticals.
Active compounds present in the various products are extracted from
vegetables, fruits, pulses, medicinal herbs and plants with antiaging
power. A plant named Alpinia
galangal is a well reputed medicinal plant which has been
used in food and medicine for a long time. Flavonoids are phytonutrients
which are very beneficial and commonly used in the development of
cosmetic or cosmeceutical products due to their antiaging and antioxidant
functions. Lotus plant’s other
name is Nelumbo Nucifera Gaertn. It is used in the formation of teas,
traditional medicine, and foods. Evaluation of the stamen extract
as an antiaging skin protector concluded that it has more power to
stop tyrosinase and collagenase than the whole flower. 

## Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Phytonutrients
IBD 
is a chronic inflammatory disease. It affects the gastroenteric tissues,
which are characterized with intestinal inflammation. In this disorder,
intestinal mucosa become inflamed and cause episodic abdominal pain,
blood in the stool, diarrhea, weight loss, and influx of neutrophils
and macrophages which produce cytokines, free radicals and proteolytic
enzymes that result in ulceration and inflammation. Chronic inflammatory bowel disorders include ulcerative
Colitis and Crohn’s disorder. They have almost the same symptoms
that cause digestive system inflammation. The rate of prevalence is gradually increasing in western countries,
and there is a rapid increase in the rate of incidence in newly industrialized
countries. Another study demonstrated
a comparison of the population-based data for the West and East. It
indicates that the incidence of inflammatory bowel disease is rapidly
increasing in the East and plateauing in the West. Patients in the
East with this disease have more complications. 
Several in vivo and in vitro practicals represent
that the secondary metabolite or phytonutrients are plant based and
have alkaloids, terpenoids, glucosinolates, phenolic compounds, oligosaccharides,
and quinones. All of these phytonutrients will reduce the permeability
and ameliorate associated dysfunctions with good results. Most of
them suppress the inflammatory transcriptional factors, decrease the
pro-inflammatory cytokine secretions, help with oxidative stress,
and modulate the enzymatic activity. Various biologically active components present in the functional
agent have received attention by indicating powerful therapeutic effects
against inflammatory bowel disease. Trillions
of microorganisms are colonized in the intestine of the host. So,
it is reported that the gut microbiota are involved in the pathophysiology
of inflammatory bowel disorder. Flavonoid phytonutrients have been
given more attention because of their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
properties. 
On the surface of
the immune cell, flavonoids interact with the
toll-like receptors; then they enter the cytosol and transfer into
the nucleus. Then they attach to the aryl hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor
in the nucleus. Then aryl hydrocarbon receptors become bound with
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator. Then through the
aryl hydrocarbon response element helpful protective enzymes and 
cytokines will be induced. This mechanism will lead to the up regulation
of the anti-inflammatory effect. Hence, phytonutrients like flavonoids
bind with the nuclear aryl hydrocarbon receptor, producing protective
enzyme activities. Polyphenol is another
example that is present in plant foods. It synergistically interacts
with the microbiome of the gut to repress inflammation and increase
the symptoms of inflammatory bowel disease. Polyphenols increase the
availability of healthy bacteria, stop the pathogenic species, and
enhance the diversity of the gut microbiota. Polyphenols are not 
absorbed in the small intestine. They will be catabolized in the colon
through the microbiota into the microbial metabolites. Most of them
have more bioavailability and anti-inflammatory properties than the
precursors. Different classes of polyphenols
(anthocyanins, stilbenoids, and flavonols) are also healthful for
treating inflammatory bowel syndrome. According to studies, supplementing
the diet with red grapes skin (having flavonals, stilbenoids and anthocyanins)
will give positive and beneficial protection. Polyphenol antioxidants are effective for treating experimental
colitis. Green tea curcumin, wheat grass juice, resveratrol, bilberry
anthocyanins, fish oil and superoxide dismutase are effective for
treating inflammatory bowel disease. Green tea polyphenols also play a key role in the down regulation
of the signaling pathways. Green tea-based polyphenols give beneficial
antioxidant properties and regulate the toll like receptor 4 expression
by the specific receptors and inhibit the endotoxin mediated TNF-α’s
production through blockage of the transcription NF-kB upstream of
the mediated I kappa B kinase complex path activities and also the
intrusion with the flow of cytokines and synthesis of COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2). 
From the studies, it is hypothesized
that the changes in the diet
will be helpful. According to the hypothesis, decreased exposure to
pro-inflammatory antigens, for example, emulsifiers, omega 6 fatty
acids, and additives, and enhanced intake of anti-inflammatory compounds
such as curcumin and omega 3 fatty acids in the foods or diet will
tip the balance toward a low inflammatory profile. Anthocyanin in plant food is also very helpful for inflammatory
bowel disorder. A new therapeutic option is also available: intake
of anthocyanin enriched dietary supplements with the existing medication
will be a good treatment option for IBD. An anthocyanin rich diet (fruits and vegetables) protects from inflammation,
enhances gut permeability, and is also beneficial for colon health
due to its ability to change bacterial metabolism and microbial milieu
in the intestine. Probiotics are also
very beneficial in inflammatory bowel disease and ulcerative colitis. Probiotics treat ulcerative colitis, specifically
when various strains are concomitantly administered. The most used
genera are Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus. Some
studies even demonstrate a benefit if we replace medical nutrition
therapy with the probiotic supplementation. 

## Stress-Sleep and Phytonutrients
Systemic inflammation
and oxidative stress are the main reasons for the deleterious effect
of chronic psychological stress. Dietary supplementation of the macular
carotenoids lutein, meso-zeaxanthin and zeaxanthin will decrease the
stress cortisol and improve symptoms of physical and emotional health. According to research, affron is a standardized
stigma extract from Crocus Sativus L. and is used
for the treatment of sleep quality, stress, anxiety, and mood swings
in healthy adults. They perform this research on 128 participants
with self-reporting low mood but not depression diagnosed. They were
given affron of 22 mg/day, 28 mg/day or a placebo treatment in a double
blind, randomized, and placebo-controlled trail for 4 weeks. Improvements
were seen in the group taking the 28 mg/day dose. Another study was also performed to check the efficacy
of the crocetin on the architecture of the sleep and subjective sleep
parameters in healthy adults with mild sleep complaints. Thirty participants
were divided into the 2 groups. One group treated with crocetin 7.5
mg/day and with the placebo. The results of this study recommend that
the crocetin supplementation is very beneficial for the maintenance
of sleep and also involves improving the quality of sleep. Insomnia is a chronic condition that is most
common in the elderly population. According to the findings, Montmorency
tart cherry juice is useful for treating insomnia. Cherry juice increases
the sleep efficiency and sleep time. Cherry juice is procyanidin B-2,
which stops the IDO, reduces inflammation, enhances tryptophan availability,
and is also partially effective for insomnia patients. 

## Bioavailability
Bioavailability is a term used to explain
the proportion of phytonutrients absorbed, digested, and utilized
in normal metabolism. Moreover, the bioavailability measurement depends
on the estimation of the antioxidants absorbed. Most common phytonutrients such as polyphenols, curcumin,
and green tea polyphenols are not satisfied with all these chemical
specifications and exhibit lower bioavailability. Following are examples
of the bioavailability of different food items. The first example
is tomatoes (food matrix), whose food processing procedures may change
the availability of its nutrients. If tomato sauce is cooked for 60
min at 99 degrees centigrade and crushed, the phenolic acid phytonutrients
level will reduced by 43.18% and the levels of flavonols and flavanones
will be increased by 12.21% and 245.03%, respectively. Upon drying of the tomatoes at 70 degrees centigrade
for 36 h, the in vitro gastrointestinal digestion model gives a higher
total polyphenol capacity and total flavonoid capacity than those
for raw tomatoes. 
In another study,
berry availability was checked by the freeze-drying method. The berries
were dried at 130 °C for 2 h, 65 °C for 20 h, and 50 °C
for 48 h until 89 moisture content was obtained below the 15%. Anthocyanins
in the berries are best preserved by the freeze-drying method and
degraded at 130 °C. In the berries, the highest value of the
total polyphenol capacity is obtained from the drying at 65 °C
through the freeze-drying method. Antioxidant activity includes ABTS,
radical removing activity, and ferric reducing power, which varied
depending on the berries type. Raspberry and boysenberry give the
highest ABTS in the case of drying at 65 °C and redcurrant and
blackcurrant in the case of freeze-drying. Strawberries total polyphenolic capacity and total monomeric anthocyanin’s
content are higher in quick-frozen samples than in slow-frozen samples. The total polyphenols are reduced but not significantly,
and total anthocyanins were reduced significantly by 42.2%. Chlorogenic
acid increased significantly by 23.46%, and total procyanidins, quercetin,
caffeic acid and ferulic acids increased but not significant. 
In the Cassava, total extractable polyphenols
are increased to
152% after boiling, 236% after steaming, and 164% after microwaving.
The antioxidant activity of the cassava is also enhanced 151.56% after
boiling, 208.60% after steaming and 173.44% after microwaving. To determine the availability of sweet potatoes
(2 varieties grown in Slovakia and Croatia), they were cooked in water
for 10 min, steamed for 15 min at 97 ± 2 °C, microwaved
for 5 min at 800 W, and baked for 15 min at 200 °C. Total anthocyanins’
capacity is increased in all the samples, Total polyphenolic capacity
is increased after all the treatments of all the varieties, except
in Beauregard from Croatia. Neochlorogenic acid was reduced in all
the samples after treatment, and chlorogenic acid level also decreased
in all the samples of treatment except after steaming of Beauregard
from Slovakia. trans-Ferulic acid decreased in all samples of treatment
except in boiled. The antioxidant capacity of all the samples of treatment
is increased. 
In another study,
the content of the phytonutrients in apples was
determined by two types of freezing methods: freezing by immersion
at liquid nitrogen and freeze drying at the 50 °C. The total
polyphenol capacity is reduced before digestion by both freezing methods,
and the antioxidant activity is also reduced before and after digestion
(CUPRAC, FRAP and ABTS assays). Another
experiment was also performed on apple puree; the methods used were
freeze-drying, hot-air-drying, infrared-drying at 35, 40, 50, and
60 °C and pasteurization. In the human in vivo crossover study,
three subjects’ % of urine excretion of total polyphenols was
highest in pasteurized apple puree followed by the hot air-dried and
then freeze-dried samples. When apricot
canning was studied in industrial vs domestic thermal processing,
it was found that the total polyphenol capacity was reduced 13 to
47% in the industrial and 2 to 33% in the domestic settings; procyanidins
decrease by 44% in the industrial environment and by 2.4% in domestic
locations. Phenolic acids are being utilized in industrial settings
as compared to domestic cooking. 
The Ting fermentation method is performed at different time and
temperature regimes to analyze the content of the antioxidants and
phytonutrients in sorghum. TPC, total flavonoid, and total tannin
content are investigated. So, all the analyzed compound’s optimal
values at 27 °C for 72 h and the antioxidative properties are
best found in the sample fermented at 27 °C for 24 h. Fermentation of the 8 pulses such as mottled
cowpea, black cow gram, speckled kidney beans, small rice beans, lentil,
2 soybeans, and small runners’ beans was performed with naturally
occurring bacteria and lactic acid bacteria. Total polyphenol capacity
is enhanced in all the legume samples, and antioxidant activities
are also higher in the speckled kidney beans, mottled cowpeas and
small rice beans and no significant changes are seen in the other
treatment samples. Pickling of the green
peppers, green beans, chili peppers, white cabbage, cauliflower, sneak
melon, cucumbers, tomatoes, carrots, and garlic was done to find the
availability. It was observed that the total polyphenol capacity of
all these vegetables was reduced after 15 days but enhanced after
30 and 60 days in all the vegetables. The antioxidant capacity also
was reduced after 15 days and then was enhanced after 30 and 60 days
in the green peppers, green beans, chili peppers, white cabbage, cauliflower,
cucumber and sneak melon; for the tomatoes, garlic and carrots, it
was enhanced during all the time points (as shown in ). A large body of evidence highly supports that the use of polyphenol
rich food and food products is excellent for the prevention and treatment
of several chronic disorders. It is also estimated that their bioavailability
is of great interest to draw a straightforward conclusion about their
original efficacy. 
 

## Conclusion and Future Perspectives
Chronic diseases
are the leading causes of death. Various pathological
conditions are occurring due to increased amounts of harmful oxidants
such as reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. It is required to lower
oxidative stress to reduce all of these disease-causing oxidants.
These plant-derived compounds, including polyphenols, flavonoids,
and carotenoids, play pivotal roles in countering oxidative stress
and inflammation, thereby contributing to the management of diverse
ailments. Phytonutrients are plant-based bioactive compounds present
in dietary sources and are also used in the nutraceutical industry.
All the observed studies show a positive effect of phytonutrients
on disease prevention and management. The major phytonutrients discussed
are polyphenols, anthocyanin, resveratrol, phytosterol (stigmasterol),
flavonoids, isoflavonoids, limonoids, terpenoids, carotenoids, lycopene,
quercetin, phytoestrogens, glucosinolates, and probiotics. All of
these phytonutrients are present in several fruits, vegetables, legumes,
beans, nuts, seeds, and other medicinal plants. It is concluded that
the intake of phytonutrients through the diet has beneficial effects
on disease prevention and treatment such as diabetes mellitus, obesity,
hypertension, cardiovascular disorders, different types of cancers,
neurological disorders, age-related diseases, inflammatory disorders,
and other biological activities. Despite the acknowledged limitations,
the integration of phytonutrient-rich foods into one’s diet
holds significant promise for improving overall health. Ongoing research
and a nuanced understanding of individual variability are critical
to fully harness the potential of phytonutrients in disease prevention
and treatment. Future perspectives should explore personalized approaches
to harness the potential of phytonutrients, leveraging advancements
in omics technologies and precision nutrition while also investigating
novel sources and synergistic combinations to enhance their therapeutic
applications.

## Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful to the University of Lahore,
Pakistan, for providing free full-length articles.

## Author Present Address
9 School of
Food Science and Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou
225012, China

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References