1991clintransmedClinical and Translational MedicineClin Transl MedWileyPMC1275332912753329127533294146933410.1002/ctm2.70566Single‐nucleus RNA sequencing reveals the distinct heterogeneity of primary pulmonary sarcomas (PPS) and pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC)
ZhuJianfei XiongYanlu MaShouzheng WeiJun ChenJiakuan WangWenchen DuanQianqian ZhangQin ChenDongsheng DengWanglong JiangTao LeiJie 
1
Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Air Force Medical University, Xi'an, China
2
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Air Force 986th Hospital, Air Force Medical University, Xi'an, China
3
The State Key Laboratory of Neurology and Oncology Drug Development, Jiangsu Simcere Diagnostics Co., Ltd, Nanjing, China
4
Department of Medicine, Nanjing Simcere Medical Laboratory Science Co., Ltd. Nanjing, China*

Correspondence
, Jie Lei and Tao Jiang, Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Air Force Medical University, Xi'an, China. Email: leijiemd@163.com and jiangtaochest@163.com

✉Corresponding author.
30122025161e70566e70566112026© 2025 The Author(s). Clinical and Translational Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Shanghai Institute of Clinical Bioinformatics.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract

## Background
Primary pulmonary sarcomas (PPS) and pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC) are rare and aggressive diseases that pose significant diagnostic challenges, requiring extensive sampling and comprehensive evaluation. To date, the single‐cell characteristics and distinctions between these two conditions have not been thoroughly investigated.

## Methods
In this study, we employed single‐nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA‐seq) to characterise the cellular heterogeneity of PSC and PPS. Our analysis included 20 PSC samples, seven PPS samples and two non‐malignant control samples obtained from adjacent normal tissue.

## Results
Our results revealed that the majority of cells in PSC were of epithelial origin, while fibroblasts predominated in PPS. Specifically, AT2 cells, a major source of epithelial cells in PSC, underwent malignant transformation primarily through epithelial–mesenchymal transition, suggesting AT2 cells may serve as the origin of PSC. High Mobility Group AT‐Hook 2 (HMGA2) expression was elevated in malignant AT2 cells of PSC and correlated with an unfavourable prognosis. Moreover, MET‐mutated patients have a significantly higher expression level of HMGA2 (p < .001). In PPS, fibroblasts constituted the majority, only lipofibroblasts exhibited malignant features. A direct comparison between PSC and PPS lipofibroblasts revealed largely similar expression profiles, with the exception of an enrichment in DNA repair pathways specifically observed in PPS lipofibroblasts.

## Conclusion
These findings provide novel insights of PSC and PPS at the single‐cell level.

## Key points

Distinct Cellular Origins: PSC arises primarily from epithelial (AT2) cells via EMT, whereas PPS is predominantly fibroblast‐derived.

Prognostic Driver HMGA2: Elevated HMGA2 in malignant AT2 cells correlates with poor prognosis and is significantly higher in MET‐mutated PSC.

Pathway Divergence in Malignant Cells: Malignant lipofibroblasts in PPS share a similar profile with PSC but uniquely enrich DNA repair pathways.

Keywords: primary pulmonary sarcomas, pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma, single‐nucleus RNA sequencing, TME

Single‐nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA‐seq) maps the cellular diversity of pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC) and primary pulmonary sarcomas (PPS). AT2 cells, a major source of epithelial cells in PSC, underwent malignant transformation primarily through epithelial–mesenchymal transition, suggesting AT2 cells may serve as the origin of PSC. HMGA2 expression was elevated in malignant AT2 cells of PSC and correlated with an unfavourable prognosis. In PPS, fibroblasts constituted the majority, lipofibroblasts exhibited malignant features. Comparison between PSC and PPS lipofibroblasts revealed largely similar expression profiles, with the exception of an enrichment in DNA repair pathways specifically observed in PPS lipofibroblasts. 

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Dec 3; Received 2025 May 20; Accepted 2025 Dec 14; Collection date 2026 Jan.

1.

## BACKGROUND
Pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC) and primary pulmonary sarcomas (PPS) both represent infrequent and highly aggressive neoplasms of the lung. The biphasic lung carcinoma known as PSC, characterised by a combination of epithelial and sarcomatous components, is an exceedingly rare entity, accounting for only .1%–.4% of all primary lung neoplasms. PSC subtypes exhibit a range of deviations from the typical epithelioid morphology seen in non—small‐cell lung cancer (NSCLC). These neoplasms may contain spindle‐shaped or giant cells that resemble sarcomas, as well as heterologous sarcomatous components or rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation. The WHO classifies tumours as PSC when these morphological transformations are present in at least 10% of the neoplasm. , , While PPS which was raised from mesenchymal tissue of the bronchial wall vessels or pulmonary stroma that are not a metastasis from an extrathoracic sarcoma are reported to constitute only .1%–.3% of all lung malignancies. The frequently observed histological subtypes include synovial sarcoma, epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, leiomyosarcoma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour. Subsequently, undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, liposarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma are also commonly encountered. At present, pathophysiological mechanisms and molecular pathways underlying PPS are largely unknown. The clinical and imaging characteristics of PPS and PCS resemble those observed in other subtypes of NSCLC. Extensive tissue sampling is the key to distinguishing PCS from PPS. In addition, they frequently manifest with regional invasion and distant metastasis. Owing to their more aggressive nature, both PPS and PCS exhibit a relatively unfavourable prognosis compared to other forms of NSCLC. According to several studies, the poor prognosis of both tumour types can be attributed to the aggressive behaviour of their sarcomatous components. , Due to the non‐specific symptoms, the rarity of the disease, and the intratumoural heterogeneity (ITH) makes the diagnosis and treatment of PSC and PPS particularly tricky. Considering the infrequency of PSC and PPS cases, conducting a randomised controlled trial with sufficient participant numbers becomes an arduous task in determining the most effective treatment strategy for both PSC and PPS. The involvement of thoracic surgeons within lung cancer multidisciplinary teams is seldom sought when making decisions related to managing patients with PSC. This circumstance might contribute to a pessimistic outlook concerning treatment options and prognostic outcomes.
Recently, the ITH of PSC have presented by the multi‐omics analysis including whole‐exome sequencing (WES), RNA sequencing test and methylation sequencing demonstrated molecular characteristics and relationship with targeted therapy and immunotherapy. , While, regards to PPS, existing literature regarding PPS has been limited only to small retrospective case series that have examined the impact of tumour pathology and clinical management strategies on overall survival (OS). The similarities and differences between PSC and PPS at the single‐cell level have not been studied so far. Consequently, a comprehensive exploration of the molecular characteristics of PSC and PPS, particularly at the single‐cell level, can assist us in comprehending their molecular mechanisms and also offer some guidance for the management of postoperative treatment.
In this study, we conducted single‐nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA‐seq) analysis on PSC, PPS and normal control lung tissues. We characterised the interaction profiles of tumour cells and tumour microenvironment (TME) cells in PSC and PPS. Our data provide an in‐depth understanding of PSC and PPS, and may provide a resource for the accurate diagnosis and treatment.

2.

## METHODS
2.1.

## Patients and sample
All participants were enrolled from January 2015 to December 2020; the last follow‐up was in December 2022. Inclusion criteria: (1) All patients with PSC and PPS were those who had undergone surgical; (2) Informed, written consents were obtained from all participants prior to specimen collection; (3) Sample of surgery diagnosed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) combined with haematoxylin–eosin (H&E) staining. All tumour specimens were reviewed by at least two independent pathologists according to the WHO (5th edition) lung tumour or soft tissue and bone tumours classification. For PSC, elements of both NSCC (usually squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma) and sarcoma with heterologous elements (rhabdomyosarcoma, chondrosarcoma and osteosarcoma) must be present. The IHC of the carcinomatous element corresponds to that seen in typical tumours of the same subtype: TTF1 and napsin A are expressed in adenocarcinoma, while p40 is positive in squamous cell carcinoma. , For heterologous sarcomatous elements, markers such as desmin or myogenin can identify rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation, whereas S100 is indicative of chondrosarcomatous components. Extensive tissue sampling and sarcomatous element marker are used to identify PPS. Exclusion criteria: (1) Patients with a history of malignant tumours should be excluded; (2) Exclude patients who have received chemotherapy and radiation therapy before surgery; (3) Patients with insufficient samples or substandard sample quality should be excluded during the experiment. This study involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee (TDLL‐202204‐01). We collected a total of 51 samples. After the cell nuclei isolation from cell suspensions, 21 samples ultimately met the quality control (QC) standards and were sequenced, including twenty PSC, seven PPS and two non‐malignant samples (normal control from adjacent tumour).

2.2.

## Haematoxylin–eosin staining and immunohistochemistry
PSC and PPS must be diagnosed by a combination of H&E and IHC from surgically resected specimens. The diagnosis of PSC must meet the following two conditions: CK is positive in epithelial cells and Vimentin was positive in spindle cells and negative in epithelioid cells. The diagnosis of PPS should be consistent with the fact that CK is negative and Vimentin is positive in spindle cells. All diagnoses were made by three independent experienced pathologists according to the WHO (5th Edition) criteria for classification (online version) of thoracic tumours and soft tissue and Bone tumours. 

High Mobility Group AT‐Hook 2 (HMGA2) expression was performed using HMGA2 (20795‐1‐AP, 1:500, Proteintech) monoclonal antibody using an automatic immunostainer and Ultra VISION universal DAB (3,3′‐diaminobenzidine) detection kit (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc.). Appendix tissue sections were used as the positive and negative controls. All microscopic analyses were performed using an optical microscope (Zeiss).

2.3.

## Cell preparation—Nuclei isolation from cell suspensions
After harvested, tissues were dissociated using Isolation of Nuclei for Single Cell RNA Sequencing (10× Genomics Catalog No. CG000124) reference 10× Genomics guideline and literatures as instructions. , Nuclei count and viability were estimated using fluorescence Cell Analyzer (Countstar® Rigel S2) with acridine orange/propidium iodide reagent after removal debris. Finally, nuclei were washed twice in the 1 × phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) and .2U/µL RNase Inhibitor and then resuspended at 1 × 106 nuclei per mL in 1 × PBS and 1% BSA and .2 U/µL RNase Inhibitor BSA.

2.4.

## snRNA‐seq library construction and sequencing
Single‐cell RNA‐Seq libraries were generated using the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3ʹ Reagent Kits v3.1 (10× Genomics Catalog No. 1000121). In summary, a suitable quantity of cells was combined with reverse transcription reagents and introduced into the sample well of the Chromium Next GEM Chip G. Gel beads and partitioning oil were then added to the designated wells of the chip. Following the formation of emulsion droplets, reverse transcription was carried out at 53°C for 45 min, followed by enzyme inactivation at 85°C for 5 min. The resulting cDNA was then extracted from the broken droplets and subjected to amplification via polymerase chain reaction (PCR). After amplification, the cDNA products were purified, fragmented, end‐repaired, A‐tailed, and connected to sequencing adapters. Afterwards, indexed PCR was conducted to enrich DNA fragments corresponding to the 3′ polyA regions of expressed genes, which also included cell barcodes and unique molecular identifiers (UMIs). The final indexed libraries were purified using SPRI beads, quantified using qPCR (KAPA Biosystems KK4824) and sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform with a paired‐end read length of 150 bases.

2.5.

## snRNA‐seq data quality control and integration
The raw gene expression matrices generated using CellRanger (version 6.1.2) were integrated in R (version 4.1.1) and converted to a Seurat object using the Seurat package (version 4.0.5). For each cell, we used four QC measures. Cells meeting any of the following criteria were excluded: (1) fewer than 700 expressed genes, (2) >20% UMIs of mitochondria genes, (3) (UMI) count <1000, (4) the number of genes detected per UMI at log scale <.8; After applying the filtering criteria, the final dataset comprised from a total of 181 764 cells. Subsequently, integrated analyses were conducted using Seurat. The filtered gene expression matrix was initially normalised using the SC Transform method based on the top 3000 highly variable features calculated by vst method. Subsequently, batch effects were mitigated utilising the Harmony package (version 1.0). Ultimately, a batch‐corrected expression matrix encompassing all cells was obtained for subsequent downstream analysis. The results before and after batch correction are shown in Extended Data Figure  .
 
2.6.

## Cell clustering and annotation
The clustering analysis was performed using the integrated joint embedding generated by Harmony, followed by application of the Louvain algorithm to compute a shared nearest‐neighbour graph. This graph was then utilised within the ‘FindClusters’ function of the Seurat package. The resolution was set to .8 to obtain the clustering results. The identified clusters were visualised on the two‐dimensional (2D) map produced with the uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) method. Cell clusters were annotated by identifying differentially expressed genes (DEGs) with strong discriminatory abilities between the groups using the FindAllMarkers function in Seurat, employing the default non‐parametric Wilcoxon rank sum test with Bonferroni correction. The cell groups were annotated based on the DEGs and the well‐known cellular markers (Extended Data Table  ). Subsequently, we used SingleR to make annotations for each cell type. SingleR identified cell types based on similarities in expression patterns between the cells to be identified and the reference cells.
 
2.7.

## Copy number variation estimation and identification of malignant cells
Malignant cells were identified using infer copy number variation (CNV). , , InferCNV which works by finding cells with large copy number variations as determined by sorting expressed genes by their chromosomal location and applying a moving average, a sliding window of 100 genes within each chromosome, to the relative expression values. All cells from two normal samples were used as reference controls. We scored each cell for the extent of CNV signal and plotted cells on a dendrogram which was then cut at the highest point in which all the spiked in control cells belonged to one cluster All cells that clustered together with spiked in controls were labelled ‘non‐malignant’, whereas the remaining two clusters were labelled as ‘malignant’.

2.8.

## Functional enrichment analysis and gene set variation analysis
The R package ClusterProfiler 4.0.5 was used for gene ontology (GO), Kyoto encyclopaedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) analysis of the differential marker genes among subclusters. To assign pathway activity estimates to individual cell type or sample, we applied gene set variation analysis (GSVA) using standard settings, as implemented in the GSVA R package (version 1.40.1), as described previously. The gene set of 50 hallmark pathways we investigated (h.all.v7.2.symbols.gmt) was downloaded from the GSEA website (https://www.gsea‐msigdb.org/gsea/index.jsp).

2.9.

## Epithelial and fibroblasts subset analysis
Cells previously annotated as epithelial (n = 41 648) and fibroblasts (n = 89 622) were subset and reclustered using methods described above and the following parameters: Ngenes = (2000), Npcs = 20, Res = .7, Kparam = 30. Gene signatures were compiled using differential expressed as well as known cell marker genes. The remaining signatures were identified directly from top DEGs.

2.10.

## Trajectory analysis
2.10.1.

## RNA velocity
The sorted bam files were used to generate loom files using the velocyto run10× function with the genome annotation file ‘GRCh38.gtf’. The loom files for each sample were merged into one loom file. velocyto.R package (version 0.6) was used to calculate the velocity and visualise on plot, we used the method using steady‐state mode, following the Seurat to RNA velocity guides (https://github. com/basilkhuder/Seurat‐to‐RNA‐Velocity).

2.10.2.

## Monocle2
We used Monocle2 (version 2.14.0) to infer the cell lineage trajectory of AT2 cells with the top 1000 signature genes with q value <.001 calculated by differential GeneTest function. The differentiation trajectory was inferred with the default parameters of Monocle after dimension reduction and cell ordering.

2.11.

## Simultaneous gene regulatory network analysis
SCENIC30 is an innovative computational approach designed for building regulatory networks and discerning distinct cellular states using scRNA/snRNA‐seq datasets. To assess variations among cell clusters in terms of transcription factors or their associated target genes, SCENIC was applied across all individual cells, and the Limma package was utilised to determine the regulons with preferential expression. Only those regulons exhibiting significant upregulation or downregulation in at least one cluster, with an adjusted p value below .05, were included in subsequent analyses.

2.12.

## Cell–cell communication analysis
We evaluated disparities in putative cell–cell communication modules among different cell types within each group (PSC and PPS) by integrating the gene expression data using CellChat (version 1.1.3). Following the standard CellChat pipeline, we utilised the default CellChatDB as the ligand–receptor database and subsequently inferred cell type‐specific communication by identifying upregulated ligands or receptors in one cell group, followed by identification of augmented ligand–receptor interactions upon overexpression of either the ligand or receptor. We then used NicheNet to investigate the signalling mediators involved in ligand–receptor pairing among cancer cells signalling with immune cells (T cells, B cells, macrophages), epithelial cells and fibroblasts. During the NicheNet runs, we evaluated the interaction between ligands and receptors. For both the sender and receiver populations, downstream analysis was conducted using genes from the signalling pathway of interest that exhibited expression in at least 10% of the cells. NicheNet analysis was conducted utilising the vignette to rank potential ligands, infer receptors and predict top target genes of the identified ligands.

2.13.

## Genomic profile analysis
For the remaining tissue samples (17 PSC and seven PPS), we conducted further DNA‐level mutation analysis (detecting 539 tumour‐related genes). Genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated using a DNA extraction kit designed for tissue samples (Kai Shuo). The indexed paired‐end adapters compatible with the Illumina platform were developed and tailored in‐house (SimcereDx). End repair was carried out using two different kits: the KAPA HyperPlus DNA Library Prep kit (Roche Diagnostics) and the VAHTSTM Universal DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina® (Vazyme). Each step of the process was conducted in accordance with the protocols provided by the manufacturers. The concentration of the final DNA library was measured using the Qubit Fluorometer along with the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay kit (Thermo Fisher), while the library quality was assessed using the Agilent 4200 TapeStation system (Agilent). Prepared DNA libraries were sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform (Illumina). The fastp tool (V.2.20.0) was used for adapter pruning and to filter low‐quality sequencing reads. Cleaned reads were aligned to the human reference genome (hg19) using the burrows‐wheeler transform‐mem algorithm. Somatic mutations of 551 genes including point mutations, small insertions and deletions were identified and annotated using VarDict and InterVar, respectively. , We screened for germline variations using the internal database. Copy number variation involved amplification and deletion were analysed by CNVkit (dx1.1). 

3.

## RESULTS
3.1.

## A snRNA‐seq atlas in primary pulmonary sarcomas and pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma
To investigate the cell populations and the associated molecular characteristics between PSC and PPS, 20 PSC, seven PPS and two non‐malignant samples (normal control from adjacent tumour) were included in our survey (Figure  ). The enrolled patients were all newly diagnosed and had not been diagnosed with any other tumours. The pathological type of all samples was reviewed by the pathologist (Figure  and Extended Data Figure  ). The clinical characteristics of these participants including age, gender, clinical stages, pathological features were recorded in Extended Data Table  . After removal of low‐quality cells (see ‘Methods’ section), 181 764 cells were retained for biological analysis, which detected a median of 2059 genes (Extended Data Figure  ). After normalisation of gene expression and principal component analysis (PCA), we used graph‐based clustering to partition the cells (Figure  ). All cells were divided into seven clusters, including epithelial cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells (ECs), CD8+T cells, macrophages, B cells, CD4+T cells (Figure  ). These clusters could be assigned to known cell lineages through marker genes (Figure  and Extended Data Figure  ). The proportion of each cell lineage varies greatly between PSC and PPS groups, epically in epithelium cells and fibroblasts. Compared with PPS group, PSC group had a higher proportion of epithelial cells (30.4% vs. 4.8%), but a lower proportion of fibroblasts (29.4% vs. 89.8%; Figure  and Extended Data Figure  ). In addition, compared with PPS, PSC also has a higher proportion of CD8+ T cells. Our research group previously explored the immune microenvironment of PSC through IHC methods. Most patients with PSC had positive infiltration of CD8+ T cells in the tumour area, and had positive expression of PD‐L1 in tumour cells (Tumor cell proportion score ≥ 1). Notably, histologically, PPS is usually categorised as malignant fibrous histiocytoma, non‐epithelial tumour. , By analysing cell types, we discovered that there was still a very small proportion of epithelial cells (4.8%) in PPS.
 This result indicates that PSC and PPS harbour distinct Cell composition on a single‐cell level. Therefore, further examination of epithelial cells and fibroblasts may reveal the origin of PPS and PSC.

3.2.

## Classification of malignant and non‐malignant epithelial cells in PSC and PPS
To identify distinct transcriptional profiles of epithelial cell populations, we employed dimensionality reduction and unsupervised cell clustering techniques using the Seurat package. By leveraging key marker genes expression, we successfully reclustered epithelial cells of PSC into five major cell types, comprising AT1 cells (AGER; TIMP3), AT2 cells (SFTPB; SFTPA1), ciliated cells (TPPP3; RSPH1), and basal cells (KRT15; KRT17) (Figure  ). In the epithelial cells of PSC, AT2 cells accounted for the vast majority. Additionally, in order to distinguish between malignant and non‐malignant epithelial cells in PSC and PPS, we employed CNV analysis of RNA expression due to the established correlation between cancer development and large‐scale chromosomal alterations. In comparison to ECs in the control group, cancer cells exhibited more pronounced alterations in relative expression intensities across the entire genome (Extended Data Figure  ). Among the malignant epithelial cells, the vast majority are AT2 cells (Figure  ). By comparing malignant and non‐malignant epithelial cells in PSC, malignant cells showed high expression of marker genes associated with epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumour metabolism regulation related genes, such as HMGA2, FN1, PDE10A, and PCAT1 (Extended Data Figure  ). Referring to the EMT‐related gene set in Hallmark gene set (including 200 genes), we conducted pathway enrichment through GSEA. The results indicated that EMT pathway genes were highly expressed in malignant epithelial cells (Figure  ). Using the genes in this gene set as marker genes and referring to the methods in the literature, the EMT score values of different types of cells in PSC were evaluated. The results indicated that the EMT scores of different types of epithelial cells varied significantly (Figure  ). It is worth noting that for AT1 cells, there was no statistically significant difference in EMT scores between malignant and non‐malignant cells (Figure  ). For AT2 cells, malignant AT2 cells significantly have a higher EMT score. This result demonstrates that malignant AT2 cells in PSC have a higher ability for EMT (Figure  ).
 While in the PPS group, six cell types were identified, including five known cell type AT1 cells, AT2 cells, ciliated cells, basal cells and goblet cells (NPDC1) and one unknown cell type cluster 1 (Figure  ). AT1 cells and basal cells in PPS groups were likely to malignant epithelial cells (Figure  ). Previous single‐cell studies have demonstrated that AT2 cells are the source of lung adenocarcinoma, , AT1 cells are an important driver of lung squamous cell carcinoma. In our study, the AT2 cells of PPS were identified as non‐malignant cells, while AT1 cells were recognised as malignant cells. The malignant epithelial cells in the PPS group exhibited elevated expression of genes involved in metabolic regulation, such as DLGAP1 and PDE3A, as well as heightened expression of neuronal regulatory genes, including ADARB2 and DPP6 (Extended Data Figure  ). To decipher the molecular characteristics difference of malignant and non‐malignant epithelium, we performed GSEA. Compared with non‐malignant epithelium, malignant epithelium in PSC was enriched for signalling pathways in integrin binding, guanyl–nucleotide exchange factor activity, actin binding, cadherin binding, GTPase regulator activity (Figure  ). Malignant epithelium in PPS was also enriched for actin binding, cadherin binding, GTPase regulator activity. Moreover, malignant epithelium in PPS was enriched for 3′,5′‐cyclic‐nucleotide phosphodiesterase activity and structural constituent of ribosome (Figure  ).
 
3.3.

## The epithelial cell repertoire of PSC is markedly changed and contains aberrant AT2 cells
The vast majority of epithelial cells in PSC were comprised AT2 cells. Unsupervised cell clustering revealed the AT2 cells could be further divided into seven clusters (Figure  ). Because of the cell numbers of cluster (cluster 3–cluster 6) being insufficient, we proceeded to investigate cluster 0–cluster 2 (C0–C2). The C0 cluster overexpressed LRRK2, a gene associated with lung homeostasis, which was highly expressed in normal lungs, as well as SFTPB, marker of the common AT2 phenotype. The C1 cluster highly expressed HMGA2, which was upstream mediator of cancer hallmarks and targets many critical signalling pathways. The C1 cluster also highly expressed EMT marker FN1. The C2 expressed enzyme activity related genes, such as PCAT1 and PDE10A (Figure  ). , The differential expression genes from C0 to C2 cluster suggested a phenotypic transition towards malignancy. This result was consistent with the proportion of malignant cells identified by different AT2 cells (Figure  ). Moreover, the C1 and C2 highly expressed HMGA2 and PDE10A, which was enriched in malignant AT2 cells (Extended Data Figure  ). The GSEA analysis revealed that malignant AT2 cells exhibited upregulated of the EMT pathway and downregulated of INF‐γ, IL‐6_JAK_STAT3 and UV response pathway (Figure  ). Previous research has indicated that AT2 cells, through a process of dedifferentiation, enhance stemness and facilitate EMT, thus contributing to the progression of pulmonary adenocarcinoma. Our results also elucidated the similar significant role of AT2 cells in PSC. Pseudotime analysis by Monocle2 shows the potential evolutionary trajectory of AT2 cells (Figure  ). Dynamically expressed genes were screened depended on the regulation of the branch during the transition from pre‐branch to cell‐fate 1 and cell‐fate 2 branches (Figure  ) and the genes were divided into four clusters (cluster 1–4). Most of the genes in cluster 1 and cluster 2 are highly expressed in the pre‐branch, and their functions are involved in transcription and development, such as PTPN14, PBX1 and BZW1. , , The genes in cluster 3 exhibited high expression levels in cell fate 1, which were associated with tumourigenesis, EMT and other processes, such as ROR1. Given the important role of transcriptional regulation and EMT in malignant transformation of AT2 cells, and the important position of HMGA2 in these biological processes, we speculated that HMGA2 is an important marker of malignant AT2 cells. Therefore, the HMGA2 expression levels of PSC samples in gene expression omnibus (GEO) database (GSE110205) and normal controls were compared. The results showed that HMGA2 was highly expressed in PSC samples (p = .0029, Figure  ). We also verified the results at the protein level by IHC (Figure  ). In addition, despite not reaching statistically significant differences, PSC patients in our cohort with high HMGA2 expression had a worse prognosis in our cohort (mOS: 5.47 vs. 15.63 months, p = .22, Figure  ).
 MET gene has been confirmed as a driver gene in PSC. Previous studies on NSCLC have suggested that patients with MET mutations may be more likely to have HMGA2 amplification. , We performed DNA‐based next‐generation sequencing sequencing on PSC and PPS. Among the 17 cases of PSC, five cases had MET mutations (Figure  ). Moreover, patients with MET mutations have higher levels of HMGA2 expression (Figure  ). Meanwhile, HMGA2, as a transcription factor, is highly expressed in malignant AT2 cells (Figure  ).
 
3.4.

## Classification of malignant and non‐malignant fibroblasts and endothelial cells in PSC and PPS
By utilising key marker gene expression, we reclassified fibroblasts into five major cell types, comprising myofibroblasts, peribronchial fibroblasts, lipofibroblasts, mesothelial cells and cluster 1 (Figure  ). In PSC group, most of the fibroblasts were malignant (Figure  ). In comparison to fibroblasts in the normal control, malignant cells also exhibited more pronounced alterations in relative expression intensities across the entire genome with inferCNV (Extended Data Figure  ). By comparing malignant and non‐malignant fibroblasts in PSC, malignant cells showed high expression of marker genes associated with EMT and tumour signal transduction, such as FSTL5 and ERBB4 (Extended Data Figure  ). , While in the PPS group, three cell subtypes were identified, including alveolar fibroblasts, myofibroblasts and lipofibroblasts (Figure  ). Notably, in the PPS group, only lipofibroblasts showed the characteristics of malignant cells (Figure  ). The malignant fibroblasts in PPS exhibited upregulation of the EMT‐related gene CDH12, as well as upregulation of apoptosis‐related genes such as MEG3 and MEG8 (Extended Data Figure  ). The malignant cells in PSC exhibited a higher abundance of signalling pathways associated with transmembrane receptor protein kinase activity, among others, when compared to non‐malignant fibroblasts (Figure  ). Malignant fibroblasts in PPS were enriched for GTPase‐related pathway (Figure  ). The lipofibroblasts were malignant cells in both PSC and PPS groups. Therefore, A direct comparison of PSC versus PPS lipofibroblasts revealed the expression signature of both groups were similar, with the exception of an enrichment in the DNA repair pathway observed in lip fibroblasts of PPS (Figure  ).
 Tumour angiogenesis represents a crucial characteristic of cancer, serving as a mechanism through which tumours secure the necessary nutrients and oxygen to support their growth. ECs serve as crucial elements of the vascular system and play a direct role in the formation of new blood vessels during tumour angiogenesis. To dissect the tumour vascular microenvironment, we recluster the ECs and annotated the cell types on the basis of representative gene signatures (Figure  ). The results indicated that PSC had the largest number of arterial ECs.
 
3.5.

## Inference of cell–cell communications in TME
Given the variations of different cell type compositions within TME, it may be due to the alteration of the complex intercellular communications. Herein, we employ the CellChat which is specifically designed for quantitative inference of intercellular, communication using snRNA‐seq data, to discern cell–cell interactions and explore their potential implications in promoting tumour progression. Cell communication between different types of ECs and immune cells in PSC and PPS is shown in Extended Data Figure  . The numbers and strength of interactions among different cell populations in PSC are presented in Figure  . Given the significant role of epithelial cells, especially epithelial AT2 cells, in PSC, we further conducted CellChat between different AT2 subclusters (AT2‐C0, AT2‐C1, AT2‐C2) and immune cells. Once the interaction strength is considered (represented by the interaction counts), AT2‐C1 cells demonstrate a pivot role in the TME, which strongly interacts with other AT2 cells and immune cell types (Figure  ). The AT2 subcluster also interacts with various types of ECs. However, more frequently, it is the communication among different types of ECs (Extended Data Figure  ). We further explore the ligand–receptor pairs involved in the cellular crosstalk between AT2 cells and other immune cells (Figure  ). Noteworthy, strong communication probabilities mostly occur between ligands including protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPRM, PTPRC), collagens (type I and IV) and fibronectin (FN1), with receptors PTPRM, MRC1 and CD44. These ligands and receptors dominate the active signalling between AT2 and other cell types. The receptor CD44 is notably shared by all cell types, making it the most prevalent one. While its association with the TME is well‐known, this study provides the first documentation of its role as a common receptor in PSC. To elucidate the signalling pathways contributing to intricate intercellular communication, we quantitatively assess both the outgoing and incoming interaction strengths of each individual pathway. Notably, PTPRM signalling is shown as the most predominant signalling in AT2‐C2, as reflected by the largest outgoing and incoming interaction strength compared to other signalling pathways. In addition to PTPRM signalling, we also observe increased collagen, extracellular matrix (ECM) signalling related to fibronectin 1 (FN1) and laminin (LAMININ) signal (Figure  and Extended Data Figure  ). In PPS group, most interactions are observed among fibroblasts, CD8+T cells and macrophages (Figure  ). Further, the cell communication between different types of fibroblasts and immune cells was analysed. Lipofibroblasts play a crucial role in the TME, interacting strongly with various cell types, particularly alveolar fibroblasts (Figure  ). Ligand–receptor analysis revealed strong communication probabilities mostly occur between ligands including PTPRM, PTPRC, collagens type I, collagens type IV, LAMA2, LAMA3, LAMA4, LAMB1 and CADM1, with receptors PTPRM, MRC1, CADM1 and CD44 (Figure  ). The analysis of outgoing and incoming interactions showed collagen signalling was the mainly signalling in T cells and myofibroblasts (Figure  ).
 

4.

## DISCUSSION
PPS and PSC are rare, malignant, sarcomatous subtypes of lung cancer. The diagnosis, treatment and prognosis of PSC and PPS all pose challenges. In this work, relying on snRNA‐seq, we investigated the single‐cell landscape of PSC and PPS. In clinical practice, the clinical manifestations and imaging of PSC and PPS are similar. At present, extensive tissue sampling is the key to distinguishing PCS from PPS. While, at the single‐cell level, we identified significant disparities in cell composition between PSCs and PPSs. On the whole, PSC group had a higher proportion of epithelial cells (30.4% vs. 4.8%), but a lower proportion of fibroblasts (29.4% vs. 89.8%) than PPS. According to WHO classification, PSC, as a poorly differentiated NSCLC, should contain at least a 10% component of spindle and/or giant cells, or a carcinoma that consists entirely of spindle and/or neoplastic giant cells. Therefore, there are considerable variations in the proportion of cells among different individuals of PSC. In addition, PPS is usually categorised as mesenchymal malignancy, non‐epithelial tumour. By analysing cell types, we discovered that there was still a very small proportion of epithelial cells (4.8%) in PPS. Through further exploration of the epithelial cells of PPS, we identified six cell types, among which the AT1 cells and basal cells were regarded as malignant epithelial cells. A single‐cell study on the development from immature to mature lungs has shown that AT1 epithelial cells can act as a unique signalling centre, secreting ligands essential for mesenchymal cell and alveolar development. Generally, PPS assumed that it is mesenchymal tissue of the bronchial wall vessels or pulmonary stroma. The findings of this study suggest that PPS is composed of some malignant epithelial cells, while concurrently demonstrating a close association between malignant AT1 cells and PPS.
In the epithelial cells of PSC, AT2 cells constituted the predominant population, and the AT2 cells of PSC gradually transition from benign to malignant, suggesting that PSC may originate from AT2 cells. The pathway enrichment results showed that malignant AT2 cells activated EMT and passivated immunorelated pathways such as INF‐γ, IL‐6_JAK_STAT3 and UV_response pathway. These pathways are highly relevant to the development, proliferation and metastasis of tumours. , , Further, unsupervised cell clustering revealed the AT2 cells could be further divided into seven clusters (Figure  ). Ninety‐two percent of the cells within cluster 1 (AT2‐C1) were malignant (Figure  ), and significant highly expressed HMGA2 than other clusters. HMGA2 represents a group of small chromatin‐associated proteins that act as architectural transcription factors. They directly bind to DNA sequences, consequently inducing structural alterations in the DNA molecule and modulating the transcriptional activity of target genes. The aberrant expression of HMGA2 plays a crucial role in the process of carcinogenesis, such as colorectal cancer, high‐grade serous ovarian carcinoma, NSCLC, serving as an upstream mediator for various cancer hallmarks including EMT, apoptosis and so on. The literature reported HMGA2 overexpression influence the E‐cadherin and vimentin. Thereby, the cells becoming invasive or metastatic. Moreover, HMGA2 regulates the DNA repair process by exerting control over various proteins associated with DNA repair. In our study, malignant AT2 cells showed high expression while the DNA repair pathway was inhibited, suggesting that HMGA2 may negatively regulate this pathway in PSC. Then, we further confirmed the high expression of HMGA2 in PSC through GEO data, which was also validated by the IHC. Finally, considering the pivotal role of HMGA2 in malignant tumours, we conducted a prognosis analysis for PSC based on its expression level. The results revealed that PSC patients with elevated HMGA2 expression had a poorer prognosis. At present, surgery serves as the primary treatment choice for PSC and PPS. The median survival durations and 5‐year survival percentages for surgically resected and non‐resected PPS were recorded as 39.6 months and 28.7%, respectively. For resected and non‐resected PCS, median survival times and 5‐year survival rates were 23.6 months and 31.0%, and 14.9 months and 28.2%, respectively. However, given the rarity of PSC, there are no effective molecular markers for the prognostic stratification of PSC. Our study indicates that HMGA2 could potentially serve as a potential molecular prognostic marker for PSC. Moreover, PSC is usually not sensitive to conventional chemoradiotherapy, HMGA2 supports a cancer stem cell phenotype and renders cancer cells resistant to chemotherapeutic agents. , 

It is worth noting that, as an important driver gene in PSC, our research has found that patients with MET mutations usually have high expression of HMGA2. Therefore, in further studies, the role of HMGA2 in providing therapeutic and prognostic guidance for PSC can be explored.
The fibroblasts of PSC and PPS were subjected to further analysis in our investigations. The malignant fibroblasts cells in PSC exhibited a higher abundance of signalling pathways associated with transmembrane receptor protein kinase activity. Malignant fibroblasts in PPS were enriched for GTPase‐related pathway. To our surprise, despite a high proportion of fibroblasts in PPS, the majority of these fibroblasts were found to be benign, while the lipofibroblasts exhibited malignancy. Some recent studies have demonstrated that lipofibroblasts in cancer‐associated fibroblasts (CAFs) also plays a crucial role in the onset and progression of tumours. In a study on the colon cancer, researchers found that KRAS mutations can activate the transcription factor TFCP2, which in turn upregulates the expression of adipogenic factors BMP4 and WNT5B, ultimately inducing CAFs to transform into a special subtype rich in lipids. These lipifibrogenesis are not inert bystanders; they actively secrete vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), directly contributing to tumour angiogenesis. A study on pancreatic cancer has shown that the loss of SETD2 can cause CAFs in the tumour to differentiate into a lipid‐rich phenotype. These CAFs provide lipids to support mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) in the tumour through the ABCA8a transporter, thereby promoting tumour progression. This indicates that the role of lipofibroblasts in different types of cancer is highly heterogeneous, including their participation in vascular survival and metabolic regulation. A direct comparison of PSC and PPS lipofibroblasts revealed similar expression signatures between both groups, except for an enrichment in the DNA repair pathway observed in PPS lipofibroblasts. This pathway is closely associated with tumourigenesis, tumour progression and targeted immunotherapy. Future studies investigating the impact of CAFs on PPS and PSC should place greater emphasis on this pathway.
Finally, the TME of PSC and PPS was analysed by cell communication analysis. In PSC, AT2‐2 cells, which highly express HMGA2, demonstrate strong interactions with other AT2 cells and immune cell types. The ligand–receptor analysis involved strong communication probabilities mostly occur between PTPRM and CD44. According to literature reports, collagens (type I and IV) and FN1 are closely related to EMT. In PPS group, most interactions are observed among fibroblasts, CD8+T cells and macrophages. Fibroblasts play a crucial role in TME of lung cancer, interacting with various cell types. , Notably, the receptor CD44 is notably shared by all cell types in PSC and PPS, making it the most prevalent one. CD44 is an important stem cell marker. Studies have shown that HMGA2 co‐expressed or regulated stem cell marker expression to promote cancer cell growth and motility, including CD44. , The significant involvement of HMGA2 in the epithelial–mesenchymal transformation of PSC and PPS, driving tumour stemness, as well as its crucial role in chemotherapy resistance, necessitates further investigation into the underlying mechanism of action.
In this study, we revealed that PSC epithelial cells have a unique AT2 cell subtype and found that HMGA2 plays an important role in PSC epithelial–mesenchymal transformation.
In PPS, the composition of it includes a few of malignant epithelial cells, while simultaneously indicating a strong correlation between malignant AT1 cells and PPS. Fibroblasts were the majority in PPS, only lipofibroblasts were malignant. Moreover, similar expression signatures in lipofibroblasts between PSC and PPS. TME first showed the receptor CD44, a biomarker of cell stem, is prominently shared by the majority of cell types in both PSC and PPS.
However, our research also has some limitations. Firstly, there is an imbalance in sample size; we included 20 cases of PSC, but only seven cases of PPS. Secondly, there is a lack of more basic experiments for verification, due to the limited availability of tissue samples. For instance, we utilised bulk RNA sequencing data from publicly available databases to validate the elevated mRNA expression of HMGA2 in tumour tissues. In addition, cell communication analysis indicates that CD44 plays a significant role in various cell types. However, due to sample issues, we were unable to conduct characterisation by using tissue sample. In the future, we will recollect clinical samples. On one hand, we will conduct further characterisation and validation of CD44 and HMGA2. On the other hand, we will employ spatial transcriptomics to further explore the distribution patterns of different cell types in PSC and PPS, along with their more precise interactions. We will also delve deeper into the origin and development patterns of these highly heterogeneous tumours.
In conclusion, our snRNA sequencing analysis reveals distinct cellular origins and TMEs in PPS and PSC. We demonstrate that PSC is predominantly composed of malignant epithelial cells, with AT2 cells identified as a likely cellular origin undergoing malignant transformation via EMT, driven in part by the oncogenic factor HMGA2. In contrast, PPS is characterised by a majority of fibroblasts, among which only lipofibroblasts display malignant features, and also harbours a minor population of malignant epithelial cells, including AT1 cells. The TME in both malignancies is marked by complex cell–cell communication, with the stemness‐associated receptor CD44 being a central node. These findings provide critical insights into the pathogenesis of PSC and PPS at single‐cell resolution, offering a molecular basis for improving diagnostic accuracy and developing targeted therapeutic strategies for these aggressive diseases.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors have read and approved the manuscript. Data curation: Jianfei Zhu, Yanlu Xiong and Tao Jiang. Investigation: Jun Wei and Jie Lei. Methodology: Shouzheng Ma, Qianqian Duan, Qin Zhang and Wanglong Deng. Project administration: Jie Lei and Dongsheng Chen. Supervision: Jiakuan Chen and Qianqian Duan. Writing – original draft: Wenchen Wang, Qianqian Duan, Qin Zhang and Jianfei Zhu. Writing– review & editing: Tao Jiang and Jie Lei.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## FUNDING INFORMATION
No.

## ETHICS STATEMENT
This human study was conducted under the approval of the Ethics Committee of The Second Affiliated Hospital, Air Force Medical University (TDLL‐202204‐01), as per the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, which was revised in 1983. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and the relative of the patient.

## CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION
Not applicable.

## CODE AVAILABILITY
No new algorithms were developed for this study. All codes generated for analysis are available.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors have nothing to report.

Zhu J, Xiong Y, Ma S, et al. Single‐nucleus RNA sequencing reveals the distinct heterogeneity of primary pulmonary sarcomas (PPS) and pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma (PSC). Clin Transl Med. 2026;16:e70566. 10.1002/ctm2.70566

Jianfei Zhu, Yanlu Xiong, Shouzheng Ma and Jun Wei contributed equally to this article.

## Contributor Information
Tao Jiang, Email: jiangtaochest@163.com.
Jie Lei, Email: leijiemd@163.com.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supporting information, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author. Bulk‐RNA‐seq data of PSC are available from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus under accession no. GSE110205.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Data Availability Statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supporting information, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author. Bulk‐RNA‐seq data of PSC are available from NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus under accession no. GSE110205.