3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC8640475864047586404753490179110.1016/j.isci.2021.103438Murine cerebral organoids develop network of functional neurons and hippocampal brain region identity
CiarpellaFrancesca ZamfirRaluca Georgiana CampanelliAlessandra RenElisa PedrottiGiulia BottaniEmanuela BorioliAndrea CaronDavide Di ChioMarzia DolciSissi AhtiainenAnnika MalpeliGiorgio MalerbaGiovanni BardoniRita FumagalliGuido HyttinenJari BifariFrancesco PalazzoloGemma PanuccioGabriella CuriaGiulia DecimoIlaria 1Section of Pharmacology, Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona, P.le Scuro 10, 37134 Verona, Italy2Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 Modena, Italy3Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies (NBT), Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genova, Italy4BioMediTech, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, 33520 Tampere, Finland5Department of Surgery, Dentistry, Paediatrics and Gynaecology, University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy6Department of Neurosciences, Biomedicine and Movement Sciences, University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy7Laboratory of Cell Metabolism and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine, University of Milan, 20133 Milan, Italy∗Corresponding author ilaria.decimo@univr.it
8These authors contributed equally
9Lead contact
1511202124121034381034389122021© 2021 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Brain organoids are in vitro three-dimensional (3D) self-organized neural structures, which can enable disease modeling and drug screening. However, their use for standardized large-scale drug screening studies is limited by their high batch-to-batch variability, long differentiation time (10–20 weeks), and high production costs. This is particularly relevant when brain organoids are obtained from human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Here, we developed, for the first time, a highly standardized, reproducible, and fast (5 weeks) murine brain organoid model starting from embryonic neural stem cells. We obtained brain organoids, which progressively differentiated and self-organized into 3D networks of functional neurons with dorsal forebrain phenotype. Furthermore, by adding the morphogen WNT3a, we generated brain organoids with specific hippocampal region identity. Overall, our results showed the establishment of a fast, robust and reproducible murine 3D in vitro brain model that may represent a useful tool for high-throughput drug screening and disease modeling.
Subject areas: Biological sciences, Neuroscience, Cell biology, Developmental biology

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Murine embryonic NSCs are able to self-organize into brain organoids
•Murine brain organoids mature in 32 days, showing dorsal forebrain identity
•Brain organoids develop 3D network of functional neurons
•WNT3a supplementation induces specific hippocampal brain region identity

Biological sciences; Neuroscience; Cell biology; Developmental biology

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2021 Jun 10; Revised 2021 Oct 13; Accepted 2021 Nov 10; Collection date 2021 Dec 17.

## Introduction
In recent years, in vitro three-dimensional (3D) biological systems have emerged as the state-of-the-art biotechnology to investigate brain development, neurological or neuropsychiatric disorders, and to perform large-scale pharmacological studies. Drug discovery is a complex process with a low success rate ( ). To ameliorate this aspect, high-throughput drug screening and drug repositioning strategies have been developed. High-throughput drug screening allows us to assay a large amount of compounds, but specific platforms are necessary to make the process reliable and fast. A crucial aspect is the possibility of using a robust and appropriate model of disease. This is particularly challenging for disorders affecting the central nervous system (CNS), given the complexity of the cerebral architecture. To overcome this aspect, 3D-based in vitro approaches, such as brain organoids, represent an appealing alternative to animal models for preclinical assays ( ). Brain organoids are in vitro 3D structures able to recapitulate the development and topological organization of the brain tissue. They are typically derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and embryonic stem cells (ESCs), exploiting the stem cell properties of self-renewal and self-organization ( ; ).
Since the original work by Reynolds ( ), traditional 3D neuronal cultures have been identified as neurospheres or neuro-aggregates in which neuronal progenitors grow in suspension in a medium that favors their expansion maintaining their stem cell properties ( ; ). With time, in vitro cultured brain organoids develop into mature neural structure, which recapitulate the development and topological organization of the in vivo brain tissue. Eiraku et al. showed that mouse ESCs could be steered to differentiate into neuroepithelial tissues when cultured as floating aggregates in a serum-free medium ( ). Starting from this pioneering study, more sophisticated and fine-tuned culture methods have been developed to generate human brain organ-like structures, termed organoids or spheroids ( ; ; ; ; ). These structures can also generate brain region-specific organoids ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ).
The intensive use of human iPSCs (hiPSCs) is prompted by the achievement of comparable results between the patient-derived organoid and the diseased tissue ( ). hiPSC-derived brain organoids own relevant translational potential and several groups have recently improved the protocol for their reliable and reproducible generation ( ; ). On the other hand, accordingly to human development timeline ( ), hiPSC-derived brain organoids require long time and high production cost for their in vitro generation that may hinder their potential application in large-scale studies.
The development of highly reproducible functional murine brain organoids may overcome some of these limitations and may represent a useful supportive tool to optimize protocols for human-derived brain organoids and to perform large-scale drug discovery studies. Given the fast growth rate and short scaling time of mouse brain development, murine brain organoids can be generated in a short time and with low production costs. Moreover, the extensive amount of in vivo data available on mouse brain development, together with the possibility of obtaining genetically mutant phenotype samples, provide invaluable points of comparison to validate murine organoids as systems to study the pathophysiology of different brain disorders ( ). Despite early attempts to generate 3D forebrain structures from mouse and human ESCs by Sasai et al. ( ; ; ), there are no data in literature on the generation of robust and reproducible functional rodent brain organoids ( ).
In this work, we have generated highly standardized murine brain organoids with functional neurons in 32 d of in vitro culture. Several complementary techniques, including global transcriptomic analysis, protein expression, and metabolic analysis showed the highly reproducible and consistent progressive maturation of the brain organoids. Moreover, by combining different methods such as trans-synaptic tracing, wholemount calcium imaging, whole-cell patch clamp, and microelectrode array (MEA) recordings, we showed that brain organoids acquire functional neurons with neuronal synaptic connections organized in 3D networks. Finally, we demonstrated that murine brain organoids can be further induced to acquire brain region–specific features, namely, by adding the morphogen WNT3a we obtained brain organoids enriched in neurons with CA3 hippocampal signature.
Overall, our results showed robust and reproducible murine 3D in vitro brain model with mature neural structure and functional neurons.

## Results

## Murine brain organoids show reproducible development and maturation
We isolated and cultured in vitro neural stem cells (NSCs) from the subgranular zone (SGZ), a well-known stem cells niche ( ; ), of mouse brain embryos (E14.5) following a three-step culture method. During the first phase of the protocol, referred to as expansion phase (days 0–4), the SGZ-derived NSCs were seeded at a specific cell density (20000 cells/well) ( ) in each well of a 24-well plate (day 0) and kept in dynamic culture in growth media (see section) supplemented with 20 ng/mL of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and 20 ng/mL of basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). At this stage, cells started to self-assemble into neurospheres. The accurate initial cell seeding density allowed us to obtain, in each well, one organoid with defined size (maximum diameter: 0.82 ± 0.01 mm) at the end of the expansion phase (day 4, A and 1B). To reduce cell proliferation and trigger cell differentiation, we subsequently lowered the growth factors concentration to 10 ng/mL EGF and bFGF (day 5) and then 5 ng/mL bFGF (day 7) (induction phase, days 5–14) ( A). In line with the morphology of early development human brain organoid ( ), by day 7, we observed organoids with smooth edges, a bright and optically translucent surface, and a darker center ( A). At day 9, the organoids reached the maximum diameter of 1.7 ± 0.02 mm (n = 89) ( B).
 To specifically induce neuronal differentiation and maturation, following the induction phase, we added the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 50 ng/mL to the culture media (differentiation phase, days 15–32) ( A). The BDNF belongs to the neurotrophin family, is a key molecule in neural development and function, and is required to increase the neurite number, length and complexity, as well as dendritic spine density in primary 2D NSC-derived neuronal cultures ( ). During this phase, the organoids showed a thinner translucent surface with a darker core and they achieved a stationary maximum diameter of 0.79 ± 0.01 mm (n = 59) at day 28 and of 0.78 ± 0.01 mm (n = 49) at day 32 ( B). These data indicated that the organoids developed with consistent size throughout the different phases of the protocol. To assess the overall success rate of organoid formation across different murine SGZ-derived NSC batches (n = 7), we started the production of at least 54 organoids for each batch for a total of 732 generated organoids. We found a 95% rate of successful organoid formation and maintenance along the in vitro culture timing (32d) with a 5% rate of organoid disintegration after 14d or no aggregation within the first 48h (see A).
To assess the volume of the organoids, we measured the 3D structures by performing a 3D optical projection tomography (OPT) reconstruction using in-house build system ( ) ( C and ). In line with the maximum diameter measures, this analysis showed a higher organoid volume during the induction phase (0.063 ± 0.008 mm3) compared to the differentiation stage (0.023 ± 0.007 mm3) ( C). 3D reconstruction of organoid morphology showed that early organoids (7d in culture), in which a considerable volume is associated with a flat appearance, acquired a spherical shape at later maturation stage (35d in culture) (see C and and ). The different shapes and volumes observed in the mature organoid compared with the early organoid may be correlated to a progressive changing in the cellular spatial organization during the in vitro organoid maturation. Moreover, we observed high cell viability at all time points analyzed (98.97 ± 0.36% vs 94.17 ± 0.48% vs 81.21 ± 1.72% of live cells detected inside the organoids at 14, 21 and 32d respectively; n = 3 organoids/time point) ( D) indicating that the relatively small dimension of mature organoids guarantees sufficient nutrient and oxygen diffusion without substantial impact on the cell survival within the 3D structure. To assess cell proliferation, we quantified the cells expressing the cell-cycle G1/S-G2/M marker Ki67 ( E). As expected, we detected a high cell proliferation rate within the organoids during the expansion phase, which drastically decreased from the end of the induction phase (Ki67+ cells over total cell nuclei: 17.18 ± 1.03% at 7d vs 1.9 ± 1.08% at 14d; p<0.0001) to the differentiation phase (0.76 ± 0.04% and 0.98 ± 0.12% at 21d and 32d, respectively; p<0.0001) ( F). These data were in line with the morphological analysis (size – maximum diameter), suggesting a decrease in the proliferative activity, promoting cellular maturation during the induction phase.

## Video S1. OPT 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid at 7d, related to Figure 1

## Video S2. OPT 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid at 35d, related to Figure 1

To assess the brain organoid maturation through the developmental stages, we performed global transcriptomic analysis (RNA sequencing – RNAseq) of organoids at (1) early (day 7 – end of expansion phase), (2) intermediate (day 14 – end of induction phase) and (3) mature developmental stages (day 32 – differentiation phase) and compared them to neonatal (P0) and adult (3 months) mouse cerebral tissues. Principal component analysis (PCA) of the gene expression profiles clustered the different samples in five groups ( G): (1) organoids at 7 d; (2) organoids at 14 d; (3) organoids at 32 d; (4) P0; and (5) adult mouse cerebral tissues. These results confirmed that organoids at the same developmental stage had a similar gene expression signature, further indicating the reproducibility and robustness of the protocol. In addition, the PCA distribution of the organoid clusters suggests a progressive maturation of organoids through the different growth protocol stages ( G). The predominant source of variation was related to the nature of the samples (tissue or organoid) (first principal component – PC1, explaining 78% of the variance), whereas different organoids at distinct differentiation phases accounted for the 12% of the variance (PC2), with different samples belonging to the same maturation stage clustering close together ( G). The transcriptional differences observed between organoids and the murine tissue may be attributed to the indisputable in vitro limitations in resembling accurately the in vivo development ( ; ). Gene ontology analysis of mature organoids compared with immature organoids indicated that the most significant categories of up-regulated genes were related to (1) neuron differentiation, including dendritic spines and regulation of neuron projection, (2) ion channel, including voltage gated ion channels, calcium ion transport and development of calcium ion homeostasis, and (3) synapse structures, vesicular trafficking and glutamate- and GABA-specific receptors ( H). Gene set variation analysis (GSVA) showed that early and intermediate organoids had a higher expression of genes related to the NSCs identity (e.g., Nes, Pax6, Sox2, Sox9 and Vim), while organoids at 32 d increased the expression of genes related to mature neurons (e.g., NeuN, Map1b, Vamp1, Snap25 and Syt1) ( I and ).
Overall, our data indicated the reproducibility and reliability of the brain organoid development, showing the progressive maturation and acquisition of the neuronal phenotype.

## Cellular phenotype and distribution during murine brain organoid maturation
To assess the progressive brain organoid cell differentiation and distribution, we evaluated the expression and localization of NSCs, neural progenitors, neurons, and glial cells throughout the brain organoid developmental stages. First, we characterized the SGZ-derived NSC by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence analysis. As expected, we found that embryonic (E14.5) SGZ-derived neurospheres expressed the specific SGZ hippocampal derived NSC genes (Sox2, Musashi, Slc1a3, Nestin, Dach1), bona fide NSCs hallmark genes (Sox1, Sox5, Dcx, Pax6, Vimentin) and ESC genes (Nanog, Oct3/4, Klf4, Stat3, Cdh1) ( ; ; ) ( A). The expression of SGZ hippocampal derived NSC (SOX2, Musashi, Nestin) and bona fide NSC (SOX1, Vimentin) markers was confirmed by protein expression, while little to no expression was observed for ESC markers (Oct3/4, Nanog, E-cad) ( B).
 Then, we assessed the NSC markers expression during organoid maturation. Immunofluorescence analysis performed at day 7 (end of the expansion phase) revealed a high number of stem cell expressing Vimentin (15.45 ± 0.5% among the total cell nuclei) and sex determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2: 79.1 ± 2.95% among the total cell nuclei) ( C, 2D, B, and S1C). During organoid differentiation, the number of Vimentin+ and SOX2+ NSCs progressively decreased (see B and S1C) (8.79 ± 1.02% and 7.88 ± 1.15% Vimentin+ cells at 21 and 32d, respectively, p = 0.01 and p = 0.02 respect to 7d; 9.95 ± 2.42% and 10.79 ± 0.51% SOX2+ cells at 21 and 32d, respectively, p<0.0001 respect to 7d). Qualitative analysis of cellular distribution showed an initial (day 7) widespread localization of Vimentin+ and SOX2+ NSCs inside the organoid ( C, 2D, and 2G and see I), that maintained an intersperse distribution both in the inner and the external layer until the later stage of differentiation ( G).
During the initial stages of organoid formation, we also observed the presence of doublecortin (DCX) positive neural progenitors (10.97 ± 1.60% and 17.1 ± 2.83% at 7d and 14d, respectively) ( D), while they significantly decreased up to ∼5% at later time points (day 21: 5.77 ± 1.07%; day 32: 5.73 ± 0.9%, p = 0.01 and p = 0.009 respect to 14d) ( D and D). The DCX neural progenitors showed a widespread distribution within the organoid at day 7 (see I) and, starting from the induction phase (day 14), they spatially rearranged to cluster in the external region of the organoid ( D and 2G). As expected, during brain organoid maturation, we observed a progressive statistically significant increase in the number of immature (Tubulin Beta 3 Class III -TUBB3) (17.55 ± 2.35% and 7.63 ± 1.56% at 32d and 7d, respectively; p = 0.0014) ( E) and mature (Microtubule-Associated Protein 2 - MAP2) (24.4 ± 2.08% and 7.38 ± 1.43% at 32d and 7d, respectively; p < 0.0001) ( F) neurons. Notably, starting from day 14 and more consistently in the later differentiation stage, we observed a major edge zone of TUBB3+ ( E and 2G) and MAP2+ cells ( F and 2G), which accumulated in the external layer (( E–2G). In line with the increase in the total neuronal number and with their modified distribution in the organoid, the thickness of both TUBB3+ and MAP2+ cells outer layer increased as the maturation proceeds (TUBB3+ cells layer: 18.69 ± 0.55μm and 30.96 ± 3.99μm at 14d and 32d, respectively; MAP2+ cells layer: 17.89 ± 1.13μm and 30.76 ± 2.19μm at 14d and 32d, respectively; p = 0.0009).
These data suggested that SGZ-derived NSCs inside the brain organoid progressively differentiate into neurons, which are mostly compartmentalized at the organoid edge forming a net of neuronal cells ( J). The maturation of neuronal cells observed by immunofluorescence was further supported by RNAseq data which highlighted an increased expression in late-stage organoid of genes related to synaptic formation and plasticity (Cttn, Nsg2, Syt1, Snap25), signal transduction (Srrm3, Stmn2, Trim67) as well as genes encoding specific mature neuron proteins (Vamp1, Map1b) ( ; ; ) ( K and ).
To evaluate the presence of different cell populations in brain organoids, we analyzed the protein expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)+ astrocytes, neural/glial antigen 2 (NG2)+ oligodendrocytes, ionized calcium-binding adapter molecule 1 (Iba1)+ microglia cells and CD31+ endothelial cells. While we did not detect at any time point oligodendrocytes, microglia, nor endothelial cells (data not shown), we found a stable ∼10% of astrocytes (see G), closely associated with neural cells ( F and L). Although we did not observe any change in the number of astrocytes through the organoid development, the transcriptome analyses indicated that genes related to astrocyte maturation such as Slc1a2, encoding for a transporter protein that clears the glutamate from the extracellular space at synapses, Gfap, Aqp4, Slc1a3, and Slc4a4 ( ; ), were progressively up-regulated in the mature organoid stage ( M and ).
Among the total number of cells detected, early organoids (7d) were mainly characterized by the presence of NSCs and neuronal progenitors (∼80%). In line with the progressive maturation stages of the organoid development, intermediate stage organoids (14d) showed an increased number of immature neurons and neural progenitors (∼32%) and at later stages (21d and 32d) ∼ 60% of the entire cellular population was represented by immature and mature neurons ( H).
Overall, these data indicated that the distribution of neural cell types in different regions of the brain organoid showed a progressive organization. Early-stage organoids were characterized by a non-organized structure, with spread proliferative and stemness markers, then they progressively showed a radial distribution of neurons which, at late stage of differentiation, increased in number and outer layer thickness.

## Murine brain organoids undergo an oxidative metabolic switch supporting neuronal maturation
Together with changes in morphology, a switch from glycolytic to oxidative metabolism is required for neuronal differentiation ( ). To describe brain organoid progressive maturation through oxidative phosphorylation, we characterized their metabolic profile. First, we assessed the mitochondrial mass and mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes content of the organoids throughout the maturation stages. The mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, an index of mitochondrial mass, progressively and significantly increased with time ( A), rising from 438 ± 36.47 mtDNA molecules/cell at day 7–809.7 ± 59.82 mtDNA molecules/cell at day 32 (p < 0.001), indicating an increase in the mitochondrial amount during brain organoid maturation. Therefore, we performed immunoblot analysis on total cellular extracts to evaluate the mitochondrial proteins and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system quantity. Given the heterogeneity of cell composition of brain organoids across the developmental stages, equal amounts of protein/organoid pool at different maturation phases may not reflect the cell number. Therefore, we expressed the mitochondrial markers as fold-change of the nuclear marker Lamin B, rather than to the total protein content per lane. The voltage-dependent anion-selective channel 1 (VDAC 1) protein, a mitochondrial channel of the outer mitochondrial membrane widely used as an indicator of mitochondrial mass ( ), significantly increased in the organoids at different maturation times (from 1 ± 0.59 at 7d to 19.99 ± 1.52 at 32d; p < 0.0001) ( B and 3H). Mitochondria are mainly responsible for energy production through the OXPHOS process that is upregulated in mature neurons compared to NSCs ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Therefore, we checked the amounts of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I-V by immunoblot analysis ( B) of specific complex subunits. We found that the ATP5A, UQCRC2, MTCO1, SDHB, NDUFB8 proteins, structural subunits of complexes V, III, IV, II, and I, respectively, significantly increased during the maturation process ( C–3G). Overall, these data suggested that brain organoids increased their mitochondrial mass during maturation.
 To further confirm the metabolic development of the organoids toward oxidative phosphorylation during the process of neuronal maturation, we switched the carbon source to a fully oxidative substrate by replacing glucose with galactose in the culture medium, forcing the organoids to use OXPHOS for the ATP production. Early organoids (7d) significantly dropped their ATP content in response to galactose, demonstrating their inefficiency in producing energy with solely OXPHOS. Interestingly, a 2-fold increase in cellular ATP content was observed in intermediate organoids (14d) cultured with galactose, suggesting their capability to switch to mitochondrial metabolism, if required. Total ATP content in mature organoids (32d) was more stimulated ( I), indicating their full differentiation toward mature neurons which could easily adapt to oxidative substrates.
Accordingly, we observed a statistically significant higher expression of genes related to OXPHOS pathway (e.g., Ndufa13, Ndufa1, Ndufa3, Ndufb7, Ndufv1, Cox7a1, Ndufa6, Cox7b, Ndufa2, Ndufa7, Sdhaf2, Atp5k, Ndufb10, Sdhc, Sdha, Ndufaf7) (see ) in mature organoids compared to early organoids, further suggesting a metabolic switch toward oxidative phosphorylation adaptation.
We found a significant upregulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparg) in the mature organoids. The PPARγ activation may influence neuronal differentiation of mouse NSCs and rat embryonic midbrain cells ( ; ). The PPAR-agonist drug bezafibrate could improve neuronal maturation that is altered in an organoid model of genetic neurological disease ( ), further suggesting that the activation of PPARG contributed to the correct neuronal development. According to the upregulation of PPARG, several genes related to peroxisomal (Acox, Lbp, Dbp, Ech1), and mitochondrial (Acad11, Acadsb, Acad12, Slc25a20, Cpt1c, Echdc2, Hadhb) (see ) beta-oxidation pathways were upregulated in the mature organoid. Peroxisomal and mitochondrial beta-oxidation have different substrate specificity and respond to different environmental changes and cellular processes, including developmental stages ( ), to support energy requirements.
Taken together, these results indicated that the maturation of the organoids was accompanied by a significant upregulation of the mitochondrial biogenesis, which sustained the oxidative metabolism in differentiating neurons.

## Mature brain organoids develop a 3D neuronal network with excitatory and inhibitory synapses
To analyze the distribution of neurons inside the organoid, we performed wholemount immunostaining and 3D imaging reconstruction. As shown in A and 4B, mature MAP2+ neuronal cells were characterized by the formation of an intricate neuronal network with cells populating the entire organoid surface and elongating processes extending in the three dimensions across the organoid structure (see and ), suggesting that they may contact both adjacent and distal cells.
 

## Video S3. 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid's region at 32d using IMARIS software, related to Figure 4
Neurons MAP2+, astrocytes GFAP+ and total nuclei (TOPRO-3) are shown in white, red and blue, respectively.

## Video S4. 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid at 32d using IMARIS software, related to Figure 4
Neurons MAP2+ and total nuclei (TOPRO-3) are shown in green and blue, respectively.

To assess the organoid potential to develop neuronal connections, we performed immunofluorescence analysis evaluating the expression area of the presynaptic marker synaptophysin (Syn) in MAP2+ neurons at different developmental stages. In line with the overall increment of MAP2+ cells throughout organoid development (see F and F), we observed expression of Syn marker ( C and 4D), which increased at day 32 (Syn positive area over MAP2+ area: 34.52 ± 4.26 vs 0.62 ± 0.25 at 32 and 7 d respectively, p< 0.001) ( E and A).
We next assessed the presence of inhibitory and excitatory synaptic punctae at later stages of organoids maturation (21d and 32d). The co-localization of presynaptic and postsynaptic punctae revealed the presence of synapses ( ). In order to distinguish GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses, we assessed the co-localization of specific presynaptic and postsynaptic marker proteins ( ). We used the vesicular GABA transporter vGAT and gephyrin to identify respectively the pre- and post-synaptic terminals of inhibitory synapses ( F), while the vesicular glutamate transporter VGlut and the scaffolding protein PSD95 were used to identify respectively the pre- and post-synaptic terminals of the excitatory synapses ( G). In keeping with what is observed during brain development ( ; ), immunofluorescence analysis of vGLUT-PSD95 punctae revealed that excitatory synapses were mainly expressed in early mature organoids (21d) reaching about 80% of the total synaptic punctae per 100 μm2. The analysis of the vGAT-gephyrin colocalization showed an increase of inhibitory synapses during organoid maturation (about 20% and 50% over the total synaptic punctae per 100μm2 at 21d and 32d, respectively). At the latter stage (32d) of organoid development, the relative amount of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic punctae was found to be in equal proportion ( H). In addition to the observed expression of synaptic proteins, we further evaluated the presence of inhibitory ( B) and excitatory ( C) synapses by transcriptomic analysis using a selected gene panel ( ). Heatmap profiles and DESeq2 analysis revealed that mature (32d) rather than early (7d) organoids showed an upregulation of genes related to NMDA and cholinergic receptors (i.e. Chrm1, Chrm4), glutamate receptors and reuptake (i.e. Grin2b, Grin1, Grm4, Grik1) as well as GABA receptors and transporters (i.e. Gabra4, Gabrb1, Camk4, Gabra1, Slc32a1, Gabra5, Gabrg2, GAD2) (see ). The presence of inhibitory (GAD65-67+) and excitatory (NMDA+) neurons in organoids at later stage of differentiation ( D and S2E) was also supported by immunofluorescence analysis. RNAseq data further revealed that the gene expression of the chloride extruding K+-Cl− cotransporter isoform 2 (Kcc2) was upregulated in mature compared to early organoids (padj value <0.00001; log2FoldChange: 3.11) while the chloride-importing Na+-K+-Cl− cotransporter isoform 1 (Nkcc1) was downregulated during organoid development (padj value <0.00001; log2FoldChange:−0.81) (see ). The change in the expression of Nkcc1 and Kcc2 during organoid development might suggest a switch of GABAergic-signaling from excitatory-to-inhibitory which characterized in vivo neuronal brain development ( ; ; ).
To investigate whether the mature astrocytes found at later time points of organoid development contributed to boosting the synapses formation and specification, we stained astrocytes for glutamine synthetase (Gln Syn), a protein involved in the ATP-dependent conversion of glutamate and ammonia to glutamine. In the brain, glutamine synthetase produced by astrocytes plays an important role in regulating the glutamate/glutamine cycle between neurons and astrocytes and it has been suggested to play a pivotal role in synaptogenesis ( ). We found that at 21 d astrocyte expressed Gln Syn ( F), indicating their possible contribution in the neuronal network formation.
The murine cerebral organoid method described here relies on the spontaneous neuronal differentiation without any extrinsic patterning to guide the development into a specific brain region. The SGZ neural stem cells source used may have defined an intrinsic patterning toward dorsal, rather than ventral, brain regional specification. To characterize the brain regional identity and neuronal diversity of the tissue-like mature organoid generated, we analyzed RNA-seq data by evaluating the degree of similarity (percentage) between organoids (7d, 14d, 32d) and murine adult cortex and hippocampal tissue, considering selected gene lists (cortical signature: Stard8, Sytl2, Tnnc1, Myl4, Drd2, Calb2, Reln, Lhx1, Lhx5, Ebf3, Cux1, Satb2, Dok5, Ctp2, Emx1, Tiam2, Tbr1, Foxg1, Pvrl3; hippocampal signature: Zbtb20, Sipa1l3, Gpr161, Crlf1, Glis3, Dcx, Nrp2, Tgf2b, Gria1, Tnip2, Slc39a6, Prox1, Slc26a10, Trpc6, Neurod1, C1ql2, Gqrik4, Elavl2, Elavl4, Dkk3, Nectin3, Scip, Spock1). As expected, hippocampal and cortical tissue revealed a score of 100% of similarity for hippocampal and cortical gene set, respectively. This further validated the reliability of the selected genes. This analysis did not find any affinity of organoids at 7d and 14d to murine adult cortex and hippocampal tissue gene set, indicating that organoid brain regional identity is not defined at the early stage of development. Interestingly, we observed about 70% of gene expression similarity between hippocampal adult tissue and the 32d mature organoids and about 30% between cortical adult tissue and mature organoid ( I and 4J). These results further indicated that mature organoids may better reproduce dorsal forebrain with a predominant hippocampal component. However, the presence of other brain regions cannot be excluded. We then analyzed the expression of specific cortical (FOXG1), hippocampal (FZD9), choroid plexus (TTR) ( K–4M) and ganglionic (NKX2.1, GSX2) (see G and S2H) markers ( ) in adult brain murine tissue and mature organoids by immunofluorescence. We found that in all the analyzed mature organoids (32d: n = 4), both cortical and hippocampal markers were expressed mainly at the edge of the organoids as well as in the specific brain tissue region ( K and4 L). Ganglionic markers were undetectable while they were expressed in ventral brain tissue (see G and S2H). We also found few TTR positive cells at the center of the organoid structure ( M). These data suggested that during development the murine brain organoids acquired features of dorsal forebrain tissue.
Taken together, these results suggested that the mature brain organoid display 3D neuronal network coupling via inhibitory and excitatory synapses, which is supported by mature astrocytes. Regional identity analysis revealed that murine brain organoids acquired, along the maturation, dorsal forebrain phenotype. Next, we questioned about the presence of neuronal activity.

## Whole-cell patch-clamp recording reveal functional neurons inside the brain organoids
To assess the functionality of the organoids, we performed whole-cell patch-clamp recording. To preserve the cellular network and properties, we used whole-mount organoids ( A), rather than organoid slices or dissociated cells – techniques commonly used by other laboratories ( ; ). Recorded cells were primarily localized at the edge of the organoid. We investigated the passive membrane properties and the expression of voltage-gated currents (outward potassium (K+) and inward sodium (Na+) currents) in a total of 63 cells recorded from at least 56 different organoids at three different stages of development: intermediate (11–13d), early mature (19–26d), and mature (33–42d).
 Resting membrane potential (RMP) ( B) showed a trend from highly depolarized (lowest RMP:−29 mV) to less depolarized values (highest RMP:−52 mV) from intermediate toward mature organoid cells, although statistical significance was not reached due to the wide range of RMP values exhibited by the organoids at each of these stages (−29.0 [-22.5 to −34.0] mV, n= 5 at 11-13d;−30.0 [-27.0 to −40.0] mV, n = 27 at 19–26 d;−39.0 [-31.0 to −52.0] mV, n = 31 at 33–42 d; ANOVA). The membrane capacitance (Cm) ( C) was 10.0 [5.8–11.2] pF, n= 5 at 11-13d, 7.0 [5.0–9.0] pF, n = 27 at 19–26 d, and 11.0 [8–16] pF, n = 31 at 33–42 d (values not statistically different; ANOVA). Input resistance (Rin) ( D) was 1130.0 [596.3–1437.0] MΩ, n= 5 at 11-13d, 610.2 [224.1–1558.0] MΩ, n = 24 at 19-26d, and 865.1 [464.9–1266.0] MΩ, n = 31 at 33-42d (values not statistically different; ANOVA).
All the patched neurons showed outward K+ currents ( E) elicited by depolarizing voltage steps in voltage-clamp whole-cell configuration ( E, inset in left panel). In particular, while delayed rectifier K+ currents (IDR) were recorded in 100% of cells at any developmental stage (n = 3 at 11-13d, n = 24 at 19-26d, and n = 29 t 33-42d; E and 5F), the A-type K+ current (IA) appeared only in 2 out of 3 cells recorded from intermediate organoid cells, in 87.50% (21 out of 24) cells recorded from early mature organoid (19–26d), and in 100% (n = 29) in mature organoids ( F). Organoid cells at 11–13d (n = 3) did not exhibit inward Na+ current (INa), while it was recorded in 1 out 24 cells (4.1%) at 19-26d, and in 16 out of 29 organoid cells (55.17%) at 33–42d ( E and 5F). Number of cells manifesting IDR (n = 1 at 11–13d, n = 3 at 19-26d, n = 0 at 33-42d), IDR + IA (n = 2 at 11-13d, n = 20 at 19–26d, n = 13 at 33–42d), or IDR + IA + INa (n = 0 at 11–13d, n = 1 at 19–26d, n = 16 at 33-42d) were statistically different in intermediate, early mature and mature organoids (p = 0.00003, Fisher Exact test). I-V relationships for the voltage-activated K+ currents showed an increase in current density recorded up to sub-maximal stimulus amplitude; for example, at +90 mV voltage step, IA density was 153.4 ± 73.4 pA/pF at 11–13d (n = 2), 244.4 ± 28.31 pA/pF at 19-26d (n = 19) and 371.8 ± 35.24 pA/pF at 33–42d (n = 26, p = 0.015, ANOVA), while IDR density was 110.9 ± 66.8 pA/pF at 11–13d (n = 3), 121.9 ± 14.2 pA/pF at 19–26d (n = 22) and 187.0 ± 19.4 pA/pF at 33-42d (n = 26, p = 0.0321, ANOVA) ( G). INa recorded in mature organoid cells showed typical INa I-V relationships ( H). In accordance with these results, none of the patched organoid cells recorded in current-clamp mode at 11–13d (n= 5) and 19–26d (n = 4) phases could generate action potentials when injected with positive current, while 6 out of 16 mature organoid cells (37,50%) were able to generate action potentials; both action potential and INa were completely abolished when by the sodium channel blocker tetrodotoxin (TTX, 1 μM; n = 6; I).
In line with patch-clamp results, upregulated genes for voltage-gated ion channels were detected with gene ontology analysis (see H). In particular, upregulation of genes related to voltage-gated K-channels (i.e., Kcnc4 and Kcna3) in mature (32d) rather than early (7d) organoids were confirmed by heatmap profiles and DESeq2 analysis (see C).
Overall, electrophysiological data indicated that neurons within the organoid progressively mature and were able to generate action potentials at late stages of development.

## Mature murine brain organoids exhibit functional synaptic connection and neuronal spontaneous activity
Spontaneous neuronal activity is an important step during neuronal development. The first spontaneous electrical activity in the immature brain is driven by intracellular calcium fluctuations ( ). Thus, we examined spontaneous calcium fluctuations by timecourse live calcium imaging using different approaches.
We examined the overall intracellular spontaneous calcium dynamics of the entire brain organoid at early (7d), intermediate (14d), and mature (21d and 32d) stages by using the fluorescent calcium dye Fluo4-AM ( A, left panels). We analyzed the cellular activity within organoids evaluating the fluorescence intensity signal of the calcium indicator in different cells (n = at least 10 cells/organoid, n= at least 3 organoids/time point) by 3 min of live-imaging acquisition. The Fluo4-AM dye exhibits an increase in fluorescence upon binding Ca2+, thus, variations of intensity correspond to intracellular calcium fluctuations ( A, right panels).
 At early stages of organoid development (7d), almost no peaks were detected through the brain organoids (4 active cells out of a total of 40 evaluated cells). Starting from day 14, we observed an increment in the spontaneous activity with 24 cells displaying calcium flux out of a total of 30 analyzed cells ( B). The large majority of the cells (29 active cells/30 evaluated cells) analyzed both at 21 and 32 days showed spontaneous activity along the acquisition time ( B and see and ). By evaluating the mean number of the detected peaks per minute of recording per organoids at different developmental stage, we observed a statistically significant higher number of calcium peaks in early mature (21d: 1.78 ± 0.07 peaks/min, p = 0.006) and mature (32d: 1.62 ± 0.37 peaks/min, p = 0.01) organoids compared to the peaks detected in early organoids (7d: 0.34 ± 0.20 peaks/min) ( C), suggesting the progressive increase of spontaneous calcium activity.

## Video S5. Calcium imaging performed on a whole mount organoid at 21d using the Fluo4-AM dye, related to Figure 6
The video is reported in grayscale and 10X speed.

## Video S6. Calcium imaging performed on a whole mount organoid at 32d using the Fluo4-AM dye, related to Figure 6
The video is reported in grayscale and 10X speed.

Calcium imaging analysis revealed that mature brain organoids organized in 3D networks of functional neurons with synaptic components exhibited spontaneous cellular activity. Collectively, these features set the basis for the generation of functional circuits throughout the 3D structure ( ). Therefore, we investigated the presence of functional synaptic connection. To this aim we took advantage of the rabies virus (RABV)-based monosynaptic tracing technique ( ). A lentiviral vector encoding GFP- and EnvA-pseudotyped DG RABV (pAAV-Syn-H2B-GFP-TVA-oG-WPRE3) was delivered to the organoids at 18d in order to drive the expression of the EnvA receptor (TVA) under synaptophysin promoter. This allowed us to confine primary RABV infection to neurons as ‘‘starter’’ population expressing GFP. 48 h later, we transduced the organoid with the rabies virus encoding for mCherry and the RABV glycoprotein (BRVenVA-1 G-deleted Rabies mCherry), which is necessary for subsequent monosynaptic transfer to their coupled neuron. Thus, we observed yellow (GFP+/mCherry+ double-positive) starter neurons which had received the G-TVA retrovirus encoding the EnvA receptor (TVA) 24 h later ( D). Only the neurons activating a synaptic contact with a starter neuron (GFP+/mCherry+ double-positive) received the viral particle and expressed exclusively mCherry (mCherry+/GFP−). One week following the transduction we observed clusters of mCherry+/GFP− neurons distributed at the edge of the organoid indicating that they had generated monosynaptic connections with the starter neurons ( D). The specificity of RABV to infect only cells in organoids that previously had received the RABV glycoprotein was confirmed by the absence of signals in organoids infected only with the BRVenVA-1 G-deleted Rabies mCherry (see I).
These results suggested that neurons of murine brain organoid established neuronal synaptic connections.
Next, we sought to determine whether the neurons populating the organoids were forming electrically active networks. To this end, we performed MEA electrophysiology in intact organoids to evaluate their functional profile during development. Organoids exhibited spontaneous electrical activity as of day 14 and up to 4–5 weeks in culture. E shows a 14-d organoid on a planar MEA. This organoid could generate spontaneous electrical activity ( F) consisting of a mixed pattern of population spikes ( F, inset a) and population bursts ( F, inset b). The electrical activity recorded from a 31-d organoid presented similarities with the pattern observed at day 14 ( G). Overall, we observed spontaneous electrical activity in 3 of the 30 tested organoids. This activity was generated sporadically and disappeared over time. The electrical activity of functional organoids was typically restricted to 1–2 electrodes at the edge of the organoid, out of the 15–25 electrodes covered within the 60-channel MEA. These results indicated that functional neurons self-organize in small ensembles located at the periphery of the organoid.

## WNT3a induces organoids enriched in CA3 hippocampal neurons
The hippocampus is one of the brain regions mostly involved in the pathology progression of many neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer’s disease and epilepsy, therefore, an in vitro 3D structure able to replicate the hippocampal signature can be extremely useful for drug testing and neurodegenerative disease studies. Thus, we first assessed the hippocampal signature of the generated organoids by comparing their hippocampal gene expression profile with the one of the neonatal and adult mouse hippocampal tissue. This analysis revealed that brain organoids generated by NSCs originally obtained from SGZ showed a gene signature similar to the hippocampal tissue, for the upregulation of genes related to hippocampal cell growth and division (e.g., Ywhae, Bcan, Ptprs, Usp9x), regulators of proliferation and axon sprouting (e.g., Nr2e1, Uba6, Gli3, DCX, Plxna3, Btg2, Kdm6b, Hdac1) ( A and ). Interestingly, we noted that murine brain organoid had a lower expression of the genes related to hippocampal neural differentiation and migration, such as WNT3a compared to hippocampal tissue (e.g., Lef1, Drd1, Dlx2, Neurod6, Alk, Dlx1, Fgf13, Wnt3a, Cdk5r2), hippocampal neurogenesis and cell fate determination (e.g., Cdk5r1, Srf, Nr4a3, Prox1) ( A and ).
In order to improve the hippocampal signature in the brain organoid, we added WNT3a factor during the expansion and induction phase; the neuronal differentiation was then reached by providing the BDNF to the culture medium from day 15 ( B), as for the standard protocol (CTRL). By using a low concentration of WNT3a (5 ng/mL) we attempted to drive specifically the CA3 hippocampal neurons phenotype ( ).
We first characterized the WNT3a-treated organoid cellular organization and phenotype specification by immunofluorescence, as previously performed for the control organoids. We followed the progressive WNT3a-treated organoid NSCs (Ki67, SOX2, Vim), neuronal progenitors (DCX), mature neurons (TUBB3, MAP2), and glial cells (GFAP) differentiation, maturation, and spatial distribution through the different developmental stages. Results showed that WNT3a supplementation did not impact the organoids spatial distribution and maturation compared with control organoids (see ).
Second, we assessed the organoid hippocampal signature following WNT3a supplementation and compared it to the standard control organoid. We performed RT-PCR analysis for specific hippocampal genes ( ) in mature organoids samples (n = 3 pool of 6–8 organoids/pool) generated both with control and WNT3a protocol. Importantly, we found higher expression of hippocampal-related genes (e.g., Grik4, Alk, Sct, Dkk3, Nectin3, Fzd9, Tgfb2, Neurod1) in WNT3a organoids compared to control organoids ( A), suggesting that WNT3a factor is able to induce the hippocampal patterning. Then, we evaluated the protein expression of the specific pan-hippocampal marker ZBTB20 and the glutamate receptor kainate type 1 (KA1) which is typical of the cornu ammonis 3 (CA3) hippocampal pyramidal neurons ( ; ) by immunofluorescence ( B). Results showed that mature organoids (32d) supplied with WNT3a displayed a significantly higher expression of ZBTB20 (1.8 ± 1.25% vs 8.24 ± 0.87% of ZBTB20+ cells in CTRL and WNT3a organoids, respectively; p = 0.0047) ( C) and KA1 markers (6.28 ± 1.11% and 14.2 ± 2.3% of KA1+ cells in CTRL and WNT3a organoids, respectively; p = 0.04) ( D) compared to control organoids. Moreover, we found that mature (32d) WNT3a organoids drastically increased the proportion of hippocampal ZBTB20 ( E) and KA1 ( F) neurons compared to controls (48.33 ± 12.09% and 6.59 ± 2.90% of ZBTB20+/MAP2+ cells over total number of neuronal cells in WNT3a and CTRL organoids, respectively; p = 0.0058. 83.13 ± 5.45% and 18.14 ± 2.45% of KA1+/MAP2+ cells over total number of neuronal cells in WNT3a and CTRL organoids, respectively; p = 0.001) ( E and 7F). The improved hippocampal signature of WNT3a organoid was also confirmed by the expression of the hippocampal CA1/2 region markers (OCT6, FDZ9) ( G and 7H). The expression of the DG granule neuronal marker PROX1 was not found ( I), further suggesting that the usage of low WNT3a concentration is able to specifically boost the CA3 and to a lesser extent CA1/CA2 commitment. Regional identity analysis further confirmed the specific hippocampal signature of WNT3 organoid showing rare cortical and choroid plexus marker expression and undetectable level of ganglionic eminence hallmarks ( J).
 Calcium imaging analysis using Fluo4-AM was lastly performed to test the cellular activity of the WNT3a organoids. Similarly, to control organoids, WNT3a treated organoids (n= at least 10 cells/organoid, n= at least 3 organoids/time point) displayed a progressive increase of spontaneous calcium activity during development ( K–7M) suggesting that WNT3a modulation preserved the spontaneous cell activity of murine brain organoid.
Overall, these data suggested that murine brain organoids can be induced to specifically acquire the neuronal signature of the CA3 hippocampus.

## Discussion
In this work, we obtained robust, reproducible, and functional 3D brain organoids starting from mouse SGZ-derived NSCs. In line with the different developmental time required for human and murine brain development ( ; ; ; ), we effectively generated brain organoids in 32 d of in vitro culture, overthrowing the time necessary for human iPSCs, which requires at least 30 d for neuronal induction and further 60 to 90 d for overall differentiation ( ; ; ; ).
The fast production of murine brain organoids composed of functional mature neurons ensures their use as feasible, cost-effective, time-saving tools for high-throughput drug screening before the validation on human-models. Global transcriptomic analysis demonstrated the robustness of the method through the protocol phases showing similar gene profile of organoids belonging to the same developmental stage. We used principal component analysis to characterize transcriptional variance between different organoid's maturation stage and murine tissue counterparts. Different organoids at distinct differentiation phase accounted for only 12% of the variance with different samples belonging to the same developmental stage clustering close together suggesting the reproducibility of the protocol and the low variability across multiple organoid samples. This aspect (low variability) is of fundamental importance for future drug screening applications ( ). Moreover, taking advantages of the fast growth rate and the possibility of easily obtaining mutant lines, organoids derived from mouse embryonic NSCs may represent a valuable tool to investigate both neurodevelopmental physiological processes and disorders thanks to the lower number of mice required to generate a high number of brain organoids.
The standardization of the proposed protocol was reached by two important steps: (1) the seeding of a precise number of cells in the expansion phase (20000 cells/well), that allowed us to obtain in each well one organoid with defined size and developmental stage; (2) the use of a time-controlled growth factor media concentration, to start the cells maturation process. In addition, we demonstrated that the neurotrophin BDNF, commonly used to increase neuronal maturation in primary 2D NSCs-derived culture ( ; ), was able to induce neuronal maturation also in 3D structures. In this work we demonstrated that mSGZ-derived NSCs can efficiently self-assemble and differentiate into brain tissue-like structure endowed with functional mature neurons. As already described ( ; ; ), mSGZ-derived NSCs derived from E14.5 embryos display neuronal commitment with the expression of markers that are specific for NSCs. This pointed out an important difference with the protocol used for human-derived organoids ( ; ; ; ) since no neuroepithelia induction step was required for mSGZ-derived NSC brain organoid generation.
The maturation of murine SGZ-NSCs-derived organoids was confirmed by comparative techniques, evaluating organoids morphology, transcriptomic profile, cellular organization, metabolic profile, and functionality.
In line with in vivo brain development ( ) whole transcriptomic analysis showed the progressive maturation of the organoid highlighting the down-regulation of gene related to neural stem cells and the up-regulation of gene related to neuron differentiation, synapse structures, calcium ion transport, and the development of calcium ion homeostasis. We specifically observed increasing expression of gene related to NMDA and cholinergic receptors, glutamate receptor and reuptake as well as GABA receptors and transporters further supporting functional neuronal maturation. Expression of chloride (Cl−) co-transporters, such Nkcc1 and Kcc2, is important for intracellular Cl− homeostasis and for GABA reversal potential, playing a critical role in GABAergic transmission. NKCC1 is best known for its role in maintaining a high intracellular Cl−concentration in immature neurons. During the second postnatal week in rats and mice ( ), NKCC1 expression decreases while KCC2, the main Cl− extruder in the CNS, is upregulated, leading to a decrease in neuronal intracellular Cl− concentration and a shift toward hyperpolarizing GABAergic responses. Accordingly, transcriptomic analysis of the murine brain organoid showed the increase of KCC2 during organoid development, while NKCC1 expression decreased over organoid maturation, suggesting that the maturity level reached by the organoid at 32d is comparable to the maturity of a postnatal brain. However, it has to be considered that in vitro culture determines the loss of important intrinsic and morphogenic signals ( ) thus leading to obvious differences in terms of specific cell identity commitment, differentiation, and maturation time respect to what is commonly observed in vivo.
We reported the formation of 3D structures in which the initial high abundance of stem cells and neuronal progenitors is scattered through the entire organoid. As soon as the differentiation proceeds, we observed neuronal cells mainly localized at the edge of the 3D structure. DCX+, TUBB3+ and, later, MAP2+ cells moved from the center to the edge of the organoid, acquiring a radial-like organization. Radial cell migration replicates neuronal in vivo migration from the SVZ to the cortical plate ( ; ). Interestingly, we observed a metabolic switch from glycolytic to oxidative metabolism during the maturation of the organoid. In vivo and in vitro experiments previously showed that neuronal precursors are highly glycolytic and switched toward oxidative metabolism during the migration and maturation to the upper cortical layer ( ; ; ). Indeed, 3D brain organoids maturation proceeded toward oxidative metabolism replicating in vivo brain development metabolic switch ( ; ).
Neuronal cells populating the brain organoids were characterized by extending processes that converged into 3D neuronal network with synaptic connections. Proper brain development and function require the presence and a stringent balance between excitatory and inhibitory synapses formation during neural circuit assembly ( ). The initial overproduction of excitatory synapses subsequently undergoes a pruning process which consists of an activity-dependent elimination of synapses until the synaptic density is almost stable ( ). This process ensures the right ratio between excitatory and inhibitory synapses, which in turn contribute to this balance by refining the amount of excitatory synapses, a typical feature of a maturational process. By evaluating the expression of specific excitatory and inhibitory synaptic markers, we showed that the murine brain organoids were able to undergo neuronal maturation through a process similar to the one that occurs in vivo, reaching a balance between the number of excitatory and inhibitory synapses overtime, suggesting the accomplishment of the pruning process.
Several studies showed that the synaptic development depends not only on neurotrophins and neuronal cells, but also on glia ( ), in particular revealing a key astrocytes' contribution to the synaptic pruning and equilibrium. The presence of astrocytes within human brain organoids is already disclosed ( ; ; ) and it is reported that the addition of astrocytes to neuronal cultures promotes synapses maturation and spontaneous action potential formation ( ). We showed that astrocytes within the brain organoid progressively matured and were in close contact with differentiating neuronal cells suggesting they might support the synaptogenesis and the regular neuronal activity.
Currently, unguided brain organoid generation protocol starting from hiPSCs show the presence of different brain regional identities (cortex, hippocampus, ganglionic eminences, and choroid plexus). The murine brain organoids generated with our protocol presented dorsal forebrain signature with no evident expression of ganglionic components. Interestingly, a higher similarity to hippocampal rather than to cortical tissue was observed in mature SGZ-NSCs derived organoids. The lack of a ganglionic eminence identity observed in the murine SGZ-NSCs derived organoid may be explained by the absence of extrinsic pattering factors. On the other hand, possibly, the brain regional identity differences between the SGZ-NSCs derived murine brain organoids described here and the embryonic and hiPSC derived cerebral organoid may be due to the different signature of the initial stem cell source.
Calcium signaling and spontaneous oscillation of intracellular calcium concentrations are important to maintain brain development and function, playing a pivotal role in several aspects of neuronal growth and differentiation, such as synapse maturation and synaptic contact formation ( ). By calcium imaging analysis, we noted a developing cellular activity inside the organoids along the stages of maturation suggesting the possible existence of a cellular network composed of neurons exhibiting a functional synaptic connection. To identify an active neuronal connection, we exploited the transneuronal tracing technology of the rabies virus, which specifically propagates exclusively between connected neurons by strictly unidirectional (retrograde) transneuronal transfer ( ). Thus, we demonstrated that neurons composing the 3D murine brain organoids were connected by active synapses.
Previous works reported functional characterization of neurons within the organoid and their network activity; however, they have not been entirely described ( ; ; ; ). A critical point about the complete evaluation of neuron activity within the organoid is represented by the 3D spheroid structure that limits the use of current electrophysiological technologies. To the best of our knowledge, acute MEA recordings were performed in few studies only ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ). The large majority of brain organoid functionalities described were performed in organoid-derived cells outgrowing as a monolayer culture ( ; ) or in organoid slices ( ; ). In this study, we presented a functional assessment via MEA electrophysiology performed on intact organoids, preserving their 3D architecture and neuronal connections. Although the yield of MEA recording was low, these experiments demonstrated the formation of electrically active neuronal clusters located at the periphery of the organoid, thus providing the very first evidence of functional microcircuits in intact organoids derived from murine SGZ-derived NSCs. These results were in line with the functional studies on human iPSC-derived organoids, wherein the detected activity was confined within the outer organoid layer, and, overall, in a restricted number of MEA electrodes ( ). The low yield reported in this study may be explained by the use of planar MEAs, not penetrating the organoid, thus, not allowing us to detect the activity possibly generated by neurons populating deeper layers of the 3D structure. Another possible explanation is that despite the presence of active neurons, as also supported by calcium imaging analysis, their activity is not robust/synchronous enough to give origin to local field potentials or multiunit activity, which are recorded with low-density planar MEAs. Further studies deploying 3D MEAs or silicon probes or high-density MEAs will help address more in depth the functionality of murine organoids.
To stabilize the organoids during patch-clamp recording and facilitate giga-ohm seal formation, we plated them on poly-D-lysine coated cover glasses, a strategy that allowed us to record from over 60 living cells. All cells recorded were located at the edge of the organoid where neurons tend to cluster, especially in the mature organoids. The patch-clamp analysis revealed the presence of functional cells as 100% of the recorded ones showed ionic currents that progressively changed in density and type over organoid maturation. Specifically, potassium currents were observed in all developmental stages and increased in density with organoid maturation, while sodium currents appeared only in the most mature phase. These results were in line with the increasing expression of genes related to voltage-gated channels in mature compared to early organoids observed by gene ontology, heatmap profiles, and DESeq2 analysis, and confirming a developmental process in which neurons in mature organoids were able to fire action potentials.
Lastly, we provided a proof of concept of the possibility to modulate the 3D model by inducing the brain organoid toward a hippocampal specific phenotype. Since WNT pathway is crucial for the hippocampal fate determination ( ), we specifically prompted the hippocampal signature by supplying the culture medium with specific concentration of WNT3a factor ( ; ) during the proliferation and induction phases of the protocol. This modulation allowed us to obtain consistent hippocampal specific neurons, expressing both the pan-hippocampal ZBTB20 marker, typical of all neurons committed to hippocampal identity and the KA1 marker which, within the hippocampus, is primarily expressed by pyramidal neurons in the CA3 subfield. Interestingly, a slight expression of other CA hippocampal subfield markers (i.e., OCT6 and FZD9) was found in mature WNT3a-treated organoids while no expression of PROX1, specific for the DG hippocampal region, was observed. The reliability and flexibility of the herein developed protocol not only enable to adopt it systematically for generating in vitro brain hippocampal replicas, but may be also further implemented to mimic different hippocampal brain subregions.
In conclusion, our results showed for the first time the effective generation of reliable and reproducible murine brain organoids. SGZ-derived NSCs progressively mature in a short time (5 weeks) forming 3D networks of functional neurons with synaptic connections able to acquire a specific hippocampal brain region signature. The accessibility of the stem cell source, the reproducibility, robustness, and functionality of the murine SGZ-NSC-derived organoids may represent valuable supporting tools for high throughput drug screening, hiPSCs-derived organoid protocol optimization and brain disease modeling.

## Limitations of the study
This approach would highly benefit from further improvements including the generation of ventral forebrain cell types and the development of a defined brain region specific organization, such as the cortical layering showed in human-derived organoids. This aspect could be improved by combining ECM components or by creating assembloids, which consist of a fusion of more brain region specific organoids. In addition, the brain organoid co-culture with other cell types (i.e., microglia/oligodendrocytes) and the implementation of other strategies, such as optogenetic approaches with cell-type-specific reporter, could allow us to increase the study of functional neurons and neuronal network activity.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Ilaria Decimo (ilaria.decimo@univr.it)

## Materials availability
This study did not generate any unique reagents.

## Experimental model and subject details

## Primary neural stem cells
Pregnant wild-type (WT) C57Bl/6J mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA). E14.5 mice subgranular zone (SGZ) was isolated to obtain NSCs and to generate organoids. Animal housing and all experimental procedures were approved by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità (I.S.S., National Institute of Health; protocol n. C46F4.N.N4E, Italy) and the Animal Ethics Committee (C.I.R.S.A.L., Centro Interdipartimentale di Servizio alla Ricerca Sperimentale) of the University of Verona (Italy).

## Method details

## Mouse neural stem cells (NSCs) culture
Pregnant C57Bl/6J female mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation; NSCs were extracted from the SGZ of E14.5 embryos’ brains using fine tweezers under stereo microscope and collected into ice-cold HBSS solution (sterile water, HBSS 10X, HEPES 0.3 M, 1% Pen/Strep). After centrifugation at 300g per 1 min, HBSS was substituted with PBS 1X and then the sample was centrifuged again at 300g for 1 min. The pellet was suspended in a solution containing DNase (Sigma Aldrich) and Trypsin 1X (GIBCO) diluted 1:5; the first round of dissociation was performed using the gentleMACS™ Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec). After incubation for 10 min at 37°C, other two rounds of dissociation were done. PBS was added to inactivate the enzymes and then the sample was filtered with a cell strainer (40 μm diameter). After 10 min final centrifugation at 300g, samples were suspended in DMEM-F12 (GIBCO) with 2% B27 (GIBCO), 1%N2 (GIBCO), 1% Pen/Strep (GIBCO) enriched with 20ng/ml bFGF and EGF. Cells were stained with Trypan blue 0,4% (Lonza BioWhittaker), counted and cultured as neurospheres in suspension in T75 flasks (Falcon) up to the second passage at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air. After 7–10 d, neurospheres were collected, centrifuged, mechanically dissociated to a single-cell suspension ( ) and further used for organoid generation.

## Organoid generation protocol
Brain organoids were obtained starting from E14.5 murine-derived NSCs. A three-phase organoid generation protocol was developed, each stage relying on a different media composition (see section ). Specifically, the protocol consisted of the (1) expansion phase, (2) induction phase and (3) differentiation phase. The expansion phase starts after the seeding of the single cells (day 0) and lasts 5 d. Briefly, 20000 cells/well were seeded into each well of 24-well plates (Thermofisher) in 500 μl of medium enriched with 20 ng/ml EGF and 20 ng/ml bFGF (Expansion medium). During the induction phase, that continues for up to day 14, the concentration of bFGF and EGF was gradually scaled down: First, at day 5, both EGF and bFGF were decreased to a concentration of 10 ng/ml (Induction medium I); second, at day 7, bFGF concentration was reduced to 5 ng/ml, while EGF was eliminated altogether (Induction medium II). During the last step (differentiation phase), starting at day 15, the organoids were cultured in the differentiation medium enriched with 50 ng/ml BDNF. Cells plates were kept in continuously agitation (65rpm) using the ORBi-SHAKER CO2 (Benchmark Scientific) at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air for all the culture time. Seven different batches of SGZ-NSCs belonging to seven different embryos extraction were used to generate organoids. The organoids used in this work were generated starting from single cells obtained after no more than 3/4 subsequent phases of expansion following tissue isolation.

## Media composition of organoid generation protocol
Expansion medium (day 0-4): DMEM/F-12 GlutaMAX, (GIBCO), 2% B27 supplement (GIBCO), 1% N2 supplement (GIBCO), 1% Pen/Strep (GIBCO), 20 ng/ml EGF, 20 ng/ml bFGF.
Induction medium I (days 5-6): DMEM/F-12 GlutaMAX, (GIBCO), 2% B27 supplement (GIBCO), 1% N2 supplement (GIBCO), 1% Pen/Strep (GIBCO), 10 ng/ml EGF, 10 ng/ml bFGF.
Induction medium II (days 7-14): DMEM/F-12 GlutaMAX, (GIBCO), 2% B27 supplement (GIBCO), 1% N2 supplement (GIBCO), 1% Pen/Strep (GIBCO), 5 ng/ml bFGF.
Differentiation medium (days 15-42): Neurobasal medium (GIBCO), 2% B27 supplement (GIBCO), 1% Pen/Strep (GIBCO), 0,25% L-glutamine, 50 ng/ml BDNF.

## RNAseq analysis
Total RNA was extracted from 14 samples (7 days organoids: n=3 pools of 3 organoids each, 14 d organoids: n=3 pools of 3 organoids each, 30 d organoids: n=3 pools of 3 organoids each, adult – 3 months – cerebral tissue: n=3, P0 cerebral tissue: n=2) using the RNeasy Plus Micro Kit (Qiagen, Cat No. 74034) according to the manufacturer's protocol and RNA integrity was evaluated using the Fragment Analyzer (Agilent Technologies). RNAseq library preparation was performed starting from 100ng high-quality total RNA using the “TruSeq Stranded mRNA library prep kit” (Illumina, San Diego, USA). Briefly, the mRNA fraction was purified from total RNA by polyA capture, fragmented and subjected to cDNA synthesis. Barcoded DNA adapters were ligated to both ends of the double-stranded cDNA and subjected to PCR amplification. The library products were evaluated using Fragment Analyzer (Agilent Technologies), then sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq500 sequencer using 75bp single-end reads, generating ∼17 million reads per sample. Quality control was conducted using the software Scythe (v0.991) and Sickle (v1.33). Transcript expression levels were then quantified in each sample by running the computer software Salmon v.1.0.0 against the reference sequence of the mouse transcriptome (Gencode M23-GRCm38).
Differential expression analysis on sequence count data was performed using negative binomial distribution models as implemented in the library DESeq2 of R software (https://www.r-project.org/), using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to adjust the p-values for multiple comparisons. Transcript expression fold-changes were estimated for each expressed transcript in every comparison. The most relevant up-regulated genes were then summarized into biological processes and molecular functions by an enrichment analysis based on gene ontologies as implemented in the library dnet of R. Gene Set Variation Analysis was performed using the package GSVA (ver 1.38.2) of R to identify functionally enriched gene sets.
Selected gene lists were adapted from literature: (i) neural stem cell dataset, neuronal progenitors ( ); (ii) mature neurons ( ; ; ); (iii) astrocytes ( ; ); (iv) inhibitory synapses and excitatory synapses ( ); (v) hippocampal development ( ; ). The possible contribution from Hippocampus (H) and Cortex (C) cells in the organoid tissue based on gene expression was estimated by investigating different proportions of H and C cells into the organoid tissue according to gene expression profiles of selected genes (cortical signature: Stard8, Sytl2, Tnnc1, Myl4, Drd2, Calb2, Reln, Lhx1, Lhx5, Ebf3, Cux1, Satb2, Dok5, Ctp2, Emx1, Tiam2, Tbr1, Foxg1, Pvrl3; hippocampal signature: Zbtb20, Sipa1l3, Gpr161, Crlf1, Glis3, Dcx, Nrp2, Tgf2b, Gria1, Tnip2, Slc39a6, Prox1, Slc26a10, Trpc6, Neurod1, C1ql2, Gqrik4, Elavl2, Elavl4, Dkk3, Nectin3, Scip, Spock1) defining either hippocampal or cortical phenotype. For each gene lists and different amounts of H and C cells, it was calculated the sum of the difference of gene expression levels (log-TMP transformed values) with the organoid sample (7 d organoids: n=3 pools of 3 organoids each, 14 d organoids: n=3 pools of 3 organoids each, 30 d organoids: n=3 pools of 3 organoids each) under investigation. The difference between samples was estimated as the normalized values of the squared differences between samples (C+H and organoid tissues). Lower overall values of differences suggested a higher confidence of the suggested proportion H and C cells in the organoid tissue. In order to validate the selected gene list, we performed the above analysis by including adult murine hippocampal and cortical tissue (adult – 3 months – cortical tissue: n=3, adult – 3 months – hippocampal tissue: n=3). A low value of differences was obtained by both hippocampal and cortical samples, thus suggesting reliability of the analysis performed. The percentage of similarity to hippocampus or cortex was evaluated based on the H/C proportion showing the higher confidence.

## Optical projection tomography (OPT) and volume measurement
In-house-built 3D imaging system for Optical Projection Tomography (OPT) ( ) was used to image and characterize the 3D structures of the organoids. Brightfield OPT was used to capture the 360-degree structure of the organoids. White LED source (LTCL23; Opto Engineering, Mantova, Italy) with a 0.65 μm voxel size (1 px=0.65 μm) illuminated the samples in 0.9° intervals while a 10× objective captured a total of 400 projection images simultaneously rotating the sample. The projection images were then used to reconstruct the 3D tomographic image of the sample using a filtered back-projection algorithm (Matlab; MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) ( ) and further edited using Fiji (ImageJ) and Avizo (ThermoFisher Scientific). All 3D images were manually segmented using Avizo, and organoid volumes, images, and rotating videos were calculated and processed based on the 360-degree reconstructions using Avizo.

## Organoids maximum diameter measurements
To determine the organoids’ maximum diameter, bright field images were acquired, during the various stages of the protocol (2, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14, 21, 28, 32d; n>30) using the Axiovert 200M (Carl Zeiss, Munch, Germany) microscope. The maximum diameter was measured using the “straight line” tool of ImageJ software (U.S. National Institutes of Health). The pixel obtained value was converted in mm.

## Viability assay
Organoid viability was assessed using a fluorescence staining solution containing propidium iodide (50%), fluorescein diacetate (50%) and Hoechst (1:1200), freshly prepared the day of the experiment and protected from light. The propidium iodide is an intercalating red fluorescent dye labeling dead cells, fluorescein diacetate is hydrolized to fluorescent fluoresceine in live cells, whereas Hoechst is used for total nuclei staining. Whole mount organoids (n=3 sample/time point) were washed in PBS 1X and incubated for 5 min in the staining solution. Three PBS 1X washes were performed. Then, the samples were fixed in a 4% PFA and 4% sucrose solution for 10 min, before being acquired at Zeiss LSM710 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Munich, Germany). Quantification of the propidium iodide positive cells was done by counting positive cells on total nuclei. Then, the number of viable cells was obtained. The quantification was performed using a specific plugin of ImageJ software (U.S. National Institutes of Health) and a semi-automated cell count.

## Organoid Immunohistochemistry
Murine NSCs-derived organoids were selected at 7, 14, 21, and 32 d after seeding and fixed for 15 min in 4% PFA/4% sucrose, then rinsed and stored in PBS 1X at 4°C. For cryosectioning, each organoid was embedded in Cryobloc (Diapath, Italy) and cut at 30 μm. Immunostaining was performed after 1 hour incubation in blocking solution (PBS 1X with 0.25% Triton X-100, 2% bovine serum albumin for cytosolic antigens and PBS 1X with 0.5% Triton X-100, 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for nuclear antigens) ( ). Sections were then incubated with primary antibodies in blocking solution at 4°C for 2 hours. After rinsing 3 times for 10 min in blocking solution, appropriate secondary antibodies were applied for 1.5 h at room temperature. After final washing steps in blocking solution and then in PBS 1X, nuclear staining with TOPRO™-3 or DAPI (Invitrogen Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed, and slides were mounted using 1,4-Diazabicyclo[2.2.2] octane (DABCO) (Sigma-Aldrich). For whole-mount immunofluorescence staining, whole organoids were incubated in blocking solution (PBS 1X with 0.5% Triton X-100, 2% bovine serum albumin) for 1 h; then, they were incubated with primary antibodies in blocking solution and kept on a shaker overnight at 4°C. After rinsing 3 times for 10 min in PBS 1X, secondary antibodies were applied for 6 h at room temperature. After final washing steps in PBS 1X, nuclear staining with TOPRO™-3 or DAPI (Invitrogen Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed; in order to preserve the 3D structure of the organoid, an in-house method was set up, using a parafilm chamber fixed on a glass slide; the whole organoids were inserted in the chamber and mounted using DABCO.

## Tissue immunofluorescence
Intact adult mice brain tissues were extracted after animal perfusion in 4% PFA then rinsed in PBS and stored in sucrose 30% at 4°C. Medio-lateral sagittal or coronal sections were cryosectioned at 35μm throughout the entire samples. Slides were stored at -20°C. Immunostaining on cryosections was performed after 30 min incubation in blocking solution (PBS 1X with 0.25% Triton X-100, 2% bovine serum albumin). Sections were then incubated with primary antibodies in blocking solution overnight at 4°C. After rinsing 6 times for 5 min in blocking solution, appropriate secondary antibodies were applied for 4 h at room temperature. After final washing steps in blocking solution and then in PBS 1X, nuclear staining with TOPRO™-3 (Invitrogen Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed and slides were mounted using DABCO (Sigma-Aldrich).

## Antibodies
The following primary antibodies were used: anti-SOX2 (goat, 1:200, R&D System, Cat#AF2018), anti-Vimentin (chicken 1:400, Millipore, Cat#AB5733), anti-Ki67 (rabbit, 1:200, Abcam, Cat#ab16667), anti-DCX (rabbit, 1:400, Cell Signaling Technology, Cat#4604), anti-β3Tubulin (mouse, 1:400, Promega, Cat#G7121), anti-MAP2 (mouse, 1:200, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#M1406), anti-ZBTB20 (rabbit, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX121616), anti-KA1 (rabbit, 1:200, Abcam, Cat#ab67404), anti-NeuN (rabbit, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX121616), anti-GAD65/67 (mouse, 1:400, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat#sc-365180), anti-NMDA (mouse, 1:400, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat#sc-365597), anti-GLSYN (mouse, 1:400, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat#sc-74430), anti-GFAP (goat, 1:200, Abcam, Cat#ab53554), anti-synaptophysin (guinea pig, 1:200, Synaptic System, Cat#101004), anti-PSD95 (mouse, 1:200, Millipore, Cat#MAB1596), anti-gephyrin (mouse, 1:200, Synaptic Systems, Cat#147011), anti-VGAT (guinea pig, 1:400, Synaptic Systems, Cat#131004), anti-VGLUT (rabbit, 1:400, Synaptic Systems, Cat#135303), anti-Total OXPHOS Rodent WB Antibody Cocktail (mouse, 1:200, Abcam, ab110413), anti-VDAC1 (rabbit, 1:200, Cat# ab15895), anti-Lamin B (rabbit, 1:200, Abcam, Cat#ab16048), anti-GSX2 (rabbit, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX129390), anti-FOXG1 (rabbit, 1:200, Abcam, Cat#18259), anti-NKX2.1 (mouse, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX34907), anti-PreAlbumin (chicken, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX85112), anti-Frizzled9 (rabbit, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX71581), anti-Musashi 2 (rabbit, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX117808), anti-OCT3/4 (mouse, 1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat#sc-5279), anti-OCT6 (rabbit, 1:200, Abcam, Cat#ab272925), anti-E-Cadherin,(rabbit, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX100443), anti-NANOG (mouse, 1:200, Genetex, Cat#GTX627421), anti-SOX1 (goat, 1:200, R&D Systems, Cat#967237), anti-Nestin (mouse, 1:200, R&D Systems, Cat#MAB2736). Appropriate secondary antibodies were used: donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 488 (donkey, 1:1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#A21206), donkey anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (donkey, 1:1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#A21202), donkey anti-guinea pig CY3 (donkey, 1:1000, Jackson ImmunoResarch, Cat#AB2340460), goat anti-mouse CY3 (goat, 1:1000, Amersham, Cat#PA43002), donkey anti-goat Alexa Fluor 546 (donkey, 1:1000, Invitrogen by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#A-11056), goat anti-rabbit CY3 (goat, 1:1000, Amersham, Cat#PA43004), donkey anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor 546 (donkey, 1:1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#A10040), goat anti-chicken Alexa Fluor 546 (goat, 1:1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat#A11040). TO-PRO™-3 (1:3000, Molecular Probes-Thermo Fisher Scientific) or DAPI (1:2000, Invitrogen Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used to visualize the cell nuclei.

## Immunofluorescence image acquisition, analysis and quantification
Immunofluorescence imaging of sliced and whole-mount organoids was performed using a Zeiss LSM710 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Munich, Germany). Both reconstruction of 3D images and quantification were performed using a specific plugin of ImageJ software (U.S. National Institutes of Health) and a semi-automated cell count. Quantification of positive-immunoreactive cells for Ki67, Vimentin, SOX2, DCX, TUBB3, ZBTB20, KA1, GFAP and MAP2 was done by counting positive cells over the total number of nuclei (TOPRO™-3) per field. The number of excitatory synaptic puncta was measured by evaluating the co-localization of the expression of the presynaptic marker vGLUT and the postsynaptic marker PSD95; the presence of inhibitory GABAergic synapses was quantified by analyzing the co-localization of the presynaptic marker vGAT and the postsynaptic marker gephyrin. The colocalization analysis was performed in blind using a custom-designed macro in Image J. Synaptic density was expressed as synaptophysin-positive area against the MAP2+ neuronal cells area. For the quantification of organoid marker expression, at least 3 slices for each organoid sample were analyzed, from n ≥ 3 different organoids. For whole-mount staining, at least 10 plane sections were acquired and analyzed for each organoid. Statistical differences between marker expression at different time points were calculated by ordinary one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical differences between two groups (CTRL vs WNT3a) for hippocampal markers expression were calculated by two-tailed unpaired t-test for two datasets. P < 0.05 was considered significantly different.

## Fluorescence intensity quantification
Fluorescence intensity in cryosections was obtained using the Plot Profile command in ImageJ (Fiji). Fluorescence intensity graphs for each marker was obtained by further using the Fit Function (8th Degree Polynomial) in ImageJ.

## Immunoblot analysis
Immunoblot analysis was performed as previously described ( ). Murine NSCs-derived organoids at 7, 14, 21 and 32 d of culture were pooled (n=2 or 5 organoids/sample depending on the analyzed time point) and homogenized in modified radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer [100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), DTT 5 mM, MgCl2 5 mM, Glycerol 3%, Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) 5 mM, and Benzonase 2 unit/μl] in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Samples were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 15 min at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined with the Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) protein assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Aliquots (20 μg each) were run through a 4–15% SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), electroblotted onto a PVDF membrane. Amido Black staining solution (Sigma, Cat#A8181-1EA) was used to detect total protein. After blocking, the membranes were probed by the primary antibodies overnight at +4°C and subsequently incubated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (anti-mouse, 1:5000, Promega, Cat#W402B; anti-rabbit, 1:5000, Promega, Cat#W4018) for 2 h at room temperature. Chemiluminescence-based immunostaining (Clarity Western ECL Substrate, Biorad, Cat#170-5060) was performed.
The following primary antibodies were used: total oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) rodent antibody cocktail (mouse, 1:1000, Abcam, Cat#ms604-300), VDAC-1 (rabbit, 1:5000, Abcam, Cat#ab15895), Lamin B (rabbit, 1:1000, Abcam Cat# ab16048). Images were acquired with the ImageQuant LAS 4000 apparatus (GE Healthcare); the quantification was performed using Image Lab™ software, version 6.0.1 for Windows (Bio-Rad Laboratories). For each time point n>3 organoid pools were evaluated. Statistical differences in graphs were calculated by ordinary one-way ANOVA. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## DNA extraction and mitochondrial DNA quantification
Total DNA was extracted from organoids (n=9-11 for each time point) with proteinase k-based protocol. Briefly, each organoid was incubated in Lysis Buffer (Tris-HCl pH 8.5 100mM, EDTA 5mM, SDS 0.2% and NaCl 200mM) supplemented with 10 μg/ ml of proteinase K at 55°C for 2 h. After centrifugation, the DNA was precipitated with isopropyl alcohol, washed with 70% v/v ethanol, suspended in TE buffer and quantified with NanoDrop™ One/OneC Microvolume UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Mitochondrial DNA was quantified by Sybr Green-based real time PCR (QuantStudio™ 3 Real-Time PCR System, Applied Biosystem) according to the ΔΔCt method. The mitochondrial gene MT-ND1 and the nuclear gene Hexokinase 2 (HK2) were amplified from approximately 20 ng of total DNA. Triplicate experiments were carried out for each biological replicates. For each time point, n=9 organoids were evaluated; Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s comparison test. P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Bioenergetic assessment
Organoids were kept at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air, on an orbital shaker, with culture medium supplemented either with glucose or galactose as carbon source. Total ATP content was evaluated in samples at different time points. The glucose media consisted of DMEM supplemented with 17mM glucose, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1% pen-strep, 2% B27 plus 1% N2 and 5 ng/ml bFGF or 50 ng/ml BDNF for organoids at 7 d or 14, 21, and 32 d, respectively. Galactose media consisted of DMEM supplemented with 5 mM galactose, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 1% pen-strep, 2% B27 plus 1% N2 and 5 ng/ml bFGF or 50 ng/ml BDNF for organoids at 7 d or 14, 21, and 32 days, respectively. After 60h, the cellular ATP content was evaluated by CellTiter-Glo 3D Cell Viability Assay in n=8 (7d), n=8 (14d), n=10 (32d) organoids for each condition, following manufacturer’s instructions. To exclude any differences in cell proliferation/viability, a subset of organoids treated as above (7d: n=4, 14d: n=4 and 32d: n=6 for each media condition) was used for data normalization by evaluating the DNA content with CyQUANT Cell Proliferation Assay Kit, following manufacturer's instructions. Results were then expressed as A.U. relative to glucose and presented as mean ±SEM. Statistical differences were evaluated by two-tailed unpaired t-test for two datasets (glucose versus galactose) at each time point. P < 0.05 was considered significantly different.

## Patch-clamp recordings
Organoid at different stages of development (11-13d: intermediate; 19-26d: early mature; 33-42d: mature) were plated on glass coverslips coated with poly-D-lysine (10 μg/mL; Sigma) more than 24h before recording and left in the incubator under controlled conditions (37°C, 5% CO2). Prior to recording, the coverslips with organoids were moved from a Petri dish (35 mm) to a recording chamber where the experiments were performed at room temperature in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) composed of (in mM): NaCl (115.0), KCl (2.0), KH2PO4 (1.25), MgSO4 (1.0), CaCl2 (2.0), D-Glucose (25.0), and NaHCO3 (26.0), and bubbled in carbogen (95% O2 and 5% CO2). Borosilicate glass patch pipettes were pulled (P-97 micropipette puller, Sutter Instrument, USA) to a final resistance of 5-7 MΩ and filled with an intracellular solution composed of (in mM): K-Gluconate (120.0), NaCl (5 mM), HEPES (10.0), EGTA (10.0), MgCl2 (2.0), CaCl2 (1.0), ATP-Na2 (2.0), and GTP-Na (0.4), osmolality was adjusted at 285 mOsm with 10 mM sucrose. Resting membrane potential (RMP) was measured in whole-cell configuration immediately after disrupting the patch in current-clamp mode with null current injection. Membrane capacitance (Cm) was measured calibrating whole-cell compensation (Cslow) and series resistance compensation from a holding potential of -70 mV. Input resistance (Rin) was determined from the analysis of response to depolarizing steps with 10 mV increments applied from the holding potential of -70 mV. For voltage-clamp recordings, membrane potential was held at -70 mV and positive voltage steps (500 ms) were applied from -70 mV to 100 mV (ΔV=10 mV). For current density analysis, current amplitude was measured at the positive peak for IA (○ in D), at the steady-state for IDR (• in D), and at negative peak for INa (□ in D) ( ). Current-clamp activity was recorded at resting membrane potential and evoked by 500 ms current pulses from -10 pA to +10 pA (ΔA=10 pA). Data were acquired with an Axopatch 1D amplifier and Digidata 1322, using pClamp 10.6 software (all from Molecular Devices, USA) and stored in a pc for offline analysis. pClamp 10 (Molecular Devices, USA) and Origin 2020 (OriginLab, USA) software were used routinely during data analysis and graph plotting. Data of passive membrane properties experiments are presented as median followed by 25-75 confidence interval. Data of current density are presented as mean±SEM. Statistical differences were evaluated by one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc Tukey’s Multiple Comparison Test if applicable (passive properties and current densities), or with Fisher exact test (number of cells variably expressing Na+ and K+ currents). P < 0.05 was considered significantly different. Drugs: the sodium channel blocker Tetrodotoxin (TTX) was purchased from Tocris Bioscience (Bio-Techne, USA), while all the other chemicals, unless otherwise stated, were obtained from Carlo Erba Reagents (Italy) or Sigma-Aldrich (Merck Life Science, Germany).

## Intracellular calcium imaging
To test spontaneous calcium activity, organoids at 7 (n=4), 14 (n=3), 21 (n=3), 32 (n=3) days of maturation were assessed with Fluo-4 Direct Calcium Assay Kit (Invitrogen). WNT3a-treated organoids at different time points (7d: n=2; 14d: n=3; 21d: n=3; 32d: n=3) were likewise used. For calcium dye loading, the organoids were first incubated 10 minutes with HEPES pH 7.3 (Sigma, H3375-250G), rinsed and then with equal parts of physiological salt solution (PSS) pH 7.4 (140 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1.2 mM Na2PO4, 1.4 mM MgCl2, 1.8 mM CaCl2, 11.5 mM glucose, 10 mM HEPES) and Fluo-4 acetoxymethyl ester solutions for 3 h at 37°C. Excess dye was removed by washing with culture medium, and a 30-min incubation was done at 37°C in order to allow the complete de-esterification of the dye and avoid artifacts such as continuous increase in fluorescence intensity during the experiment. Imaging was carried out at 37°C and 5% CO2 using epifluorescence microscopy optics (Eclipse Ti Nikon Microscope), while the organoids were placed in glass bottom 96-well cell imaging plate (Eppendorf #0030741030) maintained in the appropriate culture medium (see section).
Time-lapse imaging was performed at 1 frame/100 ms for 3 min and then processed using ImageJ software. For calcium imaging analysis the intensity signal of the calcium indicator of different cells of interest (n=10/organoid) within the organoids over the entire time of acquisition was measured using the “Plot Z-axis profile” plugin of ImageJ. The fluorescence change over time was defined as ΔF/F=(F-Fbasal)/Fbasal, where F is the fluorescence of a ROI at a specific time point and Fbasal is the corresponding fluorescence of a background area. Cells were considered active when at least a change in the fluorescence intensity (peak) was detected. For each ROI corresponding to a selected cell within an organoid, the number of intensity fluorescence peaks were counted and expressed as mean of peaks per minute.

## Rabies virus and adenovirus
To assess the synaptic connections between neuronal cells, organoids at 18 d (n=6) were transfected with adenoviral vector pAAV-Syn-H2B-GFP-TVA-oG-WPRE3 (MOI=50) and kept at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2 in air, on an orbital shaker for the first 30 min, to promote the transfection and then in static culture for about 20 h. Fresh medium was supplied the day after transfection and the AVV cellular transfection was evaluated with a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Ti Eclipse). 48h later, BRVenVA-1 G-deleted Rabies mcherry ( ) virus (MOI=0.25) was added to the culture media. The green, red, and yellow spots were evaluated in the following days by confocal microscope (LSM510 confocal microscope).

## Microelectrode array recording
To favor adhesion of the organoid to the microelectrode array (MEA), the array electrodes were first cleaned enzymatically and autoclaved, then made hydrophilic by overnight incubation with sodium phosphate buffer and subsequent overnight coating with a 50 μl drop poly-D-lysine (PDL, 50 mg/ml in sodium phosphate buffer), both at 37°C. MEAs were then thoroughly washed with MilliQ water to remove excess coating, filled with MilliQ water, sealed and stored at 4°C until use.
On the day of recording, individual intact organoids were transferred in a 50 μl drop of culture medium to the previously dried MEA. A custom hold-down anchor was then placed on top of the organoid to ensure its mechanical stability. The MEA chamber was subsequently filled with warm (∼37°C) artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) and sealed with a custom replica-moulded polydimethylsiloxane lid ( ) to ensure sterility and maintenance of a physiological microenvironment throughout recordings. The ACSF was composed of (mM) NaCl 115, KCl 2, KH2PO4, 1.25, MgSO4 1, CaCl2 2, D-glucose 25, NaHCO3 26, L-Ascorbic Acid 1, equilibrated at pH = 7.4 with carbogen gas mixture (95% O2 / 5% CO2), and maintained at ∼37°C with the use of a custom-made mini-incubator placed on top the MEA head stage.
Extracellular field potentials were acquired using the Multichannel Experimenter software through an 8 x 8 planar MEA (TiN electrodes, diameter 30 mm, inter-electrode distance 200 mm, impedance < 100 kΩ) connected to a MEA2100-Mini60 head stage (all from Multichannel Systems – Reutlingen, Germany). Signals were low pass filtered at 2-10 kHz before digitization at 10 kHz, and stored in the computer hard drive for offline analysis.

## Quantitative RT-PCR analysis for SGZ-NSCs characterization and hippocampal phenotype
Total RNA was extracted from 4 different SGZ-NSCs samples (500000 cells/sample) and from 6 different mature (32d) organoids sample (3 CTRL organoids: n=3 pools of 6–8 organoids each, 3 WNT3a-treated organoids: n=3 pools of 6–8 organoids each) using the RNeasy Plus Micro Kit (Qiagen, Cat No. 74034) according to the manufacturer's protocol and RNA abundance was evaluated using the NanoDrop™ One/OneC Microvolume UV-Vis Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Reverse transcription was carried out using Superscript VILO Master Mix (Invitrogen, Thermo-Fisher Scientific, #11755050, Waltham, USA). Expression level of specific hippocampal or embryonic and neural stem cells genes (see ) was quantified by Sybr Green-based real-time quantitative RT-PCR (7900HT Real-time PCR System, Applied Biosystems) according to the ΔΔCt method and by using Tbp and Gapdh as reference genes for data normalization.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Unless otherwise stated, n ≥ 3 samples or replicates were used for statistical analysis. Data on graphs are expressed as mean ± SEM. Statistical differences were calculated by two-tailed unpaired t-test for two datasets and ordinary one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test for multiple datasets using Prism (GraphPad Inc., La Jolla, CA). P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001; ∗∗∗p < 0.001; ∗∗p < 0.01; ∗p < 0.05; ns not statistically significant.

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge Dr. Edward Callaway, Systems Neurobiology Laboratories, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA, for providing the modified rabies virus particle, Margrate Anyanwu (University of Verona) for help with immunofluorescence staining, Dr. Monica Castellucci, CPT University of Verona, for technical help with RNAseq, Dr. Giacomo Pruzzo, IIT Genoa, for MEA mold design and realization of the custom mini-incubator. “Centro Interdipartimentale di Servizi per la Ricerca che utilizza Animali da Laboratorio”– C.I.R.S.A.L. and “Centro PiattaformeTecnologiche”–CPT (University of Verona) are acknowledged for services and support. European Union project FETPROACT-2018-2020 HERMES [grant number 824164], is acknowledged for the support on research provided to I.D, G.C., G.P. and G.P., J.H.; Fondazione Telethon–Italy (Grant Number GSP20004_PAsMCT8006) to I.D. Italian patient association la Colonna and GALM and University of Verona (Grant Number DDSP-FUR-6616) to I.D. and G.F.; University of Milan (Grant Number BIOMETRA15-6-3003005-1 and PSR2018_RIVA_BIFARI) to F.B; and Fondazione Telethon–Italy (Grant Number GGP19250) to F.B.

## Author contributions
F.C., R.G.Z., and A.C. performed experiments, analyzed and interpreted data; E.R. performed electrophysiological experiments, analyzed and interpreted data; G.P., E.B. performed metabolic experiments, analyzed and interpreted data; A.B., M.D.C., S.D. performed immunofluorescence experiments; D.C. performed MEA recording and interpreted data; A.A., J.H. performed OPT microscopy and organoid volume analysis; G. M., G.M. analyzed and interpreted gene expression data; R.B. performed electrophysiological experiments; G.F., F.B., G.P., G.P., G.C. analyzed and interpreted data. F.C., G.C., I.D wrote the paper. All authors discussed results and commented on the manuscript. F.C., R.G.Z., I.D conceptualized the study and I.D. supervised the project and had the scientific direction.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Published: December 17, 2021

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2021.103438.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S3 and Tables S1–S7

## Data and code availability

•The RNAseq dataset has been deposited at GenBank and is publicly available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA778927. The accession link is listed in the . All other data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Video S1. OPT 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid at 7d, related to Figure 1

## Video S2. OPT 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid at 35d, related to Figure 1

## Video S3. 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid's region at 32d using IMARIS software, related to Figure 4
Neurons MAP2+, astrocytes GFAP+ and total nuclei (TOPRO-3) are shown in white, red and blue, respectively.

## Video S4. 3D reconstruction of a representative whole mount organoid at 32d using IMARIS software, related to Figure 4
Neurons MAP2+ and total nuclei (TOPRO-3) are shown in green and blue, respectively.

## Video S5. Calcium imaging performed on a whole mount organoid at 21d using the Fluo4-AM dye, related to Figure 6
The video is reported in grayscale and 10X speed.

## Video S6. Calcium imaging performed on a whole mount organoid at 32d using the Fluo4-AM dye, related to Figure 6
The video is reported in grayscale and 10X speed.

## Document S1. Figures S1–S3 and Tables S1–S7

## Data Availability Statement

•The RNAseq dataset has been deposited at GenBank and is publicly available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA778927. The accession link is listed in the . All other data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
•This paper does not report original code.
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.