pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC13137218PMC13137218.11313721813137218NIHMS21601374183295710.1016/j.celrep.2026.117110NIHMS2160137NIHPA21601371ArticleSingle-nucleus multiome analysis in the human prefrontal cortex identifies gene expression and cis-regulatory elements associated with aging
CatchingAdam WellerCory A. HuFangle BromberekSarah AbbasShahroze DaidaKensuke MalikLaksh BakerBreeana AuluckPavan K. ScrevenLaurel A. AndershKate M. BillingsleyKimberley J. MarencoStefano North American Brain Expression Consortium (NABEC)CooksonMark R. Van Keuren-JensenKendall NallsMike A. SingletonAndrew B. BlauwendraatCornelis ReedXylena 1Center for Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias, National Institute on Aging and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA2DataTecnica, Washington, DC, USA3Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA4Human Brain Collection Core, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA5Present address: Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA6Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
A.B.S., C.B., and X.R. conceptualized the project. F.H., S.B., P.K.A., L.M., and B.B. were involved in the investigation. F.H., S.B., and X.R. optimized the methodology. A.C., C.A.W., S.A., and K.D. played roles in software and formal analysis. L.A.S. and K.M.A. assisted with project administration. A.C. and C.A.W. completed data curation and visualization. P.K.A., S.M., M.R.C., NABEC, and K.J.B. provided resources. A.B.S., C.B., and M.A.N. acquired funding. A.B.S., C.B., K.V.K.-J., M.R.C., M.A.N., and X.R. provided supervision. A.C. and X.R. wrote the original manuscript draft. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.
*Correspondence: xylena.reed@nih.gov2432026143202645351290311711011711012042026040520260505202622052026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Aging is an unavoidable part of life, but gaps still remain in the understanding of age-associated molecular changes within the brain. We generated single-nucleus multiome ATAC plus gene expression profiles in 357 human brain samples from European and African admixed ancestry individuals ranging from 15 to 100 years old. The final dataset consisted of paired transcriptomic and epigenomic profiles for over 1.5 million cells. These were classified into seven major cell types using canonical marker genes, and each type was analyzed for features associated with aging. Open chromatin regions were correlated with transcription factor expression to identify age-associated regulatory networks, and co-accessibility identified linked peaks and genes, revealing a catalog of putative cis-regulatory elements by cell type. These multiomic data serve as a resource to characterize transcriptional regulation by cell type and generate hypotheses about how these distinct profiles both influence and are influenced by aging and disease.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Catching et al. use single-nucleus ATAC plus gene expression to profile 357 neurologically unaffected postmortem human prefrontal cortices and characterize the molecular effects of aging on different cell types. Analysis of each cell type identifies genes and chromatin regions associated with aging in the human prefrontal cortex.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Single-cell and single-nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq) have opened up many new opportunities for biological analyses in the human brain since the first single-cell transcriptome was published in 2009. As these methods have improved in recent years, they have enabled the study of specific brain cell types and subtypes across large numbers of samples and populations. Numerous single-nucleus studies in the human brain have been published recently, revealing gene expression profiles of cell types, neurological disease states, – and throughout developmental stages, – allowing for the identification of pathogenic mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets. Similar lines of research have used Assay for Transposase-Accessible Chromatin using sequencing (ATACseq) to examine the chromatin landscape across cell types of the human brain, providing an overview of putative cis-regulatory elements (CREs) that may function in transcriptional regulation. , , These studies, often called brain atlases, are large scale resources that can be used to study the underlying cell types and molecular mechanisms involved in brain health and disease. , 
Prior studies have shown that there are transcriptomic signatures associated with aging across the human brain. – However, many large-scale aging experiments have been limited by the use of bulk RNA-seq, which does not distinguish which specific cell type is responsible for age associations. More recent publications have used snRNA-seq and snATAC-seq separately to characterize cell type specific gene expression and putative CREs across development and aging. , – Combining these two single-nucleus modalities has allowed researchers to investigate the complex mechanisms that regulate cell type restricted expression patterns, but the sample size using multiome from the same nuclei remains low. – We aimed to fill this unmet need by generating a large (n = 357) single-nucleus multiome ATAC plus gene expression dataset from the human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (PFC) of samples collected from individuals across the age spectrum (15–100 years).
Within this large multiome atlas, we assigned nuclei into one of seven broad cell types. Linear regression analysis was used in each cell type to identify genes and chromatin regions that are associated with aging across samples from two genetic ancestries. We identified multiple examples of loci where CREs may be involved in transcriptional regulation within a specific cell type throughout aging. We used co-expression, co-accessibility, and correlation between peaks and genes to identify features that may act in the same transcriptional regulatory networks. These analyses suggest genes, pathways, and gene regulatory networks that may be clinically significant during the aging process. The resulting multiome PFC brain atlas presented here is a highly valuable and publicly accessible resource, accompanied by open-source code, designed to support investigations into brain-related pathologies spanning aging to neurodegeneration.

## RESULTS

## Single-nucleus multiome atlas of the frontal cortex
We collected postmortem PFC samples from two genetic populations and processed them through a custom data pipeline (see ). The North American Brain Expression Cohort (NABEC) included 202 individuals of European ancestry, which has been previously studied using bulk experiments of gene expression, epigenetics, and genetic variation. , , The second cohort comprised 155 individuals of African admixed ancestry from the Human Brain Collection Core (HBCC) at the National Institute of Mental Health, which reported all individuals to be neurologically healthy at the time of death. Ages across the two populations ranged from 15 years to 100 years, with an average age of 48.8 years in NABEC (15–100 years) and 45.2 years in HBCC (18–85 years; ). The difference between cohorts in age distribution made direct comparisons across aging between cohorts infeasible. Therefore, we combined both cohorts for these analyses. While there was a higher average postmortem interval (PMI) in the HBCC cohort relative to NABEC (33.79 vs. 12.34 h; ), we did not observe a significant correlation between PMI and other covariates ( – ).
We then performed single-nucleus multiome ATAC plus gene expression sequencing (multiome) in these samples to generate a multi-ancestry human brain atlas that combines gene expression and chromatin accessibility from the same nuclei. With these data, we identified features (gene expression or chromatin accessibility) that are associated with aging in the human brain ( ). Each data type was pre-processed separately, filtering 2.83 million single nuclei for percent ambient RNA, minimum number of ATAC fragments, number of genes per cell, percent ribosomal genes, percent mitochondrial transcripts, and the proportion of predicted doublets ( – ; ). This resulted in a multiome dataset containing over 1.5 million cells, which was visualized using a Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) for gene expression ( ). We assigned cell types by Leiden cluster using over-representation analysis for canonical cell type markers. Cells were defined as astrocytes (Astro; GFAP and AQP4), excitatory neurons (ExN; SATB2 and SLC17A7), inhibitory neurons (InN; GAD1 and GAD2), microglia (MG; APBB1IP and ADAM28), oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs; PDGFRA and VCAN), oligodendrocytes (Oligo; MOG and ST18), or vascular cells (VCs; CLDN5 and EPAS1; ). To ensure a high-quality dataset, the final number of genes per cell, percent ribosomal genes, and percent mitochondrial reads ( – ) were plotted to verify the final composition. This was followed by validation that each cluster was well mixed for age, cohort, and sex ( – ). We confirmed that despite differences in postmortem collection and storage protocols, combining the cohorts from two different ancestries did not cause a separation in cells by ancestry. Finally, gene expression was ranked by cluster for each cell type, and, as expected, the top five genes for each cluster contained several known marker genes for their cell type ( ).
Chromatin fragments were then pseudobulked and used to call peaks by cell type, followed by generation of atlas-wide consensus peaks (see ). The chromatin accessibility UMAP was computed from this cell by peak matrix, and cell-type labels were transferred from the gene expression data by matching cell barcodes ( ). Chromatin accessibility was found to be similar across clusters based on the total number of fragments and unique fragments ( and ). Sample age was not as uniformly distributed across the chromatin accessibility feature plot, but cohort and sex were evenly spread across all clusters ( – ). Given the well-resolved UMAPs for chromatin accessibility and gene expression, we combined both modalities and plotted the weighted nearest neighbor (WNN) UMAP ( ). Again, we found a uniform distribution of age, cohort, and sex across all clusters ( – ).
We then broke down the composition of cell types across this multiome atlas by individual samples and observed some sample-to-sample variability in cell type proportions ( ). This can be biologically explained by slight differences in the placement and cell composition of the dissection of each donor. While the highest number of cells were found in the Oligo cluster (610,235 nuclei [37.8%]), we also recovered large numbers of ExN (373,139 nuclei [25.5%]), InN (197,917 nuclei [13.9%]), and Astro (128,599 nuclei [9.9%]; ). We examined how cell type proportions change across aging by performing linear regression with respect to age and show that while some cell type proportions were significantly associated with aging, the R-squared values did not indicate a strong correlation to trend lines, suggesting large variance across individuals ( – ). There was a trend toward reduced proportions of ExN, InN, MG, OPCs, and VCs at older ages. The most significant association between cell proportion and age was seen in OPCs, which showed a reduction of − 0.05 percent/year (R2 = 0.15, p value = 1.05 × 10−13). We also saw an increase of 0.17 percent/year in the proportion of Oligo during aging; however, the correlation was low and variance was high across all ages (R2 = 0.03, p value = 0.0012).
To validate the utility of the chromatin accessibility dataset, we viewed the fragment distributions by cell type for the genomic loci surrounding several cell-type marker genes. We observed high numbers of fragments around each selected marker gene in its respective cell type, and the number of peaks called within that cell type was higher at the marker gene locus ( ). Finally, we computed transcription factor (TF) motif enrichment and identified the top enriched motifs for each cell type ( ). Many of the enriched motifs identified were binding sites for TFs that have been previously reported to be involved in the specification or maintenance of the cell type analyzed. This, combined with the well-separated cell type clusters in the integrated WNN UMAP, demonstrates the relationship between the two matched single-nucleus sequencing modalities.

## Pan-cell-type age-associated gene expression and chromatin accessibility
To identify features that were associated with age, log-normalized gene expression and peak accessibility were pseudobulked by cell type for each sample. Linear regression of expression or accessibility was calculated with respect to sample age across all samples (see ). Overall, we identified 270 significant gene-cell type associations with age and 555 significant peak-cell type pairs associated with aging ( ). The slope from this analysis is defined as change in gene expression per year (annotated as g.e./year). The resulting sets of significant genes and peaks were sorted by cell type and direction of effect across aging ( ). Overall, the greatest number of up- or down-regulated genes were detected in ExN and InN, whereas Oligo and OPCs had the highest number of up- and down-regulated peaks ( ). These sets of significant genes and peaks were used for all downstream analyses. Several genes were significant in more than one cell type and showed increased gene expression across aging, which nominated them for investigation at the chromatin level. Genes generally clustered by significance and slope magnitude within either neuronal or glial cell types; for example, genes known to play a role in microtubule stability in axons, including MAP7, TUBA1A, and TUBB2A, were found to be significant in both neuronal cell types ( ).
Age-associated peaks and genes were then connected via genomic proximity and correlation. For every significant peak, a 2-Mb window was scanned for significant genes in each cell type, and pseudobulked Pearson correlation was calculated between genes and peaks ( ). Surprisingly, only glial cell types displayed gene-peak connections of this kind, with the closest gene-peaks found in Astro ( and ). Only four connections were found in MG ( ), the closest being DOCK5, which was also identified in OPCs ( ). OPCs also had overlapping gene-peak connections at FKBP5 with Oligo ( ). While several gene-peak connections were found in OPCs and Oligo, the distances between peaks and genes were toward the 1-Mb threshold. Observing overlap between the same gene in a few gene-peak connections then motivated us to look deeper into genes that were significant in multiple cell types.
In neurons, MAP7 expression increased during aging (+1.43 ± 0.21 g.e./year for ExN; +1.19 ± 0.17 g.e./year for InN; and ), and these cell types also showed increased chromatin accessibility at the gene locus ( ). The DOCK5 locus had the most significant changes in accessibility across glial cell types. DOCK5 has been reported to have a role in neurological development and disease, and copy number variants have been suggested to be associated with Parkinson’s disease, an age-associated neurodegenerative disease. Our data showed a large number of peaks and high co-accessibility scores across the DOCK5 locus, especially in OPCs and MG, which also showed significant associations with aging (adj. p values 3.6 × 10−13 for OPCs and 6.0 × 10−4 for MG) and large slopes for gene expression (+4.7 g.e./year for OPCs and +1.70 g.e./year for MG; see and ). While DOCK5 expression did not change significantly in Oligo, there were peaks overlapping the DOCK5 transcription start site (TSS) and predicted promoter that were shared with OPCs, where they were significantly increased with age and showed strong co-accessibility with several peaks throughout the locus ( ).
FKBP5, which encodes a protein co-chaperone known to be upregulated during stress and glucocorticoid stimulation by epigenetic factors, was significantly increased with age in ExN, Astro, OPCs, and Oligo (+0.76, +2.45, +2.1, and +2.68 g.e./year, respectively; – ). Expression in glial cells was reflected by significant chromatin peaks in both promoter and intronic regions of all cell types ( ), as well as co-accessibility with several nearby regions. The presence of these peaks along their high co-accessibility across cell types indicates that these may act as CREs important across all cell types in the transcriptional regulation of FKBP5.

## Age related changes in expression and chromatin accessibility in astrocytes
Next, we investigated the genes and peaks that were significantly associated with aging in select cell types. While age-related analysis was performed for both gene expression and chromatin accessibility in all cell types, we chose to focus on Astro, InN, ExN, and MG cell types due to the field’s interest in age-related responses in these cell types. For brevity, we focused on gene dysregulation and correlations that built upon previous literature, where we hope the comprehensive nature of this dataset might fill in gaps and stimulate further research. We started by subtyping astrocytes, due to their previously described importance in aging, with the goal of identifying age-related clusters. We did not identify any clear age-associated subtype clusters based on either gene expression or chromatin accessibility but did find three Leiden sub-clusters that showed distinct patterns of gene expression ( – ). While the general Astro marker AQP4 was ubiquitously expressed across all cells, the protoplasmic Astro marker SLC1A2 was higher in sub-clusters with lower levels of fibrous Astro markers, , 
GFAP and CD44 ( – ). Further investigation revealed that one subcluster expressed higher levels of fibrous Astro genes, such as TNC and GFAP ( ; cluster 23). Based on these expression patterns, subclusters 22 and 24 were assigned as protoplasmic Astro and subcluster 23 as fibrous Astro. We then created a ranked gene list for each subcluster to identify the top expressed genes and plotted each gene by heatmap ( ). The fibrous Astro genes TNC, GFAP, and CD44 were among the top 15 differentially expressed genes when compared to protoplasmic Astro genes, confirming the identity of subclusters.
Several genes were found to significantly change with age in the Astro population ( ). While not the most significant or with the greatest slope, the presence of FKBP5 in Astro underscored an age association that was relevant across all cell types in the PFC. LINC00943, a long intergenic non-coding RNA, was the most significant gene identified in Astro and exhibited expression levels between ∼0 and 100 log-normal pseudobulk counts at the youngest ages but converged to almost zero in the oldest samples ( ). Interestingly, LINC00943 has previously been shown to act as a sponge for microRNA-338-3p, which in turn regulates levels of SP1, a TF associated with proliferation and apoptosis in a cellular model of Parkinson’s disease as well as double-strand break repair and aging. , In addition, LINC00943 and HES4, the only significant age-dependent TF in Astro ( ), were shown to be correlated with a peak within the gene body of LINC00943 ( and ). Furthermore, all three of these features were positively correlated with one another ( ), suggesting HES4 has a role in regulation of LINC00943 expression.
Another gene identified as significantly age-associated uniquely in Astro was GMPR, which encodes an enzyme that converts guanosine monophosphate to inosine monophosphate. The expression of GMPR increased with respect to age (+0.54 g.e./year, adjusted p value 1.2 × 10−7), and there was a strong correlation between GMPR gene expression and chromatin accessibility at its predicted promoter region ( and ). Overall chromatin accessibility was similar between Astro and InN, but co-accessibility scores were much higher in Astro. We identified two intronic GMPR peaks that were co-accessible with the GMPR promoter peak specifically in Astro (arrows, ). These intronic peaks were also identified in InN, MG, and Oligo, but co-accessibility scores with the GMPR promoter were not significant in these cell types ( and ). GMPR expression was highest in InN and Astro, relative to the nearby gene MYLIP, suggesting that the increase in chromatin accessibility opens up nearby CREs for GMPR specifically in these cell types ( ).

## Inhibitory neurons display altered pathways by subtype
Next, we investigated the age-associated features in InN and used Pearson correlation to identify co-expressed gene sets that may act in similar regulatory pathways ( ). To further enhance this network, we combined our gene list with previously reported pathways and interactions, using StringDB to construct edges between genes, where node size and color were annotated by linear regression adjusted p value and slope ( ). Most of the significantly associated genes in InN decreased in expression with age, while a small subset including ERC1, IGF1R, SYN2, and RUNX2 increased with age. RUNX2, a TF of particular interest, was positively correlated with a smaller co-expressed gene set that had four of 17 genes overlapping the StringDB network. To better characterize potential TF-peak interactions in this dataset, Pearson correlation was calculated between all significant peaks and TF expression levels. Two TFs, BACH1 and RUNX2, were significantly correlated with age-associated chromatin peaks proximal to HES4, AGRN, VGF, NR4A3, and BACH1 ( ). Interestingly, VGF increased with age as did one of its associated peaks.
We then split the InN cluster into four known subtypes: VIP+, SST+, PVALB+, and LAMP5+ to determine if there were more age associations revealed at the subtype level ( and ). The largest number of cells were found in the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE) subtypes SST+ and PVALB+, while caudal ganglionic eminence (CGE) subtypes VIP+ and LAMP5+ had fewer cells ( ). InN subtypes were well separated by gene expression, but differences were reduced on the chromatin accessibility UMAP ( ). Interestingly, when all subtype markers (LAMP5, PVALB, SST, and VIP) were measured across aging, we found their expression levels decreased across all subtypes (− 0.063, − 0.68, − 16.7, and − 3.46 g.e./year for LAMP5+, PVALB+, SST+, and VIP+ InN, respectively) and reached statistical significance in SST+ and VIP+ InN (1.44 × 10−6 and 1.45 × 10−3 Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p values, respectively; – ).
Analysis of the significant TFs within InN subtypes showed inverse patterns of expression, with RUNX2 highly expressed in the PVALB+ InN sub-cluster and BACH1 showing higher expression in LAMP+ InN cells ( and ). A peak at the HES4 locus that was also significantly age-associated in Astro showed a strong negative correlation with RUNX2 expression, suggesting that RUNX2 may behave as a transcriptional repressor at this locus. Overall, HES4 expression was low across InN, regardless of localized RUNX2 expression, showing the complexity of transcriptional regulatory networks and the need for more data and functional analysis in relevant cell types ( ).
Continuing the subtype InN analysis, we observed that VGF was more highly expressed in the VIP+ InN sub-cluster that had lower levels of RUNX2 ( ). We found a negative correlation between VGF expression and RUNX2 expression across InN subtypes (R2 = 0.52; p value = 2.9 × 10−30; slope = − 0.55 ± 0.06 g.e./year; ). Similarly, there was an inverse correlation between expression and age, where RUNX2 increased with respect to age, while VGF levels decreased ( and ). Cross-referencing previously published ChIP-seq data in the ReMap database revealed RUNX2 binding sites near the VGF TSS in a Karpas 45 T cell leukemia-derived cell line. These RUNX2 binding sites overlap with our chromatin accessibility peaks in both InN and ExN, suggesting a potential general neuronal RUNX2-VGF regulatory mechanism ( ). Interestingly, ExN RUNX2 expression did not change with respect to age, and the VGF-age interaction is non-significant in ExN, although VGF expression trends down with age ( and ). Overall, RUNX2 gene expression was higher and present in more cells in the InN cluster than in ExN, but VGF expression remained similar across the two cell types ( ). These results suggest that there may be a different mechanism responsible for regulation of VGF in ExN. Additionally, while RUNX2 is expressed at higher levels in MG, the values did not vary with age ( ), showing that age-related changes in RUNX2 expression are specific to InN.
Next, we identified all genes with age-associated expression within each InN subtype ( ). The PVALB+ InN subtype was found to have the highest number of up-regulated genes (12; ), contributing to three clusters of co-expressed genes ( ). Genes that were previously found to be significant in multiple cell types (MAP7, TUBA1A, and VGF) were still found to be significant across InN subtypes ( ). Interestingly, VGF, TUBA1A, and HSPA8 were all positively associated together in PVALB+ InN, suggesting an interplay between axon trafficking and VGF expression. MAP7 was positively associated with age across InN subtypes but was only significant in PVALB+ and VIP+ ( ). LAMP5+ InN only had 2 significant genes, in addition to the overall decreasing TUBA1A ( ). SST+ InN had the highest number of significant genes overall, and almost all genes were found in the same co-expression network ( ). Taken together, this suggests that both conserved and subtype-specific interaction networks link TF-peak networks to gene networks that have implications in axon maintenance and trafficking.

## Excitatory neurons subtypes exhibit conserved gene pathways
ExN exhibited the highest number of age-associated genes of all cell types ( ) and displayed a range of linear regression slopes ( ). Most genes had slopes between ±10 g.e./year, and co-expression analysis showed three distinct gene sets ( ). The gene set with the highest positive correlation included YWHAZ, a 14-3-3 type adapter protein involved in many signaling pathways, as well as two tubulin genes that were also significant in InN (TUBA1A and TUBB2A). These genes were shown to be part of a shared pathway using StringDB ( ), where YWHAZ linked the tubulin genes to the JAK-STAT pathway. This suggests a potential connection between JAK-STAT signaling and microtubule dysregulation through YWHAZ. As with InN, we sub-clustered ExN into subtypes including layer 2/3 intratelencephalic (L2/3 IT), layer 3/5 intratelencephalic (L3/5 IT), layer 5 extratelencephalic (L5 ET), layer 6 cortical/layer 6b (L6 cortico-thalamic/6b), and layer 6 intratelencephalic neurons ( ). These subtypes clustered well by gene expression, with the majority of cells belonging to ExN L2/3 IT and ExN L3/5 IT ( and ). However, we did not observe a difference in significance or g.e./year for most genes across ExN subtypes ( ). Only a small number of genes appeared to be age-associated in the subtypes, including the known subtype markers CUX2, RORB, TLE4, and THEMIS ( ).
Next, we investigated the genes with the highest changes across aging in more depth. PTPRD showed the strongest negative age-dependent slope ( ), and had the highest expression in ExN relative to other cell types. ExN were also the only cell type in which PTPRD expression decreased with age ( ). On the other end of the spectrum, SNHG14 displayed the highest age-dependent increase in expression in ExN ( ). However, this change was not restricted to ExN since SNHG14 expression was higher and had a similar slope in InN ( ). RHBDL3, a gene previously reported to be associated with aging in bulk RNAseq studies of the cortex, showed the second most significant slope, and its expression was strongly correlated with two peaks at the RHBDL3 locus ( and ). This peak-gene association was supported by strong co-accessibility between the two peaks ( ). The linear regression slope and overall significance reaffirmed that the peaks near the RHBDL3 TSS were of high significance in aging (BH-corrected p values 5.60 × 10−17 and 1.28 × 10−12 for chr17:32264293–32267092 and chr17:32267580-3 2269967, respectively; ).
Three genes encoding TFs—TCF12, ZBTB16, and ZNF483— showed significant age-associated expression in ExN. Of these, there was significant correlation between TCF12 and a peak associated near KCNIP3, and ZBTB16 also showed significant correlation with multiple peaks on chr1 and one on chr7 ( ). We further investigated the putative interaction between TCF12 and the KCNIP3 locus, also known as calsenilin, a gene reported to interact with AD-associated presenilins. We plotted chromatin co-accessibility at the KCNIP3 locus, showing the significant age-associated peak in an intron, which may interact with other CREs up- and down-stream ( and ). Two TCF12 binding sites were found to overlap at a co-accessible chromosome region ( ) and the age-associated peak in the promoter region ( ). This suggests an age-associated trans-regulatory TCF12-KCNIP3 interaction that could be functionally validated in future studies.

## Characterization of candidate loci associated with aging in microglia
The last cell type we investigated in depth was MG, where we constructed a co-expression network of significant age-related genes ( ). In line with MG function, some genes involved in immune responses were found to have significant age-associations. Using Leiden clustering we identified two sub-clusters and used ranked gene expression to characterize MG subtypes ( and ). However, gene expression did not vary greatly between these clusters, with only a few genes (FTL, CD81, EIF4A2, and PSAP), suggesting a connection with an activated state ( – ).
ESR1, encoding estrogen receptor 1, and FOXP1, encoding forkhead box P1, were the only TFs that were significantly associated with aging in MG. Among the significant gene-peak correlations were peaks near ESR1 and FOXP1, suggesting a feedback loop of transcriptional regulation ( ). Both of these genes also showed significantly increased expression with age and a large jump in expression at around 70 years old ( and ). The two significant peaks in the FOXP1 locus were co-accessible with each other and contained predicted binding sites for both FOXP1 and ESR1 ( and ). Similarly, the significant peak at the ESR1 locus contained both ESR1 and FOXP1 binding sites ( and ). This suggests these are putative CREs involved in a transcriptional regulatory feedback loop with both TFs and merits further functional analysis.
Finally, we examined immune loci that correlated with ESR1 and FOXP1 expression for possible regulatory network interactions. Expression levels of SLA and TLR2, known innate immune system genes, were found to significantly increase with age and were highly expressed in MG relative to other cell types ( ). The TLR2 locus also contained multiple chromatin peaks that were co-accessible with a peak at the gene promoter ( ). Despite there being no significant correlation between these putative CREs and expression of ESR1 and FOXP1, all co-accessible peaks overlapped with ESR1 binding sites, suggesting that TLR2 expression may be regulated by ESR1 binding. This is of interest, as TLR2 is known to activate MG alongside IFN-gamma and facilitate MG-Astro crosstalk during neurodegeneration. Greater accessibility was observed at the SLA locus for an intronic region in MG relative to other cell types ( ), and both FOXP1 and ESR1 binding sites were also found to be present in these peaks. These putative CREs suggest a general aging phenomenon in MG that could also contribute to age-related neurodegenerative diseases.

## DISCUSSION
Here, we present a large multiome study in the human brain. Our final filtered dataset contained nuclei from the PFC of over 350 neurologically normal samples aged from 15 to 100 years. We identified major cell types using canonical cell type markers. Linear regression analysis was then used across each cell type in both gene expression and chromatin accessibility datasets to identify hundreds of features associated with aging in the PFC. The resulting gene and peak sets were then probed for co-expression, chromatin co-accessibility, and TFs in each cell type to better characterize transcriptional regulatory networks and identify potential cell type-relevant CREs. This dataset provides a valuable resource for researchers to investigate transcriptional regulatory networks, integrating gene expression and chromatin accessibility data across the adult aging spectrum.
We highlighted several genes and loci previously associated with brain aging phenotypes and neurological diseases, supporting their roles in aging and suggesting links to neurodegenerative diseases. By integrating the chromatin accessibility data generated from the multiome ATAC-seq, we also generated hypotheses for how age-associated gene expression levels are regulated by changes in chromatin accessibility or TF expression. For example, we identified a peak overlapping the GMPR TSS that showed increased chromatin accessibility at older ages, which corresponded to increased gene expression in astrocytes. There were multiple peaks that also had co-accessibility scores with this peak in astrocytes and could act as CREs that modulate GMPR expression levels. As a metabolic enzyme, this gene may be a good candidate for functional studies, and CREs at this locus may be therapeutically relevant as previous studies have reported GMPR as a possible target in Alzheimer’s disease. Additionally, these data reproduce prior results from a bulk RNA-seq study in the human frontal cortex, which found VGF to have age-dependent expression in InN and suggested it as a potential therapeutic target in Alzheimer’s disease. These findings add to the evidence that VGF may play a role specifically in InN during healthy aging. The multiome analysis presented here underscores the importance of using single cell chromatin accessibility in conjunction with gene expression to characterize transcriptional regulation at the cell type level and understand the molecular pathways that lead to changes in gene expression.

## Limitations of the study
The populations used in this study are made up of samples from four different brain banks, which can introduce confounding variables to the data. Two of the brain banks from the European ancestry cohort were enriched for older individuals with short PMIs, while the African admixed cohort was made up of relatively younger individuals with a longer PMI. Although we did not detect a direct correlation between PMI and age in either modality, potential effects of these confounding variables cannot be ruled out. Additionally, single-nucleus sequencing suffers from a known set of limitations, including zero-inflated distributions, lack of fully spliced transcripts, and potential chromatin and RNA degradation postmortem; however, it remains a powerful tool for investigating CREs and transcriptional regulatory networks.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Information and reagent requests should be addressed to the lead contact, Xylena Reed, xylena.reed@nih.gov.

## Materials availability
Commercial reagents used in this study are listed in the . This study did not generate any new unique reagents.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Postmortem human brain samples
Samples (n = 202) were collected from the North American Brain Expression Consortium (NABEC) which includes individuals of European ancestry from the University of Maryland and Sun Health Brain Banks, Kentucky ADRC (dbGaP Study Accession ID phs001300). Brain tissue for the NABEC cohort were obtained from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, the NICHD Brain and Tissue Bank for Developmental Disorders at the University of Maryland, the Banner Sun Health Research Institute Brain and Body Donation Program (supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (U24 NS072026 National Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders), the National Institute on Aging (P30 AG019610 and P30 AG072980, Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Center), the Arizona Department of Health Services (contract 211002, Arizona Alzheimer’s Research Center), the Arizona Biomedical Research Commission (contracts 4001, 0011, 05–901 and 1001 to the Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium) and the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, and from the University of Kentucky Alzheimer’s Disease Center Brain Bank (supported by the National Institute on Aging P30 AG072946). The African admixed sample set (n = 155) was provided by the Human Brain Collection Core (HBCC) at the National Institute on Mental Health (ZIC MH002903). All HBCC samples were collected with broad research permissions from the next-of-kin, with procedures approved by the HBCC Oversight Committee and the NIH Department of Bioethics. Postmortem tissue research is classified as non-human subjects research by the National Institutes of Health and it does not fall under IRB jurisdiction. Age, sex, ancestry and PMI information for all samples can be found in . Sex was included as a covariate for all analyses and sex-based differences were not examined in this study.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Homogenization and isolation of single nuclei
A multiome optimized version of the published homogenization protocol – was used to collect nuclei from frozen brain tissue from the dorso-lateral prefrontal cortex. On ice, 30-50mg of tissue was homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer (Kimble, 885301-0002, 885302-0002) with 20 strokes of the loose pestle followed by 20 strokes of the tight pestle in 500uL chilled 1x Lysis Buffer 1 (10mM Tris-HCl (Sigma-Aldrich, T2194-1L), 10mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich, 5922C-500ML), 3mM MgCl2 (Sigma-Aldrich, M1028-100ML), 0.1% Nonidet P40 Substitute/IGEPAL CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich, I8896-50ML), 1mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, 646563-10X.5ML) and 1U/ul RNase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, 03335402001)). Homogenate was incubated on ice then neutralized with chilled Wash Buffer (10mM Tris-HCl, 10mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% Bovine Serum Albumin (Miltenyi Biotec, 130-091-376), 0.1% Tween 20 (BioRad, 1610781), 1mM DTT). Large debris and cell clumps were removed by passing the suspension through a 70um Flowmi Cell Strainer (SP Bel-Art, 136800070). After lysis, nuclei were collected by centrifugation through a sucrose cushion gradient. Sucrose Cushion gradients were prepared using the Nuclei PURE Prep kit (Sigma-Aldrich, NUC201-1KT). Two sucrose gradients were prepared in 2mL tubes, and the nuclei suspension was divided and carefully layered to the top of each tube containing the Sucrose Cushion Buffer 1. The tubes containing the nuclei suspension and Sucrose Cushion Buffer 1 were centrifuged at 16000 x g for 45 min at 4°C in a swinging bucket rotor. Myelin and debris were carefully removed with a 1mL pipette, and nuclei were resuspended in Wash Buffer. Suspensions were passed through a 40um Flowmi Cell Strainer (SP Bel-Art,136800040), and aliquots were combined and centrifuged at 500 x g at 4°C in a fixed angle rotor. The cell pellet was resuspended in 0.1x Lysis Buffer 2 (10mM Tris-HCl, 10mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, 1% Bovine Serum Albumin, 0.1% Nonidet P40 Substitute/IGEPAL CA-630, 0.01% Digitonin (Invitrogen, BN20061)) and incubated for two minutes on ice to permeabilize nuclei. The reaction was stopped by adding wash buffer, and nuclei were pelleted at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in PBS Buffer (PBS (Lonza, 17-516F), 1% Bovine Serum Albumin, and 1U/ul RNase inhibitor) and counted using the Denovix Cell Drop FLi with AO-PI (Denovix, CD-AO-PI-1.5). The nuclei suspension was centrifuged at 500x g for 5 min at 4°C (fixed angle), and the final nuclei pellet was resuspended in chilled Diluted Nuclei Buffer (Nuclei Buffer 20x (10X Genomics, 2000207), 1mM DTT, 1U/ul RNase inhibitor) for a concentration of 6000 nuclei/uL. Homogenization was completed in batches of eight samples.

## Library preparation and sequencing
The resulting single nucleus suspension was then put through the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression kit (10x Genomics, 1000283) and loaded on Chromium Next GEM Chip J (10x Genomics, PN-1000234) for targeted recovery of 10,000 nuclei. Single nucleus chromatin accessibility and gene expression libraries were constructed as directed in the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene Expression user guide (10x Genomics, CG000338 Rev. E). All libraries were quantified with Qubit 1X dsDNA High Sensitivity reagents (Invitrogen, Q33231). The average fragment size was determined using high sensitivity DNA D5000 screentape analysis (Agilent Technologies, 5067–5593, 5067–5592). Chromatin accessibility library region selection was between 170 and 830 bp to determine the average fragment size. Gene expression library peak size was between 400 and 500 bp with an average of 452bp. Library preparation was completed on batches of 16 samples at a time. Gene expression libraries were sequenced in batches of 40 on 3 lanes of an Illumina NovaSeq6000 S4 flow cell (150PE) aiming for 20,000 reads per nucleus (Psomagen, Rockville, MD). Chromatin accessibility libraries were sequenced in batches of 40 samples on 2 NovaSeq6000 S2 flow cells (50PE) aiming for at least 25,000 reads per nucleus. Samples were demultiplexed and fastqs generated using Cell Ranger-ARC mkfastq (v2.0.2). The resulting fastqs were aligned to the genome (chromatin accessibility, reference vhg38) or transcriptome (gene expression, reference vGRCh38-2024-A) and multiome counts tables were generated using Cell Ranger ARC count (v2.0.2).

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## Data processing
All data processing downstream of Cell Ranger ARC were performed using the pipeline scMAVERICS. We created this pipeline for enhanced reproducibility and transparency, with all code documented in a turn-key snakemake (v7.7.0) pipeline, powered by publicly available Singularity (v4.1.5) images, and publicly available GitHub repository (github.com/NIH-CARD/scMAVERICS/tree/PFC).

## Pre-processing expression data
The unfiltered raw gene expression count matrix resulting from Cell Ranger ARC for each sample was subjected to ambient RNA correction using CellBender (v0.3.0). Outputs were then converted into Scanpy objects for downstream processing and analysis (v1.12.1). This was followed by quality control filters applied to each sample matrix, number of genes detected >250, mitochondrial RNA percentage (pct_counts_mt) < 15%, and ribosomal RNA percentage (pct_counts_rb) < 15%. After previous QC filters were applied, doublet detection was performed using Scrublet (0.2.3), to compute doublet scores for each cell on a per sample level. The QC-filtered matrices for each sample were then, normalized by counts per million (cpm), followed by logarithmic scaling. Finally, all sample matrices were merged into a single atlas for further analysis. Metadata was included for each sample, including Sample ID, age of death, sex, sequencing batch, cohort, brain bank, PMI, and ancestry.

## Gene expression feature selection
QC-filtered and processed gene expression data were further filtered for highly variable regions, using the Scanpy implementation of the Seurat v3 method (v3.0.0). For expression data, we used the top 1000 highly variable genes, excluding mitochondrial and ribosomal genes, for downstream dimensionality reduction (v1.12.1). The AnnData atlas, filtered for highly variable genes, was used for downstream dimensionality reduction, while the unfiltered atlas was saved for appending the resulting dimensionality reduction parameters.

## Expression dimensionality reduction
Dimensionality reduction for gene expression data was performed independently using scVI (v1.1.1). The optimized models were trained on a neural network-based approach, with two hidden layers, 30 layers for the latent space, and 128 hidden nodes per hidden layer. Dispersion was mapped on the between batches on a per-gene level. Gene likelihood distributions were estimated to a zero-inflated negative binomial distribution, running 654 epoches to learn reduced and denoised embeddings. The resulting embedded model was used to compute nearest neighbors, followed by UMAP, utilizing the Scanpy framework (v1.12.1).

## Pre-processing chromatin accessibility data
All cells that passed expression QC were retained for subsequent chromatin accessibility processing. A filter of the minimum number of 500 fragments per cell applied in addition to the expression QC using snapATAC2 (v2.8.0). Fragments were then pseudobulked by cell type, using annotation transferred by matching cell barcodes from the corresponding gene expression atlas. Peaks were called for each cell type using the pseudobulked fragments with MACS2 (v2.0.0). AnnData objects were created using pyCisTopic (v2.0a0) on each cell by peak type. Peaks were populated by fragments occurring within the peak for each cell type; we used the cell by peak matrices for linear regression and co-accessibility analysis. To compare peaks between cell types, consensus peaks were called. Overlapping peaks between datasets were merged, where the most enriched submits were set as the new midpoint of the new 500 bp peak. Motif enrichment between cell types was calculated using this merged peak dataset snapATAC2 (v2.8.0). The merged snATACseq atlas was then used for dimensionality reduction.

## Chromatin accessibility dimensionality reduction
The peak by cell AnnData matrix, consensus peaks present in at least 5% of the total cell population were retained for dimensionality reduction. Consensus peaks were used for variational inference, assuming a poisson distribution of peak abundance, with poissonVI (v1.1.2).The optimized models were trained on a neural network based approach, with two hidden layers, 30 layers for the latent space, and 128 hidden nodes per hidden layer. Peak likelihood distributions were estimated as a logarithmic-normal distribution, running 30 epochs to learn reduced and denoised embeddings. The resulting embedded matrix was then used to compute nearest neighbors, followed by uniform manifold approximate projection (UMAP). Individual cell type parameters were applied to the resulting dimensional reduction and downstream analysis was performed.

## Weighted nearest neighbor graph construction
Nearest neighbor graphs were constructed from embeddings separately for each data type. The 20 nearest neighbors were determined based on the cosine distance. To integrate both data types, a Weighted Nearest Neighbors (WNN) approach from muon (v0.1.5) was employed, which combines information from both modalities to construct a joint nearest neighbor graph. This method leverages the complementary nature of gene expression and chromatin accessibility data to enhance the accuracy of cell type identification and clustering.

## Cell typing
UMAP embeddings were generated from gene expression, chromatin accessibility, and joint WNN graphs. Following calculation of nearest neighbors, leiden clusters, and UMAP, each dimensional reduction was applied to each of the AnnData atlases saved before filtering for highly variable genes and top 5% peaks. Over representation analysis was performed using a set of known gene markers for each cell type with the package Decoupler (v1.0.0). A Wilcox rank-sum test was used to determine which cell type best mapped to sets of cells within gene expression Leiden clusters. The number of nuclei per cell type in each sample were divided by the total number of nuclei per sample to calculate the proportion of cell types per sample, as well as the total number of nuclei per cell type.

## Gene and peak linear regression
Pseudobulked gene and peak expression were merged with a table of quantified metadata covariates. Linear regression was calculated by each cell types pseudobulked matrix using Statsmodels75 (v0.14.4) using age as the independent variable and gene expression or peaks as the dependent variable, with metadata covariates of PMI, genetic sex, cohort, and brain bank. P-values were false-discovery-corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. We then imposed significance thresholds for adjusted p-values less than 0.05 and adjusted r-squared values greater than 0.3 for genes and 0.2 for peaks. The lowered r-squared threshold for peaks reflect the sparsity of snATACseq data.

## Correlation analyses
Gene co-expression was calculated between significant hits, as described above, by Pearson correlation (v1.15.2). Clustering was then performed to search for correlations between significant gene expression, alongside networks created through StringDB (v12.0) confidence cutoff of 0.4 was imposed, and visualized with CytoScape (v3.10.3). Nodes were colored by the given gene’s linear regression slope, and radius given by −log10 adjusted p-value. Gene pathway enrichment was inferred using WEBGESTALT on genes clustered by StringDB, where an FDR cutoff of 0.05 was imposed. Peak co-accessibility was calculated using graphical Lasso likelihood estimator on the cell by peak matrix. The sparse matrix was aided by calling nearest neighbors informed meta cells through Circe (v0.3.6). Co-accessibility was displayed as arcs between peaks on locus plots. Gene-peak correlations were called from transcription factors interacting with peaks with significant age association. Correlations were calculated by Pearson correlation, followed by finding transcription factors between associated peaks using a database of ChIPseq experiments, REmap (version 4).

## Supplementary Material
123 can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2026.117110.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank donors and family members of the North American Brain Expression Consortium and the Human Brain Collection Core for providing postmortem samples. This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The contributions of the NIH author(s) are considered Works of the United States Government. The findings and conclusions presented in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the NIH or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. This research was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, in part by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), National Institutes of Health; project number ZO1 AG000545 to Andrew Singleton, and the Center for Alzheimer’s and Related Dementias. The work was also partially supported by the National Institute of Mental Health project ZIC MH002903 to Stefano Marenco and the Human Brain Collection Core. This work utilized the computational resources of the NIH STRIDES Initiative (https://cloud.nih.gov) through the Other Transaction agreement - Google Cloud Platform: OT2OD027060. This work utilized the computational resources of the NIH HPC Biowulf cluster (http://hpc.nih.gov). The graphical abstract and were created in BioRender with the assistance of Paige Jarreau.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The participation of A.C., C.A.W., S.A., and M.A.N. in this project was part of a competitive contract awarded to DataTecnica LLC by the National Institutes of Health to support open science research. M.A.N. also owns stock in Character Bio Inc. and Neuron23 Inc. Neuron23 has filed a patent related to patient selection related to precision medicine (Application PCT/US2024/028704).

## Data and code availability
The final processed multiome data matrix has been deposited at Zenodo as accession number 18394349. It is publicly available as of the date of publication. Raw sequencing data derived from NABEC samples are deposited at dbGaP as a substudy of phs001300.v6.p1 under accession number phs004202.v1.p1, and HBCC samples are available at the National Institutes of Mental Health Data Archive (NDA) under NDA collection #3151 as experiments 3056 and 3057. Prior to publication, the authors officially requested that the raw sequencing datasets reported in this paper be made publicly accessible. To request access, contact dbGaP or NDA.
All original codes used in this study have been deposited on GitHub and Zenodo at https://github.com/NIH-CARD/scMAVERICS and are publicly available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18135365 as of date of publication.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

 

## Highlights
snMultiome sequencing in multi-ancestry brain samples reveals features associated with aging
Profiles chromatin accessibility and expression for the same cells across seven cell types
Establishes a large dataset to characterize gene regulatory mechanisms in human brain cells
Nominates cell-type-specific changes in aging for functional analysis in model systems