319nihpaNatureNaturePMC577675657767565776756NIHMS9253702902259710.1038/nature24277Genetic effects on gene expression across human tissues
GTEx consortium✉Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.B. (ajbattle@cs.jhu.edu), C.D.Br. (chrbro@pennmedicine.upenn.edu), B.E.E. (bee@princeton.edu) & S.B.M. (smontgom@stanford.edu)
Lead analysts: François Aguet , , Andrew A. Brown , , , , Stephane E. Castel , , , Joe R. Davis , , , Yuan He , , Brian Jo , , Pejman Mohammadi , , , YoSon Park , , Princy Parsana , , Ayellet V. Segrè , , Benjamin J. Strober , , Zachary Zappala , , 
Laboratory, Data Analysis & Coordinating Center (LDACC): Beryl B. Cummings , , Ellen T. Gelfand , Kane Hadley , Katherine H. Huang , Monkol Lek , , Xiao Li , Jared L. Nedzel , Duyen Y. Nguyen , Michael S. Noble , Timothy J. Sullivan , Taru Tukiainen , , Daniel G. MacArthur , , Gad Getz , 
NIH program management: Anjene Addington , Ping Guan , Susan Koester , A. Roger Little , Nicole C. Lockhart , Helen M. Moore , Abhi Rao , Jeffery P. Struewing , Simona Volpi 
Biospecimen collection: Lori E. Brigham , Richard Hasz , Marcus Hunter , Christopher Johns , Mark Johnson , Gene Kopen , William F. Leinweber , John T. Lonsdale , Alisa McDonald , Bernadette Mestichelli , Kevin Myer , Bryan Roe , Michael Salvatore , Saboor Shad , Jeffrey A. Thomas , Gary Walters , Michael Washington , Joseph Wheeler , Jason Bridge , Barbara A. Foster , Bryan M. Gillard , Ellen Karasik , Rachna Kumar , Mark Miklos , Michael T. Moser , Scott D. Jewell , Robert G. Montroy , Daniel C. Rohrer , Dana Valley , Deborah C. Mash , David A. Davis 
Pathology: Leslie Sobin , Mary E. Barcus , Philip A. Branton 
eQTL manuscript working group: Nathan S. Abell , , Brunilda Balliu , Olivier Delaneau , , , Laure Frésard , Eric R. Gamazon , Diego Garrido-Martín , , Ariel D. H. Gewirtz , Genna Gliner , Michael J. Gloudemans , , Buhm Han , Amy Z. He , Farhad Hormozdiari , Xin Li , Boxiang Liu , , Eun Yong Kang , Ian C. McDowell , Halit Ongen , , , John J. Palowitch , Christine B. Peterson , Gerald Quon , , Stephan Ripke , , Ashis Saha , Andrey A. Shabalin , Tyler C. Shimko , , Jae Hoon Sul , Nicole A. Teran , , Emily K. Tsang , , Hailei Zhang , Yi-Hui Zhou , Carlos D. Bustamante , , Nancy J. Cox , Roderic Guigó , , Manolis Kellis , , Mark I. McCarthy , , , Donald F. Conrad , , Eleazar Eskin , , Gen Li , Andrew B. Nobel , Chiara Sabatti , , Barbara E. Stranger , Xiaoquan Wen , Fred A. Wright , Kristin G. Ardlie , Emmanouil T. Dermitzakis , , , Tuuli Lappalainen , 
✉Corresponding authors: Alexis Battle , , Christopher D. Brown , , Barbara E. Engelhardt , & Stephen B. Montgomery , , 
1The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
3Institute for Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iG3), University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
4Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
5New York Genome Center, New York, New York 10013, USA.
6Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
7Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
8Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
9Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.
10Lewis Sigler Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08450, USA.
11Department of Genetics and Institute for Biomedical Informatics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
12Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.
13Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
14Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
15Division of Neuroscience and Basic Behavioral Science, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
16Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research Branch, Cancer Diagnosis Program, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
17Division of Neuroscience and Behavior, National Institute on Drug Abuse, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
18Division of Genomics and Society, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
19Division of Genomic Medicine, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
20Washington Regional Transplant Community, Annandale, Virginia 22003, USA.
21Gift of Life Donor Program, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103, USA.
22LifeGift, Houston, Texas 77055, USA.
23Center for Organ Recovery and Education, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15238, USA.
24LifeNet Health, Virginia Beach, Virginia 23453, USA.
25National Disease Research Interchange, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103, USA.
26Unyts, Buffalo, New York 14203, USA.
27Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.
28Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, Michegan 49503, USA.
29Department of Neurology, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.
30Leidos Biomedical Research Inc., Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.
31Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.
32Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and Technology, 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.
33Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08002 Barcelona, Spain.
34Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 84540, USA.
35Biomedical Informatics Program, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
36Department of Convergence Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, 05505, Korea.
37Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
38Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
39Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
40Computational Biology and Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA.
41Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.
42Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
43Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.
44Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
45Center for Biomarker Research and Personalized Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.
46Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
47Bioinformatics Research Center and Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA.
48Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
49Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
50Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
51Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford University Hospitals Trust, Oxford OX3 7LE, UK.
52Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.
53Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.
54Department of Biostatistics, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
55Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
56Section of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, Center for Data Intensive Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
57Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
58Bioinformatics Research Center, Departments of Statistics and Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA.
59Department of Computer Science and Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
§These authors jointly supervised this work.
111020175507675204204–2132212018This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) licence. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons licence, users will need to obtain permission from the licence holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.The publisher's version of this article is available at NatureThis article has been corrected. See Nature. 2017 Dec 20.See commentary "Human genomics: Cracking the regulatory code." on page 190.See commentary "Taking genomics research to the next level: The Genotype-Tissue expression project." in Mov Disord, volume 33 on page 1097.See commentary "A more personal view of human-gene regulation." on page 157.See commentary "Gene expression: Principles of gene regulation across tissues." in Nat Rev Genet, 10.1038/nrg.2017.94.See commentary "Gene-expression study raises thorny ethical issues." on page 169.

## Abstract
Characterization of the molecular function of the human genome and its variation across individuals is essential for identifying the cellular mechanisms that underlie human genetic traits and diseases. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project aims to characterize variation in gene expression levels across individuals and diverse tissues of the human body, many of which are not easily accessible. Here we describe genetic effects on gene expression levels across 44 human tissues. We find that local genetic variation affects gene expression levels for the majority of genes, and we further identify inter-chromosomal genetic effects for 93 genes and 112 loci. On the basis of the identified genetic effects, we characterize patterns of tissue specificity, compare local and distal effects, and evaluate the functional properties of the genetic effects. We also demonstrate that multi-tissue, multi-individual data can be used to identify genes and pathways affected by human disease-associated variation, enabling a mechanistic interpretation of gene regulation and the genetic basis of disease.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoThe human genome encodes instructions for the regulation of gene expression, which varies both across cell types and across individuals. Recent large-scale studies have characterized the regulatory function of the genome across a diverse array of cell types, each from a small number of samples – . Measuring how gene regulation and expression vary across individuals has further expanded our understanding of the functions of healthy tissues and the molecular origins of complex traits and diseases – . However, these studies have been conducted in limited, accessible cell types, thus restricting the utility of these studies in informing regulatory biology and human health.
The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project was established to characterize human transcriptomes within and across individuals for a wide variety of primary tissues and cell types. Here, we report on a major expansion of the GTEx project that includes publicly available genotype, gene expression, histological and clinical data for 449 human donors across 44 (42 distinct) tissues. This enables the study of tissue-specific gene expression and the identification of genetic associations with gene expression levels (expression quantitative trait loci, or eQTLs) across many tissues, including both local (cis-eQTLs) and distal (trans-eQTLs) effects.
In this study, we associate genetic variants with gene expression levels from the GTEx v6p release. We found pervasive cis-eQTLs, which affect the majority of human genes. In addition, we identify trans-eQTLs across 18 tissues and highlight their increased tissue specificity relative to cis-eQTLs. We evaluate both cis- and trans-eQTLs with respect to their functional characteristics, genomic context, and relationship to disease-associated variation.

## Study design
The GTEx project has created a reference resource of gene expression levels from ‘normal’, non-diseased tissues. Every tissue sample was examined histologically; the sample was accepted for the project if the tissue was non-diseased and in the normal range for the age of the donor. RNA was isolated from postmortem samples in an ongoing manner as donors were enrolled into the study. For this data release, 44 sampled regions or cell lines were considered, each from at least 70 donors, and thereby considered suitable for eQTL analysis: 31 solid- organ tissues, 10 brain subregions including duplicates of two regions (cortex and cerebellum), whole blood, and two cell lines derived from donor blood and skin samples. We hereafter refer to these tissues, regions, and cell lines as the ‘tissues’ used in eQTL analysis. A total of 7,051 samples from 449 donors represent the GTEx v6p analysis freeze ( ; ; ; ). RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) samples were sequenced to a median depth of 78 million reads. This is 4.3 times more samples than reported in the GTEx pilot phase . DNA was genotyped at 2.2 million sites and imputed to 12.5 million sites (11.5 million autosomal and 1 million X chromosome sites) using the multi-ethnic reference panel from 1000 Genomes Project Phase 1 v3 . Sampled donors were 83.7% European American and 15.1% African American. Whole-genome sequencing was performed for 148 donors to a mean coverage greater than 30×, and all donors were exome-sequenced to a mean coverage over captured exons of 80×. The resulting data provide the deepest survey of individual- and tissue- specific gene expression to date, enabling a comprehensive view of the impact of genetic variation on gene expression levels. All data are available from dbGaP (accession phs000424.v6.p1) with multiple data views publicly available from the GTEx Portal (www.gtexportal.org).
 

## Expression QTLs across human tissues
We identified associations between the expression levels of all expressed genes (eGenes) and genetic variants (eVariants) located within 1 Mb of the target gene’s transcription start site (TSS), which we refer to as cis-eQTLs for convenience, without requiring evidence of allelic effects at each locus. However, the majority of cis-eQTLs do exhibit allele specific expression. We applied a linear model controlling for ancestry, sex, genotyping platform and latent factors in the expression data for each tissue that may reflect batch or other technical variables (see Methods; , and ). Considering all tissues, we found a total of 152,869 cis-eQTLs for 19,725 genes, representing 50.3% and 86.1% of all known autosomal long intergenic noncoding RNA (lincRNA) and protein-coding genes, respectively ( ). We identified a median of 2,816 autosomal protein-coding or lincRNA eGenes at a 5% false discovery rate (FDR) within each tissue ( ). Protein-coding genes without a cis-eQTL in any tissue were more likely to be expressed at low levels or loss-of-function intolerant and were enriched for functions related to development and environmental response, indicating specific contexts in which additional eQTLs may be identified ( ). To identify cis-eGenes affected by more than one functional regulatory variant, we applied forward–backward stepwise regression (see Methods). This approach identified an additional 24,886 secondary cis-eQTLs, with 41.2% of protein-coding genes and 24.8% of lincRNAs having multiple, conditionally independent eVariants in at least one tissue ( ).
To identify trans-eQTLs, we tested for association between every protein-coding or lincRNA gene and all autosomal variants where the gene and variant were on different chromosomes. To minimize false positives in trans-eQTL detection, we controlled for the same observed and inferred confounders as in the cis-eQTL analysis, and further removed genes with poor mappability, variants in repetitive regions, and trans-eQTLs between pairs of genomic loci with evidence of RNA-seq read cross-mapping due to sequence similarity. Applying this approach, we identified 673 trans-eQTLs at a 10% genome-wide FDR. This includes 112 distinct loci (R2 ≤ 0.2) and 93 unique genes (94 total gene associations, including a trans-eGene detected in both testis and thyroid) in 16 tissues ( , , , and ). An alternative approach to quantifying FDR at the gene level ( and ) identified 46 genes at 10% FDR, with estimated q values of less than 0.4 for all 94 gene associations identified using the genome-wide FDR . By investigating long-range intra-chromosomal eQTLs (≥5 Mb from the TSS), we discovered an additional 33 eGenes (10% FDR; and ). We found decaying support for cis-regulation (or interaction between cis- and trans-effects) over increased genomic distances based on evidence of allelic effects ( ). Evidence of cis-regulation fell below background levels between 0.85 and 1.3 Mb from the TSS, empirically supporting the conventional distance threshold of 1 Mb for cis-eQTL detection.
As expected, sample size greatly affects eQTL mapping. Discovery of eGenes increased with sample size with no evidence of saturation at the full sample size for each tissue ( ). The tissue with the highest number of identified cis-eGenes was tibial nerve, with 8,087 eGenes in 256 samples. Testis had the most trans-eGenes, with 35 eGenes in 157 samples ( ), consistent with the elevated number of expressed genes (16,853 protein-coding genes and 4,362 lincRNA genes) and cis-eGenes (6,796 genes). Continued discovery of eGenes with increasing sample size suggests that the expression of nearly all genes is influenced by genetic variation ( ). We further observed that, for sub-sampled data ranging from 70 to 250 donors, sample size was a more significant contributor than additional tissues to the discovery of novel cis-eGenes ( ). For trans-eQTL mapping, we used informed subsets of variants to reduce the number of tests by one to three orders of magnitude ( and ). We found statistical power to detect additional associations in these restricted tests, such as the test restricted to cis-eVariants. Our results indicate that ongoing increases in sample size will continue to yield additional eQTLs, both in the cis-eQTL setting, where smaller and conditionally independent effects will be identified, and in the trans-eQTL setting, where statistical power is the main limitation.

## Allele-specific expression across human tissues
The effect of cis-regulatory variation can also be quantified by allele- specific expression (ASE) analyses obtained by measuring the allelic imbalance of RNA-seq reads at transcribed heterozygous sites. A large-scale, multi-tissue resource of ASE estimates complements eQTL mapping by providing access to individual-specific effects, which assists in the interpretation of rare variants, somatic mutations and patterns of imprinting , , . We measured ASE at more than 135 million sites across tissues and donors, with a median of over 10,000 genes quantified per donor ( and ). In total, 63% of all protein-coding genes could be tested for ASE in at least one donor and tissue, with 54% exhibiting significant allelic imbalance (binomial test, 5% FDR, |effect size| ≥ 1, ). Overall, 88% of testable genes had significant allelic imbalance in at least one donor (binomial test, 5% FDR), demonstrating an abundance of cis-linked regulatory effects. Per donor, a median of 1,963 genes had significant allelic imbalance in at least one tissue, with a median of 570 genes where the donor was not heterozygous for a top eVariant, suggesting more complex or rarer regulatory effects at these loci.

## Tissue-sharing and specificity of eQTLs
The extensive and diverse tissue sampling allowed us to develop a global view of how genetic effects vary between tissues of the human body by evaluating the sharing of eQTLs across tissues. We performed a meta-analysis across all 44 tissues for both cis- and trans-eQTLs to assess eQTL sharing between tissues. To do so, we applied Meta-Tissue , a linear mixed model that allows for heterogeneity in effect sizes across tissues and controls for correlated expression measurements that result from collecting multiple tissues from the same donors. For each eQTL, we estimated the posterior probability that the effect is shared in each tissue (m value). For both cis- and trans-eQTLs, we observed patterns that reflected relationships between related tissues and concordance between cis and trans in estimates of tissue similarity ( , and ). The strongest broad pattern observed was the high correlation among brain tissues (median Spearman’s ρ of 0.584 (cis) and 0.241 (trans)) and among non-brain tissues (median Spearman’s ρ of 0.606 (cis) and 0.165 (trans)), with much lower correlation observed between these two groups (median Spearman’s ρ of 0.499 (cis) and 0.096 (trans)). Within non-brain tissues, we observed strong correlation among closely related tissues, such as arterial tissues (median Spearman’s ρ of 0.743 (cis) and 0.264 (trans)), skeletal muscle and heart tissues (median Spearman’s ρ of 0.672 (cis) and 0.184 (trans)), and skin tissues (Spearman’s ρ of 0.804 (cis) and 0.365 (trans)). Overall, the median pairwise correlation between tissues was 0.547 (cis) and 0.138 (trans).
 The patterns of sharing were also supported by replication between single-tissue cis-eQTLs, estimated by π1 (the proportion of true positives ) among the eQTLs identified in one tissue and then tested for replication in a second tissue ( , median π1 = 0.740). The patterns held even when accounting for variable number of overlapping donors among pairs of tissues in the GTEx study design ( ). cis-eQTLs exhibited a distinctly bimodal pattern of tissue sharing—they were likely to be either shared across most of the 44 tissues or specific to a small subset of tissues ( ). This bimodality was further supported by three different methods: simple overlap of the single tissue eQTLs, a hierarchical multiple comparison procedure (treeQTL ), and an empirical Bayes model (MT-eQTL ; ). Each method also demonstrated that cis-eQTLs discovered in tissues with larger sample sizes were more often tissue-specific; however, estimates of tissue-specificity for large sample-size tissues can be influenced by difficulty in replicating small effect-size eQTLs in tissues with fewer samples.
Overall, we observed much greater tissue specificity for trans-eQTLs than a set of FDR-matched cis-eQTLs ( ); this observation was robust to choices of m value threshold and selection criteria for matching cis-eQTLs ( ). While 3.8% of trans-eQTLs were shared across three or more tissues at m > 0.9, 25.3% of FDR-matched cis-eQTLs were shared. The extensive tissue-specificity of trans-eQTLs was also supported by a hierarchical approach for FDR control , where we found no trans-eQTLs shared across more than one tissue ( ). Our estimate of increased tissue specificity for trans-eQTLs agreed with the minimal sharing of trans effects reported in previous eQTL studies with fewer tissues , , and greatly exceeds what would be expected on the basis of replication between tissues for cis-eQTLs of matched minor allele frequency (MAF) and effect size (Wilcoxon rank sum test; P ≤ 2.2×10−16 for all choices of replication FDR; ). Given the greater tissue-specificity of trans-eQTLs, we note that heterogeneity in cellular composition of bulk tissue samples is one important confounder that may reduce power to detect trans-eQTLs, or even lead to false positive associations . Despite the high tissue-specificity, we did observe a small number of tissue-shared trans-eQTLs, including rs7683255, which was moderately associated in trans with NUDT13 across most tested GTEx tissues with a consistent direction of effect ( ). We also found examples of trans-eQTLs shared across a subset of related tissues, such as an association between rs60413914 and RMDN3, a gene with increased expression levels in brain regions as compared to other tissue types, and for which the trans-eQTL had moderate effects in all tested brain regions but no strong effect in other tissues ( ).
Multi-tissue cis-eQTL analyses have been shown to increase power by explicitly modelling sharing patterns across tissues , , . We did not observe an improvement in power for trans-eQTL discovery, consistent with the limited sharing observed across tissues ( ). However, we did observe improvements for cis-eQTL discovery, particularly among tissues with smaller sample sizes ( ). To ensure that these findings did not depend on the modelling assumptions of Meta-Tissue, we analysed the P values for all genes and all tissues with treeQTL, which controls the FDR of eGene discoveries across tissues . This procedure identified 17,411 cis-eGenes at 5% FDR, 2,314 fewer eGenes than with the single-tissue analysis. Although this analysis is more conservative overall than the tissue-by-tissue analysis, we observed an increase in the number of eGenes detected in the tissues with the smallest sample sizes, including several brain regions, as well as an increase in the average number of tissues in which an eGene was detected (from 7.8 for single-tissue analysis to 8.3; ). Additional cis-eGenes identified through meta-analysis were more likely to be significant as sample size increased compared to similar numbers of eGenes identified using a less stringent single- tissue FDR ( ). This suggests that one strategy for increasing power in studies of inaccessible or sample-limited cell types would be to analyse them jointly with data from GTEx tissues.

## Functional characterization of cis-eQTLs
To characterize the biological properties of multi-tissue cis-eQTLs, we annotated discovered eVariants using chromatin state predictions from 128 cell types sampled by the Roadmap Epigenomics project . eVariants were enriched in predicted promoter and enhancer states across all Roadmap cell types ( ). However, the eVariants exhibited significantly greater enrichment in promoters and enhancers from matched tissues (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P ≤ 9.3 ×10−4, ), illustrating consistent patterns of tissue specificity for cis-regulatory elements and eQTLs ( ). Furthermore, eQTL activity was significantly more likely to be shared across pairs of tissues when the eVariant overlaps the same chromatin state in both tissues (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P ≤ 5.0×10−5, ).
 Integration of genomic annotations such as chromatin state has been demonstrated to improve power for eQTL discovery , – . For 26 GTEx tissues matched with cell-type specific annotations from the Roadmap Epigenomics project, we applied a Bayesian hierarchical model for eQTL discovery by incorporating variant-level genomic annotations that provided a substantial boost to discovery power. Inclusion of genomic annotations (enhancers, promoters and distance to the TSS) increased the total number of cis-eQTL discoveries by an average of 43% (or 1,200 genes) per tissue ( ), demonstrating the considerable advantage of integrating genomic annotations into eQTL mapping models.
Conditionally independent (secondary) cis-eQTL signals were located further from the TSS (median distance 50.1 kb from the TSS, compared to 28.9 kb for primary eQTLs; Wilcoxon rank sum test, P ≤ 2.2×10−16). However, similar to primary eVariant associations, secondary eVariants were enriched for chromosomal contact with target eGene promoters, as determined through Hi-C, compared to background variant–TSS pairs ( ). This suggests that, despite their sequence-based distance from the TSS, primary and secondary eVariants are in close physical contact with their target gene promoters via chromatin looping interactions. While primary eVariants were significantly more enriched in promoters than enhancers, secondary associations exhibit increased enhancer enrichment, consistent with their increased distance from the TSS and tissue-restricted activity (Wilcoxon rank sum test, P ≤ 2.2×10−16, ).
To identify causal variants that are likely to underlie cis-eQTLs, we applied two computational fine-mapping strategies , ( and ). First, we identified 90% credible sets (that is, the collection of variants with 90% probability of containing all causal variants) for each eGene in each tissue using CAVIAR . Across all tissues, the mean credible set size was 29 variants (per tissue means ranged from 25 to 31). Second, we estimated the probability that each eVariant is a causal variant using CaVEMaN . Across tissues, between 3.5% and 11.7% of top eVariants were predicted to be causal variants (causal probability P > 0.8). Consistent with variants with high causal probabilities being functional regulatory variants (as opposed to linkage disequilibrium proxies), 24.3% of eVariants with causal probabilities in the top tenth percentile (0.77 <P < 1) lay in open chromatin regions, while only 6.56% of eVariants in the lowest tenth percentile (0.0266 <P < 0.189) lay in such regions ( ).
To determine the effect sizes of cis-eQTLs, we used allelic fold change, a method that assumes an additive model of eQTL alleles on total gene expression, allowing for interpretation of effect sizes as a fold change between alleles ( ). 17.4% of eGenes had cis-eQTLs with median effect sizes of at least twofold across tissues ( ). The prevalence of many ≥ twofold effects highlights the large impacts that common regulatory variants can have on gene dosage. cis-eVariants at canonical splice sites exhibited the strongest effects, followed by variants in noncoding transcripts, while variants in the 3′ UTR had the weakest effects ( ).
Analysis of eQTL effect sizes around the TSS demonstrated that, as a group, upstream variants had the strongest effects, while those within transcripts had the weakest effects ( ). This suggests that eVariants that are likely to affect transcription have stronger effects on gene expression levels than variants that are likely to affect post-transcriptional regulation of mRNA levels. A notable exception is splice site and stop-gained variants, which make up a small number of total eQTLs but have large effects on expression levels (presumably owing to nonsense-mediated decay). When genes are stratified by the number of tissues in which they are expressed, the average effect size decreases as the number of tissues increases, indicating that genes expressed in greater numbers of tissues are less likely to have eQTLs with large regulatory effects (Spearman’s ρ =−0.29, P ≤ 2.2×10−16; ).
ASE provides an independent measure of a cis-eVariant’s effect size. We estimated the effects of the primary eVariant for each eGene by applying allelic fold change to ASE measurements (see Methods). Effect size estimates from both total and allele-specific expression approaches were highly correlated (mean Spearman’s ρ =0.82, s.d.= 2%) with an average ratio of eQTL effect sizes to ASE effect sizes of 0.937 (s.d. =6%; ). This observation suggests that cis-eQTLs and ASE capture the same regulatory effects.

## Functional characterization of trans-eQTLs
To better understand the cellular mechanisms of trans-eQTLs, we characterized several of their functional properties. Of the 673 trans-eQTLs from the genome-wide analysis, 161 also had a cis-association (at a cis P value threshold of P ≤ 1.0×10−5) with 113 unique variants, yielding the set of 296 unique trios of an eVariant, a cis-eGene and a trans-eGene. This suggests a common mechanism for trans regulation in which the eVariant directly regulates expression of a nearby gene whose protein product then affects other genes downstream. Considering this observation, we ran a restricted test for trans-associations, limiting variants to the set of significant cis-eVariants ( ). From this, we identified a total of 33 trans-eGenes (10% FDR) among this subset of tests, 14 of which were not discovered in the genome-wide analysis ( ). There were substantially more trans-eQTLs at 50% FDR from this cis-eVariant restricted test than random variants matched for MAF and distance to TSS and stratified by tissue (Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel test, P ≤ 2.2×10−16).
We performed Mendelian randomization on the full set of 296 trans-eQTLs matched with a unique corresponding cis-eGene, measuring the causal impact of the cis-eGene on the trans-eGene, using the eVariant as the randomized instrumental variable ( ). For trans-eQTLs with a cis-eGene, we observed strong evidence for regulation of the trans-eGene expression via the cis-eGene ( ; P values ranging from P ≤ 3.0 × 10−5 to P ≤ 2.2 × 10−16). trans- eVariants with no cis-eGene may alter protein function, may reflect false negatives in the cis association test, or may arise from unmeasured regulatory mechanisms. Protein-coding loci were not enriched among our trans-eVariants (odds ratio 0.94; Fisher’s exact test, P ≤ 0.80), suggesting that modification of protein function is not the dominant mechanism for trans-eQTL effects.
 We investigated whether trans-eVariants were each associated with numerous target genes, which may reflect broad effects of regulatory loci, as have been reported in model organisms , . Disambiguating true broad regulatory effects from artefacts remains an important challenge . In our primary analysis, we applied aggressive correction of potential confounders, controlling for 15–35 probabilistic estimation of expression residuals (PEER) factors capturing 59–78% of total variance in gene expression levels ( ). However, PEER and related approaches may also remove variance in gene expression levels arising from regulatory pathways and broad trans effects. Indeed, several loci with numerous associations were found in uncorrected data, but disappeared after controlling for PEER factors ( ). Associations found in uncorrected data are likely to include many false positives for three reasons: 1) the PEER factors were strongly associated with known technical confounders ( and ); 2) trans-eVariants identified from raw data and lost after correction were enriched for association with technical covariates ( ); and 3) no other parameter setting clearly optimized trans-eQTL discovery ( ). Even after PEER correction, we observed evidence of eVariants with multiple targets; at genome-wide significance, four separate loci were associated with more than one trans-eGene each ( ).
We quantified the enrichment of trans-eVariants in promoter and enhancer regions using the same tissue-specific annotations from the Roadmap Epigenomics project , used for cis-eQTL analysis ( ). trans-eVariants (10% FDR) were enriched in cell-type matched enhancers (median Fisher’s exact test, P ≤ 2.2 ×10−3) but not strongly enriched for promoters (median P ≤ 0.22), compared to randomly selected variants matched by distance to nearest TSS, MAF and chromosome ( ). trans-eVariants were more enriched than cis-eVariants at matched FDR (Wilcoxon rank sum test, promoter: P ≤ 4.6 ×10−7; enhancer: P ≤ 2.2 ×10−16). Stronger effect sizes are needed to detect trans-eVariants at the same FDR, but even comparing to a matched number of the strongest cis-eVariants, we observed greater enrichment in enhancer (but not promoter) regions among trans-eVariants, consistent with greater tissue-specificity of enhancer activity and trans-eVariants ( ).
Given the large number of trans-eQTLs detected in testis, we investigated their possible regulatory mechanisms in more detail. Piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) are small 24–31-bp RNAs that bind to piwi-class proteins and silence mobile elements by RNA degradation and DNA methylation. PiRNAs are strongly expressed in testis and may regulate gene expression and play a role in protection against transposable elements in germ line cells . We tested for enrichment of trans-eVariants in piRNA clusters identified in testis . We found that 38.6% of testis trans-eVariants, corresponding to 12 independent loci (R2 ≤ 0.2), directly overlapped piRNA clusters, a significant enrichment compared to the 2.5% of the genome covered by these regions (permutation test, P ≤ 1.0 × 10−4). In aggregate, eVariants from all tissues were enriched in piRNA clusters (permutation test, P ≤1.0×10−4), but this appeared to be almost entirely driven by testis eQTLs ( ). This suggests a testis-specific functional effect of genetic variation in piRNA clusters, consistent with their biological role.

## Replication of eQTLs
To assess the replicability of the identified cis-eQTLs, we compared our results to four matched tissues from the Twins UK project ( ). The vast majority of GTEx cis-eQTLs replicated at 5% FDR ( ; 84% in whole blood, 87% in subcutaneous adipose, 94% in lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), and 93% in sun-protected skin). trans-eQTLs have not replicated consistently in human studies, compared to cis-eQTLs , – , owing in part to insufficient statistical power and a limited number of studies with comparable tissues and cohorts, but also reflecting potential false positive associations. We tested trans-eQTLs discovered at 10% FDR in GTEx for replication in the TwinsUK data. Five hundred and sixty GTEx trans-eQTLs were testable in the four TwinsUK tissues and, of these, three trans-eQTLs replicated at 10% FDR ( ). Despite the small number that individually replicated, in aggregate, the full set of trans-eQTLs demonstrated significantly greater replication than expected by chance (Wilcoxon rank sum test on association P values compared to uniform; P ≤3.05 ×10−5 for 16 tests in matched tissues; P ≤2.2 ×10−16 for 2,176 tests across all four TwinsUK tissues). In addition, aggregate replication of trans-eQTLs was significantly stronger for matched tissue types than for unmatched tissue types (Wilcoxon rank sum test; P ≤1.54×10−4; ).
Finally, we replicated two tissue-specific trans-eQTLs highlighted in the TwinsUK Multiple Tissue Human Expression Resource (MuTHER) study , (n = 845 donors in three tissues: subcutaneous adipose, LCLs and skin). First, in sun-exposed skin in GTEx, rs289750 was associated in cis with NLRC5 (association P ≤4.7 ×10 −16) and in trans with TAP1 (association P ≤9.0 ×10 −10, 4.3% FDR in the cis-eQTL restricted trans-eQTL discovery set), while the TwinsUK study found rs289749 (located 469 bp away from rs289750; R2 =0.918) associated in skin samples with NLRC5 in cis (association P ≤2.2 ×10 −16) (ref. ) and TAP1 in trans (tensor association P ≤4.3 ×10 −7) (ref. ). Second, the MuTHER study identified a master regulator in subcutaneous adipose, rs4731702, associated with the maternally expressed cis target gene KLF14, which encodes the transcription factor Kruppel-like factor , . cis-eQTL rs4731702 showed enriched association with genes that are relevant in metabolic phenotypes, such as cholesterol levels. In the GTEx data, rs4731702 is in strong linkage disequilibrium with two variants, rs13234269 and rs35722851 (R2 =0.98 and 0.99, respectively), that are cis-eQTLs for KLF14 in subcutaneous adipose (P ≤2.2×10−5 and P ≤4.7×10−5, respectively). We evaluated the association of rs13234269 with all expressed genes in GTEx subcutaneous adipose (17,633 genes). Although we found no individually significant trans-eGenes, we found an enrichment of association with distal gene expression in subcutaneous adipose tissue (π1 =0.07, after PEER correction), replicating the results of the MuTHER study.

## Expression QTLs and complex disease associations
Overlaps between genome-wide association study (GWAS) associations and eQTLs have provided important insights into regulatory genes and variants for a wide range of complex traits and diseases . As both the presence and extent of overlap between GWAS and eQTLs can be tissue- specific, the current phase of GTEx overcomes a major limitation in interpretation of disease variants by enabling analysis across a broad range of tissues.
We observed that the degree of tissue sharing of an eQTL is associated with several indicators of phenotypic impact. Tissue-shared eGenes are depleted from loss-of-function mutation-intolerant genes (as curated by ExAC ) ( ), consistent with purifying selection removing large-effect regulatory variants that involve many tissues. Tissue-shared eGenes were also less likely than tissue-specific eGenes to be annotated disease genes (Fisher’s exact test, nominal P ≤10−6 for GWAS, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM), and loss-of-function-intolerant gene sets; , ), highlighting the importance of broad tissue sampling for GWAS interpretation.
 This broad tissue sampling affects the use of eQTL data for the interpretation of GWAS variants. We observed that a GWAS variant of interest is likely to be a cis-eQTL by chance. Of all common variants assayed within GTEx, 92.7% are nominally associated with the expression of one or more genes in one or more tissues (P < 0.05) and nearly 50% are significant when correcting for the number of tissues tested ( ). Furthermore, linking an eQTL signal to a specific gene becomes increasingly complicated with abundant eQTL data. Some variants are associated with more than 30 different nearby genes ( ). Furthermore, even restricting to strong associations (P <10−10 in each tissue), for over 10% of eVariants, the gene with the strongest association varies between tissues ( ; ). These results reinforce the need for caution when using eQTL data to interpret the function of GWAS variants.
To assess the extent to which GTEx cis-eQTLs are responsible for common phenotypic variation, we applied co-localization analysis to examine local linkage disequilibrium and sharing of association signals using GWAS summary statistics across 21 traits – ( ). Among tested loci, 52% of trait-associated variants co- localized with an eQTL in one or more tissues ( ). Importantly, no single tissue explained the majority of trait-associated loci, but the breadth of GTEx tissue sampling identified more co-localizations than any single tissue alone. Seven per cent and 93% of co-localizations are with lincRNA and protein-coding eGenes, respectively, suggesting that lincRNAs have a limited role in common disease pathogenesis. However, several findings complicate the interpretation of GWAS–eQTL overlaps. First, 26% of GWAS loci co-localize with more than one distinct eGene (that is, half of all co-localized loci). Second, GWAS co-localized eGenes are shared across an average of four tissues. Third, similar to lead eVariants, only 40% of GWAS signals co-localize with their nearest expressed gene, a finding that has important implications for the functional characterization of GWAS results.
Genetic variants associated with complex traits have been suggested to be enriched for trans-eQTLs , – . Accordingly, we performed trans-eQTL mapping, restricting it to variants associated with a complex trait in a GWAS ( ). In this analysis, across the 44 tissues, we found 29 trans-eQTL associations involving 24 unique variants and 25 unique genes (10% FDR; ), each specific to a single tissue. There were more trans-eVariants at 50% FDR with association in at least one tissue when testing was restricted to trait-associated variants compared with random variants matched by MAF and distance to TSS (Fisher’s exact test, P ≤1.3×10−3).
Among trait-associated variants with trans-eQTL effects, we found two genome-wide significant trans-eVariants at the 9q22 locus (rs7037324 and rs1867277, R2 = 0.74) with thyroid-specific associations in trans with TMEM253 and ARFGEF3 (P ≤ 2.2 × 10−16 for both with rs1867277; and ). The 9q22 locus has previously been linked to multiple thyroid-specific diseases including goitre, hypothyroidism and thyroid cancer , , and loss-of- function mutations in a thyroid-specific transcription factor at this locus, FOXE1, manifest as ectopic thyroid tissue or cleft palate in developing mice. However, the mechanism of any cis-effects of these trans-eVariants remains uncertain from the GTEx data; a post hoc analysis demonstrated that PEER correction removed broad regulatory signals from the 9q22 locus, and particularly from cis- and trans-eQTL signals for FOXE1 ( ). In PEER-corrected data, cis- and trans-eQTL signals co-localized for another cis-eGene in 9q22, TRMO, for both trans-eGenes (posterior probability >0.99). Mendelian randomization analysis of the PEER-corrected data supported the idea that TRMO regulates TMEM253 (P ≤1.3×10−9) and ARFGEF3 (P ≤2.1×10−11) based on trans-eVariant rs1867277. By contrast, FOXE1 had weak Mendelian randomization support in the PEER-corrected data. Despite the ambiguity of cis-mediation, the locus is one of the strongest trans-eQTL signals in GTEx. We further replicated both the broad regulatory effect and specific target genes of this locus in 498 primary thyroid cancer RNA-seq samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; , ).
 In a second example, two muscle-specific trans-eVariants at the 5q31 locus (rs2706381 and rs1012793; R2 = 0.84) were associated in trans with PSME1 (P ≤1.1×10−11) and PARP10 (P ≤7.8×10−10), and in cis with IRF1 (P ≤2.0×10−10; ), a transcription factor that facilitates regulation of the interferon-induced immune response , . Both variants are associated with circulating fibrinogen levels and influence muscle injury, Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis , , and have been shown to drive fibrosis in DMD, where they promote expression of IL1B and TGFB1 . These variants were moderately associated with numerous genes in skeletal muscle (50 trans-eGenes at 20% FDR, assessed only among the three variants; ). Additional candidate target genes (at 20% FDR) were enriched in multiple immune pathways from MsigDB ( ). Mendelian randomization analysis supported the idea that IRF1 regulates PSME1 (P ≤3.1×10−8) and PARP10 (P ≤1.9×10−7) through cis-eVariant rs2706381 with a consistent direction of effect ( ). Moreover, the cis-eQTL signal for IRF1 co-localized with the trans-eQTL signals for both trans-eGenes ( ; posterior probability >0.99) . Together, these results suggest that cis-regulatory loci affecting IRF1 are regulators of interferon-responsive inflammatory processes involving genes including PSME1 and PARP10, with implications for complex traits specific to muscle tissue.

## Discussion
Since the initial sequencing of the human genome, extensive effort has been devoted to the characterization of genome function and phenotypic consequences of genetic variation. Describing the effects of genetic variation on gene expression levels across tissues is a critical but challenging component of this goal. Here, we describe advances enabled by the GTEx project v6p data, which provide a comprehensive survey of gene expression and the impact of genetic variation on gene expression across diverse human tissues. We report widespread cis-eQTLs in 44 tissues and trans-eQTLs in 18 tissues. cis-acting genetic variants tend to affect either most tissues or a small number of tissues. By contrast, identified trans-eQTL effects tend to be tissue-specific and correspondingly show greater enrichment in enhancer regions. By integrating GTEx data with summary statistics from diverse GWAS, we observed that half of complex trait- associated loci co-localize with a GTEx eQTL. GTEx data have already served as a valuable community resource for the identification of the tissue-specific regulatory effects underlying variants associated with human disease phenotypes – .
Additional papers from the GTEx consortium for the v6p data describe the impact of rare genetic variation on gene expression , methods for analysis of transcriptome data , the discovery and characterization of regulatory networks across tissues , and analyses of diverse regulatory processes such as RNA editing and X-inactivation . To enable ongoing use of the GTEx data, summary-level expression data and eQTLs across all tissues are available from the GTEx Portal (www.gtexportal.org), while all individual-level raw data have been deposited in dbGaP (accession phs000424.v6.p1).
There are both opportunities and challenges as efforts to characterize genome function grow in scope and scale. The discovery and characterization of eQTLs in these data required careful data modelling to account for confounders and to characterize statistical discovery. We anticipate that complementary analyses with novel methods, enabled by the public availability of these data, may reveal additional insights. Despite the scope of these data, we remain underpowered to detect trans-eQTLs. Larger cohorts of individuals with a smaller number of tissues have yielded hundreds of trans-eGenes , , , , and we similarly expect trans-eQTL discoveries to increase with additional samples in the final phase of GTEx. Furthermore, some genetic effects may manifest only within a specific cell type, rather than an entire heterogeneous tissue. Both computational and experimental methods, such as deconvolution methods and single-cell sequencing as part of the proposed Human Cell Atlas and related projects, promise to improve resolution to identify precise cell type-specific regulatory effects . Future aims of the GTEx project include increased sample size, with cis-eQTLs from 53 tissues across 714 donors, now available in the v7 release, and plans to include approximately 1,000 donors in the final data release. Additional plans include the collection of complementary molecular data on subsets of samples, including epigenetic and protein data, with the Enhanced GTEx (eGTEx) project, enabling an increasingly complete picture of epigenetic and regulatory variant diversity across human tissues . We expect that the continued expansion of the GTEx resource, and its integration with other efforts capturing diverse data types, will be an essential asset for the study of gene regulatory mechanisms and how these contribute to human traits and diseases.

## METHODS
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized, and investigators were not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

## Sample procurement
All human donors were deceased. Informed consent was obtained for all donors via next-of-kin consent to permit the collection and banking of de-identified tissue samples for scientific research. The research protocol was reviewed by Chesapeake Research Review Inc., Roswell Park Cancer Institute’s Office of Research Subject Protection, and the institutional review board of the University of Pennsylvania. Complete descriptions of the donor enrolment and consent process, as well as biospecimen procurement, methods, sample fixation, and histopathological review procedures, have been described previously , . In brief, whole blood was collected from each donor, along with fresh skin samples, for DNA genotyping, RNA expression, and culturing of lymphoblastoid and fibroblast cells, and shipped overnight to the GTEx Laboratory Data Analysis and Coordination Center (LDACC) at the Broad Institute. Two adjacent aliquots were then prepared from each sampled tissue and preserved in PAXgene tissue kits. One of each paired sample was embedded in paraffin (PFPE) for histopathological review and the second was shipped to the LDACC for processing and molecular analysis. Brains were collected from approximately one-third of the donors, and were shipped on ice to the brain bank at the University of Miami, where eleven brain sub-regions were sampled and flash-frozen. These samples were also shipped to the LDACC for processing and analysis.
All DNA genotyping was performed on blood-derived DNA samples, unless these were unavailable, in which case a tissue-derived DNA sample was substituted. RNA was extracted from all tissues and RNA sequencing was performed on all samples with an RNA integrity number (RIN) of 5.7 or higher and with at least 500 ng total RNA. Nucleic acid isolation protocols and sample QC metrics applied are as described ( ).

## Data production
Non-strand specific, polyA+ selected RNA-seq libraries were generated using the Illumina TruSeq protocol. Libraries were sequenced to a median depth of 78 million 76-bp paired-end reads. RNA-seq reads were aligned to the human genome (hg19/GRCh37) using TopHat (v1.4) based on GENCODE v19 annotations. This annotation is available on the GTEx Portal (gencode.v19. genes.v6p_model.patched_contigs.gtf.gz, available at https://www.gtexportal.org/home/datasets). Gene-level expression was estimated as reads per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads (RPKM) using RNA-SeQC on uniquely mapped, properly paired reads fully contained within exon boundaries and with alignment distances ≤ 6. Samples with fewer than 10 million mapped reads or with outlier expression measurements based on the D statistic were removed .
DNA from 450 donors was genotyped using Illumina Human Omni 2.5M and 5M Beadchips. Genotypes were phased and imputed with SHAPEIT2 and IMPUTE2 , respectively, using multi-ethnic panel reference from 1000 Genomes Project Phase 3 . Variants were excluded from analysis if they: 1) had a call rate < 95%; 2) had minor allele frequencies < 1%; 3) deviated from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium (P <1.0×10−6); or 4) had an imputation info score <0.4. The final genotyped and imputed array VCF (file format v4.1) for autosomal variants contains genotype posterior probabilities for each of the three possible genotypes for 11,552,519 variants across 450 GTEx donors. The dosages of the alternative alleles relative to the human reference genome hg19 were used as the genotype measure for subsequent eQTL analysis. In addition to array-based genotyping, 148 and 524 donors were whole-genome and exome sequenced, respectively. Additional details on genotyping, imputation and sequencing can be found in the .

## cis-eQTL mapping
We conducted cis-eQTL mapping within the 44 tissues with at least 70 samples each. Only genes with ten or more donors with expression estimates > 0.1 RPKM and an aligned read count of six or more within each tissue were considered significantly expressed and used for cis-eQTL mapping. Within each tissue, the distribution of RPKMs in each sample was quantile-transformed using the average empirical distribution observed across all samples. Expression measurements for each gene in each tissue were subsequently transformed to the quantiles of the standard normal distribution. The effects of unobserved confounding variables on gene expression were quantified with PEER , run independently for each tissue. Fifteen PEER factors were identified for tissues with fewer than 150 samples; 30 for tissues with sample sizes between 150 and 250; and 35 for tissues with more than 250 tissues. The covariates that were most consistently associated with PEER factors include factors related to parameters of donor death, ischaemic time, RIN and sequencing quality control metrics. In addition, we have observed that little, if any, genetic signal is present in the PEER factors ( ).
Within each tissue, cis-eQTLs were identified by linear regression, as implemented in FastQTL , adjusting for PEER factors, sex, genotyping platform, and three genotype-based principal components (PCs). We restricted our search to variants within 1 Mb of the TSS of each gene and, in the tissue of analysis, minor allele frequencies ≥0.01 with the minor allele observed in at least 10 samples. Nominal P values for each variant–gene pair were estimated using a two-tailed t-test. The significance of the most highly associated variant per gene was determined from empirical P values, extrapolated from a Beta distribution fitted to adaptive permutations with the setting –permute 1000 10000. These empirical P values were subsequently corrected for multiple testing across genes using Storey’s q value method . To identify the list of all significant variant–gene pairs associated with eGenes, variants with a nominal P value below the gene-level threshold were considered significant and included in the final list of variant–gene pairs.

## trans-eQTL mapping
Matrix eQTL was used to test all autosomal variants (MAF > 0.05) using the same expression filters as cis-eQTL mapping, but restricted to variants and genes lying on different chromosomes, in each tissue independently using an additive linear model. For trans-eQTL mapping, we tested variants for association with expression of only protein coding or lincRNA genes. We included as covariates the three genotype PCs, genotyping platform, sex, and PEER factors estimated from expression data in Matrix eQTL when performing association testing. The correlation between variant and gene expression levels was evaluated using the estimated t statistic from this model, and corresponding FDR was estimated using Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction , separately within each tissue and also using permutation analysis. We performed restricted trans-eQTL association tests by filtering the set of variants considered in three ways. First, we filtered the final VCF files using linkage disequilibrium pruning (R2 > 0.5, plink parameters – indep 50 5 2), removing approximately 90% of variants. Second, from the original VCF file, we performed association mapping using only the most significant GTEx cis-eQTL per eGene per tissue. Third, from the original VCF file, we performed association mapping using only variants that had been found to have a trait association in a genome-wide association study (P ≤2.0×10−5). The three association mapping analyses and FDR estimation were performed in each tissue separately. For all trans association tests, we applied stringent quality control to account for potential false positives due to RNA-seq read mapping errors, repeat elements, and population stratification ( ).

## Multi-tissue eQTL mapping
We quantified the tissue-specificity and tissue-sharing of cis- and trans-eQTLs using Meta-Tissue . This tool extends Metasoft , a meta-analysis package, by using a mixed effects model for eQTL sharing that accounts for correlation of expression between tissues driven by overlapping donors. All genotypes and gene expression quantification estimates were adjusted for covariates in accordance to the single tissue analysis as described in the previous sections. For each variant–gene pair, we calculated mixed model effect size estimates in each expressed tissue, thereby adjusting for partial sharing of signal between tissues. These effect size estimates were used in meta-analysis using Metasoft to assess the tissue-specificity of each variant–gene pair. For each variant–gene pair tested, Meta-Tissue estimates a global P value of association and the posterior probability that an effect exists in a tissue (m value). For computational feasibility, the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method was used to approximate the exact solution.
Hierarchical agglomerative clustering was performed on trans-eGenes (50% FDR) and cis-eGenes (5% FDR) using distance metric (1 − Spearman’s ρ) of Meta-Tissue effect sizes across all observed genes between tissue pairs. To supplement this analysis, we also performed multi-tissue analysis using 1) replication analysis ( ); 2) hierarchical FDR control for both cis and trans analysis ( ); and 3) an empirical Bayes approach .

## Allele-specific expression
For each sample, allele-specific RNA-seq read counts were generated at all heterozygous variants with the GATK ASEReadCounter tool . Only uniquely mapping reads with a base quality ≥10 at the variant were counted, and only those variants with coverage of at least eight reads were reported. Variants that met any of the following criteria were flagged and removed from downstream analyses: 1) UCSC 50-mer mappability of <1; 2) simulation-based evidence of mapping bias ; and 3) heterozygous genotype not supported by RNA-seq data across all samples for that donor and no significant (FDR > 1%) evidence that the variant is monoallelic in expression data . Gene level measurements of haplotype expression were calculated by aggregating counts per sample across all heterozygous variants with ASE data within the gene using population phasing. Full ASE data are available through dbGaP.

## Functional enrichment
We annotated discovered eVariants using chromatin state predictions from 128 cell types or cell lines sampled by the Roadmap Epigenomics project . Genome segmentation was performed for each cell type or cell line using a 15-state hidden Markov model (HMM) over 400 bp windows. Several of the learned states are labelled as enhancers, promoters, and repressed regions. For the standard 15-state Roadmap segmentations, regulatory elements are labelled independently for each cell type. For enrichment analyses, we constructed background variants sets that matched eVariants to randomly selected variants based on chromosome, distance to nearest TSS, and MAF.
trans-eQTL analysis was restricted to protein-coding genes and to GTEx tissues that are composed of at least one Roadmap Epigenomics cell type (26 tissues), which included 85 eVariants and 23 eGenes (10% FDR). We quantified enrichment of the trans variants relative to random variants in both enhancer and promoter elements in the GTEx discovery tissue’s matched Roadmap cell type ( ). We then performed the same analysis with randomly matched cis-eGenes. Matching cis-eGenes were selected as follows: for each of the 23 trans-eGenes g, each having Ng associated eVariants (10% FDR), we randomly selected a cis-eGene that also had at least Ng associated variants (10% FDR). We then selected the top Ng variants associated with this gene based on P value. We then performed the same analysis using random sets of the strongest cis-eGenes, rather than random eGenes. Matching the strongest cis-eGenes was performed as follows: for each of the 23 trans-eGenes g, each having Ng associated eVariants (10% FDR), we randomly selected a cis-eGene amongst the ten strongest cis-eGenes in that tissue, based on the P value of the strongest associated variant that also had at least Ng associated variants (10% FDR). We then selected the top Ng associated variants with this gene based on P value. Selecting 23 random cis-eGenes a single time yields unstable results, so we ran cis-eGene selection and enrichment 70 times with different selections. This was done for both random cis-eGenes and random selections amongst the strongest cis-eGenes. We rank-ordered the 70 trials for both promoters and enhancers based on average odds ratio enrichment relative to background. We then used the trial that was closest to median rank for plotting both promoter and enhancer enrichment results.
For piRNA enrichment analysis, we obtained a list of 6,250 piRNA clusters that were experimentally determined from RNA sequencing of human testis . When considering all unique trans-eVariants identified in all tissues, we identified an enrichment of trans-eQTLs overlapping a piRNA cluster (17.8%) compared to the null expectation that trans-eVariants are randomly distributed relative to piRNA clusters (2.5%). To further establish the statistical significance of this observation, we generated a null distribution of piRNA-eVariant overlap by permutation. Using bedtools2 , we permuted the location of piRNA clusters on the human genome 10,000 times, requiring the piRNA clusters to be excluded from centromeres and sex chromosomes. We also evaluated the proportion of trans-eVariants located within 10 kb of a piRNA cluster, and estimated the significance of this enrichment using the same permutation scheme.

## Co-localization of GWAS and eQTL associations
In order to assess the probability that molecular traits as estimated by cis- and trans-eQTLs and physiological traits as estimated by GWAS share the same causal variant, we applied the coloc R package . For each GWAS, we approximated the number of independent loci by extracting variants with at least genome-wide significance (P <5 ×10−8) and farther than 1 Mb away from all other variants of higher statistical significance. For each genome-wide significant variant, we extracted the list of all eGenes (q < 0.05 for cis-eGene) within 1 Mb for coloc analyses. For each eGene, we excluded any variants without either eQTL or GWAS association statistics (effect size estimate, standard error and P value). We obtained reference information such as MAF, sample size and case-to-control proportions (in case of binary traits) for each variant whenever available; otherwise, study-wide estimate was used as a proxy. We defined a region or an eGene as having evidence of co-localization when region- or gene-based posterior probability of co-localization 
 .

## Data and biospecimen availability
Genotype data from the GTEx v6p release are available in dbGaP (study accession phs000424.v6.p1; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/gap/cgi-bin/study.cgi?study_id=phs000424.v6.p1). The VCFs for the imputed array data are available through dgGAP, in phg000520.v2.GTEx MidPoint Imputation.genotype-calls-vcf.c1.GRU.tar (the archive contains a VCF for chromosomes 1–22 and a VCF for chromosome X). Allelic expression data are also available in dbGaP. Expression data (read counts and RPKM) and eQTL input files (normalized expression data and covariates for 44 the tissues) from the GTEx v6p release are available from the GTEx Portal (http://gtexportal.org). Expression QTL results are available from the GTEx Portal. In addition to results tables for the 44 tissues in this study (eGenes, significant variant–gene pairs, and all variant–gene pairs tested), the portal provides multiple interactive visualization and data exploration features for eQTLs, including:
eQTL box plot: displays variant-gene associations
Gene eQTL visualizer: displays all significant associations for a gene across tissues and linkage disequilibrium information
Multi-tissue eQTL plot: displays multi-tissue posterior probabilities from meta-analysis against single-tissue association results
IGV browser: displays eQTL, across tissues and GWAS catalogue results for a selected genomic region
Residual biospecimens are available to all researchers according to the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project biospecimens access policy. The policy and related forms can be found on the GTEx Portal under the Biobank tab.

## Code availability
Software used to process the RNA-seq, genotypes, cis-eQTLs, and ASE is available at: https://github.com/broadinstitute/gtex-pipeline.

## Extended Data
 

## Supplementary Material
S1.pdfS2.pdfS3.xlsxS4.xlsx

## Acknowledgments
The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project was supported by the Common Fund of the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health (http://commonfund.nih.gov/GTEx). Additional funds were provided by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), and National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). Donors were enrolled at Biospecimen Source Sites funded by Leidos Biomedical, Inc. (Leidos) subcontracts to the National Disease Research Interchange (10XS170) and Roswell Park Cancer Institute (10XS171). The Laboratory, Data Analysis, and Coordinating Center (LDACC) was funded through a contract (HHSN268201000029C) to The Broad Institute, Inc. Biorepository operations were funded through a Leidos subcontract to the Van Andel Institute (10ST1035). Additional data repository and project management were provided by Leidos (HHSN261200800001E). The Brain Bank was supported by a supplement to University of Miami grant DA006227. J.R.D. is supported by a Lucille P. Markey Biomedical Research Stanford Graduate Fellowship. J.R.D., Z.Z., and N.A.T. acknowledge the Stanford Genome Training Program (SGTP; NIH/NHGRI T32HG000044). Z.Z. is also supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) GRFP (DGE-114747). L.F. is supported by the Stanford Center for Computational, Evolutionary, and Human Genomics (CEHG). D.G.M. is supported by a “la Caixa”-Severo Ochoa pre-doctoral fellowship. D.M. is supported by NIH grants U54DK105566 and R01GM104371. B.J.S is supported by NIH training grant T32GM007057. E.K.T is supported by a Hewlett-Packard Stanford Graduate Fellowship and a doctoral scholarship from the Natural Science and Engineering Council of Canada. T.S. is supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE-1656518). A.B. is supported by the Searle Scholars Program and NIH grant R01MH109905. A.B., C.D.Bu. and S.B.M are supported by NIH grant R01HG008150 (NHGRI; Non-Coding Variants Program). S.B.M. and C.D.Bu. are supported by NHGRI grants U01HG007436 and U01HG009080. A.B., C.D.Bu., E.T.D., S.E.C., T.L, and S.B.M. are supported by NIH grants R01MH101814 (NIH Common Fund; GTEx Program). C.D.Br., Y.P., B.J., G.G., and B.E.E. are supported by NIH grant R01MH101822. B.E.E. is supported by NIH grants R00HG006265, R01MH101822 and U01 HG007900 and a Sloan Faculty Fellowship. G.L., A.B.N, J.J.P., A.S., Y-H.Z., and F.A.W. are supported by NIH grants R01MH101819, R01HG009125, and R21HG007840. T.L. and P.M. are supported by NIH grant R01MH106842. T.L. is supported by the NIH grant UM1HG008901. T.L. and S.E.C. are supported by NIH contract HHSN2682010000029C. B.J. is supported by NIH grant 2T32HG003284-11. C.B.P. and C.S. are supported by NIH grant R01MH101782. D.F.C. is supported by NIH grant R01MH101810. E.R.G and N.J.C are supported by NIH grants R01MH101820 and R01MH090937A. We thank A. Nellore and C. Wilks for assistance with TCGA data, K. Small for discussions, J. T. Leek for suggestions on the manuscript, N. L. Cyr for drawing the body map in , and A. Kundaje and O. Ursu for input on Hi-C analysis.

## GTEx Consortium

## Laboratory, Data Analysis & Coordinating Center (LDACC)—Analysis Working Group
François Aguet , Kristin G. Ardlie , Beryl B. Cummings , , Ellen T. Gelfand , Gad Getz , , Kane Hadley , Robert E. Handsaker , , Katherine H. Huang , Seva Kashin , , Konrad J. Karczewski , , Monkol Lek , , Xiao Li , Daniel G. MacArthur , , Jared L. Nedzel , Duyen T. Nguyen , Michael S. Noble , Ayellet V. Segrè , Casandra A. Trowbridge , Taru Tukiainen , 

## Statistical Methods groups—Analysis Working Group
Nathan S. Abell , , Brunilda Balliu , Ruth Barshir , Omer Basha , Alexis Battle , Gireesh K. Bogu , , Andrew Brown , , , Christopher D. Brown , Stephane E. Castel , , Lin S. Chen , Colby Chiang , Donald F. Conrad , , Nancy J. Cox , Farhan N. Damani , Joe R. Davis , , Olivier Delaneau , , , Emmanouil T. Dermitzakis , , , Barbara E. Engelhardt , Eleazar Eskin , , Pedro G. Ferreira , , Laure Frésard , , Eric R. Gamazon , , , Diego Garrido-Martín , , Ariel D.H. Gewirtz , Genna Gliner , Michael J. Gloudemans , , , Roderic Guigo , , , Ira M. Hall , , , Buhm Han , Yuan He , Farhad Hormozdiari , Cedric Howald , , , Hae Kyung Im , Brian Jo , Eun Yong Kang , Yungil Kim , Sarah Kim-Hellmuth , , Tuuli Lappalainen , , Gen Li , Xin Li , Boxiang Liu , , , Serghei Mangul , Mark I. McCarthy , , , Ian C. McDowell , Pejman Mohammadi , , Jean Monlong , , , Stephen B. Montgomery , , Manuel Muñoz-Aguirre , , , Anne W. Ndungu , Dan L. Nicolae , , , Andrew B. Nobel , , Meritxell Oliva , , Halit Ongen , , , John J. Palowitch , Nikolaos Panousis , , , Panagiotis Papasaikas , , YoSon Park , Princy Parsana , Anthony J. Payne , Christine B. Peterson , Jie Quan , Ferran Reverter , , , Chiara Sabatti , , Ashis Saha , Michael Sammeth , Alexandra J. Scott , Andrey A. Shabalin , Reza Sodaei , , Matthew Stephens , , Barbara E. Stranger , , , Benjamin J. Strober , Jae Hoon Sul , Emily K. Tsang , , Sarah Urbut , Martijn van de Bunt , , Gao Wang , Xiaoquan Wen , Fred A. Wright , Hualin S. Xi , Esti Yeger-Lotem , , Zachary Zappala , , Judith B. Zaugg , Yi-Hui Zhou 

## Enhancing GTEx (eGTEx) groups
Joshua M. Akey , , Daniel Bates , Joanne Chan , Lin S. Chen , Melina Claussnitzer , , , Kathryn Demanelis , Morgan Diegel , Jennifer A. Doherty , Andrew P. Feinberg , , , , Marian S. Fernando , , Jessica Halow , Kasper D. Hansen , , , Eric Haugen , Peter F. Hickey , Lei Hou , , Farzana Jasmine , Ruiqi Jian , Lihua Jiang , Audra Johnson , Rajinder Kaul , Manolis Kellis , , Muhammad G. Kibriya , Kristen Lee , Jin Billy Li , Qin Li , Xiao Li , Jessica Lin , , Shin Lin , , Sandra Linder , , Caroline Linke , , Yaping Liu , , Matthew T. Maurano , Benoit Molinie , Stephen B. Montgomery , , Jemma Nelson , Fidencio J. Neri , Meritxell Oliva , , Yongjin Park , , Brandon L. Pierce , Nicola J. Rinaldi , , Lindsay F. Rizzardi , Richard Sandstrom , Andrew Skol , , , Kevin S. Smith , , Michael P. Snyder , John Stamatoyannopoulos , , , Barbara E. Stranger , , , Hua Tang , Emily K. Tsang , , Li Wang , Meng Wang , Nicholas Van Wittenberghe , Fan Wu , , Rui Zhang 

## NIH Common Fund
Concepcion R. Nierras 

## NIH/NCI
Philip A. Branton , Latarsha J. Carithers , , Ping Guan , Helen M. Moore , Abhi Rao , Jimmie B. Vaught 

## NIH/NHGrI
Sarah E. Gould , Nicole C. Lockart , Casey Martin , Jeffery P. Struewing , Simona Volpi 

## NIH/NIMH
Anjene M. Addington , Susan E. Koester 

## NIH/NIDA
A. Roger Little 

## Biospecimen Collection Source Site—NDrI
Lori E. Brigham , Richard Hasz , Marcus Hunter , Christopher Johns , Mark Johnson , Gene Kopen , William F. Leinweber , John T. Lonsdale , Alisa McDonald , Bernadette Mestichelli , Kevin Myer , Brian Roe , Michael Salvatore , Saboor Shad , Jeffrey A. Thomas , Gary Walters , Michael Washington , Joseph Wheeler 

## Biospecimen Collection Source Site—rPCI
Jason Bridge , Barbara A. Foster , Bryan M. Gillard , Ellen Karasik , Rachna Kumar , Mark Miklos , Michael T. Moser 

## Biospecimen Core resource—VArI
Scott D. Jewell , Robert G. Montroy , Daniel C. Rohrer , Dana R. Valley 

## Brain Bank repository—University of Miami Brain Endowment Bank
David A. Davis , Deborah C. Mash 

## Leidos Biomedical—Project Management
Anita H. Undale , Anna M. Smith , David E. Tabor , Nancy V. Roche , Jeffrey A. McLean , Negin Vatanian , Karna L. Robinson , Leslie Sobin , Mary E. Barcus , Kimberly M. Valentino , Liqun Qi , Steven Hunter , Pushpa Hariharan , Shilpi Singh , Ki Sung Um , Takunda Matose , Maria M. Tomaszewski 

## ELSI Study
Laura K. Barker , Maghboeba Mosavel , Laura A. Siminoff , Heather M. Traino 

## Genome Browser Data Integration & Visualization—EBI
Paul Flicek , Thomas Juettemann , Magali Ruffier , Dan Sheppard , Kieron Taylor , Stephen J. Trevanion , Daniel R. Zerbino 

## Genome Browser Data Integration & Visualization—UCSC Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz
Brian Craft , Mary Goldman , Maximilian Haeussler , W. James Kent , Christopher M. Lee , Benedict Paten , Kate R. Rosenbloom , John Vivian , Jingchun Zhu 

## Footnotes
1The Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.
2Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
3Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
4Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
5Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
6Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
7Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.
8Department of Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.
9Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and Technology, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.
10Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08002 Barcelona, Spain.
11Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
12Institute for Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (iG3), University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
13Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.
14Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.
15New York Genome Center, New York, New York 10013, USA.
16Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York 10032, USA.
17Department of Public Health Sciences, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
18McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
19Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
20Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
21Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.
22Department of Computer Science, Center for Statistics and Machine Learning, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA.
23Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
24Department of Human Genetics, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
25Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), Universidade do Porto, 4200-135 Porto, Portugal.
26Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology (IPATIMUP), University of Porto, 4200-625 Porto, Portugal.
27Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
28Department of Psychiatry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
29Lewis Sigler Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA.
30Department of Operations Research and Financial Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA.
31Biomedical Informatics Program, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
32Institut Hospital del Mar d’Investigacions Mèdiques (IMIM), 08003 Barcelona, Spain.
33Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.
34Department of Convergence Medicine, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 138-736, South Korea.
35Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.
36Section of Genetic Medicine, Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
37Department of Biostatistics, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
38Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
39Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.
40Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LE, UK.
41Oxford NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Churchill Hospital, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.
42Computational Biology & Bioinformatics Graduate Program, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27708, USA.
43Human Genetics Department, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 0G1, Canada.
44Departament d’Estadística i Investigació Operativa, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.
45Department of Statistics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
46Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
47Department of Statistics and Operations Research, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.
48Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.
49Institute for Genomics and Systems Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
50Department of Biostatistics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
51Computational Sciences, Pfizer Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.
52Universitat de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
53Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
54Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.
55Institute of Biophysics Carlos Chagas Filho (IBCCF), Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), 21941902 Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
56Department of Psychiatry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA.
57Center for Data Intensive Science, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
58Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
59Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
60Bioinformatics Research Center and Departments of Statistics and Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA.
61National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer-Sheva 84105, Israel.
62European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
63Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA.
64Altius Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Seattle, Washington 98121, USA.
65Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
66University of Hohenheim, 70599 Stuttgart, Germany.
67Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Population Health Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.
68Center for Epigenetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
69Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
70Department of Mental Health, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
71McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
72Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
73Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.
74Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
75Division of Cardiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
76Institute for Systems Genetics, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA.
77Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.
78Office of Strategic Coordination, Division of Program Coordination, Planning and Strategic Initiatives, Office of the Director, NIH, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.
79Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research Branch, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
80National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
81Division of Genomic Medicine, National Human Genome Research Institute, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.
82Division of Neuroscience and Basic Behavioral Science, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
83Division of Neuroscience and Behavior, National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
84Washington Regional Transplant Community, Falls Church, Virginia 22003, USA.
85Gift of Life Donor Program, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103, USA.
86LifeGift, Houston, Texas 77055, USA.
87Center for Organ Recovery and Education, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15238, USA.
88LifeNet Health, Virginia Beach, Virginia 23453, USA.
89National Disease Research Interchange, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19103, USA.
90Unyts, Buffalo, New York 14203, USA.
91Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, New York 14263, USA.
92Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan 49503, USA.
93Brain Endowment Bank, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.
94National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.
95Biospecimen Research Group, Clinical Research Directorate, Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Rockville, Maryland 20852, USA.
96Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick, Maryland 21701, USA.
97Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122, USA.
98Department of Health Behavior and Policy, School of Medicine, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA.
99European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SD, UK.
100UCSC Genomics Institute, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA.
Online Content Methods, along with any additional Extended Data display items and Source Data, are available in the online version of the paper; references unique to these sections appear only in the online paper.
 is available in the online version of the paper.
Author Contributions All authors reviewed and revised the manuscript. Detailed author contributions are available in the .
The authors declare competing financial interests: details are available in the online version of the paper.
Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the paper.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
S1.pdfS2.pdfS3.xlsxS4.xlsx