pmcMol Ther OncolMol Ther Oncol4545mtonc9918752083706676Molecular Therapy Oncology2950-3299American Society of Gene & Cell TherapyPMC11783428PMC11783428.111783428117834283989569210.1016/j.omton.2024.200930S2950-3299(24)00172-32009301ReviewRole of exosomes in diagnosis, prognostication, and treatment of pediatric solid tumors
GhufranShaikh M. BrownMorgan L. BeierleElizabeth A.elizabeth.beierle@childrensal.org 1University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA∗Corresponding author: Elizabeth A. Beierle, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA. elizabeth.beierle@childrensal.org203202530122024331479200200930301220243101202503022025© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Cancer is the second leading cause of death in children, and solid tumors make up 30% of childhood cancers. Molecular profiling of pediatric solid tumors allows a personalized approach to therapy, but this approach mostly relies on surgical biopsy, which is invasive and carries the risk of complications. Liquid biopsy serves as a reliable alternative and a minimally invasive tool for diagnosing, prognosticating, and residual disease monitoring in childhood cancers. This review outlines the potential of exosomes as informative liquid biopsies in pediatric solid tumors. Studies highlighting the potential applications and clinical utility of exosomes and their molecular constituents as prognosticators and therapies in common childhood solid tumors, including neuroblastoma, medulloblastoma, sarcoma, and hepatoblastoma, have been overviewed. We also discuss the limitations and technical challenges of utilizing exosomes for pediatric solid tumors.

## Graphical abstract
 
Beierle and colleagues draw attention to the fact that diagnosing solid tumors in children requires surgical biopsy, which may lead to complications. They highlight the potential of exosomes as minimally invasive and informative liquid biopsies, emphasizing their clinical utility in treating, prognosticating, and monitoring treatment response in childhood solid tumors.

## Keywords
exosomesmiRNAspediatric cancersliquid biopsybiomarkerspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Cells secrete bioactive molecules either freely or enclosed in extracellular vesicles (EVs). EVs encapsulate nucleic acids, amino acids, proteins, lipids, and metabolites that frequently reflect their cell of origin. EVs are broadly classified as ectosomes and exosomes. Ectosomes are EVs ranging from ∼50 nm to 1 μm in diameter that bud off from the surface of the plasma membrane and include microvesicles, microparticles, and large vesicles. Exosomes are a unique subset of EVs that are of endosomal origin and have a smaller average diameter of ∼100 nm. Exosomes are released by almost all cell types, including prokaryotes and eukaryotes, but the physiologic purpose of generating exosomes is not clearly established. One speculation is that cells secrete exosomes to maintain homeostasis by unloading excess and/or non-essential components. Another hypothesis is that exosome shedding is a unique signaling response regulating cell-cell crosstalk, with specific mechanisms involved in the packaging and unloading of exosomes. The release of exosomes and their contents is governed by physiologic, metabolic, or pathologic conditions, and therefore, exosomes offer information regarding altered cellular states.
Exosomes have been associated with several hallmark characteristics of cancers, including clonality, metabolism, and metastasis. Exosomal microRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to play a significant role in inducing the clonal expansion of prostate and breast tumors. The release of exosomes may be controlled by nutrient deprivation, hypoxia, and an acidic environment, thereby reflecting the metabolic status of the tumor cells. Tumor-derived exosomes may be transported to recipient cells in distant organs. On the other hand, they may be involved in the local tumor microenvironment (TME), where the exchange of exosome metabolites reciprocally from tumor stromal cells to cancer cells modulates the tumor phenotype, affecting angiogenesis, immune cell evasion, drug resistance, and metastasis. The outcome of these interactions depends on the cell producing the exosomes, the molecular cargo of the exosomes, and the dose of the cargo. Whether exosomes have a cell-independent and rate-limiting role in the neoplastic transformation of target cells needs further evaluation.
Screening for cancer in children demands approaches that are easily performed, affordable, associated with minimal discomfort, and offer the smallest possible false detection rate. A test with remarkably high sensitivity and specificity may still detect numerous false positives, particularly when the disease is rare, as in the case of childhood cancers. Moreover, detecting tumors before children develop clinically apparent or invasive disease remains a major challenge to clinicians and researchers. The detection of circulating nucleic acids, commonly referred to as liquid biopsies, potentially offers improved accuracy and, therefore, has been the focus of studies investigating novel diagnostic molecular tools in oncology. There are several advantages to liquid biopsies. They are cost effective, serve as a good source of biomarkers, and employ minimally invasive sampling techniques. Serial liquid biopsies may allow for improved monitoring of the dynamic molecular landscape of tumors over time during treatment compared to the static picture provided by traditional solid tumor biopsies. They provide data for an improved understanding of the divergence of different metastatic lesions, the effect of therapeutic stress on tumor cells, and therapy resistance in refractory tumors. 
Liquid biopsies comprise circulating tumor cells, circulating tumor DNA, and exosomes. Exosomes may be isolated from blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), milk, saliva, and urine. Exosomes are easier to isolate than circulating tumor DNA, and most cell-free DNA from human plasma is found in exosomes, making them promising targets for detecting genotypic and phenotypic alterations. The role of exosomes and their molecular signatures in adult cancers has been well documented , ; however, few studies have examined their clinical relevance in pediatric solid tumors.
The ability of cells to internalize circulating exosomes may also be harnessed for targeted drug delivery, and exosome-mediated drug formulations are currently undergoing preclinical and clinical trials. Exosome-based anti-tumor vaccines have shown promising results. Exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), , and dendritic cells (DCs) , have shown efficacy in treating inflammatory conditions and for drug delivery. 
Due to their ubiquitous nature, exosomes and their molecular constituents have potential clinical applications for cancer diagnosis, in providing prognostic information, and for therapy. Here, we review the exosome-based studies performed in pediatric solid tumors with an emphasis on the role of exosomes in the diagnosis, as prognostic markers, as indicators of disease response to therapy, and in therapeutics. The information is organized to be used as a basis for designing future preclinical studies and to guide patient care.

## Procedure for exosome isolation and detection
There are several established methods for exosome isolation from biofluids or tissue culture supernatants. The most commonly used techniques include ultracentrifugation, size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), precipitation-based commercial kits, and immunoaffinity-based methods ( ). , 
Ultracentrifugation is considered the gold standard for exosome isolation and involves multiple centrifugation steps to separate exosomes based on size and density. The sample is first centrifuged at low speeds to remove cells and debris, followed by high-speed ultracentrifugation (100,000–120,000 × g) to pellet exosomes. SEC separates exosomes based on their size and allows the isolation of exosomes while preserving their structural integrity and functionality. This method is gentler and results in higher purity compared to ultracentrifugation. Precipitation-based commercial kits are widely used by investigators, allowing the precipitation of exosomes from the sample in a simple and fast manner. However, exosomes isolated using kits may be contaminated with non-exosomal proteins and lipoproteins. Immunoaffinity-based techniques employ antibodies specific to exosomal surface markers, such as cluster of differentiation (CD)63 or CD81, to isolate exosomes from a sample. Immunoaffinity capture yields high specificity but may be limited by the expression of target proteins on different exosome subtypes.
Regardless of the type of isolation procedure, the isolated exosomes must be characterized to confirm their identity, size, concentration, and content. Morphology is usually examined by electron microscopy and nanoparticle tracking analysis. Biochemical analyses may be performed by immunoblotting. According to the latest recommendations by the Minimal Information for Studies of EVs (MISEV), "exosome proteins in enriched fractions should be confirmed with at least three recognized exosome markers, and one negative exosome marker should be demonstrated to be absent or highly reduced in exosome fractions compared to the tissue homogenates". Flow cytometry is often performed to analyze surface proteins on individual vesicles, allowing for subtype analysis.
These characterization steps provide quality assurance of small vesicle purification. Moreover, a comparison of tumor tissue-derived exosome content to non-tumor tissue or tissue-of-origin exosomes may determine the utility of isolated vesicles as tissue and disease biomarkers. Few investigators have described tumor-derived EV isolation methods. , With some modifications and optimization, these methods could be extended to work with other solid tissues, including pediatric solid tumors. In general, a floatation-based density gradient method is usually employed for the isolation of enriched small vesicles from complex samples such as solid tumor tissues. This method is based on the principle that vesicles from diverse tissues may float to slightly different density fractions or may separate into predominately light or dense subpopulations. Nonetheless, due to the cost and time limitations associated with these isolation procedures, there is an unmet need for rigorous methods to characterize tissue exosomes. Moreover, the isolation and detection of exosomes from pediatric solid tumor tissues may require modified and optimized protocols distinct to the tumor type. Advancement in techniques allowing rapid extraction of exosomes from surgical specimens may facilitate the clinical use of exosomes as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in pediatric oncology.

## Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumors of childhood and accounts for 15% of pediatric cancer deaths. These neuroendocrine tumors are characterized by an early age of onset, high frequency of metastases at diagnosis, and their unique ability to spontaneously regress during infancy. Highly malignant neuroblastoma tumors feature amplification of the MYCN oncogene. Segmental chromosome alterations and mutations in the ALK gene are also associated with worse outcomes. Advances in risk-stratified therapy have improved outcomes for children with low- and intermediate-risk disease, but children with high-risk disease continue to have a poor prognosis. These children are currently treated by intensive induction chemotherapy, surgery, myeloablative chemotherapy with stem cell rescue, radiation therapy, and immunotherapy, followed by the treatment of minimal residual disease using differentiation therapy. Although these strategies have improved the 5-year overall survival, children treated with these regimens suffer from long-term, detrimental side effects. Further research directed at the early detection and identification of therapy response markers would allow for better risk stratification and eventually positively affect treatment outcomes.
Esposti et al. characterized exosomal DNA isolated from the plasma of patients with neuroblastoma. They provided evidence for the presence of double-stranded DNA in the neuroblastoma exosomes and, through whole-exome sequencing, showed that neuroblastoma exosome DNA carries tumor-specific genetic mutations. The exosome DNA mutations reflected the mutational status of the parent cells, include those occurring on ALK, CHD5, SHANK2, PHOX2B, TERT, FGFR1, and BRAF genes. Exosome DNA, therefore, may serve as a non-invasive biomarker for the molecular diagnosis of neuroblastoma, especially in those cases where tissue biopsy is not available. Another group of researchers showed that plasma derived exosome proteins reflect the status of the tumor cell of origin in patients with neuroblastoma. They characterized exosomes from plasma specimens of 24 high-risk and low-risk patients with neuroblastoma at diagnosis, as well as 24 age-matched healthy controls. Neuroblastoma patient-derived exosomes revealed a distinct expression profile compared to the controls. Specifically, NCAM, NCL, LUM, and VASP exosome proteins demonstrated a diagnostic value in discriminating patients with neuroblastoma from healthy controls. Moreover, the differentially regulated proteins in the high-risk compared to the low-risk patient group were predicted to play a role in the modulation of proteins involved in cell migration, proliferation, and metastasis. The MYH9, FN1, CALR, AKAP12, and LTBP1 exosome proteins were able to differentiate between the high-risk and low-risk patients. Exosome DNA may be utilized to identify the variants responsible for acquired resistance that include mutations in the ALK, TP53, and RAS/MAPK genes that are often observed in relapsed patients with neuroblastoma. Ma et al. examined the role of plasma-derived exosomal miRNAs in neuroblastoma progression. They found that exosome-derived hsa-miR199a-3p was significantly upregulated in patients with neuroblastoma and correlated with the severity of disease. Their study further showed that exosomal hsa-miR199a-3p promoted neuroblastoma proliferation and motility in vitro and in vivo through decreased NEDD4 expression. Progression from standard therapies to early-phase clinical trials evaluating novel treatments for high-risk patients with neuroblastoma depends on an inadequate therapeutic response as assessed by imaging, but biomarkers that would provide an earlier prediction of an inadequate response may be used for justifying upfront or earlier institution of alternative therapies. There is evidence that exosomes may be utilized as markers of response in neuroblastoma. Morini et al. proposed that circulating exosomes in patient blood samples could be utilized to predict the response to induction chemotherapy. They isolated and characterized exosomes from the plasma samples of 52 children treated in the High-Risk Neuroblastoma Study 1.8 of SIOP-Europe (SIOPEN) (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01704716) before and after the induction chemotherapy and found that neuroblastoma-derived exosomes, identified by the presence of GD2, decreased upon induction chemotherapy. They further compared the plasma-derived exosomal miRNA expression profiles at diagnosis and at the end of the treatment, identifying a panel of three exosomal miRNAs (miR-29c, miR-342-3p, and let-7b) capable of distinguishing good from poor clinical responders. These investigators suggested that utilizing the exosomal miRNA analysis that was performed in the mid-phase of induction chemotherapy, may provide data to direct further more personalized therapy. 
Previous studies have shown that cells in the surrounding TME, including tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), promote progression, metastasis, and drug resistance in neuroblastoma. The effects of exosomes on cells in the TME have been investigated. Challagundla et al. showed that the pro-tumoral functions of TAMs in neuroblastoma may be partly attributed to the exchange of exosomal miRNAs between the stroma and tumor cells. They isolated exosomes from cell culture supernatants of three neuroblastoma cell lines and evaluated the expression profile of pro-inflammatory miRNAs, noting that the expression of miR-21-5p was found to be common to all three cell lines. Co-culture experiments further revealed that human monocytes take up the neuroblastoma cell-derived exosomal miR-21-5p, with subsequent activation of the nuclear factor κB (NF-κB) pathway by stimulating Toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8). NF-κB activation in human monocytes mediated the release of miR-155. Inside the neuroblastoma cells, miR-155 was capable of targeting TERF1, thereby affecting their telomere length. The exo-miR-21/TLR8-NF-кB/exo-miR-155/TERF1 signaling pathway resulted in the acquisition of cisplatin drug resistance in neuroblastoma cells both in vitro and in vivo. This study showed that exosomes within the neuroblastoma TME may be utilized as molecular targets to restore drug sensitivity. Exosomes derived from the TME may have alternative functions distinct to cell type and context. Haug et al. examined the miRNA profile of EVs isolated from two MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cell lines, Kelly and SK-N-BE(2)-C. Functional enrichment analysis of the top 25 upregulated exosomal miRNAs predicted their involvement in oncogenic functions, including tumor survival, proliferation, and metastasis. Eleven of the exosomal miRNAs identified (mir-16, -125b, -21, -23a, -24, -25, -27b, -218, -320a, -320b, and -92a) were found to be commonly expressed in both cell lines, with miR-92a being the most highly expressed. These investigators cultured human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells stably transfected with TLR8 and NF-κB/AP-1 SEAP reporter constructs with exosomes to investigate whether exosomal miRNAs could induce NF-κB activation through TLR8. However, unlike the previous study performed by Challagundla et al., Haug and colleagues did not observe TLR8-mediated activation of NF-κB in the recipient cells. These researchers added further impact to their findings by performing experiments and duplicating results employing two different procedures for isolating exosomes as opposed to a single protocol throughout the study. 

## Medulloblastoma
Medulloblastoma (MB) comprises a heterogeneous group of embryonal tumors of the cerebellum. MB is classified into four subgroups, WNT, sonic hedgehog (SHH), group 3, and group 4, each associated with specific molecular alterations. Current management strategies are based upon the subgroup involved but include resection of the tumor, cranio-spinal irradiation, and chemotherapy. Survival for MB, particularly for those with group 3 disease, remains poor. Most children will succumb due to leptomeningeal spread, refractory disease, or tumor relapse. Further, children who do survive their treatment often show neuroendocrine dysregulation and significant cognitive, developmental, and behavioral sequelae. A deeper understanding of MB migratory/invasive behaviors and propensities to escape immune responses is clearly needed to design improved therapies.
Exosomal miRNAs may serve as promising candidates for minimally invasive biomarkers in brain tumors. Previous studies have shown that miRNA profiling of the CSF may reflect glioblastoma disease activity and allow for early tumor detection. With regards to MB, Grotzer et al. performed one of the first studies, in which they screened exosomal miRNAs from cell culture supernatants of three MB cell lines representing different subtypes. They found 3 miRNAs enriched in the conditioned media from metastatic MB cells as well as in the CSF of a patient with MB. Functional analysis of exosome proteins derived from these cell lines suggested potential roles in MB tumor cell proliferation, migration, and immune responses. In another study, GPNMB and/or ERBB2 proteins were found to be enriched in exosomes derived from the sera of patients with MB, but the role of these two exosome proteins as MB specific markers requires further investigation.
Exosomes have been linked to more aggressive MB and worse patient outcomes. SHH MB cells developed a more aggressive phenotype when treated with exosomes isolated from group 3 MB cell lines, D283 and D341, and the SHH cell line, Daoy cells. Three exosomal miRNAs (miR-181a-5p/miR-125b-5p/let-7b-5p) were found to be differentially overexpressed between the group 3 and SHH MB cell lines. Functional analysis showed that these miRNAs may be associated with the activation of the Ras/MAPK pathway. Jackson et al. showed that metastatic MB cells secreted higher quantities of exosomes compared to nonmetastatic, primary MB cells and that these exosomes upregulated the migration and invasiveness of primary MB cells. Their experiments showed that exosomes from metastatic cells demonstrated higher levels of functionally active MMP-2 on their external surface. Stable genetic knockdown of MMP-2 or extracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer, EMMPRIN, genes in metastatic MB cells resulted in the loss of their promigratory behavior. Serial analysis of MB patient CSF samples showed an increase in MMP-2 activity in three out of four patients as their tumors progressed. Altering the mechanism of MMP-2 and EMMPRIN transportation between the MB TME and exosomes may preclude the establishment of a premetastatic niche, thereby preventing MB dissemination. This study demonstrated the significance of EMMPRIN- and MMP-2-associated exosomes in creating a favorable environment to drive MB metastasis via extracellular matrix signaling. Further research on MB-derived exosomes may explain subgroup-specific heterogeneity and the propensity to disseminate locally and distally between MB subtypes. Purvis et al. showed that high expression of B7-H3, an immune-suppressive surface ligand, is associated with MB angiogenesis and low overall survival in MB cells. They found that overexpression of B7-H3 in MB cells led to increased B7-H3 protein in exosomes and an increase in the size distribution and concentration of exosomes. In addition to B7-H3, other proteins such as PI3K-C2β, PI3K-C2γ, and STAT3 were also packaged in the MB cell-derived exosomes, suggesting novel tumorigenic pathways influenced by B7-H3. These studies provide evidence for the importance of investigating the role of exosomes in cell-cell communication and immune evasion in MB. 
Huang et al. performed a study comparing plasma-derived exosomes from patients with MB and healthy control subjects. They found that miR-130b-3p was upregulated in the plasma exosomes of patients with MB. Treatment of the MB cell lines with exosomes derived from patient plasma further showed that miR-130b-3p functioned as a tumor suppressor by targeting a serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 (SIK1) through p53 signaling pathways. In a separate study, the same group of investigators analyzed the miRNA profiles of circulating exosomes utilizing a larger cohort, again comparing patients with MB to healthy controls. They identified significantly higher levels of miR-101-3p and miR-423-5p expression in plasma exosomes from patients with MB. Like miR-130b-3p, these exosomal miRNAs functioned as tumor suppressors when delivered to tumor cells by directly targeting FOXP4, a gene that encodes a transcription factor important for embryonic development and tumorigenesis. In addition, miR-101-3p targeted EZH2, a histone methyltransferase, to reinforce its tumor-inhibitory functions. Finally, they showed that overexpression of miR-101-3p and miR-423-5p inhibited tumorigenesis in vivo. The plausible explanation for the tumor-suppressor functions may be that exosomes derived from monocytes or polarized macrophages act as carriers for the delivery of anti-tumor factors. For further clarity, miR-101-3p and miR-423-5p expression levels were analyzed from exosomes isolated from CD14+ peripheral blood mononuclear cells of plasma from both patients with MB and healthy controls. Both miR-101-3p and miR-423-5p were overexpressed in the exosomes derived from CD14+ monocytes of patients with MB. These results suggest that miR-101-3p and miR-423-5p may have a monocyte-macrophage origin. However, mechanistic details are needed before identifying these miRNAs as therapeutic targets.

## Rhabdomysarcoma
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in children, representing the neoplastic transformation of skeletal myoblast-like cells. RMS is categorized into two major subtypes, alveolar RMS (ARMS) and embryonic RMS (ERMS), each driven by different molecular mechanisms. The ARMS variant is characterized by a chromosomal translocation resulting in the fusion of the paired box (PAX) gene on chromosome 2 or 1 and the forkhead box protein O1 (FOXO1) fusion gene on chromosome 13. Chromosomal translocation resulting in a fusion between PAX7 on chromosome 1 and the FOXO1 gene on chromosome 13 occurs in a small fraction of patients with ARMS. Primary tumors arise at various anatomic sites, and local control is primarily achieved by surgical resection with or without radiotherapy. Risk stratification for application of multifaceted therapy is based on clinical, pathological, and molecular features. In addition to known molecular characteristics, the development of novel prognostic biomarkers may allow for better risk stratification and precise therapeutic approaches. Moreover, the application of molecularly targeted therapies may improve outcomes in children with metastatic or recurrent disease.
Investigators have examined whether the makeup of exosomes may be predictive for diagnostics and follow-up of treatment in RMS. Stegmaier and colleagues utilized the soft tissue sarcoma registry of the Cooperative Weichteilsarkom Studiengruppe (CWS) to examine the PAX-FOXO1 or SYT-SSX fusion transcript expression levels in plasma-derived exosomes. The expression levels of the cell-free RNA fusion transcript in blood exosomes correlated with the initial tumor status. Liquid biopsies were positive for the SYT-SSX fusion transcript in 94% of patients with metastatic ARMS who had initial bone marrow (BM) involvement and negative in patients with localized tumors, suggesting their potential clinical use for diagnosis. Gayad and co-workers found that exosomes derived from ERMS differ from those derived from ARMS, potentially allowing for improved diagnostics. They isolated exosomal miRNAs from ERMS and ARMS cell lines, performed RNA sequencing, and showed that 10 miRNAs were commonly found in cell lines from the two major subtypes, whereas only 2 miRNAs (miR-1246 and miR-1268) were carried by exosomes derived from all cell lines used in the study. In a separate study, this group further examined the protein composition and levels in EVs derived from the RMS cell lines through liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). They reported that 80 proteins were commonly found in all five RMS cell lines, 81 proteins were exclusive to ERMS cells, and 42 were unique to ARMS cells. Functional analysis revealed that these proteins are involved in pathways associated with proliferation, invasion, and metastasis. 
Exosomes likely contain elements responsible for the aggressive phenotypes associated with RMS. These are potential markers that may be applied to determine prognosis. Ghamloush et al. investigated whether the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion oncogene modulates exosome content sorting and secretion. Mouse skeletal myoblasts, C2C12 cells, transduced with the PAX3-FOXO1 fusion gene revealed altered expression of exosomal miR-486-5p. Overexpression and knockdown studies confirmed that miR-486-5p is an effector of PAX3-FOXO1 and, via exosomes, promotes migration, invasion, and colony formation in normal mouse embryonic fibroblasts. miR-486-5p expression was observed in both cell lysates and exosomes of PAX3-FOXO1-positive RMS cells, their abundance being the highest in PAX3-FOXO1-positive Rh30 and Rh41. Exosomes derived from the sera of 1 patient with ARMS and 6 patients with ERMS were found enriched in miR-486-5p compared to those of healthy controls. miR-486-5p expression was highest in the one patient with PAX3-FOXO1-positive ARMS. Follow-up for 2 patients post-chemotherapy, including one patient with PAX3-FOXO1-positive ARMS, showed decreased exosomal miR-486-5p values in both patients. Another study showed that the transmembrane protein CD147 may mediate tumor-to-stromal cell crosstalk through exosomes. Inhibition of CD147 decreases RMS cell invasion and suppresses anchorage-independent growth in vitro. While the treatment of normal fibroblasts with RMS-derived exosomes results in significant increases in proliferation, migration, and invasion, these effects are reversed when using exosomes from CD147-downregulated RMS cells. Expression analysis in 26 nonmetastatic and 7 metastatic RMS patient tissue samples revealed that CD147 was expressed exclusively in metastatic tumors. Targeted inhibition of CD147 reduces its expression levels within the isolated exosomes and reduces the capacity of these exosomes to enhance cellular invasive properties. This study demonstrated that tumor cell-secreted exosomes engage in modulating the RMS TME. These results provide potential avenues to investigate exosomes in their role in predicting response to therapy.

## Non-rhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcoma
Non-rhabdomyosarcoma soft tissue sarcomas (NRSTSs) constitute a very heterogeneous group of tumors with varying molecular patterns and clinical presentations. NRSTSs account for about 3%–4% of pediatric cancers, and synovial sarcoma (SS) is the most common type. SS is characterized by local invasiveness and a propensity to metastasize to distant sites. Most cases of SS display chromosomal translocations resulting in the fusion of the SYT gene on chromosome 18 with the SSX1 or SSX2 gene located on chromosome X. Therapeutic options are limited, and many SS cases show unresponsiveness to chemotherapy.
There are limited studies investigating the roles of EVs in SS. Studies have demonstrated the presence of the SYT-SSX fusion transcript in SS cell-derived EVs, suggesting the potential role of the latter as biomarkers. Uotani et al. analyzed the expression profiles of cell-free miRNAs in blood samples comparing 9 patients with SS to age-matched patients with benign tumors and healthy controls. They found 49 miRNAs upregulated in the sera of patients with SS, out of which 8 miRNAs showed reduced expression following surgical resection. Of these 8 miRNAs, 5 (miR-92b-3p, miR-150-3p, miR-4701-5p, miR-4327, and miR-4728-3p) were also significantly upregulated in cell culture supernatants of SS cell lines. Animal experiments showed a positive correlation between tumor size and serum miR-92b-3p levels. Serum miR-92b-3p levels decreased following tumor resection in SYO-1 SS cell-bearing mice, reflecting their tumor burden. Serum miR-92b-3p levels correlated with tumor size in patient cohorts. Their study also showed that miR-92b-3p was contained in exosome fractions from SS cells as well as patients’ sera. These researchers later performed a proteomic analysis of purified EVs from 3 SS cell lines and identified monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1) as a surface marker of SS-derived EVs. MCT1 was also enriched in SS patient-derived EVs compared to those of healthy controls. Moreover, MCT1+CD9+ EV expression levels correlated with tumor volume in SS-bearing mice, and serum MCT1+CD9+ EVs reflected the tumor burden in patients with SS. Expression of MCT1 in the cytoplasm/plasma membrane was significantly associated with worse overall survival. Their work demonstrates the significance of the liquid biopsy technique to sensitively monitor SS using circulating MCT1+CD9+ EVs. 
Exosomes may help identify treatment-resistant SS. Shiozawa et al. performed miRNA expression analysis of EVs released by SS cells with and without pazopanib treatment. They reported that upregulated exosomal miR-761 was associated with pazopanib resistance in SS cell lines. Moreover, the exposure of pazopanib-sensitive SS cells to EVs from pazopanib-resistant cells conferred pazopanib resistance in the recipient cells. In a separate study, these investigators performed an exosome protein expression analysis of the same samples. Wnt proteins were upregulated in EVs derived from cell culture supernatants compared to their levels in whole-cell lysates or a cell-conditioned medium. Pathway analysis revealed significant differences in the Wnt signaling pathway proteins between pazopanib-resistant versus -sensitive cells. Tsuno and colleagues isolated exosomes from the SW982 SS cell line following treatment with methotrexate, salazosulfapyridine, and/or interleukin (IL)-1β. Exosome protein analysis identified immunity or oxidative stress pathway-associated proteins significantly secreted by the cells treated with either methotrexate or salazosulfapyridine or the two in combination. These findings altogether highlight the usefulness of analyzing EVs as an optimal non-invasive diagnostic or prognostic technique for patients with SS.

## Desmoplastic small round blue cell tumor
Desmoplastic small round blue cell tumors (DSRCTs) are aggressive, rare, and often lethal mesenchymal tumors predominantly affecting male adolescents and young adults. DSRCTs carry a characteristic EWS-WT1 fusion protein, and patients present with multiple intra-abdominal tumors. Intensive multimodality treatments and aggressive surgical procedures are currently employed to target these tumors, and yet the disease continues to carry a poor prognosis. The use of biomarkers for risk stratification and prognosis is poorly defined for DSRCTs, and studies investigating EVs in DSRCTs are limited. Colleti et al. performed miRNA profiling of exosomal RNA from 3 DSRCT patient plasma samples and compared them to plasma exosomes from healthy controls. They showed a differential expression of 5 miRNAs in all 3 patients: miR-34a-5p, miR-22-3p, and miR-324-3p were overexpressed, whereas miR-342-3p and miR-150-5p were underexpressed. To our knowledge, this study is the only one investigating the role of exosomes in DSRCTs. Whether these miRNAs have a tumor-suppressive role or promote oncogenic function needs further elaboration in a larger patient cohort. The role of exosomes as predictors to response to therapy in this cohort also remains to be examined.

## Osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most frequent malignant pediatric bone tumor, affecting the long bones of children and adolescents. OS has a bimodal age distribution: an initial peak at 10–14 years of age, consistent with the age of bone growth, and a second peak after 60 years. Metastatic disease is present at diagnosis in 10%–15% of patients. Although the long-term survival of patients with nonmetastatic OS has significantly improved, the risk of relapse or distant metastasis remains high, and the presence of metastasis has a significantly negative impact on survival. Developing novel strategies for diagnosis, risk assessment, and personalized therapy may reduce the tumor burden. To identify novel biomarkers, several studies have investigated the expression profile of miRNAs carried in exosomes isolated from OS cells or sera/plasma samples of patients with OS.
Studies support the role of exosomes in OS metastasis. Gong et al. purified exosomes from OS cell culture supernatants as well as patients’ sera. Exosomal miR-675 was found to be significantly upregulated in metastatic OS cell lines compared to nonmetastatic cells and in the plasma of patients with lung metastasis compared to patients without metastatic disease. miRNA target prediction revealed that CALN1 is a possible target of miR-675. In vitro experiments confirmed the downregulation of CALN1 in human osteoblast cell lines treated with miR-675-enriched exosomes. Moreover, sera from patients with OS with lung metastasis exhibited lower CALN1 expression and higher exosomal miR-675 levels. Jerez and colleagues performed RNA sequencing of EVs isolated from 6 OS cell lines. They found 4 miRNAs (miR143-3p, miR21-5p, miR181a-5p, and miR148-5p) upregulated in metastatic OS cell lines compared to their nonmetastatic counterparts. Pathway analysis suggested a potential role of these miRNAs in the transcriptional regulation of proteins involved in apoptosis, cell adhesion, and motility and their potential applicability as biomarkers. Components of the TME and angiogenesis are critical determinants of OS aggressiveness. Wang and colleagues showed that cancer-associated fibroblast (CAF)-derived exosomes promoted the migration and invasion of OS cells via the delivery of miR-1228 and the downregulation of the suppressor of cancer cell invasion (SCAI) gene. miR-25-3p enriched in OS cell line-derived exosomes promoted capillary formation in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in vitro, and dysregulation of miR-25-3p expression correlates with poor prognosis in OS tissues. Raimondi et al. compared the expression pattern of miRNAs derived from OS cells and OS cell-derived exosomes. RNA sequencing showed that 21 human miRNAs were differentially expressed between exosomes and their parental cell lines. Among those, 10 miRNAs were downregulated in exosomes, and 11 were upregulated. miR-21-5p and miR-148a, known to be involved in bone remodeling and neo-angiogenesis, were significantly upregulated in Raw264.7 and HUVEC cells, respectively, when treated with OS cell-derived exosomes. Moreover, the overexpression of these 2 miRNAs in Raw264.7 cells induced the expression of osteoclast markers and stimulated bone resorption activity while promoting capillary network formation in HUVECs. Taken together, the findings from these studies suggest a potential role for exosome miRNAs as diagnostic and prognostic indicators in OS.
Exosomes appear to play a role in OS response to chemotherapy. Xu et al. performed miRNA profiling of exosomes derived from the sera of patients with OS with differential chemotherapy response. In patients having a poor response to chemotherapy, miR-124, miR-133a, miR-199a-3p, and miR-385 were downregulated, whereas miR-135b, miR-148a, miR-27a, and miR-9 were upregulated. Statistical analysis confirmed the diagnostic potential of these miRNAs as biomarkers of treatment response. Pathway analysis predicted the involvement of these miRNAs in biological processes associated with a poor chemotherapy response, including PI3K-Akt and Ras signaling pathways, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and choline metabolism. Exosomes derived from OS express specific protein signatures associated with acquired chemoresistance and are also capable of transferring mRNAs and noncoding RNAs that may assist in the acquisition of chemoresistance. , Torreggiani et al. established that drug-resistant OS cells release exosomes capable of mediating doxorubicin resistance by utilizing multidrug resistance-1 mRNA and its product P-glycoprotein. These data provide support for the use of exosomes in the prediction of response to therapy in OS.

## Ewing sarcoma
Ewing sarcoma (EWS) is the second most common bone malignancy in childhood and adolescence. EWSs are aggressive cancers, with 70%–80% survival rates for standard-risk cases and ∼30% survival rates for patients with metastatic disease. Histologically, EWS features small round cells expressing elevated levels of the membrane glycoprotein CD99. They are characterized by the presence of a fusion oncogene arising due to balanced chromosomal translocations between a member of the FET gene family and an ETS transcription factor. 85% of EWSs present with the EWSR1-FLI1 fusion gene, leading to the oncoprotein, which is known to reprogram the transcriptome as well as the epigenome. Current therapy depends on a multidisciplinary approach that includes intensive chemotherapies combined with surgery and/or radiotherapy. Accessible and robust biomarkers allowing early detection, disease monitoring, and therapy response prediction may help to achieve improved overall survival and better quality of life for patients with EWS.
Initial studies performed on EWS cell line-derived EVs showed that they carry the EWS-FLI1 fusion gene, , indicating the role of EVs as a non-invasive diagnostic marker for patients with EWS. Samuel and co-workers performed the first proteomic study of EVs isolated from 5 EWS cell lines representing the most common EWS-ETS fusion types. They identified 2 membrane-bound proteins, CD99/MIC2 and NGFR, enriched in the EVs derived from EWS cells with potential as biomarkers in EWS. In a follow-up study, these researchers performed quantitative proteomic profiling of EVs derived from EWS cell lines and non-EWS controls, such as OS, RMS, and benign cells. The screening of markers exclusively enriched in EWS-derived EVs led to the identification of the UDP glycosyltransferase 3A2 (UGT3A2) protein. UGT3A2 expression was clinically validated in patient tumor tissues and plasma-derived EVs, demonstrating its specificity to EWS. EWS cells release CD99 via exosomes. Ventura et al. analyzed the miRNA content and identified factors responsible for the neoplastic transformation of EWS cells. Both CD99 and EWS-FLI1 affect EWS cell differentiation, with opposing effects: EWS-FLI1 induces neural differentiation, and CD99 prevents it. A comparison of CD99-suppressed EWS with wild-type cells showed significant differences in the abundance of secreted exosomes. CD99-silenced EWS cell-derived exosomes induced neural differentiation in recipient wild-type EWS cells. These researchers demonstrated that silencing CD99 drives its uncoupling from the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein, which re-establishes the neural differentiation program via NF-κB inhibition through miR-34a-mediated repression of the Notch pathway. CD99-silenced EWS cells secrete miR-34a enclosed in exosomes. The delivery of exosomes from CD99-silenced cells was sufficient to induce neural differentiation in recipient EWS cells through miR-34a inhibition of Notch-NF-κB signaling. De Feo et al. identified miR-199-3p as the most enriched miRNA inside CD99-depleted exosomes. miR-199-3p reduced growth, migration, and invasion in recipient tumor cells. Moreover, the expression of miR-199a-3p was significantly lower in metastases than in localized primary tumors. These studies suggest that the inhibition of CD99 in EWS tumor cells leads to the release of oncosuppressive exosomes, suggesting a novel role for exosomes in tumor regression rather than in priming the soil for progression and metastatic seeding.
EWS cells reprogram various cells of the TME via EVs. High expression of the RNA-binding protein IGF2BP3 correlates with a poor prognosis in EWS. IGF2BP3 was detected in the EVs derived from EWS cell culture supernatants. EVs from IGF2BP3-positive or IGF2BP3-negative EWS cells reciprocally affected cell migration in EWS recipient cells. Eleven miRNAs were found to be differentially expressed between IGF2BP3-positive and IGF2BP3-negative EVs, which also correctly grouped with IGF2BP3-positive and IGF2BP3-negative clinical tissue specimens. This study shows the significant role of IGF2BP3 in regulating phenotypic heterogeneity in EWS. Kling et al. analyzed exosomal miRNA cargo in hypoxia-induced EWS cell lines. They found that HIF-1α-regulated miR-210 potentially downregulates apoptotic pathways and mediates stemness in EWS cells treated with hypoxic exosomes. The study highlights the effects of EWS-derived exosomal miRNAs on target genes and the role these interactions play in driving the aggressiveness and potentially the prognosis in EWS tumors. Continued work to develop liquid biopsy techniques for the purposes of diagnosis, prognosis, and response to therapy in EWS is ongoing. 

## Hepatoblastoma
Hepatoblastoma (HB) is the most frequent primary pediatric liver cancer with the poorest 5-year survival among childhood cancers. HB is derived from hepatic precursor cells and morphologically resembles immature hepatocytes. Treatments include surgical resection and chemotherapy. Children presenting with pre-treatment extent of disease (PRETEXT) staging system III or IV are at risk of local relapse or distant metastasis even after curative treatments. For patients with unresectable HB, liver transplantation is the only effective treatment option. Early diagnosis leads to improved prognosis for patients with HB. Risk stratification is based on imaging and histologic features at diagnosis, with serum alpha fetoprotein (AFP) serving as the only molecular marker for diagnosis, disease response, and disease relapse.
There is some evidence that exosomes may prove to have a role as HB biomarkers. The expression pattern of miRNA-21 isolated from plasma exosomes in a small cohort of 32 patients with HB and 32 healthy controls was studied. Based on receiver operating curve (ROC) analyses, the study reported that increased levels of exosomal miRNA-21 were superior to serum AFP levels in diagnosing HB. 
Serum-derived exosomal miRNAs were analyzed for their role as prognostic indicators in a larger group of patients with HB (control group = 63, training group = 63, and validation group = 26). In this study, miRNA-34a, miRNA-34b, and miRNA-34c expression levels were found to be superior to AFP levels in differentiating the HB training group from the control group. Using Cox proportional hazard models, the expression values of the exosome-derived panel of miRNA-34s was better at predicting the prognosis of patients with HB compared to other risk factors, including tumor metastases, vascular invasion, and PRETEXT stage. Exosome-mediated tumor-stroma interactions play a key role in regulating tumor growth and metastasis. Through co-culture studies, Hu et al. examined the influence of exosomal miRNAs derived from HB cells and tissue samples on bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs). Using an miR-126 mimic/inhibitor, they showed that exosomal miR-126 promoted HB tumorigenesis by inducing the differentiation of BMSCs into cancer stem cells. EVs secreted at the primary tumor site may travel to distant organs and promote the establishment of premetastatic niches. A recent study showed that exosomes derived from HB cells promoted the differentiation of BMSCs to invasive myofibroblasts. The HB-derived exosomal long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) NEAT1 stimulated the differentiation of BMSCs into tumor-supporting myofibroblasts by regulating the miR-132/MMP9 axis. The knockdown of lncRNA NEAT1 reduced the growth of subcutaneous HB tumors in vivo. 
Exosomes have been examined in the context of HB response to immunotherapy. HB cells secrete a significant amount of PD-L1 in exosomes rather than on the cell surface, allowing HB cells to evade anti-tumoral immunity and providing the cells with resistance to anti-PD-L1 blockade. The measurement of cell surface and exosome PD-L1 has been shown to be variable between patients and will be important in determining their response to anti-PD-L1 therapy. 

## Clinical and technical challenges with exosome biomarkers
The use of exosomes as biomarkers in pediatric cancers is a novel clinical application that poses many technical challenges. The challenges lie in the heterogeneity of the processes used to isolate and purify the exosomes, as well as in the intrinsic heterogeneity of exosomes. The most often cited technical challenge is the lack of a gold-standard protocol for the isolation and purification of exosomes. Exosome isolation and purification in general is performed via stepwise centrifugation, ultrafiltration, and SEC techniques. , However, the biological source, isolation protocol, choice of internal and exogenous controls, analytical approach, sample size, and lack of validation in independent cohorts affect the reproducibility of exosome-based experiments. The purification process for obtaining exosomes may potentially damage their membrane, thereby affecting their activity. Other technical issues compromising the yield and purity of exosomes during isolation include their propensity to bind to plasma proteins and laboratory plasticware. The time from blood withdrawal to isolation may also influence the amount of exosomes collected from blood samples. The inability to extract a large enough blood sample in small children to produce a sufficient sample continues to remain a challenge to the widespread use of exosomes in the pediatric population. , Moreover, gene expression levels are not always consistently represented due to differential expression of the proteins and genetic material packaged in exosomes. It is important to stress that both normal cells and cancer cells release exosomes, and quantitative analysis is not always specific. Distinguishing exosomes from microvesicles is an additional challenge. Finally, exosomes have a short half-life and are rapidly cleared, which may limit their utility. 
The use of exosomes as biomarkers in malignancies may have tumor-specific challenges. In neuroblastoma, MYCN gene amplification is a critical factor in disease prognostication. MYCN amplification status is associated with worse overall survival and is currently determined by invasive tumor biopsies. The use of exosomes to determine MYCN amplification status has been previously investigated as a less invasive means to determine treatment for these patients. In one study, the investigators were able to detect MYCN mRNA in microvesicles but not in exosomes of MYCN-amplified cells. The investigators hypothesized that the complex process of exosomal cargo sorting contributed to the inability to detect MYCN mRNA. These findings obviously diminish the enthusiasm for utilizing exosomes as biomarkers for MYCN in neuroblastoma. Other tumors with rare subtypes present a challenge in the clinical application of exosomes as biomarkers due to difficulty developing standardized protocols. Exosomes will require more study to determine their usefulness in rare tumors.

## Challenges to exosomes as therapeutics
The therapeutic application of exosomes demands optimal bioavailability and a minimal immune response. However, the complexity and diverse functions of natural exosomes may limit their clinical application. Like the utilization of exosomes as biomarkers, the issue of obtaining adequate yields affects their general applicability as therapeutics. Functional heterogeneity between exosome subsets must be overcome prior to widespread use. The heterogeneity of malignancies, TME complexity, and mixed effects of exosomes are some other difficulties that need to be addressed. Importantly, current preclinical studies in animal models are confounding. These investigations often employ exogenous administration of surplus exosomes, derived from large cell numbers, but whether non-manipulated, physiologically relevant levels of exosomes recapitulate the same effects in the clinical setting will require further investigation. To that end, Hagey et al. have emphasized that dose-response experiments should be a prerequisite to testing EVs as therapeutic modalities. Using Drosophila, C. elegans, 
Xenopus, and zebrafish models may offer additional insights into exosome biogenesis and function in vivo. Finally, one approach that serves as a promising alternative to natural exosomes is the use of nanoparticles or liposomes. These artificial exosomes may guarantee higher yields, greater reproducibility, and easier quality control; however, none have progressed forward into clinical application so far. 

## Conclusion and perspectives
A multitude of exosome-derived miRNAs and proteins have been reported as potential biomarkers for cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and predicting therapy response, but reports on the role of exosomes as biomarkers in pediatric solid tumors are not conclusive and require further validation in larger and homogeneous cohorts of patients. Nevertheless, accumulating evidence suggests that tumor-derived exosomes are present in the body fluids and play a crucial role in mediating intercellular communication. Exosomes may be better candidates for biomimetic drug delivery vehicles compared to synthetic drug-loaded polymers that may either induce toxicity or/and immunogenicity and potentially get cleared by the mononuclear phagocyte system. The application of exosomes as direct therapeutic targets or drug delivery vehicles may open new avenues for treating cancers. However, the translation of these therapies from laboratory to clinical settings requires specific guidelines and procedures.
Novel, multidisciplinary contributions making the use of exosomes more feasible are on the horizon. Alternatives to one-step exosome detection techniques would allow for advancements in biomarker discovery. One example includes microfluidic chip development, which allows for the examination of exosomes in liquid biopsies. , Ground-breaking EV surface engineering for drug loading, imaging, and targeting via physical or chemical modifications may further improve their therapeutic efficacy. Single-exosome identification, improved informatics systems, and high-resolution microscopy will deepen our understanding of exosome biology, addressing issues such as whether exosomes grow and divide autonomously. Cancer cell-derived exosomes have been shown to mediate significant transcriptome alterations in target cells via RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC)-associated miRNAs. Exosomes may have a possible role in inducing an oncogenic “field effect” over the adjacent normal cells, which may further stimulate their participation in cancer development and progression. In the future, biochemical and bioelectrical experiments may unveil functions of exosomes independent of the cells from which they originate. Investigating the cell-independent functions may further advance exosome research for drug delivery and therapy.

## Acknowledgments
The authors are thankful to lab members Jerry Stewart, Dr. Nazia Nazam, Dr. Swatika Butey, and Dr. Michael H. Erwin for their input and critiques. This work was supported in part by funding from the 10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health (NIH) NCI 75N91023C0038, 75N91024C00009, and T32CA229102. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. Additional funding came from the Kaul Pediatric Research Foundation, 10.13039/100008258Hyundai Hope On Wheels, and the National Pediatric Cancer Foundation (E.A.B.). The graphical abstract and figures were created with BioRender (https://biorender.com).

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, S.M.G. and E.A.B.; funding acquisition and resources, E.A.B.; writing – original draft, S.M.G.; writing – review & editing, E.A.B.; writing – revised draft, S.M.G., M.L.B., and E.A.B. All authors have read and agreed to the current version of the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.