3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1087038410870384108703843837181110.1021/acsomega.3c08353Lipid Nanoparticle-Based Delivery System—A
Competing Place for mRNA Vaccines
ZhangXinyu LiYuanfang ZhouZehua †Research
Center for Infectious Diseases, Tianjin
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 300193 Tianjin, China‡Institute
for Biological Product Control, National
Institutes for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC) and WHO Collaborating
Center for Standardization and Evaluation of Biologicals, No.31 Huatuo Street, Daxing District, 102629 Beijing, China§Department
of Neurology, Zhongshan Hospital (Xiamen Branch), Fudan University, 361015 Xiamen, Fujian China∥College
of Life Science, Jilin University, 130012 Changchun, China*Email: li.yuanfang@zsxmhospital.com.
*Email: zhouzh1003@tjutcm.edu.cn.
30120249662196219–62341722024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 mRNA, as one of the
foci of biomedical research in the past decade,
has become a candidate vaccine solution for various infectious diseases
and tumors and for regenerative medicine and immunotherapy due to
its high efficiency, safety, and effectiveness. A stable and effective
delivery system is needed to protect mRNAs from nuclease degradation
while also enhancing immunogenicity. The success of mRNA lipid nanoparticles
in treating COVID-19, to a certain extent, marks a milestone for mRNA
vaccines and also promotes further research on mRNA delivery systems.
Here, we explore mRNA vaccine delivery systems, especially lipid nanoparticles
(LNPs), considering the current research status, prospects, and challenges
of lipid nanoparticles, and explore other mRNA delivery systems.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Oct 23; Accepted 2023 Dec 29; Revised 2023 Dec 24; Collection date 2024 Feb 13.

1.

## Introduction
When mRNA is used for
vaccines, it can encode target antigens,
which are usually produced by DNA transcription in vitro and subsequently inoculated into the body. mRNA
is translated into an antigenic protein in the body, triggering an
adaptive immune response. The whole process
does not involve cell culture, so it is simple, fast and attractive
and is a candidate form of vaccine suitable for responding to outbreaks
of new infectious diseases, such as COVID-19. Researchers’ efforts in mRNA purification, sequence optimization
and nucleoside chemistry have endowed mRNAs with stability and strong
immunogenicity. − Research based on mRNA itself has paved the way for its application.
Although the optimization and modification of mRNAs are key to their
successful translation into antigenic proteins, we must admit that
the delivery system makes the same important contribution to the performance
of mRNA vaccines. Naked mRNA is easily degraded in systemic circulation,
whether it is modified, and the degradation products are small enough
to be excreted by the kidney. These degraded small molecules are not
ingested or displayed by antigen-presenting cells, nor will they trigger
an adaptive immune response through the immune organs. In the past
decade, a large number of new nucleic acid nanoparticle delivery systems
have emerged − that aim to encapsulate mRNAs effectively to protect them from degradation
by serum nucleases and promote endocytosis and endosome escape to
successfully trigger the immune response. Among them, LNPs have become
a highly concerning delivery system because of their efficient delivery
characteristics.
In the 1960s, the first generation of LNPs,
which were called liposomes,
appeared. They are produced in water
and have a closed phospholipid bilayer. Lipids can enhance the water solubility of drugs; therefore, they
are considered to have potential as drug delivery systems. In recent years, nanotechnology has been developed,
and the function of nanoliposomes has further developed to realize
simple targeting or other simple functions. LNPs developed for mRNA delivery in recent years consist of ionizable
cationic lipids, phospholipids, cholesterol, polyethylene glycol (PEG)
lipids, and mRNAs ( ). LNPs have been studied as drug delivery systems that encapsulate
small molecules, nucleic acids, small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and
mRNAs. − Ionizable cationic lipids contain ionizable amine groups, self-assembled
hydrophobic tails, and connectors. After entering the body, the peptide
is ionized in an acidic environment, which helps to form a hexagonal
phase, facilitating the escape of mRNA from degradation in the body
and release into the cytoplasm. − The choice of PEG lipid depends on the molar mass
and length of the PEG, which can affect the overall outcome, including
targeted delivery and cell uptake efficiency. , Auxiliary lipids and cholesterol also contribute to the formation
of LNPs, which contributes to the fluidity (or rigidity) of LNPs. In addition, the presence of the cold-terol
complex affects the delivery and distribution of LNPs, and specific
modifications enhance the targeting of certain cell types. , 
 The success of mRNA in treating COVID-19 has laid the foundation
for its application in other places and established the confidence
of researchers. The authors believe that the next successful use of
mRNA vaccines is to be expected because LNPs are widely used in nucleic
acid delivery research and clinical applications, and nearly 80 kinds
of nucleic acid drugs based on LNPs have entered the clinical stage. Although some clinical data are still available
after approval and emergency use authorization (EUA) are obtained
from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), LNPs still have
many problems that cannot be bypassed. There are several obstacles
inside and outside the cells that prevent the application of mRNA
LNPs within a wide range. Liver enrichment is a common phenomenon
in the mouths of LNP patients. LNPs require some effort to pass through
the liver system, and nanoparticles must first be isolated from Kupffer
cells (which are macrophages resident in the liver). Kupffer cells
in the liver can absorb LNPs of different sizes. In addition, LNPs
also interact with hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) to
prevent LNPs from passing through the liver system ( ). A total of 30–90% of these drugs are concentrated in the
liver, which leads to drug deviation during nonliver-targeted administration, thus affecting the therapeutic efficacy. In
addition, even for LNPs approved by the FDA for sale, only 1–4%
of nucleic acids have the opportunity to escape from endosomes and
reach the cytoplasm, which is the main
barrier for LNPs to play their role after entering cells. These limitations
are the main obstacles to organ and cell targeting of mRNA vaccines.
Although mRNA vaccines can induce an immune response by targeting
antigen proteins, more in-depth research and additional attention
need to be given to the stability and toxicity of these agents. This
review discusses the research status of mRNA vaccine delivery systems.
 
2.

## mRNA Vaccines
2.1.

## Mechanisms of Action of mRNA Vaccines
When the concept
of mRNA vaccines was introduced, researchers first
attempted to use in vitro transcribed (IVT) mRNA as a protective vaccine. , However, bare IVT mRNA is not sufficient to drive full protective
immunity in most cases, and although
complexation of mRNA with fish sperm proteins effectively enhances
the immunostimulatory potential of nucleic acids, it is still associated
with the risk of reducing its translatability, thus reducing the preventive
effect of the vaccine. Another challenge
for mRNA vaccines is the inability to exercise the correct function
in dendritic cells (DCs), which may require special means to direct
DC activation. In addition, the poor
in vivo stability of mRNAs, their susceptibility to degradation by
nucleases, and their high molecular weight (MW) and high negative
charge, which prevent them from entering cells by passive diffusion,
are also issues that need to be addressed. LNPs, commonly used nonviral
vectors for delivering mRNA vaccines, show great potential for protecting
mRNAs from nuclease degradation and facilitating antigen-presenting
cell (APC) uptake as well as for carrying their own adjuvant effect
to enhance the immunogenicity of endogenous proteins encoded by mRNAs.
The mRNA vaccine relies on the interaction of LNPs with the cell
membrane to molecularly deliver the mRNA encoding the target antigen
to the cytoplasm of inoculated individual cells, where the mRNA can
be translated into endogenous immunogenic proteins to elicit an immune
response ( A).
When a pathogen invades, the host can then rely on its immune memory
to respond rapidly to clear the antigen. mRNA-LNPs enter the cell
through endocytosis, where they can form endosomes that enter the
cytoplasm. The acidic environment inside the endosome causes the headgroup
of ionizable cationic lipids, one of the components of LNPs, to protonate
and carry a positive charge, which attracts and binds the anionic
headgroup of phospholipids in the endosomome. Upon binding, the hydrophobic
tails of cationic lipids and phospholipids expand, and the endosomal
membrane is disrupted, thereby allowing the mRNA cytoplasm to undergo
translation and preventing lysosomal degradation of the endosome. , Activation of mRNA for humoral immunity is similar to that of most
conventional vaccines, and although the exact process of activation
of CD8+ T cells is currently not fully understood, endogenous antigens
are considered potent conditions and antigenic peptides need to be
presented to CD8+ T cells via the major histocompatibility complex
class I (MHC I) molecular pathway, which mRNA vaccines can do very
well, exerting both humoral and cellular immunity at the same time
( B).
 
2.2.

## mRNA-LNPs
against Viruses
mRNA vaccines
have emerged as promising alternative platforms to traditional vaccines.
They are easy to produce, low cost, safe, and highly effective, making
them ideal candidates for the prevention and treatment of infectious
diseases. The development of an mRNA vaccine against COVID-19 was
the first successful introduction of the entire mRNA platform. Pfizer/Biontech
and Moderna are two COVID-19 mRNA vaccines (BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273)
that were approved and showed 94.1% and
95% efficacy, respectively. The success
of mRNAs in fighting COVID-19 has given confidence. Researchers have
studied the effectiveness of mRNA vaccines against other viruses to
improve the use of these new technologies for protecting human health.
mRNA-LNP was also applied to the Zika virus and influenza virus
(H7N9 and H10N8). Mice and nonhuman primates produced high neutralizing
antibody titers (1/100,000) against Zika
virus after administration of two or more single doses of the vaccine;
in mice and ferrets, a single dose of the vaccine produced HA-inhibitory
and potent neutralizing antibodies against H7N9 and H10N8. LNP-embedded modified mRNA vaccines encoding
viral glycoproteins have been investigated in preclinical studies
against a variety of viruses, including Ebola, HIV-1, and Nipah virus. These studies demonstrated that the vaccines
were able to induce high glycoprotein-specific neutralizing antibody
titers as well as antibody-dependent cytotoxicity, thereby protecting
animals from lethal viral attacks. The mRNA-LNPs also showed superior
immune strength to other vaccine forms when glycoproteins from cytomegalovirus
(CMV), vzv, RSV, and the rabies virus were used as immunogens.

2.3.

## mRNA-LNPs
for Cancer Immunotherapy
mRNA vaccines have emerged as promising
platforms for the development
of cancer vaccines. mRNA vaccines work by introducing single-stranded
molecules that encode tumor neoantigens. mRNA-based cancer vaccines
encode key components of the immune response process, such as tumor-specific
antigen (TSA), tumor-associated antigen (TAA), and immunomodulatory
factors, which promote immune activation to carry out antitumor functions. , Upon injection, the mRNA cancer vaccine is delivered to the cytoplasm
of the APC, where it is subsequently translated into neoantigenic
proteins and stimulates TLR7 and TLR8. , Subsequently,
mature APCs are translocated to the lymph nodes, where they generate
significant humoral and cellular immunity. , Compared with conventional vaccines, mRNA vaccines induce a more
potent type I interferon response and efficiently trigger human CD8+
T-cell responses, which play a key role
in tumor eradication. In a previous study, Oberli et al. designed
and optimized an LNP library for the delivery of an mRNA vaccine encoding
the model antigen ovalbumin (OVA). The vaccine successfully induced
potent CD8+ T-cell activation and immune responses. CD8+ T-cell activation
was successfully induced, and the overall survival of B16F10 melanoma
patients was prolonged. prolonged overall survival in a B16F10 melanoma
model. In another study, Bevers et al.
optimized an mRNA-LNP formulation by adjusting the molar concentration
of the four components of the mRNA-LNP formulation to optimize the
delivery of the mRNA-LNP vaccine encoding HPV16. The optimal mRNA-LNP vaccine induced a strong CD8+ T-cell
response and enhanced uptake of the mRNA into the cells. These results
demonstrated the feasibility of using mRNA-LNPs as a cancer vaccine. 
A TSA-based vaccine, mRNA-4157, which
is capable of encoding up to 34 antigens, is currently being evaluated
for its efficacy in the treatment of melanoma (NCT03897881). The results
of the phase IIb KEYNOTE-942 trial suggest that mRNA-4157/V940 in
combination with pembrolizumab may be a potential adjuvant therapy
for melanoma because patients receiving this combination have a significantly
lower risk of disease recurrence than patients receiving only the
PD-1 inhibitor alone. Patients treated with this combination have
a significantly lower risk of disease recurrence. The ability of the autologous gene cevumeran (BNT 122),
which contains up to 20 neoantigens, to stimulate immunity to neoantigens
in patients with resected pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
was tested in a phase 1 clinical trial. The BioNT111 vaccine developed
by BioNTech is an mRNA cancer vaccine that encodes four TAAs, namely,
New York Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma 1 (NY-ESO-1), Melanoma-Associated
Antigen A3 (MAGE-A3), tyrosinase, and tensor protein homologous transmembrane
phosphatase (TPTE). These mRNAs were
encapsulated in liposomes and administered intravenously to patients.
In a phase I trial, a vaccine alone or in combination with immune
checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) induced durable responses and had a favorable
safety profile in patients with advanced melanoma. These findings suggest that the BNT111 vaccine has potential
as a candidate for melanoma treatment. The success of mRNA cancer
vaccines in combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors has inspired
further ideas on the use of mRNAs encoding immunostimulants that enhance
the efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors. Trials of cytokine-encoded
mRNA products by BioNTech and Moderna have yielded satisfactory results. , For example, Moderna-generated intratumorally administered mRNA-2416,
which encodes OX40L, demonstrated safety and tolerability in a phase
I trial and triggered broad proinflammatory activity and an altered
TME. In addition, BioNTech’s BNT131
(SAR441000) (NCT03871348), which encodes IL-12sc, IL-15 sushi, and
IFN-α for intratumoral administration, is being tested as a
monotherapy as well as in combination with cemiplimab in patients
with advanced solid tumors to alter the TME.

3.

## Composition of LNPs
When the in vivo delivery of mRNA was
first investigated, viruses
as natural nucleic acid delivery systems first attracted the attention
of researchers. However, most viruses are still dangerous because
of their self-integrating DNA and pathogenicity. Risk-reducing viral
vectors still do not fully address these shortcomings and are difficult
to produce. Nonviral vectors, which are
negatively charged themselves, interact with negatively charged mRNAs,
bind mRNAs and enter the cell via endocytosis. This approach circumvents
the drawbacks of viral vectors but results in a decreased transfection
efficiency. In the 1990s, researchers experimented with the use of
cationic liposomes and fish sperm proteins, among others, as delivery systems, followed
by further attempts with biodegradable, ionizable polymers. However, the complex structure and high toxicity
of these materials as well as their lower transfection efficiency
prevent them from entering the clinic. LNPs solve these problems to
some extent with good biocompatibility and high transfection efficiency,
as well as greatly reduced toxicity. As a result, LNPs have become
the most widely used mRNA delivery system and have advantages over other delivery systems.
3.1.

## Ionizable
Cationic Lipids
Ionizable
cationic lipids are pH sensitive, and their head groups can transfer
charge, changing from a positively charged state at low pH to a neutral
state at physiological pH. , This allows the formation
of mRNA–LNP complexes, and LNPs provide a safe and stable environment
for mRNA in a pH-dependent manner. , Ionizable
cationic lipids can remain neutral in the blood, so the pH of the
mRNA released by LNPs can be adjusted to reduce toxicity. In addition, in the low-pH environment of the
inner body, ionizable cationic lipids can obtain a positive charge,
which makes the inner body envelope unstable and allows the nanoparticles
to escape from the inner body compartment. 

3.2.

## Polyethylene Glycol
Another key component
of lipid nanoparticles is PEG, which has a significant effect on their
properties. The most commonly used PEG in LNP structures is PEG2000
(PEG, MW = 2000), which was shown by Oberli et al. to contribute to
smaller LNP particle sizes as well as stronger T-cell responses. Rondine et al. explored the effect of the structure–activity
relationship of PEG-peptide complexes on the uptake of Kupffer cells
and showed that the smaller the MW of PEG was, the more pronounced
the hepatic escape effect of the nanoparticles was when the peptide’s
structure was fixed. PEG can increase
the ability of mRNA LNPs to escape conditioning and phagocytosis by
macrophages. When PEG2000 was used, modulation of the PEG density
and chain length allowed it to interfere with the binding of modulator
molecules (e.g., C3b and iC3b) to their corresponding receptors expressed
on macrophages by means of spatial site barriers, enhancing the mobility
of the PEG chains, and softness and stretching have been shown to
have similar significant effects. PEG
on the surface of LNPs can stabilize the spatial structure of LNPs
and prevent nonspecific binding with some proteins. Due to its hydrophilicity, the addition of PEG chains results
in a hydration cloud with a large excluded volume of LNPs, which reduces
the interaction of LNPs with neighboring LNPs or blood constituents.
The flexibility of the PEG conformation, which has a large degree
of freedom, renders the thermodynamic interpenetration of the PEG
corona unfavorable for other substances. Therefore, the addition of PEG can lead to a significant prolongation
of the in vivo circulation time of LNPs. The PEG content in LNPs is
usually positively correlated with the blood circulation time. 

3.3.

## Other Lipids
Cholesterol,
phospholipids,
and PEG are the components of LNPs, except for ionizable cationic
lipids. Cholesterol is key to the stability of LNPs, and its role
in cell transfection experiments has been proven. When the transition temperature is low, the cholesterol
content in the LNPs must increase, which can cause the LNPs to transition
from the lamellar phase to the hexagonal phase. These processes are necessary for LNPs to release mRNA
and interact with the endosomal membrane. The role of phospholipids in LNPs is to stabilize the structure,
which is related to the formation and destruction of the phospholipid
bilayer to promote endosome escape. In addition, some phospholipids
exhibit polymorphism, which can cause the inner body membrane to change
from a layered to a hexagonal phase. , Moreover,
the negatively charged phosphoric acid group may participate in cationic
charge neutralization, which also contributes to phase transition
and internal body escape. , 

3.4.

## Clinical
Application of LNPs
Malone
et al. reported that the cationic lipid n-[1-(2,3-dioleoyloxy)propyl]-N,N,n-trimethylammonium
chloride (DOTMA) can be used as an mRNA transfection reagent to transport
mRNAs into cells. However, it can cause
proinflammatory and proapoptotic toxicity in vivo, so it can be quickly
removed during recycling. Therefore,
since ionizable lipids can promote the escape of mRNAs into endosomes
and are neutralized at physiological pH, they can be more stable,
safer, and more suitable for mRNA vaccine delivery systems. Ampatro Dlin-MC3-DMA ( A) in the LNP
formula is the first siRNA drug approved by the FDA worldwide. Moderna
used Dlin-MC3-DMA to test an mRNA vaccine based on Zika virus and
influenza virus and further conducted preclinical and clinical studies. , Research has shown that the vaccine form of mRNA-LNPs can generate
strong protective immune responses in mice, ferrets, and nonhuman
primates, and preliminary data from the first human trial of mRNA-LNPs
using influenza virus as the immunogen has shown some success. , However, the alkyl tail of linoleic acid in Dlin-MC3-DMA is not
easily degraded, which may lead to toxicity when the amount of this
compound is too high. The novel Pfizer/Biontech
and Moderna vaccines, two COVID-19 mRNA vaccines (BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273)
have recently been approved by the FDA and symbolize the successful
use of LNPs in the field of mRNA vaccines. These two LNPs were rapidly
developed to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The lipids produced by
Moderna are called SM-102 (also known as lipid H; B). Its tail has more branches,
which can increase its efficacy, and the ester bond introduced by
this tail improves its biodegradability in vivo and safety. , Almost at the same time, Biontech used ALC-0315 ( C), which has a chemical structure
similar to that of SM-102, as the ionizable lipid in its COVID-19
mRNA vaccine LNP formula. , Both mRNA vaccines
have a protective effect of more than 90%. , Monitoring of populations vaccinated with these two types of mRNA
vaccines showed good protective efficacy, although the protection
against mutations may be relatively poor. The molar ratio of LNPs developed by Moderna was SM-102: PEG: cholesterol:
phospholipids (DSPC) = 50: 1.5: 38.5: 10. The molar ratio of the LNP
formula developed by Pfizer/Biontech was ALC-0315: PEG: cholesterol:
phospholipids (DSPC) = 46.3: 1.6: 42.7: 9.4. The particle size of the LNPs in these two formulations is approximately
80–100 nm, and the LNPs contain
approximately 100 mRNA molecules; additionally,
the LNPs perform well in the prevention and control of COVID-19.
 In addition to the three approved
LNPs mentioned above, a considerable
number of LNP-based products are in clinical trials ( ). These studies demonstrated
that LNPs are effective in vivo delivery vehicles, highlighting the
need for a deeper understanding of LNP delivery systems.
 

4.

## Challenges in LNP design
As the most widespread and prominent mRNA vaccine delivery vector,
LNPs not only demonstrate potential but also present problems that
need to be solved. The resolution of these problems will expand the
application of mRNA vaccines to a greater extent.
4.1.

## LNP Targeting
When LNPs are injected
intravenously (IV) or intramuscularly (IM), a majority of the LNPs
accumulate in the liver, which contradicts the original intention
of achieving the function of mRNA vaccines. Researchers are attempting
to modify LNPs to alter organ targeting preferences. The charge, composition,
and size of LNPs can affect their trafficking, absorption, and organ
distribution. − Research on LNP targeting has become a global research
hotspot. The progress made in these studies has helped us gain a deeper
understanding of the adaptability of LNPs to immune organs. − 
4.1.1.

## Modifications Made to Achieve Immune Organ
Targeting
Recent studies have shown that changing the apparent
acid dissociation constant (pKa) of LNPs
can enable LNPs to target extrahepatic tissues (such as the spleen
or lungs). The pKa of LNPs enriched in the liver is generally between 6 and
7; when the pKa is between 2 and 6, LNPs
exhibit good spleen enrichment ability. The surface pKa ≈ 5.7 of spleen-targeted
OF-Deg-Lin FLuc mRNA LNPs also provides a good example. The above phenomenon may be due to the different
head groups of different ionizable cationic lipids determining the
pKa, which determines the surface charge
difference of LNPs, affects their ability to interact with different
types of serum proteins, and ultimately leads to their different distributions
in the body. The negative surface charge of LNPs is related to their
uptake in the spleen. Cheng et al. recently
found that the presence of a fifth component, called “selective
organ targeting (SORT)”, can alter the organ targeting effect
of LNPs in vivo. Studies have shown
that SORT lipids can affect the apparent pKa values of LNPs and the interaction between LNPs and serum proteins.
Changing the quantity and type of SORT lipids can endow LNPs with
different targeting selectivities. Interestingly, when the lipid 18PA,
which has a negative surface charge, is added to LNPs, spleen targeting
can be achieved. Next, 18PA was replaced with 14PA and 18BMP, which
also had negative surface charges. The results showed that the ability
of the LNPs to target cells was independent of the structure of the
fifth component. These findings are undoubtedly exciting and can be
foreseen for the further development of mRNA vaccines. Currently,
the LNP-SORT platform has been established. 
The spleen is an immune organ that contains a large number
of lymphocytes. A library of ionizable amino polyesters (APEs) was
synthesized by the ring-opening polymerization of lactones and tertiary
amino alcohols. Fusion of APE to LNP (i.e., APE-LNP) resulted in the
observation of an increased preference of LNP for splenic antigen-presenting
cells. In another study, Anderson et
al. synthesized a series of alkenyl amino alcohol (AAA) lipids, named
OF-XX, via a ring-opening reaction between an alkenyl epoxide and
a polyamine core. One of them, OF-02 LNPs, showed notable hepatic
targeting. To achieve splenic targeting,
they later designed OF-Deg-Lin lipids based on the lipids OF-02, which
have a diketopiperazine core and four esterified unsaturated tails.
A specific preference for B lymphocytes in the spleen was achieved. In addition, by increasing the length of the
carbon chain to 4, the lipid named OF-C4-Deg-Lin was further modified,
and this lipid possessed even better mRNA delivery capacity. Gomi et al. prepared a series of LNPs using
alcohol-soluble phosphatidylserine (PS) molecules to achieve splenic
targeting, which is a potential direction for the development of vac-cine
LNPs. Dong et al. designed TNT-b10,
optimized on the basis of the siRNA carrier TNT-a 10, which has altered
functional group positions and a significantly improved ability to
target the spleen. Ni et al. also studied
several ionizable lipids (Pi lipids) with piperazine, where Pi-A10
can preferentially deliver mRNA to immune cells in the liver and spleen,
with 50% expressed in macrophages of the spleen and 30% expressed
in DCs of the spleen. Targeted delivery
of DCs is also necessary for cancer vaccines to function. Veiga et
al. designed an unmodified RNA lipid complex (RNA-LPX) that targets
spleen DCs to activate immune responses by reducing the content of
ionizable cationic lipids. Significant T-cell responses were observed
in clinical trials, proving that this method can work. Furthermore, Tomácz et al. combined
CD4 antibodies with LNPs and compared with unmodified LNPs with CD4,
the accumulation rate of radiolabeled mRNA in the spleen was greater
during systemic administration. Cre-based reporter gene expression
experiments also showed stronger spleen- and lymph node-targeting
ability. Epstein et al. coupled CD5
antibodies to the surface of LNPs and found a trend toward targeting
lymph node T cells after systemic administration, enabling T cells
to be reprogrammed in vivo. DC205 is
highly expressed in some DCs, and Katakowski et al. reported that
modifying LNPs with a single-chain antibody specific to DEC205 can
lead to DC205+ DC uptake in the spleen. These studies demonstrated that LNPs can target specific immune
cells by coupling certain antibodies or ligands, achieving immune
organ targeting, and stimulating immune response activation in specific
viral infection backgrounds.
In addition to the above research,
Okuda et al. reported that the
particle size is also one of the factors affecting the targeting preference
of LNPs. They found that adding salt to mRNA buffer can increase the
particle size to approximately 200 nm, allowing the particles to travel
more to mouse spleen lymphocytes and DCs without changing the LNP
composition or effectively activating immune cells. 

4.1.2.

## Administration Routes
In addition
to modifying the LNP itself, local administration, such as via lymph
node intramuscular injection, can also increase the targeting potential
of LNPs, which prevents them from reaching specific organs after systemic
administration and helps in the selective delivery of LNPs.
In preclinical or clinical trials, LNPs are mainly administered through
intradermal, subcutaneous, or intramuscular injection, allowing them
to target nearby draining lymph nodes and present antigens to T cells,
exposing antigens to B cells and activating the immune response. − The two COVID-19 mRNA vaccines currently on the market are administered
through intramuscular injection. In regard to tumor vaccines, in addition
to the above three pathways, colon administration, nasal drip administration,
or intratumoral administration can also improve the targeting and
efficacy of LNPs. − The method of needle-free injection can
alleviate patient pain while also allowing LNPs to reach immune cells
under the skin under the influence of high-pressure sources.

4.2.

## Endosome Escape
When LNPs enter the
target cell, the mRNA inside must escape from the endomes to the cytoplasm
to be translated into the target protein for function. However, most
mRNAs are transported by the endosome to the lysosome for degradation, , and only a small portion of the proteins can escape into the cytoplasm. , This situation has been the main barrier for accounting for drug
delivery for more than 50 years and
is another major problem that needs to be solved in the application
of LNPs. A better understanding of the interactions between LNPs and
in vivo pathways can guide the design of better treatment methods.
It is necessary to improve the effectiveness of mRNA vaccines and
allow more mRNAs to escape from endosomes. Currently, it is possible
to advance this field by changing the LNP structure to address the
mechanism of endosome escape, but there is no perfect method for
achieving endosome escape. To ultimately achieve the goal of internal
escape, any feasible opportunity is worth trying.
4.2.1.

## Mechanism
of Endosomal Escape
In
a series of processes from early endosomes to late endosomes and then
to lysosomal degradation, the pH steadily decreases from physiological
7.4, early endosomes decrease to 6.5, late endosomes decrease to 6,
and lysosomal degradation decreases to 5. Then, LNPs can escape endophagy through a membrane phase transition
related to pH. The highest proportion of ionizable cationic lipids
in the LNP structure determines the basic properties of LNPs, which
are undoubtedly closely related to the function of endosome escape. When the hydrophobic tail of ionizable cationic
lipids is equivalent in size to the head, LNPs are dispersed in a
bilayer form in water. Early endosomes
are vesicles that engulf LNPs. As endosomes mature, the pH gradually
decreases and the head of the ionizable cationic lipids gradually
acquires a positive charge, allowing them to interact with negatively
charged endosomes. During this process, endosomes completely fuse
with LNPs, allowing mRNA to be released into the cytoplasm ( ).
 
4.2.2.

## Modification of Ionizable Cationic Lipids
Because ionizable cationic lipids fuse with endosomal membranes
under acidic conditions and because the hydrophobic tail expands,
it is more advantageous for them to insert into the phospholipid bilayer
to form the HII phase if they have a conical structure. The size of
the hydrophobic tail of ionizable cationic lipids strongly influences
the efficiency of endosomal membrane inversion. When the hydrophobic
tail has an unsaturated bond, the spatial hindrance created by the
rigid structure of the cis-double bond facilitates the formation of
the HII phase and promotes the escape of endosomes. Yusuke Sato et al. developed a library of ionizable cationic
lipids that can respond to pH changes in 2019. Among them, the lipid CL1H6, which has a high endosomal
escape efficiency, consists of a hydrophilic head with a tertiary
amine and two tails with double bonds. The hydrophilic head of CL1H6
affects the apparent pKa of the LNP to
control endosomal escape and organ preference, a process that is achieved
by membrane fusion rather than disruption of the endosomal membrane
(analyses showed an intracellular translocation ED50 of
0.0025 mg/kg). Tanaka et al. developed
a self-degrading lipid molecule (ssPalmO Phe) based on a double-bonded
hydrophobic tail that can accelerate the breakdown of LNPs and promote
the release of RNA into the cytoplasm, in which the inserted aromatic
ring can alter the structure of LNPs to enhance endosomal escape. The above evidence suggests that hydrophobic
tails carrying unsaturated bonds can indeed increase endosomal escape,
and it is speculated that the rate of endosomal escape increases with
an increasing number of unsaturated bonds. Based on these results,
Heyes et al. speculated that short-branched trialkyl hydrophobic structural
domains may also improve the endosomal escape efficiency of LNPs. 

4.2.3.

## Modification of Other
Lipids
As
mentioned earlier, LNPs are composed of four components, each of which
plays its own role, and the formation of LNPs is indispensable. In
addition to increasing the escape rate of endosomes by altering ionizable
cationic lipids, optimization based on cholesterol and phospholipids
can also contribute to this process. Cholesterol is related to the
structural stability of LNPs and can regulate membrane fluidity while directly disrupting the stability of
endosomes and promoting mRNA release to the cytoplasm. Researchers have shown that the length of the
alkyl tail, the flexibility of the sterol ring, and the polarity of
−OH are related to improvement of transfection efficiency
in cholesterol research. Siddharth et al. prepared a series of cholesterol
analogs to replace LNPs and found that when cholesterol analogs with
alkyl substituents at the C-24 position were used in the LNP structure,
the LNPs showed increased transfection efficiency. The mRNA release of LNPs formed by replacing cholesterol
with sitosterol increased by more than 10-fold during transfection. Gaurav et al. also discovered that the use
of β, the assembly of LNPs with sitosterol instead of cholesterol,
can enhance the transfection ability of LNPs. It is speculated that
β-sitosterol provides a polyhedral shape to LNPs, thereby promoting
endosome escape. Increasing the proportion
of phospholipids in LNPs can improve the delivery of mRNAs. The formation
of LNPs requires phospholipids to regulate the electrostatic interaction
among ionizable cationic lipids, mRNAs, and solvents. The LNP membrane
is rich in phospholipids, while the inner membrane is rich in a phospholipid
bilayer. This membrane is rich in bis(monoacyl-glycerol)phosphate
(BMP). Unlike phospholipids containing PC and PS groups (which can
increase the stability of the LNP bilayer structure), phospholipids
containing PE can guide the bending of the LNP membrane to promote
fusion with the inner membrane. Daniel et al. attempted to explain
the role of phospholipids in endosome escape based on the influence
of chain length and the unsaturation of phospholipids when the PE
and PC head groups remain unchanged. The results showed that LNPs with PE as the head base had the highest
efficiency in delivering mRNA. Currently, an increasing number of
LNPs are using sterol lipids to replace cholesterol to increase internal
body escape, and on this basis, sterol lipids with PE heads can further
improve the internal body escape efficiency of LNPs.

4.2.4.

## Adding Exogenous Substances to Promote Endosome
Escape
In addition to the modification of the LNPs themselves,
the addition of other components is another method for improving endosome
escape. Like for most proteins, Yusuke et al.’s research showed
that protamine itself carries a large amount of negative charge, and
when mixed with LNPs, it can effectively control the positive charge
toxicity of LNPs. YSK05 is a cationic
lipid designed specifically for endosomal escape. The amount of fluorescent
protein expressed in cells incubated with protamine and LNPs containing
YSK05 was three times greater than that in cells without protamine,
proving that the addition of exogenous protamine can increase the
efficiency of LNP endosome escape. Several
other methods for endosomal escape using siRNA as a delivery target
have also been reported. Cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) are one
of the techniques used to increase the level of intracellular escape.
After the addition of CPP, the first step in the cell cycle is binding
to the sulfated heparin proteoglycan on the cell surface, which allows
siRNA to enter the cell through nonendocytosis. Kim et al. recently attempted to add biocompatible polyhistidine
(pHis) to traditional LNPs to enhance endosome escape and observed
good results in siRNA delivery. This
solution is achieved not by promoting membrane phase transition but
by the proton sponge effect generated by the aggregation of a large
number of nitrogen atoms through histidine polymerization.

4.3.

## mRNA-LNP Stability
Encapsulation
of LNPs prevents premature degradation of mRNAs in vivo and enhances
the in vivo stability of mRNAs. Storage
stability is also a necessary consideration in the design of mRNA
vaccines due to the time required for transport, delivery, and community
distribution. To distribute the vaccine efficiently worldwide, it
should have a sufficiently long shelf life, preferably at temperatures
consistent with those of conventional vaccines (2–8 °C)
or higher. While most conventional vaccines can be stored in a refrigerator
at 4 °C for more than 6 months, mRNA-LNP vaccines require refrigerated
cold-chain transport. mRNA-1273 can be stored at temperatures between
−15 and −25 °C, whereas BNT162b2 can be stored
at temperatures between −60 and −90 °C. , Very low storage temperatures have become a major obstacle for vaccine
distribution, especially in countries with poor infrastructure. However,
the mRNA-LNP stability at nonrefrigerated temperatures needs to be
further improved.
4.3.1.

## Adding Protective Agents
In contrast
to the harsh storage conditions used for mRNA-1273 and BNT162b2, Onpattro
(Patisaran), a siRNA-LNP drug product, can be stored for up to 3 years
between 2 and 8 °C. The ionizable
cationic lipid that makes up the LNPs is DLin-MC3-DMA. dLin-MC3-DMA:
DSPC: cholesterol: PEG2000-C-DMG = 50: 10: 38.5: 1.5; the composition
of this LNP is similar to that of the LNPs of the two neo-crowned
mRNA vaccines. Based on these data, it was hypothesized that mRNA
is the destabilizing factor in overall mRNA-LNPs and determines the
storage conditions of mRNA vaccines. Moderna uses Tris-HCL as a stabilizer
of mRNA-1273 to stabilize the mRNA, and
other nonreducing free radical scavengers could perhaps be used as
well, but the extent to which this approach alters the storage stability
of the mRNA-LNP above 0 °C has not yet been determined.

4.3.2.

## Lyophilization
Since mRNA-LNPs
are readily degraded in water, lyophilization may be an effective
way to store mRNAs at relatively high temperatures. The lyophilized
form of Pfizer’s mRNA-based cytomegalovirus vaccine (mRNA-1647)
was tested in phase 2 clinical trials. It has a shelf life of up to
18 months at 5 °C. Freeze-drying
is widely used for live attenuated virus vaccines. Its use in naked mRNA preparations has also been investigated,
demonstrating its applicability and beneficial effects on the mRNA
stability. Hiromi et al. demonstrated that the use of freeze-drying
to store mRNA vaccines resulted in essentially unchanged vaccine potency
after 24 weeks of storage at 4 °C. Thus, lyophilization may be a possible method for increasing the
stability of mRNA–LNP combinations, thus allowing higher storage
temperatures of mRNA vaccines. However, lyophilization is also a time-consuming
and labor-intensive process, and alternative drying techniques should
be considered.

4.4.

## Adverse Effects
Anaphylactic reactions
triggered by vaccination with the COVID-19 mRNA are rare but not unknown.
Between 14 and 23 December 2020, 175 patients with severe anaphylactic
reactions were reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
(VAERS) after 893,360,19 people received the first dose of BNT162b2. The first dose of mRNA-1273 was initiated on
21 December 2020, and between 21 December 2020 and 10 January 2021,
10 anaphylactic reactions were identified out of 4,041,396 vaccines. However, neither the mRNA nor the excipients
used in both vaccines (BNT162b2: sucrose, sodium chloride, potassium
chloride, disodium phosphate dihydrate, potassium dihydrogen phosphate,
and water) were used for injection. mRNA-1273: aminoglutethimide,
aminoglutethimide hydrochloride, acetic acid, sodium acetate, and
sucrose) constitute allergens. When using polyethylene glycolated
nanomedicines (e.g., polyethylene glycol), individuals experiencing
allergic reactions had higher titers of anti-PEG IgG, while individuals
with high titers of anti-PEG IgG did not all experience allergic reactions. It is hypothesized that the nature of the anti-PEG
IgG agent may have some influence on this phenomenon as well as individual
differences in antibody sensitivity. It has also been reported that
anaphylactic reactions may be associated with the preexistence of
anti-PEG IgE, but PEG is widely available
for use in everyday hygiene and cosmetics, and these products do not
cause anaphylactic reactions. Overall, the causes of allergic reactions
caused by mRNA vaccines are unclear, and further studies are needed
to understand the causes of allergic reactions, which are also necessary
for the establishment of mRNA vaccines.

5.

## Other mRNA
Delivery Systems
While working on improving LNPs, scientists
have also invested
their efforts in other delivery systems. Different chemical and biological
materials based on polymers, nucleic acids, peptides, proteins, biofilms,
metals, and inorganic materials have been developed for mRNA delivery.
These delivery systems were either developed at the same time as the
LNPs or were designed to overcome some of the limitations of the LNPs.
5.1.

## Polymer Delivery Systems
Polymer
delivery systems, although far less clinically advanced than LNPs,
are also an important class of mRNA carriers. systems are also an
important class of mRNA carriers. Cationic/ionizable polymers with
different chemical structures, including polyethyleneimine (PEI),
polyesters, poly(amino acids), polyolefins, polysaccharides, cationic/ionizable
polymers with different chemical structures, and polysaccharides),
and cationic/ionizable polymers with different topologies, including
linear polymers, dendrimers, hyperbranched polymers, and polysaccharides,
were studied for mRNA delivery. , In our recent
study, we synthesized a set of alternating hydroxy-tertiary amine
(PHTA)-based copolymers, PHTA-Cn, and identified the lead polymer
nanocarrier PHTA-C18, which successfully delivered mRNA-based cancer
vaccines in vivo and induced effective antitumor cellular immune responses. Notably, unlike conventional LNPs, which induce
an inflammatory response to a different extent, PHTA-C18-based polymeric
nanocarriers trigger only negligible inflammatory side effects in
vivo, which provides a promising approach for constructing nanocarriers.

5.2.

## Inorganic Material-Based Delivery Systems
Inorganic materials have been used to synthesize nanostructured
materials for nucleic acid delivery applications. These inorganic
NPs have been precisely formulated and can be designed to have a variety
of sizes, structures, and geometries. Common inorganic NPs include
calcium phosphate and mesoporous silica. Huang et al. designed tumor-targeted
lipid-dendritic polymer-calcium phosphate (TT-LDCP) nanoparticles
(NPs) and delivered siRNA targeting plasmid DNA encoding the immune
checkpoint ligand PD-L1 and immunostimulatory IL-2 to hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cells, which increased tumor infiltration of CD8 T
cells and inhibited HCC progression. Xu et al. synthesized biodegradable mesoporous silica nanoparticles
(MSNs) and coloaded multiple neoantigenic peptides, CpG oligodeoxynucleotide
adjuvants, and the photosensitizer chlorin e6 into MSNs, which triggered
neoantigen specific, tumor-infiltrating cytotoxic T-cell lymphocytes
after IV administration, with strong antitumor efficacy. Zhang et al. applied an mRNA-MSN vaccine preparation
consisting of naked mRNAs encoding OVA and granulocyte macrophage
colony-stimulating factor, as well as MSNs, to a xenografted E.G7-OVA
prophylactic tumor model and showed a very strong inhibitory effect
on the tumor. 

5.3.

## Peptide-Based
Delivery Systems
CPPs
can also cross cell membranes and efficiently deliver nucleic acids.
Lou et al. developed a method for formulating mRNA polymers functionalized
with GALA that showed a high transfection efficiency and no cytotoxicity.
An arginine-rich CPP variant, RALA, has been developed for mRNA vaccine
delivery. 

5.4.

## Biological-Membrane-Based
Delivery Systems
Various biofilm-based delivery systems,
such as extracellular vesicles (EVs)
(e.g., exosomes), have been used for
mRNA delivery. The most commonly used EVs are exosomes 30–100
nm in length. The initial discovery
of nucleic acids in exosomes suggested
that EVs have the potential to be loaded with nucleic acids. Transmembrane
proteins and lipids on the surface of EVs from host cells can release
signals to evade phagocytosis and cross
cellular barriers, which is an advantage that makes EVs unique to
EVs compared to other delivery systems, including LNPs. You et al. produced human dermal fibroblast-based
EVs by cell nanocutting for the delivery of mRNAs encoding extracellular
matrix α1 type I collagen and successfully replenished dermal
collagen in mice. Popowski et al. developed inhalable lung-derived
exosomes that showed better tissue distribution than LNPs when delivering
mRNA to the lungs of rodents and nonhuman primates. , Ma et al. utilized a mixture of EV-loaded mRNAs of human vascular
endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) and human bone morphogenetic
protein 2 (BMP-2) to achieve efficient bone regeneration in rats. Exosomes are well tolerated after repeated
administration and have been widely used as nanocarriers for the delivery
of various therapeutic agents, including mRNAs. 
Moreover, EVs show great potential for mRNA delivery
due to their excellent biocompatibility and stability and ability
to cross biological barriers. Bioengineered exosomes show greater
potential than natural exosomes for disease treatment due to their
improved in vivo performance. However, unmodified EVs tend to accumulate
in the liver, kidney, and spleen, possibly leading to insufficient
mRNA delivery to the target site. , To address
this problem, scientists have generated bioengineered natural EVs
by inserting tissue-specific coding sequences or combining them with
peptides, but the production of bioengineered EVs is expensive and
time-consuming. This may also explain why few clinical applications
of EV-based mRNA products have been reported thus far.

5.5.

## Hybrid Delivery Systems
Lipid–polymer
hybrid carriers, also known as lipid polymers (LPPs), are a promising
class of organic–organic hybrid carriers in which the lipid
component can be cationic/ionizable lipids, phospholipids, cholesterol,
or PEG–lipids and the polymer component can be polylactic–coglycolic
acid (PLGA) or dendritic polymers. Supe et al. used LPP-loaded human
antigen R (HuR) siRNA to effectively alleviate diabetic retinopathy
(DR) in rats. Persano et al. used LPP
loaded with OVA mRNA to reduce B16-OVA-based tumor nodules by more
than 90% in mice after injection. Biochemical
hybrid supports allow for the relatively easy and precise synthesis
of chemical carriers with good biocompatibility and modification targeting
ability. One hybridization strategy is to prepare synthetic NPs for
the encapsulation of mRNA vectors; for example, Liu et al. prepared
ABNP-mRNA biomimetic NPs by fusing mRNA-PEI/poly(l-lysine)
complexes with erythrocyte membranes with apolipoprotein E (ApoE),
enhancing blood–brain barrier (BBB) penetration. In addition, Wu et al. designed folate-modified
exosome-liposome hybrid nanoparticles loaded with ALKBH5 mRNA to inhibit
disease progression in a preclinical colorectal cancer (CRC) model
by regulating the ALKBH5/JMJD8/PKM2 axis and inhibiting glycolysis. The use of an mRNA hybrid delivery system has
gradually emerged, and this approach has become a promising mRNA delivery
method.

6.

## Conclusion
The successful
application of mRNA vaccines (against COVID-19)
has led to the emergence of a new intersection between nanotechnology
and the infectious disease vaccine industry for the treatment of many
different diseases, including infections and cancers, among others,
opening up a potential avenue for the protection of human health.
However, as a new research direction, there are still many challenges
to overcome. The properties, of LNPs, such as particle size, morphology,
and surface properties, are strongly influenced by lipid structure
and composition, which can affect the in vivo distribution, release
efficiency, and storage stability of mRNA-LNPs. Scientists from different
fields around the world are working together to address the issues
of hepatic enrichment and insufficient in vivo escape in the application
of LNPs. Scientists have used a number of strategies to achieve mRNA-LNP
enrichment in target tissues and target cells, including (1) altering
the structure or ratio of lipids, including ionizable lipids, cholesterol,
and polyethylene glycolated lipids; (2) adding components other than
the traditional four components to alter LNP properties; and (3) altering
the mode of inoculation. All of these factors are altered to increase
the interaction with different target organs or cells to some extent,
and additional studies are needed to achieve complete organ or cell
targeting. Regarding endosomal escape, altering the structure of lipids
to allow better fusion of LNPs with endosomal membranes and utilizing
a charge-based pH-sensitive approach to facilitate endosomal escape
will be the focus of future LNP research and design. The finished
mRNA-LNPs are currently licensed with specific protectants to increase
their stability at common temperatures, which could be a more promising
storage option if the time-consuming and expensive issue of lyophilization
can be resolved. In addition, some discussions on other delivery systems,
especially EVs, which have their own advantages in terms of biocompatibility
and permeability and have the potential to achieve specific cellular
targeting through surface-modified ligands, are also presented in
this paper; however, if these systems are combined with the advantages
of LNPs, then these systems could lead to a significant boost in the
development of nucleic acid and drug delivery. Research on LNPs and
other delivery systems will continue, and these steadily advancing
research advances have led to a steady increase in the use of mRNA
delivery systems.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Dr Yimeng
An of Tsinghua University/Peking Union
Medical College for her assistance with the revision and Dr Feng Shi
of the University of Hong Kong for providing the molecular formula
in .

## Author Contributions
Investigation,
Xinyu. Zhang; resources, Zehua, Zhou; writing—original draft
preparation, Xinyu. Zhang; writing—review and editing, Xinyu.
Zhang; supervision, Yuanfang. Li; funding acquisition, Zehua. Zhou.
All the authors have read and agreed to the published version of the
manuscript.

This research
was funded by Scientific research project of Tianjin Municipal Commission
of Education (grant number 2023KJ138), and Scientific research project
of Tianjin Municipal Commission of Education (grant number 2023KJ138).

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References