pmceLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC12931925PMC12931925.112931925129319254173398810.7554/eLife.1043201043201version of recordResearch ArticleBiochemistry and Chemical BiologyCancer BiologySynthetic gene circuits that selectively target RAS-driven cancers
SennGabriel Valentinhttps://orcid.org/0009-0002-7123-2899 ), accounting for 19% of all cases ( ). The RAS gene family consists of HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS, with KRAS being the most frequently mutated isoform ( ). Considered ‘undruggable’ for many years, recent approval of several KRASG12C inhibitors ( ) has demonstrated the efficacy of targeting RAS in cancer treatment. However, these therapies are limited to cancers with KRASG12C mutations, which narrows the target range and makes the inhibitors susceptible to resistance development due to the emergence of other RAS mutations ( ). While KRASG12C remains the only RAS mutation with approved targeted inhibitors, recent advances have expanded the therapeutic landscape. Several inhibitors targeting other RAS mutations, including KRASG12D (e.g. MRTX1133; ), as well as pan-RAS inhibitors ( ), are currently in clinical development. A comprehensive overview of these efforts is provided by .
Additional RAS-targeting strategies have encompassed protein engineering, RAS silencing, and artificial promoters. Synthetic proteins and endogenous RAS effectors (proteins that interact with active RAS and transduce its signaling) were engineered to bind ( ), inhibit ( ), or degrade RAS ( ; ). Additionally, miRNAs modulated by oncogenic RAS were identified as potential drug targets ( ) and siRNA against KRAS was used to target RAS-driven cancers in mice ( ). Artificial promoters or synthetic transcription factor response elements responsive to transcription factors downstream of RAS were developed to interrogate RAS signaling ( ) and target cancer cells with RAS mutations by expressing a toxin-antitoxin system ( ; ).
Gene circuits that logically integrate multiple biomolecular inputs are an emergent modality that allows discriminating between malignant and healthy cells and selectively eliciting a therapeutic response only in target cells ( ; ; ). Logic gene circuit-based therapeutic prototypes already demonstrated efficacy and safety in animal tumor models ( ). Some of the previously explored approaches for sensing and targeting RAS ( ; ; ; ; ) are potentially compatible with the logic gene circuit paradigm. Two circuits have already been shown to build upon, or directly sense, RAS signaling. Gao and colleagues demonstrated a split protease approach to sense over-activation of proteins upstream of RAS. By fusing one domain of a protease to HRAS and the other domain to a RAS-binding domain (RBD) of rapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma type C (CRAF), they created a sensor for overexpressed mutated epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) or son of sevenless 1 (Sos-1) in HEK293 cells ( ). Vlahos and colleagues adapted this approach to directly sense RAS activation by fusing either part of a split protease to an RBD domain, enabling RAS-dependent interleukin-12 secretion in HEK293T cells overexpressing KRASG12V ( ). Further advancing synthetic circuits for therapeutic applications against RAS-driven cancer requires achieving high selectivity for mutated RAS and robust function in heterogeneous cancer cells. High selectivity is required to achieve strong output expression in cancer cells while minimizing off-target effects and toxicity in healthy cells with wild-type RAS. In addition, eventual translatability of these approaches to the clinic requires improved robustness in the face of tumor heterogeneity.
In this study, we address these challenges by developing a set of versatile RAS sensors and RAS-dependent transcription factor response elements to create synthetic gene circuits that use RAS activation as input. By combining these direct and indirect RAS sensors in an AND-gate configuration, we develop RAS-targeting circuits with high dynamic range and high selectivity towards cells with mutant RAS. The modular design allows fine-tuning the circuits to specific target and off-target cells and balancing their activation strength versus leakiness. Finally, we demonstrate that our new RAS-targeting circuits function as cancer cell classifiers, selectively expressing an output protein in a wide range of cancer cell lines with RAS-overactivating mutations while maintaining minimal output in cell lines with wild-type RAS.

## Results

## Design of a synthetic RAS sensor
The endogenous RAS signaling pathway is initiated by the binding of cytoplasmic effector proteins to activated RAS-GTP. The effectors sense RAS-GTP dimerization and propagate the signal downstream through a phosphorylation cascade. Post-activation, GTPase-activating proteins, such as neurofibromin 1 (NF-1), facilitate the hydrolysis of RAS-bound GTP to GDP, thereby terminating the signaling. Cancer-associated mutations in RAS render it insensitive to this hydrolysis, resulting in constitutively active RAS ( ) that drives uncontrolled cell proliferation and tumor growth.
Inspired by the natural function of CRAF, a key effector of RAS ( ), we designed a sensor that exploits the selective binding to RAS-GTP of CRAF’s RBDCRD (RAS-binding domain/cysteine rich domain) domain. In our sensor, we fuse the RBDCRD domain to engineered truncated and mutated NarX variants originally derived from the bacterial two-component system, namely NarX379-598H399Q and NarX379-598N509A ( ). We showed previously that these NarX variants are able to transphosphorylate in mammalian cells, but only upon forced dimerization via fused protein domains. Therefore, NarX variants can functionally replace CRAF’s own dimerization domain when fused to RBDCRD, while enabling orthogonal signaling in mammalian cells via a humanized NarL response regulator ( ). We call these chimeric constructs ‘RBDCRD-NarX fusions’.
 
 
We surmised that the RAS sensor would function as follows: activation of RAS (whether endogenous or mutation-driven) would elevate RAS-GTP levels, which would in turn bind the RBDCRD domain of the RBDCRD-NarX fusion. Resulting dimerization of RBDCRD would lead to a forced dimerization of the fused NarX, leading to NarXH399Q transphosphorylating NarXN509A, in turn phosphorylating NarL. Phosphorylated NarL would bind to its response element on the NarL-responsive promoter and induce the expression of an output protein, here mCerulean ( ). In order to test these assumptions, we constructed the necessary components including the two complementary RBDCRD-NarX fusions, the humanized NarL and the NarL-responsive promoter coupled to mCerulean. Initially, we chose HEK293 cells as a test system. To emulate the presence of mutant RAS, we transfected HEK293 cells with a plasmid expressing KRASG12D, and to emulate high levels of wild-type RAS, we transfected them with a plasmid-encoded wild-type KRAS (KRASWT). (Note that HEK293 cells express low endogenous levels of wild-type KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS.) In the first set of tests, delivery of all the sensor components to HEK293 cells using transient transfection showed significantly higher output expression in cells expressing KRASG12D than in cells transfected with KRASWT ( ). In HEK293 cells transformed with the mutant KRAS, sensor response increased upon increase in the dose of the sensor-encoding plasmids ( ). Further, sensor function depended on RAS binding, because mutations in the RBD and the cysteine-rich domain (CRD) strongly decreased output expression. To demonstrate this, we mutated two residues in RBDCRD important for RAS-RAF signaling: Arginine 89 in RBD ( ) and Cysteine 168 in CRD ( ). Arginine 89 forms electrostatic interactions with acidic residues in the RAS switch I region, stabilizing the RBD–RAS complex. Cysteine 168 is part of a zinc finger motif that is critical for high-affinity association with RAS and efficient RAF signaling ( ; ). Mutating these residues –R89L in RBD or C168S in CRD– has been shown to reduce RAS binding, diminish RAF kinase activity ( ; ), and impair RAS-dependent membrane localization of RBD–CRD fusion proteins ( ). Interestingly, while the RBDR89L mutant still exhibited dose-dependent leakiness, the CRDC168S and the double RBDR89LCRDC168S mutant reduced output expression to background levels ( ). In agreement with previous reports ( ) and with our observation that the sensor employing RBDCRD instead of RBD alone shows increased downstream signaling ( ), this result confirms that both RBD and CRD domains are involved in RAS binding and sensor activation.
We then characterized sensor response to increasing input levels. As expected, increased levels of mutant KRAS drove higher output expression, whereas wild-type KRAS resulted in some sensor activation but at much higher expression levels ( ). Finally, we measured the RAS-GTP protein levels in HEK293 cells using a RAS-pulldown ELISA assay. We manipulated the RAS-GTP levels in the cells by co-expressing different amounts of KRASWT, KRASG12D, or KRASWT +Sos-1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor that activates RAS, and were able to directly correlate higher RAS-GTP levels with higher output expression ( ).
To assess the generalizability of the RAS sensor across different oncogenic mutations and RAS isoforms, we tested a panel of oncogenic RAS variants, including multiple KRAS mutants as well as HRASG12D and NRASG12D. In all cases, we observed concentration-dependent activation of the sensor ( ). Among the KRAS mutants, no significant differences in sensor output were observed ( ), suggesting that the behavior characterized with KRASG12D is representative of other activating KRAS mutations. In contrast, we found more heterogeneous responses across RAS isoforms ( ). Notably, high overexpression of wild-type HRAS or NRAS resulted in stronger sensor activation than wild-type KRAS ( ). This indicates that all wild-type RAS isoforms can activate the sensor, underscoring the need to consider physiological activity of all isoforms when evaluating circuit specificity and minimizing potential off-target effects in healthy cells.
Collectively, this dataset provides evidence that the RAS sensor is activated by RAS-GTP and therefore can selectively sense mutant RAS variants because the hallmark of these mutants is increased RAS-GTP levels. Nonetheless, wild-type RAS also binds GTP, which explains sensor response in HEK293 cells that overexpress wild-type RAS and contain relatively high levels of RAS-GTP ( ).

## Mechanism of action
To recapitulate, our design anticipates that the function of the RAS sensor requires the following steps: delivery and expression of the RAS sensor components; RAS-GTP binding of RBDCRD-NarX fusion proteins via their RBDCRD domain, resulting in forced dimerization of the NarX domains and transphosphorylation; NarL phosphorylation; and NarL-mediated output expression. To quantify the effect of RAS activation on these steps, we manipulated the RAS-GTP levels in HEK293 cells in a variety of ways: (i) we overexpressed wild-type KRAS to show the effect of high non-mutant KRAS concentration on downstream sensor response and quantify sensor activation in the presence of RAS-GTP associated with wild-type KRAS; (ii) we overexpressed mutant KRAS in order to measure sensor response to the mutant KRAS input; (iii) we overexpressed NF1, an endogenous GTPase-activating protein that deactivates residual endogenous wild-type RAS in HEK293 cells and allows us to quantify non-specific sensor response in the absence of RAS-GTP; and (iv) we expressed Sos-1, which activates endogenous RAS generating high levels of RAS-GTP, to quantify the upper bound on sensor output without RAS overexpression.
In order to quantify signal propagation along this cascade, we generated a number of reporter constructs. First, to quantify the expression of the RBDCRD-NarX fusion, we further fused this component to SYFP2 and measured YFP fluorescence in HEK293 cells with various RAS-GTP levels. We observed that overexpression of KRASG12D or overactivation of endogenous RAS with Sos-1 resulted in YFP increase and thus elevated expression of the RBDCRD-NarX fusion, compared to cells with baseline RAS-GTP. Conversely, inactivation of endogenous RAS with NF1 resulted in a lower YFP/RBDCRD-NarX expression ( ). Second, we used the same construct to visualize RAS binding of the RBDCRD-NarX. Because RAS is a membrane protein ( ), we expected the binding of RBDCRD-NarX to KRAS-GTP to result in YFP accumulation at the membrane. Indeed, RAS-GTP increase by overexpressing KRASG12D or via Sos-1 led to higher membrane-to-total-signal ratio, compared to cells with endogenous RAS-GTP levels or with NF1-deactivated RAS ( ). Third, we examined the dimerization of the RAS sensor by fusing the two parts of a split mVenus to RBDCRD-NarX proteins and measuring the signal from reconstituted mVenus. Again, RAS activation increased the signal from dimerized RBDCRD-NarX-mVenus, while RAS deactivation decreased it ( ). Last, we investigated the effect of RAS-GTP levels on mCerulean sensor output of the complete RAS sensor. We observed the expected trend, whereas the magnitude of the effect was amplified compared to the effects of individual sensing step, suggesting signal amplification in the synthetic sensing pathway ( ).
 
 
While the dependency of RAS binding, dimerization, and output expression of the sensor on RAS-GTP levels was expected, we did not expect that the expression of the RBDCRD-NarX fusion itself ( ) would be RAS-GTP dependent. Possible explanations could include the presence of transcription factor binding sites activated by RAS signaling in the elongation factor 1 a (EF1a) promoter driving the expression of RBDCRD-NarX, or RAS-dependent non-specific activation of protein synthesis. EF1a promoter sequence contains potential binding sites of CREB, c-Myc, SRF, AP1, and Elk-4 ( and ; ). Additionally, there are reports that (over-)activated RAS or MAPK signaling can increase protein synthesis ( ; ; ; ) through post-transcriptional and translational mechanisms. These include upregulation of translation initiation factors and translational machinery ( ), as well as increased ribosome biogenesis ( ; ), suggesting that multiple mechanisms may be involved.
Comparing the functional RAS sensor to a panel of non-functional or constitutively active control sensors resulted in two additional insights: One, inactive controls lacking NarX dimerization show low increases in mCerulean output ( ), which are fully compensated – or slightly overcompensated – by normalization to the EF1a-driven mCherry transfection control ( ). Two, the RAS-dependent increase in expression is non-linearly amplified by the NarX-NarL system. Although the resulting fourfold RAS-dependent increase in output signal is significantly lower than the 14-fold increase of the functional RAS sensor, suggesting that increased expression does not explain the full response ( ).
This indicates that dimerization and functional binding of RBDCRD to RAS are required for full sensor activation and output generation, which is further evidenced by the decreased activity of non-RAS binding mutants ( and ). While increased expression and its non-linear amplification are a contributing factor, RAS binding and RAS-dependent dimerization are necessary for achieving maximal dynamic range in RAS sensing.

## Optimization of activation efficiency and sensor tunability
The RAS sensor is activated by RAS-GTP and therefore by both wild-type and mutant RAS. Cells with mutant RAS have higher RAS-GTP and higher sensor activation than cells with wild-type RAS. Nevertheless, residual sensor activation in healthy cells with wild-type RAS may cause toxicity in a clinical implementation of the sensor. Therefore, we aimed to further improve the RAS sensor’s ability to discriminate between wild-type and mutant RAS and optimized the transfer function between RAS-GTP input and mCerulean output. Structural predictions with AlphaFold2 ( ) motivated the exploration of longer linkers between the sensor’s RBDCRD and NarX-derived domains by showing that longer linkers may provide more flexibility for the NarX domains to get into close proximity, which could improve dimerization and transphosphorylation efficiency ( ). Our measurements showed that up to a certain size, longer and/or more rigid linkers indeed increased output expression, but not the dynamic range between KRASG12D and KRASWT ( ).
 We also explored alternative natural and synthetic RBDs. Among the tested binding domains, the Ras association domain (RA) of the natural RAS effector Rassf5, the RAS association domain 2 (RA2) of the phospholipase C epsilon (PLCe; ), and the synthetic RAS binder K55 ( ) showed a slightly higher or similar dynamic range than RBDCRD ( ). To better understand how different binding domains affect RAS-specific activation, we deactivated endogenous RASWT in HEK293 using NF-1. RBDCRD was the only binding domain that showed a pronounced decrease in output expression in cells with NF1 compared to cells with KRASWT, indicating low RAS-unspecific activation for RBDCRD but also activation in cells with KRASWT. The other binding domains showed one of two responses: (1) already very low activation in cells with KRASWT which was not further decreased in cells with NF1, for example in RA(Rassf5) and K55; (2) background activation in cells with NF-1 indicating RAS-unspecific activation, for example in RA2(PLCe) ( ).
Fusing stronger transactivation domains to NarL markedly increased output expression of the RAS sensor without changing its dynamic range ( ). Specifically, we replaced the initial VP48 with either F.L.T., a fusion of three partial transactivation domains, FoxoTAD (Forkhead-Box-Protein-O3604-664), LMSTEN (MYB251-330), and TA1 (RelA521-331) or with RelA342-551 with all its transactivation domains. In cells co-transfected with NF1, the sensor with NarL-F.L.T. exhibited low output expression similar to the initial sensor variant with NarL-VP48. In contrast, the sensor with NarL-RelA had high background in cells with NF1, suggesting RAS-unspecific activation when using RelA as a transactivation domain ( ). Overall, the testing of alternative sensor parts did not increase the dynamic range between KRASG12D and KRASWT, but it showed that the RAS sensor was modular. Different linkers, binding domains, and transactivation domains could be used to construct the sensor and tune the absolute strength of output expression without affecting the dynamic range.

## Multi-input RAS-targeting circuits with improved selectivity for KRASG12D
Mutations in signaling proteins, such as RAS, often lead to increased activation of downstream transcription factors ( ). We hypothesized that using transcription factors from the mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway (MAPK) downstream of RAS as inputs could add an additional layer of selectivity to RAS-targeting circuits. Regulating the expression of RAS sensor components via MAPK-dependent response elements allowed us to create a coherent type-1 feed-forward motif with AND-gate logic ( ; ). This motif has been shown to act as a noise repressor ( ) and as a persistence detector with a delayed onset that is only activated by persisting input stimulation ( ). Both are desired properties in RAS-targeting circuits to detect constitutively active mutated RAS while minimizing output expression from the more transient activation of wild-type RAS ( ; ).
 
 
 
As an initial step, we designed synthetic response elements with binding sites for transcription factors shown to be activated by mutated RAS, including Elk-1 ( ), c-Fos & c-Jun ( ), c-Myc ( ), and SRF ( ). For each response element, multiple binding sites of MAPK transcription factors ( ; ; ), minimal promoters from genes downstream of RAS ( ), or sequences from existing RAS-responsive promoters ( ; ; ) were encoded upstream of a low leakage minimal promoter ( ; and detailed in ).
To assess the functionality of the response elements, we cloned the response elements directly upstream of a fluorescent mScarlet protein and transfected them into HEK293 cells. The minimal promoter of c-fos (pFos; ), the polyomavirus enhancer domain (PY2; ), and the serum response element (SRE; ) were the response elements exhibiting the highest dynamic range between cells with KRASG12D and cells with KRASWT ( ). The response elements demonstrated a similar dependency on KRASG12D and KRASWT to the one observed with the binding-based RAS sensor in and . All three response elements contain binding sites for Ets-like 1 protein (elk-1). However, the Elk response element consisting of only elk binding sites showed low mScarlet expression and low dynamic range. To better understand this apparent contradiction, we further investigated the Elk response element. Overexpressing elk-1 with the Elk response reporter increased the mScarlet expression, indicating that endogenous elk-1 levels are not high enough for efficient activation of the Elk response element. With overexpressed elk-1, we observed high selectivity for cells with KRASG12D and low RAS-independent background activation in cells overexpressing NF-1 ( ). A RAS titration provided more evidence for the RAS dependence of the Elk response element ( ).
Superior performance of pFos, SRE, and PY2 response elements demonstrates that inclusion of additional transcription factor binding sites can amplify transcriptional sensor response, potentially due to synergy ( ). Consistent with this and previous reports that the combination of AP-1 and elk-1 binding sites is critical for maximal RAS responsiveness in the polyomavirus enhancer ( ; ), we found that combining elk-1 with additional transcription factors allows the design of efficient RAS-dependent response elements.
Finally, we combined these MAPK response elements with the RAS sensor using AND-gate logic, by using the response elements to regulate the expression of binding-triggered RBDCRD-NarX sensor. The resulting RAS-sensing circuits showed improved selectivity for KRASG12D with the best performer exhibiting an 81-fold dynamic range between KRASG12D and KRASWT compared to the 8-fold dynamic range of the binding-based RAS sensor alone ( ). To assess the importance of RAS-binding in the RAS-targeting circuits, we replaced the RBDCRD-NarX fusion proteins with a constitutively dimerized non-truncated NarX control. The MAPK response element-expressed, non-truncated NarX showed dynamic ranges between KRASG12D and KRASWT from 2-fold to 20-fold. However, expressing RAS-binding dependent RBDCRD-NarX showed a higher dynamic range for all but the SRE_NarX +PY2_NarL combination ( ). Thus, combining the MAPK response elements with the binding-based RAS sensor into RAS-targeting circuits generally improved the distinction between cells with KRASG12D and KRASWT and allowed for higher maximal fold changes.

## Modularity allows creating RAS sensor circuits with high dynamic range
As shown above, RAS-sensing circuits can utilize a variety of MAPK response elements, RBDs, linkers, and transactivator domains. To further optimize the transfer function between the input and the output and improve the discrimination between cells with mutant and wild-type RAS, we performed a screening campaign to examine the effect of different combinations of circuit components on the dynamic range. In this screen, we tested combinations of various building blocks: RBDCRD, K55, and RA(Rassf5) as binding domains fused to the NarX; VP48 or F.L.T as transactivation domain of NarL; and pFos, PY2, and SRE as MAPK response elements. The response elements regulated the expression of either the NarX fusion proteins only or of the NarL protein only, while the other part was constitutively driven by EF1a. For the EF1a-driven RBDCRD-NarX proteins, we tested two versions with either a 6 x flexible or a 3 x rigid linker. This set resulted in a total of 222 unique conditions, over two experimental batches. Almost thirty conditions resulted in high dynamic ranges of >100 fold, with the highest circuit variants using the combination of PY2, RBDCRD, and F.L.T. ( ).
 
 
 
 
We found that PY2 was the most prevalent response element among the high-performing hits, followed by pFos, while SRE only occurred in three hits. The prevalence of the transactivation domain varied depending on whether the NarX or the NarL proteins were regulated by an MAPK response element. While F.L.T. was more abundant among the hits where NarL was regulated by the response elements, VP48 dominated in the circuits where the response elements regulated the NarX fusion proteins. The K55 and RBDCRD binding domains were found in an equal number of hits ( ). However, we observed that circuits with F.L.T. as the transactivation domain performed best with RBDCRD as the binding domain, while there was no significant difference between RBDCRD and K55 for circuits with VP48 ( ).
To further improve our understanding of the effect of different building blocks, we fitted a linear regression model ( ) and compared it with the experimental data ( and ). This revealed that the effect of the MAPK response elements depended on which sensor components they regulated. Expression of NarL-F.L.T. under the control of MAPK response elements strongly increased the output expression in cells with KRASG12D, while, except for the SRE_NarL-F.L.T. circuit, the activation in cells with KRASWT remained low. In contrast, MAPK control of NarL-VP48 decreased the output in KRASG12D and even more so in KRASWT cells. Expression of the NarX fusion proteins increased the circuit activation in cells with KRASG12D, but also in cells with KRASWT. ( , & ).
In this campaign, we focused on circuits where only NarL or only the NarX proteins were regulated by the response elements. Next, we also implemented the regulation of all circuit components by PY2. The PY2_NarX and NarL-F.L.T. circuit led to the highest output in cells with KRASG12D, with only marginally higher activation with KRASWT than PY2_NarX_F.L.T. or PY2_NarL-F.L.T. and still lower than the RAS_Sensor_F.L.T. ( ).
In summary, the tests revealed that the RAS-targeting circuits are modular, with various combinations of parts leading to circuits with high dynamic ranges that diverge in their transfer functions and their activation thresholds. The availability of different circuit parts thus allowed for the adaptation of the input-output behavior of the circuits and increased the distinction between cells with mutated and cells with wild-type RAS.

## RAS sensor circuits detect endogenous RAS mutations in cancer cells
To evaluate the response of the RAS sensor circuits to endogenous RAS activation in cancer cell line, we transfected the EF1a-driven, binding-triggered RAS sensor into wild-type HCT-116 cells, a colon cancer cell line harboring a KRASG13D mutation (HCT-116WT; ). To have a comparable off-target cell line without mutated RAS, we also transfected a commercially available KRAS knock-out HCT-116 cell line (HCT-116k.o).
The RAS sensor was functional in HCT-116 cells and responded to endogenous levels of RAS activation with higher activation in HCT-116 cells with KRASG13D than in the knock-out cells. Further, loss-of-function mutations in RBDCRD decreased activation ( ). However, the dynamic range was only threefold ( ). Therefore, we leveraged the modularity of the circuit design to improve selectivity for target HCT-116 cells. We found that the amplified AND-gate circuits with PY2 response element, F.L.T transactivation domain, and RBDCRD as a RBD were most effective in distinguishing HCT-116WT from HCT-116k.o. ( ). In contrast to what we saw in HEK293 overexpressing RAS ( ), the ‘AND-gate’ RAS-targeting circuits do not generate higher output than the EF1a-driven, binding-triggered RAS sensor in HCT-116. Instead, the improved dynamic range results from decreased leakiness in HCT-116k.o. Only with a 3 x rigid linker in RBDCRD-NarX fusion did the PY2_NarL-F.L.T circuit show higher output expression compared to the EF1a-driven, binding-triggered RAS sensor. However, while the circuit with the 3 x rigid linker still showed a dynamic range of 18-fold, it had a decreased dynamic range compared to the same circuit with the 6 x flexible linker (57-fold; ). Taken together, this dataset demonstrates that the RAS-targeting circuits are functional in cancer cells and are able to respond to endogenous levels of mutated RAS. While there are differences between the model systems, we can leverage the availability of multiple circuit parts to adapt the circuits to specific target and off-target cells to improve selectivity.
 

## RAS circuits can generate selective output in RAS-driven cancer cells
To specifically target RAS-driven cancer, the RAS-targeting circuits need to show selective output expression in cancer cells with mutations over-activating RAS (RASMUT), while maintaining minimal expression in cells without such mutations (RASWT). Testing the most promising RAS-targeting circuits in 12 cancer cell lines showed that all circuits exhibited significantly higher output expression in RASMUT cells ( ). The PY2_NarX&NarL-F.L.T. circuit had the highest response rate among the RASMUT cells but displayed slightly increased background activation in RASWT cells. This was particularly notable in HT-29, a cell line harboring a BRAF mutation ( ) and thus representing a RASWT cell line but with an over-activated MAPK pathway. HT-29 did not show an elevated background in any of the other circuits, indicating a clean AND-gate behavior between the RAS sensor and the MAPK response element for the circuits that express only NarL-F.L.T. with the response elements ( ).
 
 
 
The output expression of the RAS circuits correlated with the direct expression of a fluorescent protein via the MAPK response elements, although not perfectly ( ). This indicates that, while not the only factor, the response elements are important for the differential activation between the cell lines.
Changing the response element that regulates NarL-F.L.T. expression in the RAS circuit altered which RASMUT cells showed output expression. While some RASMUT cell lines, such as HCT-116 and K562, had higher output expression than all RASWT cells with all tested circuits, other RASMUT cell lines only showed higher expression with certain circuits, indicating that not all response elements work equally well in all RAS-driven cancer cell lines ( and ). The availability of different response elements enabled us to identify for each RASMUT cell line a functional RAS circuit with higher activation in these cells than in all RASWT cell lines ( ). For example, while the PY2_NarL-F.L.T. circuit did not show higher activation in AsPC-1 than in the RASWT cell lines ( ), using SRE instead of PY2 led to a 26-fold higher output expression than in the RASWT cell lines ( ). This demonstrates that the response elements allow adapting the RAS circuits to the targeted cancer cell type.

## RAS circuits can kill RAS-driven cancer cells
To bring RAS-targeting circuits closer to therapeutic application, we replaced the fluorescent reporter with a clinically relevant output protein: a herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase variant (HSV-TK; ). HSV-TK functions as a suicide gene by converting the non-toxic prodrug ganciclovir (GCV) into a cytotoxic triphosphate derivative ( ).
RAS-targeting circuits expressing HSV-TK induced robust cell death in KRAS-mutated HCT-116 cells after treatment with 50 µM GCV ( ). Compared to the non-toxic GFP-output control (GFP-circuit) condition, where cells reached full confluence, EF1a_RAS-Sensor_F.L.T. and PY2_NarL-F.L.T. reduced confluence at 180 h 1.8- and 1.7-fold, respectively. The positive control (EF1a_HSV-TK) reduced confluence 2.9-fold. Looking only at transfected cells, the effect was even more pronounced with EF1a_RAS-Sensor_F.L.T. and PY2_NarL-F.L.T. showing a 2- and 2.6-fold lower fluorescence than the GFP-circuit, respectively ( ). Microscopy at 180 h confirmed substantial killing. While GFP-circuit wells showed dense monolayers, those transfected with RAS-targeting circuits or EF1a_HSV-TK contained debris and rounded, aggregated cells, indicating low viability ( ). These results show that HSV-TK enables the RAS-targeting circuits to efficiently kill RAS-mutant HCT-116 cells, including non-transfected neighbors likely via a bystander effect ( ).
 
Next, we tested the circuits in Igrov-1, the RAS wild-type line that previously showed the highest activation among RASWT cells for both circuits ( ). RAS-targeting circuits with HSV-TK did not prevent growth in Igrov-1. Following 50 µM GCV treatment, both transfected and total cell populations continued to grow ( ). In contrast, constitutive HSV-TK expression inhibited growth of transfected cells ( ), although without a significant effect on bystander cells ( ), likely due to lower transfection efficiency than HCT-116. Compared to the non-toxic GFP-circuit, EF1a_HSV-TK caused a fourfold reduction in confluence of transfected cells, while both RAS circuits showed a non-significant, 1.1-fold reduction of growth ( and microscopy in ). This suggests low toxicity of the RAS circuits in these RASWT cells. However, it is important to note the lower transfection efficiency of Igrov-1 ( ), compared to HCT-116 ( ).
To assess the effect of transfection efficiency, we tested SW620 – a RASMUT cell line with lower transfection efficiency than HCT-116 – and HCT-116 transfected with only half the DNA dose. Lower circuit dose or transfection efficiency also showed killing of RAS-driven cancer cells, but a less pronounced effect on bystander cells ( ). SW620 and Igrov-1 had similar transfection efficiency ( ) but distinct killing curves with SW620 showing a decrease and Igrov-1 showing an increase in confluence of transfect cells ( ), supporting the notion of selective cytotoxicity in cells with mutated RAS. However, the differences observed in transfection efficiency ( ), growth characteristics ( ), and GCV / Ef1a_HSV-TK- sensitivity ( ) may also influence RAS circuit-mediated killing, indicating that comparisons across cell lines should be interpreted cautiously.
In summary, RAS-targeting circuits expressing HSV-TK-induced cell death in transfected RAS-mutant lines (HCT-116 and SW620), while RAS wild-type Igrov-1 cells continued to grow. Although cell-line-specific differences limit final conclusions about selectivity, our data support a preferential cytotoxic effect in RAS-mutant cells. Remarkably, in KRASG13D-mutated HCT-116 cells, higher DNA doses led to near-complete eradication of both transfected and neighboring cells, validating the potential of RAS-targeting circuits to express clinically relevant output proteins and effectively kill RAS-driven cancer cells.

## Discussion
In this study, we report the design of synthetic gene circuits to target RAS-driven cancers. We developed a set of RAS sensors with interchangeable parts that can be combined to flexibly design RAS-sensing circuits. Using our modular design, we created and characterized gene circuits advancing RAS-targeting circuits on two key performance criteria: selectivity for mutated RAS and adaptability to different target and off-target cell lines.
To date, the only existing synthetic gene circuit that directly targets RAS had a twofold dynamic range between HEK cells overexpressing KRASG12V and KRASWT and a fourfold dynamic range when compared to HEK cells with endogenous RAS levels ( ). Our design of RAS-targeting circuit greatly improves specificity for mutant RAS. This is critical given that RAS circuits sense activated RAS-GTP, which is highly overactivated in cancers with RAS mutations ( ) but also present in healthy cells with wild-type RAS. Since this could lead to on-target, off-tumor effects, RAS-targeting circuits are designed to sense the different activation dynamics and activation levels ( ; ) resulting from the constitutive overactivation of RAS in cancer ( ; ). To achieve high dynamic range between cells with mutated and cells with wild-type RAS, we optimized the transfer function governing the relationship between the RAS-GTP input and sensor output. To this end, we combined binding-triggered RAS sensors and RAS-dependent MAPK transcription factor sensors into a coherent type 1 feed-forward AND-gate. In this design, MAPK sensors enhance the RAS-dependent increase in expression of the binding-triggered RAS sensor components. Thus, cells with wild-type RAS have lower levels of the RAS sensor components than cells with mutant RAS, leading to suppression of RAS-dependent leakage of output production by the binding-triggered RAS sensor. This network motif was shown to delay the onset of output expression but not the output shutdown ( ). This dynamic behavior, termed sign-sensitive delay ( ), acts as a noise repressor ( ) and persistence detector ( ), which could further explain why this design improves the sensing of constitutively active mutant RAS while minimizing output expression from the more transient activation of wild-type RAS ( ; ). Integrating multiple RAS-dependent sensors into the circuit design resulted in a strongly enhanced distinction between cells overexpressing mutant or wild-type RAS and a more than 100-fold higher dynamic range than previous circuits ( ).
Validation in cancer cell lines demonstrated that the RAS-targeting can selectively express an output in cancer cells. The RAS circuits are activated by all three RAS isoforms and a variety of mutations which allowed targeting of cancer cells with diverse KRAS mutations, but also of K562 cells with a BCR-ABL fusion gene that constitutively activates RAS through Sos-1 ( ). A broad targeting range is advantageous because tumors exhibit high intra- and intertumoral heterogeneity of RAS mutations ( ). While broader RAS inhibitors are under development ( ), RAS heterogeneity is a limiting factor in current KRASG12C inhibitors because of resistance development due to escape variants with different RAS mutations ( ). The broad target range of the RAS-targeting circuits enabled us to identify a circuit for each mutant RAS cell line that was more active in those cells than in all wild-type RAS cell lines. However, the heterogeneous cancer cell lines showed variable dynamic ranges, indicating a need for adaptation of the circuits to the target cells.
Additional input sensors may allow for further enhancement of the RAS-targeting circuits. Beyond the direct RAS sensors and the MAPK response elements, adding other RAS-dependent sensors, such as ERK sensors ( ; ) or RAS-dysregulated miRNAs ( ; ) in an AND-gate configuration could further improve specificity. Alternatively, an OR-gate configuration could reduce the risk of resistance development. Off-target effects could be minimized by including NOT-gates with inputs associated with healthy cells, such as existing p53 sensors ( ; ) or new sensors specific for healthy cells with high RAS activation ( ; ).
In the context of cancer therapies, synthetic gene circuits can express a variety of therapeutic proteins as output, such as proapoptotic proteins ( ; ), enzymes that convert a prodrug into a cytotoxic drug ( ), immunotherapeutic proteins ( ), or even combination therapies ( ). We demonstrated that exchanging the output protein can be achieved by changing the coding sequence on the output plasmid. Armed with a therapeutic output, such as HSV-TK, RAS-targeting circuits can robustly kill the RAS-driven cancer cell lines HCT-116 and SW620. Simultaneously, these RAS circuits did not prevent growth in Igrov-1, suggesting low toxicity in this wild-type RAS cell line. While this indicates preferential cytotoxicity in RAS-driven cancer cells, cell-line-specific differences, such as in transfection efficiency, limit conclusions, underscoring the importance of further validation.
This further highlights another remaining challenge: delivery. The multi-plasmid-based delivery is likely difficult to implement in RAS-driven solid cancers. Thus, future efforts should aim at integrating all components on a single vector. For DNA, viral delivery is generally most efficient but has limited packaging capacity ( ). Compared to EF1a, the MAPK response elements reduce the overall size of the constructs to approximately 5 kb, bringing them well within the 8 kb packaging capacity of lentiviral vectors ( ) and leaving space for outputs, such as the 1.5 kb NarL-RE_HSV-TK cassette. The assembly of multiple modules on a single vector provides challenges for synthetic gene circuits, including positive and negative interactions between promoters and genes in proximity ( ). Using the MAPK-driven circuit versions without constitutive promoters may provide some robustness. Unintended direct output expression by neighboring MAPK response elements would still retain a certain RAS dependency, reducing the risk of constitutive, non-specific output expression in healthy cells. Nonetheless, assembling the circuit on a single vector will require careful design and rigorous validation to ensure optimal performance.
Reaching every single cancer cell will be challenging with any delivery system. We have seen that HSV-TK can also kill non-transfected, neighboring cancer cells, suggesting that outputs with bystander effect are potentially more effective. However, this effect was strongly dose-dependent, and it may require precise dosing to optimize the killing of cancer cells while minimizing toxicity. In addition to dosing the DNA amount, selection of the components used in our RAS circuits tunes the expression strength, which may allow further dosing of HSV-TK but also adaptation when using different therapeutic output proteins. Potent molecules, such as interleukin-12, will require stringent expression with low leakiness to prevent systemic toxicity ( ), while less toxic molecules could benefit from stronger expression. We envision that the modularity of our system will allow us to tailor the expression profile to the therapeutic output.
In conclusion, this study provides the foundation for the design of RAS-targeting circuits. Our results confirm the feasibility of developing synthetic gene circuits that selectively target RAS-mutated cancer cells, demonstrate robust killing of certain RAS-driven cancer cells, and encourage the use of their versatility to adapt the circuits to future challenges during clinical translation. While alternative delivery systems and validation in more realistic models will be essential, this highlights the potential of RAS-targeting circuits as a new therapeutic strategy that could reshape therapies against RAS-driven cancer.

## Methods

## Plasmid construction
Plasmids were cloned using standard cloning techniques, such as Gibson, GoldenGate assembly, or restriction enzyme cloning. DNA fragments were ordered from TWIST Biosciences or Genewiz (Azenta Life Sciences). Enzymes were purchased from New England Biolabs and Thermo Fisher Scientific. The sequences of all used plasmids are listed in and the sequences of the individual RAS circuit parts in .

## Cell culture
All cell lines used were cultured at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in the medium suggested by the provider with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin solution. Cells were passaged before reaching confluency 1–3 times per week, depending on experimental plans. Details on all cell lines, such as provider, medium, and splitting ratios are listed in . Mycoplasma detection was performed using the protocol from the PCR Mycoplasma test kit (Promokine, Cat#PK-CA91-1024). In brief: supernatant from >80% confluent cell cultures was centrifuged (14,000 × g, 15 min), resuspended in water and heated (95 °C, 10 min), before performing a PCR with mycoplasma-specific primers: PR1843 (cgcctgagtagtacgtwcgc), PR1844 (tgcctgrgtagtacattcgc), PR1845 (cgcctgagtagtatgctcgc), PR1846 (cgcctgggtagtacattcgc), PR1847 (gcggtgtgtacaaracccga), and PR1848 (gcggtgtgtacaaaccccga). As a positive control, PR0673 (tcccacaacgaggactacac) and PR0674 (cgagtcagtgagcgaggaag) were used. Cell line identity was confirmed for all cell lines using the commercial ‘cell line authentication’ STR profiling service provided by Microsynth (Switzerland).

## Transfections
The transfections for the RAS-GTP pulldown experiment in and the confocal microscopy experiment in were performed in six-well plates, the transfection for the microscopy experiment in , and the cell line screening in in 24-well plates, and all other experiments were performed in 96-well plates. The difference in plate size was accounted for by scaling the amount of transfected DNA to the number of seeded cells. The cells were seeded 24 hr before transfection in 100 µL of medium (500 µL for 24-well; 2.5 mL for six-well plates). Endotoxin-free (ZR DNA Prep Kit, Zymo Research, cat.no. D4201 and D4212) plasmids were mixed according to the experimental layout ( ), Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to reach a volume of 30 µL (50 µL in 24-well plates; 500 µL in six-well plates). Transfection reagents were mixed with Opti-MEM to reach a volume of 20 µL (50 µL in 24-well plates; 500 µL in six-well plates). After incubation for at least 5 min, the mixture was added to the DNA samples, gently vortexed, spun down, and then incubated at room temperature for at least 20 min before addition to the cells. The seeding and transfection conditions for each cell line are shown in – Table A for the cell line screening in and in – Table B for all other experiments. To minimize the effect of differential evaporation in 96-well plates, only the inner 60 wells were used for samples, while the outer wells were filled with PBS.
For the experiments comparing different cell lines ( — ), the DNA amount was optimized to achieve more similar transfection efficiencies, as listed in . In the cancer cell line screening, we adjusted the DNA amount to 1.5 x for cell lines with low transfection efficiencies (<20%), 1 x DNA for cell lines with moderate efficiency (20–50%), and 0.5 x DNA for cell lines with high efficiency (>50%).

## Structure prediction
The protein structure of the RBDCRD-linker-NarX fusion proteins was predicted with AlphaFold2 from the amino acid sequence using the Latch Console platform (LatchBio). Using PyMOL (Version 2.5.4, Schrödinger, LLC.), we aligned the NMR-derived structure of two KRAS-RBDCRD dimers tethered to a nanodisc (worldwide Protein Data Bank, PDB accession code: 6PTS ) with the NMR structure of a KRAS4B-GTP homodimer on a lipid bilayer nanodisc (PDB accession code: 6W4E ). The predicted structure of two RBDCRD-linker-NarX proteins was then aligned to each of the RBDCRD structures. The flexible parts of the RBDCRD and the linkers were rotated to bring the two NarX domains into proximity.

## Fluorescence microscopy
Microscopy pictures were taken 36–48 hr after transfection using a Nikon Eclipse Ti inverted microscope equipped with a Nikon Intensilight C-HGFI fiber illuminator, Semrock filter cubes (IDEX Health & Science), a 10 x objective, and a Hamamatsu C10600 ORCA-R2 digital camera. Excitation filters, dichroic mirrors, emission filters, and exposure times are summarized in . The look-up table (LUT) values were adjusted for ideal contrast and kept constant within an experiment.
 

## Flow cytometry
36–48 hr after transfection, we prepared the cells for flow cytometry analysis by removing the medium and adding 70–100 µL of Accuatase (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat.no. #A1110501). The cells were incubated for 15–30 min at room temperature and then kept on ice before measurement using a BD LSRFortessa with a high-throughput screening device. To avoid potential cell damage and minimize time on ice, the plates were prepared consecutively, right before analysis. Excitation wavelengths, longpass filters, and emission bandpass filters were optimized to reduce crosstalk between different fluorophores and are summarized in . When working with 24-well plates, after removing the medium, 150–200 µL of Accutase was used to detach the cells. After 15–30 min of incubation, the cells were detached by gentle pipetting, and the complete cell suspension was transferred to a 96-well plate for analysis using the HTS device.
 

## RAS-GTP pulldown ELISA
RAS-GTP levels were measured using a Ras Activation ELISA assay kit (Merck Millipore cat.no. #17–497) according to the manual. HEK293 cells were seeded in six-well plates and transfected as described in the ‘Transfection’ section. Cells were lysed using 250 µL of the provided lysis buffer with added Halt Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat.no. #89900). Samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80 °C. An aliquot was used to quantify the protein amount in the cell lysates using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat.no #23227). The next day, 100 µg of each sample was used for the ELISA. The anti-RAS antibody (Merck Millipore cat.no. #17–497; part no.2006992) was provided in the ELISA kit. Chemiluminescence was measured using a Tecan Spark Multimode Microplate Reader and measured 20 min after the addition of the substrate with an integration time of 1 s.

## Confocal microscopy for quantification of membrane binding
Cells were seeded in a 24-well plate and transfected as described in the ‘Transfections’ section. After 36 hr, we detached the cells using 0.25% trypsin and re-seeded 30,000 cells in 200 µL medium into an eight-well glass-bottom plate to have sparsely distributed cells suitable for membrane detection and image analysis. The cells were incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 to reattach. After 4 hr, we stained the membrane of the cells with the CellBrite Steady 685 Membrane Staining Kit (20 µL of 1:100 dilution; Biotium cat.no. #30,109 T) and the nuclei with 5 µL NucBlue Live Cell Stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat.no. R37605). The wells were imaged using a Falcon SP8 confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems) with a 20 x objective. SYFP2 was measured using an excitation laser at 524 nm and 540–600 nm bandpass filter, NucBlue was measured using the 405 nm laser and 415–460 nm bandpass filter, CellBrite was measured using a 670 nm excitation laser and a 750–800 nm bandpass filter.

## Image analysis for quantification of membrane binding
Confocal images were analyzed with Python v3.10 using the Scikit-Image v0.19.2, SciPy v1.8.1, NumPy v1.22.4, Pandas v1.4.2, OpenCV v4.5.0 and custom packages built upon these libraries. Cells were segmented based on the membrane (CellBrite Steady 685) and nuclear (NucBlue) signals. The nuclear signals were used to assign the membrane signal to the individual cell. First, each nucleus was identified as a single cell. Second, the membrane signal was assigned to the nearest nucleus and used to create a mask for the membrane of each cell. Third, the membrane masks were post-processed to exclude non-closed objects, such as cell debris or cells with incomplete membrane staining as well as cells with more than one nucleus per cell. Fourth, the membrane masks were filled to additionally obtain the full cell masks. Fifth, for signal analysis, the total fluorescence in the SYFP2 channel was calculated for both the membrane and the full cell mask of each cell. Finally, the ratio between the membrane and the total cell signal was calculated for each cell. We used untransfected cells stained with NucBlue and CellBright Steady 685 to assess background fluorescence. For the analysis, we included all transfected cells with total cell fluorescence above this background. The code is available on GitHub (copy archived at ).

## Regression model
The effect of different circuit parts on the output expression in HEK-293 with KRASG12D, in HEK-293 with KRASWT as well as on the dynamic range (KRASG12D/KRASWT) was modeled using a Gaussian generalized linear model in R Studio v2023.06.0+421. Because the datasets were skewed toward low values, resulting in a loss of model accuracy at low values, a log transformation of all values was performed before running the models. Linearity and homoscedasticity assumptions were assessed using residual plots ( ). The goodness of fit was evaluated by comparing the fitted and measured values and calculating Pearson (R2) and Spearman correlations using the cor() function in R Studio ( ). For the selection of the independent variables, we tested three models assuming different interactions between the response elements and the parts they express. ( ). The model with the best correlation (Model 3) was selected to analyze the effect of the different circuit parts in . In addition to the primary variables of interest, we considered potential covariates such as experimental batch, transfection efficiency, and amount of NarX and NarL plasmids. While the experimental batch did not affect the correlation of the model, transfection efficiency and plasmid amounts were included in the regression to ensure the robustness of the model.

## Analysis of flow cytometry data
Flow cytometry data analysis was performed using FlowJo software v10.8.0 (BD Life Sciences). The gating strategy is shown in ( ). When multiple cell lines with different transfection efficiencies were used, the cells were binned using the expression of the mCherry transfection control to include only cells with high transfection levels >103 ( ). For testing of different cell lines in , we further validated that there was no direct correlation between transfection efficiency and normalized output in our experimental data ( ). Absolute units (AU) of fluorescence were calculated by multiplying the number of positive cells (frequency of parent) with the mean expression of the fluorophore:FrequencyofParentFluorophor∗MeanFluorophor\begin{document}$$\displaystyle Frequency \,of \,Parent_{Fluorophor}\ast Mean_{Fluorophor}$$\end{document}
Relative units (RU) of fluorescence were calculated by dividing the AU of the fluorophore of interest by the AU of the transfection control:Fluorescence[RU]=FrequencyofParentFluorophorofInterest∗MeanFluorophorofInterestFrequencyofParentTransfectionControl∗MeanTransfectionControl\begin{document}$$\displaystyle Fluorescence\left [RU\right ]=\frac{Frequency\,of\,Parent_{Fluorophor\,of\,Interest}\ast Mean_{Fluorophor\,of\,Interest}}{Frequency\,of\,Parent_{Transfection\,Control}\ast Mean_{Transfection\,Control}}$$\end{document}
For the dynamic range, the fold change between the target cell line (HEKG12D or HCT-116WT; ON-state) and off-target cell line (HEKG12D or HCT-116WT; OFF-state) was calculated. The error bars were calculated using error propagation rules:PropagatedUncertainty=FoldChange∗(SDON−stateMeanON−state)2+(SDOFF−stateMeanOFF−state)2\begin{document}$$\displaystyle Propagated\,Uncertainty=Fold\,Change\ast \sqrt{\left (\frac{SD_{ON- state}}{Mean_{ON- state}}\right)^{2}+\left (\frac{SD_{OFF- state}}{Mean_{OFF- state}}\right)^{2}}$$\end{document}
The flow cytometry histograms in and show all mCerulean-positive cells concatenated from the three biological replicates. The numerical values of the cell number, mean, and frequency of parent can be found in and respectively.
 

## Analysis and visualization of screening data
Data analysis and plotting of the data from the screening of different circuit parts ( ) and the screening of cancer cell lines ( ) were performed using R studio v2023.06.0+421. The data was imported from FlowJo analysis and labeled with the corresponding sample descriptors before calculating the mean and SD for the biological replicates. Plots were generated using ggplot2 v3.4.3 and cowplot v1.1.1. Large language models (ChatGPT3.5, ChatGPT4.0; OpenAI) were used to facilitate code writing.

## HSV-TK killing assays
Cells were transfected as described under transfection, except that only half the number of cells were seeded, to adjust for the long duration of the assay. 46 hr after seeding (ca. 36 hr after transfection), 100 µL of medium with GCV (Sigma, cat.no. SML2346-1ML) or was added to reach a final concentration of 50 µM. Brightfield and mCherry confluences of the cells were continuously imaged over the time course of the assay using the xCelligence eSight Real-Time Cell Analysis (Agilent, USA, CA). The Agilent RTCA eSight software v.1.3.2 was used to create brightfield and red fluorescence segmentation masks and quantify the confluence. Segmentation parameters were selected for each cell line to optimize for cell size and background-to-cell contrast ( ). Quantified confluence data was exported and analyzed using R Studio v2023.06.0+421. To adjust for differences in confluence before addition of GCV between the conditions, the confluence shown in was background adjusted to the EF1a_HSV-TK condition of the same cell line at t=46h:BackgroundadjustedMeant=n=Meant=n+(MeanHSVTKatt=46−Meant=46)\begin{document}$$\displaystyle Backgroundadjusted\,Mean_{t=n}=Mean_{t=n}+\left (Mean_{HSVTK\,at\,t=46}- Mean_{t=46}\right)$$\end{document}

## Statistical analysis
In experiments comparing two groups, unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-tests were used to assess significance ( and , and ). When comparing three or more groups, an ordinary one-way ANOVA was used followed by a Dunnett’s multiple comparison test when all groups were compared with a control column ( and , and ) or a Tukey’s test when all columns were compared ( , and ). Significance in the regression model ( ) was tested using a Wald test. Data was considered statistically significant at a p-value below 0.05. The number of replicates is provided in the figure captions. Each replicate was taken from a distinct sample. Apart from the large screening experiments ( and ), data is representative of at least two experiments. The p-values, F-values, t-values, and degrees of freedom (df) from all statistical comparisons are provided in . Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 10 (GraphPad) or R Studio (v2023.06.0+421).

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

National Center of Competence in Research - Molecular Systems Engineering
 to Yaakov Benenson.

https://ror.org/05a28rw58ETH Zurich

Core Funding to Yaakov Benenson.

## Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Center of Competence in Research Molecular Systems Engineering (NCCR-MSE) and ETH Zurich core funding. We thank M Di Tacchio, C Cavallini, A Gumienny, E Montani, and A Ponti for assistance with flow cytometry and image acquisition as well as analysis. We also thank B Treutlein for discussions, proofreading, and providing the lab infrastructure during the last part of the project. We thank D Schweingruber, F Trick, V Cheras, and S Seidel for proofreading. Thank you to M Lampis and V Cheras for support during revisions. Lastly, we would like to thank A Abraham, J Jaekel, J Schreiber, M Dastor, P Müller-Thümen, and all Benenson and Treutlein lab members for discussions.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.
Shareholder and an employee of Pattern Biosciences.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Investigation.
Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.

## Additional files
Supplementary file 1.

## Overview & sequences of all used plasmids.
Supplementary file 2.

## Sequences of all circuit parts.
Supplementary file 3.

## Cell line & culturing details.
Supplementary file 4.

## Transfection & experimental layout details.
Supplementary file 5.

## Transfection details for screening of circuit parts in .
Supplementary file 6.

## Seeding and Transfection conditions.
Supplementary file 7.

## Segmentation parameters for image analysis using Agilent eSight in .
Supplementary file 8.

## Overview of used statistical tests.
MDAR checklist

## Data availability
Full sequences of all plasmids and fragments used are provided in . Experimental set-up for all transfections is provided in the . contains the data used for the regression model in . Data for and are available in , and , respectively. The formula and independent variables used for the regression are shown in . The statistical tests and analysis used for each figure are provided in the legends. Code used to analyze the membrane localization of the RAS sensor in and R scripts for plotting of and are available on Github (https://github.com/gabsenn/RAS-targeting_Gene_Circuits; copy archived at ).

 10.7554/eLife.104320.3.sa0eLife Assessment
KhalilAhmad SReviewing Editor
Boston University
United States
ConvincingImportantThis important study demonstrates the potential of synthetic gene circuits to detect and target aberrant RAS activity in cancer cell lines. The circuit design is novel and the evidence supporting the claims is convincing. As a proof-of-concept, this will be of broad interest to researchers in synthetic biology and therapeutics development, while future work will be required to help translate this technology toward clinical applications in cancer therapeutics and address potential limitations of the strategy.
10.7554/eLife.104320.3.sa1Reviewer #1 (Public review):
ReviewerSummary:
The manuscript presents a comprehensive study on the developing synthetic gene circuits targeting mutant RAS expressing cells. The aim of this study is to use these RAS targeting circuits as cancer cell classifiers and enable the selective expression of an output protein in correlation with RAS activity. The system is based on the bacterial two-component system NarX/NarL. A RAS-binding domain is fused to a NarX mutant either defective in the ATP binding (N509A) or the phosphorylation site (H399Q). Nanocluster formation of RAS-GTP reconstitutes an active histidine kinase sensor dimer that phosphorylates the response regulator NarL thus leading to the expression of an output protein. The integration of RAS-dependent MAPK responsive elements to express the RAS sensor components generates RAS circuits with an extended dynamic range between mutant and wild-type RAS. The selectivity of the RAS circuits is confirmed in a set of cancer cell lines expressing endogenous levels of mutant or wild-type RAS or oncogenes affecting RAS signaling upstream or downstream. Expression of the suicide gene HSV thymidine kinase as an outcome protein kills RAS-driven cancer cells demonstrating the functionality of the system.
Strengths:
This proof-of-concept study convincingly demonstrates the potential of synthetic gene circuits to target oncogenic RAS in tumor cell lines, act as RAS mutant cell classifier, and induce the killing of RAS-driven cells.
Weaknesses:
A therapeutic strategy based on of this four-plasmid system may be difficult to implement in RAS-driven solid cancers. However, potential solutions are discussed.
10.7554/eLife.104320.3.sa2Reviewer #2 (Public review):
ReviewerThe manuscript describes an interesting approach towards designing genetic circuits to sense different RAS mutants in the context of cancer therapeutics. The authors created sensors for mutant RAS and incorporated feed-forward control that leverages endogenous RAS/MAPK signaling pathways in order to dramatically increase the circuits' dynamic range. The modularity of the system is explored through the individual screening of several RAS binding domains, transmembrane domains, and MAPK response elements, and the author further extensively screened different combinations of circuit components. This is an impressive synthetic biology demonstration that took it all the way to cancer cell lines. However, given the sole demonstrated output in the form of fluorescent proteins, the authors' claims related to therapeutic implications require additional empirical evidence or, otherwise, expository revision.
Major comments:
"These therapies are limited to cancers with KRASG12C mutations" is technically accurate. However, in this fast-moving field, there are examples such as MRTX1133 which holds the promise to target the very G12D mutation that is the focus of this paper. There are broader efforts too. It would help the readers better appreciate the background if the authors could update the intro to reflect the most recent landscape of RAS-targeting drugs.
Only KRASG12D was used as a model in the design and optimization work of the genetic circuits. Other mutations should be quite experimentally feasible and comparisons of the circuits' performances across different KRAS mutations would allow for stronger claims on the circuits' generalizability. Particularly, the cancer cell line used for circuit validation harbored a KRASG13D mutation. While the data presented do indeed support the circuit's "generalizability," the model systems would not have been consistent in the current set of data presented.
In Figure 2a, the text claims that "inactivation of endogenous RAS with NF1 resulted in a lower YFP/RBDCRD-NarX expression," but Figure 2a does not show a statistically significant reduction in expression of SYFP (measured by "membrane-to-total signal ratio [RU]).
The therapeutic index of the authors' systems would be better characterized by a functional payload, other than florescent proteins, that for example induce cell death, immune responses, etc.
Regarding data presented in "Mechanism of action" (Figure 2), the observations are interesting and consistent across different fluorescent reporters. However, with regard to interpretations of the underlying molecular mechanisms, it is not clear whether the different output levels in 2b, 2c, and 2d are due to the pathway as described by the authors or simply from varied expression levels of RBDCRD-NarX itself (2a) that is nonlinearly amplified by the rest of the circuit. From a practical standpoint, this caveat is not critical with respect to the signal-to-noise ratios in later parts of the paper. From a mechanistic interpretation standpoint, claims made forth in this section are not clearly substantiated. Some additional controls would be nice. For example, if the authors express NarXs that constitutively dimerize on the membrane, what would the RasG12D-responsiveness look like? Does RasG12D alter the input-output curve of NarL-RE? How would Figure 4f compare to a NaxR constitutively dimerized control that only relies on transcriptional amplification of the Ras-dependent promoters? It's also possible that these Ras could affect protein production at the post-transcriptional or even post-translational levels, which were not adequately considered.
The text claims that "in contrast to what we saw in HEK293 overexpressing RAS (Figure 5d), the "AND-gate" RAS-targeting circuits do not generate higher output than the EF1a-driven, binding-triggered RAS sensor in HCT-116. Instead, the improved dynamic range results from decreased leakiness in HCT- 116k.o." Comparing the experiment from Figure 5d, which looks at activation in KRASG12D and KRASWT, to the experiments in Figure 6b-d, which looks at activation in HCT-116WT and HCT-116KO is misleading. In Fig 5d., cells are transfected with KRASG12D and KRASWT to emulate high levels of mutant RAS and high levels of wild-type RAS. In Figures 6b-d, HCT-116WT has endogenous levels of mutant RAS, while the KCT-116KO is a knock-out cell line, and does not have mutant or WT RAS. Therefore, the improved dynamic range or "decreased leakiness in HCT-116KO" in comparison to Figure 5d. is more comparable to the NF1 condition from Figure 2, which deactivates endogenous RAS. While this may not be feasible, the most accurate comparison would have been an HCT-116KO line with KRASWT stably integrated.
We couldn't locate the citation or discussion of Figure 4d in the text. Conversely, based on the text description, Figure 6g would contain exciting results. But we couldn't find Figure 6g anywhere ... unless it was a typo and the authors meant Figure 6f, in which case the cool results in Figure S8 could use more elaboration in the main text.
Comments on revisions:
Now that the authors have extensively addressed my comments through text and additional experiments, I am supportive of its conclusions. I thank them for the rigorous updates and congratulate them on an important piece demonstrating the potential of synthetic biology circuits.
10.7554/eLife.104320.3.sa3Reviewer #3 (Public review):
ReviewerSummary:
Mutations that result in consistent RAS activation constitute a major driver of cancer. Therefore, RAS is a favorable target for cancer therapy. However, since normal RAS activity is essential for the function of normal cells, a mechanism that differentiates aberrant RAS activity from normal one is required to avoid severe adverse effects. To this end, the authors designed and optimized a synthetic gene circuit that is induced by active RAS-GTP. The circuit components, such as RAS-GTP sensors, dimerization domains, and linkers. To enhance the circuit selectivity and dynamic range, the authors designed a synthetic promoter comprised of MAPK-responsive elements to regulate the expression of the RAS sensors, thus generating a feed-forward loop regulating the circuit components. Circuit outputs with respect to circuit design modification were characterized in standard model cell lines using basal RAS activity, active RAS mutants, and RAS inactivation.
This approach is interesting. The design is novel and could be implemented for other RAS-mediated applications. The data support the claims, and while this circuit may require further optimization for clinical application, it is an interesting proof of concept for targeting of aberrant RAS activity. I therefore recommend accepting this paper.
Strengths:
Novel circuit design, through optimization and characterization of the circuit components, solid data.
Weaknesses:
This manuscript could significantly benefit from testing the circuit performance in more realistic cell lines, such as patient-derived cells driven by RAS mutations, as well as in corresponding non-cancer cell lines with normal RAS activity. Furthermore, testing with therapeutic output proteins in vitro, and especially in vivo, would significantly strengthen the findings and claims.
Summary:
Given the revision made, I would recommend a minor revision that discusses the specificity limitations of this experimental setup.
10.7554/eLife.104320.3.sa4Author response
SennGabriel ValentinAuthor
ETH Zurich
Basel
Switzerland
NissenLeonAuthor
ETH Zurich
Basel
Switzerland
BenensonYaakovAuthor
ETH Zurich
Basel
Switzerland
The following is the authors’ response to the original reviews.

Reviewer #1 (Public review):

Summary:
The manuscript by Senn and colleagues presents a comprehensive study on the developing synthetic gene circuits targeting mutant RAS-expressing cells. This study aims to exploit these RAS-targeting circuits as cancer cell classifiers, enabling the selective expression of an output protein in correlation with RAS activity. The system is based on the bacterial two-component system NarX/NarL. A RAS-binding domain, the RBDCRD domain of the RAS effector protein CRAF, is fused to the histidine kinase domain, which carries an inactivating amino acid exchange either in its ATP-binding site (N509A) or in its phosphorylation site (H399Q). Dimerization or nanocluster formation of RAS-GTP reconstitutes an active histidine kinase sensor dimer that phosphorylates the response regulator NarL. The phosphorylated DNA-binding protein NarL, fused to the transcription activator domain VP48, binds its responsive element and induces the expression of the output protein. In comparison to mutated RAS, the effect of the RAS activator SOS-1 and the RAS inhibitor NF1 on the sensing ability as well as the tunability of the RAS sensor were examined. A RAS targeting circuit with an AND gate was designed by expressing the RAS sensor proteins under the control of defined MAPK response elements, resulting in a large increase in the dynamic range between mutant and wild-type RAS. Finally, the RAS targeting circuits were evaluated in detail in a set of twelve cancer cell lines expressing endogenous levels of mutant or wild-type RAS or oncogenes affecting RAS signaling upstream or downstream.
Strengths:
This proof-of-concept study convincingly demonstrates the potential of synthetic gene circuits to target oncogenic RAS in tumor cell lines and to function, at least in part, as an RAS mutant cell classifier.
Weaknesses:
The use of an appropriate "therapeutic gene" might revert the oncogenic properties of RAS mutant cell lines. However, a therapeutic strategy based on this four-plasmid-based system might be difficult to implement in RAS-driven solid cancers.
Thank you for the insightful comments. We agree that the delivery of a four-plasmid system represents a major challenge for translating RAS-targeting circuits into therapeutic applications. Reducing the number of plasmids –ideally consolidating all components onto a single vector– will be critical for clinical implementation.
Viral delivery is generally the most efficient strategy for DNA-based therapies, but viral vectors have limited packaging capacities, which differ by virus type[1]. The RAS_sensor_F.L.T. circuit under the EF1α promoter requires ~7.7 kb for the sensing components alone, excluding the output gene. This exceeds the packaging limit of adeno-associated virus (AAV) and is at the upper boundary for lentiviral vectors but could potentially be accommodated by larger vectors such as γ-retroviruses, poxviruses, or herpesviruses¹. Co-transduction with dual AAVs [2] or ongoing engineering to expand packaging capacity [3] may also offer future solutions. An additional route to reduce construct size could be alternative splicing, especially given redundancy between the two NarX fusion proteins[4].
An advantage of our current architecture is that synthetic response elements replace constitutive promoters, reducing construct size. For example, the MAPK-driven PY2_NarX&NarL circuits range between 4.9 and 5.2 kb depending on the transactivation domain, bringing them within AAV packaging limits for the sensor module[5], though co-delivery of the output gene would still be necessary. For lentiviruses, this is within the packaging capacity of 8 kb1 and would allow for inclusion of ~3 kb output genes.
Still, assembling multiple modules onto a single vector introduces new challenges, including possible crosstalk or interference between neighboring promoters [6]. For example, placing the output gene too close to MAPK response elements may trigger unwanted MAPKdependent expression, potentially bypassing the intended AND-gate logic. Moreover, expressing three genes under separate response elements may shift expression ratios and reduce circuit functionality. Nonetheless, the absence of constitutive promoters and the RAS-dependence of MAPK response elements could provide partial robustness, since even unintended activation would still reflect RAS signaling to some extent. Further, our data (Fig. 1d) show that some deviation in component levels can be tolerated, provided all parts are sufficiently expressed. Nonetheless, assembling the circuit on a single vector will require careful design and rigorous validation to ensure optimal performance.
While addressing this is beyond the scope of the current study, we agree that future efforts should focus on vector consolidation and delivery strategies. We now include a paragraph discussing these challenges in the revised manuscript.

Reviewer #2 (Public review):

The manuscript describes an interesting approach towards designing genetic circuits to sense different RAS mutants in the context of cancer therapeutics. The authors created sensors for mutant RAS and incorporated feed-forward control that leverages endogenous RAS/MAPK signaling pathways in order to dramatically increase the circuits' dynamic range. The modularity of the system is explored through the individual screening of several RAS binding domains, transmembrane domains, and MAPK response elements, and the author further extensively screened different combinations of circuit components. This is an impressive synthetic biology demonstration that took it all the way to cancer cell lines. However, given the sole demonstrated output in the form of fluorescent proteins, the authors' claims related to therapeutic implications require additional empirical evidence or, otherwise, expository revision.
Thank you very much for the thoughtful evaluation, precise critique, and constructive suggestions.
As correctly noted, our study initially focused on developing and optimizing input sensors and processing units for synthetic gene circuits targeting mutated RAS. To address the concern regarding therapeutic relevance, we have now incorporated functional validation using a clinically relevant output protein: herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (HSV-TK), which converts ganciclovir into a cytotoxic compound. We replaced the mCerulean reporter with HSV-TK and tested the resulting RAS-targeting circuits in both RAS-mutant and wild-type cancer cell lines. The results, now presented in a new chapter (Figure 8 and Supplementary Fig. 14), demonstrate robust killing of RAS-mutant cells and support the potential therapeutic utility of these circuits.
Major comments:
"These therapies are limited to cancers with KRASG12C mutations" is technically accurate. However, in this fast-moving field, there are examples such as MRTX1133 which holds the promise to target the very G12D mutation that is the focus of this paper. There are broader efforts too. It would help the readers better appreciate the background if the authors could update the intro to reflect the most recent landscape of RAS-targeting drugs.
Thank you for this helpful suggestion. We have updated the introduction to reflect the rapidly evolving landscape of RAS-targeting therapies, including the development of inhibitors for nonG12C mutations such as KRASG12D (e.g., MRTX1133). Given the pace and breadth of these advances, we also refer readers to a recent comprehensive review that provides an in-depth overview of current RAS-targeting strategies.
Only KRASG12D was used as a model in the design and optimization work of the genetic circuits. Other mutations should be quite experimentally feasible and comparisons of the circuits' performances across different KRAS mutations would allow for stronger claims on the circuits' generalizability. Particularly, the cancer cell line used for circuit validation harbored a KRASG13D mutation. While the data presented do indeed support the circuit's "generalizability," the model systems would not have been consistent in the current set of data presented.
To further support the generalizability of our RAS sensor, we titrated plasmid doses for a panel of oncogenic RAS variants, including multiple KRAS mutants as well as HRASG12D</sup and NRASG12D</sup. Across all tested variants, we observed concentration-dependent activation of the RAS sensor. At 1.67 ng/well, the sensor output for all oncogenic RAS variants was at least as high as that for KRASG12D, suggesting that the behavior observed in our initial design and optimization is representative of a broader set of RAS mutations.
We also noted that high overexpression of wildtype HRAS and NRAS can lead to substantial activation of the sensor, exceeding that observed with wildtype KRAS. This underscores the importance of considering all RAS isoforms when assessing circuit specificity and avoiding potential off-target activation in healthy cells.
In Figure 2a, the text claims that "inactivation of endogenous RAS with NF1 resulted in a lower YFP/RBDCRD-NarX expression," but Figure 2a does not show a statistically significant reduction in expression of SYFP (measured by "membrane-to-total signal ratio [RU]).
Thank you for pointing this out. We repeated the experiment to reassess the effect of NF1 on RBDCRD-NarX-SYFP2 expression and were able to confirm statistical significance. Accordingly, we have replaced Figure 2a with updated data. To facilitate better visual comparison across conditions, we also standardized the y-axis range across all relevant flow cytometry plots.
The therapeutic index of the authors' systems would be better characterized by a functional payload, other than florescent proteins, that for example induce cell death, immune responses, etc.
Thank you for this insightful comment. We agree that fluorescent reporters are limited to approximating expression levels, and that a functional output protein is more appropriate for assessing therapeutic potential. To address this, we replaced mCerulean with the therapeutic suicide-gene, HSV-TK, and tested the circuits in RAS-mutant and wild-type cancer cell lines. These experiments demonstrate that our circuits can express functional proteins and induce cell death in two RAS-mutant cell lines while showing low toxicity in a RAS wild type cell line (new chapter including Fig. 8 and Supplementary Fig.14).
Comparing confluence of cells transfected with the RAS-targeting circuits to cells transfected with non-toxic GFP-output negative control or the constitutively expressed EF1αHSV-TK positive control allowed us to estimate the killing-strength of the circuits in each cell line. In RAS-mutant HCT-116 the confluence curves were similar to the positive control, indicating effective killing (Fig. 8b). At lower DNA dose in HCT-116, or in SW620 with lower transfection efficiency, the killing of transfected RAS-driven cancer cells was less pronounced, falling approximately midway between the controls (Fig. 8g&j). In the RAS wild type cell line, Igrov-1, the RAS circuits showed continued growth similar to the non-toxic negative control (Fig. 8d), suggesting low toxicity.
While this may indicate low circuit activation in Igrov-1, an alternative explanation for the low toxicity could also be insufficient transfection efficiency. Testing in SW620 –which had similar transfection efficiency as Igrov-1 (Supplementary Fig. 14a)– showed that this moderate transfection efficiency was sufficient for RAS-circuit-dependent killing (Fig. 8d & 8g), supporting the notion of low activation in Igrov-1 and selective cytotoxicity in RAS-driven cancer cells.
Nonetheless, it is important to note that comparisons between the cell lines need to be interpreted cautiously because of inter-cell line differences in transfection, growth, and HSV-TK/ganciclovir (GCV)-sensitivity (Supplementary Fig. 14) and further validation will be essential.
A conclusive assessment will require more efficient delivery strategies, such as viral vectors (as discussed above). Efficient delivery would allow to investigate selectivity in a more realistic setting with patient-derived RAS-mutant cancer and healthy cells as well as testing in an vivo model. While beyond the scope of the current study, we view it as a critical direction for future work and have therefore added a paragraph about this to our discussion.
Regarding data presented in "Mechanism of action" (Figure 2), the observations are interesting and consistent across different fluorescent reporters. However, with regard to interpretations of the underlying molecular mechanisms, it is not clear whether the different output levels in 2b, 2c, and 2d are due to the pathway as described by the authors or simply from varied expression levels of RBDCRD-NarX itself (2a) that is nonlinearly amplified by the rest of the circuit. From a practical standpoint, this caveat is not critical with respect to the signal-to-noise ratios in later parts of the paper. From a mechanistic interpretation standpoint, claims made forth in this section are not clearly substantiated. Some additional controls would be nice. For example, if the authors express NarXs that constitutively dimerize on the membrane, what would the RasG12Dresponsiveness look like? Does RasG12D alter the input-output curve of NarL-RE? How would Figure 4f compare to a NaxR constitutively dimerized control that only relies on transcriptional amplification of the Ras-dependent promoters?
This is a great point. We agree that the observed differences in output levels (Fig. 2) could arise from non-linear amplification due to increased expression of RBDCRD-NarX, rather than RAS binding or dimerization alone. To further investigate this possibility, we performed titrations of KRASG12D in combination with the functional RAS sensor and a series of constitutively active and inactive control constructs (Supplementary Fig. 4).
Inactive controls lacking NarX dimerization showed only a modest increase in output expression, similar to direct mCerulean expression under the EF1α promoter. Transfection of the output plasmid alone, with NarL, or with NarL and non-RAS-binding RBDR89L CRDC168S -NarX, resulted in minimal RAS-dependent increases (Supplementary Fig. 4a). Importantly, after normalization using the EF1α-driven mCherry transfection control, these effects were fully or even slightly over-compensated (Supplementary Fig. 4b), showing that we don’t include the effect of EF1α-dependent increased leakiness in the data presented throughout the manuscript, but also that –due to the normalization– we potentially underestimate the dynamic range of the RAS-targeting circuits.
In contrast, constitutively dimerizing NarX controls (both membrane-bound and cytosolic dimerized via the FKBP–FRB system) exhibited a more pronounced RAS-dependent increase in output –even after normalization– confirming the presence of non-linear amplification (up to 3–4fold). However, this effect was still lower than that achieved with the functional RAS-binding sensor (8-fold at 1.67 ng/well KRASG12D; 14-fold at 5–15 ng/well), indicating that the increase in expression of the sensor parts is not the full explanation of the effect we see. Instead, RAS binding and dimerization further amplify the response and are necessary for full activation (Supplementary Fig. 4b).
We also addressed the reviewer’s suggestion by testing the MAPK response elements used in Fig. 4f with constitutively dimerizing NarX. These controls generally showed lower fold changes between KRASG12D; and KRASWT than the corresponding RAS-binding circuits (Supplementary Fig. 7), with one exception: the combination of SRE_NarX and PY2_NarL-VP48.
Together, these data show that non-linear amplification via increased expression and dimerization contributes to output activation. However, RAS binding and induced dimerization of the NarX sensor are required for full functionality and enhanced signal strength. This underscores that integrating the MAPK response elements with the binding-based RAS sensor into RAS-targeting circuits generally improves the distinction between cells with KRASG12D; and KRASWT and that it was the combination that allowed to reach maximal fold changes.
It's also possible that these Ras could affect protein production at the post-transcriptional or even post-translational levels, which were not adequately considered.
Thank you for this comment. We now mention in the manuscript the potential mechanisms by which (over-)activated RAS or MAPK signaling can increase protein synthesis. We cite relevant reports of the mechanisms we found, including upregulation of translational initiation and machinery[10] and ribosomal biogenesis[11].
The text claims that "in contrast to what we saw in HEK293 overexpressing RAS (Figure 5d), the "AND-gate" RAS-targeting circuits do not generate higher output than the EF1a-driven, bindingtriggered RAS sensor in HCT-116. Instead, the improved dynamic range results from decreased leakiness in HCT- 116k.o." Comparing the experiment from Figure 5d, which looks at activation in KRASG12D and KRASWT, to the experiments in Figure 6b-d, which looks at activation in HCT-116WT and HCT-116KO is misleading. In Fig 5d., cells are transfected with KRASG12D and KRASWT to emulate high levels of mutant RAS and high levels of wild-type RAS. In Figures 6b-d, HCT-116WT has endogenous levels of mutant RAS, while the KCT-116KO is a knock-out cell line, and does not have mutant or WT RAS. Therefore, the improved dynamic range or "decreased leakiness in HCT-116KO" in comparison to Figure 5d. is more comparable to the NF1 condition from Figure 2, which deactivates endogenous RAS. While this may not be feasible, the most accurate comparison would have been an HCT-116KO line with KRASWT stably integrated.
Thank you for this input. We understand that comparing the results from HEK293 cells transfected with KRASG12D; or KRASWT (Fig. 5d) to those from HCT-116WT and HCT-116k.o. cells (Fig. 6b–d) may be misleading if interpreted as a direct comparison of RAS signaling levels. Our intent was not to compare HEK293 with KRASWT directly to HCT-116k.o.., but rather to contrast the behavior of the EF1α-driven RAS sensor and the MAPK-responsive RAS-targeting circuits within each cell line context.
Specifically, we observed that in HEK293 cells expressing KRASG12D, the MAPK-based RAS-targeting circuits produced higher output than the EF1α-expressed RAS sensor. In contrast, in HCT-116WT cells, the EF1α-expressed RAS sensor resulted in higher output levels than the RAS-targeting circuits. Despite this, the MAPK-driven circuits showed an improved dynamic range compared to the EF1α-expressed RAS sensor in HCT-116, due to the reduced background expression in the HCT-116k.o.. cells. We have revised the manuscript text to clarify this distinction.
We agree that an HCT-116k.o cell line with stable integration of KRASWT would provide a more direct comparison. Nonetheless, HCT-116k.o.. cells still express endogenous NRAS and HRAS, both of which are capable of activating the RAS sensor (as shown in Fig. 1g). Therefore, we believe that HCT-116k.o. cells are more comparable to HEK293 with KRASWT than to the NF1 condition in Fig. 2, in which all endogenous RAS isoforms are inactivated.
We couldn't locate the citation or discussion of Figure 4d in the text. Conversely, based on the text description, Figure 6g would contain exciting results. But we couldn't find Figure 6g anywhere ... unless it was a typo and the authors meant Figure 6f, in which case the cool results in Figure S8 could use more elaboration in the main text.
Thank you for this helpful observation. The figure references were indeed incorrect due to a typo. The results discussed in the text refer to Figure 6f (not 6g), which is now Figure 7a in the revised version. To further highlight these findings, we have added a new Figure 7b that better illustrates how different MAPK response elements enabled us to identify, for each RAS-mutant cell line, a RAS-targeting circuit that showed stronger activation than in all RAS wild-type lines. We have also expanded the corresponding section in the main text to elaborate on these results and their significance.

Reviewer #3 (Public review):

Summary:
Mutations that result in consistent RAS activation constitute a major driver of cancer. Therefore, RAS is a favorable target for cancer therapy. However, since normal RAS activity is essential for the function of normal cells, a mechanism that differentiates aberrant RAS activity from normal one is required to avoid severe adverse effects. To this end, the authors designed and optimized a synthetic gene circuit that is induced by active RAS-GTP. The circuit components, such as RAS-GTP sensors, dimerization domains, and linkers. To enhance the circuit selectivity and dynamic range, the authors designed a synthetic promoter comprised of MAPK-responsive elements to regulate the expression of the RAS sensors, thus generating a feed-forward loop regulating the circuit components. Circuit outputs with respect to circuit design modification were characterized in standard model cell lines using basal RAS activity, active RAS mutants, and RAS inactivation.
This approach is interesting. The design is novel and could be implemented for other RASmediated applications. The data support the claims, and while this circuit may require further optimization for clinical application, it is an interesting proof of concept for targeting aberrant RAS activity.
Strengths:
Novel circuit design, through optimization and characterization of the circuit components, solid data.
Weaknesses:
This manuscript could significantly benefit from testing the circuit performance in more realistic cell lines, such as patient-derived cells driven by RAS mutations, as well as in corresponding non-cancer cell lines with normal RAS activity. Furthermore, testing with therapeutic output proteins in vitro, and especially in vivo, would significantly strengthen the findings and claims.
Thank you very much for the thoughtful and supportive comments. We fully agree with the reviewer’s suggestions for improving the translational potential of the RAS-targeting circuits.
As a first step toward therapeutic relevance, we replaced the fluorescent reporter with HSV-TK, a clinically validated suicide gene, and demonstrated killing in RAS-mutant cancer cell lines. This is described above and in the new section of the manuscript (Figure 8).
We also agree that testing in patient-derived cancer cells and especially healthy cells with wild-type RAS activity will be essential. However, testing in primary or patient-derived cells presents delivery challenges: transient transfection of our current four-plasmid system is unlikely to achieve sufficient expression. As discussed in our response to Reviewer #1, development of a more efficient delivery strategy –such as viral vector-based delivery– is a necessary next step.
Once a delivery system is established, identifying relevant off-target tissues throughout the body with high physiological RAS signaling will be key to assessing selectivity. While comparative data on RAS activation across healthy tissues are scarce[12,13], recent atlases of transcription factor activity[14,15] provide insights to identify off-target cells with high activation of RAS-dependent transcription factors and may even approximate RAS activity across healthy tissue. Alternatively, our single-input sensors for RAS and MAPK pathway activity could be used in vivo to identify off-target cells based on endogenous activity.
Once relevant target and off-target cells have been identified, patient-derived cancer and healthy cells can help select and adapt cancer-specific RAS-targeting circuits and nominate therapeutic candidates for further safety and efficacy assessment[6,8].

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

For the most part, the data in this study are very convincing and very well presented. The cartoons make it easier to understand the complex experimental setups.
(1) Did the authors use wild-type Sos-1 or a constitutively active membrane-bound catalytic domain in their studies? How is SOS-1 activated when in case Sos-1 wild-type was used?
Thank you for this feedback. We used the constitutively active catalytic domain of Sos-1 (AA5641049; PDB ID 2II0).
(2) Figure 1f: In case of KRAS-G12D, it looks like the output expression does not really correlate with the RAS-GTP level. Can the authors give an explanation?
Thank you for this interesting question. We believe the observed discrepancy arises primarily from differences in the sensitivity and readout dynamics of the two assays. The RAS-GTP pulldown ELISA appears insufficiently sensitive to detect small changes in RAS-GTP levels at lower KRASG12D plasmid doses (0.19, 0.56, or 1.67 ng). Only at 5 ng and 15 ng do we observe clear increases in RAS-GTP signal (25% and 700%, respectively). In contrast, the RAS sensor shows strong activation already in the 0.56–5 ng range but begins to saturate at higher doses (see Figure 1f and Figure 1e).
Beyond the differing technical sensitivities of the ELISA (plate reader) and flow cytometry, an important conceptual distinction may further explain this behavior: the RAS sensor likely integrates RAS signaling over time. Once NarX binds RAS-GTP and dimerizes, it activates NarL, triggering mCerulean expression. If the rate of mCerulean production exceeds its degradation, signal accumulates throughout the assay duration. Thus, the flow cytometry readout reflects time-integrated signaling, allowing small differences in RAS-GTP to be amplified into measurable differences in output—especially at low input levels. This may explain why flow cytometry detects circuit activation earlier and more steeply than the pulldown assay, which provides a snapshot of RAS-GTP abundance at a single time point and saturates less readily at high input levels.
Together, these factors likely explain the observed differences in signal dynamics: the RAS sensor exhibits steep activation followed by saturation at high plasmid doses (flow cytometry), while the ELISA shows limited sensitivity at low doses but a broader linear range at higher doses.
(3) Figure 2b: It appears that even in the case of KRAS-G12D and Sos-1, only a few cells are positive. Does this result depend on low cell density, low transfection efficiency, or a wide range of the expression level? As a control, nuclear staining could be shown.
Thank you for this question. In the experiment shown in Figure 2b, our goal was to assess the membrane localization of the RBD^CRD-NarX-SYFP2 construct, which serves as a proxy for RAS-bound sensor. To enable accurate computational segmentation and separation of membrane signal from adjacent cells, we intentionally reseeded cells at low density in glassbottom plates for confocal imaging.
The observed variability in signal likely reflects a combination of transient transfection and heterogeneous expression levels. While the overall transfection efficiency was approximately 70%, expression varied between individual cells. To account for this, we analyzed the membrane-to-total signal ratio per cell, which internally normalizes the membrane signal to the total cellular expression of SYFP2 and controls for differences in transfection efficiency.
In response to the reviewer’s suggestion, we have updated the figure to include nuclear staining to aid interpretation. We would like to emphasize, however, that the images are intended to illustrate subcellular localization per cell, not expression frequency or intensity across the population.
Minor points
(1) Figure 1b: "The third plasmid expresses NarL, .." should be changed to "The third plasmid expresses NarL-VP48, .."
Done
(2) Figure 1c, right part: The orange arrow should be labeled NarX-H399Q (not N509A).
Done
(3) Supplementary Table 6 and 7: [cells/wells] - should probably be [cells 10*3/well].
Thank you for these points, we updated the manuscript accordingly

Reviewer #2 (Recommendations for the authors):

Minor comments:
(1) N509A seems mislabeled in Figure 1b.
(2) It would help the readers if the authors could elaborate a bit on what is known about the RBD and CRD mutations used here.
Thank you for the input, we added a paragraph in the paper to expand on the effect of these commonly used mutations.
(3) The KRASWT&Sos1 condition is not explained within the text for Figure 1f, which is the first figure with the KRASWT&Sos1 condition, but rather later on for Figure 2a. Adding a description of this condition to the discussion of Figure 1f would add clarity to this figure.
Thank you, we corrected this.
(4) Citing AlphaFold2 structural predictions as having "revealed that longer linkers between the sensor's RBDCRD and NarX-derived domains could bring the NarX domains into closer proximity" is probably an overstatement. AlphaFold2 generally has low confidence in the placement of long flexible linkers, and the longer linkers in the illustration could facilitate NarX and NarL being even farther apart than they are in the original design.
Thank you for this input. We agree that AlphaFold2 predictions generally have low confidence in the placement of long, flexible linkers, and we did not intend to imply that the structural models were predictive of actual linker conformations. Rather, the models were used heuristically to generate the hypothesis that longer linkers might facilitate better positioning of the NarX domains for dimerization.
As described in the Methods, we manually rotated the flexible linker regions to explore plausible conformations. These exploratory models showed that with a short (1x GGGGS) linker, it was more challenging to bring the NarX domains into close proximity, whereas longer linkers allowed greater positional flexibility. This modeling exercise provided a structural rationale for experimentally testing longer linkers. We have revised the manuscript text to clarify that the structural predictions were used to motivate linker design –not to validate or predict structural outcomes.
(5) Figure 3b shows that the fold change (KRASG12D/KRASWT) is higher at shorter linker lengths and lower at longer linker lengths, and that the output expression of mCerulean is lower at shorter linker lengths and higher at longer linker lengths. Having a bar plot with the output expression mCerulean levels comparing KRASG12D and KRASWT next to each other would be a significantly more informative representation of this data. In particular, the readers might be interested in understanding the effect of linker length on off-target activation from the sensor, which is not clear from this figure.
Thank you for the suggestion. We adapted Figure 3b to better present this.
(6) While it is implied that the sentence "Among the tested binding domains, the Ras association domain (RA) of the natural RAS effector Rassf5, the RAS association domain 2 (RA2) of the phospholipase C epsilon (PLCe)33, and the synthetic RAS binder K5534 showed a slightly higher or similar dynamic range." is comparing these RAS binding domains to RBDCRD, for clarity it should be noted what the point of reference is for this "slightly higher or similar dynamic range."
(7) Claims are made throughout the text that require supporting data, and thus require a reference to a figure, but there are a few instances where the reference is several sentences after the discussion of data and findings begins. For example, the discussion of Figure 3c begins with the claim "Among the tested binding domains, the Ras association domain (RA) of the natural RAS effector Rassf5, the RAS association domain 2 (RA2) of the phospholipase C epsilon (PLCe)33, and the synthetic RAS binder K5534 showed a slightly higher or similar dynamic range," but there is no reference to the data or figure being discussed until the end of the discussion of Figure 3c. This formatting is also present in Figure 3d and Figure 6f.
Thank you for mentioning these imprecisions and inconsistencies, we addressed them in the manuscript.
(8) In Figures 5d and 5e, the formatting of underscores and dashes is occasionally inconsistent within the text. (ex. "PY2_NarX_FLT or PY2_NarL-FLT" on page 13.).
Thank you for this precise observation. The formatting differences were intentional and reflect distinct design principles. Specifically:
An underscore (e.g., PY2_NarX_FLT) denotes that two separate proteins are expressed –here, PY2-driven RBDCRD-NarX and EF1α-driven NarL-F.L.T.
A dash (e.g., PY2_NarL-F.L.T.) indicates a fusion protein –i.e., PY2-driven NarL-F.L.T. combined with EF1α-driven RBDCRD-NarX.
This notation is used to distinguish expression sources and fusion constructs while avoiding redundancy with the base circuit (EF1α_NarX + EF1α_NarL-VP48). We hope the included schematic diagrams in each relevant figure helps the reader interpret these combinations.
(9) The text claims that "loss-of-function mutations in RBDCRD decreased activation. However, the dynamic range was only 3-fold" and attributes this claim to Figure 6a. For a claim about specific fold-change activation, one would expect a corresponding figure with quantitative measurements of this fluorescence to be referenced.
Thank you for this remark. We made a supplementary figure (Supplementary Fig. 11) to show the quantitative measurement of the 3-fold dynamic range between HCT-116WT and HCT-116k.o. when using the EF1a-expressed RAS sensor with NarL-VP48.
(10) The claim of this Figure 2d is that the effect of RAS-GTP levels on mCerulean output is amplified in comparison to Figures 2a, 2b, and 3c, representing expression, RAS binding, and dimerization respectively. While visually this might be true from the figure, the readers might be confused by the lack of significance between the control and the NF1 condition, alongside the variation between the triplicates. Could this experiment be repeated to gain clearer data and to support their claim more effectively?
Thank you for this important observation. To address the concern regarding variability and statistical significance in Figure 2d, we repeated the experiment using 24-well plates to increase the number of cells analyzed per condition. This improved the consistency of the data and allowed us to reduce variability across replicates. As a result, we now observe a statistically significant difference between the control and the NF1 condition. The updated results are shown in the revised Figure 2.
(11) The readers might be less familiar with the concept of "composability" than "modularity" and it would be good to explain it if the authors did intend to use the former.
Thank you for this comment. We changed it to modularity to avoid confusion.
References
(1) Shahryari, A., Burtscher, I., Nazari, Z. & Lickert, H. Engineering Gene Therapy: Advances and Barriers. Advanced Therapeutics vol. 4 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1002/adtp.202100040 (2021).
(2) Mcclements, M. E. & Maclaren, R. E. Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) Dual Vector Strategies for Gene Therapy Encoding Large Transgenes. YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE vol. 90 (2017).
(3) Wagner, H. J., Weber, W. & Fussenegger, M. Synthetic Biology: Emerging Concepts to Design and Advance Adeno-Associated Viral Vectors for Gene Therapy. Advanced Science vol. 8 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.202004018 (2021).
(4) Doshi, J., Willis, K., Madurga, A., Stelzer, C. & Benenson, Y. Multiple Alternative Promoters and Alternative Splicing Enable Universal Transcription-Based Logic Computation in Mammalian Cells. Cell Rep 33, 108437 (2020).
(5) Wu, Z., Yang, H. & Colosi, P. Effect of genome size on AAV vector packaging. Molecular Therapy 18, 80–86 (2010).
(6) Dastor, M. et al. A Workflow for in Vivo Evaluation of Candidate Inputs and Outputs for Cell Classifier Gene Circuits. ACS Synth Biol 7, 474–489 (2018).
(7) Preuß, E. et al. TK.007: A novel, codon-optimized HSVtk(A168H) mutant for suicide gene therapy. Hum Gene Ther 21, 929–941 (2010).
(8) Angelici, B., Shen, L., Schreiber, J., Abraham, A. & Benenson, Y. An AAV gene therapy computes over multiple cellular inputs to enable precise targeting of multifocal hepatocellular carcinoma in mice. Sci Transl Med 13, (2021).
(9) Mesnil, M. & Yamasaki, H. Bystander Effect in Herpes Simplex Virus-Thymidine Kinase/Ganciclovir Cancer Gene Therapy: Role of Gap-Junctional Intercellular Communication 1. CANCER RESEARCH vol. 60 http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/articlepdf/60/15/3989/2478218/ch150003989.pdf (2000).
(10) Proud, C. G. Ras, PI3-kinase and mTOR signaling in cardiac hypertrophy. Cardiovascular Research vol. 63 403–413 Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cardiores.2004.02.003 (2004).
(11) Azman, M. S. et al. An ERK1/2driven RNAbinding switch in nucleolin drives ribosome biogenesis and pancreatic tumorigenesis downstream of RAS oncogene. EMBO J 42, (2023).
(12) von Lintig, F. C. et al. Ras activation in normal white blood cells and childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Clin Cancer Res 6, 1804–10 (2000).
(13) Guha, A., Feldkamp, M. M., Lau, N., Boss, G. & Pawson, A. Proliferation of human malignant astrocytomas is dependent on Ras activation. Oncogene 15, 2755–2765 (1997).
(14) Pan, L. et al. HTCA: a database with an in-depth characterization of the single-cell human transcriptome. Nucleic Acids Res 51, D1019–D1028 (2023).
(15) Pan, L. et al. Single Cell Atlas: a single-cell multi-omics human cell encyclopedia. Genome Biol 25, (2024).