pmcGenes DevGenes Dev101genesdevGADGenes & Development0890-93691549-5477Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory PressPMC11789494PMC11789494.111789494117894943963856710.1101/gad.352081.1241752034Reviews“Undruggable KRAS”: druggable after all
Cox and DerDirect KRAS inhibitorsCoxAdrienne D. DerChanning J. 1Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA;2Department of Radiation Oncology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA;3Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USACorresponding authors: cjder@med.unc.edu, adrienne_cox@med.unc.edu112025391-248113213216201072025010720250402202501072025
© 2025 Cox and Der; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press
2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This article is distributed exclusively by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the first six months after the full-issue publication date (see http://genesdev.cshlp.org/site/misc/terms.xhtml). After six months, it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International), as described at http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.In this review, Cox and Der perform a retrospective evaluation of the field's endeavors to target activated mutant KRAS, a prominent oncogenic driver in lung, pancreatic, and colorectal cancers. They collate insights from preclinical and clinical studies that led to the development of various KRAS inhibitors, detail potential resistance mechanisms, and discuss the promise of combination therapies in treating RAS-driven cancers.

The three RAS genes (HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS) comprise the most frequently mutated oncogene family in cancer. KRAS is the predominant isoform mutated in cancer and is most prevalently mutated in major causes of cancer deaths including lung, colorectal, and pancreatic cancers. Despite extensive academic and industry efforts to target KRAS, it would take nearly four decades before approval of the first clinically effective KRAS inhibitors for the treatment of KRAS mutant lung cancer. We revisit past anti-KRAS strategies and painful lessons learned and then focus on the rapidly evolving landscape of direct RAS inhibitors, resistance mechanisms, and potential combination treatments.

CRCcolorectal cancerKRASNSCLCnon-small cell lung cancerPDACpancreatic ductal adenocarcinomaNational Cancer Institute 10.13039/100000054R01CA42978P50CA196510P50CA257911U01CA199235P01CA203657R35CA232113Pancreatic Cancer Action Network 10.13039/10000178422-WG-DERBDepartment of Defense 10.13039/100000005W81XWH2110692The Blue Ribbon RunJulie M. Brown and Christina Gianoplus Foundation for Colon Cancer Researchpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NCTwo of the three RAS genes (KRAS, HRAS, and NRAS) were identified originally in oncogenic retroviruses ( ), which have proven to be a rich source of the most important cancer-driving genes. Ki-ras was identified as the viral gene that accounted for the highly oncogenic nature of the laboratory-derived murine sarcoma virus (Ki-MSV) isolated by ( A). Scolnick and colleagues ( ) later identified K-ras as the gene that was responsible for the potent rat sarcoma-inducing activities of Ki-MSV. They determined that, analogously to the viral src gene that was transduced from the normal chicken genome ( ), K-ras was transduced from the normal rat genome ( ).
 Discoveries in 1982 then catapulted KRAS to prominence: An activated human KRAS gene, detected in DNA isolated from a lung carcinoma cell line by the NIH/3T3 focus formation assay, was the human counterpart of viral KRAS ( B,C; ). This initial discovery was greatly expanded on in studies by Barbacid and colleagues ( ), who identified activated KRAS genes in DNAs derived from additional human carcinoma cell lines as well as from patient tumors.
HRAS was also identified originally as a viral oncogene in the Harvey murine sarcoma virus (Ha-MSV) isolated by ( A). Three groups later determined that H-ras was homologous to the activated oncogene detected in DNA from the T24 human bladder carcinoma cell line ( ; ; ). Unlike the retroviral origins of KRAS and HRAS, which were denoted by the initial of their discoverer, NRAS was identified much later, when three groups searching for activated oncogenes, also by using the NIH/3T3 focus formation assay, independently detected NRAS as an activated oncogene in human neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and promyelocytic leukemia cell lines ( ; ; ). This led to a common in-joke in the field wherein the N in NRAS was said to represent either “neuroblastoma” or “nothing in particular.”
Because the structural and biochemical properties of RAS proteins did not reveal attractive druggable properties, early drug discovery efforts focused on indirect approaches to blocking RAS functions ( ; ; ; ). The first comprehensive attempts involved development of farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) to block obligate RAS lipid modification and membrane association ( ; ). The second focused on targeting key effector signaling components activated downstream from KRAS: the RAF–MEK–ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and PI3K–AKT–mTORC1 signaling networks ( ). A third direction involved searches for genes that are normally dispensable but are synthetically lethal when lost in cell lines harboring mutant but not wild-type (WT) KRAS ( ).
In this review, we revisit these efforts and summarize critical lessons learned. We then focus on attempts to identify direct KRAS inhibitors—efforts that led to the 2021 and 2022 approvals of the first two KRAS inhibitors (sotorasib and adagrasib, respectively) for second-line treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring a smoking-associated KRAS mutant (glycine 12–cysteine [G12C]) ( ; ). This success has fueled ongoing extensive preclinical development and clinical evaluation of additional inhibitors for KRASG12C and for other KRAS mutants. Here, we focus on use of these inhibitors in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), arguably the most KRAS-addicted cancer, and additionally in NSCLC and colorectal cancer (CRC), which also frequently harbor activating KRAS mutations. We summarize the history of efforts to directly target KRAS for cancer treatment ( ). We highlight that the surprisingly low initial clinical responses to these inhibitors in patients whose cancers harbor the specific targeted mutations, with overall response rates (ORRs) of <50% and durations of response (DORs) of only a few months, emphasize that understanding and overcoming primary and acquired resistance will be the major challenge for the long-term success of KRAS inhibitor therapy.
 

## KRAS mutations in cancer
Cancer genome sequencing has established KRAS as among the most frequently mutated oncogenes in cancer ( ). Although reported KRAS mutation frequencies vary somewhat based on the database evaluated due to differences in cancer type representation, the highest frequencies are seen in the top three causes of cancer deaths in the United States: lung, colorectal, and pancreatic carcinomas. Furthermore, data available at AACR GENIE (v.15.1) identified a KRAS somatic mutation frequency of 16% across all cancers. Thus, it is widely recognized that effective anti-KRAS therapies will have a significant impact on cancer death rates, prompting extensive research and drug discovery efforts.
Of the three RAS genes, KRAS is the predominant one mutated in human cancers (81%), followed by NRAS (15%), whereas HRAS is mutated infrequently (4%) ( ). Although a molecular/biological basis for the predominance of KRAS remains elusive, one intriguing possibility reflects the high frequency of rare codons in KRAS relative to NRAS and HRAS ( ; ). That KRAS is uniquely poorly translated may allow mutant KRAS to persist in normal tissue without inducing cellular senescence, particularly in cancers such as PDAC and NSCLC, where KRAS mutations are the initiating genetic event ( ; ; ).
 In KRAS, of the three mutational hotspots, codon G12 mutations predominate, followed by G13 and then Q61 ( ). In contrast, Q61 mutations predominate in HRAS and NRAS. Although six single-base missense mutations can occur at KRAS G12, G13, and Q61, the relative frequencies at each hotspot also differ in different cancers ( , ; ). Overall, G12D is the most frequent, followed by G12V. G12C, the most prevalent KRAS mutant in NSCLC (39%), is found at lower frequency in CRC (7%) and is rare in PDAC (>2%). Conversely, whereas G12R is the third most prevalent mutant in PDAC (15%), it is rare in CRC and NSCLC (∼1%).
The frequency of some mutated alleles, such as KRASG12C, likely reflects tissue-specific differential exposure to specific mutagens ( ). KRASG12C in NSCLC is nearly exclusively associated with current or former smokers, and 90% of the occurrences of KRASG12C in CRC are also associated with a history of smoking. A comparison of predicted versus observed mutation frequencies supports a biological basis for tissue-selective KRAS mutation frequencies ( ; ).

## KRAS structure and biochemistry: in search of druggable vulnerabilities
The three RAS genes encode four highly identical (∼85%) 188–189 amino acid proteins ( A). Through the use of alternative fourth exon sequences ( B), KRAS encodes two proteins that diverge in their C-terminal 151–188/189 amino acids ( A; ). KRAS4B is the primordial RAS gene in evolution, with HRAS, then NRAS, and finally KRAS4A arising later through gene duplication and diversification ( ). Thus, although HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS genes and their protein products are commonly referred to as isoforms of each other, they are more accurately termed paralogs because they arose from different genes. In contrast, KRAS4A and KRAS4B are true isoforms, arising as the result of alternative RNA splicing.
 Most “KRAS” research is really KRAS4B research. Part of the reason is historical: Reagents were first developed for KRAS4B rather than for KRAS4A. Additionally, KRAS4A but not KRAS4B is dispensable for normal mouse development ( ), and the predominant KRAS isoform expressed in most tissues is from the 4B transcript ( ). Ironically, the version originally identified as Ki-MSV was the far lesser studied 4A isoform ( ). Nevertheless, because mutant KRAS4A both is oncogenic and displays functions distinct from KRAS4B, inhibition of both 4A and 4B will likely be required for effective anti-KRAS therapy ( ).
RAS proteins, first identified in the 1960s as transforming proteins of murine sarcoma viruses and denoted as “p21src” for their size and that origin, were initially thought to be protein kinases, also by analogy to SRC. However, in the following decade, observations by Scolnick and colleagues ( ; ) that viral RAS proteins bound GDP and GTP provided the critical clue that identified their then-unique biochemical activities as guanine nucleotide-binding transforming proteins. Thus, RAS proteins are GTPases that bind GDP/GTP and hydrolyze GTP through removal of the bound GTP γ-phosphate to form RAS–GDP. The KRAS tertiary structure is comprised of six β sheets and five α helices ( C), of which the N-terminal residues (1–166) comprise the G domain ( , ), whereas the C-terminal residues are critical for membrane targeting ( A). Within the G domain are consensus guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and triphosphate (GTP) binding motifs shared with other GTP-binding proteins ( C).
The first clue as to how point mutations alter RAS function came with the discovery that intrinsic GTP hydrolysis activity, already low, was impaired in mutant RAS ( ; ; ; ). However, this biochemical defect alone did not fully explain why mutant RAS was oncogenic. Instead, made the seminal discovery in 1987 that the intrinsic GTPase activity of WT but not mutant RAS was accelerated by a GTPase-activating protein (GAP), thereby establishing that GAP insensitivity was the critical biochemical defect of mutant RAS proteins that led to its persistently active state. Thus, mutationally activated RAS is a relatively special case because the gain of its signaling function is the consequence of loss of its GTPase function. In other words, RAS mutations found in cancer are loss of function in terms of biochemistry but gain of function in terms of biology. Throughout this review, we consider oncogenic RAS to have undergone gain-of-function alterations.
The RAS proteins are founding members of a large superfamily of evolutionarily conserved small GTPases comprised of the RAS, RHO, RAB, ARF, and RAN families that share similarities of sequence and of biological functions ( ; ). Given the conservation of RAS itself in evolution ( ), genetic studies of RAS in yeast, flies, and worms were instrumental in establishing key components of RAS GDP–GTP regulation and effector signaling ( ).
 In quiescent normal cells, wild-type (WT) RAS is predominantly GDP-bound ( A). Contributing to efficient RAS cycling, the low intrinsic rates of GDP–GTP exchange and GTP hydrolysis are accelerated by RAS interactions with RAS-selective guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs; e.g., SOS1) and GAPs, respectively ( A). In response to extracellular growth factors or other stimuli ( B), GEF-mediated activation promotes transient formation of RAS–GTP, with GAP activity then restoring normal levels of RAS–GDP ( ; , ). RAS cycling between the GDP- and GTP-bound forms results in tertiary conformation changes restricted to two short sequences termed switch I (SI; residues 30–40) and switch II (SII; residues 60–76) ( A; ). SI spans the minimal effector binding domain for direct interactions with effector proteins and is essential for RAS downstream signaling ( ), whereas SII is involved in interaction with a subset of effectors as well as with GEFs and GAPs.
 In contrast to WT RAS, mutationally activated RAS proteins, particularly at the hotspots of G12, G13, and Q61, are refractory to GAP activity and/or exhibit enhanced exchange activity ( C), both of which favor growth factor-independent formation of RAS–GTP ( ). In addition to mutations in RAS itself, mutational activation or overexpression of receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) ( D), as well as loss of function of GAPs ( E), can drive enhanced formation of active RAS–GTP. For example, the NF1 tumor suppressor encodes a RAS-selective GAP that is lost by somatic mutation in cancer ( ) and by germline mutations in the RASopathy, neurofibromatosis type I ( ).
Early ideas for developing anti-RAS inhibitors were prompted by these findings. First, analogy to ATP-competitive inhibitors of protein kinases suggested that GTP analogs competing for GTP binding may be one logical strategy. However, ATP binds to protein kinases at low micromolar to millimolar affinities ( ), making feasible low nanomolar ATP analog inhibition of kinase activity, whereas GTP binding to RAS is at the low picomolar level ( ). Second, a small molecule mimic of GAP that could restore the GTPase activity of mutant RAS was pursued, albeit with no success. However, recently it was found that RGS proteins, which classically have been known as GAPs for heterotrimeric G proteins, also had activity against mutant KRAS ( ), suggesting that this idea remains a viable concept.

## Farnesyltransferase inhibitors: the first anti-RAS approach that reached clinical evaluation
The C-terminal 22–23 amino acids of RAS comprise the hypervariable region (HVR) that exhibits significant sequence divergence among the isoforms and includes crucial sequences involved in facilitating obligate RAS association with the plasma membrane ( A). Early studies of viral HRAS identified its association with the inner face of the plasma membrane ( ) and the essential role of the C-terminal sequences in promoting this association ( ). Because the C terminus of viral HRAS is palmitoylated ( ), it was originally believed that this 16 carbon fatty acid modification was the basis for RAS membrane association. However, three independent studies in 1989 determined that the C termini of RAS proteins are modified by a 15 carbon farnesyl isoprenoid lipid and that this modification is definitively required for association with the inner face of the plasma membrane ( ; ; ). The discoveries of the enzyme protein farnesyltransferase (FTase), which catalyzed this modification, and that a short tetrapeptide sequence was both necessary and sufficient to signal for FTase enzymatic activity stimulated comprehensive efforts to develop small molecule FTase inhibitors (FTIs) ( ).
All RAS proteins terminate in a CAAX (where C = cysteine, A = aliphatic, and X = terminal) tetrapeptide sequence that signals for a coupled series of three post-translational modifications, which together enhance protein hydrophobicity and promote RAS membrane association ( ). FTase catalyzes the irreversible covalent addition of a 15 carbon farnesyl group to the cysteine residue of the CAAX motif, which is followed by RAS-converting enzyme (RCE1)-mediated endoproteolytic removal of the -AAX residues and, finally, isoprenylcysteine carboxymethyltransferase (ICMT)-catalyzed carboxylmethylation of the now terminal farnesylated cysteine. Laboratory-generated oncogenic mutants of RAS with a cysteine-to-serine substitution (SAAX) or lacking the AAX residues were completely inactive ( ; ), providing strong support for FTIs as promising anti-RAS therapies. Indeed, because RAS lipid modification by FTase was definitively shown to be an obligate modification for RAS transformation, the development of FTIs was widely expected to have dramatically positive antitumor effects on RAS-driven cancers.
 Both specific design of peptidomimetics of the CAAX motif and unbiased high-throughput screens for FTase inhibitory molecules led to the identification of potent and selective FTIs ( ; ). Three of these advanced to phase III clinical evaluation in cancer types harboring a high frequency of KRAS mutations yet exhibited no significant clinical efficacy ( ; ; ), a result that was received with shock and dismay by many in the pharmaceutical industry and elsewhere. However, this disappointing outcome had been predicted years earlier, when it was observed that FTIs impaired the transforming activity of HRAS but not KRAS ( ). Based on the widespread misconception that RAS isoforms were interchangeable, this finding was largely viewed as confusing rather than the cautionary tale that it turned out to be. The biochemical basis for KRAS insensitivity to FTIs was subsequently determined to be the ability of KRAS and NRAS, but not HRAS, to undergo alternative prenylation by the FTase-related enzyme geranylgeranyltransferase-I (GGTase-I), which catalyzes modification by the 20 carbon geranylgeranyl isoprenoid ( ; ; ). Because alternative prenylation occurs only when FTase is blocked, it was not initially perceived as a possibility. However, even after this was well documented, clinical trials of FTIs were still performed in KRAS-driven cancers, to little effect ( ).
A concern for all indirect strategies targeting an entity that supports RAS function involves the non-RAS functions also supported by that entity. That FTase has >160 known/candidate substrates ( ) thus raised the concern that FTIs may be limited by toxicity due to blocking some of those functions; for example, in vision or the cell cycle. However, the existence of other substrates of FTase also led somewhat fortuitously to the evaluation and eventual approval of the FTI lonafarnib to treat the rare germline disorder Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) ( ). In this disease, a mutation in the LMNA gene causes aberrant splicing ( ; ). The resulting aberrant lamin A protein, termed progerin, is farnesylated and causes premature aging and early death due to heart attack or stroke. FTI treatment improved disease pathology and caused a modest improvement in survival ( , ). For a long time, HGPS represented the only clinical indication for the effective use of these compounds. Recently, however, FTIs have been resurrected again, including as a therapeutic approach for cancers driven by mutation or high-level activity of HRAS, the only RAS isoform that can be blocked effectively by FTIs. Nevertheless, HRAS may not always be the most relevant target of FTIs, leading to several ongoing clinical trials of the FTI tipifarnib or a next-generation FTI, KO-2806, in a variety of tumor types (NCT04997902 and NCT06026410) ( ; ).
The first disappointing clinical outcomes of FTIs in KRAS-driven cancers caused plummeting industry interest in pursuing RAS by any means. In the era of cancer genome sequencing, a major hope was that more promising druggable targets would be discovered. However, elucidation of the genetic landscape of NSCLC ( ), CRC ( ), and PDAC ( ) found that KRAS was the predominant oncogene driver for each of these cancers. Hence, with no attractive alternative targets in the major cancers, KRAS remained the best bet, however challenging. Slowly, interest in targeting KRAS began to return.

## Targeting KRAS effector signaling: inhibitors of the RAF–MEK–ERK mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade
In 1992–1993, a series of independent studies taking different experimental approaches in invertebrate and mammalian models established the RAF serine/threonine kinases (RAF1/CRAF, ARAF, and BRAF) as key downstream effectors of RAS-driven cancer development and growth ( ; ; ; ; ; ). Like RAS, RAF was also identified originally as a retroviral oncogene ( ; ; ; ), providing instant validation of RAF as a driver of RAS-driven cancer. Additionally, mutational activation of BRAF was found in melanoma and other cancer types ( ). BRAF mutations are typically mutually exclusive with RAS mutations in cancer, supporting mechanistically equivalent roles as cancer drivers.
Because previous studies had already established a RAF–MEK–ERK three-tiered mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade ( ; ; ; ; ), the discovery connecting RAS directly to RAF established RAS as a key component of the first signaling cascade that spanned the cell surface to the nucleus where every component was identified ( ).
In the canonical RAS signaling pathway, RAS is activated by growth factor signaling through RTKs such as EGFR ( ). EGF binding to and activation of EGFR leads to its autophosphorylation, which recruits GRB2 and other adapter proteins that bring the RASGEF SOS1 into proximity with membrane-associated RAS. GEF-stimulated formation of RAS–GTP then promotes RAS binding to the RAF serine/threonine kinase, recruiting RAF to the plasma membrane where a complex series of events leads to RAF kinase activation. RAF then activates the MEK1 and MEK2 dual-specificity protein kinases, which in turn activate the ERK1 and ERK2 serine/threonine kinases. Activated ERK phosphorylates a highly diverse spectrum of proteins including transcription factors as well as other protein kinases, leading to transcriptional activation of thousands of genes and phosphorylation of thousands of proteins. The MYC transcription factor oncogene is a key target of ERK ( ; , ). Other transcription factors regulated by ERK include ETS, FOS, and JUN. Among the many other RTKs upstream of RAS are HER2, FGFR, MET, RET, ROS, PDGFR, and KIT. Like RAS, many other components of the RAS signaling network were identified originally as retrovirus oncogenes ( ), further supporting a driver role for aberrant RAS activation in cancer.
 A second RAS effector family, comprised of the catalytic subunits of class I phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Kα, PI3Kγ, and PI3Kδ) also includes one isoform, PI3Kα, identified previously as a retroviral oncogene ( ; ). In a lipid kinase cascade parallel to the protein kinase cascade of RAF–MEK–ERK, PI3K promotes the conversion of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to phosphatidylinositol-3,4,5-triphosphate (PIP3), and membrane-associated PIP3 then activates the AKT serine/threonine protein kinase, the product of yet another previously identified retroviral oncogene ( ; ; ). Mouse model studies demonstrated that impairment of mutant KRAS binding to PI3Kα significantly impaired cancer development ( ; ).
Beyond RAF and PI3K, a multitude of other validated or putative RAS effectors have been identified. Many are characterized by structurally related RAS binding domains (RBDs) or RAS association (RA) domains, comprising >50 proteins composed of 12 functionally distinct classes ( ; ; ). However, despite this signaling complexity, the ERK MAPK cascade is the predominant driver of KRAS-dependent growth in PDAC ( , ). Mutationally activated BrafV600E but not Pik3caH1047R phenocopied mutant KrasG12D and, when coupled with mutational loss of the Tp53 tumor suppressor, drove development of metastatic PDAC ( ).
Collectively, these results provide strong rationale for the use of RAF–MEK–ERK MAPK inhibitors in RAS-driven cancers. With the encouragement of successful development of a wide spectrum of clinically effective protein kinase inhibitors, numerous inhibitors targeting one or more levels of this protein kinase cascade have also been developed and evaluated clinically ( ). However, therapeutic targeting of the RAF–MEK–ERK MAPK cascade in RAS mutant cancers has met with unexpected challenges. First, on-target toxicity has been a surprisingly significant limitation ( ). Although this cascade is essential for normal cell physiology, like RAS itself, the relative lack of toxicity of FTIs lulled the field into concluding that MAPK inhibitors might offer similar safety profiles. Second, it became clear that inhibition of this pathway results in the loss of ERK-dependent negative feedback loops ( ; ), resulting in increased upstream RTK-mediated signaling and in ERK reactivation driven by WT RAS. This likely contributes greatly to the ineffectiveness of MEK inhibitors as monotherapy ( ). Thus, although inhibitors of ERK MAPK signaling have been approved for the treatment of BRAF mutant cancers, particularly in combination with each other, similar success has not been seen in KRAS mutant cancers.

## Synthetic lethal genes in KRAS mutant cancers
The concept of a synthetic lethal relationship between two genes is based on the premise that cancer cell viability is maintained upon mutation of either gene alone, whereas simultaneous mutation of both genes leads to growth impairment ( ). Numerous studies used RNA interference-based genetic loss-of-function screens to identify lethal interactors with KRAS. Such interactors would then be candidates for therapeutic inhibition, resulting in selective inhibition of KRAS mutant but not WT cells. Several studies identified multiple genes synthetic lethal with KRAS ( ), including genes that encode protein kinases, such as STK33, TBK1, and PLK1 ( ; ; ). Because protein kinases have been the most successful targets in oncology drug discovery, these findings prompted considerable excitement that new targets for the development of effective anti-KRAS therapies had been revealed.
However, further evaluation of these hits failed to support their synthetic lethal relationship with mutant KRAS. This failure was due in part to the utilization of so-called isogenic pairs of KRAS mutant and WT cell lines and in part to off-target activities of si/shRNA. Addressing these limitations, subsequent studies such as Project Achilles used large sets of KRAS mutant versus WT human cell lines and CRISPR-based genetic screens. However, aside from RAF1 ( ), the strongest hits encode proteins whose functions are challenging to drug.

## Direct inhibitors of KRAS: druggable after all
When the crystal structure of HRAS was determined in 1989 ( ), its lack of attractive druggable allosteric pockets, also observed in numerous other structural determinations of RAS proteins ( ), contributed to the perception that RAS was “undruggable.” Together with the high affinity of RAS for GTP, this dampened interest and reduced efforts to search for direct RAS inhibitors.
The first promising hint of druggability came in 2012 from two independent studies of fragment-based screens using recombinant KRAS4B ( ; ). performed an NMR-based fragment screen using a 3300 compound library and identified three compounds that bound to recombinant KRAS4BG12D. Cocrystal structure determination with full-length KRAS4B demonstrated that all three bound to a similar site between helix α2 and the core β sheets β1–β3. This binding pocket is adjacent to the RAS–SOS interaction surface, and one compound, DCAI, inhibited SOS1 binding and stimulation of exchange activity at high millimolar concentrations in vitro. DCAI also inhibited WT RAS activation in cellular assays. In another approach, Kataoka and colleagues ( ) performed an in silico screen using a virtual compound library. They identified several small molecules that inhibited RAS–GTP binding to the RAF1/CRAF RBD and inhibited tumorigenic growth of a human CRC cell line harboring a KRASG12V mutation. However, more potent and selective compounds were not developed from these initial hits.
In 2013, the significant breakthrough that has made direct KRAS inhibitors a reality was the seminal discovery by Shokat, Wells, and colleagues ( ) of an inducible, druggable pocket in KRAS that had not been seen in previous RAS structures. Only 8 years later ( ), the first direct KRAS inhibitor targeting this allosteric pocket was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the KRAS G12C mutant. Moreover, numerous KRAS inhibitors targeting G12C and other KRAS variants are currently under preclinical evaluation and clinical development. In the remainder of this review, we provide an overview of events subsequent to this crucial discovery that created a turning point for the field.
The druggable “switch II pocket” in KRAS, designated SIIP ( ), is located between the central β sheet of RAS and the α2 (switch-II) and α3 helices ( C). As elaborated below, the KRASG12C mutant was selected for initial targeting attempts due to the highly reactive nature of the cysteine substitution. A disulfide fragment-based screen with GDP-bound KRASG12C identified compound 6H05, which bound to KRAS G12C but not WT protein and was selective for the GDP-bound off state. Analogs based on 6H05 led to the design of acrylamide warhead-based compound 12, which irreversibly bound GDP–KRASG12C and exhibited limited cellular potency.
The development of analogs based on compound 12 led to ARS-853, which exhibited more potent biochemical and cellular activities ( ; ). Like compound 12, ARS-853 selectively bound to SIIP in GDP- but not GTP-bound KRASG12C, locking it in the GDP-bound state, preventing effector engagement, and impairing activation of ERK. ARS-853 exhibited low micromolar cellular activity and inhibited the anchorage-dependent and -independent growth of KRAS G12C but not non-G12C mutant cancer cell lines. This growth inhibitory activity was not expected given the widespread but inaccurate perception that mutant KRAS is persistently GTP-bound and consequently should not be susceptible to a GDP-selective molecule. However, it became clear that at least some mutant KRAS must be GDP-bound. That KRASG12C does retain some degree of cycling between GDP- and GTP-bound states was further supported by the finding that ARS-853 potency was reduced upon activation of EGFR to cause GEF-dependent activation of RAS from its GDP-bound state, a reduction that could be reversed by concurrent treatment with EGFR inhibitors.
To enhance the drug-like properties of ARS-853, additional structural analogs were developed. This led to the identification of ARS-1620, which displayed 10-fold greater potency and improved ADME/PK (absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and pharmacokinetics) ( ). Furthermore, ARS-1620 exhibited submicromolar inhibition of the growth of KRAS G12C but not non-G12C mutant cancer cell lines. Despite some initial concerns that these compounds would lead to widespread nonspecific targeting of cysteines in general, chemical proteomics demonstrated that ARS-1620 was highly selective for the KRAS G12C substitution compared with >8000 cysteine residues across >3000 proteins. ARS-1620 was well tolerated and potently inhibited the tumorigenic growth of KRASG12C mutant cell line-derived xenograft (CDX) and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. These findings established the therapeutic promise of small molecules targeting the SIIP of KRASG12C and stimulated a frenzied level of activity to develop and advance more potent inhibitors to clinical evaluation.

## Approved KRASG12C inhibitors
AMG 510 was the first KRASG12C targeted inhibitor to enter clinical evaluation for advanced KRASG12C mutant solid tumors (NCT03600883; CodeBreaK 100), starting in 2018, and initial patient responses were described in 2020 ( ). Like ARS-1620, AMG 150 recognizes the SIIP and covalently modifies KRASG12C but has improved potency and pharmacodynamic properties ( ). AMG 510 potently and selectively inhibited KRASG12C mutant cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, and concurrent treatment with chemotherapy or immunotherapy caused synergistic tumor suppression. Furthermore, AMG 510 provided the first demonstration that a KRASG12C inhibitor can exhibit clinical efficacy, causing tumor regression in some patients with KRASG12C mutant NSCLC ( ).
On May 28, 2021, nearly four decades after the initial discovery of KRAS in human cancer but a remarkably short 8 years after the identification of the SIIP druggable pocket, the FDA granted accelerated approval to sotorasib/AMG 510 for KRASG12C mutant advanced or metastatic NSCLC ( ; ). Approval was based on the results in 124 evaluable patients of the CodeBreaK 100 phase 2 trial, where the objective response rate (ORR) was 37.1%, with a median overall survival (OS) of 12.5 months ( ).
 Phase 3 clinical trial studies (CodeBreaK 200) then showed that oral sotorasib was superior to second-line standard of care (SOC) intravenous docetaxel, with increased ORR (28.1% vs. 13.2%) and progression-free survival (PFS; 5.6 vs. 4.5 months) and decreased toxicity ( ; ). Disappointingly, despite these important apparent advantages, OS was not improved (10.6 vs. 11.3 months). Furthermore, the trial design of CodeBreaK 200 was widely seen as suboptimal and the results therefore not reliably interpretable ( ). The FDA did not grant full approval to sotorasib, requiring additional studies, and its accelerated approval status remains in place as of this writing. Unfortunately, due to the designs of CodeBreaK 200 and the follow-up trial, CodeBreaK 202 (NCT05920356), it may be a long time until it becomes possible to fully elucidate the results of treatment with sotorasib compared with other options for KRASG12C mutant NSCLC.
A second KRASG12C-specific covalent inhibitor, MRTX849/adagrasib, also entered clinical evaluation in 2018 (KRYSTAL-1) ( ). On December 12, 2022, the FDA granted accelerated approval to adagrasib for KRASG12C mutant advanced or metastatic NSCLC ( ; ). Approval was based on phase 1/2 evaluation of 112 patients who had progressed on SOC chemotherapy or immunotherapy. Similar to sotorasib, the ORR to adagrasib in NSCLC was 42.9% and the median OS was 12.6 months ( ). Toxicities were also like those seen with sotorasib. Unlike sotorasib, adagrasib additionally exhibited activity against brain metastases, which occur in 40% of KRAS mutant NSCLC ( ).
Clinically observable activities of the two approved G12C inhibitors have also been reported in other cancer types, albeit at substantially lower levels than in NSCLC, reflecting both different dependencies on mutant KRAS and distinct feedback mechanisms. In CRC, where G12C comprises only 8% of KRAS mutations, significantly lower ORR (10%–19%) and DOR (4.2–4.3 months) have been observed ( ; ; ). In PDAC, where G12C comprises <2% of KRAS mutations, sotorasib and adagrasib treatment of patients previously treated with chemotherapy resulted in ORRs of 21.1% and 33.3%, respectively, and PFS of 4.0 and 5.4 months, respectively ( ; ; ). These responses compare favorably versus second-line chemotherapy using nal-irinotecan plus 5-FU and leucovorin (ORR of 16.2% and PFS of 3.1 months) ( ), or gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel (ORR of 2.9% and PFS of 2.7 months) ( ). KRAS inhibitor treatment also resulted in lower toxicity. By comparison, the ORR to first-line treatment with FOLFIRINOX was 34.1% and median PFS was 6.4 months ( ). However, FOLFIRINOX toxicity was considerably higher, such that grade 3 or 4 neutropenia occurred in 46% of patients. That treatment with a KRAS inhibitor together with first-line chemotherapy may be an effective combination is supported by preclinical findings ( ; ) and is currently being evaluated in ongoing clinical trials (NCT05609578, NCT05920356, NCT05722327, and NCT06252649).
Although these results are tantalizing and clearly demonstrate the feasibility of directly targeting cancer-driving mutant KRAS, it is important to note that even the best ORRs achieved by G12C mutant-selective KRAS inhibitors in NSCLC patients carrying those mutations are far less than those achieved by approved mutant-selective protein kinase inhibitors. For example, the third-generation EGFR inhibitor osimertinib produced an 80% ORR in EGFR mutant NSCLC ( ), and the ORR to the second-generation ALK inhibitor alectinib was 70% in ALK-rearranged NSCLC ( ). These differences are both disappointing and surprising given the expectations that mutant-selective targeting of KRAS would be clinically effective in nearly all patients whose tumors harbored the relevant KRAS mutant allele. Below, we discuss potential strategies to improve initial responses to later generations of KRAS inhibitors.
Another hope for these KRAS inhibitors was that, because they are allele-specific, toxicity would be quite limited in normal tissues that by definition do not harbor the mutant allele. Nevertheless, some degree of toxicity has occurred. Typical adverse events include fatigue, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, and hepatotoxicity. Unknown off-target activities likely account for these toxicities associated with normal tissues. The development of second-generation inhibitors with greater cancer cell potency and selectivity will be an important step in advancing tumor-selective clinical impact. Adagrasib and sotorasib, as well as investigational KRAS inhibitors described below, are currently under clinical evaluation in combination with other therapies ( ). It is hoped that such combinations will enable both greater efficacy and decreased toxicity.

## Next-generation KRASG12C inhibitors
Following the limited depth and duration of response seen with approved KRASG12C inhibitors, a multitude of second-generation G12C inhibitors (G12Cis) have entered clinical evaluation ( ; ). Most exhibit similar mechanisms of action, targeting the SIIP, selectively binding the GDP-bound “off” state, and covalently modifying the cysteine substitution. Phase 1 evaluation of divarasib/GDC-6036 found an improved ORR in NSCLC (60.3%) and similar ORR in CRC compared with approved inhibitors ( ). D3S-001 was more potent in preclinical models compared with sotorasib and adagrasib ( ), and early phase 1 evaluation in solid tumors revealed clinical activity in both primary tumors and brain metastases (NCT05410145) ( ). Early phase 1/2 clinical trial results have also been reported for garsorasib/D-1553, where a 40.5% ORR was observed in KRASG12C mutant NSCLC patients ( ).
Whether any of these newer agents will overtake the already approved G12Cis remains to be determined. A different approach to using G12Cis takes advantage of the fact that binding to their targets creates neoantigens capable of MHC class I presentation, which can then be used to engineer antibody fragments for use as bispecific T-cell engagers (BiTEs). This has recently been done for ARS-1620 ( ) and for sotorasib ( ). In proof of principle preclinical experiments, cytotoxic T cells were then able to kill drug-treated, inhibitor-resistant KRASG12C mutant tumor cells. Importantly, the “HapImmune” technology of Koide and colleagues ( ) created BiTEs that only minimally recognize free sotorasib, thereby enabling cell killing in the presence of the inhibitor.
In contrast to sotorasib, adagrasib, and their second-generation cousins, RMC-4998 and RMC-6291 are structurally, pharmacologically, and mechanistically distinct KRAS G12C-selective inhibitors ( , ; ). They are selective for GTP-bound KRAS (KRAS “on”) rather than for GDP-bound KRAS (KRAS “off”). Furthermore, unlike the SIIP-directed KRAS inhibitors, they do not directly bind KRAS. Instead, they first form a binary complex with a modified form of the molecular chaperone cyclophilin A (CYPA) ( ), which then in turn forms a further complex with KRAS–GTP. Revolution Medicines refers to these as “tricomplex” inhibitors, counting the RMC small molecule itself, CYPA, and KRAS–GTP as the three components. The inhibited complex may also be viewed as quaternary (RMC small molecule, CYPA, KRAS, and GTP) or even higher order (RMC small molecule, CYPA, KRAS, GTP, divalent magnesium, and water). Overall, the RMC inhibitors can be considered a distinctive “molecular glue” approach to allele-specific inhibition of mutant KRAS. This approach is reminiscent of the mechanisms of natural products such as rapamycin, which first binds the immunophilin FKBP12 to create a complex that in turn binds to and inhibits the serine/threonine kinase mTOR (“mechanistic target of rapamycin”). The initial compound-1 ( ) was designed by adding a cysteine-reactive warhead to the minimal CYPA binding domain of sanglifehrin A, a polyketide natural product related to cyclosporine A. Guided by the crystal structure of the CYPA:compound-1:KRASG12C tricomplex, further chemical modifications led to RMC-4998. Finally, because RMC-4998 activity is not affected by the KRAS-specific residue H95 ( A), this inhibitor will likely also be active on G12C mutants of HRAS and NRAS.
 The CYPA:RMC-4998 binary complex was shown to associate with the SI and SII regions of the covalently modified GTP-bound KRASG12C and to disrupt interaction with the RBD/RA domains of RAF, PI3K, and RALGDS ( ). Cis mutations in KRASG12C that prevent sotorasib and/or adagrasib binding did not prevent RMC-4998 binding, consistent with its distinct mode of association with KRASG12C. Encouragingly, RMC-4998 exhibited subnanomolar and selective inhibition of KRASG12C mutant cancer lines and caused tumor regression in KRASG12C mutant CDX models.
Further optimization of RMC-4998 led to RMC-6291 ( ), which is currently under phase 1/1b clinical evaluation both as monotherapy (NCT05462717) and in combination with a RAS-“multi” tricomplex inhibitor (RMC-6236; NCT06128551) in advanced KRASG12C mutant solid tumors. RMC-6236 may prevent or overcome resistance mechanisms that involve RTK activation of WT RAS. RMC-6291 is also under evaluation in combination with multiple standards of care (pembrolizumab, cisplatin, carboplatin, and pemetrexed) in KRASG12C mutant NSCLC (NCT06162221). Early clinical observations found an ORR of 57% in NSCLC patients with prior GDP–KRASG12C “off” inhibitor treatment and 44% in CRC patients naïve to G12Ci treatment ( ).
Unlike either GDP- or GTP-selective G12Cis, BBO-8520 is a covalent G12C-selective inhibitor with activity against both GTP- and GDP-bound KRASG12C ( ). It is currently under phase 1 clinical evaluation for advanced or metastatic KRASG12C mutant solid tumors (NCT06343402) ( ). As expected, preclinical evaluation showed that BBO-8520 was less susceptible to resistance mechanisms that promote formation of the GTP-bound protein.
Finally, a subset of inhibitors intended to block KRASG12C also displays activity against HRASG12C and NRASG12C ( ). Specificity for KRAS occurs with inhibitors making contact (e.g., by hydrogen bonding) with the KRAS-specific His95 residue, which is Leu in NRAS and Gln in HRAS ( A). Whereas adagrasib and divarasib (and ARS-1620) interact with His95 and act only on KRASG12C, sotorasib, opnurasib/JDQ443, and the tricomplex inhibitor RM-018 (a preclinical analog of RMC-6291) are active on G12C mutants of all RAS isoforms. Indeed, sotorasib does not interact with residue H95 ( ) and was shown to be fivefold more potent against NRASG12C than against KRASG12C ( ). Consistent with this activity, two patients with NRASG12C mutant CRC responded to the combination of sotorasib and the EGFR inhibitor panitumumab ( ; ). Although NRAS mutations overall comprise only 15% of all RAS mutations in cancer, and NRAS mutations in solid cancers are predominantly at Q61, the rare patients whose cancers harbor NRASG12C mutations may thus benefit from these erstwhile “KRAS” G12C inhibitors.

## KRASG12D inhibitors
Encouraged by the clinical success of inhibitors selective for KRASG12C, the focus has now shifted to G12D, the most common KRAS mutation in cancers overall (27%) and in CRC (44%) and PDAC (46%) in particular ( ). An advantage for G12C inhibitors is that the cysteine is highly reactive, and thus creation of covalent binders, following discovery of the SIIP, was relatively straightforward. In contrast, the aspartic acid in the KRASG12D mutant allele is not nearly as reactive, which made developing similarly potent and selective G12D inhibitors more challenging. However, several mechanistically distinct direct inhibitors of KRASG12D have been developed and are currently under preclinical or very early clinical evaluation ( ; ). These include noncovalent binders, molecular glues, and degrader inhibitors ( ).
In a tour de force effort, MRTX113 was developed as a noncovalent KRAS inhibitor based on the structure of adagrasib but preferentially binds GDP-bound KRASG12D with 700-fold selectivity for KRASG12D compared with KRAS WT ( ; ). MRTX1133 blocks effector binding, inhibits the growth of iKRASG12D mutant cell lines with >1000-fold selectivity compared with KRAS WT cell lines, caused tumor regression in KRASG12D mutant CDX and PDX models ( ; ), and elicited a T-cell-mediated immune response in KrasG12D mutant syngeneic mouse pancreatic tumors ( ). Based on these promising preclinical data, MRTX1133 entered phase 1/2 clinical evaluation in 2023 in patients with KRASG12D-positive advanced solid cancers (NCT05737706).
On the molecular glue front, RMC-9805 is a CYPA tricomplex inhibitor that binds and covalently modifies GTP-bound KRASG12D (a KRASG12D “on” inhibitor) ( ). Well tolerated in vivo, RMC-9805 displayed single-agent antitumor activity in KRASG12D mutant CDX and PDX models and caused synergistic growth suppression of KRASG12D mutant tumors when combined with anti-PD1 therapy in immune-competent mice. RMC-9805 is under phase 1/1b evaluation in KRASG12D mutant solid tumors (NCT06040541).
ASP3082 is a proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC) that selectively promotes KRASG12D association with an E3 ubiquitin ligase, which leads to proteasome-mediated degradation ( ; , ; ). Unlike allosteric inhibitors, which impair a subset of KRAS functions, degradation causes loss of all KRAS functions ( ; ). Additionally, whereas allosteric inhibitors require extensive and prolonged target occupancy, PROTACs are catalytic, which decreases the dose required and thus potentially decreases off-target activities. Potential downsides of PROTACs include the more complex chemistry and higher molecular weight of a bifunctional molecule, which reduce cell permeability and bioavailability. ASP3082 must be delivered intravenously rather than orally. Preclinical studies showed that ASP3082 selectively inhibited the growth of KRASG12D mutant but not KRAS WT cancer cells in vitro and suppressed the tumorigenic growth of KRASG12D mutant CDX models. In 2022, ASP3082 began clinical evaluation in previously treated patients with advanced or metastatic KRASG12D mutant solid tumors (NCT05382559).
Preclinical evaluation of several additional KRASG12D-selective inhibitors has also been reported. GFH375/VS-7375 targets both GTP- and GDP-bound KRASG12D ( ) and is highly selective for KRAS G12D relative to KRAS WT and non-G12D KRAS mutant cell lines. GFH375 caused tumor regression in KRASG12D mutant PDAC and CRC CDX tumor models and synergized strongly with concurrent avutometinib (RAF–MEK inhibitor) treatment in vitro and in mouse models. LY3962673 is a GDP–KRASG12D-selective inhibitor that displayed low nanomolar potency in vitro and caused tumor regression in KRASG12D mutant cell models ( ). QTX3046, related to the “multi-KRAS” inhibitor QTX3034 described below, is a noncovalent GDP–KRASG12D-selective inhibitor that inhibited the growth of KRASG12D mutant cell lines in vitro and in vivo ( ). These and other KRASG12D-selective inhibitors are currently under phase 1 clinical evaluation: GFH375/VS-7375 (NCT06500676), HRS-4642 (NCT05533463), INCB161734 (NCT06179160), QTX3046 (NCT06428500), and YL-17231 (NCT06385925).
The clinically relevant outcomes of these inhibitors remain to be determined. Although there is cautious optimism that at least some of the agents described in this section will represent an advance in treating KRASG12D mutant cancers, it is also important not to let excitement and hope triumph over real-world results. It is clearly early days yet for all KRASG12D inhibitors.

## Other allele-selective inhibitors
One inhibitor has been described as selective for KRASG12V, the second most frequent KRAS mutant in cancers overall, as well as in NSLC, CRC, and PDAC ( ). RMC-5127 is a noncovalent tricomplex inhibitor that displayed potent antitumor activity in CDX and PDX models of KRASG12V mutant NSCLC, CRC, and PDAC ( ). Tricomplex inhibitors selective for KRASG13D (RMC-8839) and KRASQ61H (RMC-0708) are also under preclinical development ( ).
Shokat and colleagues ( ) have described early-stage GDP-selective allele-specific inhibitors. One compound, G12Si-5, targeting SIIP and covalently modifying the KRAS G12S substitution, displayed low micromolar cellular activity ( ). G12S is the eighth most common KRAS mutation, found in 2% of all cancers and 6% of CRC ( ). Additionally, several compounds were designed that covalently modified KRASG12R ( ). Although no cell-active compounds were identified, this study provided proof of concept that inhibitors targeting G12R can be developed. Although KRASG12R is rare in NSCLC and CRC (∼1%), this mutant is the third most prevalent in PDAC (16%) ( ). Its absence in NSCLC and CRC may reflect the inability of KRASG12R to engage PI3Kα ( ), whereas its high prevalence in PDAC is consistent with KRAS utilization of RAF–ERK alone to drive this tumor type ( ; , ).

## “Pan-KRAS” and “multi-KRAS” inhibitors
Unlike the mutation-selective KRASG12C/D inhibitors, pan-KRAS and multi-KRAS inhibitors target both WT and mutant KRAS proteins ( , ). The first of these to be described were the preclinical tool compounds BI-2493 and BI-2865 ( ). BI-2865 selectively recognized GDP-bound KRAS4A/B, but not NRAS or HRAS, through the SIIP, largely due to recognition of the KRAS-specific H95 residue in the α3 helix of KRAS. BI-2493, an analog of BI-2865 optimized for in vivo properties ( ), blocked the tumorigenic growth of KRAS G12C/V/D and A146T mutant CDX models without significant toxicity, as indicated by the lack of weight loss.
Although they are commonly referred to as “pan-KRAS” inhibitors, they are not truly “pan” in that activity is not seen against all KRAS mutants. BI-2865 and BI-2493 exhibited inhibitory activity against 18 of the 24 most common KRAS mutations but not against G12R, three of four Q61 mutations (i.e., blocking Q61H but not Q61L, Q61R, or Q61K), or A59T. Different mutations cause distinct consequences for GDP–GTP regulation, and a majority of the most common KRAS mutants retain some degree of GDP–GTP cycling ( ). The lack of activity against some mutants likely reflects different biochemical properties that limit their cycling to the GDP-bound state. Nevertheless, that these KRAS “off” inhibitors prevent activation of a surprisingly extensive range of KRAS mutants suggests that more KRAS mutants cycle between “on” and “off” states in cancer cells than was previously appreciated.
A more potent and orally available analog, BI-3706674, also a noncovalent “off” “pan-KRAS” inhibitor, was well tolerated and caused tumor regression in both KRAS mutant and KRAS WT-amplified CDX and PDX models, especially of gastric cancer ( ). This preclinical efficacy is of particular note as there is a significant unmet need for therapies directed against KRAS WT-amplified tumors. Accordingly, BI-3706674 is now under clinical evaluation (NCT06056024) in patients with unresectable metastatic KRAS WT-amplified gastric, esophageal, and gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinomas, which are tumor types where amplification of the KRAS WT allele is most common ( ).
QTX3034, a “multi-KRAS” noncovalent GDP-selective inhibitor, inhibits both KRAS G12D and KRAS G12V mutants, with a preference for G12D, and also inhibits KRAS WT. It displayed potent activity in KRASG12D/V mutant CDX and PDX models that was enhanced by concurrent treatment with any of three distinct EGFR inhibitors ( , ). Based in part on widespread tumor regressions in mouse models of KRASG12D mutant pancreatic and colorectal cancers ( ), QTX3034 is currently under phase 1 clinical trial evaluation (NCT06227377) in patients with KRASG12D mutant solid tumors, both as monotherapy and with cetuximab.

## “Pan-RAS” inhibitors
RMC-7977 is a preclinical CYPA tricomplex GTP-selective (RAS “on”) inhibitor that displays activities against the GTP-bound forms of both WT and mutant RAS proteins ( , ; ; ). Notably, although designed using the same overall sanglifehrin A immunophilin-based strategy as the mutation-selective, irreversible, covalent tricomplex inhibitors RMC-4998 and RMC-9805, RMC-7977 is a reversible, noncovalent inhibitor. Furthermore, whereas RMC-4998 and RMC-9805 are selective for KRAS G12C and KRAS G12D, respectively, RMC-7977 has equivalent potency against all RAS isoforms: K, N, and H. Based in part on earlier studies demonstrating that, whereas Hras and Nras are dispensable for mouse development ( ; ; ), Kras is essential ( ; ), it was widely speculated that a truly “pan-RAS” inhibitor would suffer from significant normal tissue toxicity. However, RMC-7977 treatment of KRAS mutant CDX models caused tumor regression without significant toxicity, as determined by the lack of weight loss. Interestingly, mouse embryonic fibroblasts null for all three ras genes, though nonproliferating, remain viable, and growth can be restored by activation of ERK ( ), suggesting that full loss of RAS function may be tolerated.
Mechanistically, because RMC-7977 has activity against both GDP- and GTP-bound RAS, it should be resistant to the RTK-mediated processes that drive resistance to KRASG12C off-selective inhibitors by promoting the GTP-bound state ( , ). Supporting this possibility, RMC-7977 showed prolonged tumor suppression in KRASG12C mutant lung tumor models ( ). Whereas the KRASG12C-selective on inhibitor RMC-4998 showed a delay in tumor recurrence compared with the KRASG12C-selective off inhibitor sotorasib, RMC-7977 resulted in a “cure” where no on-treatment tumor relapse was seen. One reasonable possibility is that the enhanced efficacy of RMC-7977 may be attributed to inhibition of WT RAS in the immune, vascular, and stromal cells that comprise the tumor microenvironment. The relative degrees of target inhibition in the tumor itself among different inhibitors, which could also contribute to differing degrees of efficacy, are currently unknown.
The related RAS multiselective inhibitor RMC-6236 is currently under clinical evaluation in KRAS mutant solid tumors (NCT05379985) ( , ; ). Analyses of RMC-6236 activity in mice provided clues for the unexpectedly limited toxicity seen with this inhibitor of both mutant and WT RAS activity, where apoptosis and inhibition of proliferation were observed in tumor but not normal tissue ( ). Specifically, reduced and adaptive levels of RAS activity, reflecting the concept of oncogene addiction, may contribute to RMC-6236 selectivity for tumor tissue. Preliminary evaluation of 10 PDAC and four NSCLC patients with KRASG12X mutations reported a 36% ORR and 86% disease control rate, with tumor reduction in four patients ( ). Treatment-related adverse events were controllable rash, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. Two cases were described in detail. In one case, a patient with KRASG12D mutant PDAC that progressed on FOLFIRINOX experienced tumor regression upon treatment with RMC-6236 and remained disease-free after 5 months ( ). A similarly dramatic response was seen in a patient with KRASG12V mutant NSCLC who had no evidence of disease after 8 months of treatment.

## Mechanisms of resistance to KRAS inhibitors
Two limitations of essentially all targeted therapies are primary (also called intrinsic or innate) resistance, which is present prior to treatment, and treatment-associated or acquired drug resistance ( ; ). Resistance may be driven through tumor cell-intrinsic mechanisms or by nontumor cells in the tumor microenvironment. Both types of resistance have significantly limited the clinical benefit of KRASG12C-specific inhibitors ( ).
Knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of primary resistance is presently limited. Clinicogenomic evaluation of co-occurring mutations in patients with KRASG12C mutant NSCLC who were treated with sotorasib or adagrasib showed that mutational loss of function of the tumor suppressor genes KEAP1, SMARCA4, and CDKN2A was independently associated with earlier disease progression and worse clinical outcomes (shorter PFS and OS) upon G12Ci treatment compared with when these genes were WT and functional ( ). In a somewhat surprising contrast, although TP53 was the most frequently comutated gene overall, and although emergent TP53 mutations were detected after treatment in NSCLC and PDAC patients whose tumors relapsed on G12Ci therapy ( ; ), the loss of this tumor suppressor was not associated with inferior clinical outcomes.
A causal role for KEAP1 loss in driving resistance to KRAS inhibitors is supported by previous observations that KEAP1 loss drove resistance to pharmacologic inhibitors of ERK MAPK signaling in NSCLC cell lines ( ). Mechanistically, KEAP1 encodes a component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex that regulates the degradation of the NRF2 transcription factor ( ). Thus, loss of KEAP1 results in NRF2 accumulation and stimulation of NRF2-dependent genes that support a protective response to oxidative stress. NRF2 activation has been implicated in driving lung cancer resistance to EGFR inhibition ( ; ). In another study, loss of KEAP1 or CDKN2A, but not of SMARCA4, which encodes a SWI/SNF family chromatin remodeler, drove resistance to RMC-6236 ( ). CDKN2A encodes the p16INK4A inhibitor of cyclin D1/CDK4/6, and consequently, its loss leads to CDK4/6 hyperphosphorylation and inactivation of the RB1 tumor suppressor. Further supporting a driver role for CDKN2A loss in resistance, concurrent CDK4/6 inhibition enhanced G12Ci antitumor activity ( ).
In addition to co-occurring loss of tumor suppressor gene functions, another potential basis of primary resistance to KRASG12C inhibitors may simply be insufficient inhibition of the drug target. Although target inhibition has been difficult to monitor clinically, a recently generated improved KRAS-dependent gene signature enabled transcriptomic evaluation of target inhibition in 10 patients bearing KRASG12C mutant NSCLC or CRC who were treated with adagrasib ( ). Limited to no KRAS inhibition was observed in six of eight patients who did not respond to treatment. Thus, merely improving drug potency and/or drug delivery may address one significant basis for apparent primary resistance. The increased ORR of more potent second-generation KRASG12C inhibitors ( ) is consistent with this possibility.
Other likely mechanisms of primary resistance include activation of bypass signal transduction pathways. Among the most significant of these is RTK activation of the RAS–ERK and PI3K–AKT signaling networks ( ). Upregulated EGFR activity contributes significantly to the lower ORR seen in KRASG12C mutant CRC. This mechanism is reminiscent of the finding that EGFR activity drives resistance to BRAF inhibitors in BRAF mutant CRC ( ; ), where concurrent anti-EGFR therapy enhanced BRAF inhibitor response ( ; ). Similarly, KRASG12C mutant preclinical CRC models are characterized by elevated EGFR activity, and concurrent EGFR inhibition enhanced G12Ci response ( ). Concurrent treatment with anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody therapies significantly enhanced ORRs compared with monotherapy with three different G12Cis ( ; ; ; ; ). Ongoing phase 3 studies (CodeBreaK 300; NCT 05198934) suggest that combining sotorasib and the anti-EGFR antibody panitumumab can nearly triple the response rate compared with that of sotorasib alone ( ). Similarly, the KRYSTAL-1 trial showed that the combination of adagrasib and cetuximab achieved an ORR of 34% and a median DOR of 5.8 months in patients bearing KRASG12C mutant CRC. Based on these results, that combination was granted accelerated approval by the FDA on June 21, 2024, specifically for patients with KRASG12C mutated locally advanced or metastatic CRC who have received prior treatment with fluoropyrimidine-, oxaliplatin-, and irinotecan-based chemotherapy.

## Genetic mechanisms of acquired resistance
To identify the basis for acquired resistance, several studies have compared circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) from liquid biopsies taken pretreatment and after relapse. Most of these ctDNA analyses were limited to targeted gene sets comprised of several hundred established cancer drivers. Our summary of acquired DNA mutations from five different studies with three different KRAS G12Cis ( ; ; ; ; ) reveals an emerging landscape of putative genetic resistance mechanisms ( A; ).
 In contrast to the simpler mutational alterations found in patients treated with inhibitors of protein kinases such as BCR-ABL, EGFR, and BRAF, patients treated with KRAS G12Cis displayed a spectrum of genetic alterations even within a single individual. In particular, more complex mutational patterns were seen in CRC patients compared with individual lung or pancreatic cancer patients. The basis for this is not clear.
Mutational activation at the level of RAS itself or activation/inactivation of components both upstream of and downstream from RAS were identified. Mutations in KRAS included in cis mutations that either impaired G12Ci drug binding to RAS or enhanced RAS binding to GTP ( ). KRAS mutations at H95 caused inhibitor-specific consequences, driving resistance to some (e.g., adagrasib) but not other G12C-selective inhibitors. Experimental mutagenesis studies have determined that the Y96D mutation drove resistance to both adagrasib and sotorasib but not to the KRASG12C-selective tricomplex inhibitor RM-018 ( ). Conversely, such analyses also identified mutations that caused resistance to sotorasib but not adagrasib ( ). Thus, additional inhibitor-specific in cis KRAS mutations that disrupt inhibitor binding will likely emerge, providing rationale for combining different KRAS inhibitors.
Other resistance-associated mutations were also identified in both KRAS and NRAS. Those with known gain-of-function consequences (e.g., G12R, G13D, and Q61X) likely occur in trans and may additionally represent pre-existing mutations ( ). KRASG12C but not KRASWT or NRASWT was amplified to a high level, generally at least 10 but sometimes up to 100 copies.
Amplification (e.g., of MET) or mutational activation via point mutations or fusion events (e.g., of ALK, EGFR, FGFR2/3, and RET) were observed in RTKs that function upstream of RAS. Gain-of-function mutations were identified in downstream effector components, including BRAF and MEK1 mutations that bypass inhibitor action to reactivate ERK. Gain-of-function mutations in the p110α catalytic subunit of PI3K and loss-of-function mutations in the PTEN-negative regulator were also detected ( , A; ). A recent study evaluating the relative contribution of these two pathways found unexpectedly that reactivation of RAF–ERK but not PI3K–AKT effectors was the predominant driver of resistance to both mutation-selective and multi-RAS inhibitors in PDAC ( ).
All of the mutations identified in relapsed patients make sense mechanistically. However, one puzzling finding in longitudinal studies of progression of KRASG12C mutant CRC treated with a combination of adagrasib and the EGFRi cetuximab to prevent EGFR-mediated reactivation of WT RAS was the low allelic representation of these mutations. Although bona fide drivers of resistance would be expected to be enriched, instead, this was true only for DNA amplification of the mutant KRAS allele. To date, KRAS amplification is the best validated mechanism of resistance in that context ( ). Whether a similar evaluation of genetic alterations over time would have also come to the same conclusion as in the above-cited studies, which compared only a single pretreatment and postrelapse sample, remains to be determined.

## Nongenetic mechanisms of resistance
In approximately half of relapsed patients, no genomic DNA mutations were identified, suggesting that nongenetic mechanisms, in particular cellular states driven by alterations in gene transcription ( B), may also contribute significantly to acquired resistance ( ; ). For example, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a process in carcinoma progression whereby epithelial cells progressively adopt a more mesenchymal morphology that is associated with increased invasive and metastatic capabilities and with resistance to chemotherapy ( ). An earlier study found that only some KRAS mutant carcinoma cell lines were dependent on mutant KRAS for growth; KRAS independence was associated with an EMT gene signature ( ). Experimentally, induction of EMT was sufficient to cause resistance to KRAS G12Ci in lung cancer cell lines ( ). Furthermore, upregulation of an EMT gene signature was seen in posttreatment tumors from a patient with NSCLC who relapsed on sotorasib ( ), and an EMT gene signature was elevated upon acquired resistance to the G12Di MRTX1133 in KRASG12D mutant PDAC cell lines ( ).
Full exome sequencing of tumors from a patient with KRASG12C mutant NSCLC who relapsed following an initial response to sotorasib did not detect any gene mutations associated with resistance ( ). However, RNA sequencing analyses identified a YAP gene signature, consistent with previous preclinical studies that had identified YAP activation as a driver of KRAS independence ( ; ). Recently, two studies used CRISPR screening to identify YAP–TEAD activation as a mechanism of resistance to G12Cis ( ; ). EMT has also been found to be driven by YAP transcriptional upregulation of the EMT-associated transcription factor Slug ( ).
A histologic transition from adenocarcinoma to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) ( B) was observed during adagrasib treatment of two NSCLC patients whose relapsed tumors contained no identified DNA mutations ( ). Supporting a causal role for such a transition in driving G12Ci resistance, studies in mutant Kras-driven genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) of lung cancer found that Lkb1/Stk11 loss drove an SCC histology and reduced G12Ci sensitivity ( ). The two histological states are characterized by distinct gene transcription signatures, and NSCLC patients exhibiting enrichment of the SCC signature also exhibited significantly shorter responsiveness to adagrasib treatment.
Analyses of long-term treatment of Kras mutant NSCLC GEMMs with RMC-7977 revealed the onset of a mucinous phenotype in drug-tolerant persistent cells that increase the risk of tumor regrowth ( ). Supporting the clinical relevance of this finding, evaluation of 130 KRASG12C mutant NSCLC patients treated with either sotorasib or adagrasib showed that tumors with mucinous features were associated with lower ORRs and shorter PFS and OS ( B). Mechanistically, secreted mucins may provide a physical protective barrier to limit immune response and stress-induced damage ( ).
Last, transition between molecular subtypes may cause drug resistance and also serve as a therapeutic vulnerability. Two major molecular subtypes of PDAC have been identified ( , ; ; ). The classical (more epithelial) subtype is associated with increased responsiveness to some forms of conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy, such as mFOLFIRINOX, whereas the basal-like (similar to squamous/quasimesenchymal) subtype is associated with a more invasive phenotype and yet increased responsiveness to targeted agents relative to the classical subtype. Accordingly, MRTX1133 treatment of preclinical mouse or human models of PDAC, including the KPC KrasG12D mutant GEMM or KRASG12D mutant PDX, indicated that basal-like tumors were more sensitive to this G12Di and conversely that the classical subtype may define a resistant subpopulation ( B; ; ). Tumors may be composed of a mix of subtypes that form a continuum or undergo significant plasticity, switching subtypes in response to treatment. These findings suggest therapeutic strategies such as combining targeted KRAS inhibitors with conventional chemotherapies, an approach that is currently under widespread clinical evaluation ( ).

## Combination strategies
Observations from preclinical studies and from patient analyses have guided the development of numerous combination drug strategies intended to enhance the antitumor activity and clinical durability of KRAS inhibitors ( ). Due to the heterogeneous mutational profiles within and among patients, the genetic instability of cancers in general, and innate and adaptive mechanisms of resistance, it is likely that a wide variety of combinations will ultimately be needed, depending on context and patient. Current clinical trials ( ), now largely focused on G12Ci combinations in NSCLC, CRC, and PDAC but expanding rapidly, include combination partners ranging from signal transduction inhibitors targeting components of the RAS signaling network to immune checkpoint inhibitors to cytotoxic drugs to stereotactic radiation therapy. Below, we highlight some of the most promising combinations ( ).
 Some strategies have been or will be guided by DNA mutations found in patients who relapsed on adagrasib or sotorasib therapy ( ; ; ; ; ; ). One major mechanism of resistance involves activation of RTK signaling. Therefore, inhibitors of SHP2 and SOS1, both of which facilitate RTK activation of RAS ( ), have been evaluated as “pan”-RTK inhibitors that can overcome any of the multiple RTKs involved. For example, preclinically, the combination of G12Ci JDQ443 and SHP2 inhibitor TNO155 (batoprotafib) prolonged antitumor response in CDX tumors ( ), providing additional rationale for ongoing clinical trials of this and similar combinations ( ; ). A second major mechanism of resistance involves mutational activation of components of the RAF and PI3K effector signaling networks. Therefore, combinations of RAS inhibitors with inhibitors of MEK, ERK, PI3K, and mTORC1 have been evaluated to overcome these mechanisms ( ). Finally, a third class of resistance involves cis or trans mutations in RAS itself ( ). One approach to address this is to combine a mutation-selective and a pan-RAS inhibitor. Addressing this potential, a phase 1b study is evaluating the G12C-selective inhibitor RMC-6291 or the G12D-selective inhibitor RMC-9805 in combination with the RAS multi-inhibitor RMC-6236 in advanced KRASG12C mutant solid tumors (NCT06128551 and NCT06040541) ( ).
As described above, nongenetic mechanisms of resistance can also form the basis of potentially effective combinations. Experimental analyses in preclinical models as well as observations from an NSCLC patient who relapsed but without DNA mutations demonstrated that YAP/TAZ–TEAD activation can drive resistance to KRAS inhibitors. Multiple independent studies have found that pharmacologic inhibition of TEAD synergistically enhanced the activities of KRASG12C inhibitors ( ; ; ; ; ; ). TEAD inhibitors, such as BPI-460372, IAG933, IK-930, SW-682, and VT3989, are an active area of development, and some have recently entered clinical evaluation in patients with mutational loss of the NF2 tumor suppressor. It is likely that testing combinations of TEAD inhibitors with KRAS inhibitors in KRAS mutant cancers will soon join these efforts.
Other preclinical studies have established that aberrant KRAS activation and signaling can impair the immune response to KRAS mutant PDAC tumors ( ; ). Consistent with this possibility, evaluation of sotorasib activity against tumors derived from the same KrasG12C mutant CRC mouse cell line but in different immune environments found more durable long-term suppression of tumor growth in syngeneic immune-competent versus immune-suppressed mouse models ( ). Furthermore, checkpoint inhibitors are increasingly standard of care with other agents. Consequently, concurrent treatment with immune checkpoint inhibitors is a logical therapeutic strategy, and ongoing clinical trials are evaluating them in combination with sotorasib, adagrasib, and other G12C inhibitors ( ; ; ; ).
Current G12Cis are approved as second-line treatment for patients who have advanced on SOC cytotoxic chemotherapy. A number of current trials are now evaluating KRAS inhibitors in combination with chemotherapies to potentially move KRAS inhibitors for cofirst-line application where they may be more effective. Supporting the benefit of combination with cytotoxic drugs, sotorasib in combination with carboplatin SOC in a KRASG12C mutant NSCLC CDX model ( ) significantly improved tumor suppression compared with single-drug treatment. A phase 3 trial was recently initiated to evaluate sotorasib in combination with carboplatin-based doublet SOC therapies as a first-line therapy (CodeBreaK 202; NCT05920356).
Similarly, the combination of MRTX1133 with SOC gemcitabine was evaluated in a metastatic KPC-derived KrasG12D mutant PDAC mouse model ( ). Whereas mice treated with MRTX1133 or gemcitabine alone developed metastatic growth, the combination reduced metastasis to undetectable levels. RMC-6236 is currently under clinical evaluation in combination with SOC in RAS mutant NSCLC (NCT06162221), CRC, and PDAC (NCT06445062).
Finally, another crucial treatment modality for many RAS-driven cancers is radiation therapy. As noted above, there are several trials evaluating combinations of KRAS inhibitors with stereotactic radiosurgery ( ), in part simply because adding KRAS inhibitors to standards of care is a logical strategy. More specific reasons for testing such combinations include the ability of radiation therapy to reveal new therapeutic vulnerabilities by inducing expression of neoantigens and promoting sensitivity to other agents already known to counter activities of RAS that promote tumor resistance to conventional treatments.

## Conclusions and future perspectives
The decades-long pursuit of anti-KRAS therapies has been marked by misconceptions, mistakes, and missteps. Past failed efforts were often rooted in our incomplete understanding of KRAS function. For example, a key learning moment from the failure of farnesyltransferase inhibitors to directly block KRAS-driven cancers as monotherapy showed that the three RAS isoforms are not functionally identical, pivoting the field to focus on KRAS. Efforts to target KRAS effector signaling, in particular the ERK MAPK cascade, failed in large part because of the unexpectedly dynamic nature of signaling networks. Despite the way in which it is commonly depicted, the RAF–MEK–ERK protein kinase cascade is not a simple, linear, unidirectional signaling pathway. Instead, it is but the core of an intricate signaling network characterized by complex feedback mechanisms that dynamically maintain activity in response to pharmacologic inhibitors of a single node. Even unexpected successes have offered learning moments. The successful development of KRAS inhibitors that are selective for the GDP-bound “off” state of the G12C mutation led to the realization that one of the dogmas in the field—that all mutant RAS proteins are persistently locked in the GTP-bound state—is incorrect. Finally, the functional consequences of different activating mutations in KRAS are highly varied, and at least some of their resistance mechanisms may also be distinct. Thus, it may be unreasonable to expect that there will be a simple, universal “one size fits all” therapy for different KRAS mutants.
The approval of two KRASG12C-specific inhibitors does not signal the end of anti-KRAS drug discovery. Instead, it marks the beginning of a new chapter. Critical questions moving forward include whether clinically effective inhibitors will be developed for mutations beyond G12C, in particular for the two most prevalent mutations: G12D and G12V. The answer currently emerging is a resounding “yes,” as clinical trial results begin to describe responses in patients whose tumors harbor other KRAS mutations. More challenging are the issues of primary and acquired resistance. More potent inhibitors will likely partially address the low ORRs currently seen with approved KRAS inhibitors. Despite accumulating evidence for diverse mechanisms of acquired resistance, combination approaches to block these mechanisms have not significantly improved the activities against KRASG12C seen with monotherapy. Whether we have already identified the major bona fide resistance mechanisms or whether unexpected but crucial mechanisms remain to be discovered remains a critical issue for the field. It is widely accepted that the long-term success of KRAS inhibitors will hinge on developing effective combinations to greatly enhance the durability of responses to KRAS inhibitors. Finally, with the successful development of RAS inhibitors adding GTPases to the list of components of the druggable genome, there is emerging interest in developing inhibitors of other members of the RAS superfamily that are mutationally activated in cancer (e.g., RIT1, RHOA, and RAC1) ( ; ; ). Shokat and colleagues ( ) recently extended their discovery of the SIIP in KRAS to identify analogous druggable SIIPs in RAS, RHO, and RAB small GTPases. In summary, the next decade will surely bring new insights into KRAS and revisions of past dogma that will fuel further advances in targeting once-undruggable RAS. In response to Taylor Swift's recent question, “Is it over now?,” we bring back Yogi Berra (and Lenny Kravitz), who famously stated that “It ain't over ’til it's over.” Stay tuned.

## Supplemental Material
Supplement 1

## Acknowledgments
Our research was supported by grants from the National Cancer Institute (R01CA42978, P50CA196510, P50CA257911, U01CA199235, P01CA203657, and R35CA232113), the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network (22-WG-DERB), and the Department of Defense (W81XWH2110692), and donations from The Blue Ribbon Run and the Julie M. Brown and Christina Gianoplus Foundation for Colon Cancer Research.
Author contributions: A.D.C. and C.J.D. collectively conceived this work, wrote the original manuscript, made revisions, and approved the final version. A.D.C. and C.J.D. are responsible for the contents of this work.
Supplemental material is available for this article.
Article published online ahead of print. Article and publication date are online at http://www.genesdev.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gad.352081.124.

## Competing interest statement
C.J.D. was a consultant/advisory board member for Cullgen, Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, Mirati Therapeutics, Reactive Biosciences, Revolution Medicines, Ribometrics, Sanofi, and SHY Therapeutics. C.J.D. has received research funding support from Deciphera Pharmaceuticals, Mirati Therapeutics, Reactive Biosciences, Revolution Medicines, and SpringWorks Therapeutics. A.D.C. has consulted for Eli Lilly and Mirati Therapeutics.