319nihpaThe ocular surfaceOcul SurfPMC119210401192104011921040NIHMS20601773942667710.1016/j.jtos.2024.10.005Target specification and therapeutic potential of extracellular vesicles for regulating corneal angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and nerve repair
PedersenCameron ChenVictoria T HerbstPaula ZhangRunze ElfertAmr KrishanAbhi AzarDimitri T ChangJin-Hong HuWen-Yang KremsmayerTobias P JalilianElmira DjalilianAli R GuaiquilVictor H RosenblattMark I aDepartment of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USAbUniversity of Illinois Cancer Center, Chicago, IL, USAcJesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USAdDepartment of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USAeRichard and Loan Hill Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60607, USA*Corresponding author. Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Illinois Eye and Ear Infirmary, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. changr@uic.edu (J.-H. Chang)
**Corresponding author. mrosenbl@uic.edu (M.I. Rosenblatt).
1equal contribution.
1810202434459459–47618102025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Ocul Surf

## Abstract
Extracellular vesicles, including exosomes, are small extracellular vesicles that range in size from 30 nm to 10 μm in diameter and have specific membrane markers. They are naturally secreted and are present in various bodily fluids, including blood, urine, and saliva, and through the variety of their internal cargo, they contribute to both normal physiological and pathological processes. These processes include immune modulation, neuronal synapse formation, cell differentiation, cancer metastasis, angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, progression of infectious disease, and neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. In recent years, interest has grown in the use of exosomes as a potential drug delivery system for various diseases and injuries. Importantly, exosomes originating from a patient’s own cells exhibit minimal immunogenicity and possess remarkable stability along with inherent and adjustable targeting capabilities. This review explores the roles of exosomes in angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and nerve repair with a specific emphasis on these processes within the cornea. Furthermore, it examines exosomes derived from specific cell types, discusses the advantages of exosome-based therapies in modulating these processes, and presents some of the most established methods for exosome isolation. Exosome-based treatments are emerging as potential minimally invasive and non-immunogenic therapies that modulate corneal angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis, as well as enhance and accelerate endogenous corneal nerve repair.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2024 Oct.

1.

## Introduction
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are endosomal-derived, membrane-bound vesicles secreted by most cell types in the body, and they facilitate cell-to-cell communication by carrying a variety of molecular cargo [ - ]. They are categorized into several groups by size and origin: exosomes, microvesicles/ectosomes, apoptotic bodies, autophagic EVs, stressed EVs, and matrix vesicles [ - ]. The cargo includes proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and other cellular components that are transferred between cells for various biological processes [ ]. This review focuses on exosomes, which are the most-studied and likely to have more significant physiological roles.
Exosomes have a distinctive lipid bilayer membrane, typically measuring 30–150 nm in diameter, and are formed through inward endosomal budding, which generates multivesicular bodies (MVBs) that then merge with the plasma membrane for their release into the extracellular microenvironment [ , , ]. The exosomal lipid bilayer composition and embedded transmembrane protein selection can vary depending on the originating cell type and are critical for uptake by other cells. This interaction is partially mediated via a ligand–receptor mechanism, as postulated in [ , - ].
 Exosomes represent an important mode of intercellular communication by serving as vehicles for the transfer of cytosolic proteins, lipids, and genetic information [ , ]. Exosomes can contain many types of signaling molecules, including proteins, messenger RNA (mRNA), microRNA (miRNA), and noncoding RNA that can be incorporated into target cells via endocytosis. These signaling molecules regulate target cell activity via effects on translational activity, proliferation, metabolism, and apoptosis [ ]. Based on the advantages of immune compatibility, mass production, and efficient transport capacity, exosomes derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are being used in regenerative medicine applications and treatments specifically for ocular diseases [ ].

2.

## Physiological and Pathophysiological roles of exosomes
Exosomes are found in various bodily fluids and play important roles in regulating various physiological functions [ , ]. Exosomes were first recognized for their function in eliminating transferrin receptors, thereby contributing to waste removal during the erythrocyte maturation process. Currently, exosomes are widely acknowledged for their crucial role in intercellular communication. Their significance spans various physiological and pathological processes, including immune regulation, tissue regeneration, viral infection, tumor development, and metastasis [ ]. Due to the lipid membrane packaging of exosomes, they can function as vehicles for direct cellular fusion transportation of various biologically important molecules, such as proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids, to their target cells. The transfer of signaling molecules and inflammatory mediators facilitates cell-to-cell communication in various tissues, including those of the eye [ ]. In corneal tissue, exosomes help maintain cellular homeostasis by mediating intercellular and inter-layer communication among the three layers of the cornea [ ].
This review explores the specific roles that exosomes can play in regulating angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and nerve repair, along with the potential for their utilization in treating corneal injuries. The unique advantages of exosome-derived therapies provide promising avenues for treating corneal injuries that are typically fraught with complications. The potential applications of exosome-derived therapies are seemingly endless, but the field is still in its infancy. Further research into relevant underlying mechanisms of action is needed to quantitatively characterize exosomal content and avoid potential side effects and complications of exosome-based therapies. In an effort to expedite this process, a functional protein association analysis was completed for the complex protein–protein interaction networks related to corneal angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and nerve regeneration ( ).
 
3.

## Cellular specificity of exosomes
Target cell preference has been observed in various studies, although exosome uptake was once considered non-specific and universal [ ]. Current research shows that specificity of exosome internalization is largely conferred by exosome–target cell membrane receptor interactions. Indeed, as shown by Saghizadeh’s group, exosomes secreted by stromal cells in the limbal niche influence the overlying epithelium and vice versa [ ]. Also, Sancho-Albero et al. demonstrated that exosomes are preferentially internalized by the same cell type that originally released them [ ]. Their study used MSC-exosomes containing polyethylene glycosylated hollow gold nanoparticles (PEG-HGNs), MSCs, and monocytes, along with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) for visualization. They noticed that PEG–HGN–loaded exosomes released by MSCs contacted both MSCs and monocytes. However, exosome uptake by MSCs after 24 and 48 h was significantly greater than that by monocytes. While the exact mechanism for this cell specificity is poorly understood, some studies have proposed an association with certain extracellular receptors. Another study by Christianson et al. provided evidence that heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) contribute to cell specificity by functioning as internalizing receptors for cancer cell-derived exosomes. They showed that addition of HSPG inhibitors reduced exosome uptake by more than 90 % compared with that in the control group [ ].
The process of how cells specifically take up exosomes is not yet fully understood, which complicates the development of a highly targeted exosome therapy. However, researchers, particularly in the field of cancer therapeutics, have made progress in developing fusion proteins to enhance the specificity of exosome drug delivery for tumor treatment. Liang et al. fused human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) with the human lysosomal associated membrane protein 2 (Lamp2) to create a fusion protein called THLG [ ]. Exosomes containing the THLG fusion protein showed enhanced specificity for colon cancer cells and improved tumor cytotoxicity. Ohno et al. also used a fusion protein to significantly improve the target specificity of exosomes for breast cancer cells [ ]. Fusion proteins expressed on the exosomes were created by combining platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor with GE11 peptide. These engineered exosomes demonstrated a high specificity toward epidermal growth factor receptor-expressing breast cancer cells.
In the cornea, exosomes facilitate the function of corneal epithelial cells in multiple ways. They facilitate corneal epithelial, stromal, and endothelial cell communication following injury. Desjardins et al. explored the various wound healing properties and target specification of exosomes on corneal epithelial cells [ ]. Exosomes derived from various cell types, including corneal epithelial cells, corneal fibroblasts, and corneal endothelial cells, significantly improved wound closure times of scratch-wounded human corneal epithelial cells (hCECs) in vitro, albeit through different mechanisms. Exosomes derived from endothelial cells were shown to inhibit phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β), p38α MAPK, and β-catenin in hCECs, while exosomes from corneal epithelial cells and corneal fibroblasts were shown to increase the activation of these signal transduction mediators. Gene expression profiles also indicated that the exosomes derived from each cell type activated distinct gene subsets. Thus, exosomal content varies based on the derived cell type and exerts effects on target cells through diverse mechanisms to improve healing times.

4.

## Methods for Exosome isolation
4.1.

## Conventional methods for Exosome isolation
Recently, the Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles (MISEV) provided set guidelines for best practices for isolation of extracellular vesicles such as exosomes, characterization, quantitation, and functional studies [ ]. As outlined in , several isolation methods are utilized, and no standard method has been adopted in the literature. Differential centrifugation, or ultracentrifugation, is one of the most widely used methods for exosome isolation, as it separates exosomes from other cellular components such as cell debris and microvesicles [ ]. The advantages of this method include a relatively high yield, simple protocols, and cost-effectiveness compared with other isolation protocols. Despite its high yield though, ultracentrifugation results in low-purity products. Additionally, it requires a high labor load that must be optimized for efficient large-scale production.
 Density gradient ultracentrifugation uses a density gradient medium. By using density gradient mediums like iodixanol and centrifugal force, it separates and purifies EVs based on their buoyant density. One potential disadvantage is that the isolation of EVs using the ultracentrifugation step from a fixed density range may co-isolate non-EV particles of a similar density and result in the loss and damage of some EVs [ ].
An alternative method for exosome isolation is polyethylene glycol (PEG)-based precipitation, which uses PEG as a reagent to precipitate samples [ ]. This method is efficient and yields exosomes of high morphological and functional quality. However, similar to ultracentrifugation, this method produces low-purity exosomes, concentrating the exosome fraction without removing other sample components.
Immunoaffinity procedures offer a powerful isolation approach that uses antibody-functionalized magnetic beads to capture and isolate exosomes based on the external presentation of specific exosomal markers [ ]. This method provides high specificity and purity, allowing for greater enrichment of exosomal contents from selected cell types. However, this technique is limited by the availability and specificity of the magnetic beads needed for purification.
Another common method for exosome isolation is size-exclusion chromatography, in which exosomes are separated by size in a column packed with porous beads [ ]. Unlike immunoaffinity procedures, this method produces high-purity products and is not limited by antibody availability. The limitations of this method include longer processing time and possible exosome degradation in the needed operation buffers.
Microfluidics-based devices can be used to rapidly and efficiently isolate exosomes based on size or surface markers, because they can achieve microscale manipulation according to both the physical and biochemical properties of exosomes [ ]. This method has distinct limitations, such as time-consuming sample pretreatment steps for some devices, low isolation efficiency when using pristine samples, and the requirement for specialized equipment and expertise.
Overall, various viable purification methods are available, each with distinct advantages and disadvantages. Accordingly, no one method can be recommended for general use, and the optimal purification method for different studies and applications must be determined based on the unique needs and resources in each case.

4.2.

## Advanced method for Exosome isolation
To further explore the function of exosomes and devise methods for their therapeutic use, it is crucial to have optimized protocols for exosome visualization. The development of genetically encoded fluorescent proteins and the discovery of exosomes markers have allowed for the generation of cells expressing fluorescently tagged exosomes. Transfection of cells with vectors encoding fluorescent proteins fused to exosomal markers, such as CD63, CD9, or CD81, allows for precise exosome tracking and visualization [ ]. This innovative approach enables studies that provide valuable insights into exosome release, uptake, and intercellular communication, thereby deepening our understanding of their roles in various physiological and pathological processes.
Fluorescence labeling of exosomes also enables quantification. Indeed, different approaches involving lipophilic membrane-permeable fluorescent dyes have been used to specifically label exosomes for fluorescence imaging [ ]. These dyes can be easily incorporated into the exosome membrane, providing a robust and reliable method for exosome tagging [ ].

5.

## MSC-exosomes treatment in Cornea injury
When utilized for corneal injury treatment, exosomes are typically sourced from patient- or donor-derived stromal cells, MSCs (isolated from bone marrow, adipose tissue [AT], or umbilical cord tissue), epithelial cells, or macrophages. Exosomes contain bioactive molecules such as growth factors, cytokines, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, microRNAs, and lipids that promote the growth of blood or lymphatic vessels and the regeneration and repair of nerves. Exosomes have also been shown to act on corneal endothelial cells. Exosomes derived from AT MSCs have been shown to promote the proliferation of human corneal endothelial cells in vitro [ ]. In the same study, rat models demonstrated shorter healing times and increased endothelial cell proliferation in vivo following cryoinjury. They observed increased corneal endothelial cell (CEnC) proliferation and noted reduced oxidative stress and senescence induced by transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) or hydrogen peroxide. Furthermore, the sequencing of exosomal contents demonstrated changed levels of miRNAs associated with various pathways, including lysine degradation, adherens junctions, TGF-β signaling, p53 signaling, Hippo signaling, forkhead box O signaling, actin cytoskeleton regulation, and RNA degradation. Interestingly, disease may also alter exosome cargo, as exosomes from corneal stromal cells were found to produce concentration-dependent effects on gene transcription depending on whether they were derived from healthy controls or keratoconus patients [ ].
Exosomes derived from MSCs have also been shown to confer neuroprotective effects following ocular injury [ ]. Yu et al. demonstrated the neuroprotective effects of exosomes following optic nerve injury. Expanding on the therapeutic promise of MSC-derived exosomes in ocular surface disease, their study on exosomes from human corneal mesenchymal stromal cells (cMSCs) revealed compelling insights [ ]. Isolated from human cadaver corneas, cMSC exosomes, characterized by a round morphology (40–100 nm) and expressing CD9, CD63, and CD81, demonstrated effective uptake by various cell types, including corneal epithelial cells and macrophages. In functional assays, these exosomes significantly accelerated wound closure in scratch assays with human corneal epithelial cells and, notably, promoted rapid corneal wound healing in vivo. This highlights the potential therapeutic use of MSC-derived exosomes in ocular surface disease.
Furthermore, exosomes play a critical role in regulating inflammatory processes in the ocular system. Autologous bone marrow-derived stem cell therapy has been reported to improve vision after 6 months in a small number of patients with chronic ischemic optic neuropathy [ ]. Possible mechanisms by which visual improvement could occur via exosome delivery include the release of mRNA or other compounds. Yu et al. reported that intravitreal administration of MSC-exosomes enhanced visual function by modulating the pro-inflammatory environment in a laser-induced retinal injury [ ]. Human bone marrow-derived MSCs (BMSCs) and exosomes were also shown to suppress the immune reaction and deliver small RNAs. In a model of islet transplantation, MSC-exosomes were successfully used to deliver small RNAs to promote islet function and inhibit immune rejection. Specifically, MSC-exosomes treatment with co-delivery of siRNA against Fas receptor and miR-375 inhibitor significantly improved the success of islet transplantation, which suggests the possible application of exosomes in establishing corneal graft immune tolerance [ , ].
Additionally, exosome biogenesis contributes to autophagy and maintenance of corneal epithelial cell homeostasis through shared pathways and molecular intermediaries [ ]. For instance, exosomes may trigger autophagy when binding to target cells. Autophagy processes can, in turn, influence the production and breakdown of exosomes. This interplay presents promising opportunities for future diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for ocular diseases [ , ].

6.

## The role of exosomes in the injured Cornea
6.1.

## Wound healing after corneal injury
Corneal injury can occur as a result of trauma, infection, inflammation, and surgery. Alterations in corneal wound healing after corneal, keratorefractive, and cataract surgery may be associated with altered visual outcomes [ , ]. The wound healing process necessitates contributions from epithelial, stromal, and endothelial cells, along with corneal ECM components [ ]. It is a complex process involving cell death, migration, proliferation, differentiation, and ECM remodeling [ ], and is accompanied by physiological nerve regeneration. While the cornea normally heals with avascularity and minimal scarring, in rare cases, pathological haze, angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and loss of nerve function can occur [ , ].
The healing of the injured cornea depends on the type, severity, and duration of the insult. Similarly, the outcome of restrictive injuries, such as those induced by surgery, varies with the surgery type [ ]. After photorefractive surgery, corneal epithelial healing is largely mediated by limbal stem cells and remodeling of the basement membrane [ , - ]. During stromal healing, keratocytes transform into motile and contractile myofibroblasts largely due to activation of the TGF-β system [ - ]. Wound healing after LASIK surgery is associated with less corneal scarring and haze compared to keratorefractive surgery [ , ]. The posterior corneal surface is also altered after keratorefractive surgery without corneal endothelial injury [ , ]. Other types of surgery, such as lenticular refractive surgery, cataract surgery, and keratoplasty, are all associated with corneal endothelial cell injury. The wound healing process after these types of injury involves cellular migration and spreading, with cell proliferation playing a secondary role [ ]. Interestingly, exosomes derived from the cornea contain matrix metalloproteinases, which are believed to have important roles in wound healing and angiogenesis [ , , ].

6.2.

## Role of exosomes in corneal angiogenesis
As a specialized avascular tissue, the cornea relies on a delicate balance of angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors within the epithelium for preservation of avascularity [ , ]. In other words, angiogenesis must be tightly regulated to maintain the avascularity and clarity of the cornea during the tissue repair process [ ]. Any imbalance between pro- and anti-angiogenic factors during wound healing can result in corneal neovascularization, causing loss of transparency and, thus, impairment of visual clarity. Neovascularization underlies various eye diseases, including neovascular age-related macular degeneration (AMD), diabetic retinopathy, macular edema, neovascular glaucoma, and corneal neovascularization. While anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) therapies are effective in treating disease-related corneal neovascularization, alternative approaches such as stem cell therapy or the delivery of MSC-exosomes are gaining interest.
Depending on the insult, excessive or abnormal angiogenesis following corneal injury can develop and impede proper wound healing and functionality. However, less severe corneal injury often results in impaired angiogenesis due to a combination of inflammation, hypoxia, and oxidative stress post-injury. Inflammatory mediators, such as interleukin 1 beta (IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), released by corneal epithelial cells and immune cells inhibit angiogenesis by suppressing the expression of VEGF, angiopoietin-1, and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) while promoting the expression of thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1) and pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) [ , ]. Injury-induced hypoxia activates hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs), further promoting the expression of anti-angiogenic factors and inhibiting the expression of pro-angiogenic factors [ ]. Inflammatory infiltration following injury leads to the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which causes oxidative stress and further inhibits angiogenesis [ ].
Exosomes are being increasingly explored as promising vehicles for targeted drug delivery in the modulation of angiogenesis. Wang et al. used exosomes derived from engineered MSCs expressing a cardiac homing peptide to promote angiogenesis in a mouse model of myocardial infarction. The engineered exosomes exhibited enhanced homing capacity to the heart and improved angiogenic activity compared with non-engineered exosomes, indicating the potential for targeted delivery of angiogenesis-promoting agents to specific tissues [ ]. The potential of exosomes to act as promoters of neovascularization has also been explored in cutaneous wound healing. For example, human induce pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-MSC-exosomes increased the proliferation, migration, and tube formation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) in a dose-dependent manner [ ]. In another study by Teng et al., exosomes derived from human umbilical cord-derived MSCs were also shown to enhance angiogenesis and promote wound healing in a diabetic mouse model. In fact, exosome-facilitated transport of VEGF to endothelial cells allowed for improved neovascularization and accelerated wound healing in diabetic mice [ ]. The exact underlying mechanism by which MSC-exosomes modulate angiogenesis remains unclear. Evidence suggests it may partially be due to activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway in endothelial cells or mediated by the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) cascade [ ].
Hence, a deeper understanding of the involvement of exosomes in neovascularization may allow for the development of novel therapeutic targets. In the cornea, exosomes are vital for maintaining corneal epithelial cell integrity, aiding healing, and contributing to neovascularization during repair [ , , ]. Lee et al. demonstrated that MSC-exosomes can suppress angiogenesis by downregulating the expression of VEGF, partly via miR-16 [ ], and Tao et al. showed that exosomes derived from human placenta-derived MSCs can promote corneal healing in a mouse corneal injury model by reducing post-trauma inflammation [ , ].
Studies by Han et al. further demonstrated the potential for corneal epithelial cells to regulate corneal angiogenesis following injury. Specifically, it was shown that exosomes secreted from in vitro mouse corneal epithelial cells fused to keratocytes and induced myofibroblast transformation [ ]. Using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), exosomes derived from epithelial cells were observed within the stroma and corneal epithelium after epithelial injury. The fusion of these exosomes to fibroblasts was visualized through confocal microscopy and immunostaining. These findings provide insight into how exosomes facilitate the transformation of stromal keratocytes into myofibroblasts.
These studies inspired further investigation of exosomes as potential therapeutic agents for promoting tissue repair and determining their role in corneal angiogenesis and repair. Interestingly, the angiogenesis-promoting effects of exosomes have been shown in several studies. Indeed, mouse corneal epithelial cell-derived exosomes were found to induce endothelial cell proliferation and ex vivo aortic ring sprouting. Additionally, in an aortic ring culture, epithelial cell-derived exosomes exhibited a greater capacity to promote neovascularization than fibroblast-derived exosomes. Furthermore, in a murine model, epithelial cell-derived exosomes contained proteins associated with tissue repair and angiogenesis, including chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 5 (CXCL5), latent TGF-β–binding protein 1 (LTBP-1), and thrombospondin 2 (THBS2). Of these proteins, only THBS2 was found to regulate angiogenesis significantly [ ]. However, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. It was proposed that TGF-β may be carried in a complex form, such as in combination with LTBP-1, which could prevent its detection. The study suggests that epithelial-derived exosomes likely play a larger role in regulating and promoting angiogenesis than fibroblast-derived exosomes, which has implications for future research [ ].
Additional studies have shown that corneal fibroblast-derived exosomes containing matrix metalloproteinase 14 (MMP14) were also found to contribute to the development of corneal neovascularization through multiple signal transduction pathways [ , ]. Furthermore, exosomes derived from iPSCs were able to alleviate limbal ischemia in mice by promoting angiogenesis. This effect was achieved by upregulating angiogenesis-related factors such as VEGF and angiogenin [ ].
Exosomes can modulate the angiogenic response to injury by delivering their bioactive contents to endothelial and immune cells post-injury. As outlined in , exosomes containing pro-angiogenic factors, such as VEGF, angiopoietin-1, bFGF, and miRNAs can be derived from a variety of cell types, including endothelial cells, iPSCs, and MSCs. The applicability of these cell-derived exosomes in the treatment of various disease processes has also been demonstrated. Specifically, MSC-exosomes containing pro-angiogenic cytokines, such as IL-6 and IL-8, have been shown to promote endothelial cell migration and proliferation, resulting in increased angiogenesis [ ]. Pan et al. explored how MSC-exosomes promote angiogenesis in vitro using HUVECs and showed that these exosomes contained VEGF, FGF, and PDGF as well as pro-angiogenic miRNAs such as miR-126, miR-130a, miR-132, miR-210, and miR-214 [ ].
 In contrast, further research indicates that exosomes can have a potent inhibitory effect on angiogenesis, which may aid in corneal wound healing. Studies have shown that corneal-derived MSCs can modulate the phenotype and angiogenic function of macrophages. Specifically, exosomes were shown to modulate the CD14+, CD16+, CD163+, and CD206+ macrophage immunophenotype, leading to reduced angiogenic and inflammatory effects [ ]. Furthermore, corneal mesenchymal stromal cells were found to possess direct anti-angiogenic properties through the secretion of factors such as PEDF and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFLT-1) [ ]. Thus, further studies are necessary to determine the applicability of exosomes in modulating corneal tissue repair.
In a recent study conducted by Saccu et al., the potential of BMSC-EVs for influencing the repair process in corneal injury induced by alkali burn was evident. Specifically, the delivery of BMSC-EVs, including exosomes, promoted anti-inflammatory responses and enhanced cell survival, both of which are crucial factors in preventing pathologic neovascularization during the corneal healing process [ ]. The delivery of EVs improved the recovery time of corneal damage and revealed a decrease in angiogenesis in mice treated with BMSC-EVs compared to the control group. Additionally, pro-angiogenic growth factors VEGFA and VEGFD and their receptors Flt1 and Flt4 were significantly upregulated only in the control group [ ]. These findings support the potential use of exosomes in corneal tissue recovery to prevent neovascularization. However, further studies are needed to determine the minimal essential components of exosomes to mediate these anti-angiogenic, anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective, and proliferative effects. Combined with targeted delivery methods, engineered exosomes may emerge as a viable therapy in treating numerous eye pathologies [ ].
Overall, key corneal properties (transparency, refractivity, and mechanical strength) deteriorate in many corneal diseases but can be restored after corneal transplantation (penetrating and lamellar keratoplasties). However, the global shortage of transplantable donor corneas remains significant, and patients are subject to the life-long risk of graft rejection. Multiple studies have demonstrated that MSC-exosomes can support corneal reconstruction through immunomodulatory, anti-angiogenesis, and anti-inflammatory effects and thus may be considered as an alternative treatment approach in the future [ ]. Similarly, epithelial cell-secreted exosomes are a promising alternative to stem cell therapy [ ].

6.3.

## Cellular specificity of exosomes in angiogenesis
Han et al. demonstrated that exosomes derived from human corneal fibroblasts can fuse with human corneal epithelial cells and vice versa [ , ]. Their study emphasized how exosomes involved in angiogenesis can fuse with their originating cell type as well as other cell types. Additionally, as epithelial cell-derived exosomes fused with fibroblasts, a noticeable increase in fibroblast proliferation resulted. Interestingly, exosomes from both corneal epithelial cells and fibroblasts were found to stimulate angiogenesis.
The same group provided additional evidence reinforcing these findings and demonstrated that exosomes play a crucial role in promoting corneal angiogenesis through intercellular signaling and communication with stromal cells [ ]. This study established that corneal fibroblasts can release exosomes containing proteins such as MMP14 and MMP2 to vascular endothelial cells. Delivery of these proteins to corneal endothelial cells is proposed to induce angiogenesis following corneal injury. Specifically, MMP14, known for its pro-angiogenic properties, and MMP2, a gelatinase involved in ECM remodeling, contribute to the intricate processes that drive the formation of new blood vessels in the cornea following injury. The cellular source of exosomes may furthermore define healing potential, as exemplified by exosomes derived from iPSCs, which exhibited superior efficacy compared to MSC-exosomes in the treatment of corneal epithelial defects both in vitro and in vivo [ ].
Studies in other tissues have shown that exosomes specifically deliver miRNAs, which then induce a pro-angiogenesis effect in heart regeneration studies. For example, Ibrahim et al. demonstrated a correlation between the delivery of miRNA-146a–enriched exosomes from cardiosphere-derived cells and myocyte regeneration as well as angiogenesis [ ]. In contrast, Li et al. reported that miR-939-5p–containing exosomes reduce angiogenesis by attenuating endothelial nitric oxide production in an ischemic myocardial model. The effect of exosome delivery on angiogenesis is, therefore, determined by the nature of the enclosed RNA molecules. In addition to nucleic acids, Ko et al. explored how VEGF delivered by cancer cell-derived exosomes stimulates angiogenesis [ ]. These studies underscore effects that additional research is needed to characterize the cargo carried in exosomes produced by ocular cells and how these molecules influence or restrict angiogenesis in the eye.

6.4.

## Role of exosomes in corneal lymphangiogenesis
Embryonic lymphangiogenesis, the growth of lymphatic vessels, is essential in development. However, during adulthood, it becomes a pathological process inducing lymphedema, inflammatory diseases, and tumor metastasis [ ]. Lymphangiogenesis is observed in many corneal pathologies, such as dry eye disease, cornea allograft rejection, ocular allergy, keratitis, and transient corneal edema [ ], and a possible mechanism of corneal lymphangiogenesis has been proposed. Lin et al. showed that a versatile ECM protein, TGF-β induced protein (TGFBIp), promotes lymphatic sprouting in corneal lymphangiogenesis. Subconjunctival injection of liposomal clodronate can significantly reduce macrophage infiltration and TGFBIp expression in the inflamed mouse cornea, thereby decreasing corneal lymphangiogenesis after corneal suture placement. Additionally, they observed that integrin α5β1 blockade significantly inhibited TGFBIp-induced lymphatic sprouting [ ].
To date, there has been limited research demonstrating exosomal promotion or regulation of lymphangiogenesis. Examples of exosome involvement in the regulation of lymphangiogenesis come from other research fields, such as cancer. Within the tumor tissue, several proteins have been identified as key to the delivery of exosomal contents to lymphatic endothelial cells (LECs) and are therefore crucial in the promotion of lymphangiogenesis. Examples include laminin 332 and interferon regulatory factor 2 (IRF-2). Laminin 332 knockdown inhibits exosome-mediated LEC migration and lymphangiogenesis, demonstrating that laminin 332 is critical for exosome uptake by LECs [ ]. IRF-2–positive exosomes were shown to be ingested by macrophages, resulting in the release of VEGFC, which plays a key role in lymphangiogenesis [ ].
Additionally, various intra-exosomal nucleic acids have been shown to promote lymphangiogenesis in cancer. These include miR-296, a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) termed lymph node metastasis-associated transcript 2 (LNMAT2), and miR-221-3p. A hepatocellular carcinoma-associated lncRNA (HANR) also has been reported to promote the secretion of miR-296–enriched exosomes. This release activates the EAG1/VEGFA signaling pathway, which regulates lymphangiogenesis [ ]. LNMAT2 recruits hnRNPA2B1 to the promoter region of the PROX1 gene, leading to increased gene expression and lymphangiogenesis in bladder cancer [ ]. In addition, miR-221-3p released from cervical squamous cell carcinoma-derived exosomes can target LECs and promote lymphangiogenesis by inhibiting vasohibin-1 (VASH1). By inhibiting VASH1’s negative regulation of VEGFC production, miR-221-3p promotes lymphangiogenesis [ ].
Advances during the past decade have dramatically increased the knowledge of the mechanisms of lymphangiogenesis, including the roles of transcription factors, lymphangiogenic growth factors and their receptors, and intercellular and intracellular signaling cascades. Strategies based on these mechanisms are being tested in the treatment of various human diseases such as cancer, lymphedema, and tissue allograft rejection. However, the exact involvement of exosomes in lymphangiogenesis remains unclear, and more studies are needed to develop innovative exosome-based drugs for lymphangiogenesis-related pathologies including those in ocular diseases.

6.5.

## Cellular specificity of exosomes in lymphangiogenesis
Most studies investigating the functions of exosomes in relation to lymphangiogenesis have used cancer cells due to the significance of lymphangiogenesis in cancer metastasis. A full outline of EVs and their respective functions in tumor-induced lymphangiogenesis is presented in . Several studies have highlighted specificity in the uptake of exosomes by LECs. For instance, Wang et al. demonstrated that exosomes released from LN1-1 cells (squamous cell carcinoma-derived) can induce lymphangiogenesis when taken up by LECs [ ].
 Garcia-Silva et al. explored how exosome uptake by LECs depends on the expression of proteins present on target cells [ ]. Exosomes were isolated from a metastatic melanoma cell line and injected intradermally into mouse ears. After 16 h, cells expressing lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor 1 were enriched in exosomes, and more specifically, 95 % of LECs expressing a combination of CD45−CD31+podoplanin+ contained exosomes. Overall, the specificity of exosome uptake by LECs is regulated by the membrane proteins present on both the exosomal and target cell surfaces.
A summary of receptor–ligand specificity of exosomes involved in angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and neuronal degeneration is presented in Additionally, exosome ligand content and the probable receptors that interact with them in endothelial (vascular and lymphatic) cells and nerves are presented in Most likely, the ligand–receptor interactions dictate downstream physiological or pathological phenotypes. In the cornea, all of these scenarios are possible given that blood and lymphatic vessels are present in the limbus area and nerves are widely distributed through the cornea. Depending on the type of injury, blood and lymphatic vessels may spread into the cornea tissue, and the cargo released by exosomes may provide harmful or beneficial effects. displays the putative receptors specific to vascular endothelial cells, LECs, and neurons and their potential ligand relationships determined utilizing the STRING database.
 
6.6.

## Exosomes in nerve repair and corneal nerve regeneration
Exosomes have been tested in therapeutic approaches for both central and peripheral nerve injury. Exosomes as a therapeutic vector can be derived from the patient’s own cells, which reduces the likelihood of an immune response. As such, a variety of cell types have been used to generate exosomes for nerve repair, including human neural stem cells (NSCs), rat NSCs, mouse NSCs, rat BMSCs, non-human animal MSCs, human embryonic stem cells, and mouse neural progenitor cells. Exosomes harvested from these cells have been tested in injury and disease models such as stroke, spinal cord injury, radiation-induced cognitive dysfunction, Alzheimer’s disease, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and Rett syndrome, demonstrating their potential in the treatment of neurological disorders [ - ]. Stem cell-derived EVs, like those harvested from mesenchymal stromal cells, serve inherent functions in immune modulation, neuroprotection, and inflammation, which highlights their potential in the treatment of optic neuropathy and neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases [ - ].
In the context of Alzheimer’s disease, Chen et al. [ ], proposed that MSC-exosomes could serve as a cell-free therapy for Alzheimer’s disease by transferring miRNAs to regulate key cellular and molecular mechanisms. Their study highlighted the potential of MSC-exosomes to reduce amyloid-β production and prevent the downregulation of genes involved in memory and neuroplasticity, such as BdnflV, GluR1, and Syp [ ]. Additionally, MSC-exosomes offer versatility by being derived from various cell types and can mitigate neuroinflammation [ ] by promoting a shift in microglia from the pro-inflammatory M1 phenotype to the anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype, which secretes cytokines like TNF-α, IL-10, and TGF-β [ ].
Physiologically, exosomes play an important role in modulating the immunological response and nerve growth following peripheral nerve injury. Inflammation can lead to nerve damage and impair corneal nerve function. It can also interfere with nerve regeneration and hinder the recovery process. By transferring anti-inflammatory cytokines to immune cells, exosomes can mitigate the effects of inflammation and promote healing [ ]. MSC-exosomes can transfer growth factors and cytokines known to stimulate nerve repair and regeneration, such as glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and nerve growth factor (NGF) [ ]. Exosomes can also contain miRNAs that promote processes necessary for nerve regeneration, including axonal growth, remyelination, and growth cone formation [ , ]. Specifically, within the study by Li et al., introduction of exosomes containing the miRNA miR-124-3p in mice exhibiting repeated traumatic brain injury resulted in improvements in modified neurological severity score (mNSS) by inhibiting pathways associated with neuronal autophagy [ ].
Exosomes can specifically target and modulate nerve repair through several possible contributing mechanisms, including the induction of a more conducive environment for repair via reductions in inflammation and fibrosis, delivery of growth factors and cytokines, and regulation of gene expression through mRNA and miRNA delivery. The anti-inflammatory properties of exosomes and their positive nerve regenerative outcomes are well documented and in part explained by their promotion of macrophage polarization to an anti-inflammatory M2 phenotype through regulation of the cytokine array produced. For instance, Ma et al. showed that human umbilical cord MSC-derived EVs increase sciatic nerve regeneration and growth following peripheral nerve injury via downregulation of inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-1β, with upregulation of anti-inflammatory IL-10, suggesting that the anti-inflammatory properties of exosomes contribute to peripheral nerve repair [ ]. Ni et al. demonstrated similar conversion to an anti-inflammatory polarity of both neuroglia and macrophages upon treatment with BMSC-exosomes following traumatic brain injury [ ]. Additionally, Schwann cell (SC)-derived exosomes promote anti-inflammatory properties after nerve injury via delivery of αB-crystallin and galectin-1 that act through independent pathways; αB-crystallin inhibits NF-κB activation leading to decreased expression of TNF-α and IL-1β, whereas galectin-1 acts on immune cells to promote the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-10 [ ]. Exosomes may modulate neural regeneration independently of effects on the neuron soma. Axonal regrowth is essential for peripheral nerve repair, as the dedifferentiation of SCs is dependent on surface interactions with axons. Without these surface interactions, peripheral nerve repair stalls [ ]. Exosomes from dedifferentiated SCs are internalized by axons and facilitate the growth and survival of dorsal root ganglion neurons. Lopez-Verrilli et al. demonstrated that SC-derived exosomes delivering miRNA-21 promote a pro-regenerative phenotype of the growth cone and inhibit GTPase RhoA, a pathway involved in growth cone breakdown and axonal retraction [ ]. This finding was further supported by the findings of Zhao et al., which showed significantly improved neurite growth and increased axonal length upon treatment with MSC-exosomes in vivo [ ].
Exosomes also play a key role in the activation of SCs post-injury, which is essential to peripheral nerve integrity and the maintenance of signal transmission velocity. Following peripheral nerve injury, SCs dissociate from the injured neuron and dedifferentiate into repair cells. These progenitor-like SCs assist macrophages in clearing Wallerian degeneration products and thereby allow for nerve regeneration [ ]. Additionally, SCs synthesize and secrete cytokines, growth factors, and ECM proteins that promote the survival and regrowth of neurons [ ]. Several studies have demonstrated the activation of SCs via MSC-exosomes. Chen et al. demonstrated that AT stem cell-derived exosomes significantly promote SC proliferation, migration, and myelination via gene upregulation of BDNF, ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), and NGF following injury in a rat sciatic nerve transection model [ ]. Liu et al. elucidated the mechanism by which AT MSC-exosomes promote SC proliferation and function. Specifically, MSC-exosomes reduce SC apoptosis via the upregulation of anti-apoptotic genes like Bcl-2 and downregulation of proapoptotic genes like Bax. These modulations promote the survival and proliferation of SCs, which improves peripheral nerve regeneration [ ]. Haertinger et al. investigated different mechanisms of AT-derived exosome uptake by SCs and determined that it occurs primarily via an endocytosis-mediated internalization pathway that then allows imported miRNAs to regulate gene expression [ ]. Overall, there is significant evidence for the potential of exosome-based interventions to improve SC activation and thus promote peripheral nerve repair.
The role of exosomes in ocular nerve repair has been attributed to relevant signaling pathways influenced by their bioactive cargo. For instance, in a study conducted by Yu et al., retinal damage was induced in animals using lasers after which MSC-exosomes were injected into the vitreous cavity [ ]. It was found that exosomes could mitigate the infiltration of immune cells, such as CD68-expressing cells, suppress apoptosis of retinal ganglion cells, and reduce retinal damage by downregulating the expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 [ , ].
Furthermore, exosomes derived from AT MSCs are enriched with bioactive molecules (miRNAs, enzymes, cytokines, chemokines, and immunoregulatory, trophic, and growth factors) that alleviate inflammation and promote the survival of injured cells in neural and retinal tissues [ ]. AT-MSC-exosomes easily bypass the blood–brain and blood–retinal barriers, delivering their cargo directly into target cells, unlike the barrier to infiltration encountered by immune cells. By supplying neurotrophins, AT-MSC-exosomes prevent apoptosis of injured neurons and retinal cells while also promoting neuritogenesis. AT-MSC-exosomes also alleviate inflammation in the injured brain, spinal cord, and retina by delivering immunoregulatory factors to immune cells, thereby suppressing their inflammatory properties. AT-MSC-exosomes may act as biological mediators by delivering pro-angiogenic miRNAs to endothelial cells, enabling the revascularization of ischemic neural and retinal tissues. In a rat model of optic nerve crush, MSC-exosomes containing neurotrophic factors, along with various proteins, mRNAs, and miRNAs, showed positive effects on neuroprotection and axonal outgrowth [ , ]. The miRNAs found in MSC-exosomes highlighted in the study by Mead et al., miR-146a and miR-17-92, are implicated in downregulation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mRNA and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) expression, which are involved in axonal growth and regeneration, respectively [ ].
Kwon et al. demonstrated the therapeutic potential of a hypoxia-preconditioned strain of placenta-derived MSCs in an in vitro model of hypoxia-damaged R28 cells and an in vivo rodent optic nerve compression model [ ]. In this model, VEGF acts as a mediator during recovery when secreted by human placenta-derived MSCs. Based on these results, the potential of advanced cell therapy using human placenta-derived MSCs to restore the optic nerve after injury is evident.
Increasing number of studies are addressing the roles of exosomes in the cornea [ , ]. The cornea is the most densely innervated tissue and its nerves play both sensory and trophic functions. Cornea innervation comes from the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve, which plays a critical role in maintaining corneal homeostasis and wound healing [ ]. Due to corneal avascularity and high nerve density, the direct effects of exosomes on corneal nerve regeneration can be assessed, thus rendering the cornea an excellent model in which to study the role of exosomes in nerve repair. Corneal nerve regeneration depends largely on interactions between the immune cells and sensory corneal nerves [ ]. Trigeminal nerve stereotactic electrolysis in mice has been shown to induce dry eye, increase inflammatory infiltrate, and cause stromal cell apoptosis [ ]. With further study, a better understanding of how exosomes regulate nerve regeneration may provide alternative therapies for patients with contraindications for steroid use.
Several studies have demonstrated improved corneal nerve regeneration following exosome exposure [ , , ]. For instance, Jalilian et al. examined the regenerative potential of human BMSC-derived exosomes on corneal nerves in vitro [ ]. Mouse trigeminal ganglia neurons were isolated and cultured with exosomes purified from 2D monolayer cultures of BMSCs and 3D bioreactor-based cultures. Axonal growth and morphology were tracked using β3 tubulin staining and Sholl analysis. The study concluded that BMSC-exosome exposure significantly induced neurite growth and complexity compared with the control group. Furthermore, it was also found that nerves exposed to exosomes derived from the 3D culture produced a significantly higher complexity and elongation compared to control and 2D cultures. Overall, this study provides a comparative analysis of the effects of exosomes derived using different culture techniques and integral data linking the regenerative potential of MSC-exosomes to potential applications in corneal nerve tissue repair [ ].
Although the contents of most exosomes have not been fully identified, some exosomes have been shown to carry factors such as VEGF, with the potential to promote angiogenesis as well as neurite growth [ ]. Guaiquil et al. demonstrated that VEGFB induces neurite growth in trigeminal ganglia neurons of VEGFB knockout mice [ ], and both the PI3K and Notch pathways were implicated in the promoting cell growth, survival, differentiation, and development. No significant effect was observed in uninjured neurons, indicating the therapeutic potential of VEGFB with limited adverse effects. Indeed, VEGFB selectively regenerates injured peripheral neurons and restores sensory as well as trophic functions. These findings suggest a potential underlying mechanism by which exosome delivery can promote peripheral nerve growth following injury. Ongoing clinical trials are aimed at determining the therapeutic effects of exosomes on nerve injury. summarizes recent and ongoing clinical trials of exosome-based treatments for nerve-related disorders.
 
6.7.

## Exosome specificity in nerve repair
In a study by Lopez-Verrilli et al., menstrual MSCs (MenSCs) and cortical neurons were found to hinder neurite outgrowth, while the overall secretome of MenMSCs enhanced neurite outgrowth [ ]. Specifically, the fraction enriched with exosomes promoted neurite outgrowth, while the fraction enriched with microvesicles exerted an inhibitory effect. Comparison of exosomal fractions derived from different sources of human MSCs showed that MenSC-derived exosomes exhibit superior effects on neurite growth in cortical neurons relative to BMSC-exosomes in dorsal root ganglion neurons. These findings highlight the growth-stimulating potential of exosomes derived from MenSCs and the contrasting effects of different EV fractions. Furthermore, these findings hold significance for the potential use of MenSCs as therapeutic carriers in neurodegenerative diseases.
Additionally, Bucan et al. explored the repair mechanism of dorsal root ganglion neurons. Specifically, delivery of AT-MSC-exosomes increased neurite growth and nerve repair following a crush injury of the sciatic nerve in vivo [ ]. Furthermore, Rao et al. observed increased sciatic nerve regeneration in rats following the delivery of gingival MSC-exosomes in biodegradable chitin conduit scaffolding, commonly used in nerve repair, compared to chitin scaffolding alone [ ]. Fibroblast-derived exosomes showed similar effects on neurite growth and central nervous system regeneration, through activation of the Wnt10b-mTOR pathway [ ]. This evidence supports the capacity of exosomes from multiple cell types to modulate axonal growth.
However, there is a significant gap in the current understanding of the potential for exosome-based therapies for specific exosome-mediated corneal nerve repair. Further research in this area will provide novel insights into the regenerative capabilities of exosomes and their therapeutic potential for corneal nerve injuries, addressing a crucial aspect of ocular health.

7.

## Genetically engineered exosome-based therapies
Numerous exosome-based drug delivery systems have been explored and are being further developed due to their advantages of low toxicity, low immunogenicity, and high engineering ability [ ]. Despite extensive literature exploring exosome-based therapies, the lack of standardization and the absence of a thorough understanding of the underlying mechanisms have limited the clinical application and approval of exosome-based therapies. Previous reviews, such as that by Mehryab et al. [ ], have expounded on this point thoroughly and provided future directions for more rational research strategies in this area [ ].
Exosomes naturally carry heterogeneous cargo, but implementation of various engineering approaches may yield optimized delivery of specific cargo to cells of interest. Potential advancements for the field include mechanisms to gain control of cargo release only upon encountering target cells, improvement of exosome specificity determined by the cargo composition, and the development of more precise techniques for loading desired cargo into exosomes, such as sonication, electroporation, transfection, incubation, extrusion, saponin-assisted loading, transgenesis, freeze-thaw cycles, thermal shock, pH gradient method, and hypotonic dialysis [ ]. and summarize genetically engineered and chemically modified exosomes that have been developed for drug delivery. Integrins on the exosome membrane surface have been shown to play a key role in intercellular communication and in docking of exosomes for cellular uptake. The roles of integrins and cargo composition in exosome specificity must be further explored to better understand the potential side effects and mechanisms of exosome-based therapies.
 Advancements in exosome engineering hold promise for enhancing specificity in therapeutic applications. Recent studies have focused on refining exosome surface modifications to precisely target specific cell types [ , ]. By leveraging advanced molecular engineering techniques, researchers can manipulate exosomal surface proteins, such as integrins, to enhance their affinity for particular cells or tissues. This molecular customization allows for the creation of exosomes with heightened specificity for their interactions. Additionally, innovative strategies are being explored to engineer exosomes with tailored cargo, optimizing their therapeutic potential. By further elucidating the intricate interplay between cargo composition, surface proteins, and exosome specificity, researchers aim to develop next-generation exosomes with enhanced targeting precision and reduced off-target effects. This ongoing exploration of exosome customization strategies is pivotal for overcoming current challenges and unlocking the full therapeutic potential of exosome-based treatments.
In a recent study aimed at enhancing the specificity of cell targeting for genome editing components in human T cell engineering, researchers developed EVs with enhanced specificity by utilizing modified virus proteins and antibody fragments [ ]. The approach involved surface display of antibody fragments alongside a mutant form of the vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSVGmut), which maintained endosomal fusion activity while lacking native low-density lipoprotein receptor binding affinity. This innovative combination demonstrated selectivity in cell transduction, effectively avoiding non-target cells and hepatocytes, addressing a common challenge in in vivo delivery. The use of VSVGmut, coupled with cell-specific targeting molecules, showcases the potential for precise genome editing delivery and highlights advancements in redirecting viral vectors for improved therapeutic applications.
One of the major challenges in applying clinical gene therapy is the development of vehicles for diffuse delivery to the brain. The specificity imparted by targeted exosomes, the capacity to load exogenous genetic cargo, the ability to systemically administer the gene therapy, and the potential for immune evasion represent valuable properties of exosomes for future development of oligonucleotide therapy applications [ ].

8.

## Future directions and challenges
Exosomes have great potential for use in therapeutic interventions for a variety of diseases and conditions. However, many improvements are still needed in areas such as cargo loading methods, targeting strategies, and large-scale production.
MSCs and MSC-exosomes have anti-inflammatory, tissue repair, and immune regulatory effects and thus have become promising tools for treating dry eye disease [ ]. Topical administration of MSCs or conditioned MSC media to a murine corneal epithelial wounding model attenuated corneal inflammation, reduced neovascularization, and promoted wound healing. With the retention of most MSCs in the corneal stroma rather than epithelium, these findings indicate that MSCs act through a paracrine mechanism mediated through exosomes rather than direct cell replacement [ , , ]. At present, there is no effective treatment for the irreversible loss of vision caused by optic neuropathy, glaucoma, and other conditions, and exosome-based therapy has the potential to offer new solutions [ ].
While some exosome-based therapies have already been used in clinical applications and some have been shown to enhance anti-tumor immune responses, significant challenges remain regarding the use of exosomes as therapeutic agents for corneal injury [ ].
One significant challenge facing the clinical application of exosome-based therapies is standardization of exosome isolation and characterization procedures. As previously discussed, no currently recommended standardized process for isolating exosomes exists. Without standardized procedures, comparisons between studies and determination of the exact molecular contents of exosomes are difficult. Before such therapies can be moved into clinical care, standardized procedures are needed to ensure consistent outcomes and minimize risks.
Exosomes are heterogenous, which limits their specificity [ ]. This partially explains the poor characterization of exosomal contents. However, to be used most effectively in a clinical setting and to limit safety concerns and adverse outcomes, exosomal heterogeneity, therapeutic efficacy, and possible side effects need to be thoroughly examined.
Exosome half-life varies depending on many factors, such as the type of cells from which the exosomes originated, their cargo composition, and their environment. Exosomes can have a half-life ranging from a few minutes to several hours. For example, exogenous exosomes administered intravenously have a circulating half-life of 2–30 min [ ]. Camouflage strategies and other modifications of therapeutic exosomes have been shown to increase their half-life by facilitating evasion of phagocytosis by circulating monocytes and thus allow for more efficient targeting of cancer cells [ ].
Several studies have aimed to improve the yield and scalability of therapeutic exosomes, but improvements are needed to optimize the cost-effectiveness of large-scale production and clinical treatment. Two main methods for large-scale production include natural and induced production. Both methods hold distinct advantages as exosomes obtained using natural production are more likely to retain therapeutic potential, while induced production methods (i.e., bioreactor systems) can produce larger quantities of exosomes [ ]. Additionally, biomimetic vesicles may provide a unique solution to the difficulty of mass production. Ultrasound techniques, nitrogen cavitation, cell extrusion, and microchannel cutting can be used to disrupt the cell membrane, leading to the self-assembly of biomimetic membrane vesicles [ , - ]. However, alteration of the cell membrane is common in these techniques, which leads to variability in exosomal contents and, thus, the biological activity of biomimetic vesicles. Therefore, biomimetic vesicles require strict quality control monitoring. Optimization of existing methods for production and purification, as well as the development of novel biomimetic production methods, should help increase the cost-effectiveness of exosome-based therapies.
Tear exosomes hold significant potential as noninvasive diagnostic tools for various diseases, including diabetes and dry eye conditions. However, traditional isolation methods like ultracentrifugation and size exclusion chromatography have practical limitations that hinder their widespread clinical use. Recently, the development of the iTEARS platform has revolutionized tear exosome isolation by utilizing a dual nanoporous membrane and negative-pressure-oscillation strategy, enabling the efficient capture of exosomes [ ]. The study of EVs in tear fluid, particularly their RNA content, offers significant potential for uncovering valuable insights into cellular health and disease states [ ]. Currently, exosomes are used for angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in diseases such as cancer. Building on this foundational understanding, similar principles could be applied to the study of exosomes in tear fluid, potentially positioning them as treatment, diagnostic, and prognostic tools for corneal diseases.

9.

## Conclusion
This comprehensive review examines the potential of exosome-derived therapies for regulating corneal angiogenesis, lymphangiogenesis, and nerve repair. There is vast potential for the clinical use of exosomes due to their numerous physiological and pathological roles, including immune and ocular system modulation. The variations in isolation and purification methods discussed here demonstrate the need for workflow optimization and standardization to expedite future clinical applications. Exosomes display several mechanisms of specificity with regard to cell type and response, and genetically engineered exosomes are currently being utilized as drug delivery systems. The underlying mechanisms of exosome target specificity are not fully characterized, which limits their clinical application and inspires further research to elucidate their specificity and ensure the safe application of exosome-derived therapies. Additionally, scalability solutions should be explored to make mass-produced exosomes more cost-effective and large-scale distribution of therapies possible. Once these issues are resolved, the vast potential of exosomes can be unlocked, and the numerous applications of exosomes can be further explored.

## Acknowledgements
Publication of this article was supported in part by National Institutes of Health grants EY10101 (D.T.A), EY01792, and EY027912 (M. I.R), merit review awards I01 BX002386,and I01 BX004234 from the United States (U.S.) Department of Veteran affairs, and the Eversight, Midwest Eye Bank Award (J.H.C), as well as an unrestricted grant from Research to Prevent Blindness, New York, NY.

## Abbreviations
ABLabelson murine leukemia
ADAM12a disintegrin and metalloproteinase-12
AMDage-related macular degeneration
Angangiotensin-1
ApoA-1apolipoprotein A-1
ARID2AT-rich interactive domain 2
ARPE-19arising retinal pigment epithelia 19
AS1411anti-nucleolin aptamer 1411
ASIRPαanti-signal regulatory protein alpha
AT-MSC-Exoadipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cell exosome
ATMataxia telangiectasia mutated kinase
BACE1beta secretase 1
BAMBIBMP and activin membrane bound inhibitor
BCL-2B-cell lymphoma 2
BCRB-cell receptor
BCYRN1brain cytoplasmic RNA 1
BDNFbrain-derived neurotrophic factor
BFGFbasic fibroblast growth factor
BMSC-Exobone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell exosome
BMP-7bone morphogenetic protein 7
BMSC-EVbone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived extracellular vesicle
CA9carbonic anhydrase 9
CAPcatabolite activator protein
CCAT2colon cancer-associated transcript 2
CCL21chemokine ligand 21
CDcluster of differentiation
Chol-PEG2000cholesteryl-polyethylene glycol-peptide 2000
CircHIPK3circular homeodomain-interacting protein kinase 3
CLEC-2c-type lectin-like receptor 2
c-Metcellular-mesenchymal-epithelial transition factor
CPCcancer propagating cell
CTGFconnective tissue growth factor
CuAACcopper-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition
CXCL5CXC motif chemokine ligand 5
CXCR4CXC motif chemokine receptor 4
DARPindesigned ankyrin repeat protein
DLL4delta-like ligand 4
DMBT1deleted in malignant brain tumors-1
DNMT1DNA methyltransferase 1
DOXdopa oxidase
DRGdorsal root ganglion
DUSP2dual specificity phosphatase 2
E2F2E2 transcription factor 2
EAG1ether-à-go-go 1
ECendothelial cell
ECMextracellular matrix
EMMPRINextracellular matrix metalloproteinase inducer
EPHA2EPH receptor type 2
ERKextracellular regulated tyrosine kinase
FAKfocal adhesion kinase
FGFfibroblast growth factor
Flk-1fetal liver kinase
Fltfms-related tyrosine kinase
GFPgreen fluorescent protein
GTPase RhoAguanosine triphosphatase ras homolog A
HANRhepatocellular carcinoma-associated lncRNA
HCC70hepatocellular carcinoma 70
hCEChuman corneal epithelial cell
HCT-116human colon cancer cell line
HDLEChuman dermal lymphatic endothelial cell
HepG2hepatoblastoma cell line
HER2human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
HGFhepatocyte growth factor
HIF-1αhypoxia-inducible factor 1α
HLEChuman lymphatic endothelial cell
HMGB1high mobility group box 1
hnRNPA2B1heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein A2B1
HPSChuman pluripotent stem cell
HSPheat shock protein
HSPGheparan sulfate proteoglycan
hucMSChuman umbilical cord-derived MSC
HUVEChuman umbilical vein endothelial cell
ICAM-1intercellular adhesion molecule 1
IDOindoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
IFN-γinterferon gamma
IGF-1insulin-like growth factor 1
IGFBP-3insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 3
IL-1βinterleukin 1β
iPSCinduced pluripotent stem cell
IRF-interferon regulatory factor 2
iVPCinduced vascular progenitor cell
KGNkartogenin
KLAlysine lactylation
KRASKirsten rat sarcoma
LAMA84human chronic myeloid leukemia cell line
LAMC2laminin γ2
LAMP2lysosomal associated membrane protein-2
LEClymphatic endothelial cell
lincRNAlong intergenic non-coding RNA
LN1-1lymph node metastatic cell line
LNMAT2lymph node metastasis-associated transcript 2
LPAlysophosphatidic acid
LTBP-1latent transforming growth factor beta binding protein 1
LYVE-1lymphatic vessel endothelial hyaluronan receptor 1
MADECmagnetic resonance angiography dynamic enhanced contrast
MCP-2monocyte chemoattractant protein 2
MDA-MB-231metastatic breast cancer cell line
MenSCmenstrual mesenchymal stem cell
MGlumetabotropic glutamate receptor 2
MHCmajor histocompatibility complex
miRmicroRNA gene
miRNAmicroRNA
MMPmatrix metalloproteinase
mRNAmessenger RNA
MSC-exosomemesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes
MSCmesenchymal stem cell
mTORmechanistic target of rapamycin kinase
MVBmultivesicular body
NF-κBnuclear factor kappa B
NGFnerve growth facto
NgRnogo/nogo receptor
NLSnuclear localization signal
NMDARN-methyl-D-aspartate receptor
Nrpneuropilin
NSCneural stem cell
P38MAPKp38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
PAL-Epathologische anatomie Leiden-endothelium
PD-L1programmed cell death ligand 1
PDGFplatelet-derived growth factor
PEDFpigment epithelium-derived factor
PEGpolyethylene glycol
PEG-HGNglycolyated hollow gold nanoparticle
Pet-1polyethylene terephthalate 1
PlGFplacental growth factor
VEGF-Avascular endothelial growth factor A
PROX1prospero homebox 1
PrPCcellular prion protein
PSMAprostate-specific membrane antigen
PTENphosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome ten
PTXpentraxin
PV-1/PLVAPplasmalemma vesicle-associated protein
RCCrenal cell carcinoma
RGDarginylglycylaspartic acid
ROSreactive oxygen species
RPEretinal pigmented epithelium
RVGrabies virus glycoprotein
SCSchwann cell
SDF-1αstromal cell-derived factor 1α
TrKAtyrosine kinase receptor 1
VEGFR3vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3
SEMAsemaphorin
SERTserotonin transporter
SF-MSCsynovial fluid mesenchymal stem cell
sFLT-1soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1
siRNAsmall interfering ribonucleic acid
SIRPαsignal regulatory protein alpha
SMADsuppressor of mothers against decapentaplegic
SOX2sex determining region Y-box 2
SPIONsuperparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle
TEMtransmission electron microscopy
TGF-βtransforming growth factor beta
TGFBIptransforming growth factor-β induced protein
THBS2thrombospondin-2
Tie2/Tektyrosine kinase
TNF-αtumor necrosis factor-alpha
TRPM7transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 7
TSP-1thrombospondin-1
USCurine-derived stem cell
VASH1vasohibin-1
VEGFvascular endothelial growth factor
VSGmutmutant vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein
FGFfibroblast growth factor
VGLUT1vesicular glutamate transporter 1
Wnt10bwingless 10b
α-SMAalpha-smooth muscle actin

## Footnotes
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Cameron Pedersen: Writing – original draft. Victoria T. Chen: Writing – original draft. Paula Herbst: Writing – original draft. Runze Zhang: Writing – original draft. Amr Elfert: Writing – original draft. Abhi Krishan: Writing – original draft. Dimitri T. Azar: Writing – original draft. Jin-Hong Chang: Writing – original draft, Conceptualization. Wen-Yang Hu: Writing – original draft. Tobias P. Kremsmayer: Writing – original draft. Elmira Jalilian: Writing – original draft. Ali R. Djalilian: Writing – original draft. Victor H. Guaiquil: Writing – original draft. Mark I. Rosenblatt: Writing – original draft.
Disclaimer
“The contents do not represent the views of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States Government.”

## References