822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1187001611870016118700163981874310.1021/acs.chemrev.4c00595Protein-Based Degraders: From Chemical Biology Tools
to Neo-Therapeutics
OuLisha SetegneMekedlawit T ElliotJeandele ShenFangfang DassamaLaura M K †Department
of Chemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States‡Sarafan
ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States§Department
of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, United States∥Department
of Microbiology & Immunology, Stanford
School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, United States*Email: dassama@stanford.edu.
1712025125421202120–21831712026© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The nascent field
of targeted protein degradation (TPD) could revolutionize
biomedicine due to the ability of degrader molecules to selectively
modulate disease-relevant proteins. A key limitation to the broad
application of TPD is its dependence on small-molecule ligands to
target proteins of interest. This leaves unstructured proteins or
those lacking defined cavities for small-molecule binding out of the
scope of many TPD technologies. The use of proteins, peptides, and
nucleic acids (otherwise known as “biologics”) as the
protein-targeting moieties in degraders addresses this limitation.
In the following sections, we provide a comprehensive and critical
review of studies that have used proteins and peptides to mediate
the degradation and hence the functional control of otherwise challenging
disease-relevant protein targets. We describe existing platforms for
protein/peptide-based ligand identification and the drug delivery
systems that might be exploited for the delivery of biologic-based
degraders. Throughout the Review, we underscore the successes, challenges,
and opportunities of using protein-based degraders as chemical biology
tools to spur discoveries, elucidate mechanisms, and act as a new
therapeutic modality.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Aug 8; Accepted 2024 Dec 30; Revised 2024 Dec 26; Collection date 2025 Feb 26.

1.

## Introduction
Proteins are a major class
of biomolecules central to the biological
processes of all organisms. The precise control of proteins has long
been a goal for both fundamental biomedical research and the development
of therapeutics. Targeted protein degradation (TPD) technologies,
which recruit proteins of interest (POIs) to the cellular digestion
machinery for elimination, have opened exciting avenues for the precise
control of proteins. − There are two major classes of small molecules developed to modulate
proteins through TPD: the proteolysis-targeting chimeras (PROTACs)
and molecular glues. PROTACs are hetero-bispecific small molecules
joined by a linker, where one warhead binds to the POI and the other
warhead binds to a ubiquitin E3 ligase. , The second
class is termed molecular glues and is defined as a single molecule
that enhances the interaction between the E3 ligase and a POI. , Simultaneous binding of the POI and E3 ligase by PROTACs or molecular
glues leads to polyubiquitylation and subsequent degradation of the
POI by the ubiquitin–proteasome system (UPS). Compared to classic small-molecule inhibitors, PROTACs
and molecular glues have significant advantages: (1) PROTACs and molecular
glues can target nonenzymatic proteins, as opposed to inhibitors that need to occupy the active enzymatic
pocket or an allosteric site; (2) degraders have a catalytic effect
and have shown high potency, thereby allowing the use of lower doses
compared to traditional inhibitors and lowering the risk of side effects
and drug resistance; , (3) degradation of a POI removes
the entire protein and provides a more sustained response of downstream
signaling; and (4) the warheads of PROTACs do not require high-affinity
binding to recruit the POI and the E3 ligase. 
In the past two decades, TPD molecules have demonstrated broad
therapeutic potential in cell studies and animal models. , The clinical development of several PROTACs and molecular glues
whose designs are based on immunomodulatory drugs (IMiDs) has further highlighted the exciting opportunities
that TPD technology offers for drug development. However, the dependency
on small-molecule handles and the UPS system limits the application
of PROTACs and molecular glues to cytosolic proteins with available
“ligandable” pockets. Many therapeutically relevant
POIs are inaccessible to small-molecule-based degraders. , To tackle challenging proteins that do not have small-molecule ligands
available, alternative TPD approaches that use peptides, proteins,
and nucleic acids as POI warheads have been developed. − In fact, one of the pioneering TPD examples was a peptide-based
PROTAC composed of a small-molecule warhead that recognizes the peptidase
METAP2 linked to a phosphopeptide that binds to the E3 ligase β-TRCP. Later, a peptide from hypoxia-inducible factor
1 subunit-α (HIF1α) was used to recruit the E3 ligase
VHL. In recent years, more biologics-based
PROTACs that employ proteins, peptides, and nucleic acids as POI warheads
have been developed to mediate the degradation of challenging POIs
by the UPS system. − , Moreover, a potent
peptide macrocycle that binds directly to the 26S proteasome subunit
PSMD2 has been identified to induce protein degradation without E3
ligase recruitment. Nucleic acids have
also been used to develop degraders that target transcription factors,
RNA binding proteins, G4 binding proteins, and aptamer binding proteins. − Recently, biologics-based PROTACs such as LYTACs, , AbTACs, , PROTABs and
KineTACs, which all harness the lysosomal
digestion machinery, have been developed to degrade transmembrane
proteins and extracellular proteins. Biologics-based degraders certainly
allow for broader access to previously challenging targets (highly
disordered proteins, transmembrane proteins, secreted proteins, etc.)
and widen the array of E3-ligase choices beyond what has been explored
for PROTACs and molecular glues. Although biologics-based TPD approaches
have the potential to become therapeutic agents, their delivery, pharmacokinetics,
and immunogenicity remain key hurdles to overcome.
In this Review,
we broadly assign biologics-based TPD approaches
into two categories: bioPROTACs and nucleic acid PROTACs. BioPROTACs
are degraders that employ amino acid-based chimeras, including peptide–peptide
chimeras, peptide–small molecule hybrids, fusion proteins,
and bifunctional antibody/antibody fragment derivatives; nucleic acid
PROTACs are degraders use nucleic acid–based chimeras, including
RNA, RNA–small molecule hybrids, double-stranded DNA (dsDNA),
dsDNA–small molecule hybrids, or aptamer–small molecule
hybrids. In , we introduce the display methods and computational or artificial
intelligence-facilitated strategies for identifying proteins or peptides
as POI binders and discuss approaches to enhance their binding affinities
and specificities. We then review the development of bioPROTACs that
target the UPS system by interacting with various E3 ligases or the
26S proteosome, those that target the lysosomal degradation pathway
via interactions with lysosome targeting receptors or lysosome sorting
signals, and those that function through autophagy ( ). We do not extensively review
nucleic acid PROTACs because they are covered in other reviews. , , , In , we
highlight the existing strategies to address the delivery, pharmacokinetics,
and immunogenicity of drugs and explore how they might be applicable
to bioPROTAC therapeutics. In , we discuss the opportunities and challenges of bioPROTACs
as neo-therapeutics. Together, these topics provide an overview of
the past, present, and future of bioPROTACs.

2.

## Characteristics
of Biologics
The major hurdle of small-molecule-based TPD
platforms is their
limited application to challenging proteins, which we define as a
group inclusive of transmembrane, extracellular, and highly disordered
cytosolic proteins, along with proteins lacking available binding
pockets. To overcome this limitation, bioPROTACs, which leverage peptides
and antibodies (or fragments thereof) as warheads that bind to challenging
proteins, have been developed. Some of the most commonly used peptides
and protein binders are summarized in . Compared with small molecules, bioPROTACs
offer several advantages: (1) peptides and antibodies can bind to
surfaces of challenging proteins without relying on buried binding
pockets; (2) high-throughput screening and directed evolution systems
simplify the identification of peptides and proteins as binders, thereby
reducing the demands of binder design and synthesis; (3) biologics
typically exhibit higher specificity and affinity to target proteins
than small molecules and can differentiate between protein isoforms
and variants to reduce off-target effects and enhance specificity
and safety; (4) by recruiting components of the lysosomal pathway,
bioPROTACs are capable of degrading membrane proteins and extracellular
proteins; and (5) the “hook effect”, which describes
a phenomenon where higher concentrations of a heterobifunctional degrader
results in decreased degradation efficiency, appears to occur less
often with bioPROTACs. In this section, we will discuss the characteristics,
advantages, and limitations of peptides, antibodies, and nucleic acids
as binders for POIs.
 2.1.

## Peptide as Binders
Peptides binders
are short chains of amino acids (AAs) containing 2–50 residues.
Like antibodies, peptides can bind to protein surfaces with high affinity
and specificity. Because of their relatively small size, some peptides − can cross the plasma membrane to engage with intracellular targets.
Thus, they offer a unique means to target difficult proteins that
are currently not accessed by small molecules or antibodies.
Therapeutic peptides encompass linear peptides of different lengths,
cyclic peptides, peptide-conjugated constructs, and peptidomimetics. They can interact with proteins in various conformations,
including the extended chain conformation, the β-turn conformation,
and the α-helical conformation. The extended chain conformation is a frequently observed protein
recognition motif in which intermolecular hydrogen bonds forms between
C=O and N–H groups of the peptide backbone and the protein
receptor at the interface of the peptide–protein complex; the secondary structure of bound peptide becomes
disrupted and forms an extended chain. This conformation is observed
in complexes with proteases such as the HIV-1 protease, , major histocompatibility complex class I and class II molecules, − and chaperones. In complexes between
peptides and antipeptide antibodies, a β-turn is the predominant
structural feature. A β-turn is defined by four consecutive
amino acids that form a hairpin structure in the polypeptide chain;
it is characterized by a distance of less than 7.0 Å between
two α-carbons of residues i and i + 3. β-Turns change the direction of the peptide backbone
by nearly 180°, allowing the peptide chain to fold back onto
itself. The α-helix conformation
has been found in peptides bound to Ca2+-dependent calmodulin, , the primary receptor for Ca2+ in eukaryotic cells. The
α-helix conformation depends on the super secondary structure,
where the side chains of peptide residues intercalate into “holes”
on the protein surface. 
Due to
the different binding conformations, the bound peptides
usually show strong affinities for POIs and can engage with a variety
of protein targets through buried pockets or interactions at the protein
surface. , Compared with other biologics, peptides
have a longer shelf life and good stability at room temperature; they
also lack higher-order structures, making them resistant to denaturation
via unfolding. In addition, peptides
can be obtained by chemical or enzymatic synthesis (solid-phase peptide
synthesis, convergent synthesis, and chemical ligation ) or the use of expression systems (cell-free or recombinant systems,
transgenic animals, and plants). Chemical
synthesis provides quick and reliable access to nearly all peptides.
General medicinal chemistry strategies can be systematically applied
to peptides; these include the identification of a minimally active
sequence from truncated analogs, cyclization, and the use of unnatural amino acids. Many systematic approaches are also available
for peptide affinity maturation and optimization of their pharmacodynamic
characteristics. , 

2.2.

## Proteins
as Binders
Antibodies (Abs)
represent the most successfully used proteins for antigen recognition
and are widely used as biological therapies and diagnostic reagents. , The major characteristics of Abs are their high specificity and
affinity for the protein targets. Compared to conventional small-molecule
therapeutics, Abs are reported to show less toxicity to patients. The hybridoma and
antibody humanization , techniques have promoted the
development of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). To date,
more than 100 mAbs have been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) for the treatment of human diseases that include cancer, autoimmune,
and chronic inflammatory diseases. , , 
Immunoglobin G (IgG) is predominant in current
antibody drugs. It has a molecular weight
(MW) of ∼150 kDa and is composed of two identical heavy chains
and two identical light chains connected by disulfide bonds. Both
heavy and light chains have two regions: the constant region and the
variable region. Despite the successful use of antibodies as research
tools and therapeutics, the large size and complexity of antibodies
results in multiple limitations. These include restricted tissue penetration,
the relatively high cost associated with production in mammalian cells,
and Fc domain-mediated immunogenicity. Given these limitations, various antibody fragments and non-IgG
scaffold proteins have been developed. These smaller protein binders usually retain the antigen specificity
of the full-length antibody and show advantages compared to IgG in
terms of size (they are smaller), high thermal stability, high solubility,
low production costs, and low Fc-related toxicity. − Here, we briefly
introduce different types of antibody fragments, including fragment
antigen-binding domain (Fab), single-chain variable fragments (scFvs),
antigen-binding fragment of heavy-chain-only antibodies (VHH), and
non-IgG scaffold synthetic proteins.
2.2.1.

## IgG
Fragments
A Fab is a monovalent
fragment that consists of one constant and one variable domain from
each of the heavy and light chains, which binds to antigens but contains
no Fc region and has a smaller MW (∼55 kDa). Fabs can be generated through use of the enzyme papain
to cleave an IgG into two Fab fragments and an Fc fragment. The enzyme pepsin cleaves below the hinge region
so that a F(ab′)2 fragment and a pFc′ fragment are formed. , The F(ab′)2 fragment has a MW of 110 kDa; it can be split
into two Fab fragments after mild reduction of the hinge region. A
Fab has a shorter half-life (12–20 h) due to the lack of Fc-mediated
recycling. Fab was considered the first
therapeutic fragment antibody format. To date, four Fabs have been
approved by the FDA: abciximab (Reopro), targeting the glycoprotein
IIb/IIIa receptor on the platelet membrane; idarucizumab (Praxbind),
targeting dabigatran that is free or bound to thrombin; ranibizumab
(Lucentis), targeting vascular endothelial growth factor in the eyes;
and certolizumab (Cimzia), targeting tumor necrosis factor-α.
Both Fab and F(ab′)2 show better penetration than mAbs due
to their smaller size.
The scFv was first described by Bird
et al. in 1988 and consists of variable
regions of heavy and light chains connected by a flexible peptide
linker. The molecular weight of an scFv is ∼25 kDa and it can
be easily expressed in Escherichia coli, which reduces
the production costs. The small size
of scFv increases its tissue penetrance but also causes faster renal
clearance (half-life of ∼5 h). It has been reported that scFv tends to aggregate due to poor stability
and shows high immunogenicity. , , To improve the pharmacokinetic properties and affinity of scFv,
multimerization of scFvs has been employed. This includes diabodies
(bivalent dimers, 55 kDa), triabodies
(trivalent dimers, 80 kDa), tetrabodies
(tetravalent dimers, 110 kDa), and minibodies
(80 kDa). In 1993, Hamers-Casterman discovered
a special antibody in camelids that comprise a single variable domain
on a heavy chain antibody (VHH antibodies, also referred to as nanobodies). Interestingly, despite having a molecular weight
of ∼15 kDa, the VHH antibody retains high binding affinity
and specificity to antigens. Compared to conventional IgG, The VHH
has multiple advantages: (1) VHHs are highly soluble and stable; they can survive harsh conditions such as pH
stress (from 3.0 to 9.0), chemical stress (e.g., 6–8 M urea
treatment), and thermal conditions. (2) The complementarity determining
region (CDR) 3 loop in camelid VHH domains is usually longer (3–28
amino acids) than that in human IgG (8–15 amino acids); CDR3 defines the specificity for target antigen
in the absence of a VL domain. Interestingly, the longer CDR3 in VHH
domains can form a finger-like appendage that fits into a protein
cleft, enabling the recognition of epitopes that are not accessible
to the larger mAbs. , (3) The VHH antibody shares greater
than 80% homology with VH domains in the VH III human Ig family, thereby
inducing relatively low immunogenicity when applied to humans. , However, the small size of the VHH domain results in fast renal
clearance (half-life ∼2 h); conjugating
VHH domains to Fc domains and E3 ligases or creating bispecific VHH
binders to increase their size could help to overcome this disadvantage.

2.2.2.

## Non-IgG Scaffold Proteins
Non-IgG
scaffolds are another group of small proteins that can be engineered
to have affinity and specificity similar to monoclonal antibodies. , These proteins are characterized by a single polypeptide chain folded
into a structured core. They are usually generated via directed evolution
from large combinatorial libraries in which the amino acid sequence
of a binding surface on the scaffold is extensively diversified while
maintaining the overall domain structure. Combining molecular display technologies such as phage display,
yeast display, ribosome display, and mRNA display (vide infra) with
tailored oligonucleotide synthesis methods such as trimer nucleotides
and massively parallel synthesis, large combinatorial libraries (1010–1013 unique sequences) of synthetic binding
proteins have been developed. The effective
library size can be readily expanded by the incorporation of genetic
recombination and random mutagenesis steps. Upon proper experimental
design, potent and exquisitely selective binding synthetic proteins
can be rapidly developed by subjecting a library to selection and
screening. The introduction of these synthetic binder libraries and
identification strategies is presented in of this Review. In this section, we focus
on the characteristics of established synthetic proteins that include
anticalins, affibodies, designed ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPins),
and monobodies.
Anticalins are a class of engineered proteins
whose design is inspired by the natural protein lipocalin; , lipocalin is abundant in human plasma. Lipocalin is composed of
a rigid β-barrel with four structurally variable loops that
form a binding site. Anticalin proteins
are generated by diversifying the residues in loops, which results
in binding to a range of targets such as small molecules, peptides,
and proteins. , One of the advantages of anticalins
over antibodies or other binding scaffolds is its competitive binding
affinity, especially for low molecular weight ligands. Typically, anticalins that bind ligands with
low nanomolar equilibrium dissociation constants (Kds) can be obtained after initial selection from a naïve
library; after affinity maturation via mutagenesis and selection,
picomolar Kds can be achieved. , Apart from ligand affinity and specificity, anticalin proteins have
shown good solubility, proper folding, and stability. As anticalins are derived from human lipocalins,
they are also reported to have low immunogenicity. Several anticalin
therapeutics have entered early clinical development and have so far
been well tolerated with no signs of overt immunogenicity after repeated
administration. 
In 1997, Nord
et al. reported a small three-helical subdomain as
a natural receptor for the Fc-domain of IgG. By randomizing amino acids on the helices of the three-helical subdomain,
large libraries of affibodies were constructed from which potent affibodies
for peptides and proteins can be obtained via a variety of display
methods. An affibody molecule is composed
of three α-helices with 58 amino acids and has a MW of ∼6
kDa. It is very robust and has been reported to withstand high temperatures
(90 °C) or acidic and alkaline conditions (pH 2.5 and pH 11,
respectively). , Affibodies also tolerate modifications
and can independently fold when incorporated into fusion proteins.
Fusion of an affibody to antibodies or another affibody with a different
specificity enables the generation of bi- or multispecific high-affinity
binders. , Affibody molecules have been used as tools
for molecular recognition in diagnostic and therapeutic applications. , 
DARPins consist of tightly packed ankyrin repeats, with each
forming
a β-turn and two antiparallel α-helices. , A single repeat typically consists of 33 amino acids, six of which
form the binding surface. DARPins have molecular weights of 14–18
kDa and are extremely thermostable and resistant to proteases and
denaturing agents. , The rigidity and small size
of DARPins made it possible to create bivalent or multivalent constructs
in which DARPins form rigid constructions connected by flexible linkers
and still retain their ability to bind their targets. , The disadvantages of DARPins as binders include their concave binding
surfaces, rigidity, and incomplete randomization of amino acid residues
in variable sites that could potentially limit the range of possible
targets. To overcome these limitations, LoopDARPins, a new generation
of DARPins, was created by Andreas Plückthun and co-workers. In LoopDARPins, the central β-turn is
replaced with a 19-amino-acid loop from the CDR-H3 loop region of
immunoglobulin molecule. This insert made it possible to change the
geometry of the antigen-binding surface and introduce a flexible motif
with more varied amino acid residues, as well as improve binding selectivity.
Using ribosome display, the authors successfully identified LoopDARPins
with Kds in the mid-picomolar to low nanomolar
range against extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) and four
members of the BCL-2 family (BCL-2, BCL-XL, BCL-W, and MCL-1) of antiapoptotic
regulators. 
Monobodies are synthetic
proteins derived from the tenth fibronectin
type III (FN3) domain of human fibronectin. , This domain forms a β-sandwich, which is a monomeric domain
with structural homology to immunoglobulin domains but lacks cysteines.
Recent monobodies were developed from distinct types of monobody libraries:
one library diversifies portions in three loops at one end of the
scaffold, which are structurally equivalent to antibody CDRs; the other diversifies residues on the opposite
end of the FN3 scaffold and the β-sheet surface in between. These libraries present diversified positions
with distinct surface topographies and thus provide diverse binding
epitopes. Monobodies from the “loop”
library bind to concave surfaces, while those from the “side”
library prefer flatter and convex surfaces. , Similar to affibodies and DARPins, the robust scaffold of monobodies
also makes it compatible with diverse fusion partners to achieve bi-
or multivalent fusion proteins. 
IgG fragments and non-IgG scaffold synthetic proteins share the
advantages of robust scaffold stability, small size, no Fc domains,
and low immunogenicity. These advantages make them promising candidates
to generate bi- or multifunctional protein binders in the reducing
environment of the cytosol. For example,
some intrabodies constructed using the scFv and nanobody frameworks
can retain functionality in the reducing intracellular reducing environment
despite the presence of disulfide bonds in these binders. , Various bioPROTACs constructed using peptides, DARPins, and nanobodies
show targeted protein degradation intracellularly. , , Bifunctional antibodies or antibody
derivatives have been used for the degradation of extracellular proteins. , These examples clearly show that, in principle, these and similar
scaffold systems can be used to generate protein binders with therapeutic
applications.

2.3.

## Nucleic Acids As Binders
Protein
and nucleic acid interactions are critical for cellular functions.
For example, proteins associate with nucleic acids to mediate the
transcription and translation of DNA and RNA to decode genetic messages.
In addition, proteins interact with nucleic acids in processes such
as DNA replication, repair, and processing, as well as RNA processing
and translocation. There is a special
category of nucleic acids termed aptamers that are single-stranded
oligonucleotides (RNA or DNA) with a typical length between 25 and
100 nucleotides. Aptamers can fold into
three-dimensional structures and bind to proteins or other cellular
targets. By fusing nucleic acids to small molecules or proteins, a
series of bio-PROTACs that target transcription factors, , RNA binding proteins, G4 binding proteins, and aptamer binding proteins have also been developed. Given that nucleic acid PROTACs
are outside of the scope of this Review, readers interested in this
area are referred to other reviews. , , 

3.

## Synthetic Binder Identification
Methods
3.1.

## Defining Protein Binding Surfaces
The so-called “undruggable” human proteome, which in
this Review we group with “challenging” proteins, has
been historically defined as target proteins whose primary mode of
function do not require small and well-defined binding pockets and
instead rely on extensive, shallow interactions with protein partners.
These types of interactions have been notoriously hard to engage using
rationally designed small molecules. Examples of proteins relying
on interactions with protein (or other biomolecular) partners include
transcription factors, nonenzymatic proteins, and scaffolding proteins. TPD has provided a non-occupancy-driven method
to alter and study protein function and, as discussed in and , bioPROTACs allow its expansion to include challenging protein
targets. Central to this expansion are the protein binders in bioPROTACs.
In the following section, we discuss design principles and methods
or technologies to identify novel and specific binders for challenging
targets.
3.1.1.

## Defining Protein Binding Surfaces
Understanding the guiding principles of how proteins recognize and
interact with other proteins is an important perspective to frame
binder development for challenging candidates. One guiding principle
is the recognition that not all parts of a protein contribute equally
to a particular protein–protein interaction (PPI). The idea
that certain residues are more significant in ligand binding is referred
to as the theory of “hot spots”. A hot spot is defined
as one or several residues in a binder whose conversion to alanine
results in a 2.0 kcal/mol or more change in the binding free energy
( ). Further analysis of hot spots has revealed
relevant structural and biochemical properties such as hydrophobicity,
solvation, and complementarity (defined as the matching of protein
partners at the site of PPI). These properties can very between PPIs
types such as homodimers, constitutively bound partners, heterodimers,
and nonpermanent partners and can often help determine the strength
of an interaction. , Other terms such as “hot
segments”, which are continuous peptide epitopes, have been
coined to further define these functional protein surface areas ( ). , Methods to identify hot spots on challenging proteins have been
invaluable for the design of protein-based ligands for targets with
no readily available pockets. , , 
 As an example, hot spot identification
and PPI inhibition were
vital for the development of relevant binders for the Bcl-2 family
proteins. Bcl-2, Bcl-XL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1, and Bfl-1 are important for
regulating apoptosis and are therefore relevant targets for anticancer
therapeutics. Due to their high sequence similarity, it has been difficult
to identify binders selective for Bcl-XL over Bcl-2 and Bcl-w or vice
versa. Researchers leveraged a separate protein family, the BH3-domain
sensitizers, that are known to interact through direct binding at
a hydrophobic groove of Bcl-2 proteins with high selectivity to develop
of specific Bcl-2 family protein binders. , The work of Boersma et al. used biochemical scanning experiments
(such as alanine and hydrophile scanning) and high-resolution crystal
structures to provide insights of the molecular basis of hot spots
that govern endogenous binding between BH3 domain peptide and the
highly similar BcL-2 family proteins. Dutta et al. later used peptide yeast display to develop selective
peptide inhibitors based on the BH3 peptide interactions. These allowed
mapping of the selectivity for one pro-survival protein over the other
to key residues in their peptides. , Together,
this body of work (1) identified relevant amino acid interactions
that defined BH3 domain binding to Bcl-2 family hot spot and (2) developed
novel Bcl-XL binding peptides that showed activity in relevant cell
models. This work also emphasized the
utility of leveraging known binders and hot spots to understand binding
specificity and inspire novel ligand design ( ).
When designing inhibitory binders
of POIs, known protein partners
and PPI interfaces provide a starting point. Structural and molecular
analysis of endogenous binding interactions can unveil hot spot residues
that govern most of the interaction. Traditional biochemical methods
such as alanine scanning and more modern methods such as sequence
walks combine with large library screenings to provide foundational
experimental evidence of specific hot spots in PPIs. Li et al. developed
the method known as “sequence walk” ( ) to identify the hot segment
within a wide spanning PPI. By creating smaller peptides that span
the width of the PPI, one can identify potential inhibitors of protein–protein
or protein–DNA interactions. Coupling
these approaches with site-directed mutations to stabilize or destabilize
interactions between designed binders and the POI creates an iterative
platform for binder development. More recently, computational methodologies
for identifying hot spots have been established and will be discussed
in . These
advancements expand the use of hot spots for binder design.

3.1.2.

## Methods to Develop Ligands for Selective
Targeting of POIs
One of the defining characteristics of
a challenging protein is the lack of well-structured pockets for small-molecule
ligands. Transcription factors are of interest for TPD, but their
extensive structural disorder makes them poorly targeted by small-molecule
drugs. As such, they are compelling targets for the development bioPROTACs.
One case study for ligand development of disordered proteins is BCL11A.
BCL11A is a transcriptional repressor that has function in the maturation
of hematopoietic cell and is a master regulator of fetal-to-adult
hemoglobin switch that occurs after birth. BCL11A contains significant
regions of structural disorder outside of its 7 structured zinc finger
(ZnF) domains (6 C2H2, 1 CCHC). Because of this, full-length BCL11A
has not yet been isolated for binder screens. To circumnavigate this hurdle, Shen et al. and Yin et al. produced small protein fragments that centered around functional
and more ordered regions of BCL11A and used these fragments to screen
a yeast surface display library of synthetic nanobodies (Nbs) for binders. Both teams obtained highly selective
binders that could be used for the targeted degradation of BCL11A
and the induction of fetal hemoglobin, but they each used different
design principles to achieve selectivity. The groups aimed to achieve
selectivity for BCL11A over its paralog BCL11B, which is 61% similar
in overall sequence and 93% identical in the ZnF regions. BCl11A and
BCl11B share similar properties and both act as transcriptional repressors. 
Yin and team primarily focused on developing
binders at the DNA binding site of BCL11A (known as ZnF456). , They designed and purified various fragments of the protein from
recombinant expression in E. coli: ZnF456 (residues
737–835), ZnF56 (residues 768–835), and ZnF6 (residues
797–826). The team screened for binders and identified 72 unique
clones, of which Nb15, Nb14, Nb53, and Nb61 engaged with ZnF456 in
a pull-down assay. To improve affinity, Yin et al. developed a variant
library of Nb53 and Nb61 and used a Nb-bound crystal structure to
design mutations that would further enhance affinities. Nb61 and its
variants Nb6101, Nb6102, and Nb6160 showed improved binding via surface
plasmon resonance measurements. The crystal structure of Nb6101 and
ZnF6 showed that most of the engagement occurs through hydrogen bonding
of Ser 824, Asp 825, Arg 826, Lys 801, and Lys 806. Due to the sequence
divergence of ZnF6, the selective binding to ZnF6 afforded a high
degree of selective binding to BCL11A over BCL11B. Nb6101 showed no
noticeable binding to BCL11B ZnF456 fragment. Computational optimization
of Nb6101 using Rosetta produced Nb6101–14 and Nb6101–19,
which both had significantly improved affinities for ZnF456. Yin et
al. took take advantage of natural divergence between the paralogs
and optimized the selectivity of binders.
On the other hand,
Shen et al. focused on the ZnF23 region of BCL11A.
Their methodology involved extending past the C terminus of the ordered
ZnF23 regions to leverage the natural divergence in the disordered
regions while still taking advantage of the well folded epitopes for
fragment stability. The team produced
“extended” ZnF23 (extZnF23) in E. coli and used yeast surface display to identify binders. A counter-screen
using only the well-ordered ZnF23 ensured that only binders selective
for the disordered “extended” region would emerge as
hits. From the screen emerged wild-type (wt) 2D9 as a strong binder.
Random mutagenesis revealed two variants with better affinities: V102G
and W108L. 2D9-V102G selectively engaged with extZnF23 of BCL11A and
not extZnF23 of BCL11B in pull-down experiments, thereby confirming
that disordered regions can be leveraged to develop highly selective
binders. Nanobodies identified by both
studies were used for to degrade BCL11A in erythroid-relevant cell
lines (HUDEP-2 and CD34+) for the induction of fetal hemoglobin.
These studies demonstrated that protein engineering and careful selection
of epitopes make it is possible to obtain highly selective protein
binders, even for highly disordered and highly similar paralogs.
Another major class of POIs long considered challenging is the
RAS family proteins. Mutations in the genes encoding the RAS proteins
are drivers of human cancers, with KRAS being the most variant within
the RAS family. KRAS functions a regulator of various signaling cascades
via GTP hydrolysis. In its active form, KRAS can bind its effectors
RAF and PI3K and activates various downstream kinases such as MEK,
ERK, AKT, and mTOR. Various mutations in the gene encoding KRAS lead
to a constitutively activated protein that also acts as an oncogene. To address the need for more KRAS binders,
Sakamoto et al. screened a library of 1011 random peptides
using phage display. To identify a selective peptide inhibitor of
the KRAS G12D, the authors used recombinant GDP-bound KRAS G12D as
the antigen and performed a counter-screen with wt KRAS; using wt KRAS in a counter-screen allowed the
elimination of binders not selective for the G12D variant. From the
initial naïve phage library, the authors identified three sequences
they named KRpep-1, KRpep-2, and KRpep-3; these were evaluated for
binding to GDP-bound KRAS G12D. KRpep-2 and KRpep-3 showed the strongest
affinity with Kd values of 51 and 65 nM,
while KRpep-2 showed the best selectivity by displaying 9-fold and
14-fold stronger binding to KRAS G12D over KRAS G12C and wt KRAS,
respectively. To improve the binding of KRpep-2, the authors created
a KRpep-2-derived phage library and screened more stringently for
binders to KRAS G12D. These efforts yielded KRpep-2d, which has additional
arginine residues at the N- and C- termini. The KRpep-2d peptide demonstrated
a significant decrease in cell proliferation in A427 (a KRAS G12D
cell model) but not A549 (a KRAS G12C model). The decrease in pERK
levels in A427 cells and not A549 cells indicted that the peptide
functions through inhibiting KRAS activation. 
Similarly, Teng et al. contributed to the identification
of variant-specific
KRAS protein inhibitors. The authors used a combination of phage and
yeast display to identify selective monobodies for GTP-bound KRAS
G12 V and G12C. Initial screening with
decreasing amounts of KRAS G12C to enrich the phage library for binders
was followed by yeast display for additional rounds of selection.
This rigorous approach yielded monobody 12VC1, which demonstrated
high selectivity for GTP-bound KRAS G12 V and KRAS G12C but virtually
no other GTP-bound or GDP-bound mutants. To probe the basis of selectivity,
the team obtained a crystal structure of the monobody bound to the
readily crystallized paralog HRAS G12C to provide residue-level detail
on the binding of the monobody. The structure and energetics analysis
showed direct binding of the monobody residues V33, A48, and K50 to
the G12C site of RAS, suggesting that the monobody recognizes and
fills the shallow pocket that contains the G12C mutation. The authors
hypothesized that hydrophobicity also plays a role in the variant-specific
recognition by the monobody. Compared to other variants (e.g., G12D)
or the wt, Cys is more hydrophobic and may be buried in the pocket.
Teng and colleagues used the identified monobody to recruit the E3
ligase VHL and mediate the degradation of KRAS G12C and G12V.
In summary, designing potent binders or inhibitors of challenging
POIs involves leveraging functional hot spots, iterative screening
for selectivity and improved affinity, and using biophysical approaches
to obtain molecular level insights into binding events ( ). Aside from complex design
considerations, display technologies have been important for the rapid
evolution of binders and can be used as a means to test many variants
at once. As such, understanding the basics of display technologies
and current advancements will be fundamental for binder design of
challenging targets.

3.2.

## Display Methods to Identify
Binders
Since the first reports of display technologies, library displays have revolutionized the identification
biologic-based ligands such as peptides, , antibodies, DARPins, nanobodies, monobodies, and
macrocyclic peptides. The basis of all
display technologies is a physical link between phenotype and genotype
that allows researchers to swiftly screen billions of clones for a
desired phenotype ( ). Through successive selection rounds with a “bait”
or target molecule, called biopanning, one can enrich the library
with high-affinity binders for the POI. By varying stringency and
utilizing negative/counter selection, biopanning allows for the identification
of binders to immobilized POIs. With
these technologies, one can readily characterize physical parameters
of binders such as Kds, determine protein
stability, map the epitope of a PPI, stabilize specific conformations,
and more. This section covers the fundamentals
of the most popular display technologies: phage, yeast, and mRNA/ribosome
library.
 3.2.1.

## Phage
Display

## Biology of Phage
Phages are made of a protein capsid
coating that contains their genome; this can vary widely in size depending
on type of phage. Infection of the bacteria begins with recognition
of the host cell receptor via “tail” or receptor binding
proteins. After binding, the phage undergoes a conformational rearrangement
that leads to sheath contraction and injection of the genome for replication
into the cytosol of bacteria. After entry into the host cell, phages
undergo multiple pathways to replicate and eventually exit the host
through either lysogenic or lytic cycles. Filamentous phages are unique in that they do not lyse the cells;
rather, they use a very coordinated assembly and translocation mechanism
to secrete fully formed virions into the environment without harming
the host. This allows filamentous phages to have high titers (1013/mL) , and be highly favorable for
biotechnology development. While there is a diverse set of filamentous
phages, the M13 phage types are the most widely used to create binder
libraries. It is important to note that a wider range of phage types,
including T7 and lambda (λ) phage
types, are being used to generate binder
libraries and have been discussed in detail elsewhere. , 
M13 is a well-studied filamentous phage that infects E. coli and serves as the standard for display technology.
M13 filamentous phages are made of a capsid and single-stranded DNA
backbone packed into a helix. The genes encoding proteins relevant
to the reproduction of phage include pII, pV, and pX (DNA replication
proteins), along with pI, pIV, and pXI (assembly proteins). In 1985, Smith and colleagues described editing
M13 phages for protein display. They
first inserted a full protein-coding sequence at the site of pIII
in between the N-terminus (necessary for infection of host cells)
and the C-terminus (which supports the phage structure). In a follow-up paper, Parmley and Smith optimized
the site of insertion further upstream and coined the term “biopanning”. , They utilized a biotinylated handle on the target ligand for selection
of specific binder phages in a population size of 108. After the first binding event, the target is
washed to remove nonspecific and weak binders. Strong binders were
then eluted with an acidic elution buffer and amplified through replication;
sequencing revealed the genotype. The process is iterative and can
be coupled with mutagenesis or error prone PCR to evolve better binders.
Since the first description of phage display technology, researchers
have inserted genes of interest into other coat proteins to create
various platforms. These insertion locations include the high copy
coat protein VIII that allows for thousands of copies to be displayed. Additionally, poly- and monovalent surface
expression, improved infectivity with
a helper phage, indirect display on
coat proteins (through the use of high affinity protein partners that
can capture difficult-to-produce libraries), and a selective infective phage (which
requires a specific protein–ligand interaction to induce infections
and replication) have all been achieved. However, these approaches
have been reviewed elsewhere and will not be discussed here. , 

## Current Phage Displays
In 2013, Rust and colleagues
used a scFv phage library to screen for binders unique to triple negative
breast cancer cells (MDA-MB-231). The goal of this study was to identify
strong and selective binders to triple negative breast cancer types
and to also identify binders that undergo internalization. The authors
used phage display, membrane protein profiling, and hybridoma technology
for a multiplexed platform to identify unique membrane targets. The
initial phage screening identified 1631 clones, of which approximately
half showed binding in a fluorescent microvolume assay. The authors
then performed a negative selection against the noncancerous breast
cell line MCF10A. After isolating selective binders, hits were tested
for internalization by flowcytometry. Ultimately, 9 unique sequences
that bound were internalize only in the triple negative cancer cell
line model ( ). Of these hits, an anti-CD73 scFv was shown to significantly inhibit
the growth of breast cancer xenograft tumors. The phage display library was also used in a phenotypic
screen to identify designed ankyrin repeat protein (DARPin) binders
that preferentially bind human regulatory T cells (Treg) over effector
T (Teff) cells. The authors performed
a screen using human CD4+CD25+ Treg cells isolated
from donor peripheral blood as the antigen. Multiple rounds of selection
against the Treg cells and negative selection with a recombinantly
expressed universal T-cell marker produced ∼30 hits selective
only for CD4+CD25+ Tregs. This work provided
another example of the use of phage display to identify cell-specific
surface binders that can be internalized to reveal novel targets for
cell-specific lysosomal protein degradation methods.
 

3.2.2.

## Yeast Display
Yeast display technology
was introduced soon after phage display as an alternative because it allows proper functioning of the eukaryotic
machinery for optimal protein folding, glycosylation, and other post-translational
processes. This enables access to certain
structures and motifs that are not possible with bacterial expression.
The so-called expression bias is unpredictable particularly for mammalian
proteins, where failure to maintain proper folds can abolish expression,
binding, or activity. Finally, because the yeast library is expressed
on the cell surface, there are any more copies per cell that can readily
be analyzed via fluorescence-activated sorting (FACS). FACS allows
for rapid isolation of favorable clones for expansion and diversification.
This section of the Review will provide a brief background on the
technology, will highlight its benefits over other display technologies,
and will review how libraries have recently been used to identify
ligands for challenging targets.

## Biology of Yeast
The basis of yeast surface display
is a plasmid for heterologous protein expression under regulatory
constitutive or inducible promoters. Common promoters have been optimized
for various yeast species such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Pichia pastoris, and Yarrowia lipolytica. The yeast plasmid genetically anchors
the POI or the library to an endogenous surface protein attached to
the cell wall. Anchors are either glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-dependent
or independent, where GPIs are lipids that tether proteins to the
cell surface. GPI-dependent anchoring involves a covalent link between
the protein and the yeast cell, which allows for a more stable immobilization
of displayed proteins. These anchors extend to different distances
from the cell surface and can be further optimized with the use of
linkers, which can be beneficial for the expression of larger ligands
(such as antibodies) and downstream binding events.
There have
since been significant improvements in yeast display workflows. Notably,
the selection process now first includes use of magnetic-activated
cell sorting (MACS) followed by FACS. MACS involves magnetic beads coated with a soluble target of interest
that are incubated with the yeast library. This extra step removes
variants that are weak or nonbinding and reduces the library size,
allowing for quantitative screening by FACS to directly determine
relevant Kds. Other recent improvements
have resulted in better library expression, more precise analysis
of binders via FACS, and ultimately selective ligand identification.
Zahradnik et al. engineered new vector-dual reporter system, which
allows for in vivo analysis of surface versus intracellular expression
of antigen and improved overall surface expression of the library
ligands. The higher surface expression also lowers the amount of antigen
needed to screen the library, which can be desirable for antigens
that are difficult to obtain. 

## Current
Yeast Displays Used for Ligand Development
Nanobodies have
received considerable interest as a class of binders
and modulators. As introduced in , Nbs are antibody fragments that only contain
the VHH unit and have a history of being used as structural biology
tools. , Their single domain architecture can still
bind to targets with high affinity and selectivity, but unlike their
antibody counterparts they are readily expressed in bacteria and are
smaller in size. In 2018, McMahon et al. developed a synthetic yeast
display platform for Nbs and made it publicly accessible. The library
was developed using a consensus scaffold from naturally occurring
and structurally characterized llama nanobodies, but with variability
in each complementarity determining region (CDR) that mimicked the
highly diverse sequences that occur naturally. McMahon and team used
a linker of more than 600 amino acids instead of the canonical Aga2p/Aga1p
tether, which reduced the levels of yeast cell transformants but not
the number of unique clones. This library contains 1 × 108 unique Nbs expressed on the yeast surface and has been used
to identify novel binders for a wide variety of targets. , Recently, the Kruse and Liu groups created a hypermutant yeast display
technology to allow the identification of more potent and specific
nanobody ligands that they termed AHEAD ( ). The foundation of this work is the pairing
of an orthogonal-error prone DNA polymerase alongside yeast display
technology. The design allows for stable yeast genomic replication
while allowing continuous hypermutation for the nanobody library to
enable an exploration of mutational space without risking yeast genome
integrity. 
 While ligand identification is a major application of yeast
surface
display, yeast display can also be used to identify orientations of
proteins of interest, which can be especially useful in designing
degraders for specific mutations of protein targets. Proteins with
transient binding pockets are often difficult to identify, let alone
target with specific binders. In an approach described by Romero and
Kolmar, yeast display was used to stabilize transient conformations
of proteins to enable the identification of ligands specific for those
conformations. In this method, yeast display was used to screen a
library of random variants of a POI. While screening with a known
binder, it was possible to identify mutations that improved binding.
Additional binding studies on the variants provided insights on the
stabilizing effect of the binder on the POI and developing novel conformation-specific binders. 

3.2.3.

## In
Vitro/Cell-Free Display
While
phage and yeast displays are the most popular biological display technologies,
cell-free analysis of potential binders for POIs provides another
means of ligand development. A cell-free library can circumnavigate
the limitations of library size, yields, proper folding of certain
proteins, solubility, and labor-intensive protocols for evolving binder
hits that cell-based displays inherently have. For cell display methods,
the synthesis of the protein is at the mercy of endogenous protein
synthesis machineries, which biases libraries toward the production
of certain types of binders over others. This Review will cover only
two platforms: mRNA and ribosome display. For both methods, the physical
connection between phenotype and genotype is made possible by covalent
attachment of the mRNA to the protein. For mRNA display, the protein
is only linked to the mRNA molecule that produced it. For ribosome
display, there is a ternary complex that involves a physical connection
between the ribosome, mRNA, and protein. 

## Biology of In Vitro Display
Hanes and Pluckthun introduced
the first in vitro ribosome display when they established a technology
that maintained a direct linkage between the protein, mRNA, and ribosome.
The team used a DNA library of scFvs devoid of stop codons to prevent
the binding of release factors, thereby leaving a portion of translated
proteins attached to the ribosome. This method allowed for protein
folding while stabilizing the ternary structures (ribosome, protein,
mRNA) during selection rounds. In mRNA
display, the linkage to the protein is achieved through a covalent
bond via puromycin, a mimic of aminoacylated tRNA that is appended
with a synthetic linker. At the end of protein translation, puromycin
occupies the A site of the ribosomes to form a peptide bond with the
last amino acid at the C-terminus of the polypeptide. − After formation of the peptide bond, the complex is additionally
stabilized reverse transcription to create a cDNA. The cDNA stabilizes
the mRNA and ensures that the complex’s stability is mainly
determined by the stability and binding of the polypeptide. After
selection of the clones, the complex is destabilized, and the cDNA
is sequenced to reveal the identity of the binders. Both approaches
can be adapted with error-prone PCR, mutagenesis and a non-proofreading
polymerase to allow for directed evolution of the binders. , 

## Current In Vitro Display Technologies
Cell-free platforms
enable screening with large libraries (1011 −1012). As such, they have been used to obtain binders to challenging
targets where it is beneficial to have a much larger pool. Zimmermann
et al. reported an expansive approach to select synthetic scaffolds
called sybodies, which are highly stable mimics of nanobodies. The
authors achieved a diversity of 9 × 1012 unique clones
for the library and acknowledged the limitation of phage and yeast
technologies to display the full scope of clones (they are limited
to 109–1010 clones). Zimmermann et al.
used ribosome display in the first round of selection to maximize
the number of potential binders. They also established a cascade of
selection screens that first used ribosome display followed by phage
display. The authors observed that initial screening from a large
library and changing surface chemistry of the immobilization step
between library display types was critical for isolating conformation-specific
binders for the ABC transporter protein TM287/288. 
In vitro display is uniquely situated for the development
of libraries of macrocyclic peptides, peptides are made of a ring
containing 12 or more amino acid residues. There has been a growing
interest in macrocyclic peptides because they share characteristics
with small-molecule drugs (small size and better cell penetrance)
and peptide modulators (ability to bind to shallow PPI interfaces). mRNA and ribosome displays are well adapted
for screening macrocyclic peptides and are particularly well suited
for the incorporation of nonproteinogenic amino acids and ring cyclization
steps, which are not possible in cell display technologies. However,
the chemistry for cyclization must be relatively mild to maintain
the integrity of the ternary structure and mRNA in the display. Advances
have been made to induce covalent cyclization with mRNA display. The
first method utilized a disuccinimidyl glutarate linker that cyclizes
at the N-terminus to a lysine residue. Since then, various methods for cyclizing peptides have been integrated
into mRNA display. Yamagishi et al. created the Random Nonstandard
Peptides Integrated Discovery (RaPID) library by reprogramming certain
codons for the display of N-methylamino acids or
a chloracetyl-d-tryptophan to allow for spontaneous cyclization.
The library was used to design selective inhibitors of the E6AP/HPV
E6 complex, the E3 ligase that degrades p53 to inhibit apoptosis in
HPV-infected cells. While much is not known about the E6AP E3 ligase,
the authors used their library to isolate 47 clones from a library
size of 6 × 107. Of the 47 clones, 8 were unique sequences,
CM11-1–6, CM13–7, and CM13-8,
that have low nanomolar Kds for the target.
Additional comparisons to their linearized versions indicated that
cyclization was significant for binding. It is notable that versions of CM11-1 without the N-methylated backbone showed undetectable binding (N-methylation and its role in rigidifying conformations
of peptides will be discussed in greater detail in ).

3.2.4.

## Discerning Optimal Display for Binder Selection
Each
display technology provides its own set of advantages and
drawbacks, and choosing one depends on factors such as desired library
size, binder type, and selection workflow. Phage display library
displays are approximately 108–1010 in
size, a number that is typically larger than yeast but smaller than
in vitro display. Due to the high stability and small size of phages,
binders can be directly screened within a range of relevant biological
environments such as cell surfaces and direct injection in animal
models. Phage display has been used to identify different types of
binders, but due to phage production in E. coli there
is bias toward certain sequences. Furthermore, the technology is not
amenable to post-translational modification of binders. Yeast display
libraries are typically smaller (107–108). However, they have the ability to form structurally complex eukaryotic
proteins and can accommodate post translational modifications such
as glycosylation. The expression of the library directly on the yeast
surface allows for easy, high-throughput selection via FACS to isolate
desired clones. The in vitro mRNA and ribosome display
technologies allow for the screening of the largest binder libraries
(1012–1015), allow for precise control
over selection conditions through buffer composition, and allow for
the incorporation of unnatural amino acids or mild chemical modifications;
they also reduce bias in the composition of nucleotides and amino
acid. Drawbacks for these methods include the necessary modification
at the C-termini, identified binders that may not show in vivo properties
due to lack of complex interaction during the selection process, and
the inability to express larger and/or post translationally modified
binder types.

3.3.

## Computation-aided Design
While the
library technologies described above serve as powerful tools to discover
protein-based binders for a diverse set of target proteins, the lack
of complete randomization in the libraries limits their size. Directed
evolution attempts to mitigate this challenge, but the existing selection
strategies are still biased toward the enrichment of binders with
similar physical properties. In theory, computationally designed binders
should resolve this issue. The following section will present a brief
review of computational approaches to produce novel protein binders;
more in depth review can be found elsewhere. 
3.3.1.

## Computational Optimization of Known Binders
Natural effectors are protein binders that bind endogenously to
the target and can modulate function. Effectors often serve as starting
epitopes that are desirable for modulating POIs and can provide a
starting design for binders. As described earlier, BH3-domain stabilizers
of Bcl-2 family proteins have provided important molecular design
information critical for identifying specific peptide modulators of
certain Bcl-2 family members over others. Yet natural effectors often lack the desired affinity to target
POIs, ensuring that designing and optimizing effectors is necessary
for synthetic binder design. While display libraries and mutational
scans have historically been used to evolve natural effectors in synthetic
binders, they are often laborious and time-consuming. Computation-aided
binder design has provided another means to evolve and evaluate optimizing
mutations for binder improvement ( ).
 Work by Havranek et al. used computational analysis to optimize
soluble ACE2 (sACE2) as a decoy for SARS-CoV2 receptor-binding domain
(RBD). This decoy method, along with another optimized binder, was
shown to significantly reduce injury and mortality in mice infected
with SARS-CoV-2 variants and is considered a pan-coronavirus inhibitor. , Havranek and team built in silico saturation mutagenesis
using Rosetta’s flex ddG protocol
to identify mutations that would improve RBD binding to ACE2. By accounting
for protein conformational flexibility and estimated ΔΔG values, they modeled local hinge-like conformations of
backbone and side chains to capture
dynamics and sample variability in protein structure. Their computational
analysis alongside experimental deep mutational scan (DMS) guided optimization of key residues near the
RBD binding epitope. In vitro binding studies of designed variants
showed a 9-fold improvement in binding to wt ACE2. The authors later improved the computational screen and
identified variants that were 80-fold improved in terms of binding
compared to wt ACE2. , These variants are similar to
or better than other tight binders of the RBD raised through other
methods, including monoclonal antibodies. This body of work highlights
the potential of computational screens to evolve relevant binders
without the time and physical requirements of experimental evolution.
Identifying the minimal epitope required for selective binding
is another means to computationally optimize natural effectors. Chatterjee
and co-workers employed this strategy by focusing on strong PPIs and
designing linear peptides that mimicked those interactions; these
peptides were investigated for their ability to recruit proteins for
targeted degradation. With the goal of developing an intracellular
degrader of SARS-CoV-2 RBD, the authors developed a minimal linear
peptide of sACE2 protein. Similar to the “sequence walk’
method presented by Li et al., they
used PeptiDerive from the Rosetta protein modeling software to generate
peptides ranging from 10–150 amino acids from wt sACE2, along
with FlexPepDock and Protein–Protein protocols to virtually
dock peptide fragments and predict their binding energies. Overall,
the computational screens in this work yielded 26 optimized peptides
that were predicted to bind to the RBD. These peptides were fused
to the Fc region of the E3 ligase TRIM21, and the authors demonstrated
that one of their originally designed peptide hits (a 23-mer) could
degrade the RBD to a level comparable to the endogenous binder sACE2.
The authors further evolved their computationally designed peptide
with a deep mutational scan to identify variants that showed better
degradation then wt ACE2. 

3.3.2.

## Structure-Forward Rational Design
Computational tools
can also use known structures to rationally design
high affinity binders for targets with no known or characterized binders.
As detailed previously, “hot spots” are major players
in binding events at PPI interfaces ( ). Kortemme and Baker reported the computational
prediction of alanine scanning results for a large set of interfaces.
Their model for free energy calculations of PPIs uses an atomic representation
of the protein and a simple free energy function that calculates packing
interactions, hydrogen bonds, and solvation. This simple model could
accurately predict 79% of all hot spot interfaces tested. Since then, other models have emerged to predict
PPIs and hot spots. Geppert and colleagues developed an alignment-free
computational method called iPred to predict hot spots from structures.
Generally, their model uses relevant differences in the local structural
environment of PPI interfaces of the training set and considers the
interaction partners from both molecules of interest. It then predicts
the interface by measuring the dissimilarity between the interface
and all other surface residues from only one protein of the complex.
The authors evaluated 1442 proteins, 530 heterodimers, and 616 monomers
and studied interferon α-2a, for which iPred correctly predicted
a cluster that has been corroborated with experimental alanine scanning. iPred represents one way to analyze and develop
novel binders based on identifying potential hotspots for a POI. 
Structures of POIs can also be used for
de novo binder development. In 2011, Fleishman et al. reported the
rational design of a binder for a conserved region at the stem of
the influenza virus hemagglutinin. The guiding principles enabling
their design were (1) solvent-exposed surfaces are buried during the
interaction, (2) noncovalent interactions are optimized, and (3) “hot
spots” are important for binding. The workflow focused on identifying
hot spots on the POI and simultaneously identifying complementary
structures to those hot spots. 
While hot spots are highly used in most predictive algorithms to
guide the rational design of binders, the Baker group introduced a
method for de novo binder design for proteins that have no obvious
or weak (at best) interactions ( ). Cao et al. developed a multistep approach by first
examining potential residue contacts, identifying scaffolds that can
contain these interactions with the target protein, and finding consistent
motifs and scaffolds to focus on for promising interactions. The authors
sampled billions of potential interactions that were appended to a
set of potential scaffolds rationally designed to be stable and amenable
to binding interactions. They further improved and diversified their
designed binders using yeast display technology. While the platform
does survey a large portion of the target to design many potential
binders, not all predicted binders can be validated and sometimes
substitutions or maturations are necessary. Furthermore, the platform
is biased toward more hydrophobic regions on the target, thereby limiting
its use in targets that form interactions using polar groups 

3.3.3.

## Generative Artificial
Intelligence for the
Discovery of Novel Binders
A newer addition to the field
of computational biology is artificial intelligence (AI). While this
Review presents select examples of de novo binder design using AI,
other reviews provide a deeper look on how to leverage new technologies
for binder design for a POI. Predicting
protein structure from sequence is an exciting endeavor in computational
protein engineering and provides the opportunity to strategically
target the most difficult proteins whose structures are unknown or
contain significant structural disorder. AlphaFold, RoseTTAFold, and
ESMFold all predict structure from sequence only. In the case of AlphaFold,
the algorithm accomplishes structure prediction through use of a large
sample of multiple sequence alignments and templates of similar proteins
whose structures have been solved. Other algorithms use deep learning
or protein language models for the prediction. Recently, even ChatGPT
has been used to predict novel protein sequences with predicted function,
thereby indicating the power of AI in predicting structure–function
relationships. 
Bhat et al. developed
Peptide Prioritization via CLIP (PepPrClip) for the discovery of novel
peptides based on sequence alone. Bhat and colleagues used CLIP to
prioritize peptide–protein binders over nonbinders, MetaAI’s
ESM-2 protein language model was used to predict peptide and target
protein structures from sequence alone, ESM-2 provided a model for
structure prediction, and AlphaFold Multimer was used to predict docking
of the designed peptide and target protein. Overall, this work provided
a roadmap for the use of various computational modeling tools to develop
computationally designed protein-based binders. As an application
of value, Bhat et al. used PepPrCLIP to generate E3 ligase recruiting
peptides. One peptide replaces the TPR region on the CHIP E3 ligase
and can induce degradation of target proteins. Another peptide was
generated for the recruitment of TRIM8 E3 ligase (an E3 ligase for
which no recruiting molecules have been identified). Using their novel
computationally designed peptide that was derived only through sequence,
the authors demonstrated the induced apoptosis of Ewing sarcoma cells
through the selective recruitment and degradation of TRIM8. 
More recently, Brixi et al. reported
a new pipeline called Structure-agnostic Language Transformer and Peptide Prioritization (SaLT&PepPr).
These authors employed a language model that was trained on data from
ESM-2 pLM. With this pipeline, the user must input a known PPI or
identify a PPI, and SaLT predicts the potential interfaces for a POI.
Following the prediction, Pep explores PPI databases to suggest potential
peptide binders for the POI; finally, Pr prioritizes peptide binder
hits. Using SaLT&PepPr, the authors validated predicted peptides
for the degradation of target proteins β-catenin and 4E binding
protein 2 (4E-BP2, where 4E-BP2 is a small and disordered protein). While these computational and generative methods
are highly promising for less known protein targets, experimental
validation of many binders is necessary, as some will not show in
vitro or in vivo activity. Overall, these approaches and others allow for de novo design of high-affinity binders
for POIs that can be used in targeted degradation ( ). 

4.

## Biologics-Based Modulators
4.1.

## Targeting to the Proteasomal Degradation Pathway
The
proteasomal degradation pathway is the primary method of modulating
and maintaining protein levels within the cell. It plays significant
roles in cell proliferation, cell survival, inflammatory responses,
and immune responses by degrading appropriate proteins within a given
pathway. It also aids in preventing
cellular malfunction by clearing misfolded and aggregated proteins.
A push in the 20th century led to the elucidation of the mechanism
by which the proteasomal degradation pathway identifies and digests
protein materials. The well-established and widely accepted mechanism
involves a diverse group of regulatory proteins and enzymes that include
the highly conserved components ubiquitin and the 26S proteasome.
Ubiquitin is a small regulatory protein that marks a target for degradation
when covalently linked in a chain; the process of attaching ubiquitin
is known as ubiquitination. Ubiquitination aids in the regulation
of various cellular functions depending on the lysine residue(s) involved
in the linkage. Several lysine residues exist in the ubiquitin sequence,
but its linkage at K48 specifically induces the degradation of proteins
via the proteasomal pathway. Ubiquitination
involves a series of enzymes: the E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme (E1),
the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), and the E3 ubiquitin ligase
(E3). In a cascade of events with increasing substrate specificity,
the E1 activates ubiquitin with its binding side, causing the transfer
of ubiquitin to the active site of the E2. E3 then catalyzes the transfer
of ubiquitin from the E2 to the substrate protein ( ). Cycles of this process establish the polyubiquitin chain that the
26S proteasome recognizes to begin proteolysis. The 26S proteasome
comprises the two key subunits that process degradation targets: the
19S regulator removes ubiquitin from and unfolds target proteins,
while 20S catalytic core that digests the denatured protein into short
peptides. 
 As the most diverse element
of the proteasomal degradation pathway,
the E3 ubiquitin ligases continue to be extensively studied. Compared
to the approximately 8 E1 and 40 E2 enzymes, more than 600 E3 ligases
exist in the cell. These enzymes can be further classified based on
their enzymatic domains (RING, HECT, or RBR); each domain transfers
ubiquitin from the E2 to the substrate protein using a unique mechanism. The RING (really interesting new gene) E3 family ubiquitinates targets by transferring ubiquitin directly
from the E2 bound to the RING domain to the substrate without forming
an intermediate with ubiquitin. In contrast, both the HECT (homologous to E6-AP C-terminus) and RBR (RING-between-RING) E3 families first form a thioester intermediate with ubiquitin
before ubiquitin is transferred to the substrate. HECT does so with
its C-terminal lobe that contains a catalytic cysteine, while RBR
E3 ligases bind to E2 with one of RING domain and form the intermediate
with a second RING domain. 
The
RING E3 family has primarily been used in targeted proteasomal
degradation studies because it comprises the largest known and most
understood class of ubiquitin ligases. These proteins can exist as
monomers, homo- and/or hetero-oligomers, or multisubunit structures
to enable their ubiquitination function. The immense complexity of RING E3 ligases allows the organization
and characterization of these enzymes into numerous subfamilies based
on sequence and structural motifs, with the most distinct being their
separation into cullin-dependent and cullin-independent E3 ligases
( ). The cullin-RING
ligase (CRL) E3 family consists of multisubunit complexes nucleated
by cullin (CUL) proteins. Eight different cullin proteins (CUL1, CUL2,
CUL3, CUL4a, CUL4b, CUL5, CUL7, and CUL9) define the eight types of
CRL E3s that exist in the human proteome; each recruits different
subunits to enable the recognition of diverse substrates. All CRL
classes have the same basic mechanisms: CUL binds on one side to a
RING-box protein (Rbx1 or Rbx2) that enables its E2 binding and enzymatic
activity; on the other side, the CUL binds to adaptor proteins that
recruit substrate receptors proteins to enable target recognition. , A cullin-independent E3, in its simplest form, contains a RING or
RING-like domain and a substrate recognition domain but can also be
further categorized by common motifs. For instance, TRIM (tripartite motif) E3s possess
a conserved N-terminal RBCC motif consisting of a RING domain (R),
a B-box domain (B), and a coiled-coil domain (CC). Other examples
include the MARCH (membrane associated RING-CH-type
finger) E3 ligases, the PA-TM-RING (protease-associated transmembrane RING) E3 ligases, and the UIM (ubiquitin-interacting motif) E3 ligases. Notably, noncanonical RING-like E3 ligases
still fall under this category because their RING-like domains are
structurally and functionally similar to canonical RING domains. Classes
of note include U-box E3 ligases, which distinctly lack the chelating
Zn2+ ions characteristic to RING domains, and the UBR Box
E3 ligases that include a third Zn2+ ion (classic RING
domains only have two , ).
 The development of PROTACs
allowed for novel protein modulation
methods devoid of previous limitations. The focus on small-molecule
PROTACs has left much about biologics-based PROTACs unknown, especially
regarding the direct fusion of the target binder to E3 ligases ( ). These fusions
often involve the truncation of the E3 to reduce bulk while retaining
activity, which has been shown to enhance degradation efficiencies
over full-length E3 ligases. Additionally, these truncations likely
disrupt the ability of these biologics to mimic native E3 ligases,
thereby preventing their overexpression from causing cell dysfunction.
An interesting avenue that has yet to be explored, however, is the
potential advantages of using the full-length or multidomain versions
of the E3 ligases in comparison to their homologues. Regardless, fusion
degraders require an intentional design choice involving the N- or
C-terminal of the target binder so that the E3 does not prevent target
association and ubiquitination. This may sometimes be rational because
of current understanding of the binder, but it may require empirical
determination. Despite these lingering questions, biologics-based
PROTACs continue to have important roles in the field of targeted
protein degradation, including their use in studying the effects of
target depletion at the protein level and identifying new recruitable
E3s for therapeutic developments. This section will discuss the discoveries
and developments made that involve peptide and/or protein-based degraders.
All of these technologies will be referred to as bioPROTACs for the
purposes of this Review; named technologies may also be used in conjunction
should they exist.
 4.1.1.

## Cullin-Dependent RING E3

## CRL1 (SCF): β-TrCP
[deGradFP]
CRL1 E3s, more
commonly known as SCF, consist of the adaptor protein Skp1 (S), the
cullin protein CUL1 (C), and a set of F-box (F) domain-containing
substrate receptors. Targeted protein
degradation by SCF has primarily focused on associating with the substrate
receptor β-TrCP. β-TrCP consists of an F-box domain and
a seven repeat WD40 domain to recognize phosphorylated substrates. For example, NF-κB signaling pathway
associated protein IκBα is phosphorylated upon cytokine
stimulation (e.g., TNFα) and binds to β-TrCP. This causes
its ubiquitination by the SCF complex and its subsequent degradation. β-TrCP has been repurposed for non-native
protein recognition using two methods: recruitment with a IκBα-inspired
binder and direct fusions to the β-TrCP F-box domain at minimum.
Other F-box proteins have yet to be used as extensively as β-TrCP
for PROTAC development, but Lim et al. reported the degradation of
green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged proteins with fusions of SCF
substrate receptors FBW7 and Skp2. However,
additional studies are needed to explore these in depth.
Sakamoto
et al. coined the term PROTAC in a study that used a IκBα-derived
phosphopeptide (IPP) to recruit β-TrCP for targeted degradation. The authors targeted the protein MetAP-2 because
its regulation notably does not involve ubiquitination. Conjugating
IPP to ovalin (OVA), a small molecule that covalently binds to MetAP-2,
created a PROTAC (Protac-1) that redirected β-TrCP to ubiquitinate
and degrade MetAP-2 in a cell-free environment. Sakamoto and colleagues
further expanded on this finding by targeting and degrading the estrogen
receptor α (ER) and androgen receptor (AR). By fusing estradiol to IPP, they created Protac-2, which
degraded ER in a cell-free environment. The Protac-2 ubiquitination
efficiency improved with increasing concentrations only up to 500
μM; no ubiquitination occurred at higher concentrations. This
“squelching” phenomenon, as Sakamoto and colleagues
described it, is now widely known as the “hook effect”;
the “hook effect” occurs when increasing saturation
of binary E3-to-PROTAC or target-to-PROTAC interactions prevents ternary
complex formation necessary for PROTAC function. The replacement of estradiol with dihydroxytestosterone
(DHT) created Protac-3, which the authors delivered into cells via
microinjection to demonstrate in vitro ubiquitination and degradation
of AR. More than 70% of cells treated with Protac-3 demonstrated AR
depletion compared to cells treated with Protac-2, which highlighted
the importance of POI-targeting binders. Following this report, the
Crews group expanded on PROTAC technology by introducing recruitment
of the E3 ligase VHL (discussed in the section on CRL2).
Melchionna
et al. also used IκBα to degrade a POI but
employed a full length IκBα fusion instead of the phosphopeptide. This study established the silencing intrabody
technology (SIT) that allows any protein-targeted intrabody to acquire
neutralizing effects upon fusion to IκBα. To demonstrate
the technology, fusion of the tau-targeting intrabody scFv#2 to IκBα
created scFv#2-IκBα that was coexpressed with tau in cells.
Expression of scFv#2-IκBα induced the degradation of tau
by 70% upon TNFα-induced phosphorylation of IkBα. In comparison,
tau protein levels remained unchanged in controls where GFP replaced
the IκBα. scFv#2-IκBα also successfully degraded
endogenous tau in a neuroblastoma cell line. Notably, scFv#2-IkBα
cleared tau in a catalytic manner, as observed by the effective degradation
of tau despite reduced expression of the degrader. The authors provided
a second demonstration of SIT utility by targeting and degrading β-galactosidase
(β-Gal) with scFvR4-IkBα in TNFα-treated cells,
which resulted in the reduction of β-Gal activity by 20%.
While Sakamoto et al. are largely credited for establighing the
field of targeted protein degradation with their use of chimeras to
recruit β-TrCP, Zhou et al. demonstrated the first instance
of β-TrCP-induced degradation with direct fusion to a binding
partner. The degrader in this study,
βTrCPF/WD-E7N, consisted of the F-box and WD-40 (F/WD)
domains of β-TrCP fused to the N-terminal region of an E7 protein
(E7N) encoded by human papillomavirus type 16. E7N specifically targets
pocket proteins such as retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and p107. The
coexpression of βTrCPF/WD-E7N and pRB into cells
led to a decrease of pRB levels by 90% and rescued cell morphology
in 35% of cells overexpressing pRB. In comparison, 80% of cells displayed
aberrant morphologies of enlargement and flattening when untreated.
Similar results occurred when βTrCPF/WD-E7N induced
the degradation of endogenous p107 in cell cultures. Although Zhou
et al. successfully degraded target proteins with the fusion of both
the F-box domain and the WD40 domain of β-TrCP to target POIs,
many studies following this only fused the F-box domain without affecting
degradation efficiencies. This revelation came from Su et al. and
Kuo et al., where the F-box-only fusions expressed most stably compared
to other truncated β-TrCP fusions and interacted with Skp1 in
a manner similar to full-length β-TrCP. , 
Many have since used β-TrCP for SCF-induced degradation
to
demonstrate therapeutic relevance, interrogate protein function, and
develop research tools for nonmammalian cells. Su et al. and Cong
et al. separately targeted and successfully degraded β-catenin
because its overexpression is correlated to the development of colorectal
cancers. , Success in targeting this protein
for anticancer therapeutics depends on binder specificity for the
free β-catenin (compared with β-catenin associated with
E-cadherin), as this form regulates cell migration via the Wnt signaling
pathway and has no role in cell–cell adhesion. Su et al. derived
a peptide binder from the β-catenin regulatory protein, APC,
by using four repeats of its β-catenin binding motifs (APCbc4).
Among the designed APCbc4 fusions to different truncated β-TrCP
sequences, F3APCbc4 expressed the most stably and associated with
Skp1 most efficiently. F3APCbc4 features only the F-box domain of
β-TrCP and APCbc4 combined with a short linker. Cong et al.
created a different degrader named F-TrCP-Ecad with the β-catenin
binding sequence in E-cadherin fused full-length β-TrCP. Despite
the differences in degrader design, both F3APCbc4 and F-TrCP-Ecad
ubiquitinated and degraded only free β-catenin in cells, which
led to the suppression of β-catenin-mediated transcription activity.
Both studies additionally demonstrated in vitro and in vivo inhibition
of cancer cell proliferation and tumor growth upon degrader expression.
Kuo et al. aimed to develop a therapeutic against botulism, a condition
that results from the injection of the Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin (BoNT) protease light chain (Lc) into neurons. Lc cleaves SNARE proteins in neurons, which
disrupts essential neurotransmission and causes paralysis in patients.
The persistence of Lc in neurons correlates with the amount of time
patients experience symptoms. Kuo and colleagues designed degraders
comprising β-TrCP fused to previously identified camelid heavy-chain-only
VH (VHH) AlcB8 and BlcB10, which target the BoNT/A serotype
Lc (ALc) and the BoNT/B serotype Lc (BLc), respectively. Although
different truncated β-TrCP fusions were also constructed, the
F-box domain-only fusion had the most stable expression in cells.
Coexpression of these constructs with their respective substrates
in neuronal cells led to specific and efficient depletion of ALc by
65% and that of BLc by 50%. The induced degradation of ALc and BLc
subsequently accelerated recovery and stabilization of the SNARE protein
SNAP25 to preintoxication levels
Bery et al. validated the function
of RHOB (RAS homologue family
member B) in its guanosine triphosphate (GTP)-bound state by targeting
this specific conformation for degradation with an intrabody. The specific function of RHOB-GTP had thus
far been difficult to study because its downregulation by small interfering
RNA (siRNA) leads to compensatory expression of RHOA or RHOC. Additionally,
downregulation by siRNA inhibits both the guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-
and GTP-bound states of RHOB. A previous study by Moutel et al. established
the synthetic screening library to identify intrabody binders and
demonstrated successful targeted degradation with their fusion to
the F-box domain of Slmb, a β-TrCP homologue in Drosophila,
as described by Caussinus et al. (discussed later in this section). The authors noted, however, that not all intrabodies
identified inherently caused targeted degradation upon fusion. Therefore,
Bery and colleagues designed a cell-based fluorescent screen that
directly screened intrabodies fused to the β-TrCP F-box domain
to select for intrabodies capable of degrading RHOB-GTP. The fusion
F-B6 demonstrated the selective degradation of RHOB-GTP protein without
eliciting changes to RHOA or RHOC levels. Additional studies with
F-B6 led to the discovery that RHOB-GTP aids in the regulation of
genome stability and protects against acquisition of invasive phenotypes.
Later, Fagbadebo et al. used similar methods to establish tools for
probing the function of mitochondrial RHO GTPase Miro1. Nanobodies
fused to β-TrCP when expressed in cells depleted Miro1 by 80%
at most. However, additional studies are needed to delineate the cellular
and phenotypic effects of this degrader. 
Yeast and Drosophila β-TrCP
homologues have also been used to degrade target proteins in nonmammalian
systems, which demonstrates the wide range of applications for targeted
degradation technologies. In the initial β-TrCP fusion study,
Zhou et al. achieved degradation of pRB in yeast by conjugating E7N
to the F-box and WD-40 domains (F/WD) of Cdc4p, the yeast homologue
of β-TrCP, before replacing Cdc4p with β-TrCP. Caussinus et al. used the Drosophila β-TrCP homologue, Slmb, to modify any protein fused with a
GFP tag. Thus, genetically appending GFP to POIs allowed the Slmb-GFP
nanobody fusion to induce degradation of the target and resultant
phenotypes. As examples, the degradation
of sqh-GFP inhibited the final stages of cell division to result in
multinucleated cells, and the degradation of ap-GFP led to the development
of malformed wings. Baudisch et al. also used the Slmb fusion to degrade
GFP in tobacco plants, thereby establishing a new method to study
plant proteins. 

## CRL2: VHL,
KLHDC2 [phosphoPROTAC, RNA-PROTAC, AdPROM]
CRL2 comprises
the adaptor proteins elongin B/C, the cullin protein
CUL2, and various substrate recognition receptors. VHL and KLHDC2
both belong to this set of substrate receptors and have been recruited
for targeted protein degradation studies. Röth et al., however,
only recently demonstrated KLHDC2 to be a recruitable component, and
it has yet to be studied extensively. In contrast, VHL is one of the most recruited proteins for PROTAC
development and has driven most of the current understanding of targeted
protein degradation. Studies now primarily recruit VHL with its nanomolar
affinity small-molecule binder derived from the VH298 inhibitor, but
initial binders against VHL consisted of peptides inspired by its
binding to the protein HIF1α. In fact, the development of VH298
drew inspiration from the hydroxylated proline that can be found at
the VHL-HIF1α interface as the basis for structure-guided optimization. While variants of the VHL peptide recruiter
exist, the two most used peptides contain the sequences LAP(OH)YI
and ALAPYIP. Notably, preparation of the former includes hydroxylating
the proline prior to its delivery into cells, while the latter relies
on prolyl hydroxylase within cells to catalyze the hydroxylation of
the central proline. Direct fusions of full-length VHL to target binders
have also been successful in redirected protein degradation.
The pentapeptide VHL recruiter LAP(OH)YI initially started as an
extended octapeptide that Zhang et al. used to recruit VHL for the
degradation of MetAP-2. Zhang and colleagues
fused LAP(OH)YI to the MetAP-2 covalent ligand fumagillol, leading
to the degradation of MetAP-2 when delivered into cells. To demonstrate
degradation with a reversible target ligand, estradiol replaced fumagillol
in a version targeting ER (named E2-octa). E2-octa almost fully depleted
ER in cells despite its reversible binding. Bargagna-Mohan et al.
expanded on this study by demonstrating that E2-octa treatment inhibited
angiogenic sprouting by 50% when compared with untreated controls. Bargagna-Mohan and colleagues also established
the minimum pentapeptide sequence for VHL recruitment. Estradiol conjugated
to the pentapeptide LAP(OH)YI (E2-penta) nearly degraded all of ER
at concentrations from 10- to 20-fold lower than E2-octa. E2-penta
additionally inhibited angiogenic sprouting, which decreased by 80%.
Rodriguez-Gonzalez et al. explored the mechanism of LAP(OH)YI-induced
degradation by targeting the androgen receptor (AR) and the estrogen
receptor (ER). The degrader designs
consisted of the AR ligand, namely, dihydrotestosterone (DHT), and
the ER ligand estradiol, which were conjugated to LAP(OH)YI to create
the degraders DHT-HIF1α and E2-HIF1α, respectively. DHT-HIF1α
treatment in an AR-dependent cancer cell line and E2-HIF1α treatment
in an ER-dependent cancer cell line led to the degradation of the
respective proteins. Both degraders induced cell cycle arrest by inhibiting
phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma protein, with an IC50 of 12.5 μM in the AR-dependent cell line and an IC50 of 16 μM in the most effective ER-dependent cell line. For
comparison, the authors also treated AR-independent and ER-independent
cancer cells lines with DHT-HIF1α and E2-HIF1α, respectively.
Neither treatment of AR-independent or ER-independent cells elicited
any effects compared to the inhibited cell proliferation seen in previous
experiments. Lastly, adding a polyarginine tail to DHT-HIF1α
improved cellular delivery and potency to an IC50 of 3.8
μM after 72 h.
Other studies have made improvements to
E2-HIF1α. Cyrus et
al. proposed that a divalent estradiol variant of E2-HIF1α would
increase the potency and degrade ER more efficiently. Indeed, the addition of estradiol to either
terminus led to a dramatic decrease of ER when compared to the original
E2-HIF1α. Jiang et al. also improved E2-HIF1α by replacing
estradiol with an ER-targeting stapled peptide named TD-PROTAC. The stapled peptide, as discussed in , would improve
cell permeance. The delivery of TD-PROTAC to cells degraded ER and
induced cell death with an IC50 of ∼20 μM
through inhibition of downstream receptor signaling. In vivo studies
also indicated inhibition of tumor growth upon treatment. By comparison,
the control experiment using an unstapled peptide did not induce any
notable effects. Following on this study, Dai et al. optimized the
ER-targeting stapled peptide binder. The authors incorporated neopentyl glycine residues that were previously
shown to increase a helical conformation, leading to improved stability
and cell penetration. This improved degrader exhibited an IC50 of ∼10 μM in vitro and inhibited tumor growth in vivo.
LAP(OH)YI has also been used in various studies that expand the
substrate scope of VHL-mediated targeted degradation. Ma et al. targeted
a novel oncogenic protein known as CREPT to demonstrate that the degradation
of CREPT is a valid anticancer therapeutic strategy. The authors identified a lysine zipper-like motif within
the protein that facilitated its homodimerization and created a bioPROTAC
named PRTC that consisted of this domain conjugated to LAP(OH)YI and
a polyarginine tail to enhance cell permeance. In pancreatic cancer
cells, PRTC degraded CREPT by 60% and led to the inhibition of tumor
cell proliferation, colony formation, and migration in vitro and in
vivo. Chen et al. also aimed to improve anticancer therapeutics by
degrading MDM2, an E3 ligase that regulates p53 degradation. The authors fused LAP(OH)YI to a stapled peptide
(SPMI) to create an effective bioPROTAC for MDM2. The best of these
fusions induced cell death with an IC50 value of 6.7 μM
when a single PEG linked the SPMI and pentapeptide. Linker lengths
of PEG2 and PEG3, in comparison, led to IC50 values of
10.8 and 15.2 μM, respectively. Inhibitory effects, including
in vivo reduction of tumor growth, occurred due to the degradation
of MDM2 and subsequent stabilization of p53. Lastly, Ghidini et al.
demonstrated the use of LAP(OH)YI for targeted degradation of the
RNA-binding protein Lin28A. Lin28A has
thus far been difficult to target due to its large intrinsically disordered
regions. The authors created RNA-PROTACs that fused various miRNA
oligonucleotides, derived from the conserved RNA binding sequence
of Lin28A, to the pentapeptide. The best RNA-PROTAC selectively degraded
Lin28A by 50% while avoiding its close relative Lin28B. To demonstrate
the broad applicability of this technology, a RBFOX1-targeting RNA-PROTAC
also successfully degraded its POI by 50%.
The other common
VHL recruiting peptide consists of the sequence
ALAPYIP, was chosen based on structural insights into the VHL-HIF1α
interface. Schneekloth Jr. et al. first
used this sequence in a study to improve on the initial PROTAC (designed
by Sakamoto et al.) so that degradation could be induced upon incubation
with cells. Fusion of this peptide to
a ligand targeting FKBP12F36V and a polyarginine tail created
Protac-4, which caused a loss of fluorescent GFP signal in cells stably
expressing GFP-FKBP12F36V. The authors applied this strategy
to target AR by fusing ALAPYIP to DHT and a polyarginine tail. Treatment
with cells stably expressing GFP-AR similarly resulted in a loss of
fluorescent signal.
One interesting development that used ALAPYIP
came from Hines et
al., who aimed to couple targeted protein degradation with the activation
state of a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) in a technology named phosphoPROTAC
(PP). Successfully doing so would enable
phosphorylation-dependent inhibition of RTK signaling pathways. The
authors first targeted the RTK known as TrkA, which activates the
effector protein FRS2α upon NGF-dependent phosphorylation. The
PP for this system (TrkAPPFRS2α) comprised
the TrkA phosphorylation site, the VHL recruiter, and a polyarginine
tail. Delivery into cells caused the degradation of FRS2α through
a mechanism dependent on activating TrkA via treatment of NGF and
the phosphorylation of the TrkA phosphorylation site. TrkAPPFRS2α reduced FRS2α levels by approximately
50% at a concentration of 40 μM and achieved a maximum degradation
of 90% at concentrations greater than 60 μM. Hines et al. expanded
on this technology by targeting the RTK pair ErbB2/ErbB3, which activates
PI3K upon NRG-induced phosphorylation. With all other components remaining
the same, the phosphorylation sequence on ErbB3 replaced that of TrkA
to create ErbB2PPPI3K. The delivery of ErbB2PPPI3K into cells degraded PI3K with maximum
reduction at a concentration of 40 μM. Similar to the previous
PP, ErbB2PPPI3K reduced P13K through a mechanism
that depended on both NRG induction and proper phosphorylation of
ErbB3. Further in vitro and in vivo studies revealed increased apoptosis
of cancer cells due to downstream activation of Akt.
As is with
the pentapeptide, many researchers have used ALAPYIP
to recruit VHL for the degradation of POIs that include disease-relevant
targets. Chu et al. aimed to degrade tau in this way to address tau-dependent
neurodegenerative disorders. The authors
screened different variations of the degrader, including one that
recruited β-TrCP. Their work revealed that a tau-targeting sequence
derived from β-tubulin combined with ALAPYIP and a polyarginine
tag (TH0006) resulted in the largest reduction of signal when coexpressed
with tau-GFP. TH0006-induced tau degradation in cells caused the redistribution
of clustered mitochondria and enhanced cell survival both in vivo
and in vitro. In a related strategy, Liao et al. targeted β-catenin
with the previously reported stapled peptide xStAx to modulate the
Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway. The degrader named xStAx-VHLL was composed of xStAx fused to ALAPYIP.
Upon delivery into cells, xStAx-VHLL degraded endogenous β-catenin,
which inhibited Wnt signaling more potently and potentiated effects
for a longer time than xStAx alone. Further studies suggest this also
caused the inhibition of cell proliferation and tumor formation in
vitro and tumor growth in vivo. Monstrose et al. used a variation
of the common VHL recruiter consisting of the sequence MLAPYIPM to
degrade X-protein, a hepatitis B virus antigen that increases risk
of hepatocellular carcinoma. After identifying
the minimum sequence required for X-protein dimerization, the authors
created two molecules that induced the near-complete degradation of
X-protein in cells: one formed with the VHL recruiter and one formed
with the X-protein instability domain. Degradation of X-protein, as
predicted, reduced apoptosis of hepatocytes. Similarly, Henning et
al. conjugated a previously identified ligand against Akt that allosterically
activated phosphorylation of its substrate to ALAPYIP. This led to the degradation of Akt in a dose-dependent
manner, with a concentration of 128 μM degrading approximately
half of Akt (DC50). Lastly, Zheng et al. proposed the term
proteolysis targeting peptide (PROTAP) to describe PROTACs composed
of peptide binders only. To demonstrate
the potential of PROTAPs, the authors conjugated ALAPYIP to a peptide
sequence that binds Bcl-xL and the cell penetrating TAT sequence,
creating the PROTAP RR-39. In vitro experiments demonstrated a DC50 of 300 μM for RR-39-mediated degradation of Bcl-xL.
Aside from peptides, recruitment of CRL2 has also been accomplished
through direct fusions of VHL to POI binders. Fulcher et al. first
did so with a technology named affinity-directed protein missile (AdPROM)
to target GFP-tagged proteins with the fusion of full-length VHL and
a GFP nanobody (aGFP). Similar to the
deGradFP technology established by Caussinus et al., the AdPROM system
enables investigations into the functional consequences of POI degradation.
The authors demonstrated AdPROM-mediated degradation by appending
GFP to the proteins VPS34 and PAWS1. The expression of the VHL C-terminal
fusion, VHL-aGFP, in these cells degraded only GFP-tagged targets
as endogenous VPS34 and PAW1 remained unaffected. Interestingly, the
expression of the VHL N-terminal fusion, aGFP-VHL, did not degrade
either target. Fulcher et al. expanded the system in a separate study
by redirecting the VHL with a POI-specific nanobody rather than one
targeting GFP. To model this, the authors fused VHL to monobodies
the bind to the N-terminus (aNSa1) or the C-terminus (aCS3) of SHP2.
SHP2 natively regulates Ras/MAPK signaling, which involves the phosphorylation
of the protein ERK1/2. The expression of either aNSa1 or aCS3 thus
, led to depletion of SHP2 in various cancer cell lines, including
U2OS osteosarcoma, MDA-MB-468 mammary gland adenocarcinoma, A549 pulmonary
adenocarcinoma, and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells, and reduced ERK1/2
phosphorylation. Pretreatment with MLN4924, which inhibits E3 ligase
activity, rescued both SHP2 levels and ERK1/2 phosphorylation. When
studying the downstream effects in EGF-induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation
system, Fulcher and colleagues discovered that potency depended on
a variety of factors, including the cell type and degrader used.
Roth et al. employed the AdPROM technology to degrade HRAS and
KRAS, two RAS family members frequently mutated in cancers. Efforts to inhibit all RAS oncogenes have been
underway since their discovery, but the authors proposed in this study
that the degradation of RAS proteins also presents a valid approach
to develop anticancer therapeutics. As a proof of concept, the authors
first expressed the anti-GFP AdPROM in A549 non-small-cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC) cells with GFP appended at the N-terminus of KRAS. Immunoblots
indicated the near-complete degradation of GFP-KRAS. Flow cytometry
further confirmed that 98% of cells transduced with the fusion of
VHL and a GFP nanobody (VHL-aGFP16) showed the loss of the GFP signal.
By comparison, less than 1% showed the loss of GFP signal when transduced
with either VHL or aGFP16 only. At the time of the study, no KRAS-specific
monobodies existed; therefore, the authors used a previously reported
monobody that showed an affinity for both HRAS and KRAS (aHRAS). Transduction
of this construct into cells led to the degradation of both GFP-tagged
HRAS and KRAS, but with significantly lower efficiencies than those
observed with anti-GFP AdPROM. VHL-aHRAS additionally degraded untagged
HRAS by more than 50% and KRAS by ∼15% as measured by quantitative
proteomics. Notably, VHL-aHRAS only reduced KRAS to statistically
significant levels when compared to the empty vector control but not
the VHL-only control. The degradation of HRAS and KRAS, however, varied
depending on the cell type. In cell lines HT-29 and SW620, which express
wild-type KRAS and mutant KRASG12V, respectively, VHL-aHRAS
did not degrade either KRAS proteins. Additionally, degradation of
HRAS could only be confirmed in HT-29 cells, since no HRAS signal
existed for any SW620 samples. Inhibition of cell proliferation also
depended on the cell type and AdPROM design. Neither wild-type A549
nor A549GFPKRAS displayed any differences in proliferation
with any of the treatment conditions. Treatment of VHL-aHRAS or VHL-aGFP16
in HT-29 cells mildly inhibited cell proliferation but to a lesser
extent than aHRAS-only treated cells. In SW620 cells, both VHL-aHRAS-
and aHRAS-only conditions reduced cell proliferation by more than
50%, while VHL-aGFP16-treated SW620 cells remained unaffected.
Inspired by the work of Bery et al. in developing a KRAS-specific
DARPin (covered in ), Teng et al. engineered a monobody named 12VC1 that
binds specifically to the GTP-bound state of KRASG12V and
KRASG12C mutants. , 12VC1, notably, does
not bind to wild-type RAS, including wild-type KRAS. Initial studies
indicated that 12VC1 alone could inhibit RAS signaling in HEK293 cells
overexpressing KRASG12V or KRASG12C, and this
suppressed cell proliferation and tumor growth in vitro and in vivo,
respectively. As expected, cells expressing wild-type KRAS remained
unaffected upon treatment. The authors then engineered degradation-resistant
12VC1.1 and 12VC1.2 that were fused to VHL for targeted degradation
of mutant KRAS. Both fusions successfully degraded mutant KRAS, but
12VC1.2 degraded KRASG12C and reduced downstream pERK levels
more efficiently despite being less abundantly expressed. Additionally,
RAS levels remained low and pERK levels continued to decline within
48 h of the 12VC1.2 degrader treatment. By comparison, RAS levels
increased and pERK returned to pretreatment levels within 48 h of
the 12VC1 inhibitor treatment. Finally, expression of 12VC1.2 in mouse
xenograft models using H23 cells expressing KRASG12C suppressed
tumor growth compared to noninduced tumors and tumors expressing a
nontargeting degrader. This finding improves upon a prior study that
reported a poor response of H23 cells when directly inhibited with
a KRASG12C-specific covalent inhibitor.
More recently,
Roth et al. reported the use of the substrate receptor
KLHDC2 as an alternative to VHL when redirecting CRL2 for targeted
degradation. Using the GFP-targeting
AdPROM technology, the authors screened more than 30 E3 ligases for
their ability to degrade attractive, disease-relevant targets such
as KRAS, STK33, β-catenin, and FoxP3. KLHDC2, KLHL6, RNF125,
RNF144A, and SiAH2 all showed promise for PROTAC development, but
they continued with the development of a KLHDC2 degrader because of
existing knowledge about its mode of action. Structural studies specifically
indicate that KLHDC2 binds to a diglycine moiety on its binding partner,
SelK. To demonstrate the recruitment of KLHDC2, Roth and colleagues
modified their existing AdPROM by fusing the KLHDC2 peptide recruiter
(GG) to the GFP nanobody to create aGFP16-GG. aGFP16-GG successfully
degraded KRAS-GFP in A549 cells, STK33-GFP in A549 cells, and β-catenin-GFP
in HEK293 cells whereas an inactivated variant of the degrader did
not lead to noticeable changes in any of the proteins of interest.
KLHDC2, however, may need optimization to improve their efficiencies
as the degradation of GFP by a halo-PROTAC recruiting KLHDC2 only
reduced halo-GFP by 40% compared to 60% when recruiting VHL.

## CRL3:
Keap1, SPOP
In addition to the RING protein RBX1,
CRL3 comprises the cullin protein CUL3 and a set of BTB/POZ domain-containing
substrate receptors. CRL3 E3 does not possess adaptor proteins (e.g.,
Skp1 in CRL1 and Elongin B/C in CRL2) that bridge the cullin protein
with the substrate receptor protein. Instead, the conserved BTB/POZ
domain in the substrate receptors facilitate the connection to CUL3.
CRL3 E3s have only recently been repurposed for targeted degradation
with the successful recruitment of Keap1 and SPOP. Whereas Keap1 has
been recruited by a peptide binder, SPOP has mostly been used in direct
fusions with target binders.
Lu et al. previously used computational
methods to improve Nrf2-inspired peptide inhibitors against Keap1
in the hopes of developing novel therapeutics for inflammatory diseases.
The authors discovered that the peptide LDPETGEYL binds to Keap1 with
a Kd in the low nM range. Due to the knowledge of Keap1 as a component
of CRL3, however, Lu et al. followed up with the use of this peptide
in a PROTAC that targets tau for degradation. The design used in this study consisted of the Keap1 peptide
ligand, a β-tubulin-derived tau protein binder, and a polyarginine
cell-penetrating moiety (Peptide 1). The delivery of Peptide 1 into
GFP-tau-overexpressed SH-SY5Y cells reduced the fluorescent signal
that was rescued with the silencing of Keap1. Lu and colleagues also
screened for PROTAC variants that included alternative Keap1 binders
(e.g., strong affinity LDPETGEFL and weak affinity
LDPATGEYL), an α-tubulin derived tau
binder, and/or the cell-penetrating TAT sequence but found Peptide
1 to be the most efficient, as its delivery into GFP-tau-overexpressed
SH-SY5Y cells decreased the green fluorescence by 84%. By comparison,
the other degraders reduced the GFP signal between 50% and 75%, while
the degrader employing the weak Keap1 binder only reduced GFP-tau
by 10%.
In another study, Shin et al. aimed to degrade the nuclear
protein
H2B-GFP initially using the deGradFP method, where fusion of the F-box
domain to a GFP nanobody led to the degradation of any protein tagged
with GFP. After experiencing difficulties with this method, however,
the authors screened various E3 fusions designed to degrade nuclear
proteins. These fusions included the
NSlmb F-box domain, Skp1, elongin C, SPOP, Keap1, and DDB1. Only the
SPOP fusion led to significant decrease of H2B-GFP, where it lowered
GFP levels by 50-fold in the 293TetOn cell line. At best, the elongin-C
and F-box fusions demonstrated a 3–5-fold decrease of the GFP
signa,l while the others did not show any significant changes. SPOP
retained degradation efficiencies against six other GFP fusion proteins
(cMyc-GFP, Pin1-GFP, Cdk4-GFP, Elf3-GFP, and GFP alone) and when fused
to four different GFP nanobodies (GBP1, GBP2, GBP6, and GBP7), which
implies the adaptability of this E3 ligase. Additional experiments
indicated that SPOP functions as a dimer because the deletion of the
dimerization domain but not the nuclear localization sequence inhibited
H2B-GFP. Lastly, the authors demonstrated the use of this SPOP degrader
in zebrafish studies by inducing defects in early embryogenesis with
the degradation of Hmga2.
Lim et al. systematically explored
numerous fusions that altered
the cullin-associated E3 adaptor protein and the GFP binding element. The results of the former, which includes CRL1,
CRL2, CRL3, CRL4a, and CRL5, are presented in their respective sections
of this Review. However, this study primarily focused on SPOP fusions.
After confirming the results published by Shin et al., the authors
studied the effects of replacing the previous GFP binder, VHHGFP4,
with other GFP binders of protein scaffolds that included DARPins,
monobodies, and αReps (the synthetic self-assembling Brick and
Staple pairs). All degraded H2B-GFP successfully despite differences
in size, structures, and binding epitopes. Degraders containing the
weakest monobody binders (Kd ∼
200–250 nM) failed to deplete GFP, implying a correlation between
substrate binding affinity and degradation efficiency. Lim and colleagues
applied the anti-GFP bioPROTAC platform to target a potential therapeutic
target, PCNA, due to its association with tumor growth. While 5 of
the 10 fusions degraded PCNA-GFP (FBW7, VHL, SPOP, SOCS2, and CHIP),
only the SPOP fusion continued to be used in additional experiments.
To recruit PCNA directly, the authors used a previously reported PCNA
peptide binder named Con1 to replace GFP. Expression of both VHHGFP4-SPOP
and Con1-SPOP reduced the GFP signal in cells, but Con1-SPOP appeared
to do so to a greater extent than VHHGFP4-SPOP. While 83% of cells
reported reduced GFP when treated with Con1-SPOP, only 53% of the
VHHGFP4-SPOP0-treated cells lacked the GFP signal. Con1-SPOP also
degraded endogenous PCNA in HEK293 cells, which led to cell cycle
arrest at a concentration markedly lower than that in previous inhibition
studies with Con1 alone.
Inspired by the ongoing efforts to
degrade distinct RAS mutants,
Lim et al. applied the approach to create degraders for KRAS. Upon screening 10 E3 fusions targeting GFP-KRAS
in HEK293 cells, Lim and colleagues observed that all but the one
that recruited CRL4A successfully degraded the target protein. Six
attenuated the GFP signal in more than 70% of cells (βTrCP,
FBW7, SKP2, SPOP, SOCS2, and CHIP), but SPOP was used in additional
studies because of its previously reported robustness. Five KRAS binders
were chosen to be fused to SPOP for degradation studies: the monobody
NS1 targeting KRAS and HRAS, DARPin K27 targeting GDP-bound KRAS,
DARPin K55 targeting GTP-bound KRAS, R11.1.6 targeting variants of
KRAS, and RBD (RAS-binding domain) targeting GTP-bound RAS. Only NS1-SPOP,
K27-SPOP, and R11.1.6-SPOP successfully depleted GFP when expressed
in cells. NS1-SPOP preferentially degraded KRAS over other variants,
and K27-SPOP preferentially degraded GDP-bound KRAS. R11.1.6-SPOP
demonstrated only partial reduction, perhaps because of its preference
for KRAS variants. Moreover, use of all three degraders led to sustained
pERK inhibition, with K27-SPOP demonstrating the most profound downstream
effects. Lim and co-workers also established a NanoLuc assay to further
probe the degradation selectivity and measure degradation rates. The assay revealed that NS1-SPOP degraded only
KRAS and HRAS, while K27-SPOP indiscriminately degraded all variants.
NS1-SPOP notably degraded KRAS at a faster rate than HRAS despite
having a lower affinity for KRAS. When comparing degradation rates
of the most common KRAS variants (G12C, G12D, G12 V, and Q61H), the
authors noted that K27-SPOP degraded KRAS variants at rates that directly
correlated with the hydrolysis rate of cycling between the GDP-bound
state and the GTP-bound state of KRAS. However, KRASQ61H did not follow this trend despite having the lowest hydrolysis rate
of all variants. In comparison, NS1-SPOP degraded all variants at
similar rates, which can be attributed to its similar affinity for
KRAS in its GDP-bound and GTP-bound states.
Recently, Shen et
al. reported the successful delivery of bioPROTACs
into cells to affect hemoglobin expression as a possible treatment
for sickle cell disease. Specifically,
degradation of the transcription factor BCL11A would lead to an increase
in the levels of γ-globin, which has been shown previously to
mitigate disease symptoms. The authors reasoned that identifying a
nanobody that binds to BCL11A and appending it to the cell-permeant
miniature protein ZF5.3 and either RNF4 or SPOP would effectively
induce γ-globin expression. Both RNF4 and SPOP degraders successfully
depleted BCL11A in the erythroid precursor HUDEP-2 cells, but the
SPOP fusion (ZnF5.3-2D9-SPOP) demonstrated more striking results by
degrading up to 70% of BCL11A within 12 h and sustaining low BCL11A
levels for 72 h. Immunoblots and quantitative PCR confirmed that the
degradation of BCL11A by ZF5.3-2D9-SPOP increased γ-globin transcripts
in HUDEP-2 cells. Delivery of ZF5.3-2D9-SPOP to primary hemopoietic
stem cells (CD34+) produced results where the level of
γ-globin transcripts increased 2.4–3.9-fold more than
in untreated cells. At best, this correlated to γ-globin rising
to 30% of all β-like hemoglobin in developing erythroid cells.
The authors also successfully degraded BCL11A using nanobodies and
the TRIM21 E3 ligase (discussed in ).

## CRL4–7
The other CRL complexes have only recently
begun to be fully explored for their targeted degradation potential.
Lim et al. briefly studied CRL4A and CRL5 recruitment by including
them in their E3 recruiter screen, as discussed in the CRL3 section. The CUL4A-associated proteins CRBN and DDB2
demonstrated little to no degradation of GFP-tagged proteins in this
study, perhaps because of lowered CRL4A activity in HEK293 cells rather
than the lack of recruitment potential. Interestingly, in a later
study on KRAS degradation, Lim et al. noted a similar lack of CUL4A-associated
degradation in HEK293. However, the authors used confocal microscopy
to note that expression of DDB2-vhhGFP4 caused GFP-KRAS to redistribute
to the cytosol/nucleus, whereas GFP-KRAS primarily existed on the
membrane in control cells. This suggests that DDB2-vhhGFP4 binds to
GFP-KAS but lacks the ability to degrade it. Unlike CUL4A associated
proteins, CUL5 associated SOCS2 and ASB1 successfully degraded GFP
tagged proteins. The authors did not pursue these constructs further
than this initial screening.
More recently, Cornebois et al.
designed a similar method to screen novel E3 ligases for their ability
to degrade non-native substrates. The authors established cells with
stable expression of a KRAS fusion that comprised an ALFA tag for
E3 recruitment, a GFP tag as a reporter, and an H2B nuclear localization
sequence. Appending select E3 components to sdAb, an ALFA tag binder,
allowed the recognition and ubiquitination of the KRAS construct.
In addition to screening proteins in the CRL family of E3 ligases,
Cornebois and colleagues also included an RBR E3 ligase (RNF144B)
and one from the APC/C multisubunit RING E3 family (CDC20). Only SOCS7
from CRL5 demonstrated a significant reduction of the GFP signal at
levels comparable to the VHL-positive control (∼90%), while
RNF144B RBR E3 and FBX38 from CRL7 demonstrated a moderate decrease
of the GFP signal (∼50%). Notably, KLHL7 demonstrated no degradation
in this study, which contrasts with a study by Roth et al. The authors further explored SOCS7 as a degradation
tool by probing its activity in various cell types and its structure–activity
relationship with different fusion designs. SOCS7 degraded nuclear
localized KRAS fusion in all cell lines tested by at least 75% but
degraded diffuse KRAS fusion with differing efficiencies. Interestingly,
the most efficient degradation occurred when targeting the ALFA tag;
a notable drop in efficiency occurs when targeting GFP, especially
when targeting a diffuse POI. The SOCS7 fused with a C-terminus target
binder also degraded its target more efficiently than the N-terminus
fusion, confirming the importance of degrader design in efficiency.
The target binder Kd only began to affect
degradation efficiency when reaching the low μM range. Lastly,
Cornebois and colleagues demonstrated that the fusion of SOCS7 with
the KRAS binder K19 can degrade endogenous KRAS, which inhibits the
proliferation of pancreatic cancer cells.

4.1.2.

## Cullin-Independent RING/U-box E3

## XIAP
Gross et
al. aimed to establish a quick and reversible
method to eliminate inhibitory inputs in neurons by depleting geophyrin,
a postsynaptic protein that clusters with GABAα and the glycine
receptor. To do so, the authors engineered
a degrader named GFE3 by fusing the high affinity geophyrin binder,
GPHN.FingR, to the ring domain of XIAP. Delivery of GFE3 to COS-7
cells expressing GFP-fused geophyrin led to the depletion of the fluorescent
signal in 80% of cells. Notably, GFE3-induced degradation of geophyrin
did not affect the overall expression of GABAα receptors and
allowed their redistribution throughout dendrites. Controls where
geophyrin levels remained unaffected demonstrated GABAα receptor
clustering as would be expected. Degradation of geophyrin by GFE3
in cultured hippocampal neurons caused the decrease of the miniature
inhibitory postsynaptic signaling current (mIPSC) frequency and amplitude
by 65% and 30%, respectively; the miniature excitatory postsynaptic
signaling current remained unaffected, as desired. To demonstrate
the reversibility of this system, the authors established an inducible
GFE3 expression system. As expected, mIPSC decreased with the initial
doxycycline induced expression of GFE3 but recovered following the
removal of doxycycline from media. In vivo experiments with intact
brains of mice expressing GFE3 also demonstrated decreased inhibitory
signaling, while excitatory signaling remained unaffected. Finally,
expression of GFE3 in zebrafish led to motor function defects previously
identified as the phenotypic consequences of mutant inhibitory receptors.

## RNF4 [ARMeD]
Ibrahim et al. established a technology
termed antibody-RING-mediated degradation (ARMeD), which, in its simplest
form, consists of a target nanobody fused to the RING domain of RNF4. The authors conjugated targeting nanobodies
to one or two copies of the RING domain (1 × RING and 2 ×
RING) and the existing RNF4 nuclear localization sequence remained
in the final construct to enable targeting of nuclear proteins. As
proof of concept, the RING domains were fused to a GFP nanobody (GNb)
that also recognizes yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) to target YFP-conjugated
proteins. These constructs degraded the nuclear and cytosolic proteins
YFP-PARG, YFP-PML, YFP-RNF146, and YFP-PEX10 via a proteosome-dependent
mechanism. To target an endogenous protein, Ibrahim and colleagues
identified two nanobodies with high affinity to the NEDD8 protease
NEDP1 and created the degraders NNb2–1 × RING and NNb9–2
× RING. Both degraded NEDP1 when expressed in HeLa cells and
increased levels of NEDD8-conjugated proteins. Notably, immunoblots
indicated the loss of NNb9–2 × RING itself, perhaps because
of autoubiquitination. After purifying both ARMeD fusions targeting
YFP or NEDP1, delivery by methods such as microinjection and electroporation
also successfully caused degradation of targets. However, sustained
depletion of YFP-PML only occurred with the delivery of both the GNb-2
× RING protein and mRNA. Additionally, because dimerization of
RNF4 is essential for proper function, all 2 × RING fusions outperformed
their 1 × RING counterparts in the degradation of NEDP1.

## MDM2
The development of the kinase inhibitor imatinib
represents major progress in the treatment of BCR/ABL-driven cancers.
Results from clinical trials have indicated that some BCR/ABL-driven
cancers either inherently have or develop resistance to the drug by
mutations in the protein. A previous study established a potent tumor
inhibitor that binds both BCR/ABL and MDM2 called PMIBCR/ABL-R6.
Ma et al. proposed that this peptide functioned by three mechanisms:
the inhibition of BCR/ABL tetramerization, the depletion of cellular
BCR/ABL levels, and the disruption of p53/MDM2 interaction to prevent
MDM2-induced degradation of p53. Indeed,
fluorescent polarization assays confirmed PMIBCR/ABL-R6
disrupted BCR/ABL oligomerization and caused MDM2 to release p53.
The delivery PMIBCR/ABL-R6 to different leukemia cell lines
revealed the scope of improvements compared to BCR/ABL-R6, which does
not target the p53/MDM2 complex. In K562 and MOLM-13 cells, PMIBCR/ABL-R6 demonstrated significantly stronger potency than BCR/ABL-R6,
as the IC50 in both cell lines decreased by half. Additionally,
only PMIBCR/ABL-R6 treatment had a detectable IC50 in the imatinib-resistant cell lines KU-812 and SUP-B15, which can
be credited to the degradation of BCR/ABL variants p210 and p190.
Immunoblots showed that PMIBCR/ABL-R6 successfully inhibited
the growth of all tested drug-resistant cell lines efficiently due
to its ability to degrade all variants of BCR/ABL. Additional in vivo
models demonstrated that the addition of a p53/MDM2 targeting sequence
allowed for the most efficient inhibition of tumor growth.
Ma
et al. recruited MDM2 to degrade the androgen receptor (AR) and its
splice variant AR-V7 in hopes of combatting acquired drug resistance
in prostate cancers. To do so, the authors
used generative AI to identify a peptide binder against the DNA binding
domain (DBD) of AR, which facilitates the homodimerization necessary
for activity. The DBD is highly conserved in AR and variants; therefore,
it serves as a unique and specific drug target. This peptide fused
to a the MDM2 binder, PMI, created the degrader AR pep-PROTAC. For
efficient delivery into cells, Ma and colleagues loaded the AR pep-PROTAC
into ultrasmall gold (Au) nanoparticles to create the modulator Au-AR
pep-PROTAC; details regarding AI-assisted ligand discovery and nanoparticle
synthesis are discussed in other sections of this Review. Delivery
of Au-AR pep-PROTAC into different AR-positive cancer cell lines caused
the degradation of both nuclear and cytosolic AR by MDM2 at DC50 values in the nM range in a dose- and time-dependent manner.
This correlated with the inhibition of cell growth at IC50 values in the nM range as well. Bare Au nanoparticle-treated cells
indicated that the cytotoxic effects seen with Au-AR pep-PROTAC result
from the degrader, as cytotoxicity from bare Au nanoparticles occurred
at 20 μM. Au-AR pep-PROTAC predictably only targeted AR and
its variants while other receptors (estrogen, progesterone, mineralocorticoid,
and glucocorticoid) remained unaffected. Lastly, in vivo studies demonstrated
potent tumor inhibition at concentrations significantly lower than
existing AR inhibitors.

## PML/TRIM19
Previous studies have
shown that PML, also
known as TRIM19, recognizes proteins with extended polyQ tracts such
as ataxin1 (Atxn1). PML association with Atxn1 through its coiled-coil
domain has been shown to reduce Atxn1 aggregates by solubilizing the
monomeric form. However, total levels of Atxn1 remain the same, which
could still pose an issue. Dhar et al. proposed that replacing the
C-terminal SRS2 domain with a scFv targeting polyQ would cause the
degradation of Atxn1 and thereby reduce both the monomeric and aggregate
forms. Two polyQ scFvs fused to PML
created the degraders PML-6E and PML-MW1. Expression of either protein
in cells depleted the total levels of Atxn1 by 2-fold compared to
a nontargeting control. Fractionation studies also indicated the reduction
of both soluble monomeric Atxn1 and the insoluble aggregate Atxn1,
but mechanistic studies later determined the reduction in aggregates
stems from monomeric Atxn1 degradation. Using constructs targeting
polyQ tracts, the authors also demonstrated the ability to degrade
huntingtin protein, where an extended polyQ tract has also been implicated
in the progression of disease.

## TRIM21 [TRIM-Away, TRIMbody-Away,
optoTRIM-Away, miniTRIM-Away]
While many tools exist to degrade
targets on proteome-wide scales,
limitations still prevent current methods from easily degrading endogenous
proteins. For instance, many methods require the existence of a ligand
or peptide binder. If not a binder, genetic editing can be used to
tag a protein with GFP, but efficiency can vary depending on the cell
line. Clift et al. aimed to address this issue by exploiting the native
function of the widely expressed cytosolic protein, TRIM21, to recognize
the Fc domains of antibodies in a system called TRIM-Away. The delivery of TRIM21 and an antibody specific
for any POI would cause the ubiquitination and degradation of said
POI. The authors used the approach to successfully deplete GFP both
in cell lines and primary cells. TRIM21 also degraded GFP localized
to different regions of the cell, such as the plasma membrane (anchored
by a N-myristoyl motif), the membrane of vesicle-like structures (anchored
by a S-palmitoyl motif), and the nucleus (fused to H2B). Notably,
only an engineered antibody mimetic Fc-Nb fusion crossed the nuclear
membrane and degraded H2B-GFP, while the full antibody did not. Clift
et al. also demonstrated the use of TRIM-Away in studying phenotype
changes and protein functions upon degradation. In mouse oocytes,
TRIM21 degraded the motor protein Eg5, which caused the same malfunctions
as the inhibition of Eg5 by the small molecule monastrol. TRIM21 degradation
of endogenous unmodified Rec8 confirmed its function as a sister chromatid
cohesion facilitator in mouse eggs. This previously could only be
studied with complex mouse genetics because Rec8 is a long-lived protein
that could exist for up to decades in humans.
In early studies,
Clift et al. delivered TRIM-Away by microinjection. To apply the technology
in bulk cells, the authors used electroporation to deliver TRIM-Away
components. TRIM21 degraded target proteins IKKα and ERK1 with
the delivery of the antibodies only to cells stably expressing mCherry-TRIM21
and with the codelivery of the antibodies and mCherry-TRIM21. In the
former experiment, IKKα and ERK1 were degraded in some cell
lines despite the lack of recombinant TRIM21, suggesting that endogenous
TRIM21 can also mediate protein degradation. Reliance on endogenous
TRIM21, however, may not be a suitable tactic because results from
this study also indicated that TRIM21 is degraded along with the POI.
Additionally, TRIM21 expression varies depending on cell types, and
low levels in some cells may prevent POI degradation. Additionally,
Zeng et al. confirmed that the autoubiquitination of TRIM21 occurred
upon target binding. Regardless, coelectroporation of TRIM21 and a
targeting antibody allows protein depletion studies in cases where
genetic editing is difficult (such as in primary cells).
As
observed with the mouse oocyte studies, TRIM-Away can be also
used to study phenotype changes and protein functions upon degradation.
TRIM21 degradation of mTOR led to the reduced phosphorylation of ribosome
protein 6, which correlated with the loss of signaling activity consistent
with mTORC1 inhibition by the small molecule rapamycin; TRIM21 degradation
of IκBα, an inhibitor of NF-κB, enabled NF-κB
signaling activity in a gain-of function phenotype. TRIM-Away studies
confirmed the function of pericentrin in Cdk5rap2 localization to
the centrosome and the function of NLRP3 in inflammasome activation
of primary human macrophages by IL1-β secretion. Finally, a
notable advantage to the TRIM-Away technique is its specificity to
the target protein. In all experiments, proteins closely associated
with the target protein remained unaffected when the target protein
was degraded (e.g., TRIM-Away of IkBa did not cause degradation of
NF-kB).
Despite the increasing use of TRIM21 in targeted degradation
studies,
information regarding its mechanism of action was lacking. Zeng et
al. remedied this issue by elucidating TRIM21 structural dependencies,
which allowed them to expand the TRIM-Away toolbox. The results of this study indicate that TRIM21 exists as
a dimer with an antiparallel coiled-coil domain that places the RING
domains 150 Å apart. As TRIM21 RING dimerization is required
for catalytic function, the authors proposed that multiple TRIM21
molecules must be recruited to enable targeted degradation of a POI.
A virus neutralization assay confirmed this hypothesis when neutralization
efficiency correlated with the density of recruited TRIM21 on the
virion surface. The loss of full neutralization occurred when the
surface retained less than 25% of the TRIM21 binding capacity. Additionally,
targeting GFP alone by TRIM-Away using a monoclonal antibody did not
cause GFP degradation, but TRIM21 ubiquitination activated upon GFP
fusion to oligomeric scaffolding proteins. Zeng et al. therefore proposed
that TRIM21 could specifically target the disease-causing extended
polyQ huntingtin protein because polyQ monoclonal antibodies will
recognize its antigen in multiple locations. Indeed, TRIM-Away degraded
only disease-relevant huntingtin proteins with tracts longer than
39Q because this length allowed sufficient clustering of TRIM21.
Given the new insights from their study, Zeng et al. and colleagues
expanded the TRIM-Away toolbox by establishing optoTRIM-Away, in which
blue light is necessary to activate TRIM21-mediated degradation. TRIM21
modified with a GFP nanobody and the plant photoreceptor cryptochrome
2 (CRY2) allowed light-induced clustering by CRY2 and protein targeting
by the GFP nanobody. Upon coexpression in cells, diffuse distribution
of the optoTRIM-Away construct and GFP-conjugated protein kinase c
(PKC) revealed the inability of TRIM21 to degrade monomeric GFP-PKC.
However, within minutes of blue-light stimulation, TRIM21 rapidly
degraded GFP-PKC due to the CRY2-facilitated clustering. The authors
additionally established that a GFP nanobody fused to the RING domain
of TRIM21 alone, named miniTRIM-Away, also caused rapid and stable
degradation of GFP fused proteins. The smaller size of miniTRIM-Away
serves as an advantage over the original TRIM-Away technique when
targeting proteins in the nucleus or proteins in primary cells.
Inspired by Clift et al., Chen et al. modified the TRIM-Away strategy
into TRIMbody-Away, which replaces the PRY-SPRY domain of TRIM21 with
a divalent nanobody recognizing GFP. The resulting bioPROTAC consisted of the TRIM21 tripartite RBCC
motif fused to the GFP nanobodies LaG12 and LaG6. By combining the
two TRIM-Away components into one, the authors hoped to prevent detrimental
effects arising from the overexpression of full length TRIM21 and
to avoid the need to deliver bulky cargo into cells. Both transient
transfection of TRIMbody-Away and doxycycline-induced expression of
TRIMbody-Away led to the decrease of the fluorescent signal by 60–67%
in HEK293T cells stably expressing GFP. Interestingly, the mechanism
of TRIMbody-Away-induced degradation involved both the proteasome
and lysosomal degradation pathways, as complete abrogation of GFP
degradation could only be achieved with the inhibition of both.
While TRIMbody-Away specifically used VHH nanobodies to target
POIs, VanDyke et al. demonstrated that alternative binding scaffolds
can also be used to target proteins. Tn3 binding scaffolds, based on the third fibronectin type III domain
of human tenascin-C, were used to target the proteins MALT1 and EED.
The authors developed seven different yeast display libraries to screen
for Tn3 binders against MALT1 and EED and identified fusions TRIM21-ME2
and TRIM21-EG5. TRIM21-ME2 degraded MALT1 fused to GFP, and TRIM21-EG5
degraded a similar GFP fusion with EED in HEK293F cells. The fusion
proteins also mediated the degradation of untagged MALT1 and EED when
overexpressed in cells, and TRIM21-ME2 successfully degraded endogenous
MALT1. In this study, the authors noted the importance of careful
construct and library design, as all Tn3 candidates derived from a
single library. This likely occurred because of steric hindrance on
the N-terminus of Tn3 upon fusion to TRIM21, an issue that was not
addressed during the initial screening.
Applications of and
improvements to the TRIM-Away strategy continue
to be explored. Shortly after Clift et al. established the method,
Chen et al. explored its use in the degradation of endogenous proteins
in zebrafish. Results of this study
firmly established TRIM-Away as an improvement from genetic-based
protein modulation with the degradation of Ddx19b and Dicer1, which
rapidly induced morphogenesis defects. Additionally, introduction
of TRIM-Away components prior to the expression of crucial proteins
enabled a temporary delay of functional protein levels. In another
study, Fletcher et al. targeted the disease-relevant protein human
antigen R (HuR), which has been associated with tumor growth. After identifying the nanobody VHHHuR, the authors created two TRIMbody-Away degraders with VHHHuR fused either to the N- or C-terminus of the RBCC domain of TRIM21.
Both fusions mediated the degradation of HuR, but T21RBCC-VHHHuR appeared to be the most efficient. In vitro doxycycline-induced
expression of T21RBCC-VHHHuR in HCT116 cells decreased
cell viability and colony formation. Additionally, in vivo models
demonstrated tumor growth inhibition with the expression of T21RBCC-VHHHuR. Lastly, given the difficulty of delivering large proteins,
Sui et al. aimed to establish a safe and effective method of delivering
TRIM-Away components. In this technology,
named Nano-ERASER, the delivery of TRIM-Away components targeting
COPZ1 led to COPZ1 degradation in cell cultures and corresponding
cell death. Given the relevance of COPZ1 in the progression of cancers,
the authors proposed that this delivery method could enable therapeutic
applications of TRIM-Away.

4.1.3.

## Atypical
RING E3 Recruitment

## CHIP [Ubiquibodies]
The first instances
of CHIP use
in targeted protein degradation studies came from Hatakeyama et al.
and Ma et al., who fused the U-box domain of CHIP to known interactors
of protein targets. Hatakeyama et al. targeted the proto-oncogene
c-Myc by fusing the U-box domain to Max (Max-U). Max-U only targeted c-Myc, despite Mad1 also being a known
interactor of Max. Although Max-U exhibited self-ubiquitination activity,
its expression led to the degradation of c-Myc by ∼50%. This
degradation translated phenotypically to slow growth of cancer cells,
inhibition of colony formation, and suppression of tumor growth. Ma
et al. applied a similar concept to target KRAS. In Raf1, KRAS binds to the RAS binding domain (RBD) in
combination with the cysteine-rich domain (CRD). The U-box domain
of CHIP fused to these two domains created the degrader RC-U. RC-U
expression in pancreatic cancer cells led to the degradation of KRAS,
which inhibited the cancer cell growth. In vivo studies also indicated
that RC-U inhibited tumor growth.
Portnoff et al. introduced
ubiquibodies (uAbs), the targeted degradation technology that employs
U-box domain fusions. In this study,
the authors used designer binding proteins such as intrabodies and
monobodies instead of known protein binders so that any POI can be
targeted. They exemplified the technology with two ubiquibody fusions.
First, the intrabody scFv13-R4 fused to the U-box domain created R4-uAb
that targeted β-galactosidase. The coexpression of R4-uAb and
β-galactosidase caused the near complete depletion of β-galactosidase
(by 97%) compared to a nonbinding control. The second ubiquibody comprised
the monobody YS1 fused to the U-box domain to create YS1-uAb that
targets the maltose binding protein (MBP). Similar to R4-uAb, YS1-uAb
expression led to the near complete depletion of MBP (by 93%) compared
to a nonbinding control.
Bery et al. applied the U-box fusion
technology in their study
to degrade mutant KRAS. They aimed to
the compare the effects of using the KRAS-specific DARPin K19 (DP
KRAS) and the nonspecific RAS binder iDAb (iDAb RAS). Given the multitude
of options for fusion proteins in targeted degradation studies at
this point, the authors screened the fusion of either binders to VHL
or U-Box on the N-terminus or C-terminus. No clear trend emerged,
as iDAb RAS degradation preferred fusion with the U-box domain and
DP RAS preferred fusion with VHL. Additionally, the U-box domain on
the C-terminus of iDAb RAS degraded proteins more efficiently while
VHL on the N-terminus of DP RAS degraded protein more efficiently.
Moving forward with these constructs, expression of UBOX-iDab RAS
and DP KRAS-VHL led to degradation of RAS proteins with the expected
specificities. All cell lines expressing UBOX-iDAb RAS degraded all
isoforms of RAS, while cell lines expressing DP KRAS-VHL only degraded
KRAS. However, DP KRAS-VHL only induced downstream phosphorylation
in cell lines with mutant KRAS, which correlated in vitro with induced
apoptosis and in vivo with tumor regression of these cell lines alone.
Interestingly, the replacement of VHL with GFP to create DP KRAS-GFP
fusion enabled downstream phosphorylation of WT KRAS cell lines, which
implied an added level of specificity upon conversion of an inhibitor
into a degrader.

## UBR1
Lee et al. aimed to recruit
the RING-like E3 ligase
UBR1 to degrade the steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1). UBR1 uniquely recognizes an N-degron sequence
and subsequently activates the N-degron proteasomal degradation pathway.
Given its ubiquitous role, many different types of cells express UBR1.
The authors used the previously reported stapled peptide YL2 to bind
SRC-1 and the tetrapeptide RLAA to recruit UBR1. Because RLAA binding
to UBR1 only requires the arginine and lysine, ligands screened for
degradation included different linkers between RL and YL2. Ultimately,
the degrader ND1-YL2, containing the original RLAA sequence demonstrated
the most potent degradation with a DC50 of ∼10 μM.
Lee and co-workers confirmed that ND1-YL2 enabled the degradation
of SRC-1 by forming a ternary complex that induced ubiquitination
of SRC-1. This occurred in a time-dependent manner, with SRC-1 recovering
upon wash out of ND1-YL2. This study additionally compared ND1-YL2
to the commonly recruited E3 ligase cereblon by conjugating YL2 with
pomalidomide. Interestingly, both mediated the depletion of SRC-1
to similar levels despite the 10-fold lower affinity of ND1 for UBR1.
Additionally, UBR1 degraded SRC-1 in a different cell-line, while
recruitment of cereblon had no effect. The functional impact of SRC-1
degradation included upregulation of cell adhesion protein, E-cadherin,
which inhibited cell migration and proliferation.
More recently,
Gunasekaran et al. aimed to recruit UBR E3 for the targeted degradation
of PLK1. Instead of using the tetrapeptide
UBR binder, Gunasekaran and colleagues used a polyarginine peptide
of size 12 (R12) because UBR recognizes it as a type-1 N-degron and
its cell-penetrating capabilities make delivery into cells possible.
In a binding assay, R12 associated with UBR1 and UBR2 the most efficiently;
at minimum, UBR1 and UBR2 required at least 4 arginine residues for
binding. Fusing the PLK1 binder PLHSpT to R12 created the degrader
DD-1, which caused a maximum degradation of 80% PLK1 in cells. To
improve the efficiency of DD-1, the authors designed a cyclic peptide
binder for PLK1 and created degrader DD-2 upon its fusion to R12.
Incubation of DD-2 in cells degraded 80% of PLK2 at 10-fold lower
concentrations than with DD-1. DD-2 also degraded PLK1 in multiple
PLK1-overexpressed cancer cell models, leading to a significant decrease
in cancer cell populations that result from cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis. In vivo studies also demonstrated tumor growth inhibition
upon treatment of DD-2.

4.1.4.

## Direct
Targeting to 26S Proteasome
With the rapid development of
E3-recruiting targeted degradation
molecules, Bashore et al. proposed simplifying degraders by targeting
a POI to the 26S proteasome directly. They posited that doing so could alleviate concerns about proper
ubiquitination, especially with targets that lack lysine residues
for ubiquitin attachment. The authors recruited targets to the proteasome
through the subunit PSMD2, which natively delivers and processes substrates
for degradation. The authors first screened the recombinantly expressed
and purified PSMD2 protein with two display libraries and identified
three notable high affinity binders: two macrocycles and one peptide
chain. Only the macrocycle MC1 was used in further studies because
structural studies identified that MC1 bound to PSMD2 at a novel site
that did not disrupt endogenous protein binding. To target the model
protein BRD4, Bashore and team conjugated a BRD4 ligand to MC1. This
degrader facilitated the formation of the ternary complex between
the 26S proteasome and BRD4, and treatment of the molecule in HEK293
cells produced a dose-dependent degradation of BRD4 with a DC50 of 0.73 μM.

4.2.

## Targeting
to the Endosomal-Lysosomal Degradation
Pathway
The lysosomal degradation pathway exists to regulate
homeostasis in both the intracellular and extracellular space. Consequently,
this pathway mediates the degradation of a wider range of substrates
than the proteasomal pathway. Aside from soluble and aggregated proteins,
substrates also include nonproteinaceous materials and organelles.
The trafficking of such biomaterials into lysosomes, organelles that
have characteristically acidic environments, defines this pathway’s
mechanism of action. Subsequent degradation by hydrolytic enzymes
leads to products that can be released into the cytosol for reuse
(such as with amino acids and nucleic acids) or exported out of the
cell (such as with the elimination of pathogenic proteins). The varied
outcomes for degraded substrates ensure that the lysosomal degradation
pathway contributes to cellular processes that include protein homeostasis,
plasma membrane repair, nutrient uptake, and intercellular signaling.
Lysosomal degradation occurs through either an endocytic pathway or
an autophagic pathway, and both have been exploited successfully for
targeted protein degradation. This section will focus on developments
toward targeted degradation by the endocytic pathway; the following
section will cover the autophagic pathway.
The endocytic pathway
of lysosomal degradation allows the intake of extracellular and transmembrane
components into cells. This pathway notably starts with invagination
of the cell membrane into carrier vesicles. Although many mechanisms
have been identified for the initial bending of the membrane, clathrin-mediated
endocytosis (CME) remains the most well understood and thus is a focus
of therapeutics development. The cell performs CME as the primary
route to obtain vital nutrients by displaying the family of membrane
associated proteins known as lysosome targeting receptors (LTRs) on
its cell surface. Doing so allows the cell to endocytose highly specific
target ligands via the receptor–ligand complex. LTRs induce endocytosis by exposing the endosomal
lysosome sorting signals (LSSs) located on their cytosolic domains.
Various adaptor proteins recognize these signals and recruit additional
components to promote the polymerization of clathrin on the cell membrane. Notably, LTR interactions can also mediate
clathrin-independent endocytosis, but their impact on the degradation
of cargo remains unknown. Regardless of the initiation pathway, vesicles
traffic the cargo to early endosomes, where the mildly acidic environment
aids in dissociating most protein–protein interactions. Contents
in the early endosome subsequently sort into recycling endosomes,
and this allows some cargo such LTRs to return to the cell surface
while others move to the late endosomes/multivesicular bodies (MVBs).
With the fusion of late endosomes/MVBs to lysosomes, trafficked materials
are degraded into amino acids and nucleic acids that can be reused
by cells. 
The endosomal-lysosomal
pathway has long been exploited for its
unique sorting and degradative functions. Drug delivery methods have
used LTRs to enhance specificity for certain cell types or organelles
to minimize off-target effects. The targeting of the lysosomal pathway
has recently become an emerging modality in the field of targeted
protein degradation. Its utility in degrading extracellular proteins,
membrane-associated proteins, and other proteins independent of the
proteasomal degradation pathway significantly broadens the substrate
scope and thus its technological applications. In this Review, the
term LYTAC, coined by Banik et al., generally refers to all degraders
that use the lysosomal degradation pathway. More specific names, should
they exist, will be used to describe specific LYTAC developments ( ).
 4.2.1.

## Lysosome-Targeting
Receptors

## Fc Receptor: FcRn, FcγRIIb [Abdegs,
Sweeping Antibodies,
Seldeg]
Antibodies represent a large percentage of modern
drug modalities, with many used to treat various cancers. These drugs
target both transmembrane and extracellular proteins, making them
a versatile and attractive method of modulating protein amounts and
protein function. However, this often requires large doses to neutralize
highly concentrated antigens. Traditional antibodies also have long
half-lives and remain bound to their antigens throughout the endocytosis
cycle, thus leading to the accumulation of antigen–antibody
complexes. This limitation is the focus
of various engineering efforts that involve the inclusion of pH-dependent
binding properties. pH-dependent recycling antibodies, reported by
Igawa et al., release their antigens in the acidic environment of
the lysosome. The antigen subsequently
continues through the lysosomal degradation process while the antibody
returns to the extracellular space. Although recycling antibodies
represented a momentous advance for antibody therapeutics, the rate-limiting
step of the cellular uptake of antibodies impeded their efficiency.
Many subsequent studies have focused on using receptor-mediated endocytosis
to increase the rate that antibodies cycle through cells ( ).
 The first instance of the use
of an antibody targeting a receptor
to modulate antigen levels came from a study by Vaccaro et al. In a technology named Abdegs, Vaccaro and colleagues
exploited the native antibody binding of FcRn, an IgG recycling receptor.
Following endocytosis of antibodies, the acidic environment of lysosomes
allowed the antibody to bind to FcRn. FcRn recycles antibodies back
to the cell surface, where the return to physiological pH promotes
the release of the antibody to the extracellular space. Vaccaro and
colleagues engineered an IgG antibody that binds to FcRn at both acidic
and neutral pHs, which led to the inhibition of antibody recycling
and the enhancement of IgG clearance in vivo. Additional developments
in FcRn targeting occurred nearly a decade later when Igawa et al.
converged on a similar idea with their previously reported recycling
antibodies. Starting with an IgG recycling
antibody against IL-6R, they generated and screened more than a thousand
variants with changes in the Fc domain to identify those that bound
to FcRn at neutral pH. The delivery of these antibodies, henceforth
known as sweeping antibodies, into mouse models indicated a clear
degradative advantage over both conventional antibodies and recycling
antibodies when measuring IL-6R concentrations in plasma. Additionally,
Igawa and co-workers demonstrated the necessity of the pH-dependent
antigen binding in sweeping antibodies when its removal significantly
reduced the efficiency of IL-6R clearance.
Sweeping antibodies
have also been shown to be effective when engineered
to enhance binding to FcγRIIb. Unlike the ubiquitously expressed
FcRn, FcγR proteins are primarily expressed in cells of hematopoietic
origin to recognize IgG antibodies and regulate major immune responses.
These cells include B cells, mast cells, and liver cells. FcγRIIb,
the only inhibitory FcγR subtype, contains a tyrosine-based
motif on its cytoplasmic tail that regulates the activation of B cells
and the removal of immune complexes. While studying the mechanism
of antigen clearance by recycling antibodies in mouse models, Iwayagani
et al. discovered that FcγRII, the mouse equivalent of FcγRIIb,
facilitated the uptake of these antibodies. This invalidated their previous assumption of cell entry by nonspecific
uptake and/or pinocytosis. To investigate the translational potential
of this discovery, the authors generated an IL-6R antibody with enhanced
FcγRIIb binding. In transgenic mice expressing FcγRIIb,
the IL-6R antibody clearly enhanced the depletion of soluble IL-6R
when compared to control mice. Previous anticancer therapies have
also enhanced binding to the FcγR family, specifically the activating
receptor FcγRIIIa, to induce cell death by antibody-dependent
cell cytotoxicity. However, the development of antibodies targeting
FcγIIb presented a novel nontoxic method to clear targeted proteins.
Many researchers have since incorporated the FcR-targeting strategy
into antibody designs to improve therapeutics against various disease
models. The combined efforts of Fukuzama et al. and Sampei et al.
led to the generation and enhancement of SKY59, a sweeping antibody
that clears the complement protein C5 convertase via enhanced FcRn
binding. , Results indicated that SKY59
successfully prevented the overactivation of the immune response in
diseases with dysregulated complement cascade signaling at notably
lower concentrations than the currently available C5 monoclonal antibody
eculizumab. Muramatsu et al. developed GYM329 to clear latent myostatin
via FcγRIIb targeting. The delivery
of GYM329 to muscle disease models prevented myostatin overactivation,
an inhibitory signal that results in enhanced levels of muscle growth
unseen with current myostatin targeting therapeutics. Lastly, Jiang
et al. engineered antibodies 73-DY and C26-DY against hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg), the antigen that causes chronic hepatitis
B. Both antibodies efficiently and effectively
suppressed HBsAg serum levels compared to their control counterparts
in vivo, providing a foundation for therapeutic development against
hepatitis B. New enhancements to this technology continue to generate
more effective and efficient monoclonal antibody therapeutics through
Fc engineering. For example, Hori et al. most recently reported a
novel Fc domain design that increased cellular uptake by enhancing
FcγRIIb binding and modulating charge characteristics and also
increased antigen-free antibody recycling by enhancing FcRn binding. 
Motivated by the lack of specificity
for targeted modulation of
antibody levels, Devanaboyina et al. developed a FcRn-targeted lysosomal
degradation approach known as Seldeg. The authors drew initial inspiration from the study delivering erythropoietin
to cells via an erythropoietin-Fc fusion. They opted to enhance Fc
domain binding to FcRn at neutral pH to improve antibody recycling,
as previously reported by Vaccaro et al. Seldegs consist of a monomeric
antigen linked to a dimeric Fc fragment (engineered with the knob-in-hole
method) that captures and degrades antigen-specific antibodies. The
authors demonstrated the generality of Seldegs by creating one with
a MOG antigen (MOG-Seldeg) and one with a HER2 antigen (HER2-Seldeg).
Both MOG-Seldeg and HER2-Seldeg injections with their respective antibodies
in vivo led to improved depletion compared to Abdeg controls and improved
specificity for the antigen-specific antibodies. In follow-up studies,
the Ward-Ober group confirmed the clinical relevance of MOG-Seldeg
and HER2-Seldeg treatments in mice for therapeutic and diagnostic
purposes, respectively. The MOG-Seldeg treatment ameliorated symptoms
associated with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a disease
model of brain inflammation, which implies its potential development
into drugs for multiple demyelinating diseases. Janakiraman et al.
published a study of a similar nature that provided additional mechanistic
information. HER2-Seldeg-induced removal of excess radiolabeled antibodies
enhanced the signal-to-noise ratio when imaging HER2-overexpressing
tumor cells via PET imaging methods.

## CI-M6PR/IGF2R [iLYTAC]
Many cellular processes require
the glycoprotein CI-M6PR, also known as IGF2R. CI-M6PR primarily mediates
subcellular transport through different organelles by recognizing
proteins bearing N-glycans capped with mannose-6-phosphate
(M6P). It additionally functions as the receptor for IGF2, where binding
of the hormone induces internalization to regulate cell growth and
metabolism. CI-MP6R/IGF2R recognizes its two ligands in different
domains and will be referred by the respective protein name depending
on the interaction being described. Given the dysregulated expression
of CI-M6PR in various diseases, it has long been exploited as a drug
delivery method to treat various cancer and lysosome storage disorders. However, the development of the first lysosome-targeting
degrader using CI-M6PR made it well-known in the field of targeted
protein degradation.
Banik et al. are credited with developing
the first lysosome-based degrader named LYTAC by designing a glycopolypeptide
ligand that recruits a POI to CI-M6PR. Based on existing CI-M6PR ligands, Banik and colleagues designed
one that consists of an N-carboxyanhydride (NCA)-derived
backbone with interspersed serine-O-mannose-6-phosphonate (M6Pn) and
alanine residues. The polymerization of poly-M6Pn with this design
formed heterogeneous lengths of peptide chains ranging from 60 to
90 M6Pn. Without further purification, they conjugated poly-M6Pn with
various target binders using click chemistry to create M6Pn-LYTACs
of varying lengths. All conjugations successfully degraded numerous
therapeutically relevant targets: NeutrAvidin fused ApoE4, EGFR (>70%),
CD71 (>80%), and PD-L1 (70%). This work demonstrated the broad
applicability
of LYTACs in degrading extracellular and membrane-bound disease-relevant
target proteins.
Subsequent research has tried to address drawbacks
pertaining to
the heterogeneity and low specificity of the original LYTACs. Zhang
et al. reported a chemoenzymatic method that conjugates natural mannose-6-phosphate
glycans to antibodies in a single-step and site-specific manner. They previously explored glycan remodeling
with bacteria-derived endoglycosidase (Endo) proteins and identified
the minimal glycan structure necessary for high-affinity CI-M6PR binding.
Combining these studies, Zhang and colleagues established a method
to synthesize a M6Pn-LYTAC that retains its degradation activity but
prevents any unnecessary protein engineering that may introduce nonspecific
and “unnatural” modifications. In the one-pot strategy,
Endo-S facilitated both the deglycosylation and transglycosylation
of the previously identified M6P tetrasaccharide oxazoline to IgG
antibodies. Both methods of glycosylation degraded 60% of EGFR and
HER2 when conjugated to cetuximab (ctx) and trastuzumab (tz), respectively.
Should the deglycosylation and transglycosylation require decoupling,
the authors also established a two-step method with the use of Endo
S2 and an Endo S2 mutant.
Stevens et al. also reported a more
systematic synthesis of LYTACs
by a thiol–ene reaction that conjugates M6Pn to cysteine residues
in a peptide backbone. This method guarantees
the homogeneity of poly-M6Pn constructs. With the ability to develop
structurally well-defined LYTACs, they investigated the structure–activity
relationship of various poly-M6Pn designs. Their initial studies suggested
that the internalization efficiency correlates with specific multimeric
requirements because the monomeric and dimeric MP6n-LYTAC did not
internalize into cells. The authors proposed, then, that the most
effective M6Pn peptide ligand would be tetrameric, consisting of two
dimeric M6Pn peptides separated by a linker because of both the dual
M6Pn binding sites within CI-M6PR and its dimerization upon ligand
binding. Follow-up studies, however, did not indicate a clear trend
between linker length and position with uptake efficiency. Interestingly,
internalization efficiency increased with a hexameric M6Pn peptide,
but only by almost half the fold-change when compared to the increase
from a trimeric to tetrameric M6Pn peptide. Thus, they concluded that
a tetrameric M6Pn peptide, regardless of linker length, may represent
the best balance between LYTAC ease of preparation and uptake efficiency.
Despite efforts to streamline the synthesis of poly-M6Pn, glycan
synthesis remains complicated and inefficient. Zhang et al. aimed
to remove glycopolypeptides from LYTAC designs entirely by utilizing
the IGF2 hormone. In designing a protein-only
molecule, they made use of bacterial expression to purify high yields
of protein (∼50 mg/L of cells). Their degraders, termed iLYTACs,
successfully depleted extracellular and membrane proteins using two
types of mechanisms. Type I iLYTACs, created by direct fusion of IGF2
to a target binder, facilitated the degradation of EGFR (75%) and
α-synuclein through affibody binding and the degradation of
PD-L1 (50%) through nanobody binding. The fusion of IGF2 to the IgG-binding
Z-domain lead to the creation of Type II iLYTACs, where its coadministration
with antibodies cet and ritu also degraded EGFR and CD20 by 60% and
70%, respectively. Notably, in vivo use of type II iLYTACs with cet
showed enhanced tumor inhibition when compared to cet alone, indicating
the benefits of supplementing current FDA-approved therapeutics with
iLYTACs.
Using a similar concept, Mikitiuk et al. designed an
IGF2-based
peptide binder to recruit IGF2R for targeted lysosomal degradation. In designing the LYTAC, the authors used the
peptide M1 because it bound with a higher affinity and demonstrated
specificity for IGF2R. In contrast, the native substrate, IGF2, demonstrated
strong affinity for both IGF2R and IGF1R. They created two types of
degraders with M1 and the PD-L1 antibody, C5: the first by using the
knob-into-hole technique where M1 replaces one C5 Fab, and the second
by conjugating M1 to a C5-derived scFv. Both successfully degraded
PD-L1 by 55% and 40%, respectively, and significantly inhibited the
growth of various tumorous cell lines.

## ASGPR [Apt-LYTAC, Nano-LYTAC,
LYTEX]
Similar to CI-M6PR/IGF2R,
ASGPR represents another receptor that has been extensively studied.
ASGPR natively recognizes proteins with exposed d-galactose
(Gal) or N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), often desialyated
glycoproteins, in the presence of Ca2+ and at pH 6. This
interaction leads to clathrin-mediated endocytosis, where ASGPR recycles
back to the cell surface while its ligand degrades in lysosomes. ASGPR
has been targeted for drug delivery because of its near exclusivity
to hepatocytes (with concentrations reaching as high as 500 000
ASGPR/hepatocyte) and its rapid internalization upon binding. As such,
its utilization in targeted protein degradation provides an attractive
level of cell specificity that has yet to be explored. 
Independently, Ahn et al. and Zhou et
al. reported a new type of LYTAC utilizing triantennary N-acetylgalactosamine (tri-GalNAc) to bind ASGPR for targeted lysosomal
degradation, introducing the aforementioned element of cell-type specificity. , In the study by Ahn et al., the conjugation of tri-GalNAc to ctx
and pertuzumab (ptz) degraded EGFR (>70%) and HER2 (75%), respectively;
Zhou et al. also saw EGFR degradation by 40% with their ctx conjugation.
Both confirmed GalNAc-LYTAC preferential activity in ASGPR-expressing
cells, while Ahn et al. confirmed preferential delivery to the liver
in vivo.
In addition to antibody-based LYTACs, Ahn et al. conjugated
tri-GalNAc
to a high-affinity peptide-based ligand for integrins (known as poly
specific integrin-binding peptide, PIP, or EETI 2.5F) in a 1:1 ratio.
This LYTAC improved depletion of total integrin levels by 60%; in
comparison, only compared to the 40% of total integrin levels were
depleted by PIP alone. Delivery of the LYTAC to cells revealed longer
lasting and enhanced antiproliferative effects. With the revelation
that a single GalNac still induces degradation of a POI, Ahn et al.
probed the effects of site-specific conjugation by tagging both ctx
and ptz antibodies at three different sites: the C-terminus, the hinge,
and the CH1 heavy chain. All ctx constructs degraded EGFR less than
the nonspecific version, i.e., the C-terminus, and the CH1 heavy chain
conjugation degraded EGFR more than 50%, while the hinge conjugation
only degraded EGFR by 40%. Interestingly, the hinge conjugation degraded
comparably less EGFR despite its ligand to antibody being twice that
of the others. In contrast, the conjugation of a single tri-GalNAc
to the hinge of ptz unexpectedly degraded 70% of HER2, a level comparable
to the nonspecific version, while the conjugation to the C-terminus
and CH1 heavy chain degraded 60% of HER2. These results suggest that
the most optimal conjugation site will depend on the antibody in use.
Since the report by Ahn et al., many have used GalNAc in different
biologic-based degraders to target various therapeutically relevant
POIs. Wu et al. conjugated GalNAc to aptamers to create Apt-LYTACs
that mediate the degradation of the extracellular protein PDGF and
membrane protein PTK7 (by 40%); both degradation targets are known
cancer drivers. Similarly, Bagdanoff
et al. created biologic-based degraders against PCSK9, a liver-secreted
protease associated with cardiovascular disease. They designed two antibody-based degraders that led to
significant clearance of PCSK9 in vivo (by ∼90%): one bispecific
PCSK9 antibody had a singular Fab replaced with tri-GalNAc, and one
had tri-GalNAc directly conjugated to the PCSK9 antibody.
Also
motivated by inefficient antibody therapeutics, Donahue et
al. aimed to develop the most efficient degrader for PCSK9. The authors used their previously reported
chemoenzymatic glycan remodeling method to conjugate different ASGPR
ligands to alirocumab, a PCSK9 antibody, in an effort to optimize
its efficiency. In addition to the synthetic tri-GalNAc (GalNAc) ligand,
they employed natural biantennary (G2) and triantennary (G3) galactose-capped N-glycans conjugated to alirocumab. All resulting chimeric
conjugates included an extended glycan linker, but the GalNAc and
G3 versions also included a short disaccharide linker variation. G2-LYTAC
did not induce the degradation of PCSK9, potentially because of its
low affinity for ASGPR. GalNAc-LYTAC performed the best by degrading
60% of PCSK9 compared with the 30% degradation mediated by G3-LYTAC.
The degradation efficiencies of GalNAc-LYTAC and G3-LYTAC, notably,
decreased significantly with the short disaccharide linker (to 34%
and no degradation, respectively), indicating that receptor–ligand
interactions depend on proper spacing from the bulky Fc domain. Although
the synthetic tri-GalNAc conjugate clearly degraded PCSK9 more efficiently,
the increasing concentrations of GalNAc-LYTAC treatment (25 to 200
nM) led to decreasing efficiency due to the hook effect. In contrast,
degradation facilitated by G3-LYTAC consistently degraded up to 30%
of PCSK9 at various concentrations. The authors further confirmed
in vitro that the degradation of PCSK9 by both GalNAc-LYTAC and G3-LYTAC
led to the stabilization of LDLR levels. The same conjugate to cetuximab,
an EGFR antibody, led to similar SAR results in demonstrating the
broad applicability of this technology.
Beyond the direct conjugation
of GalNAc to target binders, Wang
et al. developed a nanoparticle that simultaneously degrades POIs
and delivers drugs. They proposed that
doing so would not only potentiate therapeutic effects compared to
the individual systems but would also offer a level of cell-specificity
to broadly targeting drugs. Starvation therapy for cancers utilizes
glucose oxidase (GOx) to suppress tumor growth by depleting essential
glucose molecules, but off-target effects due to the lack of targeting
restrict its usage. In this work, Wang et al. first developed an unloaded
Lauryl-P3GKS-based nanoparticle that displayed GalNAc molecules along
with lysine residues for antibody conjugation. They successfully demonstrated
in vitro the degradation of EGFR and CD24 with this design. Given
that the overexpression of CD24 in hepatomas inhibits macrophage activation,
they followed up with in vivo studies using anti-CD24 nano-LYTAC loaded
with GOx. As expected, the combined effects of CD24 degradation and
GOx-induced starvation suppressed tumor growth most effectively compared
to the antibody and the unloaded nano-LYTAC. Both the CD24 antibody
and the unloaded nano-LYTAC suppressed tumor growth similarly; notably,
however, the unloaded nano-LYTAC sustained higher levels in serum
after 48 h compared to the antibody alone, implying it has enhanced
stability when delivered in vivo.
In another nanoparticle-inspired
LYTAC development, Wang et al.
developed lysosome-targeting exosomes (LYTEX) to induce targeted degradation. Endogenous exosomes have recently become attractive
drug nanocarriers because of their high biocompatibility and low immunogenicity.
They can also be easily engineered to display various biomaterials
on their phospholipid bilayer membranes. To demonstrate the feasibility
of their design, Wang and co-workers produced LYTEXs that displayed
scFv binders to ASGPR and POIs HER2 and PD-L1. The delivery to cultured
cells confirmed their ability to degrade both HER2 and PD-L1 by 47%.
Subsequent in vivo studies also demonstrated the ability of LYTEXs
to target and degrade PD-L1 efficiently.

## PA-TM-RING: RNF43 and ZNFR3
[AbTAC, PROTAB, ROTAC, REULR]
A unique mechanism of targeted
protein degradation was recently
reported upon the recruitment of the PA-TM-RING family of E3 ligases.
Three conserved domains characterize these E3 ligase: the protease-associated
(PA) domain, the transmembrane (TM) domain, and the RING-H2 (RING)
finger domain. These features result in structural and functional
resemblance to single-pass transmembrane receptors. The PA-TM-RING
E3 ligases are anchored to the cell membrane by their TM domain and
use their extracellular PA domain to recognize substrate proteins.
The binding of a ligand causes PA-TM-RING E3 ligases to ubiquitinate
their targets using the intracellular RING domain. Thus, ubiquitination
follows the recruitment of components necessary for membrane invagination,
endocytosis, and subsequent degradation of the ubiquitinated target
and any associated proteins. Insights into the function of RNF43 and
ZNRF3 drives most of our understanding of these E3 ligases, but there
are other family members under investigation. 
Many studies use RNF43 and ZNRF3 because of their
known cellular roles. Both enzymes were recently shown to use similar
mechanisms to regulate the same signaling cascades: the Wnt/β-catenin
pathway and the BMP pathway. Thus, RNF43 and ZNRF3 exist as functional
homologues despite sharing only 39% sequence identity. RNF43/ZNRF3
inhibits Wnt/β-catenin signaling by ubiquitinating the Wnt receptor,
FZD. The cell subsequently endocytoses FZD for degradation by the
lysosomal pathway, while RNF43/ZNRF3 remains on the cell surface.
The stem growth factor, R-spondin (RSPO), aids in regulating RNF43/ZNRF3
levels on the cell surface by forming a ternary complex with either
LGR4/5/6 or BMPR1A. When bound, LGR4/5/6 or BMPR1A undergo ubiquitination
by RNF43/ZNRF3, leading to the endocytosis and degradation of the
full ternary complex. This mechanism of RNF43/ZNRF3 depletion not
only potentiates Wnt/β-catenin signaling but also inhibits BMP
signaling due to the simultaneous depletion of its receptor, BMPR1A. 
The Wells group first reported the recruitment
of RNF43 for degrading
PD-L1. Because a ligand did not already
exist for RNF43, Cotton et al. used phage display to generate a recombinant
antibody, R3, that bound to the extracellular domain of RNF43. They
subsequently combined R3 with atezo (a PD-L1 binder) using the knob-in-hole
technique to generate a bispecific antibody-based degrader termed
AbTAC. This approach degraded PD-L1 successfully degraded by 63% in
various cancers cell lines through a lysosome-dependent mechanism.
In a follow up study, Gramespacher et al. used the AbTAC technology
to recruit ZNRF3 for targeted protein degradation. They created a ZNRF3 AbTAC using their previously published
methods and successfully degraded 65% of PD-L1 in cultured cells,
similar to that of the RNF43 AbTAC. These degraders neither potentiated
unwanted Wnt signaling nor disrupted R-spondin binding, implying that
the endogenous functions of these proteins remained undisturbed. The
authors concluded that AbTACs may be especially potent in disease
models with enhanced expression of ZNRF3 because of fewer off target
effects.
The ease of screening and genetically modifying antibodies
with
varying binding affinities and specificities led Gramespacher et al.
to perform structure–activity relationship (SAR) studies of
AbTACs that focused primarily on the RNF43 variant. However, SAR
studies with ZNRF3 AbTACs demonstrated similar results. In altering
the E3 ligase binding arm, they confirmed that the increase in RNF43
affinity correlated with the increase in PD-L1 degradation. However,
they discovered that degradation of the target eventually plateaued
at higher affinities, implying the existence of a threshold binding
time required for maximum degradation. These studies also indicated
that the epitope where the antibody binds is perhaps more significant
than its binding affinity. Of the three AbTAC variations with different
RNF43 affinities, the lowest-affinity binder (Kd of 60 nM) degraded the highest amount of PD-L1, while the
highest-affinity binder (Kd of 12.5 nM)
showed only modest degradation. The same trends occurred when altering
the POI binding arm such that increasing the AbTAC affinity for PD-L1
led to increasing degradation efficiency until a threshold affinity,
and only half of the AbTACs targeting different epitopes of EGFR led
to its degradation. Degradation efficiency also seemed to be more
sensitive to changes in the POI binding affinity: whereas decreasing
the E3 ligase binding variants affinity rescued only 20% of degradation,
decreasing the POI binding affinity rescued 60% of degradation. Altering
AbTAC valency and format also affected the maximum degradation of
PD-L1, especially at low treatment doses. However, the relationship
between all factors showed no observable trend.
Motivated by
RNF43/ZNRF3 upregulation in diseases with aberrant
Wnt, Marei et al. designed bispecific antibody degraders that recruit
RNF43 and ZNRF3 for targeted degradation. They generated antibodies against the extracellular domain of the
two enzymes, creating bispecific antibodies called PROTABs that enhanced
the degradation of IGF1R in colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues when conjugated
to cixutumumab (cixu). This technology also successfully degraded
HER2 and PD-L1 when conjugated to the HER2 antibody 7C2 and the PD-L1
antibody atezolizumab (Atezo), respectively. However, PROTABs activated
some unwanted Wnt signaling but did not cause any concerning phenotypic
aberrations in vivo despite prolonged exposure.
Interestingly,
while the RNF43 AbTAC functioned only through the
lysosomal degradation pathway, the ZNRF3 AbTACs degraded POIs via
the lysosomal and proteasomal degradation pathways. To demonstrate
that the bispecific antibodies can also be used to recruit other PA-TM-RING
E3 ligases, Marei and co-workers created a glycoprotein D (gD) domain
fused to RNF128, RNF130, RNF133, RNF149, and RNF150. All fusions degraded
IGF1R, HER2, PD-L1, and FZD5 with a PROTAB that recognized the gD
domain and the POI. Notably, several of the E3 ligases exhibit varying
expression levels in different tissue types, thereby implying that
tissue specificity similar to that of ZNRF3 is achievable. Efforts
to optimize the degradation efficiencies of the PA-TM-RING E3 ligases
led to the discovery that the variant with a one-arm Fv-IgG and bivalent
ZNRF3 Fab enhanced degradation. One disadvantage of the latter, however,
is the degradation of ZNRF43 from autoubiquitination along with the
degradation of the target POI. 
Sun et al. eliminated the necessity of generating antibodies against
RNF43/ZNRF3 by utilizing a natural ligand, RSPO2, to recruit these
E3 ligases. RSPO2 consists of three
domains that interact with different proteins: FU1 binds to RNF43/ZNRF3,
FU2 binds to LGR4/5/6, and TSP1 binds to BMPR1A. To engineer RSPO2
into a degrader without potentiating Wnt or BMP signaling, they abolished
FU2 binding with a single residue change and replaced TSP1 with a
PD-L1 binder. The resultant ROTAC degraded a maximum of 90% PD-L1
without activating the Wnt or BMP signal pathway. Additional in vitro
studies also demonstrated the ability of the ROTACs to activate T-cell
cytotoxicity more potently than the FDA-approved monoclonal therapeutic,
atezo.
More recently, Siepe et al. reported a method to recruit
PA-TM-RING
enzymes with nanobody binder in a technology they called REULR. The authors screened five different E3 ligases
for nanobody binders to develop a versatile toolbox that spans a wide
range of tissue expression: RNF128 (GRAIL), RNF130 (GOLIATH), RNF167
(GODZILLA), RNF43, and ZNRF3. The conjugation of these nanobodies
to POI binders led to the degradation of EGFR and inhibited cell proliferation
at levels comparable to the FDA-approved therapeutic, cetuximab; this
work also reported the successful degradation of EPOR and PD-L1. The
E3 ligases in this study degraded POIs with varying efficiencies,
highlighting the importance of proper E3 ligase pairing. For example,
RNF130 effectively degraded EGFR, while RNF128 and RNF167 effectively
degraded PD-L1. Given the increasing role of PA-TM-RING in cancer
cells, Siepe and co-workers also demonstrated PA-TM-RING self-degradation
using REULRs. When nanobodies for RNF43, ZFFR3, and RNF128 were fused
together, the resulting REULR caused the degradation of all involved
receptors. Additionally, the self-degradation that occurred from REULR
targeting both RNF43 and ZNFR3 increased the Frizzled or FZD proteins
and highlighted the potential therapeutic applications of this technology.

## Cytokine Receptors: CXCR7, IL-2R [KineTAC]
Pance et
al. introduced KineTACs as method of targeted protein degradation
using cytokines as recruiting ligands for cytokine receptors. While there already exists a therapeutic modality
of cytokines conjugated to antibodies to facilitate drug delivery,
this study proposed that KineTACs could allow simultaneous delivery
and degradation for more effective therapeutics. The authors primarily
focused on the degradation potential of CXCL12 as the recruiting ligand
for CXCR7. Noting that CXCL12 binding to CXCR4 is a point of concern
because of consequential induction of aberrant cell growth, subsequent
studies indicated that CXCL12 degraded POIs independently of CXCR4.
Regardless, the authors demonstrated recruitment using CXCL11 and
cMIPII, cytokines that bind only to CXCR7. CXCR12-KineTACs successfully
degraded a wide variety of transmembrane proteins, including PD-L1
by 70%, HER2 by 62%, EGFR by 84%, CDCP1 by 93%, TROP2 by 51%, PD-1
by 82%, and the extracellular proteins VEGF and TNF-α. Interestingly,
mass spectrometry analysis indicated that KineTACs degraded EGFR more
specifically, thus causing less cellular disturbances compared to
a previously published LYTAC mass spectrometric data set. Pance and
colleagues also successfully demonstrated the modularity of KineTACs
by using the cytokine IL-2 to recruit IL-2R and degrade 87% of PD-1.
SAR studies indicated that the optimization of the POI binding arm
affected degradation efficacy more profoundly than the LTR recruiting
arm. To arrive at this conclusion, the authors conjugated CXCL12 to
various EGFR antibodies and monitored the degradation of EGFR; this
exercise revealed that proper epitope binding of the POI drove efficacy
more strongly than the ligand binding affinity. The authors also observed
a strong inverse correlation between decreasing off-rate of the POI
ligand and degradation efficiency; a similar correlation for CXCL12
was weak.

## Integrin [IFLD]
Zheng et al. expanded
target LTRs by
introducing integrins as means of inducing targeted protein degradation. As cell adhesion receptors, integrins link
the extracellular matrix with the cytoskeleton of the cell and play
important roles in signaling physiological processes such as cell
migration, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. Their dysregulation
has been associated with various diseases. The overexpression of integrin
αvβ has been associated with numerous tumor types and
is the focus of cancer therapeutics. Many ligands with high affinities
and specificities for various inhibitory and delivery functions have
been discovered. Using cyclic Arg-Gly-Asp-containing pentapeptides
(cRGD) as ligands against integrin αvβ3, the initial studies
successfully degraded mCherry, ApoE4, and PD-L1 with proximity-inducing
tags, indicating the ability of this technology to target extracellular
and membrane proteins. The authors conjugated cRGD to a PD-L1 small-molecule
ligand (BMS-8) and observed that its delivery in vitro quickly degraded
70% of PD-L1. Subsequent in vivo studies indicated that the cRGD chimeric
conjugate induced apoptosis and inhibited tumor growth more strongly
than BMS-8 alone. The data additionally implied that metastasis may
also be inhibited via treatment with the cRGD chimeric conjugate.

## GLP-1R
Zhu et al. expanded the LTR toolbox by recruiting
GLP-1R to induce targeted lysosomal degradation. GLP-1R belongs to the glucagon receptor subcategory under
the G protein-coupled receptor family. Natively, it binds to GLP-1,
a 30 amino acid long peptide hormone to regulate glucose homeostasis
but has been exploited for delivery of other materials. The authors
conjugated the full GLP-1 peptide to various target binders to demonstrate
the ability of this LYTAC to degrade extracellular and transmembrane
proteins. The LYTACs degraded EGFR to a maximum of 90% with no discernible
hook effect, and PD-L1 to a maximum of 75%. The decrease in pAkt levels
following EGFR degradation also confirmed the downstream signaling
effects of the degrader.

## TG2/LRP-1
In a previous study, the
Kholsa group characterized
the mechanism of gluten peptide endocytosis by the TG2/LRP-1 pathway. They synthesized an irreversible inhibitor
against TG2 that mimicked its preferred sequence, PQLPF, and discovered
a TG2•α2 M ternary complex formation. α2M, having
been activated by the formation of this complex, binds to its canonical
receptor LRP-1 to induce endocytosis. Following this report, Loppinet
et al. proposed repurposing the unique ability of TG2 to deliver low-abundance
substrates to lysosomes for targeted protein degradation. They synthesized degraders using the TG2 binding
sequence to study the internalization and degradation of different
substrates, successfully degrading streptavidin (recruited by biotin),
the cubulin receptor (recruited by vitamin B12), and integrin αvβ5
(recruited by the peptide RGDVF). In these studies, the authors demonstrated
the dependence on the existence of all components in the TG2/LRP-1
pathway. Although this limits the systems in which this technology
can be applied, it also enables a level of tissue specificity unlike
those in other LYTAC studies.

## TfR1 [TransTAC]
Zhang et al. designed a degrader that
recruits the transferrin receptor, TfR1, for targeted protein degradation
in a technology they call TransTAC. TfR1
is one of the fastest internalizing receptors and natively transports
iron-bound transferrin across the cell membrane. As such, its overexpression
often facilitates growth of malignant tumors. Indeed, transcriptomic
data revealed TfR1 overexpression in 14 out of 19 cancerous tissues,
including in activated T cells. Zhang and co-workers proposed that
its overexpression and quick internalization enable TfR1 to be a prime
candidate for targeted protein degradation selectively in diseased
cells. In a novel approach, they engineered TransTACs of varying formats
to optimize for degradation, with the final design consisting of a
dimeric antibody-like molecule with a cathepsin-sensitive linker.
This TransTAC degraded the chimeric antigen receptors (CAR) by >80%,
PD-L1 by 98%, EGFR by >80%, and CD20 by 97% via the lysosomal degradation
pathway. Additional in vitro studies indicated the ability of TransTACs
to inhibit T-cell activation with the degradation of CAR. In optimizing
the degrader, the authors discovered some important SAR elements.
Dimeric TransTAC internalized most efficiently compared to its monomeric
counterpart, especially on the receptor recruitment module. This likely
occurs because TfR1 exists as a homodimer and requires the binding
of two transferrin molecules to induce internalization. The degradation
of POIs depended on cathepsin cleavage in early endosomes, both for
an endogenous TfR1 ligand transferrin and a generated scFv. Lastly,
the geometry of the receptor and POI ligands influenced the TransTAC
efficiency, as seen with the enhanced efficiency of TransTAC with
ligands on separate Fc dimers.

4.2.2.

## Lysosome
Sorting Signals (LSSs)

## [GlueTAC]
Zhang et al. used a tyrosine
based LSS ( ) conjugated to
a covalent nanobody to develop a modulator of transmembrane proteins. The strategy was exemplified by engineering
an existing PD-L1 nanobody, KN035. Through the pLink software, they
strategically introduced proximity reactive uncanonical amino acids
(PrUAA) such as BrC6K and fluorosulfate-l-tyrosine (FSY)
into various PD-L1 nanobody sites near antigenic nucleophilic residues
at the protein–protein interface. The authors screened for
successful cross-linking using a mass spectrometry-assisted screening
platform. The selected covalent nanobody, also known as a Gluebody,
degraded 67% of PD-L1, while the original nanobody did not significantly
degrade PD-L1. When conjugated with a cell-penetrating nona-d-arginine peptide and the common NGPY LSS, the resulting GlueTAC
depleted 98% of PD-L1, a marked increase. By comparison, the GlueTAC
lacking PrUAA only degraded 32% of PD-L1. Additional in vitro and
in vivo studies indicated that the GlueTAC degradation of PD-L1 resulted
in strongly enhanced T-cell activation and significantly inhibited
tumor growth with a more efficacious effect when compared to the Gluebody
alone.

## [SignalTAC]
Inspired by their previous
work with GlueTACs,
Yu et al. harnessed the dileucine-based LSS from CI-M6PR to degrade
POIs in a broadly applicable method. The authors developed degraders named SignalTACs for the oncogenic
driver HER2 because of its propensity to recycle back to the cell
surface after endocytosis. In searching for the most efficient design,
they created combinations of degraders by taking in to consideration
the HER2 binder, the existence of a CPP, the valency of the LSS, and
LSS itself. Interestingly, initial internalization studies with a
HER2 nanobody conjugated to either the previously mentioned NGPY sequence
or the CI-M6PR-derived SFHDDSDEDLLHI peptide showed that the latter
facilitated more efficient entry into cells than the former. However,
neither internalized as efficiently as the HER2 antibody trastuzumab
(Tz) SignalTAC with a tetravalent display of LSSs combined with the
CPP sequence, RRRRK. As expected, this HER2 SignalTAC also depleted
the highest percentage of HER2 (75%) when compared to other combinations.
In vitro studies demonstrated that SignalTAC degradation of HER2 enhanced
the apoptosis of breast cancer cells and inhibited their proliferation
more productively than Tz alone. In support of its more efficacious
therapeutic effect, in vivo studies also indicated that the SignalTAC
limited tumor growth more strongly. Aside from HER2, Yu and co-workers
also successfully degraded the membrane proteins EGFR, PD-L1, CD20,
and CD71 to demonstrate the broad application of this technology.
In summary, their work revealed that antibody, nanobody, or peptide
binders mediated EGFR degradation up to 50%, and respective antibody
binders mediated PD-L1 degradation by 55%, CD20 degradation by 70%,
and CD71 degradation by 80%.

4.3.

## Targeting
to the Autophagy-Lysosomal Degradation
Pathway
As mentioned in the previous section, the lysosomal
degradation pathway degrades a diverse set of biomaterials and aids
in regulating various cellular processes, including protein homeostasis,
plasma membrane repair, nutrient uptake, and intercellular signaling.
In contrast to the endocytic pathway of lysosomal degradation, which
regulates the extracellular space, the autophagic pathway is important
for managing the homeostasis of the intracellular space. The autophagy-lysosome
pathway can be divided into three categories: chaperone-mediated autophagy
(CMA), macroautophagy, and microautophagy. Each category has a distinct
mechanism of action and differing substrate scopes, but all direct
targets to the lysosome for degradation. , 
CMA primarily targets soluble proteins through recognition
of a KFERQ-like sequence known as the CMA-targeting motif (CTM). The
chaperone HSC70 recognizes the CTM and shuttles its substrate to the
lysosomal membrane protein, LAMP2A, which mediates substrate translocation
into lysosomes for degradation. Macroautophagy degrades a much wider
scope of substrates because its mechanism does not depend on transmembrane
movement. Instead, a cargo-carrying organelle known as the autophagosome
mediates degradation by the direct engulfment of various biomaterials
that include aggregated proteins, DNA lesions, and damaged organelles.
Subsequent fusion of the autophagosome with the lysosome creates the
autolysosome for further processing. Despite the broad scope of targets,
the macroautophagy pathway can also confer substrate specificity by
employing selective autophagy receptors, such as p62, to bring substrates
into the forming autophagosome. To do so, these receptors simultaneously
bind their substrates while recognizing the membrane protein, LC3,
on the autophagosome with their LC3 interacting region (LIR). Finally,
microautophagy refers to the direct engulfment of cytosolic material
into lysosomes for degradation. Although it seems to be a nonselective
process, little is known about the molecular machinery and regulatory
mechanisms.
Studies utilizing the autophagy-lysosomal degradation
pathway have
only recently become a focus in the targeted protein degradation space
as an alternative method to the protesome-dependent degradation pathway
for cytosolic manipulation. The ability to direct substrates via the
autophagic pathways vastly expands the target scope to include nonproteinaceous
materials and organelles, as demonstrated by the literature reviewed
in this section. Although many details about the autophagic pathways
remain unknown, especially regarding microautophagy, targets have
successfully been degraded by CMA and macroautophagy.
4.3.1.

## Chaperone Mediated Autophagy (CMA)

## HSC70
Bauer et
al. first demonstrated the ability to
direct proteins to the CMA pathway ( ) for degradation in the context of Huntington’s
disease. Huntington’s disease
results from the accumulation of a mutated huntingtin protein (mHTT)
with an extended polyglutamine (polyQ) sequence of greater than 35.
The authors proposed that the degradation of the aggregated, insoluble
form of mHTT would mitigate symptoms associated with Huntington’s
disease. In designing this construct, the authors conjugated QBP1,
a synthetic peptide that binds to polyQ sequences, to two CTMs: the
α-synuclein specific CTM (VKKDQ) and the consensus CTM (KFERQ).
The expression of the construct termed RHQ in cultured cells led to
the degradation of insoluble mHTT by 82%. The expression of QBP1 alone
also decreased the levels of insoluble mHTT, as has been demonstrated
in previous studies, but the observed increase in soluble mHTT confirmed
that the mechanism involved QBP1 increasing the solubility of rather
than degrading mHTT. In contrast, RHQ also degraded soluble mHTT by
34%. Thus, RHQ effectively diminished total levels of mHTT instead
of shifting the equilibrium of soluble and insoluble forms. The authors
also identified that RHQ preferred to degrade mHTT with an extended
polyQ sequence (150Q vs 16Q), indicating its selectivity toward disease
progressing proteins. Lastly, in vivo studies showed that the viral
delivery of RHQ achieved similar selective degradation and led to
the amelioration of symptoms associated with Huntington’s Disease.
 Fan et al. further developed the technology by
studying its modularity
in a cell delivery model rather than one of exogenous expression. They first targeted the neuron-associated protein
DAPK1, an inactive calcium-calmodulin-regulated protein that becomes
activated during times of oxidative stress or NMDA stimulation. In
both conditions, active-DAPK1 leads to accelerated cell death. To
target DAPK1 for degradation by CMA, the authors conjugated a DAPK1
binder (a peptide derived from GluN2B) with a cell-penetrating peptide
(TAT) and CTMs from three different proteins: RNase A (KFERQ), HSC70
(QKILD), and hemoglobin (QRFFE). As hypothesized, the delivery of
the construct TAT-GluN2Bct-CTM led to decreased DAPK1 levels at 57%
and 40% when activated by NMDA stimulation and H2O2-induced oxidative stress, respectively. In contrast, DAPK1
levels remained unchanged both in experiments without initial NMDA
or H2O2 activation and in experiments with the
delivery of TAT-GluN2Bct that lacked the CTM domain. Phenotypically,
the degradation of DAPK1 led to decreased neurotoxicity and neuronal
death in both in vitro and in vivo models. To demonstrate the modularity
of their design, the authors replaced the cell-penetrating peptide
TAT with carrier peptide-1. The delivery via peptide-1 degraded DAPK1
similarly to delivery via TAT. The authors also demonstrated the broad
applicability of their design by replacing the DAPK1 binding domain
with peptide binders targeting two other neuron-associated proteins,
α-synuclein and PD95, creating peptides TAT-βsyn-CTM and
TAT-GluN2B9c-CTM, respectively. The treatment of both in vitro led
to the degradation of their respective target proteins to 30% each.
Notably, TAT-βsyn-CTM degraded α-synuclein independently
of the protein’s native CTM, as the mutation of this sequence
did not rescue α-synuclein levels.
Dou et al. expanded
on previously published studies by developing
a CMA-targeting degrader against Aβ oligomers, protein aggregates
associated with the progression of Alzheimer’s Disease. While keeping the cell-penetrating peptide
(TAT) domain and the CTM domain the same as those used by Fan et al.,
they inserted the Aβ oligomer-interacting peptide (AIP) sequence
to create P1, an Aβ oligomer-targeting degrader. P1 induced
the uptake of Aβ oligomers into endosomes and lysosomes compared
to the control peptide. The authors also hypothesized that including
readily oxidized amino acids into their constructs would enhance the
uptake of target proteins because studies have shown that HSC70 prefers
to bind to oxidized CMA substrates. Coupled with the reports of many
Alzheimer disease-associated inductions of oxidative stress, this
design could prove especially efficient in an Alzheimer’s disease
model. Indeed, the inclusion of readily oxidized amino acids (tryptophan,
tyrosine, and cysteine) between AIP and TAT to create P3 led to twice
the amount of Aβ oligomer uptake during β-hydroxybutyrate-induced
oxidative stress. Additional in vitro studies in differentiated iPSC
cells from Alzheimer’s disease patients demonstrated the degradation
potential of P3 against Aβ oligomers and the resulting neuroprotection
from cell death.

4.3.2.

## Macroautophagy

## LC3 and
ATG16L1 [ATACC, AceTAC, ATNC]
Within the span
of one year, four individual groups published studies reporting biologic-based
modulators that target the macroautophagy pathway for non-native protein
degradation. Though nearly identical in concept, all contributed relevant
insights into the design and target scope of such a technology.
Inspired by developments in small-molecule-based lysosomal-targeted
degradation in the form of ATTECs and AUTACs/AUTOTACs, Mei et al.
demonstrated a similar system using peptide-based recruitment of autophagy-associated
proteins ATG16L1 and LC3. Their designs
used the ATG16L1 binding peptide (ABP) and LC3 interacting region
(LIR) from the autophagy receptors TMEM59 and SQSTM1. The authors
aimed to degrade oligomeric cargo Phox1 and Bem1p (BP1) domains derived
from SQSTM1 and the expanded polyQ HTT protein (mHTT), respectively.
Initial studies indicated the success in degrading both targets by
autophagy when directly fused to ABP or LIR and when targeted via
a streptavidin tagging system. Interestingly, Mei and team discovered
that this approach preferentially degraded large targets, as the direct
conjugation of neither ABP nor LIR led to the degradation of GFP alone.
Moving forward with the mHTT aggregate, the authors designed and purified
a cell-permeant degrader by replacing the streptavidin tagging system
with a peptide that binds mHTT directly (QBP1) and included a cell-penetrating
peptide sequence (polyR). The delivery of either construct, QBP1-LIR
or QBP1-ABP, led to the in vitro degradation of mHTT in HEK293 cells.
Mei et al. additionally used this system to target dysfunctional mitochondria
for autophagic degradation. They hypothesized that tagging mitochondria
with either a LIR or ABP signal would be sufficient to induce degradation.
After screening to identify the most efficient mitochondrial targeting
sequence (MTS) to tag mitochondria with LIR or ABP, they continued
with the MTS of TOMM20 because this design led to the most efficient
degradation of mitochondria associated proteins, TIMM32 and TOMM20,
following FCCP-induced damage of the mitochondria (FCCP is a mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation uncoupler). The authors also successfully
visualized the movement of the mitochondria through autophagy using
the mitophagy biosensor mCherry-GFP-MTS2, where GFP no longer fluoresces
in the acidic environment of the lysosome. Additional in vitro models
indicated the degradation of aggregated mitochondria in PINK1-KO cells,
a model for Parkinson’s disease, which protected cells from
apoptosis.
Similarly, Tong et al. developed a peptide-based
degrader targeting
LC3 they termed ATACC. They aimed to
degrade α-synuclein due to its role in numerous neurodegenerative
diseases; their design included the α-synuclein binder βSyn
conjugated to a CPP and a LIR. To optimize their constructs, the authors
screened three different LIR sequences (derived from p62, NBR1 (P3),
and optineurin (P4)) and identified that the lowest Kd value resulted from βSyn conjugated to the LIR
from p62. Additionally, they optimized the delivery of this βSyn-LIR
fusion by screening two different cell penetrating peptides: TAT (P1)
and polyR (P2). Notably, delivery of all four peptides degraded α-synuclein
in a dose-dependent manner, but P1 proved to be the most efficient
due to its tighter binding and enhanced delivery. This work also revealed
that ATACC led to minimal off-target effects, as treatment of the
degrader only caused the downregulation of 20 other proteins. In the
SH-SY5Y model cell line for neurodegenerative disease, the degradation
of α-synuclein by ATACC led to dose-dependent neuroprotective
effects. Whereas the control condition resulted in only 78% of viable
cells at the point of analysis, 94% of P1 treated cells were viable,
which also correlated with the decrease in reactive oxygen species.
In vivo studies showed a similar decrease of α-synuclein and
neuroprotective features, leading to the amelioration of symptoms
associated with Parkinson’s disease.
Jiang et al. approached
the design of a LC3-targeted degrader,
otherwise known as AceTACs (autophagy receptor-inspired targeting
chimeras, not to be confused with acetylation targeting chimeras that
are also called AceTACs) more systematically than the previous studies. They created first-generation AceTACs by directly
conjugating an antibody against mutant huntingtin protein (mHTT) to
the autophagy receptor p62. This construct alone led to significant
depletion of mHTT, especially at an antibody valency of two. The authors
evaluated how deletion mutations and/or replacements of the native
LIR sequence would affect the degradation efficiency. Interestingly,
deletion of four of the five domains that have previously been shown
to play important roles during autophagy (the ZZ domain, LIR domain,
NES domain, and UBA domain) led to more efficient degradation of mHTT.
The fifth PB1 domain did not have any significant effect on mHTT degradation.
The authors also saw an improvement of mHTT degradation by 26% when
the native p62 LIR sequence was replaced with that of TP53INP2. In
comparison, other sequences of p62 LIR (TBC1D25 and FYCO) only improved
degradation by 10%. With new insights into their design, the second-generation
AceTACs modified the p62 backbone by deleting the UBA domain and replacing
the LIR sequence with that of TP53INP2; a third generation removed
p62 completely, leaving only the TP53INP2 LIR sequences and the antibody
binders. In degradation studies, the third generation of AceTACs degraded
mHTT more efficiently than the second generation, leading to the conclusion
that the LIR alone induces degradation of a target. Additional LIR
and antibody valency studies did not indicate a clear correlation
to degradation efficiency. With their engineered AceTACs in hand,
Jiang et al. demonstrated the broad applicability and tunability of
all three generations. They successfully degraded five disease relevant
targets: wild-type α-synuclein, wild-type and mutated tau, mutated
TDP43, and mutated FUS. At best, the third generation AceTACs degraded
all five proteins by ∼80%, but the degradation efficiency varied
based on the design and valency of a given degrader. The authors also
successfully targeted and degraded mitochondria by 40%, peroxisomes
by 35%, and the endoplasmic reticulum by 25% by targeting an exogenously
expressed ALFA tag fused to an organelle targeting sequence. While
their flow cytometry analysis did not indicate significant degradation
of the golgi apparatus, live cell imaging demonstrated a decrease
in this organelle as well.
Lastly, He et al. found success in
utilizing a similar technology
with nanobodies that target substrate proteins, creating a degrader
class they named autophagy-targeting nanobody chimeras (ATNCs). In optimizing their degraders, the authors
observed that direct conjugation of a GFP nanobody (GBP) to the LC3B
protein, which natively localizes to autophagosomes, led to stronger
degradation of GFP when compared to a construct with the GBP conjugated
to an LIR sequence derived from the AG4B protein. Thus, they continued
with the LC3B fusion throughout their study. In initial studies, the
authors demonstrated the modularity of their design by replacing the
GBP with nanobodies of various targets: mCherry-tagged proteins, ALFA-tagged
proteins, BC2-tagged proteins, RhoA, and hTPX2. This design also allowed
for bispecific targeting, where two targets could be degraded with
a single treatment. Additionally, delivery of the ATNC into cells
via a cyclic cell-penetrating deca-arginine peptide retained degradation
functionality, a development used to target an overexpressed tumor
marker, human epididymis protein 4 (HE4). Delivery of a HE4 targeting
ATNC in an ovarian cancer cell line led not only to the degradation
of HE4 but also the inhibition of cell proliferation, thereby revealing
the therapeutic potential of ATNCs.

5.

## Intracellular Delivery of Protein
5.1.

## Increasing
Permeance
5.1.1.

## The Basics of Biomolecular Transport
The delivery of protein- and peptide-based molecules is a major bottleneck
for the modulation of challenging POIs. This is because the plasma
membrane acts as a barrier for most biologics, resulting in its impermeability
to peptides, proteins, and nucleic acids. The lipid bilayer is a protective
barrier that allows for dynamic interaction with the extracellular
environment and ensures foreign substances do not dysregulate cellular
homeostasis. The mammalian plasma membrane is primarily made of glycerophospholipids,
sphingolipids, and cholesterol and has a high protein to lipid ratio
(1:40). Lipids frequently flip and are internalized to sample the
extracellular matrix for the import exogenous molecules. As such, the cell has evolved highly regulated
active process to induce and maintain dynamic transport across the
membrane. These active mechanisms of transport include specific channels,
pores, micropinocytosis, and endocytosis. Understanding the natural
mechanism of intracellular entry is an important part of designing
binders for challenging intracellular POIs. Generally, achieving cytosolic
delivery is dependent on the cargo undergoing conformational change,
the presence attractive forces, or the hijacking of natural mechanisms
to overcome the naturally repulsive lipid bilayer. , 

## Passive Diffusion
While the transport of most molecules
is tightly regulated by specific processes, passive diffusion is an
energy-independent process in which a molecule naturally diffuses
through the extracellular matrix and membrane to enter the cytosol
( ). Typically,
the driving force that determines solute movement is a concentration
or an electric gradient. Usually, smaller molecules and molecules
with higher lipophilicity are more permeant via passive diffusion.
Approximately 25 years ago, Lipinski et al. used the “Rule
of 5” (number of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors, molecular
weight, and LogP) to describe the likelihood of a compound to be permeant.
While these rules are no longer presumed to be the most predictive,
they have influenced drug design greatly. More recent classes of drugs (especially with the rise of macrocyclic
peptides) challenge the Rule of 5, but it is widely accepted that
specific pharmacological parameters are necessary for a molecule to
be favorable for passive diffusion. 
 

## Active Transport
The other category of movement across
the membrane is active transport, which typically occurs through transporter-mediated
entry. Transporter-mediated entry requires coupled energy and specific
receptor(s) or protein partners to facilitate the entry of molecules.
Some examples include ion channels and pore forming complexes. This
mechanism of transport is responsible for movement of a wider variety
of molecules and involves 10% of all protein types. There is diversity in the pathways and molecules (large
and hydrophilic, small, charged) that are transported via active transport,
and the following are brief descriptions of mechanisms of active transport.

## Secretory Pathway
The secretory pathway is responsible
for the synthesis, folding and delivery of proteins to other cellular
compartments. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and its translocon complex
play a significant role in the folding and proper post-translational
modification of proteins. After processing in the ER, proteins are
transported to the Golgi, from where they can be trafficked to other
organelles and the plasma membrane or inserted into vesicles for secretion. While most techniques for delivering proteins
into cells do not use this method, some vehicles and microbes hijack
parts of the pathway for retroactive delivery of biomolecules. The
delivery of mRNA and processing through the secretory pathway in lieu
of delivering proteins is an example. These approaches have been covered
in detail elsewhere. , 

## Endocytosis
Endocytosis
is one of the key means of
internalizing extracellular cargo. Many engineered delivery vehicles
co-opt endocytosis and endocytic escape pathways to deliver protein
binders of interest. In this section, we briefly describe various
endocytic pathways to provide a context for different mechanisms of
delivery.
Most cells undergo a form of endocytosis called pinocytosis,
where the cell invaginates or “drinks” a small amount
of the extracellular matrix. Micropinocytosis is the largest pinocytosis
process and can achieve a vesicle size of ∼1 μm; the
process is triggered through the Rho family of GTPases. This mechanism allows cells to sample large
volumes of their extracellular environments and perform immune surveillance.
Other pinocytosis subtypes use much smaller vesicles (60–120
nm in diameter) and are more specific in their fluid intake. These
subtypes are classified as caveolae-mediated, clathrin-mediated, or
clathrin- and caveolae-independent; the classifications describe partners
that mediate the invagination of the membrane and the formation of
the endosomes. Caveolae-mediated endocytosis occurs through the invagination
of the plasma membrane by structures known as caveolae ( ). Caveolae-mediated
endocytosis is triggered by phosphorylation of nearby kinases and
phosphatases, such as Src-family tyrosine kinase and PP1 and PP2A
classes of serine/threonine phosphatases, and occurs in cholesterol- and sphingolipid-rich areas of the plasma
membrane. Clathrin-mediated endocytosis
is vital to a wide array of cellular activities. Previously known
as receptor-mediated endocytosis because a specific receptor–ligand
interaction mediates the initiation of endocytosis, this process involves
the clathrin proteins mediating the accumulation of receptors in high
concentrations (“coated pits”). The coated pits subsequently
invaginate to form vesicles ( ). For both clathrin- and caveolae-mediated endocytosis,
the formation of vesicles is mediated by the GTPase dynamin. Finally, clathrin and caveolae-independent
endocytic pathways are much less studied and molecules that regulate
these processes are not well understood. It is thought that these
pathways are regulated by ligands, membrane composition, dynamin,
or other unknown factors ( ). Moreover, the regulation of these pathways could
vary in different cells and may be dependent on the functional outcome
of the endocytic events. Some toxins and viral molecules induce these
independent endocytic pathways, suggesting that they could be hijacked
for cargo delivery. , , 

## Endosomal Escape
Once in endosomes, the fate of most
cargo is to be trafficked to lysosomes for degradation. While this
is favorable for LYTACS, degraders targeting cytosolic proteins must
achieve cytosolic entry for functionality. The cytosolic delivery
of biomolecules via endocytosis requires efficient and reliable escape
out of endosomes. Since the rapid expansion in the use of peptides
and proteins as binders for intracellular targets, many studies have
explored ways of delivering these molecules to the cytosol. As such,
endosomal escape has been a focal point. Some popular theories point
to osmotic lysis, the proton sponge effect, membrane fusion, pore
formation, and local membrane disruption. Endosomal escape can also vary by protein delivery vehicles, as
some can leverage endosomal complexes like the homotypic fusion and
protein-sorting (HOPS) complex and others
require unfolding and refolding. , Variation
in endosomal escape can impact the cargo type each vehicle can optimally
deliver.
A recent theory with experimental backing that reconciles
other theories and can be generalized across various types of delivery
vehicles was proposed by Pei and colleagues. Their work established
vesicle budding and collapse (VBC) as a fundamental framework that
explains the endosomal escape of various types of molecules ( ). The VBC mechanism was first observed by Qian
et al. in 2016 while performing mechanistic studies on the cytosolic
delivery of various cyclic peptides. The authors found that the best
performing CPPs had the strongest correlation between (1) plasma membrane
binding and total cell uptake and (2) endosomal membrane binding and
endosomal escape. After initial confocal microscopy data revealed
budding vesicles from endosomes in live cell experiments, the authors
observed similar results in giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) used
to simulate endosomes. In particular, the authors noted that fast
and tight binding along with dynamic accumulation of cargo in certain
areas of the membrane led to bud formation. In follow up papers, Qien and Sahni performed quantitative studies
to understand the underlying mechanisms and generalizability of VBC.
Through multiplexed labeling and confocal imaging of endosomes and
endosomes-associated membranes, the authors showed time-lapse budding
and the eventual collapse of the endosomal membrane to release the
protein and lipid aggregates in the cytosol. The authors observed
that VBC indiscriminately released cargo from endosomes that bud alongside
the vehicles; this was true in studies with various vehicles including
TAT (an important model for cell penetrating peptides, CPPs), the
bacterial diphtheriae toxin (Dt), and NleC (a metalloprotease from E. coli). , Overall, the proposed mechanism
involves the interaction of protein/peptide-based vehicles with the
plasma membrane, either directly or through specific protein interactions.
As the vehicles are acidified in early endosomes, it is thought that
positively charged residues interact and partially protonate the phospholipids,
thereby creating microdomains enriched with vehicle and lipids that
reduce repulsion. The microdomains are electrostatically different
from surrounding domains, which causes tension and “budding
of the domain”. Vehicles continue to attach to the microdomain
and the budding region to further increase the curvature of the bud.
This phenomenon continues until this region buds off the endosome
as small peptides and lipid aggregates quickly fall apart in the cytosol
( ). This
theory explains many of the patterns observed for CPP-mediated cargo
delivery. For example, conformational rigidity (as seen in macrocyclic
peptides) can increase the association of the vehicle to the domains,
thereby improving curvature and budding. Altogether, this body of work presents VBC as an experimentally
validated mechanism through which peptide and protein-based vehicles
become free from endosomes.

5.1.2.

## Engineering
Proteins for Better Permeance
As described above, most protein
and peptides are not capable of
passively diffusing through the membrane at high enough concentrations
to be therapeutically significant. Since the discovery of cell penetrating
peptides in 1988, there has been a rapid
expansion of research focused on understanding and engineering protein
cargo for improved cell permeance. This section of the Review covers
research pertaining to direct modifications to proteins to enable
plasma membrane permeance.

## Peptide Cyclization
In recent years,
macrocyclic peptides
have sparked interest as new drug modalities. Their peptidic nature
allows them to bind and engage with a variety of POIs at shallow PPI
interfaces; unlike their linear peptide/protein counterparts, macrocyclic
peptides tend to have better oral availability and cell permeance. Cyclization of cell-penetrating peptides has
more recently been shown to improve delivery efficiency. − Designing cyclic peptides or cyclizing peptides of interest is a
means of increasing the ability of protein therapeutics to target
intracellular POIs ( ). One of the main differences between cyclized and linear
versions of the same peptide sequence is the conformational stability
that cyclization provides. Cyclization limits the forms of interaction
possible with the cell membrane. By limiting hydrogen bonding, polar
surface engagement, and desolvation requirements, cyclization can
result in a more favorable conformation for peptides to cross the
largely hydrophobic barrier. Cyclization
can also improve the peptide pharmacokinetics by reducing interactions
with proteases. There are several naturally occurring cyclized cell-permeant
molecules whose mechanisms of action inspired research. One is cyclosporin
A (CsA), an undecamer macrocycle that can exist in two conformations.
When in aqueous solvent, the unmethylated backbone of CsA engages
in hydrogen bonding with the solvent in an “open” conformation;
when CsA traverses the lipid bilayer, it switches to a “closed”
conformation, wherein the same unmethylated residues engage in intramolecular
hydrogen bonding. This switch to intramolecular hydrogen bonding is
thought to be relevant in the lower dielectric environment of the
cell membrane. , Witek and team conducted a systematic
study to understand the conformational response to the distinct environments
and the permeance of CsA and cyclosporin E (CsE). CsE is structurally
like CsA except for a single Nα-methylation at the
Val11 position; CsE is much less cell-permeant. Through structural
and molecular dynamics experiments, the authors hypothesized that
the main difference in permeance is due to the kinetics of the interconversion
of the open and closed conformations of the two molecules. The extra
Nα-methylation may lower the energetic barrier for
CsA, thereby improving the kinetics of its conformational switch. 
 

## Nα-Methylation and Other Methods to Reduce
Hydrogen Bonding of Peptides
In the example of CsA and CsE,
a single Nα-methylation resulted in a significant
difference in permeance, perhaps due to hydrogen bonding and desolvation
effects as the peptide moves from an aqueous solution and highly hydrophobic
environment. It is also possible that extensive Nα -methylation improves lipophilicity, which can also impact cell
permeance. , This observation elevated the
Nα-methylation of the peptide backbone as a tool
to improve the cell penetrating properties of cyclic peptides. By
reducing the amount of hydrogen bond donators and acceptors, Nα-methylation provides similar accessibility to both cis and trans conformations of the peptide
backbone. Although Nα-methylation can improve permeance,
there is no established rules about the number and location of Nα-methylations necessary to achieve this phenotype. Additionally,
the increase in potential conformations can result in reduced target
engagement and binding.
To understand the impact of Nα-methylation on the ability of cyclized peptides to penetrate cell
membranes, Bokus and team used modifiable sanguinamide A, a thiazole-containing
cyclic peptide natural product. In addition to the focus on Nα-methylation, the authors explored the impact of β-branching
and side chain size on permeance. While little correlation was noted
for branching, the authors observed a strong correlation with Nα-methylation. Bokus and team synthesized four analogues
of the parent compound with various Nα-methylated
positions and saw that only modification at position 3 (Phe3-NH) produced
a significance increase in penetrance (by 5.7-fold) compared with
the parent compound. While the modification that improved lipophilicity
did improve permeance, it lowered the solubility of the compound significantly
(unlike other Nα-methylated products that seemed
to have improved solubility). Molecular dynamics studies of improved
compounds showed that the ability to adopt an open and closed conformation
in response to a dielectric field can explain the improvement in permeance.
Together, these findings indicated that both position-specific Nα-methylation and increased lipophilicity should be considered
in designs to create permeant cyclic peptides ( ). 
In
addition to Nα-methylation, other methods to
remove or reduce hydrogen bonding of the peptide backbone have motivated
the design of cell-permeant peptides. Peptoids are synthetic peptide
derivatives made of N-substituted glycines. They are thought to provide modularity of the peptide building block
and have improved stability. An example is provided by Schwochert
and colleagues, who systematically developed peptoid mimics of a Nα-methylated cyclic hexapeptide, cyclo-[Leu1D(NMe)Leu2-(NMe)Leu3-Leu4-DPro5-(NMe)Tyr6(1NMe3)] and investigated
the conformational propensity and permeance of the mimics. The authors
noted that while most peptoid substitutions maintained similar permeance,
substitutions at certain positions (Leu2 and Tyr6) improved permeance
by 50%. The authors speculated that peptoid substitutions only yielded
modest improvements in due to potential steric hindrance that impacts
the β-turns in the cyclic hexapeptide. This can result in unsatisfied
H-bond donors and lead to an increased cost for penetrance. Since this first description, there have been
many uses of peptoids as binders, including for targets the such as
the proteasome and p53-MDM2, thereby demonstrating the dual utility of these
ligands as binders and for improved cellular penetration.

## Structural
Stabilization through “Stapled” Peptides
Another
method of improving uptake and hence the pharmacokinetics
of peptide therapeutics is to stabilize a desirable secondary structure.
One way to do this is the so-called “stapling” of peptides
to increase the tendency of a polypeptide to exist as an α-helical
structure; this characteristic is known as helix propensity ( ). The process
of “stapling” peptide helices was first shown by Schafmeister
et al. as means to improve the stability and potency of α-helices.
Stabilizing the α -helix also helps shield the polar amide backbone
from the surface, which improves permeance through the decreased desolvation
energy. In this work, the authors designed
helical peptides with unnatural amino acids and varied the stereochemistry
at the α-carbon. They incorporated various length alkyl chains
and performed olefin-mediated cross-linking of helices. Overall, Schafmeister
and co-workers noted a significant difference in chain length and
ring-closing efficiencies. They hypothesized that linkers too short
to span the face of the templating helix are not metathesized efficiently
and therefore could not be produced as stapled peptides. Using circular
dichroism, the authors analyzed the helix stability of the designed
stapled peptides and observed that cross-links of 9 and 10 carbons
were too short and either destabilized the helix or did not change
the helix stability compared to control. A cross-link of 11 carbons
showed the most optimal stabilization, with a 44% increase helix stability;
linkers longer than 11 showed less optimal stabilization. This work
revealed that the ideal ring size is one large enough to permit helical
turns but sufficiently restrained to optimally stabilize helical structure.
Finally, the authors determined that stapled peptides were significantly
more resistant to digestion by trypsin. Since the proof-of-concept
study, the use of stapled peptides to stabilize conformations has
been shown to improve cellular uptake, most likely related to improved
desolvation and insertion into the membrane afforded by rigidifying
of peptides. 
A good illustration
of the benefit of stapled peptides can be seen in the development
of inhibitors for the murine double minute (MDM)2/MDMX complex. MDM2/MDMX
are proteins that bind to and negatively regulate the transcription
factor p53 and are often overexpressed in cancer cells. Identifying
an inhibitor of the MDM2/MDMX complex could lead to anticancer drug
development. Chang et al. improved a previously designed stapled peptide,
SAH-p53-8, for the inhibition of MDM2
and MDMX as a modality for p53-based cancer therapy. This study incorporated structural analyses from both the
previously reported stapled peptide and phage display technology to
identify residues relevant for tight binding to MDM2/MDMX. While the
authors maintained the same staple moiety (annotated as 14–30),
they removed some residues and modified others. These residue changes
resulted in ATSP-7041 and made a marked difference in solubility,
permeance, and binding selectivity compared to SAH-p53-8. Chang and
team showed that treatment of the stapled peptide for 4.5 h at 20 μM
resulted in robust intracellular entry and substantially reduced MDMX
and MDM2 co-immunoprecipitation with p53 in lysates compared with
DMSO controls. Moreover, ATSP-7041 had antitumor properties in human
xenograft models, favorable pharmacokinetics, and tissue distribution.
This work highlighted the potential of stapled peptides as vehicles
for the delivery of proteins and the modulation of intracellular POIs.

## Charge Modification and Supercharged Proteins
Since
the discovery cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs), it has been appreciated
that charge plays a significant role in improving the delivery of
biomolecules. The improvement is thought to occur due to attractive
interactions between positively charged amino acid residues and negatively
charged lipids on the membrane. While the actual relationship is more
complex, increasing the positive charge on biomolecules, particularly
proteins, improves their intracellular delivery in a concept is known
as “super charging” proteins ( ). The best described example was provided
by Lawrence et al. Taking inspiration
from the fact that some proteins can withstand extensive acetylation
of their surface lysines while maintaining function and folding, the
authors developed variably charged GFP variants and studied their
physiochemical properties (folding, fluorescence, aggregation propensity,
and melting temperatures). The team converted 29 highly-solvent accessible
residues in superfolder GFP to lysines or arginines; the variants
had theoretical surface charges ranging +36 to −30. The authors
observed that the super charged constructs showed increased stability
and reduced aggregation. In a follow up paper, the team investigated
the role of charge and the distribution of charge on the variants
in cellular uptake. This study revealed that an inflection in the
number of surface charge (in this case, +22) enabled high delivery
efficiency and allowed the proposal that the observed uptake efficiency
is an indication of a unique internalization pathway when positive
charge is spread over a globular protein as opposed to concentrated
on a small peptide. Further studies with inhibitors of endocytosis
suggested that supercharged GFP was primarily internalized through
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. 
While supercharged proteins have emerged as a mechanism for aiding
entry of macromolecules into cells, certain challenges and considerations
for their use still exist. A significant challenge stems from the
mutagenesis required to generate charged surfaces on the protein.
Substituting residues of a protein’s primary sequence has the
potential to disrupt interactions necessary to proper folding and
function of the protein. Indeed, in 2007 Lawrence et al. reported
that their supercharged GFP variants exhibited a 1–4 kcal/mol
decline in thermodynamic stability. Furthermore, residues are commonly
changed to lysines due to the positive charge they carry. However,
the lysines on proteins can potentially be ubiquitinated and cause
degradation of the protein. As such, this delivery mechanism poses
a risk of premature loss of protein-based degraders. Finally, supercharged
proteins also indiscriminately increase the permeability of surrounding
cells and thereby hinder the specificity of cargo delivery.

5.1.3.

## Peptide-Based Delivery Vehicles
Most
discussions about cellular uptake of proteins and peptides involves
the class of delivery vehicles known as cell-penetrating peptides
(CPPs). CPPs are positively charged short peptides containing 5–30
amino acids and are thought to have high efficiency in cellular entry;
they can function via direct translocation or endocytic mechanisms
( ). CPPs
have been used in a wide variety of biomedical applications. The foundation
of the CPP field was heavily influenced by naturally occurring proteins
that possessed cell-to-cell shuttling capabilities. The first described
CPPs were TAT (derived from the HIV TAT protein) and penetratin (from
antennapedia homeodomain). Homeoproteins
were observed to use the third helix of the homeodomain, known as
the protein translocation domain, to translocate efficiently across
biological membranes. In addition to
homeodomains, signal peptides form another class of natural polypeptide
sequences that allow for protein translocation. Since the discovery of these naturally shuttling proteins,
studies have revealed the minimal penetrating sequences from the proteins,
designed and optimized synthetic analogues of these sequences, and
investigated the mechanism(s) of cell entry and protein translocation.
Functionally, CPPs and similar peptides are fused to cargo via a stable
or semilabile linker that allows for the cotransport of the cargo
into the cell. In this section of the Review, we will highlight some
widely used CPPs, describe their physiochemical properties, and finally
discuss more recent rational design efforts.

## Canonical Cell-Penetrating
Peptides
Typically, CPPs
are categorized into three main classes: cationic, amphipathic, and
hydrophobic. Since CPPs are known are known to carry a positive charge,
these classification distinctions are meant to categorize each one
relative to other CPPs. Furthermore, this classification system can
explain patterns in permeation and escape. , , Cationic CPPs are known to contain
a continuous stretch of basic residues (such as the polyarginine motif
in TAT, R8, and R10 peptides). It is thought that the continued stretch
of positively charged residues drive internalization into the cell.
There appears to be a unique functional effectiveness for arginine
residues when compared to other positively charged residues. Mitchell
and team explored the effect of residue makeup, length, stereochemistry,
and headgroup on permeation. The authors confirmed that there is a
significant difference in heptamers consisting of arginine compared
to other positively charged residues. Synthesized poly-l-arginine
(R3–R9, R15, R20, R25, R30), l-lysine (L7, L9), and l-histidine (H7, H9) were covalently attached to fluorescein
at the N-termini of each peptide. Upon incubation of the fluorescent
peptides, it was observed that only l-arginine polymers showed
significantly improved uptake into cells over l-lysine and l-histidine polymers. The authors observed that the ideal number
of arginines ranged from 8 to 10 residues; peptides much longer or
shorter had decreased uptake efficiencies. Finally, this study revealed
that charge and size alone did not explain the varying uptake efficiencies
of arginine polymers. To investigate the relevance of the guanidinium
headgroup, the authors performed uptake experiments with citrulline
(an isostere of arginine with a urea headgroup), homoarginine (additional
methylene and a guanidinium headgroup), and δGABA (one less
methylene and a guanidinium headgroup). They observed that citrulline
lost uptake ability while homoarginine and δGABA showed similar
efficiencies as the R7 peptide. This finding supported the hypothesis
that the guanidinium headgroup is relevant, perhaps due to its ability
to form ionic interactions. 
Amphipathic
CPPs contain both cationic and hydrophobic regions. This category
encompasses most CPPs and can be further defined based on how integrated
the various regions are. Primary amphipathic CPPs have spatially
separated cationic and hydrophobic regions, and the two regions are
stabilized through hydrogen bonding. On the other hand, in secondary
amphipathic CPPs, the regions are intermixed and can have a functional
secondary structure when the peptide interacts with polyanionic surfaces
(such as the membrane). A popular example of a secondary amphipathic
CPP is penetratin. Magzoub et al. investigated varying conformational
states of penetratin and how they impacts its binding to phospholipid
vesicles. By attaching an electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spin
probe to a tryptophan residue, the authors measured secondary structural
changes in response to changes in surface charge density, lipid-to-peptide
ratio, and salt concentration. They observed that penetratin in solution
is typically a random, unstructured coil. Interaction with lipids
result in increasing formation of either α-helical or β-sheet
secondary structures. The authors concluded that lower surface charge
densities or lower penetratin concentration preferred a helical structure,
while higher charge densities and concentrations showed a preference
for the β-sheet structure. This
work, among others, indicates that the conformational variation of
the secondary structure plays a role in the ability of amphipathic
CPPs to engage and penetrate, not just their charge.
The final
category is hydrophobic CPPs, which contain nonpolar
residues and a small number of cationic residues (compared to their
counterparts in the other categories). Overall, there are not many
CPPs that fall in this category, but their stretch of hydrophobicity
plays a crucial role in their mechanism of entry, perhaps because
of favorable interactions with the lipid bilayer. They have also been
shown to transport cargo primarily through direct penetration. 

## Improvements to Naturally Occurring CPPs
While naturally
occurring CPPs have been widely adopted for intracellular protein
and peptide delivery, they often require high concentrations, exhibit
poor uptake kinetics, and mostly remain trapped along with their cargo
in endosomes. As such, a major focus has been the rational design
and synthesis of improved CPPs. The spatial distribution of charge
and structural rigidity and conformation are important for the penetration
efficiency. Daniels and Schepartz built on the natural penetrating
capabilities of the polyarginine motif to rationally design type II
helical cell-permeant miniature proteins by introducing proline residues.
The authors designed two series of cationic polyproline type-II structure
(PPII) helices (3 residues per turn): (PPR)n and (PRR)n, both of which created aligned
faces of proline or arginine residues. They observed that (PRR)5 and (PRR)6 showed significant cell penetrance
compared to (PRR)3, (PRR)4, or any of the (PPR)n series. The designed peptides (PRR)5 and (PRR)6 showed penetrance levels comparable to arginine
polymers R8, R10, and R12. The authors later utilized the scaffold
of the avian pancreatic polypeptide (aPP) to further stabilize PPII
motifs. The authors replaced the PPII helix in aPP with either RR5,
RR4, or RR3. These designs reduced helicity but otherwise retained
the structure of the scaffold. RR5-aPP, RR4-aPP, and RR3-aPP showed
uptake comparable to that of polyarginine tags and (PRR)5. The success of these designs was attributed to the helix turn being
sufficiently large to accommodate high positive charges of the additional
arginine, which resulted in a thermostable secondary structure. Appelbaum et al. further designed a set of
miniature proteins that had 1–6 arginine residues at various
locations and provided varying densities of α-helical arginine
side chains on the aPP scaffold. Proteins labeled with fluorescein
and HeLa cells were incubated with resulted in increases in cell fluorescence
between 3 and 40-fold. Further studies of endosomal release identified
one miniature protein (5.3) as enabling robust cytosolic delivery,
which correlated with its release from early endosomes (as compared
to R8 and TAT, which are released from late endosomes). Finally, the
authors tested whether the 5.3 motif could be used with other scaffolding
proteins such as CP1 (a single zinc finger); this exercise produced
ZF5.3 as a cell-permeant miniature protein. Similar to aPP5.3, ZF5.3
showed robust delivery efficiencies compared with linear CPPs such
as TAT and R8. These designed proteins
have been used for the functional cytosolic delivery of enzymes and bioPROTACs. 
Recent research has explored whether the use of CPPs as additives,
which along with thiol-reactive molecules, could improve cargo delivery
efficiency ( ). In work by Schneider et al., the team observed that adding a 5-fold
excess of unconjugated cyclic R10 (cR10) improved the cytosolic delivery
of various CPP-cargo combinations. The authors noted that entry was
facilitated via a nonendocytic mechanism and suggested that the excess
cR10 acted as a membrane modifier to enable direct penetration. Furthermore,
the work revealed that additives with increased thiol reactivity such
as cystine-R10, acetamide-R10 (AA-R10), dicystine-R10, and thio-nitro-benzoic-acid-activated
R10 (TNB-R10) and further improved delivery of cargo cystine-cR10
showed efficient uptake of mCherry-R10. The authors hypothesized that
this might be due to increased interaction with disulfides at the
surface of cells. To probe this phenomenon, they studied TNB-R10,
which has an electrophilic disulfide bond, and showed that it significantly
facilitated the uptake of other additives. The use of TNB-R10 as an
additive showed a 50% increase in nuclear mCherry fluorescence intensity
compared with a less reactive cystine variant, cystine-R10. The use
of TNB-R10 as an additive to R10-labeled cargo enabled the delivery
of a wide range of protein cargos. A
later study by Arafiles et al. showed that the delivery efficiency
was further improved when a short hydrophobic anchor was attached
to the electrophilic thiol-reactive additive. The small hydrophobic
peptide ILFF, which was the transposed version of the Pas peptide,
allowed for longer retention of the vehicle on the surface of cellular
membranes. Increased retention drives improved uptake compared to
nonanchored additives. This pattern
is similarly observed with primary amphipathic CPPs, in which structurally
separate charged and hydrophobic regions improve delivery. 
 

## Cell Penetrating Poly(disulfide)s
(CPDs)
As observed
with CPP additives, thiol reactivity can increase membrane permeability.
This is thought to occur through the creation of a nucleation zone
at the disulfide-containing cell surface. This phenomenon is further
supported by cell-penetrating poly(disulfide)s (CPDs), synthetic polyarginine
CPP mimics in which the peptide backbone is replaced with poly(disulfides).
These molecules take advantage of the positively charged guanidinium
groups and the activation of disulfides at the cell surface to induce
endocytic and nonendocytic delivery of protein cargo ( ). Following covalent attachment to cell surface thiols, CPDs are released
directly into the cytosol by disulfide exchange with glutathione.
As such, CPDs rapidly fall apart in the reducing environment of the
cytosol and leave no trace on the cargo. While these synthetic mimics
are very promising, bioconjugation to cargo remains an area active
of research. One of the first instances of using CPDs mimics for protein
delivery came from Gasparini and Matile. These authors demonstrated the delivery of streptavidin. Beginning
with a biotinylated and green-fluorescent thiol, they propagated multiple
ring-opening disulfide-exchange polymerization of arginine-lipoate
under mild conditions; the final CPD contained both a biotin handle
to bind to streptavidin and fluorescein for imaging. The tagged streptavidin
was delivered to HeLa Kyoto cells, and uptake was measured using flow
cytometry and confocal imaging. Gasparini and Matile observed that
only streptavidin protein labeled with biotin-CPD successfully entered
cells and showed bright staining of the nucleoli. The authors provided
a method for reliable bioconjugation of CPD to proteins of interest
that can be used for delivery to the nucleus. Qian et al. presented two additional methods to “tag”
cargos of interest with CPDs. They developed PTM-based bioconjugation
using glycan and lysine tag methods to decorate a wide variety of
cargo. For native glycoproteins, the authors activated surface glycans
into either an aldehyde (with oxime conjugation) or an azide headgroup
(at free surface lysines sites). The authors also developed traceless
tagging methods using two cleavable linkers (NBL and TCOL) that modified
the surface lysine of any native protein. Both linkers contain p-nitrophenyl carbonate to react with primary amines and
either a disulfide-bridged norbornene (NB) or trans-cyclooctene (TCO) for CPD conjugation. The team then used compatible
CDPs that react with the activating head groups on the protein cargo
for covalent linking. Using these methods, they delivered functional
and tagless IgG, BSA, RNase A, and horseradish peroxide to HeLa cells. 

5.1.4.

## Bacterial-Based
Delivery Vehicles
Pathogens have evolved complex machineries
to enter host cells. Some
of these machineries have been repurposed for cytosolic delivery of
protein cargo. In this section of the Review, we introduce generally
used toxins and their entry mechanisms and highlight those that have
been used for cargo delivery. , Toxin proteins have
evolved multiple mechanisms for gaining access to host cells. These
include translocation across the plasma membrane via pore formation,
receptor-mediated endocytosis, and retrograde transport ( ). Within bacterial
toxins, the AB class toxins have been widely studied and repurposed
for protein delivery. AB toxins typically consist of separate enzymatic
and cell surface binding domains that work together to specifically
attach to host cells and gain entry. Examples of their use in the delivery of protein cargo are provided
below.

## Anthrax Toxin
Anthrax is one of the most well studied
bacterial toxins. Anthrax is made of two separate components: the
lethal factor (LF) and protective antigen (PA) that bind and engage
with tumor endothelial marker 8 (TEM8) or capillary morphogenesis
gene 2 (CMG2). Once bound, the protective antigen (PA) is activated
by a protease and forms oligomers that recognize and bind to the N-terminus
of the toxin domain known as the lethal factor (LF). The complex of
PA and LF is then endocytosed and eventually escapes endosomes in
an unfolded state via pores; the complex refolds in the cytosol. The anthrax system has been used to deliver
various non-native cargo by attaching cargo to LF through recombinant
expression, ligation with chemically formed amide bonds, or enzyme-mediated
ligation. The anthrax toxin has been employed to deliver more than
30 distinct cargos, including affibodies, DARPins, Pseudomonas exotoxin A, and dihydrofolate reductase, and is one of the more well studied bacterial toxins. Liao et al.
explored the ability of PA/LF platform to deliver antibody mimics
(affibody, protein GB1, DARPin, and monobody) and compared it to more
commonly used CPPS. Their approach appended cargos of interest to
truncated LF (the N-terminus of full length LF, LFN) using
a Sortase A-mediated linkage. To study translocation efficiencies,
the authors additionally appended active diphtheria toxin A (dtA,
discussed in detail later) to the C-terminus of LFN. This
allowed protein synthesis to serve as a measure of delivery efficiency.
All constructs were incubated with CHO cells in the presence of 20
nM PA, and fraction protein synthesis was determined. All antibody
mimic constructs showed similar half-maximal effective concentration
values (EC50) for reducing protein synthesis when compared
to LFN-dtA only, indicating efficient translocation. Next,
the authors probed the ability of the PA/LFN platform to
deliver functional antibody mimics for disrupting PPIs. This work
revealed inhibition of Bcr-Abl kinase and disruption of the MAPK signaling
pathway upon the efficient delivery of monobody HA4-7c12 (Kd = 6 nM to Abl-SH2 domain) and affibody ABRaf
(Kd = 100 nM for hRaf1), respectively.
HA4-7c12, known to bind the Abl-SH2 domain, can induce apoptosis by
disrupting kinase activity. The use of 500 nM LFN-HA4-7c12
and 80 nM PA resulted in the cytosolic delivery of functional HA4-7c12
and a 20% increase in apoptosis in K562 cells. Moreover, delivery
of the ABRaf affibody was achieved with the PA/LFN platform.
This body of work established the PA/LFN platform as a
functional delivery vehicle for a wide variety of properly folded
and active antibody mimics. 
The
specificity of PA of anthrax toxin could also be repurposed to target
noncanonical receptors. Verdurmen et al. first established retargeting
PA/LFN by replacing its natural receptor recognition motif
with a receptor-targeted DARPin. By
fusing an EpCAM-targeting DARPin (Ac2, Kd of 130 nM) to the C-terminus of variant PA with no binding to its
endogenous receptors, the authors observed that even 20 nM of PAm-Ac2 was sufficient to show cytosolic delivery of cargo. More recently, Becker and team systematically
identified the mechanism of toxicity and improved upon the original
design. PAwt typically binds its endogenous receptor using
domain 4, but pore formation is pH-dependent and requires the stabilization
of PA domain 2 by the CMG2 receptor von Willebrand factor A (VWA)
region. This mechanism limits pore formation by preventing conformational
change until later in the endocytosis step and a lower pH (pH = 6).
Variant PA was unable to achieve this conformational stability, resulting
in pore formation as early as initial receptor binding on the cell
surface, which the authors hypothesized is the cause of the toxicity
(pH = 7). As such, they recapitulated that stabilizing effect using
PAwt fused to residues 40–217 of the VWA domain of CMG2 (PAwt-sANTXR) and fused PAwt-sANTXR to DARPin Ac2 (PAwt-sANTXR-Ac2).
The authors showed that PAwt-sANTX-Ac2 had much lower cytotoxicity,
which indicated that the design stabilized timing of pore formation. This optimization resulted in improved delivery
of cargo to cells. The body of work highlights that while bacterial
toxins are highly modular and can be repurposed, systematic studies
of mechanisms must influence protein design to avoid unwanted side
effects.

## Diphtheriae Toxin
Diphtheriae toxin
is another well
characterized AB toxin, but unlike the anthrax toxin the domains are
on a single polypeptide chain. The DT toxin consists of an N-terminal
ADP–ribosyl transferase enzyme (dtA) with a central translocation
domain and a C-terminal receptor-binding domain (dtB). DT toxin binds
to the heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor
via its C-terminus domain with a Kd of
27 nM to trigger clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Once inside endosomes, that same domain undergoes conformational
change due to the acidic endosomal environment and exposes two hydrophobic
α-helices that can insert into the endosomal membrane, create
membrane-spanning pores, and facilitate endosomal escape. , Once successfully escaped, the DT toxin inactivates the host protein
synthesis machinery through the NAD+-dependent ADP-ribosylation
of elongation factor 2 (EF-2). For a
long time, DT was repurposed to make cell-specific immunotoxins by
replacing the receptor-binding domain of dtB to bind and kill cells
that express certain surface markers. For example, recent work from
Zhang et al. developed PD-1 diphtheria immunotoxin (PD-1 DIT). PD-1
DIT appends a truncated diphtheria toxin with scFvs derived from an
antimouse PD-1 antibody. The truncated DT toxin included residues
1–390 of diphtheria toxin, of which residues 1–187 are
the catalytic domain, residues 188–199 link dtA and dtB, and
residues 200–390 are the translocation domain of dtB. The authors
observed that the PD-1-targeting immunotoxin bound and internalized
into PD-1+ cells El4 (high PD-1+ levels) and
2D2 (lower PD-1+ levels) cells but showed significant toxicity
with EC50 values of 0.4 and 1 nM, respectively; the immunotoxin
also lost toxicity when PD-1 was knocked out of EL4 (EC50 = 1 μM). Development of the PD-1 DIT immunotoxin to selectively
deplete PD-1+ cells can help to decipher the role of these
cell types, and the vehicle serves as a platform to selectively deplete
PD-1+ cells, which would be relevant in disease progression
of certain autoimmune diseases such as type I diabetes and cancers. 
Auger and team reported the delivery
of various functional and well folded proteins (SUMO, α-amylase,
and GFP) by attaching the cargo to either terminus of the A domain.
To analyze the functional delivery, the authors maintained the A domain
function of the wild-type toxin (halting protein synthesis by inhibition
of eukaryotic elongation factor or eEF-2). The key finding from this
work is that the location of the added cargo affects the toxicity
of the A domain. When cargo was appended at the N-terminus, there
was an increase in the EC50 of 65-fold for Sumo-dtA, 260-fold
for α-amylase-dtA, and 1200-fold for eGFP-dtA compared with
wild-type dtA. Optimization of the designs uncovered that increasing
linker (GSG) size between eGFP and dtA improved the potency in cells,
thereby indicating that the reduction in dtA activity may correlate
with dtA activity rather than the delivery efficiency. The authors
then inserted cargo between the N-terminus of the inactive dtA (denoted
as dta) domain and the C-terminus of an active dtA domain and could
recapitulate the wild type toxicity. To confirm that cargo codelivered
with functional dtA was functional itself, they tested and confirmed
the ability of α-amylase to enzymatically digest cytosolic glycogen.
The observed dtB delivery efficiencies for the active dtA domain was
4-fold improved from that of the canonical TAT CPP, indicating that
DT provides a more efficient platform for intracellular protein delivery. 

## Botulinum Neurotoxin
Botulinum neurotoxin
(BoNT) is
another bacterial toxin that has been repurposed for a wide variety
of applications, including the Botox drug. BoNT is an extremely potent neurotoxin that contains a light and
heavy chain, and there are known 7 serotypes with the most common
being BoNT/A, BoNT/B, and BoNT/E. The heavy chain contains both the
translocation domain (HN) and the receptor-binding domain
(HC), while the light chain contains the enzymatically
active domain (LC). Following protease processing within
the producing organism Clostridium botulinum, the
protein is linked only by a disulfide chain. Once it undergoes receptor-mediated
endocytosis, the heavy chain creates a pore and is released into the
cytosol, where the disulfide bond is cleaved to free the enzymatically
active domain. Naturally the BoNT serotypes target motor neurons and
cleaves neuronal proteins belonging to the SNARE protein family, such
as SNAP-25, syntaxin 1, VAMP 1, VAMP 2, and VAMP 3 resulting in disruption
of the release of neurotransmitters. This multistep and complex entry mechanism has many exploitable
parts that could be repurposed for protein delivery. BoNT delivery
efficacy is achieved through complex interactions from both chains,
but it must be inactivated. To circumnavigate this, researchers designed
an enzymatically dead BoNT variant by introducing mutations in the
conserved HEXXH motif and altering residues critical for protease
activity (R363A and Y366F). Miyashita
et al. developed a chimeric toxin-based delivery method using BoNT
variants for the delivery of a therapeutic nanobody to neutralize
the BoNT toxin after it has infected neurons. BoNT/X, a recently discovered
BoNT variant, shows increased translocation compared to its BoNT/A,
BoNT/C, and BoNT/D counterparts but lacks neuron specificity. To exploit
the strengths of the variants, Miyashita and colleagues designed various
chimeric BoNT proteins by appending LCHN/X with
the HC of BoNT/A (HC/A), BoNT/C (HC/C), or BoNT/D (HC/D). The final protein design included
three-point mutations to remove the protease recognition site (E228Q/R360A/Y363F)
in LC/X, insertion of a thrombin cleavage site to create
a dichain form, and addition of A8, a nanobody cargo that can neutralize
wild-type active BoNT/A. The authors showed the successful delivery
of active forms of their chimeric BoNT/XA and A8-BoNT/XA with VAMP2
cleavage median inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of 1.26
and 9.38 pM, respectively, in neurons. To test the efficacy of A8
cargo to neutralize wild-type BoNT/XA, neurons were exposed to active
BoNT/A, then A8-BoNT/XA or A8 and BoNT/XA (A8 not appended to toxin)
were delivered. Only A8-BoNT/XA showed a decrease in SNAP25 cleavage
activity that indicated functional inhibition of BoNT/XA. The authors
saw similar results with A8-BoNT/XC and A8-BoNT/XD chimeric variants.
In vivo injection of sublethal doses of A8-BoNT/XA shortened BoNT/A-induced
leg muscle paralysis. Miyashita et al. demonstrated that chimeric
BoNT is a modular and highly potent delivery platform for therapeutic
relevant cargo in vitro and in vivo. 
Recently, Roh et al. further established the modularity of
BoNT for cell-type specific delivery of non-native cargo using non-native
receptor targeting. Using an enzymatically dead BoNT variant, the
design replaced the natural receptor-binding domain with various cell
surface marker binding nanobodies (Nbs) and attached cargo of interest
at the N-terminus of the light chain. In this study, chimeric toxins
bearing both GFPnb (Kd = 1 nM) and EGFRnb
(Kd = 25 nM) could enter cells expressing
a fusion of GFP and the transferrin receptor (hTfR-GFP), as well as
EGFR expressing cells. The authors developed a highly sensitive split
luciferase assay and showed GFPnb and EGFRnb BoNT variants demonstrated
successful endosomal escape and cytosolic delivery of functional cargo
ranging from 1.3 to 55 kDa. Delivered cargo included HiBIT, Ras/Rap1-specific
endopeptidase (RRSP), tetanus toxin protease (TTP), and BoNT/A protease
(BTP). Finally, the authors delivered both TTP-BoNT-GFPnb and BTP-BoNT-EGFRnb
GFPnb variants in a coculture of GFP+ and EGFR+ HEK293T cells and observed 4–29-fold selectivity over nontarget
cells. This work shows the high modularity of BoNT in particular for
cell-type-specific delivery but notes that BoNT stability is a major
hurdle for future applications. Recently,
Sg et al. reported similar work with a programmable BoNT delivery
platform. In this case, the authors used the SpyCatcher/SpyTag system
to enable switching of cargo. The SpyCatcher/Spytag system allows
for the formation of a covalent bond under robust reaction conditions
and allows researchers to interchange protein partners. While Roh et al. and other studies fused protein
cargos directly to the full BoNT template and isolated unique constructs
for each protein cargo, Sg and colleagues provided a platform for
easy interchange of cargo. In this design, the natural receptor-binding
domain was fused with a EGFR binder, and SpyCatcher(SC) was attached
to the N-terminus of the inactive protease. Appending SpyTag to various
cargo allowed the intercellular entry and endosomal escape of cargo,
as determined by confocal imaging and cytotoxicity studies. 

5.1.5.

## Bacterial
Nanostructures for Direct Injection
While some bacteria evolved
proteins to invade other cells through
receptor-mediated endocytosis and escape, others contain nanomachines
that allow for direct injection into the cytosol. Here we briefly
describe two types of syringe-like nanomachines that have been leveraged
as tools for the cytosolic delivery of protein cargo.

## Type III
Secretion System
The type III secretion system
(T3SS) is a highly coordinated multiprotein system that acts as a
needle between the bacteria and the host cells. This type of system
is seen in various pathogenic bacteria strains of Salmonella, Shigella, E. coli, Pseudomonas, and Yersinia. T3SS
complexes span the membranes of bacteria and use ATP to power the
injection of an effector protein from the inner membrane to the cytosol
of the host. This process commences when the T3SS complex senses cell-to-cell
contact and induces upregulation of the effector protein in the bacteria.
While many pathogenic bacteria possess this complex, Salmonella
typhimurium and Yersinia enterocolitica have
been re-engineered as protein delivery vehicles. 
Rüssmann et al. demonstrated the use of T3SS
from nonvirulent strains of Salmonella typhimurium for the delivery of an antigen as a method for vaccine development.
The authors developed a chimera from the 63 T3SS (SptP) and appended
a class I restricted epitope of the influenza virus nucleoprotein
(IVNP) at domains that were predicted to be negligible for the overall
structure and activity of T3SS. The chimeric SptP-IVNP366–374 protein was secreted from S. typhimurium cultures,
collected, and used for cytosolic delivery of the antigen epitope
into epithelial cells. Rüssmann and colleagues observed that
only SptP containing sipD, a gene essential for type
III protein translocation, achieved cytosolic delivery. This work
showed that cells infected with SptP-IVNP366–374 elicited T-cell response by presenting the IVNP epitope on the surface
stimulating T-cell hybridoma. 
More recently Chabloz et al. enhanced the S. typhimurium T3SS system without all known pathogenic effectors and replication
abilities to improve cytosolic delivery abilities. Use of their plasmid
would allow one-step cloning of a protein, which is a considerable
advantage when using various cargos. The authors achieved the delivery
of different DARPins across various cells lines (HeLa, A427, MEF,
and HEK), where over 95% of cells showed uptake of the protein cargo.
It is important to note that to pass through T3SS system, protein
cargo must be able to unfold as it moves through the narrow syringe.
Chabloz and co-workers demonstrated that RAS binding DARPin and monobodies
were successfully and colocalized with wt KRAS, indicating proper
folding of these protein binders. 
The Yersinia enterocolitica T3SS has also been
utilized for the cytosolic delivery of protein cargo. Y. enterocolitica encodes its T3SS on a separate virulent plasmid. Nontoxic strains
of Y. enterocolitica that remove the toxic YOP effector
proteins are valid candidates for cargo delivery. Ittig et al. appended
only the N-terminal YopE1–138, which contains the T3SS signal and binding site for the
rest of the nanostructure, to the protein cargo. This was sufficient
for the secretion and delivery of protein cargo to different compartments
within the cell without cytotoxicity. While these T3SS systems can delivery robust amounts of cargo throughout
most cells treated, they are only functionally expressed on or secreted
from their endogenous strains.

## Extracellular Contractile
Injection Systems (eCISs)
Recently, extracellular contractile
injection systems have been used
as programmable delivery tools. Photorhabdus asymbiotica can form and release functional nanosyringes into the environment.
These nano syringes (also known as photorhabdus virulence cassettes
or PVCs) can recognize specific receptors and use force injection
to deliver payload toxins into the cytosol of cells expressing the
receptor. While P. asymbiotica naturally targets
insect cells, Kreitz et al. reengineered cell specificity and cargo
toward various mammalian cells as well as showed delivery in vivo. Unlike the T3SS complexes, PVC can be grown
and easily purified from readily available bacterial strains.

5.2.

## Using Delivery Vehicles
5.2.1.

## Stability
Protein and peptide-based
degraders need to maintain their structures to perform their intended
functions. The three-dimensional conformation of a protein is often
essential for its function. As such, misfolding or unfolding of the
protein, particularly at the target engagement regions, can result
in aggregation and loss of the intended function. The stability challenge of protein-based drugs is greater
when compared with small molecules. While drug delivery vehicles have
typically been optimized to enhance both delivery and in vivo stability,
the vehicles also offer protection against some external environmental
conditions. For example, high temperatures
affect the dynamic interactions between amino acid residues, making
most proteins susceptible to this physical stress ( ). In most natural conformations,
hydrophobic residues engage in van der Waals interactions and hydrophobic
interactions that allow folding and shielding into the protein interior.
At high temperatures, weakening of electrostatic forces causes unfolding
of buried regions, thereby exposing their hydrophobic residues. The
hydrophobic residues of multiple proteins are then able to bind to
each other and aggregate. The misfolded aggregates resulting from
high temperatures usually cannot be reversed. 
 Agitation is also known to promote protein aggregation.
It has
been suggested that the increase in liquid–air interfaces introduced
during agitation promotes exposure of the inner hydrophobic regions
of the protein to the air interface. The protein then gradually unfolds
to expose its hydrophobic core, which inactivates it and promotes
binding to other proteins at their exposed hydrophobic regions. The
effects of agitation are of particular concern during shipping and
handling of protein-based pharmaceuticals. , 
Few strategies to increase the stability of proteins during
storage
and transport have been investigated. Liu et al. demonstrated that
a trehalose glycopolymer could prevent the aggregation of insulin
during temperature- or agitation-induced stress. Trehalose is a nonreducing
disaccharide composed of two α-glucose units. While its mechanism
of action has been widely debated, trehalose has been shown to stabilize
biomolecules against thermal- and dehydration-induced degradation;
it also acts as a cryoprotectant. Trehalose is present in insects,
yeasts, algae, and fungi that live in extreme environments; the polymer
is central to their resilience in harsh conditions. This protective
phenomenon has been linked to trehalose’s ability to preserve
the conformational integrity of the proteins in producing organisms.
Liu et al. developed a trehalose glycopolymer using reversible addition–fragmentation
chain transfer polymerization at either ketone or aldehyde groups.
The authors demonstrated this polymer’s ability to stabilize
protein therapeutics by investigating its effect on insulin when chemically
conjugated or added as an excipient. Insulin is susceptible to thermal
degradation and ∼50% of the protein will degrade when kept
at 90 °C for 30 min. The addition of trehalose glycopolymer as
an excipient reduced insulin degradation by half when heated to 90
°C for 30 min. Trehalose was also able to completely prevent
the aggregation of insulin when agitated for up to 3 h, whereas 70%
of pure insulin would have aggregated under this condition. 
The stabilizing effect of trehalose is
not limited to the use of
monomeric or polymeric trehalose. Trehalose can enhance the stabilizing
properties of other polymers when conjugated as a side chain. In another
study, Peligri-O’Day et al. investigated the stabilizing effects
of a library of caprolactone polymers that were functionalized with
different side chains. Polycaprolactone is a lactone polymer that
is hydrophobic and biodegradable. It is an FDA approved polymer commonly
used as an excipient in biomedical applications. Peligri-O’Day
and colleagues functionalized caprolactone polymers with trehalose,
glucose, lactose, PEG, and a carboxybetaine zwitterion. The functionalized
polymers were tested for their ability to stabilize biologics by using
the therapeutic protein, G-CSF, as a model. G-CSF is an FDA approved
therapy used to increase neutrophil granulocyte count during chemotherapy.
However, the protein is highly unstable, particularly at physiological
pH, and also degrades upon heating and during storage. To test the
stabilizing ability of the functionalized caprolactone polymers, the
authors added each as an excipient for G-CSF and heated the resultant
mixture to 60 °C for 30 min. The amount of functional G-CSF present
was assessed by the ability of the sample to induce the proliferation
of neutrophil granulocytes of the murine myeloid leukemia NFS-60 cell
line. The caprolactone polymers functionalized with either trehalose
or carboxybetaine zwitterion side chains had the most profound stabilizing
properties, and these excipients induced cell proliferation at levels
similar to the unheated and ideally stored G-CSF. 
Even with strategies to ensure ex vivo stability
during manufacturing,
shipping, and storage, protein-based drugs have a greater hurdle to
maintain stability in vivo. The in vivo environment presents a different
context of challenges that cannot be malleated or fine-tuned to match
the aforementioned ideal storage conditions. The first challenge pertains
to administration of the protein-based therapeutic. The most common
route of protein-based drug administration is intravenous application,
in which drugs are directly injected into the bloodstream. This route
of administration causes the protein drugs to experience a large temperature
shift (from the 4 °C storage temperature to the 37 °C body
temperature). A second issue pertains to inactivation once in the
body. In the bloodstream, drugs encounter hundreds of proteins, of
which ∼99% are blood-specific proteins (albumins, globulins,
and fibrinogens). If a protein drug encounters these blood-specific
proteins, it could bind to them and become inactivated. A third concern
is the pH stability of the drug. The homeostasis of carbon dioxide
and bicarbonate concentrations maintains a blood pH of 7.4; this pH
might be suboptimal for some protein drugs. 
Another common method of drug administration is subcutaneous
administration.
This involves the insertion of drugs into adipose tissue and the interstitial
space. This space is characterized by high vasculature and an abundance
of interstitial fluid and extracellular matrix components that engage
with the protein drugs. Some of these major components include hyaluronic
acid, collagen fiber, glycosaminoglycans, elastin, and numerous cell
adhesion proteins like fibronectin. Moreover, the interstitial fluid
contains less protein than the blood and lower concentrations of ions
such as K+ and Na+. However, Cl– ions are more abundant in the interstitial fluid compared to the
blood. 
Protein molecules administered
either intravenously or subcutaneously
will first experience considerable dilution at these sites and exposure
to enzymes and salt solutions that could potentially alter the bonds
that maintain their three-dimensional structure. Additionally, the
human blood buffer system based on bicarbonate concentration may be
significantly different from a protein’s ideal buffer conditions.
These environmental factors leave the protein drug highly susceptible
to chemical alterations that either impede its intended functions
or result in aggregation. Furthermore, accumulation of aggregated
protein in the body is associated with immunogenicity and can be damaging
to health. 
Delivery systems such
as nanoparticles provide a microenvironment
to house drugs through their journey in vivo, are distinct from the
surrounding physiological environment, and can be tuned to have desired
properties. While delivery systems form a protective barrier against
endogenous enzymes, they also face the challenge of needing to promote
the stability of the cargo while maintaining their own stability. This is particularly true in the case of protein
cargo, which can require a very specific and small range of buffer
conditions to maintain their functional structures. An example of
this struggle between the ability to protect and enhance pharmacokinetics
of therapeutic cargo while being susceptible to partial degradation
of cargo is the case of poly(lactic-co-glycolic)
acid (PLGA) polymers, which are common materials used in nanoparticle
systems. They are highly biocompatible and neither the intact polymer
nor the degradation products incite inflammatory immune responses.
They can maintain good colloidal stability, uniform size, and shape
(with few defects) in a broad range of conditions. PLGA has a well-defined
degradation mechanism that allows the polymer to be modulated for
controlled degradation and the release of therapeutic cargo. While
PLGA releases acidic monomers upon degradation, the effect of its
acidity on the body is easily managed by the strong blood buffer system.,
However, lowering the pH within the nanoparticle microenvironment
often disrupts protein folding and results in a proportion of aggregated
protein cargo. 
Zhu et al. sought
to improve the stability of protein cargo loaded
into PLGA nanoparticles. The authors loaded bovine serum albumin (BSA)
into PLGA microcylinders and monitored the release of PLGA-encapsulated
BSA into phosphate buffered saline. These results revealed that while
20% of functional BSA was released from the polymer in 28 days, the
remaining 80% of encapsulated BSA became insoluble and could not be
released from the polymer. SDS-PAGE analysis revealed the formation
of noncovalent protein aggregates driven by hydrophobic interactions
and peptide bond hydrolysis. By testing conditions of the microclimate
that would be found within each PLGA microcylinder, Zhu and colleagues
determined a pH of <3 was mainly responsible for the observed aggregation
of BSA. To ameliorate the deleterious effects of increasing microenvironment
acidity, Mg(OH)2 was dissolved into the BSA solution to
neutralize the acidic microclimate. This strategy extended the half-life
of BSA from 16 to 25 days. Furthermore, the authors showed that this
strategy could be applied to other protein cargo by demonstrating
that Mg(OH)2 and heparin similarly preserved the structure
and bioactivity of the growth factors bFGF and BMP-2. 
Polyanhydrides constitute another class
of biocompatible polymers
that have been studied as an alternative to PLGA. Polyanhydrides are
synthetic polymers composed of copolymers based on 1,8-bis(p-carboxyphenoxy)-3,6-dioxaoctane (CPTEG), 1,6-bis(p-carboxyphenoxy)hexane (CPH), and sebacic acid (SA). These
polymers experience a high rate of hydrolysis at the surface, which
contributes to their “surface erosion” and thus in vivo
biodegradability. Unlike the acidic microenvironment fostered by PLGA,
the degradation of polyanhydrides results in a neutral or slightly
acidic environment (pH 6.5–7). In addition to their hydrophobic
interactions, this property helps stabilize labile proteins and protects
them from acid-induced aggregation. As such, these polymers prolong
the functional life of proteins in storage conditions and in vivo. Wagner-Muñiz et al. encapsulated Streptomyces pneumococcal surface protein (pspA) in two
anhydride polymeric nanoparticles (called nanovaccines) to create
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccines (PPVs). The anhydride polymeric
formulations made of a 50:50 molar composition of copolymer CPH and
CPTEG and a 20:80 molar composition CPH and SA resulted in particles
that were ∼400 nm in diameter and anionic, with zeta potentials
between −31 and −40 mV. Upon immunization of CBA/CaHN-Btkxid/J
(CBA/N) mice with pspA nanovaccines, the mice developed a higher level
of pspA antibodies compared to the delivery of free pspA and at an
analogous level to the delivery of free pspA and Alum adjuvant. Specifically,
mice immunized with 50:50 CPTEG/CPH nanovaccines showed a superior
survival rate of 100% after being exposed to S. pneumoniae. Furthermore, the nanoparticles improved the stability of the pspA
vaccine at room temperature for 60 days. Mice immunized with the nanovaccine
after 60 days of room temperature storage showed superior response
when compared to those immunized with the free protein after identical
storage conditions. 

5.2.2.

## Circulation Time of Cargo
While
drug candidates may show robust performance in vitro, these studies
cannot fully recapitulate the myriad of systems and phenomena present
in a body. This then presents an additional challenge to making the
drug clinically relevant. Pharmacokinetics refers to the interactions
encountered by administered substances inside the body. Of particular
relevance are their absorption, distribution, metabolism, and clearance
half-life. The pharmacokinetic profile is integral in determining
which drugs will succeed clinically. Central to the pharmacokinetic
profile is the clearance half-life in the body, and this will be discussed
in the following section of the Review. 
Clearance from the body typically occurs via the kidney or
the monophagocytic system (MPS). , The kidney
is a central organ of the excretory system and is responsible for
maintaining blood homeostasis and filtering waste out. Urea is the
main toxin removed by pressure filtration from the capillaries lining
the glomerulus of the kidney. The pressure accumulated in the capillaries
forces small molecules through the pores of the capillaries into the
kidney’s glomerulus. These molecules enter the kidney tubules,
which eventually transport material to the bladder. However, other
components in the blood that are small enough to escape the glomerular
capillaries can easily be removed from the body, including small nanoparticles
(NPs) ( ). The MPS is defined as a lineage of cells that
phagocytose and remove foreign material in the body. Macrophages,
along with monocytes and dendritic cells, are immune cells that phagocytose
foreign material; macrophages make up the majority of cells that comprise
the MPS. The cells of the MPS reside primarily in the liver, spleen,
bone marrow, and to a lesser extent in the lungs. As blood flows through
these organs in the sinusoidal capillaries, cells of the MPS that
line the adjacent endothelia can filter out and phagocytose foreign
material ( ). Thus, clearance by the MPS usually leads to accumulation in the
liver, spleen, bone marrow and sometimes the lungs. The MPS clearance
half-life is a property that varies widely across delivery vehicles.
Furthermore, the distribution of accumulation within the associated
organs varies and is influenced by the characteristics of the delivery
vehicle. 
 A major challenge in drug development
and delivery is rapid clearance
from the body. If a drug is cleared prematurely, it fails to reach
the target site in a dose effective manner. While the pharmacokinetic
profiles of drugs can be modified by altering the drug itself, this
may also affect and hamper their intended action. Using a delivery
system circumvents the need to alter a drug to prevent its early elimination.
Using a delivery system does not innately solve the problem of rapid
clearance from the body. Rather, it offers another means to modulate
the pharmacokinetic profile in a way that is distinct from altering
the drug’s structure and performance. The biodistribution and
clearance of delivery vehicles have been shown to be determined by
their size, charge, material, and common modifications such as PEGylation
or biomimicry that shield them from the immune system. , , Because free proteins ranging
from 5 to 500 kDa will be on the size order of 2–10 nm in diameter,
most are typically cleared by the kidney rather quickly ( ). , Work by Müller et al.
reported that single-chain diabodies and variable fragments that target
T-cells show half-lives of 8 and 5 min in the body, respectively.
As such, encapsulating proteins in nanoparticles increases their size,
prolongs their time in the body, and improves their pharmacokinetic
properties. 
Free proteins are not the only particles subjected to clearance
due to their size. Nanoparticle size is also one of the most determining
factors of the mechanism by which they will be cleared by the body,
and their clearance half-life is highly correlated with their size.
The smallest nanoparticles (within the range of 1–8 nm) are
primarily and easily cleared by the kidney ( ). It is well established that particles
under 8 nm are small enough to be filtered by the glomerular in the
kidney and excreted in urine. However,
NPs synthesized with softer materials such as water-soluble polymers
gain enough flexibility and are filtered through the glomerulus even
at diameters as high as 10 nm. Renal
clearance, in general, tends to be faster than MPS clearance. As such,
the half-life for the smaller, water-soluble particles tends to be
on the scale of minutes and can span anywhere from 5 to 30 min, depending
on the specific size and charge of the particles and how these factors
contribute to the particles’ flow rate in the body. , , Choi et al. investigated the
biodistribution of quantum dots and observed the excretion of particles
sized 4.36, 4.99, and 5.52 nm in the bladder by 4 h after injection.
Similarly, Burns et al. reported a half-life of 190 min for silica
NPs with a diameter of 3.3 nm. This half-life increased to 350 min
when the diameter of the nanoparticles increased to 6.0 nm. The rapid
renal clearance can prevent significant catabolism and absorption
of the particles into tissues. , 
Generally, NPs
larger than 10 nm in diameter are sufficiently large
to escape renal clearance; these are eventually cleared by the MPS. When NPs enter the body, they nonspecifically
encounter proteins from the blood plasma in a phenomenon termed opsonization.
The protein coat of NPs is dynamic as NPs travel through the body.
The composition of the proteins bound to the NP make up the NP’s
protein corona; the corona is dependent on the surface material, charge,
and properties of the NP. It is the protein corona that alerts immune
cells such as macrophages to phagocytose the NPs. Thus, the unique protein corona formed for each NP formulation,
especially particles within the size range of 10–200 nm, influences
the NP’s “visibility” to the MPS and its eventual
clearance time from the body. 
Visalakshan et al. investigated the effect of NP shape on protein
corona formation. The authors synthesized mesoporous silica NPs of
comparable surface areas and zeta potentials. However, one particle
was spherically shaped with a diameter of 270 nm and one was rod shaped
with 290 nm diameter and 1100 nm length. After exposing both particles
to either serum or plasma, Visalakshan and colleagues observed that
the compositions of the coatings were almost identical but the rod-shaped
particles accumulated approximately 4-fold the amount of protein compared
to spherical particles for both serum and plasma. Rod-shaped particles
also tend to adsorb a greater proportion of immunoglobulins (57% in
plasma, 50% in serum) when compared to spherical particles (42% in
plasma, 45% in serum). In another study
investigating the types of proteins likely to adsorb onto nanoparticles,
Treuel at al. modified human serum albumin (HSA) to compare the effect
on binding affinity to polymeric coated metallic quantum dot NPs that
were 5 nm in diameter and had a negative zeta potential (−31.2
mV); HSA is an abundant serum protein and common in protein corona.
Treuel and colleagues succinylated HSA to increase the number of carboxyl
groups and thus induce a more negative charge. The succinylated HSA
had a 3-fold decrease in affinity to the quantum dots when compared
to native HSA. Alternatively, aminated HSA with a less negative zeta
potential (−6.1 mV) showed a 1000-fold increase in affinity
to the quantum dots. Despite the decrease in the affinity of succinylated
HSA, this protein had a thicker adsorption layer (8.1 nm) compared
to aminated HSA (4.6 nm). Nonetheless, the increase in the affinity
of HSA to the nanoparticles with the increasing difference in zeta
potential demonstrates the role of electrostatic forces in protein
corona formation and composition. However,
protein corona formation is a complex process driven and influenced
by many factors other than electrostatic interactions. Work from Tenzer et al. provided a nice illustration
of the complexity when the authors observed was enhanced adsorption
of negatively charged proteins to negatively charged amorphous silica
NPs. Furthermore, in synthesizing silica particles that were identical
except for their sizes of 8, 20, and 125 nm, the authors investigated
and reported unique protein corona compositions for each size. More
specifically, 37% of all corona proteins varied in their presence
and abundance based on particle size. Lundqvist et al. noted a similar phenomenon when using polystyrene
nanoparticles of different charges and sizes. Approximately 30% of
proteins were conserved among particles of one size, regardless of
whether they were carboxy-modified (negatively charged), amine-modified
(positively charged), or unmodified. Furthermore, unmodified particles
had a large proportion (80%) of conserved proteins regardless of their
size. Once the particles were modified with more electrostatic charge
(either positive of negative), size played a more prominent role in
determining corona composition and a larger difference in protein
makeup was observed between the sizes. 
Another method widely used to increase the blood circulation
time
of NPs is PEGylation (the addition of polyethylene glycol). PEG has
been shown in many cases to have a shielding effect that prevents
opsonization. Because opsonizing proteins quickly alert immune cells
to clear foreign material, PEGylation reduces or prolongs such clearance. , In a simple study, Partikel et al. investigated the effect of PEGylation
on protein corona formation by incubating PLGA particles in fetal
bovine serum. PEGylation of the particles decreased the abundance
of the protein corona by more than 7-fold. The majority of proteins
adsorbed onto non-PEGylated PLGA but prevented from adsorption by
PEGylation were complement proteins that opsonize and trigger the
removal of foreign material from the bloodstream. Thus, their results
indicate that PEGylation can extend circulation time in the blood. 
Another phenomenon affecting the distribution
of particles sized
10–100 nm, especially in tumor environments, is their ability
to escape fenestrated vascular and lymphatic vessels to enter cancerous
tissue. As early as 1986, Hiroshi Maeda observed this phenomenon and
termed it the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect to
describe the extravasation and retention of macromolecules within
the tumor microenvironment. In this early work, the authors intravenously
administered six different proteins of increasing molecular weights
and noted the increased tumor accumulation that correlated with higher
molecular weight proteins; later work revealed a similar observation
for NPs. Tsukigawa et al. synthesized
18.9 nm micelles of styrene–maleic acid copolymer (SMA) conjugated
to the antitumor drug pirarubicin (THP). Within 24 h of intravenous
administration to mice, the polymeric micelles showed an 8.4-fold
increase in lung tumor accumulation when compared to the free THP
drug. This marked increase is attributed
to the EPR effect, which co-opts the irregular vasculature and endothelial
fenestrations present in the tumor environment that permit transendothelial
movement of macromolecules, increased expression of inflammatory cytokines
and reduced lymphatic drainage in solid tumor tissue. Thus, the drug delivery field established early
on the importance of this effect and its contribution to enhancing
cancer therapeutic delivery. However, studies have shown varied success
in taking advantage of the EPR effect and it has since been found
to have largely varied efficiency based on the size and physio-chemical
properties of the NPs as well as the tumor type. Furthermore, the
EPR effect was only observed in mice; its relevance to humans remains
unclear. 
To demonstrate the effects
of size on NP distribution, Luarent
et al. successfully increased the vascular residence time of gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs) by increasing their diameter. AuNPs have gained
much attention for their potential diagnostic and therapeutic applications
in cancer. These NPs are made of clusters of gold atoms and have sizes
<3 nm. Regulating the layers of gold clusters allows modulation
of their intrinsic excitation and emission wavelengths from visible
to near-infrared (NIR-II, 1000–1700 nm), which allows their
use for biological imaging. AuNPs absorption of near-infrared photons
results in a local heating effect that is cytotoxic to surrounding
cells and therefore therapeutic in the context of cancer, assuming
that they are delivered to tumors within the body. Laurent et al.
investigated the use of AuNPs coated with gadolinium chelate, a contrast
agent that facilitates magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), on gliomas
in rats. While AuNPs have great theranostic potential, Laurent and
colleagues observed that they were limited by short blood residence
time of 30 min and major accumulation within the kidney. In an attempt
to improve the pharmacokinetics of this particle in vivo, the authors
encapsulated the AuNPs within PLGA and polyethylene glycol-PLGA (PLGA–PEG)
NPs to achieve a diameter increase from 7 nm to >100 nm. The larger
encapsulated particles showed significant improvement in clearance
half-life and organ distribution. At 30 min after intravenous administration,
the particles had a 3× higher concentration in the blood when
compared to the smaller unencapsulated AuNPs. At 30 min and 2 h post-administration,
the NP accumulation in the kidney drastically decreased after encapsulation
in PLGA–PEG when compared to unencapsulated AuNPs. As expected,
renal clearance became insignificant and MPS clearance occurred, leading
to major accumulation in the liver and spleen. The conundrum, however,
is that while the circulation half-life increased with increasing
size, the overall clearance of the encapsulated particles by the MPS
was still relatively quickly with only 99.8% of the injected dose
being cleared from the blood in just 2 h. 
Blood clearance by the MPS varies based on the biological
identity
that is unique to each nanoparticle. As previously stated, the protein
corona formed after opsonization is the primary determinant of the
speed by which macrophages clear NPs. One NP that has been used to modulate clearance time is made from
the protein ferritin, which when expressed in mammalian cells forms
a 24-mer cage structure that has high thermal and pH stability. Due
to its biological compatibility, stability, and ease of cellular uptake,
it has gained much traction for the delivery of cargo that include
cancer therapeutics. The ferritin cage has a diameter of ∼12
nm, but its structure permits renal clearance within ∼2 h,
and this has been the major limitation of using ferritin. Many groups have modified ferritin with peptide
branches to increase the diameter of the cage. Wang et al. instead
developed a strategy to both increase ferritin’s in vivo hydrodynamic
diameter and reduce the NP detection by the MPS. To achieve this,
the authors functionalized albumin binding domains onto the surface
of the ferritin nanocage. Albumin is an abundant nonopsonizing protein
in human serum that does not invoke rapid clearance by the MPS. Albumin
coatings can shield particles from adsorption of other opsonizing
proteins present in blood plasma and therefore increase the stealthiness
of the particles. While the albumin binding domains by themselves
did not increase the diameter of the nanocage, they engaged with plasma
albumin, which increased the hydrodynamic diameter of the particles
from 12 to 30 nm. This size increase ensures escape from renal clearance,
and the particles are not opsonized because of their greater affinity
for albumin versus opsonizing proteins. The latter property also allows
the NPs to evade macrophages. When administered intravenously to Sprague–Dawley
rats, the blood clearance half-life of the albumin-ferritin nanocage
increased by more than 17-fold compared to the nonfunctionalized nanocage.
The benefit of this strategy is that unlike renal clearance, clearance
by the MPS does not necessarily mean excretion from the body but rather
sequestration in associated organs of the MPS. This natural phenomenon
can be taken advantage of when considering therapies for diseases
of the liver and spleen. 

5.2.3.

## Specificity
Perhaps the most attractive
feature driving the importance of drug delivery is the ability to
engineer targeted delivery. Targeted delivery refers to the accumulation
of a therapy at a higher concentration in cells or tissues of interest.
This theory emerged over a hundred years ago when Paul Erlich postulated
his “magic bullet” theory. In Paul Erhlich’s
theory, the “magic bullet” was a drug that could act
specifically on a feature of a pathogen and thereby harm an invading
pathogen while leaving the host untouched. While this theory emerged in a slightly different context from drug
delivery, it has become a central component for the field. Specific
targeting in drug delivery is most commonly achieved by co-opting
receptor–ligand interactions ( ). One of the first attempts to enhance
chemotherapy by using specific targeting groups was performed by the
Langer group. Farokhzad et al. enhanced the efficacy of the chemotherapy
drug docetaxel by encapsulating it into a nanoparticle targeted to
prostate epithelial cells. The nanoparticle was formulated using a
PLGA-block-PEG, or PLGA-b-PEG copolymer.
As discussed previously, PLGA is often used in nanomedicine because
it has high biocompatibility and is biodegradable, while PEG enhances
the biodistribution of the particles by evading premature clearance
by the reticuloendothelial system. For this work, NH2-PEG-COOH
was coupled to PLGA by reacting the amine group of PEG with carboxyl
groups of the PLGA polymer to form a PLGA polymer with PEG branches
that contain terminal COOH groups. The targeting ligand used was the
A10 2-fluoropyrimidine RNA aptamer, which recognizes and binds to
a prostate-specific membrane antigen abundant on prostate endothelial
cells. The aptamer was conjugated to the nanoparticle using click
chemistry to couple the amino group present on the aptamer to the
terminal carboxyl group of the PEG branches. This formulation was
hypothesized to help sequester the toxic chemotherapy drug only to
prostate cells in animals with prostate cancer. The nanoparticles
were revealed to be endocytosed by prostate cells in vitro within
2 h. The aptamer conjugated particles (Dxtl-NP-Apt) showed a 1.6-fold
increase in toxicity when compared to the control formulation without
the nanoparticle. Using a xenograft tumor mouse model, the Dxtl-NP-Apt
treatment group showed an average of a 7-fold decrease in tumor size
when compared to all control groups of free Dxtl, empty NP, and saline.
Furthermore, the Dxtl-NP-Apt treated group had a mean tumor size smaller
than that of the untargeted Dxtl-NP treated group. Maximum body weight
loss was also used as a measure of body duress and deprecation of
the tumor; the Dxtl-NP-Apt-treated group exhibited a mean maximum
body weight loss lower than the group treated with the untargeted
Dxtl-NP. These results demonstrate the
potential of specific targeting to massively enhance clinical outcomes.
 The robustness of cancer therapeutics
lies in their ability to
annihilate the most persistent cells. An off target of a drug that
is potent against cancer cells can wreak havoc on healthy cells. As
such, the largest potential harm of most cancer therapeutics arises
from their ability to kill healthy cells. Most cancer therapeutic
research employs some form of precision medicine, wherein studies
take advantage of receptor–ligand interactions to localize
therapies to regions of interest. Folate,
mannose, transferrin, and epidermal growth factor receptors have been
reported to be overexpressed in different cancers. Because of this, many delivery systems have been designed
to incorporate ligands for these receptors so as to enable targeted
delivery of the cancer drug.
The transferrin receptors Tfr1and
Tfr2 are known to bind to transferrin
and facilitate receptor-mediated endocytosis. Tfr1, however, is more
abundant in mammalian cells and binds transferrin (Tf) with 30-fold
higher affinity (Kd ∼ 0.1 nM) than
Tfr2; the Tfr1–Tf interaction functions in mediating iron import
into cells. Tf binds two Fe3+ ions at a time, engages with
Tfr1, and is endocytosed. In the acidic lysosome, iron is released
and the Tfr1–Tf complex recycles back to the plasma membrane.
Tfr1 is overexpressed in many cancer cells due to the increased demand
for iron to power metabolic processes. This makes Tfr1 a good receptor
for targeted deliver to cancer cells. Delivery systems have targeted
this receptor by functionalizing the vehicles with transferrin or
antibodies that bind to Tfr1. Success has been achieved for delivery
therapeutics against cervical, breast, ovarian carcinomas, leukemia
cells. However, the most common application for this strategy has
been in brain gliomas, where it has shown potential in delivering
drugs that cross the blood–brain barrier. Although the transferrin
receptor expression is upregulated in cancer cells, it is also expressed
moderately on other healthy cell types and highly expressed on nerve
and erythroid cells. While the targeting studies have achieved increased
uptake in cells of interest, the specificity of Tfr1-targeted systems
are compromised in vivo. − 
A second receptor of interest is the mannose receptor (also
known
as CD206) that is highly expressed on macrophages and immature dendritic
cells. It is commonly used as a marker for anti-inflammatory macrophages
and engages in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. As a receptor on macrophage immune cells, its various implications
in immunological responses make it a relevant receptor target. For
example, this receptor is used to target cancer indirectly through
tumor associated macrophages that reside in and nurse cancerous tissue. , These tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) show increased expression
of the mannose receptor (MR). Because of this, drug delivery vehicles
conjugated with mannose, MR ligands, or anti-MR antibodies are readily
endocytosed into macrophages where their cargo can kill the TAMs that
promote cancer cell proliferation. , − 
A third receptor of interest is the folate receptor (FR) that
exists
in at least four isoforms: α, β, γ/γ′,
and δ. High FRα expression
is characteristic of many carcinomas, including nonmucinous ovarian
carcinomas, uterine carcinomas, testicular choriocarcinomas, ependymomas,
and pleural mesotheliomas. It is less frequently expressed on the
cells of breast, colon, and renal cell carcinomas. This receptor shows
selective expression on healthy cells in that it is restricted to
certain epithelial cells, and it can undergo receptor-mediated endocytosis.
These factors make FRα an attractive target for cancer therapies. Folate binds to the FRα isoform with
the highest affinity of (Kd = 0.1 nM),
which allows vehicles conjugated to folate to experience minimal off-target
binding to other receptors (including other FR isoforms). Folate-conjugated
particles have been used for cancer-specific targeting of multiple
carcinomas in vitro and in vivo. − 
Beyond receptor
targeting, recent studies have observed specific
interactions between certain cell types and some NP materials. Correa
and Boehnke et al. reported that from a screen of ten different polymer
nanoparticles, the carboxylated polymers PLD and PLE showed specific
interactions with OVCAR8 cells that could not be explained by interaction
with a specific receptor. The nanoparticles in this screen were formulated
using a particular layer by layer (LbL) technique. This LbL technique
works by using a nanoscale core particle that may be polymeric or
liposomal. This core particle is then coated multiple times with polymeric
films. Each layer of polymeric film has alternating charges and thus
the layers onto each other via electrostatic charges. The LbL technique
is an alternate strategy for incorporating therapeutic, diagnostic
or other stabilizing agents such as siRNA and polypeptides and enhancing
polymers between the layers. As such, it circumvents the need for
traditional conjugation strategies to the nanoparticle. In the screen
by Correa et al., a three-layer nanoparticle was formulated. All nanoparticles
consisted of a fluorescent, negatively charged, carboxyl-modified
latex core coated with a cationic layer of poly-l-arginine.
Ten different polymers were chosen for the final layer of the respective
particles. This final layer is the densest layer, and only polyanions
were used because of the reported biocompatibility of anionic particles;
the polyanions contained either sulfated or carboxyl functional groups.
Sulfated or carboxyl polymers with known ligand–receptor interactions
such as sodium hyaluronate, heparin sulfate, and heparin folate conjugates
were chosen, and the poly(amino acid) polymers poly(l-glutamate)
(PLE) and poly (l-aspartate) (PLD) were used. When NPs formulated
from these polymers were tested against OVCAR8 cells, cells treated
with PLE and PLD nanoparticles both showed 5-fold higher NP-associated
fluorescence compared to the sulfated polymers that were capable of
binding ligands present on the cells. These results were consistent
across 20 ovarian cancer cell lines tested. Binding saturation isotherms
revealed that the PLD and PLE nanoparticles bound to cells with Kds of 6.8 and 2.2 pM, respectively. Furthermore,
the inhibition of clathrin, a protein necessary for receptor-mediated
endocytosis, showed no impact on PLD and PLE nanoparticle uptake.
This finding further corroborated that while these particles show
high affinity to OVCAR8 cells, they do not undergo receptor-mediated
trafficking. However, caveolae-mediated endocytosis and cholesterol
were found to play major roles in the trafficking of PLD and PLE,
respectively. 

5.2.4.

## Types
of Delivery Systems

## Hydrogels
Hydrogels were first developed
by Witcherle
et al. 1954. The inspiration for their
conception derived from the consequences of the widespread use of
plastics in biomedical applications. Plastic devices had caused irritation
and tumors and thus had low biocompatibility. Witcherle and Lim aimed
to develop a material with three main characteristics: a structure
that permits the desired water content, compatibility with normal
biological processes that prevent premature degradation of the material
and side effects to patients, and a material that is permeable to
metabolites. The authors postulated that to achieve this the material
needed both hydrophilic groups and a three-dimensional structure with
enough cross-links to prevent its absorption. Thus, hydrogels are
now defined as a three-dimensional hydrophilic network of cross-linked
polymers. Water-soluble linear polymers
can be cross-linked into hydrogels by chemical reaction with multifunctional
cross-linkers ( ). This can be achieved by reacting the monomeric free radicals and
using mechanical methods such as entanglements, electrostatics and
crystal grain formation. Both synthetic and natural polymers can be
used in hydrogel formation, but natural polymers tend to be more hydrophilic. Examples of commonly used natural polymers
in hydrogels include collagen, gelatin and polysaccharides. , 
 Collagen is a natural polymer that can be cross-linked with
other
natural polymers to modulate specific hydrogel properties. Nguyen
et al. demonstrated this by synthesizing a hydrogel made from the
natural polymers fish scale collagen and the sulfated polysaccharide
polymer obtained from seaweed (carrageenan). The cationic property
of collagen allowed it to crosslink via ionic and hydrogen bonds with
anionic carrageenan. This cross-linked reaction formed hydrogel beads,
which increased the thermal degradation temperature of pure carrageenan
by 32.5 °C. The hydrogel beads had a drug loading capacity (which
denotes the amount of total drug incorporated into a delivery system)
of 40–45%. However, the release profiles of the drug from these
hydrogel beads showed burst release ranging from 12% to 60% in the
first hour after delivery and gradual release thereafter. 
For many drug delivery applications,
consistent and gradual release
of the drug can maintain therapeutic effect over longer periods, while
a sharp initial burst can increase off-target cytotoxic activity.
Moeinzadeh et al. developed natural hybrid hydrogels for drug delivery
and tissue regeneration. While the authors identified collagen as
a useful biocompatible polymer, cross-linked collagen lacks the shear-thinning
properties necessary to make it injectable, and uncross-linked collagen
exists as a liquid that lacks stability and a 3D structure. In this
study, a hybrid polymer was designed by cross-linking collagen with
the natural polymer alginate, which is derived from seaweed. Alginate
cross-linked in solutions of divalent ions with low solubility promotes
stable yet shear-thinning gels that are injectable. Moeinzadeh et
al. synthesized alginate–collagen hydrogels using weight ratios
of 1:0.25, 1:0.5 and 1:1. All three formulations showed the increased
viscosity and structural stability of the hydrogel, as well as enhanced
shear rates and injectability. Additionally, the hydrogel could release
all of the loaded protein over a span of ∼10 days. 
An attractive feature of hydrogel drug
delivery platforms is the
ability to engineer controlled and sustained drug release. As such, nanohybrid hydrogels composed of natural
polymers can also be modified by cross-linking with inorganic components
to improve drug release profiles. George et al. demonstrated this
while investigating the poor release of drugs from the nanohybrid
hydrogel, which is made by cross-linking the natural polymers chitosan
and cellulose (both are biocompatible). By embedding zinc nanoparticles
within the hydrogel, the authors altered the diffusion kinetics of
drug release and achieved gradual and sustained release of the drug. 

## Lipid Nanoparticles/Liposomes
Lipids
can be used to
make nanoparticles for drug delivery, as they spontaneously form hollow
spherical particles in aqueous mixture. Liposomes are made of phospholipids
and consequently form a bilayered membrane with phosphate heads lining
the inner and outer surfaces of the membrane and hydrophobic lipid
tails forming the inner membrane ( a). This structure can be advantageous because
the hydrophilic interior allows encapsulated drugs to remain in solution
if they are hydrophilic or embedded in the lipid membrane if they
are hydrophobic. The hydrophilic exterior keeps the system distinct
in solution. Unilamellar lipid nanoparticles
can be made from triglycerides, fatty acids, and steroids. They may
be defined as solid lipid nanoparticles (SLNs) ( a) made only of lipids that
are solid at room temperature or nanostructured lipid nanoparticles
made from a mixture of both solid and liquid lipids. Synthesis methods for SLNs emerged in the 1990s and were
pioneered by Gasco (1993) and Müller (1996). , These nanoparticles are defined by their composition of lipids that
remain in the solid state at physiological temperatures and are stabilized
by emulsifiers. Solid lipid particles were thought to be advantageous
when compared to liposomes because their kinetics of drug release
can be modulated more easily. It was postulated that the solid lipids
would prevent the rapid release observed with lipid nanoparticles. , 
 Müller et al. outlined the process for high- pressure homogenization
to synthesize drug-loaded SLNs. In this process, lipids were melted,
drugs were added to the melted lipids, and the lipids were dispersed
into an aqueous surfactant solution by steering or ultrasonic treatment.
This resulted in spontaneously formed micelles that encapsulated the
drug solution. The micelles were then heated above the melting temperature
of the lipids and homogenized at high pressure ( b). The lower viscosity under
these conditions promotes the homogeneous reduction in particle size
of the vesicles. The lipids were then cooled to be solidified; during
cooling, lipids may crystallize and undergo morphological changes
that sometimes expel the loaded drugs. 
Lobovkina et al. demonstrated the sustained release of drugs
from
SLNs in vivo. In this work, anionic siRNA was complexed with the cationic
lipid, 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium propane (DOTAP), via electrostatic
forces and coated with SLNs. In a neutral phosphate buffer saline
solution, this formulation showed a low initial burst release of 10%
followed by sustained release of the siRNA. These results showing
steady and sustained release translated to in vivo intradermal delivery
of the siRNA by SLNs. With delivery of 4 μg siRNA by SLNs, a
flux remained present at the delivery site for up to 11 days; this
is in comparison to the delivery of 8 μg free siRNA, which could
not be detected at the delivery site by day 7. 
Since this report, alternative methods for preparing
SLNs have
emerged. One is the solvent emulsification method, where lipids are
dissolved in an organic solvent and subsequently dispersed in an aqueous
solution to form cells. The organic solvent is then removed by evaporation
under reduced pressure. Another method is the supercritical fluid
extraction of emulsions, wherein the solvent is removed with a supercritical
fluid like carbon dioxide to rapidly dissolve the organic solvent.
This results in the precipitation of the drug-loaded lipid micelles.
After dispersion into aqueous solutions, the micelles may be homogenized
using ultrasonication. More recently,
microfluidics techniques have also been developed for enhanced synthesis
of SLNs. Arduino et al. reported an optimized method for the preparation
of SLNs using a microfluidic device consisting of a heated syringe
with the lipids and the drug to be loaded, which were dissolved in
an organic solvent. The syringe injects into the device, while the
aqueous surfactant solution flows into the device through another
stream and is mixed with the lipid solution. A stream of air is finally
added to promote efficient mixing of the lipid and surfactant streams,
which aids in reducing the particle size and increasing their uniformity.
By adjusting the flow rates and concentrations of incoming streams,
the authors synthesized particles with a decreased diameter of 181
nm and an increased uniform polydispersity index of 0.11; these values
are favorable when compared to traditional bulk methods of homogenization.
In addition, the production of particles via microfluidics was more
reproducible and consistent. In comparison to the bulk homogenization
preparation, the particles synthesized using microfluidics also showed
superior loading of the chemotherapy drugs paclitaxel (42% vs 54%)
and sorafenib (65% vs 79%). 
Despite
these favorable properties, the crystalline structure of
SLNs can impede high loading efficiencies of drugs due to expulsion
of the drug during the crystallization process. Thus, nanostructured
lipid carriers (NLCs) were developed as an alternative ( a). Unlike SLNs, NLCs are formulated by mixing
both solid and liquid lipids. They consequently do not have a crystalline
structure and are more unstructured due to the combinations of different
lipids. However, this unstructured nature facilitates a higher drug
loading capacity. , NLCs also enhance the solubility
of their cargo and display more gradual and controlled release in
comparison to SLNs. While Mü̈ller
and colleagues identified the drawbacks of initial homogenization
methods to synthesize SLNs that resulted in lower encapsulation efficiency,
Tabatt et al. compared the encapsulation efficiency of SLNs and NLCs.
Tabatt and co-workers indeed observed higher encapsulation efficiencies
in NLCs but noted that the efficiency of particle uptake by cells
may be more correlated with electrostatic charge than the lipid structures
particles. This finding has been recognized as an important parameter
that influences nanoparticle interaction with cells and tissues. As
such, the zeta potential has emerged as a defining characteristic
of nanoparticles.
Ionizable lipids that carry an electrostatic
charge at environmental
pH have recently become more popular. Hasset et al. optimized a lipid
nanoparticle formulation for the delivery of mRNA vaccines by screening
30 ionizable lipids to determine which formulation showed superior
transfection in mice when delivered intramuscularly. These ionizable
lipids contained a quaternary amine that allows the lipid to be cationic
at pH values below their pKa and neutral
at values above their pKa. The cationic
charge is thought to aid cellular entry and endosomal escape, while
the neutral charge improves biodistribution. This enhanced efficacy
was previously observed with the ionizable lipid MC3, but adverse
immunogenic effects were also apparent with its use. The screen by
Hasset and colleagues revealed four ionizable lipids that showed a
greater transfection efficiency when compared to MC3 as denoted by
increased expression of the vaccine mRNA and a 4-fold increase in
antibody titer produced that was specific to the vaccine antigen.
One lipid (SM-102) was the least immunogenic and was eventually used
in 2021 as part of the vehicle for delivering Moderna’s SARS-CoV-2
mRNA vaccine. 

## Polymeric
Nanoparticles
Nanoparticles can be synthesized
from polymers. These polymeric nanoparticles can range 5–1000
nm in size. The polymers used in their synthesis can be synthetic
or natural and enable drug loading into the interior and coating of
the polymer surface. The diverse molecular interactions of different
monomers and the ability to combine them in unique ways for different
multimeric polymers affords polymeric nanoparticles a large range
of tunability. Additionally, these nanoparticles
can assume different shapes. Polymeric capsules have a hollow shell
that the drug is typically loaded into, whereas in polymeric nanospheres
the polymer matrix assembles into a sphere with the cargo embedded
in the matrix. Dendrimer nanoparticles form highly branched structures,
while polymeric micelles assemble in aqueous environments to form
a core structure with a hydrophobic interior and hydrophilic exterior
( ). Numerous methods for the synthesis of polymeric
particles have been reported over the years. Briefly, nanospheres
and capsules can be formed by adding the monomers to an emulsion,
initiating the polymerization by simultaneous stirring, and the addition
of a polymerization initiator and a surfactant. In the solvent evaporation
method, the polymer is dissolved in an organic solvent and subsequently
dispersed in an aqueous solution; the solvent is then evaporated from
the mixture. Alternatively, dialysis can be used to exchange the solvent
of the polymer-drug solution to an aqueous solution, causing the polymeric
particles containing the drug to precipitate. 
 An early study on polymeric vehicles emerged in a report
by Gref
et al. In this study, the authors developed biodegradable nanoparticles
from amphiphilic copolymers. The nanospheres
were made from the synthetic but biodegradable polymers PLGA and polycaprolactone
(PCL) and covalently attached PEGs of different molecular weights.
Emulsion polymerization was used to form the nanospheres by dissolving
the diblock copolymers in an organic solvent. The solution was subsequently
added to an aqueous solution, vortexed, and sonicated to create an
emulsion. Removal of the organic solvent resulted in the solidification
of the diblock copolymer nanospheres. The particles displayed a mean
diameter between 90 and 150 nm and a drug encapsulation efficiency
of 45%. As the molecular weight of the functionalized PEG moiety increased,
the accumulation of the particles in the liver decreased, suggesting
lower clearance of the particles by the immune system and a longer
circulation time in the body. 
PLGA has since gained FDA approval for use in parenteral administered
drug delivery systems. As discussed previously, the rapid clearance
of polymeric nanoparticles like PLGA nanospheres has remained a core
challenge. Lopez-Cazares et al. demonstrated a method of coating PLGA
particles to reduce immune clearance as an alternative strategy to
covalent functionalization of PEG molecules. Endothelial-targeted
PLGA nanoparticles were observed to have suboptimal affinity to endothelial
cells, perhaps due to the rapid adsorption of biological proteins
onto the polymeric particle surface that altered their surface chemistry
and consequently lowered the affinity of particles to their target
cells. PLGA particles were prepared similarly to the emulsion solvent
evaporation method but modified so that the dissolved polymer was
dispersed in an aqueous solution of chitosan, which yielded chitosan-coated
PLGA particles; the particles were subsequently conjugated with human
serum albumin (HSA). The 1.6 μm sized particles became cationic
after dual coating with chitosan, with their zeta potential increasing
from −30.7 to +10.7 mV. The dual coated particles experienced
a 4× increase in adhesion to endothelial cells when in serum.
Together, these results suggest that particle coating and charge can
reduce and/or alter the protein corona and subsequent biological interactions
of the nanoparticles. Furthermore, it demonstrates the importance
of electrostatic charge in influencing the interaction between nanoparticles
and cells. 

## Protein Nanoparticles
Delivery systems for proteins
and peptides can also be composed of the same biological building
blocks (amino acids) that can assemble and fold into a cage capable
of housing protein therapeutics in their interior ( a). Protein nanoparticles
have advantageous properties of increased biocompatibility, biodegradability,
and their innate tendency for molecular recognition. This enhances
their ability for modulation as targeted and functional delivery systems. , Some protein nanoparticles are endogenous proteins that are conserved
across many species. Numerous monomers may self-assemble into a cage
structure with a hollow sphere. One example that has been described
in this review is ferritin. Ferritin is a globular protein made of
24 monomer subunits that self-assemble into a hollow sphere. There
are two forms of the monomer: a 21 kDa heavy chain and a 19 kDa light
chain. Any ratio of the heavy and light chains can form hydrogen bonds
to assemble into a ∼470 kDa sphere with an inner diameter of
8 nm and an outer diameter of 15 nm. Drugs can be loaded into the
interior, and moieties can be functionalized to be displayed on its
outer surface. Research groups have
employed protein engineering approaches to develop new classes of
vaccines that are delivered and displayed by ferritin. Powell et al.
developed a ferritin-based spike protein vaccine against SARS-Cov-2.
Two gene constructs encoding full-length and truncated spike protein
fused by a GSS linker to the H. pylori ferritin light
chain were expressed in and secreted from Expi293F cells. The ferritin
subunits were fused to the spike protein at the N-terminus and assembled
into a 3D structure displaying 8 spike proteins on its surface. This
vaccine proved effective in eliciting an immune response after a single
dose. Furthermore, the ferritin-based vaccine remained viable up to
14 days when stored at room temperature. 
 In addition to self-assembling proteins, other methods can be used
to cross-link, polymerize, and foster interactions between protein
subunits to generate protein nanoparticles. Wang et al. used these
techniques to generate a protein nanoparticle that could deliver a
chemotherapeutic and target cancer cells without using a targeting
moiety. The authors were inspired by transferrin, a glycoprotein that
binds to iron mediates its transport into the cell via endocytosis
with the tfr1 receptor in humans. As discussed previously, Tfr1 is
often overexpressed on certain cancer cells because of increased metabolic
demands. Wang and colleagues synthesized a transferrin NP by interrupting
the hydrophobic interactions to expose the inner core of the protein
and subsequently allowing the hydrophobic chemotherapeutic drug, paclitaxel
(PTX), to bind to the inner core and bridge interactions across multiple
transferrin molecules ( b). This strategy produced particles with diameters
of 115–125 nm that were comprised of an inner core loaded with
PTX that integrated with the surrounding shell of transferrin molecules.
These transferrin nanoparticles maintained the ability to bind to
Tfr1 and undergo receptor-mediated endocytosis in the human breast
cancer cell line MCF-7. 
Protein
vesicles may also be synthetic and produced by recombinant
expression of constructs engineered to assemble upon expression. Work
reported by Park et al. revealed recombinant protein vesicles composed
of two protein units that self-assembled under specific conditions.
One protein unit was a coiled-coil domain, ZE, fused to
a hydrophilic globular protein such as mCherry. The other protein
unit was a complementary coiled-coil domain, ZR, fused
to an elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs); ELPs are natural polymers
sourced from human tropo-elastin. These polypeptides consist of repeating
units of the pentapeptide sequence (VPGXG)n, where X denotes a guest
residue and n signifies the number of repeats. At room temperature
and above a salt concentration of 0.3 M, the ELP fragment separates
into a hydrophobic phase and folds into the vesicle formed by the
self-assembling of the protein complexes. However, 0.3 M is twice
the physiological salt concentration and thus the ELP vesicles will
become destabilized once inside the body. Researchers investigated
design parameters to enable the assembly of functional ELP vesicles
under physiological conditions. Li et al. investigated the effect
of changing the guest residue, X, of the ELP pentapeptide sequence
VPGXG, as well as the number of repeats of the pentapeptide sequence.
By using the more hydrophobic isoleucine as the guest residue and
a length of five repeats of the pentapeptide sequence, the authors
achieved stable assembly of the protein vesicles under physiological
salt concentration. 

## Viral-Based
Delivery Systems
Viruses are designed to
penetrate and infect cells to find a host for their survival. This
innate ability of viruses has been leveraged for drug delivery. Viral vectors used for drug delivery are modified
by removing portions of their genomes that are integral to their replication
and immunogenicity; this improves their safety for use in clinical
settings. Viral vectors carrying DNA
into host cells include retroviral and lentiviral vectors, which integrate
the DNA into the host genome to cause permanent transcriptional changes
to the cells. Viral vectors such as
adenovirus and adeno-associated viruses, however, carry RNA into the
cells and cause transient changes in cellular protein expression.
The most studied viral based delivery vehicles to date are lentivirus,
retrovirus, lenti-virus, adenovirus, and adeno-associated virus. 
Retroviral vectors have a protein shell
(capsid) encased by a lipid membrane. These house the virus contents
of positive sense RNA and the enzymes, integrase and reverse transcriptase.
This RNA is reverse transcribed into double-stranded DNA by the reverse
transcriptase. Retroviruses can only transfect dividing cells if the
double-stranded DNA enters the nuclear pores of mitotic cells and
integrates into the host cell genome. The gene insert capacity of
retroviruses ranges from 2.5 to 5.0 kb. These vectors have been used
successfully in gene therapy, with hundreds making it to clinical
trials. However, this technique is still hampered by low level of
protein expression. Retroviruses also have low multiplicity of infection,
where only up to 10 copies of the gene can be integrated into each
cell. These viral vectors have also demonstrated immunogenic effects
including activation of oncogenes, which resulted in cancer. , 
Lentiviral vectors used are often derived from the human immunodeficiency
virus. They contain an RNA genome that is reverse transcribed into
double-stranded DNA inside the host. Similarly to retroviral vectors,
lentivirus vectors can make permanent changes to cells but have an
advantage of transducing nondividing cells. This leads to higher transduction
efficiencies than those achieved with retroviruses. The genome insert
capacity also ranges from 2.5 to 5.0 kb, and the vectors similarly
exhibit low multiplicity of infection. Furthermore, modified lentiviral
vectors have the potential to revert to the harmful wild type and
thus have not been approved for clinical trials. , 
The family Adenoviridae consists of seven different species
of
adenoviruses. Adenovirus contains nonenveloped double-stranded DNA
and causes respiratory tract infections such as the common cold. Of
the many serotypes of adenovirus, serotype 2 and serotype 5 are widely
used for gene therapy. As early as 1993, Bett et al. showed that the
gene size packed into the virus was inversely correlated to the ability
of the virus to grow and proliferate. By making deletions to regions
of the genome that are not necessary for survival and proliferation,
adenoviruses can have the largest insert gene capacity. While they
can typically carry up to 8kb, high-capacity Adenovirus vectors have
been developed to carry up to ∼36 kb. Adenovirus is also usually
able to generate high levels of protein expression. However, the adenovirus
does not integrate into the host genome. Thus, only transient changes
can be made to the host. In addition, the use of this vector can incite
strong immunological responses, which have led to death in treated
patients. , , 
Adeno-associated virus is among the most robust gene delivery
vehicles.
It belongs to the family of parvoviruses and is characterized as a
protein cage housing a single strand of DNA. Adeno-associated viruses
require coinfection with adenoviruses to enable replication. They
are able to transfect both dividing and nondividing cells. While AAVs
have proven to be very effective viral vectors, they are limited by
a low size capacity of 2.5 kb. There are 11 serotypes of the AAV vectors,
but the AAV2 serotype was the first to be discovered and remains the
most extensively understood. , 
Miller et al.
developed protein degraders that successfully degraded
the tau aggregates in Alzheimer’s disease and progressive supranuclear
palsy. The authors fused the RING domain of the TRIM21 E3 ligase to
a tau “bait” to generate what they termed a RING-bait
degrader. In this case the protein, tau, was also used as the “bait”
to bind to other tau aggregates and thus recruit the degrader. However,
in order to translate this work in vivo, the authors used AAV to encapsulate
and deliver the RING-bait degrader RNA to the brain and neurons of
mice by intravenous tail-end administration. They first tried the
serotype used in vitro to transfect primary neurons, PHP.eB. This
AAV was delivered systemically into tau expressing Tg2541 mice and
showed low transduction in the target region of the brain. However,
the AAV capsid 9P31 was previously shown to cross the blood–brain
barrier by unknown mechanisms. Using
this AAV, the authors administered the RING-bait RNA to the tail vein
of mice. Staining sections of the brain with the antitau antibody,
AT8, showed that the delivery and treatment were effective in slowing
the growth of tau aggregates when compared to the PBS-treated control
mice. The level of tau aggregates in the whole brain of 6-months treated
mice were comparable to the levels in 4-months untreated mice. 
Similarly, Benn et al. developed a tau-targeted
TRIM21-based degrader.
Rather than using tau to target intracellular aggregated tau, the
authors appended the TRIM21 RING domain to a tau -targeting nanobody.
They screened variants of a tau-targeting nanobody with different
affinities to measure the degradation efficiency. The F8–2
variant with 638 nM Kd to tau showed the
highest degree of degradation of aggregated tau and the lowest degree
of degradation of native soluble tau. In this study, the AAV1/2 serotype
was used to deliver the RING-Nb degrader. In contrast to Miller et
al., administration was done by unilateral injections into the frontal
cortex of 5.5-month-old tau-expressing Tg2541 mice. While this did
not show the ability of AAV1/2 to cross the blood–brain barrier,
the authors achieved expression of the degrader localized to the frontal
cortex. Staining of those areas for tau 10 and 30 days after treatment
revealed reduced levels of tau when compared to the untreated control. 

5.2.5.

## Future
Prospects for the Delivery of bioPROTACs
Herein we have presented
a comprehensive review of the use of vehicles
to deliver various drugs. From the existing literature, it is clear
that delivery systems are necessary to allow bioPROTACs to achieve
their translational potential and enable their use as therapeutics.
However, few bioPROTACs have employed the drug delivery systems described
in this section. Hence, this area of research that is ripe for exploration.
In seminal work, Chan et al. used lipid LNPs to increase the delivery
efficiency of a bioPROTAC. Chan and colleagues fused the robust E3
ligase (IpaH9.8) with a RAS binder (K27) to develop a bioPROTAC that
induced degradation of a RAS-GFP fused protein. The bioPROTAC, however,
was unable to penetrate HEK293 cells. The authors then complexed the
degrader with the lipid excipient lipofectamine, which allowed it
to enter cells and achieved a 46% reduction of GFP-KRAS levels. To
improve the delivery efficiency observed using lipofectamine, Chan
and colleagues developed a formulation for cationic lipid nanoparticles
that would have greater entry into HEK293T cells. They developed three
formulations with different mole amounts of the cationic lipid 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane
(DOTAP). The first formulation, K1, consisted of 20 mol % DOTAP, the
lowest mol % of an ionizable lipid (C12-200 at 19 mol %,) and 19 mol
% of the helper lipid DOPE. The second formulation, called C1, instead
consisted of the highest percentage of the cationic lipid DOTAP (25
mol %), 10 mol % ionizable lipid C12-200, and the helper lipid DSPC
(25 mol %). The third formulation, termed B6, consisted of the lowest
mol % of the cationic lipid DOTAP (15 mol %), the highest mol % (35%)
of an ionizable lipid C14-4, and 10 mol % of the helper lipid DOPE.
All formulations also included ∼38 mol % cholesterol and were
PEGylated with either 1.5 or 4 mol % of C14PEG-2000. Furthermore,
an anionic polypeptide was fused to the bioPROTAC to enable complexation
with the LNP through electrostatic interactions. The bioPROTAC encapsulated
in all three LNP formulations showed superior degradation of GFP-KRAS
when compared with those complexed with lipofectamine. The K1 formulation
was most effective and induced 95% KRAS-GFP degradation. Furthermore,
the use of LNPs in the bioPROTAC design proved to be robust, as they
also effectively entered and induced degradation in A549, HeLa, and
U2OS cell lines. This work highlights
how delivery systems can be used in future studies to enable clinical
success of bioPROTACs.

6.

## Outlook
In the two decades since protein degraders such as PROTACs were
introduced, proximity-based tools for mediating protein degradation,
and hence controlling protein function, have almost become omnipresent
in the fields of chemical and synthetic biology. Moreover, modalities
other than degradation have emerged with the creation of tools that
promote protein stabilization, and the addition and removal of PTMS.
As such, there are ongoing efforts toward developing methods for high-throughput
proteome-wide discovery of recruitable effectors for the modulation
of novel and relevant protein targets. While the early PROTAC drugs advance through clinical trials, it
is reasonable to presume that they will effectively compete with and
may even surpass traditional occupancy-driven inhibitors as therapeutics.
However, for these molecules to achieve their highest transformational
potential, they need to be adopted broadly to classes of proteins
that are intractable to occupancy-driven inhibitors. Because a key
limitation for PROTAC development has been the identification of ligands
specific for proteins of interest, the use of proteins and peptide
binders, which can be highly specific and genetically encoded, could
alleviate this limitation and thus expand the scope of PROTACs. In
this Review, we evaluate the existing body of work that has employed
such binders for protein degradation. We envision that similar binders
are adaptable to other proximity-driven modalities. We also review
the current drug delivery strategies as the standard that needs to
be achieved for protein-based PROTACs to become effective therapeutics.
It is our hope that the resource provided herein will spur new discoveries
that propel protein-based PROTACs as tools for discovery and as neo-therapeutics.

## Acknowledgments
This work is supported in part
by NIH grant R01HL173127
(to L.M.K.D.). L.O. and M.T.S. are Sarafan ChEM-H CBI fellows. M.T.S.
is additionally supported by DARE and EDGE Fellowships at Stanford
University. J.E. is the recipient of a Stanford Graduate Fellowship.
L.M.K.D. is supported by a Terman Fellowship from Stanford University,
is the David Huntington Dean’s Faculty Scholar in the School
of Humanities and Sciences, and is the MAC3 Impact Philanthropies
Faculty Fellow at the Sarafan ChEM-H Institute.

## Biographies
Lisha Ou received her Bachelor of Science in Chemical
Biology at
the University of California, Berkeley in 2019, where she worked in
the lab of Professor Dan Nomura. She is currently a graduate student
at Stanford University working towards her Ph.D. in Chemistry under
the guidance of Professor Laura Dassama. Her research focuses on expanding
available targeted protein degradation tools for the advancement of
human health.

Mekedlawit Setegne received
her B.S. (2019) in Chemistry from Rice
University, where she worked on probe development for site-specific
protein backbone modification with Prof. Zachary Ball. She is a currently
a Ph.D. student at Stanford University Department of Chemistry and
a Stanford ChEM-H Institute Chemical Biology Interface Graduate Fellow,
a Stanford Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education (EDGE) Fellow,
and a Stanford Diversifying Academia Recruiting Excellence (DARE)
Fellow. Her thesis work involves engineering protein-based tools for
cell-specific therapeutic intervention for blood disorders through
modulating the proteome of developing erythrocytes under the supervision
of Prof. Laura Dassama.

Jeandele Elliot
was born and raised in Saint Lucia. She completed
her Bachelor of Science in Chemical Engineering at Howard University
and is currently a Chemical Engineering Ph.D. candidate at Stanford
University, where she received the Stanford Graduate Fellowship. She
has a passion for solving problems related to efficient and specific
delivery of therapeutics.

Dr. Fangfang
Shen received her Ph.D. in Chemical Biology from the
University of Hong Kong in 2019, where she was supervised by Dr. Dan
Yang and developed small molecules capable of mimicking ion channel
functions and inducing cancer stem cell death. As a postdoctoral researcher
under the supervision of Prof. Laura Dassama, she is developing novel
protein-based bifunctional constructs to modulate challenging disease-relevant
targets in cells.

Prof. Laura M. K. Dassama
is a chemical and structural biologist
who leverages chemical and physical insights to understand complex
biological phenomena. Her interests lie in modulating intractable
disease-relevant human proteins and discovering novel strategies for
infectious disease curtailment. She holds appointments in the department
of Chemistry at Stanford University and the department of Microbiology
& Immunology at Stanford School of Medicine.

## Author Contributions
CRediT: Lisha Ou conceptualization, data curation, writing - original
draft, writing - review & editing; Mekedlawit Setegne conceptualization, data curation, writing - original draft, writing
- review & editing; Jeandele M Elliot conceptualization,
data curation, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing; Fangfang Shen conceptualization, data curation, writing -
original draft, writing - review & editing; Laura M. K.
Dassama conceptualization, data curation, funding acquisition,
writing - original draft, writing - review & editing.

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.

## Special Issue
Published
as part of Chemical Reviewsspecial issue “Synthetic Biology”.

## References