94jbbJournal of Biomedicine and BiotechnologyJ Biomed BiotechnolWileyPMC3239563239563239561272151610.1155/S1110724303209074Transcriptional Targeting in Cancer Gene Therapy
RobsonTracy HirstDavid G 1School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulster, Newtownabbey, Co. Antrim, BT37 0QB, Northern Ireland, UK✉Corresponding author.
214200320032110110–137642004Copyright © 2003, Hindawi Publishing Corporation

## Abstract
Cancer gene therapy has been one of the most exciting areas of
therapeutic research in the past decade. In this review, we
discuss strategies to restrict transcription of transgenes to
tumour cells. A range of promoters which are tissue-specific,
tumour-specific, or inducible by exogenous agents are presented.
Transcriptional targeting should prevent normal tissue toxicities
associated with other cancer treatments, such as radiation and
chemotherapy. In addition, the specificity of these strategies
should provide improved targeting of metastatic tumours following
systemic gene delivery. Rapid progress in the ability to
specifically control transgenes will allow systemic gene delivery
for cancer therapy to become a real possibility in the near
future.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2002 Jun 10; Accepted 2002 Jul 19.

## INTRODUCTION
Gene therapy is the transfer of exogenous genes,
called transgenes, into the somatic cells of a patient to obtain a
therapeutic effect. Initially, gene therapy was viewed as an
approach for treating hereditary diseases, but its potential role
in the treatment of acquired diseases such as cancer is now widely
recognised. In theory, gene therapy offers the potential for
enormous improvements in the targeting of cancer therapy, but it
is clear that this has not yet been achieved, although early
trials are promising.
One of the main goals for all cancer therapies is the selective
targeting and killing of tumour cells, thereby increasing the
therapeutic ratio. Both chemotherapy and radiotherapy induce
dose limiting normal tissue toxicities, which reduce their
clinical effectiveness. Cancer gene therapy has the advantage
that normal tissue toxicity might be avoided if suitable
strategies can be employed to target the therapeutic transgene
directly to tumour cells; an outcome that conventional
therapeutic approaches have failed to achieve.
To date, clinical trials have focused on the delivery of genes
directly to the tumour site by intratumoural injection using both
viral and nonviral delivery agents, thereby largely avoiding normal
tissues. However, the goal of most cancer gene therapy is to be able
to administer a suitably packaged transgene systemically and achieve a
high level of tumour targeting. This will be important for targeting
the majority of tumours, that are not accessible for direct injection,
and to ensure adequate distribution of the transgene throughout the
tumour mass. The blood supply still offers the best opportunity to do
this. Systemic delivery of transgenes would also allow targeting of
both the primary tumour and metastatic deposits, which must be
controlled if therapy is to be successful. A number of strategies are
now being developed to target both viral and nonviral delivery agents
to tumour cells. These include exploitation of natural viral
tropisms, such as those exhibited by adenoviruses to target lung
epithelium; retargeting viruses using a bispecific molecule to
simultaneously block native receptor binding, redirecting virus to a
tissue-specific receptor; genetically modifying the virus to ablate
native receptor interactions and incorporating a novel ligand into one
of the virus' coat proteins; using tissue-specific ligands or
monoclonal antibodies incorporated onto the surface of liposomes to
direct them to target cells. A detailed description of these targeted
delivery strategies, lies beyond the scope of this review (for reviews
covering this area see references [ , , , ]).
As well as controlling the delivery of the therapeutic gene to the
tumour tissue, controlled regulation of transgene expression is now
playing a major role in targeted cancer gene therapy strategies.
Indeed, by combining targeted delivery with tumour-specific expression,
the level of transgene product in nontarget normal tissues, compared
with that in tumours, can be greatly reduced. The purpose of this
review is to focus on transcriptional targeting of transgenes, which
will undoubtedly be an essential component of systemic cancer gene
therapy.

## TRANSCRIPTIONAL CONTROL OF EXPRESSION
In the last decade, it has become increasingly clear that gene
expression is regulated by a complex interplay of factors that
function in a cell-type-specific manner to produce diverse
effects. These subtleties arise from the balance of
tissue-specific transcriptional control elements present in the
various cell types, for example, hepatic, melanocyte, neuronal,
and erythroid or tumour-specific promoters/enhancers that are
activated in diseased states, or as a result of being
exposed to an unfavourable tumour-associated microenvironment, for
example, hypoxia. These cis-acting elements can be harnessed to
drive the transcription of a therapeutic gene in a tissue- or
tumour-specific manner ( ). The use of
tissue-specific cellular promoters to restrict transgene
expression usually results in constitutive expression in the
target tissue. However, for some therapeutic strategies, it will
be preferable to regulate the duration and level of expression
exogenously. This may be achieved by the use of cellular
promoters that are preferentially activated under certain
conditions to drive transgene expression in the target cell
population. Research has focused on promoters induced by
ionising radiation, heat, and small molecules. The use of tissue-
and tumour-specific and exogenously controlled inducible
promoters will now be discussed, as well as novel molecular
adaptations of these promoters to strengthen gene expression.
However, because the number of promoters that have been used for
transcriptional targeting of transgenes for cancer gene therapy
is very large, it is not feasible to discuss all of these in
detail. The available data to date will therefore be presented
in a series of tables.
 

## TISSUE-SPECIFIC PROMOTERS
Transcriptional targeting utilising tissue-specific promoters exploits
genes that are switched on only in certain tissues. A list of
tissue-specific promoters currently being used in cancer gene therapy
is given in . One of the main limitations of this
type of promoter is that transgene expression may lead to cytotoxic
effects in normal as well as tumour tissue derived from that same cell
type. Therefore, the use of such promoters must be restricted to
tissues in which damage is not critical for the survival of the host,
for example, prostate, melanocytes, or thyroid. If the tissue/organ is
critical, then the transgenes must be delivered directly to the tumour
site to prevent normal tissue toxicity or be delivered with
retroviruses which are less efficient at infecting nondividing slowly
proliferating normal tissues, such as the liver.
 

## Melanocyte-restricted expression
The use of tissue-specific promoters was pioneered by Vile and
Hart in 1993, with the use of the tyrosinase promoter to target
melanocytes/melanomas. Melanin biosynthesis is restricted to
melanocytes, partly, as a consequence of transcriptional
regulation of gene products, such as tyrosinase or
tyrosinase-related protein 1, involved in this biochemical
pathway. Vile and Hart demonstrated that small elements of the
5′ flanking regions of these two genes could drive reporter
gene expression in murine and human melanoma cell lines in vitro
and in vivo, but they could detect only low level expression in
other cell types in vitro and no expression in Colo 26 tumours
grown in vivo following direct injection of the transgenes
[ ]. They went on to demonstrate efficacy in vivo using the herpes simplex thymidine kinase (HSV-tk)/gancyclovir
(GCV) combination, which gave a significant tumour growth delay
following intratumoural injection of the tyrosinase-driven
constructs and decreased metastatic potential in mice injected
with melanoma cells expressing these constructs following
treatment with GCV [ ]. In a separate study,
tissue-specific expression of IL-2, IL-4, and GM-CSF was also
seen in vitro and in vivo [ ]. As an extension to this work, retroviruses were developed containing the murine tyrosinase
promoter to achieve transcriptionally targeted expression of
HSV-tk or IL-2 genes [ , ]. Antitumour efficacy and tissue specificity were observed after intratumoural and IV delivery using localised and metastatic melanoma models [ ]. Other studies have demonstrated antitumour efficacy using both retrovirus [ ] and cationic liposomes [ ] to achieve tyrosinase driven expression of cytosine deaminase (CD), which in turn catalyses the conversion of the nontoxic prodrug
5-fluorocytosine (5-FC) to 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). Adenoviral
delivery of the murine tyrosinase promoter, introduced into the
E1 region, has been used to drive melanoma-specific expression of
the reporter gene β-galactosidase [ ]. Both studies showed effective transcriptional targeting. More recently,
tissue-specific elements of the tyrosinase promoter have been
incorporated into more elaborate DNA constructs, that incorporate
either a second tumour-specific promoter, cyclin A [ ] for added specificity, or elements to help increase tyrosinase
promoter expression [ ]. As an extension to this, both
targeted delivery and transcriptional targeting of melanoma cells
via the tyrosinase promoter were combined in one study. Anionic
liposomes carrying a peptide ligand for targeting
α-v-β3-integrin receptors, commonly upregulated on
malignant melanoma cells, were used in this instance for the
transductional targeting [ ]. These more elaborate combined approaches will be discussed in detail later as future
perspectives.

## Prostate-specific expression
Another well-characterised tissue-specific promoter is that of
prostate-specific antigen (PSA). Prostate-specific antigen is
expressed predominantly in the prostate and is transcriptionally
upregulated by androgens. Pang et al [ ] demonstrated that elements from the 5′ region of this gene can drive reporter
gene expression in the PSA-producing cell line, LNCaP, but not in
the nonproducing tumour cell lines, DU145 and PC-3, nor in renal
or breast cancer cell lines. Tumour cell growth was inhibited
when the PSA promoter was used to drive expression of antisense
constructs targeting DNA polymerase α and topoisomerase
α in prostate tumour cell lines, but not in cell lines of
any other tumour [ ]. In addition, a replication-competent adenovirus, CN706, has been developed with a selective toxicity
for PSA-positive prostate cancer cells, using minimal
enhancer/promoter constructs derived from the 5′ flank of the
PSA gene, to drive the E1A gene [ ]. A single intratumoural injection of the virus destroyed large LNCaP tumours and
abolished PSA production in mice. Gotoh et al [ ] have
developed an attenuated adenovirus which expresses HSV-tk
from a 5837-bp fragment of the PSA promoter. This promoter was
active in both androgen-dependent and independent PSA-producing
prostate cancer cells in vitro, and in prostate tumours in
castrated hosts. Chimeric constructs which have also been
engineered improved the activity and specificity of the PSA
enhancer. Importantly, intravenous delivery of adenoviral
constructs, with either duplication of the enhancer core or
insertion of tandem copies of the proximal androgen response
elements, not only showed enhanced activity and inducibility but
also retained tissue discrimination for human LAPC-9 tumour
xenografts [ ]. Constructs utilising PSA promoter elements have also been developed to drive the expression of the sodium
iodide transporter to concentrate radioiodine in the prostate
[ ]. They have also been used to increase the expression of nitroreductase or CD allowing sensitisation of prostate cells to
the prodrugs, CB1954 [ ] or 5-FC, respectively [ ]. PSA promoter driven transgenes have also been delivered using an HIV-1-based lentiviral vector [ ] and liposomes [ ].
Promoters of prostate-specific genes other than PSA
are now being utilised. Prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA)
is a type-2 membrane protein expressed in virtually all prostate
cancers and their metastases. Moreover, unlike PSA, PSMA
expression is upregulated by androgen deprivation. These
advantages make PSMA a useful target for advanced prostate cancer
therapy, especially in combination with conventional hormonal
treatment. O'Keefe et al [ ] have determined the most active regions of the PSMA enhancer and revealed a 1.6-kbp region
which was active in driving prostate-specific CD expression,
sensitising cells in vitro to 5-FC more than 50-fold compared to
control cells. Furthermore, C4-2 prostate tumours grown in nude
mice were eliminated by 5-FC when CD expression was induced by
the PSMA promoter/enhancer [ ]. This type of promoter will be particularly useful for patients who have undergone androgen
ablation therapy and are suffering from a relapse of the disease.
Human glandular kallikrein (hK2) and PSA are
related members of the human kallikrein gene family, however,
unlike PSA whose expression displays an inverse correlation with
prostate cancer stage and grade, hK2 is upregulated in higher
grade and stage of the disease. Yu et al [ ] identified an androgen-dependent and prostate-specific enhancer located between
−3.4 and −5.2 kbp upstream of the hK2 transcription start
site. A replication-competent adenovirus was constructed, CV763,
in which the E1A gene was driven by the hK2 enhancer/promoter.
Specificity for prostate tumours in vivo was impressive. More
recently, a recombinant adenovirus expressing EGFP under the
control of a triplicate hK2 enhancer/promoter led to robust
tumour-restricted EGFP expression [ ].
Probasin is another prostate-specific promoter,
which has been used by many groups for transcriptional targeting
of therapeutic transgenes. Steiner et al [ ] used probasin to drive the expression of the LacZ reporter gene in a
canine model following intraprostatic injection. They were able to
demonstrate that, although adenovirus was detected in other
tissue, lacZ mRNA could be detected by RT-PCR only in the
prostate and not in other tissues. A small potent composite rat
probasin promoter has been developed, ARR(2)PB, which is both
androgen- and glucocorticoid-inducible [ ]. When used to drive cell cycle-independent caspases, in an adenoviral system,
it can lead to apoptosis in prostate cancer xenografts, but not
in xenografts of other tumours, when the dimeric ligand AP20187
is delivered to trigger caspase activation [ ]. More
importantly, systemic delivery of a similar adenovirus, utilising
the ARR(2)PB composite promoter to drive BAX expression,
revealed no toxicity in the liver, lung, kidney, or spleen, but
resulted in highly specific cytotoxicity in the prostatic cancer
cell line LNCaP [ ]. Lastly, a tumour-specific rather than prostate-specific promoter from the osteocalcin gene has shown a
considerable promise in targeting prostate cancer bone
metastases. This will be discussed in the next section.

## Glial-restricted expression
A number of tissue-specific promoters have now been tested for
targeting of gliomas. In 1993, Miyao et al [ ], described 2.5 kbp, 1.3 kbp, and 1.5 kbp 5′ flanking regions of the mouse glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) gene, myelin
basic protein (MBP) gene, and myelin proteolipid protein (PLP)
gene, respectively, which conferred specificity for glial cells.
Following retroviral delivery, transcription was initiated more
effectively in glioma cells via the MBP promoter where the
HSV-tk transgene sensitised cells to gancyclovir in both
murine and human glioma cells [ ]. GFAP promoter driven expression of HSV-tk and therapeutic efficacy for gliomas
was demonstrated by other groups [ , ]. The RL1 variant herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) has also been engineered to target intracerebral tumours of glial and astrocyte origin by using the GFAP promoter. These viruses, 1774 and 1775, showed high levels
of β-galactosidase expression specifically in astrocytes
following intracerebral inoculation [ ].
Replication-defective adenoviral vectors have also been
engineered to contain either the GFAP promoter or the neuronal
specific enolase promoter [ , ]. Importantly, in the Morelli study, Fas ligand (FasL) transgene expression and induced-toxicity following IV delivery were restricted to glial
tissue, unlike the noncell-type-specific CMV-driven viruses that
induced acute liver haemorrhage with hepatocyte apoptosis. Tight
control of transgene expression was therefore achieved following
systemic delivery. In the Chen study, a repressible adenovirus was
developed by driving expression of a tetracycline-controlled
transactivator. This was the first glial-specific gene delivery
system that allowed for repression of ectopic gene expression.
More recently, an elegant liposomal delivery system has been
developed; it incorporates both transport across the blood brain
barrier following IV administration of a targeting ligand such as
the peptidomimetic rat 8D3 mAb to the mouse transferrin receptor,
and restricted expression to glial cells by the use of the GFAP
promoter. This particular study demonstrates that tissue-specific
gene expression in brain is possible after IV administration of a
nonviral vector combined with gene targeting technology and
glial-specific promoters [ ]. Shinoura et al [ , , ] have used the MBP promoter to drive expression of two apoptosis-related genes, BAX and caspase 8, selectively, in glioma cells both in vitro, and in vivo using adenoviruses. Massive apoptosis was seen in glioma cells only, demonstrating effective tissue specificity and good antitumour
efficacy was observed in vivo.
As well as promoters that can target gliomas, a promoter that
could be useful in targeting neuroblastomas has also been described. The human NCX gene, is a homologue of the murine neural crest homeobox (Ncx/Hox11L.1) gene, whose expression is restricted to a subset of neural crest-derived tissues. A 1.7-kbp fragment upstream showed preferential promoter activity in
neuroblastoma cells and when linked to the HSV-tk gene
caused increased sensitivity to gancyclovir [ ]. The
regulatory region of this gene may therefore be useful for
neuroblastoma-specific gene therapy.

## Liver-specific expression
The enhancer/promoter of the albumin gene is the only
tissue-specific promoter that has been shown to preferentially
target liver cells. The first demonstration of efficacy using
this promoter was by Kuriyama et al [ ]. When this promoter was delivered using a retrovirus, which is efficient only in
dividing cells, β-galactosidase expression was restricted
to hepatoma cell lines in vitro. When this retrovirus was
injected via the spleen or directly into the liver, gene
expression was observed only in dividing heptocytes in partially
hepatectomised mice, but not in nondividing hepatocytes in normal
mice. These authors went on to show that the susceptibility of
murine and rat hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells, infected with
retroviruses expressing HSV-tk under the control of the
albumin promoter, were 100-fold more sensitive to gancyclovir
than non-HCC cells. Systemic gancyclovir administration resulted
in complete regression of retroviral-infected HCC cells and
significant inhibition of tumour growth even when only 5% of the
cells were infected with retrovirus [ ]. The albumin
promoter has also been used to develop a retrovirus expressing the
TNF-α, IL-2, and IL-3 genes [ , ], an adenovirus
expressing HSV-tk [ , ] and a replication-competent herpes simplex virus, HSV G92A [ ].

## Thyroid-specific promoters
Thyroid cancer is a disease with a relatively good prognosis, but
about 30% of the tumours dedifferentiate and may finally develop
into highly malignant anaplastic thyroid carcinomas which are
inaccessible to standard therapeutic procedures such as
radioiodine therapy and thyroxine-mediated thyrotrophin
suppression. Several gene therapy strategies are now
available to target therapeutic genes to thyroid tissues using
tissue-specific promoters. Zeiger first described the use of the
thyroglobulin (TG) gene promoter for the selective targeting of
thyroid cell lines. Nearly, 100% of thyroid carcinoma cells
treated with an adenovirus expressing HSV-tk under the
control of a TG promoter were killed by GCV compared to only 5%
of control cells [ ]. A retrovirus carrying
HSV-tk under the control of the TG promoter also showed
preferential GCV toxicity for malignant rat thyroid carcinoma
cells compared to a normal rat thyroid cell line in vitro and in
vivo [ ]. Furthermore, systemic delivery of an adenovirus expressing thyroglobulin-driven HSV-tk did not induce
luciferase activity in the liver or spleen, indicating that TG
does not induce luciferase expression in non-TG producing tissues
[ ]. In addition, transfer of the HSV-tk gene
driven by the TG promoter following administration of GCV is
specifically cytotoxic to thyroid cells [ ]. In order to
address the issue that most poorly differentiated and anaplastic
thyroid carcinomas have lost the ability to express the TG gene
through loss of the thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1),
TTF-2, or Pax 8, Shimura et al infected thyroid cells with both
adenoviruses expressing TTF-1 and adenoviruses carrying
HSV-tk driven by the thyroglobulin promoter [ ]. Cotransduction permitted 90% cytotoxicity in thyroid carcinoma
cells lacking this transcription factor and normally unable to
express the TG gene. A putative enhancer element for the TG gene
has also been recently identified which appears to increase the
TG promoter activity and specificity for thyroid cells.
Interestingly, the TG promoter is also being used to target
feline thyroid disease and neoplasia by selectively increasing
expression of the nitroreductase gene allowing subsequent
activation of a prodrug, CB1954 [ ].
Several other novel tissue-specific genes have been used to target
tumours in a tissue-specific manner, although only one or two
reports are available. These include an ovarian-specific
promoter, OSP-1, a 462-bp sequence that is a part of a
retrovirus-like element specifically expressed in rat ovary
[ ]. The expression of HSV-tk under the control of this promoter significantly sensitised ovarian cancer xenografts
(OVCAR) to GCV following delivery with a cationic lipid [ ]. In addition, the promoter for surfactant protein B
(SPB), whose activity is restricted to adult type II alveolar
epithelial cells and bronchial epithelial cells, has been used to
target both replication-deficient [ ] and -competent
adenoviruses by replacement of the E4 promoter [ ]. This promoter showed good specificity for bronchial cancer cells in
vivo.

## TUMOUR-SPECIFIC PROMOTERS
Ideally, tumour-specific promoters should be highly active in
tumour cells and have little or no activity in normal cells.
Harrington et al [ ] elegantly split this vast group of
promoters into subgroups depending on their discrete
characteristics and for the purpose of this review this
convention will be applied. Tumour-specific promoters can be
described as (1) cancer-specific promoters, that is, specific for
the malignant process, but showing no tissue specificity (2)
tumour-type-specific promoters, that is, oncofoetal related with
tissue specificity (3) tumour microenvironment-related promoters,
that is, promoters which respond to the tumour microenvironment
and physiology, for example, hypoxia and glucose regulated (4)
tumour vasculature-related promoters, that is, promoters which
are more active in the tumour vasculature rather than normal
vasculature.

## Cancer-specific promoters
One of the main obstacles to current cancer therapies is the lack of
tumour specificity. Targeting gene expression specifically to tumour
cells is therefore one of the most important goals of cancer gene
therapy strategies. A common problem with the use of the
tissue-specific promoters which were described in the previous
section, is that transgene expression can also occur in the normal
tissue and whilst some tissue damage may be acceptable in certain
organs, in other organs such as brain, liver, and so forth, it could be
catastrophic. There is probably only one gene, telomerase, that can be
genuinely classified as cancer specific and whose promoter is being
used to drive the expression of transgenes selectively in a wide
variety of tumour cells.
Telomerase activation is considered to be a critical step in
cancer progression because of its role in cellular
immortilisation. Approximately 90% of human cancers possess
active telomerase, whereas normal somatic tissues have either
much lower or undetectable activity [ , , ]. Human
telomerase activity depends on the presence of both the RNA
subunit (hTR) and the catalytic protein component (hTERT)
[ ]. For both genes there is a clear differential
expression between normal and malignant cells. A number of
studies have used these two promoters to drive transgene
expression for therapeutic benefit. Pan and Koeneman [ ] first described the use of the hTERT promoter in a retroviral
system and combined it with a Cre/loxP site-specific
recombination system to allow the killing of p53-negative tumour
cells while sparing normal wild-type cells. Since then, a host of
papers have reported the use of both promoters in several
different tumour types in combination with several different
transgenes. Bladder and liver tumour cell lines were targeted
using both hTR and hTERT to drive expression of the diphtheria
toxin A chain gene [ ]. The glioma cell line, UVW, was
targeted using the hTR promoter to drive expression of the
noradrenaline transporter gene (NAT) where a 17-fold enhancement
of the radionuclide [131]meta-iodobenzylguanidine uptake was
reported resulting in complete sterilisation of tumour spheroids
[ ]. Gliomas were also the target for hTERT-driven
expression of Fas-associated protein with death domain (FADD) or
rev-caspase-6. FADD is a protein which induces apoptosis in cells
regardless of Fas expression on the cell surface and rev-caspase
6 induces apoptosis independent of initiator caspases.
Subcutaneously implanted human gliomas treated with this
construct were significantly reduced in volume compared to
control tumours [ , , ]. More recently, the apoptotic
pathway was successfully targeted both in human tumour xenograft
and syngeneic mouse UV-2237m fibrosarcomas, using Bax as a
transgene, driven by the hTERT promoter [ , ]. In a suicide gene therapy approach, hTERT was also used to drive expression of HSV-tk in an osteosarcoma xenograft model
following intratumoural injection. Targeted delivery using this
approach avoided the liver toxicity observed using a CMV driven
construct following GCV administration. Finally, Keith's group
[ ] tested hTR and hTERT in a panel of 10 cell lines
consisting of lung, colon, ovarian, bladder, and cervical origin,
demonstrating the truly “cancer specific” nature of these
promoters. The hTR promoter appeared to have the superior
activity in the telomerase-positive cell lines and when used to
drive the nitroreductase gene to increase the activation of the
prodrug, CB1954, in two xenograft models, it showed even better
antitumour effects (up to 97% reduction in tumour volume) than a
CMV-driven construct [ ]. These promoters clearly have a real potential in targeting a wide range of different tumour
types.

## Tumour-type-specific promoters
Certain types of tumour often overexpress genes of oncofoetal origin
that are silent in normal tissue. The most well-characterised
promoters of these tumour-specific genes are the carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA) and α fetoprotein (AFP), which are expressed in
adenocarcinomas and hepatocellular carcinomas, respectively. There are
also many other genes that are overexpressed in certain tumour types
and, as such, their promoters are being utilised for transcriptional
regulation of therapeutic genes.

## CEA
The CEA promoter is active in a proportion of breast, lung, colorectal, and pancreatic cancers. The 5′ promoter sequences have been analysed and identified by reporter gene assays and have lead to high-level selective expression of transgenes in
CEA-positive cell lines [ ]. The CEA promoter has been used to drive CD expression [ , , ], HSV-tk
[ , , , , ], BAX [ ], and mammalian degenerin, a sodium ion channel gene, overexpression of which leads to sodium influx and cell bursting [ ]. Importantly, CEA appears to be truly selective for tumour tissues in animal models as several reports have not detected transgene expression or related toxicities following systemic delivery of these
constructs via tail vein injection [ ] or intraperitoneally [ ]. Although a significant number of studies have shown that the CEA promoter is effective for selectively targeting
tumour cells, there have been few studies which have demonstrated
truly significant in vivo antitumour effects possibly because of
the low activity of the promoter. More recently, several studies
have made use of a Cre recombinase/lox P system
[ , , ] or a GAL4 regulatory system [ ], both of which significantly increased transgene expression by up to 100
fold, while maintaining tumour specificity. These strategies will be discussed in more detail later. Finally, Qiao et al [ ] constructed an adenovirus containing a binary promoter system with a CEA promoter driving a transcription activator, which then activates a minimal promoter to express
HSV-tk. Importantly, in vivo dose-escalation studies demonstrated significantly reduced toxicity following intravenous administration of this construct and provide a proof of principle for the powerful enhancement of a weak promoter for effective tumour-restricted gene expression.

## AFP
The α-fetoprotein gene is normally expressed in foetal
liver and is transcriptionally silent in adult liver. It is also
expressed in around 70% of the hepatocellular carcinomas and its
promoter has been used extensively to drive transgene expression
for targeting these tumours. Studies have clearly shown that
transgene expression is restricted to tumours that overexpress
AFP and that transgene expression is less efficient in tumours
with lower AFP levels. A variant 0.3-kbp promoter has also been
developed with a G to A substitution at nucleotide −119; a
point mutation responsible for hereditary persistence of human
AFP. This promoter has proved particularly useful for transgene
expression in low AFP producing hepatoma cells [ ].
Ishikawa et al have also shown that by placing the AFP promoter/enhancer in the reverse orientation to the long terminal repeats with a retroviral construct dramatically increases both HSV-tk transgene expression and GCV-mediated cytotoxicity in a HepG2 tumour in vivo [ ]. The AFP promoter has also been used to drive CD [ ], IL-2 [ , ], diphtheria toxin A [ ], and interestingly, a replication-competent adenovirus has been constructed using the
AFP promoter to drive an attenuated E1B gene. Systemic delivery
of this virus resulted in tumour-specific regression [ ]. The AFP promoter activity can be weak, but it can be enhanced
using Cre/loxP technology to increase transgene
expression [ ], a similar strategy to that applied to CEA.

## ErbB2
ErbB2/HER2 is an oncogene that codes for a receptor tyrosine
kinase that is overexpressed by transcriptional upregulation in
approximately one third of breast and pancreatic tumours, and in
a small proportion of other tumours. This promoter has been used
to drive the expression of CD and when delivered using a
retrovirus, CD expression and significant 5-FC-mediated cell
death was observed only in ErbB2-positive cell lines
[ , ]. ErbB2-driven expression of a membrane receptor, murine gastrin releasing peptide, has also been used effectively
to target breast cancer cell lines with a radiolabelled peptide
[ ]. More recently, studies to identify a minimal ErbB2 promoter were successful. Maeda et al [ ] identified a 251 bp fragment (−213/+38) that could direct transcription of a luciferase reporter gene better than the SV40 immediate
early promoter in breast cancer cells. When linked to the
HSV-tk gene, increased sensitivity to GCV was observed
in breast but not nonbreast cancer cell lines, and suppressed the
growth of these lines in nude mice.

## MUC1/DF3
The MUC1 gene encodes a high molecular weight mucin-like
glycoprotein and is overexpressed at the transcriptional level in
breast and cholangiocarcinomas. A 114 bp enhancer region has
been identified that can modulate transcription from heterologous
promoters [ ]. DF3-positive breast cancer cell lines were more sensitive to GCV-mediated cell killing when the
HSV-tk gene was delivered and driven by this enhancer. A
replication-defective adenovirus containing this construct was
subsequently developed and inhibition of tumour growth was
observed in an intraperitoneal breast cancer metastases model
[ ]. This strategy could transfect and kill carcinoma
cells within haematopoetic stem cell populations without causing
associated normal tissue toxicity [ ]. An adenovirus
expressing BAX under the control of this promoter has
also been constructed for targeting ovarian cancer cell lines
expressing DF3. Transgene expression was restricted to tumour
tissue in a nude mouse model and administration of the virus
2–3 days after tumour inoculation eradicated > 99% of
tumour implants [ ].

## Osteocalcin
Osteocalcin (OC) is a noncollagenous bone matrix protein
expressed at high levels in the neonate. It functions primarily
in osteoblasts found in growing bone and is highly expressed in
osteogenic sarcomas. Koeneman et al [ ] have also provided evidence of expression in ovarian, lung, brain, and prostate
tumours (especially those showing androgen-independence). A
phase I trial is now underway to target androgen-independent
prostate cancer using an adenoviral construct expressing
HSV-tk under the control of this promoter. Of all the
transcriptional targeting strategies discussed so far, the use of
the osteocalcin promoter has been tested thoroughly using
systemic delivery. Matsubara et al [ ] have successfully constructed a replication-competent adenovirus using this
promoter to drive E1a expression. They demonstrated that 100% of
mice carrying prostate xenografts responded to systemic
adenoviral delivery and more significantly 40% of mice were
cured. Phase I/II trials are now being carried out using the same
virus to target pulmonary metastases of osteosarcomas, following
systemic delivery of this virus, which must pass through the lung
before being sequestered in the liver [ ]. Shirakawa et al [ ] also used an adenovirus to target osteosarcoma pulmonary metastases with an osteocalcin driven HSV-tk.
In an established animal model, systemic delivery of these
constructs via tail vein injection and subsequent intraperitoneal
acyclovir treatment significantly decreased the number of tumour
nodules in the lung, while significantly increasing the survival
of these animals. Interestingly, because the osteocalcin
promoter can also target bone stromal cells, which are important
for supporting the growth of prostate tumour metastases, an
adenovirus expressing HSV-tk under the control of this
promoter was effective at destroying prostate cancer xenografts
in both subcutaneous and bone sites [ ]. It is quite
clear that this promoter will be important for the treatment of
both prostate and osteosarcoma, but it will be some time before
we learn about its true specificity and any associated toxicities. Certainly, because this promoter is effective in androgen-independent prostate tumours, it will ultimately be more effective than the tissue-specific PSA promoter discussed in the last section. A clearer understanding of this promoter may help
to increase specificity even further and Yeung et al have already
identified elements important for prostate specificity, in
particular, the elements important for androgen-independent
specificity [ ].

## L-plastin
L-plastin is constitutively expressed at high levels in malignant
epithelial cells, but is not expressed in normal tissue, except
at low levels in haemopoetic cells. A replication-incompetent
adenovirus has been constructed to express either LacZ or CD
under the control of the human L-plastin promoter. High levels of
expression of β-galactosidase was seen in breast, ovarian,
and fibrosarcoma cell lines [ ] and in explants of ovarian cancer cells from patients compared to normal mesothelial cells
from surgical specimens [ ]. A greater reduction in
tumour size was seen when the adenovirus expressing CD under the
control of the L-plastin promoter was injected into human ovarian
tumour xenografts than when the CD was controlled by the CMV
promoter. L-plastin may therefore be an effective promoter for
targeting ovarian cancer.

## Midkine
Midkine (MK) is a heparin-binding growth factor that is transiently expressed in the early stages of retinoic acid-induced differentiation of embryonal carcinoma cells. Many malignant tumours express high levels of MK mRNA or protein with
no expression in human liver. This is important as adenovirus' have a natural tropism for liver and such promoters could be useful for preventing transgene expression and associated hepatotoxicity in the liver. Miyauchi et al [ ] examined the expression of MK in human oesophageal cancer cells. Positive staining with anti-MK antibody was found in 8 out of 14 tumour specimens, while the surrounding normal oesophageal
tissues in these specimens were not stained. The 5′ flanking
2.3-kbp region of the MK gene was then used to drive the expression of HSV-tk, where expression conferred the sensitivity to GCV. Since then, an adenoviral vector has been constructed to express HSV-tk under the control of the MK promoter to target Wilm's tumour and neuroblastoma cell lines [ ]. Importantly, systemic delivery of these constructs into mice resulted in much lower hepatotoxicites; by day 8 of
systemic delivery, four out of five mice treated with an
adenovirus expressing HSV-tk via a CMV promoter had
died, whereas all the mice treated with the midkine adenovirus
survived at least 10 days [ ]. The midkine promoter has also proved useful for targeting ovarian cancer cells and
pancreatic cells, as has the cyclooxygenase-2 gene promoter [ , ].

## Other tumour-type-specific promoters
Many other tumour-specific promoters have been utilised to target
particular types and are listed in .
Particularly interesting is the secretory leukoprotease inhibitor
gene (SPL1) promoter for targeting cervical carcinoma cells
[ ], lung, breast oropharyngeal, bladder, endometrial, and colorectal carcinomas [ ]. Yamamura et al [ ] have used the promoter from the human calponin gene, normally expressed in maturated smooth muscle cells and overexpressed in human soft tissue and bone tumour cells, to drive expression of
ICP4, a major transacting factor for viral genes to produce a
novel conditionally replicating herpes simples virus. The viral
treatment showed stable and significant inhibition of tumourigenicity with cures in four out of five mice harbouring synovial sarcoma, leimyosarcoma, and osteosarcoma cells, while sparing normal vascular smooth muscle cells. Chen and McCormick [ ] report on a novel transcriptional targeting strategy for colon cancer. Since many colon cancer cells show mutations in either the adenomatous polyposis coli or β-catenin genes
that lead to stabilisation of β-catenin and activation of
downstream T-cell factor (Tcf) target genes, tcf promoter
elements were used to control expression of an apoptosis gene,
FADD, which appears to effectively and selectively kill colon
cancer cells. The regulatory regions of the H19 gene, is
differentially regulated in normal and cancer cells and has been
linked to diphtheria toxin A or HSV-tk to successfully
target syngeneic bladder tumours in vivo with no obvious systemic
toxicity towards the host animals [ ]. A 2.2-kbp 5′ flanking region of the human calretinin gene has been used to
drive the expression of HSV-tk selectively in mesothelioma cell lines [ ] and the human calcitonin promoter has been used to drive expression of HSV-tk in medullary thyroid carcinomas following systemic delivery by adenovirus without any evident toxicity [ , , ]. The gastrin-releasing peptide gene promoter has been used to
selectively control HSV-tk expression in small-cell lung
cancer cells [ ]; injection of an adenovirus containing this construct resulted in complete regression of lung tumour
xenografts following IP administration of GCV [ ].
Lastly, Vandier et al [ ] have been successful in targeting cisplatin-resistant ovarian carcinoma cells which overexpress the
metallothionein gene, a metal binding protein. The human
metallothionein promoter was therefore used to drive expression
of HSV-tk, resulting in marked sensitisation to GCV in
the cisplatin-resistant cell lines compared to the cisplatin
sensitive cells.
 

## Cell cycle-related promoters
The expression of proliferation-associated genes is a hallmark of
both cancer cells and tumour endothelial cells. The
retinoblastoma tumour suppressor gene (RB), is a cell
cycle-associated gene, which has the ability to repress
E2F-responsive promoters, such as E2F-1. E2F-responsive promoters
should therefore be more active in tumour cells relative to
normal cells because of an excess of free E2F and loss of RB/E2F
repressor complexes. Parr et al [ ] have shown that
adenoviral vectors, containing transgenes driven by an E2F-1
promoter, can mediate tumour-selective gene expression in vivo,
allowing for eradication of established tumours. Significantly,
less toxicity was seen with this adenovirus than standard
constitutively regulated adenoviral constructs.
Muller's group have published several papers where the cell
cycle-related promoter, cyclin A or cdc25c, has been used in
combination with a tissue-specific tyrosinase promoter to
selectively target proliferating melanoma cells [ , ].
These dual specificity promoters showed > 20 fold and > 50 fold
increase in cell cycle-related and cell-type-specific regulation,
respectively, and will be discussed in more detail later.
Finally, the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) has a central
role in normal cellular proliferation. Transcription of this gene
is controlled by a number of tumour suppressors. On the other
hand, a number of oncogenes, including mutant p53 and
c-Myb and the fusion protein EWS-WT1 significantly
stimulate promoter activity. This promoter may therefore be a good
candidate for use in transcriptional targeting in cancer gene
therapy protocols [ ].

## Promoters that respond to the tumour microenvironment and
physiology
There are many aspects of the tumour microenvironment that are
unique, and can be targeted with strategies that take advantage
of genes upregulated in response to these environments. For
tumours to grow, they must stimulate angiogenesis; this requires
proliferation of endothelial cells, a process specific (in normal
adults) to the tumour microenvironment. An additional bonus of
this strategy is that vectors delivered systemically will have
direct access to the proliferating endothelial cells of the
tumour vasculature. Furthermore, specific genes are upregulated
in proliferating endothelial cells whose promoters are attractive
for targeting transgenes to the tumour vasculature. Secondly,
because the tumour vasculature is often disorganised and
inadequate, areas of low oxygen tension (hypoxia) are prevalent
in malignant tumours [ ]. Many genes transcriptionally upregulated in response to hypoxia are mediated by the inducible
transcription complex, hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). HIF-1
binds to DNA motifs known as hypoxia response elements (HREs)
within these genes. HREs can therefore be used to drive transgene
expression specifically within areas of tumour hypoxia. It is
extremely important to target this population of cells since they
are highly resistant to other forms of treatment, such as radio
and chemotherapy. Lastly, as well as oxygen starvation, tumours
can also be deprived of glucose leading to the increased
expression of genes involved in glucose metabolism. The promoters
of these genes are therefore also being used to drive transgene
expression specifically within a tumour. A list of tumour
microenvironment and physiology-related promoters can be found in
 .
 
 

## Endothelial cell-specific promoters
Over the past 10 years a number of genes have been reported
to be upregulated in proliferating endothelium of tumour blood
vessels. The endothelial-specific kinase insert domain receptor
(KDR/flk-1) and E-selectin have been shown to be upregulated in
tumour endothelium, and defined regions of these promoters have
been used to drive TNF-α carried by a retroviral vector. A
10–11-fold increase in TNF-α expression within sEND
endothelioma cells was observed compared to NIH-3T3 fibroblasts
[ ]. More recently, it was demonstrated that the
KDR/flk-1 promoter, is not only endothelial cell-specific, but
also active in two human ovarian cancer cell lines where CD
expression sensitised these cells to 5-FC both in vitro and in
vivo [ ]. E-selectin expression is very low in normal
adult capillaries, but is significantly elevated in newly formed
tumour vessels. It has been shown that the E-selectin promoter
is also activated by TNF-α, generating a 30-fold increase
in transgene expression compared to untreated cells. Furthermore,
endothelial cells exposed to tumour-conditioned medium as an in
vitro simulation of the tumour microenvironment resulted in even
higher induction of transgene expression [ ].
Flt-1, a receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), is
known to display dysregulated expression in both tumour vasculature
and tumour cells per se, and adenoviral vectors containing transgenes
under the control of the flt-1 promoter achieve very low levels of
toxicity in normal liver. This is important, as this is the major
organ responsible for blood clearance of adenoviruses and most at risk
from inadvertent transgene-related toxicity. Bauerschmitz et al
[ ] have shown that the flt-1 promoter is useful for the transcriptional targeting of adenoviruses to teratocarcinomas.
The promoter of human preproendothelin-1 has been used to
generate a retrovirus that demonstrates endothelial-specific
expression of the β-galactosidase gene [ , ]. An adenovirus containing the preproendothelin-1 promoter driving luciferase expression has also been constructed. Following
systemic injection, higher transgene expression was seen using
this promoter rather than a CMV promoter, resulting in a high
level of activity specifically in the new vasculature of primary
tumours and lung metastases, with the highest level in the
angiogenic endothelial cells of the metastasis [ ].
However, an impediment to the use of the preproendothelin-1
promoter may be that it is also active in some epithelial cells
[ ], compromising its vascular targeting specificity.
The promoter for human von Willebrand factor (vWF) has also been
used to drive transgene expression selectively in proliferating
endothelial cells [ , ]. Both reports emphasise that although this promoter is very weak, it appears to be highly selective for endothelial cells and is effective at suppressing
endothelial cell growth when driving the HSV-tk gene in
the presence of GCV. Furthermore, a novel strategy has been
developed to enhance this promoter > 14–100 fold while
maintaining > 30–100 fold specificity and will be
discussed in more detail later [ ]. Nettelbeck also
tested the PECAM-1, endoglin, P-selectin, and KDR promoters, but
vWF promoter was clearly the most specific for endothelial cells.

## Hypoxia-responsive promoters
Hypoxia response elements (HREs) found within the
hypoxia-responsive genes of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF), erythropoietin (Epo), and phosphoglycerate kinase-1
(PGK-1), have been tested for their use in cancer gene therapy.
Shibata et al examined the HREs of human VEGF and Epo and found
high inducibility of both in mammalian cells, while only the HREs
from the VEGF promoter were active in murine cells, and then to a
lesser extent than in human cells. In addition, the
introduction of multiple copies of the HRE and an E1B minimal
promoter improved the hypoxia responsiveness [ ]. Shibata then tested other HRE promoter combinations and found that 5HREs
and a CMV minimal promoter exhibited the most effective hypoxia
response (over 500 fold) when compared to an intact CMV promoter
[ ]. In addition, significant antitumour effects were
achieved with intraperitoneal injections of the prodrug, CB1954,
in tumours that expressed bacterial nitroreductase (NTR)
constitutively or via this hypoxia-inducible promoter.
Furthermore, respiration of 10% O2 increased tumour
hypoxia in vivo and enhanced the antitumour effects [ ]. The HREs of the mouse VEGF gene have also been used to construct
a retroviral vector expressing HSV-tk and tumours
expressing this construct regressed following administration of
GCV [ ]. Dachs et al [ ] have successfully utilised HREs from the PGK-1 gene and have shown that it is active in hypoxic tumour cells in vivo and Ruan et al [ ] have constructed an adeno-associated virus carrying HREs from the Epo gene that can increase gene expression in brain tumour cell
lines, under anoxia, by 79–110 fold. Combinations of both
hypoxia and tumour/tissue-specific elements are now being
developed to increase specificity for hypoxic tumour cells
[ , , , ]. These will be discussed in more detail later.

## Glucose-responsive promoters
The glucose-regulated protein GRP78 functions as a molecular
chaperone and can bind to malfolded proteins and unassembled
complexes. They are induced in response to low glucose, hypoxia,
acidic pH, or oxidative stress, which are hallmark features of
solid tumours. The use of these promoters for cancer gene
therapy was first proposed by Lee's group [ ]. This group has fully characterised the use of this promoter in several
tumour systems. A truncated rat GRP78 promoter with most of its
distal basal elements removed drove high level expression in a
murine fibrosarcoma model [ ] and when GRP78 was used in a retroviral system to drive HSV-tk, HSV-tk
expression levels were much higher [ ] in tumours in vivo than cells in vitro, resulting in complete tumour eradication
with no recurrence of tumour growth. Similarly, impressive
results were obtained in a murine mammary adenocarcinoma cell
line (TSA) in syngeneic, immune-competent hosts [ ]; in addition, immune memory was induced in these hosts with this
system. Finally, Luna et al [ ] have used photodynamic therapy (PDT) to activate the GRP78 promoter, since this modality
generates cytotoxic singlet oxygen species, which are potent
activators of this promoter. Inducible expression of
HSV-tk was observed after PDT in stably
retroviral-transduced mouse mammary carcinoma cells (TSA), and
enhanced tumouricidal activity was seen. The GRP78 promoter is,
therefore, also inducible and can function as a molecular switch
following exposure to PDT.
Hexokinase II is also overexpressed in solid tumours, partly due
to elevated glucose catabolism in rapidly proliferating cells.
Hexokinase II catalyses the first committed step of glycolysis
and is overexpressed in some tumours since it is no longer
responsive to the physiological inhibitor, glucagon. Adenovirus
carrying LacZ under the control of the hexokinase
promoter showed preferential β-galactosidase expression in
nonsmall cell lung carcinomas compared to primary normal human
bronchial epithelial cells. Cells infected with an adenovirus
expressing HSV-tk under the control of this promoter,
demonstrated selective toxicity, with a 10 to 100-fold increase
in IC50 between the lung cancer cell lines and the normal
bronchial epithelial cells and a 100-fold increase in the IC50
when compared to MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells [ ].

## EXOGENOUSLY CONTROLLED INDUCIBLE PROMOTERS
The use of tissue/tumour-specific cellular promoters
to restrict transgene expression usually results in constitutive
expression in the target tissue. However, in many situations it
might be preferable to exogenously regulate the duration and
level of expression. A list of exogenously controlled inducible
promoters currently being used for cancer gene therapy purposes
can be found in .
 
 

## Radiation-inducible promoters
Radiation therapy is one of the main strategies used to treat
solid tumours and although successful in some cases, there is the
potential for enhancing radiation effects by combining with other
agents such as gene therapy. Radiation-mediated gene therapy
exploits the fact that as well as the cell killing effect,
radiation will also activate transgenes which are driven by a
radiation-inducible promoter. Confinement of transcription to the
radiation field should be achievable by either using conformal,
interstitial, or brachytherapy and by targeted delivery of
radioisotopes. The cellular response to ionising radiation
includes the transcriptional activation of a variety of genes,
for example, c-jun, NFB, EGR1, and
p21
 WAF1/CIP1, to name but a few. However, although
numerous radiation-inducible genes and proteins have been
identified, relatively few radiation-inducible
promoters/enhancers have been fully characterised.
Datta et al [ ] identified a sequence of the EGR-1 gene that confers radiation inducibility. This sequence, CC(A+T
rich)GG, is known as the radiation-responsive CArG element. In
vitro studies, using the CArG, elements of the EGR1 promoter have
demonstrated a dose-dependent expression of reporter gene
activity of up to 28 fold following radiation exposure (0–20 Gy)
[ ]. However, at therapeutically relevant doses of
radiation (2 Gy) only a 3-fold increase in reporter gene activity
was achievable [ ]. The thymidine analogue
5-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine radiolabelled with the Auger
electron-emitter iodine-125 also activated the promoter and
resulted in increased β-galactosidase activity in the 9L
gliosarcoma tumour model in vivo. A number of studies have used
CArG elements to drive expression of TNF using liposomes
[ ], a haemopoetic cell carrier [ ] and adenovirus [ , , ]. These studies have led to clinical trials where an adenovirus carrying TNF driven by CArG elements of the
Egr-1 promoter are injected intratumourally into patients with
soft-tissue sarcomas, followed by irradiation [ ].
Enhanced antitumour effects were also observed when the Egr-1
promoter was combined with HSV-tk [ , ]. Tumours regressed significantly after GCV and radiation in comparison to GCV alone. Furthermore, tumour regrowth did not occur when GCV treatment was withdrawn. As well as being radiation-inducible the
Egr-1 promoter was tumour-specific for hepatocellular carcinomas
whereas its expression was barely detectable within normal liver
[ ]. It was evident from some of these papers that
reporter gene expression was detectable in nonirradiated cells,
which could limit its use in combination with cytotoxic agents.
Weichselbaum et al [ ] are also developing a herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) that is induced to proliferate within the tumour
volume following ionising radiation exposure. Finally, Marples and
Scott are developing a novel molecular switch using CArG elements
derived from this promoter, in combination with a
Cre/loxP site-specific recombination system of the P1
bacteriophage, to generate high level and constitutive expression
of transgenes following activation by therapeutically relevant
radiation doses [ , , ]. This system will be discussed in more detail later.
The promoter of the P21WAF1/CIP1 gene is also
radiation-sensitive and its activation is also increased in tumour
cells [ , , , , , , , ]. Interestingly, expression appears to be independent of p53 status in a variety of tumour types [ , , ]. Furthermore, we have evidence that this promoter is also highly active following exposure of
cell in vitro to hypoxia (unpublished data, 2002). This promoter
therefore, may have several layers of specificity, that is,
tumour-, radiation-, and hypoxia-specific. Research in our
laboratory has shown that WAF-1 can successfully drive expression
of inducible nitric oxide synthase which leads to the generation
of the vasoactive, cytotoxic, and radiosensitising product,
nitric oxide (NO), close to therapeutically relevant
doses. As well as causing significant vasorelaxation in isolated
arteries [ ], it also caused abundant apoptosis in a
murine fibrosarcoma model and a highly significant tumour growth
delay in vivo when used in combination with 20 Gy radiation
[ ]. This promoter is also being used to drive expression of cytochrome P450 enzymes to increase the activation of the
bioreductive drug, AQ4N [ , ].
Radiation-inducible bacterial promoters have also been used such
as RecA, delivered using the anaerobic pathogenic bacterium,
clostridia, as a gene transfer system to target anoxic areas
within tumours. Significant increases in β-galactosidase
activity and TNF-α secretion was seen following 2-Gy
irradiation [ , , ]; fractionation of the radiation
dose lead to repeated gene induction.
Lastly, a retrovirus gene trap screening identified c-IAP2 as an
X-ray-inducible gene with radiation-sensitive NFkB binding sites.
Construction of a plasmid with four tandem repeats of the NFkB
binding site driving the expression of the apoptotic suicide gene
BAX, resulted in significant cell kill following a
therapeutically relevant dose of 2-Gy X-rays [ ].

## Heat-inducible promoters
Hyperthermia is known to improve the response of tumours to
radiation and chemotherapeutic treatment [ ]. The
cellular response to hyperthermia is associated with the
synthesis of heat shock proteins (HSP). Strategies are now being
developed to combine hyperthermia with gene therapy by using the
promoter of the HSP70B gene to selectively activate therapeutic
transgenes following hyperthermia treatment, thereby controlling
the location, duration, and level of expression of the
therapeutic transgene. MRI-guided ultrasound is also being used to
accurately focus gene activation [ ]. The HSP70B promoter has been used to drive expression of TGF-β in an adenoviral
construct [ ]; HSV-tk, where sensitivity to GCV in a mouse mammary cancer cell line was increased more than 50,000
times [ ]; HSV-tk/cytosine deaminase fusion gene and a replication-competent E1B-attenuated adenoviral vector
[ ]; and IL-12 in combination with radiation
[ , ]. The HSP70B promoter appears to be highly active and a 200–950-fold increase in reporter gene expression was observed when additional heat shock elements (HSE) were introduced to the HSP70 promoter with a 1–2°C decrease in the activation temperature [ ]. Two very elegant constructs have now been developed which incorporate
elements from the HSP70 promoter. Emiliusen et al and Lipinski
et al have developed constructs which incorporate effective
feedback loops which can enhance transgene expression and immune
response [ ] or inhibit transgene expression in normal cells expressing wild-type p53 [ ]. These will be discussed in more detail later. Interestingly, electromagnetic fields have
been reported to activate the HSP70 promoter and could possibly
be used as switches to regulate transgenes for cancer gene
therapy purposes [ ]. This has already been achieved with another stress-inducible promoter, Gadd153. The promoter from
this gene was placed upstream of the TNF-α gene and
delivered using magnetite cationic liposomes (MCLs). In nude
mice, these constructs induced cell death throughout much of the
tumour area on heating under an alternating magnetic field as a
result of a 3-fold increase in TNF-α production compared
with that of a nonheated tumour [ ].

## Drug-inducible promoters
As already mentioned many tissue/tumour-specific
promoters are often weak and are therefore less effective than
constitutive promoters. Much work has therefore focused on
developing promoters which are both strong and regulatable
exogenously. The use of tetracycline (tc)-responsive promoters
is probably best researched. Two systems exist; the
allosteric-off system or the allosteric-on system which have been
described in detail by Harrington et al [ ]. A tc
inducible promoter has been used to drive expression of
HSV-tk in breast carcinoma cells and increased the IC50
for GCV by 50 fold, although bystander effects were not enhanced
[ ]. Both IL-2 and IL-1β converting enzyme (ICE) have been shown to be tightly regulated, respectively, in human
melanoma cells [ ] and in a rat brain tumour model
[ ] in vivo using a similar approach. However, the real beauty of this system has been to selectively regulate transgene
expression in certain tissues by combining with tissue/tumour-specific promoters. A replication-incompetent adenovirus, which has the glial fibrillary acidic protein coupled to a minimal CMV promoter, has been constructed to drive
expression of a tc-controlled transactivator. High levels of
expression were reported in cells of glial origin and expression
was tightly controlled by the addition of tc. This system is both
glial-specific and allows for repression of ectopic gene
expression [ ]. Both a parvovirus and an adenovirus have been constructed to combine cell-type specificity with high-level
regulated expression for prostate tissues using the ARR2BP
promoter [ ] or for hepatoma cells using a liver-specific promoter [ ]. In a similar study, Rubinchik et al [ ] have placed the tc transactivator gene under the control of the ARR2PB promoter and an FASL fusion gene under the
control of a tc responsive promoter, within a single construct.
Not only is the expression of this apoptotic related gene FASL
restricted to prostate cancer cells and is regulatable by the tc
analogue, doxycycline, but also, in vivo studies confirmed that
systemic delivery of this vector was well tolerated at doses that
were lethal for the FASL controlled by a CMV promoter. Overall,
tc promoters show high-level inducibility compared to other
inducible promoters and when combined with other tissue- and
tumour-specific elements, they can be highly inducible and
specific.
Dimerisation switch-on systems are also being developed, which
make use of the immunosuppressive agent, rapamycin, and again
this area has been reviewed by Harrington et al [ ].
Rapamycin has been used to control regulation of adenoviral
vectors where inhibition of tumour growth was seen following
subcutaneous injection into the human fibrosarcoma, HT1080
[ ].
As well as tc, there is now much interest in the use of estrogen
response elements (EREs) which are responsive to estrogens and can be
controlled by antiestrogens, such as tamoxifen. EREs have been used to
drive expression of the E1a and E4 units in response to
estrogens-generating conditionally replicative adenoviruses, selective
for ER-positive breast cancer cells, which can also be modulated by the
addition of tamoxifen [ ]. When these EREs were combined with hypoxia response elements, these viruses can kill ER-positive breast cancer cells or cells growing under hypoxic conditions [ ].
Lastly, a series of papers have described the use of the multidrug
resistance (mdr1) gene promoter which harbours drug-inducible
response elements to drive expression of a reporter gene [ ] and TNF-α within a retroviral construct both in vitro in mammary and colon carcinoma cell lines [ ] and in vivo in MCF-7 mammary xenografts [ ]. Chemotherapy regulation by doxorubicin or vincristine showed a 25-fold increase in TNF-α secretion within the xenografts and was more effective in inhibiting tumour growth than constitutively TNF-α-expressing vectors. More recently, Walther et al [ ] have shown that the mdr1 promoter also harbours heat-inducible elements.

## STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING THE EFFICIENCY OF WEAK TISSUE/TUMOUR-INDUCIBLE PROMOTERS
The transcriptional activity of the tissue-specific elements used as
promoters for gene therapy is often too weak to generate adequate
concentrations of transgene product in target cells. The dilemma is
how to achieve high levels of transgene expression without
compromising specificity. As mentioned previously, several elegant
strategies have been developed which combine both inducible and
tissue/tumour-specific elements, thereby increasing transcriptional
activation while allowing tissue specificity to be retained.
Furthermore, other systems have been developed which are
tissue-specific but also highly active by encouraging positive
feedback loops incorporating strong transcriptional activators.
In one approach, a weak tissue-specific promoter (vWF or
gastrointestinal-specific sucrose-maltase) initiates
transcription of both the transgene and a gene encoding a
VP16-LexA fusion protein ( ). This protein, in
turn, interacts with LexA binding sites inserted upstream of the
tissue-specific promoter, leading to transactivation and enhanced
transcription. Repeated cycles of this amplification lead to
very high levels (14–100 fold) of tissue-specific expression
[ ]. An alternative strategy using a GAL4/VP16 fusion protein to enhance the weak tumour-specific CEA promoter achieved
similar amplification of the reporter genes LacZ or
GV16 [ ]. This concept has been further developed by using a tissue-specific promoter (PSA) to drive expression of
GAL4 derivatives fused with up-to-4 VP16 activation domains. By
incorporating up-to-5 GAL4 binding sites upstream of the reporter
gene (firefly luciferase) 800-fold amplification was achieved
[ ].
 The Cre/loxP system offers a different approach to the
enhancement of tissue-specific promoter activity
( ). Target cells are transfected with a
plasmid incorporating the therapeutic transgene separated from a
strong constitutive promoter by a “stop” cassette enclosed by
two loxP sites. Cotransfection with a site-specific Cre
gene driven by the tissue-specific promoter generates Cre, which
excises the stop cassette, bringing the therapeutic transgene
under the control of the constitutive promoter [ ]. This system has been used to achieve therapeutic levels of transgenes
in mouse tumours in vivo with a high degree of tissue
specificity. CEA-driven expression of Cre together with
expression of lox-HSV-tk caused significant suppression
of tumours in mice treated with GCV, without significant side
effects [ , ]. CEA-driven expression of Cre also achieved cytotoxicity in tumours in mice transfected with cytosine deaminase and dosed with the 5-FU precursor, 5-FC, and this was
reflected in enhanced overall survival. Diphtheria toxin (DT) has
also been used therapeutically in growth hormone (GH)-producing
pituitary tumours; the DT gene was activated via the
Cre/loxP system driven by the GH promoter [ ]. Cre/loxP has also been used to increase HSV-tk
transgene expression following expression of Cre via the
radiation-inducible CArG elements [ , ].
 Another approach that has a potential for tumour-specific
activation incorporates specificity for mutated p53 [ ]. In this study, a double recombinant adenovirus consisting
of two independent expression cassettes was constructed; one
controlled expression of the E. coli nitroreductase gene
via an hsp70 promoter containing Lac1 binding sites, which was
capable of binding a p53-inducible lac repressor, incorporated
into the second expression cassette. This resulted in growth
inhibition of human tumour xenografts with mutated p53 following
exposure to the prodrug, CB1954, but not in tumours with
wild-type p53 status.
Lastly, high-level tissue-specific expression of a directly cytotoxic
protein, gibbon ape leukemia virus hyperfusogenic envelope protein
(GALV-FMG), has been achieved in melanoma cells by elegantly driving
both GALV and the gene for heat shock factor 1 (HSF-1) from a human
tyrosinase promoter, preferentially activated in melanoma cells
[ ]. Promoter activity initiates low-level expression of the toxic transgene, but also HSF-1, which binds to a heat shock binding
element upstream of the tyrosinase promoter. This enhances promoter
activation and completes the transcriptional feedback loop
( ). This strategy has achieved long-term
eradication of melanomas in mice [ ].
 

## CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
The ultimate goal of all currently used cancer therapy is to target
damaging events to tumour cells while sparing normal tissues
sufficiently that they can recover to an adequate functional level;
this applies equally to gene therapy. However, while conventional
therapies rely on one, or at the most two, targeting characteristics
such as spatial deposition, biochemical pathway specificity, or
cellular proliferation, there is no theoretical limit to the number of
elements that can be incorporated into a gene therapy strategy to
confer tumour specificity. There is also the potential for controlling
temporal expression of transgene products in tumours much more
precisely than the concentration of conventional anticancer agents.
The first opportunity for targeting specificity is at the level of
vector delivery. There is currently an immense amount of research
activity in this area (beyond the scope of this review) reflecting the
recognition that advances in this process are critical to unleashing
the potential of all the recent developments in transcriptional
control. Direct injection systems have been important in providing the
proof of principle for several gene therapy strategies, but however
sophisticated these may become, the number of accessible sites will
always be limited and perhaps more importantly the crucial problem of
disseminated disease cannot be addressed.
As detailed in this review, the possibilities for targeting via
transcriptional control are endless. It is unlikely for most
cancers that any one promoter will offer the ideal combination of
interrelated characteristics: high level specificity to
endogenous or exogenous factors, silence in the absence of these
factors and sufficient strength to induce the therapeutic
transgene many fold. In any event, the use of a single
promoter/transgene combination fails to exploit one of the main
advantages of gene therapy: the ability to custom design, even
within a single plasmid, a combination of diverse elements that
confer exquisite spatial and temporal specificity for an
individual tumour type. It may even be possible using
gene/protein array technology to tailor this specificity to an
individual patient's tumour. It could be envisaged that
promoters specific to the tumour tissue type could be combined
with factors inducible by the tumour microenvironment and/or
exogenous control elements (eg, radiation). This has already been
successfully achieved in vivo by combining cell cycle and
tyrosinase promoters [ ], HREs and KDR/E- selectin
promoters [ ], and HREs and the AFP promoter [ ]. Furthermore, these could be combined with elements incorporating strong promoters/enhancers in positive feedback loops giving
progressively stronger and more specific transgene expression
[ , ] or by using a Cre/loxP system [ ]. The packaging of such complex constructs, ideally within a single construct, will require a more thorough understanding of the control domains from individual promoters such that multiple
copies of the elements that confer tumour specificity can be
incorporated while eliminating those sequences that permit
expression in nontarget tissues.
A vital issue when considering the clinical application of any
gene therapy protocol is the basal expression of the transgene.
Many of the papers discussed in this review have failed to
adequately assess basal-level expression in other tissues
following systemic delivery in an appropriate in vivo model.
Highly sensitive systems now exist for assessing promoter
leakiness in vitro [ ] and recent developments in imaging technology have permitted whole animal detection of fluorescent
reporter gene products in small rodents [ , ]. Although this technology is theoretically applicable in man, considerable caution must be exercised in extrapolating from animal data. It
is likely in early trials that transgene activation by a given promoter combination will need to be assessed using a nontoxic reporter gene, particularly where tissue-specific promoters are to be used. This use of a surrogate marker is an additional and important advantage of gene therapy over conventional
chemotherapy that can be applied even at the level of the
individual patient.
Finally, the therapeutic transgene product will usually be an
enzyme, so the opportunity arises to achieve additional
specificity at the level of enzyme biochemistry or enzyme product
characteristics. For example, reductive enzymes can metabolise
bioreductive prodrugs, such as AQ4N [ , ] or tirapazamine [ ], specifically in a hypoxic environment thereby adding an additional layer of tumour specificity even after transductional and transcriptional targeting. A similarly
enhanced specificity can be achieved, where the final product of the enzyme specifically sensitises hypoxic tumour cells [ , ]. Alternatively, a powerful approach for tight regulation has been to make the activity of the apoptotic target
gene, E2F1, tamoxifen-dependent by fusing it to the
ligand-binding domain of the estrogen receptor; massive apoptosis
was seen upon activation by tamoxifen [ ].
The rate of development of gene therapy over the past decade has
been dramatic and if this continues, it is reasonable to
speculate that the next decade will see widespread introduction
of this new technology to clinical practice. We can anticipate a
level of anticancer efficacy combined with normal tissue sparing
that few small molecules have yet achieved and with the current
advances in systemic gene delivery this is a very real
possibility. By combining the very best of cancer gene therapy
strategies with current chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment
regimens, real patient benefit with reduced toxicities should be
achievable.

## Acknowledgments

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Prof Stephanie McKeown for her critical
reading of this manuscript.

## References