eLifeElife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC4951197PMC4951197.1495119749511972743176310.7554/eLife.13087130871Genes and ChromosomesHuman Biology and MedicineResearch ArticleTranscription-coupled genetic instability marks acute lymphoblastic leukemia structural variation hotspots
HeinäniemiMerjahttp://orcid.org/0000-0001-6190-3439 ; ; , ), while the onset of overt disease requires additional genetic alterations. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of ETV6-RUNX1 (also known as TEL-AML1) positive acute leukemias suggested that the secondary lesions are predominantly caused by off-target activity of the RAG complex ( ). In a similar fashion, the expression of the AID complex in more mature B cells is implicated in genomic instability and development of lymphomas ( ; ; ). To date, WGS in leukemia have been reported from several pre-B-ALL subtypes ( ; ; ; ), resulting in a comprehensive characterization of the underlying genetic alterations. Therefore, the research focus on leukemia genetics is moving into characterization of the mechanisms by which these lesions occur and the consequences of the resulting clonal heterogeneity.
Antigen receptor genes are assembled from discrete gene segments by RAG-mediated V(D)J recombination at sites of recombination signal sequences (RSS) during early lymphocyte development ( ; ). Cells incorporate multiple strategies to control the action of the RAG complex to appropriate genomic loci: the expression of RAG1 and RAG2 is limited to precursor stages of lymphocytes, the activity of the complex is attenuated during S-phase of cell cycle, and RAG cleavage is directed towards RSS pair containing sequences ( ). The engagement of RAG2 is further limited by the histone modification H3K4me3, which is typically found at transcription start sites (TSS) ( ; ). However, RSS and RSS-like motifs are found only at around 7–40% of breakpoints at SV (genomic imbalance, translocation or inversion) sites ( ; ). Furthermore, the RSS motifs and H3K4me3 occur frequently in the genome suggesting that additional features, possibly even additional complexes including AID ( ), are relevant for the genetic instability underlying leukemia SV.
In lymphomas, AID off-target effects localize to intragenic super-enhancer (SE) and promoter areas characterized by transcription from both strands, i.e. convergent transcription (convT) ( ). Notably, VH gene segment recombination by RAG at the IgH locus coincides with sense- and antisense transcription ( ), which could be relevant also at off-target sites. Secondly, stalled polymerases, which are found at exons, R-loops and actively paused at TSS regions ( ), expose single stranded DNA, recruiting AID via Spt5 binding ( ). Furthermore, the polymerase complex displaces nucleosomes completely or partially (the H2A/H2B moiety), which in vitro promotes cleavage by RAGs ( ). Despite these intriguing findings, the relevance of transcription-coupled processes has not been systematically characterized, and the clinical relevance of RAG and AID expression in the different leukemia subtypes remains unclear. RNA polymerases engaged into primary transcription across the genome can be measured using Global-Run-On sequencing (GRO-seq) ( ). Therefore, this method is ideally suited to distinguish features of transcription at SV sites, including convT and RNA polymerase stalling. To this end, we acquired the first patient profiles of nascent transcriptional activity in leukemic blasts representing seven cytogenetic subgroups and performed integrative analysis of various genome-wide profiles and patient transcriptomes.

## Results

## Integrative analysis of transcription and genomic instability in leukemic cells
Transcriptional activity from ALL cells representing seven different pre-B-ALL cytogenetic subtypes was assayed using GRO-seq (both primary patient and cell line samples, see and Materials and methods), and jointly analyzed with WGS data from the ETV6-RUNX1 (51 cases; ), high hyperdiploid (HeH, 16 cases; ), hypodiploid (20 cases; ) and MLL-rearranged (22 cases at diagnosis and 2 relapses; ) subtypes of precursor B-ALL. GRO-seq signals and breakpoint data are shown in at the CDKN2A locus, a significant SV site in childhood ALL ( ).
To systematically identify regions with high frequency of SV across the genome, topologically-associated domains (TADs) were retrieved based on HiC data from B-lymphoid lineage cells ( ). TADs reflect the three-dimensional structure of chromatin. These natural boundaries to transcriptional activity were used to divide the chromosomes into subregions for analysis (see and Materials and methods). To link typical transcriptional activity patterns and hotspots of genomic instability, we related the breakpoint frequency with chromatin domains, as illustrated in (see also ). 
 
 
 
 

## The most frequent SV regions encompass novel transcribed regions
An increasing trend of transcriptional activity was observed when TADs were compared based on breakpoint frequency quartiles (see Materials and methods, ). TADs with highest SV count are shown in (see also and ). The PAX5 and ZCCHC7 genes are located within a TAD region with 20 breakpoints in the ETV6-RUNX1, 4 in HeH and 6 in MLL subtype (excluding the MLL-fusion itself) ( ). Frequent SV were also found in TADs with no annotated coding genes ( , 20 breakp in ETV6-RUNX1; , 4 breakp in HeH), yet GRO-seq exhibited transcription signal spanning several hundred thousand base pairs in both regions, typical of long non-coding transcripts ( ). There was evidence of non-coding transcripts, based on Refseq and GENCODE, but none matched the same location (refer to for all genomic coordinates shown; a TAD with frequent SV in hypodiploid subtype is shown in ). The nascent ALL transcriptomes thus reveal novel transcribed regions as recurrent SV-associated hotspots in the two most common ALL subtypes.

## Convergent transcription and RNA polymerase stalling are prevalent at genomic regions with frequent breakpoint events
The prevailing notion is that active transcription start sites (TSS) in pre-B cells are susceptible to RAG off-targeting due to the H3K4me3 chromatin mark ( ; ). However, we noticed that the recurrent breakpoints often lied several kb downstream of TSS, as highlighted in (see inserts), and coincided with simultaneous transcription on both strands, ie. convT spanning a minimum of 100 bp. In closer examination of the signal data from leukemia SV hotspots, many of these regions likely correspond to transcription from intragenic enhancers that generate enhancer RNAs (eRNA) that are typically a few kb in size ( ). In agreement, a significant enrichment of breakpoints in enhancers overlapping with convT was observed (hypergeometric test P=0.00012 for intergenic and P=4.6e-08 for all enhancers identified based on eRNA signal, see Materials and methods and ). An overlapping eRNA transcript at the TSS region of PAX5, confirmed by the active enhancer chromatin marker H3K27ac, led to convT extending nearly 20 kb, with SV sites located between 3.7–9.7 kb downstream of the TSS ( , see insert).
Secondly, convT in the vicinity of intragenic breakpoints was often associated with localized elevation in the GRO-seq signal, as exemplified at the ZCCHC7 and RAG loci ( , see also ). The observed signal features were highly reproducible between biological replicates and shared among a subset of cytogenetic groups ( ). We hypothesized that they represent RNA polymerase II (Pol2) stalling events. Previous analyses of Pol2 stalling have focused on promoter proximal regions ( ). To examine such events genome-wide and across gene bodies, we developed a general analysis approach that identifies change points within gene regions and reports those with high elevation in the signal level (see Materials and methods and for the identified regions) ( ). As additional confirmation, we analyzed stalling from Pol2 ChIP-seq in the REH and Nalm6 cell lines ( ). To distinguish between different Pol2 complexes ( ), antibodies against the serine 2 or serine 5 phosphorylated Pol2 were used (see Materials and methods). 
 
 
 
 
 

Genome-wide analysis of convT and Pol2 stalling (see Materials and methods and ) substantiated the relevance of these observations: considering the breakpoint frequency per TAD size, the top ranked TADs in each ALL subtype represented genomic regions with abundant convT and Pol2 stalling ( ). Significant enrichment was confirmed for the upper quartiles (hypergeometric test P=0.00038 in ETV6-RUNX1, P=0.00018 in hyperdiploid, P=0.028 in hypodiploid and P=0.00004 in MLL-rearranged). The increased overlap was found for breakpoints with and without RSS motifs (denoted as R-breakp and NR-breakp, see and Materials and methods) and it was preserved when total transcriptional activity was considered ( ). Furthermore, the distinct transcriptional profile of embryonic stem cells (ES) had lower overlap ( ).
For comparison, chromatin segmentation of B-lymphoid cells was similarly analyzed (see and ). TADs with high number of breakpoints consistently had significant overlap with chromatin segments representing active transcription (refer to ), supporting a transcription-coupled mechanism for the observed genetic instability. We then distinguished regions with overlap to the transcriptional features defined here within active promoters and enhancers. Comparing these against the TAD SV frequency quartiles ( ), as before, revealed the most pronounced enrichment in convT/Pol2 stall overlapping regions.
Next, we set out to define what may link convT and Pol2 stalling regions with AID and RAG recruitment. The signal feature detection for convT (as in ) and Pol2 stalling (as defined here) enables this on a genome-wide level.

## R-loop formation and convergent transcription co-occur with Pol2 stalling
RNA polymerases are expected to stall at regions harboring R-loop forming sequences (RLFS) ( ; ). The sensitivity of DNA sequence to form R-loops can be computationally predicted ( ) (see Materials and methods). These RLFS motif containing regions exhibited a significantly higher overlap with Pol2 stalling sites when compared to random intragenic regions ( , empirical P<0.001 in B-lineage and ES cells). A highly concordant local RLFS motif density and GRO-seq signal profile was observed across gene regions ( ). The profiles peaked near TSS, where the presence of RLFS motifs led to a significant elevation in the median GRO-seq signal level ( , 2.1-fold increase in B-lineage cells, Wilcoxon rank sum test P<2.2e-16, 95% CI 2.1–2.3). As a second mechanism, collisions due to convT may halt transcription ( ) in a dynamic and cell-specific manner. Accordingly, higher antisense signal at convT regions (see Materials and methods) increased the overlap with Pol2 stalling sites on the sense strand ( ), intriguingly exceeding that observed for RLFS motifs ( ). 
 
 

As an additional experimental validation of R-loops, we used DNA-RNA-immunoprecipitation sequencing (DRIP-seq) results from ES cells (see Materials and methods) that correspond to detection of DNA-RNA hybrids ( ). The 2.1-fold elevation in median DRIP-seq signal confirmed that RLFS motifs favor DNA-RNA hybrid formation ( , Wilcoxon rank sum test P<2.2e-16, 95% CI 2.0–2.1, see for each replicate). Moreover, DRIP-seq quantification showed 1.7-fold higher median signal at convT-positive TSS regions ( , Wilcoxon rank sum test P<2.2e-16, 95% CI 1.6–1.7). These results demonstrate that transcription stalling occurs at RLFS and convT regions in mammalian cells that associates with R-loop formation based on evidence from ES cells.

## Transcriptional-coupled instability at RSS-independent SV hotspots
A mechanistic link between R-loops and AID off-targeting has been established in lymphomas ( ). With this in mind, we investigated regions where off-targeting could occur via R-loops by focusing on breakpoints without RSS-motifs (data shown in figures represents the 416 ETV6-RUNX1 NR-breakp, refer to and for all statistical results). We observed significant genome-wide enrichment of breakpoints with the investigated transcriptional features ( and F, 29% overlap with Pol2 stalling within gene regions, binomial test P=4.088e-07; 9% genome-wide overlap with convT, P=5.16e-07). This enrichment of breakpoints to convT and Pol2 stalling regions was significant across a wide range of transcriptional activity (refer to ). Co-occurrence of breakpoints within a 1-kb window was used to distinguish non-recurrent (one breakpoint) and recurrent (more than one breakpoint) events ( ). Breakpoint recurrence was found to increase the overlap with both Pol2 stalling ( )and convT ( ). The mean overlap observed in 1000-fold random sampling (grey bars) confirmed the specificity of the overlap (note that Pol2 stalling is analyzed from intragenic regions only). The breakpoints in Pol2 stalling sites were concordant with analysis using Pol2 ChIP-seq (by 78%) and they co-localized with both Ser2 and Ser5 phosphorylated forms of Pol2 complex ( ). A schematic model summarizing the possible underlying mechanisms based on these results is shown in . The distinct integrated genomic profiles are collectively depicted at the TPI1 loci, representing an SV hotspot with the highest number of NR-breakp in ETV6-RUNX1 cases ( , see also and ). At the breakpoint region, both RLFS and convT are visible and overlap the elevated DRIP-seq signal measured from ES cells.

## Access to RAG cleavage sites increases at Pol2 stalling regions
Next, we focused on deciphering whether the transcriptional features associate with RAG off-targeting. We hypothesized that locally depleted nucleosomes around the Pol2 complex ( ) may enhance access to RSS/RSS-like sequences. To this end, we retrieved DNAse hypersensitivity data from ENCODE ( ; see Materials and methods). DNAse-seq signal peaks were significantly wider when overlapping with Pol2 stalling sites ( ). A 876 bp (95% CI, 855–896) increase was observed in B-lymphoblastoid cells and 412 bp (95% CI, 395–429) in ES cells (Wilcoxon rank sum test P<2.2e-16 in both cell types, see also ). This was reproducibly observed using peaks located within gene TSS, body or end regions ( ). We selected TSS regions with RSS motifs for closer examination and found that Pol2 stalling sites at these TSS were significantly wider than at other TSS ( ), with a difference of 259 bp (95% CI, 79–475 bp, Wilcoxon rank sum test P=0.0024). Thus, wide Pol2 stalling increases the likelihood of RSS motif occurrence in accessible chromatin. The width of stalling did not correlate positively (Pearson’s correlation −0.11; 95% CI, −0.09 to −0.13) with the transcription level of the corresponding gene, indicating that stalling events, and not just active transcription, are important. We further analyzed the top 5% of widest Pol2 stalling regions by comparing them to widest peaks from DNAse hypersensitivity and ChIP for histone marks (see Materials and methods). The odds ratios for the overlap are visualized as a heatmap (see , OR>10 is shown in darkest color tone, refer to for more statistics). In addition to DNAse-seq and Pol2 ChIP peaks, the H3K4me3 was found among the top category, confirmed also by ChIP-seq data acquired from REH and Nalm6 cells ( ). 
 

Next, the ETV6-RUNX1 R-breakp (335; 156 intragenic) were analysed for the genome-wide overlap with the transcriptional features. A 66% overlap was found with Pol2 stalling at intragenic regions (binomial test P<2.2e-16) and a 44% genome-wide overlap with convT (binomial test P<2.2e-16, see also for joint analysis across pre-B-ALL subtypes). The overlap with Pol2 stalling had high agreement between GRO-seq and ChIP-seq ( ) and it increased at recurrent R-breakp ( ). In addition, overlap with convT ( ) was considerable (91%) at regions with 4 or more breakpoints. In comparison, regions with RLFS motifs or annotated TSSs showed less marked enrichment (up to 36%) ( ). Similar, as for NR-breakp, the significant overlap with transcriptional features was preserved at a wide range of expression levels ( ). A schematic model that links the obtained results with vulnerability to RAG cleavage is shown in . As in , the different profiles are depicted at the SV hotspot with the highest number of R-breakp ( 
BTG1 locus, see also ). Further examples in show RSS-dependent clustered deletions as defined in ( ). Overall, the presence of both convT and Pol2 stalling best characterized the recurrent ETV6-RUNX1 breakpoints with RSS motifs (101/148; compared to 20/70 without motif), with 90% (43/48, empirical P=0.002) co-occurrence at intragenic sites (see also ).

## AID expression marks pre-B-ALL lacking common cytogenetic changes
To elucidate the potential for RAG and AID mediated genetic instability in leukemia blasts, we compared the expression of the genes RAG1, RAG2 and AICDA across a transcriptome data set with 1382 pre-B-ALL patients ( , ). Among samples with annotation of cytogenetic subtype (N = 1008), the ETV6-RUNX1 cases (N = 153) exhibited 10.8-fold higher median level of RAG1 expression relative to other cases with annotated cytogenetic type (Wilcoxon rank sum test P<2.2e-16, 95% CI 8.6–13.6-fold, ) and also high RAG2 expression ( ). Moreover, AICDA expression was also detected in a specific subset of patients. It was highest in the 'other' group (N = 267) that does not carry recurrent fusion genes or karyotypic changes ( , no statistical evaluation was performed as majority of signal values were below detection level of 4.2 in log2 scale). As comparison, we carried out unsupervised analysis of sample similarities based on the global gene expression profiles. To visualize these molecular subtypes in two dimensions, we utilized the t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE) method ( ) (see Materials and methods, refer to for coordinates). The t-SNE map places highly similar samples in close proximity. The discrete expression states (high; low; not detected) of RAG1, RAG2 and AICDA were evident in distinct groups ( , respectively, the annotated ALL subtypes are colored in ). Upon further examination, high levels of AICDA expression were particularly prevalent in sample clusters that corresponded to high risk cases from two independent ALL datasets (hypergeometric test P=7.19e-47, , see for patient characteristics). The highest level of AICDA expression was presented by a relapsed ALL case, and the RAG1 and RAG2 expression levels were 3.09- and 1.93-fold increased at relapse, respectively. Based on the integrated patient profiles, the expression of AID and RAG is distinct in leukemia subtypes and clinical prognosis groups. 

## Discussion
Next generation sequencing technologies have enabled the elucidation of mechanisms regulating transcription and the analysis of genetic alterations across different cancer genomes. Precursor leukemias are unique in that they often harbor SV and have relatively few mutations ( ). Recently, a functional role of transcription in genomic instability has begun to emerge ( ; ). The maturing lymphoid cells are vulnerable to off-target effects downstream of RAG and AID activity that is required for immune gene rearrangement ( ; , , ). The present study represents a systematic investigation of SVs detected in acute pre-B-cell leukemia using WGS in the context of global transcriptional activity in leukemic cells. We identified specific transcriptional features, namely convergence of transcription and Pol2 stalling, as key factors underlying secondary genetic lesions frequently seen in precursor B leukemias.
Pol2 stalling and convT strongly associate with recurrent breakpoint sites across the genome and at gene loci implicated in leukemia such as CDKN2A and PAX5 ( ). While protein-coding secondary hits required in disease progression have been recognized for some time, our integrative analysis identified several putative long non-coding RNAs and eRNAs, which merit further investigation. Earlier work has linked eRNAs generated from intragenic superenhancers with AID-mediated instability in lymphomas ( ), proposing that convT leads to arrested transcription, in agreement with experimental evidence from yeast cells ( ). Similarly, it has been shown that Pol2 stalling and R-loops expose ssDNA for AID targeting ( , , ). We show for the first time that leukemia breakpoints similarly display significant enrichment to enhancers overlapping convT. We further demonstrate a link between convT and elevated R-loop levels and Pol2 stalling on a genome-wide level, with evidence from normal and leukemic human cells. These mechanisms of transcription-coupled genetic instability, earlier implicated in lymphomas ( ; ; ) and breast cancer ( ), therefore have relevance in multiple different cancer types.
Breakpoints carrying RSS-like recognition motifs for RAG1 showed high overlap with the vulnerable regions as defined by convT and Pol2 stalling. Therefore, we propose that also RAG1 access to its target sites is related to the fidelity of elongation. Previous studies investigating motif recognition and genome-wide binding profiles of RAGs have shed light on the mechanisms how this complex is recruited to DNA ( , ); however these studies have been carried out using normal cells or mouse models that limit their integration with patient WGS data. The chromatin mark H3K4me3 typically found at active promoters serves as a docking site for RAG2 ( , ). RAG-mediated cleavage further requires recognition of RSS motifs by RAG1 ( ). Our results revealed that TSS that carry breakpoints with an RSS motif differ from unaffected TSS by the presence of unusually wide Pol2 stalling. We show that Pol2 stalling sites, in general, have increased DNA accessibility. Further, the top 5% of widest stalling regions are characterized by unusually broad DNAse hypersensitive regions and H3K4me3 signal. Unique regulation of Pol2 pausing and elongation has been recognized to be related to broad H3K4me3 domains across a wide variety of cell types ( , ). Together, these properties of Pol2 stalling sites may favor both the recognition and cleavage by the RAG complex.
In this study, we developed a genome-wide approach to capture Pol2 stalling events across gene bodies using change points analysis. This extends previous approaches to detect promoter-proximal pausing events (reviewed in ) to analysis of slowing down of Pol2 within the full transcribed region. The feasibility of our approach was confirmed by high overlap of detected regions with RLFS rich regions that represent known structural obstacles to the progression of transcription ( ; ). Furthermore, analysis of Pol2 stalling from Pol2 ChIP-seq profiles acquired in pre-B-ALL cells had high agreement with the GRO-seq profiles. The slowing of Pol2 upon transition from initiation to elongation, measured by the Pol2 Ser5 phosphorylation, occurs at AID hypermutation sites within the IgH-V region ( ). We show that this type of Pol2 stalling had high overlap with leukemia breakpoints.
While RAG has a well-established role in pre-B cells, expression of AID represents a recently discovered threat for lymphoid precursor genome integrity. ( ) showed that infection-triggered attenuation of IL-7 receptor signaling led to strong AID expression, thus exposing pre-leukemic cells to additional off-targeting events. Moreover, a negative effect on patient survival and increased relapse frequency were observed in high AICDA expressing leukemia patients ( ). We found that high expression of RAG1/2 or AICDA is markedly distinct between different subtypes of pre-B-ALL at the leukemia state. Prevalent AICDA expression was a distinguishing feature of high risk pre-B-ALL cases, in line with the previous data ( ). Furthermore, the molecular profiles of patients belonging to the cytogenetic subtype designated as 'other', had high similarity, placing them in close proximity on the t-SNE map. This genetically heterogeneous category of rare cytogenetic types had a distinct elevation in AICDA expression. Further investigation of the WGS profiles focusing on this patient category may shed light on whether AICDA expression could serve as a putative underlying factor that may spur the diversity of DNA lesions in these patients. Similarly, the over ten-fold higher RAG1 expression could also be relevant for the prevalent development of leukemia carrying the ETV6-RUNX1 initiating fusion. The RAG locus is under complex regulation of local chromatin looping by SATB1 ( ) that controls silencing and activating regulatory elements and was shown to directly control the elevated RAG1 expression in mice. The enhancer activity in patient blast cells, as captured here in the nascent transcriptomes, will help understanding the regulation of such key loci in detail.
As more data on SV becomes available across cancers, further efforts should be made to elucidate the contribution of different complexes in transcription-coupled genomic instability and to develop strategies for dampening their levels and activity. Translation of these measures into clinical practice could impact treatment efficacy by decreasing clonal heterogeneity and relapse risk.

## Materials and methods

## GRO-seq samples
Primary bone marrow or blood samples from pediatric precursor B-ALL patients that represented different cytogenetic subtypes were used for GRO-seq assay (refer to for cytogenetic and blast count data). The study was approved by the Regional Ethics Committee in Pirkanmaa, Tampere, Finland (#R13109). The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki, and a written informed consent was received by the patient and/or guardians. In addition, three ALL cell lines (REH, Kopn-8 and Nalm-6) representing different genetic subtypes (ETV6-RUNX1 fusion, MLL rearrangement and 'other') were included to complement the dataset. REH (ACC-20), Nalm6 (ACC-128), and Kopn8 (ACC-552) cell lines were obtained from the Leibniz-Institut DSMZ-Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH (Germany). Mycoplasma status was defined negative by PCR (PCR Mycoplasma Test Kit I/C, PromoCell GmbH, Germany) for all cells. The cell lines were authenticated by PCR of known fusion genes: ETV6-RUNX1 in REH, MLL-MLLT1 in Kopn8, and the lack of recurrent fusions in Nalm6. In addition, the generated genome-wide results can be used in verification of cell line specific markers. We reasoned that a collection of samples that represent both primary blasts and cell lines of different cytogenetics types (and genetic complexity) would be ideal to capture the patterns of transcriptional activity in the lymphoid lineage and leukemic cells. Furthermore, 4–8 replicates were collected from a subset of samples to ensure reproducibility of the results ( ). In cell culture studies, same cell lines with similar conditions are defined as biological replicates, as nuclei were extracted from temporally independent experiments. For nuclei extractions in co-culture experiments, same cell lines with different culture conditions but with same time points were processed simultaneously. For example, total of eight extractions from REH cells were performed ('Sample name' column), in six slightly different culture conditions ('Cell culture type' and 'Time point (h)' columns), and with two replicate samples collected for two conditions in independent experiments ('Biological replicate' column). There were no technical replicates in the sense that multiple nuclei extractions would have been made from the same biological replicate. Patient samples (N = 7) collected represent different cytogenetic subtypes and were used as additional confirmation at individual gene loci: for most subtypes N = 1, except hyperdiploid N = 2; ETV6-RUNX1 is represented also by the REH cell line; and replicate samples were generated for Patient 1 that correspond to cultured and freshly isolated cells. (Re-analyzed GRO-seq data: lymphoblastoid data is from three donors; ESC data is from two independent experiments where several technical replicates were pooled). For cell culture conditions and further details, see . The nuclei isolation was performed as previously described ( ), yielding ~1–5×106 nuclei per condition. The REH, Nalm6, lymphoblastoid and ES cell samples that represent very deeply sequenced data, were used in the genome-wide analysis ( , GEO accession numbers for deposited pre-B-ALL data: GSE67519 and GSE67540).

## GRO-seq assay
Cells were suspended in 10 ml of swelling buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 3 mM CaCl2 and 2 U/ml SUPERase Inhibitor [Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA] RNAse inhibitor) and let swell for 5 min. The cells were pelleted for 10 min at 400 × g and resuspended in 500 µl of swelling buffer supplemented with 10% glycerol. Subsequently, 500 µl of swelling buffer supplemented with 10% glycerol and 1% Igepal was added drop by drop to the cells while being vortexed gently. Nuclei were washed twice with 10 ml of swelling buffer supplemented with 0.5% Igepal and 10% glycerol, and once with 1 ml of freezing buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.3, 40% glycerol, 5 mM MgCl2 and 0.1 mM EDTA. Nuclei were counted and centrifuged at 900 × g for 6 min and suspended to a concentration of 5 million nuclei per 100 µl of freezing buffer, snap-frozen and stored -80°C until run-on reactions. The nuclear run-on reaction buffer (NRO-RB; 496 mM KCl, 16.5 mM Tris-HCl, 8.25 mM MgCl2 and 1.65% Sarkosyl (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) was pre-heated to 30°C. Then each ml of the NRO-RB was supplemented with 1.5 mM DTT, 750 μM ATP, 750 μM GTP, 4.5 μM CTP, 750 μM Br-UTP (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, Texas, USA) and 33 μl of SUPERase Inhibitor (Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA). 50 μl of the supplemented NRO-RB was added to 100 μl of nuclei samples, thoroughly mixed and incubated for 5 min at 30°C. GRO-Seq libraries were subsequently prepared as previously described ( ). Briefly, the run-on products were treated with DNAse I according to the manufacturer’s instructions (TURBO DNA-free Kit, Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA), base hydrolysed (RNA fragmentation reagent, Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA), end-repaired and then immuno-purified using Br-UTP beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, Texas, USA). Subsequently, a poly-A tailing reaction (PolyA polymerase, New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) was performed according to manufacturer`s instructions, followed by circularization and re-linearization. The cDNA templates were PCR amplified (Illumina barcoding) for 11–14 cycles and size selected to 180–300 bp length. The ready libraries were quantified (Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit on a Qubit fluorometer, Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and pooled for 50 bp single-end sequencing with Illumina Hi-Seq2000 (GeneCore, EMBL Heidelberg, Germany). GRO-Seq reads were trimmed using the HOMER v4.3 (http://homer.salk.edu/homer) software (homerTools trim) to remove A-stretches originating from the library preparation. From the resulting sequences, those shorter than 25 bp were discarded.

## ChIP-seq assay
ChIP-seq was performed using antibodies against the Ser2 and Ser5 phosphorylated forms of Pol2 and against the histone mark H3K4me3 in REH (N = 1) and Nalm6 cells (N = 2). Ser5 phosphorylation is present before the Pol2 is released to active elongation and it diminishes within the gene body and is greatly reduced downstream of the poly(A) site, where Ser2 phosphorylation is predominantly found ( ). For ChIP, 40 million cells were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde for 10–15 mins. The reactions were quenched by adding glycine to a final concentration of 125 mM, and the cells were centrifuged and washed twice with ice-cold PBS. For ChIP 5 or 10 million cells were used (Pol2 or H3K4me3, respectively). Nuclei were extracted by washing cell pellet twice with 1 ml of MNase buffer (10 mM Tris ph 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630 [Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany], 1x protease inhibitor cocktail [PIC, Roche, Basel, Switzerland], 1 mM PMSF [Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA]). Nuclei were spun down (1500 × g, +4°C, 5 min) and suspended into 90 µl of MNase buffer supplemented with 5 mM CaCl2 and 0.1% Triton-X. Different amounts of MNase (0.5–20 U; #88216, Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was added to the nuclei in 10 µl volume and incubated at 37°C for 10 mins. To stop the reaction, 100 µl of 2x Lysis buffer was added to the reaction (1% SDS, 40 mM EDTA, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.1) and samples were sonicated using Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 5 cycles (30 s - 30 s) to break the nuclei. The lysate was cleared by centrifugation and supernatant was diluted with RIPA buffer (for Pol2 antibodies, 1X PBS, 1% NP-40, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, PIC) or dilution buffer (for H3K4me3; 20 mM Trix-HCl pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5% TritonX, PIC). The diluted lysate was pre-cleared by rotating for 2 h at 4°C with 60 µl 80% CL-4B sepharose slurry (GE Healthcare, UK). Before use, sepharose was washed twice with TE buffer, blocked for 1 hr min at room temperature with 0.5% BSA and 20 µg/ml glycogen in 1 ml TE buffer, washed twice with TE and brought up to the original volume with TE. The beads were discarded, and 1% of the supernatant were kept as ChIP input. The protein of interest was immunoprecipitated by rotating the supernatant with 3–5 µg antibody overnight at 4°C. Antibodies against Ser2P (cat# ab5095, RRID:AB_304749) and Ser5P (cat# ab5131, RRID:AB_449369) were purchased from Abcam (Cambridge, MA, USA). The Ab was captured using 25 µl blocked Protein G Sepharose 4 Fast Flow (GE Healthcare, UK) and rotating the sample for 2 hr at 4°C. Sepharose was blocked as CL-4B above, except that it was rotated overnight at 4°C. The beads were pelleted (1 min, 1000×g, 4°C) and the supernatant discarded. The beads used to bind Ser2P/5P Ab were washed five times with 5X LiCl IP wash buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 1% NP-40, 1% Sodium deoxycholate) and twice with TE in 0.45 µm filter cartridges (Ultrafree MC, Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA). The beads used to pull down H3K4me3 Ab were washed three times with wash buffer I (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA), twice with buffer II (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA) and buffer III (10 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.4, 250 mM LiCl, 1% IGEPAL CA-630, 1% Na-deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA), once with TE + 0.2% TritonX and twice with TE. Immunoprecipitated chromatin was eluted twice with 100 µl elution buffer (TE, 1% SDS). The NaCl concentration was adjusted to 300 mM with 5 M NaCl and crosslinks were reversed overnight at 65°C. The samples were sequentially incubated at 37°C for 2 h each with 0.33 mg/ml RNase A and 0.5 mg/ml proteinase K (both from Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The DNA was isolated using the ChIP DNA Clean & Concentrator (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing libraries were prepared from collected DNA by blunting, A-tailing, adaptor ligation as previously described ( ) using barcoded adapters (NextFlex, Bioo Scientific, Austin, TX, USA). Between the reactions, the DNA was purified using Sera-Mag SpeedBeads (Thermofisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Libraries were PCR-amplified for 15–16 cycles, size selected for 230–350bp fragments by gel extraction and single-end sequenced on a Hi-Seq 2000 (Illumina) for 50 cycles.

## Processing of GRO-seq, ChIP-seq, DRIP-seq and HiC sequencing reads
The GRO-seq data from lymphoblastoid cells (GSE39878, ; GSE60456, ), ES cells (GSE41009, ), DRIP-seq data from ES cells (GSE45530, ) and HiC data from human lymphoblastoid GM12878 cells (GSM1551571, GSM1551572, GSM1551574, GSM1551575; ) were downloaded from SRA (raw reads) and processed similarly as the new samples: reads were quality controlled and subsequently aligned to the human hg19 reference genome version. Specifically, the quality of raw sequencing reads was confirmed using the FastQC tool (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) and subsequently bases with poor quality scores were trimmed (requiring a minimum 97% of all bases in one read to have a min phred quality score of 10) using the FastX toolkit (http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit/). Samples sequenced on multiple lanes were pooled after quality control. Read stacks were collapsed from ChIP-seq files using fastx (collapse). The Bowtie software (bowtie-0.12.9v0.1.x) ( ) was used for aligning the GRO-seq, ChIP-seq and DRIP-seq reads to the human genome (version hg19). Up to two mismatches and up to three locations were accepted and the best alignment was reported for each read. For the GRO-seq reads this step was preceded by removing reads mapping to rRNA regions (AbundantSequences as annotated by iGenomes) and discarding reads overlapping with so-called blacklisted regions that represent unusual low or high mappability as defined by ENCODE, ribosomal and small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) loci from ENCODE and further manually curated for the human genome (bed file with sequences is provided in ).

## HiC
Reads from paired-end sequencing were separately filtered and aligned to the genome using bowtie. The reads were checked for MboI restriction sites before doing the alignments and the sequences after GATC sites were trimmed out to improve mappability. The HOMER v4.3 (http://homer.salk.edu/homer) software was used in further processing of HiC-data. Paired-end reads were connected and read pairs with exact same ends were only considered once and read pairs were removed if they were separated by less than 1.5× the estimated sequencing insert length to remove likely continuous genomic fragments or re-ligation events. Paired-end reads originating from regions of unusually high tag density were left out by removing reads from 10 kb regions that contain more than five times the average number of reads. Background model for normalization of HiC-data was generated with 50 kb resolution. The topological domains were identified using the HOMER command’ findHiCDomains.pl’ using a resolution of 50 kb. This analysis is based on a statistic referred to as the ‘directionality index’, which describes the tendency of a given position to interact with either the chromatin upstream or downstream from its current position.

## GRO-seq
Combined tagDirectories from GRO-seq samples were made by pooling the sequencing data for each cell and sample type with fragment length set to 75. The findPeaks.pl program in the The HOMER v4.3 software (http://homer.salk.edu/homer) was used to identify de novo transcripts from GRO-seq data using pooled sequencing reads per sample type. Deeply sequenced REH, Nalm6 and lymphoblastoid cells were used to define signal features in B-cell lineage and separate analysis was carried out for ES cells (see ). Gaps were allowed at non-mappable regions (-style groseq -uniqmap).

## ChIP-seq
Peaks were identified using findPeaks (-style histone –size 1000).

## Signal tracks
BedGraph and bigWig files were generated with reads in each sequencing experiment normalized to a total of 107 mapped reads. The bigWig files were further converted to track hubs and visualized as strand-specific, overlaid MultiTracks as a custom Track Hub in the UCSC Genome browser.

## Genomic regions used in analyses
The hg19 genome version from UCSC (available from iGenomes) was used to specify chromosome lengths in the analysis. The gene annotations from Refseq and UCSC known gene tables were retrieved using the UCSC Table Browser (hg19, GRCh37 Genome Reference Consortium Human Reference 37 (GCA_000001405.1)). Unique transcript coordinates were used in analysis, that is, any transcripts sharing the same start and end coordinate were considered together. The TSS regions were defined as +/- 1 kb regions around the annotated start coordinate. Only transcripts mapping to canonical chromosomes were kept, also those on chrM were removed.

## Enhancers
Super-enhancer coordinates from CD19+, CD20+ and HSC cells were obtained ( ) and merged for visualization of tracks. De novo enhancer detection was performed from the deeply sequenced REH, Nalm6 and lymphoblastoid cells based on the transcript identification result. Transcripts with length <15 kb and the characteristic bidirectionality or co-localization with enhancer locations defined using DNAse and chromatin marker data were used to distinguish eRNAs (see for data).

## Analysis of SV in context of chromosome subregions
TADs reflect the three dimensional structure of chromatin, forming natural boundaries that divide the chromosomes into sub-regions. To identify TADs with highest frequency of breakpoints, HiC-data analysis was performed using HOMER 4.3. As our goal is to generate a natural division of the genome into sub-regions that are relevant in context of transcriptional regulation, this approach is superior to arbitrarily assigning sub-regions based on fixed windows. The pre-B-ALL breakpoints and annotation data ( ; ; ; ) were analyzed in context of TADs. Specifically, TADs were overlapped with subtype-specific breakpoints ( presents TADs sorted based on the count of breakpoints). Subsequently, TADs with breakpoints were divided into quartiles based on breakpoint frequency per bp to analyze enrichment of feature overlap that exceeds the genomic background level. To obtain the total transcribed area width within each TAD, the TAD coordinates were overlapped with the detected GRO-seq transcripts (bedtools intersect -wao). The combined SV data represents in total 1680 breakpoints and is the most comprehensive collection of pre-B-ALL SV that we are aware of.

## Chromatin segmentation data
BroadChromHMM chromatin segmentations were obtained from GM12878 and H1 ES cells including the following segment types: 1_Active_Promoter, 2_Weak_Promoter, 3_Poised_Promoter, 4_Strong_Enhancer, 5_Strong_Enhancer, 6_Weak_Enhancer, 7_Weak_Enhancer, 8_Insulator, 9_Txn_Transition, 10_Txn_Elongation, 11_Weak_Txn, 12_Repressed", 13_Heterochrom/lo, 14_Repetitive/CNV, 15_Repetitive/CNV. The sizes of the segments of each type were used to calculate the total span from the genome. Each segment type was then overlapped with a combined bed file specifying convT and Pol2 stalling regions. Overlapping and non-overlapping pieces were returned and analyzed separately (bedtools intersect, followed by bedtools subtract with the overlapping pieces given as parameter b).

## Distinguishing breakpoints based on RSS-like motifs or recurrence
Two types of breakpoints were distinguished based on RSS motif annotation to result in the following region assignment: regions containing a consensus RSS/heptamer sequence motif were used to categorize co-localized breakpoints as putative RSS-dependent breakpoints (R-breakp: 447 in total, 335 in the ETV6-RUNX1 subtype), while regions devoid of recognition sequence were used to classify RSS-independent lesions (NR-breakp: 938 in total, 416 in the ETV6-RUNX1 subtype). Regions harboring unresolved breakpoints were left out from majority of analysis performed (285 regions harboring 295 breakpoints in the ETV6-RUNX1 subtype that were mainly isolated and non-recurrent). The RSS assignment for other breakpoints was obtained in the following way: the resolved breakpoints were extended to both sides by 10 bp, resulting in a 21 bp region. The MEME analysis in for 708 resolved breakpoints from ETV6-RUNX1 patients was replicated and comparable sequence logos to that reported previously were obtained and used to annotate RSS status. A p-value cut-off of 0.003 was chosen for the MEME motif scanning based on FIMO analysis of the ETV6-RUNX1 data.
To evaluate recurrence, the breakpoint ends at 1 kb distance were stitched together to form regions (each with at least one breakpoint, see ), annotating the number of breakpoints inside (BEDTools mergeBed –d 1000 –n). Overlap of breakpoint regions with RLFS, TSS, convT and Pol2 stalling regions were obtained using BEDTools with 1 kb window. The overlap frequencies were compared to random sampling of similarly sized genomic regions. Further comparisons were performed separating recurrent (>1 breakpoint per stitched region) and non-recurrent regions, and with increasing the cut-off for the number of breakpoint events per stitched region. The same was repeated for breakpoints within genes binned into four categories based on their transcription level. The transcript regions were quantified using data from REH, Nalm6, and lymphoblastoid cells, and normalized by RPKM. The maximum expression value was to divide transcripts into quartiles based on the expression level.

## Signal feature analysis
The visual examination of SV sites served as the first step to define transcriptional features of potential relevance. This motivated the analysis of regions with overlapping transcription from both strands (convT) and local elevations in the signal (Pol2 stalling), with detailed definitions given below. For genome-wide analysis of signal feature overlap with SV, feature tracks from several samples were combined. This approach was deemed most appropriate to address the dynamic nature of transcriptional activity and to avoid missing regions that due to high recurrence of SV may be deleted in subset of leukemic cells studied.

## ConvT
ConvT regions were identified as transcripts that overlap on opposite strands by at least 100 bp (as in ). Subsequently, a combined bed track was created for the leukemic and lymphoblastoid samples using bedTools mergeBed command (-d 0). The data from ES cells (GSE41009) served as an independent control. The level of convT was quantified using the HOMER program analyzeRNA.pl from both strands separately and normalized by region size. The minimum value obtained per region (comparing + and - strands) was assigned as convT level.

## Pol2 stalling
Change-point detection is the mathematical problem of finding abrupt changes in a signal, typically applied in context of time series ( ). Both approximate and exact methods exist for estimating the point at which the statistical properties of a sequence of observations change. The analysis of changepoints in the signal mean was carried out using functions implemented in the R package ‘changepoint’ ( ). An exact method with favorable computational cost was recently introduced in context of time-series data ( ). This method called PELT was selected to detect the changepoints from scaled (zero mean, equal variance) signal profiles calculated at 50-bp resolution (generated bedGraph files are available under the GEO accession GSE67540). The analysis was performed separately for each gene, using Bayesian Information Criterion as a penalty term with the changepoint counted as a parameter (function cpt.mean with parameters penalty = 'BIC1', method ='PELT'). The input dataset representing primary transcription activity at gene loci was generated by overlapping the GRO-seq signal file strand-specifically with transcript coordinates from UCSC and Refseq (see genomic regions used). The analysis only considered regions with annotation match (in minimum 5% of identified transcript covered by annotation; a minimum of 50% overlap with the identified transcript; annotated and detected starts do not differ more than 10 kb). In order to define Pol2 stalling sites, the signal level between changepoints were compared to the median across the whole gene, and intervals above 90% quantile were reported as stalled. For ChIP-seq, this cut-off was relaxed to 80% due to higher background signal. Notice also that there is no strand information based on ChIP-seq. The analysis was carried out separately for each of the deeply sequenced (REH, Nalm6 and lymphoblastoid) GRO-seq datasets and ChIP-seq replicates and subsequently merged to one bed file specifying stalled region coordinates (bedTools merge –d 100). The ES GRO-seq dataset GSE41009 was processed similarly and used as an independent control. To study whether there was a relationship between the stalled region size overlapping TSS regions and R-breakp frequency, the following intersects were calculated using BEDTools (intersectBed -wa | uniq): (i) overlap of Pol2 stalling sites and TSS regions harboring R-breakp and (ii) overlap of Pol2 stalling sites and TSS regions not harboring R- or NR-breakp. Subsequently, the sizes of Pol2 stalling sites in each coordinate file were calculated and the Wilcoxon rank sum test used for evaluating statistical significance for the difference in Pol2 stalling width. Secondly, top 5% widest Pol2 stalling sites were identified and compared to top 5% widest peaks from ChIP-seq and DNAse-seq profiles (see below).

## Signal comparison at gene regions
The HOMER command annotatePeaks.pl was used to create a transcriptional profile of active genes (RPKM > 0.5) in ES, lymphoblastoid and REH cells by scaling the histogram to each region (i.e 0–100%) using a bin size of 100. RLFS motif density was calculated across genes with the BEDtools coverage tool. A density plot representing RLFS frequency across gene regions was then obtained as above.

## DRIP-seq and RLFS motif data for R-loop detection
Data from replicate DRIP-seq experiments with two different restriction enzyme digestions (GSE45530) were used in the analysis. Log2 signal levels were quantified using HOMER at TSS regions. Statistical significance was estimated separately for the two different restriction enzyme digestions. RLFS motif search was performed using the software QmRLFS-finder that predicts R-loop forming sequences based on structural models of known sequences ( ). The fasta input file was generated by extracting DNA sequences based on the hg19 genome version.

## DNAse-seq data and additional ChIP-seq data to characterize wide Pol2 stalling events
The DNAse-seq peaks were first overlapped with the Pol2 stalling regions detected based on the GRO-seq signal. Only peaks with a score above 15 were considered. The width of the overlapping peaks was then compared to the width of peaks with no overlap using the Wilcoxon rank sum test. Next, top 5% widest peaks were obtained from the DNAse-seq and ChIP-seq data (refer to ). The overlap with 5% widest Pol2 stalling regions was subsequently evaluated using the BEDTools fisher tool.

## Transcriptome data
Gene expression data from pre-B-ALL studies was combined from microarray datasets retrieved from the NCBI GEO database as part of a data collection representing both healthy and malignant samples hybridized to hgu133Plus2 genome-wide microarrays (in preparation for submission). In total, 1382 pre-B-ALL samples were included. Probe-level quality control was performed to exclude samples with very high difference in data location or distribution as measured by median and interquartile range of raw probe intensities. Samples that passed this filtering were processed using the RMA probe summarization algorithm with probe mapping to Entrez Gene IDs (from BrainArray version 18.0.0, ENTREZG), followed by bias correction using the R package ‘bias’. The Barnes-Hut-SNE algorithm (computationally faster approximation of t-SNE) implementation from the R package ‘Rtsne’ ( ) was used to discover near-optimal representation of sample distances in two dimensions (using parameter values perplexity 30 and theta 0.5) using 15% genes with highest variance. The t-SNE method belongs to dimensionality reduction methods that include also traditional methods such as Principal Component Analysis. The main objective of the method is to accurately place highly similar samples (here based on the high-dimensional gene expression profile) to close proximities in lower dimensions. The result can be visualized in two-dimensions as a scatter plot that allows observing sample groups based on the molecular profiles. According to our experience, this method provides better separation between sample groups compared to more traditional methods for large heterogeneous sample collections. To identify whether a given gene was expressed or unexpressed in a sample, a Gaussian finite mixture model (testing equal and variable variance models, best fit chosen by BIC) was fitted by expectation-maximization algorithm to the probe signals (R package ‘mclust’, version 4.3, ).

## Statistical tests
Statistical significance was estimated using several tests to ensure reliability, including tests that rely on assumptions about data distributions and empirical tests that rely on randomization of data points. The statistical tests used, exact values of N, definitions of center and dispersion and precision measures are indicated in Results, in the respective supplementary tables or figure legends.

## Binomial test
Test for independent random trials with binary (success/failure) outcome, with replacement. This test was used to assess the statistical significance of observing breakpoint events overlapping a transcriptional feature (Pol2 stalling or convT). Success in population was defined using 1 kb windows across the genome. The windows overlapping the studied feature was divided by the total number of 1 kb windows analyzed. E.g. in the Pol2 stalling analysis, the total number of windows overlapping Pol2 stalling regions divided by this number of 1 kb windows within gene coordinates (included to the input for the change point analysis), define probability of success.

## Hypergeometric test
Test for independent random trials with binary (success/failure) outcome, without replacement. This test was used to assess the statistical significance of observing greater than or equal overlap frequency between breakpoints and an annotated set of genomic regions. E.g. to test for enrichment of breakpoints inside convT-positive enhancers, convT-positive enhancers with breakpoints define sample success; all enhancers with breakpoints population success; and sample taken is all convT-positive enhancers (from the population of all enhancers). The related Fisher’s test (implemented in BEDTools fisher) was used to obtain similar statistics with odds ratios.

## Wilcoxon rank sum test (Mann-Whitney test)
A nonparametric two-sided Wilcox test was performed to estimate whether two samples (continuous values, unknown distribution) come from the same population (R function wilcox.test). This test was applied to quantified signal levels compared between categories.

## Random sampling
This test can be used to obtain an empirical estimate of random overlap frequencies. The sampling was performed 1000-fold within the same genomic context as used in the analysis. To estimate the significance of overlap between stitched breakpoint regions with e.g. convT regions, the stitched regions were allocated random genomic coordinates, thus preserving the size distribution and breakpoint event frequencies within stitched regions. The observed random region overlap was used as the empirical p-value estimate. Further, the z-test was used to evaluate whether there was evidence to reject the null hypothesis that the observed feature overlap value would belong to the empirical distribution obtained.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100003125Suomen Kulttuurirahasto
00150214 to Merja Heinäniemi, Olli Lohi.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100007753Itä-Suomen Yliopisto to Merja Heinäniemi.
The Finnish Cancer Foundation to Merja Heinäniemi.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100004756Emil Aaltosen Säätiö to Merja Heinäniemi.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100002341Suomen Akatemia
276634 to Merja Heinäniemi.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100004371Tampereen Yliopisto to Susanna Teppo, Saara Laukkanen, Thomas Liuksiala, Olli Lohi.
Sigrid Juselius Foundation to Minna U Kaikkonen.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100002341Suomen Akatemia
277816 to Olli Lohi.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100004012Jane ja Aatos Erkon Säätiö to Olli Lohi.
Paulo Foundation to Olli Lohi.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100005744Lastentautien Tutkimussäätiö to Olli Lohi.
Competitive State Research Financing of the Expert Responsibility area of Tampere University Hospital to Olli Lohi.

## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Ville Hautamäki for comments on signal analysis methods and the EMBL Gene Core sequencing team for the sequencing service provided. The work was supported by grants from the Emil Aaltonen Foundation, Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation, Finnish Cancer Foundation, Academy of Finland, Sigrid Juselius Foundation,Finnish Cultural Foundation, Paulo Foundation, Foundation for Pediatric Research, the Competitive State Research Financing of the Expert Responsibility area of Tampere University Hospital, University of Tampere and University of Eastern Finland.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
The authors declare that no competing interests exist.

## Author contributions
MH, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
TV, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
ST, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
MUK, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
MB-L, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
JM, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
HN, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
VZ, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
SL, Acquisition of data, Drafting or revising the article.
TL, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
KT, Acquisition of data, Drafting or revising the article.
OL, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.

## Ethics
Human subjects: The study was approved by the Regional Ethics Committee in Pirkanmaa, Tampere, Finland (#R13109). The study was conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki, and a written informed consent was received by the patient and/or guardians.

## Additional files
10.7554/eLife.13087.030Supplementary file 1.

## GRO-seq sample summary.
Description of the patient and cell line GRO-seq samples used in the analysis, including the cell culture conditions, replicate information and the total number of pooled sequencing reads obtained after quality filtering and alignment. A more detailed table for cultured samples with replicate information and accession codes is provided at the bottom. Sample accession codes for already published and re-analyzed GRO-seq data, and additional GRO-seq data displayed in are listed in worksheet 2.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13087.030
10.7554/eLife.13087.031Supplementary file 2.

## Genomic coordinates for regions displayed.
The coordinates of example gene regions displayed in the main and supplementary figures are listed (hg19 human genome version).
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13087.031
10.7554/eLife.13087.032Supplementary file 3.

## Breakpoint hotspot analysis for genes binned by the transcription level.
Hypergeometric test statistics for genes stratified by expression level. Breakpoint overlap with transcriptional features was tested within the binned intragenic regions. Data for ETV6-RUNX1 subtype and all pre-B-ALL subtypes are shown as separate worksheets. Related to and .
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13087.032
10.7554/eLife.13087.033Supplementary file 4.

## Intragenic recurrent SV in ETV6-RUNX1 patients with overlap to vulnerable regions.
The patient and region identifiers for recurrent intragenic SV in ETV6-RUNX1 patients are listed, reporting separately those co-localized with Pol2 stalling or convT regions.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13087.033
10.7554/eLife.13087.034Supplementary file 5.

## Clinical data for patients with high AICDA expression.
Study description, sample identifier, cytogenetic group, age and dataset identifier are listed for the patients within high AICDA expression level. Statistical analysis testing enrichment of detected AICDA expression in high risk studies is summarized in worksheet 2.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13087.034
10.7554/eLife.13087.035Supplementary file 6.

## Custom blacklisted genomic regions.
Blacklisted regions discarded from the analysis that were deemed to represent low-mappability, rRNA and snoRNA loci based on GRO-seq signal. Coordinates refer to the hg19 human genome version.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13087.035

## Major datasets
The following datasets were generated:
Heinäniemi M,Teppo S,Kaikkonen MU,Bouvy-Liivrand M,Lohi O,2015,ALL cells,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE67540,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE67540)
Heinäniemi M,Teppo S,Lohi O,2015,Genome-wide mapping of TEL-AML1 targets in acute leukemia,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE67519,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE67519)
The following previously published datasets were used:
Wang IX,Core LJ,Kwak H,Brady L,Bruzel A,McDaniel L,Richards AL,Wu M,Grunseich C,Lis JT,Cheung VG,2014,RNA-DNA DIFFERENCES IN NASCENT RNA,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE39878,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE39878)
Core LJ,Martins AL,Danko CG,Waters CT,Siepel A,Lis JT,2014,Analysis of transcription start sites from nascent RNA identifies a unified architecture of initiation at mammalian promoters and enhancers,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE60456,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE60456)
Sigova AA,Mullen AC,Molinie B,Gupta S,Orlando DA,Guenther MG,Almada AE,Lin C,Sharp PA,Giallourakis CC,Young RA,2013,Divergent transcription of lncRNA/mRNA gene pairs in embryonic stem cells,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE41009,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE41009)
Ginno PA,Lim YW,Lott PL,Korf I,Chédin F,2013,DNA-RNA Immunoprecipitation sequencing (DRIP-seq) of human NT2 cells,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE45530,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE45530)
Sanborn AL,Rao SS,Huang SC,Durand NC,Huntley MH,Jewett AI,Bochkov ID,Chinnappan D,Cutkosky A,Li J,Geeting KP,Gnirke A,Melnikov A,McKenna D,Stamenova EK,Lander ES,Aiden EL,2014,A three-dimensional map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals prinicples of chromatin looping,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE63525,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE63525)
Sandstrom R,2011,DNaseI Hypersensitivity by Digital DNaseI from ENCODE/University of Washington,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE29692,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE29692)
Shoresh N,2011,Histone Modifications by ChIP-seq from ENCODE/Broad Institute,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE29611,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE29611)
Sandstrom R,2011,CTCF Binding Sites by ChIP-seq from ENCODE/University of Washington,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE30263,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE30263)
Myers R,Pauli F,2011,Transcription Factor Binding Sites by ChIP-seq from ENCODE/HAIB,http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE32465,Publicly available at NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (accession no: GSE32465)

 10.7554/eLife.13087.059Decision letter
ArmstrongScott AReviewing editorMemorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, United StatesIn the interests of transparency, eLife includes the editorial decision letter and accompanying author responses. A lightly edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the most substantive concerns; minor comments are not usually included.
Thank you for submitting your work entitled "Transcription-coupled genetic instability marks acute leukemia structural variation hotspots" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by two peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Reviewing Editor and Jessica Tyler as the Senior Editor.
The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.
Summary:
A series of recent studies demonstrated that genetic diversification during adaptive immune responses of B cells comes with an increased risk of malignant transformation, i.e. when AID, RAG1 and RAG2 target non-immunoglobulin genes. Based on integrative analyses of transcriptional activity (GRO-seq) and genetic lesions (whole genome sequencing), Lohi and colleagues propose a novel scenario to explain how AID and RAG1/RAG2 can be aberrantly targeted to Non-Ig sites and thereby cause genetic lesions that drive malignant transformation.
Essential revisions:
1) The scenario in Figure 6 is potentially interesting but goes far beyond what is supported by the actual data presented in the study. The Discussion section dilutes the main findings by additional speculation. A more detailed discussion of their actual data (instead of what could be gleaned from hypothetical future experiments) would be helpful. There is a lot of speculation on the Results section and in particular around findings that build up to this mechanism and it is not clear how the data/analysis supports these observations.
2) The manuscript is of potential interest to a broader audience but mainly written for expert readers in computational biology. To make this work accessible to a wider group of scientists that are potentially interested in the topic, it would seem to be necessary to explain the rationale for the use of certain methods and techniques in some meaningful detail. For instance, the use of t-SNE blots (as for CyTOF) to correlate AID, RAG1 and RAG2 expression with cytogenetic subtypes is of interest, but not discussed what exactly can be seen in the diagrams and why this method was chosen.
3) Expression of AID and RAG1/RAG2 "markedly distinct between pre-B ALL subtypes": The measurements were performed in fully established ALL clones. The interpretation that different expression levels of AID and RAG1/RAG2 point to a different role of these enzymes in different cytogenetic subtypes is likely incorrect. As in B cell lymphoma, AID and RAG1/RAG2 act together in a multi-step process of clonal evolution towards full transformation. In the fully established leukemia, secondary genetic events and consequences of oncogenic signaling may alter expression levels and obscure the role of AID and RAG1/RAG2 in these leukemia subsets. In addition, the significance of AID and RAG1/RAG2 expression only measured at the mRNA level is unclear. Western blot analyses should be performed if authors feel strongly about documenting different expression levels.
4) Do the proposed transcriptional features of instability at SV-sites coincide with cryptic RSS or minimal RAG1/RAG2 substrates? This would add to mechanistic plausibility of their scenario.
5) For the TAD Analysis: Would TAD definition change if a lymphoid origin cell lines or tissue types were used? The authors divide TADS in quartiles on the basis of number of breakpoints within TADs and study how this correlates with% study of convT at these loci. The size range and density of the TADs can vary greatly (T2). The authors should ensure that TAD size does not confound this analysis.
6) Correlation of 'transcriptional features' such as prevalence of POL2 stalling, DNA sequences that are susceptible to R-LOOP formation and also convergent transcription, with regions that are frequently rearranged in ALL, and in regions with high prevalence of RSS.
7) Whilst there is a notable enrichment against other active promoters for example the 'width' of the 'stalling' region, although what this really represents, as defined from GRO-seq data, is the high density of active RNA polymerases, so is it possible that these represent regions of active transcription.
8) With previous reports showing enrichment of genomic rearrangements at active promoters and enhancers it is not clear whether the observations here are a consequence of transcriptional activity in these regions or an enriched mechanism underpinning the regions that are frequently targeted. The authors should present a global analysis – see statistical review section.
9) A major limitation of the analysis here is that there are not overlapping datasets from the same samples. As the authors have access to direct primary patient cells and cell lines representative of B-ALL their interpretations of the data would significantly benefit from performing RNAseq, POL2 chip, and potentially MNase-seq to support their observations (Pol2 stalling and convergent transcription).
10) Overall there is a clear narrative issue, the dataset is complex and the analysis is not clear nor comprehensive – making it rather hard for the reviewer and in time a reader to comprehensively evaluate the analytical approaches used, as well as, the evaluate the interpretation of the findings, which often render conclusions as facts by citing other papers rather than being supported by the data in itself. It would be very helpful if the authors included a supplemental figure containing a flow chart describing what datasets where put together and which subsets of data were used for which analysis.
11) Results should be interpreted on the basis of their analysis. Conclusions that account or include findings from the literature should be placed in the Discussion section.
12) It would be useful if the authors performed a global analysis- accounting for chromatin segmentation in ALL and considering these features. It would be very interesting to show specifically how the parameters they consider (TAD domains, RNA pol stalling, conv T) correlate with promoters/ active transcription first and then evaluate if these metrics show significant deviations (enrichment) in the areas most widely affected by genomic rearrangement in ALL and how do these differ between frequent breakpoints and rare breakpoints?
13) Perhaps incorporating metrics that include expression of genes in those regions in B-ALL might strengthen this analysis and provide additional insights into the proposed mechanism. Whilst it may be really difficult to obtain such additional RNA seq data – the authors could consider using gene expression metrics from prior SNP array studies of distinct ALL subtypes.
10.7554/eLife.13087.060Author response
Essential revisions:

1) The scenario in Figure 6 is potentially interesting but goes far beyond what is supported by the actual data presented in the study. The Discussion section dilutes the main findings by additional speculation. A more detailed discussion of their actual data (instead of what could be gleaned from hypothetical future experiments) would be helpful. There is a lot of speculation on the Results section and in particular around findings that build up to this mechanism and it is not clear how the data/analysis supports these observations.
We thank the reviewer for the suggestions on how to improve the presentation of the obtained results in context of previous work. We have reorganized the text to make a clear distinction between these. In addition, the data related to the mechanisms of how transcriptional features may contribute to genetic instability have been split into two figures ( focusing on R-loops and presenting data on DNA access). Instead of a separate model figure, we have included summary panels into these figures. New experimental data and analysis from B-lymphoid and pre-B-ALL cells have been added to support the observations, as further detailed below.
2) The manuscript is of potential interest to a broader audience but mainly written for expert readers in computational biology. To make this work accessible to a wider group of scientists that are potentially interested in the topic, it would seem to be necessary to explain the rationale for the use of certain methods and techniques in some meaningful detail. For instance, the use of t-SNE blots (as for CyTOF) to correlate AID, RAG1 and RAG2 expression with cytogenetic subtypes is of interest, but not discussed what exactly can be seen in the diagrams and why this method was chosen.
We thank the reviewers for acknowledging the interest to a broad audience. We have expanded the rationale for method selection in the Results text and Materials and methods section, as suggested, and explain more in detail what is shown in the diagrams in the respective figure legends, to help the reader follow the analysis performed.
3) Expression of AID and RAG1/RAG2 "markedly distinct between pre-B ALL subtypes": The measurements were performed in fully established ALL clones. The interpretation that different expression levels of AID and RAG1/RAG2 point to a different role of these enzymes in different cytogenetic subtypes is likely incorrect. As in B cell lymphoma, AID and RAG1/RAG2 act together in a multi-step process of clonal evolution towards full transformation. In the fully established leukemia, secondary genetic events and consequences of oncogenic signaling may alter expression levels and obscure the role of AID and RAG1/RAG2 in these leukemia subsets. In addition, the significance of AID and RAG1/RAG2 expression only measured at the mRNA level is unclear. Western blot analyses should be performed if authors feel strongly about documenting different expression levels.
The reviewer raises an interesting point. The clinical relevance of comparing RNA expression in samples from fully established leukemia (i.e. diagnostic samples) between subtypes, has been addressed and supported with patient data in the earlier work by Swaminathan et. al 2015 Nat Immunol. Specifically, in their Results section Swaminathan et al. write “We correlated AICDA mRNA expression in patients at diagnosis with overall and relapse-free survival. […] Notably, higher-than-median AICDA expression was strongly indicative of poor overall patient survival(P = 0.026; Supplementary , left [shown using The ECOG E2993 trial that included 215 patients: 106 bone marrow samples and 109 peripheral blood samples]). Likewise, higher-than-median RAG1 mRNA abundance was indicative of shorter relapse-free and overall survival of patients with ALL (Supplementary , center and right). In a comparison of AICDA mRNA expression in matched sample pairs at diagnosis and relapse, for most patients, AICDA mRNA abundance was increased at relapse (Supplementary [shown using 49 patients relapsed after successful initial therapy from COG P9906 trial]). These findings suggested that AICDA expression at diagnosis can be used to predict the outcome of patients with ALL.”
As these results convincingly show the relevance of mRNA level of RAG and AICDA in clinical context, we did not include the same analysis to this manuscript. Further confirmation on protein level would be important for further elucidating their functional role at the overt disease step, however such study is beyond the scope of this manuscript.
Here, we provide a first comparison of AID and RAG expression across the cytogenetic subtypes of pre-B-ALL and in context of unsupervised clustering of molecular profiles. Our result shows that specific pre-B-ALL cytogenetic subtypes differ in the prevalence of high RAG or high AICDA mRNA expression that has not been studied before. In particular, the finding that high AICDA expression is prevalent in the subtype designated “other” by the cytogenetic profile is novel. Moreover, we also observed that samples belonging to the high risk subtype often had high AICDA expression, providing further confirmation to conclusions presented in the earlier study regarding clinical relevance.
We have clarified the distinction between the analysis SV sites in context of transcriptional features, and the differences in RAG and AID expression between the subtypes, by placing the expression profile analysis at the end of the manuscript (paragraph starting “To elucidate the potential for RAG and AID mediated genetic instability in leukemia blasts, we compared the expression of the genes RAG1, RAG2 and AICDA across a transcriptome data set”).
4) Do the proposed transcriptional features of instability at SV-sites coincide with cryptic RSS or minimal RAG1/RAG2 substrates? This would add to mechanistic plausibility of their scenario.
The distinction between R-breakp and NR-breakp (no RSS or minimal motif match) was perhaps not explicit from our previous Methods description. We have modified the text with a more detailed explanation on how the RSS status was assigned. in the previous version compared the overlap of the transcriptional features separately for R-breakp and NR-breakp sites in using the ETV6-RUNX1 data on SV (WGS dataset from Papaemmanuil et al. 2014). These data are now presented in and (no RSS vs. RSS/cryptic RSS, respectively, see also showing TAD analysis stratified by RSS status), to make the distinction more clear. Further, we extended the analysis by performing the RSS motif search for all breakpoint data used, based on hexameric motifs identified by Papaemmanuil et al. We have included the description in the Methods text and the results were included to Tables and , and .
5) For the TAD Analysis: Would TAD definition change if a lymphoid origin cell lines or tissue types were used? The authors divide TADS in quartiles on the basis of number of breakpoints within TADs and study how this correlates with% study of convT at these loci. The size range and density of the TADs can vary greatly (T2). The authors should ensure that TAD size does not confound this analysis.
There appears to be a misunderstanding regarding the division of TADs into quartiles. This division was done based on the number of breakp per bp, i.e. considering the TAD size as indicated in the legend “The percentage of TAD spanned by convT in pre-B/B-lymphoid cells is summarized as boxplots from TADs divided into quartiles based on number of breakpoints per bp”. The example TADs shown represent TADs with highest absolute number of breakpoints. We apologize for the possible confusion and have clarified this in the text and figure legend.
To have better consistency across data sources, we repeated the TAD analysis using HiC data from deeply sequenced B-lymphoblastoid cells that recently became available and substituted these results to and (and relevant supplementary results). The results remained essentially the same, typically slight changes in coordinates occurred at TAD boundaries. Compared to the previous, 65% of B-lineage TADs were similar by size using a strict 95% identity cut-off. shows the TAD regions from chr1 ( ) as an example: results from pooled data across cell types is shown above and B-lineage data below (the TAD with several breakpoints is the 3rd from left). 
6) Correlation of 'transcriptional features' such as prevalence of POL2 stalling, DNA sequences that are susceptible to R-LOOP formation and also convergent transcription, with regions that are frequently rearranged in ALL, and in regions with high prevalence of RSS.
The referee suggests a valid approach that is very similar to what we have carried out based on enrichment metrics. As the data is essentially discrete (presence/absence of feature or breakpoint counts), we carried out statistical analysis using binomial and hypergeometric tests. In parallel, empirical estimation of random overlap frequency served as an additional confirmation.
Analysis that stratifies breakpoint sites based on the recurrence (frequent rearrangements in ALL) was presented in for the ETV6-RUNX1 subtype (now shown in ). Specifically, breakpoints were binned into hotspots using a 1 kb distance. We added new data to confirm that similar results were obtained by considering all WGS datasets included to our study (included to and ). This analysis reveals whether higher overlap with transcriptional features can be found at highly recurrent SV sites. Following the suggestion from the reviewer, we extended the analysis of breakpoint hotspots with analysis of R-loop forming sequences (refer to and ). The RLFS sequence motif alone did not display a strong enrichment trend for recurrent sites. However, we found that convT can contribute to R-loop generation based on DRIP-seq data ( ), and that convT overlap was increased at recurrent breakpoints. Although the experimental evidence for R-loops used in our analysis comes from non-B-lineage cells (ES cells), the biochemical mechanism for recruitment of AID or similar complexes binding to R-loops is unlikely to be cell-specific. Overall, our results are consistent with the mechanism proposed for convT/Pol2 stalling mediated AID recruitment in lymphomas (Pavri et al. 2010, Meng et al. 2014, Wang et al. 2014), and we have included experimental and sequence-level motif data to support a mechanistic link between genetic instability and convT and Pol2 stalling. The new and address the difference between overlap of SV sites carrying RSS-motifs and those lacking them, respectively.
7) Whilst there is a notable enrichment against other active promoters for example the 'width' of the 'stalling' region, although what this really represents, as defined from GRO-seq data, is the high density of active RNA polymerases, so is it possible that these represent regions of active transcription.
We thank the referee for raising this important question. A transcript that would have uniform signal in GRO-seq from its TSS to TTS would correspond to a genomic region where the Pol2 elongation rate is uniform. However, this is rarely observed (reviewed in Jonkers and Lis, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 16, 167–177, 2015). A Pol2 stalling region corresponds to elevated signal within an actively transcribed region. As described in the review by Jonkers and Lis, Pol2 has been documented to slow down e.g. at exons (to facilitate splicing), R-loops (difficult structurally to transcribe) and is actively paused at TSS regions (regulated by phosphorylation, this type of pausing typically occurs within the first 50-200 bp). Each of these events are visible as a signal increase in GRO-seq. Our changepoint analysis assigns a relative increase in the signal (cut-off at highest 90%) within a transcribed region as a Pol2 stalling site, which corresponds to local slowing of Pol2. Notice that the signal data is scaled and analyzed separately for different gene regions.
One important control that we are observing real stalling events is presented in the new (previously in ): the detected Pol2 stalling events overlap RLFS motifs more often than expected by random. RLFS contribute to the stalling event itself due to slow progression at R-loops. We also show data (now in ) that the presence of RLFS is visible as statistically significant elevation of GRO-seq signal. As additional confirmation, these results were reproduced using B-lineage and ES data (see and ).
As additional experimental data that could assist in interpreting the GRO-seq signal profile, we performed Pol2 ChIP-seq using antibodies against the Ser2 and Ser5 phosphorylated forms. Ser5 phosphorylation is present before the Pol2 is released to active elongation (Zhou et al. 2012). Using a similar analysis of the signal profile to detect Pol2 stalling from the ChIP-seq profile, we found highest overlap of RSS-motif containing SV sites with the Ser5 form, typically considered as the paused/stalled Pol2. However, also locally elevated Ser2 phosphorylated Pol2 has been found to be relevant for genomic instability (Hatchi et al. 2015): in this case the stalling typically occurs at gene ends. We have included new references to literature in the Introduction, Methods and Discussion to assist in interpretation of the signal profiles presented.
The width of Pol2 stalling was analyzed since displaced nucleosomes in vicinity of Pol2 could enhance access to RSS sites and thereby RAG cleavage events. To support this conclusions, we performed additional analysis (see new ) to characterize more in detail the stalling regions. DNA accessibility, based on DNAse-seq peaks, was increased at Pol2 stalling sites (new ). Specifically, we compared peaks from different gene regions, by dividing them based on overlap with Pol2 stalling. Consistently, the peak width and intensity was higher for the peaks overlapping Pol2 stalling. We carried out the analysis with both B-lineage and ES cell data, to support our rationale that the general properties of the Pol2 stalling sites are cell-type-independent (see also comment (9)).
As an additional control, we correlated the width of Pol2 stalling at the TSS region and the expression level (rpkm within the gene body). There was weak negative correlation, indicating that the vulnerability of TSS with wide stalling is not simply due to higher expression level.
8) With previous reports showing enrichment of genomic rearrangements at active promoters and enhancers it is not clear whether the observations here are a consequence of transcriptional activity in these regions or an enriched mechanism underpinning the regions that are frequently targeted. The authors should present a global analysis – see statistical review section.
It appears that a similar concern is raised here as in (7): whether high transcription activity alone explains the overlap. We addressed this question in two ways:
In the TAD analysis, we performed an additional control where we used the ENCODE chromatin segmentation for defining active promoters and enhancers. Subsequently, we overlapped these regions with convT/Pol2 stalling to obtain a measure for the base pair span i) with convT/Pol2 stalling overlap and ii) without overlap. Next, the% of TADs spanned by each feature type was compared between breakpoint frequency quartiles. There was a consistent increasing trend (see new ) for the convT/Pol2 stalling overlapping parts of active promoter and enhancer regions, thus pinpointing the most vulnerable regions.
We analyzed breakpoint hotspot regions that localize to annotated gene regions. The genes were binned by the transcriptional level to control for the effect of transcriptional activity. Subsequently, the significance of overlap with the transcriptional features was evaluated for the different bins. The result was consistent across a wide range of expression levels and this new data has been included to .
The new analysis results support the conclusion that convT/Pol2 stalling are enriched at regions that are frequently targeted.
9) A major limitation of the analysis here is that there are not overlapping datasets from the same samples. As the authors have access to direct primary patient cells and cell lines representative of B-ALL their interpretations of the data would significantly benefit from performing RNAseq, POL2 chip, and potentially MNase-seq to support their observations (Pol2 stalling and convergent transcription).
We have carefully considered this comment and added new experimental validation and supporting data from pre-B-ALL and B-lineage cells. However, we would like to stress that the Pol2 transcription process itself should not fundamentally differ between leukemic and non-leukemic cells. Characteristic and reproducible transcriptional features at specific genomic regions can be identified by comparing samples of different origin. Here, we have identified where Pol2 stalling and convT occurs from pre-B-ALL patient and cell line material that represent several different subtypes, from normal B-lymphoid cells and ES cells. We then related the features detected from B-lineage cells to SV event frequency in pre-B-ALL patients on a genome-wide level ( – ), while utilizing the ES and B-lineage data jointly to discern what properties of convT and Pol2 stalling regions may leave the DNA vulnerable to SV.
Following the reviewer’s suggestion, we performed additional Pol2 ChIP-seq data to support the detection of Pol2 stalling events. We also considered MNase-seq but obtaining high enough sequence depth was deemed unfeasible. As an alternative, we tested a ChIP protocol that involves MNase digestion. The signal profile obtained therefore reflects Pol2 enrichment on the background of nucleosome positions. We focused here on the overall signal profile across gene regions (Pol2 stalling detection based on change points) but we make the data available for further analysis that also models the nucleosome positioning. RNA-seq was not included as the signal does not reflect active ongoing transcription (mainly mature RNAs are measured) and is additionally influenced by RNA stability, which would complicate the analysis.
We have also extended the results evaluating the properties of regions with Pol2 stalling with more data from pre-B-ALL and B-lineage cells (included to and ). To address DNA access, we utilized the ENCODE DNAse-seq profiles. Acquiring complementary data from primary ALL cells would represent a significant investment and according to our experience, primary patient material is not available at sufficient amounts to allow performing each assay.
10) Overall there is a clear narrative issue, the dataset is complex and the analysis is not clear nor comprehensive – making it rather hard for the reviewer and in time a reader to comprehensively evaluate the analytical approaches used, as well as, the evaluate the interpretation of the findings, which often render conclusions as facts by citing other papers rather than being supported by the data in itself. It would be very helpful if the authors included a supplemental figure containing a flow chart describing what datasets where put together and which subsets of data were used for which analysis.
We thank the reviewer for the suggestions how to improve the manuscript. We have reorganized the manuscript and modified to highlight the main datasets and added a new supplementary figure to illustrate the data integration approach more in detail (see ). To clarify the interpretations, we have made a more clear separation between the Results and Discussion sections.
11) Results should be interpreted on the basis of their analysis. Conclusions that account or include findings from the literature should be placed in the Discussion section.
We have re-organized the Results and Discussion text to address this.
12) It would be useful if the authors performed a global analysis- accounting for chromatin segmentation in ALL and considering these features. It would be very interesting to show specifically how the parameters they consider (TAD domains, RNA pol stalling, conv T) correlate with promoters/ active transcription first and then evaluate if these metrics show significant deviations (enrichment) in the areas most widely affected by genomic rearrangement in ALL and how do these differ between frequent breakpoints and rare breakpoints?
We thank the reviewer for the suggested use of chromatin segmentation data and inclusion of additional results to further support the relevance of transcriptional activity. We added a new figure ( ) that compares the expression median level of genes within TADs (using the pre-B-ALL transcriptome data) between TADs binned by breakpoint frequency.
Next, we utilized the chromatin segmentation generated by the ENCODE consortium that is based on a large collection of ChIP-seq data from B-lymphoblastoid cells (unfortunately a similar segmentation is not available directly from ALL cells). Similar as in , we compared their span within TADs sorted by breakpoint frequency (included in ). These analyses confirmed that TADs with high number of breakpoints have more overlap with chromatin segments representing active transcription (including active promoters), supporting a transcription-coupled mechanism for the observed genetic instability.
Subsequently, we analyzed whether the convT/Pol2 stalling had relevance as a specific feature within active promoters and enhancers defined by the chromatin segmentation. These results are presented as an additional figure supplement to (see new ). The presence of convT/Pol2 stalling was an important determinant for the promoter and enhancer enrichment within TADs that contain most breakpoints.
We deemed these two approaches appropriate to address first the relevance of transcription and then to distinguish the specific contribution of convT/Pol2 stalling. Correlating convT/Pol2 stalling with active transcription is not meaningful as, by definition, these transcriptional features occur within areas of active transcription. We correlated the width of Pol2 stalling at the TSS region with the expression level of the transcript. Comparison of frequent and rare breakpoints is presented in , and and .
13) Perhaps incorporating metrics that include expression of genes in those regions in B-ALL might strengthen this analysis and provide additional insights into the proposed mechanism. Whilst it may be really difficult to obtain such additional RNA seq data – the authors could consider using gene expression metrics from prior SNP array studies of distinct ALL subtypes.

Adding expression metrics from pre-B-ALL is an excellent suggestion. By “those regions” we understand the reviewer refers to TADs and chromatin segmentation data. We analyzed expression within TADs by calculating the median and maximum expression level in pre-B-ALL cells for the co-localized genes. To this end, we utilized the 1382 patient transcriptomes available in our integrated dataset across pre-B-ALL studies (these expression metrics are included in ). As a second measure, we used the total GRO-seq read count per TAD. A new figure has been added to show how the activity of transcription increases in the TADs with highest breakpoint frequency ( ), supporting a transcription-coupled mechanism. We have further provided a new control that shows the% of transcribed region spanned by convT/Pol2 stalling (new ). This result confirmed that the enrichments we see are not just a reflection of total transcriptional activity. We also binned genes by their transcription level for the analysis of recurrent breakpoints, similarly to control for the effect of transcription (new ).
The new analysis results support the conclusion that convT/Pol2 stalling are enriched properties of regions that are frequently targeted.