Chem RevChem. Rev822acssdcrChemical Reviews0009-26651520-6890pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC4378506PMC4378506.1437850643785062559438110.1021/cr500452k1ReviewProtein Lysine Acetylation
by p300/CBP
DancyBeverley M. ColePhilip A. Department
of Pharmacology
and Molecular Sciences, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 725 North Wolfe Street, Hunterian 316, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, United States *Phone: (301) 496-3658. Fax: (301) 402-2389. E-mail: beverley.dancy@nih.gov.*Phone: (410)
614-8849. Fax: (410) 955-3023. E-mail: pcole@jhmi.edu.160120152503201511562511642015 Epigenetics241924521808201416012016160120161108201507062025Copyright © 2015 American Chemical Society2015American Chemical SocietyThis is an open access article published under an ACS AuthorChoice License, which permits copying and redistribution of the article or any adaptations for non-commercial purposes.Correction to Protein Lysine Acetylation by p300/CBP
11614156201683148314Chemical ReviewsPMC831485827304234National Institutes of Health, United Statespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesdocument-id-old-9cr500452kdocument-id-new-14cr-2014-00452kccc-price1

## Introduction
Since their discovery
in the 1980s and 1990s, the human protein
lysine acetyltransferase encoded by the paralogous p300 and CBP genes
has received much interest. p300/CBP functions in regulating the expression
of genes controlling several basic cellular processes, such as proliferation
and homeostasis, and plays a role in a variety of human diseases,
particularly solid tumors.
Numerous natural product and synthetic
inhibitors of the acetyltransferase
activity have been identified and used to generate a crystal structure
of the active site, probe the p300/CBP enzyme kinetics, and interrogate
p300/CBP cellular functions. These studies revealed that acetyl-CoA
binds in a tunnel enclosed by a unique loop, while the substrate protein
transiently associates with an acidic patch, following a hit-and-run
kinetic mechanism. p300/CBP acetylates histones as well as other proteins
including other epigenetic enzymes and transcription factors. Studies
with inhibitor compounds in cells and animals have confirmed that
the p300/CBP acetylation activity has roles in diverse functions including
cell migration and invasion, maintenance of the differentiated state,
tau-mediated neurodegeneration, and learning and memory.
Also,
important components of p300/CBP are the domains flanking
the acetyltransferase domain, including three cysteine/histidine-rich
domains and a bromodomain. Protein ligands of these have been identified.
Their roles in regulating the acetyltransferase activity and substrate
specificity, as well as identification of compounds that can block
or mimic ligand binding, are topics of ongoing study.
Biochemical
investigation of protein acetylation has posed unique
challenges, due in part to its dynamic reversibility, the weak affinity
of binding modules that recognize it, and the complexity of the multiprotein
interaction networks. Therefore, diverse techniques in biochemistry,
molecular biology, and proteomics have coevolved with our understanding
of the p300/CBP enzyme. In this Review, part of the thematic issue
on Epigenetics, we summarize the current understanding of p300/CBP
including the novel technologies developed for these studies.

2

## Background Information
2.1

## Epigenetics and Chromatin
While the
central dogma of molecular biology describes how the DNA sequence
dictates the cell’s functions, recent researchers have observed
several intriguing phenomena that prove reality to be more complex.
Identical twins inherit the same DNA sequence, but can have differences
in appearance, intellect, and disease incidence. Multicellular organisms
are composed of extremely diverse cell types, almost all of which
contain the same DNA sequence. Mice with the same DNA sequence can
have different coat colors and body weight. Calico cats have patches
of fur with different colors, but the underlying skin cells have the
same DNA sequences. Several disorders exist that have different outcomes
depending on whether the mutation responsible was inherited from a
female or a male parent. Also, the human genome encodes only twice
as many genes as the fly genome, for example, so the number of genes
cannot account for the greater complexity of humans.
These examples
all illustrate the existence of mechanisms over and above the genome,
which influence biology, and fall into the emerging field of epigenetics.
The term “epigenetics” was coined by Waddington in 1942. As was eloquently put, “Mendel’s
gene is more than a DNA moiety.” Several mechanisms exist in cells that contribute to epigenetic
inheritance. In addition to the DNA inherited by a gamete during meiosis,
the egg and embryo receive maternal RNAs. These serve various transient
functions in the progeny’s cells before the RNAs are degraded.
Similarly, the cytoplasm of the daughter cell contains many proteins
that were made in the germline of the parent, constituting another
mode of inheritance of traits not necessarily encoded by the DNA.
Furthermore, the DNA inherited is not a naked sequence; it is packaged
into chromatin, which is the topic of the rest of this section.
The human genome, a copy of which is contained in almost every
human cell, is about 2 m in total length, if placed end-to-end, while
the chomatinized genome is about 0.09 mm in total length, if placed
end-to-end, which can fit into the cell nucleus, that is typically
less than 0.01 mm in diameter. Chromatin
is made up of fundamental subunits called nucleosomes. A nucleosome
consists of 146 base pairs of DNA wrapped around an octamer of histone
proteins. The histone octamer consists of two copies each of histones
H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. Furthermore, at least 20bp of DNA between each
nucleosome can be packaged with the linker histone, H1. The histones,
however, are not simply inert packaging, but rather they arrange the
DNA in a way that the information can be stored and retrieved.
Chromatin can be assembled in different conformations, which are
influenced by a variety of factors, including DNA sequence elements,
DNA modifications, histone modifications, incorporation of histone
variants, nucleosome occupancy and spacing, nucleosome sliding, and
association of nonhistone proteins with the chromatin. The physical
structure of chromatin has functional consequences for DNA templated
processes, including gene expression, DNA replication, and DNA repair.
Open, permissive, active chromatin promotes DNA transcription and
replication, whereas closed, silenced, repressed chromatin is turned
“off” to these processes. For example, telomeres and
centromeres are generally silenced, and boundary elements prevent
the silencing from spreading into regions that are turned “on”.
Yet these distinctions are not static: enzymes that modify DNA and
histones, chaperones that allow histones to be replaced, and enzymes
that consume ATP to slide nucleosomes can alter the local chromatin
structure. Through these actions, chromatin structure can be altered
during one’s lifetime in response to a variety of environmental
and internal conditions. In this way, the expression of genes can
be altered in a cell or a cell lineage without changing the DNA sequence.
In addition to duplication of the DNA sequence, aspects of the
chromatin conformation are passed down as the cell divides, as modifications
to the DNA and histones distribute semiconservatively to the daughter
strands during replication. For example, gene X could be transcriptionally
silenced in a parent cell, and the progeny cell then inherits this
silenced state along with the gene sequence. Thus, chromatin embodies
an important level of epigenetic inheritance.

2.2

## Post-Translational
Modifications of Proteins
Once made, proteins can be regulated
by an astounding variety of
changes. Collectively, these changes are called post-translational
modifications, or PTMs. PTMs can affect enzyme activity, protein–protein
interactions, or other functions of the target protein.
Certain
residue side chains can undergo chemical modifications, which expand the building blocks of proteins
from the 20 canonical amino acids to a growing list of interesting
molecules, and expand the proteome to include differentially modified
proteins. Without changing the atoms in a proline residue, reversible
isomerization can change its structure. Arginine residue side chains
can be deiminated, whereby a terminal nitrogen atom is replaced with
oxygen. In rare cases, histidine can be modified to dipthamide. Several
types of small groups, which are usually donated from coenzymes, can
be covalently added to residue side chains. Serine, threonine, tyrosine,
and histidine side chains (as well as arginine and lysine side chains
in prokaryotes) can be reversibly phosphorylated. Lysine side chains’
epsilon amine (as well as protein N-terminal alpha amine and, in rare
cases, serine and threonine side chains ) can be reversibly acetylated, and lysine side chains’ epsilon
amine can also be formylated, crotonylated, propionylated, butyrylated,
hydroxybutyrylated, glutarylated, succinylated, malonylated, or 3-phosphoglycerylated. Arginine side chains can be mono- or dimethylated,
while lysine side chains can be reversibly mono-, di-, or trimethylated.
Tyrosine side chains can be hydroxylated. Serine and threonine side
chains can be O-GlcNAcylated. Cysteine side chains can be prenylated
(by the addition of a farnesyl or a geranyl–geranyl moiety).
Serine side chains can be octanoylated. Arginine, glutamic acid, aspartic
acid, asparagine, cysteine, and phosphoserine (and sometimes lysine
and diphthamide) side chains can be mono- or poly-ADP-ribosylated.
There are also different redox states of certain side chains, which
can give rise to cysteine oxidation, cysteine disulfide formation,
and histidine oxidation. Post-translational modifications can also
be larger in size: target proteins can be covalently linked at their
lysine side chains to small proteins like ubiquitin, SUMO, Rubb, and
Nedd, either with one such addition or linkage in a chain. Finally,
proteins can be modified by the removal of part of the sequence by
proteolytic cleavage.
This field of post-translational modifications
is best summarized
by Cohen et al.: “one of the major goals in postgenomic biology
is to unravel the molecular basis and the physiological role of covalent
protein modifications... This has the potential to identify novel
disease pathways and thereby new therapeutic targets as well as diagnostic
markers.” 
This Review is
focused on lysine acetylation. The acetyl group
in question is donated by the cofactor, acetyl-coenzyme A. Coenzyme
A, which is found in all characterized living organisms on earth, is synthesized by cells from pantothenic acid
(vitamin B5) and cysteine, and its thiol
moiety can react with the carboxylic acids of acyl groups to activate
those groups with an energy-rich thioester bond. Acetyltransferase
enzymes catalyze the covalent transfer of the acetyl group from acetyl-CoA
to the epsilon amine of the lysine side chain, with the release of
the free thiol, CoASH (see Figure ). The resultant
addition of atomic bulk to the side chain and loss of positive charge
can change intramolecular protein conformation or change affinity
for binding partners. Thus, this small modification can have a variety
of possible influences on the function of the particular substrate
protein.
 One method of studing post-translational
modifications is to measure
the function of site-specifically modified proteins, but this has
encountered challenges in the case of acetylation. Acetylation and
deacetylation can be mimicked using site-specific glutamine and arginine
mutations (respectively), which preserve the charge of the residue
they are replacing but are not substrates for acetyl transfer or deacetylation.
However, these are not perfect mimics and often do not phenocopy the
acetylated or deacetylated protein in cells. Proteins can be purified
from cells that lack deacetylases or acetyltransferases, generating
populations that are hyper- or hypo-acetylated (respectively), but
these alterations typically affect more than one substrate and/or
residue. Third, purified proteins can be reacted with purified acetyltransferase
enzyme and acetyl-CoA to generate acetylated products, but the site-specificity
of acetyltransferases is often promiscuous and reactions rarely go
to completion. Acetyl-lyine can be installed
in a site-specific manner to proteins using a nonsense-suppression
methodology, , but this typically generates
only very small quantities of the desired protein. Fifth, acetyl-lysine
can be installed in a site-specific manner to purified proteins using
expressed protein ligation or native
chemical ligation, to generate a semisynthetic product, but this is
restricted to proteins with acetylation close to one of the termini
(or approachable by circular permutation ), and has additional structural and sequence requirements. Finally,
cysteine alkylation chemistry can be performed on purified proteins
to generate an acetyl-lysine or the corresponding lysine mimic, although
any other cysteines present would similarly be modified. This latter methodology produces an acetyl-lysine
mimic that is not hydrolyzed by deacetylases (as demonstrated by reactions
with two example deacetylases). This therefore addresses a further
challenge in lysine acetylation research, which is that the acetyl
group is rapidly hydrolyzed in experiments where deacetylase enzymes
are present, such as lysates or other complex mixtures.
One
group of proteins that undergo acetylation is histones. All
histones, including the four canonical histones, their variants, and
linker histones, can undergo acetylation, and this was first observed
as early as the 1960s. , Indeed, histones have served
as a model system for the study of acetylation and other post-translational
modifications, partially because of their abundance in cells and their
high sequence conservation among eukaryotes. 
Several nonhistone proteins also have well-characterized acetylation
sites, including the tumor suppressor
protein p53 and the tubulin components of the cytoskeleton. The perception of the “acetylome”
as being on a scale close to that of the phospho-proteome has only
recently become appreciated. Several
reports of proteome-wide study of lysine acetylation have identified
thousands of sites. − These proteins span many important cellular pathways,
including chromatin remodeling, cell cycle, splicing, nuclear transport,
actin nucleation, and mitochondrial metabolism. Interestingly, a great
proportion of acetylated proteins seem to be included in large macromolecular
complexes. For example, 61 of the 81 ribosomal subunits are acetylated,
11 of the 16 F1F0-ATP synthase subunits are
acetylated, and 69 of the 143 spliceosome subunits are acetylated.
These example complexes are found in the cytoplasm, mitochondrion,
and nucleus (respectively), and this further illustrates the pervasiveness
of acetylation throughout the cell.
The link between metabolism
and acetylation is multifaceted. In
addition to the acetylation of metabolic enzymes to regulate their
activities, and regulation of the expression of metabolic enzymes
by acetylation of histones and transcription factors, metabolic pathways
influence the amount of acetyl-CoA available to lysine acetyltranferase
enzymes (see Figure ). In general, a high energy balance leads to a higher level
of acetyl-CoA in the cell, due to catabolism of glucose and fatty
acids, while some acetyl-CoA is available during conditions of low
energy balance from acetate. Although acetyl-CoA is membrane-impermeable,
it can pass through the nuclear pore complex, and pyruvate can be
imported to the mitochondrion or citrate exported to the cytoplasm
for acetyl-CoA production. Recently, the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
subunits were found to be present in the nucleus, providing a mechanism
for nuclear acetyl-CoA production. Reactions
that compete with lysine acetylation for the pool of acetyl-CoA include
the synthesis of fatty acids, cholesterol, citrate, and ketone bodies.
In fact, about 4% of cellular enzymes utilize coenzyme A and its thioesters
as a cofactor. 
A further way in
which lysine acetylation is linked to energy balance
is through the sirtuin deacetylase enzymes, which require a nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD) cofactor, and
therefore low nutrient conditions can facilitate deacetylation. Acetylation
is not the only PTM that is influenced by energy balance; for example,
glycosylation of proteins is regulated by the availability of UDP-GlcNAc
through the hexosamine pathway. These mechanisms help a cell make
appropriate responses to nutrient conditions, but might also provide mechanisms for disruption of post-translational
modification states in diseased cells that have altered metabolism.
 
2.3

## Case Study: Histone H4 Tail
Between
the 1960s and 1990s, histone lysine acetylation was found to correlate
with transcriptional activation. − It is now known that this correlation
is especially true for histone H4 lysines 5 and 8 (as well as histone
H3 lysines 9 and 14), where acetylation is considered permissive to
transcription, but there are exceptions, for example, histone H4 lysine
12, where acetylation may be repressive to transcription. 
One way that the post-translational modifications
on the histone tail can influence chromatin structure is by weakening
the interaction of positively charged residue side chains with the
negatively charged phosphodiester backbone of DNA, thereby allowing
easier access of the DNA by polymerase. Indeed, of the 23 residues of the histone H4 tail, 10 residues are
positively charged. However, recent reports reveal that disruption
of these electrostatic interactions is not sufficient to cause the
histone tails to dissociate from the DNA. 
In addition to altering affinity for DNA, protein function
can
be regulated by acetylation through altering affinity for other proteins.
Bromodomains are domains with the special purpose of binding acetylated
proteins, bearing different flanking sequence specificities. Bromodomains are contained either singly or
doubly in more than 40 human proteins. Although the binding affinity
of each bromodomain with each acetylated lysine is generally weak,
it is believed that it has major functional relevance in the cell,
due in part to some proteins possessing more than one bromodomain
in tandem that synergize to increase binding affinity, and also due
to histones possessing multiple acetylated residue that can act combinatorially.
In the example of the histone H4 tail, at least three bromodomain-containing
proteins have been identified that interact with the various acetylated
residues. Gcn5 has one bromodomain, while TAF1 and BRDT each have
double bromodomains in tandem.
Acetylation is not the only post-translational
modification that
attracts proteins with a specifically tailored recognition domain.
The list of proteins with domains that bind methylated, phosphorylated,
or other modified residues is growing. For example, with respect to the histone H4 tail, di-/trimethylated
lysine 20 is specifically recognized by the tandem tudor domains of
53BP1, the tandem tudor domains of Crb2, and the tandem tudor domains of JMJD2A, while mono-/dimethylated lysine 20 is specifically recognized by
the three MBT repeats of L3MBTL2. , An interesting
phenomenon of cooperativity in binding between two nearby histone
molecules is illustrated by the protein BPTF, which has a bromodomain
that binds acetylated histone H4 as well as a PHD-finger domain that
binds methylated histone H3. 
Given
the number of residues on each histone that can be post-translationally
modified, and the variety of modifications possible, one can begin
to envision the potential combinatorial complexity possible for each
nucleosome. For every molecule of the histone H4 N-terminal tail,
over 500 such combinations are possible! One way to frame this problem
is the Allis lab’s “histone code hypothesis”,
whereby the “marks” (PTMs) on histones are “written”
(by enzymes like acetyltransferases and methyltransferases), “read”
(by proteins with domains like bromodomains and tudor domains), and
“erased” (by enzymes like deacetylases and demethylases)
to encode information in each nucleosome to direct its functions. A further extension of this scheme is the “nucleosome
code hypothesis”, whereby histone H4 could be grouped with
sequence variants of H3, H2A, and H2B to create another level of the
information encoded by each nucleosome. 
While many combinations are theoretically possible for each
nucleosome,
it has been hypothesized that only a few functionally relevant patterns
are prevalent in the cell, and recent
evidence supports this model. Indeed,
there are documented examples of crosstalk between different modified
residues, which may be the mechanisms for how these combination states
are established. In the example of histone H4, methylation of R3 could
increase acetylation of K5 (because of the chromodomain in the acetyltranferase,
yeast Esa1 ), methylation of K20 could
increase acetylation of K16 (because of the chromodomain of Msl3 in
the acetyltransferase complex, Mof ),
acetylation of K5 could increase dimethylation of R3 and decrease
monomethylation of R3 (by altering the activity of the methyltransferases,
PRMT5 and PRMT1 ), lysine SUMOylation
decreases lysine acetylation and ubiquitylation (because these modifications
compete for the same residues ), and acetylation
of K16 decreases possible lysine ADP-ribosylation. 
Furthermore, several acetyltransferases have bromodomains, which could mediate further cooperativity between
acetylation sites. This has been proposed to influence the histone
H4 N-terminal tail acetylation by an an N-terminally progressing “zip”
mechanism. In this model, K16 is the first to be acetylated, followed
by K12, then K8, and finally K5. In this manner, acetylation on this
tail may be an all-or-nothing phenomenon, where K16 acetylation sets
off a cascade that results in hyperacetylation of all four lysines
on each molecule of histone H4. , 
In the case of
histone acetylation, the balance of addition and
removal of the acetyl groups is thought to be highly dynamic, − which is especially true in regions of the chromatin with high levels
of histone methylation, , specifically histone
H3 with trimethylated K4. , This dynamic state
is possible because of the action of histone deacetylase enzymes (HDACs),
the first of which was cloned in 1996. We now know that HDACs can act by a simple hydrolytic mechanism
(the classical HDACs, which contain a crucial zinc ion), or a complex
NAD-requiring mechanism (the sirtuins). At least one sirtuin, SIRT2,
is known to deacetylate histone H4.
Several acetyltransferases
are known to acetylate histone H4. Lysine
acetyltransferase enzymes are classified according to sequence conservation
into four families, GNAT family (Gcn5 and Pcaf), p300/CBP, Rtt109
(not present in humans), and the MYST family (includes MOZ/Morf, Ybf2/Sas3,
Sas2, Tip60), and examples from more than one class are thought to
acetylate histone H4, including p300/CBP. Specifically, when recombinantly
expressed and purified, Pcaf can acetylate histone H4 K8 and Tip60 can acetylate histone H4 K5/8/12/16. Recombinantly expressed and purified p300 acetyltransferase
domain efficiently acetylates H4 N-terminal tail when supplied as
a synthetic peptide. Purified full-length
p300 also efficiently acetylates H4 N-terminal tail when supplied
as full-length free histones or mononucleosomes, with a preference for K5/K8. To extend this to histones in a more native chromatin conformation,
Cos7 cells were transiently transfected with p300 or CBP and analyzed
for histone acetylation by immunofluorescence microscopy. In cells
with increased p300/CBP levels, increased H4 K5/K8 acetylation was
seen, as well as other sites. In cells
with p300/CBP knockout, reduced H4 acetylation at certain gene sequences
was observed by chromatin IP with antibodies against acetylated K5,
K8, K12, and K16. 
In the field
of cancer therapeutic discovery, development of acetyltransferase
inhibitors has lagged behind other epigenetic target classes. The
deacetylase inhibitors Vorinostat and Romidepsin have proved useful
in the clinic for treating cutaneous T cell lymphoma, and compounds
that block the acetyl-binding pocket of BET bromodomains (in proteins
like Brd2/3/4) are currently in clinical trials for midline carcinoma
and other cancers. To our knowledge,
there have been no acetyltransferase inhibitors that have progressed
to clinical trials, despite the sense that they might prove equally,
or more, valuable as compared to deacetylase and bromodomain inhibitors.
Acetyltransferase enzymes, in particular p300/CBP, their involvement
in disease, and their inhibitor development is the topic of the rest
of this Review.

2.4

## Discovery of p300/CBP
p300 and CBP
are two acetyltransferase enzymes in humans and most higher eukaryotes.
p300 (also called EP300 or KAT3B) is so-named because it is about
300 kDa in size (with 2414 amino acids). p300 was reported in 1985 and 1989 (and cloned
in 1994 ) in studies looking for proteins
that bind E1A, an adenoviral oncogenic transcription factor. Meanwhile,
CBP (also called CREBBP or KAT3A) was first reported and cloned in
1993 in a study of proteins that bind CREB, a transcription factor that binds cAMP response elements (CREs).
CBP is composed of 2441 amino acids, and because of the high sequence
homology observed between it and p300, the two proteins are now collectively referred to as p300/CBP. They
are in a family of their own, with little sequence homology between
them and other acetyltransferases in the human genome. 
Soon after the first known histone acetyltransferases
(HATs) were cloned in 1995–1996, − p300/CBP was found to
have HAT activity as well. , Characterization of
this acetyltransferase activity has been of ongoing interest since
then, and significant contributions have been made by many laboratories.
The search for p300/CBP orthologs in a variety of living organisms
has yielded several interesting observations. First, no orthologs
have been found in prokaryotes, and within the domain of eukaryotes,
only the “higher” eukaryotes appear to have p300/CBP
orthologs. Because nuclear and chromatin structures
are largely conserved between “lower” and “higher”
eukaryotes, this argues that the evolution of p300/CBP was not triggered
by the evolution of the nucleus and chromatin, but later when metazoa
evolved. Thus, p300/CBP function may be especially important in aspects
of growth and development that are prevalent in multicellular organisms,
such as cell-to-cell communication or organ morphogenesis. That being said, crystallography studies have
unveiled that p300/CBP has a structural homologue in yeast, called
Rtt109, although there is little sequence
or apparent functional similarity between the two acetyltransferases.
Four genes that may be orthologs of p300/CBP have been identified
in the plant Arabidopsis. Within the animal kingdom, many different species
have been found to possess p300/CBP, but with different copy numbers.
Evolutionarity distant animals such as flies and roundworms possess
one p300/CBP each, although flatworms seem to have acquired their
own duplication of p300/CBP. Sea squirts, which are in the phylum
chordata but are not in the subphylum vertebrates, also seem to possess
one p300/CBP. When vertebrates evolved, the chromosomal region corresponding
to p300/CBP, as well as eight nearby genes, seems to have undergone
a duplication that resulted in the p300 gene (on human chromosome
22, at the locus 22q13) and the CBP gene (on human chromosome 16,
at the locus 16p13). Thus, chickens,
opossums, mice, and humans all have one p300 gene and one CBP gene.
However, even among the vertebrates there is some variation in copy
number, as frogs appear to have lost their p300 gene, zebrafish appear
to have lost their CBP gene, and puffer-fish appear to have duplicated
their CBP gene.
After the duplication event, p300 and CBP have
diverged in sequence
somewhat, with 61% overall sequence identity. Interestingly, some
domains have retained more similarity than others. Not surprisingly,
sequence variation in the catalytic acetyltransferase domain has been
selected against, resulting in 86% amino acid residue identity, in
the region corresponding to the acetyltransferase domain and its two
flanking domains, when comparing human p300 protein and human CBP
protein sequence. The acetyltransferase
domain spans residues 1284–1673. This conservation suggests an evolutionarily optimized function
of the catalytic domain and underscores the importance of the acetyltransferase
roles of p300 and CBP.
Furthermore, there is significant sequence
homology in other noncatalytic
domains of p300/CBP, including in several types of protein–protein
interacting motifs (see Figure ). At the N-terminal
side there is a nuclear receptor interacting domain (NRID or RID),
which is also one of two SPC domains (SPC-1 and SPC-2), that may bind
PXXP motifs. SPC-2 is also a Sin3 interacting domain (SID). There
are three cysteine/histidine-rich (C/H) domains. The C/H1 and C/H3
domains contain transcriptional adaptor zinc fingers (TAZ1 and TAZ2),
and the C/H3 also contains a ZZ zinc finger. The C/H2, which is part
of the catalytic domain, contains a plant homeo domain (PHD). Between
the C/H1 and C/H2, there are an interferon binding homology domain
(IHD), KIX domain, and a bromodomain. At the C-terminal side of p300/CBP
there is an interferon binding domain (IBiD), which contains a nuclear
coactivator binding domain (NCBD) and a glutamine-rich domain, followed
by a proline-containing PxP motif. , 
 Sequence homology in these domains helps explain why p300
and CBP
have many overlapping functions. For example, p300 was first identified
because of its ability to bind E1A, but CBP can also do this, for which they both use their mutually conserved
C/H3-TAZ2 region. Also, CBP was first
identified because of its capacity to bind CREB, but p300 also has
this ability, for which they both use
their mutually conserved KIX domain. However,
despite these similarities, p300 and CBP appear to also have a handful
of distinct functions, which may be due to slight differences in substrate
specificity and/or in a subset of protein–protein binding interactions. 

2.5

## p300/CBP Function in Signaling
Pathways
As discussed in section , the cell must
turn different subsets of genes on, in response to intracellular or
extracellular signals, to regulate cellular functions, and this is
accomplished partially by the acetylation of histone proteins to open
the chromatin conformation and promote transcription. An intriguing
collection of cellular signaling pathways have been dissected, and
one striking finding is that p300/CBP is almost always a player. Examples
of signals that ultimately use p300/CBP as downstream effectors include
calcium signaling, response to hypoxia, Notch signaling, and NFκB
signaling (see Figure ).
Notch is a
transmembrane protein that is involved in intercellular signaling.
When neighboring cell proteins engage and activate Notch, this induces
cleavage of Notch and release of the active intracellular domain (ICD).
The ICD then binds CSL and Mastermind. CSL targets the complex to
DNA elements, while Mastermind recruits coactivators including p300/CBP
and Pcaf, and together this complex activates transcription of target
genes. For a more detailed description
of this example, see section .
Another
example is the cAMP pathway, which was mentioned because
of its historical role in the first identification and naming of CBP.
In this signaling pathway, growth factors or other extracellular signals
are received by transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs),
which activate heterotrimeric G proteins. The G proteins can then
activate adenylyl cyclase, which produces cAMP, and this releases
the active protein kinase A (PKA) from a complex with an inhibitory
subunit. PKA then diffuses into the nucleus and phosphorylates CREB
at serine 133. CREB dimers bind cAMP-response elements (CREs) in the
genomic DNA and also recruit p300/CBP to activate transcription of
an estimated 100 target genes. 
A third example is the estrogen pathway, which is important to
hormone-dependent cancers (see section ).
Estrogen is a steroid hormone that diffuses into cells and binds to
intracellular estrogen receptors. Estrogen receptor dimers bind estrogen-response
elements (EREs) in the genomic DNA. Upon ligand binding, the complex
recruits p300/CBP to activate transcription of around 1000 target
genes. 
p300/CBP is also involved
in stress response pathways, in which
adaptation to conditions such as hyperosmolarity involves changes
in gene expression. For example, osmotic
shock induces several kinase cascades, including those involving the
kinases p38, JNK, and ERK. Phosphorylation
of p300/CBP can regulate its activity in different ways, depending
on the phosphorylation site, and thereby
regulate transcription of target genes.
There are also several
links between p300/CBP and the DNA damage
response pathway. The DNA damage response is orchestrated mainly by
the protein p53, and its expression and post-translational regulation
are modulated by p300/CBP activity. p53 and other proteins in the
DNA damage response are substrates for acetylation by p300/CBP. , p300/CBP is also involved in the activation of genes following DNA
damage, such as p21. 
 One way in which p300/CBP is able
to respond to signaling pathways
is by the post-translational modifications of p300/CBP itself. Phosphorylation
of p300/CBP occurs at several sites, catalyzed by kinases including
PKC, cyclin E/CDK-2, CaMKIV, IKK, and
AKT, that are reported to negatively
or positively regulate p300/CBP acetyltransferase activity, protein–protein
interactions, or protein stability, depending on the site. − p300/CBP also has two sites of methylation near the KIX domain,
and one effect of an arginine methylation event by CARM1 is the decreased
recruitment by CREB but the increased
recruitment by estrogen receptor. p300/CBP
can also be SUMOylated at three lysines near the bromodomain, which
may influence p300/CBP subnuclear localization, is antagonistic with acetylation at the same sites, and
negatively regulates p300/CBP activity. Acetylation of p300/CBP occurs on 17 lysine residues of a regulatory
loop within the acetyltransferase domain, probably by a highly efficient
and cooperative intermolecular reaction, and stimulates its acetyltransferase activity , and binding of proteins. One regulatory
mechanism that this autoacetylation could serve is by relieving the
steric hindrance in the substrate binding site, with the regulatory
loop acting as a pseudosubstrate.
Another way in which p300/CBP
is able to respond to signaling pathways
is due to the ability of p300/CBP to bind a multitude of different
proteins, using its various protein-interacting domains. The number
of proteins that p300/CBP can bind to, also referred to as the p300/CBP
interactome, is a list that is ever growing. In 2006, the count was
at 312, and today at least 411 proteins
are implicated in binding p300/CBP (see Table 2). Some of
these proteins interact directly with DNA, sometimes in response to
a signal, recruiting p300/CBP to the target gene element. Genomic
profiling of p300/CBP recruitment to DNA sequences has been analyzed
by several groups using chromatin immunoprecipitation. At these DNA
elements, p300/CBP nucleates a complex of many proteins that together
allow for transcriptional activation. Transcriptome profiling of genes
regulated by p300/CBP has been analyzed by one study, using treatment
with a p300/CBP inhibitor and microarray analysis, which implicated
615 as being regulated by p300/CBP. One
limitation of these interactome and transcriptome studies of p300/CBP
is that cryptic protein partners, DNA elements, and regulated genes
might be missing from the lists, if certain signaling pathways need
to be activated before p300/CBP can engage in a specific binding partnership,
recruitment, or transcriptional event.
Many of the protein–protein
interactions making up transcription
complexes are mediated by the acetylation of lysines on the proteins,
by p300/CBP or by other associated acetyltransferases, and the resultant
binding to other proteins with bromodomains. To date, ∼100
proteins have been implicated as p300/CBP acetylation substrates (see Table 1). Thus, p300/CBP helps supply acetylation as
a glue to hold the complex together, while also serving as a scaffold
to bring together many proteins, and a bridge to connect one protein-bound
DNA element with another (see Figure ). , 
 In light of the astounding number
of possibilities of complexes
in which p300/CBP could participate, one may wonder how this is regulated.
The first clue is that certain domains, such as the C/H3 domain, have
many potential protein binding partners that compete for the same
recognition sequence within p300/CBP. Another clue is CBP haploinsufficiency,
where one wild-type CBP copy is not enough for normal mouse development,
and, conversely, CBP overexpression is also lethal in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster, indicating a tightly controlled,
limiting pool of p300/CBP in cells. Therefore,
in our current model, which protein any given molecule of p300/CBP
might interact with would depend upon the relative nuclear concentrations
of the potential partners and upon relative binding affinities of
the potential partners. Therefore, information from an intracellular
or extracellular signal would be relayed through a pathway to produce
a change in a certain effector protein’s nuclear concentration
or affinity for p300/CBP, altering p300/CBP cellular complexes. For
example, upstream signaling pathways may enhance p300/CBP recruitment
to a specific target gene by translocation of a certain protein to
the nucleus, or post-translational modification of the protein to
increase the binding affinity to p300/CBP.
What emerges is a
fascinating picture of different signaling pathways
competing for p300/CBP. This hypothesis
has been supported by several interesting studies. In one report,
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) was used to stimulate
the RelA subunit of NFκB binding to p300/CBP (via its zinc finger)
and resultant induction of HIV gene expression, but this was inhibited
when interferon-α (IFN-α) was used to stimulate STAT2
binding to p300/CBP (via the same zinc finger). In another study, when AP-1 was bound to p300/CBP (via
its C-terminal region ), this resulted
in induction of TRE genes (involved in the antioxidant response),
but this was inhibited when p53 was bound to p300/CBP (via the C/H1
and/or C/H3, resulting in induction of p53-regulated promoters), and also inhibited when glucocorticoids were
used to stimulate glucocorticoid receptor binding to p300/CBP (via
the N-terminal nuclear receptor interacting domain). Similarly, genotoxic stress stimulates p53 binding to p300/CBP
and resultant induction of p53-dependent genes (resulting in cell
cycle arrest), but this is inhibited when overexpressed E2F-1 is bound
to p300/CBP (via its TAZ2 domain, resulting
in apoptosis). In another study, cAMP
stimulates CREB binding to p300/CBP (via its KIX domain) and resultant
induction of cAMP-responsive genes, but this is inhibited when insulin
or growth factors were used to stimulate S6 kinase pp90RSK binding
to p300/CBP (via its C/H3 domain), which resulted in induction of
Ras-responsive genes. 
Taken together,
these and other studies demonstrate that p300/CBP
is not only essential to many cellular signaling pathways, but utilizes
its protein–protein interactions to integrate the different
signals and determine how the cell will respond. In this manner, p300/CBP
has a hand in controlling virtually all of the major cellular functions,
including proliferation, differentiation, and response to stress (see
Figure ).

3

## p300 Acetyltransferase Activity
p300/CBP has a central acetyltransferase (also called HAT) domain
that catalyzes the reaction in which the acetyl group from acetyl-CoA
is transferred to a protein lysine side chain. p300/CBP has the ability
to acetylate a wide variety of proteins (see Table 1). These substrate proteins are located
principally in the nucleus (such as histones) but are also present
in other parts of the cell (such as the cytosolic GAPDH). Immunofluorescence
microscopy and subcellular fractionation studies have localized p300/CBP
predominantly to the nucleus. It is not completely understood how
p300/CBP shuttles in and out of the nucleus, and part of the answer
may be its binding interactions with protein ligands that are themselves
targeted to the nucleus or elsewhere.
3.1

## p300
Acetyltransferase Domain Structure
One of the challenges
for biochemical characterization of p300/CBP
is the difficulty to express and purify active enzyme. This may be
due to the large size of full-length protein (see Figure ) and/or inappropriate hyperacetylation when the
active acetyltransferase domain is overexpressed. This can be overcome
by coexpression with the deacetylase Sir2. Alternately, for the acetyltransferase
domain, it is possible to express an inactive protein followed by
ligation to a synthetic peptide to generate the active enzyme. , Purified p300 containing its acetyltransferase domain plus its two
flanking domains can be prepared efficiently from insect cells. The effect of the flanking domains on acetyltransferase
activity will be discussed in further detail in section .
As transferase enzymes, acetyltransferases
have two substrates (acetyl-CoA and a lysine-containing protein) and
two products (CoASH and an acetyl-lysine-containing protein). For
an enzyme with two substrates, a rational strategy to create a high
potency inhibitor is to incorporate the major structural features
of both substrates, and thereby allow binding to be tighter than for
either substrate on its own. This idea sparked the generation of a
variety of acetyltransferase inhibitors, starting with the minimalist
bisubstrate analog Lys-CoA, and including various peptide sequences
appended to the lysine. Discovery of Lys-CoA, in addition to enzymology
applications that will be discussed in section , allowed for the crystallization of the p300 acetyltransferase
domain active site in complex with the bisubstrate, with the structure
solved at 1.7 Å resolution (see Figure ). 
This crystal structure revealed
six nucleophilic residues in sufficient
proximity to be able to attack the carbonyl carbon of acetyl-CoA,
but mutational analysis and the use of an electrophilic CoA labeling
reagent refuted a mechanism that p300
catalysis proceeds through a covalent enzyme intermediate.
 In contrast to other crystallized acetyltransferases
like Gcn5
and yeast Esa1, the crystal structure of p300 revealed a shallow,
acidic surface about 10 Å distance from the substrate lysine
(see Figure ). This surface is thought to
interact with the substrate flanking sequence, and mutational analysis
confirmed that E1505 and D1628, both found in this surface, are important
for catalysis. This provides insight
into the broad peptide substrate specificity of p300, and the preference
for nearby basic residues (usually a lysine or arginine, within 3
or 4 residues of the modified lysine). This contribution to catalysis
was analyzed for histone H4, where the K8 substrate is flanked by
basic residues at K5 and K12. Replacing K5 and K12 with alanine impaired
acetylation at K8, but this was rescued if either alanine was changed
to arginine to preserve the positive charge. Acetylation was not rescued
if K5A was changed to citrulline, which can still be a hydrogen-bond
donor but loses the potential for an electrostatic interaction associated
with lysine, arguing that the positive charge is important in substrate
recognition and catalysis. 
In addition
to revealing this acidic surface, the crystal structure
highlighted the importance of many residues involved in Lys-CoA binding
(see Figures and ). Mutationally sensitive Y1467 was implicated in a hydrogen bond
between its side chain hydroxyl and the sulfur of Lys-CoA. This may
allow the Y1467 to function as a general acid, facilitating the protonation
of the leaving group during catalysis. W1436 was implicated in a hydrogen
bond between its main chain oxygen and epsilon nitrogen atom of the
substrate lysine, as well as van der Waals interactions between its
hydrophobic indole side chain and the aliphatic portion of the substrate
lysine. This forms a hydrophobic tunnel in combination with two tyrosines,
which may reduce the substrate lysine pKa, such that the neutral amine required for attack is more favored.
p300 acetyltransferase catalytic activity was sharply reduced by W1436A
mutation. As the pH–rate profile of p300 reveals an important
pKa of 8.4, it is proposed that this pKa may correspond
to this substrate amine in complex with p300. In addition, R1410 showed
salt bridging interactions with the phosphates of CoA, whose importance
was confirmed using 3′-dephospho-Lys-CoA and mutagenesis. Interestingly, W1436 and R1410 p300 point mutations
have been observed in patients with lung cancer, suggesting that p300
can be a tumor suppressor.
The crystal structure of the p300
acetyltransferase domain also
showed that p300 has structural similarity, and hence a possibly ancient
common ancestor, with the fungal acetyltransferase Rtt109. Furthermore, although p300/CBP has little sequence
similarity with other acetyltransferases, p300 has a conserved CoA
binding region in common with other crystallized acetyltransferases
like Gcn5, yeast Esa1, and yeast Rtt109. In this CoA binding region, the pantetheine arms of CoA adopts similar
positions surrounded by several integral beta strands and alpha helices
that overlap in superposition models, but the adenosine rings of CoA
occupy differing conformations, with Gcn5 and Esa1 structures being more flexible.
In the p300 structure, a specialized substrate-binding loop, called
the L1 loop, interacts with the entire length of the lysine and CoA,
and locks them in place (see Figure ). This is consistent with the tight binding observed
with p300 and acetyl-CoA, as well as the reduced inhibition seen for
Lys-CoA varieties with longer peptide sequences, as there may be a
steric clash between the peptide and the L1 loop. Assays with bisubstrate
analogs containing various length linkers between the peptidyl-Lys
and the CoA showed that linker length correlated with potency, although
these compounds never exceeded the potency of the original Lys-CoA.
This suggests that the crystal structure is of p300 trapped in the
conformation of a late step in catalysis, where the acetylated peptide
substrate is rapidly ejected from the active site. 

3.2

## p300 Acetyltransferase
Reaction Chemistry
There are several kinetic mechanisms possible
for a two-substrate
two-product “bi bi” scheme like the reaction catalyzed
by p300/CBP. We now know that most acetyltransferases follow an ordered
binding, ternary complex mechanism, but p300 appears to proceed through
a Theorell–Chance mechanism, in which there is no stable ternary
complex, and the peptide substrate associates only very transiently
with the enzyme, leaving as soon as the reaction is complete. 
One of the first insights into the catalysis
by p300 was derived from solvent viscosity studies. Initial velocities
were measured in the presence of different concentrations of sucrose,
and a significant dose-dependent loss in catalysis was observed. Moreover,
substrate analogs that were poor substrates did not have as large
a solent viscosity effect. These data argue that release of at least
one of the products is the rate-limiting step in the reaction with
a normal substrate, as opposed to the chemical step(s). Binding studies with CoASH and substrate analog
acetonyl-CoA helped characterize the tight binding properties. p300
binds acetyl-CoA with an affinity in the high nanomolar or low micromolar
range. 
To distinguish among several
possible p300 kinetic mechanisms,
two-substrate kinetics was performed and reported in 2001. The steady-state kinetic parameters, using initial
velocities, were determined for acetyl-CoA at different concentrations
of a H4–20 peptide substrate. In double-reciprocal plots (E/V versus 1/[acetyl-CoA]), parallel lines
were observed, which was originally interpreted as support for a ping-pong
kinetic mechanism rather than a ternary complex mechanism involving
direct transfer of the acetyl group from acetyl-CoA to a lysine-containing
peptide. , 
These steady-state kinetics of p300
confounded researchers for
some time, because a covalent enzyme intermediate could not be identified,
and because the bisubstrate analog Lys-CoA was a potent p300 inhibitor.
Once the crystal structure of the p300 acetyltransferase domain was
elucidated, a Theorell–Chance, also known as hit-and-run, catalytic
mechanism was considered. Implicit in this model was a relatively high affinity for acetyl-CoA, which was
consistent with the observed low Ki of
the substrate analog acetonyl-CoA. The Theorell–Chance mechanism
was further investigated using product inhibition studies. This included
four separate experiments, with inhibition by either CoASH or Ac-peptide
(K8Ac H4–12 with K5R and K12R), and varied substrate as either
acetyl-CoA or peptide (H4–12 with K5R and K12R). The observed
pattern was fully consistent with a Theorell–Chance mechanism,
but not ping-pong or ordered bi bi mechanisms. 
The Theorell–Chance mechanism helps account
for why Lys-CoA
is a ∼20-fold better p300 inhibitor than the longer peptide-CoA
conjugate H4-CoA-20, even though Ac-Lys is a ∼15-fold worse
p300 substrate than H4–20. In contrast, Gcn5 and Pcaf acetyltransferases
obey classical ternary complex mechanisms, and are more potently inhibited
by the longer peptide-CoA conjugate bisubstrate analogs. A further application of Lys-CoA and the cocrystal
structure was to facilitate in silico modeling of small molecules
in the p300 active site. The understanding of the features that distinguish
p300/CBP from other acetyltransferases, including the Theorell–Chance
catalytic mechanism and the key role that acetyl-CoA binding plays
in the reaction, led to interest in designing inhibitors that would
bind in the same tunnel as acetyl-CoA, acting as competitive inhibitors
that would be expected to be specific for p300/CBP versus other acetyltransferases.
These studies resulted in the discovery of C646, a small molecule
inhibitor of p300/CBP that is relatively potent, specific, and cell
permeable. In agreement with the rationale behind this inhibitor,
it is competitive for acetyl-CoA and selective for p300/CBP. This and other inhibitors of p300/CBP will
be discussed in further detail in section .
 

4

## Inhibitors of p300 Acetyltransferase Activity
Especially for the
p300/CBP field, a challenge faced interpreting
gene knockdowns or knockouts is that the resultant phenotypes can
be attributed to the disruption of either the enzymatic acetylation
activity of p300/CBP or the protein–protein binding activities.
One way that the two properties of p300/CBP can be deciphered in cells
is through the application of inhibitors that only block the catalytic
activity and not the protein–protein binding. Acetyltransferase
inhibitors may therefore be useful as tool compounds in understanding
acetyltransferase functions and also have the potential to treat a
variety of diseases (which will be described in section ). Therefore, the identification and characterization of pharmacologic
acetyltransferase inhibitors are ongoing.
4.1

## Bisubstrate
Acetyltransferase Inhibitors
The first potent acetyltransferase
inhibitor identified is Lys-CoA, which
is a covalent fusion between an acetyl-lysine
and coenzyme A, with an extra methylene in between (see Figure ). Structure–activity relationship studies
have subsequently attempted to improve potency of Lys-CoA and probe
p300 catalysis. − Lys-CoA proved a powerful tool in studies
of the p300 mechanism by crystallography and kinetics. , , 
The rationale behind the
bisubstrate design is that features of the acetyltransferase that
engage each individual substrate (the lysine and the CoA) can be simultaneously
engaged by a compound that mimics both. A similar bisubstrate strategy
has also been employed to generate potent inhibitors of carnitine
acetyltransferase, gentamycin acetyltransferase, spermidine acetyltransferase, , serotonin acetyltransferase, − GNAT acetyltransferases, aminoglycoside acetyltransferase, − ghrelin O-acyltransferase, , and protein kinases. , Lys-CoA is potent
against p300, with a Ki of 19 nM, and is between 50- and 400-fold tighter binding
than CoASH alone. , Because the inhibition by Lys-CoA
follows slow, tight-binding kinetics, the measured IC50 can vary depending on whether a preincubation
step with enzyme is included.
Lys-CoA is specific for p300 (and
CBP, which has a near-identical
acetyltransferase domain sequence). This selectivity can be explained
by its Theorell–Chance kinetic mechanism, whereby p300 interacts
with the substrate protein weakly using a broad, promiscuous surface
(see Figures and ). This is in contrast to other acetyltransferases, many of which
employ a ternary complex mechanism, − in which protein substrate interactions
are more important for enzyme engagement. For non-p300/CBP acetyltransferases,
it can be deduced that the simple Lys-CoA molecule does not engage
enough of their active site to confer high affinity. This explains
why Lys-CoA inhibits other acetyltransferases with lower potency as
compared to p300.
However, with its Theorell–Chance kinetic
mechanism, p300
does not naturally engage the substrate protein for a long period
of time, ejecting it from the active site soon after acetyl transfer.
This explains why adding flanking peptide sequences in the Lys-CoA
design actually reduces potency against p300. Even though H2A, H3,
and H4 tail peptides are substrates for p300, embedding Lys-CoA in
these sequences reduces potency against p300. 
By appending different peptide sequences flanking
the lysine residue
in Lys-CoA, bisubstrate inhibitors were generated with varying specificity
profiles with other acetyltransferases (see Figure ). These acetyltransferases are more substrate selective,
and thus the inhibitor selectivity comes from matching the flanking
sequences to that of the natural substrate. For example, H3-CoA-20
(20-mer peptide with K14 as the site of CoA conjugation) is potent
(Ki of around 28 nM) and selective for
Pcaf. , An H3-CoA-20 derivative proved useful in
generating a cocrystal structure with Gcn5. Additional studies on peptide-CoA conjugates have explored the broader
potential of these bisubstrate analogs against a range of acetyltransferases. 
One major limitation of these bisubstrate
inhibitors is that they
are not efficiently cell permeable. Cell delivery by microinjection
allowed the study of p300 acetyltransferase functions in a variety
of systems, including the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, frog oocytes, and cultured mammalian cells, , although these methods are labor-intensive. Delivery by cell permeabilization
allowed the introduction of Lys-CoA into muscle cells and melanocytes, but the lipid-based detergent used has some cytotoxicity.
Because the negative charges on the three phosphates of the phosphoadenosine
moiety may be responsible for reduced cell permeability, analogs were
explored that lack some of these groups, but most had no detectable
p300 inhibition, and the best was 3′-dephospho-Lys-CoA, which
had a 32-fold worse potency (IC50 of 1.6 μM). Prodrug strategies have been suggested to mask
the phosphate groups. Some success has
been achieved by appending positively charged arginines and lysines
in peptides appended to the target lysine moiety. Appending the Tat
peptide sequence (see Figure ), which originates
from the well-established cell-penetrating HIV Tat protein, resulted
in a mere 5-fold worse IC50 for p300, but also made it
less selective for p300, with 91-fold better potency for Pcaf (IC50 of 2.2 μM for Pcaf, which is only 8.8-fold that of
p300). A similar Tat-conjugate was employed
to generate H3-CoA-20-Tat, which retained 300-fold selectivity for
Pcaf over p300, and these were used to study the functional interaction
of acetyltransferases and the protein PZLF in cells. 
 
4.2

## Natural Product Acetyltransferase Inhibitors
There is much interest in the identification of nonpeptidic small
molecule inhibitors of acetyltransferases. Many natural products have
been isolated and tested for acetyltransferase inhibitory properties.
It should be noted that as these were studied by different laboratories
employing varying methodologies, the IC50 numbers included
here might not all be directly comparable. It is also notable that
most of those described here are conveniently commercially available.
The first natural product that was found to have acetyltransferase
inhibitory properties is anacardic acid (see Figure ). 
Anacardic acid can
be isolated from cashew nutshell oil, mangos, and geraniums. It consists
of a salicylic acid substituted with an alkyl chain. It is partially
miscible in ethanol and ether, but immiscible in water. It is known
to be toxic to Gram-positive bacteria and causes an allergic skin
rash in humans. A PubMed search for
“anacardic acid” yields 117 articles, spanning the years
1976–2013.
The inhibition of acetyltransferases by anacardic
acid was first
described in 2003, and it appeared to be fairly potent against p300
(IC50 of 8.5 μM) and Pcaf (IC50 of 5 μM),
showing noncompetitive inhibition kinetics. However, an independent analysis of anacardic acid suggested inhibitory
action against Tip60 (IC50 of 64 μM) and MOF (IC50 of 43 μM) but not against p300 or Pcaf (IC50 > 200 μM), while a third
study
measured IC50 above 200 μM for yeast Esa1, Tip60,
p300, and Pcaf. Certain benzamide analogs
of anacardic acid have increased potency against acetyltransferases. Intriguingly, modification of anacardic acid
by adding a phenyl ring, to produce the benzamide analog called CTPB
(see Figure ), was reported to confer p300
activation. − In addition to its likely modulation of
other nonacetyltransferase targets in the cell, a major limitation
of anacardic acid is its poor solubility. 
Another natural product found to have acetyltransferase inhibitory
properties is curcumin (see Figure ). Curcumin can be isolated from tumeric, which
is a root spice in the ginger family. It consists of two phenols connected
by two carbonyls. It is soluble in oil and DMSO, but not in water.
It is a commonly used yellow food dye, and it is nontoxic: a daily
dose of 12 g for 3 months is safe. A
PubMed search for “curcumin” yields an astounding 5400
articles, spanning the years 1949–2013. The use of curcumin
in food and ethnic medicines has a long history. In addition to acetyltransferases, curcumin is thought
to affect a variety of other targets in cells, including several kinases,
COX2, phosphatases, and Bcl proteins. − 
Its inhibition of acetyltransferases
includes p300 and acetyltransferases
in the MYST family, and may occur via
the electrophilic unsaturated ketone in curcumin being attacked by
a acetyltransferase cysteine thiol group, to produce a covalent adduct. The IC50 against p300 is 25 μM. Despite many clinical observations of a variety
of positive effects, curcumin showed unacceptably poor absorption,
rapid metabolism, and elimination in Phase I clinical trials. , Several curcumin analogs have been described, , but a pharmacologically useful acetyltransferase-specific inhibitor
has yet to be derived from curcumin.
In the same year that curcumin
was found to have acetyltransferase
inhibitory properties, the natural product garcinol was also found
to have acetyltransferase-inhibitory properties (see Figure ). , Garcinol can be isolated from Garcinia indica, also known as kokum, which is a plant in
the mangosteen family that produces edible fruit. Garcinol consists
of a polyisoprenylated benzophenone. It is soluble in DMSO, ethanol,
or DMF, but not in water. A PubMed search for “garcinol”
yields 76 articles, spanning the years 1987–2013. It is a fairly
potent acetyltransferase inhibitor, hitting p300 (IC50 of
7 μM) and Pcaf (IC50 of 5 μM), and has mixed-type
inhibition kinetics. Unfortunately,
garcinol (and the related isogarcinol) is fairly toxic in cells. An
analog of garcinol, called LTK-14 (see Figure ), improves toxicity and selectivity, with retained p300 potency
(IC50 around 6 μM) but has no detectable inhibition
of Pcaf. , Garcinol and LTK-14 are poorly
soluble and unstable, and this has been attempted to be corrected
through further investigation of structural analogs. − One intriguing garcinol analog is nemorosone, which was found to
have a modest (1.5–2-fold at 10 μM) activation of p300. 
Also in 2004, certain γ-butyrolactone
analogs, including
one named MB-3 (see Figure ), were found to
have acetyltransferase inhibitory properties. Although the γ-butyrolactones used in that study
were rationally designed and of synthetic origin, γ-butyrolactones
can be isolated from wine, and have therefore been included in this
section on natural products. MB-3 is soluble in DMSO or methanol.
γ-Butyrolactones were developed with varying specificities against
Pcaf and a Gcn5-like acetyltransferase, although potencies were modest
(for example, the Gcn5 inhibitor has an IC50 of 100 μM ) and cellular activity remains to be demonstrated. 
Another natural product that was found
to have acetyltransferase-inhibitory
properties is plumbagin (see Figure ). Plumbagin can be isolated from the plant genera Plumbago (leadwort), Drosera, and Nepenthes. Plumbagin is a napthoquinone
derivative. It is soluble in DMSO and ethanol, but only slightly in
water. A PubMed search for “plumbagin” yields 370 articles,
spanning the years 1968–2013. Plumbagin is fairly safe at low
doses but toxic at high doses. Plumbagin
is thought to undergo redox cycling, which has effects on reactive
oxygen species and the chelating of metals in cells. It also affects
the drug efflux mechanism in cells and the conjugative transfer of
antibiotic-resistance plasmids in bacteria. The effect of plumbagin on acetyltransferases was revealed in 2009,
with modest inhibition of p300 (IC50 of 25 μM) and
Pcaf (IC50 of 50 μM). Further analysis of structural
analogs of plumbagin did not result in improved potency or specificity
with p300 or Pcaf. 
Also in 2009,
the natural product epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG)
was found to have acetyltransferase inhibitory properties (see Figure ). EGCG can be isolated
from tea plants. It consists of an epigallocatechin linked to a gallic
acid via an ester linkage. It is soluble in water, DMSO, ethanol,
and DMF. A PubMed search for “epigallocatechin-3-gallate”
yields 3434 articles, spanning the years 1985–2013. EGCG appears
to be a broad-spectrum acetyltransferase inhibitor, with modest potency
against p300 (IC50 of 30 μM), CBP (IC50 of 50 μM), Pcaf (IC50 of 60 μM), and Tip60
(IC50 of 70 μM), and uncompetitive inhibition kinetics. EGCG has several targets in cells, including
topoisomerase. − EGCG appears to negate the effects of other compounds when combination
therapies were attempted, suggesting potentially detrimental contraindications. , EGCG, like other topoisomerase poisons, may be carcinogenic. 
Also in 2009, the natural product quercetin
was found to have acetyltransferase-inhibitory
properties (see Figure ). Quercetin can be isolated from a wide variety of plants,
including the oak tree for which it is named, Quercus, as well as tea leaves, honey, fruits, and vegetables. Quercetin
is a polyphenolic flavonoid, is insoluble in water, and is soluble
in DMSO. A PubMed search for “quercetin” yields an astounding
9568 articles, spanning the years 1948–2013. Quercetin also
has other effects in cells, including scavenging reactive oxygen species and inhibiting cytochromes p450, monoamine-oxidase, and DNA gyrase. Although the effects
of quercetin on acetyltransferases have not yet been fully analyzed,
an IC50 for p300 was measured at 100 μM. However,
they isolated p300 from cells that were treated with the compound,
and tested the purified enzyme for acetyltransferase activity, and
therefore the effects of quercetin on p300 activity could be indirectly
mediated by another factor, such as by altering p300 phosphorylation. 
Another natural product found to have
acetyltransferase inhibitory
properties is ochratoxin A. Ochratoxin A is produced by certain bacteria
in the Aspergillus and Penicillium genuses, it is poisonous, and humans
are believed to be exposed to substantial amounts of ochratoxin A
in their environment and food. It is
a bicyclic lactone and is soluble in water and organic solvents. A
PubMed search for “ochratoxin A” yields 2410 articles,
spanning the years 1965–2013. Although detailed analysis of
its acetyltransferase target or its mode of action has not been done,
it appears to inhibit acetyltransferase(s) with moderate potency (IC50 of 25 μM). 
The
final natural product discussed here, which was found to have
acetyltransferase-inhibitory properties, is a prostaglandin, specifically
Δ12-PG-J2 (see Figure ). Prostaglandins are fatty acids with important
functions in the human body, and Δ12-PG-J2 is a decomposition
product of PG-D2, which is a major prostaglandin produced by mast
cells, and is found in mast cells and brain cells. The “Δ12”
indicates that it is unsaturated at the twelfth carbon along the chain,
and the “J” refers to the α,β-unsaturated
cyclopentanone moiety. Prostaglandins are slightly soluble in ethanol
and insoluble in water. PG-J2 derivatives are natural activating ligands
of the nuclear receptor PPARγ. The electrophilic carbon in the cyclopentanone moiety appears to
be attacked by the p300 cysteine 1438 to form a covalent adduct with
reduced acetyltransferase activity. It
is relatively potent against p300 (IC50 of 750 nM) but
not Pcaf (no detectable inhibition at 5 μM), and also inhibits
acetylation in cells (ED50 of 5 μM by immunoblotting
against acetyl-K9/K14 H3 in HepG2 cells).
 
4.3

## Synthetic Acetyltransferase Inhibitors
Apart from natural products, several small molecules and other synthetic
compounds have been found to have acetyltransferase-inhibitory activity
through various chemical screens. Isothiazolones with acetyltransferase-inhibitory
properties were identified in 2005 (see Figure ). A series of isothiazolone analogs
were compared for potency against Pcaf (which was as low as an IC50 of 1 μM , ) and p300 (which was
as low as an IC50 of ∼30 μM), and many were
Pcaf-specific. Interestingly, no inhibition was observed in the presence
of 1 mM DTT, implying that these compounds
may not work well in reducing intracellular conditions, and also implying
a possible mechanism. The nitrogen–sulfur bond is thought to
be weak and susceptible to cleavage by thiols, such as via reaction
with an acetyltransferase cysteine, to produce a disulfide adduct. Consistent with this, isothiazolones also inhibit
the cysteine protease cathepsin B, although certain structural analogs
exhibit >20-fold selectivity for Pcaf over cathepsin B. Intriguingly, the isothiazolone Kathon CG,
an ingredient in cosmetics, was found to have potent inhibition of
Pcaf and caused decreased cell growth. 
Also in 2005, quinoline compounds were found to have acetyltransferase-inhibitory
properties (see Figure ). Inhibition of Gcn5
by the quinoline MC1626 was first implicated by chemical genetic studies, but the effects observed were subsequently
thought to occur via a Gcn5-independent mechanism in cells. However, several quinoline analogs were determined
to have bona fide modest potency against p300 and CBP (IC50 as low as 25 μM) but little or no inhibition of Pcaf or Gcn5. , Intriguingly, the quinoline HCQ (hydroxychloroquine, an antimalarial
drug) and a structurally unrelated all-trans retinoic acid were found
to stimulate Pcaf activity (1.5–2-fold at 1 μM). A larger molecule that contains a quinoline
moiety, called montelukast, which is a leukotriene receptor antagonist
and used to treat asthma and allergies, was found to inhibit cellular
NFkB-associated acetyltransferase activity with submicromolar potency,
although potentially indirectly. 
Another class of compounds found to have acetyltransferase-inhibitory
properties is the thiazoles (see Figure ),
including the compound CPTH2, which has weak potency (high-mM IC50) against Gcn5. A compound
that bears some structural similarities to the thiazoles is the so-called
compound a (see Figure ), found by the Zheng
lab to have acetyltransferase-inhibitory properties. This compound appears to have weak potency against several
acetyltransferases, including Tip60 (IC50 of 149 μM),
yeast Esa1 (IC50 of 190 μM), and p300 (IC50 of 150 μM).
Virtual screening of a commercially available
library of ∼500 000
compounds started with in silico docking to the acetyl-CoA binding
pocket of the p300 acetyltransferase domain. Compounds with predicted binding affinity were then screened by
various assays with purified p300 acetyltransferase domain. This led
to the identification of three inhibitors of p300, which all shared
a linear arrangement of 3 or 4 aromatic rings terminating in a benzoic
acid. Despite this apparent structural similarity, the steady-state
kinetic mechanism of each inhibitor was distinct. Compound C646 appeared
to act by competition with acetyl-CoA but not with peptide substrate,
which was consistent with the original docking model and further validated
by site-directed mutagenesis (of the residues highlighted in Figure ). Although C646 contains a potentially electrophilic
group, its inhibition of p300 appeared to be noncovalent. C646 was
fairly potent against p300 (Ki of 400
nM) and had at least 8-fold selectivity versus Pcaf, Gcn5, yeast Rtt109,
Sas histone acetyltransferase, MOZ histone acetyltransferase, and
serotonin N-acetyltransferase. C646 was also proven
to inhibit acetylation in cells, making it an attractive probe for
p300/CBP acetyltransferase studies.
An analog of C646, C107,
retains potency as a p300 acetyltransferase
inhibitor, as measured against purified enzyme and in cells by acid-urea
gel analysis. In assays where C646-induced fluorescence interferes
with measurements, C107 appears to be a valid substitute as it lacks
the intrinsic fluorescence properties of C646. It also lacks the pharmacologic liabilities commonly associated
with furan rings, but still retains most of the same structural features
of C646, including a five-membered heterocycle that may cause off-target
effects. , 
 

5

## Protein Ligands of p300/CBP
5.1

## Structures
of p300/CBP with Bound Protein
Ligands
Another factor in the functions, catalysis, and inhibition
of p300 is interactions of domains that flank that catalytic domain.
On the N-terminal side of the p300 catalytic domain is a bromodomain,
and on the C-terminal side is a cysteine-histidine rich (C/H3) domain.
Many proteins have been identified that bind to these domains (see Table 2). These ligands
include acetylated proteins that interact with the p300 bromodomain,
such as histones (for example, histone H4 acetylated at K20, and H3 in the context of chromatin ), MyoD (acetylated at K99, K102), , STAT3 (acetylated at K49, K87), p53
(acetylated at K382), CtBP, and HIV Tat (acetylated at K50). Many proteins
bind the C/H3 domain, including NUT, adenoviral E1A, FOS, Pcaf, Gcn5, TFIIB,
p53, FOXO3a, STAT1, and MEF2. There
are some ligands that seem to bind both the bromodomain and the C/H3
domain, such as p53 and MyoD. Furthermore, there may be crosstalk
between ligand-binding domains, for example, between the p300 bromodomain
and PHD finger in the C/H2 domain. 
Some of the p300–ligand interactions have been studied in
structural detail by cocrystal X-ray diffraction and solution binding NMR − analysis. Bromodomain binding typically
occurs on one side of the four-helical bundle, and is mediated by
the two loops between helices, although one crystal structure had
an additional ligand bound against the side of the helix (see Figure ). A recent study reports that the histone chaperone
Asf1 binds the p300/CBP bromodomain in a noncanonical way. A recent structure from Daniel Panne and colleagues
reveals a potential intramolecular regulatory interaction between
the p300 bromodomain and its neighboring acetyltransferase domain. Structural features of these protein ligand
interactions have been replicated by several recent synthetic ligands
for the p300/CBP bromodomain, which will be discussed in section .
The TAZ2 region of the C/H3 domain appears
to bind ligands in diverse
conformations (see Figure ). C/H3 binding
to the N-terminal region of MEF2 appears to be via any of three distinct
surfaces on the TAZ2 domain. The crystal structure had a MEF2 dimer
with three bound TAZ2 domains, each in a different conformation. C/H3 binding to the p53 TAD1 appears to be
via extended interactions across a large part of the TAZ2 domain. C/H3 binding to E1A appears to induce a helical
structure in the CR1 region of E1A, which is otherwise unstructured. A structure of C/H3 TAZ2 binding to STAT1 helps
explain why TAZ2 binds STAT1 while TAZ1 binds STAT2, which occurs
when the STAT1/STAT2 heterodimer engages p300 through both contacts. 
 
5.2

## Flanking Domains on p300/CBP Acetyltransferase
Activity
One well-documented effect of these p300–ligand
binding interactions is to facilitate the formation of a transcriptionally
activating complex. DNA-binding ligands could recruit p300 to gene
elements. p300 could nucleate complex formation by serving as a scaffold,
also interacting with general transcriptional machinery. Some p300
ligands are effector proteins that modulate chromatin or have other
activities, which are brought into proximity with their chromatin
substrate by the bridging p300. Some
p300 ligands have activities that are inhibitory to transcription,
for example, HDAC1, which binds the p300 C/H3 domain, and these corepressors could be relieved by
competing interaction with an alternate ligand. By these mechanisms,
regulated ligand binding changes the subnuclear targeting of p300
and other proteins, without necessarily influencing the catalytic
function of p300 (see Figure ).
 One naturally occurring
p300 ligand of interest is the protein
Mastermind. Mastermind binds to the C/H3 domain of p300. Mastermind received its name from researchers
studying the Drosophila gene, and when
describing the human homologue, it can also be known as Mastermind-like
protein 1, MAM, MAM1, MAML, or MAML1, but these are all the same gene.
Mastermind first became a gene of interest in C. elegans (where it has been called sel-8, lag-3, or pqn-17) when its mutation
was found to suppress a mutation in lin-12 (human
Notch3) and subsequently found to function
in the Notch pathway by binding LAG-1 (human CSL, a DNA-binding protein)
and activating transcription. When protein
sequence homology was found between the human genes and those in model
organisms, this allowed researchers
to understand how the Notch pathway works in humans. , The first crystal structure of Mastermind was from C. elegans, and was in complex with Notch, CSL, and
DNA, in which the Mastermind N-terminal region forms a long α
helix resembling an arm, with a bend or elbow in the middle, that
hugs around Notch and CSL. Subsequent
crystallography of the human proteins showed a comparable structure. − 
We now know that when activated, Notch binds CSL and Mastermind,
and this complex associates with DNA via CSL (see Figure ). The core complex then recruits transcriptional
coactivators, including p300 and Pcaf. In addition to nucleating a
transcriptional complex and being recruited to chromatin associated
with Notch regulation, it was hypothesized that there are additional
synergistic effects of the Mastermind–p300 interaction.
 Interestingly, it was shown that Mastermind can activate
p300 acetyltransferase
catalysis. The effect of Mastermind
on p300 acetyltransferase catalysis was dose-dependent and appeared
to enhance the maximal acetylation rate of p300 and not the binding
of p300 to peptide substrate. In cells, Mastermind increased p300
autoacetylation, measured using immunoblotting, and increased transcriptional
coactivation, measured using a luciferase reporter. Mastermind and
p300 were recruited to nuclear bodies, and these nuclear bodies had enhanced histone H3 and H4 acetylation.
A remaining question is how the events are timed. A simple model would
be that first Mastermind binds to the C/H3 domain of p300, and this
promotes activation of p300 acetyl transfer, leading to its increased
autoacetylation, acetylation of histones, acetylation of Mastermind,
p300–Mastermind targeting to nuclear bodies, and transcriptional
coactivation (see Figure ). This is supported
by the loss of Mastermind activation of p300 autoacetylation when
the C/H3 domain is deleted. A further
observation is that the activation loop (residues 1523–1554)
is not required for Mastermind effects on p300 autoacetylation (at
lysine 1499) or transcriptional activation. However, some of the data
argue against this simple model; for example, p300 lacking the C/H3
domain still gets targeted to nuclear bodies by Mastermind. It is also still unknown how and when these
steps are reversed, and one clue is that acetylation decreases the
binding affinity between Mastermind and p300. Therefore, Mastermind may first associate with p300, turn
it on, and then dissociate. 
It
also remains to be seen whether these trends observed with Mastermind
will extend to other p300 ligands. Because there are more than one
ligand that interact with the C/H3 domain, there may be a common mechanism
by which they influence p300 catalysis, or it may vary entirely depending
on the specific ligand in question. Interestingly, a ligand of the
p300 bromodomain, called CtBP, appears to change p300 acetyltransferase
activity via steric hindrance that blocks other substrates. Furthermore, many ligands of other p300 domains,
and their effects on p300 catalysis, are still being uncovered and
investigated. It could be hypothesized that ligand binding could influence
substrate specificity through direct competition for the same binding
site or conformational changes in the binding pockets of p300/CBP
or the multiprotein complex. Ligand binding could also theoretically
change the catalysis itself via long-range conformational changes
in the region that binds acetyl-CoA or the residues involved in catalysis.
In purified p300, the flanking bromodomain and C/H3 domain have
a significant effect on catalysis in the absence of ligands. p300
BHC (a construct containing the bromodomain, catalytic acetyltransferase
domain, and C/H3 domain) is considerably more efficient as a histone
acetyltransferase than the p300 acetyltransfarase domain, with a 5-fold
higher kcat. Even more dramatic, p300 BHC has a 10-fold lower Km for acetyl-CoA. Interestingly, the small molecule inhibitors
C646 and C107 appeared to show about 4–5-fold reduced potency
against BHC acetyltransferase activity versus the isolated acetyltransferase
domain. However, another study showed different results. The bromodomain-HAT crystal structure suggests
the potential for intramolecular interactions that can be communicated
between the domains. 
 
5.3

## Compounds That Block or Mimic p300/CBP Ligand
Binding
Recent progress has been made in developing inhibitors
of bromodomain interactions (reviewed by Filippakopoulos et al. ). Several compounds have been identified that
inhibit BET bromodomains, such as I-BET762/GSK525762A, I-BET151/GSK1210151A, , JQ1, PFI-1, , and various isoxazoles. − These have proven useful in
a variety of exciting biological applications, including in HIV, − merkel cell polyomavirus, leukemia, − lymphoma, multiple myeloma, lung adenocarcinoma, inflammation, − kidney disease, and fertility research. Low micromolar
inhibitors of other bromodomains have also been reported. In general, bromodomain inhibitors may block
the binding interactions of many different protein ligands, often
complicating analysis of single ligand interactions in cells. − 
Compounds that target the p300/CBP bromodomain have been identified
by the Structural Genomics Consortium (SGC) and Ming–Ming Zhou’s
group (see Figure ). MS7972 appears to inhibit
the p300/CBP bromodomain with an affinity of around 20 μM and
undetermined specificity for other bromodomain-containing proteins. The compound ischemin was identified that also
appears to inhibit the p300/CBP bromodomain with affinity of around
20 μM and undetermined specificity for other bromodomain-containing
proteins. Cyclic peptides containing
acetyl-lysine were designed to inhibit the p300/CBP bromodomain with
an affinity of as low as 8 μM and undetermined specificity for
other bromodomain-containing proteins. Further compounds were identified that have an affinity for the
p300/CBP bromodomain of around 0.39 μM and affinity for a BET
bromodomain of around 1.4 μM. The
Brennan group tested a collection of [1,2,4]triazolo[4,3-a]phthalazines against a panel of bromodomains, and found several
with submicomolar affinity for p300/CBP bromodomain, although all
had relatively strong affinities for BET bromodomains. The widely used analgesic acetaminophen (paracetamol)
was also found to bind the CBP bromodomain, probably by a weak nonspecific
interaction. A series of 3,5-dimethylisoxazoles
were found to have varying micomolar inhibitory properties against
the p300/CBP bromodomain, although all still retained relatively potent
inhibitory activity against BET bromodomains. There is structural evidence that several of these inhibitors
bind the bromodomain in a manner similar to that of the natural protein
ligands (see Figure ).
More recently,
the compound named 59 was identified with affinity
of around 32 and 21 nM for p300 and CBP bromodomains, respectively,
and reported 40-fold or greater selectivity versus all 10 other bromodomains
tested. Although promising, this compound did show some pan-inhibitory
properties against several unrelated enzymes including adrenergic
receptors, phosphodiesterase-5, and platelet-activating factor. 
 For the C/H3 domain, no inhibitors
have been carefully studied
to our knowledge, although there is some evidence to suggest that
the drug Roscovitine (see Figure ), also
known as Seliciclib, which is an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase
(CDK), may in fact inhibit the interaction of p300 C/H3 and CDK. 
The KIX domain (located before the N-terminus
of the bromodomain)
is the target of several small molecules. The compound napthol AS-E
(see Figure ) appears to bind the KIX domain
with an affinity of 8.6 μM and undetermined specificity. The NMR structure was obtained of the KIX domain
in complex with the phosphorylated compound, known as KG-501 (identical
to napthol AS-E except the hydroxyl group is replaced with a phosphate
group). This compound was the first KIX inhibitor identified, and was subsequently reported to be converted
to more-active napthol AS-E in the cell medium prior to cellular entry. In the costructure, KG-501 does not directly
compete for ligand binding. Rather, it binds at a site that is known
to dynamically regulate binding interactions at the distal groove. It is likely that the active dephosphorylated
compound binds in a similar manner. The effect of binding allosterically
inhibits the binding of the CREB KID domain, inhibits CREB-mediated
gene induction, but appears to increase histone acetylation. , At around the same time, a series of isoxazolidine-containing molecules
named iTADs were described that bind
in the same binding site of KIX as transactivation domains of proteins
such as MLL, c-Jun, and Tat. iTAD1 (see
Figure ) binds KIX with an affinity of around
38 μM and promiscuously binds other proteins known to also interact
with transactivation domains, such as TRRAP and Med23. Binding of
iTAD to KIX competitively inhibits endogenous transactivation domain-containing
ligands from binding the same site, while activating CBP activities
that are normally induced by protein ligand binding. The addition of a DNA-binding moiety to iTAD can allow
activation of the associated gene by recruiting the active CBP. The CBP KIX domain may also be the target of
the compound ICG-001 (see Figure ), which
appears to block the association of CBP with β-catenin, and
decrease expression of genes usually induced in the Wnt/β-catenin/CBP
pathway. Although the specificity of this compound is not known, nor
the exact binding mechanism, it does show promising effects in animal
models of colon cancer, myocardial infarction, pulmonary fibrosis,
and fibrotic kidney disease. − 
More recently, two natural products
from lichen, sekikaic acid
and lobaric acid (see Figure ), were found
to have KIX-binding properties, in addition to their other known activities. Sekikaic acid and lobaric acid inhibit the
KIX interaction with the ligand MLL with IC50 values of
34 and 17 μM, respectively. Interestingly, they also inhibit
the binding of the KID domain of CREB, at a distinct binding site
within KIX, with IC50 values of 64 and 25 μM, respectively.
Furthermore, the interaction appears to have some specificity, because
the binding of Med15 and its cognate transactivation domain within
VP16 was not inhibited by sekikaic acid. The effect is a downregulation
of p300/CBP-mediated gene expression, including the Cyclin D1 gene
normally induced by c-Jun through its interaction with KIX.
The binding of the C/H1 region of p300/CBP with the protein ligand
HIF-1α has also been the target of inhibition studies. Several
epidithiodiketopiperazine (ETP) compounds have been found to inhibit
this interaction, including the fungal natural products chaetocin
and chetomin, as well as the synthetic
ETP 3 (see Figure ). Chetomin and ETP 3 both bind to C/H1 (KD values of 540 and 750 nM, respectively) and inhibit
HIF-1α binding (IC50 values of 540 and 1500 nM, respectively),
probably by disrupting the global folding of the domain, which prevented
hypoxia-induced gene induction in cultured cells. The specificity
of these compounds for the p300/CBP C/H1 has not yet been studied,
but it will be interesting to see whether the promising effects that
these compounds have on animal models are due to the p300/CBP inhibition
or another target. Another compound, called KCN1 (see Figure ), appears to inhibit p300/CBP interaction with
HIF-1α, although by an unknown mechanism. 
 

6

## Potential Applications for
Inhibitors and Activators
of p300/CBP
6.1

## Loss of p300/CBP Activity in Human Disease
Given the
pivotal role of p300/CBP in essential cellular functions,
it is not surprising that p300 homozygous knockout, CBP homozygous
knockout, p300/CBP double homozygous knockout, and p300/CBP double
heterozygous knockout are lethal in mammals. , These gene dosage effects provide further evidence for the existence
of a limiting pool of p300/CBP that may allow for differential p300/CBP
recruitment depending on signaling pathway activation.
Furthermore,
single heterozygous loss-of-function mutations, in p300 or CBP, are
one of the known causes of Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome (abbreviated
RTS or RSTS), a congenital developmental disorder. The frequency of
RTS is approximately one affected individual out of every 100 000
newborns. p300/CBP mutations that cause
RTS are usually de novo mutations (i.e., not inherited from either
parent), but in the extremely rare cases of vertical transmission,
inheritance is Mendelian autosomal dominant. 
p300/CBP mutations that cause RTS are found in the germline
of
the patient, can occur in any of several p300/CBP exons (and disrupt
any of several p300/CBP protein domains), and are usually point mutations
or small deletions or insertions (which can cause truncations , ), but can also be translocations, inversions, or large deletions. 
40% of RTS patients either have unknown
RTS etiology, or may be
more appropriately diagnosed with a different (but phenotypically
similar) syndrome, such as Saethre–Chotzen syndrome (caused
by mutations in TWIST1) or Mowat–Wilson syndrome (caused by
mutations in ZEB2). Approximately 55%
of RTS patients have germline mutations in CBP, and approximately
5% of RTS patients have germline mutations in p300. RTS patients with p300 mutations often have milder phenotypes
than those with CBP mutations. − In RTS patients, CBP mutations
are more common than p300 mutations, but in the human population,
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in general are more common in the
p300 gene than the CBP gene. It has
therefore been hypothesized that p300 germline mutations could be
associated with a disorder or phenotype other than classical RTS,
which has yet to be found.
RTS is characterized by postnatal
growth deficiency, mental retardation,
skeletal and cardiac abnormalities, psychomotor development delay,
and a dysmorphology involving broad thumbs and big toes, short stature,
and characteristic facial features. Cells
taken from these patients have reduced acetylation of histones, particularly
H2A and H2B, as compared to control cells, further implicating the loss of function of p300/CBP in the disease
etiology. Another phenotype of RTS is an increased likelihood to develop
cancer. About 5% of children with RTS develop tumors of neural crest
origin. It has been hypothesized that
such tumors might have somatic mutations in the remaining p300/CBP
allele. 
Apart from RTS-associated
tumors, loss-of-function in p300/CBP
has been implicated in several additional cancers with somatic mutations
in p300 or CBP. One study, which screened 103 cancer cell lines, examined
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and found that 51% of the cell lines
had LOH at the p300 locus and 35% had LOH at the CBP locus (with 19%
of the cell lines having LOH at both loci), and these numbers are consistent with another study of 203 cancer
samples, which found 35–50% of primary ovarian, colon, and
breast tumors had LOH at the p300 locus. In another study, 222 cancer samples were examined, and while only
1% of the samples had mutations in CBP (heterozygous truncations),
3.6% of the samples had LOH at the p300 locus (either by mutation
or by silencing of one p300 allele) combined with a truncation in
the remaining p300 allele. Similarly, in a study of colorectal and
gastric carcinomas, LOH at the p300 locus was combined with missense
mutations in the remaining p300 allele. These data are consistent with a “two-hit” inactivation
model, which is characteristic of tumor suppressors. However, other
genes are also located within the regions lost in many of these large
deletions, so that LOH may only be part of the story.
Furthermore,
p300 mutations identified in primary tissues were
found in solid tumors of colorectal, breast, and gastric tissue, while
p300 mutations identified in cell lines were found in colorectal,
breast, ovarian, pancreatic, oral squamous cell, and cervical cancers. A recent study of B-cell non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma identified CBP (or more rarely p300) heterozygous loss of
function mutations in 40% of samples, while another study of 154 lung cancer samples identified mutations
in 5–10% of samples. These cancer-associated
p300/CBP mutations were found in several p300/CBP exons, without any
obvious connection between the p300/CBP protein domain disrupted in
each case and the phenotypes observed.
While these mutation
screening studies may be largely correlative,
several experiments have helped establish the p300/CBP mutation as
being causative. In one study, carcinoma cell lines with p300 truncation
mutations (but not cancer cell lines without p300 mutations) acquired
a reduction in proliferation when transfected with full-length, wild-type
p300 (although not CBP), further implicating the p300 mutation in
the cancerous phenotypes of this cancer. In a recent study of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), cells were
taken from 71 ALL patients at the time of diagnosis and again at the
time of relapse, and CBP loss of function mutation was found to correlate
with patients acquiring resistance to therapy. 
In addition to p300/CBP mutation, another mechanism
by which p300/CBP
may experience loss of function in cancer is through decreased expression,
selective degradation, or both. This was explored in a study in which
prolonged activation of Ras signaling and platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF) signaling, which are known to cause cancer, also causes
reduced p300/CBP expression and proteasomal degradation. These experiments
were performed in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, but the decreased p300/CBP
protein levels might be relevant in cancers involving Ras, PDGF, and
possibly other pathways. Another observation
of decreased p300/CBP expression was made in certain breast and colorectal
carcinomas (but not in bladder, renal, or ovarian tumors) and in a similar study finding decreased p300
expression in breast and prostate cancer (but not in cervical cancer). A third example was observed in instances of
acute myeloid leukemia that were caused by a translocation in which
MOZ is fused with TIF2, , and this oncogenic
chimeric protein bound to p300/CBP and resulted in decreased p300/CBP
protein levels by an unknown mechanism. 
In summary, p300/CBP partial loss of function can contribute
to
cancer in humans. This result may seem paradoxical, becausep300/CBP
total loss of function prevents cell growth, but one explanation is
that p300/CBP acts in concert with tumor suppressor proteins. One
such example is in the TGF-β pathway, which involves the tumor
suppressors TGF-β, Smad2, Smad4, and RUNX. In this pathway, TGF-β signaling results in the transcriptional
activation of target genes, and this transcriptional regulation requires
p300/CBP in cooperation with Smads and RUNX. Another example of a
tumor suppressor protein is p53, which
is acetylated by p300/CBP, contributing to its stability. In addition,
p53 binds to p300/CBP to form a coactivator complex with DNA, and
utilizes the acetyltransferase activity of p300/CBP to activate target
gene expression. Another tumor suppressor protein that is regulated
by p300/CBP is retinoblastoma protein Rb, whose acetylation decreases
its phosphorylation, and the acetylation
of the associated E2F increases its ubiquitylation. 
To further explore p300/CBP loss-of-function in RTS
and cancer,
several mouse models have been developed. Mouse models of RTS with
heterozygous truncation in CBP or p300 have phenotypes that mimic RTS, and consistent
with observations in humans, the p300 mutants had milder phenotypes.
Mice with heterozygous knockout of CBP also had hematopoeitic failure
and hematological malignancy. The role
for p300/CBP in hematopoiesis is not surprising, considering that
over 56 proteins that bind p300/CBP are known to be essential for
T and B cell production in mice. Furthermore,
in these malignant cells, there was often somatic loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) at the CBP locus, which inactivated the wild-type allele, similar
to LOH seen in human cancers.
Although embryonic lethal, homozygotes
were successfully generated
from these mice using a chimera strategy, and p300 or CBP knockout
caused hematological malignancy. Interestingly, the type of hematological
malignancy was different depending on whether p300 or CBP was mutated. Another strategy to generate homozygous knockouts
of p300 and/or CBP utilized flanking LoxP sites to create conditional
deletions, dependent on the presence of Cre recombinase, that was
used to inactivate p300 and/or CBP in thymocytes. In this study, loss
of CBP (but not p300) occasionally caused T cell lymphoma, but neither
loss consistently resulted in drastic T-cell phenotypes, while loss
of both p300 and CBP caused T cells to die. 
Taken together, these studies using mouse genetics validate
the
role of p300/CBP loss-of-function in RTS and cancer, confirm our understanding
of p300/CBP gene dosage and a limiting pool of p300/CBP protein, and
provide further evidence of subtle functional differences between
the p300 and CBP paralogs. Diseases involving loss-of-function of
p300/CBP could theoretically be treated using compounds that chemically
complement point mutations in the acetyltransferase active site, stimulate p300/CBP activity, or inhibit deacetylase
activity. Studies of loss-of-function serve as a caution that activity
inhibitors might be contraindicated in certain patients, and correct
dosing would need to be optimized to minimize harmful consequences
of too little p300/CBP activity.

6.2

## Overexpression,
Inappropriate Activation,
or Mistargeting of p300/CBP
While loss-of-function in p300/CBP
is deleterious, gain-of-function in p300/CBP also contributes to human
disease, because the correct balance of acetylation and deacetylation,
in the right time and place, is required for normal cell functioning.
This section explores cases of gain-of-function in p300/CBP, either
by direct mutation or overexpression of p300/CBP or by the involvement
of p300/CBP in the disease etiology, as well as additional instances
where disruption of p300/CBP activity would be therapeutically advantageous
(see Figure ).
 There are several instances where p300/CBP overexpression
has been
found to correlate with cancer. In one study of 209 normal nasopharyngeal
mucosa and nasopharyngeal carcinoma samples, p300 expression correlated
with malignancy, aggressive behavior of the carcinoma, and poor patient
prognosis. Furthermore, in a study of
123 hepatocellular carcinoma samples, plus 123 matching adjacent nonmalignant
liver tissue samples, p300 expression correlated with malignancy,
tumor size, poor differentiation, tumor progression, and poor prognosis. 
Overexpression of p300 is also present
in many hormone-dependent
cancers. In one study of 183 breast cancer samples, and another that included matched normal breast tissue, p300 expression correlated with malignancy,
activation of the hypoxia response, and dominant-negative mutant p53
levels. In a study of 95 prostate cancer samples, and another of 92 prostate cancer samples, p300 expression correlated with phenotypes
of malignancy, including proliferation, tumor volume, extraprostatic
extension, seminal vesicle involvement, tumor progression, nuclear
alterations, and poor prognosis. Furthermore, p300 knockdown resulted
in decreased prostate cancer cell proliferation. Targeting p300 in
these cancers could also decrease hormone receptor acetylation, which
would modulate sensitivity to hormones and drugs like tamoxifen. 
Genomic profiling in 101 melanoma samples
provides evidence for
p300 overexpression in this cancer. Subsequently,
profiling of samples from 358 melanoma patients revealed that p300
levels were increased in the cytoplasm while decreased in the nucleus, and that the increase in the cytoplasm correlates
with melanoma progression, tumor size, and ulceration status. Furthermore, in normal melanocytes, decreased
p300/CBP protein levels correlate with activation of replicative senescence,
and because senescence is broadly tumor-suppressive, this prompted
the study of p300/CBP inhibitors in melanoma. Indeed, inhibition of
p300/CBP reduced proliferation and induced senescence in melanoma
cells, as well as sensitizing cells
to DNA damage, which increases the interest in potential combination
therapies of p300/CBP inhibition plus DNA damaging agents. 
This advantageous combination with DNA
damage has also been demonstrated
for colorectal cancer. In one report using colorectal cancer cells,
p300 knockout strains were generated, and they responded to DNA damage
by undergoing apoptosis at a greater rate than cells expressing p300.
Moreover, xenografts of the p300 knockout cells were hypersensitive
to doxorubicin, a cancer therapeutic that induces DNA damage. 
In the case of certain hematological
malignancies, part of p300
or CBP is translocated such that it becomes fused with another protein,
creating an oncogenic fusion protein with inappropriate p300/CBP activity.
These translocations are more common for CBP than p300, and this is
thought to be due to an unstable genomic element near the 5′
end of the CBP gene, although breakpoints
in the second intron have also been described as occurring often. Truncations near the 5′ end of the CBP
gene result in loss of the regulatory N-terminal portion of CBP, may
activate the catalytic acetyltransferase domain, and may target the
fusion protein to inappropriate genes or substrates.
One example
fuses the monocytic leukemia zing-finger (MOZ) gene
with CBP (or in rare cases, with p300), − and is found in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Another example fuses
the gene for MOZ-related factor (MORF), with CBP, and is also found
in AML, but less frequently than for MOZ. − A third example fuses the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene with
p300 or CBP, − is found in patients with infantile acute leukemia and patients
with treatment-related leukemia, and has been studied using a conditional
knockin mouse model. 
A further
avenue of gain-of-function in p300/CBP is through the
action of oncogenes that misappropriate p300/CBP in their transformation
of cells. One such example is in acute myeloid leukemia, which can
be caused by an oncogenic fusion of AML1 and ETO genes. Leukemogenesis
induced by AML1-ETO involves binding of this fusion protein with p300/CBP,
acetylation of the fusion protein by p300/CBP, and the activation
of target genes. Another example is
in NUT midline carcinoma, which is caused by oncogenic fusions of
the NUT protein, including BRD4-NUT and BRD3-NUT. Malignant cell transformation
by BRD4-NUT involves binding of this fusion protein with p300/CBP,
translocation of this complex to nuclear foci, and stimulation of
p300/CBP catalytic activity at these foci. Another way that p300/CBP can be required for the activity of oncogenes
is by controlling the transcription of those oncogenes, which is true
for the immediate early proto-oncogenes c-jun and c-fos. These are oncogenic transcription factors,
and they, as well as c-myb, utilize
the action of p300/CBP in activating target genes in their oncogenic
pathways.
Another example of gain-of-function in p300/CBP is
in viral transformation.
Transformation occurs when a virus usurps the cell’s p300/CBP
to promote the viral life cycle, and in so doing confers inappropriate
activities on p300/CBP, and as a result the cell becomes immortalized.
p300 was first identified because of its ability to bind the adenoviral
E1A protein, and subsequent experiments have elucidated the essential
role of the interaction with p300/CBP in transformation of the host
cell. Likewise, the papillomaviral E6 protein and the viral SV40 large
T antigen protein require interaction with p300/CBP for cellular transformation. 
Chromatin modifiers, including p300/CBP,
are also being explored
as therapeutic targets for treating retroviral infections, such as
HIV. Part of this is because the viral genome expression is impacted
by host chromatin dynamics, including
in HIV LTR transcription initiation and the reversal of viral latency. To that end, targets that have been investigated
include the lysine demethylase Lsd1, lysine deacetylases, and lysine acetyltransferases. Furthermore,
p300/CBP might be dually useful for HIV treatment because the HIV
lifecycle involves p300/CBP acetylating the HIV Tat and integrase proteins. , There is
also evidence that HIV Tat expression could cause the induction of
p300 overexpression, further demonstrating
the potential benefit for testing p300/CBP inhibition in HIV treatment.
Genetic studies suggest a role for p300/CBP in platelet cell production,
where disruption of p300/CBP can cause a high platelet count in a
normal animal, or stimulate platelet production in a diseased animal.
This is likely due to the involvement of p300/CBP in transcriptional
control of genes involved in platelet and megakaryocyte production.
p300/CBP disruption has proved a promising therapeutic option for
several animal models of different types of thrombocytopenia. , 
Additionally, p300/CBP inhibition may prove therapeutic for
heart
disease. As mentioned above, patients with RTS and mice with p300
deleted have cardiac abnormalities, which is consistent with the role
of p300/CBP in transcriptional control by cardiac factors such as
MyoD, MEF2, and GATA4/5/6. On the other
hand, overexpression of p300 has been shown to induce hypertrophy
in cardiomyocytes. Treatment of cardiomyocytes with the hypertrophic
agent phenylephrine has been shown to activate p300, and genetic knockdown
of p300 or CBP inhibited the hypertrophy. 
p300/CBP is also a potential therapeutic target in diabetes.
Hepatic
gluconeogenesis is controlled at the transcriptional level by p300/CBP
as cAMP signaling results in the activation of genes that drive glucose
production. In the fed state, insulin signaling leads to p300/CBP
phosphorylation, preventing its association with CREB and down-regulating
glucose production. In diabetic patients
with decreased insulin or insulin insensitivity, disruption of p300/CBP
activity could therefore reduce the transcription of CREB-controlled
genes, and result in lower glucose production. In a related pathway
that leads to type 2 diabetes, obesity, and nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease, p300/CBP plays a role in transcriptional activation of genes
in lipogenesis and fat accumulation in the liver. High glucose levels
result in activation of p300/CBP, acetylation of carbohydrate-responsive
element-binding protein (ChREBP), formation of a complex including
p300/CBP and ChREBP, acetylation of promoter histone H4, and activation
of target gene transcription. p300 overexpression
results in fat accumulation, insulin resistance, and inflammation
of the liver, thus providing a further potential role for p300/CBP
inhibition in the treatment of type 2 diabetes, obesity, and nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease. 
In summary,
p300/CBP is involved in a variety of different human
diseases, including several where p300/CBP acetyltransferase inhibition
may be of therapeutic value. Thus, understanding p300/CBP function,
developing assays to measure p300/CBP activity in cells, and developing
small molecule agents that target p300/CBP are of pharmacologic interest.

6.3

## Cell-Based Assays of p300/CBP Activity and
Inhibition
This section deals with studies in cultured cells
of inhibitor target validation, pharmacodynamics, and studying the
phenotypes downstream of p300/CBP modulation. A variety of techniques
have been developed to study post-translational modifications; however,
the understanding of acetylation has lagged behind some of the better-characterized
PTMs, such as ubiquitylation and phosphorylation. In many cases, this
may be due to technical challenges faced when studying acetylation.
For the separation and/or detection of acetylation states of proteins
from cells and cell lysates, typical methods can involve acetyl-specific
antibodies, specially formulated acid-urea gel electrophoresis, or
mass spectrometry. Acid-urea gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry
require fixed time points of bulk populations of cells, and are conducted
after cells are killed and lysed. Assays that involve antibodies include
immunoblotting (also known as western blotting), immunoprecipitation
(also known as pulldowns), chromatin immunoprecipitation (also known
as ChIP), and immunohistochemistry (also known as immunofluorescence
microscopy). Several antibodies have been developed that recognize
either acetyl-lysine in general, or acetyl-lysine in the context of
specific neighboring sequences. These antibodies have been, and continue
to be, useful for a variety of studies, but their poor affinities
and imperfect specificities are often a limitation. Of these techniques,
only immunocytochemistry makes single cell analysis possible, which
allows analysis of heterogeneity within a cell population, and also
makes it possible to visualize subcellular spatial distribution of
the signal. For conventional immunofluorescence, the cells must be
fixed and permeabilized, which are known to be associated with disruptions
to the sensitive structures in the cell. 
Each of these traditional techniques involves several steps
between
harvesting the cells and analyzing the signal, during which time the
acetylation state could theoretically be altered. Acetyl-lysine-specific
antibodies could be used in living cells via two possible methods.
First, the antibody can be labeled with a dye and introduced into
cells by microinjection or bead loading, − which are disruptive to cells, although less drastic than killing
and lysing cells. Bead loading of antibodies or antibody fragments
is less laborious and results in higher sample numbers than microinjection.
In a second method for using antibodies in living cells, genetically
encoded single-chain antibodies can be fused to fluorescent proteins, , which is a promising strategy that has yet to be demonstrated for
the study of p300/CBP. Both of these methods would theoretically be
able to track the localization of acetylated proteins and any redistribution
that might occur when p300/CBP is disrupted, but would not be capable
of measuring changes in the total amount of acetyl-protein or the
ratio of acetyl- to unmodified-protein, because the fluorescence level
is constitutive.
To follow acetyltransferase-deacetylase activity
in living cells,
one potential method that has been applied to methylation is using
bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC). Another approach is with bimolecular Förster resonance
energy transfer (FRET). , One group tagged bromodomain-containing
proteins BRD2, TAFII250, and Pcaf with YFP, tagged histones with CFP,
and measured the CFP–YFP interaction by flow cytometry. The major limitation of this flow cytometry
approach is that changes in acetylation dynamics within a single cell
cannot be monitored in real-time. Also, the apparent changes in acetylation
could be on an untagged substrate, providing it is in close enough
proximity to the tagged subunit, and therefore the target site determination
requires inference from mutagenesis studies.
As an improvement
on these techniques, the Minoru Yoshida and colleagues
developed a unimolecular FRET-based assay that allows the analysis
of acetylation and deacetylation in single, living cells. , , This methodology has proved
useful for the dynamic analysis of other post-translational modifications, − including on histones, , and has only recently
been expanded to study acetylation, by the creation of reporters based
on histone H4 lysine substrates and BRDT (binds acetyl-K5/K8) or BRD2
(binds acetyl-K12) bromodomains. These FRET experiments can show dynamics
in real-time; for example, a baseline with normal acetyltransferase/deacetylase
activity levels is established, followed by addition of drug, and
the time-course of drug response is thereby followed in each cell.
As a first demonstration of the technique, dose-dependent FRET decreases
of about 20% (Y/C emission) after 2 h of treatment with trichostatin
A (TSA), a deacetylase inhibitor, were
observed for the K5/K8 and K12 reporters. This could be reversed upon
washout and the response of the K12 reporter (and to a lesser degree
the K5/K8 reporter) could be blocked by BIC1, a compound that weakly
disrupts the bromodomain that the reporter depends upon. Dose-dependent
FRET increases of about 10% after 5 min of treatment with 20 μM
C107, a p300/CBP acetyltransferase inhibitor, were observed for the
K5/K8 reporter. Similarly, FRET was increased by
about 20% in cells with stably knocked down p300 or CBP as compared
to control cells, for the K5/K8 reporter. Limitations of this assay
include potential signal from intermolecular FRET such as in dense
chromatin, disruptions to the cells from transfection agents and expression
of a tagged histone, potential phototoxicity and photobleaching after
long time-courses, and the inability to do time-courses for genetic
disruption of p300/CBP as opposed to pharmacologic disruption. An
exciting extension of this methodology would be to adapt it for high-throughput
drug screening, such as by epifluorescence imaging in 96-well glass-bottomed
culture dish format, with robotics to control the field of view in
each well, and employing a microfluidic device for precise timing
of drug delivery in each well.
In addition to target validation,
an important question in drug
discovery is whether disease phenotypes can be reversed by pharmacologic
inhibition of p300/CBP. As discussed in section , overexpression or dysregulation of p300/CBP can contribute
to cell transformation. Hallmarks of cancer include increased malignant
cell growth (and evasion of pathways that could block growth or induce
cell death such as apoptosis), increased blood vessel growth (angiogenesis),
ability to multiply indefinitely (immortality), movement to distant
sites and invasion of surrounding tissues (metastasis), aberrant metabolism,
evasion of the immune system, chromosome abnormalities and DNA instability,
and inflammation. , Genetic knockout or knockdown
of p300 has implicated p300 in pathways that favor growth and angiogenesis.
However, as discussed in section , p300
has diverse functions as a scaffold and bridge, and thus it is unclear
how significantly the acetyltransferase function of p300 contributes
to these cellular phenotypes. p300 inhibitors can therefore also be
used as tools to dissect the role of the catalytic activity in cellular
pathways.
For these reasons, the various acetyltransferase inhibitors
have
been utilized in a variety of experiments aimed at measuring their
biological effects. In fact, the anticancer properties of several
natural products were described before their acetyltransferase-inhibitory
properties were known. Because, to date, C646 is the most potent,
specific, cell-permeable, small molecule inhibitor of p300/CBP that
has been reported, we will focus on its applications in this section,
but it should be noted that many of the effects have been phenocopied
in studies with other acetyltransferase inhibitors such as curcumin.
One biological effect of acetyltransferase inhibition that can
be measured is changes in gene expression, including genes involved
in cancer. One study of a carcinoma caused by a BRD4-NUT fusion protein
found that C646 interferes with the changes in gene expression seen
with different expression levels of BRD4-NUT. Another study found that C646 interferes with the c-jun
and c-fos oncogene expression induced by growth factor. A study of prostate cancer cell lines found
that C646 interfered with expression of an NFκB subunit, and a study of a hepatocellular carcinoma cell
line found that C646 interfered with expression of microRNA-224. When examining melanoma cell lines, C646 interfered
with the expression of several genes involved in cell cycle regulation,
DNA damage repair, and nucleosome assembly, while enhancing expression
of the tumor suppressor protein p53. 
Other cancerous phenotypes have also been examined in the
presence
of p300 inhibition. C646 was observed to induce apoptosis and increase
prostate-specific antigen secretion in prostate cancer cell lines. C646 was observed to decrease the growth of
leukemia cells but not control cells, and in a mouse model of leukemia,
C646 was observed to improve white blood cell count, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and survival. Inhibition of p300/CBP
by genetic or small molecule approaches blocked regulatory T cells
and enhanced immune surveillance of tumors. 
Other effects, unrelated to cancer, of C646 treatment in cells
have been recorded. C646 was observed to interfere with tau phosphorylation,
an event involved in neurodegeneration. C646 was observed to interfere with the reprogramming of fibroblasts
to produce induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. In explants, C646 was observed to decrease hepatoblast
production, while at the same time changing gene expression levels
that relate to liver and pancreas cell fate. In mice, C646 was observed to enhance the consolidation of fear
extinction memory and long-term memory potentiation. 

6.4

## Overlap between Genetic
and Pharmacologic
Disruption of p300/CBP
In contrast to small molecules, which
have been developed that target less than 5% of the proteome, RNAi strategies have allowed for comparatively
straightforward specific targeting of virtually every gene in the
transcriptome, and, more recently, CRISPR/TALEN technology has made
genomic editing even more accessible. As discussed in sections and , genetic studies
of p300/CBP have been useful in identifying phenotypes of p300/CBP
knockdown or overexpression and understanding human diseases where
p300/CBP has loss- or gain-of-function. However, there are examples
in the biochemical literature where genetics and pharmacology specifically
targeting the same gene or protein have led to different phenotypes. 
Phenomena that can cause apparent discrepancy
between genetic and pharmacologic effects include protein level thresholds,
compound allosteric effects, protein–protein binding independent
of enzyme activity, and cellular compensation over time. All of these could be expected to play a part
in p300/CBP function, and it could be predicted that p300/CBP would
present such a dichotomy. For example, inhibitors target a particular
function or activity, while genetic knockdowns and knockout target
the total protein levels.
However, in general, the phenotypes
of cells treated with p300/CBP
inhibitors, RNAi-based knockdowns, and conditional knockouts all have
common features. For the live-cell studies of histone hyperacetylation
dynamics, a similar FRET increase was observed for C107 and shRNA
against p300 or CBP. The real-time response to C107 was rapid and
peaked at around 45 min after addition of C107, while the response
to knockdown was measured after several passages of cells stably expressing
the shRNA and compared to empty vector control cells. 
Cells with stable knockdown could compensate
for prolonged p300/CBP
deficiency by overexpressing another acetyltransferase with overlapping
activity, by downregulating deacetylase
activity to restore the acetylation balance, or through other mechanisms.
Indeed, the Brindle lab observed partial compensation through CRTC2
overexpression in their p300/CBP knockout cells. Another acetyltransferase that could compensate is Gcn5,
because mice with heterozygous mutation in Gcn5 and heterozygous mutation
in p300 have greater lethality and phenotypic defects than either
heterozygous mutation alone, arguing for functional overlap between
Gcn5 and p300. However, we observed
that a chronic defect in acetylation was present in cells with p300
or CBP stable knockdown.

7

## Future Directions
Although many substrates, protein ligands, and target genes have
been identified for p300/CBP, it is still unclear what fraction of
the acetylome is catalyzed by p300/CBP and under what circumstances
each occurs. Mutagenesis and methods to artificially introduce acetylated
lysines (or their mimics) into proteins have been used to study some
specific acetylation events, but others still have unknown functions.
Another area of current investigation is the flanking domain interactions
of p300/CBP, and determining how specific ligands regulate acetyltransferase
activity and/or substrate specificity. Further studies with natural
and synthetic ligands will prove useful to determine the effects of
various protein ligand interactions. Finally, it remains possible
that there are additional protein lysine acetyltransferases that have
yet to be discovered, the identification of which may require high
throughput screening and CoA capture compounds.
Recent progress
has been made toward developing high-throughput
assays to measure p300/CBP inhibition against purified enzyme and
in cells, screening of natural product and synthetic compound libraries,
and developing candidate molecules that could be active in vivo. Although
several small molecule probes are available for research, there remains
a need for better compounds with varied structures and improved pharmacokinetics
that can be used in live animals.
Of the many theoretical medical
applications of p300/CBP inhibitors,
a few have been supported by encouraging data using cultured cells,
such as certain models of solid tumors. A new era of p300/CBP biomedical
research will emerge as new p300/CBP inhibitors are tested in animal
disease models. Important questions will be what level of inhibition
of p300/CBP defines an effective therapeutic window, and what the
main toxicities of this inhibition will be.
It will be interesting
to see whether future p300-specific and
CBP-specific inhibitors have therapeutic value in distinct and/or
overlapping disease states. Developing inhibitors for other acetyltransferases
besides p300/CBP is also an area of potential significance to biomedicine.
Because epigenetic marks can function combinatorially (see section ), it is possible that acetyltransferase inhibitors
will be highly useful in combination therapies with other epigenetic
modulators, in specific cases. In the cell, different post-translational
modifications on the same segment of chromatin can combine to fine-tune
the functional readout, and PTM reader domains are often found together
in a large macromolecular complex. Furthermore, multiple PTM-altering
abnormalities can be present in the same disease state. To exploit
this, combination therapies have been explored for other epigenetic
modulators, − but not yet for acetyltransferases. Also,
along the lines of combination therapies, there is reason to believe
that p300/CBP inhibitors will synergize in cancer cells with drugs
that act by inducing DNA damage. Furthermore,
bifunctional drugs or “codrugs” that have two individual
active moieties linked covalently may offer therapeutic advantages. 

8

## Conclusion
Three
decades of research into p300/CBP, since the first report
in 1985, have revealed its importance to normal cell health and etiology
of disease. p300/CBP is a key enzyme in higher eukaryotes, where it
acts as an effector in myriad major cellular signaling pathways, which
modulate protein functions and gene expression in response to a variety
of signals. This is accomplished by binding of over 400 protein ligands
to its various protein interaction-mediating domains and the acetylation
of ∼100 protein substrates. The unusual hit-and-run kinetic
mechanism has permitted the identification of p300/CBP-specific acetyltransferase
inhibitors, which have shown promising effects in studies in living
cells. The protein acetylation and protein binding functions of p300/CBP
are intricately interrelated, and both are targets of pharmacological
interventions that may have considerable therapeutic applications.

## Supporting Information Available
Table of 98 protein acetylation
substrates of p300/CBP and table of 411 protein binding partners of
p300/CBP. This material is available free of charge via the Internet
at http://pubs.acs.org.

## Supplementary Material
cr500452k_si_001.pdf

## Author Present Address
† National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Laboratory for Cardiac
Energetics, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room B1D400,
MSC 1061, 10 Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, United States.
The
authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): P.A.C. is a
cofounder, advisor, and equity owner in the company Acylin Therapeutics
that is developing HAT inhibitors. B.M.D. declares no competing financial
interest.
 
Beverley M. Dancy, originally
from Cape Town, was introduced to
research in the laboratory of Greg J. Hermann at Lewis & Clark
College. Her graduate studies with Philip A. Cole, centered on p300
acetyltransferase inhibition, earned her a Ph.D. in Pharmacology and
Molecular Sciences from the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
in 2013. As a postdoctoral fellow in the Morgan-Sedensky laboratory,
she investigated enzymes and pathways involved in mitochondrial disease,
and in 2014 she will begin a fellowship at the National Institutes
of Health Laboratory of Cardiac Energetics, with Robert S. Balaban.
Dr. Dancy is interested in developing molecular tools and imaging
technologies for understanding the consequences of disease at the
molecular, cellular, and organismal levels. In addition to research,
she is passionate about bridging the gap between science research
and a broader audience through communication and engagement.
 
Philip A. Cole was born in Paterson, NJ and graduated from Yale
University with a B.S. in Chemistry in 1984 and then spent a year
as a Churchill Scholar at the University of Cambridge, England. Cole
went on to obtain M.D. and Ph.D. degrees from Johns Hopkins University
where he pursued research in bioorganic chemistry in 1991. Cole then
entered postdoctoral fellowship training at Harvard Medical School
prior to joining the Rockefeller University in 1996 as a junior lab
head. In 1999, Cole moved back to Johns Hopkins as the Marshall-Maren
professor and director of pharmacology. His research interests are
in the area of protein post-translational modifications and chemical
biology.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) and Flight
Attendant Medical Research Institute (FAMRI) Foundation for funding.

## Abbreviations
Acacetyl
CBPCREB (cAMP response element-binding)
binding protein
CoAcoenzyme A
ED50half-maximal effective
dose in a cell, tissue, or organism
HAThistone acetyltransferase
HDAChistone deacetylase
IC50half-maximal
inhibitory
concentration in solution with a purified enzyme
Klysine
NADnicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
p300E1A binding protein
p300
PTMpost-translational
modification
TSAtrichostatin A