eLife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC4695385PMC4695385.1469538546953852649949510.7554/eLife.09436094361Cell BiologyDevelopmental Biology and Stem CellsResearch ArticleFunctional genomic screening reveals asparagine dependence as a metabolic vulnerability in sarcoma
HettmerSimone ). For most STS tumors, cure depends on radical resection and/or radiation of the tumor, and therapeutic options for tumors that have spread regionally and/or systemically are limited ( ). The genetic spectrum of STS is heterogeneous. Many tumors carry complex karyotypes with variable genetic changes; others express specific oncogenic mutations or exclusive chromosomal translocations within a relatively simple karyotype ( ). For RMS, two main genotypes have been described: those characterized by expression of the fusion oncogenes PAX3:FOXO1 or PAX7:FOXO1 and those that lack these fusions. The most common oncogenic mutations in the latter group of fusion-negative RMS tumors are in the Ras pathway ( ; ).
We previously reported rapid sarcoma induction by intramuscular implantation of Kras (G12V)-expressing, Cdkn2a (p16p19) deficient mouse myofiber-associated (MFA) cells into the extremity muscles of NOD. SCID mice ( ). Transcriptional profiling of Kras; p16p19nullsarcomas identified a cluster of sarcoma-relevant candidate genes. These genes are enriched in mouse sarcomas and in human RMS as compared to normal mouse or human skeletal muscle ( ), and may include transcripts of fundamental importance for sarcoma growth. To examine the contributions of each of these candidate genes to sarcoma growth, we performed a customized shRNA-based proliferation screen. The strongest inhibitory effect on sarcoma cell proliferation was observed after silencing of asparagine synthetase (ASNS), the enzyme that catalyzes cellular synthesis of the non-essential amino acid asparagine. We found that adequate availability of asparagine is required in rapidly proliferating sarcomas cells, likely to support nascent polypeptide synthesis, and that asparagine starvation impedes sarcoma growth. Thus, small molecules targeting asparagine availability ( ) could be useful as anti-sarcoma therapeutics.

## Results

## Kras;p16p19null mouse sarcomas identify a cluster of sarcoma-relevant genes
In prior work, we showed that ex-vivo lentiviral transduction with oncogenic Kras (G12v) of Cdkn2a (p16p19)-deficient myofiber-associated (MFA) cells, isolated by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) from muscle tissue of Cdkn2a-/- mice, drives rapid sarcoma formation upon transplantation of these cells into the muscle of immunocompromised mice ( ) ( ). The myogenic differentiation status of the Ras-driven sarcomas generated in this system depends largely on the cell type transduced, also known as the “cell-of-origin”: Kras; p16p19null satellite cells typically gave rise to RMS, whereas the identical oncogenetic lesions introduced into fibroadipogenic precursors within the MFA cell pool almost always produced sarcomas lacking myogenic differentiation features (non-myogenic sarcomas, NMS) ( )( ). We previously showed that Kras;p16p19nullmouse sarcomas from each of these cellular origins recapitulate transcriptional profiles across the entire spectrum of human RMS and used this information to identify 141 genes of potential significance for sarcoma growth ( ). To evaluate the functional contributions of each of the previously identified sarcoma-relevant genes, we designed a customized shRNA proliferation screen, using 5 distinct shRNAs per candidate gene ( ). The screen was carried out in one Kras;p16p19nullRMS and one Kras;p16p19nullNMS cell line, and shRNAs were delivered in puromycin-selectable pLKO lentiviral vectors. Correlation coefficients of 0.8348 and 0.9501 between puromycin-treated and untreated cells confirmed adequate transduction efficiencies ( ). As shRNA mediated silencing of Kras (G12v)-IRES-GFP, the driver oncogene used to initiate the mouse sarcomas, markedly inhibits the growth of Kras;p16p19nullsarcoma cells ( , ), shRNAs directed against either GFP or KRAS served as positive controls in this screen and showed clear growth-inhibitory effects ( ). Control shRNAs (cntrl-shRNA) directed against LACZ, red fluorescent protein (RFP) and luciferase (LUC) served as negative controls, and showed no growth-inhibitory effects ( ). Receiver operator curve (ROC) analysis, using an external control set of shGFP-infected and cntrl-shRNA-infected RMS and NMS cells ( ), validated the ability of this system to distinguish between shRNAs with and without growth-inhibitory effects on sarcoma cell proliferation ( ). ROC analysis also determined a false discovery rate of <30% for shRNAs associated with a reduction in proliferation to <52% of the average of cntrl-shRNA-infected RMS cells ( ) and <40% of cntrl-shRNA-infected NMS cells ( ). In both RMS and NMS cells, silencing of ASNS (Asparagine Synthetase) produced by far the strongest anti-proliferative effect (p<0.0001, q<0.01, 4–5 of 5 shRNAs with FDR<30%; and ). ASNS silencing reduced the growth of Kras;p16p19nullRMS and NMS cells to 30.16% and 6.69% of the average of control RMS and NMS cells, respectively. Effective depletion of ASNS protein by the target-specific shRNAs employed in our screen was confirmed by Western Blot ( ). 
 
 
 

## ASNS silencing inhibits growth of mouse Kras;p16p19null sarcoma cells by asparagine starvation
ASNS encodes the enzyme asparagine synthetase, which converts aspartate into asparagine using glutamine as a nitrogen donor. Therefore, we next tested if the growth-inhibitory effects of genetic ASNS inhibition ( ) on mouse sarcoma growth were reversed by exogenous supplementation with the ASNS product asparagine. Supplementation of the culture media with 100 mg/L asparagine reversed the growth inhibition observed in shASNS-infected Kras;p16p19null RMS ( ) and NMS ( ) cells. Dose response analysis revealed that reversal of growth inhibiton of shASNS-transduced Kras;p16p19null RMS and NMS cells was also observed at 10 mg/L asparagine, whereas 0.01, 0.1 or 1 mg/L asparagine were insufficient ( ). Asparagine supplementation did not reverse the growth inhibitory effect of shRNA-mediated silencing of Kras in Kras;p16p19null RMS cells ( ). Taken together, we conclude that the growth-inhibitory effects of ASNS silencing on mouse sarcoma cells result from cellular asparagine starvation.

## Asparagine starvation reduces cell proliferation, increases cell death and impedes nascent polypeptide synthesis in mouse Kras;p16p19null sarcoma cells
Asns silencing in mouse Kras;p16p19null RMS cells caused an increase in the fraction of sarcoma cells undergoing apoptosis, as determined by staining with propidium iodide (PI) and Annexin V (p<0.001, ). Moreover, Asns silencing reduced the percentage of BrdU + cells in S phase (p<0.001, ). Both effects were reversed by exogenous asparagine supplementation ( ). To evaluate whether cellular asparagine starvation due to Asns silencing impedes sarcoma cell proliferation by interfering with the cells’ ability to generate nascent polypeptide chains, Kras;p16p19null RMS cells were exposed to O-propargyl-puromycin (OP-puromycin). OP-puromycin forms covalent conjugates with newly synthesized polypeptides, which can be visualized by azide-alkyne cycloaddition. Rapidly proliferating shLUC-infected Kras;p16p19null RMS cells exhibited strong OP-puromycin staining, indicating brisk polypeptide synthesis ( , middle panels). However, blockade of protein translation by exposure to cycloheximide abrogated OP-puromycin staining ( , far right panels). Similarly, shASNS-infected cells exhibited only minimal OP-puromycin staining ( , upper left panel), while synthesis of new polypeptides was restored in shASNS-infected sarcoma cells grown in medium supplemented with asparagine ( , lower left panel). Similar effects of ASNS silencing on apoptosis, cell cycle and synthesis of nascent peptide chains were observed in Kras;p16p19null NMS cells ( ).

## Asparagine starvation impedes human RMS growth and polypeptide synthesis
ASNS expression was evaluated in primary human sarcoma tissue by immunohistochemistry (IHC) using a commercially available tissue array (US Biomax SO2081). ASNS was detected in 16 of 22 (73%) human RMS cores ( ) and in 12 of 27 (44%) human leiomyosarcoma cores ( ). Also, increased expression of ASNS compared to normal human muscle was detected in 9 of 9 human sarcoma cell lines analyzed by PCR ( ), including the PAX3:FOXO1-positive human RMS cell line Rh30. To evaluate the impact of ASNS silencing on human RMS cells, we transduced Rh30 cells with lentiviruses encoding shASNS or control (shLACZ) shRNAs ( ). ShRNA-mediated knockdown of ASNS in Rh30 cells ( ) reduced proliferation (p<0.001; ), increased the percentage of apoptotic cells (p<0.01; ), reduced the percentage of cells in S phase (p<0.001; ) and impeded nascent polypeptide synthesis ( ). The effects of ASNS silencing on Rh30 growth and peptide synthesis were reversed by asparagine supplementation ( ). Thus, ASNS silencing in human Rh30 cells recapitulated the inhibitory effects on cell growth and polypeptide synthesis observed in mouse Kras;p16p19null sarcoma cells. 

## Chemical targeting of Asparagine availability reduces sarcoma growth
Asparagine homeostasis represents an actionable cellular process. Amino sulfoximines directly inhibit ASNS activity ( ; ), whereas asparaginase, an FDA-approved drug widely used in the treatment of leukemia, hydrolyzes asparagine to aspartate and ammonia. Both amino sulfoximine 5 (AS5) and asparaginase reduced the proliferation of mouse and human sarcoma cell lines in vitro ( ). For asparaginase, EC50 concentrations were estimated at 0.2–0.5 IU/ml in mouse Kras;p16p19null sarcoma cells, 0.8–0.9 IU/ml in human HT1080, Rh30 and Rh41 cells and 6 IU/ml in human RD cells ( ). For the ASNS inhibitor AS5, EC50 concentrations were estimated at 80–150 μM in mouse Kras;p16p19null sarcoma cells and 200–300 μM in the human sarcoma cell lines tested ( ). Similar to previous observations in cells that underwent genetic inhibition of ASNS, the growth-inhibitory effects of chemical ASNS inhibition by AS5 were reversed by exogenous asparagine supplementation ( ). These findings strongly suggest that the growth inhibitory effects of AS5 result from asparagine deprivation of sarcoma cells. 

## Asparagine depletion impedes mouse sarcoma growth in vivo
Due to the poor cell permeability of AS5, its growth-inhibitory effects on sarcoma cells required EC50 concentrations greater than 80 μM, making in vivo testing infeasible. Thus, to determine the effects of reduced ASNS activity on sarcoma growth in vivo, 100 shASNS-infected and 100 shLUC-infected Kras; p16p19null RMS cells were implanted into the cardiotoxin-preinjured gastrocnemius muscles of 1- to 3-months old NOD. SCID mice ( ). IHC showed that tumors arising from shASNS cells expressed less ASNS than tumors arising from shLUC cells ( ). However, there was no difference in latency of shASNS- and shLUC-tumors (p = 0.3; ). 

Our in vitro data suggested that growth inhibition induced by ASNS silencing can be rescued by provision of exogenous aparagine at concentrations between 1 and 10 mg/L ( ). As normal asparagine concentrations in mouse and human plasma were previously reported to be between 3.8 mg/L and 7.3 mg/L ( ), these data suggest that freely available asparagine in mouse serum and tissue might counteract the effects of tumor-specific ASNS silencing. To examine this possibility, we treated subgroups of animals transplanted with shASNS- or shLUC-tumor cells with asparaginase (1500 IU/kg; ( )) by daily intraperitoneal (IP) injection. Asparaginase treatment was initiated on the day of tumor cell injection and continued for 35–41 days. This dosage was well tolerated by the animals without significant weight loss ( ). Serum asparagine levels were reduced 13-fold in asparaginase-treated mice (0.53 mg/L (4 μM) versus 6.87 mg/L (52 μM) in untreated mice, p<0.001; and ). Daily exposure to asparaginase did not change the latency of shLUC-tumors (p = 0.5; ); however, asparaginase treatment significantly prolonged tumor latency in mice implanted with shASNS-RMS cells (p<0.001; ). Moreover, 2 out of 8 mice in this experimental group did not develop tumors during 4 months of follow up after tumor cell injection. Similar effects were observed when NOD. SCID mice were transplanted with shASNS-infected and shLUC-infected Kras; p16p19null NMS cells ( ). Thus, ASNS inhibition combined with depletion of plasma asparagine reduces sarcoma growth in vivo.

## Discussion
Cancer cells depend on biological mechanisms that guarantee adequate provision of energy and biosynthetic precursors to support cell growth. Functional genomic screening of genetically engineered mouse sarcomas revealed that asparagine synthetase (ASNS) exerted the strongest observed effect on sarcoma cell proliferation within a small group of genes upregulated in both mouse and human sarcomas. ASNS is the amidotransferase that converts L-aspartic acid into L-asparagine in an energy-consuming enzymatic reaction requiring ATP and a nitrogen source that is L-glutamine in eukaryotic cells ( ). Depletion of functional ASNS in both mouse and human RMS cells reduced the proportion of cells in S phase and impeded synthesis of nascent polypetide chains. Similarly, ASNS silencing in melanoma cells was recently reported to result in cell cycle arrest ( ). The effects of ASNS reduction in sarcoma cells were reversed by exogenous supplementation with asparagine, supporting the notion that rapidly growing sarcoma cells depend on adequate availability of intrinsic or extrinsic asparagine to support tumor growth. Moreover, ASNS inhibition significantly slowed mouse sarcoma growth in vivo only when combined with depletion of plasma asparagine, likely reflecting the ability of systemic asparagine in the tumor environment to replenish intracellular asparagine availability after ASNS inhibition. We speculate that asparagine reliance of sarcoma cells represents a metabolic vulnerability that could be exploited therapeutically to inhibit rapid tumor growth.
Previously published metabolic profiling studies have identified a number of metabolites that are heavily consumed by cancer cell lines, including glycine and asparagine ( ). Glycine starvation prolonged the G1 phase of the cell cycle and reduced proliferation, in part because sufficient amounts of this amino acid are required to support de novo purine biosynthesis in rapidly dividing cells. Unlike purine synthesis, protein synthesis in glycine-starved cells remained relatively intact ( ). In contrast, we found that asparagine starvation of mouse and human sarcoma cells impedes synthesis of nascent polypeptide chains thereby slowing cell proliferation. These results are consistent with observations in soybean, barley and maize where free asparagine levels in developing seeds correlate positively with higher protein levels at maturity ( ). Moreover, limiting the extracellular supply or blocking the synthesis of single amino acids is known to suppress global translation initiation via activation of GCN2 and phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor EIF2α ( ). Thus, asparagine in the tumor cell environment may have important functions in controlling the synthesis and turnover of protein in sarcoma cells.
Impaired peptide biosynthesis may not be the only mechanism contributing to the asparagine dependence of sarcoma cells described in this study. For instance, our data do not exclude the possibility that glutamate deprivation and/or aspartate excess resulting from changes in asparagine biosynthesis negatively impact cell survival and proliferation. However, aspartate carries reducing equivalents in the malate-aspartate shuttle ( ), and increased aspartate levels after ASNS knockdown might be predicted to benefit the redox state of sarcoma cells. In addition, it has been suggested that increased glutaminase expression in cancer cells can counterbalance decreased glutamate levels, especially in a glutamine-rich environment ( ). Consistent with this notion, we found that glutaminase expression was increased by 7- to 11-fold in mouse sarcoma cells compared to normal mouse muscle ( ), suggesting that this mechanism may be used by sarcoma cells to counteract glutamate reductions that may result from ASNS silencing.
Finally, a recent report demonstrated, unexpectedly, that asparagine supplementation can suppress cell death in glutamine-deprived cells ( ), implicating asparagine in promoting cellular adaptation to metabolic stresses such as glutamine depletion. This study also noted that asparagine is the last amino acid synthesized in the TCA cycle and that its amination depends exclusively on glutamine ( ). Amino acid availability is known to stimulate mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1, which integrates environmental and intracellular signals to regulate cell growth ( ). Taken together, these observations suggest that asparagine may serve a central role as a cellular sensor of TCA cycle intermediate/ reduced nitrogen availability and, ultimately, as a metabolic regulator of cell behavior.
While our studies demonstrate a clear dependence of sarcoma cell growth and survival on cellular asparagine levels, they certainly do not exclude the possibility that adequate availability of amino acids other than asparagine may also be important. The shRNA proliferation screen we performed was designed to evaluate the functional contributions of a particular group of sarcoma signature genes identified by their high level expression in both Ras-driven mouse sarcomas and human sarcomas, and thus did not comprehensively evaluate all amino acid biosynthetic pathways. Indeed, within the cluster of sarcoma genes evaluated, the top-scoring cellular functions were cell cycle control and cell division ( ). However, we note that in addition to ASNS, our list of candidate targets included genes encoding 3 other enzymes relevant for amino acid biosynthesis: branched chain aminotransferase 1 (BCAT1), phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT1) and phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). Both PHGDH and PSAT1 contribute to serine/ glycine biosynthesis, which plays an important role in supporting nucleotide synthesis in rapidly proliferating cells ( ; ), and recent publications indicate that high expression of PHGDH in tumor tissue is required for cell growth in epithelial malignancies ( ; ). However, in our screen, silencing of PSAT1, PHGDH or BCAT1 did not inhibit sarcoma cell growth ( ), suggesting that these biosynthetic pathways may be of lesser importance for the sarcomatous malignancies studied here.
ASNS expression among tissues in adult animals varies considerably ( ). ASNS in tumor tissue has been linked to the transactivating effects of oncogenic effectors such as TP53 ( ) and metabolic stress ( ; ). For example, in pancreatic cancer, glucose deprivation upregulated ASNS expression, which, in turn, protected tumor cells from apoptosis induced by glucose deprivation itself ( ). Similarly, upregulation of ASNS in response to amino acid restriction, such as plasma asparagine depletion by treatment with asparaginase ( ), is part of a normal physiological adaptation response to counteract nutrient deprivation ( ). As sarcomas outgrow the existing vasculature, tumor cells are continuously exposed to a microenvironment in which the supply of nutrients is limited. Increased Asns mRNA expression in Kras;p16p19null mouse sarcomas as compared to normal muscle could occur in response to amino acid and glucose deprivation in rapidly growing sarcomas.
Cellular asparagine reliance has been exploited successfully in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with bacterially derived asparaginase ( ; ; ). Lymphoblasts are thought to be exquisitely sensitive to asparaginase treatment due to their low ASNS expression ( ). Growth inhibitory effects of asparaginase on sarcoma cells in vitro were previously reported by Tardito et al ( ). However, the response of sarcoma cells to asparaginase alone is moderate to poor ( , ( )) when compared to the published spectrum of asparaginase sensitivity of primary lymphoblasts (EC50 concentrations between <0.002 and >10 IU/ml; ( )). One published report on the efficacy of asparaginase as a single agent documented remissions in 7 of 32 children with ALL, but there was no objective response in a single patient with RMS ( ). Yet, asparaginase is a well-characterized drug with a relatively favorable toxicity profile that does not overlap with the toxicities of conventional cytostatics used in RMS treatment ( ), and the further development of specific, cell-permeable chemical inhibitors of ASNS may open additional therapeutic opportunities ( ), especially when combined with systemic asparagine depletion.
Understanding the molecular networks that support sarcoma cell proliferation may enable the development of therapies based on selective targeting of proliferation-relevant cellular pathways. This study identified asparagine starvation as a candidate intervention that impedes sarcoma growth. Yet, it is highly unlikely that any interventions will have noticeable anti-sarcoma effects in vivo when used alone. For future studies and clinical development, it will be important to rationally select combinations of interventions that target multiple proliferation-relevant cellular processes including Asparagine reliance of sarcoma cells.

## Materials and methods

## Kras;p16p19null mouse sarcomas
Primary Kras;p16p19null mouse sarcomas were induced by ex-vivo transduction of freshly sorted Cdkn2a-/- (p16p19null) mouse skeletal muscle precursor cells (CD45-CD11b-TER119-Sca1-CXCR4+ β1integrin+) or Sca1+ fibroadipogenic precursor cells CD45-CD11b-TER119-Sca1+) with pGIPZ-Kras (G12V)-IRES-GFP lentivirus followed by intramuscular transplantation of Kras-expressing, p16p19null cells into the cardiotoxin-preinjured gastrocnemius muscles of 1- to 3-months old NOD/SCID mice, as previously described ( ). Secondary Kras;p16p19null mouse sarcomas were generated by implanting 100 Kras;p16p19null mouse RMS or NMS cells into the cardiotoxin-preinjured gastrocnemius muscles of 1- to 3-months old NOD/SCID mice.

## Human skeletal muscle
Use of human muscle was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Joslin Diabetes Center. Human fetal muscle was obtained from 20–23 week gestation fetuses and adult muscle from deceased volunteers. Tissue was homogenized in TRIzol using a tissue homogenizer prior to RNA isolation.

## Mice
C57BL6, NOD/CB17-Prkdcscid/J (NOD/SCID) and p16p19nullmice (B6.129 background) mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory and the National Institutes of Health/Mouse Models of Human Cancer Consortium, respectively. Mice were bred and maintained at the Joslin Diabetes Center Animal Facility. All animal experiments were approved by the Joslin Diabetes Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.

## Sarcoma cell lines
Mouse sarcoma cell lines were established from 2 Kras;p16p19null mouse RMS tumors (T14-R, SMP-01) and one Kras;p16p19null mouse NMS tumor (Sca1-01). The human RMS cell line RD (translocation-negative) and the human fibrosarcoma line HT1080 were purchased from ATCC. Human RMS cell lines Rh3, Rh5, Rh10, Rh28, Rh30, Rh41 (all PAX3:FOXO1-positive) and Rh36 (translocation-negative) were gifts from Dr. Peter Houghton (Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH). All cell lines were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin. To evaluate the effects of asparagine supplementation on sarcoma cells in vitro, 4.15 g DMEM (D5030, Sigma, St. Louis, MO), 2.25 g Glucose (Sigma), 1.85 g NaHCO3 (Sigma), 292 mg Glutamine (Sigma), 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin Streptomycin (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) were reconstituted in 500 ml dH2O and supplemented with or without Asparagine at a concentration of 0 to 100 mg/L (A4159, Sigma).

## Customized shRNA proliferation screen
The screen was performed using the Kras;p16p19null RMS line T14R and the Kras;p16p19null NMS line Sca1-01. Cells were plated in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin on day -1 and infected with lentiviruses in the presence of 8 μg/ml Polybrene (Millipore, Billerica, MA) on day 0. Infected cells were selected by adding Puromycin (Santa Cruz, Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) to a final concentration of 2 μg/ml on day +1. Cell growth was evaluated by CellTiter Glo (Promega, Fitchburg, WI) on day 8. RMS cells were plated at 900 cells per well and infected with 6 μl virus in 3 replicates exposed to Puromycin and 2 replicates maintained without Puromycin. NMS cells were plated at 450 cells per well and infected with 4 μl virus in 2 replicates exposed to Puromycin and 2 replicates maintained without Puromycin.
For each cell line, raw data obtained from cells exposed to Puromycin ( + Puromycin, y axis) were plotted against raw data from cells grown without Puromycin (- Puromycin, x-axis; ). Raw data obtained from cells exposed to PGW or medium only were excluded from the analysis. Standard deviations (SD) from the mean were calculated for each data point, and those with SDs above the upper adjacent limit also were excluded from further analysis. Correlation coefficients between + Puromycin and - Puromycin data were 0.8348 (RMS) and 0.9501 (NMS), thereby confirming adequate transduction efficiency.
For each shRNA, replicate data were pooled and relative cell growth was quantified as the percentage proliferation of shRNA infected cells compared to the mean proliferation of cells infected with cntrl-shRNAs on the same plate. Receiver operator curve analysis using CTR01 data confirmed the ability of the screen to distinguish between the growth-inhibitory effects of shGFP and the neutral effects of cntrl-shRNAs ( ). For RMS and NMS, relative growth of less than 52% or less than 40% of cells infected with cntrl-shRNAs (light gray line in , and I, J), respectively, was associated with a false discovery rate less than 30%. Growth differences between cells subjected to silencing of one specific candidate gene and cntrl-shRNA-infected cells were tested for statistical significance using T-tests. Q-values were estimated using the algorithm published by J. W. McNicol and G. Hogan ( ). The growth-inhibitory effects of shRNA-mediated silencing of individual candidate genes were considered significant if p<0.0001 and q<0.01 and 3 shRNAs scored with an FDR<30%.
Candidate gene contributions to Kras;p16p19null sarcoma growth were tested using a customized, in vitro shRNA proliferation screen designed using shRNAs from The RNAi Consortium (TRC) delivered in puromycin-selectable pLKO lentiviral vectors. The screen was performed in ten 96-well-plates (DAS36-DAS45, ) using one shRNA per well. Five discrete shRNAs were used for each of the 141 candidate genes. The screen also included 3 shRNAs directed against KRAS (shKRAS; positive control) and control shRNAs directed against RFP, LUC or LACZ (cntrl; negative control). Additionally, two 96-well-plates (CTR01, ) were infected with shRNAs directed against GFP (shGFP; silencing KRAS-IRES-GFP and thereby serving as a positive control) and control shRNAs directed against RFP, LUC and LACZ. Empty pLKO lentiviral vectors (designated PGW; did not contain shRNAs) and medium (medium; did not contain any virus) served as transduction and puromycin controls, respectively. TRC clone IDs and viral titers are listed in The screen was performed using the Kras;p16p19null RMS line T14R and the Kras;p16p19null NMS line Sca1-01.

## Immunohistochemistry

Primary human sarcoma tissue was evaluated using commercially available sarcoma tissue arrays (SO2081, US Biomax, Rockville, MD). Human sarcoma sections were stained for ASNS (1 in 100, HPA029318, Sigma; human brain served as positive and muscle as negative control tissue). Mouse tumors were stained for ASNS (1 in 200, HPA029318, Sigma). Antigen retrieval was performed in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer pH6, and tissue sections were blocked in PBS, 5% BSA, pH7.4.

## RNA isolation and qRT-PCR
RNA was isolated from fetal and adult whole skeletal muscle, human RD, HT1080, Rh3, Rh5, Rh10, Rh28, Rh30, Rh41 and Rh36 cells by TRIzol extraction followed by DNAse digestion and purification using the RNeasy Plus Micro Kit. RNA was reverse transcribed using Superscript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Life Technologies) for RT-PCR (Invitrogen). qRT-PCR was performed using an ABI 7900 RT-PCR system (Applied Biosystem) with SYBR-green PCR reagents (Life Technologies). Human ASNS and mouse Gls detected using the following primer sequences (Eurofins MWG Operon, Huntsville, AL): GGAAGACAGCCCCGATTTACT (ASNS, fw), AGCACGAACTGTTGTAATGTCA (ASNS, rev), TTCGCCCTCGGAGATCCTAC (Gls, fw), CCAAGCTAGGTAACAGACCCT (Gls, rev).

## Western blot
Cells were lysed for 10 min on ice in 50 mM HEPES (4-(2- hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid), pH7.4, 40 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM sodium beta-glycerophosphate, 1% Triton X containing complete mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Indianapolis, IN), 50mM NaF and 1 mM sodium orthovanadate. Equal amounts of extract were processed for Western blot using rabbit polyclonal anti-ASNS antibody (1 in 250, HPA029318, Sigma). ASNS protein expression was evaluated using rabbit polyclonal anti-ASNS antibody (1 in 250, HPA029318, Sigma). Immune complexes were detected by chemiluminescence (ECL, 32132, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

## Proliferation assays
Sarcoma cells were exposed to asparaginase (0.1-10 IU/ml, stock 5 IU/ml in 0.9% NaCl, MyBioSource, San Diego, CA) and AS5 (50-500 mM, stock 10 mM in 0.9% NaCl, synthesized by Nigel G Richards). Proliferation assays were performed as previously described ( ). Cells were plated at 1000–7000 cells per well on day -1 and exposed to chemicals or vehicle on days 0 and 2. Cell growth was determined by MTT assay (Cayman Chemicals, Ann Arbor, MI) on day 4 and quantified as fold-increase in MTT uptake compared with baseline. All assays were performed in triplicate and replicated in two to four independent experiments. Estimated EC50 concentrations were calculated using GraphPad Prism.

## ASNS silencing
ASNS expression was silenced using TRC shRNAs delivered in pLKO vectors. TRC clones TRCN0000324779, TRCN0000031703 and TRCN0000031702 were used to silence mouse Asns. TRC clones TRCN0000045875 and TRCN0000045877 were used to silence human ASNS. TRC clones TRCN0000033260 and TRCN0000033262 were used to silence Kras in mouse sarcoma lines. Control cells were infected with lentiviruses carrying TRCN0000072250 (shLUC) and TRCN0000072250 (shLUC) or TRCN0000072231 (shLACZ) and TRCN0000072240 (shLACZ) to control for off-target effects.
Mouse Kras;p16p19null RMS and NMS cells were plated at 1000 cells per well on day -1, infected with lentiviruses in the presence of 8 μg/ml polybrene on day 0 and selected with puromycin at a final concentration of 2 μg/ml starting day 1. Effects of ASNS silencing were evaluated on days 3–5. Human Rh30 cells were plated at 5000 cells per well on day -1, infected with lentiviruses in the presence of 8μg/ml polybrene on day 0 and selected with puromycin at a final concentration of 0.5 μg/ml starting day 1. Transduced Rh30 cells were passaged and re-plated at 5000 cells per well. Effects of ASNS silencing were evaluated 3–5 days after replating.

## Annexin V staining
Annexin V staining was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using Annexin V-APC (550474, BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ) and PI.

## BrdU assay
Cells were incubated with 10 mM BrdU (552598, BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ) for one hour at 37oC. The BD BrdU flow kit (552598, BD Biosciences) was used to fix and permeabilize cells prior to DNAse treatment and staining with anti-BrdU-APC (1 in 20, 17-5071-42, eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and Dapi (1 in 1000).

## OP-puromycin staining
OP-puromycin (MedChemExpress, Monmouth Junction, NJ) was reconstituted in PBS pH6.4 and stored at minus 20 degrees centigrade. Cells were incubated with 50 μM OP-puromycin for 1 hr at 37 degrees centigrade, fixed and stained with Alexa Fluor 555-Azide (Life Technologies) as previously described ( ). Control cells were treated with 50 μg/ml cycloheximide for 15 min immediately prior to OP-puromycin exposure. Alexa Fluor 555 labeling was analyzed using an Olympus IX51 microscope at 20X.
In vivo asparaginase treatment. Asparaginase was reconstituted in 0.9% normal saline (NS) and stored at 4oC up to 3 weeks. Mice were treated daily with Asparaginase (Elspar, Lundbeck Inc, Deerfield, IL) by intraperitoneal injection at 1500 IU/kg ( ).

## Serum amino acid levels
Amino acid levels in mouse serum were determined by HPLC.

## Statistics
Differences in cell growth, tumor growth, Annexin staining, BrdU staining and serum amino acid levels were tested for statistical significance using T-tests. Differences in tumor latency were evaluated by logrank (Mantel-Cox) test (ns p≥0.05, *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p <0.001).

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000043American Association for Cancer Research
SU2C-AACR-IRG1111 to Amy J Wagers.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100003341Sarcoma Foundation of America
SARC-SPORE grant to Simone Hettmer.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100006058St. Baldrick's Foundation
Pediatric Research Grant to Simone Hettmer.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000272National Institute for Health Research
P01 CA050661 to William C Hahn.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000272National Institute for Health Research
P01 CA142536 to William C Hahn.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100000272National Institute for Health Research
U01 CA176058 to William C Hahn.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Francesca Izzo and Amy Schlauch in the DFCI RNAi Facility for technical assistance with the shRNA screen, Daniel Sherley and the DFCI pharmacy for providing pharmacy-grade Asparaginase (Elspar), Mark Kellogg at Boston Children’s Hospital for mouse serum amino acid analysis and Joyce LaVecchio, Girijesh Burizula and Atsuya Wakayabashe in the Joslin Diabetes Center Flow Cytometry Core (supported by the Harvard Stem Cell Institute and NIH P30DK036836) for flow cytometry support. We are grateful to Tata Nageswara Rao, Richard Lock, Sean Morrison and Leonard Wexler for helpful discussions, and to Jun Hiratake and Hideyuki Ikeuchi for their contributions to the development of AS5. This work was funded in part by a Stand Up To Cancer-American Association for Cancer Research Innovative Research Grant (SU2C-AACR-IRG1111; to AJW), NIH grants P01 CA050661, P01 CA142536, U01 CA176058 (to WCH) and by a SARC-SPORE career development award and PALS Bermuda/St. Baldrick’s (to SH). The authors declare no competing financial interests. Content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH or other funding agencies.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
AJW: Reviewing editor, eLife.
The other authors declare that no competing interests exist.

## Author contributions
SH, Conception and design, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
ACS, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
DT, Acquisition of data, Drafting or revising the article.
MS, Acquisition of data.
CLP, Acquisition of data, Drafting or revising the article.
RTB, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
NGJR, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
WCH, Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
AJW, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.

## Ethics
Animal experimentation: This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All of the animals were handled according to approved institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols of the Joslin Diabetes Center. The protocol was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of the Joslin Diabetes Center. All surgery was performed under tribromoethanol or isoflurane anesthesia, and every effort was made to minimize suffering.

## Additional files
10.7554/eLife.09436.014Supplementary file 1.

## Kras; p16p19null RMS cell line T14R: raw data from shRNA screen (plates DAS36-DAS45).
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09436.014
10.7554/eLife.09436.015Supplementary file 2.

## Kras; p16p19null NMS cell line Sca1-01: raw data from shRNA screen (plates DAS36-DAS45).
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09436.015
10.7554/eLife.09436.016Supplementary file 3.

## Kras; p16p19null RMS cell line T14R: raw data from shRNA screen (control plate CTR01).
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09436.016
10.7554/eLife.09436.017Supplementary file 4.

## Kras; p16p19null NMS cell line Sca1-01: raw data from shRNA screen (control plate CTR01).
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09436.017
10.7554/eLife.09436.018Supplementary file 5.

## Kras; p16p19null RMS cell line T14R: statistical evaluation (Significance levels: 1, 5 shRNAs with FDR<30%; 2, 4 shRNAs with FDR<30%; 3, 3 shRNAs with FDR<30%).
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09436.018
10.7554/eLife.09436.019Supplementary file 6.

## Kras; p16p19null NMS cell line Sca1-01: statistical evaluation (Significance levels: 1, 5 shRNAs with FDR<30%; 2, 4 shRNAs with FDR<30%; 3, 3 shRNAs with FDR<30%).
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09436.019
10.7554/eLife.09436.020Supplementary file 7.

## Amino acid levels (μM) in Asparaginase-treated and untreated mice.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.09436.020

 10.7554/eLife.09436.021Decision letter
OkanoHideyukiReviewing editorKeio University School of Medicine, JapaneLife posts the editorial decision letter and author response on a selection of the published articles (subject to the approval of the authors). An edited version of the letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the substantive concerns or comments; minor concerns are not usually shown. Reviewers have the opportunity to discuss the decision before the letter is sent (see review process). Similarly, the author response typically shows only responses to the major concerns raised by the reviewers.
Thank you for submitting your work entitled "Functional genomic screening reveals asparagine dependence as a metabolic vulnerability in sarcoma" for peer review at eLife. Your submission has been favorably evaluated by Fiona Watt (Senior Editor) and three reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors.
The following individuals responsible for the peer review of your submission have agreed to reveal their identity: Hideyuki Okano (Reviewing Editor) and Yoji Minamishima (peer reviewer).
The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.
The manuscript by Hettmer and colleagues presents the results of an shRNA-based proliferation screen in a p1619null KRAS (G12v) model of RMS and identifies asparagine synthethase (ASNS) as a main contributor to proliferation in the screened cells. It further shows a decrease in cell proliferation, increase in cell death and decrease of polypeptide synthesis after ASNS silencing in the model cells and human RMS cell line, effects that can be reversed by addition of exogenous asparagine.
All the experiments seemed to be well designed. All the data seems to be firm, have adequate controls and looks reliable. Although Asn requirement was already known in other malignant tumors such as ALL, it would be still valuable knowledge that Asn could be therapeutic target in sarcomas, which have fewer therapeutic options.
The authors need to address the following issues before the manuscript is acceptable for publication:
1) The authors clearly showed that Asn depletion suppressed nascent polypeptide synthesis, which might suppress tumor growth. If it is the cause of the tumor growth suppression, depletion of other amino acids would do the same. It would be very nice for the readers if the authors have some comments or discussion on why only Asn is required or why other amino acid metabolism pathway were not picked up by their screening. Furthermore, are the rescuing effects of Asn dose-dependent?
2) Similarly, ASNS reaction is coupled with Gln-Glu conversion. Asparaginase treatment or ASNS-knockdown might reduce Glu abundance. On the other hand, supplementation of Asn will interfere with ASNS enzyme activity, which might suppress Glu production. The authors should briefly comment on why Gln or Glu is not involved in this context. For example, Gln/Glu could be generated by other metabolic pathways, or something like that. Thus, evaluation of asparagine, aspartate, glutamine, glutamate levels before and after the treatment would be required.
3) Based on these data, the authors need to provide some mechanistic insight revealing why the combination of asparagine depletion and ASNS inhibition is required for inhibition of tumor growth in vivo. Is the inhibitory effect on polypeptide chain synthesis the only underlying mechanism for the observed metabolic vulnerability in sarcoma (i.e. tumor growth suppression)?
10.7554/eLife.09436.022Author response
1) The authors clearly showed that Asn depletion suppressed nascent polypeptide synthesis, which might suppress tumor growth. If it is the cause of the tumor growth suppression, depletion of other amino acids would do the same. It would be very nice for the readers if the authors have some comments or discussion on why only Asn is required or why other amino acid metabolism pathway were not picked up by their screening. Furthermore, are the rescuing effects of Asn dose-dependent?

We agree with the reviewers that it is very well possible that sarcoma growth and survival require adequate availability of amino acids other than asparagine. Unfortunately, the design of the shRNA proliferation screen described in this study did not allow for comprehensive functional testing of genes encoding for enzymes relevant in amino acid biosynthesis. Instead, the screen was designed to evaluate the functional contributions of a particular group of sarcoma signature genes that were expressed at higher levels in both Ras-driven mouse sarcomas and human sarcomas. Within this cluster of sarcoma genes, top-scoring cellular functions were cell cycle control and cell division (Hettmer et al., 2011).
Nonetheless, in addition to ASNS, the candidate group of sarcoma genes we evaluated in this study did include 3 other transcripts encoding for enzymes relevant in amino acid biosynthesis. These enzymes were phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT1), phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) and branched chain aminotransferase 1 (BCAT1). Recently published findings indicate that high expression of PHGDH in tumor tissue is a requirement for cell growth in epithelial malignancies (Locasale et al., 2011; Possemato et al., 2011), and both PHGDH and PSAT1 contribute to serine/glycine biosynthesis which plays an important role in supporting nucleotide synthesis in rapidly proliferating cells (Labuschagne et al., 2014; Jain et al., 2012). Branched chain amino acids provide anaplerotic substrates for the TCA cycle (Boroughs and DeBerardinis, 2015). However, in our screen, silencing of PSAT1, PHGDH or BCAT1 did not result in growth inhibition, suggesting that sarcoma cells show lesser dependence on these pathways.
To provide a more comprehensive discussion of amino acid metabolism pathways in tumor cell growth, we have revised manuscript to include the above considerations (Discussion, fourth and fifth paragraphs). We also included a new series of experiments documenting the effects of increasing concentrations of asparagine on the growth of shASNS and sh-LUC-transduced mouse Kras;p16p19null RMS and NMS cells. These experiments revealed that ≥ 10mg/L asparagine was needed to rescue the growth-inhibitory effects of ASNS silencing, whereas 0.01 – 1mg/L asparagine were insufficient. Interestingly, normal asparagine concentrations in mouse and human plasma are 3.8mg/L and 7.3mg/L, respectively (Cooney et al., 1970). Thus, even slight reductions in physiologic asparagine levels make sarcoma cells vulnerable to ASNS silencing (see and subsections “ASNS silencing inhibits growth of mouse Kras;p16p19null sarcoma cells by asparagine starvation” and”Asparagine depletion impedes mouse sarcoma growth in vivo”).
2) Similarly, ASNS reaction is coupled with Gln-Glu conversion. Asparaginase treatment or ASNS-knockdown might reduce Glu abundance. On the other hand, supplementation of Asn will interfere with ASNS enzyme activity, which might suppress Glu production. The authors should briefly comment on why Gln or Glu is not involved in this context. For example, Gln/Glu could be generated by other metabolic pathways, or something like that. Thus, evaluation of asparagine, aspartate, glutamine, glutamate levels before and after the treatment would be required.

Asparagine synthetase catalyzes the biosynthesis of asparagine from aspartate through an ATP-dependent transamination reaction. In this reaction, glutamine (Gln) acts as amino group donor and is converted into glutamate (Glu). As noted by the reviewers, ASNS inhibition or exogenous Asparaginase treatment should result in increased aspartate and glutamine, as well as decreased glutamate levels. As suggested, we confirmed this by measuring amino acid levels before and after treatment in Asparaginase treated mice ( ).
As the reviewer correctly points out, we cannot exclude that glutamate deprivation and/or aspartate excess negatively impact sarcoma cell survival/proliferation in addition to the growth inhibitory effects of asparagine withdrawal. However, increased glutaminase expression in cancer cells (Huang et al., 2014) could counterbalance glutamate reduction, especially in a glutamine-rich environment. Aspartate, on the other hand, carries reducing equivalents in the malate-aspartate shuttle (Chen et al., 2013), and increased aspartate levels after ASNS knockdown conceivably would benefit the redox state of sarcoma cells. Nonetheless, we recognize that disruption of Gln/Glu metabolism may represent an additional mechanism by which modulation of asparagine availability disrupts sarcoma cell growth.
We have addressed all of these important points in the revised manuscript, including an explicit discussion of the potential effects of altered glutamate/aspartate availability after Asparagine depletion (Discussion, third paragraph). We also demonstrated increased expression of Glutaminase transcripts in Kras;p16p19null sarcoma cells compared to normal mouse skeletal muscle (see and the aforementioned paragraph), which, as noted above, may counterbalance glutamate reduction due to ASNS inhibition.
3) Based on these data, the authors need to provide some mechanistic insight revealing why the combination of asparagine depletion and ASNS inhibition is required for inhibition of tumor growth in vivo. Is the inhibitory effect on polypeptide chain synthesis the only underlying mechanism for the observed metabolic vulnerability in sarcoma (i.e. tumor growth suppression)?

In our experiments, ASNS silencing in sarcoma cells did not impede sarcoma growth in vivo unless systemic asparagine was depleted by treatment with asparaginase. One could argue that limited nutrient availability within a rapidly enlarging solid tumor and slow asparagine uptake speak against repletion of tumor cell asparagine content from systemic sources. Nevertheless, our data support the notion that exogenous asparagine in the cell environment restores intracellular asparagine availability after ASNS silencing. This is discussed more extensively in the revised manuscript (Discussion, first paragraph).
Up until recently, the only known use of asparagine in mammalian cells was in protein synthesis, Asparagine does not contain the reducing equivalents of certain other amino acids, and Aspartate consumption due to Asparagine biosynthesis may diminish the reducing power of the malate-aspartate shuttle (Boroughs and DeBerardinis, 2015. Metabolic pathways promoting cancer cell survival and growth. Nat Cell Biol, 17, 351-9.; Chen et al., 2013; Huang et al., 2014). However, we agree with the reviewers that impaired peptide biosynthesis may not be the only mechanism responsible for the asparagine dependence of sarcoma cells observed in this study. Recently published data revealed that, surprisingly, asparagine supplementation suppressed cell death in glutamine-deprived cells (although it did not restore TCA anaplerosis and proliferation) (Huang et al., 2014). Thus, Asparagine appears to promote cellular adaptation to metabolic stress such as glutamine depletion. Zhang et al. also noted that asparagine is the last amino acid synthesized in the TCA cycle and that its amination exclusively depends on glutamine (Huang et al., 2014). Amino acid availability is known to stimulate mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1, which integrates environmental and intracellular signals to regulate cell growth (Jewell et al., 2015). Taken together, these observations by ourselves and others suggest that Asparagine may serve a central role as a cellular sensor of TCA cycle intermediate/reduced nitrogen availability and, ultimately, as a metabolic regulator of cell behavior.
An in-depth discussion of potential other mechanisms responsible for sarcoma cell asparagine dependence was added to the revised manuscript (Discussion, fourth paragraph).