eLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC7572125PMC7572125.1757212575721253307376910.7554/eLife.56651566511Replication StudyCancer BiologyReplication Study: Coding-independent regulation of the tumor suppressor PTEN by competing endogenous mRNAs
WangHongyan RadomskaHanna S ). For each of these papers, a Registered Report detailing the proposed experimental designs and protocols for the replications was peer reviewed and published prior to data collection. The present paper is a Replication Study that reports the results of the replication experiments detailed in the Registered Report ( ) for a paper by and uses a number of approaches to compare the outcomes of the original experiments and the replications.
In 2011, Tay et al. reported PTEN was modulated through competing endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs), which are protein-coding RNA transcripts that compete for microRNAs through common micoRNA response elements (MREs). Testing four candidate PTEN ceRNAs Tay and colleagues reported that for three of these candidate ceRNAS (SERINC1, VAPA, and CNOT6L) silencing the ceRNAs impacted the activity of a luciferase construct engineered with the 3’UTR of PTEN ( ). Using the same reporter construct, overexpression of the 3’UTRs of these ceRNAs were reported to increase luciferase activity suggesting inhibition of PTEN 3’UTR was relieved ( ). These effects were reported to be dependent on microRNAs since inhibition of PTEN protein expression when ceRNAs were depleted was abrogated when DICER, a key part of the microRNA machinery, was disrupted ( ). Two ceRNAs, VAPA and CNOT6L, when depleted also resulted in increased cell proliferation and phosphorylation of AKT when depleted, which was attenuated when DICER was disrupted ( ).
The Registered Report for the paper by described the experiments to be replicated (Figures 3C-D, 3G-H, 5A-B, and Supplemental Figures S3A-B), and summarized the current evidence for these findings ( ). Since that publication additional studies have reported finding other ceRNAs of PTEN. TNRC6B was identified as a ceRNA of PTEN with depletion of TNRC6B reported to decrease PTEN mRNA and protein expression in the prostate cancer cell lines DU145, 22RV1, and BM1604 and increase cell proliferation in DU145 and PC3 cells ( ). also used CNOT6L in their study and reported depletion of CNOT6L produced similar results as TNRC6B depletion. DNMT3B and TET3 were recently reported to be ceRNAs of PTEN with miR-4465 identified as a microRNA regulating these three transcripts via their 3’UTRs ( ). Multiple studies have reported a growing list of potential ceRNAs, which includes mRNAs, pseudogenes, lncRNAs, and circRNAs ( ; ; ; ). For example, the lncRNA BGL3 has been identified as a ceRNA for PTEN to regulate Bcr-Abl-mediated cellular transformation in chronic myeloid leukemia ( ) and c-Myc has been reported as a potential ceRNA for PML/RARα in acute promyelocytic leukemia ( ). Prediction of putative ceRNAs are being reported using a variety of computational methods and data sources that construct ceRNA interaction networks ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Additionally, recently it has been reported that 3’UTR shortening of transcripts of predicted ceRNAs could be a potential mechanism of repressing tumor-suppressor genes, including PTEN, in trans by disrupting ceRNA cross-talk ( ).
At the same time, whether physiological changes of ceRNAs can modulate microRNA activities remains controversial ( ; ). Experiments designed to test the feasibility of the ceRNA hypothesis, have reported that microRNA-binding sites are generally much higher than the number of microRNA molecules ( ). This would suggest that under physiological conditions ceRNA perturbation would likely lead to a change too small to be detected and to produce biological consequences ( ; ). Mullokandov and colleagues reported that only the most abundant microRNAs mediate target suppression as over 60% of detected microRNAs have no discernable activity ( ). Bosson and colleagues suggested that the microRNA-target ratios determined the respective susceptibility to ceRNA-mediated regulation ( ). This model has been further examined and Denzler and colleagues reported that while microRNA levels did not affect site competition, they defined microRNA-mediated repression ( ). The experimental strategies currently used for studying the ceRNA hypothesis are also limited, especially when attempting to represent the in vivo levels of endogenous RNAs ( ; ; ).
The outcome measures reported in this Replication Study will be aggregated with those from the other Replication Studies to create a dataset that will be examined to provide evidence about reproducibility of cancer biology research, and to identify factors that influence reproducibility more generally.

## Results and discussion

## ceRNA depletion on PTEN-3’UTR luciferase reporter activity
We independently replicated an experiment to test if putative PTEN ceRNAs modulate the 3’UTR of PTEN. This experiment used a chimeric luciferase construct tagged with the PTEN 3’UTR (Luc-PTEN-3’UTR) to uncouple regulation of PTEN via 3’UTR-targeting microRNAs from PTEN mRNA transcription and protein stability. This is similar to what was reported in Figure 3C and Supplemental Figure S3A of and described in Protocol 1 in the Registered Report ( ). DU145 cells were co-transfected with Luc-PTEN-3’UTR and siRNAs targeting the same putative PTEN ceRNAs as the original study. Knockdown efficiency was examined by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). The average reduction in gene expression relative to control siRNA was 65% when SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN were targeted, but was only 21% for ZNF460 ( ), despite transfection efficiency being at least 90% based on a fluorescent transfection indicator ( ). Luciferase activity was decreased in PTEN depleted cells (average RLU = 12%) relative to control siRNA (average RLU = 100%); however, luciferase activity when the putative PTEN ceRNAs were targeted for depletion were similar to control siRNA ( , ). All planned comparisons were not statistically significant (see legend). The original study reported statistically significant decreased luciferase activity with siRNA-mediated depletion of SERINC1 (average RLU = 70%), VAPA (average RLU = 48%), CNOT6L (average RLU = 70%), or PTEN (average RLU = 20%), but not for knockdown of ZNF460 (average RLU = 109%), compared to control siRNA (average RLU = 100%) ( ). The range of luciferase values reported in the original study had relative standard deviations (RSDs) (control = 9%; SERINC1 = 10%; VAPA = 6%; CNOT6L = 5%; ZNF460 = 8%; PTEN = 5%) that were much smaller than the RSDs observed in this replication attempt (control = 36%; SERINC1 = 57%; VAPA = 36%; CNOT6L = 50%; ZNF460 = 33%; PTEN = 19%), which is one of the factors that could influence if statistical significance is reached, particularly since the sample size of this replication attempt was determined a priori to detect the effect based on the originally reported data. The original study also reported an achieved knockdown of 90% or greater when SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN were targeted, but was 65% for ZNF460 ( ). The difference in achieved knockdown between the original study and this replication attempt is a possible reason for the differences in Luc-PTEN-3’UTR outcomes. A higher level of knockdown might be required to observe an effect with this experimental design. Although, unlike experiments that evaluate protein function where a higher level of knockdown or a longer period of time is usually needed to observe a phenotype ( ; ), the putative ceRNA function of these mRNAs should correspond to the level of knockdown. Thus, a 65% knockdown would have been expected to capture ~72% of the effect observed in the original study that reported a 90% knockdown. To summarize, for this experiment, we found results that were not statistically significant where predicted, varied in direction relative to the original study for the putative PTEN ceRNAs, and in the same direction as the original study for cells transfected with siPTEN.
 

## ceRNA overexpression on PTEN-3’UTR luciferase reporter activity
To test if sequestration of the putative PTEN ceRNAs impacted PTEN expression, we ectopically overexpressed the 3’UTR of the same putative PTEN ceRNAs as the original study in DU145 cells along with the Luc-PTEN-3’UTR plasmid. This is similar to what was reported in Figure 3D of and described in Protocol 2 in the Registered Report ( ). We used the same plasmids as the original study, which cloned the 3’UTRs of VAPA and CNOT6L as two separate fragments due to their large size with the fragments subdivided based on location of predicted MREs ( ). We found that compared to cells transfected with empty vector control, cells transfected with 3’UTR of the putative PTEN ceRNA plasmids or the 3’UTR of PTEN had decreased luciferase activity ( , ). The planned comparisons were statistically significant for SERINC1 3’UTR, VAPA 3’UTR2, CNOT6L 3’UTR1, CNOT6L 3’UTR2, and PTEN 3’UTR1, but not for VAPA 3’UTR1 (see legend). The original study reported statistically significant increased luciferase activity with SERINC1 3’UTR (average RLU = 128%), VAPA 3’UTR1 (average RLU = 141%), VAPA 3’UTR2 (average RLU = 150%), CNOT6L 3’UTR1 (average RLU = 143%), CNOT6L 3’UTR2 (average RLU = 146%), or PTEN 3’UTR (average RLU = 153%) compared to empty vector control (average RLU = 100%) ( ). The range of luciferase values reported in the original study had RSDs (control = 9%; SERINC1 3’UTR = 9%; VAPA 3’UTR1 = 13%; VAPA 3’UTR2 = 6%; CNOT6L 3’UTR1 = 7%; CNOT6L 3’UTR2 = 7%; PTEN 3’UTR = 1%) that were smaller than the RSDs observed in this replication attempt (control = 17%; SERINC1 3’UTR = 12%; VAPA 3’UTR1 = 12%; VAPA 3’UTR2 = 15%; CNOT6L 3’UTR1 = 15%; CNOT6L 3’UTR2 = 14%; PTEN 3’UTR = 10%). To summarize, we found results that were statistically significant (with the exception of VAPA 3’UTR1) and in the opposite direction as the original study.
 

## ceRNA depletion on PTEN expression
We replicated an experiment to test the microRNA dependency of the putative PTEN ceRNAs. This experiment used the same isogenic wild-type and DICER mutant (DicerEx5) HCT116 colon carcinoma cells as the original study. The DicerEx5 cell line, which was engineered to disrupt a well-conserved segment of the N-terminal helicase domain in exon 5 of DICER, while leaving the RNase III domains intact, displays a hypomorphic phenotype in the processing of mature microRNAs ( ). This experiment is similar to what was reported in Figure 3G–H and Supplemental Figure S3B of and described in Protocol 3 in the Registered Report ( ). Wild-type and DicerEx5 HCT116 cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting the same putative PTEN ceRNAs as the original study. Knockdown efficiency, measured by RT-qPCR, revealed the average reduction in gene expression relative to control siRNA was 81% in both cell lines for all putative PTEN ceRNAs, with the greatest biological variability in DicerEx5 HCT116 cells when targeting CNOT6L ( ).
Depletion of the putative PTEN ceRNAs resulted in downregulation of PTEN protein in wild-type HCT116 cells to an average of 80%, 43%, or 61% for siRNA-mediated depletion of SERINC1, VAPA, or CNOT6L, respectively, relative to control siRNA (average PTEN expression = 100%) ( , ). As a control, siRNAs targeting PTEN reduced PTEN protein levels to an average of 1.6%. To compare the relative PTEN expression among the various conditions, we planned to conduct four comparisons using the Bonferroni correction to adjust for multiple comparisons. The comparison of PTEN protein levels between control siRNA and siRNA targeting VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN were statistically significant, while the comparison of control siRNA and siRNA targeting SERINC1 were not (see legend). The original study reported statistically significant decreases in PTEN protein levels with siRNA-mediated depletion of SERINC1 (average PTEN expression = 53%), VAPA (average PTEN expression = 52%), CNOT6L (average PTEN expression = 59%), or PTEN (average PTEN expression = 1.9%) compared to control siRNA (average PTEN expression = 100%) in wild-type HCT116 cells ( ).
 
For DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, we found depletion of the putative PTEN ceRNAs resulted in higher PTEN protein levels (SERINC1: 290%; VAPA: 144%; CNOT6L: 256%) relative to control siRNA (average PTEN expression = 100%), while targeting PTEN reduced PTEN protein levels to an average of 2.6%. ( , ). To compare the relative PTEN expression among the various conditions, a similar analysis as described above for wild-type HCT116 cells was performed for DicerEx5 HCT116 cells. We found that PTEN protein levels between control siRNA and siRNA targeting SERINC1 or PTEN were statistically significant, while the comparisons between control siRNA and siRNA targeting VAPA or CNOT6L were not (see legend). The original study reported PTEN downregulation by ceRNA depletion was attenuated in DicerEx5 HCT116 cells with average PTEN expression around the same as control siRNA (control siRNA: 100%; SERINC1: 117%; VAPA: 108%; CNOT6L: 113%), while the average PTEN expression in cells transfected with siRNA-mediated depletion of PTEN was 1.3% ( ). Similar to the siRNA-mediated depletion of putative PTEN ceRNA in DU145 cells described above, the original study reported a knockdown of greater than 90% for most conditions ( ). The level of knockdown required to yield a given phenotype varies because it is system-dependent ( ), thus the difference in achieved knockdown between the original study and this replication attempt should be considered when interpreting these results. Further, the original study reported lower RSDs for PTEN protein levels across all the siRNA conditions in the DicerEx5 HCT116 cells compared to the wild-type HCT116 cells (DicerEx5: 0.1–9% vs wild-type: 8–17%), while this replication attempt observed larger RSDs compared to the original study, especially for DicerEx5 HCT116 cells (DicerEx5: 29–61% vs wild-type: 12–46%). Importantly, the individual biological repeats were largely consistent relative to the control siRNA condition ( ). This difference in variance between the original study and this replication attempt could influence if statistical significance is reached. To summarize, for this experiment, we found results that were generally in the same direction as the original study, varied in terms of statistical significance, and in DicerEx5 HCT116 cells effects that were of a larger magnitude than the original study. This absence of an attenuated ceRNA effect in this replication attempt suggests the null hypothesis that there is no difference in PTEN protein expression when the microRNA machinery is disrupted can be rejected.

## ceRNA depletion on cell proliferation
We replicated an experiment to evaluate cell proliferation of DU145, wild-type HCT116, and DicerEx5 HCT116 cells in response to siRNA-mediated silencing of the putative PTEN ceRNAs. This is similar to what was reported in Figure 5B of and described in Protocol 4 in the Registered Report ( ). Cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting the same putative PTEN ceRNAs as the original study. Knockdown efficiency, measured by RT-qPCR, revealed an average reduction in gene expression relative to control siRNA was 79% when considering all cell lines ( ). Proliferation activity was determined using the crystal violet assay starting the day after transfection with results presented as the difference in the values at the start of the timecourse for each condition (i.e. for each condition the value at the start of the timecourse was set to 0), similar to the original study. For DU145 cells, we found that siRNA-mediated depletion of VAPA or PTEN resulted in increased cell proliferation compared to cells transfected with control siRNA, while depletion of CNOT6L resulted in decreased cell proliferation ( , ). The area under the curve (AUC) during the timecourse for each biological repeat was used to compare each condition to the control siRNA, which were not statistically significant (see legend). The original study reported siRNA-mediated targeting of VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN in DU145 cells resulted in a statistically significant increase in proliferation compared to control siRNA ( ). The range of AUC values reported in the original study had a RSD for the control condition (26%) similar to this replication study (20%); however, the RSDs for the other conditions were much lower in the original study (VAPA = 4%; CNOT6L = 9%; PTEN = 7%) then this replication attempt (VAPA = 26%; CNOT6L = 20%; PTEN = 10%). As stated above this difference in variance between the original study and this replication attempt is a factor that could influence if statistical significance is reached.
 
For wild-type HCT116 cells, we found that compared to cells transfected with control siRNA, depletion of VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN resulted in different levels of increased cell proliferation ( , ). For DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, depletion of PTEN resulted in increased cell proliferation compared to control siRNA with a similar magnitude as wild-type cells, depletion of VAPA resulted in an increased proliferation compared to control siRNA, but not at the same magnitude as occurred in wild-type cells, while depletion of CNOT6L resulted in a slight decrease in cell proliferation compared to control siRNA. To test if depletion of the putative PTEN ceRNAs increased proliferation in wild-type HCT116 cells and were attenuated in the DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, we performed an analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the AUC for each biological repeat. The ANOVA result was statistically significant for the siRNA main effect (F(3,24) = 12.1, p=5.20×10−5). Thus, the null hypothesis that there is no difference in cell proliferation when the putative PTEN ceRNAs or PTEN was depleted, whether or not it was conducted in wild-type or DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, can be rejected. The main effect for cell type (F(1,24) = 1.81, p=0.191) was not statistically significant, indicating the null hypothesis that there is no difference in cell proliferation between wild-type or DicerEx5 HCT116 cells can not be rejected, and the interaction effect was not statistically significant (F(3,24) = 0.734, p=0.542). These results suggest that while there were differences in cell proliferation when the putative PTEN ceRNAs or PTEN were depleted, it was similar between cell lines suggesting a lack of an attenuated ceRNA effect. We also conducted six comparisons using the Bonferroni correction to adjust for multiple comparisons, making the a priori adjusted significance threshold 0.0083. According to this criterion, depletion of PTEN in wild-type or DicerEx5 HCT116 cells resulted in statistically significant increases in cell proliferation compared to control siRNA. Depletion of VAPA or CNOT6L did not result in a statistically significant increase in cell proliferation compared to control siRNA in wild-type HCT116 cells. Additionally, depletion of CNOT6L, but not VAPA, resulted in a statistically significant decrease in cell proliferation compared to PTEN-depleted DicerEx5 HCT116 cells. The original study reported reduced expression of VAPA or CNOT6L in wild-type HCT116 cells resulted in a statistically significant increase in cell proliferation compared to control siRNA similar to what was observed with PTEN siRNA, which was statistically significantly attenuated in the DicerEx5 HCT116 cells ( ). Further, the original study (DicerEx5: 1–15%; wild-type: 5–10%) and this replication attempt (DicerEx5: 6–19%; wild-type: 5–10%) observed similar RSDs. To summarize, for this experiment we found results that varied in statistical significance and varied in direction relative to the original study for the putative PTEN ceRNAs, but were in the same direction as the original study for cells transfected with siPTEN.

## Meta-analyses of original and replication effects
We performed a meta-analysis using a random-effects model, where possible, to combine each of the effects described above as pre-specified in the confirmatory analysis plan ( ). To provide a standardized measure of the effect, a common effect size was calculated for each effect from the original and replication studies. Cohen’s d is the standardized difference between two means using the pooled sample standard deviation, while the effect size Glass’ delta is the standardized difference between two means using the standard deviation of only the control group. Glass’ delta was used when the variance between the control and treatment conditions were not equal in the original or replication study experiments. The estimate of the effect size of one study, as well as the associated uncertainty (i.e. confidence interval), compared to the effect size of the other study provides one approach to compare the original and replication results ( ; ). Importantly, the width of the confidence interval (CI) for each study is a reflection of not only the confidence level (e.g. 95%), but also variability of the sample (e.g. SD) and sample size.
There were five comparisons of the PTEN-3’UTR luciferase reporter activity when putative PTEN ceRNAs were depleted, which were reported in of this study and Figure 3C of . Only one of the effects, control siRNA compared to ZNF460 siRNA, was consistent in direction and when considering if the effect size point estimate of each study was within the confidence interval of the other study, suggesting the null hypothesis that there is no difference in reporter activity can not be rejected ( ). The other effects were inconsistent in whether the direction of the effect was the same between the two studies, if the effect size of one study was within the confidence interval of the other study, or both. Additionally, the meta-analyses were not statistically significant, with all but one of the effects having large confidence intervals around the meta-analysis effect size along with statistically significant Cochran’s Q tests (siNC and siSERINC1, p=0.013; siNC and siVAPA, p=0.0019; siNC and siPTEN, p=0.0054) suggesting heterogeneity between the original and replication studies.
 PTEN-3’UTR luciferase reporter activity was also tested when the 3’UTR of putative PTEN ceRNAs were ectopically overexpressed, reported in of this study and Figure 3D of . The direction of all six comparisons were in the opposite direction of the original study with none of the effect size point estimates within the confidence intervals of the other study ( ). The meta-analyses were not statistically significant, with all effects having large confidence intervals around the meta-analysis effect size along with statistically significant Cochran’s Q tests (SERINC1 3’UTR and empty vector, p=0.0011; VAPA 3’UTR1 and empty vector, p=2.55×10−4; VAPA 3’UTR2 and empty vector, p=1.28×10−6; CNOT6L 3’UTR1 and empty vector, p=1.07×10−5; CNOT6L 3’UTR2 and empty vector, p=2.54×10−5; PTEN 3’UTR and empty vector, p=1.86×10−6) suggesting heterogeneity between the original and replication studies.
PTEN protein expression was examined in two cell lines, wild-type and DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, following depletion of putative PTEN ceRNAs with four comparisons made in each cell line, which were reported in of this study and Figure 3G–H of . In wild-type cells, all effects were consistent when considering the direction of the effect and varied in whether the studies were within the confidence interval of the other study ( ). The meta-analysis of one of the effects, control siRNA compared to SERINC1 siRNA, was not statistically significant suggesting the null hypothesis that there is no difference in PTEN protein expression can not be rejected; however, the large confidence intervals along with a statistically significant Cochran’s Q tests (p=0.024) suggests heterogeneity between the original and replication studies. The meta-analyses of the other effects were statistically significant suggesting the null hypothesis can be rejected and that these ceRNAs regulate PTEN protein expression in HCT116 cells. In DicerEx5 cells all effects were consistent when considering the direction of the effect and three had effect size point estimates of the original study that was within the confidence interval of the replication and vice versa. The meta-analyses of control siRNA compared to SERINC1 or CNOT6L were statistically significant, suggesting the null hypothesis that there is no difference in PTEN protein expression when the microRNA machinery is disrupted can be rejected. The other two meta-analyses were not statistically significant suggesting the null hypothesis can not be rejected; however, for the control siRNA to PTEN siRNA comparison, the large confidence intervals along with a statistically significant Cochran’s Q tests (p=2.11×10−9) suggests heterogeneity between the original and replication studies.
Cell proliferation was also tested when putative PTEN ceRNAs were depleted, with three comparisons made in each cell line as reported in of this study and Figure 5B of . In wild-type and DicerEx5 HCT116 cells all effects were consistent when considering the direction of the effect and varied in whether the studies were within the confidence interval of the other study ( ). Additionally, the meta-analyses varied in terms of statistical significance with some meta-analyses having wide confidence intervals and statistically significant Cochran’s Q tests (WT HCT116: siVAPA and siNC, p=0.048; siCNOT6L and siNC, p=2.79×10−4; siPTEN and siNC, p=0.0079; DicerEx5 HCT116: siPTEN and siNC, p=0.029). In DU145 cells, the effects were inconsistent in whether the direction of the effect was the same between the two studies or if the effect size of one study was within the confidence interval of the other study. For all effects, the meta-analysis was not statistically significant, with wide confidence intervals, and statistically significant Cochran’s Q tests (DU145: siVAPA and siNC, p=0.046; siCNOT6L and siNC, p=0.015, siPTEN and siNC, p=0.037), suggesting study heterogeneity.
This direct replication provides an opportunity to understand the present evidence of these effects. Any known differences, including reagents and protocol differences, were identified prior to conducting the experimental work and described in the Registered Report ( ). However, this is limited to what was obtainable from the original paper and through communication with the original authors, which means there might be particular features of the original experimental protocol that could be critical, but unidentified. So while some aspects, such as cell lines, antibodies, and the specific siRNA sequences and plasmids were maintained, others were unknown or not easily controlled for. These include variables such as cell line genetic drift ( ; ; ) and impacts of atmospheric oxygen on cell viability and growth ( ). Whether these or other factors influence the outcomes of this study is open to hypothesizing and further investigation, which is facilitated by direct replications and transparent reporting.

## Materials and methods
 

## Key resources table
As described in the Registered Report ( ), we attempted a replication of the experiments reported in Figures 3C–D, G–H and 5B, and Supplemental Figures S3A-B of . A detailed description of all protocols can be found in the Registered Report ( ) and are described below with additional information not listed in the Registered Report, but needed during experimentation.

## Cell culture
DU145 cells (ATCC, cat# HTB-81, RRID:CVCL_0105) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and wild-type HCT116 and DICEREx5 HCT116 cells (Horizon Discovery, cat# HD R02-019, RRID:CVCL_HD76) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. Media was supplemented with 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 2 mM glutamine and cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2. Cells were confirmed to be free of mycoplasma contamination as well as confirmed to be the indicated cells lines by STR DNA profiling. Mycoplasma and STR profile tests were performed by DDC Medical (Fairfield, Ohio).

## Transfections
DU145 cells were seeded at 1.2 × 105 cells per well in a 12-well plates for the PTEN-3’UTR luciferase assays. 24 hr later cells were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies, cat# 11668500) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 2 µl Lipofectamine 2000 was mixed with Opti-MEM so the total volume was 100 µl and incubated for 10 min at RT. 100 ng of psiCHECK-2+PTEN3’UTR (Addgene, plasmid# 50936; RRID:Addgene_50936) and 100 pmol of siRNA or 1 µg of 3’UTR plasmid were brought to a total volume of 100 µl with Opti-MEM. The two solutions were gently mixed and incubated for an additional 20 min at RT. The transfection mixture was added to the appropriate well of cells and incubated at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2. After 4 hr, growth medium was replaced. Cells were incubated for 72 hr at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2 until harvested.
DU145, wild-type HCT116, and HCT116 DICEREx5 cells were seeded at 1.3 × 105 cells per well in 12-well plates and grown overnight for the Western blot and cell growth assays. The next day cells were transfected using Dharmafect 1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat# T200104) according to manufacturer’s instructions with 100 nM siRNA. The transfection mixture was added to the appropriate well of cells and incubated at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2. For the Western blot assay, growth medium was replaced after 4 hr. Cells were incubated for 72 hr at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere at 5% CO2 until harvested. For the Crystal violet proliferation assay, cells were trypsinized after 8 hr and seeded in new plates.
Transfection efficiency was determined with a siGLO RISC-Free transfection control condition 48 hr after transfection by fluorescence microscopy, which was confirmed to be >90% for all experiments reported. siRNA reagents: siGLO RISC-free (Dharmacon, cat# D-001600–01), siGenome non-targeting control 2 (Dharmacon, cat# D-001210–02), siGenome SERINC1 (Dharmacon, cat# M-010725–00), siGenome ZNF460 (Dharmacon, cat# M-032012–01), siGenome VAPA (Dharmacon, cat# M-021382–01), siGenome CNOT6L (Dharmacon, cat# M-016411–01), and siGenome PTEN (Dharmacon, cat# M-003023–02). 3’UTR plasmids: pcDNA-SERINC1-3’UTR, pcDNA-VAPA-3’UTR1, pcDNA-VAPA-3’UTR2, pcDNA-CNOT6L-3’UTR1, pcDNA-CNOT6L-3’UTR2, pCMV-MCS-PTEN-3’UTR (shared by Dr. Pier Paolo Pandolfi, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center).

## Luciferase assay
Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, aspirated, and 100 µl 1X lysis buffer was added to cells and placed on an orbital shaker for 10 min. Dissociated cell lysate was gently pipetted to mix and 20 µl of each lysate was added to a well of a white-walled 96-well plate to measure luciferase activity using the dual luciferase reporter assay (Promega, cat# E1960), Veritas Microplate Luminometer (Turner BioSystems, part# 998–9100), and Veritas software (Turner BioSystems; RRID:SCR_018534), according to manufacturer’s instructions.

## Quantitative PCR
Total RNA was extracted with TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies, cat# 15596026) and purified with RNeasy kit (Qiagen, cat# 74104) according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA concentration and purity was determined (quality control data available on OSF project of each experiment - see Figure legends). Total RNA (1 µg) was reverse transcribed into cDNA using High Capacity cDNA Archive kit (Life Technologies, cat# 4368814) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Reactions consisted of cDNA (4.5 µl of 10X dilution), TaqMan Fast Advanced Mastermix (Life Technologies, cat# 4444964), and probes (TaqMan probes listed in Registered Report; ). Reactions were performed in technical triplicate. Cycling conditions were: one cycle: 50°C for 2 min – one cycle: 95°C for 20 s – 40 cycles: [95°C for 1 min, 60°C for 20 s] using a StepOne Plus Real-Time PCR system (Applied Biosystems) and StepOne software (RRID:SCR_014281), version 2.3. Negative controls containing no cDNA template were included. Relative expression levels were determined using the ∆∆Ct method.

## Western blot
Cells were washed with ice-cold PBS, aspirated, and incubated on ice for 20 min with 30 µl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 5 mM EDTA) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche Diagnostics, cat# 11873580001) at manufacturer recommended concentrations. Lysed cells were centrifuged at 12,100xg for 15 min at 4°C before protein concentration of supernatant was quantified using a Bradford assay following manufacturer’s instructions. Lysate samples (5 to 40 µg) were separated by 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast protein gels (BioRad, cat# 456–1094) in 1X Tris Glycine SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis buffer (National Diagnostic, cat# EC-870–4L) according to manufacturer’s instructions and then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane as described in the Registered Report (Protocol 3; ). Transfer was confirmed by Ponceau S staining and membranes were blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk in 1X TBS with 0.1% Tween-20 (TBST) for 1–2 hr at room temperature. Membranes were probed with the following primary antibodies diluted in 5% non-fat dry milk in TBST overnight at 4°C: rabbit anti-PTEN [clone 138G5] (Cell Signaling Technology, cat# 9559, RRID:AB_390810), 1:1000 dilution; mouse anti-HSP90 [clone 68] (BD Biosciences, cat# 610418, RRID:AB_397798), 1:1000 dilution. Membranes were washed with TBST and incubated with secondary antibody diluted in 5% non-fat dry milk in TBST for 1 hr at room temperature: HRP-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit (GE Healthcare, cat# NA934, RRID:AB_772206), 1:2000 dilution; HRP-conjugated rabbit anti-mouse (Abcam, cat# ab6728, RRID:AB_955440), 1:2000 dilution. Membranes were washed with TBST and incubated with ECL reagent to visualize signals. Scanned Western blots were quantified using ImageJ software (RRID:SCR_003070), version 1.50a ( ). Additional methods and data, including full Western blot images, are available on OSF project of each experiment - see Figure legends.

## Crystal violet proliferation assay
Transfected cells were plated at 20,000 cells per well in 12-well plates (enough for 4 days of measurements) with growth medium. Starting the day after plating (designated day 0), every 24 hr the crystal violet assay was performed as described in the Registered Report (Protocol 4; ). Absorbance (OD590) was measured with a Synergy HT Multi-Mode microplate reader (BioTek Instruments) and Gen5 software (BioTek Instruments; RRID:SCR_017317), version 2.05.5. For each independent biological repeat, OD590 for each condition was normalized by dividing the OD590 of each day to the OD590 for day 0 for that condition to calculate relative OD590. AUC was calculated for each condition of each biological repeat. Data files are available on OSF project - see Figure legends.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with R software (RRID:SCR_001905), version 3.5.1 ( ). All data, csv files, and analysis scripts are available on the OSF (https://osf.io/oblj1/). Confirmatory statistical analysis was pre-registered (https://osf.io/f7yjp/) before the experimental work began as outlined in the Registered Report ( ). Data were checked to ensure assumptions of statistical tests were met (i.e., Levene’s test to test for equality of variances, Shapiro-Wilk test for normality). When described in the results, the Bonferroni correction, to account for multiple testings, was applied to the alpha error or the p-value. The Bonferroni corrected value was determined by dividing the uncorrected value (0.05) by the number of tests performed. A meta-analysis of a common original and replication effect size was performed with a random effects model and the metafor R package ( ) (https://osf.io/xgrqp/). The summary data (mean and standard deviation) pertaining to Figures 3C–D, H and 5B, and Supplemental Figures S3A-B of were shared by the original authors. The summary data was published in the Registered Report ( ) and used in the power calculations to determine the sample sizes for this study.

## Data availability
Additional detailed experimental notes, data, and analysis are available on OSF (RRID:SCR_003238; https://osf.io/oblj1/; ). This includes the R Markdown file (https://osf.io/e2cun/) that was used to compose this manuscript, which is a reproducible document linking the results in the article directly to the data and code that produced them ( ).

## Deviations from registered report
The fifth protocol of the Registered Report, which was to test if knockdown of ceRNAs resulted in AKT activation in DU145, wild-type HCT116, and DicerEx5 HCT116 cells was conducted, but the results obtained were inconclusive. The Western blot results with the phospho-AKT antibody were inconsistent and largely absent of a signal. This was not due to the Western blot technique as other antibodies gave reliable singles, as illustrated in . Instead, the result is likely due to the lack of phosphatase inhibitors included in the lysis buffer. Of note, the original study also did not use phosphatase inhibitors. Since the primary outcome was not able to be observed, the experiment was not included in this manuscript. Results are available at https://osf.io/ju597/. Additional materials and instrumentation not listed in the Registered Report, but needed during experimentation are also listed above.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grant:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100009827Laura and John Arnold Foundation to .

## Acknowledgements
The Reproducibility Project: Cancer Biology thank Letizia Longo and Pier Paolo Pandolfi (Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center) for sharing critical protocol information, data, and reagents, specifically the Luc-PTEN-3’UTR and plasmids to express the 3’UTR of the putative PTEN ceRNAs. We also thank the following companies for generously donating reagents to the Reproducibility Project: Cancer Biology; American Type and Tissue Collection (ATCC), Applied Biological Materials, BioLegend, Charles River Laboratories, Corning Incorporated, DDC Medical, EMD Millipore, Harlan Laboratories, LI-COR Biosciences, Mirus Bio, Novus Biologicals, Sigma-Aldrich, and System Biosciences (SBI). All experimental work for this replication study was completed within the Pharmacoanalytical Shared Resource in The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
PhASR is a Science Exchange associated lab.
PhASR is a Science Exchange associated lab.
PhASR is a Science Exchange associated lab.
EI, RT, NP: Employed by and hold shares in Science Exchange Inc.

## Author contributions
Data curation, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Data curation, Methodology, Writing - review and editing.
Supervision, Writing - review and editing.
Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Project administration, Writing - review and editing.

## Additional files
Transparent reporting form

## Data availability
Additional detailed experimental notes, data, and analysis are available on OSF (RRID:SCR_003238) (https://osf.io/oblj1/; Wang et al., 2020). This includes the R Markdown file (https://osf.io/e2cun/) that was used to compose this manuscript, which is a reproducible document linking the results in the article directly to the data and code that produced them (Hartgerink, 2017).
The following dataset was generated:
WangHRadomskaHSPhelpsMAIornsETsuiRDenisAPerfitoNErringtonTM2020Study 24: Replication of Tay et al., 2011 (Cell)Open Science Framework10.17605/OSF.IO/OBLJ1

 10.7554/eLife.56651.sa1Decision letter
NilsenTimothy WReviewing EditorCase Western Reserve UniversityUnited StatesIn the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.
Thank you for submitting your article "Replication Study: Coding-Independent Regulation of the Tumor Suppressor PTEN by Competing Endogenous mRNAs" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, and the evaluation has been overseen by Timothy Nilsen as Reviewing Editor and Anna Akhmanova as the Senior Editor. The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous.
The reviewers have discussed the reviews with one another and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this decision to help you prepare a revised submission.
The reviewers concurred that the paper presented a sincere and thorough attempt to replicate the results of "Coding-independent regulation of the tumor suppressor PTEN by competing endogenous mRNAs" (Tay et al., 2011). A major conclusion is that Errington and colleagues were not able to reproduce the results of the Tay et al., 2011 paper. Both of the reviewers also questioned the validity of the ceRNA hypothesis, a hypothesis that serves as the foundation for Tay et al., 2011. The overall sentiment was to accept the paper provided that the authors revise the manuscript to address the points raised by reviewers 1 and 2.
We would like to draw your attention to changes in our revision policy that we have made in response to COVID-19 (https://elifesciences.org/articles/57162). Specifically, we are asking editors to accept without delay manuscripts, like yours, that they judge can stand as eLife papers without additional data, even if they feel that they would make the manuscript stronger. Thus the revisions requested below only address clarity and presentation.
Reviewer #1:
The present paper reports the results of a Replication Study detailed in the Registered Report (Phelps et al., 2016). The authors tried to replicate a few selected experiments from the paper "Coding-independent regulation of the tumor suppressor PTEN by 45 competing endogenous mRNAs" (Tay et al., 2011), and compare the outcomes of the original experiments and the replications.
This paper reports that this replication study does not support the findings in the original study for several replicated experiments.
For example, the replication study demonstrated that depletion of putative PTEN competing endogenous mRNAs (ceRNAs) in DU145 cells did not impact PTEN 3'UTR regulation using a reporter, while the original study reported decreased activity when SERINC1, VAPA, and CNOT6L were depleted. The authors suggest that differences between the original study and this replication attempt, such as level of knockdown efficiency and cellular confluence, are factors that might have influenced the results. Specifically, the average reduction in gene expression relative to control siRNA in the replication study was 65% when SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN was targeted, but was only 21% for ZNF4. In contrast, the original study reported an achieved knockdown of 90% or greater when SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN was targeted, but was 65% for ZNF460 (Tay et al., 2011). Since the purpose of the Replication Study is to replicate the original study, are there reasons or technical difficulties that prevent the authors from conducting the experiments with the same level of knockdown of SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, PTEN, and ZNF460?
In addition, the replication study showed that over-expression of ceRNA 3'UTRs resulted in decreased activity, while the original study reported increased activity. Further, the replication study found depletion of the ceRNAs VAPA or CNOT6L did not statistically impact DU145, wild-type HCT116, or DicerEx5 HCT116 cell proliferation, while the original study reported increased DU145 and wild-type HCT116 cell proliferation when these ceRNAs were depleted, which was attenuated in the DicerEx5 HCT116 cells. I assume that sample size of each replication experiment was determined with the variance estimated from the original study. I am wondering whether there is any significant difference in variances between the original study and the replication study and whether this difference can partially explain the discrepancy between the original study and the replication study.
Reviewer #2:
As part of the Reproducibility Project, the authors attempt to replicate selected experiments from Tay et al., 2011, who interpreted their results as evidence that PTEN is regulated through a mechanism involving competing endogenous mRNAs (ceRNAs). Although most of the results of Tay et al. do not appear to be reproducible, the authors of the current paper appear to have done what they could do to rigorously repeat the earlier experiments.
1) The Introduction provides many examples of other putative ceRNAs that have been proposed to regulate PTEN in the past five years (Introduction, third paragraph). However, no mention is made of either the controversy regarding the ceRNA hypothesis or the fact that experiments designed to test the feasibility of the ceRNA hypothesis have indicated that these proposed ceRNAs are expressed at levels that are far too low to enable their physiological variability in expression to impact expression of PTEN or other miRNA targets through the proposed ceRNA mechanism [see Denzler et al., 2016, and references therein]. The issue is that for each miRNA the number of target sites in the transcriptome is very high (typically estimated to exceed 50,000 sites per cell), and thus a physiologically feasible change in the level of a putative ceRNA has little hope of perceptively influencing the regulation other targets--it's just not possible because each putative ceRNA contributes such a small fraction of the total sites for each miRNA. Listing these numerous examples of putative ceRNAs proposed in the last five years without also mentioning either the controversy or the data calling into question the ceRNA hypothesis might mislead readers into thinking that the ceRNA hypothesis advocated by Tay et al., 2011, is plausible and generally accepted by the miRNA research community.
2) When discussing the results of experiment #1, the authors suggested that their inability to reproduce the results of the original study might be attributable to their inability to match the knockdown efficiencies achieved in the original study. They were able to knockdown the putative ceRNAs with an average efficiency of 65%, whereas the original study reported an average knockdown efficiency of 90%. When knocking down these putative ceRNAs, it would have indeed been better to have been able to reproduce the knockdown efficiencies of the original paper, and if the goal of the experiment was to evaluate the function of the protein products of these mRNAs, then the weaker knockdowns would have been a major concern, since a 65% knockdown is often not sufficient to observe reduced protein function. However, when evaluating the putative ceRNA function of these mRNAs, the weaker knockdown is less of a concern. Here, a 65% knockdown should capture 65% of the ceRNA effect, which corresponds to nearly three quarters of the effect expected with a 90% knockdown (0.65/0.90 = .72). Thus, the inability to detect any hint of a ceRNA effect in an experiment in which most of the effect was expected is informative. The original paper interpreted the results of these knockdowns from the perspective of the ceRNA hypothesis, and the current paper would be more informative if it did the same.
3) The summary of the results of the experiments with DicerEx5 HCT116 cells (Abstract and subsection “ceRNA depletion on PTEN expression”, last paragraph) does not convey the large difference between the results observed in the two studies. In this experiment, it is not the direction of the change that matters--it's the magnitude of the change that matters. The original study observed small differences (< 1.2-fold) when performing the knockdown of putative ceRNAs in DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, which were interpreted as evidence of an attenuated ceRNA effect. The attempt to repeat this result found large differences (1.4- to 2.9-fold), which cannot be simply interpreted as an attenuated ceRNA effect. Although this discrepancy between the two studies is correctly summarized later (subsection “Meta-analyses of original and replication effects”, fourth paragraph), it is not clearly stated when it is first described (subsection “ceRNA depletion on PTEN expression”, last paragraph) or summarized in the Abstract. Thus, as with the results of experiment #1, the results of this experiment would be more informative if viewed from the perspective of the ceRNA hypothesis. Although it would be beyond the scope of this paper to come up with new hypotheses to explain any results that differ from those of the original paper, it would be appropriate to state whether the results of the replication attempt support the ceRNA hypothesis put forward in the original paper.
10.7554/eLife.56651.sa2Author response
Reviewer #1:
The present paper reports the results of a Replication Study detailed in the Registered Report (Phelps et al., 2016). The authors tried to replicate a few selected experiments from the paper "Coding-independent regulation of the tumor suppressor PTEN by 45 competing endogenous mRNAs" (Tay et al., 2011), and compare the outcomes of the original experiments and the replications.
This paper reports that this replication study does not support the findings in the original study for several replicated experiments.
For example, the replication study demonstrated that depletion of putative PTEN competing endogenous mRNAs (ceRNAs) in DU145 cells did not impact PTEN 3'UTR regulation using a reporter, while the original study reported decreased activity when SERINC1, VAPA, and CNOT6L were depleted. The authors suggest that differences between the original study and this replication attempt, such as level of knockdown efficiency and cellular confluence, are factors that might have influenced the results. Specifically, the average reduction in gene expression relative to control siRNA in the replication study was 65% when SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN was targeted, but was only 21% for ZNF4. In contrast, the original study reported an achieved knockdown of 90% or greater when SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, or PTEN was targeted, but was 65% for ZNF460 (Tay et al., 2011). Since the purpose of the Replication Study is to replicate the original study, are there reasons or technical difficulties that prevent the authors from conducting the experiments with the same level of knockdown of SERINC1, VAPA, CNOT6L, PTEN, and ZNF460?
The criteria we used to mirror the original study was the transfection efficiency (>90%), which we were able to achieve using the same conditions as the original study. These criteria were stated in the Registered Report (e.g., Protocol 1, step g. 1.). As with other Replication studies, this is one of many differences that can be considered when interpreting the results of the replication to the original study. However, as raised by reviewer #2 the concern is larger with experiments evaluating protein function. So it is possible, but we did not explore, what conditions would be necessary to achieve a level of knockdown as reported in the original study, while maintaining a healthy cell culture.
In addition, the replication study showed that over-expression of ceRNA 3'UTRs resulted in decreased activity, while the original study reported increased activity. Further, the replication study found depletion of the ceRNAs VAPA or CNOT6L did not statistically impact DU145, wild-type HCT116, or DicerEx5 HCT116 cell proliferation, while the original study reported increased DU145 and wild-type HCT116 cell proliferation when these ceRNAs were depleted, which was attenuated in the DicerEx5 HCT116 cells. I assume that sample size of each replication experiment was determined with the variance estimated from the original study. I am wondering whether there is any significant difference in variances between the original study and the replication study and whether this difference can partially explain the discrepancy between the original study and the replication study.
This replication attempt, like all of the replication attempts in the Reproducibility Project: Cancer Biology, were designed to perform independent replications with a calculated sample size to detect the originally reported effect size with at least 80% power based on the originally reported data, which included the means, standard deviations, and sample sizes provided by the original authors. Specifically for the questions raised in this comment: For overexpression of ceRNA 3’UTRs we observed larger RSDs than the original (original: 6-13%; replication: 12-17%), but likely not large enough to fully explain the difference between the original and replication studies. For the cell proliferation experiment, we observed similar RSDs in wild-type and DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, especially for VAPA and CNOT6L (original: wild-type: VAPA = 8%, CNOT6L = 8%; DicerEx5: VAPA = 15%, CNOT6L = 6%; replication: wild-type: VAPA = 5%, CNOT6L = 10%; DicerEx5: VAPA = 12%, CNOT6L = 19%). But for DU145, while the control siRNA conditions were similar between the studies, the original RSDs were much lower in the original study compared to the replication, so is a factor that could influence if statistical significance is reached. In the revised manuscript we included the relative standard deviations (RSDs) for both the original and replication results for all experiments to provide a direct comparison as well as the impact this could have on whether statistical significance is reached.
Reviewer #2:
As part of the Reproducibility Project, the authors attempt to replicate selected experiments from Tay et al., 2011, who interpreted their results as evidence that PTEN is regulated through a mechanism involving competing endogenous mRNAs (ceRNAs). Although most of the results of Tay et al. do not appear to be reproducible, the authors of the current paper appear to have done what they could do to rigorously repeat the earlier experiments.
1) The Introduction provides many examples of other putative ceRNAs that have been proposed to regulate PTEN in the past five years (Introduction, third paragraph). However, no mention is made of either the controversy regarding the ceRNA hypothesis or the fact that experiments designed to test the feasibility of the ceRNA hypothesis have indicated that these proposed ceRNAs are expressed at levels that are far too low to enable their physiological variability in expression to impact expression of PTEN or other miRNA targets through the proposed ceRNA mechanism [see Denzler et al., 2016, and references therein]. The issue is that for each miRNA the number of target sites in the transcriptome is very high (typically estimated to exceed 50,000 sites per cell), and thus a physiologically feasible change in the level of a putative ceRNA has little hope of perceptively influencing the regulation other targets--it's just not possible because each putative ceRNA contributes such a small fraction of the total sites for each miRNA. Listing these numerous examples of putative ceRNAs proposed in the last five years without also mentioning either the controversy or the data calling into question the ceRNA hypothesis might mislead readers into thinking that the ceRNA hypothesis advocated by Tay et al., 2011, is plausible and generally accepted by the miRNA research community.
We have included additional references in the revised manuscript to present a more balanced view of the ceRNA hypothesis.
2) When discussing the results of experiment #1, the authors suggested that their inability to reproduce the results of the original study might be attributable to their inability to match the knockdown efficiencies achieved in the original study. They were able to knockdown the putative ceRNAs with an average efficiency of 65%, whereas the original study reported an average knockdown efficiency of 90%. When knocking down these putative ceRNAs, it would have indeed been better to have been able to reproduce the knockdown efficiencies of the original paper, and if the goal of the experiment was to evaluate the function of the protein products of these mRNAs, then the weaker knockdowns would have been a major concern, since a 65% knockdown is often not sufficient to observe reduced protein function. However, when evaluating the putative ceRNA function of these mRNAs, the weaker knockdown is less of a concern. Here, a 65% knockdown should capture 65% of the ceRNA effect, which corresponds to nearly three quarters of the effect expected with a 90% knockdown (0.65/0.90 = .72). Thus, the inability to detect any hint of a ceRNA effect in an experiment in which most of the effect was expected is informative. The original paper interpreted the results of these knockdowns from the perspective of the ceRNA hypothesis, and the current paper would be more informative if it did the same.
We thank the reviewer for this suggestion and have included this in the discussion of the results of experiment #1.
3) The summary of the results of the experiments with DicerEx5 HCT116 cells (Abstract and subsection “ceRNA depletion on PTEN expression”, last paragraph) does not convey the large difference between the results observed in the two studies. In this experiment, it is not the direction of the change that matters--it's the magnitude of the change that matters. The original study observed small differences (< 1.2-fold) when performing the knockdown of putative ceRNAs in DicerEx5 HCT116 cells, which were interpreted as evidence of an attenuated ceRNA effect. The attempt to repeat this result found large differences (1.4- to 2.9-fold), which cannot be simply interpreted as an attenuated ceRNA effect. Although this discrepancy between the two studies is correctly summarized later (subsection “Meta-analyses of original and replication effects”, fourth paragraph), it is not clearly stated when it is first described (subsection “ceRNA depletion on PTEN expression”, last paragraph) or summarized in the Abstract. Thus, as with the results of experiment #1, the results of this experiment would be more informative if viewed from the perspective of the ceRNA hypothesis. Although it would be beyond the scope of this paper to come up with new hypotheses to explain any results that differ from those of the original paper, it would be appropriate to state whether the results of the replication attempt support the ceRNA hypothesis put forward in the original paper.
We thank the reviewer for this suggestion and have included revisions in the discussion of the PTEN protein expression experiment as well as the Abstract to more accurately reflect how the replication results differ from the original study and the impact this has on the microRNA-dependent manner of the ceRNA hypothesis.