pmceLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC9064299PMC9064299.1906429990642993550372110.7554/eLife.69255692551Research ArticleCancer BiologyImmunology and InflammationThe oncoprotein BCL6 enables solid tumor cells to evade genotoxic stress
LiuYanan ). Conventional genotoxic chemotherapy (e.g. topoisomerase II inhibitors, cisplatin, and carboplatin) that introduce DNA damage lesions, devastate genomic integrity and activate pro-apoptotic pathways, are employed as the standard first-line treatment for a wide array of solid malignancies. Despite initial therapeutic success, intrinsic resistance or rapid adaptive resistance in cancer cells is a major hurdle, hampering the clinical efficacy of these agents ( ; ). Chemoresistance occurs due to complex reasons, such as an increased DNA damage repair capacity, activation of pro-survival pathways, and defects in caspase activity ( ; ; ). While several signaling effectors have been identified as predictive markers, such as ABCA1 ( ) and MAST1 ( ), in tumor tolerance to genotoxic agents, the majority of these studies lacked either an evaluation of the clinical correlation or an explanation for how these effectors mediate pro-survival signals in the context of genotoxic stress.
The transcriptional repressor BCL6 has emerged as a critical therapeutic target in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas ( ). Increasing evidences indicate that BCL6 plays an oncogenic role in several human hematopoietic malignancies and solid tumors ( ; ; ). BCL6 binds and represses different target genes to drive tumorigenesis in a cell context-dependent manner ( ). The constitutive expression of BCL6 sustains the lymphoma phenotype and promotes glioblastoma through transcriptional repression of the DNA damage sensor ATR ( ) and the p53 pathway ( ), respectively. According to data derived from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), the BCL6 locus is also predominantly amplified in primary breast cancer and is correlated with a worse prognosis ( ). In recent years, small molecular inhibitors that target the interaction between BCL6 and its co-repressors or that trigger BCL6 degradation effectively restored BCL6 target gene expression and impeded tumor growth ( ; ; ).
The properties of BCL6 as a therapeutic target originate from its normal function in sustaining the proliferative and the phenotype of stress-tolerant germinal center B cells ( ; ). BCL6 allows B cells to evade ATR-mediated checkpoints and tolerate exogenous DNA damage by repressing the cell cycle checkpoint genes CDKN1A, CDKN1B, and CDKN2B, and the DNA damage sensing genes TP53, CHEK1, and ATR ( ; ; ). When genotoxic stress is accumulated to some extent, BCL6 is phosphorylated by the DNA damage sensor ATM kinase and degraded through the ubiquitin proteasome system, whereby the germinal center reaction is terminated ( ). The critical functions exerted by BCL6 during normal B cell development could be hijacked by malignant transformation, thereby leading to lymphoma ( ). Recent studies have suggested that BCL6 is involved in stress tolerance and drug responses. In more detail, BCL6 can be activated by heat shock factor 1 to tolerate heat stress ( ). The aberrant expression of BCL6 can be provoked in leukemia cells in response to the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib ( ). Our recent work additionally revealed that an increased expression of BCL6 largely contributes to the resistance of KRAS-mutant lung cancer to clinical BET inhibitors ( ). However, the role and underlying mechanisms of BCL6 in chemo-sensitization of solid tumors remain elusive. Given the fact that BCL6 plays an emerging role in DNA damage tolerance and drug responses, we hypothesized that BCL6 might drive resistance to genotoxic agents in solid tumors.
Here, we report that the proto-oncogene BCL6 is a central component of the resistance pathway in tumor response to genotoxic agents. We observed a striking association between the activation of pro-inflammatory signals and BCL6 induction in chemoresistant cancer cells. The tumor suppressor PTEN is further characterized as a functional target gene of BCL6. Importantly, addition of BCL6-targeted therapy to the genotoxic agent etoposide markedly restored the sensitivity of cancer cells to chemotherapy in vitro and in vivo. Overall, our findings establish a rationale for targeting BCL6 to conquer chemoresistance in solid tumors.

## Results

## Genotoxic agents promote BCL6 transcription
While genotoxic agents have become the mainstay of clinical cancer treatments, many patients show a poor response to these drugs due to the emergence of a tumor rapid adaptive response ( ). To gain a comprehensive understanding of chemoresistance mechanisms, we initially measured the half inhibitory concentrations (IC50s) of etoposide and doxorubicin, two well-validated topoisomerase II inhibitors for clinical use, in a panel of 22 cancer cell lines derived from four types of solid tumors, including lung, pancreatic, colorectal, and ovarian carcinomas. Some cell lines displayed apparent resistance to etoposide at doses up to 30 μM ( ) or to doxorubicin at doses up to 0.6 μM ( ), while the remaining cell lines showed a gradient of sensitivity to them. The concentrations of 30 μM and 0.6 μM were chosen to define the resistance of multiple cancer cell lines to etoposide and doxorubicin, respectively, as these are the highest achievable concentration in the plasma of patients, which are likely to be clinically relevant ( ; ).
 
To decipher the mechanisms of tumor resistance to genotoxic therapy, we first performed RNA sequencing in etoposide-resistant cells (Capan-2 and H661) and etoposide-sensitive cells (PC9) in the presence or absence of etoposide. An in-depth comparison of the transcriptome was conducted to describe the transcriptional programs that were responsive to etoposide in sensitive cells but remained recalcitrant to treatment in a resistant population. By analyzing the significantly differentially expressed genes, we found that etoposide treatment triggered a remarkable increase in BCL6 expression in etoposide-resistant Capan-2 and H661 cells, but not in etoposide-sensitive PC9 cells ( ). Given that BCL6 signaling gene sets have not been fully defined in solid tumors, several studies have focused on BCL6 transcriptional program. In addition to the well-known BCL6 target genes or co-repressors in germinal centers and multiple tumors, such as BMI1, EIF4E, NOTCH2, and BCL2 ( ; ; ; ; ), several other genes directly regulated by BCL6 have been recently identified using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing, including BCL6-activated genes (e.g. SYK, BANK1, BLK, and MERTK) or BCL6-repressed genes (e.g. CDKN2C, CDKN1B, RB1, and PTPRO) ( ). We used comparative BCL6 target gene selection to identify the genes that were differentially expressed between resistant and sensitive cells in the presence or absence of etoposide. Our data revealed that the BCL6 transcriptional program was dramatically affected by etoposide in treated Capan-2 and H661 cells, but not in treated PC9 cells ( ). We further verified the specificity of BCL6 increase in other etoposide-resistant cell lines ( ) and the effects of etoposide on BCL6 target gene expression using qPCR analysis ( ). Given that BCL6 transcription was induced in primary resistant cells, we next tested whether it could be provoked in acquired resistance after chemotherapy. Therefore, we analyzed published microarray data ( ; ), and found that BCL6 upregulation was also observed in acquired resistance process ( ).
To clarify whether the fact that transcriptional induction of BCL6 confers tolerance to genotoxic stress was a general phenomenon, we treated five cell lines with a panel of frontline genotoxic agents. The results showed that BCL6 was upregulated in response to the majority of these clinical agents ( and ). In addition, a high expression of BCL6 was associated with a poor progression-free survival in patients who received cisplatin, taxol, or both drugs ( ). These results collectively suggest that an aberrant BCL6 expression might contribute to chemoresistance and is linked to a poor prognosis.

## BCL6 transactivation is correlated with therapy resistance
To further identify whether an increased BCL6 expression was associated with the therapeutic efficacy of genotoxic agents, we first examined BCL6 protein expression in a panel of solid tumor cell lines treated with etoposide or doxorubicin. In agreement with the BCL6 transcription pattern observed in , BCL6 protein abundance was dramatically and preferentially induced by etoposide in resistant cells compared to that in sensitive cells ( ). Notably, increased BCL6 protein levels were closely associated with increased etoposide IC50 values ( ). Specifically, cells with higher BCL6 protein levels were prone to be more tolerant to etoposide (R2=0.61, p<0.0001; ). Similar results were also obtained for doxorubicin ( ).
 
A more detailed observation demonstrated that BCL6 protein expression could also be time-dependently provoked by a long-term exposure of resistant cells to etoposide ( ). This prompted us to examine the responsive role of BCL6 in vivo. Therefore, we set up a xenograft mouse model using human PANC28 and HCT116 cells that are resistant to etoposide and examined the BCL6 expression shift in xenografts after treatment. Our results showed that etoposide impeded the growth at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day ( ). When noted, the BCL6 protein levels in the PANC28 and HCT116 xenografts were dramatically increased by etoposide ( ), which was consistent with our in vitro observations. These results clearly demonstrated that etoposide treatment induced BCL6 expression in vivo.
Next, to examine whether BCL6 transactivation affects drug efficacy in resistant cells, we targeted BCL6 using two different small interfering RNAs and found that BCL6 genetic knockdown dramatically attenuated the clonogenic growth of Capan-2 and HCT116 cells in the presence of etoposide ( ). In line with these results, inducible knockdown of BCL6 potentiated the killing effects of etoposide ( ). In addition, we overexpressed BCL6 using a lentiviral vector in etoposide-sensitive H522 cells and tested the cytotoxicity of etoposide. As expected, our results showed that BCL6 overexpression increased the etoposide IC50 by up to 17-fold ( ). Collectively, these data support the notion that BCL6 confers drug resistance and induces a targetable vulnerability in tumor cells.

## Genotoxic stress activates interferon responses
To further elucidate the mechanisms of BCL6 feedback activation, we conducted gene ontology enrichment analysis on the transcripts that were significantly activated by the genotoxic agent etoposide. Intriguingly, the differentially genes related to inflammatory and immune responses were enriched in resistant Capan-2 and H661 cells, but not in sensitive PC9 cells ( ), raising the possibility that pro-inflammatory factors may play a causal role in conferring chemoresistance. Gene set enrichment analysis further demonstrated a significant upregulation of genes associated with interferon-alpha (IFN-α) response, inflammatory response, and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) response in etoposide-resistant Capan-2 cells ( ) and H661 cells ( ). Along with BCL6 upregulation, the expression of IFN signaling-related genes was significantly increased accordingly in these resistant cells ( and ).
 
Recent work has revealed that consistent DNA damage triggers an inflammatory cytokine secretory phenotype in cultured cells ( ). To corroborate whether IFN-α and IFN-γ were similarly induced because of genotoxic agents, we assayed the expression of IFN-α and IFN-γ in treated cells. Our results showed that etoposide exposure resulted in an evident upregulation of IFN-α ( ) and IFN-γ transcription ( ) in etoposide-resistant Capan-2, and PANC28 cells, but not in etoposide-sensitive H522, PC9, and PANC-1 cells. We further examined the cellular production of IFN-α and IFN-γ in treated resistant cells using a direct enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and found that etoposide treatment evoked a significant increase in IFN-α ( ) and IFN-γ contents ( ) in resistant cells.
Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), a key transcription factor that regulates cell proliferation and immune responses, is an inducible gene of type I and type II interferon ( ; ). To explore the effects of etoposide on IFN signaling, we examined IRF1 expression in resistant cells. We found that etoposide not only triggered a notable increase in IRF1 transcription itself, but also dramatically enhanced IFN-α- and IFN-γ-induced IRF1 expression ( ), indicating the potent effect of etoposide on cellular interferon responses.
We next investigated the biological significance of IFN upregulation in the process of tumor adaptive response to genotoxic agents. Our results showed that exogenous addition of IFN-α and IFN-γ protected sensitive cells from etoposide-induced cell death ( ). In contrast, siRNA knockdown of the IFN-α receptor IFNAR1 led to an enhanced sensitivity of resistant cells to etoposide, as indicated by impaired clonogenic growth ( ) and decreased IC50 values of etoposide ( ). In line with these observations, antibodies against IFN-γ increased the killing ability of etoposide towards resistant cells ( and ). These results indicate that IFN activation provoked by genotoxic stress promotes tumor cell survival, leading to a tumor resistance phenotype.

## The interferon/STAT1 axis directly regulates BCL6 expression
Accumulating evidences show that IFNs produce pro-survival effects and mediate non-immune resistance to chemotherapy primarily through the transcriptional factor STAT1 ( ). Following this direction, we examined STAT1 expression in treated cells and found that etoposide treatment promoted STAT1 abundance and activation in etoposide-resistant Capan-2, PANC28, and H838 cells, but not in sensitive H522, PC9, and PANC-1 cells ( ). Furthermore, genetic knockdown of STAT1 synergized with genotoxic agents to inhibit the clonogenic growth of resistant cells ( ). These results collectively suggest that the interferon/STAT1 axis is required for the therapeutic efficacy of etoposide and plays an essential role in tumor response to genotoxic stress.
 
Activated STAT1 drives an interferon-related gene signature for DNA damage tolerance ( ), which prompted us to hypothesize that the interferon/STAT1 axis might regulate BCL6 expression. Given the regulation of IFN-stimulated gene expression specifically through the classical Janus kinase/STAT1 signaling, we first incubated resistant cells with recombinant IFN-α and IFN-γ and found that they significantly evoked a simultaneous increase in BCL6 mRNA expression ( ), and STAT1 and BCL6 protein expression ( ), implying that these two factors might be functionally linked. To further clarify the role of interferon signaling in modulating BCL6 expression, we treated resistant cells with etoposide in combination with IFN-α or IFN-γ, respectively. Our results showed that etoposide-mediated BCL6 transactivation could be further enhanced in etoposide-resistant Capan-2 cells ( ) and PANC28 cells ( ) by the addition of IFN-α or IFN-γ. Moreover, etoposide induced STAT1 and BCL6 protein expression in resistant cells, whereas these effects could be potentiated by IFN-α ( ) or IFN-γ addition ( ), implying that etoposide-induced type 1 and type 2 interferon responses are required for STAT1 and BCL6 activation. Importantly, an increased expression of BCL6 by etoposide was apparently suppressed by STAT1 genetic silencing ( ). These results collectively suggest that etoposide transactivates BCL6 primarily through the interferon/STAT1 signaling pathway.
To elucidate the regulatory link of STAT1 on BCL6, we silenced STAT1 and found that STAT1 knockdown led to a marked decrease in BCL6 protein expression ( ), while STAT1 overexpression apparently increased BCL6 protein abundance ( ), implying that STAT1 may be upstream of BCL6. To elucidate whether STAT1 is a direct regulator of BCL6, we constructed a whole BCL6 promoter luciferase reporter and found that STAT1 interference resulted in a decreased BCL6 reporter activity ( ). Our chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with qPCR analysis further revealed the recruitment of STAT1 to three putative binding regions of the BCL6 locus ( ). These results reinforced the direct regulation of the interferon/STAT1 signaling pathway on BCL6 expression.

## The tumor suppressor PTEN is a functional target of BCL6
After characterizing STAT1 as an upstream regulator of BCL6, we next explored BCL6 downstream signaling responsible for adaptive response to genotoxic stress. Considering two lines of evidences showing that: (1) phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), a lipid phosphatase that antagonizes the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway, was enriched in BCL6 promoter binding peaks in primary germinal center B cells ( ), and that (2) BCL6 directly binds to the promoter locus of PTEN in patient-derived acute lymphoblastic leukemia ( ), we hypothesized that an increase in BCL6 expression by genotoxic stress might inhibit PTEN and subsequently promote cell survival. To this end, we performed transcriptome analysis and found an evident decrease in PTEN expression in Capan-2 and H661 cells exposed to etoposide ( ). The analysis of datasets from TCGA further revealed that PTEN deletion was mutually exclusive with BCL6 amplification ( ). Furthermore, our qPCR ( ) and immunoblotting analysis ( ) showed that the upregulation of BCL6 was accompanied by a decreased expression of PTEN at both the mRNA and protein levels. We additionally overexpressed BCL6 and observed a significant decrease in PTEN ( ). In contrast, doxycycline-inducible knockdown of BCL6 increased PTEN expression ( ). Our ChIP-qPCR data further revealed that etoposide treatment significantly increased the occupancy of BCL6 at the promoter region of PTEN ( ). These results indicated that PTEN is a functional target of BCL6 and largely contributes to genotoxic stress tolerance in tumor cells.
 It is well-known that PTEN acts as a tumor suppressor and hampers the activation of the proto-oncogenic mTOR pathway ( ). We next explored the effects of etoposide treatment on the mTOR signaling. Our immunoblotting results showed that phosphorylation of mTOR (S2448), S6K (T389), and S6 (S235/S236) was strikingly increased, along with an aberrant BCL6 expression in etoposide-treated resistant cells ( ). Similar results were also obtained in a long-term drug exposure assay ( ). Notably, overexpression of PTEN enhanced the antitumor effects of etoposide in resistant cells ( ), and in contrast, PTEN deficiency significantly decreased the cytotoxicity elicited by etoposide in sensitive cells ( ). These results collectively suggest that the PTEN/mTOR pathway is a downstream signaling of BCL6.

## BCL6 inhibition conquers resistance of cancer cells to genotoxic stress in vitro
Since tumor adaptive resistance to genotoxic stress was attributed to BCL6 transactivation, we tested whether pharmacological inhibition of BCL6 could restore the sensitivity of resistant cancer cells to genotoxic agents. We suppressed BCL6’s function using two BCL6 pharmacological inhibitors, BI3802 and compound 7. BI3802 was reported as a BCL6 degrader ( ), while compound 7 targeted the BCL6 BTB/POZ domain and prevented its partner binding ( ). Our results showed that multiple resistant cell lines became vulnerable to etoposide in the presence of BI3802 or compound 7 ( ). In addition, BI3802 addition could shift the IC50 values of doxorubicin ( ). Moreover, combination index values (CIs) were further employed to indicate drug synergy, and our results showed that the majority of CIs at 50, 75, and 90% of the effective dose of each drug pair (etoposide plus BI3802, or etoposide plus compound 7) in five resistant cell lines were all lower than one ( ), displaying a synergistic action of etoposide and BCL6-targeted therapy. We further assessed the combined effects of etoposide and the BCL6 inhibitor BI3802 in a long-term colony-formation assay. Our results showed that the combination of etoposide and BI3802 led to a robust growth inhibition of cultured colonies ( ). As expected, addition of BI3802 markedly enhanced the inhibitory effects of etoposide on soft-agar colony formation ( ). A combinative synergy was also obtained for doxorubicin and targeted BCL6 inhibition ( ). All these data indicate that BCL6 blockage could restore the sensitivity of cancer cells to genotoxic agents.
 
DNA damage potency triggered by genotoxic agents is a determinant of tumor response to chemotherapy. The accumulation of DNA damage further causes genome instability and consequently triggers cell apoptosis ( ). Our results showed that the combined regimen of etoposide and BI3802 resulted in more poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage and a higher phosphorylated H2AX expression (Ser139) than single agent alone ( ). In addition, more DNA damage occurred as indicated by a significantly higher tail moment observed in a comet assay in the combined treatment group ( ). Consequently, an increase in the number of apoptotic cells was observed in the drug pair group ( ). Taken together, these data suggest that BCL6 blockade potentiates genotoxic agents by inducing DNA damage and growth inhibition.

## Targeted inhibition of BCL6 sensitizes genotoxic agents in vivo
We next investigated whether our combined therapeutic approach is effective in tumor preclinical mouse models. BI3802 was reported to possess a poor bioavailability ( ). Therefore, we applied FX1, another BCL6 pharmacological inhibitor, which disrupts the interaction between BCL6 and co-repressors with satisfactory antitumor effects in vivo ( ; ). We first set up a xenograft mouse model using HCT116 cells. Once the average volume of xenografts reached ~100 mm3, mice were treated with etoposide or the vehicle. We found that BCL6 was upregulated at both mRNA and protein levels in xenografts as early as 2 days after drug administration, and intriguingly, this effect was sustained during the treatment period ( ). Strikingly, the addition of FX1 from day 2 significantly enhanced the therapeutic potency of etoposide, as indicated by a decreased tumor volume and tumor weight ( ). Administration of 10 mg/kg etoposide and 5 mg/kg FX1 was well-tolerated in mice since the levels of blood biochemical indicators were marginally affected ( ). Immunoblot analysis of tumor lysates revealed a marked increase in p-mTOR (S2448), p-P70S6K (T389), and p-S6 (S235/S236) expression levels in etoposide-treated xenografts, whereas addition of FX1 suppressed the activation of the mTOR signaling pathway ( ). Immunohistochemistry analysis additionally showed an increase in p-H2AX (S139) expression and weaker Ki-67 signals in the xenografts from the drug pair group ( ), suggesting a fundamental role of BCL6-targeted therapy in sensitizing etoposide in vivo.
 
To further confirm the sensitizing action of BCL6 blockade to etoposide, we additionally set up a tumor xenograft mouse model using PANC28 cells that are more resistant of etoposide treatment than HCT116 cells. Our results consistently showed that BCL6 genetic silencing markedly sensitized etoposide in mice. The combination of etoposide and BCL6 knockdown significantly impeded PANC28 tumor growth compared to etoposide treatment alone group ( ). To evaluate the antitumor activity of FX1 + etoposide in a more clinically relevant mouse model, we established a patient-derived xenograft model of lung adenocarcinoma harboring a G12V mutation in KRAS (LACPDX). Our results showed that the combination of etoposide and FX1 significantly suppressed tumor weight and tumor volume compared with single agent alone ( ), without causing systemic toxicity in mice ( ). In agreement, addition of FX1 markedly decreased p-S6 (S235/S236) expression and increased p-H2AX (S139) expression in LACPDX ( ). These results collectively suggest that BCL6 is a crucial combinatorial target in the sensitization of resistant tumors to genotoxic agents in vivo.

## Discussion
The exploration of underlying mechanisms of genotoxic agent resistance may allow the prediction of patient responses, the design of combined therapies and the implementation of re-sensitization strategies. Here, we show that BCL6 upregulation is a prominent mechanism to protect tumor cells from genotoxic killing. Our current findings support the notion that BCL6 functions as a central factor in mediating chemoresistance: (1) the interferon/STAT1 pathway serves as an upstream regulator of BCL6, (2) the tumor suppressor PTEN is identified as a functional target of BCL6, (3) the activation of BCL6 signaling leads to a sustained pro-survival phenotype, whereas blocking it enhances the therapeutic efficacy of genotoxic agents. Our findings establish a rationale for the concurrent targeting of BCL6 to conquer tumor tolerance to genotoxic stress, as evidenced by the striking synergy of genotoxic therapy and BCL6-targeted therapy in vitro and in vivo ( and ).
BCL6 acts as a gatekeeper to protect germinal center B cells from undergoing somatic hypermutation and class-switch recombination against DNA damage ( ; ). We showed that BCL6 was markedly upregulated by genotoxic agents in both in vitro and in vivo settings, leading to a resistance phenotype ( and ). Furthermore, high BCL6 levels were positively associated with unfavorable clinical outcomes ( ). Our results were conceptually in line with recent findings showing that BCL6 enabled tumor cell tolerance to cytotoxic stress ( ) and conferred tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance in Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukemia ( ). In this study, we discovered that solid tumors respond to genotoxic killing through an alternative mechanism that has not been characterized previously. We found that chemotherapy-mediated transcriptional reprogramming of pro-inflammatory cytokines transactivated the STAT1-BCL6-PTEN axis, therefore protecting solid tumors from cell death. As reported in our recent work ( ), BCL6 activation attenuated the antitumor efficacy of clinical BET inhibitors in KRAS-mutant lung cancer. Our current work, along with the recently published studies, suggest a crucial role of BCL6 in rendering tumor cells more tolerant to treatments and a model in which multiple factors may contribute to BCL6 upregulation and BCL6-mediated signaling during this process. Moreover, we speculate that BCL6 may functionally program tumor pro-survival signals in drug response and can be used as a predictive biomarker for therapy resistance. As an essential transcription repressor, BCL6 suppresses rapid proliferation and survival of germinal center B cells by recruiting co-repressors, such as BCOR, NCOR, and SMRT, to its BTB domain ( ). Therapy targeting the BCL6 BTB domain lateral groove displayed inhibitory effects in the treatment of lymphoma ( ). Based on the substantial role of BCL6 in the tumor adaptive response to drug treatments, we assessed the therapeutic efficacy of BCL6-targeted therapy in combination with etoposide, which markedly strengthened DNA damage and tumor growth inhibition in vivo, providing a combinatorial strategy with translational significance.
BCL6 upregulation is required for maintaining B cells in germinal center compartments ( ). Once expressed in B cells, BCL6 is tightly controlled through an auto-regulatory circuit model, in which BCL6 negatively regulates its own transcription by binding to its gene promoter ( ; ). We recently reported that BRD3 maintained the auto-regulatory circuit of BCL6 by directly interacting with BCL6 ( ). Aberrant genomic or expressional changes of BCL6 have been detected in lymphomas and multiple solid tumors, including breast cancer, glioblastoma or ovarian cancer ( ; ; ). It has been reported that the transcriptional factor STAT5 serves as a direct negative regulator of BCL6 in lymphomas ( ), and FoxO3a promoted BCL6 expression in leukemia cells exposed to BCR-ABL inhibitors ( ; ). Nevertheless, the transcriptional regulation pattern of BCL6 in solid tumors remains largely unknown. Our findings demonstrated that the genotoxic agent etoposide activated the interferon/STAT1 signaling axis, which directly upregulated BCL6 by recruiting STAT1 to the binding regions of the BCL6 locus ( ). The regulatory mechanism that BCL6 could be transactivated by STAT1 was also observed in imatinib-treated chronic myeloid leukemia cells ( ) and contributed to CD4+ T follicular helper cell TFH differentiation and autoimmunity ( ).
While numerous cell-intrinsic processes are known to play critical roles in tumor response to genotoxic agents, increasing attention has been paid to multiple cell-extrinsic components of the tumor microenvironment that influence the malignant phenotype and disease progression. During DNA damage, the production of cellular mitogenic growth factors and proteases, such as HGF, EGF, and MMP, are programmed to facilitate tumor growth ( ; ). In addition to these pro-survival molecules, the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL6) provoked by chemotherapy, will promote anti-apoptotic signaling and intrinsic chemo-resistance ( ; ; ). The efficacy of chemotherapeutics is also linked to their ability to stimulate a type I interferon response through Toll-like receptor 3, an intracellular immune receptor that is involved in sensing viruses ( ). In this study, we showed that, in response to genotoxic stress, etoposide-resistant cells rapidly increased IFN-α and IFN-γ production, and more importantly, the increase in IFNs was sufficient to protect cells from genotoxic killing ( ). These findings support the essential role of IFNs in the tumor microenvironment of conferring drug resistance, along with the fact that the IFN-related DNA damage resistance signature acts as a predictive marker for chemotherapy ( ; ). Our results further delineate a mechanism by which increased production of IFN-α or IFN-γ facilitated cancer cells to evade genotoxic stress by activating the transcriptional factor STAT1 ( ). Although genotoxic therapy-induced damage to the tumor microenvironment promotes treatment resistance through cell nonautonomous effects ( ), whether targeting the biologically notable upregulation of IFNs in conjunction with conventional therapy could enhance the treatment response requires additional experimentation.
The BCL6 transcriptional program for the direct silencing of multiple target genes has been elaborated in primary B cells and lymphoma ( ). However, few target genes of BCL6 have been characterized in solid tumors. PTEN was reported to be enriched in BCL6 promoter binding peaks of primary germinal center B cells ( ), and BCL6 bound to the promoter locus of PTEN in lymphoblastic leukemia ( ). To the best of our knowledge, the role of this regulatory circuit in tumor cell adapation to genotoxic stress and tumor survival is still unclear so far. Given that BCL6 is dynamically regulated in a tumor context-dependent manner, we thus extensively characterized the biological role of PTEN in BCL6-mediated drug tolerance. Our study identified PTEN as a functional target of BCL6 in therapy resistance. We showed that the overexpression of BCL6 suppressed PTEN, while the knockdown of BCL6 increased the expression of PTEN ( ). Importantly, PTEN overexpression increased the sensitivity of etoposide-resistant cells to etoposide, and in contrast, PTEN deficiency decreased the cytotoxicity elicited by etoposide in etoposide-sensitive cells ( ). Our findings strengthened the connection between BCL6 and PTEN that might commonly occur in germinal center B cells and tumor cells. Moreover, the combination of BCL6 inhibitors and genotoxic agents resulted in a marked suppression of the PTEN downstream component mTOR in vivo ( ), reinforcing that mTOR activation is an actionable mechanism that confers drug resistance ( ). When acting as a transcriptional repressor, the BCL6 BTB domain recruits the co-repressors NCOR, SMRT, and BCOR ( ). The mechanism by which BCL6 mediated the repression of PTEN and whether this action is dependent on the BCL6 BTB domain requires further investigation.

## Materials and methods

## Cell lines and culture
H1975 (RRID: CVCL_1511), PC9 (RRID: CVCL_B260), H661 (RRID: CVCL_1577), H522 (RRID: CVCL_1567), HCC827 (RRID: CVCL_2063), H838 (RRID: CVCL_1594), DLD-1 (RRID: CVCL_0248), HT-29 (RRID: CVCL_0320), HCT-8 (RRID: CVCL_2478), HCT116 (RRID: CVCL_0291), LoVo (RRID: CVCL_0399), AsPC-1 (RRID: CVCL_0152), BxPC-3 (RRID: CVCL_0186), Capan-2 (RRID: CVCL_0026), PANC28 (RRID: CVCL_3917), ES-2 (RRID: CVCL_3509), OVCAR8 (RRID: CVCL_1629), OVCA420 (RRID: CVCL_3935), HEY (RRID: CVCL_2Z96), and HEYA8 (RRID: CVCL_8878) were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). PANC-1 (RRID: CVCL_0480), and MIA PaCa-2 (RRID: CVCL_HA89) were purchased from the Shanghai Cell Bank of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China). All cell lines were maintained in the appropriate culture medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin. Experiments were performed with cells under 15 passages. All cell lines were authenticated by STR analysis and routinely tested for mycoplasma by using the Mycoalert Detection Kit (Beyotime, Jiangsu, China). The culture medium of cell lines is listed in .

## Plasmids and reagents
The inducible BCL6 shRNA vectors were generated based on a pLVX-TetOne-Puro vector (RRID: Addgene 124797) according to standard protocols. All constructs were verified by sequencing. shRNAs sequence targeting BCL6 are available in . Recombinant human IFN-α1 (z02866) was purchased from Genscript (Nanjing, China). Recombinant IFN-γ (300-02) and anti-human IFN-γ antibody (506532) were purchased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill, USA). Etoposide (HY-13629, a topoisomerase II inhibitor), doxorubicin (HY-15142, a topoisomerase II inhibitor), cisplatin (HY-17394, a DNA synthesis inhibitor), carboplatin (HY-17393, a DNA synthesis inhibitor), taxol (HY-B0015, a microtubule association inhibitor), and gemcitabine (HY-17026, a DNA synthesis inhibitor) were purchased from MedChemExpress (Monmouth Junction, USA).

## Cell viability assay
Cell viability was assessed using the sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. Cells (2000–5000 cells per well) were seeded onto 96-well plates in appropriate cell culture medium, allowed to attach overnight, and treated with the indicated drug concentrations. Approximately 48 hr later, the cells were fixed in 50% trichloroacetic acid at 4 °C for 1 hr, stained with 0.4% SRB, and dissolved in a 10 mM Tris solution. The absorbance (optical density, OD) was read at a wavelength of 515 nm. The IC50 values were calculated using GraphPad Prism 8.0 (RRID: SCR_002798), and the CI values were evaluated using CalcuSyn software (Version 2; Biosoft).

## Two-dimensional clonogenic assay
Cells (1000–2000 cells per well) were seeded onto 12-well plates. After 24 hr, cells were treated with the indicated drug for about 7–10 days. When grown into visible clones, the cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, stained with 0.2% crystal violet and photographed. Stained cells were then dissolved in 10% acetic acid. The absorbance of the stained solution was read at a wavelength of 595 nm in a 96-well plate. The relative viability was calculated by setting that of untreated cells as 100%.

## Soft-agar colony formation assay
The soft-agar colony formation assay was conducted to evaluate the inhibitory effects of different treatments on the anchorage-independent growth of tumor cells. The bottom layer of soft agar was prepared by mixing 2 × growth medium and 1.5% noble agar (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) at a 1:1 ratio and the mixture was poured into six-well plates. Cells (1000–2000 cells per well) were suspended in the second soft agar layer that contained 0.5% low melting point agar mixed with growth media and spread over the bottom layer. After solidification, the growth medium was added into each well. After incubation for 5–7 days, cells were treated with various drugs for 10–15 days. When grew into visible clones, cells were imaged using a fluorescence microscope and counted to evaluate cell viability.

## Cell apoptosis assays
Cell apoptosis was quantified using flow cytometry (FACSCalibur, BD) as described previously ( ). For cell apoptosis, the cells exposed to drugs for the indicated times were washed twice with PBS, re-suspended in 400–500 μL of 1 × binding buffer (BD), and stained with 5 μL of Annexin V–FITC and 5 μL of propidium iodide (PI, Sigma; 5 μg/mL) for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Cells were detected using flow cytometry (FACS Calibur, BD) and quantitative analysis was carried out using FlowJo software (RRID: SCR_008520).

## RNA interference
For siRNA transfection, the cells were plated at a confluence of approximately 40–60% in basal culture medium and transfected with siRNA duplex using Lipofectamine TM 2000 reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions for 6 hr. After that, the medium of the transfected cells were replaced by complete medium, and the cells were plated into wells and exposed to the drugs. Western blotting was applied to detect the interference efficiency of target genes. siRNAs sequences are available in .

## RNA isolation and RT-qPCR analysis
Total RNA from cell lines was isolated using TRIzol extraction (Invitrogen). cDNA was then prepared using the PrimeScript RT reagent kit (TaKaRa). QPCR reactions were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions using SYBR Premix Ex Taq kit (TaKaRa). All reactions were performed in triplicates. The CT difference values between the target gene and housekeeping gene (GAPDH) were calculated using the standard curve method. The relative gene expression was calculated. The sequences of primers used for qPCR are listed in .

## ChIP analysis
ChIPs were performed using cross-linked chromatin from Capan-2 cells and either anti-BCL6 antibodies (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 14895, RRID: AB_2798638), anti-STAT1 antibodies (1;1000, Abclonal Cat# A12075, RRID: AB_2758978), or normal rabbit IgG (Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 2729), using SimpleChIP Plus Enzymatic Chromatin Immunoprecipitation kit (agarose beads) (Cell Signaling Technology, 9004). The enriched DNA was quantified by qPCR analysis using the primers listed in .

## Western blotting assay
The preparation of cell lysis was performed according to standard methods. Cells were treated with the respective concentrations of drug for indicated times. Afterward, the cells were washed slightly with ice-cold PBS, and then lysed with radio-immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem). The protein concentrations of cell lysate supernatants were assayed using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). Protein samples were resolved on 8–12% SDS–polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Millipore). Subsequently, the membranes were blocked using 5% BSA (bovine serum albumin) for 1 hr at room temperature and then hybridized sequentially using the primary antibodies and fluorescently labeled secondary antibodies. Signals were detected using the Odyssey infrared imaging system (Odyssey, LI-COR). The antibodies used are listed as follows: anti-BCL6 (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 14895, RRID: AB_2798638), anti-phospho-mTORS2448 (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 2971, RRID: AB_330970), anti-mTOR (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 2972, RRID: AB_330978), anti-phospho-p70S6KT389 (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 9206, RRID: AB_2285392), anti-p70S6K (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 9202, RRID: AB_331676), anti-phospho-S6S235/S236 (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 2211, RRID: AB_331679), anti-S6 (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 2217, RRID: AB_331355), anti-phospho-H2AXS139 (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 9718, RRID: AB_2118009), anti-PTEN (1;1000, Cell Signaling Technology Cat# 9559, RRID: AB_390810), anti-GAPDH (1;10000, Abcam Cat# ab181602, RRID: AB_2630358), anti-STAT1 (1;1000, Abclonal Cat# A19563, RRID: AB_2862669), and anti-IFNAR1 (1;1000, Proteintech Cat# 13083–1-AP, RRID: AB_2122626). The immunoblots are representative of three independent experiments.

## Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
To detect the cellular IFN-α and IFN-γ contents, cell lysates were extracted using RIPA buffer. The total protein concentrations were determined using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific), and IFN-α and IFN-γ protein concentrations were measured using a human IFN-α ELISA kit (1110012) and a human IFN-γ ELISA kit (1110002) from Dakewe Biotech, according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

## RNA sequencing
RNA-seq data were produced by Novogene (Beijing, China). Capan-2, H661, and PC9 cells were treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or etoposide at their respective IC50s for 24 hr. Cells were harvested, and the total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s protocol. A total of 1 μg RNA per sample was used as the input material for the RNA sample preparations. Libraries were prepared using the NEBNext UltraTM RNA Library Prep it for Illumina (NEB, USA) and library quality was assessed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system. The clustering of the index-coded samples was performed using a cBot cluster generation system and a TruSeq PE cluster kit (Illumia) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After cluster generation, the library preparations were sequenced on an Illumina platform and 150 bp paired-end reads were generated. Differential expression was analyzed using DESeq2 (RRID: SCR_000154). Pathway analysis was performed using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA; http://software.broadinstitute.org/gsea/index.jsp).

## Single cell gel electrophoresis (Comet) assay
Single cell electrophoresis (Neutral) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Trevigen). HCT116 and Capan-2 cells were treated with 10 μM etoposide, 10 μM BI3802, or both for 48 hr. Afterward, cells were re-suspended in PBS at 2 × 105 cells/mL and mixed with molten LMAgarose (at 37 °C) at a ratio of 1:10. A 50 µL mixture was pipetted onto comet slides. The slides were solidified, and successively immersed in lysis solution and neutral electrophoresis buffer. The slides were then performed to electrophoresis, placed in a DNA precipitation solution, and stained using diluted SYBR Gold. Signals were captured using a fluorescence microscope. DNA damage was quantified for 50 cells using the mean for each experimental condition, which was obtained by using Comet Score (TriTek) software.

## Animal experiments
For the human cancer cell xenograft mouse model, six-week-old male BALB/cA nude mice were purchased from the National Rodent Laboratory Animal Resources (Shanghai, China). HCT116 (3 million per mouse) and PANC28 cells (8 million per mouse) were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of nude mice. The primary KRAS-mutant lung cancer xenograft mouse model (LACPDX) was established as previously described ( ). The patient-derived tumor tissues were cut into ~15 mm3 fragments and implanted subcutaneously into BALB/cA nude mice using a trocar needle. For these two different xenograft mouse models, the tumors were measured using electronic calipers every other day, and the body was measured in parallel. When the tumor volume reached approximately 100–200 mm3, mice were randomized and treated with vehicle (dissolved in sterile water supplied with 0.5% CMC-Na), etoposide (10 mg/kg, orally, dissolved in corn oil), FX1 (5 mg/kg, intraperitoneally, dissolved in sterile water supplied with 0.5% CMC-Na) or etoposide +FX1. The tumor volumes were calculated using the formula, volume = length × width2 × 0.52. On day 16 or 24, the mice were sacrificed, and tumor tissues were excised, weighed and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for qPCR analysis, Western blotting analysis, and biochemistry testing. All animal experiments were conducted following a protocol approved by the East China Normal University Animal Care Committee.

## Statistical analysis
The data are presented as the mean ± SEM unless otherwise stated. Statistical tests were performed using Microsoft Excel and GraphPad Prism Software version 8.0. For comparisons of two groups, a two-tailed unpaired t-test was used. For comparisons of multiple groups, one-way analysis of variance was used. Significance levels were set at *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. Other specific tests applied are included in figure legends.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China

82073073 to Xiufeng Pang.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China

82060663 to Jing Chen.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China

82122045 to Xiufeng Pang.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China

81874207 to Xiufeng Pang.

Jointed PI Program from Shanghai Changning Maternity and Infant Health Hospital

11300-412311-20033 to Xiufeng Pang, Chengbin Ma.

MOE Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection (Zhejiang University)
 to Xiufeng Pang.

ECNU Construction Fund of Innovation and Entrepreneurship Laboratory

44400-20201-532300/021 to Xiufeng Pang.

ECNU Multifunctional Platform for Innovation

011 to Xiufeng Pang.

## Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Yihua Chen (East China Normal University, Shanghai, China) for synthesizing and providing BCL6 inhibitors. We also thank Dr. Boyun Tang (Baygene Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) for RNA-seq data analysis.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing - original draft, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Software, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Validation, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Validation, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Investigation, Writing – review and editing.
Data curation, Investigation, Validation, Writing – review and editing.
Software, Validation, Writing – review and editing.
Funding acquisition, Resources, Validation, Writing – review and editing.
Funding acquisition, Resources, Validation, Writing – review and editing.
Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – review and editing.

## Ethics
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the East China Normal University.

## Additional files
MDAR checklistSupplementary file 1.

## Cell lines and cell culture medium.
Supplementary file 2.

## siRNA and shRNA sequences.
Supplementary file 3.

## Primers for PCR assays.

## Data availability
RNA-seq data sets and the processed data that support the findings of this study have been deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession ID: GSE161803. All data generated or analysed during this study are included in the manuscript and supporting files. Source data files have been provided for Figures 1, 2, 3 ,4, 5, 6 and 7.
The following dataset was generated:

YananL
XiufengP
2021BCL6 Enables Cancer Cells to Evade Genotoxic StressNCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE161803

The following previously published datasets were used:

KarobiM
KateI
KatyL
AlexanderB
JulieS
RobR
NoayaY
RamS
Da WeiH
RichardAL
SusanB
MichaelD
2011Deciphering the Cancer Cell Resistome: Gene and microRNA Expression Signatures reveal Unique Molecular Targets for Therapeutic Intervention in Etoposide Resistant Breast CancerNCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE28415

JanuchowskiR
ZawieruchaP
RucińskiM
NowickiM
ZabelM
2015Expression data from A2780 cell line and wild type ovarian cancer cell line (with resistant sublines)NCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE73935

 10.7554/eLife.69255.sa0Editor's evaluation
LiuCaigangReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/00v408z34Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University
China
This study reports the role of BCL6 in mediating resistance to genotoxic agents in solid tumors and details the exact mechanism. The reversal of genotoxic therapy resistance by the BCL6 inhibitor further support the conclusions. These findings establish a rationale for targeting BCL6 to conquer resistance to genotoxic agents in solid tumors and therefore have clinical value.
10.7554/eLife.69255.sa1Decision letter
LiuCaigangReviewing Editor
https://ror.org/00v408z34Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University
China
YangQingkaiReviewer
https://ror.org/04c8eg608Dalian Medical University
China
Our editorial process produces two outputs: i) public reviews designed to be posted alongside the preprint for the benefit of readers; ii) feedback on the manuscript for the authors, including requests for revisions, shown below. We also include an acceptance summary that explains what the editors found interesting or important about the work.

Decision letter after peer review:

Thank you for submitting your article "The Oncoprotein BCL6 Enables Cancer Cells to Evade Genotoxic Stress" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by 3 peer reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors, and the evaluation has been overseen Mone Zaidi as the Senior Editor. The following individual involved in review of your submission has agreed to reveal their identity: Qingkai Yang (Reviewer #3).
The reviewers have discussed their reviews with one another, and the Reviewing Editor has drafted this to help you prepare a revised submission.
Essential revisions:
1) Employment of the cell lines in this research requires to be consistent across the experiment panels, also some of the assays need to be carried out on multiple cell lines for support of the conclusions.
2) The marker used to reflect genotoxic agents resistance warrants further enrichment and supplement.
3) For more clear elucidation of the mechanism of BCL6 exert on genotoxic agents resistance, additional experimental data are required.
4) Addressment of innovation of this research is warranted in Disccusion as the function of BCL6 has been discovered thoroughly in multiple hematological malignancies.

Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):

1. As mentioned in the article, it has been reported that BCL is a key therapeutic target for lymphoma in 2008, and that small molecule inhibitors of BCL6 hinder tumor growth in 2016, and so on. Therefore, although this study further enriched the role and mechanism of BCL6 in solid tumor, its influence was slightly limited.
2. After searching for related papers regarding the role of BCL6 in oncogenesis, though mostly reported in hematogenous malignancies, the upstream STAT1 and the downstream PTEN have both been explored and discussed, and BCL6 contributing to drug-resistance has also been mentioned, please address the innovative points in Discussion.
3. In the first result, BCL6 level was detected in multiple cell lines processed with genotoxic agents, detection with clinical sample of residual foci after neoadjuvant chemotherapy would be more convincible.
4. In Page 10 Line 3 the in vivo model was established with only one cell line, please include at least two cell lines.
5. In Page 10 Line 6, are there any more significant reference to support examining level of phosphorylated H2AX to reflect extent of drug-resistance.
6. Discovery process of upstream and downstream regulator of BCL6 are typically conducted, and in vivo and in vitro assay were included, in Figure 7E typical photos of xenograft detached should be presented along with the plot.
7. Most reference of this manuscripts dates back five years ago, please update and include more upfront content.

Reviewer #3 (Recommendations for the authors):

1. There is a general lack of information on whether biological or just technical replications were applied in this study. Many extremely low error bars (such as Figure 2e,f) raise a substantial concern that technical replications instead of biological replications were applied.
2. The mechanism for the genotoxic agents to promote pro-inflammatory cytokine remains elusive.
3. Knockdown or knockout should be applied to evaluate the role of PTEN in drug resistance.
4. Knockdown or knockout of BCL6 should be used to evaluate its roles in the xenografts.
10.7554/eLife.69255.sa2Author response
Essential revisions:
1) Employment of the cell lines in this research requires to be consistent across the experiment panels, also some of the assays need to be carried out on multiple cell lines for support of the conclusions.
We sincerely thank the editor for these helpful suggestions.
We have supplemented additional data as suggested and made consistency of used cell lines across the experimental panels in our revised manuscript. We chose the chemo-resistant cell line Capan-2, PANC28, H838 and HCT116 for mechanistic studies (Figure 3-5), and correspondingly, we employed the chemo-sensitive cell line H522, PC9 and PANC-1 for comparison in certain assays.
In addition, to test whether BCL6 played a general role in chemoresistance and whether BCL6 inhibition sensitized chemotherapy, we recruited more cell lines in pharmacological studies (Figure 2A and Figure 6). The changes are marked in red.
2) The marker used to reflect genotoxic agents resistance warrants further enrichment and supplement.
We greatly appreciate this insightful comment.
In the previous version of our manuscript, we used γH2AX as a marker to indicate cytotoxic response elicited by chemotherapy. However, after more careful consideration, we realize that γH2AX acting as a chemoresistance marker lacks solid evidences and experimental supports. In addition, the γH2AX data is not required in Figure 2D, and we thus removed it in our revised manuscript. We are sorry for the misleading and inappropriate descriptions in our previous manuscript. To dispel additional concerns, we have responded to Reviewer #1 in more detail.
3) For more clear elucidation of the mechanism of BCL6 exert on genotoxic agents resistance, additional experimental data are required.
Thanks for the suggestion.
As suggested by the reviewers, we have performed additional experiments and supplemented a number of new data in our revised manuscript, including in vivo data derived from xenograft mouse models and in vitro data derived from mechanistic studies. We have supplemented these new data in our revised manuscript and in the response letter to the reviewers as well. The changes in the main text are marked in red.
4) Addressment of innovation of this research is warranted in Disccusion as the function of BCL6 has been discovered thoroughly in multiple hematological malignancies.
Thank you so much for the comments.
We have added novelty statements and discussion in the Discussion section of our revised manuscript.
Reviewer #1 (Recommendations for the authors):
1. As mentioned in the article, it has been reported that BCL is a key therapeutic target for lymphoma in 2008, and that small molecule inhibitors of BCL6 hinder tumor growth in 2016, and so on. Therefore, although this study further enriched the role and mechanism of BCL6 in solid tumor, its influence was slightly limited.
We thank the reviewer for the comments.
Multiple lines of evidence have showed that the canonical oncogene BCL6 is a key therapeutic target for hematological malignancies and solid tumors. Correspondingly, specific BCL6 inhibitors suppress their growth in vitro and in vivo. We and others also demonstrated that BCL6 upregulation confers resistance of clinical targeted therapies in either hematological malignancies or solid tumors (Nature. 2011 May 19;473(7347):384-8; J Clin Invest. 2021 Jan 4;131(1):e133090). However, the research regarding to the role and mechanism of BCL6 in chemo-sensitization is quite limited. BCL6 was reported to evolve in vertebrates as a component of the heat shock factor 1 (HSF1)-driven stress response in 2019 (Cancer Discov. 2019 May;9(5):662-679). This study revealed that the HSF1-BCL6-TOX axis is evolutionarily conserved and necessary for cancer cells to tolerate cytotoxic stress by enhancing DNA repair capability. To the best of our knowledge, this work is currently the only one that report a responsive role of BCL6 in chemosensitivity of solid tumors. In our study, we discovered that solid tumor cells respond to genotoxic killing through an alternative mechanism that has not been characterized previously. We found that chemotherapy-mediated transcriptional reprogramming of pro-inflammatory cytokines transactivated the STAT1-BCL6-PTEN axis in solid tumors, protecting them from cell death. Our work, along with the recently published studies, suggest a crucial role of BCL6 in rendering tumor cells more tolerant to treatments and a model in which multiple factors may contribute to BCL6 upregulation and BCL6-mediated signaling during this process.
We have added these statements in the Discussion section of our revised manuscript (Page 19, Line 22; Page 20, Line 1-9). The changes are marked in red.
2. After searching for related papers regarding the role of BCL6 in oncogenesis, though mostly reported in hematogenous malignancies, the upstream STAT1 and the downstream PTEN have both been explored and discussed, and BCL6 contributing to drug-resistance has also been mentioned, please address the innovative points in Discussion.
We greatly appreciate the reviewer’s insightful comments.
The variation in BCL6 repressive complex formation and association with different transcriptional factors are indicative of the complexity of BCL6 transcriptional programming (Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5536-48). STAT1 has been reported to directly induce BCL6 expression, which contributed to CD4+ T follicular helper cell TFH differentiation and autoimmunity (J Immunol. 2014 Mar 1;192(5):2156-66). Nevertheless, whether this regulatory action occurs in solid tumor remain elusive. In addition, PTEN was reported to be enriched in BCL6 promoter binding peaks in primary germinal center B cells (Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5536-48), and BCL6 bound to the promoter locus of PTEN in lymphoblastic leukemia (Cancer Cell. 2015 Mar 9;27(3):409-25). The role of this regulatory circuit in tumor cell adaptation to genotoxic stress and survival is still unclear so far. Given that BCL6 is dynamically regulated by a unique mechanism in a cell type-dependent manner, we thus extensively characterized the biological role and regulation machinery of BCL6 in chemoresistance of solid tumors. Our study identified the IFN-BCL6-PTEN axis as an antagonism target for overcoming chemoresistance.
As suggested, we have added novelty statements and discussion in the Discussion section of our revised manuscript (Page 22, Line 20-22; Page 23, Line 1-11). The changes are marked in red.
3. In the first result, BCL6 level was detected in multiple cell lines processed with genotoxic agents, detection with clinical sample of residual foci after neoadjuvant chemotherapy would be more convincible.
We appreciate for the reviewer’s suggestion.
We sincerely agree that it will be more convincing with the evidence of elevated BCL6 expression in clinical sample after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. However, it is very hard for us to get paired tumor samples before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We are sorry that we can’t provide relevant data at current stage.
In our manuscript, we analyzed published clinical datasets and showed that a high expression of BCL6 was associated with a poor progression-free survival in patients who received chemotherapy (Figure 1G). This result supported the clinical relevance of BCL6 and chemotherapy to some extent.
4. In Page 10 Line 3 the in vivo model was established with only one cell line, please include at least two cell lines.
We thank this helpful suggestion.
Following to the suggestion, we additionally set up a tumor xenograft mouse model using PANC28 cells that are more resistant of etoposide treatment than HCT116 cells. Our new data consistently showed that the BCL6 abundance in the xenografts was apparently increased by etoposide treatment. Combing the results from the HCT116 xenograft model that were already shown in our previous manuscript, we clearly demonstrated that etoposide treatment induced BCL6 expression in vivo.
We have supplemented our new data in Figure 2D and Figure 2—figure supplement 1C of our revised manuscript.
5. In Page 10 Line 6, are there any more significant reference to support examining level of phosphorylated H2AX to reflect extent of drug-resistance.
We greatly appreciate this insightful question.
We are sorry for the misleading and inappropriate descriptions in our previous manuscript. We intended to use the expression of γH2AX, a well-known DNA damage marker, to indicate cytotoxic responses elicited by chemotherapy. We observed a decreased γH2AX expression in xenografts after etoposide treatment, implying a potentially decreased efficacy of chemotherapy, rather than the emergence of drug resistance as we described previously. Considering that the γH2AX data was not required for Figure 2D, we have removed it in our revised manuscript.
6. Discovery process of upstream and downstream regulator of BCL6 are typically conducted, and in vivo and in vitro assay were included, in Figure 7E typical photos of xenograft detached should be presented along with the plot.
We appreciate the reviewer’s comment and suggestion.
To evaluate the antitumor activity of combined regimen of BCL6 inhibition and etoposide in a more clinically relevant mouse model, we established a patient-derived xenograft model of lung adenocarcinoma (LACPDX). We previously tested the two reported BCL6 inhibitors, FX1 and compound 7, and found that they both could apparently sensitize etoposide in mice, as indicated by the tumor volume curve, tumor weight graph and xenograft image below. However, considering that compound 7, targeting BCL6 with the same inhibitory mechanism as FX1, currently in a quite early stage of development and exhibited toxicity in mice, we did not show compound 7 results in the manuscript.
Thus, we could not provide requested xenograft photos of Figure 7D along with the plot in our revised manuscript, as with FX1 and compound 7 groups together could not be cut and separated.
 7. Most reference of this manuscripts dates back five years ago, please update and include more upfront content.
We greatly appreciate the reviewer’s suggestion. We have updated the references in our revised manuscript.
Reviewer #3 (Recommendations for the authors):
1. There is a general lack of information on whether biological or just technical replications were applied in this study. Many extremely low error bars (such as Figure 2e,f) raise a substantial concern that technical replications instead of biological replications were applied.
We thank the reviewer for the helpful comments.
We have supplemented more information in the figure legends regarding to the experimental setting. Values in our study are expressed as mean ± SEM of three technical replicates. Representative of two or three independent experiments with similar results is shown.
2. The mechanism for the genotoxic agents to promote pro-inflammatory cytokine remains elusive.
We appreciate the reviewer’s insightful comments.
According to the published literature, the efficacy of chemotherapeutics is linked to their ability to stimulate a type I interferon response through Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), an intracellular immune receptor that is involved in sensing viruses (Nat Med. 2014 Nov;20(11):1301-9). In addition, an interferon-related gene signature for DNA damage resistance has been considered as a predictive marker for chemotherapy (Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 25;105(47):18490-5)
3. Knockdown or knockout should be applied to evaluate the role of PTEN in drug resistance.
We appreciate for the reviewer’s insightful suggestion.
As suggested, we further silenced PTEN in sensitive PC9 cells with siRNAs and treated those transfected cells with 0.2 μM etoposide for a week. Our results showed that PTEN deficiency significantly decreased the cytotoxicity elicited by etoposide compared with the control group.
We have supplemented this new data in Figure 5K of our revised manuscript.
4. Knockdown or knockout of BCL6 should be used to evaluate its roles in the xenografts.
We thank this helpful suggestion.
Following to the suggestion, we additionally set up a tumor xenograft mouse model using the resistant cell line PANC28. Our new data showed that BCL6 silencing markedly sensitized etoposide in vivo. The combination of etoposide and BCL6 inhibition significantly impeded tumor growth compared to etoposide treatment alone.
We have supplemented our new data in Figure 7C and added relevant descriptions in the Results section of our revised manuscript.