822acssdJournal of Medicinal ChemistryJ Med ChemPMC9340767934076793407673581667110.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00302Enriching Proteolysis
Targeting Chimeras with a Second
Modality: When Two Are Better Than One
SalernoAlessandra SeghettiFrancesca CaciollaJessica UliassiElisa TestiEleonora GuardigniMelissa RobertiMarinella MilelliAndrea BolognesiMaria Laura †Department
of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, Alma Mater
Studiorum - University of Bologna, Via Belmeloro 6, 40126 Bologna, Italy‡Department
for Life Quality Studies, Alma Mater Studiorum
- University of Bologna, Corso d’Augusto 237, 47921 Rimini, Italy*Email: marialaura.bolognesi@unibo.it
1172022651495079507–9530282022© 2022 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Proteolysis targeting chimera (PROTAC)-mediated protein
degradation
has prompted a radical rethink and is at a crucial stage in driving
a drug discovery transition. To fully harness the potential of this
technology, a growing paradigm toward enriching PROTACs with other
therapeutic modalities has been proposed. Could researchers successfully
combine two modalities to yield multifunctional PROTACs
with an expanded profile? In this Perspective, we try to answer this
question. We discuss how this possibility encompasses different approaches,
leading to multitarget PROTACs, light-controllable PROTACs, PROTAC conjugates, and macrocycle- and oligonucleotide-based PROTACs. This possibility
promises to further enhance PROTAC efficacy and selectivity, minimize
side effects, and hit undruggable targets. While PROTACs have reached
the clinical investigation stage, additional steps must be taken toward
the translational development of multifunctional PROTACs.
A deeper and detailed understanding of the most critical challenges
is required to fully exploit these opportunities and decisively enrich
the PROTAC toolbox.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Feb 24; Issue date 2022 Jul 28.

## Introduction
The use of small molecules for protein
target modulation is the
classic drug discovery approach. Broadly
defined as chemical compounds with a low molecular weight (MW = 0.1–1
kDa), small molecules have both advantages
and disadvantages. They generally bind to the protein of interest
(POI)—enzymes, ion channels,, or receptors typically endowed
with a well-defined ligand-binding site—and modulate its function. Small molecules engage their targets by various
mechanisms of action (MoAs) and, depending on their localization,
can act both intracellularly and extracellularly. However, several
proteins lack binding sites and catalytic activity, or have catalytic-independent
functions, making their modulation difficult to achieve. Consequently,
more than 80% of proteins are considered “undruggable”. This percentage comprises critical targets such
as transcription factors (TFs), scaffolding proteins, or non-enzymatic
proteins inside the cells. 
Over
the years, alternative therapeutic approaches have been developed
to face these challenges. They include
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), antisense
oligonucleotides (ASOs), small-interfering
RNAs (siRNAs), CAR T-cell therapies, and, more recently, CRISPR-Cas9 technology. However, their development has faced many problems
that still today limit their clinical applicability.
Notwithstanding
a subtle perception that they have run their course,
small molecules continue to be the mainstay of the pharmaceutical
research. In 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved
50 new molecular entities—just 3 fewer than in 2020, and the
third highest total in the past 20 years. Among these, 31 (62% of
new approved therapeutics) were small molecules, confirming their
critical role in the drug pipeline. 
Certainly, the small-molecule discovery field has been revitalized
by the emergence of a truly revolutionary modality based on PROteolysis
TArgeting Chimeras (PROTACs).
This ground-breaking approach
uses small molecules, i.e., PROTACs,
to control protein levels rather than modulate their function. − PROTACs do not inhibit the POI, but they induce its removal by binding
and harnessing the cell disposal ubiquitin–proteasome system
(UPS). Such PROTAC-mediated protein degradation (P-mPD) offers an
extraordinary strategy to enhance classic drug discovery approaches,
giving the opportunity to target the “undruggable” proteome. 
The first report about P-mPD was published
in 2001 by the groups
of Craig M. Crews and Raymond J. Deshaies, but it remained largely under-explored until 2015. Since then, PROTACs
have gained formidable attention from both academia and pharmaceutical/biotechnology
companies. , A Scopus search (January 2022)
for articles containing “Proteolysis Targeting Chimera”
or “PROTAC” in the title, abstract, or keywords retrieved,
starting from 2001, the impressive number of 590 entries ( ). Remarkably, 490
(83%) of these publications are dated between 2017 and 2021 and appear
in high-impact medicinal chemistry/chemical biology journals,
e.g., Journal of Medicinal Chemistry (59), Journal of the American Chemical Society (17), ACS
Chemical Biology (19), and ACS Medicinal Chemistry
Letters (18). The explosion observed from 2017 onward is
likely related to a shift from peptide-based to fully synthetic small-molecule
degraders, which are more promising in terms of drug-like property
optimization and oral bioavailability. In this respect, a breakthrough was the discovery of the immunomodulatory
imide drug (IMiD) thalidomide (see in ) as a cereblon (CRBN) E3 ligase ligand. 
 To further confirm the success and the amazing
potential of the
approach, in 2019, Arvinas Therapeutics began the first ever clinical
study of a targeted protein degrader, ARV-110 (1 in ), an orally bioavailable
PROTAC for the potential treatment of metastatic castration-resistant
prostate cancer, which is now in Phase II clinical trial. As if a new golden goose has been found, all
the major players in drug discovery have started their own targeted
protein degradation programs and brought several degraders into clinical
trials. , 
The medicinal chemistry behind P-mPD
has grown exponentially in
the past few years (as reviewed in refs ( − )). In a recent article, Craig Crews uses the Shakespeare quotation “the past is prologue”
to elegantly describe where we have been and where we are going in
the field. This expression reminds us that everything that has been
developed so far has occurred to prepare us for that will follow.
We feel that the field has matured so much that it has already incorporated
the latest developments in terms of novel medicinal chemistry strategies
and novel types of drugs/chemotypes, collectively highlighted
in a recent Editorial as “new modalities”. In other words, our interpretation is that,
to overcome some of the current hurdles, the PROTAC toolbox has been
expanded through the development of PROTACs endowed with a second
modality, besides the specific proteasome-mediated one. The incorporation
of a molecular framework, responsible for the extra modality, has
provided what we envisage as “multifunctional PROTACs”.
In this view and to avoid unnecessary overlap with
the prolific
recent literature, , , , the aim of this Perspective is to critically
analyze the development of such multifunctional PROTACs.
Notwithstanding their potential advantages, the reader should be aware
of the intrinsic strategic risk, considering that PROTACs are “unprecedented”
drugs, and the additional layer of complexity in terms of drug discovery
and development. Thus, after briefly introducing the essential of
PROTAC medicinal chemistry and pharmacology, we will highlight and
discuss selected PROTAC case studies from this perspective.

1.

## The Essential Medicinal Chemistry of PROTACs
From a medicinal
chemistry point of view, PROTACs are heterobifunctional
molecules consisting of a ligand that binds the POI connected via
a linker to a recruitment moiety for an E3 ubiquitin ligase ( ). This has been exhaustively
discussed elsewhere. 
Regarding the “POI ligand”, a vast
array of warheads
has been reported. It spans from non-covalent,
irreversible, and reversible covalent ligands to allosteric ones. They are directed to more than 100 targets,
including chromatin readers such as BRD4, cytoplasmic hormone receptors
(e.g., AR and ER) scaffolding and regulatory proteins, aggregation-prone
misfolding proteins (e.g., Tau), fusion proteins (e.g., BCR-ABL),
and receptor tyrosine kinases (e.g., EGFR, HER3, FLT3).
The
chemical structures of POI ligands, along with biological activities
and physicochemical properties, have been collected in the PROTAC-DB
database and PROTACpedia, useful resources
for PROTAC practitioners.
A critical role is also played by
the “linker”, featuring
structurally simple alkyl or polyethylene glycol (PEG) chains, up
to more rigid piperazine/piperidine-based linkers. Its length and
chemical composition have been shown to impact, among others, PROTAC’s
rigidity, hydrophobicity, and solubility. It is also well supported
that such linker features are very important for productive ternary
complex formation, degradation activity, and target selectivity. To date, linker structure–activity relationship
(SAR) studies are largely empirical, and linker design still represents
a bottleneck. However, recent advances
in computational approaches modeling PROTAC-mediated ternary complexes
could inform rational structure-based optimization. 
Similarly, the choice of the “E3 ligase ligand”,
which can act reversibly or irreversibly, is critical for the final
success. More than 600 E3 ligases are predicted to be encoded by the
human genome, each with its own specificities,
but only few of them have been successfully harnessed for PROTACs:
e.g., mouse double minute 2 homologue (MDM2), von Hippel Lindau (VHL),
Cereblon (CRBN), and cellular inhibitor of apoptosis protein (cIAP).
This is mostly due to the availability of small-molecule ligands to
these E3 ligases, which include, but are not limited to, those depicted
in . A comprehensive
discussion of traditional and new E3 ligase ligands can be found elsewhere. It has been also demonstrated that different
degradation and tissue-selective profiles are possible, depending
on the recruited ligase. 

2.

## The Essential Pharmacology of PROTACs
PROTACs initiate
the degradation cascade by recruiting the POI
and forming a ternary complex with the E3 ligase ( ). The induced proximity between
the POI and the E3 ubiquitin ligase elicits ectopic ubiquitination
of lysine residues of the POI surface. The ubiquitinated POI is finally
recognized and degraded by the 26S proteasome.
 PROTACs offer several advantages compared to “classical”
small-molecule-based drugs. Indeed, protein degradation is an event-driven rather than occupancy-driven pharmacology. In this view, PROTACs catalytically remove sub-stoichiometric
quantities of proteins through multiple rounds of activity and trigger
potent effects even at low doses. Evidence for the catalytic nature
of PROTACs has been originally provided by determining the kinetics
and stoichiometry of PROTAC-induced POI ubiquitination in in vitro assays. However, not
all the published PROTAC studies report on this aspect. On the contrary,
classic small-molecules-mediated pharmacology is often achieved with
>90% of target engagement; therefore,
occupation of the binding site requires high drug exposure and consequently
the use of a high dose, which can potentially lead to toxic on- and
off-target effects. In addition, PROTACs can better circumvent some
inhibitor resistance mechanisms typical of cancer and infectious diseases,
including (i) point mutations, (ii) gain of scaffolding function,
and (iii) target protein overexpression. This is mainly due to their
event-driven pharmacology, resulting in catalytic removal of POI in
its entirety and in degradation driven by binding rather than function
disruption. However, acquired resistance
to PROTACs by genomic alterations of E3 ligase complex core components
cannot be ruled out. Moreover, and more
importantly, PROTACs can expand the number of “druggable”
targets since they have been demonstrated to degrade proteins lacking
a catalytic site or a small-molecule binding site. This is the case,
for example, of aberrant Tau in frontotemporal dementia, which is
conventionally considered an intractable target because the lack of
a well-defined active site. 
Apart
from the advantages discussed above, there is still room
for improvement in some areas, such as
the following:
(a)Twelve PROTACs have recently reached
clinical phases, some of them as therapeutic combinations with other
agents to exploit synergistic effects. As a further step, the development
of PROTAC-mediated dual degradation of networked proteins is promising.
Although in its infancy, it may represent an effective strategy in
the frame of drug-resistant or multifactorial diseases.
(b)PROTACs are not always selective and
could induce degradation of other proteins (off-target effect) or
unselective degradation of POIs in an undesired tissue (on-target
effect). As an example, CRBN E3 ligase ligands induce degradation
of some TFs (e.g., SALL4) and Ikaros
family of zinc finger proteins (i.e., IKZF1 and IKZF3) by acting as
molecular glue degraders. Thus, PROTACs
might benefit from prodrug approaches and a spatiotemporal control.
(c)In spite of properties
lying outside
the classic “rule-of-five” space, when orally administered, PROTACs have been shown to induce
POI degradation in any reachable cells, without differentiating between
healthy and diseased cells. This has been partly overcome with the
development of topical PROTACs, which avoid systemic exposure and
side effects. A recent example is the androgen receptor (AR)-PROTAC
GT20029 (undisclosed structure), which entered Phase I clinical trial
in China for androgenetic alopecia and acne. However, when systemic administration is required, targeted delivery
systems may overcome limitations of poor selectivity and in
vivo pharmacokinetic (PK) profiles.
(d)PROTACs’ flexibility is a crucial
parameter to be considered during design and development. In addition
to influencing PK properties, flexibility plays an important role
in influencing the ternary complex formation. In this regard, locking
the linker or POI ligand into the bioactive conformation by macrocyclization
strategies may facilitate ternary complex formation and enhance the
PROTAC’s degradation profile.
(e)Over the years, the spectrum of targets
that can be degraded by PROTACs has greatly expanded. However, some
targets are still difficult to tackle via small-molecule degraders. Oligonucleotide-based therapeutics have received
ever-increasing attention for their potential to modulate targets
lacking hydrophobic pockets and well-defined binding sites.
Indeed, the limitations described above have been already
overcome
by the development of brand-new tools, recently highlighted as “novel”
PROTACs, to distinguish them from “classical” PROTACs. To a closer look, we envisage that in all these
cases the degradation technology has been combined with a second modality,
expanding the original MoA.
From this angle, in ( a), we will discuss how PROTACs and polypharmacology
have been combined
in what we dub multitarget PROTACs, with a pronounced
conceptual similarity to multitarget-directed ligands (MTDLs). In ( b), we will critically review light-controllable PROTACs, resulting from the combination of PROTAC technology with
photopharmacology. ( c) reports on antibody- or small-molecule-PROTAC conjugates aimed at combining targeted
delivery and PROTACs toward a higher
selectivity, reduced toxicity, and improved PK profiles. ( d) highlights PROTACs integrating
a novel chemotype, which bears great promise in pharmaceutical discovery,
i.e., macrocyclic structures. , Finally, in ( e), we will describe how the
field of PROTACs has incorporated oligonucleotide-based approaches, hence opening up exciting new avenues.
 
3.

## Combining PROTACs and Polypharmacology Modalities
In the era
of network pharmacology, complex diseases,
such as cancers and neurodegenerative diseases,
are viewed as the result of a systemic breakdown of physiological
networks. Given the robustness and redundancy of such diseased networks,
it is unlikely that a single intervention (i.e., single-target drugs)
can restore the perturbed situation. Conversely, the simultaneous
modulation of several targets may contribute to achieve the desired
therapeutic effect. Polypharmacology, which embodies the use of pharmaceutical
agents acting on multiple targets, seems to be the best way to restore
the complex diseased network. Since the
term was coined in 2008, MTDLs have become
a milestone in the modern medicinal chemistry and one of the most
explored polypharmacological strategies. MTDLs are meant as single
molecules with a potential multifaced MoA developed by framework combination
of parent scaffolds. The feasibility
of this approach is supported by the armamentarium of investigational
and approved drugs with a multitarget profile. Among them, numerous
dual inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (e.g., palbociclib)
and serotonin–dopamine activity modulators (e.g., aripiprazole)
were approved for the treatment of complex cancer and psychiatric
disorders, respectively. 
A polypharmacology
profile, in terms of multiple and concerted
pharmacological modulation of two or more targets, could be a suitable
opportunity also for PROTACs. In this section, we report examples
of multitarget PROTACs, referring to those that are
endowed with (i) two POI ligands ( A) or (ii) a dual-targeting POI ligand ( B). The recruitment
and degradation of multiple targets motivated our definition of multitarget PROTACs.
 To note, so-called trivalent PROTACs have not been deliberately included, as they
exploit multivalency concepts (i.e., enhanced avidity, potency, or
selectivity) and not polypharmacology ones. Indeed, they embody two POI ligands that can simultaneously bind
to two sites or two units of the same protein (and not to two different
targets).
A library of rationally designed multitarget PROTACs
(exemplified by case (a) in A) has been recently reported. Particularly, gefitinib and olaparib were combined in CRBN-based
or VHL-based PROTACs, with the intent to degrade two targets interconnected
in cancer evolution pathways, i.e., the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), respectively ( ). The PROTACs have
been designed around a branched core (trifunctional natural amino
acids), from where linkers connect two independent POI ligands and
an E3 ligase binder. Among the CRBN-based PROTACs, compound DP-C-1
(2, ) displayed the best dual degradation profile, which was superior
to that induced by the corresponding mono-PROTACs at the same concentration.
Similarly, DP-V-4 (3, ) belonging to the VHL-based series, showed
the best degradation effect, but a weaker anti-proliferative activity
in tumor cells compared to the parent inhibitors. This was probably
due to a poor PK profile resulting from the high MW. Engagement of
both EGFR and PARP by 2 and 3 was confirmed,
although no evidence on multiprotein complex formation was reported.
Remarkably, this work is the first successful example of rationally
designed multitarget PROTACs able to simultaneously
promote degradation of two completely different POIs in tumor cells.
 Along these lines, further rationally designed multitarget PROTACs (i.e., BET/HDAC degraders) have been
reported, , and we expect that others will show up soon.
An example of case (b) of encompasses the development of degraders based on
a dual-targeting POI ligand (ABT-263, ). The anti-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins
(including BCL-xL, BCL-2, and MCL-1) are well-validated cancer targets,
and dual inhibition is a promising therapeutic strategy. , However, ABT-263, a potent dual BCL-2 and BCL-xL inhibitor, has
not obtained regulatory approval due to its on-target thrombocytopenia.
Thus, it was speculated that a PROTAC approach might avoid this side
effect, since platelets express minimal levels of VHL, CRBN, and IAPs.
To this end, DT2216 (4, ) was developed as the first PROTAC featuring a dual-targeting POI ligand. However, 4 did not show a dual degrader profile, while achieving only
BCL-xL degradation. Thus, it had a limited effect on most solid tumors,
unless it was combined with a selective BCL-2 inhibitor. From this clearly emerged the necessity of a
simultaneous modulation of the two targets (BCL-xL and BCL-2) for
a greater therapeutic impact. With the aim of developing a truly dual
BCL-2/BCL-xL PROTAC, a different linker attachment point was explored.
The most potent compound of the series, PZ703b (5, ), exhibited balanced
potency in both MOLT-4 (BCL-xL-sensitive cell line) and RS4;11 cells
(BCL-2-sensitive cell line). However, 5-mediated BCL-2
degradation was not significant, although its inhibitory activity
on BCL-2 was enhanced. A follow-up study allowed researchers to achieve the desired dual degradation profile.
Guided by computational modeling of the entire multimeric ubiquitin
ligase complex, 5 was effectively converted into a potent
dual BCL-2/BCL-xL degrader, 753b (6, ), by modifying linker length
and composition. A series of experiments
confirmed that 6 degrades both BCL-xL and BCL-2 via the
UPS. Remarkably, 6 showed a significantly improved anti-tumor
efficacy in a Kasumi-1 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line, which
critically depends on both BCL-xL and BCL-2 for survival.
Collectively,
these works address key aspects of multitarget PROTACs.
Drug combinations of PROTACs and conventional protein inhibitors
are more effective than PROTACs alone to perturb networks and modify
the outcome of a complex disease. An even better modulation of pathological
networks may be achieved by using single-molecule multitarget PROTACs, able to act at the same time and at the same concentration
on the selected multiple targets (with respect to combinations, two
single compounds, each one with an individual PK profile). However, multitarget PROTACs based on two different POI ligands ( A) are more challenging
than classical PROTACs in terms of (i) synthesis and (ii) PK profiles,
due to their inherently higher structural complexity. As for point
(i), a toolbox for PROTAC modular synthesis and a “click chemistry platform”  have already proven effective for accessing
libraries of PROTACs. In addition, branched functionalization sites
with controlled orientation have been reported, clearly highlighting the ongoing interest of the scientific
community to expand the field in this direction. As for the PK, due
to the presence of a second POI ligand, multitarget PROTACs have an even higher MW than traditional PROTACs. Although PROTAC modes of cellular permeation/oral
bioavailability are mostly unknown, the larger structure of multitarget PROTACs might pose further PK challenges.
With regard to PROTACs featuring dual-targeting POI ligands ( B), we should remark
that besides the described examples, others have been reported. To note, all focus on PROTACs directed to proteins
belonging to the same family. Clearly, it is more challenging to identify
a chemical framework with a balanced activity against a set of multiple
targets associated with a desired effect, which do not share binding
site similarity. 
In addition to
those of ,
a particular case of dual-targeted activity is that
shown by the so-called IRAKIMiDs. By
exploiting the molecular glue activity of IMiDs, these single molecules
have been designed to degrade both IRAK4 and IMiD substrates, including
Ikaros and Aiolos. KT-413 (undisclosed structure), currently in a
Phase I clinical trial, combines IRAK4 and IMiD degradation by simultaneously
targeting both the MYD88-NFkB and IRF4-Type 1 interferon pathways.
This should broaden the anti-tumor activity of this single agent.
All in all, the rational design of multitarget PROTACs
remains a challenge, considering the unpredictable role
of the ternary complex formation and the multifaceted cascade underlying
targeted protein degradation. However, based on what we have learned
from the MTDL field, we envision that the development of multitarget PROTACs might highlight that the whole is greater than the
sum of its parts in terms of therapeutic outcome. Multitarget PROTACs might have better therapeutic windows,
thanks to lower doses and the avoidance of drug–drug interactions,
as well as reduced susceptibility to drug resistance. With this in
mind, we hope that enriching PROTACs with polypharmacological modalities
may not only open a new research direction but also foster clinical
translation.

4.

## Combining PROTAC and Photopharmacology Modalities
“Photopharmacology” is a rapidly developing field
that combines the classical pharmacological approach based on small-molecule
drugs with the light control used in photochemistry. , As such, photopharmacology aims at solving the problems of off-target
activity and severe side effects by controlling drug activity with
high spatiotemporal precision. Moreover, light can directly influence
the action of bioactive molecules by changing their PK or pharmacodynamic
(PD) profiles. To date, the field encompasses
all approaches based on photoresponsive small molecules, including
photocaged and photoswitchable ligands. , Photocaged
compounds are irreversibly photoresponsive small molecules decorated
with a photocleavable protecting group (defined as “cage group”).
The cage group masks the bioactive pharmacophore, thereby hampering
the interaction with the desired target and making the molecule inactive.
Then, photocleavage of the cage group upon irradiation allows the
controlled activation of the bioactive compound, and thus its consequent
pharmacological activity. Photoswitchable ligands are reversibly photoresponsive
small molecules, capable of switching between isomeric forms. A light
stimulus guides the reversible isomerization. The resulting conformational
change enables on/off switching of the therapeutic action by affecting
target recognition. From a medicinal chemistry point of view, both
strategies have made tremendous progress in the past decade, with
an extensive repertoire of photopharmacology small molecules directed
to a wide array of biological targets. , 
PROTACs
could provide key advantages over classical inhibitors.
However, their particular mechanism of therapeutic action might be
associated with safety risks that could hamper “bench-to-bedside”
advancement. When systemically administered,
prolonged on-target protein degradation and associated POI loss of
function might occur in any cell accessible to the degrader. For instance,
inhibition of BET bromodomains is relatively tolerated, while a complete
loss of BRD2 and BRD4 is lethal. To fine-tune
PROTAC activity and avoid toxic events, an external stimulus might
be highly beneficial. The controlled activation of PROTACs at a chosen
time and location could indeed yield a potential better selectivity.
Thus, several groups have been asking whether light could be used
as a controllable stimulus, given its non-invasive action and high
spatial and temporal precision.
To answer such a question, several
PROTACs have been converted
into light-controllable precision tools. As discussed, the main outcome
of such multifunctional PROTACs is the optical spatiotemporal
control of protein degradation, which is generally related to the
formation of a productive ternary complex upon irradiation. For clarity,
we will group the developed light-controllable PROTACs into two categories,
namely (i) photocaged PROTACs ( A) and (ii) photoswitchable PROTACs ( B).
 4.1.

## Photocaged PROTACs
Typically, photocaged
PROTACs utilize a photolabile protecting group that is irreversibly
released upon light irradiation, leading to a tissue-selective activation
of the degrader. The design and synthesis of a photocaged degrader
are quite straightforward when starting from an already validated
PROTAC. The incorporation of the cage group on the PROTAC structure
can be performed by exploiting different chemical functionalization
sites, or rather, by caging (i) the E3 ligase ligand to prevent crucial
binding interactions with the corresponding protein, (ii) the warhead
to impede POI recognition, or (iii) the linker to effect the protein–protein
interaction between the POI and the E3 ligase and influence ternary
complex formation ( A).
Among the three design options, the examples developed
so far mainly involve approach (i). Thus, the cage group is primarily
inserted on the imide nitrogen of the CRBN ligand or on the hydroxyl
group of the VHL ligand, which should be restored—upon irradiation—to
ensure E3 ligase molecular recognition. , By caging
the E3 ligase ligand, the degradation of the POI and potential off-target
effects are abolished, while the uncaged warhead can still interact
with its target and retain its full inhibitory activity (if any).
On the other hand, by caging the warhead, either degradation or inhibition
of the POI will be abrogated. In this case, the E3 ligase ligand,
which interacts with CRBN, can still behave as a molecular glue, inducing
potential E3-mediated off-target effects, like IKZF3 degradation. 
The first photocaged PROTACs have been
conceived starting from
a well-studied BRD2–4 degrader, dBET1 (7, ), which was functionalized with the appropriate photocage
group. Xue et al. installed a 4,5-dimethoxy-2-nitrobenzyl (DMNB) cage
group either on the CRBN ligand or on the amide connecting the bromodomain
inhibitor JQ1 to the linker. This latter
modification gave pc-PROTAC 1 (8, ), which was cleaved upon 365 nm irradiation
to give the active 7. 8 was demonstrated
to bind BRD4 in the dark with more than 100-fold reduced affinity.
Degradation of the POI was observed after a light irradiation of only
0.3 min, and the substrate was completely degraded after 3 min. This
fascinating study culminated with an in vivo evaluation
in zebrafish embryos, which confirmed the light-induced degrading
activity of 8 at 50 and 100 μM.
 In parallel, Naro et al. provided a general strategy
to enable
light-triggered protein degradation by any small-molecule warhead. To achieve that, they leveraged the strategic
insertion of two different photocage groups on the E3 ligase ligands
of parent CRBN-based (7) and VHL-based (9) PROTACs.
In detail, 10 ( ) was obtained from estrogen-related receptor α
(ERRα)-targeted PROTAC 9 by inserting a diethylamino
coumarin (DEACM) cage group on the hydroxyl of the VHL portion. Similarly, 11 ( ) derived from 7 by the introduction of a 6-nitropiperonyloxymethyl
(NPOM) moiety on the imide nitrogen of the CRBN ligand. The DEACM
prodrug 10 showed efficient photolysis to release the
active degrader 9 upon ≤405 nm light irradiation.
The induced degradation was confirmed in MCF-7 breast cancer cells
expressing ERRα transcripts, while showing no ERRα depletion
in the dark. 11 was photoreleased from its cage group
when irradiated with 365 nm light, restoring the BRD4-degrading ability
of 7 in cells.
In line with these findings, Kounde
et al. introduced the DMNB cage group
to the VHL ligand of the BRD4-directed
PROTAC MZ1 (12, ). As expected, the caged
PROTAC 13 showed a dose-dependent degradation of BRD4
only upon irradiation at 365 nm, with a good stability profile in
non-irradiated cells.
Finally, by inserting DMNB on CRBN ligand
of parent PROTACs 7 and MS4048 (15), Liu’s group designed opto-dBET1 (14) and opto-dALK
(16, ). Biochemical and biological
evaluations showed the light-inducible (365 nm) degradation of both
target proteins (BRDs and ALK fusion protein) in a timely and dose-dependent
fashion.
Collectively, we would like to emphasize how the photocaging
strategy
can be a universal technology for developing light-controllable PROTACs. In particular, the caging of E3 ligase ligands seems, to
date, the most feasible approach which is worthy of future applications.

4.2.

## Photoswitchable PROTACs
The idea
of combining light and P-mPD is also embodied in photoswitchable PROTACs.
Photoswitchable degraders undergo a geometrical conformational modification
upon light irradiation, which subsequently enables the reversible
on/off switching of protein degradation. Commonly, by incorporating
a photoswitch unit into a biologically active compound, light can
be used to “switch” the molecule between two states
with different binding affinities to the target (i.e., “on”
and “off”).
To date, the prototypical azobenzene
photoswitch has been largely used for the development of photoswitchable
PROTACs, given its chemical stability, predictable geometrical changes
(Z/E isomers), and facile modulation
of properties. Moreover, incorporation
of an azobenzene moiety into a PROTAC structure does not lead to a
significant increase of in the MW of the final molecule. Clearly,
the switch from Z to E isomer affects
binary and ternary complex formation. Overall, the Z isomer is generated upon irradiation of its E counterpart
using a selected wavelength (λ1), while the thermodynamically
more stable E isomer is obtained from Z with another specific wavelength (λ2) or by thermal
relaxation (kBT). The
resultant light-guided and reversible conformational change would
then enable a distinct degradation profile for each PROTAC isomer
( B).
Jin, Lu, et al. rationally designed a small series of photoswitchable
PROTACs by attaching the azobenzene unit at the phenyl ring of lenalidomide. Starting from the X-ray crystal structure of
CRBN in complex with its binder, they assumed that the two azobenzene
configurations would affect its binding and the subsequent degradation
profile of the lenalidomide-based PROTAC. By connecting the azobenzene-derived
lenalidomide to a BCR-ABL inhibitor dasatinib, they came up with AZO-PROTAC-4C
(17, ) as a reversible and light-inducible PROTAC. They demonstrated
that the E and Z isomers of 17 had significantly different protein degradation profiles
in cells. Specifically, by using a BCR-ABL-positive K562 cell line,
the E isomer degraded BCR-ABL fusion protein and
ABL, whereas no degradation was detected using the Z isomer. However, the geometrical switch to the active 17 and the related degradation outcome were controlled only by UV-C
light irradiation. As it is well known, UV-C light (200–280
nm) is characterized by poor penetrability and harmful effects on
cells, which precludes or greatly hampers future development and use.
 By following a similar chemical functionalization
strategy, Reynders
et al. inserted the azobenzene unit as part of lenalidomide of 7, developing a series of photoswitchable PROTACs targeting
several POIs, including BET (BRD2–4) proteins. To note, the BRD2–4-directed PROTAC, PHOTAC-I-3
(18, ), emerged as one of the most potent light-controllable degraders.
In detail, upon irradiation with 390 nm light pulses, 18 rapidly isomerized to the active Z form, and consequent
BET protein degradation was detected in AML cell line RS4;11. However,
only a slight recovery of protein levels was observed after 525 nm
irradiation or compound thermal relaxation in the dark (Z-to-E isomerization).
By following a rational
design, Crews’s lab achieved a fine
spatiotemporal control of BRD4 degradation. In a previous report, the authors had demonstrated that the difference
in linker length between active (11 Å) ARV-771 (19, ) and inactive (8 Å) PROTACs was critical
for inducing BRD4 degradation. This was confirmed in the corresponding
photoPROTAC-1 (20, ), obtained by inserting an ortho-tetrafluoro-azobenzene
in the linear PEG linker of 19. Accordingly, the corresponding E and Z isomers showed a dramatic difference
in promoting BRD4 degradation. The Z-20 was inactive, probably because of the unsuitable distance between
BRD4 and VHL ligands to engage both proteins in a ternary complex.
By contrast, the E-20 isomer turned
out to be an active degrader, facilitating the ubiquitination of the
POI. Moreover, a previous report showed that ortho-tetrafluoro-azobenzene motif generated thermally bistable photoswitches, meaning that the optimized light-controllable
PROTACs were stable in both conformations. In this case, irradiation
with 530 nm light gave the inactive Z-20, while irradiation with 415 nm generated the active E-20. As a result, the possibility to avoid laborious
continuous irradiation represents valuable progress in such photoactivable
technology in terms of potential translation.
From what was
discussed above, both photocaged and photoswitchable
PROTACs are valid examples of how photopharmacology enables on-demand
protein degradation. Irreversibly photocaged PROTACs activate the
P-mPD without the possibility to reverse the degradation event. Caging
the E3 ligase ligands, as in the reported case studies, could be exploited
to easily transform a PROTAC into a light-controllable one. However,
it should be noted that conjugation of a photocage group causes an
increase of the MW of the prodrug, which might result in unfavorable
drug-like properties. On the contrary, photoswitchable motifs are
not released after photoactivation. Moreover, the incorporation of
a photoswitch into PROTACs (either on E3 ligase ligands, POI ligand,
or linker) requires a more iterative structural modification. Even
in this case, insertion of the photoswitch moiety into the E3 ligase
ligand may provide a more modular and general approach. However, potential
PROTAC linkers, such as those incorporating stilbenes, 1,2-diphenyl
ethanes, 1,2-diphenyl hydrazines, N-benzyl anilines,
benzyl-phenyl ethers, benzyl-phenyl thioethers, diaryl esters, diaryl
amides, and heterocyclic derivatives thereof, might be suitable targets for azologization.
In conclusion,
although light-controllable PROTACs
offer promise for spatiotemporal control of protein degradation and
side effect minimization, they still face clear limitations. Particularly,
their clinical translation may be hampered by light-induced cellular
damage and poor tissue penetration of the incident light.

5.

## Combining PROTAC and Drug Conjugate Modalities
In recent decades, targeted delivery of therapeutic agents to diseased
cells and tissues, and not to healthy ones, has been made possible
by nanotechnology approaches or by drug
conjugates featuring a targeting moiety. Antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs) are generally comprised of
an antibody (Ab) conjugated to a cytotoxic payload via a chemical
linker. Three ADC therapeutics (trastuzumab
emtansine, brentuximab vedotin, and inotuzumab ozogamicin) are already
on the market, and several others are being investigated in clinical
trials. More recently, small molecule–drug
conjugates (SMDCs) have provided an opportunity for targeted delivery.
Typically, SMDCs feature three parts, i.e., a targeting ligand, a
cleavable linker, and a therapeutically active small molecule. Targeted
drug conjugates act by recognizing target cells through overexpressed
receptors and, once internalized, selectively releasing the therapeutic
agent. In most cases, release occurs following linker cleavage by
intracellular thiols or by using self-immolative
linkers responsive to specific stimuli, such as pH, redox system,
and light. , 
As mentioned earlier, PROTACs
effect highly efficient protein degradation
and represent a unique therapeutic strategy. However, when addressing
target proteins expressed in most of tissues, PROTACs may lack selectivity.
Clearly, tissue- or organ-specific degradation can be achieved by
exploiting differential biology and expression levels of E3 ligases. Another possibility is the development of a
site- or tissue-specific delivery system that can reduce potential
toxicity and increase the therapeutic window and eventually the translatability
into the clinical setting. Thus, PROTAC conjugates have attracted
considerable attention for targeted delivery ( ).
 In the following sections, (i) antibody- ( A) and (ii) small
molecule-PROTAC conjugates
( B) will
be discussed from the viewpoint of a double modality.
5.1.

## Antibody–PROTAC Conjugates
ADCs are targeted drug conjugates formed by three main parts: the
Ab as the targeting moiety, the therapeutic agent (payload), and the
spacer connecting the Ab to the payload. In this way, the high toxicity
of the cytotoxic small-molecule payload is combined with the high
selectivity of the Ab. 
Once administered,
ADCs bind to the target cell through specific antigen recognition
and release the active molecule inside the cell, producing the desired
therapeutic effect. Although groundbreaking, there are some important
factors that need to be considered when designing an ADC. First is the identification of the target antigen.
To limit off-target effects and therefore toxicity, the target antigen
should be overexpressed in diseased cells, with little or no expression
in normal tissues. Second, the choice of the Ab should be dictated
by the high specificity for the target antigen to avoid cross-reactions
and off-target toxicity. Spacer optimization
is another element to take into account. Spacers in ADC must be stable
during systemic circulation but then able to be cleaved and release
the payload once the ADC is internalized into the target cell. Generally,
especially in case of cancer applications, the payload needs to fulfill
the following requirements: (i) to be highly active (IC50 value in the low nanomolar or picomolar range), (ii) to act through
a well-defined MoA, and (iii) to have a suitable attachment point
for spacer insertion. Another critical
aspect is the drug–antibody ratio (DAR), i.e., the number of
therapeutic molecules loaded onto the Ab. Clearly, the potency of
ADC increases with higher levels of drug loading. This can, in turn,
affect the stability, PK, and toxicity profile of ADCs. In addition,
many payloads used in ADCs are hydrophobic in nature and thus are
prone to Ab aggregation, which must be avoided to ensure a suitable
shelf life and to limit fast clearance and immunogenicity. Although most of the developed ADCs focus on
cancer treatment, the idea is also being explored outside the oncology
field. 
In this scenario, there
is a growing interest in exploring conjugation
of PROTACs to Abs, by implementing strategies previously developed
for other payloads.
Dracovich et al. developed the first reported
Ab-PROTAC conjugate
by attaching a BET degrader to an anti-C-type lectin-like molecule-1
(CLL1) antibody. CLL-1 is an ideal target
for an Ab-based therapy for AML, due to its high expression in leukemic
cells, while being absent in normal hematopoietic stem cells.
The authors synthesized a new potent BRD4 degrader, GNE-987 (21, ), by incorporating the VHL-binding moiety along with the structure
of a potent BET inhibitor. 21 turned out to be a potent
degrader, which exhibited picomolar potency in a cell model of AML
(EOL-1 AML). However, it demonstrated unfavorable in vitro PK properties, confirmed by a poor in vivo PK profile
after intravenous or oral administration in mice. To overcome these
issues, 21 was modified by inserting, on the VHL moiety,
the S1 disulfide-containing cleavable spacer to provide 22 ( ), which, in turn, was conjugated to a CLL1-targeting Ab, leading
to the Ab-PROTAC conjugate CLL1-22. Following intravenous
administration in a xenograft mouse model of AML overexpressing CLL1, CLL1-22 showed high dose-dependent potency, stronger than
that of 21. Moreover, the intratumor levels of 21 well correlated with the CLL1-22 administered
dose. The minimal activity of the epimer of 21, not able
to bind to VHL E3 ligase, confirmed that the in vivo efficacy was related to BET degradation. CLL1-22 also
exhibited favorable in vivo stability and improved
PK, validating the design rationale. The systematic development of 21 and related Ab-PROTAC conjugates, including the optimization
of the BRD4-binding fragment and the use of different Ab spacers,
is described in two subsequent papers to which the reader is referred
for further details. , 
 In another study, the same research group reported
Ab-PROTAC conjugates
obtained by attaching two different estrogen receptor α (ERα)
degraders (23 and 24, ) with anti-human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) Ab, through three spacer modalities
(S2, S3, and S4, ). In a first attempt, they derivatized PROTAC 23 on the
E3 ligase ligand with a valine-citrulline-para-amino-benzyloxy
spacer (S2, ) obtaining 25 ( ) and the respective DAR2 Ab-PROTAC conjugate HER2-25 ( ). However, although HER2-25 was successfully
synthesized, it presented a high level of self-aggregation. To overcome
this issue, they connected the S2 to the phenol group of
endoxifen in 23, affording the spacer-PROTAC 26 and the corresponding DAR2 conjugate HER2-26. The latter
was characterized by reduced aggregation potential and efficient antigen-dependent
delivery in a breast cancer cell line overexpressing HER2. Despite
these encouraging data, HER2-26 proved to be unstable
upon in vivo administration. Thus, starting from 24, spacer-PROTACs 27 and 28 ( ) were synthesized
by inserting a disulfide spacer (S3) or a pyrophosphate
diester (S4) and then derivatized to the corresponding
Ab-PROTACs HER2-27 and HER2-28 ( ). These Ab-PROTAC
conjugates showed moderate stability in mice, retaining 80% of the
original DAR value after 72 h.
Another research group developed
an Ab-PROTAC conjugate (HER2-29, ) by combining the S5 azido-PEG
spacer with the
BRD4 degrader 12. The resulting spacer-PROTAC (29) was easily conjugated to dibromomaleimide-strained
alkyne-functionalized anti-HER2 Ab through a copper-free click chemistry
reaction. DAR4 HER2-29 showed
excellent stability in PBS and selective degradation of BRD4 only
in HER2+ cells, leaving BRD4 levels intact in HER2– cell line.
Experiments performed in the presence of proteasome inhibitors confirmed
that the degradation was proteasome-dependent, providing the cellular
proof-of-concept for antigen-specific delivery and targeted protein
degradation.
 As an evolution of the Ab-PROTAC conjugate concept
for the treatment
of breast cancer, the well-studied 12 was encapsulated
into Ab conjugate nanoparticles (ACNPs). The authors selected poly-lactic acid and polyethylenimine as building
blocks for the preparation of the nanoparticles, which were loaded
with 12 and conjugated with the anti-HER2 Ab trastuzumab
via a covalent bond ( ). The resulting ACNPs (12-ACNP, ) were characterized by an
improved anti-tumoral efficacy in HER2+ overexpressing breast cancer
cell lines when compared to 12 and exhibited high stability
and controlled release over time. Conjugation did not modify the MoA
of 12 and did not lead to additional toxicity and side
effects. Importantly, 12-ACNP displayed a strong cytotoxic
effect in trastuzumab- and 12-resistant HCC1954 cell
lines, overcoming the resistance developed to this degrader.
 From the reported examples, it emerges that the
selective antigen-dependent
delivery of Ab-PROTAC conjugates could enhance the selectivity of
the loaded PROTACs and reduce their side effects. Despite these encouraging
remarks, there are some issues that cannot be overlooked. The main
drawbacks of Ab-PROTAC conjugates are their relatively high tendency
to aggregate, immunogenicity, and instability during systemic administration,
which clearly limit their effective application in the clinical setting. 

5.2.

## Small Molecule–PROTAC Conjugates
Given the current limitations of Ab-PROTAC conjugates, targeted
delivery by SMDCs seems an attractive alternative. Compared to Abs,
small molecules usually have a better in vivo PK/PD
profile and no immunogenic issues. In addition, they are easily obtainable
by chemical synthesis, with a relatively cheap cost, and have a superior
stability/shelf life. On the other hand,
owing to their reduced size compared to Abs, small molecules are likely
to possess lower affinity and specificity as targeting moieties, although
certain exceptions may exist. 
Most
small-molecule targeting moieties bind to specific receptors overexpressed
in the diseased tissue or are sensitive to specific tissue conditions
(e.g., hypoxia). For the first application, vitamin B12 and transcobalamin
receptor, transferrin and transferrin
receptor, and folate and folate receptor have been mainly used as targeting moieties
and coupled receptors. Exploiting a small-molecule-based targeting
strategy may overcome the somehow unselective tissue profile of the
starting PROTAC while maintaining the advantages of a small molecule.
In the following subsection, selected examples of small molecule–PROTAC
conjugates ( B) will be used to substantiate this concept.
To reach a better
selectivity profile on tumor cells, the insertion
of a folate group on a PROTAC structure has been recently investigated. , Folate binds to its folate α receptor (FOLR1) that is highly
expressed in various cancer cells and not in normal cells. Thanks to this specificity, FOLR1-targeted
drugs are currently in Phase II/III clinical trials, , and a FOLR1-targeted imaging diagnostic agent has been recently
approved. By inserting the folate moiety
on the E3 ligase ligand, folate-caged PROTACs were developed to initially
mask the E3 ligase motif. As a prodrug strategy, only once internalized,
the folate-caged PROTAC is activated after being released by endogenous
hydrolase cleavage. In detail, based on the well-studied ARV-771 (19, ), Jin and colleagues developed the
corresponding folate-caged PROTAC (30, ) by functionalizing the hydroxyl
group of VHL via an ester bond. As discussed in , the hydroxyl group of
the VHL ligand is crucial for the recruitment of E3 ubiquitin ligase. The targeted delivery by such folate conjugation
can provide a highly specific degradation due to both selectivity
for tumor cells and activity triggered only after internalization
and cleavage. This was experimentally confirmed by the design of an
uncleavable (amide bond) folate-caged PROTAC. To evaluate tissue selectivity, 30 was tested in three cancer cell lines overexpressing FOLR1
(HeLa, OVCAR-8, and BRCA cells) and three non-cancerous cell lines
(HFF-1, HK2, and 3T3). The results demonstrated that 30, as well as 19, efficiently degraded BRD4 in all three
cancer cell lines. Remarkably, folate-caged 30 showed
a less efficient degradation than 19 in normal cell lines
not overexpressing FOLR1. To prove whether folate conjugation was
the only factor mediating the PROTAC targeted delivery, competition
studies with free folic acid were performed in HeLa cells. Folic acid
could indeed antagonize the ability of 30 in degrading
BRD4, but not that of 19. In the same study, starting from mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MEK1/2) PROTAC MS432 (31) and ALK PROTAC MS99 (32, ), two further folate-caged PROTACs (33 and 34, ) were
developed. Similarly, it was shown that MEK1/2 and ALK were selectively
degraded in cancer cells, in a folate receptor-dependent fashion.
 Based on MS4048 (15, ), the same
group developed a folate-caged PROTAC FA-S2-MS4048 (35, ). The folate group was inserted on the glutarimide
core of pomalidomide via a self-immolative linker, initially hindering
the interaction with the E3 ligase. The presence of a disulfide bond,
which is cleaved by the intracellular glutathione (GSH), triggers
the release of the active, uncaged 15. Compared to the
other self-immolative linkers, disulfides have demonstrated high therapeutic
performance in terms of biocompatibility, stability, and selective
cleavage by the high level of GSH in the cytoplasm. For this reason, 35 remains stable in the
oxidized state until cell penetration and is subsequently cleaved
by GSH thiol after internalization. The key role of GSH in releasing
the active PROTAC was experimentally confirmed (i) by pretreating
cancer cells with S-acetyl-l-glutathione
(S-Ac-GSH) to supplement the intracellular GSH level
or (ii) by exchanging the disulfide moiety with a methylene one. In
the latter case, FA-C2-MS4048 (36, ), which remains caged after
entering the cells, showed no activity. Conversely, 35 was shown to degrade ALK fusion proteins effectively and selectively
in FOLR1-expressing cells, and in a FOLR1-, CRBN-, and proteasome-dependent
manner. However, the authors stressed how the conjugation, causing
a MW increase of ca. 1000 Da, might compromise the PROTACs’
PK properties. 
Another reported
targeted delivery strategy relies on cage moieties
responsive to specific cellular conditions. Hypoxia is a hallmark
of most solid tumors and directly correlates with levels of nitroreductases
(NTRs). On the contrary, NTRs are only expressed to a low level in
normal tissues. Thus, prodrugs carrying nitroaromatic trigger units
have been widely used. Nitroaromatic
groups can be selectively reduced by NTRs to hydroxylamine and release
the active drug after intramolecular rearrangement. The anti-tumor
drug evofosfamide (TH-302) is a bromo-isophosphoramide mustard prodrug
bearing a nitroaromatic group, which has entered Phase III clinical
trial with promising results. 
In 2021, Tian and co-workers applied
a hypoxia-activated prodrug strategy by inserting nitroaromatic groups
into PROTAC structures. Starting from the EGFR-directed degrader 37 ( ), they developed PROTAC prodrugs 38 and 39 by introducing nitroaromatic moieties into the POI ligand ( ). As prodrugs, 38 and 39 did not recognize EGFR due to the steric
hindrance of (1-methyl-2-nitro-1H-imidazol-5-yl)methyl
and 4-nitrobenzyl groups. In fact, 38 and 39 showed a POI degradation activity that was significantly higher
in hypoxic cells than in normal ones. The active PROTAC 37 was selectively released after NTR bioreduction and intramolecular
rearrangement, to exert its degrading effect.
 A similar hypoxia-activated prodrug strategy was
also investigated
by Zhu et al. in a very recent work. In this case, the authors incorporated a (1-methyl-2-nitro-1H-imidazol-5-yl)methyl group on the hydroxyl of VHL ligand.
Starting from the EGFR-directed PROTAC 40, they synthesized
the PROTAC prodrug 41 ( ), which as a result was unable to degrade
EGFR under normoxic conditions. Conversely, it was effective in NTR
overexpressing tumor tissues. Notably, 41 induced EGFR
degradation and exerted anti-tumor effects in vivo. Once more, given the wide use of the VHL ligand in PROTAC development,
the insertion of the cage group at this level could find broad applicability.
As a general consideration on this combined modality, it should
be noted that not all the reported examples have been validated in vivo, while their proof-of-concept is usually restricted
to a cellular setting. Therefore, further translational studies are
needed to confirm these small molecule–PROTAC conjugates as
therapeutic tools able to improve PROTAC specificity, selectivity,
and potency, while decreasing toxicity.

6.

## Combining PROTAC and Macrocycle Modalities
“Macrocycles” is an umbrella term for a diverse group
of molecules, such us cyclic small molecules or cyclopeptides. As novel chemotypes with a MW of 500–2000
Da, macrocycles cover a chemical space beyond traditional medicinal
chemistry strategies and fill an important gap between small molecules
and larger biologics. Macrocyclic drugs
have drawn significant attention due to their high selectivity, capability
to target protein surfaces traditionally considered “undruggable”,
and improved synthetic feasibility. , In addition,
in the case of biologically active peptides, macrocyclization may
improve metabolic stability, cell permeability, and oral bioavailability.
For these reasons, in recent decades, macrocyclic molecules have emerged
as an attractive new therapeutic modality. , From a medicinal chemistry viewpoint, macrocyclic structures can
derive from natural cyclopeptides or as a result of a macrocyclization
strategy. In the first case, structurally diverse and complex naturally
derived macrocycles have demonstrated an impressive record of efficacy
as pharmaceutical agents and are playing an increasingly important
role in the treatment of a range of serious diseases. In the second case, macrocyclization is a design
strategy for locking a known binder into its bioactive conformation
and improving its PD profile. Already
19 macrocyclic drugs, including three radiopharmaceuticals, have been
approved by the FDA for the treatment of infectious and metabolic
diseases, cancer, immunosuppression, etc. 
Here, we review recent examples on how (i) macrocyclic molecules
( A) and (ii)
macrocyclization strategies ( B) have been fused with the PROTAC concept to provide
the so-called macrocycle-based PROTACs.
 Macrocycle-based therapeutic modality was first
combined with PROTAC
technology by McCoull’s group, which developed macrocyclic
molecules as B-cell lymphoma 6 (BCL6) protein inhibitors. A hit-to-lead optimization campaign was pursued
on fragment-like hit 42, giving rise to macrocycle 43, which demonstrated high activity, good cellular potency,
in-cell target engagement, and excellent selectivity ( ). The design strategy of
BCL6 binder 43 was guided by NMR-based conformational
analysis. Then, macrocycle-based PROTAC 44 ( ) was obtained
through the conjugation of 43 with thalidomide as CRBN
binder. Although 44 could successfully trigger BCL-6
degradation in a dose-dependent fashion, it showed a phenotypic profile
similar to that of parent 43. Despite achieving a sufficient
cellular concentration, it failed to induce a significant anti-proliferative
effect in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cell lines. This was probably
because a nuclear residual BCL6 level was detected. Although this
work demonstrated for the first time that the macrocycle modality
can be combined with PROTAC concepts, it clearly points out the challenges
associated with the strategy.
 Notably, Olsen et al. exploited macrocyclic peptides
as POI ligands
for developing epi-PROTACs. Epi-PROTACs
have great potential as both pharmacological tools and therapeutics. In detail, the researchers exploited these
chemotypes to develop the macrocycle-based PROTAC 45 ( ), capable of selectively
degrading class I HDACs 1–3 in cells, in a time- and concentration-dependent
manner. 45 was based on the potent and class I-selective
macrocyclic tetrapeptide inhibitor TpxBAoda as POI ligand, which was connected to thalidomide, by employing
a modular “click chemistry” synthesis. Notably, this
successful report shows that macrocyclic peptides can be elaborated
into cell-permeable PROTACs.
Regarding approach (ii), it was
superbly validated by A. Ciulli,
one of the PROTAC pioneers. By harnessing
the crystal structure of well-known 12 ( ) in complex with the E3 ligase
VHL and its target BRD4, the authors
realized that a macrocyclic PROTAC could be designed to lock the conformation
in the bound state. Particularly, macrocyclization was achieved by
adding a cyclizing linker between the two ligand moieties of 12, obtaining macroPROTAC-1 (46, ). The rational design was
confirmed by the cocrystal structure of a 46:VHL:BRD4
ternary complex. Despite a 12-fold loss in binary binding affinity
for BRD4, 46 revealed cellular activity comparable to
that of 12, thus supporting macrocyclization as a successful
strategy for PROTAC design. In this respect, to facilitate macrocyclization
of PROTACs, a computational method has been proposed to automatically
generate feasible cyclization by known chemical reactions. Moreover, this approach identifies attachment
points, evaluates geometric compatibility, and ranks the resulting
macrocyclic molecules by their predicted conformational stability
with the target protein. 
Although
in the reported examples the macrocycle is either a ligand
or the linker and no extra functionality is added, we dubbed them
as multifunctional PROTACS on the basis of the accomplished
combination of two modalities. 

7.

## Combining PROTAC and Oligonucleotide Modalities
Oligonucleotide-based therapeutic modalities, such as ASOs, siRNA,
microRNAs (miRNAs), and aptamers, are gaining new momentum in drug
discovery. The majority of oligonucleotide
modalities interact with a specific sequence of its target via complementary
Watson–Crick base pairing, inhibiting gene expression. Hence,
oligonucleotide therapeutics have a high selectivity, as they can
be rationally designed based on the primary sequence of the target,
allowing the modulation of patient-specific sequences for precision
and personalized treatments. In the
past decades, several oligonucleotide therapeutics have entered clinical
trials, leading to the current approval of 11 oligonucleotide-based
drugs across many disease areas. Notably,
in 2017, the FDA and the European Medicines Agency approved nusinersen
as the first ASO (i.e., short, single-stranded synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides)
for the treatment of a neurological disease. Despite booming, oligonucleotide-based
therapeutics suffer from poor drug-like properties and toxicity concerns.
Potential liabilities may arise from their polyanionic nature, causing
unexpected interactions with plasma and cellular proteins, unpredictable
tissue accumulation, non-specific pro-inflammatory toxicities, and
immune activation. Nevertheless, a number
of chemical modifications and conjugation strategies aimed at improving
nuclease resistance, binding affinity, and ADME-tox properties have
been proposed over the years. In addition,
oligonucleotide-based therapeutics have received ever-increasing attention
for the potential to modulate “undruggable” targets
that lack hydrophobic pockets and well-defined binding sites. Among
them, TFs and RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) are essential for DNA repair,
replication, transcription, and many RNA-dependent processes. When
dysregulated, TFs and RBPs trigger numerous disease pathways. To address
these undruggable POIs, PROTAC technology has successfully been combined
with oligonucleotide-based therapeutic modalities, giving rise to
innovative oligonucleotide-based PROTACs ( ). In detail, two applications have been
realized so far, namely (i) single-strand and double-strand oligonucleotide-based
PROTACs ( A) and (ii) aptamer-based PROTACs ( B).
 For the sake of clarity, we will solely focus on
RNA-based PROTACs
and the latest TF-targeting oligonucleotide-based PROTACs which have
not been discussed in other recent reviews. , 
Ghidini et al. developed the
first
degraders of RBPs (ORN3P1, 47 ) by employing—as RBP ligand—short
oligonucleotides, designed from the RNA consensus binding element,
linked to an E3 ligase-binding element. The oligonucleotide competes
with native RNA for binding the RBP, and the simultaneous recruitment
of E3 ligase allows target ubiquitination and degradation. By using
a structure-based approach, a set of oligonucleotide analogues that
selectively binds Lin28A, a stem cell factor and oncoprotein involved
in several diseases, have been designed. Particularly, the authors
structurally modified a short oligonucleotide, 5′-AGGAGAU-3′,
which is sequence-identical with the native RNA-binding element of
the RBP to enhance nuclease resistance, membrane permeability, and
PK properties. A VHL-recruiting ligand was conjugated to the 5′-end
of the oligonucleotide to provide 47, which mediated
target degradation in two cancer cell lines via the UPS. The RNA-PROTAC
described in this recent publication truly expands the PROTAC concept
by exploiting a short oligonucleotide as the POI ligand.
 Starting from a chimeric DNA:CRISPR-RNA molecule,
i.e., Transcription
Factor TArgeting Chimera (TRAFTAC), that binds a dCas9-HaloTag7 fusion
adaptor, Crews and co-workers described the development of the second-generation
TRAFTACs, so-called “oligoTRAFTACs”. OligoTRAFTACs are
constituted of a TF-binding oligonucleotide and an E3 ligase binder.
As such, the oligonucleotide sequence recruits the transcription factor
of interest (TOI), while the E3 ligase-binding element mediates cellular
ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. A short oligonucleotide
specific to c-Myc or T-box transcription factor (brachyury) as TOI
was synthesized with a terminal alkyne at either the 3′ or
5′ end (48, ). With the alkyne-oligonucleotide in hands,
a copper-catalyzed cycloaddition click reaction was then performed
with an azide-containing VHL ligand, to afford 48 ( ). Notably, oligoTRAFTACs
mediate c-Myc and brachyury degradation in cell lines. Moreover, their in vivo applicability was demonstrated by using a zebrafish
experimental model. This study clearly demonstrates that it is possible
to develop a new class of rationally designed oligo-based degraders
for extremely challenging targets, such as TFs.
Interestingly,
a similar approach was recently exploited to develop
PROTACs that degrade the estrogen receptor using decoy oligonucleotide
ligands. Beside belonging to the nuclear
hormone receptor superfamily, ERα can also act as a TF, forming
transcriptional complexes on the DNA response sequence, thereby regulating
gene expression. The developed decoy oligonucleotide is a double-stranded
decoy, namely LCL-ER(dec) (49), designed from the sequence
of the estrogen-responsive element that is known to tightly bind ERα. 49 has been functionalized with a terminal alkyne to be then
conjugated to azide-bearing E3 ligase ligands, e.g., IAP ligand LCL16,
thanks to a copper-catalyzed click reaction. Among the different subsets
of synthesized degraders, 49 ( ) showed the highest ERα degradation
activity. This last piece of work gives evidence that the development
of a PROTAC using a decoy ligand can be attractively applied for targeting
TFs.
In parallel, the use of an aptamer to develop innovative
PROTACs
has been recently proposed ( B). Aptamers are single-stranded DNA or RNA oligonucleotides
with a length less than 100, which are used as both POI ligand and
targeted delivery agent.
Tan and co-workers exploited the
aptamer AS1411 as the POI ligand of nucleolin, a protein highly expressed
on the tumor cell surface and highly implicated in tumorigenesis and
angiogenesis. Based on this, AS1411 was conjugated to VHL ligand via
a dibenzylcyclooctyne copper-free click chemistry reaction, to give
aptamer-based PROTAC ZL216 (50). Remarkably, 50 induced nucleolin degradation by UPS in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, it also showed high selectivity for
cancer cells in comparison to normal cells. This recent effort validates
the combination of aptamer and PROTAC technologies and provides a
promising strategy for the development of tumor-selective PROTACs.
Aptamers can be also used as targeted delivery units. In fact,
they are often called “chemical antibodies” due to their
function comparable to that of traditional Abs, but with numerous
advantages. In fact, aptamers bind to
their target with high specificity and affinity but, unlike Ab, possess
unique characteristics, including easy synthesis, versatile chemical
modification, and lack of immunogenicity. 
On this basis, Dong and Sheng developed the first aptamer–PROTAC
conjugate (51) by combining the BET-targeting PROTAC 12 to AS1411 via a cleavable linker ( ). 51 showed a remarkable specificity for nucleolin-overexpressing MCF-7
breast cancer cells and a potent BET degradation effect. The advantages
of AS1411 were highlighted by its excellent in vivo tumor targeting ability, reduced side effects on normal tissue,
and improvement of drug-like properties, making this strategy highly
appealing. Successfully, 51 not only combines two modalities
in a single molecule but also is a truly multifunctional PROTAC, which harnesses the oligonucleotide aptamer as an effective
targeting function.
 

## Conclusions
“The past is prologue”, as
stated by Craig M. Crews,
is the best description of the present-day PROTAC landscape. Given the potential of modulating currently
undruggable targets, this new therapeutic modality has revolutionized
small-molecule drug discovery paradigms. On the other hand, as PROTACs
differ from established concepts of drug design, drug binding, and
selectivity, a few key questions remain unsolved. Encouragingly, it
seems that we are finding answer to these questions by developing multifunctional PROTACs:
Clinical translation. The fundamental question—whether
this new therapeutic modality will be used in clinical practice—might
be figured out soon. The most advanced candidates, ARV110 (NCT03888612)
and ARV471 (NCT04072952), have reached Phase I/II for the treatment
of prostate and breast cancers, respectively. They have showed a favorable
safety profile, tolerability, and anti-tumor activity, but long-term
effects are largely unknown. Of note, ARV-471 is under evaluation
in combination with palbociclib, whereas a trial of ARV-110 and abiraterone
(NCT05177042) just started in January 2022. These combinations were
all conceived based on the prototypical polypharmacology hypothesis
that targeting two different nodes of cancer pathology may lead to
superior efficacy, especially for highly drug-resistant forms. Thus, multitarget PROTACs might be powerful tools not only for
the treatment of advanced resistant cancers but also for other complex
diseases.
Modulable targets. Another key issue is
to expand the so-called PROTACtable genome, i.e., targets that could be modulated by PROTAC modality. In a recent
analysis, Schneider et al. established
ideal features and highlighted 95 different protein targets. However,
so far, we have limited examples of protein target families, mainly
belonging to nuclear receptors, bromodomains, and kinases. All these
share similar features: They are soluble proteins with a nuclear or
cytoplasmatic localization. Only a few examples have been reported
of PROTACs targeting transmembrane proteins , (two on GPCRs , and none on ion channels), which
are major drug targets in traditional drug discovery. The oligonucleotide-based PROTAC examples discussed herein illustrate
that the PROTAC technology, when combined with this second modality,
can be successfully applied to typical “undruggable”
targets, such as TFs.
PROTAC design
and physicochemical properties. PROTAC drug design and development
is predominantly an iterative
process, with structure optimization guided mainly by chemical intuition,
due to the limited availability of ternary complex 3D structures.
Undoubtedly, such already challenging design is even more difficult
when a PROTAC is combined with a second modality. First, the resulting
PROTACs are chemically conjugated to a second framework, responsible
for the second modality. Thus, the fact that each part retains the
ability to interact with its specific target is an essential requirement.
Second, conjugation may lead to PROTACs with unfavorable physicochemical
properties such as MW and hydrophobicity increases. Integration of
a second modality thorough a framework allowing structural overlapping
(usually ring systems) may minimize such disadvantages. Similarly,
incorporation of a photoswitchable unit into a PROTAC structure through
a judicious azologization may afford light-controllable PROTACs with physicochemical properties comparable to those of parent
PROTACs and simultaneous spatiotemporal control. On the other hand,
the combination of PROTAC technology with macrocycles or oligonucleotides, both deemed to have poor drug-like
properties, has yielded potent and effective degraders. Although,
in principle, the combination with a second modality further complicates
PROTAC design, the final outcome in terms of drug-likeness cannot
be a priori established.
Selectivity. A PROTAC does not always require
selective binding to the POI, as is typically necessary for traditional
small-molecule drugs. Owing to their MoA, PROTACs may prove to be
more selective than the parent POI ligands. Although the phenomenon
has yet to be completely explained, protein–protein interactions
of the ternary complex may drive selectivity and potency. In fact,
it has been shown that promiscuous inhibitors can be turned into selective
degraders. Nevertheless, PROTACs may
display toxic and unwanted side effects that can be removed or minimized
by combining a second modality. Light-controllable PROTACs allow a fine control of degradation activity only upon irradiation,
whereas targeting moieties of PROTAC conjugates allow
selective delivery to target cells, with no toxicity to normal tissues.
On the other hand, macrocycle- and oligonucleotide-based PROTACs recognize a POI with high specificity and selectivity,
not only enhancing the degradation efficiency but also avoiding any
off-target effects.
No clear SAR. The need of identifying more
systematic approaches to PROTAC development is of critical importance.
Similar to what done by Corwin Hansch, father of QSAR, it might be
helpful to develop a set of quantitative rules built on the knowledge
of how a PROTAC molecule’s degradation activity correlates
with its physicochemical properties. Clearly, in the case of PROTACs
enriched with a second modality, additional considerations should
be made, depending on the type of PROTAC we are dealing with. Macrocycle- and oligonucleotide-based PROTACs
designed from novel chemotypes, covering a completely different chemical
space, require a deeper understanding of how to manipulate their structure
to optimize the activity.
Ternary
complex. The recognition process
between a PROTAC and its protein targets is a multistep process owing
to their high dynamicity and plasticity. This means that, to trigger
POI degradation, a PROTAC should ensure a fast and precise recruitment
of all players into the right shape and at the right time, across
several steps. A further issue is the availability on the ternary
complex of an accessible lysine that can be ubiquitinated. This, of
course, calls for more reliable computational methods, which can allow
straightforward structure-based drug design. In the past years, several in silico methodologies
have been proposed to rationally model PROTAC-mediated ternary complexes,
which have already demonstrated their utility in structure-based approaches.
Clearly, this already complex scenario becomes even more challenging
by the presence of a framework responsible for a second modality.
Also, studying the formation of a ternary complex with POIs, like
TFs and RBPs, which can produce homo- and hetero-multimeric complexes,
is extremely complicated. While crystal structures of PROTAC-mediated
ternary complexes continue to be reported, more precise computational
modeling methodologies are urgently needed to rationally propose innovative
PROTAC derivatives endowed with an additional activity.
The successful and unsuccessful efforts described herein
clearly
reflect the multiple challenges that medicinal chemists face in developing multifunctional PROTACs. The translation of academic drug
discovery has been notoriously difficult, and this could be also the
case for many of the academic innovations discussed herein. There
is no easy recipe to follow, but a deeper and detailed understanding
is required from many actors from many fields to fully exploit these
opportunities and decisively enrich the PROTAC toolbox.

## Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the University of
Bologna (Grant RFO 2021) and by MIUR-FISR2019_03796 “Proteolysis
targeting chimeras (PROTACs) to treat leishmaniasis”- PROLEISH.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
Abantibody
ACNPantibody conjugate
nanoparticle
ADCantibody–drug
conjugate
BCL6B cell
lymphoma 6
cIAP1inhibitor of apoptosis protein
CLL1C-type lectin-like molecule-1
CRBNcereblon
DARdrug–antibody ratio
DEACMdiethylaminocoumarin
DMNB4,5-dimethoxy-2-nitrobenzyl
ERRαestrogen-related
receptor α
ERαestrogen receptor α
FOLR1folate α receptor
GSHglutathione
HALGhypoxia-activated leaving group
HER2human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2
mAbmonoclonal antibody
MDM2mouse double minute 2 homologue
MEK1/2mitogen-activated
protein kinase
miRNAmicroRNA
MTDLmultitarget-directed
ligand
NPOM6-nitropiperonyloxymethyl
NTRnitroreductase
PARPpoly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase
P-mPDPROTAC-mediated protein degradation
POIprotein of interest
PROTACproteolysis targeting chimera
RBPRNA-binding protein
siRNAsmall interfering
RNA
SMDCsmall molecule–drug
conjugate
TFtranscription
factor
TOItranscription
factor of interest
TRAFTACtranscription factor targeting chimera
UPSubiquitin–proteasome system
VHLvon Hippel Lindau

## Biographies
Alessandra Salerno got her M.Sc. degree
in Chemistry
and Pharmaceutical Technologies at the University of Bologna in 2019.
She spent a research period for the development of her Master’s
thesis at Universidad Complutense de Madrid (Spain) and, after graduation,
5 months working in the field of organic chemistry at KU-Leuven (Belgium).
In 2019, under the supervision of Prof. Maria Laura Bolognesi (University
of Bologna, Italy), she started her Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry,
focused on the design and synthesis of PROTACs as potential treatment
for neglected and neurodegenerative diseases.

Francesca Seghetti received her M.Sc. degree in Chemistry
and Pharmaceutical Technologies at the University of Bologna in 2016.
In 2019 she spent a research period at Universitat de Barcelona (Spain)
as a visiting Ph.D. student, and in 2020, she got her Ph.D. in Medicinal
Chemistry from the University of Bologna. Her thesis focused on the
development of multitarget-directed ligands as a novel therapeutic
strategy for bipolar disorder. Currently, she is a postdoctoral researcher
under the supervision of Prof. Maria Laura Bolognesi, working on the
design and synthesis of PROTACs as potential therapeutic tools for
neglected tropical diseases.

Jessica
Caciolla obtained her M.Sc. degree in Chemistry
and Pharmaceutical Technologies at the University of Pisa in 2016.
She spent six months at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (The Netherlands)
as a visiting Ph.D. student and got her Ph.D. in Medicinal Chemistry
from the University of Bologna in 2021. Her thesis focused on the
design and synthesis of small molecules for breast cancer treatment.
Currently, she is working as a postdoctoral researcher in the group
of Prof. Maria Laura Bolognesi, in a project focused on the design
and synthesis of PROTACs as potential treatment for neglected diseases.

Elisa Uliassi received her M.Sc.
degree in Pharmaceutical
Chemistry and Technology in 2012, and her Ph.D. in Chemistry in 2016,
from the University of Bologna. During her Ph.D. program, she was
a visiting Ph.D. student in Prof. L. A. Romeiro’s laboratory
at Universidade Católica de Brasília, and then in Dr.
K. A. Jacobson’s laboratory at the National Institutes of Health
(U.S.). She is currently a Junior Assistant Professor in the Department
of Pharmacy and Biotechnology of the University of Bologna. She recently
was a Visiting Researcher in Prof. M. J. Fuchter’s laboratory
at the Imperial College of London, working in the field of photopharmacology.
Her research focuses on developing novel agents for neurodegenerative
and tropical diseases.

Eleonora
Testi obtained her M.Sc. degree in Chemistry
and Pharmaceutical Technologies at the University of Bologna in 2021,
and in the same year she started her Ph.D. studies in Medicinal Chemistry
at the University of Bologna under the guidance of Prof. Maria Laura
Bolognesi. Currently, she is working on the design and synthesis of
PROTACs as potential treatment for neglected tropical diseases.

Melissa Guardigni received her
M.Sc. degree in Pharmacy
at the University of Bologna, followed by a Ph.D. in Sciences and
Technologies of Chemistry and Material - Curriculum: Drug Discovery
and Nanobiotechnologies at the Italian Institute of Technology under
the supervision of Prof. T. Bandiera. She spent a research period
at the Helmholtz-Institute for Pharmaceutical Research Saarland, Saarbrücken
(Germany), working under the supervision of Prof. Anna K. H. Hirsch.
Currently she is a post-doctoral researcher at the University of Bologna
working on the development of new bifunctional degraders.

Marinella Roberti is a Professor of Medicinal
Chemistry
at the University of Bologna. Her research field regards the design
and the synthesis of biologically active small molecules which can
be either innovative lead candidates for drug discovery or valuable
chemical tools to study molecular pathways. The therapeutic field
of her main interest is cancer. Recently she has been involved in
a project focused on the design and synthesis of PROTACs as potential
treatment of leishmaniasis. Her scientific research activity is documented
by more than 100 publications in peer-reviewed journals.

Andrea Milelli graduated in Chemistry and
Pharmaceutical
Technologies from the University of Bologna and received his Ph.D.
in Medicinal Chemistry from the same institution. He spent a research
period at Aarhus University (Denmark) working in the field of asymmetric
organocatalysis under the supervision of Prof. K. A. Jørgensen,
and he was Visiting Scientist at Konstanz University (Germany), working
on the total synthesis of natural products under the supervision of
Prof. T. Gaich. Currently, he is an Associate Professor at the University
of Bologna.

Maria-Laura Bolognesi is a Professor of Medicinal
Chemistry at the University of Bologna, interested in the development
of therapeutical tools for neurodegenerative and neglected tropical
diseases. Her group has pioneered polypharmacology concepts. She is
an Associate Editor of the Journal of Medicinal Chemistry (ACS) and serves on the Advisory Board of the European Federation
of Medicinal Chemistry. She was a Visiting Professor at the Complutense
University, University of Brasilia, and University of Caen. Currently,
she is Vice-Director of the Interdepartmental Centre for Industrial
Research in Health Sciences & Technologies.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Special Issue
Published
as part of
the Journal of Medicinal Chemistry virtual special
issue “New Drug
Modalities in Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacology, and Translational
Science”.

## References