SOURCE URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03755
FINAL URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03755
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: application/pdf
======================================================================
LAP: An Agent-to-Instrument Protocol
for Autonomous Science
Linwu Zhu1, Liqiang Gao 1, Yan Chen1, Dan Zhu 1, and Jian Huang 1
1Shiyanjia Lab ,{zhulinwu, gaoliqiang, chenyan, zhudan,
huangjian}@shiyanjia.com
June 3, 2026
Abstract
Autonomous science is moving from demonstration to infrastructure. Large language model
agents now plan experiments, and self-driving laboratories execute them. Yet every such system
rebuilds the link between the reasoning agent and the physical instrument from scratch, against
fragmented vendor SDKs and standards built for deterministic software clients rather than
probabilistic, goal-directed agents. Recent agent-interoperability protocols clarify two of the
three edges of an agentic ecosystem (Anthropic’s Model Context Protocol (MCP) standardizes
theagent-to-tooledge, and Google’s Agent2Agent (A2A) theagent-to-agentedge), but neither
models theagent-to-instrumentedge, where operations are stateful, safety-critical, exclusively
owned, physically embodied, and produce measurements with units, calibration, and uncertainty.
We present theLab Agent Protocol (LAP), a protocol design that fills this gap. LAP
retains A2A’s peer-to-peer, discovery-first, task-lifecycle structure and adds four physical-world
primitives: (i) theInstrumentCard, a signed capability and physical-limit description; (ii) first-
classreservationfor exclusive instrument and sample locking; (iii) asafety-fence handshake
with operator-confirmation tokens cryptographically bound to a specific task and its parameters,
gating hazardous and irreversible operations; and (iv) aMeasurementResultschema that makes
every result physically typed (QUDT/UCUM), calibration-anchored, uncertainty-bearing, and
reproducible by construction. We specify roles, a six-layer architecture, the JSON-RPC method
set, the task and safety state machines, the error model, and cross-laboratory federation, and
walk a closed-loop autonomous campaign through the protocol end-to-end. LAP is transport-
compatible with the A2A/MCP ecosystem and encapsulates rather than replaces existing device
standards such as SiLA2 and OPC-UA.
Keywords:autonomous science, self-driving laboratories, agent protocols, AI agents, laboratory
automation, instrument interoperability, A2A, MCP, agentic AI.
Status of this document:This is a design specification (LAP v0.1) intended to seed an open,
community-built standard; it has no normative or implemented status yet, and its benefits are
argued architecturally rather than empirically validated.
1
arXiv:2606.03755v1  [cs.AI]  2 Jun 2026

Contents
1 Introduction 3
1.1 The bottleneck of autonomous science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.2 Three edges, two protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.3 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Background and Related Work 4
2.1 Autonomous and Self-Driving Laboratories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 Laboratory Automation Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.3 Agent Interoperability Protocols . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.4 Agentic Protocols for Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3 Design Overview 10
3.1 The third edge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2 Roles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.3 A layered architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.4 Identity and naming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 Protocol Specification 13
4.1 The InstrumentCard (P1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Method set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3 Theintent.resolvemethod . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.4 Reservation and resource locking (P2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.5 Task lifecycle (state machine) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.6 The safety fence (P3) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.7 The MeasurementResult (P4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.8 Error model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.9 Security considerations and threat model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5 Discovery, Federation, and a Closed-Loop Walkthrough 21
5.1 Local and federated discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2 Sample chain-of-custody . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3 A closed-loop campaign, end to end . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
6 Discussion, Limitations, and Comparison 24
6.1 Design Rationale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6.2 Relationship to Existing Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6.3 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6.4 Path to Adoption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
7 Conclusion 29
A Supplementary Material: Complete Schema Examples 34
2

1 Introduction
1.1 The bottleneck of autonomous science
A decade of progress in laboratory robotics and, more recently, in large language model (LLM)
agents has made a once-speculative idea concrete: laboratories that design, execute, and interpret
their own experiments. Berkeley’s A-Lab synthesized novel inorganic materials around the clock
with no human in the loop [39]; GPT-4-driven systems such as Coscientist planned and ran chemical
reactions on a cloud laboratory [5]; tool-augmented chemistry agents such as ChemCrow chained
reasoning over many instruments [6]; and a mobile robotic chemist ran a multi-day optimization
campaign autonomously [7]. The reasoning layer of autonomous science (hypothesis generation,
experiment design, active learning, result interpretation) is improving rapidly and is increasingly
delivered by general-purpose agent frameworks.
The layer that isnotimproving at the same rate is the link between the reasoning agent and
the physical instrument. In every system cited above, that link is bespoke. A-Lab’s orchestrator
drives twenty-eight devices across sixteen device types, each through a custom-written adapter [13].
Coscientist must parse vendor documentation at run time to control each new instrument [5].
ChemCrow integrates its tools through individually engineered wrappers [6]. Recent reviews are
consistent: self-driving laboratories operate in silos, instruments expose diverse vendor APIs with
inconsistent command interfaces, telemetry formats, and safety semantics, and integration is handled
through fragile hacks rather than robust interfaces [23, 26, 41]. Each new laboratory, and often
each new instrument, re-implements the same plumbing. This is precisely the kind ofO(n×m )
integration problem (n agents against m instruments) that a protocol is meant to collapse into
O(n+m).
1.2 Three edges, two protocols
The broader AI community has, in the span of roughly a year, converged on protocols for exactly
this class of problem, but for software rather than for matter. Anthropic’sModel Context Protocol
(MCP) standardizes how a single agent reaches tools, data, and services: theagent-to-tooledge [3].
Google’sAgent2Agent(A2A) protocol standardizes how autonomous agents discover, delegate to,
and coordinate with one another as peers: theagent-to-agentedge [16]. Both have been donated to
neutral governance under the Linux Foundation and are accumulating large ecosystems. They are
complementary: MCP is the vertical edge from an agent down to its tools; A2A is the horizontal
edge between agents.
A scientific agent ecosystem has a third edge that neither protocol addresses: theagent-to-
instrumentedge. An instrument is not a stateless tool call and not a peer software agent. It is
a stateful, physically embodied resource. Its operations consume real reagents and irreplaceable
samples; they take minutes to hours; they can injure people or destroy equipment; they require
exclusive access while running; and they produce results that are only meaningful when accompanied
by physical units, a calibration reference, and an uncertainty. None of these properties is expressible
in an MCP tool schema or an A2A AgentCard. Existing laboratory standards (SiLA2, OPC-UA,
SCPI, AnIML, Allotrope) address parts of the device and data layers, but all of them assume
a deterministic software client that knows in advance exactly which command to issue, not a
probabilistic agent that reasons from a natural-language goal and mustdiscoverwhat an instrument
can do,negotiatewhether an action is safe, andinterpreta physically typed result [20, 29].
3

1.3 Contributions
This technical report presents theLab Agent Protocol (LAP), a complete design for the missing
agent-to-instrument edge. Our specific contributions are:
• A problem framing(section 1, section 3) that locates instrument control as the third edge
of the agentic ecosystem and derives the four physical-world primitives any such protocol must
provide.
• The InstrumentCard(section 4), a signed, JSON-LD capability and physical-limit description
that extends the A2A AgentCard and the W3C Web of Things Thing Description with instrument
class, per-capability safety class, reversibility, physical limits, calibration state, and natural-
language intent grounding.
• A complete interaction layer: a JSON-RPC2.0 method set, a task lifecycle state machine
that augments A2A’s eight states with physical states (safety-hold,paused-fault,sample-wait),
first-classreservationleases for exclusive locking, and a structured error model (section 4).
• A safety-fence handshake(section 4) built on a four-level safety classification (S0–S3) and
operator-confirmation tokens cryptographically bound to a specific task and its parameter
hash, so that an autonomous agent’s authority over hazardous or irreversible actions is explicit,
bounded, and auditable.
• The MeasurementResult schema(section 4), which makes every result physically typed via
QUDT/UCUM, calibration-anchored, uncertainty-bearing, and accompanied by a reproducibility
manifest and a signature.
• A federation and discovery design(section 5) for cross-laboratory capability search, scoped
credential grants, and physical-sample chain-of-custody, together with an end-to-end worked
example of a closed-loop autonomous campaign.
LAP is not a new transport or data format. It reuses JSON-RPC, JSON Schema, QUDT/UCUM,
W3C WoT Thing Descriptions, and A2A’s discovery and task patterns, and it encapsulates rather
than competes with device standards such as SiLA2, which livebelowLAP inside an Instrument
Agent. Its novelty is the combination of the four physical-world primitives into one protocol for the
agent-to-instrument edge, which, to our knowledge, no existing protocol provides. This report is a
design and specification, not yet a large-scale implementation or empirical evaluation; we discuss
this limitation candidly in section 6.
2 Background and Related Work
2.1 Autonomous and Self-Driving Laboratories
The past five years have produced a series of demonstrations that AI-driven autonomous experi-
mentation is physically feasible. Szymanski et al.[39] introduced theA-Labat Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, a closed-loop system that combined density-functional phase-stability data from
the Materials Project, natural-language synthesis-recipe extraction, and active-learning optimization
to synthesize 36 out of 57 target inorganic compounds in 17 days of unattended operation. Critically,
its orchestration framework, AlabOS, maintains 28 device instances spanning 16 device types, each
requiring a hand-coded protocol adapter (MODBUS, TCP/IP, serial, HTTP, XML-RPC) [13],
illustrating concretely the bespoke-driver tax that every self-driving laboratory (SDL) currently
pays.
4

Boiko et al.[5] demonstratedCoscientist, a multi-LLM agent system that autonomously de-
signed, planned, and physically executed palladium-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions by composing
internet search, instrument-documentation retrieval, code generation, and remote calls to the Emer-
ald Cloud Lab’s robotic API. The generalization problem is concrete: for every new instrument the
LLM must parse vendor-specific API documentation at runtime, which scales poorly and depends
on documentation quality rather than a machine-readable capability contract.
Bran et al.[6] augmented GPT-4 with 18 expert-designed chemistry tools spanning retrosynthesis,
safety checks, and literature search. Each of the 18 tools required a bespoke integration; scaling to
hundreds of instruments demands a standard.
TheLiverpool mobile robotic chemist[ 7] sent a 1.75-metre robot to navigate a shared
chemistry lab autonomously, performing approximately 700 photocatalyst experiments over eight
days and identifying a catalyst with 6× improved efficiency. A 2024 follow-up [9] demonstrated
two cooperating AI-driven robots making autonomous synthesis and analysis decisions at human-
competitive timescales. Cooper’s “automate the researcher, not the instrument” strategy sidesteps
the driver problem by using robot manipulators on unmodified equipment, but does not eliminate
the driver problem.
TheEmerald Cloud Lab[12] is a remote-access laboratory-as-a-service where scientists submit
experiments via a programmatic interface and robotic infrastructure executes them. It demonstrates
that fully programmable cloud labs are commercially viable, while remaining a closed, proprietary
ecosystem whose instruments are not individually discoverable or taskable by external agents.
TheAcceleration Consortiumat the University of Toronto has assembled a network of over
30 partner SDLs worldwide and produced one of the most extensive demonstrations of networked
autonomous science to date: Strieth-Kalthoff et al.[38] orchestrated a single AI-managed discovery
campaign across laboratories in Toronto, Vancouver, Glasgow, Illinois, and Fukuoka, synthesizing
and characterizing more than 1,000 organic solid-state laser emitter candidates and identifying
21 top performers, the first globally networked, delocalized, asynchronous closed-loop SDL. The
campaign ran onChemOS 2.0[ 36], which uses SiLA2 for device control; yet even this system
required bespoke multi-site integration that does not generalize to a new instrument or a new
collaborating lab.
Bluesky and Ophyd[22, 27] (NSLS-II, Brookhaven National Laboratory) constitute the
de factoexperiment-orchestration and hardware-abstraction stack at US synchrotron beamlines,
deployed on 26 of 28 NSLS-II beamlines and adopted at the Advanced Photon Source (APS), the
Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL), the Canadian Light Source, and Diamond
Light Source. Ophyd provides a uniform Python device-object model over EPICS process variables;
Bluesky’s RunEngine executes scan plans against those objects and emits structured event streams
to a document model. LAP sits conceptually above this stack: an Instrument Agent wrapping a
Bluesky-controlled beamline would expose its capabilities as an InstrumentCard and accept LAP
task submissions, while continuing to drive hardware via Ophyd internally.
IvoryOS[ 42] (Acceleration Consortium, University of Toronto,Nature Communications2025)
is a web-interface SDL orchestrator that automatically generates drag-and-drop graphical workflows
from Python hardware-driver APIs, enabling within-institution coordination of SDL components
without hand-written integration code. IvoryOS operates at the UI and orchestration level within a
single institution; it does not define a wire protocol, provides no safety-fence or reservation primitive,
and was not designed for cross-institutional federation (the scope LAP addresses).
Across all these systems the same structural bottleneck recurs. Lee et al.[23] summarize it
pointedly:“SDLs often operate in silos, with experiment data, metadata, and procedures stored in
formats customized for hardware setup of each laboratory... integrating diverse instruments can
be cumbersome in the absence of common interfaces.”NIST has launched an explicit program to
5

address what it calls“fragile hacks rather than robust interfaces”when instruments are adapted
for AI control, drawing an analogy to how internet communication standards revolutionized digital
technology [26]. LAP is a direct response to this identified gap.
2.2 Laboratory Automation Standards
Several established standards govern aspects of laboratory instrument communication; none was
designed for the probabilistic, goal-directed AI agent as client.
SiLA 2[20] is the most mature open standard for laboratory instrument connectivity. Built on
gRPC over HTTP/2 with Protocol Buffers serialization, it defines a Feature Definition Language
(FDL) that provides machine-readable, typed capability descriptions for instrument commands
and observable (streaming) properties, and mandates mDNS/DNS-SD for plug-and-play discovery.
SiLA 2 excels at deterministic orchestration: a workflow engine can enumerate every command
an instrument accepts, invoke long-running operations with streaming progress, and discover new
instruments on a lab network without configuration. However, FDL schemas are static and defined
at design time; there is no runtime capability negotiation, no mechanism for expressing physical
safety limits or hazard classifications per capability, no concept of exclusive resource reservation, no
structured uncertainty in results, and no provision for a probabilistic reasoning agent to ground
natural-language intent against what the instrument can actually do in its current state. The SiLA
2 specification contains no provisions for AI or LLM integration.
AnIML[ 4] (Analytical Information Markup Language, ASTM) is an XML-based standard
for representing analytical chemistry measurement results. It covers the data-at-rest layer with
strong audit-trail and GxP compliance support, and a 2026 OWL 2 ontology extension [25] aligns
it semantically with Allotrope. AnIML cannot command an instrument or stream live data; it
represents completed measurements, not the control loop.
Allotrope/ADF[ 2] combines an HDF5 binary file format with a richly axiomatized OWL 2
ontology suite (the Allotrope Foundation Ontologies,∼5,000 terms) and SHACL-validated data
models for specific analytical techniques. ADF is the semantically richest standard for capturing
what was measured, with what, and under what conditions; however, it is a data-archival format
with no instrument control semantics, no real-time streaming model, and gated access to full tooling
requiring consortium membership.
OPC-UA with LADS[29, 30] provides a mature, secure industrial information model that
OPC-UA Companion Specification LADS extends with lab-domain concepts (FunctionalUnit, Pro-
gramManager, ResultType, device state machines). OPC-UA’s heavyweight node-graph architecture
and generic information model carry no lab-specific semantic meaning out of the box; LADS adds
domain structure but remains template-based; there is no mechanism for composing novel procedures
at runtime or expressing the scientific intent behind a measurement.
SCPI/VISA[ 18] standardizes ASCII command syntax and I/O abstraction for electronic
test and measurement instruments (oscilloscopes, power supplies, signal generators), but explicitly
excludes analytical chemistry and life-science instruments. SCPI commands are syntactically
normalized but semantically opaque; there is no structured capability discovery, no push-notification
model, and no machine-interpretable data types in responses.
EPICS(Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System) [10] is the dominant distributed
real-time control framework at particle-accelerator and synchrotron-beamline facilities worldwide,
providing a Channel Access network layer over which detector, motion, and vacuum systems publish
and subscribe to process variables. EPICS operates at the device-control layer (analogous to LAP’s
L0); LAP is designed to sit above it, with an Instrument Agent encapsulating EPICS process
variables behind a capability-described, reservation-aware, safety-fenced interface.
6

W3C WoT Thing Description 1.1[21] is a W3C Recommendation (December 2023) that
provides a JSON-LD information model for describing IoT devices: their Properties, Actions,
and Events with multiple protocol bindings (HTTP, MQTT, CoAP) and aunit annotation field
(recommending QUDT). LAP’sInstrumentCardis explicitly aprofileof WoT TD 1.1, extending
it with laboratory-domain semantics: per-capability safety classification, physical-limit declarations,
calibration and uncertainty blocks, reservation profile flags, and theintentTags grounding field.
WoT TD already handles the capability-description layer; LAP’s novelty lies instead in the safety-
fence handshake with parameter-hash-bound operator tokens, the first-class reservation primitive,
and the calibration-and-uncertainty-mandated result schema, none of which WoT TD defines.
SLAS/ANSI-SBS microplate geometry standards[37] define the 127.76mm× 85.48mm
footprint and well-position conventions that allow liquid handlers, plate readers, and centrifuges
from different vendors to physically exchange plates. This purely physical layer is a necessary
prerequisite for high-throughput automation but carries no digital, control, or semantic content.
The shared insufficiency of all these standards for AI agents is structural, not incidental: they
assume adeterministic software orchestration clientthat knows in advance exactly which commands
to issue. WoT TD 1.1 comes closest to the capability-description layer, but no prior standard
provides all four primitives as a coherent agent-to-instrument layer: intent grounding (what goal
does the agent want to achieve?), safety negotiation with parameter-hash-bound operator tokens
(what human authorization is required before irreversible or hazardous actions?), runtime capability
discovery anchored to the instrument’s current physical state, and calibration-anchored measurement
results with propagated uncertainty.
2.3 Agent Interoperability Protocols
The 2024–2025 period produced a cluster of open protocols addressing agent-to-agent and agent-
to-tool interoperability. Ehtesham et al.[11] provide a systematic survey and fifteen-dimension
taxonomy of the four leading protocols.
MCP(Model Context Protocol, Anthropic, November 2024; donated to the Linux Foundation
Agentic AI Foundation in December 2025) [3] is averticalagent-to-tool protocol: a single LLM (the
Host) connects through a stateful Client to a Server that exposes Tools (callable functions with
JSON Schema input/output), Resources (contextual data), and Prompts. Discovery is through
manual host configuration; tools are described as JSON Schema objects with free-text descriptions.
MCP is hub-and-spoke: the LLM sees all tools but two Servers cannot communicate with each
other, and there is no concept of task delegation, peer-to-peer capability negotiation, or resource
reservation between agents.
A2A(Agent2Agent, Google, April 2025; donated to Linux Foundation) [16] is ahorizontalagent-
to-agent protocol. Any A2A server publishes anAgentCardat/.well-known/agent-card.json
declaring its skills, supported MIME types, transport bindings, and security schemes. Agents
communicate via JSON-RPC 2.0 (or gRPC / HTTP+JSON bindings) using an eight-stateTask
lifecycle: submitted, working, input_required, auth_required, completed, failed, canceled,
rejected. Long-running tasks are tracked across connections via SSE streaming and webhook
push-notification configurations. The A2A/MCP distinction is crisp: MCP is the “USB-C for tool
connectivity” (vertical, agent↔tool), while A2A is “HTTP for agent collaboration” (horizontal,
agent↔agent). Production systems routinely combine both: A2A routes a task to the right specialist
agent; MCP gives that agent its context and tools.
ACP(Agent Communication Protocol, IBM/BeeAI, March 2025) [ 17] emphasizes REST-
first, async-first enterprise messaging with multipart MIME payloads and offline agent discovery
for air-gapped deployments.ANP(Agent Network Protocol) [ 1] aims at decentralized open-
7

internet agent markets using W3C Decentralized Identifiers (DID) and JSON-LD agent descriptions.
AGNTCY[ 8] (Cisco, now Linux Foundation) contributes the Open Agent Schema Framework and
a SLIM messaging layer; it is interoperable infrastructure rather than a replacement for A2A or
MCP. All four are now converging under Linux Foundation governance.
Historically,KQML[ 14] andFIPA-ACL[ 15] established the foundational concepts:
performative-based communication (speech acts), formal semantics grounded in agents’ beliefs and
intentions, and reusable multi-step interaction protocols (contract net, query, propose). FIPA-ACL’s
separation of communicative act from content language, and its contract-net protocol for task
delegation, are direct conceptual ancestors of A2A’s task lifecycle. However, FIPA’s full BDI
mental-state semantics proved impractical to implement and verify in production systems, and both
standards predate the LLM era.
None of these protocols, historical or contemporary, models the physical world. An instrument
is not a software agent: it is a stateful, safety-critical, exclusively owned, physically embodied peer
whose operations consume real reagents, take real time, can injure people, and produce physically
typed measurements with units and uncertainty. LAP takes A2A’s peer-to-peer, discovery-first,
task-lifecycle spirit as its structural skeleton and adds the four primitives the physical world demands
(detailed in section 4).
2.4 Agentic Protocols for Science
The closest prior work to LAP addresses the agent-to-instrument interface specifically in scientific
contexts; we compare each directly and state where LAP differs.
Zhang et al. [43] propose using MCP as a natural-language interface for SDL instruments,
demonstrating that wrapping instrument APIs as MCP Tools enables LLM-driven control with
a shared protocol surface. This confirms the value of a standard interface; the architecture is
MCP-native (hub-and-spoke, hub-mediated, agent-to-tool). Because MCP Tool descriptions carry
only JSON Schema and free-text, there is no physical-quantity typing in parameters, no safety
classification per capability, no exclusive reservation primitive, and no calibration- or uncertainty-
anchored result schema.
Jiang et al.[19] introduce theScience Context Protocol (SCP), the most comprehensive
existing science-domain protocol proposal. Developed by the Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory and released in December 2025, SCP extends MCP with a centralized SCP Hub that
acts as a global registry, adds persistent experiment objects with a five-phase lifecycle (Registration,
Planning, Execution, Monitoring, Archival), and provides a vendor-agnostic device-driver abstraction
layer for physical instruments. SCP is currently deployed on the Intern-Discovery platform with over
1,600 integrated tools spanning biology, physics, chemistry, and materials science. We commend
SCP as a serious and practical contribution. The architectural difference from LAP is structural:
SCP extends theMCP agent-to-tool, hub-mediatedmodel upward, meaning all instrument access
is proxied through the Hub, capability negotiation is between the agent and the Hub rather than
directly with the instrument, and the Hub becomes a single point of trust and potential failure for
federated operation. LAP follows theA2A peer-to-peerline: each instrument is a first-class agent
that publishes its own signedInstrumentCard, and a Research Agent negotiates directly with an
Instrument Agent (or with a Lab Coordinator as an optional orchestration layer that is never the
sole path to the instrument). Beyond architecture, LAP adds four capabilities absent from SCP:
1. Physical-quantity typing:every parameter and result value carries a mandatory QUDT/U-
CUM unit annotation; the InstrumentCard declares physical limits (temperature range,
maximum pressure, wavelength bounds) that are machine-checked before task submission (not
present in SCP’s tool description layer).
8

2. Exclusivereservation:afirst-classleasemechanism( reservation.request/ reservation.
renew / reservation.release) prevents two agents from commanding the same physical
instrument simultaneously, a safety property that cannot be expressed in MCP’s stateless
tool-call model.
3. Safety-fence handshake:capabilities are classified S0–S3 by hazard level; S2/S3 operations
require abound operator-confirmation token(JWS-signed by a human Safety Authority,
cryptographically bound to the exact task and parameter hash) before the Instrument Agent
will execute: a protocol-level interlock, not a UI-level hint.
4. Calibration- and uncertainty-anchored results:every lap:MeasurementResult artifact
carries a calibrationRef, propagated measurementuncertainty, a full provenance manifest
(parameter hash, instrument firmware, environmental conditions), and an instrument signature,
making results FAIR, reproducible, and machine-verifiable in ways neither MCP tool outputs
nor SCP experiment records currently mandate.
INTERSECT(Interconnected Science Ecosystem, Oak Ridge National Laboratory) [28, 34]
is a deployed federated architecture for autonomous cross-facility scientific experimentation, inte-
grating HPC resources, manufacturing user facilities, and, since 2025, LLM-based AI agents [34].
INTERSECT operates as a microservices system: a natural-language chat assistant, a multi-agent
orchestrator, programmable facility APIs (S3M), and a provenance-aware infrastructure (Flowcept)
are composed into adaptive, explainable, reproducible workflows spanning ORNL’s Manufactur-
ing Demonstration Facility and the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility. INTERSECT is
aninstitutional system and microservices architecturewith a running production deployment at
national-laboratory scale; LAP is to INTERSECT what HTTP is to a specific server stack: a
wire protocol that, if adopted, would let any INTERSECT facility API expose its instruments as
first-class, reservation-aware, safety-fenced LAP agents discoverable by external research agents
without INTERSECT-specific adapters.
Mathur et al. [24] describeVISION, a modular LLM-based assistant deployed at the 11-
BM CMS beamline at NSLS-II (Brookhaven National Laboratory) that demonstrated the first
voice-controlled beamtime, combining natural-language query with Bluesky-driven data acquisition.
VISION independently arrives at the “confirm before actuate” insight that LAP formalizes as the
intent.resolve→task.submit two-step: natural language is resolved to a structured proposed
action that a human or agent must confirm before hardware executes.
Yang et al.[41] frame theExperiment-as-Code(EaC) paradigm: treating the laboratory as
managed infrastructure analogous to Infrastructure-as-Code in cloud computing, with declarative
experiment specifications validated for safety before actuation. EaC motivates the same need
LAP addresses:“laboratory instruments expose diverse vendor APIs with inconsistent command
interfaces, telemetry formats, and safety semantics”, and proposes declarative safety validation at
the orchestration layer. LAP is complementary: EaC defines theexperiment specification language;
LAP defines theagent-to-instrument wire protocolthat executes it.
Taken together, the closest prior science-agent work establishes that the field has converged on the
problem but remains split between hub-mediated MCP extensions (SCP, Zhang et al.[43]), deployed
institutional systems (INTERSECT), and declarative orchestration layers (EaC), while the “confirm
before actuate” pattern has been independently validated at the beamline level (VISION). LAP
occupies the orthogonal position: a peer-to-peer, instrument-as-agentwire protocolwhose capability-
description layer is a profile of W3C WoT TD 1.1 (not a novel contribution) and whose typed-data
concepts build on AnIML/Allotrope conventions (equally established). The new contribution is the
combinationof primitives no prior protocol provides as a coherent agent-to-instrument layer:(a)a
9

Reasoning
Agent
Peer
Agent
Tool /
Service
Physical
Instrument
A2A: agent↔agent
MCP: agent↔tool
LAP: agent↔instrument
stateful·exclusive·safety-critical·physically typed
Figure 1: The three edges of an agentic scientific ecosystem. MCP standardizes the agent-to-tool
edge and A2A the agent-to-agent edge; LAP completes the triangle with the agent-to-instrument
edge, whose distinguishing properties (annotated below the instrument node) drive LAP’s four
physical-world primitives.
safety-fence handshake with operator-confirmation tokens cryptographically bound to exact task
parameters, making hazardous-hardware autonomy auditable and bounded at the protocol level, and
(b)a first-class reservation primitive that prevents concurrent physical actuation. Together with
physical-quantity typing (QUDT/UCUM mandatory) and calibration-and-uncertainty-anchored
measurement results, these four primitives enable autonomous, safe, and auditable operation of
physical laboratory instruments across institutional boundaries.
3 Design Overview
3.1 The third edge
We organize an agentic scientific ecosystem around three communication edges (Figure 1). The
agent-to-tooledge, standardized by MCP, lets a single reasoning agent call functions, read resources,
and invoke prompts on services it controls. Theagent-to-agentedge, standardized by A2A, lets
autonomous agents treat one another as peers, advertising capabilities through an AgentCard,
delegating work as tasks, and exchanging messages and artifacts. Theagent-to-instrumentedge,
which LAP defines, connects a reasoning agent to a physical instrument. It is not reducible to
either neighbor: a tool call is stateless and instantaneous, a peer agent is itself a reasoner, but an
instrument is a stateful, exclusively owned, safety-critical physical resource whose operations are
slow, consequential, and measured in physical units.
From these properties we derive four primitives that any agent-to-instrument protocol must
provide, and that organize the rest of this report:
(P1) Capability and physical-limit description.An agent cannot be preprogrammed for every in-
strument; it must discover, at run time, what an instrument can do, within what physical
bounds, with what safety implications, and how to express a goal to it. LAP answers this with
theInstrumentCard.
(P2) Exclusive reservation.A physical instrument can serve one experiment at a time; two agents
10

cannot interleave operations on a single diffractometer. LAP makesreservationa first-class,
leased primitive.
(P3) Safety negotiation.Some operations are hazardous or irreversible. Autonomous authority over
them must be explicit and bounded. LAP defines asafety-fence handshakewith task-bound
operator-confirmation tokens.
(P4) Physically honest results.A number without a unit, a calibration, and an uncertainty is not a
measurement. LAP’sMeasurementResultmakes all four mandatory.
3.2 Roles
LAP defines five roles (Figure 2).
• TheResearch Agent (RA)is the autonomous scientist. It forms hypotheses, plans campaigns,
decomposes them into instrument tasks, interprets results, and drives the closed loop. It speaks
LAP as a client.
• TheInstrument Agent (IA)wraps exactly one physical instrument (or one logical cluster). It
translates LAP tasks into vendor-SDK, SCPI, serial, OPC-UA, or SiLA2 calls below it, and it
owns the instrument’s state, safety interlocks, calibration, and reservation table. It publishes an
InstrumentCard and speaks LAP as a server.
• TheLab Coordinator (LC)is a per-laboratory broker, optional for a single instrument but
requiredfor multi-instrument workflows that carry cross-instrument hazards. It aggregates
InstrumentCards, arbitrates contended reservations, enforces lab-wide safety policy, and brokers
sample chain-of-custody between instruments. Because it is the only role that sees a workflow
as a whole, it is also the enforcement point forworkflow-level(class (C)) safety: before routing
a sample or granting a sequence of reservations it MUST evaluate cross-instrument safety
predicates—e.g. checking thesampleCondition flags carried on aMeasurementResult against
the next instrument’sphysicalLimits, and enforcing cumulative cost or exposure budgets—that
no single Instrument Agent can see. It presents the laboratory as a single federable endpoint,
and is a LAP server to RAs and a LAP client to IAs.
• TheFederation Registry (FR)is an optional cross-laboratory directory. It indexes instruments
by capability, location, availability, and access policy, and returns signed pointers; it never proxies
control.
• TheHuman Operator / Safety Authority (HO)is not an agent but a trust anchor: it
issues or relays the operator-confirmation tokens that gate safety-fenced operations and can
assert emergency stop.
The minimal valid topology is a single RA talking directly to a single IA; the LC and FR are layered
in as a laboratory grows and federates. This mirrors how the web grew from isolated servers into a
federated network. Single-instrument operations (classes (A) and (B) safety) are fully protected in
this minimal topology; workflow-level (class (C)) safety, by contrast, presupposes a Lab Coordinator,
since cross-instrument hazards are invisible to any single Instrument Agent.
11

one laboratory (trust domain)
Research
Agent (RA)
Lab
Coordinator (LC)
Instrument
Agent (IA)
Instrument
Agent (IA)
XRD
Robot
Federation
Registry (FR)
Operator /
Safety Auth.
LAP LAP L0
L0
advertise / query
safety token
Figure 2: LAP role topology. A Research Agent reaches Instrument Agents directly or through
an optional Lab Coordinator; each Instrument Agent encapsulates one physical device through
a device-abstraction layer (L0) that the agent never sees. A laboratory is a trust domain that
advertises capabilities to a Federation Registry; the Operator / Safety Authority is the trust anchor
for safety-fenced operations.
L5 Campaign / Closed-Loop— experiment design, active learning, iteration(RA-internal; out of scope)
L4 Orchestration— multi-instrument workflows, sample routing, scheduling, reservations(LC)
L3 Semantic— InstrumentCard, capability ontology, QUDT/UCUM typing, MeasurementResult
L2 Interaction— LAP methods, Task lifecycle, safety-fence handshake, streaming, events
L1 Identity & Transport— JSON-RPC2.0 / HTTPS+SSE+webhooks; mTLS / OAuth2.1 / DIDs;/.well-known
L0 Device Abstraction— vendor SDK / SCPI / serial / GPIB / OPC-UA / SiLA2 adapter(inside IA; out of scope)
LAP normative
Figure 3: The LAP six-layer architecture. LAP normatively specifies L1–L3 and the L4 orchestration
messages (teal). L0 (device abstraction, inside the Instrument Agent) and L5 (the science, inside
the Research Agent) are intentionally out of scope: encapsulating L0 is the protocol’s purpose, and
serving (without dictating) L5 keeps the protocol science-agnostic.
3.3 A layered architecture
LAP is organized into six layers (Figure 3). It normatively defines the identity/transport layer (L1),
the interaction layer (L2), and the semantic layer (L3), together with the orchestration messages of
L4. The device-abstraction layer (L0) and the campaign/closed-loop layer (L5) are deliberatelyout
of scope: L0 is the Instrument Agent’s private concern (encapsulating it is the entire point, so that a
Research Agent never sees a vendor SDK) and L5 is the science, which LAP serves with hooks but
does not dictate. This boundary is what lets a single InstrumentCard expose a SiLA2 instrument,
a SCPI oscilloscope, and a custom robot through one uniform agentic interface.
3.4 Identity and naming
Every LAP entity has a stable URI under a laboratory authority: an instrument is lap://
<lab>/instruments/xrd-bruker-d8-01, a capability is a path beneath it, a sample is lap:
12

//<lab>/samples/2026-0531-A7, and a task is lap://<lab>/tasks/UUID. Each Instrument
Agent, Research Agent, and Lab Coordinator carries a decentralized identifier (did:web:<lab>:
instruments:xrd-01) or an equivalent X.509 identity, and every InstrumentCard is signed by its
laboratory authority so that a remote Research Agent can verify provenance before trusting a
capability advertisement. This naming and identity scheme is the substrate on which the federation
of section 5 is built.
4 Protocol Specification
This section specifies LAP’s semantic and interaction layers: the InstrumentCard (P1), the method
set, the reservation primitive (P2), the task and safety state machines (P3), the MeasurementResult
(P4), and the error model. Throughout, we reuse JSON-RPC2.0 as the message envelope, JSON
Schema 2020-12 for parameter typing, JSON-LD with a LAP context for semantic annotation, and
UCUM codes with QUDTquantityKindURIs for physical quantities.
4.1 The InstrumentCard (P1)
The InstrumentCard is LAP’s central artifact: the instrument analog of an A2A AgentCard,
realized as a profile of the W3C Web of Things Thing Description. It is served athttps://<host>
/.well-known/instrument-card.json and is signed by the laboratory authority. Beyond the
identity, transport, and security fields it shares with an AgentCard, it adds the instrument-specific
structure that an autonomous agent needs: aninstrumentClass drawn from a capability ontology;
a list ofcapabilities, each carrying physically typed input/output schemas, asafetyClass, a
reversible flag, an estimatedDuration, physicalLimits and interlocks, and natural-language
intentTags for grounding; continuous telemetrystreams; and a calibration block. Listing 1
shows the skeleton of a card for a powder X-ray diffractometer: its identity, one physically typed
capability with its safety class and intent tags, and the signature envelope. The complete card, with
full input schemas, telemetry streams, and calibration block, is given in Listing 5 (Appendix A).
Listing 1: Skeleton of an InstrumentCard for a powder XRD instrument: identity and instrument
class, one physically typed capability (powder-scan) with its safety class, intent tags, and physical
limits, and the JWS signature envelope. The complete card is given in Listing 5.
{
" @type " : " lap : I n s t r u m e n t C a r d " ,
" id " : " lap : // < lab >/ i n s t r u m e n t s / xrd - bruker - d8 -01" ,
" i n s t r u m e n t C l a s s " : " xrd : P o w d e r D i f f r a c t o m e t e r " ,
" l a p P r o f i l e " : { " s t r e a m i n g " : true , " r e s e r v a t i o n " : true ,
" s a f e t y F e n c e " : true , " f e d e r a t i o n " : true ,
" i n t e n t R e s o l v e " : true } ,
" c a p a b i l i t i e s " : [ {
" id " : " powder - scan " ,
" i n t e n t T a g s " : [ " measure crystal s t r u c t u r e " , " phase i d e n t i f i c a t i o n " ] ,
" i n p u t S c h e m a " : { " t w o T h e t a S t a r t " : { " $ref " : " lap : Qu an tit y " ,
" unit " : " deg " , " minimum " : 5 , " maximum " : 120 } } ,
" o u t p u t S c h e m a " : { " $ref " : " lap : M e a s u r e m e n t R e s u l t " } ,
" s a f e t y C l a s s " : " S1 " , " r e v e r s i b l e " : true ,
" p h y s i c a l L i m i t s " : { " ma xPo we r " : "2.2 kW " ,
" i n t e r l o c k s " : [ " shutter " , " d o o r C l o s e d " ] }
} ] ,
" c a l i b r a t i o n " : { " c a l i b r a t i o n R e f " : " lap : // < lab >/ cal / xrd01 /2026 -05 -20" } ,
" s i g n a t u r e s " : [ { " alg " : " ES256 " , " by " : " did : web : < lab >" , " jws " : "..." } ]
}
13

Method Direction Purpose
instrument.describeRA→IA Fetch/refresh the InstrumentCard.
instrument.getStateRA→IA Operational + safety + calibration snapshot.
reservation.requestRA→IA/LC Acquire an exclusive (or shared-read) lease.
reservation.renewRA→IA Extend a lease (heartbeat) before expiry.
reservation.releaseRA→IA Free a held lease.
task.submitRA→IA Invoke a capability (typed params or proposal ref).
task.getRA→IA Poll task status and artifacts.
task.streamRA→IA (SSE) Subscribe to live status, stream frames, events.
task.cancelRA→IA Cooperative graceful cancellation.
task.subscribePushRA→IA Register a webhook for asynchronous completion.
safety.requestAuthorizationIA→RA Demand an operator-confirmation token.
safety.provideTokenRA→IA Return a signed operator-confirmation token.
safety.emergencyStopRA/HO→IA Immediate halt; bypasses the queue.
intent.resolveRA→IA Map a natural-language goal to a proposedtask.submit.
registry.queryRA→FR Find instruments by capability/location/availability.
registry.advertiseLC→FR Publish/refresh a laboratory’s instruments.
Table 1: The LAP method set. Every state-changing physical action is expressed as aTask, making
it auditable, cancellable, and streamable. Natural language enters only throughintent.resolve,
which returns aproposedstructured call that the agent must confirm viatask.submit; natural
language never drives hardware directly.
4.2 Method set
All LAP interactions are JSON-RPC2.0 requests; streaming methods upgrade to Server-Sent Events,
and long-running tasks may additionally register a webhook. Table 1 lists the method set, grouped
by the primitive it serves.
Reservation(P2).Becauseaninstrumentservesoneexperimentatatime, reservation.request
returns a reservationToken and a time-boxed lease; task.submit on an exclusive instrument
requires a valid token, and the lease must be kept alive withreservation.renew or it expires and
frees the instrument. This converts the implicit, error-prone mutual exclusion that orchestrators
hand-code today into an explicit protocol primitive with conflict and expiry semantics (error codes
in subsection 4.8).
Natural-language grounding at the edge.A central design decision is that natural language is
confined to intent.resolve, which takes a free-text goal (“acquire a fine-step powder pattern from
10 to 80 degrees”) and returns aproposedstructuredtask.submit payload (a chosen capability with
filled, typed, limit-checked parameters) that the Research Agent must explicitly confirm. Hardware
is therefore only ever actuated through a validated structured call, never directly from model output.
This is primarily areliabilitydecision: it confines the stochasticity of a language model to a proposal
that is inspected and replayable (we develop this in section 6). It is deliberatelynotthe protocol’s
safety guarantee. intent.resolve is best-effort and optional, and a proposal carries no privileged
trust; the deterministictask.submit validation gate that follows it—schema andphysicalLimits
checking, and, for S2/S3 capabilities, the operator-token handshake—is thepreconditionon which
the safety mechanisms of subsection 4.6 operate, and it runs identically whether the parameters
14

came from intent.resolve, from the agent’s own grounding against the InstrumentCard, or from
a human.
4.3 Theintent.resolvemethod
intent.resolve is the one method that accepts free text: it maps a natural-language goal to
aproposed task.submit—a chosen capability with filled, typed, limit-checked parameters—that
the Research Agent inspects and confirms. It is optional; an IA advertises support with the
intentResolve flag in itslapProfile, and an IA that does not implement it (a deterministic or
legacy instrument) simply returns JSON-RPC-32601 (Method not found) , leaving the agent
to build the task.submit from the card’s intentTags and inputSchema directly. The proposal
carries no privileged trust: because the deterministictask.submit gate (subsection 4.6) re-validates
the parameters either way,intent.resolve is a convenience, not a safety mechanism. A clean
resolution returns the proposal directly:
Listing 2: A cleanintent.resolve: the free-text goal (top) and the proposedtask.submit the
agent confirms (bottom). The IA surfaces any value it had to fill in as anassumption.
{ " goal " : " fine - step powder pattern from 10 to 80 degrees " ,
" c a p a b i l i t y H i n t " : " powder - scan " }
{ " status " : " r eso lv ed " ,
" r e s o l u t i o n I d " : " res -7 f3a " ,
" pro po sal " : {
" c a p a b i l i t y " : " powder - scan " ,
" params " : {
" t w o T h e t a S t a r t " : { " value " : 10 , " unit " : " deg " } ,
" t w o T h e t a E n d " : { " value " : 80 , " unit " : " deg " } ,
" ste pS ize " : { " value " : 0.01 , " unit " : " deg " }
} ,
" a s s u m p t i o n s " : [ " ’ fine ’ step taken as 0.01 deg ( c a p a b i l i t y default ) " ]
}
}
To act on a resolution the Research Agent does not re-author the structured call: it commitsby
reference, submittingtask.submit with the proposal’sresolutionId and a confirm flag rather
than a hand-built parameter block. The commit is still the agent’s own accountable act—signed
with its DID and bound to that exact, immutable proposal—so the provenance records that the
Research Agent, not the IA, decided to actuate, and the IA executes precisely the proposal that
was shown. An agent that wants to change a value, or a deterministic client that never called
intent.resolve, may instead submit a full typedtask.submit directly; both forms reach the
same validation gate. The common LLM-agent path is thus natural language end to end—goal in,
proposal reviewed, one confirmation—with the typed task existing as the signed record beneath it
rather than as something the agent must build.
When the goal is under-determined, the IA does not guess silently: it returns the slots it could
not fill asclarifications, with the options it can offer, and the agent answers (re-calling with the
sameresolutionId) or accepts a default before submitting:
15

Listing 3: An under-determined goal. Rather than guess, the IA returns the missing parameters as
clarificationsfor the agent—or a human—to resolve.
{ " goal " : " scan this sample " }
{ " status " : " a m b i g u o u s " ,
" r e s o l u t i o n I d " : " res -7 f3a " ,
" pro po sal " : { " c a p a b i l i t y " : " powder - scan " , " params " : { } } ,
" c l a r i f i c a t i o n s " : [
{ " param " : " t w o T h e t a S t a r t " , " qu est io n " : " start angle ?" , " unit " : " deg " } ,
{ " param " : " t w o T h e t a E n d " , " q ue sti on " : " end angle ?" , " unit " : " deg " } ,
{ " param " : " st ep Siz e " , " q ues ti on " : " fine (0.01) or coarse (0.05) ?" ,
" options " : [ { " value " : 0.01 , " unit " : " deg " } , { " value " : 0.05 , " unit " : " deg " } ] }
]
}
If the goal maps to no capability the instrument has, the call fails withIntentUnresolved
(subsection 4.8), whosereason lets the agent re-plan against a different instrument rather than
retry blindly.intent.resolvecreates no task and changes no instrument state.
4.4 Reservation and resource locking (P2)
Because a physical instrument can serve only one experiment at a time, LAP makes mutual exclusion
an explicit, leased primitive rather than leaving it to convention. Areservation.request carries a
requested mode, a duration, and the target resource (an instrument and, optionally, a sample), and
an optional budgetCap (a currency and an amount) that bounds the cumulativeoperationalCost
(declared per capability in the InstrumentCard) of all tasks submitted under the lease; on success it
returns areservationToken:
{
" id " : " < uuid >" ,
" res ou rce " : " < instrument - uri >" ,
" holder " : " < agent - did >" ,
" mode " : " e x c l u s i v e | shared - read " ,
" g r a n t e d A t " : " < ts >" ,
" e x p i r e s A t " : " < ts >" ,
" epoch " : " < int >"
}
LAP defines two modes. Anexclusivelease confers sole right to submit state-changing
tasks; while it is held,reservation.requests from other agents fail withReservationConflict
(subsection 4.8), whose error data returns the currentholder and expiresAt so the requester
can queue or back off. Ashared-readlease permits multiple concurrent holders to call read-
only methods (instrument.getState, telemetry streams) but no state-changingtask.submit;
an exclusive request is refused while any shared-read lease is active, and vice versa. Leases are
time-boxed: the holder must callreservation.renew before expiresAt or the lease lapses and the
instrument is freed, which prevents a crashed agent from deadlocking an instrument indefinitely.
The monotonic epoch is incremented on every grant so that a task submitted under a lapsed-and-
reissued lease is detected and rejected withLeaseExpired. Two operations bypass reservation
unconditionally: instrument.describe (discovery is always permitted) and the S0 fast path:
safety.emergencyStop bypasses both the lease and the credential scope. Any authenticated party
that holds, or has held within the currentepoch, a valid lease or scoped credential on the instrument
may issue it, and a conforming IA MUST honor it regardless of whether “emergency stop” was
explicitly enumerated in that credential’s scope, because halting a runaway instrument must never
be blocked by a lock or by an under-scoped grant (this is the one method whose authorization the
IA does not scope-check). In federation, this ensures that a remote Research Agent driving an
16

submitted queued running
safety-
hold
paused-
fault
sample-
wait
completed
failed
rejected
valid
schema / limit fail
lease ok
sample present
result
S2/S3,
no tokentoken ok
deny/timeout
interlockrecover
unrecoverable
e-stop
Figure 4: The LAP task lifecycle. Blue states andcompleted/failed/rejected follow A2A; the
amber/red physical states (safety-hold, paused-fault, sample-wait) are LAP additions that
capture safety negotiation, interlock faults, and physical-sample dependencies. Emergency stop
drives any running task tofailed.
instrument can always stop it even if its time-boxed credential was issued for a single capability. A
Lab Coordinator, when present, is the reservation authority for its instruments and may additionally
enforce lab-wide policies such as fair-share quotas or priority pre-emption (a pre-empted holder is
notified and its running task transitions tocanceled). When a lease carries abudgetCap, the IA
(or the LC, when it is the reservation authority) MUST refuse anytask.submit that would drive
the lease’s cumulativeoperationalCost past the cap, returningBudgetExceeded (subsection 4.8);
this bounds the class (C) failure mode of an autonomous loop consuming unbounded beam-time,
reagents, or billable cost while each individual step remains within physical limits and safety class S1.
4.5 Task lifecycle (state machine)
A LAP task extends the eight A2A task states with three states that only a physical process can
occupy (Figure 4). Aftersubmitted, parameters are validated against the capability schema and
physicalLimits, and the IA MUST additionally reject the task if the instrument’s calibration has
lapsed (calibration.validUntil in the past), since a task run under expired calibration yields
a result that is physically valid but scientifically untrustworthy (class (C) integrity); any such
failure yields rejected (CalibrationExpired for the calibration case, subsection 4.8). A valid task
moves throughqueued to running. Three physical states branch off the normal path:safety-hold,
entered when a capability of class S2/S3 lacks a valid operator token and an authorization handshake
is in progress (subsection 4.6);paused-fault, entered when a hardware interlock trips, from which
the task may auto-recover torunning or terminate asfailed; and sample-wait, entered when
the task is blocked awaiting physical delivery of a sample via chain-of-custody from another
Instrument Agent. The A2A interrupt statesinput-required and auth-required are retained.
A successful task terminates ascompleted and carries one or moreMeasurementResult artifacts;
safety.emergencyStopdrives any non-terminal state tofailedwith aneStopflag.
4.6 The safety fence (P3)
LAP separates three kinds of safety and places each at the layer that can enforce it.(A) Device-
physics safety—never exceeding an instrument’s physical envelope (torque, voltage, temperature,
17

pressure), respecting hardware interlocks, and aborting on fault—is local to one instrument and
instantaneous. LAP delegates itentirelyto the Instrument Agent: the protocol imposes the
normative requirement that an IA MUST reject or abort any task whose parameters fall outside
its declared physicalLimits or whose interlocks are not satisfied (subsection 4.8), but treats the
enforcement mechanism as a black box, since the instrument vendor is best placed to implement
it below Layer 0.(B) Authorization and accountability safety—obtaining and recording
a human authority’s consent for a hazardous, irreversible, or costly action—crosses the human–
agent trust boundary and must be uniform and verifiable across heterogeneous vendors; LAP
therefore standardizes it at the protocol level as the safety fence specified in the remainder of
this section.(C) Workflow- and integrity-level safety—hazards that no single IA can see,
such as a sequence of individually-safe steps that is unsafe in combination, a “physically valid
but scientifically invalid” result taken under expired calibration, or unbounded resource or cost
consumption across an autonomous campaign—is the concern of the orchestration layer (the Lab
Coordinator, subsection 3.2) together with a few protocol-level declarations (sampleCondition,
mandatory calibration-expiry rejection, andbudgetCap). The remainder of this section specifies (B);
(A) and (C) are referenced where the protocol carries an obligation or a declaration that supports
them.
Every capability declares asafetyClass:S0for emergency/meta operations (e-stop, abort),
always permitted and reachable on a fast path;S1for routine, reversible, non-hazardous operations,
requiring no fence;S2for operations that consume an irreplaceable sample or are costly or hard
to reverse, requiring a fresh operator-confirmation token or a standing policy grant; andS3for
hazardous operations (lasers, high voltage, pyrophorics, high pressure, radiation, or robotics acting
near humans) requiring an operator-confirmation token signed by a Safety Authorityanda positive
interlock attestation ininstrument.getState, never auto-grantable by the Research Agent alone.
The operator-confirmation token is a JWS whose claims bind the approval to one exact action:
{
" jti " : " < nonce >" ,
" sub " : " < task - uri >" ,
" instr " : " < instrument - uri >" ,
" cap " : " < capability - id >" ,
" p a r a m s H a s h " : " < sha256 >" ,
" a u t h o r i t y " : " < did >" ,
" iat " : " < ts >" ,
" exp " : " < ts >" ,
" scope " : [ "..." ]
}
The paramsHashis the SHA-256 of the capability’s parameters in canonical form (unit-normalized
values, lexicographically sorted keys), computed over a string that also incorporates theinstr and
cap fields so a token cannot be replayed against a different instrument or capability. Because the
token binds the hash of the exact parameters that were approved, a Research Agent cannot reuse it
to escalate to a different or more aggressive operation: any change to the parameters, instrument,
or capability changes the bound digest and invalidates the token. Thejti nonce makes the token
single-use: a conforming Instrument Agent records redeemedjti values until theirexp and rejects
any replay, so one human approval authorizes exactly one execution, not an unbounded series within
the validity window. Figure 5 traces the handshake for an S3 operation. This mechanism is what
makes “an autonomous agent operating hazardous hardware” abounded, auditablestatement rather
than an open-ended one: the agent’s authority is exactly the set of task/parameter pairs a human or
policy authority has signed, each redeemable once. We give the full threat model in subsection 4.9.
18

RA IA Safety
Authority
task.submit (S3 anneal)
safety.requestAuthorization state→safety-hold
relay challenge (task,paramsHash)
human / policy approvessigned operatorConfirmation (JWS)
safety.provideToken
verify hash, exp, authority→running
MeasurementResult (signed)
Figure 5: The safety-fence handshake for a hazardous (S3) operation. The Instrument Agent refuses
to actuate until it receives an operator-confirmation token whoseparamsHash matches the submitted
parameters and whose signature chains to a recognized Safety Authority. The token authorizes
exactly one task with exactly those parameters.
4.7 The MeasurementResult (P4)
The artifact returned by a completed measurement task is aMeasurementResult (skeleton in
Listing 4; complete example with inline data series, raw-artifact references, and full provenance
manifest in Listing 6, Appendix A). LAP makes four things mandatory that ad-hoc result payloads
routinely omit: every numeric value carries a UCUMunit and the result a QUDTquantityKind; a
calibrationRef links the result to the calibration under which it was taken; anuncertainty model
is stated; and aprovenance block records the exact parameters (with their hash), timing, instrument
firmware, environment, and any operator token used. In addition, when the producing IA knows facts
about the sample’s condition that bear on the safety ofdownstreamoperations (e.g. that a synthesized
compound is air-sensitive or has a thermal history), it records them in asampleCondition block
that the next IA in a workflow MUST check against its ownphysicalLimits; this is the protocol
carrier for class (C) compositional-hazard checking (subsection 5.2). The whole object is signed. A
result is thus FAIR and reproducible by construction: an agent receiving it, possibly from a remote
laboratory, can interpret it without out-of-band knowledge and can verify who produced it and
under what conditions.
19

Code Name Meaning
−33001ReservationRequiredA lease is required before this action.
−33002ReservationConflictInstrument held by another lease (holder, expiry returned).
−33003LeaseExpiredThe supplied lease has expired.
−33010ParamOutOfPhysicalLimitParameter violatesphysicalLimits(offender echoed).
−33020SafetyAuthorizationRequiredS2/S3 op needs a token (challenge attached).
−33021SafetyTokenInvalidToken hash/expiry/authority check failed.
−33022InterlockTrippedA hardware interlock is open.
−33030InstrumentFaultDevice fault; see diagnostics.
−33031CalibrationExpiredCalibration pastvalidUntil.
−33040SampleNotPresentRequired sample not loaded.
−33041ChainOfCustodyBrokenSample provenance cannot be verified.
−33050CapabilityUnsupportedNo such capability on this instrument.
−33051IntentUnresolved intent.resolvecould not map the goal (reasonin data).
−33060BudgetExceededLeasebudgetCapwould be exceeded by this task.
Table 2: The LAP error code range. Codes are designed to let an autonomous agent re-plan without
human intervention by returning the structured context of each failure.
Listing 4: Skeleton of aMeasurementResult from the powder-scan task: a physically typed value
(UCUM unit, QUDT quantity kind), an uncertainty model, a calibration reference, a provenance
digest, and the signature. The complete example is given in Listing 6.
{
" @type " : " lap : M e a s u r e m e n t R e s u l t " ,
" task " : " lap : // < lab >/ tasks /9 f3ab1 ..." ,
" q u a n t i t y K i n d " : " qudt : I n t e n s i t y " ,
" data " : { " i n t e n s i t y " : { " unit " : " counts " , " values " : [ 120 , 118 , 131 ] } } ,
" u n c e r t a i n t y " : { " type " : " counting - s t a t i s t i c s " , " model " : " poisson " } ,
" c a l i b r a t i o n R e f " : " lap : // < lab >/ cal / xrd01 /2026 -05 -20" ,
" p r o v e n a n c e " : { " p a r a m s H a s h " : " a91f ..." ,
" i n s t r u m e n t F i r m w a r e " : " D8 /3.4.1" , " l a p V e r s i o n " : "0.1" } ,
" s i g n a t u r e s " : [ { " alg " : " ES256 " , " by " : " did : web : < lab >" , " jws " : "..." } ]
}
4.8 Error model
LAP reserves a JSON-RPC error-code range for physical-world failures (Table 2). The codes occupy
the -33xxx block, placed immediately below the -32768 to -32000 band that JSON-RPC 2.0
reserves for its own predefined and transport-level errors: this keeps LAP’s application-level codes
cleanly outside the reserved range while staying numerically adjacent to it. Errors are designed to
beactionable by an agent: a ParamOutOfPhysicalLimit error echoes the offending parameter and
its limit so the agent can re-plan; aSafetyAuthorizationRequired error carries the authorization
challenge directly; aReservationConflictreports the current lease holder and expiry.
4.9 Security considerations and threat model
Because LAP actuates physical hardware, its security properties are safety properties. We state
the threat model explicitly.Identity and channel:every LAP entity is authenticated by mTLS
or an OAuth2.1 client credential bound to its DID, so message origin and integrity are assured
and an unauthenticated party cannot submit tasks. All InstrumentCards and MeasurementResults
20

are JWS-signed by the laboratory authority, so a Research Agent can detect a forged capability
advertisement or a tampered result.
What the safety fence prevents.The operator-confirmation token of subsection 4.6 defends
against three concrete attacks.Parameter escalation:because the token binds sha256 of the
canonical, unit-normalized parameters together with the instrument and capability identifiers, a
Research Agent that obtained approval for a gentle operation cannot redeem the same token for
a more aggressive one; any change to the request changes the bound digest.Cross-instrument or
cross-capability replay:the same binding prevents reusing a token approved for one instrument or
method on another.Token replay within the validity window:thejti nonce and the Instrument
Agent’s redeemed-token registry make each approval single-use, so one human decision authorizes
exactly one execution.
What it does not prevent, and the residual mitigations.The fence is an authorization
mechanism, not a substitute for a trustworthy authority. Anegligent or rubber-stamping Safety
Authoritythat signs without reading defeats it; LAP mitigates but cannot eliminate this by requiring
that the authorization challenge relayed to the human contain the human-readable parameter
values and the capability’s declaredsideEffects and hazard class (not the opaque hash alone) so
that approval is informed, and by recommending rate limits and dual-authorization policies for S3
operations. Acompromised Instrument Agentis outside the protocol’s authority boundary: an IA
that lies about its state or ignores interlocks cannot be constrained by a wire protocol, which is
why physical interlocks remain the last line of defense and the IA’sgetState interlock attestation
is advisory, not load-bearing. Distinct from a compromised IA is amislabeled InstrumentCard: a
legitimate laboratory, through negligence or to reduce friction, may sign a card that understates a
capability’s safetyClass (declaring a hazardous operation S1) or overstates itsphysicalLimits.
The card’s signature is valid, so signature verification alone does not catch this, and it is a lower bar
for an adversary than compromising a running IA. LAP’s mitigation is to makesafetyClass not
purely self-asserted: the communityinstrumentClass ontology (subsection 6.3) SHOULD define,
per instrument class and capability type, a minimum safety class that a conforming card MUST
NOT declare below, and a Federation Registry or Lab Coordinator SHOULD cross-check advertised
classes against this floor and may carry third-party conformance attestations (section 5) that agents
weight when selecting a provider. This raises card misrepresentation from undetectable to auditable,
though, like a negligent authority, it cannot be eliminated by the protocol alone. Acompromised
Research Agentcan still cause harm within its granted authority, but only within it: it cannot
exceed the safety classes and parameter envelopes a human has signed, and every action it takes is
recorded in signed task provenance, which limits and attributes any harm.Operator fatigueis a
real failure mode for autonomous campaigns that generate many S2/S3 requests; LAP’s stance is
that the safety class taxonomy should be set so that S3 is rare by construction, and that standing,
scoped policy grants (rather than per-task prompts) are the right tool for frequent S2 operations,
reserving human-in-the-loop confirmation for hazardous, infrequent actions.Denial of servicevia
reservation hoarding is bounded by lease expiry and by Lab-Coordinator fair-share and pre-emption
policy (subsection 4.4);registry trustandSybil instrumentsare discussed with the federation
in section 5.
5 Discovery, Federation, and a Closed-Loop Walkthrough
5.1 Local and federated discovery
LAP discovery is layered. Within a laboratory, a single Instrument Agent is found at its /.
well-known/instrument-card.json, and a Lab Coordinator lists all of its instruments at /.
21

well-known/lab-directory.json. Across laboratories, a Lab Coordinator publishes to one or
more Federation Registries withregistry.advertise, sending acapability digest(instrument class,
key capability and intent tags, current availability, access policy, and geographic location) butnot
control endpoints. A Research Agent issuesregistry.query (“which instruments can perform
xrd:PowderDiffraction on a sample under 50mg, are available this week, and are open to external
users?”) and receives signed pointers to matching laboratories. It then negotiates access with
the owning Lab Coordinator, receives a scoped, time-boxed credential, and talks LAPdirectlyto
the remote Instrument Agent (Figure 6). The registry is a directory, never a control proxy: this
keeps latency low and leaves each laboratory the sole authority over its own instruments. Trust is
anchored in decentralized identifiers; each laboratory is a trust domain, and cross-laboratory access
is an explicit, revocable, scoped credential grant rather than ambient access.
Trust, revocation, and failure modes.Three properties follow from the directory-only design.
First, the registry isnot a single point of failure for control: if it is unavailable or returns a
malicious pointer, an agent simply fails todiscovera remote instrument, but no instrument can
be actuated through the registry, and every InstrumentCard the agent does retrieve is verified
against the issuing laboratory’s signature before it is trusted; so a compromised registry cannot
forge capabilities or redirect control to an impostor. Second, we distinguish two threats that the
signature requirement treats differently.Identity fraud—a Sybil attacker advertising instruments
under fake identities—is bounded by the signature requirement and by laboratory-level admission: a
registry entry is only as trustworthy as the laboratory DID that signed it, and registries may require
laboratory identity proofing and carry reputation or accreditation metadata that agents weight
when selecting a provider.Misrepresentation by a legitimate laboratory—a real, correctly-signed lab
that nonetheless understates a capability’ssafetyClass or overstates itsphysicalLimits, whether
through negligence or to reduce operator friction—isnotcaught by signature verification, since
the card is genuinely signed. This is the more insidious case, and the federated analog of the
card-misrepresentation threat of subsection 4.9: the mitigation is to make safety classification not
purely self-asserted, by having the registry cross-check advertisedsafetyClass values against a
community per-instrumentClass floor and carry optional third-partyconformance attestations
(that a given IA version was verified to enforce its declared limits) as weighted trust signals that
an agent can require for safety-critical remote operations. Third, cross-laboratory credentials are
short-lived and scoped(to specific capabilities, sample-size envelopes, and time windows) so that
revocation is mostly achieved by expiry; for active revocation the issuing Lab Coordinator maintains
a credential-status endpoint that an Instrument Agent consults for long-running grants. None of
this eliminates the governance problem ofwho operates a trusted global registryand on what terms,
which we leave as an open governance problem (section 6).
5.2 Sample chain-of-custody
Physical samples move between instruments and, in the federated case, between laboratories.
LAP tracks, but does not itself enforce, this movement as a chain-of-custody on the sample
URI. When a Lab Coordinator routes a sample from a synthesis robot to a diffractometer, it
records a custody handoff; the receiving Instrument Agent’s task remains insample-wait until
it attests the sample is present, and the resultingMeasurementResult carries the sample URI so
that the full physical provenance of a datum is recoverable. The handoff is also where class (C)
compositional-hazard checking happens: aMeasurementResult carries forward asampleCondition
block (e.g. airSensitive, thermal history) recording what the producing IA knows about the
sample’s state, and the Lab Coordinator and the receiving Instrument Agent MUST check these
22

remote trust domain
Research
Agent
Federation
Registry
Remote Lab
Coordinator
Remote
Instrument Agent PL spec.
1. registry.query (capability)
2. signed pointers
0. advertise digest
3. negotiate access
→scoped credential
4. direct LAP (reserve, task, stream)
L0
Figure 6: Federated discovery and access. The registry indexes capability digests and returns
signed pointers (steps 1–2); the Research Agent negotiates a scoped credential with the owning Lab
Coordinator (step 3) and then speaks LAPdirectlyto the remote Instrument Agent (step 4). The
registry never proxies control.
flags against the receiving instrument’sphysicalLimits before the sample is loaded—so that a
sequence of individually-safe steps (a synthesis, then an open-air measurement) cannot compose
into a hazard that no single Instrument Agent could have seen. Breaks in the chain surface as
the ChainOfCustodyBroken error, prompting the Research Agent to reconcile rather than trust a
misattributed sample.
5.3 A closed-loop campaign, end to end
We now run a complete autonomous campaign through the protocol to show how the primitives
compose (Figure 7). The scenario: a materials Research Agent optimizing a perovskite composition
for stability, mixing local and remote instruments and one hazardous step.
1. The RA issues registry.query and finds a local synthesis robot and XRD plus a remote
photoluminescence (PL) spectrometer.
2. It calls reservation.request to acquire exclusive two-hour leases on the synthesis robot and
the XRD.
3. It calls intent.resolve (“synthesize Cs0.17FA0.83PbI3, anneal at 100◦C for 10min”) and
confirms the returned proposal withtask.submit. The synthesis task runs tocompleted; its
artifact is a sample URI.
4. The Lab Coordinator routes the sample to the XRD (custody handoff); the XRD task leaves
sample-waitonce the sample is attested present.
5. The RA submits a powder-scan (class S1) and openstask.stream to watch the live pattern;
the task completes with a signed, typedMeasurementResult.
6. The RA analyzes phase purity, decides it also needs a PL measurement, negotiates federated
access to the remote spectrometer, ships the sample, and repeats the measurement loop remotely.
7. One refinement step calls for a laser anneal, an S3 operation. The Instrument Agent moves the
task to safety-hold and issues safety.requestAuthorization; a human approves once, the
token is bound to that exact task and parameters, the anneal executes, and the loop continues.
23

RA LC Synth IA XRD IA
reservation.request
(robot+XRD)
intent.resolve + task.submit (synthesize)
completed: sample URI
custody handoff
sample-wait→present
task.submit powder-scan (S1) + task.stream
live frames ... then MeasurementResult
RA analyzes→updates model→proposes next composition
... next iteration / federated PL measurement ...
Figure 7: The closed-loop campaign of subsection 5.3 as a message sequence (local portion).
Reservation, intent resolution and confirmation, custody handoff, streamed measurement, and a
typed signed result compose into one iteration of an autonomous optimization loop; the loop then
repeats, optionally reaching across the federation.
8. The RA updates its surrogate model and proposes the next composition. Every step is auditable
through its task provenance.
6 Discussion, Limitations, and Comparison
6.1 Design Rationale
Transport: JSON-RPC 2.0 over HTTPS+SSE.LAP mirrors the transport choices of A2A
[16] and MCP [3] rather than adopting gRPC as SiLA2 does [35]. The reasons are ecosystem
alignment, not performance. JSON-RPC 2.0 over HTTPS is already the wire format of every
major agent framework; an Instrument Agent (IA) that speaks LAP is therefore reachable by
any A2A-compatible research agent with zero additional tooling. gRPC imposes protobuf schema
compilation, binary-only debugging, and HTTP/2 firewall issues that are acceptable costs for SiLA2’s
deterministic-orchestrator use-case but unnecessarily high for the long tail of scientific instruments
whose developers write Python, not generated stubs. For the small fraction of instruments that
require high-frequency sensor streaming (detector frames at kHz rates), LAP’s streaming capability
clause permits a WebSocket or gRPC binding alongside the normative SSE path, keeping the base
case simple and the high-performance case possible.
Natural language at the edge: confining stochasticity, not guaranteeing safety.The
central architectural choice in LAP is that natural languagenever directly drives hardware. The
intent.resolve method accepts a free-text goal and returns astructured proposal: a fully-typed
task.submit payload with all parameters filled in, which the Research Agent must inspect and
then submit explicitly. The role of this step is toconfine the stochasticityof a language model to a
proposal layer. LLMs are stochastic: the same prompt may parse identically worded requests into
24

subtly different parameter values on different invocations. By confining this stochasticity to the
proposal layer and requiring a deterministic, schema-validatedtask.submit to initiate any physical
action, LAP ensures that the exact parameters driving hardware are always inspectable, logged,
and replayable. We are deliberate that this is areliabilitymechanism, not the protocol’s safety
guarantee: intent.resolve is best-effort and optional, and the deterministictask.submit gate is a
preconditionfor, not a substitute for, the safety mechanisms. LAP separates three kinds of safety and
places each where it can be enforced (subsection 4.6):(A) device-physics safety(physical-envelope
and interlock enforcement) is delegated entirely to the Instrument Agent as a black box under a
normative “MUST reject out-of-envelope” obligation;(B) authorization and accountability
safety(human consent for hazardous or irreversible actions) is standardized at the protocol level
as the safety fence with task-bound operator tokens, because it crosses the human–agent trust
boundary and must be uniform across vendors; and(C) workflow- and integrity-level safety
(compositional hazards across steps, expired-calibration results, and resource/cost runaway) is the
concern of the Lab Coordinator together with a few protocol-level declarations (sampleCondition,
mandatory calibration-expiry rejection, andbudgetCap). Reliability follows the same containment
logic: a confirmed structured payload can be replayed for reproducibility; a natural-language string
cannot.
Reservation and locking as first-class primitives.Physical instruments are exclusively-
owned, stateful resources: a powder diffractometer cannot run two scans simultaneously; a liquid-
handler arm cannot be in two positions at once. Neither A2A, MCP, nor SCP [19] provides any
reservation or locking primitive. LAP elevatesreservation.request/.renew/.release to the
core method set so that time-bounded exclusive leases are protocol-enforced rather than left to
ad-hoc per-IA convention. Without this, a multi-agent experiment campaign has no safe way to
co-schedule instrument time; two Research Agents could simultaneously attempt to drive the same
instrument into contradictory states.
Physically-typed measurement results.In existing protocols, tool results are opaque
text or arbitrary JSON. A value of25 returned by an MCP server carries no information about
whether it is degrees Celsius, kilopascals, or counts-per-second. LAP mandates that every numeric
value in aMeasurementResult carries a UCUM unit code [33], a QUDTquantityKind URI [32],
a calibrationRef, an uncertainty model, and a signed provenance manifest (parameter hash,
timing, firmware version). This is the minimum information a downstream reasoning agent needs
to interpret a measurement correctly, compose results across instruments, and satisfy FAIR data
principles [40].
6.2 Relationship to Existing Standards
LAP does not compete with SiLA2 [35], OPC-UA/LADS [29], or SCPI [18]. These standards
operate atLayer 0of the LAP stack: the device-abstraction layer that livesinsidethe Instrument
Agent and is entirely the IA’s private implementation concern. An IA wrapping a SiLA2 gRPC
server translates incoming LAP JSON-RPC calls into outgoing SiLA2 Feature invocations; it
presents a clean LAP interface upward regardless of what protocol the physical instrument speaks
downward. Similarly, an IA can wrap an OPC-UA/LADS node, a vendor REST API, or a raw
SCPI connection over PyVISA [31]; the Research Agent sees only LAP. The relationship is one of
encapsulation, not replacement.
LAPcomposeswith A2A: an Instrument Agent is a valid A2A agent (it publishes an
InstrumentCard at /.well-known, speaks JSON-RPC 2.0 over HTTPS, and carries an A2A-
compatible security scheme), so any A2A-speaking Research Agent can discover and address it,
and drive its structuredtask.* and reservation.* methods, without LAP-specific client code;
25

Dimension SiLA2 MCP A2A SCP LAP
Primary edge sw-orch. ↔
device
agent ↔
tool
agent ↔
agent
agent ↔
tool (hub)
agent↔ instr.
Discovery mDNS, static host config AgentCard
/.well-known
hub registry InstrumentCard
+ federation
NL / intent none tool descrip-
tions
skills (text) tool descsintent.resolve
Physical-qty typ-
ing
basic types none none partial QUDT/UCUM
Reservation none none none session first-class leases
Safety fence none none none none S0–S3 + tokens
Calibration / un-
cert.
data only
(AnIML)
none none partial mandatory
Cross-lab federa-
tion
none none partial hub registry +
scoped VC
Transport gRPC JSON-RPC JSON-RPC /
gRPC
JSON-RPC JSON-RPC +
SSE
Running impl. mature,
multi-vendor
wide growing deployed
(hub)
none (design)
Table 3: Comparison of LAP with related protocols. SiLA2, OPC-UA/LADS, EPICS, and SCPI live
at Layer 0 (inside the IA); MCP, A2A, and SCP operate at higher layers and arecomplementaryto
LAP, not competing. The final row states LAP’s status plainly: it is a specification, and unlike the
comparators it has no implementation yet; the reference prototype of subsection 6.4 is its immediate
next step.
the natural-language intent.resolve path and the physical-world extension fields (reservation,
safety class, physical limits) do require a LAP-aware client to interpret, so “zero additional
tooling” applies to the structured A2A-shaped surface, not to the full physical-world semantics.
The InstrumentCard extends A2A’s AgentCard pattern with the four physical-world primitives
(capability ontology, reservation profile, safety class, calibration block) that an AgentCard has no
fields for.
LAP can coexist with MCP [3]: an orchestration environment that uses MCP to give a Research
Agent access to computational tools (literature search, DFT calculation, data analysis) can simulta-
neously use LAP to give the same agent access to physical instruments. The two protocols serve
orthogonal edges of the agentic graph.
The closest prior work is the Science Context Protocol (SCP) [19], which extends MCP with a
centralized hub, persistent experiment objects, and vendor-agnostic device drivers. LAP differs in
three structural ways: (a) LAP is decentralized: the Lab Coordinator is optional and federation is
peer-to-peer rather than hub-mediated; (b) LAP adds a formal safety fence (S0–S3 classification
plus bound operator tokens) absent from SCP; and (c) LAP mandates physically-typed, calibration-
anchored, uncertainty-bearing results rather than treating result content as opaque. Table 3
summarizes the full comparison.
6.3 Limitations
1. Specification-first; empirical validation is the next phase.LAP v0.1 is, by design,
a protocol and schema specification rather than a finished, benchmarked system, following
the same specification-first path that MCP and A2A took before their ecosystems and
26

implementations formed around a public, neutrally governed standard. Its benefits are at this
stage established by architectural argument rather than by production deployment, multi-site
conformance data, or controlled user studies. Closing that gap, starting with the reference
implementation and conformance suite described in subsection 6.4 and progressing toward
multi-laboratory deployment, is the explicit goal of the open, community-built effort this
paper is intended to seed.
2. Real-time hard-deadline control is out of scope.LAP targetstask-level orchestration:
submitting a 20-minute XRD scan, monitoring its progress, and retrieving the signed result.
It is explicitly not designed for microsecond-level closed-loop servo control, PID loops, or any
application where the control latency of JSON-RPC over HTTPS is unacceptable. Instruments
with hard real-time requirements (e.g., ultrafast pump-probe spectroscopy, fast feedback for
scanning probe microscopy) must implement their inner control loop below Layer 0, outside
the LAP scope entirely. LAP may invoke such instruments at the task level but cannot replace
their real-time firmware.
3. The safety fence assumes a trustworthy operator authority.The S2/S3 operator-
confirmation token mechanism (Section 7 of the design specification) binds a specific human
approval to a specific task and parameter hash. This prevents a Research Agent from reusing
a token for a different operation. However, it does not prevent amalicious or negligent Safety
Authorityfrom signing tokens for hazardous operations they should not approve, nor does
it prevent a compromised IA from ignoring tokens entirely. LAP provides protocol-level
hooks for auditable human oversight; it cannot substitute for institutional safety governance,
physical interlocks, and operator training. Two related residual risks follow from delegating
device-physics safety to the IA: a legitimate laboratory may sign an InstrumentCard that
understatesa capability’s safety class, which LAP raises from undetectable to auditable (but
does not eliminate) via a community-defined per-instrumentClass safety-class floor and
registry conformance attestations (subsection 4.9); and hazards visible onlyacrosssteps—an
individually-safe sequence that is jointly unsafe, or a campaign that consumes unbounded
cost—are addressed not by the fence but by Lab-Coordinator workflow checks and the
sampleCondition and budgetCap declarations, which presuppose a Lab Coordinator and
therefore do not protect the minimal single-IA topology.
4. The capability ontology (instrumentClass) is under-specified.The InstrumentCard
includes an instrumentClass field (e.g., xrd:PowderDiffractometer) intended to enable
semantic capability matching across labs. In LAP v0.1, the vocabulary for this field is
not formally defined; we reference it by example. Without a community-curated, versioned
ontology of instrument classes, two labs using differentinstrumentClass strings for nominally
equivalent instruments will be undiscoverable to each other. Developing and governing this
ontology requires sustained community effort that has not yet begun.
5. Chain-of-custody for physical samples depends on real-world logistics LAP cannot
enforce.LAP tracks sample provenance via signed URI handles and records handoffs between
Instrument Agents in an audit log. It doesnotenforce that the physical sample arrives at the
correct instrument at the correct time, that it has not been mislabeled in transit, or that the
sample a technician loads onto the instrument is the one the URI claims. Bridging the digital
chain-of-custody record to the physical world requires barcodes, RFID, robotics, and human
procedures that are entirely outside the protocol’s scope.
27

6.intent.resolve reliability is best-effort and LLM-dependent.The natural-language
grounding path (where an IA’sintent.resolve method interprets a free-text goal and pro-
poses a typedtask.submit payload) depends on the quality of the underlying language model
and the completeness of the intentTags in the InstrumentCard. There is no guarantee
that the proposal correctly reflects the scientist’s intent, particularly for ambiguous requests,
instrument-specific jargon, or edge cases not covered by the capability’sintentTags. The de-
sign requirement that a Research Agent must explicitly confirm the proposal before submission
mitigates but does not eliminate this risk.
7. Federation trust and credentialing at global scale is an unsolved governance
problem.LAP’s federation design sketches a model in which labs issue scoped, time-boxed
credentials to external Research Agents via DID-based identity and verifiable credentials. At
small scale (a consortium of trusted partner labs), this model is plausible. At the scale of a
“scientific internet of instruments” spanning thousands of institutions across jurisdictions with
differing legal frameworks, data sovereignty requirements, and biosecurity regulations, the
governance infrastructure required to issue, validate, revoke, and audit cross-lab credentials
does not exist and is not a problem LAP can solve unilaterally. Federated identity at this
scale is an open research problem in its own right.
6.4 Path to Adoption
LAP is designed for incremental adoption with minimal migration burden. An existing instrument
becomes an Instrument Agent through a thin software adapter that maps LAP JSON-RPC onto
the device’s native layer (a SiLA2 gRPC server, a vendor SDK, or a raw SCPI connection) with no
change to the instrument or its drivers.
Two adoption stages follow from this. In the near term, the burden falls on integrators: a lab,
a consortium, or an open-source community wraps an existing instrument in a thin Instrument
Agent, requiring no cooperation from the original manufacturer. In the longer term, the same L0
encapsulation that keeps a vendor SDK private below the protocol lets themanufacturer ship the
Instrument Agent natively, as a product feature, exposing a uniform LAP face without disclosing or
altering proprietary firmware. Because an Instrument Agent is a valid A2A agent, a LAP-native
instrument is immediately addressable by every agent framework in the ecosystem with no per-
customer integration, amortizing the adapter cost once, at the manufacturer, rather than repeatedly,
at every deployment, exactly as device-class standards did for USB peripherals and IPP did for
network printers. This two-stage path is deliberately not vendor-gated: stage one is actionable
today without manufacturer buy-in, and stage two follows once the standard demonstrates pull.
The immediate next step, and the smallest experiment that de-risks the whole design, is an
open reference implementation and conformance suite: the four primitives can be exercised end
to end on a single laptop, with no hardware, by asimulated XRD Instrument Agent(serving an
InstrumentCard, streaming synthetic frames over SSE, returning a signedMeasurementResult, and
exposing one S1 and one S3 capability), a minimalSafety Authoritythat issues the parameter-
hash-bound operator-confirmation token, a scriptedResearch Agentthat drives the full dis-
cover→reserve→resolve→submit→safety-hold flow, and a pytest suite asserting every state
transition and that altering any approved parameter invalidates the token. We report this as
planned work, not completed evaluation (subsection 6.3). Beyond it lie an open, community-curated
InstrumentCard registry, which would also seed theinstrumentClass ontology, and eventually
stewardship under a neutral multi-stakeholder body, the governance path that MCP and A2A
followed.
28

7 Conclusion
We have argued that autonomous science is limited less by the intelligence of its agents than
by the absence of a protocol for the edge where intelligence meets matter. The Model Context
Protocol gave agents a standard way to reach tools, and the Agent2Agent protocol gave agents a
standard way to reach each other; the Lab Agent Protocol completes the triangle by giving agents
a standard, safe, and physically faithful way to reach instruments. LAP’s contribution is not a
new transport or a new data format (it reuses JSON-RPC, JSON Schema, QUDT/UCUM, W3C
WoT Thing Descriptions, and the A2A discovery and task-lifecycle patterns) but the combination
of four primitives that the physical world demands and that no prior agent protocol provides:
the InstrumentCard, exclusive reservation, the safety-fence handshake with task-bound operator
tokens, and the calibration- and uncertainty-anchored MeasurementResult. We specified these end
to end and showed how they compose into a closed autonomous research loop and into a federated
Scientific Internet of Instruments. The design is a starting point, not a finished standard: it has no
large-scale implementation or empirical evaluation yet, its capability ontology needs community
curation, and its federation raises governance and safety questions that a specification can make
addressable but cannot resolve alone. We offer LAP as a concrete basis for that community effort,
in the open-governance spirit the agent-protocol community has adopted for A2A and MCP.
Acknowledgments
We thank several senior engineers at Shiyanjia Lab for their collaboration and support throughout
this work.
References
[1] Agent Network Protocol Community. Agent network protocol
(ANP) specification. https://agentnetworkprotocol.com/en/specs/
07-anp-agent-description-protocol-specification/, 2025.
[2] Allotrope Foundation. Allotrope data format and allotrope foundation ontologies. https:
//www.allotrope.org/, 2024.
[3] Anthropic. Model context protocol specification (2025-11-25). https://
modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25, 2025. Donated to the Agen-
tic AI Foundation / Linux Foundation, December 2025.
[4] ASTM International. Analytical information markup language (AnIML).https://www.animl.
org/, 2023.
[5] Daniil A. Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. Autonomous chemical re-
search with large language models.Nature, 624:570–578, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06792-0.
URLhttps://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-023-06792-0.
[6] Andres M. Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D. White, and Philippe
Schwaller. Augmenting large language models with chemistry tools.Nature Machine Intelligence,
6:525–535, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s42256-024-00832-8. URLhttps://www.nature.com/articles/
s42256-024-00832-8.
29

[7] Benjamin Burger, Phillip M. Maffettone, Vladimir V. Gusev, Catherine M. Aitchison, Yang
Bai, Xiaoyu Wang, Xiaobo Li, Ben M. Alston, Buyi Li, Rob Clowes, Nicola Rankin, Brandon
Harris, Reiner Sebastian Sprick, and Andrew I. Cooper. A mobile robotic chemist.Nature, 583:
237–241, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2442-2. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41586-020-2442-2.
[8] Cisco Outshift and Linux Foundation. AGNTCY: Open multi-agent system infrastructure.
https://docs.agntcy.org/, 2025.
[9] Tianwei Dai, Sriram Vijayakrishnan, Filip T. Szczypiński, Jean-François Ayme, Ehsan Simaei,
Thomas Fellowes, Rob Clowes, Lyubomir Kotopanov, Caitlin E. Shields, Zhengxue Zhou,
John W. Ward, and Andrew I. Cooper. Autonomous mobile robots for exploratory synthetic
chemistry.Nature, 635:890–897, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08173-7. URL https://www.
nature.com/articles/s41586-024-08173-7.
[10] Leo R. Dalesio, Jeffrey O. Hill, Martin Kraimer, Stephen Lewis, Douglas Murray, Stephan
Hunt, William Watson, Matthias Clausen, and John Dalesio. The Experimental Physics and
Industrial Control System architecture: Past, present, and future.Nuclear Instruments and
Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
Equipment, 352(1–2):179–184, 1994. doi: 10.1016/0168-9002(94)91493-1. URLhttps://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0168900294914931.
[11] Abul Ehtesham, Aditi Singh, Gaurav Kumar Gupta, and Saket Kumar. A survey of agent
interoperability protocols: Model context protocol (MCP), agent communication protocol
(ACP), agent-to-agent protocol (A2A), and agent network protocol (ANP).arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.02279, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2505.02279.
[12] Emerald Cloud Lab. Emerald cloud lab.https://www.emeraldcloudlab.com/, 2024.
[13] Yuxing Fei, Bernardus Rendy, Rishi Kumar, Olympia Dartsi, Hrushikesh P. Sahasrabuddhe,
Matthew J. McDermott, Zheren Wang, Nathan J. Szymanski, Lauren N. Walters, David Milsted,
Yan Zeng, Anubhav Jain, and Gerbrand Ceder. AlabOS: A Python-based reconfigurable
workflow management framework for autonomous laboratories.Digital Discovery, 3:2275–2288,
2024. doi: 10.1039/D4DD00129J. URL https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/
2024/dd/d4dd00129j.
[14] Tim Finin, Richard Fritzson, Don McKay, and Robin McEntire. KQML as an agent commu-
nication language. InProceedings of the Third International Conference on Information and
Knowledge Management (CIKM), 1994. doi: 10.1145/191246.191322.
[15] FIPA. FIPA ACL message structure specification (sc00061g). Technical report, Foundation for
Intelligent Physical Agents, 2002. URLhttp://www.fipa.org/specs/fipa00003/OC00003A.
html.
[16] Google and Linux Foundation. Agent2agent (A2A) protocol specification v1.0. https://
a2a-protocol.org/latest/specification/, 2025.
[17] IBM BeeAI. Agent communication protocol (ACP).https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/
agent-communication-protocol, 2025.
[18] IVI Foundation. Standard commands for programmable instruments (SCPI) and virtual in-
strument software architecture (VISA).https://www.ivifoundation.org/About-IVI/scpi.
html, 2024.
30

[19] Yankai Jiang, Wenjie Lou, Lilong Wang, Zhenyu Tang, Shiyang Feng, Jiaxuan Lu, Haoran
Sun, Yaning Pan, Shuang Gu, Haoyang Su, Feng Liu, Wangxu Wei, Pan Tan, Dongzhan
Zhou, Fenghua Ling, Cheng Tan, Bo Zhang, Xiaosong Wang, Lei Bai, and Bowen Zhou. SCP:
Accelerating discovery with a global web of autonomous scientific agents.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.24189, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2512.24189.
[20] Daniel Juchli. SiLA 2: The next generation lab automation standard.Advances in Biochemical
Engineering/Biotechnology, 182:147–174, 2022. doi: 10.1007/10_2022_204. URL https:
//link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/10_2022_204.
[21] Sebastian Kaebisch, Michael McCool, and Ege Korkan. Web of Things (WoT) Thing Description
1.1. W3c recommendation, World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), December 2023. URL
https://www.w3.org/TR/wot-thing-description11/. W3C Recommendation 05 December
2023.
[22] Lucas J. Koerner, Thomas A. Caswell, Daniel B. Allan, and Stuart I. Campbell. A Python
instrument control and data acquisition suite for reproducible research.IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, 69(4):1698–1707, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TIM.2019.2914711.
URLhttps://www.osti.gov/biblio/1615722.
[23] Heeseung Lee, Hyuk Jun Yoo, Hye Su Jang, Byeongho Park, Yang Jeong Park, and Sang Soo
Han. Toward self-driving laboratory 2.0 for chemistry and materials discovery.Materials
Horizons, 2026. doi: 10.1039/D5MH01984B. URL https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/
articlehtml/2026/mh/d5mh01984b.
[24] Shray Mathur, Noah van der Vleuten, Kevin G. Yager, and Esther H. R. Tsai. VISION: A
modular AI assistant for natural human-instrument interaction at scientific user facilities.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.18161, 2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2412.18161.
[25] Wilf Morlidge, Elliott Watkiss-Leek, George Hannah, Harry Rostron, Andrew Ng, Ewan
Johnson, Andrew Mitchell, Terry R. Payne, Valentina Tamma, and Jacopo de Berardinis.
The AnIML ontology: Enabling semantic interoperability for large-scale experimental data in
interconnected scientific labs.arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.01728, 2026. URLhttps://arxiv.
org/abs/2604.01728.
[26] National Institute of Standards and Technology. Development of standards to support a mod-
ular and autonomous laboratory ecosystem. https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/
development-standards-support-modular-and-autonomous-laboratory-ecosystem ,
2024.
[27] NSLS-II / Brookhaven National Laboratory. Bluesky and ophyd: Experiment orchestration
and hardware abstraction. https://blueskyproject.io/ophyd/, 2015. Deployed at 26 of 28
NSLS-II beamlines; adopted by APS, Diamond, Canadian Light Source, and others.
[28] Oak Ridge National Laboratory. INTERSECT: Interconnected science ecosystem. https:
//www.ornl.gov/intersect, 2022. Accessed: 2026-05-29.
[29] OPC Foundation. OPC unified architecture (IEC 62541). https://opcfoundation.org/
about/opc-technologies/opc-ua/, 2024.
[30] OPC Foundation and SPECTARIS. Laboratory and analytical device standard (LADS) OPC-
UA companion specification. https://opcfoundation.org/markets-collaboration/lads/,
2023.
31

[31] PyVISA Contributors. PyVISA: Python package for control of measurement devices.https:
//www.pyvisa.org/, 2024.
[32] QUDT.org. QUDT — Quantities, Units, Dimensions and Types Ontology.https://www.qudt.
org/, 2026.
[33] Regenstrief Institute. The Unified Code for Units of Measure (UCUM).https://ucum.org/,
2023.
[34] Daniel Rosendo, Stephen DeWitt, Renan Souza, Phillipe Austria, Tirthankar Ghosal, Marshall
McDonnell, Ross Miller, Tyler Skluzacek, James Haley, Bruno Turcksin, Jesse McGaha,
Benjamin Mintz, Feiyi Wang, Mallikarjun Shankar, Sarp Oral, and Rafael Ferreira da Silva.
AI Agents for Enabling Autonomous Experiments at ORNL’s HPC and Manufacturing User
Facilities. InProceedings of the SC ’25 Workshops of the International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (XLOOP 2025), 2025. doi: 10.
1145/3731599.3767592. URLhttps://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3731599.3767592.
[35] SiLA Consortium. SiLA 2 Core Specification v1.1. Technical report, SiLA Consortium, 2022.
https://sila-standard.com/standards/.
[36] Malcolm Sim, Mohammad Ghazi Vakili, Felix Strieth-Kalthoff, Han Hao, Riley J. Hickman,
Santiago Miret, Sergio Pablo-García, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. ChemOS 2.0: An orchestration
architecture for chemical self-driving laboratories.Matter, 7(9):2959–2977, 2024. doi: 10.
1016/j.matt.2024.04.022. URL https://www.cell.com/matter/fulltext/S2590-2385(24)
00195-4.
[37] Society for Laboratory Automation and Screening. ANSI/SLAS microplate dimensional
standards.https://www.slas.org/resources/standards/, 2012.
[38] Felix Strieth-Kalthoff, Han Hao, Vandana Rathore, Joshua Derasp, Théophile Gaudin,
Nicholas H. Angello, Martin Seifrid, Elina Tremblay-Lavallee, Adrianna Thomas, Haley
Harvey, Yifeng Li, Robert Pollice, Pascal Friederich, Alexandre Tkatchenko, Leroy Cronin,
and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Delocalized, asynchronous, closed-loop discovery of organic laser
emitters.Science, 384(6697):eadk9227, 2024. doi: 10.1126/science.adk9227. URL https:
//www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.adk9227.
[39] Nathan J. Szymanski, Bernardus Rendy, Yuxing Fei, Rishi E. Kumar, Tanjin He, David
Milsted, Matthew J. McDermott, Max Gallant, Ekin D. Cubuk, Amil Merchant, Hyungmin
Kim, Anubhav Jain, Christopher J. Bartel, Kristin Persson, Yan Zeng, and Gerbrand Ceder.
An autonomous laboratory for the accelerated synthesis of inorganic materials.Nature, 624:
86–91, 2023. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06734-w. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41586-023-06734-w.
[40] Mark D. Wilkinson et al. The FAIR guiding principles for scientific data management and
stewardship.Scientific Data, 3:160018, 2016. doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.18.
[41] Zhenning Yang, Yuhan Chen, Patrick Tser Jern Kon, Tongyuan Miao, Hongyi Lin, Venkat
Viswanathan, Danai Koutra, and Ang Chen. Experiment-as-Code Labs: A declarative stack for
AI-driven scientific discovery.arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.04375, 2026. URLhttps://arxiv.
org/abs/2605.04375.
32

[42] Wenyu Zhang, Lucy Hao, Veronica Lai, Ryan Corkery, Jacob Jessiman, Jiayu Zhang, Junliang
Liu, Yusuke Sato, Maria Politi, Matthew E. Reish, Rebekah Greenwood, Noah Depner,
Jiyoon Min, Rama El-khawaldeh, Paloma Prieto, Ekaterina Trushina, and Jason E. Hein.
IvoryOS: an interoperable web interface for orchestrating Python-based self-driving laboratories.
Nature Communications, 16:5182, 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-60514-w. URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41467-025-60514-w.
[43] Wenyu Zhang, Maria Politi, Rama El-khawaldeh, and Jason E. Hein. Interoperable natural
language interfaces for self-driving labs via model context protocol.NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on
AI for Accelerated Materials Design (AI4Mat), 2025. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?
id=yaZcgu8Cqe.
33

A Supplementary Material: Complete Schema Examples
This appendix gives the full versions of the two central LAP artifacts whose abbreviated skeletons
appear in the main text: theInstrumentCard(subsection 4.1, Listing 1) and theMeasuremen-
tResult(subsection 4.7, Listing 4). They are reproduced here in full so that the main text can stay
focused on the protocol’s structure while a reader who wants the complete field-level detail has an
authoritative reference.
Listing 5: Complete (abridged) InstrumentCard for a powder XRD instrument. The card declares
one capability (powder-scan) with physically typed parameters, a safety class, physical limits,
and intent tags, plus live telemetry streams and a calibration block. Fields shared with an A2A
AgentCard (transport, security) are retained; the lab-specific fields are LAP additions.
{
" @co nt ext " : [ " https : // www . w3 . org /2022/ wot / td / v1 .1" ,
" https : // < lap - namespace >/ context / v0 .1" ] ,
" @type " : " lap : I n s t r u m e n t C a r d " ,
" id " : " lap : // < lab >/ i n s t r u m e n t s / xrd - bruker - d8 -01" ,
" l a p V e r s i o n " : "0.1" ,
" title " : " Bruker D8 Advance Powder XRD " ,
" i n s t r u m e n t C l a s s " : " xrd : P o w d e r D i f f r a c t o m e t e r " ,
" vendor " : { " name " : " Bruker " , " model " : " D8 Advance " , " serial " : " DA -2231" } ,
" loc at ion " : { " lab " : " lap : // < lab >/" , " room " : "B -114" , " geo " : [ 42.36 , -71.09 ] } ,
" l a p P r o f i l e " : { " s t r e a m i n g " : true , " r e s e r v a t i o n " : true ,
" s a f e t y F e n c e " : true , " f e d e r a t i o n " : true ,
" i n t e n t R e s o l v e " : true } ,
" i n t e r f a c e s " : [ { " p r o t o c o l B i n d i n g " : " lap - jsonrpc " ,
" url " : " https : // < host >/ lap " ,
" p r e f e r r e d T r a n s p o r t " : " https + sse " } ] ,
" s e c u r i t y S c h e m e s " : { " mtls " : { " scheme " : " mtls " } } ,
" s e c u r i t y R e q u i r e m e n t s " : [ " mtls " ] ,
" c a p a b i l i t i e s " : [ {
" id " : " powder - scan " ,
" name " : " Powder theta -2 theta scan " ,
" i n t e n t T a g s " : [ " measure crystal s t r u c t u r e " , " phase i d e n t i f i c a t i o n " ,
" acquire d i f f r a c t i o n pattern " ] ,
" i n p u t S c h e m a " : {
" type " : " object " ,
" req ui red " : [ " t w o T h e t a S t a r t " , " t w o T h e t a E n d " , " st epS iz e " ] ,
" p r o p e r t i e s " : {
" t w o T h e t a S t a r t " : { " $ref " : " lap : Q ua nti ty " , " unit " : " deg " ,
" minimum " : 5 , " maximum " : 120 } ,
" t w o T h e t a E n d " : { " $ref " : " lap : Qu an tit y " , " unit " : " deg " ,
" minimum " : 5 , " maximum " : 120 } ,
" ste pS ize " : { " $ref " : " lap : Qu ant it y " , " unit " : " deg " , " minimum " : 0.001 } ,
" t i m e P e r S t e p " : { " $ref " : " lap : Qu an tit y " , " unit " : " s " , " default " : 0.5 } } } ,
" o u t p u t S c h e m a " : { " $ref " : " lap : M e a s u r e m e n t R e s u l t " } ,
" s a f e t y C l a s s " : " S1 " ,
" r e v e r s i b l e " : true ,
" e s t i m a t e d D u r a t i o n " : { " value " : 1200 , " unit " : " s " } ,
" c o n s u m e s S a m p l e " : true ,
" s i d e E f f e c t s " : [ "X - ray shutter opens " ] ,
" p h y s i c a l L i m i t s " : { " ma xPo we r " : "2.2 kW " ,
" i n t e r l o c k s " : [ " shutter " , " d o o r C l o s e d " ] } ,
" o p e r a t i o n a l C o s t " : { " cu rr enc y " : " USD " , " p e r E x e c u t i o n " : 8.0 }
} ] ,
" streams " : [
{ " id " : " live - pattern " , " en co din g " : " a p p l i c a t i o n / lap - frames + ndjson " ,
" rateHz " : 2 , " qu ant it y " : { " unit " : " counts " } } ,
{ " id " : " detector - temp " , " q uan ti ty " : { " unit " : " degC " } , " rateHz " : 0.1 } ] ,
" c a l i b r a t i o n " : { " l a s t C a l i b r a t e d " : "2026 -05 -20 T08 : 00 : 00 Z " ,
" v a l i d U n t i l " : "2026 -06 -20" , " sta nd ard " : " NIST SRM 1976 c " ,
" c a l i b r a t i o n R e f " : " lap : // < lab >/ cal / xrd01 /2026 -05 -20" } ,
" s i g n a t u r e s " : [ { " alg " : " ES256 " , " by " : " did : web : < lab >" , " jws " : "..." } ]
}
34

Listing 6: A completeMeasurementResult from the powder-scan task. Values are physically typed
(UCUM units, QUDT quantity kind), calibration-anchored, uncertainty-bearing, and wrapped in a
signed provenance manifest. Bulk data is referenced by hashed artifact; small series may be inlined.
{
" @type " : " lap : M e a s u r e m e n t R e s u l t " ,
" task " : " lap : // < lab >/ tasks /9 f3ab1 ..." ,
" c a p a b i l i t y " : " powder - scan " ,
" i n s t r u m e n t " : " lap : // < lab >/ i n s t r u m e n t s / xrd - bruker - d8 -01" ,
" sample " : " lap : // < lab >/ samples /2026 -0531 - A7 " ,
" q u a n t i t y K i n d " : " qudt : I n t e n s i t y " ,
" data " : {
" inline " : {
" two Th eta " : { " unit " : " deg " , " values " : [ 5.00 , 5.02 , 5.04 ] } ,
" i n t e n s i t y " : { " unit " : " counts " , " values " : [ 120 , 118 , 131 ] } } ,
" a r t i f a c t s " : [ { " role " : " raw " , " m e d i a T y p e " : " a p p l i c a t i o n /x - bruker - raw " ,
" url " : " https : // < host >/ blob /9 f3ab1 . raw " ,
" sha256 " : "5 e1c ..." } ] } ,
" u n c e r t a i n t y " : { " type " : " counting - s t a t i s t i c s " , " model " : " poisson " } ,
" s a m p l e C o n d i t i o n " : { " a i r S e n s i t i v e " : false , " t h e r m a l H i s t o r y " : " as - s y n t h e s i z e d " } ,
" c a l i b r a t i o n R e f " : " lap : // < lab >/ cal / xrd01 /2026 -05 -20" ,
" p r o v e n a n c e " : {
" params " : { " t w o T h e t a S t a r t " : 5 , " t w o T h e t a E n d " : 80 , " s te pSi ze " : 0.02 } ,
" p a r a m s H a s h " : " a91f ..." , " r e s o l v e R e f " : " lap : // < lab >/ r e s o l u t i o n s / res -7 f3a " ,
" s t a r t e d A t " : "2026 -05 -31 T13 : 02 : 10 Z " ,
" endedAt " : "2026 -05 -31 T13 : 22 : 01 Z " , " o p e r a t o r T o k e n " : null ,
" i n s t r u m e n t F i r m w a r e " : " D8 /3.4.1" , " l a p V e r s i o n " : "0.1" ,
" e n v i r o n m e n t " : { " r oom Te mp " : { " value " : 21.4 , " unit " : " degC " } } } ,
" s i g n a t u r e s " : [ { " alg " : " ES256 " , " by " : " did : web : < lab >" , " jws " : "..." } ]
}
35