pmcNeurooncol AdvNeurooncol Adv3838noa101755003noaNeuro-Oncology Advances2632-2498Oxford University PressPMC12418597PMC12418597.112418597124185974093303810.1093/noajnl/vdaf028vdaf0281Supplement ArticlesAcademicSubjects/MED00300AcademicSubjects/MED00310Immunologic specificity in glioblastoma: Antigen discovery and translational implications
HillCameron M
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USAWangAnthony Z
Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USAHsuehBrian
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USARamirezRamiro
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USASherpaNgima
Biological and Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USACostaMarcelo
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USAWilliamsOfir
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USALiMao
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USAhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9302-4834DunnGavin P
Brain Tumor Immunology and Immunotherapy Program, Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA With standard therapy, median survival is around 20 months, emphasizing the need for novel therapies. Targeting tumor antigens (TAs), the peptides presented by tumors on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, either via vaccine , or adoptive T cell transfer (ACT) has shown success in other cancers and holds promise for GBM.
As context for our discussion of TAs, it is important to briefly consider our definition for “antigen.” We are exclusively referring to T cell antigens: when we use the terms “antigen,” “epitope,” or “peptide” we are referring to the 8–10 length or the 13–25 length amino acid sequence that is non-covalently bound to an MHC class I (HLA-A, HLA-B, or HLA-C) or MHC class II (HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, or HLA-DR) molecule, respectively. , During class I antigen processing, proteasomes typically cleave proteins in the cytosol into shorter peptides, and during class II processing, lysosomes commonly digest uptaken extracellular proteins into shorter peptides. The peptides capable of binding MHC molecules are loaded; then, the peptide-MHC complex (pMHC) is presented on the cell surface. A class I pMHC can be recognized by CD8+ T cells, while a class II pMHC can be recognized by CD4+ T cells. , T cell activation requires T cell receptor (TCR) contact with amino acids from both the antigen and the MHC, as well as costimulating molecules. 

## Classes of T-Cell Tumor Antigens in Cancer
Tumors can present antigens on both class I and II MHCs. , The value of targeting antigens in cancer stems from the idea that vaccinations or TCR-based therapies can augment a patient’s immune response against antigens, derived from intracellular and extracellular proteins, that are presented on tumor cells. These approaches aim to induce clonal expansion of antigen-specific T cells. Overall, TAs can be classified into tumor-associated antigens (TAAs), cancer testis antigens (CTAs), and tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) , ( ).
 

## Tumor-Associated Antigens
TAAs, which are present in normal cells and tumor cells, can be further subdivided into overexpressed or lineage-specific TAAs. Overexpressed TAAs are self-antigens with amplified expression in tumor cells. These include HER2 epitopes in breast cancer and P53 epitopes in squamous cell carcinoma. Lineage-specific TAAs are self-antigens that are normally restricted to a particular cell type. An example of this class is the melanocyte differentiation antigens (MDAs), like MART-1 epitopes, which are typically only expressed by melanocytes, but can also be expressed in melanoma and GBM. , , , Despite endogenous expression of TAAs and presumed negative selection of TCRs reactive against them, studies have shown reactivity against TAAs by cytotoxic lymphocytes (CTLs). 
Notably, Tebentasfusp, a first-in-class FDA-approved treatment for metastatic uveal melanoma, is a bispecific molecule that consists of (1) an affinity-enhanced TCR specific for the HLA-A*02:01 restricted MDA gp100 peptide YLEPGPVTA and (2) an anti-CD3 single chain variable fragment. , Tebentasfusp binds the gp100 antigen-HLA complexes displayed by tumor cells and recruits and activates T cells via CD3. Tebentasfusp demonstrates the feasibility and therapeutic potential of targeting TAAs, particularly in cancers with a low tumor mutational burden (TMB), a term that quantifies the mutations in a cancer exome, , since uveal melanoma has a median TMB of 2.1 mutations per megabase. 

## Cancer Testis Antigens
CTAs, also known as cancer germline antigens, are highly restricted in normal tissues. They originate from proteins that are lineage-restricted to male germline cells and trophoblasts and are expressed in cancers. A MAGE-1 CTA was the first human TA ever identified. NY-ESO, a protein from which CTAs can derive, is expressed in cancers such as ovarian, breast, bladder, prostate, and hepatocellular carcinoma. While male germline cells and trophoblastic cells do not express MHC molecules, potential TCRs reactive against CTAs are likely subject to some self-tolerance due to CTA protein and MHC molecule expression in the thymus. , Despite this, CTLs reactive to CTAs have been observed. , Their immunogenicity, limited presentation in normal cells, and association with oncogenicity and immune invasion, make CTAs promising therapeutic targets. In fact, the FDA recently approved a TCR therapy against MAGE-A4 CTA for patients with unresectable or metastatic synovial sarcoma. 

## Tumor-Specific Antigens
Finally, TSAs are antigens exclusive to tumor cells. TSAs occur when aberrant protein expression in cancer leads to the expression of antigens novel to the immune system. TSAs can arise due to genomic mutations, in which case the resulting antigen is called a neoantigen, or due to other causes. , Importantly, the host has not developed tolerance to TSAs, since they were not present during immunologic development.

## Neoantigens—
Neoantigens are usually considered the TSAs that arise due to mutations in the cancer cell genome. Some neoantigens result from mutations that confer a selective advantage to cancer, termed “driver mutations, while the majority likely result from mutations that surface incidentally, termed “passenger mutations.” , Neoantigens commonly occur secondary to single-nucleotide variants (SNV), in which one amino acid is substituted, resulting in a missense or nonsense mutation. SNV mutations are frequent in melanoma, with a reported average of 489 SNV mutations per tumor, and less frequent in pancreatic cancer, with a reported median of 48 SNVs per tumor. GBM has been described as having 30–50 SNVs per tumor. , Neoantigens can also arise due to insertions or deletions of amino acids (INDELs), which can cause either frameshift or in-frame mutations, like EGFRvIII in GBM. INDEL neoantigens commonly accrue in cancers that occur secondary to microsatellite instability, like colon cancer. , INDEL neoantigens often promote greater immunogenicity and may have stronger binding than SNV neoantigens. In three melanoma cohorts, the number of frame-shift INDEL mutations, but neither the number of in-frame INDEL mutations nor SNV mutations, were associated with response to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB). Finally, neoantigens can originate from gene fusions, like in chronic myeloid leukemia, head and neck cancer, or breast cancer. One study determined that 21 of 92 tested GBM samples had gene fusions, suggesting that a subset of GBM patients may have gene fusion neoantigens. This represents a potential vulnerability, since the immunogenicity of fusion neoantigens has been reported as greater than those from SNVs or INDELs. , 
Personal vaccines targeting neoantigens have exhibited strong potential as a treatment for some cancers. , , In a phase I clinical trial for melanoma, four of the six patients who received the personal neoantigen vaccine NeoVax, had no recurrence at 25 months. Two patients with recurrence subsequently received anti-PD-1 therapy and experienced complete regression. This success is likely related to melanoma having a median TMB of over 10 somatic mutations per megabase , —what the FDA considers the threshold for defining a high TMB —because high TMB is associated with response to ICB in many cancers. , Since ICB’s mechanism of action leverages the tumor immunity cycle, , which requires the presentation of TAs, then transitively, high TMB likely corresponds to a response to antigen therapy.
However, the relationship between TMB and tumor neoantigen burden (TNB) is uncertain for two reasons. First, the TMB calculation is typically restricted to only mutations in the exome, the protein-coding regions of the genome. Hence, the TMB does not account for mutations in the non-coding regions, which comprise over 98% of the genome, and likely serve as abundant sources of TSAs. , Second, most mutations do not yield neoantigens, since only a select few potential neoantigens are actually processed and presented, let alone recognized by T cells. For example, less than 2% of identified somatic mutations in metastatic gastrointestinal cancers were found to have corresponding reactive T cells. Still, the higher the TMB, the greater the chance of exome mutations leading to neoantigens. , For low TMB cancers like GBM, which has a median TMB of around one to two somatic mutations per megabase, , and thus, presumably, a low TNB, it may be necessary to target other types of TAs.
The lack of correlation between the existence of a mutation and the presence of its corresponding neoantigen can pose challenges to neoantigen vaccine design. The GAPVAC clinical trial for GBM sought to vaccinate patients with both off-the-shelf, or premanufactured, TAs and personal neoantigens. Of the 643 identified genomic mutations from 15 patients, zero were identified by high-sensitivity mass spectrometry (M.S.) in the patients’ immunopeptidome, which refers to the antigens in aggregate bound to MHC molecules. , These results did not seem to reflect a lack of sensitivity due to the successful elution of both mutated antigens from non-tumor tissues and neoantigens from a GBM patient not in the study. Plus, this result corroborates other studies’ findings that only a small percentage of potential neoantigens are processed and presented on MHC molecules. As loss of antigenicity is one pathway by which tumors evade the immune system, a process that can occur secondary to mutations or epigenetic changes, , this lack of antigen presentation is not totally surprising and emphasizes the importance of confirming tumor presentation of neoantigens prior to targeting them. Moreover, the GAPVAC personal vaccine only targeted SNV neoantigens. As mentioned, GBM typically has only around 30–50 SNVs per tumor, so the number of presented SNV neoantigens is likely much lower. Thus, future therapies for GBM and other low TMB cancers should target other sources of neoantigens, like INDELs and fusions, as well as other sources of TSAs.

## Other Sources of Tumor-Specific Antigens—
Although studies have focused mostly on variant neoantigens in the coding regions of DNA, it is important to recognize other TSAs, as they may serve as a reservoir of additional tumor targets. One study investigating M.S. data from multiple cancers, including GBM, discovered that for some HLA groups, non-mutation-derived TSAs may account for up to 15% of MHC class I restricted peptides. A source of these alternative TSAs is altered mRNA processing. For instance, alternative splicing has been predicted to occur in cancer at over double the frequency of SNV mutations and has been reported to cause TSAs in cancers like melanoma or AML. Another study identified alternative splicing-derived TSAs as immunogenic across multiple cancers, including GBM. Notably, this study demonstrated that mRNA expression for the majority of GBM neojunctions, borne from cancer-specific splicing events, were conserved across multiple tumor regions. Thus, targeting alternative splicing TSAs may be an effective strategy for cancers like GBM with significant spatial heterogeneity.
Other causes of TSAs could include changes in epigenetic regulation and transposable elements (TEs), which are mobile DNA sequences that can change their location in a genome, , as in the case of ovarian cancer, breast cancer, or hepatocellular carcinoma. Post-translational processing derived TSAs can arise, such as in pancreatic cancer, melanoma, and lung cancer. Lastly, some studies have suggested that abnormal proteasomal processing can lead to TSAs, , but others have challenged this. 
Even mitochondria, , bacteria, and virus-derived proteins may lead to TSAs. Viral TSAs occur secondary to infections like human papillomavirus (HPV), Epstein–Barr virus, and human T-lymphotropic virus-1 in squamous cell carcinoma, lymphoma, and leukemia, respectively. Vaccines that target antigens of the oncogenic viruses HPV and HBV are administered prophylactically against cervical cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma, respectively. Viral antigen vaccines have also demonstrated promise as a treatment for cervical cancer. Overall, alternative sources of TSAs represent potential therapy targets for cancer, especially those with low TMB, and more research is necessary to better characterize them.

## Identifying and Validating Tumor Antigens in Patients

## Discovery of Antigens
Two general approaches can be taken for antigen discovery: (1) a genomic approach, termed “cancer immunogenomics,” , , that uses next-generation sequencing (NGS) to detect mutations, from which computational algorithms predict neoantigen sequences, and (2) an immunopeptidome approach that uses M.S. to detect antigens bound to MHC molecules on the cell surface. 
The former, which exclusively identifies neoantigens in protein-coding regions, begins with the detection of mutations via comparing whole exome sequencing (WES) of tumor DNA to normal DNA. , Multiple pipelines for “mutation calling,” which is the process of identifying somatic mutations are often used in conjunction to increase confidence. , RNA-sequencing performed in parallel to WES quantifies the expression of each mutation. (However, the logic of performing this RNA sequencing is challenged by a study that compared presentation of peptide to its corresponding mRNA levels in an in vivo murine model, and found that peptides identified in the immunopeptidome had low corresponding mRNA levels. ) Then, mutation data and patient HLA allele information can be integrated into computational algorithms that list predicted peptides and potential peptide-HLA binding partners. , , These algorithms often rank peptides by estimated binding affinity to respective HLA alleles, which is complex due to the highly polymorphic nature of the HLA locus. The algorithms vary widely in their predictions and are typically better suited to predict class I restricted peptides. Importantly, this approach does not necessarily confirm that the identified “antigens” are actually in the immunopeptidome.
Immunopeptidomics, meanwhile, can be harnessed for the identification of TAAs, CTAs or TSAs. Immunopeptidomics identifies HLA-bound peptides isolated from tumor samples using M.S. In this approach, MHC molecules with attached antigens are immunoprecipitated and eluted from tumor samples. Peptide sequences can be determined using protein database searching, library searching of antigens previously characterized by M.S., or de novo sequencing, which uses algorithms to predict antigen sequences directly from the mass spectra data without any references. , , Comparisons between peptides eluted from tumor and normal tissue determine tumor specificity.

## Determining the Immunogenicity of Discovered Antigens
Once identified, peptides require further testing to validate immunogenicity, since many do not elicit an immune response. Historically, TA immunogenicity was confirmed by screening patient-derived CTLs for recognition of cells transfected with both the antigen of interest and the matched HLA. At present, high-throughput screening methods for TCR reactivity to antigens can be used. Several variables make this validation difficult. First, limited algorithms are available for TCR and peptide-MHC complex (pMHC) binding interactions. While databases of publicly available TCRs are available for TCR comparison, the majority of these are reactive against viral antigens. Second, the correlation between antigen affinity and immunogenicity is weak. , A few key components are required for antigen screening: (1) TCRs of interest, (2) antigens of interest, (3) patient-specific HLA alleles, and (4) sources of antigen-presenting cells (APCs).
Several methods are available for biased antigen screens, which focus on select antigens. , In brief, healthy peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) or immortalized T cells are transduced with TCRs of interest. APCs are transduced with patient-specific HLA alleles and pulsed with either pools of target antigens or oligonucleotides encoding target antigens. Following T cell and APC co-culture, markers of T cell activation are measured via flow cytometric analysis. Then, the cognate antigen of the target TCR can be determined through an iterative screening process.
Unbiased approaches have also been developed to identify antigen and TCR pairs, in which selected TCRs are screened against a wide range of peptides. Yeast display, for example, involves yeast which individually expresses a random peptide that is covalently linked to an HLA molecule. These yeast are then co-cultured with soluble bead-multimerized TCR and iteratively enriched via affinity-based selection. After several rounds of enrichment, yeast are sequenced and the corresponding antigen sequences are determined. Thus, even though thousands of individual peptides presented by yeast are cultured together, only those that express the cognate antigen of the target TCR will be purified and eventually sequenced. Another example of an unbiased approach is the use of cytokine-capturing APCs. In this system, APCs are transduced with patient-specific HLA molecules and membrane-bound antibodies that bind to either IL-2 or interferon-gamma (IFNγ). These APCs, which are also transduced with oligonucleotide pools, are co-cultured with T cells expressing target TCRs. When the target TCR binds to its cognate antigen, the T cell will release cytokines which then are “captured” by the APC. APCs with bound cytokine can be isolated and sequenced to detect the cognate antigen of the target TCR. Regardless of the screening method, confirmation of antigen immunogenicity is resource-intensive. However, the recent advent of artificial intelligence in cancer immunity research has yielded tools that may expedite this process.

## Unique Features of Glioblastoma Relevant to Immunotherapy
As context for our discussion of TAs in GBM, it is important to briefly consider its properties that impact antigen-based therapy. In addition to the previously discussed low TMB, these include (a) heterogeneity, (b) immunological dysfunction, and (c) standard treatment.

## Spatial Heterogeneity of Glioblastoma
At a genetic level, GBM remains an incredibly difficult tumor to treat due to the significant heterogeneity in transcriptional expression, as well as somatic mutations, and consequently antigens—likely a result of severe immunoediting. Several studies have highlighted the transcriptional heterogeneity of GBM tumor samples, , with Verhaak et al. initially classifying 4 major subtypes using bulk RNA-sequencing: proneural, neural, classical, and mesenchymal. Other classifications highlight the complexity, and plasticity, of GBM tumor cells. Moreover, GBM tumors have been characterized as having a high frequency of subclonal mutations, leading to a lack of uniform antigen expression across a tumor spatially. Overall, the intratumoral and intertumoral heterogeneity of GBM tumors, at the transcriptional, mutational, and antigen level, should be considered during the design of antigen-based therapy, discussed in more detail in a later section.

## Immunosuppression Characterizes Glioblastoma
Immunosuppression defines the microenvironment of GBM tumors. GBM tumors are reported as infiltrated by immunosuppressive tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs). Microglia have also been observed to downregulate MHC class II, which would limit the presentation of class II-restricted antigen. The accumulation of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) also contributes to immunosuppression. Plus, T cells appear to be dysfunctional within the tumor microenvironment. Although some studies have highlighted the expression of canonical exhaustion markers on T cells derived from both human and mice tumors, , exhaustion does not seem to be the predominant phenotype of GBM T cells. , , , Specifically, studies demonstrate the lack of a strong exhaustion signature, and instead reveal the presence of CLEC2D expressing or GZMK expressing T cells. Also, immunosuppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been shown to comprise a significant proportion of the CD4+ T cell compartment in both patients with GBM and murine models. , 
GBM tumors also intrinsically contribute to immunological dysfunction. One study found that 61% of patients had at least 1% or more PD-L1-positive tumor cells, and PD-L1 expression was a negative prognostic factor. Indoleamine 2,3 dioxygenase (IDO) has been shown to be expressed by GBM tumor cells and to increase the recruitment of immunosuppressive Tregs. Expression of other proteins such as FasL which induces T cell apoptosis, non-classical MHC class I molecules , which enables evasion of immune cells, and ICAM-1, which promotes immigration of myeloid cells, by GBM tumors have also been reported. , The microenvironment and tumor-intrinsic sources of immunosuppression likely contribute to the disease’s limited response to immunotherapy.

## Standard Treatment of Glioblastoma May Influence Response to Antigen Therapy
GBM treatments can cause further immunosuppression. Some clinical trials have observed that steroid administration, commonly given to patients with GBM, was associated with no immune response to antigen therapy, , and some trials have used steroid administration as an enrollment exclusion criteria. , However, other trials have had immune responses in patients that received steroids. , Doubtlessly, timing and dose determine the effect on immune response. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy, part of the standard of care for GBM, also likely impact tumor response to immunotherapy. Radiotherapy can promote the proliferation and infiltration of Tregs, as well as the differentiation and migration of MDSCs, fostering immunosupression. Conversely, radiotherapy can cause mutations that lead to new neoantigens, providing targets for the immune system. Similarly, temozolomide (TMZ) has been observed to cause immunosuppression, and in particular, lymphopenia. However, TMZ can also cause a hypermutation phenomenon, which presumably leads to the presentation of more antigens novel to the immune system. In fact, hypermutation has been observed to be associated with increased levels of CD8 + T cell infiltration. The impact of treatments like corticosteroids, radiation, and chemotherapy on response to antigen therapy requires further investigation.

## Tumor Antigens in Glioblastoma

## Glioblastoma Tumor Antigens
GBM TAAs have been used in several vaccines (Supplementary ). GBM CTAs (Supplementary ) and shared TSAs (Supplementary ) have also been used in vaccines or shown to be immunogenic in vitro. lists clinical trials that target TAs in GBM via vaccine.
 As depicted in the “Antigen Discovery” section earlier, for an epitope to be a true TA, two criteria must be met: (1) the epitope is presented endogenously on HLA molecules by tumor cells and (2) T cells can bind the pMHC and elicit an immune response. For criterion one, antigen presentation can be confirmed by eluting antigens from tumor cells via M.S. An indirect way to confirm criterion one, while simultaneously confirming criterion two, occurs when CTLs that are specific for a particular antigen lyse tumor cells because this process requires tumor display of the antigen. IFNγ ELISpot assays, tetramer assays, or antigen screens can confirm criterion two (antigen immunogenicity) but not criterion one.
A caveat: while almost every TA listed in the tables have been shown to be immunogenic, not all the antigens listed are necessarily presented by MHC molecules on GBM cells, despite the expression of the protein from which the antigen is derived. While this is in part due to HLA restriction of peptides, it does not fully account for such discrepancies. One study highlighted this phenomenon when different antigens with the same MHC restriction and originating from the same source protein were differentially expressed in tumor and normal brain. Normal brain and tumor cells both expressed the mRNA for the protein PTPRZ1. However, while one HLA-A*02-restricted PTPRZ1-derived antigen was exclusively presented in tumor but not the normal brain, another HLA-A*02-restricted PTPRZ1-derived antigen was expressed in both tumor and normal brain. In a separate study, TAs with the same HLA restriction from the same source protein were not always simultaneously presented by HLA-matched GBM. It is possible that technical artifact could contribute to the observed lack of concordance between protein expression and antigen presentation. However, other biological reasons might include different expressions of proteasomes, different binding strength to MHCs, preferential display of more immunogenic peptides, or the opposite: MHC downregulation to facilitate immune escape. Further investigation should be done in preclinical models to interrogate the mechanisms underpinning tissue or tumor specificity of the immunopeptidome. This can be explored via an in vivo murine model that allows for the tagging of MHC I complexes from defined cell populations. Moreover, the differential display of antigens by tumor tissue underscores the importance of directly confirming MHC presentation of antigens on tumor cells before targeting them with therapy.

## Tumor-Associated Antigens in Glioblastoma
Many identified GBM TAs belong to the TAA class (Supplementary ). Overexpressed TAAs in GBM include peptides derived from ARF4L, GALT3, AIM-2, HER-2, EphA2, , tyrosinase, Sox2, Sox11, and EphB6v. Lineage-specific TAAs include MDAs from TRP-2, Mart-1, and gp100. While not tumor-specific, GBM TAAs have successfully induced immune responses from T cells either in vitro, ex vivo, , endogenously without intervention, or endogenously after vaccination. , Although targeting these TAAs with an exogenous intervention risks deadly autoimmune reactions, many GBM TAAs have been used safely in vaccines ( ).

## HER2 antigens—
Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2) is often overexpressed in GBM, including in glioblastoma stem cells (GSCs), and is associated with primary GBM and worse survival. The HER2 antigen KIFGSLAFL has been shown to be immunogenic, as antigen-specific T cells lysed HLA-matched glioma cells ex vivo. A phase I clinical trial of a dendritic cell (DC) based vaccine that included this antigen showed that some patients developed antigen-specific CD8+ T cells. However, the presence of CD8+ T cells to the vaccine TAs did not correlate with improved survival. In phase I of the ICT-107 trial, which included the HER2 antigen VMAGVGSPYV, HER2 was shown to be downregulated in recurrent tumors, suggesting either successful targeting of HER2-expressing cells or a degree of immunoediting. However, HER2 mRNA is expressed in normal brain, so prior to targeting any HER2 antigens in the future, MHC display of HER2 antigens should be evaluated both on GBM and on normal brain.

## Cancer Testis Antigens in Glioblastoma
CTAs in GBM have been reported as immunogenic both in vivo and in vitro ( ). The first TA discovered in brain cancer was the CTA SART1(259)690-698 peptide (EYRGFTQDF). The antigen was originally identified in squamous cell carcinoma and was subsequently demonstrated in glioma cell lines, as CTLs specific for the antigen could lyse HLA-matched glioma cells expressing Sart1(259). Other GBM CTAs include peptides derived from Sart-3, IL-13Rα2, Mage1, MageC2, and Survivin. CTAs have been used in many vaccines for GBM. , , , , , , , 

## IL-13Rα2 antigens—
Sixty-seven percent to ninety-six percent , of GBM tumors express IL-13Rα2, an IL13 receptor subunit, which is implicated in GBM invasion , and cooperates with EGFRvIII to promote GBM proliferation. Multiple GBM clinical trials have used antigens from IL-13Rα2. , , A clinical trial using peptide-pulsed DCs included a variant of an endogenous IL-13Rα antigen. , In this trial, 10 of 19 patients who received the vaccine were found to have an immune response to the antigen. This same IL-13Rα2 antigen variant was included in SL-701 vaccine; in a clinical trial for this vaccine, patients’ T cell response to the vaccine did not correlate with survival. In phase I of ICT-107, which also vaccinated with an IL-13Rα2 antigen, IL-13Rα2 was shown to be downregulated in recurrent tumors after vacination. Moreover, in phase II of the ICT-107 trial, vaccination with a cocktail of antigens showed therapeutic benefit with an increased OS of 1.6 months in treated compared to untreated groups. However, it is unclear which of the vaccine peptides, individually or in combination, may have conferred the survival benefit. Overall, antigens from IL-13Rα2 represent potential therapeutic targets in GBM due to their minimal expression in normal tissue, role in tumor progression and proliferation, and confirmed immunogenicity in vaccinated GBM patients. IL-13Rα2 antigens’ therapeutic application for GBM is under investigation in another clinical trial. 

## Survivin antigens—
Survivin (also known as BIRC5) inhibits apoptosis and is expressed in 80-90% of GBM, , including GSCs. Survivin expression in GBM correlates with worse prognosis. Notably, survivin has been shown to have low intratumoral heterogeneity and high expression across GBM tumor samples. A phase I clinical trial vaccinated seven newly diagnosed GBM patients with DCs transfected with mRNA encoding survivin and hTERT. Strikingly, the median progression-free survival (PFS) for the treated group was 694 days, which was 2.9 times longer than the median PFS of 236 days in the control. Separately, the IMA950 vaccine included the class II HLA-DR-restricted survivin 97-111 antigen, and in a phase I trial with the vaccine in combination with poly-ICLC, 11 of 16 treated patients developed peptide-specific CD4+ T cells. However, no tumor infiltrating vaccine-specific T cells were detected. Additionally, there was no association between patient T cell response to TAs and survival in an IMA-950 vaccine trial that used granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) as an adjuvant. Finally, the SurvmaxM vaccine includes a peptide that contains multiple HLA-restricted survivin epitopes, and it induced antigen-specific CD8+ T cells in patients. Overall, survivin antigens represent a potentially promising target for GBM therapy due to their high expression, low variance across samples, and immunogenicity. A phase II trial including SurvmaxM is currently underway (NCT05163080), and another active clinical trial includes a survivin antigen (NCT05283109).

## Tumor-Specific Antigens in Glioblastoma

## GBM shared neoantigen: EGFRVIII (LEEKKGNYVVTDHC)—
Besides the IDH1 neoantigen, which is more common in lower grade glioma and secondary GBM, the only shared neoantigen discovered to date in GBM is one from EGFRvIII, a constitutively active variant of EGFR with a mutated extracellular domain, resulting from an in-frame deletion of EGFR exons 2-7. , The EGFRvIII mutation has been shown in vitro to promote cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and invasion, and studies indicate that it is expressed in 17-64% of GBM tumors. , However, the presence of the mutation in GBM has an equivocal association with survival. , The administration of rindopepimut, the EGFRvIII neoantigen (LEEKKGNYVVTDHC) conjugated to keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH), did not show survival benefit in a phase III trial. However, this may be because rindopepimut was not designed as a T cell neoantigen therapy. While KLH can serve as an adjuvant for induction of antigen-specific CD8+ T cells, KLH primarily activates an antibody response. In fact, in one preclinical study of rindopepimut, vaccinated mice did not develop significant cytotoxic responses, but instead developed increased antibody titers. Moreover, the EGFRvIII neoantigen in rindopepimut is HLA restricted. , Yet, clinical trials did not restrict enrollment based on HLA. , Thus, a vaccine trial designed to augment the T cell response against a EGFRvIII neoantigen has yet to be developed. Importantly, CTLs specific for the EGFRvIII neoantigen have been able to lyse glioma cells expressing the mutated protein in vitro in an HLA-restricted manner. As such, this shared neoantigen is still a promising target for future therapies. The recent results of a Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR) therapy against both EGFRvIII and EGFR provide further reason to be cautiously optimistic about the therapeutic potential of the EGFRvIII neoantigen.

## GBM personal neoantigens—
In contrast to shared neoantigens, which are mutated TSAs present in multiple patients with GBM, personal neoantigens are mutated TSAs presented only by one or a very minimal subset of patients. In GBM neoantigens identified in personal vaccines , and the Cancer Antigen Atlas, the majority are personal, likely a reflection of their status as passenger mutations. While personal neoantigens will not be comprehensively covered here, they are still incredibly relevant to therapy. Neoantigen vaccines for GBM have been demonstrated to induce neoantigen-specific T cells in patients, , , with one study showing that vaccination can induce neoantigen reactive TILs. Encouragingly, a recent clinical trial demonstrated that in 173 GBM patients vaccinated with a median of 19 personal neoantigens, patients who had T cell responses to multiple peptides had a median survival of 53 months compared to 27 months in those with a response to one or zero. These studies represent the promise that antigen-based therapies have for improving outcomes for GBM patients.

## TSA of unknown etiology in glioblastoma: BCAN478-486—
Some nonmutant glioblastoma antigens have been identified as tumor-specific; however, the reason for their selective presentation by tumor cells is unknown. Their tumor-exclusive presentation could be due to any of the previously mentioned causes, including differential mRNA processing, post-translational modification, and/or proteasome processing. , The TSAs of unknown etiology include a group of HLA-A*02 restricted neoantigens identified by Dutoit et al. Of these, BCAN478-486 is promising, since brevican (encoded by BCAN) is a brain-specific extracellular matrix molecule involved in tumor invasion and expressed by GSCs. Brevican has also been implicated in migration and metastasis, and over-expression is linked to decreased survival in GBM. When tested, eight out of eight GBM patients’ T cells mounted an immune response ex vivo to BCAN478-486 in the original Dutoit et al. study, and the subsequent use of this antigen in vaccines induced immune responses in patients. , GBM samples taken before and after vaccination with IMA950, which included the peptide, and Poly-ICLC showed a lower percentage of BCAN positive cells, indicating that vaccination may have resulted either in successful targeting of the cells with the antigen, or in antigen downregulation. However, as previously mentioned, no association between T cell response to any IMA950 peptides and survival was seen in the IMA950 plus GM-CSF trial. Overall, BCA478-486 has potential as an antigen target for GBM due to brevican’s potential role in oncogenicity, its association with decreased survival, and its demonstrated immunogenicity in vaccines.

## TSA of unknown etiology: SART2-93 DYSARWNEI—
The SART2 protein was first identified in squamous cell carcinoma and has been shown to be expressed in adenocarcinoma, melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and glioma. This protein has been determined to be absent in normal tissue, including testis and fetal liver. In the phase III ITK-1 multipeptide vaccine trial for 88 patients with recurrent GBM in Japan, receiving vaccination of the SART2-93 DYSARWNEI peptide conferred a negative impact on survival. In this randomized double-blind trial, each patient in the vaccinated group was given a vaccine of four peptides out of twelve possible HLA-A24 restricted peptides based on their pre-vaccination IgG levels for each peptide. The median OS for the 13 patients that received the SART2-93 antigen in their vaccine was 6.6 months compared to eight matched placebo patients with a median survival of 22 months. This difference in survival was not necessarily mediated by receiving the SART2-93 antigen and may instead reflect the immune function of the patients for whom the antigen was selected. Investigators found that prior to vaccination, the patients that were ultimately selected to receive SART2-93 had baseline lower CTL and B cell activity against all possible vaccine peptides, as measured by ex vivo IFNγ assays and antibody assays, respectively. Despite this, investigators still opted to use the same antigen in the TAS0313 vaccine. , A phase I/II clinical trial for the vaccine in patients with recurrent GBM has not yet published its overall survival (OS), but the median PFS was 1.7 months. The function of SART2 and the reason for its tumor-specific expression remains unknown. While most antigen vaccines have not been harmful and often provided benefit, the mechanism underlying the negative association between the SART2-93 antigen and survival merits further investigation.

## Transposable element derived TSAs in glioblastoma—
Recent studies have shown that antigens derived from transposable elements (TE) are presented by GBM tumor cells and generate an immune response. Specifically, Bonte et al. identified fifteen TE-derived antigens in GBM that were validated as immunogenic by tetramer-binding assays. While TE-derived antigens have been classified as tumor-specific, , the study indicated that many TEs are expressed at low levels in normal tissues. Another study identified 19 TE-derived antigens on GBM samples ; however, this study did not confirm the immunogenicity of these peptides. One TE that warrants further investigation is human Endogenous Retrovirus K, since it is differentially expressed in GBM and likely contributes to its stem cell niche. , No clinical trials have used antigens from TEs for GBM, but given the large number of candidate antigens, they hold promise for future therapy.

## Viral tumor-specific antigens in glioblastoma—
Studies have indicated that 51–100% of GBM tumors, including GSCs, are CMV-positive, while surrounding brain tissue is CMV-negative. , As such, GBM TSAs include peptides from the CMV pp65 protein. One study found that when PBMCs from patients with GBM were exposed to DCs transfected with RNA for CMV pp65 peptides, peptide-specific T cells expanded and could subsequently lyse autologous tumor cells endogenously expressing pp65. However, since many GBM patients are seropositive for CMV, CMV antigens likely are not a bona fide tumor-specific target. In fact, an IMA-950 vaccine trial used a CMV-derived peptide as an internal positive control for ex vivo immunogenicity experiments, citing the high levels of chronic infection with the virus. Nonetheless, both CMV antigens , and CMV-specific T cells have been used safely in clinical trials.
In a clinical trial for 25 patients receiving ACT specific for CMV antigens, at 65 months, ten patients were alive and five were disease free. In addition, in a clinical trial that administered GM-CSF mixed with DCs pulsed with the mRNA of pp65 fused to lysosome-associated membrane protein (LAMP), along with dose intensified TMZ, median PFS was 20, and OS was 33.4 months. The strategy of fusing the antigenic target (in this case, pp65) mRNA to LAMP mRNA has previously demonstrated enhanced activation of the MHC class II pathway and thus, subsequent induction of CD4+ T cells. , Both in this trial, and another CMV peptide vaccine clinical trial, investigators did not confirm the presence of CMV in patients before enrolling them. , 
Contrastingly, a study that analyzed the immunopeptidome in 19 primary and recurrent GBM samples found no virus-derived antigens. Nonetheless, the increased survival seen in the early clinical trials focused on CMV antigens justify further trials to better explore their therapeutic potential, many of which are already in progress ( ).

## Bacterial TSAs in glioblastoma—
Intracellular microbes have been reported in GBM tumor cells. The previously mentioned study that analyzed the antigens present in 19 GBM tumor samples found between 5 and 54 unique HLA class II-restricted bacterial derived antigens per patient, some of which were demonstrated to be recognized by TILs. However, findings from this study challenged the utility of bacterial antigens as therapy for GBM: (1) some bacterial antigens were also found in the brain tissues of control brain tissue (taken from healthy patients or those with multiple sclerosis), and (2) there was minimal overlap of bacteria and bacterial antigens between patients. One clinical trial currently underway targets bacterial antigens from the gut that are designed to induce T cells that are cross-reactive against GBM TAAs and CTAs. However, since only a small number of studies have reported intratumoral bacterial antigens in GBM, , further preclinical work should be undertaken to validate and further elucidate this antigen type before targeting in therapy.

## Translational Considerations

## Antigen Selection
Antigens can be harnessed therapeutically in GBM via vaccines or TCR-based therapies, and when selecting target antigens, many factors should be considered ( ). First, the two criteria of being a TA should be confirmed: presentation on tumor cells and immunogenicity. Antigen presentation in the tumor compared to normal cells should be evaluated, weighing the risks of potential autoimmune reactions. Levels of antigen presentation should be evaluated within a tumor, with a preference toward those that are highly expressed. However, relatively low expression of an antigen does not necessarily militate against the success of an antigen as a target. GSCs are a small percentage of total tumor but are drivers of recurrence. Thus, GSC antigens may provide key targets. Levels of antigen presentation should additionally be considered across a tumor spatially, since GBM tumors have been shown to be intratumorally heterogeneous with distinct regions of the tumor expressing different antigens. The function of the antigen’s source protein should be considered, too, with the prioritization of those that belong to driver mutations or associate with decreased survival. Finally, HLA restriction of antigens will need to be accounted for, as further discussed below.
 Multiple antigens should be targeted because immune response to multiple vaccine antigens has been demonstrated to be associated with prolonged survival in both renal cell carcinoma and in GBM. Polyvalent targeting can counteract antigen heterogeneity, particularly regarding spatial variation in expression; indeed, Johanns et al. demonstrated the feasibility of incorporating multisector sampling of a GBM tumor into antigen vaccine design. , Directing therapy at multiple antigens can also help mitigate dampened immune response that may arise secondary to “original antigenic sin,” the process where immune cells can have weak responses to epitopes that are similar to previously encountered foreign epitopes. , Lastly, targeting multiple antigens protects against vaccine failure caused by antigen downregulation on recurrent tumors, which has occurred in multiple GBM antigen vaccine clinical trials. , , , 
Targeting multiple antigens is feasible. GBM vaccine trials have targeted multiple antigens and had varying degrees of success inducing T cell responses to their peptides. , , , , A clinical trial for melanoma exhibited that targeting multiple peptides does not decrease the immunogenicity of each peptide, and patients had a greater total immune response to a twelve-peptide compared to a four-peptide vaccine. Lastly, the previously mentioned Latzer et al. study produced personal neoantigen vaccines for GBM patients in around 12 weeks. 
Selecting antigens that encompass multiple TA classes likely provides a therapeutic advantage. In two patients who underwent adoptive transfer of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) resulting in successful eradication of their HPV+ cervical cancer, investigators looking into the antigenic targets of the infused TILs discovered the TILs were reactive against HPV antigens, neoantigens, and CTAs. They also demonstrated that these TILs remained functional and elevated in patients’ blood during tumor regression and remission. 
Targeting both MHC class I and II peptides should be prioritized. While the majority of studies have looked into MHC class I epitopes, in part due to the limitation of prediction algorithms, MHC class II epitopes are important for anti-tumor immunity. , Class II expression by tumor cells is associated with improved survival in many cancers. Plus, CD4+ T cells reactive to class II-restricted neoantigens have been observed in glioma. , , One multivalent neoantigen vaccine for GBM primarily induced CD4+ T cell responses, despite being designed to induce CD8+ T cell responses. Other neoantigen vaccines for GBM have similarly demonstrated the ability to provoke CD4+ T cell responses. , Lastly, targeting both classes may be necessary to counteract tumor immune evasion via tumor downregulation of either MHC class. 
Moreover, consideration should be paid to the changing antigenic landscape that occurs temporally as GBM tumors evolve, especially in response to standard therapy, , antigen-based therapy, and immune pressures. While personalized antigen vaccines can lead to antigenic loss, treatments have also been shown to induce new antigenic targets. , A potential approach to antigen targeting might thus involve vaccinating patients against antigens known to be induced by a treatment in conjunction with administration of the treatment. Lastly, recurrent tumors are distinct from primary tumors with presumably discrete antigenic targets and thus may require different treatments. For example, tumors expressing the EGFRvIII mutation at diagnosis have been observed to lose its expression at recurrence. , 
All these factors should bear upon the design of antigen-directed therapy, as should other factors, like the immunological response state of each patient’s tumor, which can be evaluated with techniques like CIBERSORT, , as well as the vaccine delivery platform, adjuvant therapies, and timing and route of administration. These topics merit their own review.

## TCR Engineering
Recent preclinical advances in targeting GBM antigens via ACT have been promising. One study demonstrated that ACT specific for an endogenous neoantigen in the murine GBM model GL261 resulted in intratumoral infiltration by the T cells and long-term cures in the majority of the mice. 
When developing TCR-based therapies, including ACT, three important TCR qualities must be considered: (1) affinity, (2) avidity, and (3) cross-specificity. Affinity describes the strength of interaction between a TCR and cognate peptide-MHC molecule. While some studies suggest that TCR affinity relates to T cell activation, others show that TCR affinity does not relate to T cell response. , , One group found that changing the catch bond duration between a TCR and cognate pMHC, while keeping the affinity the same, correlated with TCR activity. Structural avidity measures the number of interactions between all the TCRs of a T cell and MHC molecules on the target cell. Functional avidity measures the capacity of a T cell to respond to a given concentration of peptide. Higher avidity indicates that at lower concentrations of a peptide, a T cell will be activated. Generally, higher functional avidity is associated with increased T cell function ; however, TCR-independent factors like T cell differentiation states and epitope density can affect functional avidity levels.
Arguably, the most important variable to consider is TCR cross-specificity. TCRs that have been synthetically affinity matured have been powerful in clinical trials, but have also led to significant adverse events due to cross-reactivity. Although in vitro the affinity-enhanced MAGE-A3-specific TCR did not bind off-target, in clinical trials two patients died due to cardiogenic shock, since the TCR was cross-reactive against a titin-derived peptide. Overall, these studies underscore the importance of thorough preclinical testing of TCR-based therapies.

## TCR Therapies Compared to CAR-T
A full exploration of CAR-based therapies for GBM is not within the scope of this review, since the “antigens” that CARs target are portions of whole proteins, not T cell antigens. However, it is worth briefly delineating TCR-based versus CAR-based therapies, as they are two arms of cell-based immunotherapy. Unlike TCR therapies that can use endogenous or engineered TCRs to recognize HLA-bound antigen displayed on the cells surface, CAR-based therapies use engineered receptors to recognize cell-surface targets that are not bound by MHC. Thus, CAR-T cells are limited to surface-expressed proteins as targets but are not limited by MHC restriction. ACT is constrained by MHC but can target antigens derived from both intra- and extra- cellular proteins. Plus, in the case of ACT therapy using TILs, like lifileucel, the FDA-approved TIL therapy for use in melanoma, a patient’s T cells are removed from their tumor and expanded ex vivo without any genetic engineering, since the TCRs of the TILs presumably already have tumor specificity. CAR-T cells on the other hand, are often manufactured by taking T cells from a patient’s blood prior to engineering them to recognize a defined target. 
TCR and CAR therapy design should borrow principles from each other, as strategies have been developed for CAR-T cells to mitigate tumor heterogeneity, antigen escape, and off-target effects for non-tumor-specific antigens. For example, SynNotch, which can be engineered to require the presence of a tumor-specific antigen in order to deploy a CAR against a non tumor-specific antigen that is homogenously expressed in the tumor, showed promise against targets in a GBM model in mice. Plus, it may be beneficial to administer CAR and TCR therapies together, as using both modalities likely increases the number of possible therapy targets and decreases the possible mechanisms of immune escape by the tumor.

## Developing Equitable Antigen Therapy
Antigens are often HLA-restricted: certain antigens only bind particular HLA molecules. , Since HLA distributions vary across ethnic populations, , in the case of designing “off-the-shelf” vaccine peptides or TCR therapies, the choice of which peptides to target and their concomitant HLA restriction has significant implications for who benefits. For example, Tebentasfusp, the therapy for advanced uveal melanoma is FDA-approved only for patients that are HLA-A*02:01 positive. , A recent cross-sectional study of all U.S. clinical trials that required a certain HLA for enrollment found that due to HLA enrollment criteria, people of European descent were 46% more likely to be eligible for a clinical trial with HLA restriction than those of Asian or Pacific Islander descent and 60% more likely than those of African descent. Notably, in the United States, minorities are already underrepresented in both oncology clinical trials and brain tumor clinical trials. 
It is imperative that GBM antigen therapies do not inadvertently lead to structural racism or exacerbate the already present disparities in brain tumor care. The SurVaxM vaccine presents a proof of concept for the design of equitable therapy, since it includes a peptide that encompasses antigen binding motifs for multiple class I HLAs and successfully induced immune responses to a variety of HLA-restricted peptides. Designing equitable antigen therapy in the future hinges on how research is conducted in the present: investigating antigens that bind to HLAs of different classes. Plus, prioritizing equity in research design will strengthen insights and translate to improved patient outcomes.

## Conclusion
Targeting TAs represents an exciting therapy for GBM. Treatment design needs to account for the unique properties of GBM and overcome the limited neoantigens by targeting multiple classes of TAs, and both MHC I and II restricted antigens. Additionally, further research must be done to confirm target antigens are presented on tumor cells and that immune responses to peptides in vaccines translate to survival benefit. More broadly, understanding the immunogenic landscape of GBM is crucial to knowing how the immune system discriminates GBM from normal and, unquestionably will lead to translational insights that will change the lives of patients with this disease.

## Supplementary Material
vdaf028_suppl_Supplementary_Tables_S1-S3

## Acknowledgments
Special thanks to Erdyni N. Tsitsikov, Jose Maldonado, and Charlie Meynet for your ideas and feedback while writing this review. The figures in this article were created with BioRender.com (license was issued to G.P.D.).

## Funding
“Targeting Neoantigens in Glioblastoma” grant (5R01NS112712-05) from the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke.

## Supplement sponsorship
This article appears as part of the supplement “Immunotherapy for Brain Tumors,” sponsored by the Wilkins Family Chair in Neurosurgical Brain Tumor Research.

## Conflict of interest statement
The authors have no conflicts of interest.

## Authorship Statement
Conceptualization: C.M.H., A.Z.W., M.L., G.P.D. Writing—original draft: C.M.H., A.Z.W. Writing—reviewing and editing: C.M.H., A.Z.W., B.H., G.P.D. Tables: C.M.H., M.L., R.R. Figures—original draft: C.M.H. Figures—reviewing and editing: C.M.H., A.Z.W., B.H., R.R. N.S., M.C., O.W., M.L., G.P.D. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.