822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC1191257811912578119125784002587510.1021/acsnano.4c14102Reprogramming the
Tolerogenic Immune Response Against
Pancreatic Cancer Metastases by Lipid Nanoparticles Delivering a STING
Agonist Plus Mutant KRAS mRNA
XuXiao WangXiang LiaoYu-Pei LuoLijia NelAndre E †Division
of NanoMedicine, Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States‡California
NanoSystems Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States*Email: anel@mednet.ucla.edu.
33202519985798579–85941832025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 We demonstrate reprogramming of the tolerogenic immune
environment
in the liver for mounting an effective immune response against often-fatal
pancreatic cancer metastases. This was achieved by engineering a lipid
nanoparticle (LNP) to deliver mRNA encoding the KRAS G12D neoantigenic
epitope along with cGAMP, a dinucleotide agonist of the stimulator
of the interferon genes (STING) pathway, capable of activating a type
I interferon response. cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP were synthesized by a microfluidics
approach involving nanoprecipitation of mRNA and cGAMP by an ionizable
lipid, MC3. Controls included nanoparticles delivering individual
components or a wild-type RAS sequence. The dual delivery carrier
successfully activated the type I interferon pathway in vitro as well as in vivo, with reprogramming of costimulatory
receptor (CD80 and CD86) and MHC-I expression on liver antigen-presenting
cells (APC). This allowed the generation of IFN-γ producing
cytotoxic T cells, capable of mounting an effective immune response
in the metastatic KRAS pancreatic cancer (KPC) mouse model. Noteworthy,
intravenous injection of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP suppressed metastatic growth
significantly and prolonged animal survival, both prophylactically
and during treatment of established metastases. The protective immune
response was mediated by the generation of perforin-releasing CD8+ cytotoxic T cells, engaged in pancreatic cancer cell killing.
Importantly, the immune response could also be adoptively transferred
by injecting splenocytes (containing memory T cells) from treated
into nontreated recipient mice. This study demonstrates that reprogramming
the immune-protective niche for metastatic pancreatic cancer can be
achieved by the delivery of a STING agonist and mutant KRAS mRNA via
ionizable LNPs, offering both prophylactic and therapeutic advantages.
Keywords: lipid nanoparticles, mRNA delivery, cancer
vaccine, pancreatic cancer, liver metastasis

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Oct 7; Accepted 2025 Feb 18; Revised 2025 Feb 14; Collection date 2025 Mar 11.

## Introduction
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)
remains a formidable challenge
in oncology, with a dismal 5-year survival rate of only 12%. The disease typically presents at an advanced
stage, often accompanied by metastasis to the liver, lungs, and peritoneum. Among these, hepatic metastasis is particularly
lethal, regardless of the primary tumor’s therapeutic response. The poor prognosis is attributed to the liver’s
immune-tolerant environment, which is shaped by the production of
immunosuppressive cytokines such as TGF-β and IL-10, and the
presence of tolerogenic APCs, including liver sinusoidal endothelial
cells (LSECs), Kupffer cells, and immature dendritic cells (DCs). − Additionally, the liver’s rich blood flow within the sinusoidal
circulation supplies copious nutrients that facilitate tumor growth.
This paper aims to present a novel strategy for reprogramming the
liver’s immune microenvironment using LNPs to deliver a STING
pathway agonist. This approach is combined with the use of a commonly
expressed KRAS neoantigen to activate cytotoxic T-cells, thereby enhancing
the immune response against PDAC.
To advance immunotherapy for
PDAC metastasis to the liver, we were
interested in 4 common KRAS mutations (G12D, G12V, G12R, and G13D)
that appear in >90% of PDAC patients, , as potential
neoantigen epitopes that can be considered for combination with a
STING agonist in LNPs. Among these mutations,
G12D is the most prevalent, found in 35% of PDAC patients. It is a major oncogenic driver that is also frequently
used in the orthotopic PDAC cancer model we developed for simulating
several human PDAC characteristics. The use of KRAS mutant peptides
for PDAC immunotherapy and providing a vaccination attempt against
the return PDAC has progressed to clinical trials, as shown, for instance,
by the TG01 peptide cocktail that has been combined with granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) for intervention in pancreatic
cancer. Additionally, mRNA vaccine technology,
which gained prominence during the COVID-19 pandemic, has made significant inroads into cancer immunology. − For instance, Moderna’s mRNA-5671 (V941) encapsulates mRNA
strands encoding KRAS mutations G12D, G12V, G13D, or G12C in LNPs
for the treatment of nonsmall cell lung cancer, colorectal cancers,
or pancreatic adenocarcinoma. To address
the impact of the tolerogenic immune landscape in the liver, which
facilitates the metastasis of PDAC, we explored an alternative KRAS-targeting
strategy. This approach involves the encapsulation of mRNA encoding
the KRAS G12D neoantigen together with the cyclic dinucleotide cGAMP,
a potent STING agonist, to reprogram the tolerogenic liver microenvironment
in a metastatic KPC model. To the best
of our knowledge, this approach has not been explored in the Moderna
studies or in the TG01 peptide vaccine cocktail. As such, it represents
a promising strategy to enhance KRAS-specific vaccination efforts
and overcome immunosuppressive barriers in the liver.
We have
previously demonstrated the effectiveness of liver-targeting
cationic LNPs for encapsulating mRNA strands that encode multiple
food allergen epitopes. This approach
enables targeted delivery to liver APCs, capable of promoting a tolerogenic
immune response that mitigates peanut anaphylaxis. This includes the tolerogenic contribution of Kupffer cells
and LSECs in the generation of regulatory T cells (Tregs) that suppress
the allergic inflammatory response to crude peanut allergen proteins.
Moreover, it is likely that the same tolerogenic APCs and Tregs contribute
to the immune suppressive effects that provide a protective niche
that facilitates PDAC metastatic spread. , Therefore, we hypothesized that reprogramming the tolerogenic immune
environment in the liver is a unique strategy to generate an anti-PDAC
immune response against the immunogenic KRAS G12D mutant. To achieve
a cytotoxic rather than a tolerogenic response, this requires additional
cargo to switch the tolerogenic response to a protective immune response
in the liver. The STING pathway was chosen for its robust ability
to activate anticancer T cell immunity by a cyclic dinucleotide that
can also be coprecipitated with mRNA. , , − Since cGAMP is a strong inducer
of the type I interferon pathway, it provides a means of generating
robust cytotoxic T cell responses by uptake in liver APCs. , Indeed, it has been shown that the conjugation of cGAMP to a PEGylated
lipid enables nano disc incorporation and generation of robust antitumor
immunity in colorectal and breast cancer models. 
Building on this background, we designed and synthesized
liver-targeting
ionizable LNPs, dual-loaded with mRNA encoding a KRAS G12D epitope
plus the STING agonist, cGAMP. After confirming that these particles
are efficiently taken up by liver nonparenchymal cells (NPCs) following
intravenous (IV) administration, we demonstrated activation of the
type I interferon pathway in liver APCs, as well as the generation
of IFN-γ-producing T cells in ELISPOT assays. Using a metastatic
PDAC model with KPC cells, we demonstrate that this dual delivery
strategy is capable of effectively suppressing metastatic tumor cell
growth by cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, generated prophylactically,
or following the establishment of liver metastases. Additionally,
the ability of the treatment to generate memory T cells could be used
for adoptive transfer to protect naïve recipients receiving
KPC hemisplenic injection. Overall, this study presents a novel approach
for overcoming the immunological challenges of PDAC liver metastasis
using a cationic LNP-based vaccination strategy.

## Results

## LNP Preparation for Delivery of cGAMP and KRAS G12D mRNA Combinations
We have previously demonstrated that tolerogenic liver APCs can
be targeted by cationic LNPs to induce tolerogenic immune responses
to food allergens by including selected T cell epitopes that promote
Tregs-mediated suppression of allergic reactions. This outcome was achieved by particles constructed with
the ionizable lipid component, D-Lin-MC3-DMA (MC3), which allows uptake
by a range of parenchymal and nonparenchymal liver cell types. This
uptake can be further enhanced in the APCs by decorating the particle
surface with a mannose ligand. , In this study, we hypothesized
that the tolerogenic effects of liver APCs could be reprogrammed using
a STING agonist to develop a protective cytotoxic T cell response
against a KRAS neoepitope, thereby reversing the immune protective
niche facilitating pancreatic cancer metastasis to the liver. We focused
on the KRAS G12D epitope, which is expressed in 35% of human PDAC
cases and is also present in the robust transgenic KrasLSL G12D/+;
Trp53LSL R172H/+; and Pdx-1-Cre mouse model, which allowed us to develop
an orthotopic KPC mouse model ( A). The KRAS G12D peptide
sequence (aa 3–23) was used to derive the corresponding cDNA
sequence ( B),
followed by the insertion of five copies into an open reading frame,
flanked by natural amino acid sequences ( C). A five-epitope repetition was used to
enhance the likelihood of effective MHC class I presentation, thereby
increasing immunogenicity. Additionally, we constructed a control
cDNA sequence incorporating five repeats of a corresponding nonimmunogenic
peptide sequence from wild-type RAS (aa 5–21), also flanked
by natural amino acid sequences ( B). Following the addition of start and stop
codons, codon optimization was performed using the online GeneScript
tool, yielding GC contents of 52.08% and 53.65% for the KRAS and RASWT strands, respectively (Figure S1A). These optimized cDNA sequences were used to order the corresponding
mRNA strands from TriLink Biotechnologies, which delivered 582-nucleotide-long
strands (Figure S1B).
 To construct an ionizable LNP that coencapsulates
a STING agonist
with mRNA, we selected a negatively charged 2′3′-cGAMP
dinucleotide sequence ( D) for electrostatic binding to the cationic lipid, MC3, which
was also used for the nanoprecipitation of the mRNA ( E). The LNP synthesis was conducted
using a microfluidic mixer (Nanoassemblr), with negatively charged
mRNA and cGAMP introduced in a diluted acetic acid buffer in one channel,
while the ethanol-diluted lipid mixture was infused into the second
channel ( A).
Details of the analyte concentrations and volume calculations for
microfluidic synthesis appear in Figure S2. Following dialysis and particle filtration, dynamic light scattering
analysis showed average particle sizes of 91.6 nm ( B) with a polydispersity index
(PDI) of 0.173. cryoEM imaging confirmed the synthesis of spherical
particles, displaying a nanoprecipitated complex ( C). The concentrations of cGAMP
and mKRAS were quantified using a cGAMP ELISA kit and a RiboGreen
assay kit, respectively. The encapsulation efficiency (EE) of our
LNPs, defined as the percentage of mKRAS entrapped inside the LNPs
relative to total mRNA, demonstrated EE values of 92%. The corresponding
EE value for cGAMP was 82%. The stability of the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP formulation
was confirmed by monitoring size and EE continuously at 4 °C
for 15 days. The results showed a 10% increase in size ( D), with a minimal impact on
EE ( E). Similar
stability results were obtained when the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP was incubated
in PBS containing 10% FBS, or RPMI 1640 culture medium, supplemented
with 10% FBS (Figure S3).
 The intracellular release of mRNA from the LNP
is dependent on
the ionizable lipid component forming a hexagonal lipid phase for
fusion with the APC endosomal membrane. The acidic microenvironment
within endosomes and lysosomes is responsible for a charge reversal
in the MC3 lipid, which transitions from a neutral state to a positively
charged state. This charge alteration facilitates electrostatic interactions
promoting membrane fusion between the LNPs and the endosomal/lysosomal
membrane, allowing for intracellular release of the mRNA strand and
cGAMP. To evaluate the preservation of this mechanism in the presence
of cGAMP, we conducted red blood cell (RBC) lysis as a surrogate membrane
for assessing the hexagonal phase. RBCs were suspended in PBS at pH
7.4 or 5.5, before incubation with cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP or mKRAS/LNP at
concentrations of 0.5 μg/mL, 1 μg/mL, and 2 μg/mL.
Triton X-100 was used as a positive control for total RBC lysis. As
shown in Figure S4A, both particle types
induced concentration-dependent RBC lysis at pH 5.5, while no lysis
occurred at pH 7.4. Figure S4B details
the percent hemolysis compared to Triton (100%). These results demonstrate
that cGAMP encapsulation does not impact the generation of the hexagonal
phase, safeguarding effective release of mRNA and dinucleotide from
the LNP.

## Activation of the STING Pathway by Encapsulated cGAMP
The cGAS-STING signaling pathway, comprised of cyclic GMP-AMP synthase
(cGAS) and the transmembrane protein STING, inserted in the endoplasmic
reticulum membrane, plus downstream signaling adapters, plays a crucial
role in protective immune defense against microbial infections or
internal damage-associated DNA ( A). , , , cGAMP effectively activates the STING pathway
and its downstream signaling cascades, including TBK1-IRF3 and NF-κB,
leading to the induction of type I IFNs, such as IFN-β, and
pro-inflammatory cytokines like IFN-γ, thereby enhancing immune
responses within the tumor microenvironment. , , , There is significant
therapeutic interest in the use of STING agonists for cancer immunotherapy,
with nanoparticles presenting a promising approach, , , , , This includes the role of nanoparticles, capable
of overcoming the negative charge of dinucleotides that prevent membrane
permeation, as well as protecting the cargo to allow liver uptake.
The endocytic uptake mechanism of LNPs by APC in the liver is predominantly
mediated by a clathrin-mediated pathway. 
 To investigate whether encapsulated cGAMP could
activate the STING
pathway, we examined the in vitro induction of STING-pathway
relevant interferon β-1 (IFN-β1), CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10
mRNA expression, using RT-PCR. This analysis reflects the robust impact
of the STING pathway on IFN-β1 and related cytokine/chemokine
production in the liver, capable of activating immune responses that
combat viral infections and the elimination of infected cells. Similarly, CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10 are chemokines
involved in the recruitment and activation of innate and adaptive
immune responses, playing key roles in inflammation and immune surveillance. , RT-PCR expression analysis was conducted in bone marrow-derived
DC cells (BMDC). Using a series of primers to quantify mRNA expression
of IFN-β1, CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10, we observed the respective mRNA levels increasing by 149, 58, 15,
and 378-fold during cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP treatment compared to the untreated
control ( B–E).
Similar increases were also observed in cells treated with cGAMP/LNP
or cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP, while treatment with free cGAMP or
mKRAS/LNP failed to show significant increases in mRNA expression.
The small responses generated by mKRAS alone are likely due to the
release of the nucleic acid strand that triggers the STING pathway
intracellularly. These data confirm that encapsulated cGAMP effectively
stimulates the STING pathway. This experiment was repeated in KPC
cells, which were generated from the transgenic KrasLSL G12D+/Trp53LSL
R172H+/Pdx-1-Cre mouse model. The RT-PCR results demonstrate increases
of 201, 94, 22, and 43-fold in the expression of IFN-β1,
CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10 mRNA, respectively,
during treatment with cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP (Figure S5A–D). No response was seen for mKRAS alone.
To determine the impact of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP on DC maturation, we
monitored the surface expression of CD80 and CD86 in murine BMDCs.
CD80 and CD86 are crucial costimulatory molecules on these APCs that
interact with CD28 on T cells, providing “signal 2″,
as depicted in Figure S6A. Exposure of DCs to cGAMP/LNP, cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP,
and cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP significantly increased the percentage of CD80+/CD86+ cells from 32% in the saline group to 62%,
57%, and 63%, respectively (Figure S6B–D). In contrast, mKRAS/LNP alone was ineffective. Lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) treatment served as a positive control. These results confirm
that encapsulated cGAMP effectively promotes DC maturation.

## Encapsulated cGAMP Reprograms Liver APC Maturation Markers and
is Accompanied by Generation of IFN-γ Producing Effector and
Memory T Cells
To demonstrate the effective delivery of cGAMP
for reprogramming costimulatory receptor expression in liver NPC populations,
including LSECs, Kupffer cells, and DCs, LNP carriers were developed
for Cy5-labeled cGAMP as well as an mRNA strand encoding green fluorescent
protein (mGFP) expression ( ). This required the creation of Cy5-cGAMP/mGFP/LNP
using a microfluidics approach for which the components are shown
in A. The resulting
Cy5-cGAMP/mGFP/LNP had a size of 132 nm, with the accompanying cryoEM
features illustrated in B,C. These particles were IV injected, followed by harvesting
of major organs (including the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys)
6 h later for ex vivo IVIS imaging ( D). The Cy5 signal was exclusively
discernible in the liver of animals receiving encapsulated but not
free Cy5-cGAMP ( E). Quantitative analysis of the Cy5 radiance is shown in F. No significant
uptake of encapsulated particles was seen in other organs. Furthermore,
harvested liver tissues were sectioned and subjected to immunofluorescence
microscopy, which showed GFP expression throughout the liver, including
uptake by red fluorescent-labeled LSECs ( G). The slides from untreated mice were used
as a negative control. The average colocalization rate of GFP (green
channel) and LSECs (red channel) in our experiment was 12.3% ±
1.4%, as quantified using ImageJ software. Additionally, Mander’s
coefficients were calculated with ImageJ, yielding a value of 0.13
± 0.012. This is compatible with the demonstration that ionizable
LNPs target multiple liver cell types, including hepatocytes and NPCs. LSECs and Kupffer cells represent two of the
principal tolerogenic APC types in the liver, contributing to the
tolerance and immune protection against cancer. 
 To determine whether cationic LNP containing cGAMP
and mKRAS mRNA
(cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP) can reprogram antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in
the liver to boost the cytotoxic T cell response, we assessed the
effects on the nonparenchymal cell (NPC) fraction, including the hepatic
APCs. Mice were treated with cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP on days 1 and 7, followed
by in vivo liver perfusion under anesthesia. This
allows proper tissue dissociation using a collagenase IV buffer that
enzymatically digests the liver and allows density separation of the
NPC fraction ( A). Due to the limitation of the number of mice that can be kept
under anesthesia at one time, the performance of comparative analysis
of other LNP compositions was carried out in separate experiments
in tumor-bearing mice. The NPC cell suspension was used to evaluate
IFN-β1 mRNA expression in LNP vs saline-treated animal livers,
using RT-PCR, as well as assessing costimulatory receptor (CD80, CD86,
MHC-I, and MHC-II) expression, carried out by a standardized flow
cytometry procedure as outlined in the ( B).
 RT-PCR analysis revealed a 12.5-fold increase in
IFN-β1 mRNA
expression following cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP treatment ( C), indicating an increased expression of
a major STING pathway transcriptional activation event in
vivo. Flow cytometry further demonstrated upregulation of
the CD80, CD86, and MHC-I expression on NPCs, confirming the attainment
of a KPC phenotype that induces cytotoxic T cell activation ( D and S7). This includes MHC-I expression for presenting
the KRAS epitopes to cytotoxic T cells in generating an antitumor
immune response. Conversely, MHC-II expression,
which is associated with tolerogenic antigen presentation to regulatory
T cells (Tregs), was downregulated. , These phenotypic
changes show that the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP is capable of promoting a KRAS-mediated
immune response by improving MHC-I antigen presentation, with the
assistance of costimulatory signal delivery by CD80 and CD86, as previously
established. 
To further evaluate
whether cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP induces a robust IFN-γ
producing T cell response, female B6129SF1/J mice (n = 3) received 4 intravenous administrations of either saline or
the nanoparticle formulation. After 20 days, the mice were sacrificed
and splenocytes were harvested for IFN-γ ELISPOT assays ( E). Splenocytes from
saline-treated mice showed minimal cytokine spots when stimulated
with either G12D or wild-type peptides. In contrast, cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP-treated
mice showed a significant increase in IFN-γ-producing spots
in response to the G12D peptide, but not the wild-type peptide ( F,G). This indicates
specificity of the immune response to the mutant KRAS analog.
To further assess the contribution of memory T cells to the response,
flow cytometry was performed on harvested splenocytes as described
in the . This involved analyzing
the abundance of CD44+CD62L+ (central memory,
TCM) and CD44+CD62L– (effector memory,
TEM) subsets within the CD3+/CD8+ gated population.
Memory T cells, which differentiate from effector T cells (Figure S8A), play a critical role in long-term
immune surveillance. Both TCM and TEM
populations were significantly expanded in cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP-treated
mice ( H–J
and S8B), demonstrating the presence of
cells that can initiate a secondary antigen-specific immune response.
This finding highlights the feasibility of using this approach for
adoptive transfer experiments, as discussed later. 

## Use of a KPC Metastasis Model to Demonstrate the Therapeutic
Efficacy of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP
A PDAC metastasis mouse model
was established using hemispleen injection of KPC-luc cells, as detailed
in A. IVIS imaging confirmed that the KPC-luc cells
are retained in the liver, without impacting the heart, lungs, kidneys,
or the remaining portion of the spleen. This liver-specific growth
was further corroborated by photographing the harvested liver tissues.
While establishing this model, the number of injected KPC-luc cells
was also adjusted to align the tumor burden with the duration of animal
survival, with 50,000 cells resulting in animal demise within 16–22
days, while injecting 10,000 cells led to fatality within 26–32
days.
 To assess the therapeutic impact of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP
in a PDAC metastasis
model, animals injected with 5 × 104 KPC-luc cells
on day 0 received four IV injections of cGAMP/LNP, mKRAS/LNP, cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP, or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP on days 6, 9, 12, and 15 ( B). Each injection
delivered a cGAMP dose of 0.3 mg/kg or an mRNA dose of 1.25 mg/kg.
Tumor growth was monitored by IVIS imaging, showing visible tumor
growth on day 5, evolving to strong radiance on day 18 ( C and S9A). Among the treated groups, mice receiving cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP
showed the least increase in radiance intensity, demonstrating robust
statistical deviation from animals treated with saline (p < 0.001), cGAMP/LNP (p < 0.05), mKRAS/LNP
(p < 0.05), or cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP (p < 0.05) ( D). Body weight was recorded every 3 days (Figure S9B), and liver weight was measured at the time of
animal sacrifice. This showed a lesser liver weight gain in the dual
cGAMP and mKRAS treatment group ( E). This is consistent with quantification
of luciferase radiance during ex vivo IVIS imaging
(Figure S9C), which showed a strong statistical
deviation (p < 0.001) for cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP versus
saline, with lesser impact (p < 0.05) by other
treatment groups (Figure S9D). These results
suggest that cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP can effectively interfere with metastatic
growth.
To further evaluate the immune response in the metastatic
liver
model, histology and immunohistochemistry were used to compare H&E
with fluorescence staining, involving DAPI staining to detect nuclei
(purple blue) and Ki67 fluorescence (green) for assessing cellular
proliferation. Collectively, these results showed a significant effect
on KPC metastatic growth in the liver during LNP treatment ( F). Accompanying
H&E staining demonstrated noticeable shrinkage of the nuclear-dense
area (corresponding to the Ki-67-stained loci) in response to treatment,
particularly prominent in the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP group. These images
were used for calculating the metastatic burden, defined as the area
occupied by metastatic foci relative to the total liver surface area
( G). The average
metastatic burden in the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP group was 6%, which was significantly
lower than in the other groups. This demonstrates the superior antitumor
effect of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP treatment. Quantification of serum IL-6
and IL-10 (Figure S9E,F) was carried out
to assess whether the encapsulation of the STING agonist leads to
systemic cytokine release, capable of generating a cytokine storm
during systemic administration of nonencapsulated STING agonists. No increase in the levels of the cytokines was
demonstrated, which is in keeping with improved safety by encapsulating
the STING agonist in a nanocarrier. It is also worth mentioning that
due to the transient kinetics of STING pathway activation by nanoparticles,
usually in the range of 24–48 h, we did not assess IFN-β1 production at the metastatic PDAC
site, where organ harvesting occurred 72 h after the last injection
of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP ( B), compared to 24 h in .
To relate the decline in metastatic burden
to antitumor immunity,
immunohistochemistry was performed to assess CD8+ T cell
recruitment to the Ki-67-rich tumor loci ( H). While a paucity of T-cells was observed
in the saline-treated group, a significant increase in the level of
CD8+ T cell recruitment was observed in the other treatment
groups. The most substantial increase was for the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP-treated
group, showing CD8+ T cell levels were 25 times higher
than those of the saline group, while also deviating statistically
from other treatment groups ( I). The increased number of cytotoxic T cells was also
accompanied by perforin deposition and IFN-γ immunohistochemistry
staining, as demonstrated in . To assess whether these immune stimulatory effects
were accompanied by a change in the number and spatial distribution
of immune suppressive cells in the tumor microenvironment, immunohistochemistry
staining was performed for Treg (FoxP3) and M2 macrophage (CD163)
biomarkers ( J–M and S10). The significant reduction in FoxP3+ Tregs in the tumor
microenvironment of the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP-treated group confirmed the
decrease in this immune suppressive population. We also assessed M2
macrophage expression by CD163 staining but could not observe the
presence of a significant cell number in the tumor microenvironment
(Figure S10).

## Survival Impact of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP as a Therapeutic Response
Model
To determine the survival impact of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP
administration in mice injected with 5 × 104 KPC-luc
cells, a similar experiment was performed to compare the administration
of treatment on days 6, 9, 12, and 15 ( A). Mice in the saline group had a median
survival of 19 days (ranging from 15 to 23 days). In contrast, the
median survival for animals receiving cGAMP/LNP, mKRAS/LNP, cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP, and cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP was 24 days, 24 days, 25.5 days,
and 31 days, respectively ( B and S11). The significant
improvement in the median survival of the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP group demonstrates
the synergistic effect of cGAMP and mKRAS codelivery.
 Subsequently, we studied the survival rate for
mice receiving hemispleen
injection of 1 × 104 KPC-luc cells, followed by treatment
with saline, cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP, and cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP ( C). For logistical
reasons and in accordance with the principle of “reduction
in animal research”, encapsulated cGAMP only was omitted considering
its lesser efficacy in the experiment described in . The Kaplan–Meier plot
indicates that while animals treated with saline had a median survival
of 29 days, those treated with cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP and cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP
had median survival times of 33 days and 55 days, respectively ( D and S12). Noteworthy, 50% of the animals treated
with cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP remained alive up to day 63, when the animals
were sacrificed. This suggests the possibility of obtaining long-term
survival using the cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP.

## The Impact of Prophylactic cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP Administration, Including
the Use of Splenocytes for Adoptive Transfer to Nontreated Recipients
The development of liver metastases in PDAC is often fatal, irrespective
of the treatment response at the primary cancer site. We therefore asked whether prophylactic administration
could be used as a form of vaccination to prevent KPC metastatic growth
in the liver ( A). Animals received the same dose of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP in four IV
administrations before splenic injection of 5 × 104 KPC-luc cells for a survival experiment ( A). The resulting Kaplan–Meier plot
shows that, in comparison to the saline control group (20 days), animal
survival was significantly (p < 0.01) extended
by prior cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP treatment ( B and S13).
 The prophylactic model was subsequently used to
determine whether
the retrieval of T cells from the spleen of LNP-injected animals can
be used for adoptive transfer prior to injecting untreated recipients
with 5 × 104 KPC-luc cells in the hemispleen compartment
( C). The results
show that the median survival of mice receiving adoptive transfer
of lymphocytes from cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP-treated animals was 32.5 days,
which was significantly higher (p < 0.001) than
19 days for animals receiving lymphocytes from saline-treated animals
( D and S14). This is in keeping with the generation
of memory T cells.

## Biosafety Assessment
While the therapeutic use of STING
agonists holds great promise for cancer immunotherapy and infectious
disease treatment, systemic administration can trigger significant
off-target effects due to potent immune system activation. This includes the possibility of cGAMP generating
a cytokine storm, which stands to be lessened by encapsulated delivery. To determine if the same holds true for the
ionizable LNP, we undertook a biosafety experiment to assess the impact
on cytokine levels in the serum as well as the assessment of biomarkers
that reflect liver and renal toxicity. Four IV injections of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP,
each delivering a cGAMP dose of 0.3 mg/kg and an mKRAS dose of 1.25
mg/kg, were administered before blood collection and recording animal
weight, as shown in Figure S15A. Saline
and free cGAMP were used as the controls. Noteworthy, no significant
change in body weight or physical evidence of general health decline
was observed during daily inspections over 24 days (Figure S15B).
Blood collected from the animals on days
2, 11, and 24 was used to study serum cytokine concentrations (IL-6
and TNF-α) as well as biomarkers that reflect liver (ALT and
AST) or kidney (BUN and creatinine) damage. No significant changes
in IL-6, TNF-α, ALT, AST, BUN, or creatinine levels were observed
(Figures S15C–H). These results
demonstrate that four doses of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP (0.3 mg/kg cGAMP and
1.25 mg/kg mKRAS) are safe. We also did not observe evidence of animal
toxicity in the studies described in – .

## Discussion
In our study, we combined a STING agonist
with a KRAS mRNA vaccine
to explore the potential to generate an effective immune response
in the liver for hard-to-cure metastatic pancreatic cancer. We demonstrate
reprogramming of the tolerogenic immune environment in the liver to
generate an effective immune response against often-fatal PDAC metastatic
disease. In fact, we could achieve a 50% survival rate in an animal
experiment where a lower dose of KPC was used ( D). This was attained by developing a lipid
nanocarrier that delivers mRNA encoding a KRAS G12D neoantigenic peptide
along with cGAMP, a STING agonist. The LNPs were synthesized using
a microfluidics process, enabling the nanoprecipitation of mRNA and
cGAMP by the ionizable lipid MC3, to yield a 90-nm LNP. These carriers
successfully activated the type I interferon pathway, also enhancing
effective particle uptake and triggering IFN-β1 expression in
the liver. Moreover, this was accomplished by generating IFN-γ
producing T cells, which could be detected in the spleen using ELISPOT
assays. Additionally, cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP induced costimulatory receptor
expression (CD80 and CD86) on nonparenchymal liver APCs, promoting
the generation of cytotoxic and memory T-cells capable of mounting
an effective immune response against a metastatic KPC mouse model.
The efficacy of this approach was demonstrated by IV administration
of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNPs, both prophylactically and following the establishment
of metastases. The immune response at the metastatic tumor site was
characterized by the recruitment of CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells,
leading to tumor shrinkage and prolonged survival. Moreover, the immune
response could be adoptively transferred by injecting splenocytes,
which contain memory in addition to cytotoxic T cells, into the recipient
animals.
The most impactful finding of this study is the demonstration
of
synergy between the KRAS mRNA and the STING agonist nanoparticle components
in combating PDAC liver metastasis ( – ). The liver
is home to unique APCs for preventing an excessive immune response
to foreign antigens from the gut. This
tolerogenic immune environment also allows the liver to protect itself
or cotransplanted organs against rejection, as well as hindering protective
immune responses against metastatic cancer cells. , Among
the many pathways used by the liver for exerting immune suppressive
effects is the generation of Tregs by Kupffer cells and LSECs. , We demonstrate that it is possible to reprogram the tolerogenic
APC effects, which are dependent on differences of their unique antigen
and processing effects as well as the production of tolerogenic cytokines. , , When intracellularly delivered,
cGAMP increases IFN-β1 production as well as engaging in upregulation
of costimulatory receptors (CD80 and CD86) and MHC-I expression on
liver NPCs ( ). These phenotypic changes are known to favor MHC-I presentation
of mutant KRAS epitopes to cytotoxic T-cells, which also receive a CD28 costimulatory signal from binding to more
abundant expression of the APC surface receptors, CD80 and CD86.
The ability to accomplish both vaccination as well as an adjuvant
delivery with a single nanocarrier is highly advantageous, particularly
when accomplishable with scalable carrier technology, which also enables
incorporation of an ionizable lipid to promote uptake in the liver
through the assembly of a protein corona that binds to the apolipoprotein
E (ApoE) receptor. , Several liver cell types are
targeted by this corona, including hepatocytes and tolerogenic APCs,
including LSECs. , This approach also allows efficient
nanoprecipitation of the negatively charged dinucleotide and mRNA
by the cationic, ionizable lipid, e.g., MC3. It is notable that the
synergy between these components applies to prophylactic as well as
already established metastasis models, allowing for a range of PDAC
immunotherapy interventions ( ). The first is the potential to use a vaccination
approach to prevent new metastatic spread to the liver in recently
diagnosed PDAC patients. This may help to strengthen the efforts of
establishing therapeutic responses at the primary tumor site, more
conducive to prolonging life in the absence of metastases. However,
the demonstration of enhanced survival beyond the establishment of
metastases also shows potential to improve immunotherapy, which may
benefit the primary pancreatic cancer site. We are currently investigating
this possibility in a KRAS orthotopic model, allowing the development
of spontaneous liver metastases from the primary cancer site. This
could allow us to combine our LNP technology with the established
use of lipid bilayer-coated mesoporous silica nanoparticles (a.k.a.
the silicasome nanocarrier), used by us for the delivery of chemoimmunotherapy
that generates immunogenic cell death (e.g., irinotecan). Immunogenic cell death (ICD) releases multiple
endogenous antigens, with the possibility of subsequently triggering
integration of the immune response at the primary cancer site into
the cancer immunity cycle, generating polyclonal immune responses
that involve the spleen and regional lymph nodes. Thus, combining a polyclonal ICD response with a strong
vaccination response to a neoantigen could boost the anti-PDAC immune
response. This could include the participation of tertiary lymphoid
follicles that develop at the primary PDAC site in response to KRAS
vaccination. 
The use of STING agonists
for boosting the immune response against
infectious disease agents has been widely studied as therapeutics
for boosting the type I interferon pathway, with an impact on innate
immunity, cytokines, and chemokines. − , , From a therapeutic perspective,
it is also important to emphasize the role of encapsulated delivery
in terms of the safety of STING agonists. Negatively charged cyclic
dinucleotides (CDNs), such as cGAMP, can lead to widespread innate
immune activation when systemically administered, including the potential
to generate severe inflammatory responses, also referred to as a cytokine
storm. , However, restricted delivery to the liver
reduces the risk of systemic toxicity and also allows APC uptake and
reprogramming of the antitumor immune response. In addition to the
use of an ionizable lipid, diacyl lipids have been employed for cGAMP
conjugation and incorporation into nanodiscs, capable of inducing
robust antitumor immunity. 
In the
realm of cancer immunotherapy, STING agonists codelivered
with mRNA vaccines have proven particularly potent in stimulating
APCs through the STING pathway, leading to enhanced antitumor immunity
with minimal systemic inflammation. A
recent study also highlighted the use of STING agonists with mRNA
in lymph node-targeted nanoparticles, showing robust tumor-specific
immune responses and long-term memory in murine models. Moderna’s mRNA-5671 (V941) is another
cancer vaccine candidate that targets a combination of KRAS mutations,
including G12D, G12V, G13D, and G12C, and is currently being evaluated
for various KRAS-expressing cancers such as PDAC, nonsmall cell lung
cancer, and colorectal cancer. This vaccine
includes four common KRAS mutations that activate CTLs via APC-mediated
antigen presentation, showing promise in several solid tumors. Unlike
mRNA-5671, our cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP approach uniquely incorporates a STING
agonist to stimulate the type I interferon pathway, potentially enhancing
immune activation within the tumor microenvironment and addressing
the unique challenges of pancreatic cancer metastasis. This approach
has not been used in the Moderna vaccine, as far as we can ascertain.
Another example exploited new cationic lipids that serve as STING
agonists and further assembled into LNP for enhanced antitumor efficacy. These findings underline the potential of combining
mRNA vaccines with STING agonists for both cancer and infectious diseases
but also point to the importance of additional unique formulations
for combining adjuvants with a vaccine component targeting the liver
to enhance efficacy. A major advance in the current study lies in
addressing specific mechanistic limitations found in earlier designs,
such as mRNA translation efficiency, while advancing targeted immunomodulatory
responses not yet fully explored in the existing literature.
Our study has limitations. A major constraint is the exclusive
use of the KRAS G12D mutation, despite the oncogenic evolution of
cancer involving several KRAS mutations that need to be considered. , This limitation can be addressed by gene sequencing to determine
the range of KRAS mutants present in an individual patient, as well
as by preemptively incorporating multiple KRAS epitopes to cover a
range of possibilities. While this study demonstrates antigen-specific
T-cell activation through IFN-γ ELISPOT assays as well as cytotoxic
T cell localization at the tumor site, direct detection of KRAS/MHC
I complexes in vivo, e.g., KRAS G12D or G12V mutations,
is challenging. Although studies on KRAS epitopes have confirmed specific
TCR recognition by the KRAS-MHC I complex, tetramer-based or direct
binding evidence in the current literature remains sparse, including
for Moderna’s KRAS-targeted mRNA studies. Future studies could
explore emerging methods or reagents to improve detection in the same
model. , Moreover, although our research focused
on a specific PDAC model, the potential application of this delivery
platform may also be worth exploring for other cancer types. Recent
research efforts have focused on developing LNPs to improve nucleic
acid delivery to a variety of organs, including the lung, spleen,
and bone. In addition to the liver, we
are interested in targeting the spleen and regional lymph nodes, which
play a crucial role in generating anti-PDAC immunity. , Targeting these areas could improve the recruitment of an increased
number of activated T cells in the cancer immune cycle. Furthermore,
we anticipate that neoepitope vaccines will enhance precision medicine
and cancer immunotherapy for PDAC. While
this study primarily focuses on the reprogramming of liver NPCs and
the early activation of immune responses, we acknowledge the importance
of effector and memory T cell dynamics in evaluating the synergistic
therapeutic potential of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP. Our data suggest that the
combination treatment effectively stimulates T cell activation, as
evidenced by IFN-γ production and changes in T cell markers
(CD44/CD62L). Although the detailed profiling of central and effector
memory T cells was not the central aim of this study, the observed
immune responses lay the foundation for the further exploration of
long-term T cell memory formation in the future. These findings highlight
the potential of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP to drive not only immediate immune
activation but also durable immune memory, warranting further exploration
in future work.
In summary, this study shows that reprogramming
the immune-protective
niche for metastatic pancreatic cancer can be achieved by delivering
a STING agonist and mutant KRAS mRNA via ionizable LNPs, offering
both prophylactic and therapeutic benefits.

## Materials and Methods

## Materials
The ionizable lipid, MC3, was purchased from
MedKoo Biosciences, Inc. All other lipids, including DSPC, cholesterol,
and DMG-PEG2000, were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids,
Inc. The mRNA strands, described below, were synthesized by TriLink
Biotechnologies, using a 5′ Cap and 3′ PolyA modifications
for stabilization. DiR and the RiboGreen RNA Assay Kit were purchased
from Thermo Fisher Scientific.

## Design of KRAS and Wild-Type RAS Nucleic Acid Constructs
We chose the G12D mutation, corresponding to amino acids (aa) 5–21
in KRAS, to generate an anti-PDAC immune response by constructing
an mRNA (mKRAS) strand that includes 5 epitope repeats ( ). The epitopes were flanked
by two natural amino acids on the 5′ and 3′ ends. As
a control, five repeats of the corresponding wild-type RAS (aa 5–21)
sequence plus flanking aa were included in the mRASWT construct.
Following the addition of start and stop codons, optimization of the
codon sequence was performed using the GenScript optimization tool.
These sequences were shared with TriLink Biotechnologies to construct
mKRAS and mRASWT strands, as demonstrated in Figure S1.

## Preparation and Characterization of LNPs
A microfluidics
approach was used to synthesize a series of particles incorporating
individual or combinations of cGAMP, mKRAS, or mRASWT.
For the synthesis of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP, cGAMP, and mKRAS were dissolved
in 0.1 M NaAc (pH 4.0), serving as the aqueous phase, while the lipid
components, MC3, DSPC, cholesterol, and DMG-PEG2000, were
dissolved in ethanol, used as the organic phase. The MC3 ionizable
cationic lipid enables effective mRNA delivery to the liver by forming
a protein corona with blood proteins, which facilitates uptake by
liver cells via receptor-mediated endocytosis. The binding of ApoE
to MC3 on the LNP surface plays a role in directing the particle to
liver cells through low-density lipoprotein receptors. Once internalized, the acidic environment of
endosomes ionizes the lipid, disrupting the endosomal membrane and
releasing mRNA into the cytoplasm for translation. While hepatocytes
are a target for mRNA expression, Kupffer cells and LSECs also participate
in particle uptake. The natural liver tropism of MC3-LNPs and their
efficient intracellular release make them a powerful platform for
mRNA-based therapies. The molar ratio of MC3, DSPC, cholesterol, and
DMG-PEG2000 was 50, 10, 38.5, and 1.5, while the N/P ratio
was 4. The aqueous and organic phases were blended in a NanoAssemblr
at a 3:1 volume ratio and a flow rate of 12 mL/min. More details about
composition and NanoAssemblr settings appear in Figure S2. The nanoprecipitated cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP were purified
by dialysis against PBS (pH 7.4) at 4 °C for 1 h, followed by
pushing through a 0.2 μm cutoff filter. The particle size, PDI,
and surface charge were assessed in a ZetaPlus (Brookhaven) instrument.
Particle morphology and size were also assessed by cryogenic electron
microscopy (Cryo-EM, TF20 FEI Tecnai-G2). The particle EE for cGAMP
and mRNA was determined by cGAMP ELISA (Thermo) and RiboGreen assay
kits (Thermo), respectively. A similar approach was used for the synthesis
of carriers that incorporate cGAMP only (cGAMP/LNP), mKRAS only (mKRAS/LNP),
or a combination of cGAMP with mRASWT (cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP). To assess particle uptake and expression of mGFP in the liver,
a particle batch was synthesized for which the cGAMP and mKRAS were
replaced by Cy5-cGAMP and mGFP, respectively, yielding Cy5-cGAMP/mGFP/LNP.
The in vitro stability of LNP was assessed by monitoring
LNP size, PDI, and EE during storage for 15 days at 4 °C.

## Hemolysis Assay to Assess the Hexagonal LNP Lipid Phase
A hemolysis assay was conducted to determine the efficacy of the
cationic lipid component in disrupting the RBC bilayer. This assay
serves as a surrogate for the disruption of the endosomal membrane
under acidic conditions, leading to mRNA release in the cytoplasm
for translation. Briefly, purified murine
RBCs suspended in PBS at pH 5.0 or 7.4 were mixed with mKRAS/LNP or
cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP at concentrations of 0.5, 1.0, or 2.0 μg/mL
for 1 h at 37 °C. 0.1% Triton solution was used as a positive
control for expressing 100% RBC lysis. After centrifugation (1000
rpm, 5 min), the sample plate was photographed, and absorbance of
the supernatants was assessed at 540 nm in a microplate reader (Molecular
Devices, SpectraMax M5).

## In Vitro Transcriptional Activation by cGAMP, a STING Agonist
BMDC and KPC cells were exposed to free cGAMP, cGAMP/LNP, mKRAS/LNP,
cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP, or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP (1 μg/mL cGAMP,
4 μg/mL mRNA) for 24 h at 37 °C. Total RNA was extracted
by the TRIzol reagent (Thermo) and quantified by a NanoDrop Microvolume
Spectrophotometer (Thermo). It has been demonstrated previously that
cGAMP effectively activates signaling pathways, such as TBK1-IRF3
and NF-κB, downstream of the STING pathway, leading to increased
expression of type I IFNs, such as IFN-β1. The RNA was used
for cDNA synthesis after diluting in water (1:5, 1:25, 1:125, 1:625,
and 1:3125), mixed with SYBR green mix and a series of primer pairs
for IFN-β1, CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10). RT-PCR analysis was performed in a ViiA
7 RT-PCR System. mRNA expression was expressed as a fold increase
over the PBS-treated group.

## BMDC Maturation
Bone marrow cells were isolated from
the femur and tibia of 6-week-old female B6129SF1/J mice, followed
by culture in RPMI 1640 medium (10% FBS), supplemented with GM-CSF
(20 ng/mL) and IL-4 (10 ng/mL) for 6 days. BMDCs were then harvested
and transferred to a new plate. The cells were treated with cGAMP/LNP,
mKRAS/LNP, cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP, or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP (1 μg/mL
cGAMP, 4 μg/mL mRNA) for 24 h at 37 °C. Cells treated with
LPS (1 μg/mL) served as a positive control. Cells were stained
with an antibody mixture (anti-CD11c, anti-CD80, and anti-CD86), followed
by flow cytometry (Thermo Attune NxT) to assess CD80 and CD86 expression
on CD11c+ cells. BMDCs were also used for transcriptional
activation of IFN-β1, CCL5, CXCL9, and CXCL10.

## LNP Biodistribution
Biodistribution was carried out
in 8-week-old female B6129SF1/J mice, using 3 animals per group. Six
hours after IV injection of free Cy5-cGAMP or Cy5-cGAMP/mGFP/LNP (0.125
mg/kg Cy5-cGAMP, 0.5 mg/kg mGFP), IVIS imaging was carried out in
a PerkinElmer Lumina II. Animals were sacrificed for organ harvesting
and ex vivo imaging. We also collected paraffin-embedded
liver tissues for sectioning and staining with DAPI, anti-GFP antibody,
and anti-CD146 antibody. The reason for using the GFP antibody rather
than GFP fluorescence is due to fluorescence decay during embedding
and slicing. The slides were scanned in a Vectra Polaris Quantitative
Pathology Imaging System. For the colocalization analysis, we randomly
selected three different fields from each slide and used the green
(GFP) and red (LSECs) channels to assess the GFP expression in LSECs.
ImageJ software was employed for colocalization analysis, calculated
as the ratio of the colocalization rate between green and red fluorescent
cells. We also calculated Mander’s coefficients using the ImageJ
software.

## Analysis of Costimulatory and MHC Expression on Liver NPCs
Mice (n = 3) were IV injected with two doses of
PBS or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP (0.3 mg/kg cGAMP and 1.25 mg/kg mRNA) on days
0 and 7, before being anesthetized for in vivo perfusion
with a collagenase-containing buffer. Animals were subsequently sacrificed,
and liver tissue was used for the isolation of NPCs. The animals were
then euthanized, and their livers were harvested for nonparenchymal
cell (NPC) isolation. To separate NPCs from hepatocytes, we mechanically
disrupted the enzymatically digested liver tissues and filtered them
through a cell strainer to remove debris. The suspension underwent
differential centrifugation, allowing the larger and denser hepatocytes
to be pelleted at a low speed, with the NPCs remaining in the supernatant.
The NPC-enriched fraction was further purified using density gradient
centrifugation to enhance APC recovery, followed by washing and resuspension
in appropriate media for downstream analyses. The NPC suspension was
stained with a previously validated antibody panel that targets CD80,
CD86, MHC-I, and MHC-II for flow cytometry analysis. The procedure
is carried out according to a standardized protocol, commencing with
viability assessment before cellular staining with the antibodies
that were introduced, using the CD16/32 antibody first, before the
addition of a combination of antibodies binding to CD80, CD86, MHC-I,
and MHC-II. The procedure also includes fluorescence-minus-one controls
for precise definition of gating and the use of positive controls.

## IFN-γ ELISPOT Assay and Assessment of Memory T Cells
Eight-week-old female B6129SF1/J mice were randomly assigned to
2 groups, each including three animals. Four doses of PBS or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP
(0.3 mg/kg cGAMP and 1.25 mg/kg mRNA) were IV injected every 3 days.
Following animal sacrifice 20 days after the last injection, the spleens
were harvested to isolate splenocytes. The cells were transferred
into an ELISPOT plate and incubated in the presence of wild-type KRAS
peptide ([Acetyl]KLVVVGAGGVGKSALTI[Amide]) or KRAS G12D peptide ([Acetyl]KLVVVGADGVGKSALTI[Amide])
for 24 h. The plate was washed and incubated with the BCIP/NBT substrate
for 5–15 min to obtain the desired color intensity. After drying,
the plate was imaged in an ELISPOT reader (CTL ImmunoSpot) to obtain
the number of cytokine-producing spots using the instrument software.
To assess the presence of memory T cells, including for adoptive
transfer, the same animal exposure conditions were used, followed
by animal sacrifice 20 days after the last injection. Following euthanasia,
spleens were harvested and processed into single-cell suspensions
by mechanical disruption through a 70-μm cell strainer. Red
blood cells were lysed using an ammonium chloride-based lysis buffer,
and the remaining leukocytes were washed and resuspended in flow cytometry
staining buffer (PBS with 2% FBS). Splenocytes were incubated with
a viability dye to exclude dead cells and anti-CD16/CD32 Fc block
to minimize nonspecific binding. This was followed by staining with
a fluorescently labeled antibody panel, including anti-CD3, anti-CD8,
anti-CD44, and anti-CD62L. Cells were stained at 4 °C for 30
min in the dark, washed, and resuspended in buffer before analysis
on an Attune NxT Flow Cytometer. Following the identification of single
cells, gating was performed for the CD3+/CD8+ subset before cross-gating on CD44 and CD62 to assess the presence
of CD44+CD62L+ (central memory) and CD44+CD62L– (effector memory) T-cell subsets
(Figure S8B).

## Use of Encapsulated cGAMP and mKRAS to Treat Animals with Liver
KPC Metastases
To establish a liver metastasis model, a KRAS
pancreatic cancer cell (KPC) line, derived from a transgenic KrasLSL
G12D+/Trp53LSL R172H+/Pdx-1-Cre mouse model,
was used for hemispleen injection, allowing spread to the liver via
the portal vein ( A). Briefly, murine spleens were surgically
exposed under anesthesia, using two clips to divide the spleen in
half ( A). This was followed by injecting 10,000–50,000
KPC-luc into the splenic portion draining to the liver, followed by
removal of the other half. Metastatic spread to the liver was followed
by d-luciferin injection into the peritoneum and IVIS imaging. The
number of injected KPC-luc cells was adjusted for the length of animal
survival, established to be 16–22 days for 50,000 cells or
26–32 days for 10,000 cells. To study the therapeutic effect
of cGAMP and mKRAS, 8-week-old female B6129SF1/J mice were randomly
assigned to 5 groups, each including 8 animals. Following injection
of 50,000 KPC-luc cells per animal (day 1), 4 therapeutic doses of
cGAMP/LNP, mKRAS/LNP, cGAMP/mRASWT/LNP, or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP
were IV injected on days 6, 9, 12, and 15 ( B). The dose of cGAMP was 0.3 mg/kg, and
that of mKRAS or mRASWT was 1.25 mg/kg per administration.
Tumor growth was monitored by IVIS imaging on days 5, 11, 14, and
18, and body weights were recorded every 3 days. All mice were sacrificed
on day 18 for blood collection and harvesting liver tissues for weighing
and ex vivo IVIS imaging. Paraffin-embedded liver
tissues were sectioned and stained with H&E or a fluorescent dye
mixture (DAPI, anti-Ki67 antibody, and anti-CD8 antibody) for confocal
microscopy. Additionally, the tissue slides were stained for perforin,
IFN-γ, FoxP3, and CD163 for IHC analysis. The sections were
scanned by the Vectra Polaris Quantitative Pathology Imaging System.
The blood was used for measuring serum IL-6 and IL-10 concentrations
by ELISA according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Prophylactic Administration of Encapsulated cGAMP and mKRAS
to Determine the Effect on KPC Liver Metastasis
Eight-week-old
female B6129SF1/J mice were randomly assigned to 2 groups, each including
8 animals. Four doses of saline or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP (0.3 mg/kg of cGAMP
and 1.25 mg/kg of mKRAS) were IV injected into mice on days -14, -11,
-7, and -4. On day 0, 50,000 KPC-luc cells were injected into the
hemispleen as described above. An IVIS imaging system was used to
monitor tumor growth on days 7, 14, 21, and 28. The survival and weight
of the mice were also recorded.

## Adoptive Cell Transfer
Eight-week-old female B6129SF1/J
mice were randomly assigned among 2 groups, with 3 animals in each
group. Four IV administrations of saline or cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP (0.3 mg/kg
of cGAMP and 1.25 mg/kg of mRNA) were delivered on days -21, -18,
-14, -11. On day -7, all mice were euthanized to allow lymphocyte
isolation from the spleen. The cells were used for adoptive transfer
into recipient animals (n = 8), each receiving 3
× 106 lymphocytes IV. 50,000 KPC-luc cells were injected
into the recipient hemispleens on day 21, and the IVIS imaging system
was used to monitor metastatic growth on days 7, 14, 21, and 28. The
results were displayed in Kaplan-Meier plots. We also assessed animal
weight every 3 days.

## Biosafety Assessment
Mice were treated with four IV
administrations of PBS, free cGAMP, and cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP on days 1,
4, 7, and 10. The doses of cGAMP and mKRAS were 0.3 and 1.25 mg/kg,
respectively. Serum was collected for the quantification of IL-6,
TNF-α, ALT, AST, and BUN, and creatinine on days 2, 11, and
24.

## Statistics
Comparative analysis of differences between
groups was performed by 1-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparisons. Values were expressed as mean ± SD of multiple determinations.
For all statistical analyses, a p-value of <0.05
was considered statistically significant.

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Electron Imaging Center
for
Nanomachines (EICN), the UCLA Flow Cytometry Core Facility, the Preclinical
Imaging Technology Center, the Translational Pathology Core Laboratory
(TPCL), the Molecular Instrumentation Center, and the CNSI Advanced
Light Microscopy/Spectroscopy (ALMS) Shared Facility at UCLA. Yunfeng
Li from TPCL helped with slide scanning and analysis. Salem Haile
from the UCLA Flow Cytometry Core Facility helped set up the methods
for flow cytometry analysis. Wong Hoi Hui from EICN helped with the
cryoEM imaging and Chong Hyun Chang from the Nano and Pico Characterization
Laboratory assisted in the characterization of LNP.

## Data Availability Statement
All the data
associated with this research has been included in the paper or the
Supporting Information. Correspondence should be addressed to X.X.
and A.E.N.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c14102.
mRNA (mKRAS and mRASWT) design; Parameters
for LNP preparation; stability assay for cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP; hemolysis
assay; activation of the STING pathway in KPC by encapsulated cGAMP;
assessment of DC maturation in vitro; gating method
to assess expression of CD80 in NPC; assessment of central and memory
T-cells from spleen; impact of cGAMP/mKRAS/LNP treatment in mice with
established pancreatic cancer liver metastasis; IHC staining for CD163
in liver slides; IVIS images of all survival experiments; in vivo biosafety assay (PDF)

## Author Contributions
A.E.N. conceptualized
the study, obtained the funding, and supervised the project and manuscript
writing. The experimental planning was performed by X.X., with protocol
assistance by X.W. and Y.P.L. The experiments were conducted by X.X.,
X.W., Y.P.L., and L.L., with data analysis by X.X. and X.W. X.X. wrote
the original draft with the assistance of A.E.N. The final version
was reviewed and edited by all authors.

This study was
supported by U.S. Public Health Service Grant R01CA247666–03
from the National Cancer Institute in the USA. We also acknowledge
the generous support provided by the Marlin Miller, Jr. Family Foundation

The authors
declare the following competing financial interest(s): The authors
declare the following financial and competing interests: Andre E.
Nel is a co-founder and equity holder in Westwood Biosciences Inc.
and Nammi Therapeutics. Andre E. Nel also serves on the Board for
Westwood Biosciences Inc. The remaining authors declare no conflict
of interest.

## Supplementary Material
nn4c14102_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn4c14102_si_001.pdf

## Data Availability Statement
All the data
associated with this research has been included in the paper or the
Supporting Information. Correspondence should be addressed to X.X.
and A.E.N.