pmcJ Pharm AnalJ Pharm Anal3328jpa101579451Journal of Pharmaceutical Analysis2095-17792214-0883Xi'an Jiaotong UniversityPMC12153373PMC12153373.112153373121533734050264010.1016/j.jpha.2024.101150S2095-1779(24)00247-81011501Review PaperTargeting tumor metabolism to augment CD8+ T cell anti-tumor immunity
LiuHuan YangWenyongywenyong@hotmail.com JiangJingwenjjwcn@foxmail.comjjwcn@scu.edu.cn aWest China School of Public Health and West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan University, Frontiers Medical Center, Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory, Chengdu, 610041, ChinabDepartment of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xinxiang Medical University, Weihui, Henan, 453100, ChinacDepartment of Neurosurgery, Medical Research Center, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Jiaotong University, The Second Chengdu Hospital Affiliated to Chongqing Medical University, The Third People's Hospital of Chengdu, Chengdu, 610014, China⁎Corresponding author. West China School of Public Health and West China Fourth Hospital, Sichuan University, Frontiers Medical Center, Tianfu Jincheng Laboratory, Chengdu, 610041, China. jjwcn@foxmail.comjjwcn@scu.edu.cn⁎⁎Corresponding author. ywenyong@hotmail.com52025201120241554892301011501992024411202418112024201120241106202512062025© 2024 The Author(s)2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).CD8+ T cell-based immune-therapeutics, including immune checkpoint inhibitors and adoptive cell therapies (tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), T cell receptor-engineered T cells (TCR-T), chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T)), have achieved significant successes and prolonged patient survival to varying extents and even achieved cure in some cases. However, immunotherapy resistance and tumor insusceptibility frequently occur, leading to treatment failure. Recent evidences have highlighted the ponderance of tumor cells metabolic reprogramming in establishing an immunosuppressive milieu through the secretion of harmful metabolites, immune-inhibitory cytokines, and alteration of gene expression, which suppress the activity of immune cells, particularly CD8+ T cells to evade immune surveillance. Therefore, targeting tumor cell metabolic adaptations to reshape the immune microenvironment holds promise as an immunomodulatory strategy to facilitate immunotherapy. Here, we summarize recent advances in the crosstalk between immunotherapy and tumor reprogramming, focusing on the regulatory mechanisms underlying tumor cell glucose metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and lipid metabolism in influencing CD8+ T cells to provide promising metabolic targets or combinational strategies for immunotherapy.

## Graphical abstract
Through disruption of CD8+ T-cell function, tumor metabolic reprogramming compromises the efficacy of immunotherapies. 

## Highlights
•Challenges of tumor immunotherapy resistance are confronted in clinic.
•Tumor metabolic reprogramming mediates immune tolerance by impairing T cells.
•Targeting tumor metabolism is a promising approach to enhance immunotherapy.

## Keywords
Metabolism reprogrammingCD8+ T cellImmunotherapyTMETumorpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Immunotherapies harnessing the immune system, particularly CD8+ T cells to eliminate tumor cells have emerged as the fourth pillar of cancer treatment following surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy [ ]. Mainstream immunotherapies include immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), adoptive cell therapies (tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), T cell receptor-engineered T cells (TCR-T), and chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T)), and tumor vaccines [ ]. Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG-3), and T cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin domain-3 (TIM-3) are prominent immune checkpoints widely identified across solid tumors such as melanoma, lung cancer, gastric cancer, and hematological malignancies like peripheral T-cell and non-Hodgkin lymphoma [ ]. Among adoptive cell therapies, CAR-T, targeting primarily cluster of differentiation 19 (CD19), B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA), cluster of differentiation 22 (CD22), cluster of differentiation 20 (CD20), and other hematologic tumor antigens, has shown maturity, yet understanding of the solid tumor microenvironment (TME) remains less developed [ , ]. Despite favorable clinical outcomes that have been achieved on immunotherapy field, challenges still persist in widespread aspects. For instance, the alteration of immune cell composition, tumor immune microenvironments, tumor antigen presentation, and genomic profiles contribute to challenges such as immune tolerance, secondary immune evasion, and immune unresponsiveness during treatment [ ].
In recent years, an increasing body of literature has focused on tumor immunometabolic reprogramming, especially effects on CD8+ T cell function [ ]. Tumor cells exhibit heightened glycolytic activity, enabling rapid uptake of glucose and lactate secretion, which in turn grabs nutrients and impairs the activity of CD8+ T cells. Additionally, this metabolic profile stimulates pathways such as the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), aiding tumor cells in generating more energy and building blocks to fuel tumor cell proliferation. This low-nutrient, acidic, and hypoxic microenvironment significantly suppresses CD8+ T cell activity [ ]. Notably, tumor cells competitively inhibit the uptake of essential amino acids like Arg and tryptophan (Trp) in CD8+ T cells, meanwhile secreting harmful metabolites such as kynurenine (Kyn) and adenosine, further inhibit CD8+ T cell proliferation, activation, and differentiation [ ]. In addition, fatty acid (FA) metabolism, encompassing de novo synthesis, fatty acid oxidation (FAO), and metabolite transport, supports tumor cells in producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and adapting to extreme conditions such as high acidity, low oxygen, and heightened stress within the TME, which may contribute to immune evasion [ ].
Collectively, tumor cell metabolic reprogramming shapes an immune-suppressive microenvironment to impair CD8+ T cell function. Hence targeting tumor metabolism within the TME has great potential to enhance CD8+ T cell infiltration and restore the CD8+ T cell function in cancer therapies [ ]. In this review, we summarize the potential issues associated with current CD8+ T cell-targeted therapeutic strategies and examine the impact of tumor metabolic reprogramming on the efficacy of these approaches. We specifically discuss how tumor cell metabolism, including glucose, amino acid, and lipid metabolism, modulates CD8+ T cell proliferation, infiltration, activation, and exhaustion to identify new therapeutic targets and combinatorial strategies for cancer immunotherapy ( ). 

2

## Immunotherapy based on CD8+ T cell: Mechanisms and challenges
2.1

## ICIs
ICIs block the interaction between immune checkpoints and their ligands, alleviating immune suppression and reactivating CD8+ T cells to exert anti-tumor effects [ ]. Inhibitors targeting CTLA-4, PD-1, and PD-L1/B7-H1 have been successfully employed in clinical therapies for various malignancies [ ]. However, numerous challenges are still present in clinical tumor therapies, including genetic mutation, downstream transduction signal deficiency, and adverse immune response. Here, we discussed several representative problems encountered with immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) to shed new light on searching for new immune checkpoints ( ). 
2.1.1

## PD-1/PD-L1
Gene mutations in tumor cells are closely associated with the responses to anti-PD-1 therapy. A typical example is that microsatellite stability (MSS) and microsatellite instability (MSI) can significantly influence the responses to ICIs of tumor patients. MSS tumors are insensitive to ICI therapy, whereas MSI tumors are more responsive, particularly observed in colorectal cancer (CRC) [ ]. A three-year clinical study demonstrated that nivolumab combined with surgery and radiotherapy resulted in 100% recurrence-free survival (RFS) and overall survival rate in locally advanced microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) CRC patients, which was markedly higher than that in MSS patients [ ]. Moreover, PD-L1 embedded in extracellular vesicles (EVs) (exoPD-L1) can also contribute to immune evasion and diminish ICI efficacy. Tumor cells actively produce extracellular vesicles rich in pro-cancerous contents, carrying PD-L1 on their surface and inside. ExoPD-L1 can act as a camouflage and replace PD-L1 on tumor cell surface to inhibit CD8+ T cell activation and allow cancer cells to evade anti-tumor immunity. The correlation between exoPD-L1 and survival outcomes was also verified in advanced pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) that elevated serum levels of exoPD-L1 were associated with poorer prognosis in metastatic pancreatic cancer [ ]. Thus, ICIs may not preferentially inhibit immune checkpoints expressed by tumor cells, and spatial heterogeneity of PD-L1 expression by tumor cells poses significant challenges for ICIs. Besides, the TME is highly heterogeneous, comprising various cells and molecules, which may also influence anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. For example, the presence of tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) correlates with poor response to anti-PD-1 therapy. Specifically, TAMs can competitively bind anti-PD-1 antibody by expressing high PD-L1 to inhibit the interaction between T cells and anti-PD-1 antibody, leading to anti-PD-1 therapy resistance [ ]. In breast cancer, progranulin activated the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) signaling pathway to promote macrophage M2 polarization and thus upregulate PD-L1 expression, leading to a significantly decreased ratio of activated CD8+ T and immune escape via PD-1/PD-L1 interaction [ ]. Moreover, obesity may also impact the efficacy of PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors. For instance, a previous study has reported that adipocytes expressed high levels of PD-L1 to influence the treatment outcomes and prognosis of breast cancer patients, and inhibiting PD-L1 expression in adipose tissue cells could enhance the anti-tumor effects of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy [ ]. In addition, recent studies have also highlighted the crucial roles of the gut microbiome in influencing anti-PD-1/PD-L1 efficacy [ ]. In melanoma patients receiving anti-PD-1 immunotherapy, the composition of gut microbes had a significant impact on the immune response. Patients with elevated alpha-diversity and hugely abundant Ruminococcaceae were more sensitive to immune therapy than that patients with low diversity and high abundance of Bacteroidales [ ]. Similarly, gastric cancer patients with a higher relative abundance of Lactobacillus exhibited greater microbiome diversity, and significantly improved the response to anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapy [ ]. Therefore, PD-1/PD-L1 ICIs still have some shortcomings, and remedying these shortcomings is beneficial to the efficacy of ICB.

2.1.2

## CTLA-4
CTLA-4 is primarily expressed on the surface of activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, as well as regulatory T cells (Tregs), which have immunosuppressive functions, and together with cluster of differentiation 28 (CD28) stimulates the B7 molecules cluster of differentiation 80 (CD80) (B7-1) and CD86 (B7-2) molecules. CTLA4 has a higher affinity for B7 molecules than CD28 in inhibiting the activation of CD8+ T cells [ ]. Blocking CTLA-4 is currently an effective strategy for treating tumors. Despite significant efficacy observed in certain cancers such as melanoma, not all patients respond favorably to anti-CTLA-4 treatment [ ]. Some patients may develop resistance or show transient responses, limiting the widespread application of CTLA-4 blockade therapy. Anti-CTLA-4 treatment enhances CD8+ T cell activation based on several chemical substance secretions, especially interferon-γ (IFN-γ) production. Once IFN-γ signaling pathway deficiency, resistance could occur in anti-CTLA-4 therapy, which was associated with with poor prognosis [ ]. Further mechanistic studies have indicated that mutation and inactivation of IFN-γ signal transduction genes, Janus kinase 1/2 (JAK1/2), could protect tumor cells from the anti-tumor effects of IFN-γ. Once JAK1/2 mutation further evolves into human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I-negative lesions resistant to T cell activity, silencing genes involved in antigen presentation are no longer inducible by IFN-γ [ ].

2.1.3

## LAG-3, TIM-3
Similar to PD-1 and CTLA-4, LAG-3 is rarely expressed on naïve T cells while expressing on CD4+ and CD8+ T cells following antigen stimulation, and LAG-3 is also constitutively expressed on Tregs. LAG-3 could deliver inhibitory signals to inactivated CD8+ T cells [ ]. In patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the expression of LAG-3 on CD8+ T cells was elevated, increasing severity of drug resistance to immunotherapy [ ]. Relatlimab is the first FDA-approved LAG-3 inhibitor, while other inhibitors such as FS-118, are still undergoing clinical trials [ ]. In recent clinical studies, combination with Relatlimab showed better anti-tumor effects compared to PD-1 monoclonal antibody alone. However, it is also accompanied by adverse reactions such as diarrhea, asthenia, hypothyroidism, and other side effects, limiting its application in patients with severe adverse reactions [ ].
TIM-3 are expressed on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, as well as Tregs. TIM-3 overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in various cancers, including malignant melanoma and NSCLC [ ]. Recently, inhibitors targeting, such as TSR-022 and LY3321367, have been under evaluation in clinical trials. Recent studies suggested that TIM-3 inhibitor combined with anti-PD-1 could augment the infiltration of CD8+ T cells in tumor tissue [ ]. Additionally, other recently identified immune checkpoints, such as T cell immune receptor with Ig and ITIM domains (TIGIT), B and T lymphocyte attenuator (BTLA), cluster of differentiation 160 (CD160), 2B4, and inducible synergistic co-stimulation molecules (ICOS), are also playing critical roles in restoring CD8+ T cell activity and should be further verified [ ].
Thus, numerous factors hinder the effectiveness of immune checkpoint therapy, and further studies aimed at elucidating the underlying mechanism are urgently needed to develop new targets that hold the promise for enhancing the efficacy of immunotherapy.

2.2

## Adoptive cell therapy (ACT)
ACT is characterized as isolating immunologically active cells from tumor patients, expanding and functionally characterizing them ex vivo, and subsequently reinfusing them into the patient to directly kill tumor cells or stimulate immune responses that target tumor cells. ACT encompasses several categories, including TILs, lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cells, cytokine-induced killer (CIK) cells, dendritic cells (DCs), natural killer (NK) cells, TCR-T cells, and CAR-T cells, with CAR-T, TCR-T, and TILs considered as the most mature approaches. However, akin to immune checkpoint therapy, ACT faces several challenges, such as antigen loss, diminished CD8+ T-cell activity, genetic and phenotypic alterations, and toxic side effects, all of which lead to ACT drug resistance. Therefore, new improvement strategies are urgently needed to develop for enhancing the efficacy of immunotherapy.
2.2.1

## CAR-T
CAR is an engineered synthetic receptor designed to redirect lymphocytes, typically CD8+ T cells, to recognize and eliminate cells expressing specific antigens. The binding of CARs to target antigens on the cell surface is independent of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) receptors, resulting in robust T-cell activation and potent anti-tumor responses [ ]. CAR-T cell therapy targeting CD19 has been proven successful in treating B-cell malignancies and dramatically improved patient survival and recovery rates. However, significant limitations of CAR-T cell therapy remain to be addressed, including CAR-T cell inhibition-associated toxicities, antigen loss, and limited efficacy against solid tumors [ ]. Antigen loss is a critical factor enabling tumor cells to evade CAR-T cell attack. For example, after receiving CD19 CAR therapy, patients initially respond and achieve remission. However, due to lineage conversion associated with genetic malignancies, the tumor cells undergo phenotypic changes, resulting in the loss of CD19 expression. Consequently, CD19 CAR is unable to detect the tumor cells, leading to reduced efficacy of CAR-T therapy [ ]. Moreover, poor tumor infiltration and immunosuppressive microenvironment increase resistance to CAR-T therapy, providing additional therapeutic challenges. In addition, EVs released by solid tumors can carry targeted tumor antigens and immune checkpoint proteins such as PD-L1. These EVs act as cell-free functional units that preferentially interact with homologous CAR-T cells, effectively inhibiting their proliferation, migration, and function [ ]. Therefore, even though CAR-T therapy has achieved favorable efficacy, there still remain several challenges that need to be addressed.

2.2.2

## TCR-T
TCR-T therapy recognizes cell membrane antigens and targets intracellular tumor antigens presented by peptide-major histocompatibility complexes (pMHC). Compared to CAR-T therapy, TCR-T therapy holds advantages in solid tumors, especially in patients with melanoma-associated antigen A1 (MAGE-A1)-positive advanced solid tumors [ ]. However, recent studies have revealed several limitations of TCR-T therapy. The foundation of TCR-T therapy relies on the highly specific, immunogenic, and elevated expression of tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) within tumor tissues. Nevertheless, TAAs such as cancer-testis antigens, MAGE-A1, and melanoma-associated antigen A4 (MAGE-A4) may also be expressed in normal tissues, potentially leading to severe toxicities [ ]. Moreover, the durability of TCR-T cells in vivo remains a challenge, and the expansion of TCR-T cells to adequate numbers in vitro often induces terminal differentiation, resulting in frequent failures to elicit a sustained immune response upon reinfusion into a patient. Additionally, in solid tumors, tumor cells typically recruit immunosuppressive cells, thereby creating a suppressive immune environment, which in turn severely inhibits T-cell activity and inevitably negatively impacts TCR therapy [ ]. Therefore, TCR therapy still faces many problems, and new strategies are urgently needed to achieve to solve challenges.

2.2.3

## TILs
TILs therapy is an immunotherapy that harnesses the immune cells of patients within the TME to kill tumor cells. This approach has demonstrated remarkable efficacy in patients with metastatic melanoma [ ]. However, it has not yet become a first-line treatment strategy and still in the clinical trial phase. Similar to other adoptive cell therapies, the efficacy of TILs therapy is limited due to a variety of inhibitory factors present in the cancer microenvironment [ ]. Therefore, the development of TILs therapies faces a large of challenges, and actions should be taken to improve.

2.3

## Inevitable challenge in immunotherapy: Dysfunction of CD8+ T cells
During tumor metastasis, single or clustered tumor cells settle within normal tissues, interacting with surrounding stromal cells, immune cells, vascular endothelial cells, and extracellular matrix (ECM) components, to form the TME, which is highly heterogeneous [ ]. Notably, tumor cells can assimilate surrounding fibroblasts and macrophage and recruit immunosuppressive cells such as myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and Tregs, thus establishing an immunosuppressive microenvironment that inhibits the proliferation, differentiation, and activity of critical tumor-killing cells such as CD8+ T cells, contributing to immunotherapy failure [ ]. Immunotherapy mainly relies on the immune cells, especially CD8+ T cells for exerting anti-tumor efficacy and biological or chemical damage of CD8+ T cells in TME can lead to immunotherapy resistance [ ]. Previous studies suggested that CAR-T cell therapy has shown promising efficacy in early trials for relapsed diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), while resistance is observed at late stage [ ]. Recent studies have highlighted that metabolic reprogramming, a hallmark of tumors, significantly affects CD8+ T cells. For example, mechanistic research indicated that cholesterol efflux from M2 macrophages induced an immunosuppressive state of CD8+ T cells and inhibited CAR-T cell cytotoxicity, suggesting that metabolic reprogramming provides a theoretical basis for CAR-T therapy failure [ ]. Thus, targeting metabolic pathways to remodel the TME represents a promising strategy for restoring CD8+ T cell function and enhancing the efficacy of immunotherapy.

3

## Tumor metabolism in disrupting CD8+ T cell function
3.1

## Glycolysis: Create an acidic, hypoxic, glucose-deficient microenvironment
The proliferation and activation of CD8+ T cells rely on oxygen-independent glycolysis to supply rapid energy through generating ATP [ ]. During glycolysis, glucose is metabolized into pyruvate and lactate, which are also utilized to synthesize other biomolecules, such as lipids and nucleotides while producing ATP and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) in smaller quantities. Enhanced glycolytic activity of CD8+ T cells has been observed during infection or tumor recognition to sustain the rapid cytotoxic capabilities of CD8+ T cells [ ]. Tumor cells also harness aerobic glycolysis to facilitate their proliferation, survival, and adaptation to adverse microenvironments, which is known as the Warburg effect [ ]. Elevated levels of rate-limiting enzymes of the glycolytic pathway, such as hexokinase 2 (HK2; whereas normal cells typically express HK1) and pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) have been observed in tumor cells, indicating a preference for glycolytic metabolism of tumor to produce ATP, even under conditions of abundant oxygen [ ]. For example, elevated glucose transporter protein 1 (GLUT1) expression enabled tumor cells to actively uptake glucose, supporting their rapid proliferation and growth. Additionally, GLUT3, was also frequently upregulated in colorectal, breast, liver, gastric, and pancreatic cancers [ ]. In comparison to GLUT1, GLUT3 exhibited a higher affinity for glucose, allowing efficient glucose uptake even under low glucose conditions and thereby accelerating glucose consumption within the TME [ ]. Moreover, clinical studies have shown that a great deal of cases of lung adenocarcinoma (ADC), lung squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC), and colon cancer revealed high protein level of HK2 in tumor cells, and the ratio of CD8+ T cells/Tregs was significantly reduced, which severely diminished the effect of immunotherapy [ ]. In addition to tumor cells, neutrophils, TAMs, and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) also aberrantly express GLUTs after being “re-educated” by tumor cells, further depleting glucose in the microenvironment [ ]. Glycolytic cancer-associated fibroblasts (glyCAFs), a subpopulation of CAFs, rely on GLUT1-mediated upregulation of chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 16 (CXCL16), a ligand for C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 6 (CXCR6). This interaction enhances the recruitment of CXCR6+ CD8+ T cells, thereby hindering their contact with tumor cells, and impeding the infiltration of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) into the tumor parenchyma [ ]. Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) in tobacco smoke enhanced the uptake of glucose by TAMs and then upregulated GLUT1 and GLUT3, which led to increased transcription of insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF2) and subsequent paracrine activation of the insulin receptor (IR) in lung cancer cells, promoting their nuclear import and increasing PD-L1 expression in tumor cells [ ]. Therefore, inhibiting the glucose uptake of tumor cells and immune-suppressing associated cells represents a crucial strategy for restoring CD8+ T cell activity within the TME.
Concurrently, the glycolysis-orientated metabolism pattern of tumor cells produces abundant lactate which can be secreted into the TME, leading to acidification and substantial suppression of CD8+ T cell function. Neuromedin U (NMU) has been reported to be highly expressed in immunosuppressive PDAC to upregulate PKM2 and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), thereby increasing lactate flux and suppressing infiltrative CD8+ T cell anti-tumor activity. Deletion of NMU enhanced tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cell anti-tumor function [ ]. Another study has indicated that circFAM13B expression was notably reduced in bladder cancer (BC), contributing to upregulated glycolysis mediated by activating circFAM13B/IGF2BP1/PKM2 axis and thus inhibiting the secretion of CD8+ T cell granzyme B and IFN-γ [ ]. The export of lactate from tumor cells requires solute carrier family 16 member 3 (SLC16A3; also known as monocarboxylate transporter 4 (MCT4)), a lactate transporter that exports tumor-generated lactate and increases lactate levels in TME, leading to the reduced number of tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells and increased immunosuppressive MDSCs, ultimately diminishing the efficacy of PD-1-based immunotherapies [ ]. Mechanistic research revealed that Treg cells absorb TME lactate via MCT1. Lactate is converted to pyruvate and citrate, entering tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) while promoting nuclear factor of activated T-cells 1 (NFAT1) nuclear translocation and enhancing PD-1 expression in Treg cells. PD-1 antibodies may preferentially bind to Tregs expressing higher PD-1 antigens, contributing to therapeutic resistance [ ]. In addition to that, lactate impairs anti-tumor immune function through inactivating CD8+ T cell function, such as CD4+ T cells and DCs. Mechanistic studies have shown that lactate impaired CXCR3/CXCL10 axis and activated sterol-regulatory element binding protein 2 (SREBP2) of DCs, dampening anti-tumor CD4+ T cell function and converting conventional DC cells into mature regulatory DCs (mregDCs), respectively [ ]. In conclusion, elevated lactate in the TME significantly impairs CD8+ T cell cytotoxicity. Strategies to inhibit or eliminate lactate production are crucial for restoring CD8+ T cell activity and enhancing the efficacy of immunotherapy.
In summary, the unique aerobic glycolytic metabolism of tumor cells creates an immunosuppressive environment characterized by low glucose, high lactate, and low oxygen levels ( ). Therefore, it is imperative to investigate the underlying mechanisms and screen for potential drugs, which are crucial for improving the efficacy of anti-tumor immunotherapy. 

3.2

## OXPHOS & PPP: Non-major energy-fueling process but extremely significant for substance-producing in TME
The prolonged activation of CD8+ T cells also need mitochondrial OXPHOS to generate elevated levels of ATP [ ]. OXPHOS supports the proliferation, maintenance of activity, and execution of immune functions necessary for CD8+ T cells. Compared to glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation produces ATP more efficiently.
Tumor cells tend to favor ATP production through glycolysis rather than OXPHOS. However, certain highly resistant tumors, including estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells, rely more on OXPHOS [ ]. Elevated levels of OXPHOS may diminish the sensitivity to ICIs in metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) patients. Knocking out the mitochondrial complex I subunit Ndufb8 in renal cell carcinoma (RenCa) cell lines exposed tumor cells to CD8+ T cells in the TME under lower levels of hypoxia, while increasing the proportion of CD8+ T cells, reducing PD-1 expression and enhancing IFN-γ secretion [ ]. Moreover, the degree of mitochondrial damage in CAR T cells correlated negatively with therapeutic outcomes [ ]. OXPHOS influences CD8+ T cell activity through various facets within the highly complex TME. The immunosuppressive TME generated by tumors disrupts CD8+ T cell OXPHOS, particularly affecting mitochondrial function, which can directly impair CD8+ T cell performance. Therefore, preserving and enhancing OXPHOS homeostasis in CD8+ T cells is advantageous for restoring their function and improving the efficacy of immunotherapy.
During glycolysis, glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) entering the PPP generates the coenzyme NADPH, which is crucial for producing reduced glutathione (GSH) to maintain the redox balance and resist oxidative stress in CD8+ T cells. Additionally, NADPH participates in various biosynthetic reduction reactions, including the synthesis of lipids, nucleotides, and amino acids. Another important metabolite during PPP is ribose-5-phosphate (R-5-P), which is also vital for synthesizing FAs and membranes in newly activated CD8+ T cells [ ].
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is a crucial enzyme in the PPP. The transcription factor pre-B cell leukemia homeobox 3 (PBX3) was upregulated in CRC, where it directly interacted with the G6PD promoter, positively regulating G6PD expression and enhancing transcriptional activity in tumor cells, thereby promoting the biosynthesis of nucleotides and lipids [ ]. In ovarian cancer (OC), metastatic OC cells preferentially disseminated to the omentum and rapidly proliferate there. Enhanced PPP helped metastatic OC cells cope with substantial oxidative stress in the omental microenvironment, thereby adapting to distant microenvironments [ ]. Tumor cell proliferation and metastasis depend on NADPH and R-5-P production via the PPP. Tumor cells typically enhance the oxidative phase of the PPP, leading to increased NADPH production, and subsequently elevate R-5-P levels through the non-oxidative phase. Sirtuin 5 (SIRT5), a member of the NAD+-dependent class III histone deacetylase family, has been reported to be highly expressed in CRC. Mechanistic study revealed that SIRT5 promoted the activity of transketolase (TKT), a key enzyme in the non-oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, through demethylation and thereby augmenting the production of R-5-P in tumor cells [ ]. In brief, tumor cells can enhance NADPH and R-5-P production by upregulating PPP, involving the upregulation of critical enzymes in the oxidative branch, such as G6PD, and the non-oxidative branch, such as TKT, and then rapidly utilize NADP+ and glutamine (Gln), among others, competitively inhibiting the activation and proliferation of CD8+ T cells by depriving them of necessary substrates, which promotes tumor progression and suppresses the anti-tumor effects of CD8+ T cells.
To summarize, tumor cell glucose metabolism reprogramming not only supplies a substantial amount of nutrients to support tumor cell survival, proliferation, and metastasis but also impairs CD8+ T cell proliferation, which occurs through the assimilation of stromal cells in the microenvironment and the recruitment of immunosuppressive cells, which directly and indirectly induces CD8+ T cell dysfunction, significantly diminishing the efficacy of CD8+ T cell-mediated immunotherapy. Consequently, targeting tumor cell glycolysis reprogramming may be a promising strategy to enhance immunotherapy.

3.3

## Amino acid metabolism:Suppress CD8+ T cells by dominantly competing amino acid in TME
The activation of CD8+ T cells depends on amino acid metabolism to support protein and nucleotide synthesis. Amino acids not only serve as fundamental building blocks for the synthesis of biological and chemical substances but also participate in signaling pathways and antioxidant defense. Amino acid transporters such as solute carrier family 7 member 5 (SLC7A5; as known LAT1), solute carrier family 38 member 1 (SLC38A1; as known SNAT1), Solute carrier family 38 member 2 (SLC38A2; as known SNAT2), and solute carrier family 1 member 5 (SLC1A5; as known ASCT2) are markedly upregulated upon T cell activation, facilitating the entry of amino acids into CD8+ T cell and influencing their subsequent functions [ ]. Several amino acids, such as Arg and Trp, are particularly critical for the immune response of CD8+ T cells through regulating their activation and proliferation. Specifically, amino acid deficiency disrupts the metabolic processes of CD8+ T cells, and then impairs their functional capabilities.
Trp is an essential amino acid that influences the cell cycle and cytotoxicity functions of CD8+ T cells. The majority of Trp is metabolized by indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) to Kyn. Within the TME, cancer cells, TAMs, MDSCs, and CAFs could consume Trp through the enzymatic activity of IDO [ ]. IDO was highly expressed in CRC, lung cancer, melanoma, and cervical cancer, with a significant correlation to poor patient prognosis [ ]. The altered expression of IDO was linked to a range of factors. For example, recent researches indicated that follistatin-like 3 (FSTL3) was overexpressed in malignant cells via hypoxia-inducible factor 1α (HIF1α) activation in hypoxic conditions. FSTL3 can then bind the transcription factor cellular myelocytomatosis oncogene (c-Myc) to inhibit its ubiquitination and enhance its stability, which upregulated the expression of PD-L1 and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1), leading to an increase in the proportion of Tregs (CD25+ Foxp3+) and exhausted T cells (PD-1+ CD8+) [ ]. IDO metabolizes Trp into Kyn, which also inhibits CD8+ T cell immune responses and promotes tumor immune tolerance and evasion, particularly by suppressing T cell proliferation and inducing T cell apoptosis [ ]. Moreover, recent studies also demonstrated that the Kyn-aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway drove the upregulation of PD-1 in CD8+ T cells. IFN-γ produced by CD8+ T cells stimulated tumor-resident cells (TRCs) to release abundant Kyn, which activated AhR via transporters SLC7A8 and solute carrier family 36 member 4 (PAT4), subsequently upregulating PD-1 on CD8+ T cells [ ]. Additionally, in nasopharyngeal carcinoma TME, friend leukemia integration 1 (FLI1) enhanced the expression of CREB-binding protein(CBP) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) to activate IDO1 transcription upon IFN-γ releasing by CD8+ T cells, leading to increased Kyn synthesis in tumor cells and feedback induction of CD8+ T cell exhaustion and Treg differentiation [ ]. The Kyn-AhR pathway has been validated in tumor mice models and cancer patients. Moreover, TAMs also exhibited high AhR activity, which depended on lactobacilli metabolizing Trp into indole, thereby inhibiting the aggregation of tumor necrosis factor α+ (TNFα+) IFN-γ+ CD8+ T cells within tumors. In the clinic, high AhR expression in PDAC patients correlated with rapid disease progression, increased mortality rates, and an immunosuppressive TAM phenotype [ ].
Arg is an essential amino acid crucial in the lifecycle of CD8+ T cells, playing pivotal roles in protein synthesis, one-carbon metabolism, DNA methylation, and anti-tumor immunity of CD8+ T cells [ ]. However, tumor cells cannot synthesize Arg and depend on extensive uptake of exogenous Arg, resulting in Arg depletion in the microenvironment, which can competitively inhibit Arg uptake by CD8+ T cells [ ]. Tumor-associated myeloid cells, including TAMs and MDSCs, expressed high levels of SLC7A2 and Arg-1. SLC7A2 facilitated extracellular Arg uptake, while Arg-1 depleted Arg, contributing to Arg insufficiency for CD8+ T cells, and weakened CD8+ T cell-mediated antitumor immunity [ ]. The concentration of Arg is regulated by Arg-1, which exhibits a strong correlation with T cell function [ ]. In PDAC, MDSCs released excess Arg-1, and cathepsin S (CTSS) within neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) degraded human Arg-1 (hArg-1) to deplete Arg in the TME and inhibit T lymphocyte proliferation [ ]. Researchers have also identified that MDSCs in the TME can upregulate free fatty acid receptor 2 (FFAR2) to enhance Arg-1 expression via the Gαq/Calcium/peroxisome proliferation-activated receptor γ (PPAR-γ) axis, thereby depleting Arg in the TME [ ]. Additionally, in breast cancer, TAMs initiated a collagen biosynthesis program guided by transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) to deplete environmental Arg and ultimately secrete ornithine, thereby impairing CD8+ T cells. This illustrates a secondary effect of TAMs metabolic programs hindering anti-tumor immunity.
Gln is pivotal in CD8+ T cell activation. Gln can be converted into glutamate by glutaminase (GLS), and glutamate can then enter the TCA cycle after being catalyzed to α-ketoglutaric acid (α-KG) by Gln dehydrogenase 1 (GLUD1) [ ]. Restricting Gln utilization in activated CD8+ T cells could alter the differentiation of CD8+ T memory phenotype mediated by α-KG deficiency [ ]. In PDAC, tumor cells exhibit significant dependence on Gln for synthesizing Arg, essential for tumor growth via ornithine aminotransferase (OAT), contrasting sharply with other cancers reliant on Arg-derived polyamines, possibly linked to Arg depletion in TME [ ]. As a result, tumor cells establish a metabolic cycle through high Glu uptake, which further impedes Gln acquisition by CD8+ T cells to impair their activation, and negatively affect tumor therapy.
Serine (Ser) metabolism regulates the proliferation of CD8+ T cells. In activated T cells, the majority of intracellular Ser is derived from the extracellular environment, which is essential for CD8+ T cell proliferation while having no obvious effect on its effector function. Ser serves as a crucial intermediate in the metabolism of methionine and glycine, playing essential roles in T cell activation and proliferation, similarly, as a necessary substrate for tumor cell growth. Tumor cells exhibit a high dependency on Ser, and the actively ingesting exogenous Ser of tumor cells supports their rapid growth. For instance, epidermal stem cells (EpSCs), which are the origin of squamous cell carcinomas, require substantial amounts of exogenous Ser for their growth and self-renewal [ ]. Additionally, tumor cells can compensate for the lack of environmental Ser by synthesizing it endogenously. The glycolytic intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate initiates Ser synthesis, which proceeds through the actions of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH), phosphoserine aminotransferase 1 (PSAT1), and phosphoserine phosphatase (PSPH) to generate Ser [ ]. PHGDH, the initial key enzyme in the Ser biosynthesis pathway, is upregulated in various cells within the TME. T helper 2 cell (Th2) cytokines such as interleukin-4 (IL-4) and tumor-associated mediators elevated PHGDH expression in macrophages to promote the activation and proliferation of immunosuppressive M2 macrophages, thereby sustaining this phenotype and resulting in PD-L1 overexpression on M2 [ ]. In glioblastoma, endothelial cell-specific overexpression of PHGDH in the TME accelerated endothelial cell growth, fostering the formation of more immunosuppressive microvasculature, which compromised the efficacy of immune therapies [ ]. Therefore, inhibiting both the exogenous uptake and endogenous synthesis of Ser in tumor cells may enhance the efficacy of immunotherapy.
Tumor cells often exert competitive inhibition of amino acid uptake by CD8+ T cells by sequestering amino acids through elevated expression of amino acid transporters, such as SLC7A5/LAT1 and SLC38A1/SNAT1. In colon cancer, cancer cells competitively inhibited Gln uptake by type-1 conventional dendritic cells (cDC1s) through the upregulation of SLC38A2, leading to impaired cDC1s function and diminished cDC1s-mediated suppression of tumor growth by immunosuppressive CD8+ T cells, and ultimately resulted in resistance to checkpoint blockade and T cell-mediated immunotherapy [ ]. Besides, in gastric cancer, tumor cells overexpressing SLC6A6 competitively grabbed taurine against CD8+ T cells. Taurine deficiency in CD8+ T cells increased endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, promoting activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) transcription via protein kinase R-like ER kinase (PERK)-JAK1-STAT3 signaling dependency. This cascade induced the activation of multiple immune checkpoint genes, facilitating immune evasion and thereby fostering tumor progression [ ]. They support their life activities through amino acid metabolism and further degrading unfavorable metabolites that inhibit CD8+ T cells, such as Kyn and Arg [ ]. Therefore, within the nutrient-deprived TME, tumor cells hold a competitive advantage in resource acquisition and overexpress critical enzymes in relevant metabolic pathways to enhance nutrient utilization for growth, proliferation, and metastasis needs. In this process, anti-tumor immune cells, including CD8+ T cells, are severely disadvantaged, greatly restricting their function.
Overall, tumor cells can markedly inhibit the proliferation and activation of CD8+ T cells through competitive uptake of various amino acids, including Try, taurine, and Gln ( ). Targeting amino acid uptake in tumor cells may enhance the efficacy of CD8+ T cell-mediated immunotherapy. 

3.4

## Lipid metabolism: Attack CD8+ T cells directly or indirectly by secreting abundant harmful metabolites
Lipid metabolism supports the survival and functional role of CD8+ T cells under harsh conditions of the TME. Following activation, CD8+ T cells require substantial energy for rapid proliferation and functional exertion, with lipid metabolism providing FAs as crucial energy sources. Phospholipids derived from lipid metabolism directly influence the expression of receptors, signaling pathway activity, and intercellular adhesion capacity of CD8+ T cells [ ]. CD8+ T cells rely on antigen-presenting cells, such as DCs, to provide antigenic information for recognition and activation. Also, lipid metabolism is crucial for the metabolic state of antigen-presenting cells, which regulates the activation and effector response of CD8+ T cells [ ]. Thus, lipid metabolism impacts CD8+ T cell activity through multiple mechanisms.
Reprogramming of lipid metabolism in tumor cells contributes to the formation of the immune microenvironment. By absorbing large amounts of FAs, tumor cells not only enhance their own proliferation and migration but also fail to significantly alter the metabolism of other cells within the TME [ ]. FA uptake by tumor cells depends on the aberrant expression of lipid metabolism-related genes, including FA transporter proteins such as cluster of differentiation 36 (CD36, also known as FA translocase), fatty acid transporter proteins (FATPs), and Fatty acid binding protein (FABPs), all of which enhance the binding and uptake of FAs, leading to increased FAO [ ]. High levels of CD36 expression correlate with poor prognosis in cancers, including breast, gastric, and prostate cancers [ ]. In hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), fatty acid-binding protein 5 (FABP5) was observed as a driver in obesity-induced HCC. Additionally, single-cell transcriptomic analysis revealed significantly enhancive FABP5 expression in both HCC tumor tissues and adjacent tissues, which are enriched in various dysfunctional T cells (Tex), and immunohistochemical analysis indicated that intra-tumoral FABP5 expression correlates with overall and recurrence-free survival periods [ ]. Bladder cancer (BCa)-derived exosomes circRNA_0013936 enhanced the immunosuppressive activity of polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells (PMN-MDSCs), which are derived from polymorphonuclear cells are among the reasons for tumor immune tolerance and the failure of cancer immunotherapy, and upregulate FATP2 through the circRNA_0013936/miR-320a/JAK2 pathway and then suppressed CD8+ T cell activity [ ]. Once large amounts of FAs enter tumor cells, the metabolites are utilized to both create an immunosuppressive environment and provide energy to the tumor cells through processes such as β-oxidation. For example, acetate, the most abundant short-chain FA in human non-small cell lung cancer tissues, generates acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) derivatives that induce acetylation of c-Myc, and the further research revealed that this process could upregulate the transcription of genes encoding PD-L1, glycolytic enzymes, and monocarboxylate transporter 1 (MCT1), thereby inhibiting the infiltration of CD8+ T cells [ ]. Besides, high expression of the lipid metabolism-related gene cytochrome P450 19A1 (CYP19A1) positively correlated with the abundance of macrophages, CAFs, PD-L1 expression, tumor mutation burden, and microsatellite instability levels in CRC, but negatively correlates with CD8+ T cell infiltration levels. Mechanism research revealed that CYP19A1 can upregulate PD-L1, interleukin (IL-6), and TGF-β levels through the G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 30 protein kinase B (GPR30-AKT) signaling pathway [ ].
The high lipid metabolism of HCC tumor cells significantly impacts Tregs, macrophages and fibroblasts, and then leads to substantial suppression of CD8+ T cell activity. Lipid accumulation resulting from steatosis in HCC cells upregulates membrane-bound PD-L1 expression and induces immune-suppressive alterations in recruited macrophages and fibroblasts, including their transformation into M2-type macrophages and CAFs are closely associated with depleted CTLs [ ]. Tumor cells can induce multiple phenotypic changes in TAMs through lipid metabolism, with each phenotype being significantly enhanced. For instance, C1q+ TAMs in lung cancer enhanced FA metabolism mediated by FABP5, activating the PPARγ transcription factor and increasing the immune suppression of the malignant pleural effusion (MPE) microenvironment [ ]. Additionally, Neutral ceramidase is a crucial regulator of ceramide, a core intermediate in sphingolipid metabolism, whose absence in female mice accelerated tumor growth in various breast cancer models. Accumulation of ceramide metabolites reprograms macrophages into TREM2+ TAMs with immune-suppressive functions, thereby promoting CD8+ T cell exhaustion [ ]. Besides, resistance to ICB therapy in gastric cancer patients is linked to high frequencies of Treg cells. Ras homolog family member A (RHOA) mutations in gastric cancer cells activated the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT-mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway, increasing free fatty acid (FFA) production. Treg cells consume FFAs more effectively than CD8+ T cells, contributing to resistance to PD-1 blockade [ ]. Therefore, lipid metabolism in tumor cells can further mediate the immunosuppressive microenvironment via tumor-associated stromal cells, impairing the efficacy of immunotherapy.
Large amounts of lipids accumulated in TME can directly infiltrate CD8+ T cells and then inhibit their activity. The metabolic processes of tumor cells generate abundant oxidized phospholipids (OxPLs) and oxidized low-density lipoproteins (OxLDL), leading to increased oxidative lipid concentrations in TME [ ]. Elevated expression of CD36 on CD8+ TILs in the TME facilitates the entry of these oxidized lipids via scavenger receptor CD36, inhibiting downstream activation of p38 kinase and promoting dysfunction of CD8+ T cells. For example, lipid uptake from bone marrow in multiple myeloma (MM) suppressed CD8+ T cell function, accompanied by decreased mitochondrial mass and significantly increased uptake of long-chain FAs [ ]. CD8+ T cells require FAO for proper activation. Otherwise, the accumulation of intracellular lipid droplets (LDs) can lead to cellular dysfunction. The specific TME induces the persistent activation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) in CD8+ T cells, converting acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA. Notably, malonyl-CoA generated by ACC inhibits carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1), preventing the translocation of FA transport into mitochondria and thereby impeding FAO, resulting in LDs accumulation in TILs [ ]. Meanwhile, elevated lipid levels directly correlate with the upregulation of TIL dysfunction markers such as PD-1, TIM-3, CTLA-4, and LAG-3, highlighting the robust association between lipid accumulation and CD8+ T cell dysfunction [ ].
Cholesterol metabolism is a crucial component of lipid metabolism, and reprogramming of this pathway also occurs in tumor cells. Cholesterol is synthesized from acetyl-CoA through a series of enzymatic catalyzes and reductions, with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase (HMGCR) acting as the principal rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis, regulated significantly by SREBP2 [ ]. Besides de novo synthesis, tumor cells can also uptake exogenous cholesterol via internalization mediated by low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDLR). During tumor progression, both HMGCR and LDLR are upregulated [ ]. Elevated cholesterol synthesis in tumor cells induced high expression of CD36 on tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells, facilitating FA uptake by CD8+ T cells in the TME, which contributed to lipid peroxidation and iron dysregulation, resulting in reduced production of cytotoxic cytokines and diminished anti-tumor capabilities [ ]. Importantly, metabolites or cholesterol derivatives exert significant immunosuppressive effects within the TME. Acyl coenzyme A-cholesterol acyltransferase 1 (ACAT1) converts cholesterol into cholesterol esters (CE), thereby depriving CD8+ T cells of free cholesterol uptake in the TME, and subsequently inhibiting CD8+ T cell proliferation [ ]. Additionally, oxysterols such as 25-hydroxycholesterol (25HC), 27-hydroxycholesterol (27HC), and 22-hydroxycholesterol (22HC) accumulate in the TME, promoting tumorigenesis and immunosuppression by binding to liver X receptor (LXR) [ ]. Moreover, 25HC interacted with G protein-coupled receptor 183, promoting TAMs toward M2 polarization, thereby enhancing immunosuppression [ ].
Overall, the reprogramming of lipid metabolism in tumor cells inhibits processes such as the proliferation and activation of CD8+ T cells through both direct and indirect mechanisms ( ). In particular, lipid accumulation is detrimental to CD8+ T cells, and targeting the associated metabolic enzymes or receptors may offer a promising therapeutic strategy. 

4

## Targeting tumor reprograming to overcome immunotherapy resistance: The current status and perspectives
Metabolic reprogramming of tumor cells, including alterations in glucose, amino acid, and lipid metabolism, could establish the immunosuppressive microenvironment that impairs CD8+ T cell function and significantly diminishes the effectiveness of T cell-mediated immunotherapy ( ). Therefore, we have reviewed recent researches on targeting tumor cell metabolism to explore new therapeutic strategies and evaluate their clinical potential. 
4.1

## Targeting glucose metabolism
The high glycolytic activity of tumor cells is closely linked to the aberrantly elevated expression levels of key enzymes. HK2 and PKM2, key enzymes in the glycolytic pathway, are upregulated in various tumor cells, which enhances the glycolytic activity of tumor cells, leading to increased glucose consumption and rapid production of lactate. Meanwhile, high expression of HK2 in tumor cells may contribute to the formation of the immunosuppressive microenvironment by promoting immune inhibitory cells such as Tregs and MDSCs, and then targeting HK2 could significantly enhance infiltration of CD8+ T cells [ ]. For example, inhibition of polyadenylation-specific factor 6 (CPSF6) reduced HK2 expression in HCC tumor cells, which subsequently decreased PD-L1 expression in tumor cells and increased granzyme B levels [ ]. Another, PKM2 is the significant target for inhibiting glycolysis, which is highly expressed in tumor cell. Research indicated that CircFAM13B, a circular RNA, mitigated glycolysis in bladder cancer cells through the circFAM13B/IGF2BP1/PKM2 cascade, enhancing granzyme B and IFN-γ secretion by CD8+ T cells, thereby suppressing immune evasion and improving sensitivity to anti-PD-1 immune therapy [ ]. Therefore, targeting key glycolytic enzymes in tumor cells, such as HK2 and PKM2, or inhibiting their upstream regulators to suppress enzyme expression, represents effective potential strategies to enhance anti-tumor immunity.
Lactate, a classical byproduct of glycolysis, impairs CD8+ T-cell function. Once the strategy of glycolysis inhibition is not feasible, it becomes crucial to either remove lactate production or block its transport into the microenvironment by tumor cells. MCT4 is a lactate efflux transporter, and targeting MCT4 could significantly reduce tumor cell glycolytic activity and lactate production, which improved the immunosuppressive TME and restored the efficacy of anti-PD-1 blockade therapy. Studies demonstrated that higher expression of MCT4 was observed in tumor tissues from HCC patients who did not respond to neoadjuvant therapy with toripalimab. The application of VB124, a potent MCT4 inhibitor, reduced TME acidification and reactive oxygen species levels while increasing the secretion of the chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL10, which facilitated CD8+ T-cell infiltration and cytotoxicity, thereby suppressing HCC tumors. Additionally, VB124 improved the efficacy of anti-PD-1 immunotherapy and extended the survival of mice [ ]. In recent years, interdisciplinary approaches have significantly contributed to tumor treatment, including the restoration of anti-tumor immune effects through the inhibition of lactate production. For example, tumor-specific peroxynitrite nanogenerator APAP-P-NO could generate superoxide anions and release nitric oxide in situ within tumor cells, efficiently producing peroxynitrite, which impaired glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase activity, inhibited lactate production, and then elicited effective anti-tumor immune responses, including polarization of M2-like macrophages to the M1 phenotype, reduction of MDSCs and Tregs, and restoration of CD8+ T cell infiltration [ ]. Thus, inhibiting lactate production and targeting lactate transporters to prevent lactate release into the microenvironment are effective strategies for restoring CD8+ T-cell activity, which represent a potential idea to reverse tumor resistance to immune therapies.
In TME, CD8+ T cells exhibit significantly lower glucose uptake capabilities than tumor cells. T cell practical effector function relies on the glycolytic advantage of TILs within the TME, and inhibiting glucose uptake by tumor cells is a direct approach. Preclinical studies suggested that metabolic therapy with GLUT inhibitors could induce oxidative stress and suppress cancer growth. However, GLUT inhibitors may also inhibit GLUTs in normal cells due to limited receptor selectivity. Interestingly, researchers have engineered GLUT1-overexpressing CAR-T cells, demonstrating enhanced persistence and anti-tumor activity of CD8+ T cells [ ]. Additionally, the development of CAR-T cells combined with mitochondrial pyruvate carrier (MPC) inhibitors can enhance and prolong the antitumor activity of CAR-T cells by modulating pyruvate and lactate metabolism [ ]. Overall, inhibiting competitive glucose uptake by tumor cells is an effective strategy for enhancing anti-tumor immunity.
Intrinsic factors of T cells within the TME are influenced by the broader environment. P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) serves as an intrinsic checkpoint regulator that attenuates the activation of CD8+ T cells and drives their exhaustion. Lack of PSGL-1 supports increased glucose uptake and glycolysis in CD8+ T cells, maintaining their high metabolic profile within tumor-infiltrating settings [ ]. The pharmacological blockade of PSGL-1 inhibits T cell exhaustion, suggesting PSGL-1 as an immunotherapeutic target in PD-1 blockade-resistant tumors [ ]. Besides, a decrease of high-density lipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) levels led to increased infiltration of CD163+ macrophages and impaired infiltration of CD8+ T cells in TME. ApoA1 exerts anti-tumor activity in a CD8+ T cell-dependent manner by directly enhancing CD8+ T cell anti-tumor activity through the HIF-1α-mediated glycolytic pathway, thereby enhancing responsiveness to PD-1 therapy [ ]. Additionally, CD8+ T cells exert anti-tumor functions that are dependent on TCR stimulation, leading to the secretion of tumor-killing substances through downstream signal transduction pathways [ ]. Tumors typically downregulate antigen and MHC expression to evade recognition by T cells, leading to insufficient TCR stimulation within TME [ ]. Research indicated that the small molecule PQDN activated CD8+ T cells post-TCR engagement, even below antigen stimulation thresholds. Mechanically, PQDN enhanced mitochondrial coupling efficiency by boosting the electron transport chain (ETC) and promoting glycolysis via mTOR/AKT signaling, thereby enhancing CD8+ T cell activation. Chemical activation of mitochondrial ETC to adjust T cell activation thresholds represents a novel strategy to activate low-avidity tumor-specific T cells and improve therapeutic efficacy [ ].
In summary, targeting tumor glucose metabolism can enhance CD8+ T cell-mediated immuno-oncology. This approach includes inhibiting tumor cell glucose uptake, blocking key enzymes in the glycolytic pathway, and preventing tumor cell lactate secretion into the microenvironment. Meanwhile, increasing glucose metabolism in CD8+ T cells should also be a focus of attention.

4.2

## Targeting amino acid metabolism
Amino acids such as Trp, Arg, and Gln are crucial for the proliferation and activation of CD8+ T cells. However, tumor cells impede amino acid uptake by CD8+ T cells through metabolic reprogramming, including upregulation of amino acid transporters, metabolizing enzymes, and recruitment of immunosuppressive cells, which hampers the anti-tumor immunity of CD8+ T cells. Thus, targeting amino acid metabolism in tumor cells may help reverse the immunosuppressive microenvironment.
Tumor cells overexpressing IDO accelerate the depletion of Trp, leading to a deficiency of Trp in TME and consequent dysfunction of CD8+ T cells [ ]. Researches indicated that IDO inhibitors facilitated the accumulation of Trp, activating CD8+ T cells and thereby downregulating PD-1. Further, Trp supplementation and IDO inhibitors increased intracellular Trp levels in CD8+ T cells, enhancing tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells and slowing the growth of lung cancer tumors in mice [ ]. Additionally, Trp is metabolized to L-5-hydroxytryptophan (L-5-HTP) by the enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH). Researches revealed that L-5-HTP inhibited the expression of IFN-γ-induced receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) ligands, thereby suppressing phosphorylation-mediated activation of RTK receptors and downstream MEK/ERK/c-JUN signaling, which reduces induction of PD-L1 in tumor and increases granzyme B+ CD8+ T cell proportions [ ]. Clinically, an increasing number of cancer patients are using probiotics to assist ICIs. Studies suggested that the probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri (Lr) released dietary Trp metabolite I3A within tumors, locally promoting IFN-γ production by CD8+ T cells, thereby enhancing ICIs [ ]. Moreover, Tumor cells also enhance Trp uptake by upregulating the amino acid transporter SLC7A5 (LAT1) [ ]. Metformin, via downregulation of MYC, reduced the expression of the SLC7A5 in tumor cells, thereby inhibiting Trp uptake by CRC cells and increasing Trp metabolism in CD8+ T cells [ ]. Overall, blocking tumor cell Trp metabolism promotes the anti-tumor effects of CD8+ T cells.
Arginine (Arg) is severely deficient in TME, significantly impairing anti-tumor immune responses. Arg-1 is upregulated in the TME, continuously breaking down Arg, which hinders the binding of Arg-1 to ICIs, thereby restoring the function of CD8+ T cells in PDAC tumors [ ]. Combining supplementation of Arg and inhibition of Arg-1 represents a novel approach to rectifying Arg metabolic disorders. A multifunctional nano-platform (HN-HFPA) with cavities could load Arg, and L-norleucine (L-nor) serves as an inhibitor of Arg-1 in M2 TAMs, which is modified with hyaluronic acid (HA) and coated on the surface of HFPA. L-Nor inhibits the overexpression of Arg-1 in M2 TAMs, thereby increasing the proportion of CD8+ T cells [ ]. Also, researchers have designed polymeric vesicle technologies to sustainably supply alkaline Arg to the TME, which simultaneously altered the acidity and Arg deficiency in the TME and selectively knocked out the tumor CAT-2 transporter, inhibiting tumor Arg uptake, and significantly promoted infiltration and activation of CD8+ T cells in tumors and exhibited synergistic anti-tumor effects when used in combination with anti-PD-1 antibodies [ ]. Therefore, supplementing with Arg and inhibiting Arg-1 are effective strategies to elevate Arg levels within the TME, thereby restoring CD8+ T cell function and increasing tumor infiltration.
Blocking tumor cell Gln metabolism also enhances immune therapy efficacy [ ]. Gln metabolism is crucial for both the proliferation of cancer cells and the function of CD8+ T cells. In HCC, tumor cells exhibited significantly higher scores in Gln metabolism genes than CD8+ T cells, while a decrease in the CD8+ effector T cells-granzyme A (CD8+-Tef-GZMA) ratio is observed, and disrupting Gln metabolism in tumor cells could help enriched CD8+ T cells infiltrating the tumor, thereby enhancing the efficacy of immune therapy [ ]. JHU083 is an orally active Gln metabolism antagonist. Flow cytometry and single-cell RNA sequencing in lung tumors demonstrated that JHU083 increased infiltration of CD8+ T cells and CD4+ T helper 1 cells (Th1) while reducing immune-suppressive cells, including monocytes, myeloid-derived suppressor cells, Tregs, and pro-tumor CD4+ Th17 cells [ ]. Also, researchers have developed a photodynamic immune stimulant , composed of photosensitizer (chlorin e6), ASCT2 inhibitor (V9302), and PD-1/PD-L1 blockade (BMS-1). V9302 inhibits Gln transport in tumor cells, leading to upregulation of Fas and PD-L1. Results indicated that BVC not only enhanced immune recognition between CD8+ T cells and tumor cells overexpressing Fas, but also reduces tumor cell immune escape by blocking PD-1/PD-L1, which was beneficial for eradicating metastatic tumors such as colorectal and breast cancers [ ]. Additionally, tumor cells compete with DCs for Gln by upregulating the transporter SLC38A2, which impairs DCs function, consequently hindering the activation of cytotoxic CD8+ T cells and facilitating immune escape of tumor cells. Importantly, inhibiting Gln metabolism in tumor cells enhances immune cell function.
Targeting other amino acid metabolism pathways also contributes to immune therapy in tumors. Aspartate (Asp) synthetase (ASNS) converts aspartic acid to asparagine (Asn), studies indicated that SLC25A22 underpins immune suppression in mutant KRAS-induced CRC, which facilitated SLC25A22 binding to Asn and activates Src phosphorylation, triggering ERK/ETS2/CXCL1/CXCR2 signaling to recruit MDSCs into the TME, fostering an immunosuppressive microenvironment, and targeting tumor SLC25A22 or Asn increased infiltration of CD8+ T cells, synergizing with anti-PD1 therapy [ ]. Also, tumor cells can mediate immunosuppression via cysteine. For example, H2S promoted the activation of Tregs by persulfidation of cysteine 119 on enolase 1 (ENO1). Further, H2S enhanced the expression of AP2-associated protein kinase 1 (AAK-1) by persulfidating cysteine 25 on ETs transcription factor ELK4 (ELK4), thereby inhibiting the migration of CD8+ T cells. Dietary restriction of sulfur amino acids (SAAs) reduced H2S levels, significantly decreasing CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ Tregs and increasing CD8+ T/Treg ratio, and finally enhanced the efficacy of anti-PD-L1 and anti-CTLA4 therapies [ ]. Besides, upregulation of SLC6A6 on tumor cells competitively absorbed taurine, depriving CD8+ T cells and promoting immune evasion. Supplementation of taurine restored the exhausted CD8+ T cells and improved the efficacy of cancer therapies. Selective inhibition of tumor cell SLC6A6 may benefit immune therapy by preventing excessive taurine uptake by tumor cells [ ].
To sum up, inhibiting the competitive uptake of amino acids by tumor cells markedly improves CD8+ T cell function and enhances the efficacy of immunotherapy. Thus, targeting amino acid metabolism in tumor cells represents a perspectival therapeutic strategy for reversing the immunosuppressive TME.

4.3

## Targeting lipid metabolism
Reprogramming of lipid metabolism has emerged as a new hallmark of cancer. To sustain proliferation and survival in the hypoxic and nutrient-deprived TME, cancer cells undergo metabolic shifts to accumulate and convert lipids into harmful oxidized derivatives, which further suppress the immune response. Therefore, targeting lipid metabolism in tumor cells represents a novel strategy for remodeling the immunosuppressive microenvironment.
Inhibiting the uptake of various lipids by tumor cells effectively disrupts their metabolic reprogramming. For example, blocking CD36 could effectively restore CD8+ T cell anti-tumor activity, synergizing with anti-PD-1 antibodies to enhance anti-tumor efficacy, which indicates that targeting CD36 to restore T cell function can reshape the immune microenvironment and promote immunotherapy [ ]. Further, inhibiting or silencing FABP5 induced lipid peroxidation in cancer cells, contributing to iron-induced cell death, which increased TAMs co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 expression, and enhanced CD8+ T cell activation. Thus, targeting FABP5 represents a potential synergistic immunotherapy approach [ ]. Additionally, certain lipid metabolism-related genes, such as CYP19A1, are upregulated in tumor cells [ ]. Mechanistically, CYP19A1-catalyzed estrogen biosynthesis promoted CRC vascular abnormalities and upregulated PD-L1, IL-6, and TGF-β via the GPR30-AKT signaling pathway to suppress CD8+ T cell function. Inhibiting CYP19A1 combined with PD-1 blockade presents a promising immunotherapy strategy for CRC [ ]. Disrupting tumor cell FA metabolism increases CD8+ T cell infiltration, preventing immune evasion and improving the efficacy of anti-PD-1 therapy. These findings underscore the potential of controlling FA metabolism to inhibit tumor growth and enhance responses to ICB therapy.
Also, tumor cells assimilate macrophages, DCs, and Tregs in the TME through lipid metabolism, further establishing an immunosuppressive status. For example, inhibiting FABP5 in C1q+ TAMs of lung cancer enhanced the anti-tumor activity of CD8+ T cells in MPE, promoting ICB therapy [ ]. Furthermore, tumor lipid metabolism reprogramming significantly impaired DCs function, and restoring DCs function can enhance CD8+ T cell activity [ ]. For instance, IL-12, an essential cytokine produced by DCs, stimulates CD8+ T cells by elevating acetyl-CoA levels, enhancing histone acetylation and IFN-γ production, and improving the metabolic and functional adaptation of CD8+ T cells within tumors, which increases intracellular acetyl-CoA in CD8+ T cells, thereby enhancing their effector functions in the nutrient-deficient TME [ ]. In addition, research has been reported that monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA)-based nano vaccines (MANs) were developed, which incorporated protein antigens extracted from tumor cells. MANs induce antigen capture by DCs, promoting DCs and CD8+ T cell activation, and then optimizing the CD8+ T/Tregs ratio in tumors. In immune therapy-resistant CT26 CRC models, MANs significantly enhance anti-PD-1 efficacy [ ]. These findings suggest a feasible strategy for improving T cell anti-tumor efficacy.
Tumor lipo-metabolism generates harmful metabolites such as oxidized lipids, which induce the expression of relevant transport receptors in the TME and shuttle oxidized lipids into CD8+ T cells, directly impairing their functionality. Blocking the uptake of oxidized lipids represents a crucial approach to improving CD8+ T cell function within the microenvironment. Overexpression of glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) could alleviate lipid peroxidation, while inhibition of CD36 reduced lipid transport, and then restored the functionality of CD8+ TILs in vivo [ ]. Therefore, blockade of the oxidized lipid-CD36 pathway may restore impaired CD8+ T cell function within tumors. Furthermore, patients with MM exhibit elevated levels of FATP1 expression in bone marrow CD8+ T cells, resulting in increased uptake of oxidized lipids from the bone marrow, and inhibition of FATP1 rescued CD8+ T cell function, identifying it as a novel target to enhance T cell activity in MM patients [ ]. CD8+ T cells in TME exhibit persistent ACC enzyme activity, and inhibition of ACC-catalyzed FA oxidation in CD8+ T cells and reduced lipid droplet saturation, and then increased ATP production in CD8+ T cells and enhanced the anti-tumor efficacy of TILs. Thus, strategic inhibition of CD8+ T cell ACC represents a promising metabolic reprogramming therapy with significant potential to enhance the efficacy of CD8 T cell-based cancer immunotherapy [ ]. In conclusion, inhibiting the uptake of harmful oxidized lipids produced by tumor cells is an effective strategy for restoring CD8+ T cell function. Additionally, it is crucial not to overlook the importance of preventing the accumulation of lipids within CD8+ T cells.
Cholesterol metabolism of tumor cells also profoundly impacts CD8+ T cell function. Tumor cells enhance the de novo cholesterol synthesis pathway via upregulation of HMGCR and increase exogenous cholesterol uptake through LDLR upregulation. Inhibitors of the mevalonate pathway, such as statins, suppress rate-limiting enzymes HMGCR and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase 1 (HMGCS1), and in combination with ICB therapy significantly inhibit tumor cell growth [ ]. Importantly, reducing cholesterol metabolites is equally crucial for improving the immunosuppressive microenvironment. Cholesterol metabolized into CE via ACAT promotes tumor development and inhibits the uptake of free cholesterol by CD8+ T cells, and inhibiting ACAT reduces neutral lipid droplets in CD8+ T cells, which enhances TCR signaling and TCR-dependent bioenergetics, and increases CD8+ T cell responsiveness to PD-1 blockade, suppressing colon cancer proliferation and metastasis [ ]. Thus, targeting cholesterol metabolism in tumor cells could ameliorate the immunosuppressive microenvironment.
Overall, targeting tumor lipid metabolism could improve the immunosuppressive microenvironment, create survival niches for CD8+ T cells, restore function, and enhance the efficacy of immune therapy.

5

## Conclusions
Immunotherapy has emerged as a pivotal strategy in cancer treatment, offering the potential for tumor cures and significantly extending patient survival, especially when combined with traditional therapies such as chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation. However, the clinical use of therapies such as PD-1/PD-L1 inhibitors, CTLA-4 inhibitors, CAR-T therapy, and TCR-T therapy has revealed a growing drug resistance, primarily driven by the immunosuppressive effects on CD8+ T cells. Researches have emphasized the importance of metabolic reprogramming of tumor cells on CD8+ T cell function, contributing to the failure of immunotherapy, due to the low pH and exhausted oxygen levels within the TME. Thus, numerous strategies have been identified to target tumor metabolic reprogramming to confront these challenges in recent years. These strategies hold significant clinical implications for improving patient outcomes by reversing the immunosuppressive TME and enhancing the efficacy of immunotherapy.
We have summarized recent clinical trials targeting metabolic pathways ( ). In glucose metabolism, the focus has primarily been on targeting the glycolysis pathway, with various potential targets. In contrast, the amino acid and lipid metabolism targets are relatively more specific, namely IDO and HMGCR, respectively. When combined with immunotherapy, drugs targeting metabolic pathways have shown promising antitumor effects. Therefore, identifying additional targets that influence tumor metabolism and developing more drugs targeting tumor metabolic pathways are urgent and highly significant for cancer treatment. Overall, targeting tumor immune metabolism is beneficial for reshaping the TME and represents an effective approach to cancer treatment. 
Moreover, modifying CD8+ T cell metabolism to overcome the immunosuppressive microenvironment represents as another crucial strategy to confront the challenge of tumor cell metabolic reprogramming. Studies have demonstrated CTLs require the diversion of endogenous succinate from the TCA cycle, utilizing succinate receptor 1 (SUCNR1) to promote autocrine signaling that sustains cellular function and health. CTLs are reliant on pyruvate carboxylase (PC) to replenish TCA cycle intermediates. In contrast, lactate secreted by tumor cells inhibits PC activity by increasing pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) levels in CTLs. Targeting PDH in CD8+ T cells was sufficient to restore PC activity, and then reinstating succinate autocrine signaling and activating SUCNR1, which allowed CD8⁺ T cells to maintain their cytotoxicity and overcame the lactate-rich TME [ ]. Similarly, lipid metabolism exerts analogous effects. Reports indicated that lipids can compromise CTL mitochondrial integrity, resulting in functional deficiencies. Linoleic acid (LA) could enhance endoplasmic reticulum-mitochondria contacts (MERC), promoting CTL effector functions, further improving metabolism, preventing exhaustion, and stimulating a memory-like phenotype with enhanced effector capabilities [ ]. As a result, targeting modification of CD8+ T cell metabolism is also a significant avenue for enhancing their antitumor functions, which represents another promising strategy for improving immunotherapy.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Huan Liu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Investigation. Wenyong Yang: Funding acquisition. Jingwen Jiang: Supervision, Funding acquisition.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

 

## Acknowledgments
This research was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.: 82373336, and 82303238) and Sichuan Science and Technology Department, China (Grant Nos.: 2024NSFSC1945, and 2023NSFSC0667), The Third People's Hospital of Chengdu Clinical Research Program, China (Program Nos.: CSY-YN-01-2023-013, CSY-YN-01-2023-005, and CSY-YN-03-2024-003), Sichuan University “From 0 to 1” Innovative Research Project, China (Project No.: 2023SCUH0024), and Health Commission of Chengdu, China (Grant No.: 2024291). The authors thank biorender.com for the drawing help.
Peer review under responsibility of Xi'an Jiaotong University.