pmcMedComm (2020)MedComm (2020)4101mcomm101769925MCO2MedComm2688-2663WileyPMC12514560PMC12514560.112514560125145604107964310.1002/mco2.70321MCO2703211ReviewReviewImmune Surveillance and Immune Escape in Cancer: Mechanisms and Immunotherapy
PengYing pengying@zzu.edu.cnZhanLinsheng ShiJianxiang WangJie LiYueying SunXiangdong LvJie YangHuiyu QiuZan LiuXingzhao LiChenyan GongShanshan JiaWen WangHuiying ZhaoYuqi ZhangBin GuoWei GuoJiancheng ShangJian ZhouQianqian zhouqianvv521@126.comYangYanan yang.yanan@ahmu.edu.cnGaoFeng gaoyuanshan@126.com

1

Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences
Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou
Henan
China

2

Academy of Military Medical Sciences Institute of Health Service and Transfusion Medicine
Beijing
China

3

Henan Key Laboratory for Helicobacter Pylori & Microbiota and GI Cancer
Marshall Medical Research Center
The Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou
China

4

The Research and Application Center of Precision Medicine
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University
Zhengzhou
Henan
China

5

Department of Immunology
School of Basic Medical Sciences
Anhui Medical University
Hefei
Anhui
China
1110202510202561049687510.1002/mco2.v6.10e70321
1772025
25112024
1872025
111020251210202513102025© 2025 The Author(s). MedComm published by Sichuan International Medical Exchange & Promotion Association (SCIMEA) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## ABSTRACT
Despite the tremendous amount of basic knowledge in cancer immunity gained and many transitional approaches attempted, current cancer immunotherapies are still far from reaching universal effectiveness. Therefore, next‐generation cancer immunotherapies would emerge from deepened mechanistic insights on the full spectrum of cellular and molecular interactions between cancer cells and their immune sentinels. This review embarks on an exhaustive exploration of the cardinal immunological principles that catalyze robust cancer surveillance and their potential escapes and recapitulate the state‐of‐art understanding of both receptors and corresponding immune cell types involved. Both tumor intrinsic and tumor microenvironmental mediators of immune escapes are outlined in the context of current clinic applications. Following emphasizing the exceptional requisites that effective cancer immunity cycle must meet, specific cellular subsets crucial for igniting tumor immunity, notably effector and helper T cells alongside antigen presentation cells are examined, focusing on their close interactions in both antigen‐dependent and ‐independent manners. Such intricate interactions form dynamic immune hubs at the tumor site, holding promising key functionality in rendering effective cancer retreat. Grounded on these recent insights, refined immunotherapeutic strategies, especially those bolstering priming based anticancer effector functions are advocated.

Our review focused on how specific cellular subsets crucial for igniting tumor immunity cycle, notably effector and helper T cells alongside antigen presentation cells, interact closely in both antigen‐dependent and ‐independent manners (within centered ring) adjacent to cancer cells. Such intricate interactions form an integrated and dynamic immune hub at the tumor site, where a delicate balance between immune killing of cancer cells versus cancer immune suppression and escape is reached. To tilt the balance favoring cancer eradication, mechanistic insights inspired us to advocate for three specific refined strategies (on the peripheral of the ring) to bolster antitumor vaccine designs by ① delivering the antigen to draining lymph node, and to maintain engaged DC status within TME and DC's vital mobility back to the tumor draining lymph node (purple arrows), ② targeting the antigen to be engulfed by specialized cDC1 antigen presentation cells, and ③ promoting antigen cross‐presentation by engaging relevant cellular signaling pathways as well as purposefully shuttling endolytic protein cargoes through particular routs among diverse cellular compartments.
 

antigen cross‐presentationcancer immunosurveillancecancer vaccineconventional dendrite cell type Iimmune escapeimmune hub
Ministry of Science and Technology of China10.13039/501100002855
2022YFC2303500‐1
Henan Engineering Technology Research Center for Accurate Diagnosis Neuroimmunity

National Natural Science Foundation of China10.13039/501100001809
8247023282073257W2441013
Key Scientific and Technological Project of Henan Province
232102310312242102310369
Key Research and Development Project of Henan Provincial Department of Science and Technology
251111314500)
Project of Basic Research Fund of Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmacological Sciences
2023BP02052024BP02102025BP0105 With the widespread applications of cancer immuno therapies, in particular ICIs and adoptive cell transfer (ACT), we envision a timely review extremely beneficial on understanding how an intertwined battle between cancer immunosurveillance and cancer immune escape dictates the clinic outcomes of individual patients. Therefore, we first summarized the known principles of how cancer immunosurveillance was carried out by different effector T cells via distinctive receptors. Next, on the flip side of the coin, we discussed mediators of T cell exhaustion and other major means of cancer immune escapes. The limitations of both ICIs and ACT were discussed on the context of what is missing in sustaining effector T cell number and activities with corresponding therapeutic strategies. In depth discussion on the recently emerged local immune‐hubs sustained by organic interactions between antigen‐presenting cells (APCs) with tumor antigen harvested and relevant antigen‐specific CD4+ and CD8+ cells reveals a new but exciting scene for cancer immunotherapy. Finally, we envisioned how rationally designed cancer vaccines can be an extremely appealing therapeutic avenue by fine‐tuning not only the quantities of cancer antigens but also the integrity of cancer immune‐hubs to sustain a fruitful cancer immune cycle.

2

## Effector T Cells and Neoantigen‐Specific TCRs
T cells are the major sentinel immune cells attacking malignant transformed cells with diverse antigen specificity. We will first survey how they utilized their TCRs to distinguish transformed cells among healthy cells.
2.1

## Tumor Mutational Burden, Neoantigens, and MHC Antigen Presentation
T cells, together with B cells, are power‐horsing adoptive immunity, sharing the amazing properties combining generating diverse receptor repertoire for recognizing potential antigens with the plasticity establishing “clonal expansion‐based memory.” Such combination allows the flexibility to adjust the specific clonal population dynamically upon antigen encounters; therefore, a future repeated infection with the same pathogen can be handled more efficiently. Successful vaccines take full advantage of the dynamic nature of adoptive immunity arm, to prepare the host organism with sufficiently expanded memory and effector T cells as well as specific antibodies, blunting the significant risk of devastating infection by the prospective pathogen.
Cytotoxic effector T cells, most widely known as CD8+ T cells, and major subsets of CD4+ T cells [ , , , , , , , ], used their TCRs for cancer cell recognition [ ]. As originally proposed theoretically by Lewis Thomas “that the immune system recognize newly arising tumors through the expression of tumor‐specific neoantigens on tumor cells and eliminate them, similarly to homograft rejection, maintaining tissue homeostasis in complex multicellular organism” [ ], we now know that so called “neoantigens” are indeed recognized by host TCRs [ ], as they are “presented” as short peptides bound on MHC molecules exposed on cell surface, in a manner highly consistent with foreign antigens presented by MHC molecules from xenografted tissues [ , ]. All cells can present antigenic peptides generated from endogenous protein degradation clinched onto one of either two classes of MHC molecules, with antigens universally resting in a groove formed by an extracellular region of MHC antigen‐presenting molecules [ , , ] (Figure  ). All nucleated cells express MHC Class I (MHC‐I) molecules presenting peptides mainly derived from endogenous proteins, while peptides derived from exogenous proteins are mainly presented by professional APCs via their significant expression of MHC‐II molecules. The lack of a significant “self” immune response toward “self” cells are mainly due to efficient clonal deletions against self‐responding T cell clones with strong TCR activation during T cell maturation process in the thymus [ ]. Therefore, neoantigen peptides specifically arising from tumor mutational burdens (TMBs) (such as via generating nonsynonymous mutated amino acids) were not previously seen during T cell maturation within host thymus and is likely to be immunogenic given it can be processed and bound efficiently by one of the host's MHC molecules [ ] (Figure  ). Similarly, neopeptides can be generated from noncoding genomic sequences, translation aberrations, and posttranslational abnormality in cancer cells [ , , ], gene fusions [ , ], cancer‐specific alternative splicing [ , , ], RNA editing [ ], and endogenous retroviruses expressed in cancer cells [ , ]. Such potential sources of generating cancer‐associated neoantigens are likely to explode further through recent successes in immuno‐peptidomics technologies [ , , ]. On the other hand, microbial‐derived peptides were also discovered for their cancer immuno‐reactivity, due to tumor‐associated microbes or chronic viral infection associated with cancer incidences [ , , , , ].
High TMB (Tumor Mutation Burden), necessitating a significant variety of potential neoantigens, is associated with clinical benefit from current immunotherapy [ , , , , , ]. However, the clinical efficacy of immunotherapy is far from being predicted by the quantity of neoantigens available [ ]. For example, boosting immune response against a single shared neoantigen has been shown to be highly effective in tumor control [ ]. Furthermore, although TMB is in general consistent with the responsiveness of ICIs therapy, there are much more distinctive T cell clones discovered against each neoantigens from immune checkpoint blockade responders among melanoma patients under immunotherapy comparing with nonresponders, suggesting that a rich TCR pool against neoantigens ensures at least some of those distinctive clones will be effective in harnessing tumor growth [ ]. Among multiple TCRs against the same neoantigen, while TCR binding strength in general predicts the T cell activation probability in vitro [ ], in vivo control of tumor does not necessarily favor the T cell clone with the strongest binding affinity toward the cancer neoantigen [ ]. Therefore, a rich neoantigen‐specific, actionable T cell reportorial recognizing multiple potent patient‐specific MHC/neoantigen combination would in principle ensure higher probability of neoantigen‐dependent cancer cell killing, although the nature of mutation heterogeneity among different cancer cells in the same patient will be inflicted with differential immune surveillance pressures, therefore escaping cancer cells with the least immune pressure will likely develop further and progress [ , ].

2.2

## Effector T Cells Expansion Relies on Clonal Activation via Heterodimeric TCRs Recognizing Different Cancer Cell Surface Features
TCRs sense antigens as a heterodimer. In humans, in 95% of T cells, the TCR consists of an alpha (α) chain and a beta (β) chain, whereas in 5% of T cells, the TCR consists of gamma and delta (γ/δ) chains (Figure  ). Somatic recombination on corresponding TRA and TRB, TRG, and TRD locus is mainly responsible for creating TCR diversity on T cells [ , ]. The intersection of these specific variable regions (V and J for the alpha or gamma chain; V, D, and J for the beta or delta chain) corresponds to the complementarity determining region 3 region that is important for peptide/MHC recognition. In contrast, γδ T cells adopt an alternative TCR architecture, consisting of γ and δ chains, granting them the ability to perceive a wider array of antigens in MHC‐independent manner [ , ]. γδ T cells extend their sensing capabilities to include stress‐induced antigens, phosphoantigens, and others, all while circumventing the need for MHC‐mediated antigen presentation [ , , ]. Vγ9Vδ2 T cells—a major subtype of human circulating γδ T cells—respond to multiple cancer and viral infected cells [ ], through so called “inside‐out” activation by small diphosphate metabolites (pAgs) [ , ]. The sensing of pAgs involved ligand binding to the intracellular B30.2 domain of BTN3A, a cell membrane localizing butyrophilin protein. Subsequently, pAgs glues the intracellular domains of BTN3A1 and BTN2A1, both of which are structurally similar butyrophilins. Their intracellular association enables BTN3A1 to be free from its BTN2A1 partner on the extracellular ectodomains, subsequently triggering Vγ9Vδ2 TCR‐mediating T cell activation [ , ] (Figure  ).

2.3

## Innate Cytolytic Activities with Neoantigen‐Independent Cancer Surveillance Mode Might be Independent with Their TCRs
Besides well‐characterized Vγ9Vδ2 TCR, how other γδ T cells are activated by prospective ligand remains poorly understood. Furthermore, neoantigen‐independent cancer surveillance mode has been recently uncovered with innate cytolytic activities against tumor cells [ ], while whether their TCRs are responsible for tumor‐specific recognition remains to be explored. However, such tissue‐resident type 1 innate‐like T cells are expanded in the presence of precancerous lesions, with an apparent lack of T cell exhaustion as most conventional cytotoxic T cells do [ , ]. Processing stimulation‐dependent clonal expansion capability without simultaneously compromising its effector function makes it an attractive target for developing future cancer immune therapeutics [ ].

3

## Effector T Cells are Refrained with Signaling Modules to Counter their Effector Function
Effector T cells, although critical for immune surveillance, are extremely susceptible to cell death with prolonged immune activation. In addition, sustained immune activation will lead to uncontrolled and excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines, causing systematic “cytokine storm” that leads to frequent multisystem organ failure and even death. We will discuss endogenous signaling and metabolic modules refraining T cell effector functionality, followed by current immune therapies relieving partially such “braking” mechanisms.
3.1

## T Cell Exhaustion and Immune Checkpoint Receptors
During adaptive immune responses, naïve T cells exit quiescence and become activated with antigen encounter to undergo clonal expansion and differentiation, a process collectively initiated by at least three well‐established signaling events: TCR binding to cognate antigen presented on MHC molecules (Signal 1), costimulation largely mediated by CD28 ligation (Signal 2), and cytokines (Signal 3). The canonic model of T cell activation suggests once T cells receive these critical signals simultaneously, they are committed to proliferate and acquire cytotoxic potential immediately. With subsequent and continuous encounter of cells presenting their cognate antigen, those effectors are committed to kill target cells, despite they will gradually lose their capability to proliferate and kill (so called “exhaustion”) [ ]. Such gradual functional decline of elicited immune reaction, is thought to be mediated by so called immune checkpoint receptors. Those are a series of molecules that are found on T cells upon antigen encounter and T cell activation to prevent overactivation of the immune system [ ]. Over the past few decades, numerous immune checkpoint molecules have been identified, including but not limited to PD‐1, CTLA‐4, lymphocyte‐activation gene 3 (LAG3), T‐cell immunoglobulin, and mucin‐domain containing‐3.
T cell exhaustion is a differentiation state characterized by progressive and hierarchical loss of effector functions following chronic antigen exposure [ , ]. First characterized via chronic infection models, there are now overwhelming evidences that T cell exhaustion features are ubiquitously present in both human and mouse Tumor infiltrating T cells, as the consequence of chronic exposures to tumor‐associated antigens (TAAs) within TME [ , ]. Following the antigen exposure of naive T cells, there are at least three cell subpopulations acquiring different degrees of T cell exhaustion features (Figure  ). T progenitor cells express low level of PD1 and high level of T cell proliferation marker TCF1, without significant expression of T effector program molecules such as CD39 and GZMB. Tex progenitor cells maintain expression of PD1 and T cell proliferation marker TCF1, but acquire the full expression of T effector program molecules. Both T progenitor cells and Tex progenitor cells are antigen experienced, but can maintain self‐renewal in vitro with the condition of antigen stimulation. Tex progenitor cells can subsequently differentiate toward Tex terminal cells within TME, which are characterized by loss of TCF1 (and consequentially substantial cell proliferation capability), and instead express high level of T cell exhaustion markers TOX, PD1, and T cell Ig and mucin domain‐containing protein 3 (TIM3) [ , , , ]. Therefore, Tex terminal cells might have limited cytotoxic capability but are nonreplenishing [ , , ].
 The switch from TCF1 toward TOX expression largely defines a “definite” exhausted state, both of which are acting as master transcriptional regulators responsible for distinct T cell physiology [ , ]. The increasing expression of exhaustion‐related checkpoint receptors such as PD1, and TIM3 are directly responsible for fine‐tuning the activation thresholds of T cell, making the same antigen‐specific T cell cell more and more refractory to be actively engaged in target cell killing with identical antigen encounter [ ].
After ligand engagement with PD‐L1 expressed on cancer cells or APCs, PD‐1 becomes phosphorylated on its cytoplasmic ITIM and ITSM motifs to deliver inhibitory function. Among these two, the phosphorylation on ITSM but not ITIM might be critical, as tyrosine mutations of ITSM but not ITIM abrogates the inhibitory function of PD‐1 [ ]. Phosphorylated ITSM primarily recruits phosphatase SHP2 to dephosphorylate key signaling molecules to downmodulate activation level [ , , ]. In exhausted T cells with high PD‐1 expression, activated PD‐1 molecules form microclusters, inhibiting both antigen and costimulatory signaling, abrogating phosphorylation of TCR and its downstream signaling molecules like ZAP70 [ , ].
Costimulation signal for T cell activation is mainly mediated by CD28 ligation on T cell surface via binding with CD80/86 expressed on APCs. Compared with CD28, T cell expressing CTLA‐4 binds to CD80/86 with much higher affinity, thus inhibiting costimulation via ligand competition [ ]. At the same time, CTLA‐4‐expressing T cells can also reduce cell surface CD80/86 density on adjacent APCs by trans‐endocytosis, resulting in decreased CD28 signaling. Depending on the degree of T cell activation, CTLA‐4 can cluster into the immune synapse similar to PD‐1 [ , ]. Within such inhibitory signaling microclusters, the YVKM motif of CTLA‐4 can be tyrosine phosphorylated, which in turn prevents the interaction between CTLA‐4 with AP‐2, therefore maintaining CTLA‐4 on the cell surface to boost inhibitory signaling [ ], On the other hand, the phosphorylated YVKM motif can directly recruit SHP2 to repress T cell activation similar to the mode of action as PD‐1 [ ]. CTLA‐4 also induces retrograde signaling in dendritic cells (DCs) through ligation of CD80/86, resulting IDO (indoleamine 2,3‐dioxygenase) expression and subsequent tryptophan depletion and severe T cell suppression [ ].
TIM3 is another major checkpoint receptor highly expressed on exhausted T cells. Similar to PD‐1 and CTLA‐4, it is recruited to the immune synapse upon ligand engagement, disrupts stable immune synapse formation, and associates with receptor phosphatases [ ]. There are four ligands reported for TIM3, including Galectin9 (C‐type lectin galectin9), Ceacam1 c (arcinoembryonic antigen cell adhesion molecule 1), HMGB1 (high‐mobility group box 1), and phosphatidylserine (PS). Ceacam1 binds to TIM3 both in cis and trans. The cis interaction with Ceacam1 in T cell is necessary for TIM3 glycosylation and surface expression, while their trans interaction‐mediated inhibition of effector T cell function [ ]. Beyond T cells, TIM3 is also involved in DC function such that HMGB1 bound to TIM3 on tumor‐associated DC surface to suppress the recruitment of released nucleic acid from dying tumor cells, thus inhibiting nucleic acid‐induced innate immune response in DC, damping its costimulatory function [ ]. Furthermore, TIM3 expressed on DC and macrophages promotes efferocytosis of apoptotic cells via direct PS binding. Therefore, TIM3 antibody inhibited engulfment of apoptotic cells by APCs, thereby reducing antigen cross‐presentation [ , ].
LAG3 is identified as a ligand of MHC‐II and fibrinogen‐like protein 1 [ , ]. The cytoplasmic domain of LAG3 contains a KIEELE motif, and multiple EP repeats. The KIEELE sequence is essential for the inhibitory function of LAG3 in T cells. Immediately preceding the KIEELE sequence, an evolutionary conserved basic residue‐rich sequence (BRS) motif found within the juxta‐membrane segment of LAG3. It was found to interact with acidic phospholipids abundant on the inner leaflet of plasma membrane. Such interaction efficiently sequesters the KIEELE signaling elements of LAG3 in T cells during quiescent state [ ]. Upon T cell activation and LAG3 ligand engagement. The lysine residue on LAG3 cytoplasmic KIEELE motif is quickly ubiquitinated. While such ubiquitination does not affect LAG3 protein stability nor its cell surface presentation, it effectively relieves the plasma membrane sequestration of the KIEELE signaling elements [ ], although its downstream signaling cascades remain elusive.
BTLA (B‐ and T‐lymphocyte attenuator) contains ITIM and ITSM motifs as well as a Grb2 recognition motif in its cytoplasmic domain. Both ITIM and ITSM can be phosphorylated to inhibit T cell function upon ligand ligation [ ]. Despite the similarity between BTLA and PD‐1‐mediated phosphatase attenuation of TCR signaling, BTLA prefers to recruit the more potent phosphatase SHP1, therefore inhibits both TCR and CD28 signaling more effectively, while PD‐1 mainly recruits the weaker phosphatase SHP2 [ , , , ]. In addition, T cell lineage protein THEMIS is recruited to the cytoplasmic domain of BTLA and blocks its signaling capacity via oxidation of the catalytic cysteine of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP‐1 [ ]. Therefore, in the absence of THEMIS, the signaling capacity of BTLA is exacerbated. Under physiological condition, BTLA inhibitory signaling is fine‐tuned according to the THEMIS expression level, making CD8+ T cells more resistant to BTLA‐mediated inhibition than CD4+ T cells [ ].
While the list of additional checkpoint receptors is still accumulating, it is likely that different receptors have distinct mechanisms to tune down T cell activation‐dependent effector function. The potential complex interplay between those damping activities with TCR signaling, coactivator signaling, and cytokine sensing is beyond the scope of this review. It is worth noting that checkpoint receptor signaling likely involved in the epigenetic changes to restrain effector T cells in a “locked‐in” exhausted state with genome wide chromatin level changes [ ]. Whether such epigenetic transition can be reversed by applying checkpoint inhibitors remains a critical question to be addressed in the field of cancer immunology.

3.2

## Both Cancer Cells and APCs in Tumor Microenvironment can Directly Engage Checkpoint Receptors Upon T Cell Encounter Leading to its Immune Escape
The activation of checkpoint receptors (to mediate T cell exhaustion) depends on the encounter of their cognate ligands on interacting cells. As we have discussed on the previous section, there are a wide variety of protein and lipid ligands for different checkpoint receptors. Therefore, the potential source of those ligands can be quite diverse. Traditionally, it is thought within the tumor microenvironment, cancer cells are the major cell type applying those brakes on T cells through activating checkpoint receptors on tumor‐infiltrated lymphocytes (TILs). In human cancer, elevated expression of checkpoint receptor ligands such as PD‐L1 is widespread in various tumor biopsy among many cancer types [ ]. Therefore, a natural deduction for this phenomenon is when cancer cells are under increasing pressure of immune surveillance, epigenetic reprogramming of the cancer cells to increase their checkpoint ligand expression can effectively evict immune surveillance through damping the cognate TCR‐dependent T cell activation. This notion parallels with the observations that in many human cancer biopsies, loss of MHC‐I or II expression/maturation is frequently observed, which directly making the cancer cells “invisible” to T cells with antigen‐specific TCR surveillance.
Recent detailed examinations seems to challenge this cancer cell self‐centered view in causing TIL exhaustion. In GBM and other intracranial solid tumor models at least, TAMs seems to be a necessary cell type causing TIL exhaustion [ ] (Figure  ). When TAMs have decreased antigen presentation capacity due to conditional IRF8 ablation, tumor control is significantly enhanced [ ]. This is consistent with an independent study demonstrating the loss of MHC‐I ex vivo on TAMs led to decreased accumulation of Tex terminal cells [ ]. Importantly, TAM depletion alone can decrease the frequency of Tex terminal cells in vivo and enhances anti‐PD1 response with different mouse tumor models [ ].
Beyond the exhaustion program, the fine balance between Tex progenitor cell maintenance and Tex terminal cell differentiation is also keep by an active progenitor renewal program within TME [ ] (Figure  ). It has been demonstrated that antitumor Tex progenitor cell can be sustained by optimal TCR engagement, without which accelerated terminal differentiation is favored [ ]. Similarly, MHC‐II‐restricted antigen presentation is required to prevent dysfunction of cytotoxic T cells by blood‐borne myeloids in brain tumors [ ]. Although a definite cell type providing such TCR engagement remains unresolved (since both cancer cells and many APCs can be the source of tumor antigens), sustained Tex progenitor renewal is coupled to their proximal positioning to DC niches [ ]. Therefore, although different APC have different capacities for cross‐presenting tumor antigens to engage antigen‐specific T cells, some cell types are more likely to promote T cell exhaustion (likely through extensive engagements with checkpoint receptors or generating immunosuppressive metabolites) while other cell types are helping Tex progenitors to maintain renewal capability and effector functions, likely through elevated costimulation and favorable cytokine signaling. Additional cell surface interaction modes between different APC and T cells likely participate in this function divergence beyond well‐established immune receptors [ , ]. Such difference might be largely cell intrinsic, since in vitro TAMs sustain longer, interactions with CD8 T cells than equivalent DC–CD8 T interactions, while the the degree of cognate TCR activation is much weaker in the TAM–CD8 T cell pair [ ].

3.3

## Metabolic Sabotage: Nutrient Competition and Immunosuppressive Metabolites
Beyond the well‐established signals 1–3 for T cell activation, recent investigations have unveiled that T cell metabolism acts as an additional but critical axis for T cell functionality [ ]. Current consensus merging from an increasing number of studies suggests metabolic condition favoring increased mTORC1 signaling, c‐MYC activity, and activation of biosynthesis pathways altogether driving T cell activation with the other three traditional signaling axis. To be specific, glucose and amino acid uptake into T cells promotes mTORC1 activation; while glucose or glutamine deprivation activates AMPK instead. AMPK activation increases glutaminolysis and reduced mTORC1 signaling during glucose deprivation. Similarly, low amino acid uptake impair mTORC1 signaling and increase the number of uncharged tRNAs, which in turn drives fertile protein biosynthesis [ ].
Within the TME, nutrient competition arises from the simultaneous uptake of carbohydrates, lipids, and amino acids from a common extracellular pool by many residual cell types. Metabolic reprogramming of the cancer cells especially can effectively deprive glucose and amino acids (most prominently glutamine and methionine) from TIL via increasing cancer cell glucose and amino acid uptake and metabolism. IDO and ARG1‐expressing DCs and TAMs, and IDO‐expressing MDSCs, catabolize tryptophan and arginine through the kynurenine pathway (KP), thus leads to amino acid depletion [ ]. On the other hand, cancer cells and some innate immune cells can release various immunosuppressive metabolites to dampening antitumor immunity, among which the potent ones include adenosine, kynurenine, prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and norepinephrine and epinephrine [ ].
Adenosine acts mainly by agonizing four G protein‐coupled extracellular receptors, A1AR, A2AAR, A2BAR, and A3AR, stimulating cAMP‐dependent inflammatory inhibition pathways and suppress immune response. In CD8+ T cells, for example, adenosine‐mediated A2AAR agonism reduces cytotoxicity, inflammatory cytokine production, and TCR signaling [ ].
Norepinephrine and epinephrine bind two distinct classes of G‐coupled protein receptors: α‐adrenergic receptors (α1 and α2) and β‐adrenergic receptors (β1, β2, and β3), all of which can be expressed by immune cells. β‐adrenergic receptors are on the top of canonic cAMP–PKA–CREB signaling cascade. Therefore, it is unsurprising that norepinephrine and epinephrine has potent inhibitory effects on antitumor immunity [ ].
Kynurenine is the major metabolite produced by cancer cells and some innate immune cells through the KP, which itself causes tryptophan nutrient deprivation. Kynurenine is a potent activator for AhR (Aryl hydrocarbon receptor) [ ]. Upon ligand binding, the ER residing AhR/AIP (AhR‐interacting protein) complex sheds AIP, allowing nuclear translocation. In turn, freed AhR forms a heterodimeric transcription factor with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT) in nucleus to  alters genome wide gene expression. In particular, the kynurenine–AhR axis strongly inhibits the activity of CD8+ and CD4+ T cells [ ]
PGE2's role through PGE receptor EP2 and EP4 signaling has been well established in immunosuppression. In CD8 T cells, EP4 and EP2 are upregulated upon TCR activation. PGE2 in TME can blunt T cell inflammatory cytokine signaling by repressing Il2ra, which in turn downregulates c‐Myc and PGC‐1 activities, impairing T cell expansion and antitumor activity [ ]. EP4 and EP2 are also expressed in various myeloid cells. In particular, PGE2 signaling promoting a tolerogenic phenotype in DCs that impairs tumor immunity, which we will focus further in subsequent sections [ , ].

3.4

## Immune Checkpoint Blockade Therapy: From CTLA‐4 to Next‐Generation Targets
Antibody‐mediated blockade of the immune checkpoint was quickly translated in clinic oncology since its first experimental demonstration of efficacy in 1996 [ ]. Anti‐CTLA‐4 monoclonal antibodies ipilimumab (Bristol‐Myers Squibb) and tremelimumab (Pfizer, MedImmune) were the first ICIs to enter clinical testing, with the approval of ipilimumab in 2011 as first‐line therapy for advanced unresectable melanoma, Meta‐analysis done on long‐term follow‐ups with a large number of ipilimumab treated melanoma patients revealed durable survival in approximately 20% of patients [ ]. However, in nonmelanoma cancers, Ipilimumab as a mono‐therapy has so far only shown marginal antitumor effects [ ]. Furthermore, among the patients undergoing ipilimumab treatment, “immune‐related adverse events” (irAEs) was recognized and characterized as a spectrum of frequent accompanying side effects. These irAEs were associated with spontaneous inflammation in normal tissues, resembling pathology observed in human CTLA‐4 heterozygotes [ ].
In contrast to anti‐CTLA‐4, anti‐PD‐1/PD‐L1 blocking Abs appear to have a much broader spectrum of antitumor activity in the clinical setting. Antitumor activity has been observed with almost all epithelial cancers (lung, head and neck, and bladder cancers, among others) established the PD‐1 pathway as a dominant key target in cancer immunotherapy. Despite these promising clinical results, the majority of cancer patients treated with anti‐PD‐1 or anti‐PD‐L1 monotherapies fall short of achieving objective responses, and most tumor regressions cases are partial rather than complete. Therefore, current clinical practices are oriented around employing PD‐1 pathway blockade combinatory therapies together with anti‐CTLA‐4 or other checkpoint inhibitors, chemotherapy, targeted therapies, focal radiotherapy, cancer vaccines, or ADCs [ , ].
One exemplary combination therapy comes first from animal models. A strong synergistic immunosuppression effect by LAG3 and PD‐1 came first from double‐knockout mice that succumb to autoimmunity and early death although LAG3 or PD‐1 single knockout animals do not display obvious spontaneous lymphocytic infiltration [ , ]. In addition, most tumors xenoplanted in PD‐1/LAG3 double knockout mice were completely rejected, while similar transplantation on PD‐1 single knockout mice mostly display delayed tumor growth, reinforcing the notion that LAG3 and PD‐1 are synergistic in regulating T cell activity [ ]. Such animal models eventually led to the recent approval of the relatlimab (a LAG3‐blocking antibody)/nivolumab (anti‐PD‐1 antibody) combination for the treatment of unresectable or metastatic melanoma by United States Food and Drug Administration, establishing LAG3 as the third checkpoint inhibitor with demonstrated clinical efficacy. A phase 2/3 randomized trial reported that the anti‐LAG3 therapeutic relatlimab, in combination with nivolumab, achieved significantly larger portion with 12‐month progression‐free survival (PFS) in patients with melanoma, compared with nivolumab monotherapy [ ]. Far fewer patients had severe irAEs compared with ipilimumab/nivolumab, while the oncology response profile of opdualag (relatlimab/nivolumab) is comparable to the ipilimumab/nivolumab (anti‐CTLA4/anti‐PD‐1) combination [ ]. Thus, given the superior toxicity profile, risk:benefit ratio, and survival profile, opdualag (relatlimab/nivolumab) might become the preferred first‐line therapy in advanced melanoma and many other solid tumor.
Despite the continuous advances of ICI clinic applications, there remains a small portion of cancer patients under current therapeutic combinations can reach full tumor regressions. This limitation urges mechanistic re‐examination of immune checkpoint receptor‐mediated T cell biology. There are now widespread evidences that Tcf1+ CD8+T cells are the primary cells that proliferate in response to ICI therapy, while the TCF1‐DOX+ Tex terminal T cells cannot regain proliferation capability under ICI therapy [ , , , ]. Importantly, T cell costimulatory receptor CD28 is a primary target for PD‐1‐mediated inhibition [ ] and CD28 activation is essential for CD8+ T cells to respond to PD1 blockade in the context of tumor control [ ]. It is well known in “immune‐cold” tumors, low T cell infiltration is associated with far fewer costimulatory molecules in TME, and such “immune‐cold” cases are largely unresponsive to Immune checkpoint blockade therapy [ , ]. While costimulatory signals can be provided by activated APCs in the draining LN, recent evidences demonstrated that stem‐like CD8+ T cells still need costimulation persisting within the tumor for proliferation and more importantly effector differentiation [ ]. Thus, within an “immune‐cold” tumor, ICI is unlikely to ignite effective antitumor immunity by itself. A logical complementary approach is to to activate tumor residing DCs responsible for harvesting tumor antigens from dying cells and presenting those to tumor infiltrating lymphocytes. On the other hand, approaches such as oncolytic viral therapies or local TLR ligands therapies have shown promising efficacy at least in animal models, suggesting boosting general tissue inflammation alone can elevate specific tumor immunity [ ]. Future exciting progresses should be expected on translating those complementary approaches on different oncology clinic settings to achieve improving tumor regression and survival profiles while minimizing toxicity and associated irAE risks.

4

## Effector cells and Effector Cell Transfusion Therapies
Beyond immune checkpoint blockades, ACT is another popular class of cancer immune therapies. We will differentiate different flavors of effector cells useful for ACT and discuss current status and limitations of effector cell transfusion therapies.
4.1

## Priming‐Dependent Effector Cells versus Innate Effector Cells
While activation of αβ T cells as we discussed above demands at least a tandem input of signals‐antigen recognition, costimulation, as well as cytokine signaling, γδ T cells can be activated by a singular signal from the target cells [ ]. This distinction is critical since the first mode of effector activation is usually termed “primed activation” and the coactivator free mode is coined as “innate activation,” which is observed beyond above mentioned γδ T cells (Figure  ). NK cells, for example, are important innate immune effector cells without recombination generated target recognition receptors. They employ both germline‐encoded, activation and inhibition surveillance receptors (Figure  ). Upon target engagement via those receptors, a drastic increase of activation signal or an absence of “self” sensing, inhibitory signal, activates NK cells followed by the similar formation of immune synapse and cell polarization as during T cell activation [ , , ] (Figure  ). They are effective in killing some cancer cells and viral‐infected cells by releasing two types of preformed cytotoxic protein: the granzyme and perforin. The highly polar release of the effector molecules cross the immunology synapses ensures selective killing of target cells both in vitro and in vivo [ ]. Beyond NK cells with such well‐established innate cancer surveillance function, we now know a small portion of tissue‐resident T cells (both αβ and γδ) use cell surface innate receptors to screen and eliminate cancer cells [ , ]. Their activation and expansion are dependent on the release of IL‐15 from the cancer rather than specific known tumor antigens [ ]. Therefore, among multiple immune cell types with direct effector function against cancer, ILC1s are found to increase their numbers in tissue with cancer unlike NK cells, their enrichment does not accompany a strong TCR‐dependent bias as typical TILs (typical T cells), suggesting an antigen‐independent local amplification process is involved [ ]. This notion is confirmed by their apparent lack of cell circulation as typical T cells do [ ]. Given the notion that priming‐dependent effector cells are dynamically regulated in our immune system, most vaccination strategies have focused on providing such effective initial “priming” to boost the quantity and quality of priming‐dependent effector cells in order to better catch cancer cells. On the other hand, effector cells can be expanded and engineered in vitro and transfused back to the host to combat cancer.

4.2

## Adoptive Cell Therapy were Done via Amplifying Effector Immune Cells in Vitro and Infused Back to the Patients
In line with the identification of those cancer surveillance cell types, adoptive cell Transfer (ACT) was done via amplifying T cell or NK cells in vitro and infused back to the patients [ , , ]. Such therapeutics have reached important milestones in rendering cancer retreat, confirming the specific and independent cancer surveillance function by these effector cells. Although ACT therapy holds great promises, it has shown little progress in promoting clinic efficacy against solid tumors [ , , , , , , ]. The complication of collecting patients’ own effector cells and engineering/expanding those in vitro with sufficient quality/quantities comes with the inherent drawback of high manufacture cost and complications [ ]. Therefore, more creative ways of boosting both the number and function of those cancer combating effector cells within the individual's physiological state will open new doors of cancer immunotherapy.

4.3

## The Limitations of ACT Therapies Indicate Other Key Cell Types Beyond the Well‐Established Cytotoxic Effector Cells Providing Critical Cancer Killing Function
Notable examples include the dramatic clinical benefit of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) gene‐modified T cells redirected toward CD19 in patients with B‐cell malignancies [ ] as well as the treatment of various autoantibody‐mediated autoimmune diseases [ ]. In the cases of solid tumor, significant cellular heterogeneity is usually the norm, limiting the efficacy of using T cell/NK cells with a uniformly engineered antigen recognition modality to eradicate heterogeneous cancer cells. Additional known factors mitigating the efficacy of ACT include limited in vivo T cell persistence, poor tumor infiltration, and especially rapid loss of their effector function [ , ]. Exhaustion of the endogenous, as well as in vitro amplified immune cells within the complex, immune‐suppressive tumor microenvironment has been widely documented in various human solid tumors and was thought to be a major roadblock for cancer immunotherapy [ ]. Recent evidence suggested effector cell infiltration into mechanic stiff solid tumor will trigger exhaustion via epigenetic reprogramming [ ]. Available ICI therapies can partially overcome this blockade in certain instances. However, ICI is coming with significant risk of triggering severe autoimmune responses as discussed previously [ ], while its clinical efficacy as a monotherapy or in combination with ACT remains limited. Therefore, there are likely other key cell types beyond the well‐established CD8+ cytotoxic cells providing direct cancer killing function or critical supportive role for their sustained activity.
There have been accumulating studies on the difference of tumor infiltrating lymphocyte status comparing cancer patients responsive to ACT therapy and those unresponsive [ , , ]. A memory‐progenitor stem‐like CD8+ TIL population has been found closely associated with complete cancer regression for ACT transfused melanoma patients and long‐term T cell persistence in the patient following the cell transfusion [ , , , , ]. Such studies highlight there are additional factors maintaining an “active” cancer immunity hub for highly efficient immune cell therapy, involving the persistence of appropriate TCR‐dependent and ‐independent stimulation to maintaining those stem‐like CD8+ cells in an optimal epigenetic state [ ].

5

## Cancer Immunity Cycle with Cancer‐Derived Antigen Processing as its Core Process
The notion that additional cell types beyond effector cells are critical for cancer immune retreat is best put forward within the framework of cancer immune cycle. This concept is distinct from the oversimplified “recognize and attack” model of cancer immune surveillance by recognizing the natural balance between cancer cell proliferation and escape, cancer immune suppression, and cancer cell necrosis from immune attacks. The latter, positive leg of the cancer immune cycle is to provide the “fuel” for igniting cancer immunity further. Critical engines processing and consuming such fuel are so called APCs.
5.1

## Specialized Antigen Collection From the Dead Cancer Cells for Efficient Antigen Presentation Initiates Cancer Immunity Cycle
Concurring with this view that much more is involved than the traditional TCR–antigen recognition‐based cancer surveillance and elimination model, we now understand the iterative nature of the cancer cell recognition and killing: specialized antigen collection from the dead cancer cells for efficient antigen presentation, followed by maintaining an integrated functional immune engagements adapting in real time with tumor evolution [ ]. Any step of such “cancer‐immunity cycle” can become rate‐limiting, rendering the immune system unable to cease the tumor growth with sufficient speed during the chronic process. For example, ICI therapy can lift the brakes on T effectors cells, increasing their cancer killing activity to a given extant. In some cases, this limited boost can restore the full engagement of such a “cancer‐immunity cycle,” therefore those patients can be benefited from PFS and even complete cancer regression [ ]. However, this is not always the case, suggesting future cancer immune therapy should be targeting other critical rate‐limiting steps on the “cancer‐immunity cycle” as we discussed in previous section.

5.2

## When Antigen From the Dead Cancer Cells are Processed, Cross‐Presentation is Tightly Regulated and are Specially Potent in Promoting Cancer Immunity Cycle Progression
Historically, there has been a significant ignorance regarding how cancer‐derived antigens are processed and been used to stimulate our immune system. Among all APC cells known, there was very little known whether there were specialized cell types responsible for scavenging the corps of dead cancer cells and processing those into high quality, immune‐stimulating tumor antigens. Dendritic cells (DCs) were suspected to be a major cell type due to its critical function in mediating vaccination responses and various pathogenic resistance [ ]. Although it has been discovered more than 50 years ago as a bone marrow‐derived, short‐lived heterogenous group of cells [ ], the subtypes of DCs and their respective functionality have just begun to be uncovered [ ]. DCs can be developed mostly from myeloid‐committed progenitor (MCPs), but also from lymphoid‐committed progenitors [ , ]. While different DCs share a common ability to process and present antigen to initiate adoptive immune response, they differ in developmental trajectories, cell surface markers, cytokine productions and more importantly function [ ]. Traditionally, using mostly in vitro generated monocytes‐derived moDC models, immunologists discovered that antigens from different sources are processed in different cellular compartments and presented by distinct classes of MHC molecules on DC surface [ , ]. This classic paradigm distinguishes viral antigens (mostly made by infected viruses in the cytosol) as presented by MHC‐I class receptors versus scavenged antigens (coming into the cell via endocytic pathway) as presented by MHC‐II class receptors [ , , , ] (Figure  ). Such overall distinction makes a lot of sense since if APC presents overwhelming engulfed “self” antigens via MHC‐I class molecules, it will run into significant risk of activating “self‐reactive” CD8+ cytotoxic T cells causing undesired tissue damages, whereas such response will be favorable to clean up viral‐infected unhealthy cells, preventing further viral spread in the organism. However, this classic antigen presentation mode could not account for the immune system's capability to illicit potent CD8+ T cell responses against cancer (since cancer antigens need to be digested by APCs as “meals”) nor explain CD8+ T cell responses elicited by vaccines administrated as foreign proteins (as “meal” for APC as well). It was postulated those are due to rare “cross‐presentation” events that certain endolytic cargo vehicles are diverted with MHC‐I‐enriched endosomal recycling compartment (ERC) vesicles and trafficked toward the cell membrane directly [ ], or some cargo vehicles were blocked and their membrane leaked prior to reaching lysosome, such that the ingested proteins are accessible for cytosolic proteosome digestion in DC [ , , ] (Figure  ). Although both cross‐presentation mechanisms were observed via in vitro cultured DCs, how cross‐presentation is achieved within the context of cancer‐immunity cycle was found to be a different story.
 
5.3

## How Does CD4+ T Cells Provide Essential Help?
While most if not all nucleated cells express MHC‐I molecules mainly presenting peptides derived from endogenous proteins, only professional APCs (such as DCs, macrophages, and B cells) express MHC‐II molecules presenting peptides derived from exogenous proteins. Although direct cytotoxic activity for priming‐dependent cancer immunity is predominantly dependent on antigen cross‐presentation by MHC‐I molecules, MHC‐II‐restricted tumor antigens and tumor‐specific CD4+ T cells have long been recognized in many cancer patients and cancer types. While earlier works using mouse cancer models have clearly established that effective cancer eradication needs direct participation of CD4+ T cells by providing critical cytokines for CD8+ T cells [ , , , ] and even forging direct cytotoxic functions themselves via IFN‐γ and GzmB [ , , ], such observations were confirmed by numerous investigations on human TILs, where patients’ favorable clinical response is tightly linked to the enrichment of CD4+ TILs with Th1 features [ , ]. Given the multiple aspects of reported functionality of CD4+ T cells in tumor eradication [ ], it is still under intense debate whether both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells would need to recognize the same tumor‐derived antigen as a pair for their optimal cooperation. There have now accumulating evidences with animal models that this might not necessary, such that CD4+ T cells can be effective helpers with antigen specificity distinct from their cytotoxic CD8+ partners. Reported with model transgenic TCR mouse strains as the sources of ACT, CD8+ T cells against OVA peptide can coordinate effective cancer eradication together with infused CD4+ T cells against GP61, when the cancer cells carry both model antigens [ ]. Such separation of antigen specificity even raises the possibility that self‐reactive CD4+ cells might be efficiently mobilized for cancer eradication. Since self‐reactive CD4+ T cells are much less likely to be deleted in the thymus by central tolerance mechanism compared with their CD8+ counterparts, they are frequently found in the periphery with good tolerance [ ]. Their functionality in cancer eradication is reasonably speculated, given they were well known to be critical participants helping self‐reactive CD8+ cells causing tissue damage in the cases of autoimmune attacks [ ].
There are two additional lines of overwhelming evidence suggesting an intricate involvement of self‐reactive CD4+ cells in cancer surveillance and clearance. First of all, most of the early cancer vaccine studies focused on using TAAs as immunogenic agents [ , ]. Since TAAs are self‐antigens, they predominantly trigger CD4+T cell responses as described in the early days of cancer immunotherapy [ ]. Although retrospectively, those early cancer vaccines lacked significant clinical benefits for patients, not surprisingly due to their poor stimulation of antigen‐specific CD8+ cells [ ], those with sufficient CD8+ T cell boosts (while still much less comparing with typical infection disease‐related antigen triggered CD8+ T cell responses) demonstrated much improved clinical outcomes [ ]. This dichotomy suggests that with the sufficient cancer relevant, self‐antigen‐specific CD4+ T cells, cancer retreat can be achieved even without an overwhelming number of corresponding cytotoxic CD8+ T cells, which was further validated by MHC‐II exclusive cancer vaccine with mouse models [ ]. The other critical line of evidences come with the frequent, well‐documented observation of appearance of autoantibodies against TAAs with cancer progression, such that TAAs autoantibodies have been even well recognized as important cancer diagnostic biomarkers [ ]. Since those antibody producing autoimmune B cells are known to be strictly dependent on the availability of autoantigens, together with Th2 type CD4+ Tfh cells, the rise of tumor‐specific autoantibody tier during cancer development reflects a spontaneous activation process of TAAs‐specific self‐reactive CD4+ T cells, potentially by the release of TAAs from the necrotic cancer cells [ ]. Normally B cell maturation is achieved within a well‐defined three‐dimensional structure for the optimized cell–cell interaction, usually within secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs). As for the production of TAAs autoantibodies, lymphoid organ‐like structures are frequently found near tumor site within the diseased tissue (named tertiary lymphoid organs, TLOs). The presence of TLOs is a strong indicator of de novo lymphoid neo‐organogenesis, which correlated with better prognosis in many solid tumors [ ]. Despite whether TLO act as a functional immune hub orchestrating immune warfare against nearby cancerous lesion remains to be rigorously addressed, TLOs are strong indicators of significant CD4+ T cell activation by the locally released cancer‐associated antigens [ , ].
There are multiple routs that a strong cancer elicited CD4+ effector activation process might occur. First of all, live cancer cells can present their endogenous antigen with MHC‐II molecules to activate tumor‐infiltrating CD4+ T cells. Although MHC‐II expression is usually restricted to APC, they can be expressed by various cancer cells [ ]. MHC‐II expression across cancer types is highly variable and context dependent [ ]. Given the observation that TLOs are frequently observed some distance away from the tumor site in the same tissue, it is more likely that an antigen‐relay mechanism is employed such that CD4+ T cells are more frequently activated by “professional” APCs instead [ ]. Those can happen near the tumor since there are plenty of tumor‐derived antigen available if APC cells engulfed dead cancer cells. Additionally, this can happen within SLOs after the APC cells consumed with the “meal” circulate back in the lymphatic system. How is the peripheral tolerance for the presented self‐antigens relapse under given circumstances remains largely unknown [ ].

5.4

## DCs are Specialized APCs with Many Diverse Functional Subdivisions
DCs serve as pivotal regulators of immune responses, coordinating adaptive immunity through the activation of T cells against cancers and infectious agents. These cells are categorized into two principal groups: conventional DCs (cDCs) and plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs), with cDCs further partitioned into type 1 (cDC1) and type 2 (cDC2) subsets [ , ]. Single‐cell profiling has identified cDC2 as a heterogeneous population containing distinct DC2 and DC3 clusters [ ]. DC ontogeny initiates in bone marrow from hematopoietic stem cells, with earlier models proposing a shared progenitor for cDCs and pDCs [ ]. However, emerging evidences indicate lymphoid lineage derivation for most pDCs [ , ], though human pre‐pDC precursors remain uncharacterized [ ]. cDC1 specification is governed by transcription factors IRF8, ID2, and BATF3 [ , ], exhibiting characteristic surface profiles [ ]. cDC2 differentiation involves IRF4, ZEB2, and NOTCH2/KLF4 signaling [ , , ]. pDC development depends on multiple factors including Flt3 ligand (Flt3L), transcription factor Spi‐B [ ], and E2‐2 [ , ], maintaining conserved phenotypes across species [ ].
Functional specialization among DC subsets can best manifest through involvements in differential types of T cell‐mediated immunity. cDC1 demonstrate superior antigen cross‐presentation capabilities, critical for cytotoxic CD8+ T cell activation against tumors and intracellular pathogens [ , ]. Moreover, recent studies reveal their capacity to prime CD4+ T cells with tumor antigens, expanding their immunoregulatory repertoire [ ]. cDC2 predominantly drive CD4+ helper T cell differentiation [ ]. As a subset of cDC2, DC3 subpopulations were able to induce CD4+ helper T cell responses but were absent in cancer‐free lymph nodes [ ] suggesting they are less likely to induce immune responses in SLOs. Contrasting with cDCs, mature pDCs specialize in rapid type I interferon production and play crucial roles in antiviral immunity [ ], but pDCs are conventionally recognized as immunosuppressive in tumor. Tumor‐derived chemokines drive the recruitment of abundant immature pDCs into tumor sites [ ], while TME cytokines including VEGF, TGF‐β, and IL‐10 effectively block pDC maturation and functional activation [ , ], resulting in their compromised IFN‐α production. Furthermore, pDCs facilitate the recruitment or differentiation of regulatory T cells (Tregs) within tumors, creating an immunosuppressive niche that supports malignant progression [ ]. This functional dichotomy underscores DC heterogeneity in immune regulation, with cDC1 emerging as particularly promising therapeutic targets due to their unparalleled antigen‐presenting capacity in antitumor immunity.

5.5

## cDC1 is the DC Subpopulation Equipped with Special Receptor and Machinery, Thus Uniquely Capable for Dead Cell Antigen Cross‐Presentation
In both human and mammals, there are three major DC types with well‐characterized cell surface receptors [ ]. Among these, cDC1 subtype is the unique population expressing the receptor Clec9A (DNGR‐1), a type II CLR family (the C‐type lectin receptor) transmembrane homodimer [ , ]. After its discovery, Clec9A was found to be the major receptor detecting dead cells [ ], through its direct binding to multimeric F‐actin filament that is exposed on necrotic cell corpses [ , , ]. Even though CLEC9A is dispensable for the uptake of necrotic cell material by cDC1, genetic ablation or antibody‐mediated blockade of CLEC9A diminish cross‐presentation of engulfed antigens by cDC1 and the corresponding immunogenicity of necrotic cells in vivo [ ]. Since cDC1‐specific Clec9A uniquely links necrosis recognition to T cell immunity, much subsequent investigations further firmly established that cDC1 is indeed the key APC cell type responsible for mediating both cancer antigen retrieval from tumor and subsequent presentation steps to engage T cells during the full “cancer‐immunity cycle” [ ]. For example, with elegant mouse genetic manipulations and cell transfer experiments, Ken Murphy's group has provided the definite evidences that xenografted tumor cannot be rejected without functional cDC1 despite the presence of all other functional APC cell types, a defect that can be rescued in full by injecting specifically in vitro differentiated cDC1 back into the tumor bearing tissue [ ]. A localized rescue of antigens processing from one tumor site can also kick‐start the immune rejection against remote tumor sites with little or no cDC1 present, suggesting the steady supply of tumor antigen from one site could be sufficient to maintain functional antigen‐specific T cells deployed throughout the lymph system [ ]. There has also been numerous clinical reports of “spontaneous” tumor retractions on untreated sites after patients undergo localized radiotherapy, consistent with the notion that the limited availability of righteously presented tumor antigens is likely a common bottleneck restricting the propagation of cancer‐immunity cycle [ , ].
Besides the specific scavenger receptor, cDC1 likely processes other unique features to enable its optimal transit role in realizing “garbage in, treasure out.” It has been proposed as the specialized “cross‐presentation cell,” since cancer elimination is largely dependent on cDC1‐mediated functional maintenance of cytotoxic CD8+ T cell [ , ]. How cDC1 cross‐presents its engulfed corpus remain poorly understood; WDFY4 (WD repeat‐ and FYVE domain‐containing protein 4) was identified as cross‐presentation‐specific factor in cDC1 and cDC2‐mediated viral and tumor immunity, such that it is not required for MHC‐II presentation of antigens but essential for ingested antigens presented by MHC‐I [ ]. Wdfy4 KO mice failed to reject xenografted tumor similarly to cDC1‐deficient mice, revealing a critical role for cDC1‐mediated cross‐presentation during cancer immunity, via mobilizing CD8+ T cell in an MHC‐I‐dependent manner [ ].

6

## A Multicell Type Cancer Immunity Hub Associated with Immune Surveillance Outcome
cDC1 cells, although critical, are likely not acting alone in fueling cancer immune cycle. Recent evidences suggested a multicell type cancer immunity hub resides near the cancer site and is strongly associated with successful and persistent cancer immune cycle.
6.1

## Immunostimulatory cDC1 Acts as a Key Organizer Forming a Tightly Interacting Clusters to Execute Cancer Immunity Cycle
Consistent with a clear functional significance of antigen‐specific CD8+ effector cells as the major “ammunition head” and cDC1 cells’ unique capability converting scavenged cancer cell debris to MHC‐I‐bound tumor antigens, there is little doubt cDC1 cells is necessary for maintaining CD8+ T cell‐dependent cancer killing. Recently, a detailed pathological analysis of both mouse cancer models and human cancer biopsies have identified that a distinct population of tumor residing cDC1 employs chemokine CXCL9/10 to recruit local CD8+ TILs. In an antigen‐dependent manner, such that immunostimulatory cDC1 acts as a hub to form tightly interacting clusters with TCF1+ stem‐like CD8+ T cells [ ]. The combined actions of antigen‐dependent TCR signaling, production of T cell attractive chemokine, and T cell stimulating cytokine IL12 by cDC1 enable antigen‐dependent stem‐like T cell expansion, as well as continuous intratumoral cytotoxic CD8+ T cell differentiation [ ]. However, for tumor‐associated CD4+ T cell activity, it was less clear whether cDC1 is simultaneously critical. There are many other APCs with abundant MHC‐II expression, even though cDC1, as the unique corps scavenger, would be an ideal antigen processing factory providing MHC‐II‐bound tumor‐derived neoantigens as well as self‐antigens [ ].
To directly test the contribution of cDC1‐centered, antigen presentation onto MHC‐II molecules, conditional genetic deletion of either MHC‐II or CD40 in cDC1 were found with severely impaired tumor rejection, pinpointing cDC1 is the major APC type coordinating simultaneous activity for both cancer targeting CD8+ and CD4+ T cell functionalities [ ]. Since removing CD40 in cDC1 cells demonstrates identical tumor rejection defects as MHC‐II‐deficient cDC1 [ ], this evidence supported a long suspected hypothesis that through activating CD4+ T cells with MHC‐II presented antigen, DCs are “licensed” to maintain potent antigen presentation function when their CD40 is ligated by CD40L, which is abundant on the surface of activated CD4+ T cells [ ]. In human, contact with activated CD4+T cells or with CD40L alone enables specifically human cDC1 to maintain a “helped/licensed” transcriptional and functional state ex vivo [ , ]. Such “helped” signature correlates closely with recently identified alternative DC states from thousands of cancer patient biopsies, with favorable prognostic among diverse tumor types [ , , ]. Such state is absent from circulating DCs, nor from those residing in the SLOs. Therefore, this unique state of DC from clinically favorable TME is highly likely to be exactly activated by tumor antigen‐specific CD4 T cells [ ]. Detailed mouse genetic analysis found multiple downstream mechanisms that such “helped” cDC1 cells are much better equipped to promote cross‐presentation‐dependent CD8+ T cell activation [ ]. First of all, the “helped” cDC1 cells might be longer‐lived due to their increased expression of Bcl‐xL, an antiapoptotic protein. The prolonged lifespan of “helped” cDC1 might be necessary for them migrating back to the tumor draining lymph node to “prime” naive T cells there [ ]. At the same time, “helped” cDC1 makes much higher level of both CD70, CD80/86, and 4‐1BBL, which are ligands for CD27, CD28, and 4‐1BB, respectively, all of which are well‐known TNF receptor superfamily T cell costimulatory receptors [ ], making these DC much better agonists for T cell activation. At the same time, antigen‐activated CD4+ T cells can secrete IFNβ, which in turn boost the cross‐presentation capability by cDC1 [ ]. Subsequently, the ligation of “helped” cDC1 cells with antigen‐specific CD8+ T cells will likely render T cells with better potency.
It is also well known that DCs will specifically boost its expression of costimulatory ligands under the specific circumstances of innate immunity receptors activation [ , ]. Therefore, within the SLOs, only “inflamed” DCs with presented antigen are equipped to kick off adaptive immunity response. In the mostly “sterile” TME, cDC1 will likely spare the requirement for sensing PAMP/DAMP signals there. In their place, the CD40–CD40L signaling axis and cytokine signaling between CD4+ T cell/cDC1 can fulfill similar costimulatory function at least partially [ , ].
Traditionally, effective vaccine requires coadministration of potent adjuvants (to trigger the innate immunity sensor‐dependent activation in APC cells). Given the unique capability of cDC1 to be boosted into the “helped” state, cDC1 cells targeting vaccine might be spared with the requirement for adjuvants coadministration [ , ]. With model antigens, prior adjuvant‐free cDC1 targeting vaccine attempt has demonstrated to be effective triggering cancer clearance with a mouse xenograft model [ ]. Such vaccination scheme might mediate antigen‐dependent CD8+, CD4+ T cell activation, or both [ ]. Therefore, further in‐depth dissection of whether adjuvant‐free vaccination efficacy depends on particular antigen presentation mechanism or simultaneous MHC‐I and MHC‐II‐dependent pathway will be highly informative [ , ].

6.2

## Cancer can Escape Immunity Surveillance by Blunting the Activity of cDC1 and Disintegrating Local Immune Cell Clusters
From the progresses made in the past a few years, we begin to appreciate the critical role of cDC1 in orchestrating effective, processive cancer‐immunity cycles involving at least two major effector arms of antigen‐sensing T cells [ ] (Figure  ). Given the limited life span of cDC1, it is thus empirical to speculate that without a steady supply of replenishing cDC1 with optimal functionality within the tumor microenvironment, the tumor‐immunity cycle may be significantly reduced/impaired [ ]. Indeed, there have been numerous studies suggesting in mouse models, immunosuppressive metabolites tumor secreted such as PGE2 and IL‐6 can blunt immune surveillance by either putting local, differentiated cDC1 cells into a dysfunctional state [ ], or blocking cDC1 cells development from MCPs systematically [ ] (Figure  ). Moreover, in solid tumor with significant size, it has been demonstrated the severe deprivation of NO within the interior of hypoxic tumor significantly prevent tumor antigen bearing DC migrating back to tumor‐associated lymph nodes, attenuating the progression of cancer immune cycle [ ]. This poorly investigated phenomenon parallels with well‐characterized T cell exhaustion as discussed in the previous section. A DC‐centered immune exhaustion phenomenon, though newly revealed, might provide another critical intervention opportunity to kick start effective cancer‐immunity cycle.
 

7

## AcDC1‐Specific Targeted Cancer Vaccine Strategy to Maximize Antitumor Immune Efficacy
With the gradual elucidations on the molecular details of complex cellular interactions between live/necrotic cancer cells, cDC1, antigen‐specific CD4+, and CD8+ T cells in terms of their individual or collective functional status, it is becoming clear that a dynamic cellular immune hub has to be orchestrated near the source of cancer antigens (the tumor itself with continuous cellular turn over) for efficient immune restrains to be applied upon the tumor growth [ ]. Such realization comes shortly after we understand just having the cytotoxic machinery up and running is not really enough to carry out a sustained damage to solid tumor, as numerous CAR‐T and TCR‐T therapeutic trials have not reached satisfactory clinical efficacy [ ]. In the past few months, indeed, so called immune‐triad or immune hubs have been found beyond mouse cancer models. Its presence in numerous human cancer biopsy studies has clear prognosis value indicating better overall outcomes or better responses to ICI therapies [ , ]. While the traditional CAR‐T or cancer vaccine strategies mainly focused on boosting the absolute number of cancer antigen‐specific cytotoxic cells, the absolute number of cytotoxic cells does not necessarily translate toward overcoming the rate limiting step in cancer‐immunity cycle. Therefore, it is about the right time to devise next‐generation cancer therapeutics based on facilitating fruitful constructions of cancer antigen‐centered immune cell hubs near all tumor sites.
Vaccination, as a critical immune modulatory strategy in our medical history, aims to boost the number of specific cytotoxic T effector cells or to generate long lasting antibody producing B cells, in order to prepare for the incidence of prospective pathogen invasion. Given the immunological principles we have learned about cancer immunity during the past decades, it is increasingly clear that we would be able to employ artificially designed cancer vaccines to boost both the quantity and quality of key cell types in critical shortage, fighting off cancer cells in our own body. The rest of our article will focus on discussing how to design next‐generation cancer vaccine that can significantly shift the paradigm of current cancer therapy.
7.1

## Cancer Vaccine Should be Devised to Maximize Neoantigen‐Specific CD8+ T Cell Responses
Tradition vaccines against infectious diseases can achieve its efficacy usually by boosting the production of corresponding neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, the traditional vaccines mainly focus on stimulating MHC‐II‐dependent CD4+ T cell activity, which in turn, through antigen‐dependent CD4+ TfH cell and B cell interaction in the SLO, triggers specific B cell evolution via antibody affinity maturation and B cell differentiation. According to the canonic antigen presentation dogma, if the vaccine can be effectively taken by the DCs, its degradation products will be mainly presented by MHC‐II molecules (Figure  ). Given adjuvant molecules taken by the same DC, the activation of innate immunity receptors will ensure the DC with foreign antigen presented can be simultaneously transformed into a mature and “stimulative” phenotype, since if its costimulatory ligands and MHC molecules expression boosted, DCs will facilitate antigen‐specific T cells within the lymph nodes reaching full activation. While this practice has worked nicely with infectious disease prevention, there is little evidence that autoantibodies generated in association with tumor development are directly involved in cancer immunity [ ]. While it has been well recognized that CD4+ T cells are critically needed for elicit effective immune attacks at the tumor site, it is less clear whether the lack of cancer reactive CD4+ cells in our body could be a critical rate‐limiting bottleneck in human cancer‐immunity cycle. Recent mouse model studies also suggested that CD4+ T cells involved in “helping” the cytotoxic CD8+ cells can be of different antigen specificity [ ]. Therefore, even “self‐reactive” CD4+ T cells can fulfill such critical role. Since a majority of MHC‐II‐restricted epitopes around the tumor site should be from self‐antigens processed from cell debris, the availability of a wide variety of “self‐reactive” CD4+ T cells would be capable to engage with antigen presenting cDC1. Retrospectively, over the past few decades, the overall impact of TAAs‐based vaccines on disease‐free survival, overall survival, and cancer recurrence has been minimal [ ], although potent CD4+ center immune responses elicited by those vaccination regimes have been widely reported. Self‐TAA antigen‐specific TCRs are reported to have weaker structural avidity comparing with those against neoantigens [ ]. Therefore, their antigen‐dependent engagement at the tumor site might be suboptimal, making the corresponding T cells more susceptible to exhaustion. Nevertheless, a tumor targeting CD4+ exclusive, neoantigen vaccination scheme have demonstrated significant efficacy with mouse cancer transplantation models, via enhancing both effector function and clonal breadth of endogenous tumor‐specific CD8+T cells [ ].
CD4+ T cells can demonstrate a wide range of functional phenotypes. Tolerogenic FOXP3+ Treg cells were well known to dampen potential CD8+ T cell effector function by providing inhibitory cytokines, especially in the tumor microenvironment [ ]. It remains poorly understood how antigen stimulation can be fine‐tuned to generate distinct CD4+ T cell populations. Several recently discovered tumor antigens named “inhibigens” can suppress antitumor efficacy of cancer vaccines, likely through preferentially amplifying corresponding antigen‐specific Treg cells [ ]. On the other hand, there are clear indications that a portion of CD4+ T cells can acquire cytotoxic effector phenotype, which were thought originally as potential cancer killing CD4+ T cells [ ]. A recent report provided contradicting functional evidence that such cytotoxic CD4+ T cells can instead eliminate antigen presenting cDC1 cells near the tumor site, demonstrating a clear suppressive function against cancer immunotherapy [ ] (Figure  ). It is intriguing how such cytotoxic Tr1 CD4 T cells are primed by antigens provided by the vaccine. A clear dependence of cytotoxic Tr1 CD4 T cell‐specific priming on the dosage of antigen applied and the availability of distinct APCs was found. It was shown cytotoxic Tr1 CD4+ T cells were preferentially primed by cDC2 cells and macrophages, and if the same antigen is presented by cDC1 cells instead, “helper” CD4+ T cells were preferentially induced [ ]. Nevertheless, it is still in the early days to pinpoint the general correspondence between specific antigen presentation cells, presentation mode and preferentially triggered T cell responses. However, given the evidences available, we argue a cDC1‐centered antigen delivery and processing strategy might best fulfill both arms of antitumor T cell immunity simultaneously.
Given the understanding that the majority of cancer killing activity is achieved by the canonical CD8+ effector T cells instead of cytotoxic CD4+ T cells, recent neoantigen focused cancer vaccine studies have shifted their focus to elicit strong specific CD8 T cell responses. The availability of mRNA vaccine technology enables flexible combination of multiple personalized neoantigens into a single mRNA format [ ]. Such personalized vaccine is formulated with three successive steps: first of all, the patient's cancer biopsy is subjected to genome sequencing, identifying available potential neoantigens; second, based on the patient's own HLA haplotype, the respective binding of each neoantigen to the individual's HLA molecules are predicted and corresponding immunogenicity of each neoantigen is ranked. Since it is still unrealistic to reliably predict the binding and immunogenicity of peptide–MHC‐II complexes, so far most neoantigen prediction pipelines ranks these peptides based on the likelihood a potent CD8+ T cell response can be elicited [ ]. Finally, the top ranked neoantigen sequences are combined and coded into a single mRNA sequence for vaccine production. In combination with ICI therapy, personalized mRNA cancer vaccines have for the first time demonstrated superior clinical outcomes in a randomized clinical trial [ — ]. These initial successes with melanoma and PDAC therefore clearly demonstrated boosting more cancer targeting neoantigen‐specific (most likely) CD8+ T cells can further tilt the balance of cancer‐immunity cycle beyond ICI therapy [ ]. Although personalized cancer vaccines hold great promises, it comes with two inherent shortcomings. First of all, the requirement for individualized design and manufacturing inevitably comes with significant production time and costs, which is hard to be widely used for the general public. Second, most personalized neoantigens are from so called “passenger mutations”; therefore, the selection pressure imposed by the such immune surveillance can easily drive the propagation and evolution of cancer cells free of such passenger mutations, hence tumor evasion against therapy [ , , , ]. Therefore, shared, driver mutation‐derived “public” neoantigens have gained considerable traction in cancer therapy [ , ]. There have been numerous reports on the availability of such public neoantigen‐specific T cells discovered either at tumor biopsies, or from patient circulation and even from healthy individuals [ , , , , , ]. Such accumulating evidences are arguing against the speculation that a vacuum of immunity against public neoantigens specifically allows for the high perceived occurrence of corresponding “hot‐spot” mutations on cancer driver genes among all cancer patients. In addition to the clear efficacy of ACT therapy equipped with corresponding public neoantigen‐specific TCR [ , , , ], a number of peptide or mRNA based vaccination schemes have demonstrated promising immune potency in the scenarios of either clearing minimal residual diseases or halting advanced diseases [ , , ]. A summary of ongoing clinic trails using various formats of cancer vaccines is included with this review for interested readers to dive in further (Table  ).
 
7.2

## Stimulating Neoantigen‐Specific CD8+ T Cell Responses Requires Effective Antigen Cross‐Presentation
The challenge to elicit potent CD8+ T cell responses is unique for cancer vaccines design, since the pivotal contribution of amplified antigen‐specific CD8+ T cells was less critical for traditional vaccines. If supplied as in a protein‐based format, neoantigen vaccine will most likely been processed and presented in an MHC‐II‐dependent manner, since most DCs do not spontaneously “cross‐present” exogenous antigens. Therefore, effective cancer vaccine requires cross‐presentation of antigens by design. There have been numerous attempts to devise novel adjuvants favoring the cross‐presentation capability by acting as “proton‐sinks” once antigens engulfed in endosome, triggering subsequent swelling and rupture of the endosomal membranes before the endosomes reach lysosome [ , , , , ] (Figure  ). However, most “proton‐sinks” compounds have unavoidable cytotoxicity, such that its safety has not been rigorously evaluated with animal or preclinic studies [ ]. Novel nanomaterial‐based adjuvants, on the other hand, might provide better safety profiles, with the additional benefits of boosting DCs maturation and migration capability [ ].
While traditional adjuvant is highly desirable for vaccines to reach satisfactory efficacy, the relationship between adjuvant and antigen cross‐presentation is less clear [ ]. Although it was speculated that protein‐based antigen processing and presentation and DC activation are separated processes, there are detailed cell biology studies suggesting the fate of endocytic cargo can be tightly coupled with whether the cargo itself can elicit potent innate immunity signaling. For example, Blander lab has demonstrated that ligating TLR4 agonist LPS with the phagosome cargo will favor the particular phagosomes carrying activated TLR/Myd88 complex to fuse with MHC‐I enriched ERC compartment, thereby short‐cutting the antigen‐derived peptides back to the plasma membrane in an MHC‐I‐bound format [ ] (Figure  ). While this mechanism was learned using mo‐DC with in vitro cell culture system, it not yet clear whether conjugating any TLR agonist with protein cargo will facilitate efficient antigen cross‐presentation in all DC subtypes.
Besides Clec9a‐equipped cDC1, it is hard to pinpoint exactly whether and how much antigen cross‐presentation is carried out by other APC cell types in vivo [ , ]. Given the recent identification of cross‐presentation‐specific factor WDFY4 in mice (without which a number of viral‐related antigens cannot be processed to trigger cytotoxic T cell response), it is likely that a majority of antigen cross‐presentation in vivo is cDC1 cells dependent since WDFY4 is mainly expressed in cDC1 cells, and to a less degree in cDC2 cells [ , ]. How WDFY4 exactly mediates cross‐presentation is poorly understood. However, it has been proposed that clec9a, after mediating cargo phagocytosis, is directly involved in preparing its captured prey for cross‐presentation [ ]. Dimeric clec9A can be activated upon ligand binding, thereby vesicle‐associated SYK assembles active NADPH oxidase onto the cargo loaded phagosome, causing phagosome membrane rupture and enclosed antigen cross‐presentation [ ] (Figure  ). On the other hand, lectin family member Siglec‐G associated with the phagosome can suppress cross‐presentation by recruiting SHP‐1 phosphatase, antagonizing SYK/Nox‐dependent membrane leakage [ ]. Since Siglec‐G binds to sialic acids terminated glycans, many cancer cells specifically utilized glycosylation modification with sialic acid on their cell surface, potentially to evade efficient antigen cross‐presentation once their debris engulfed by cDC1 [ , ]. Although antigen cross‐presentation coupled with scavenging receptor engagement on cDC1 cells surface is appealing [ , , , , ], this model likely over‐simplifies how cross‐presentation is regulated delicately. For example, whether the role of innate immunity receptor ligation/activation is conserved in promoting cargo cross‐presentation in cDC1 cell is not clear. In addition, known cross‐presentation regulator WDYF4 remains a critical piece to be fit in the sophisticated puzzle.

7.3

## Effective Cancer Vaccine Should Target cDC1 Cells, Providing Antigens to be Presented While Fully Engaging DC Activity
Given the key role of cDC1 in antigen cross‐presentation, as well as at the hub for cancer immunity near the tumor site [ ], it is important to understand how innate immunity receptors and scavenging receptors activation collectively mediate cell signaling coupled cross‐presentation regulation in cDC1. Whether any of these signaling events is directly coupled with cDC1 cell maturation and gain of migratory potential as well as T cell activation potential remain a critical puzzle to resolve. Currently, nanoparticle carriers [ ], self‐assembling platforms [ ], and albumin‐binding vehicles [ ] stand out as predominant strategies to facilitate the delivery of vaccine constituents to lymph nodes, ensuring that antigens make efficacious contact with DCs and enhance their capacity to capture and process these antigens. Moreover, these delivery systems can concurrently incorporate agents that promote DC maturation and augment T‐cell stimulation, thereby priming a more potent immunological response. For example, including STING agonists in the nano particle formatted vaccine has been found to promote cDC1 activity via DC autonomous IFN secretion [ , ]. Since DCs themselves are short‐lived in vivo, DC vaccines are unlikely to have long lasting direct efficacy. However, there could be multiple ways beyond cancer vaccines to boost both the number and activities of cDC1 both in the circulation and in the tissues under surveillance [ ]. Administering Flt3 ligand (FLT3L) and granulocyte‐macrophage colony‐stimulating factor (GM‐CSF) systemically or locally within the tumor microenvironment serves as a powerful strategy to bolster this specific DC populations [ ]. Under inflammatory condition, DCs are innately wired to traffic towards the chemokines released by the inflamed site [ ]. Although most solid tumor are immune‐cold, therapeutics such as oncolytic viruses can efficiently trigger local inflammatory responses, facilitating long lasting functional DC infiltration and maturation [ , ]. Furthermore, recent investigation has attempted to reprogram cancer cells into DCs like APC directly by delivering a reprogramming factors cocktail [ ]. Such programming effectively reshaped the tumor microenvironment and triggered potent‐specific T cell immune responses and cancer regression in mouse models [ ]. The harvest and presentation of cancer‐associated antigen via those cDC1 can efficiently amplify the available adaptive immune responses. NK cells recruit cDC1 into the tumor via chemokines CCL5 and XCL1, promoting cancer immune control [ ], whereas PGE2 produced by tumor leads to immune evasion by impairing NK cell viability and decreasing both NK chemokine production and cDC1 chemokine receptor expression [ ] (Figure  ). To antagonize immune suppressive tumor microenvironment, tumor‐associated in situ hydrogel vaccines (FP/NCUM‐Gel) have been devised to form a local cDC1 favoring niche enhancing cancer vaccines effectiveness [ ]. Given the previously learned lessons from both animal models and clinical observations, the lack of cDC1, or “helped/licensed” cDC1 as the local acting immune cell hubs are now regarded as a frequent pitfall why patients are refractory to cancer immune therapy [ ]. In contrast to infection induced Adaptive immunity response where the T cell effector differentiation can be triggered quickly in the LN with the simultaneous availability of activation signals, recent mechanistic studies demonstrated a different scenario for antitumor immunity. T cell effector differentiation within TME is strictly a two‐step process dependent on local availability of both the antigen and costimulation signal [ ]. Although there are still ongoing debates on the critical DC type fulfilling the critical roles of delivering those activation signals within TME [ , ], the DC progenitors ectopically expressing two immunostimulatory cytokines can suppressed tumor growth via expanding and activating cDC1 population, without the need for antigen loading or host myeloablative conditioning [ ]. All of those above strategies can be complemented with efficient cDC1‐centered cancer vaccines, providing highly effective innate and adaptive immunity arsenals orchestrating long lasting battles at the cancer site.
 

8

## Conclusion and Prospects
Cancer immunotherapy is causing a more and more active seismic shift in our fights against malignant cells that went rogue, bringing closely collaborative clinicians, basic scientists, and biomedical engineers together. Therefore, with the rapid advances on the understanding of how our own immune system (with distinct critical innate immune cells, antigen‐specific adoptive immune cells and bystander cells in the evolving tumor microenvironment) can orchestrate a persistent, effective battle with growing cancer cells will definitively bring upon more and more innovative and effective cancer therapeutics for each individual patient.
We also envision the effective cancer immunotherapy should be a combination of personalized strategies coping with various cancer evasion mechanisms. Cancer cells can actively suppress the T effector functions and accelerate T cell exhaustion by engaging with simultaneous checkpoint receptors and TCR signaling, either directly or through suppressive APCs. This evasion mechanisms can be at least partially reversed by various ICI therapeutic antibodies. In addition, cancer cells can sequester essential nutrients, generate potent immunosuppressive metabolites, or even “sugar coat” their own cell surface which not only target effector T cells but also critical DC types within local TME. The collapse of active local immune hubs can cool off effective cancer immune surveillance and turn the tumor into an immune “cold” state refractory to standard ICI therapies. A major challenge for cancer immunotherapy is to devise safe, effective and persistent interventions to reverse an “immune cold” tumor back into one engaged with active cancer‐immunity cycles. Among many current alternative strategies such as ACT, oncolytic viral therapies, we envision next‐generation cancer vaccines holds special promises to fulfill this critical gap.
Importantly, although this battle is fought on the basis of harvesting the necrotic cancer cells as a major source of relevant antigens to build up antitumor immunity, the lack of effective neoantigen elicited, functional immune effector cells usually can be a major rate limiting step in maintaining efficient cancer‐immunity cycle. As vaccines traditionally have been battle‐proven against many devastating infectious diseases by effectively boosting the number of antigen‐specific effector cells in circulation, cancer vaccines, especially with early but promising indications of efficacy by individualized mRNA‐based cancer vaccines, have brought us high hopes that vaccination can efficiently protect us against cancer by providing a steady supply of tumor antigen‐specific immune effector cells. We argue that smarter next‐generation cancer vaccines will optimize not only personalized antigen combinations, but also precision delivery in vivo to the most ideal APCs. Innovative approaches should also be taking account regarding boosting of activities of DCs not only after uptaking such vaccines from circulation but also maintaining their optimal functionality even within a suppressive TME. Such precision medicine practice will enable a purposeful display of the right quantities of different antigens on specific MHC molecules at functional APCs equipped with fully engaged costimulatory signals at both SLOs and within the cancer immunity hub. Such exciting advances will not only bring realistic hope saving more lives from cancer, but also advance greatly our understanding of immunity holistically.

## Author Contributions
YP coordinated the overall structure, wrote most of the paper, designed all the figures: JS, ZQ, JG summerized the current cancer vaccines, managed the citatations, and compiled the table; WJ refined the figure graphics; LZ, XS, JV, HY, XL, CL, SG, HW, YZ, BZ, WG wrote part of section 2‐6. YP, JW, YL, JS, QZ, YY, FG contributed to the revisions. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## Ethics Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the support provided by the Henan Engineering Technology Research Center for Accurate Diagnosis Neuroimmunity. This work was funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2022YFC2303500‐1), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82470232, 82073257, W2441013), the Key Scientific and Technological Project of Henan Province (232102310312; 242102310369), the Key Research and Development Project of Henan Provincial Department of Science and Technology (251111314500), and the Project of Basic Research Fund of Henan Institute of Medical and Pharmacological Sciences (2023BP0205; 2024BP0210, 2025BP0105). Graphics were created by the authors with Biorender. YP coordinated the overall project and all authors have contributed to writing the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.