pmcTher Adv Med OncolTher Adv Med Oncol1560tam101510808TAMTherapeutic Advances in Medical Oncology1758-83401758-8359SAGE PublicationsPMC9459481PMC9459481.1945948194594813609080010.1177/1758835922111801910.1177_175883592211180191ReviewTherapeutic advances in metastatic pancreatic cancer: a focus on
targeted therapies
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2282-0101TurpinAnthonyDepartment of Medical Oncology, CNRS UMR9020,
Inserm UMR-S 1277-Canther-Cancer Heterogeneity, Plasticity and Resistance to
Therapies, University Lille, CHU Lille, Lille, FranceConceptualizationFormal analysisWriting original draftWriting review editingNeuzilletCindyDepartment of Medical Oncology, Curie
Institute, Versailles Saint-Quentin University, Paris-Saclay University,
Saint-Cloud, FranceFormal analysisValidationWriting review editingColleEliseDepartment of Digestive and Medical Oncology,
Hospital Paul Brousse (AP-HP), Villejuif, University of Paris Saclay,
FranceFormal analysisValidationWriting review editingDusettiNelsonCancer Research Center of Marseille, CRCM,
Inserm, CNRS, Paoli-Calmettes Institut, Aix-Marseille University, Marseille,
FranceFormal analysisValidationWriting review editingNicolleRémyCentre de Recherche sur l’Inflammation, INSERM,
U1149, CNRS, ERL 8252, Université de Paris Cité, Paris, FranceFormal analysisValidationVisualizationCrosJérômeDepartment of Pathology, University of Paris
Cité, Hospital Beaujon (AP-HP), Clichy, FranceFormal analysisValidationVisualizationde MestierLouisDepartment of Gastroenterology and
Pancreatology, University of Paris Cité, Hospital Beaujon (AP-HP), Clichy,
FranceFormal analysisValidationVisualizationBachetJean-BaptisteDepartment of Gastroenterology and Digestive
Oncology, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Sorbonne University, UPMC University,
Paris, FranceFormal analysisVisualizationWriting review editingHammelPascal 

In the early 2010s, the use of the 5-fluorouracil, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin
(FOLFIRINOX), and gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel combinations improved the
prognosis in selected patients. , However, targeted therapies and
immunotherapies, which have resulted in significant progress in patients with other
tumor types, have so far failed in PDAC due to the biological characteristics of
this entity.
Thus, the development of new, effective, and personalized treatments for PDAC is as
urgent as ever. At the same time, there have been recent, encouraging results with
the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor, olaparib to treat PDAC in
patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene germline
mutations (gBRCAm)
 
 and in the development of various molecules targeting specific somatic
genetic alterations. Nevertheless,
the proportion of patients who can actually benefit from these treatments is still
low either because these alterations are rare and can only be identified by
technical means not available in all centers, or because validation to administer
these treatments has not been obtained based on large randomized clinical
trials.
This review discusses the hopes and limitations of recent advances in personalized
treatment in patients with PDAC.

## Therapeutic targets of interest for standard of care

## HRD/BRCAness tumors and PARP inhibitors
Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins are critical to
the repair of double-strand DNA breaks by homologous recombination repair (HRR),
a form of DNA repair using a homologous DNA sequence to guide this process at
the double strand break (DSB; and ). This conservative mechanism
restores the original DNA sequence at the site of DNA damage (Lord and Ashworth).
 
 Although targeted therapies have failed in PDAC in molecularly unselected patients,
 
 progress has been made in recent years identifying small molecular
subgroups of patients with targetable alterations. While the
BRCA germline mutations are the most notable recent
example, they are not alone. The concept of synthetic lethality was applied
clinically using PARP inhibitors (PARPi) as single agent for maintenance therapy
in patients with metastatic PDAC and the germline BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutation (gBRCAm) following platinum-based induction
chemotherapy. For the first time, the POLO phase III trial confirmed the
efficacy of a biomarker-driven approach in metastatic PDAC patients with the
PARPi, olaparib. A significant benefit to progression-free survival (PFS) was
demonstrated with maintenance olaparib versus placebo [median
PFS: 7.4 months versus 3.8 months; hazard ratio (HR): 0.53; 95%
confidence interval (CI): 0.35–0.82; p = 0.004].
 

 The impressive median overall survival (OS) in these patients with metastatic
PDAC (19 months from the beginning of maintenance therapy) confirmed that gBRCAm
confers sensitivity to both platinum-based chemotherapies and PARPi, resulting
in favorable outcomes. In addition, Park et al.
 
 later showed that the maximal therapeutic benefit with first-line
platinum-based chemotherapy can be obtained in case of biallelic mutation in
core HRR genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, and PALB2)
compared to non-core genes (ATM, BAP1, BARD1,
etc.). However, the POLO study did not show an advantage to OS in the olaparib
arm compared to the placebo arm (median 19.0 versus
19.2 months; HR: 0.83; 95% CI: 0.56–1.22; p = 0.3487).
 
 One explanation could be the extensive use of effective therapies
following discontinuation of the study, resulting in tumor control in the
placebo arm. This included reintroduction of platinum chemotherapy as well as
the use of PARPi in 27.1% of patients, which was not allowed in the protocol.
Despite this, the secondary endpoints (time to second disease progression or
death, first and second subsequent cancer therapies or death and
discontinuation), and estimated 3-year OS after randomization (33.9%
versus 17.8%) were in favor of the olaparib arm.
 
 Olaparib was approved by the Food and Drug Administration and European
Medicines Agency at the end of 2019 for maintenance therapy in patients with
germline BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations (5–7% of
PDAC patients, with BRCA2 representing about two-thirds of the
gBRCAm) and metastatic PDAC, which has been controlled after at least 16 weeks
of first-line platinum-based chemotherapy.
 
 Systematic gBRCAm screening in PDAC patients is recommended in the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network clinical guidelines.
 

Thus, for the first time, targeted therapy has been shown to be effective in the
treatment of metastatic PDAC in a phase III trial, although these results have
raised several questions that will be discussed below.
Moreover, in a randomized phase II trial, O’Reilly et al.
 
 showed that there was no advantage to survival with a combination of
upfront platinum-based chemotherapy and PARPi in gBRCAm PDAC patients. This
suggests that patient selection based on tumor control during platinum
chemotherapy can help identify patients who will benefit the most from PARPi.
Indeed, about 20% of PDAC patients with gBRCAm are not platinum sensitive.
 

## Resistance to PARPi
Approximately 40% of patients have a primary resistance to olaparib and a
secondary resistance often occurs after several months of PARPi
administration. There are numerous mechanisms of resistance to PARPi: (i)
restoration of the HRR pathway through BRCA reversion
mutations and/or epigenetic upregulation of the gene, (ii) loss of
53BP1 with rewiring of the non-homologous end-joint
repair pathway, (iii) replication fork protection, (iv) upregulation of
cellular drug efflux pumps, (v) reduction in PARP1 activity, or (vi) changes
in the tumor microenvironment (TME). , Integrating
transcriptomic data with compound perturbation profiles could help identify
drugs that can exploit induced vulnerability and thus overcome therapeutic
resistance in multiple resistant clones.
 
 Finally, another important approach would be detecting
BRCA reversion mutations in circulating tumor DNA to
anticipate the loss of PARPi efficacy.
 

Rad3-related (ATR), a key protein DNA for damage response, senses replication
stress and induces signaling into the S and G2/M checkpoints to facilitate
DNA break repair. Its activation is involved in resistance to PARPi.
ATR inhibitors, such as VE-821, are a promising option
to overcome these mechanisms of resistance to talazoparib and olaparib,
mediated by inactivation of SLFN11
 
 or to resensitize PARPi-resistant BRCA1-deficient
cells which have restored HRR function to olaparib. , 
Finally, epigenetic resensitization through DNA methyltransferase
inhibition, cell cycle checkpoint inhibition, drug combinations with
antiangiogenic agents, BET inhibition or G quadruplex stabilization or
combining drugs upfront to prevent resistance, should also be
explored. , 

## Efficacy of PARPi in non-core genes mutations?
There is very little information in the literature on the sensitivity to
PARPi in tumors harboring a DNA damage repair mutation other than
BRCA1 or BRCA2 (e.g. ATM,
BAP1, BARD1, etc.) or on the activity of the different PARPi on
somatic versus germline ‘BRCAness’ mutations. , 
Somatic ‘BRCAness’ mutations could be present in up to 15–17% of PDAC patients.
 
 The activity of PARPi has been reported to be heterogeneous in other
cancers depending on the presence of a germline or somatic mutation, and the
gene involved (e.g. in prostate or ovarian cancer). , 
However, there is not enough existing data to extend the use of olaparib to
germline mutations other than BRCA1 or
BRCA2 or to somatic ‘BRCAness’ mutations, and
prospective trials are needed. The MAZEPPA French trial (NCT04348045) is an
open-label, phase II study to assess the efficacy of genomic-driven
maintenance therapy for PFS in metastatic PDAC patients whose tumor has been
controlled after 4 months of mFOLFIRINOX chemotherapy. In this trial,
patients with a BRCAness somatic profile receive olaparib while those with
no BRCAness profile and with a KRAS mutation are randomized
to receive durvalumab plus selumetinib or FOLFIRI.

## Which patients with PDAC should be tested for BRCAness mutations?
Ideally, all patients with PDAC should be tested
 
 to identify whether a gBRCAm has immediate and individual
theragnostic value. Moreover, diagnosis of a germline mutation can directly
influence the patient’s relatives and requires an oncogenetic consultation
with a longer delay. However, it should be remembered that the primary goal
of gBRCAm testing is theragnostic because it was not broadly indicated
before the POLO trial results, except in patients with a family history
suggesting a potential genetic predisposition.
It has been shown that about 40–60% of patients with gBRCAm do not declare a
family history of BRCA-related cancers (PDAC, breast,
ovarian or prostate cancer)
 
 either because they are not asked this question by the doctor, or the
patient does not know or has forgotten the family history, or the family
history is non-informative (incomplete penetrance).
 
 Published data on referral rates in PDAC are limited. A US study
reported that one-third of patients referred for genetic counseling did not
complete germline testing for various reasons (worsening of disease
severity, lack of follow-up, etc.).
 
 An Italian real-life study also showed that germinal BRCA
1/2 pathogenic variants were found in 8.1% of the population,
and 29% of patients had a family history of potentially
BRCA-associated tumors (breast ovarian, prostate, or
pancreas). However, in the same study, 45% of patients with a gBRCA mutation
had no or unknown family history of BRCAness.
 

Thus, a family history of cancers from the BRCA-spectrum
should not be considered necessary to select patients for gBRCAm screening.
It would seem that the gastroenterology/oncology medical community needs to
be more aware of the importance of collecting family information and patient
screening at the diagnosis of PDAC. However, it may not be cost-effective to
screen all PDAC patients. For example, the gBRCAm might only be searched for
in patients who are potential olaparib candidates, that is, who are fit for
platinum-based chemotherapy.

## When should patients be tested for BRCAness mutations?
In US guidelines, early testing for BRCA mutations
(excluding variants of unknown significance) in all PDAC patients is now
recommended with both somatic and germline analyses.
 
 Thus, testing can be proposed at diagnosis when planning for
biologically adapted treatment (i.e. platinum-based chemotherapy and PARPi
maintenance) whenever possible. In practice however, proposing this test
during the first meeting with patients who are worried about this
life-threatening disease can be difficult. Presenting testing as a potential
opportunity to have access to additional therapeutic options can minimize a
patient’s feeling of guilt for her/his relatives about transmitting the
mutation to her/his children if a germline mutation is discovered. Another
problem is the potential failure of upfront induction chemotherapy (17% of
patients in the POLO study) which prevents the use of maintenance treatment
such as PARPi.
 
 Thus, it seems to be acceptable to wait until the first tumor
evaluation to select patients for mBRCAg testing.
This explains why somatic testing was performed in the MAZEPPA trial after
2 months (four cycles) of mFOLFIRINOX to ensure tumor control. Finally,
testing can encounter organizational difficulties to obtain the result
within a sufficiently short period of time in relation to the theragnostic
aim, or reimbursement depending on the country and center. Moreover, there
is also the risk of poor quality material and thus to non-informative
results with somatic testing.

## Molecular alterations in KRAS wild-type PDAC
A hallmark of PDAC is the prevalence of the oncogenic mutation in the
KRAS gene.
 
 Activating KRAS mutations occur in approximately 90% of
cases. They are an early and major event in pancreatic carcinogenesis. They
result in permanent activation of the KRAS small GTPase protein, which acts as a
molecular switch to activate various intracellular signaling pathways (including
the MAP kinases and mTOR pathway) and transcription factors inducing cell
proliferation, invasion, and survival. 
KRAS-driven tumors are largely refractory to anticancer
therapies.
KRAS wild-type PDAC in 10% of PDACs,
 
 an entity with a good prognosis in the literature,
 
 offers therapeutic opportunities due to an enrichment in alternative,
potentially actionable, oncogenic drivers which are (almost always) mutually
exclusive with the KRAS mutation: (i) fusion genes and (ii)
BRAF alterations.
 

In a study by Philip et al.
 
 based on whole exome sequencing of 2483 PDACs, MSI-H/dMMR tumors were
found in 4.7% of the cases versus 0.7%, tumor mutational burden
(TMB)-high in 4.5% versus 1% and a larger infiltration of CD8+
T cells, natural killers, and dendritic cells (DCs) which could make these KRAS
wild-type tumors more sensitive to immune checkpoint inhibitors (CPIs).
Windon et al.
 
 reported that patients with KRAS wild-type PDACs have a
longer median OS (KRAS wild-type, 957 days versus
KRAS mutant, 531 days; p = 0.026) than those
without. Similarly, Ogura et al.
 
 found significantly better OS in patients with KRAS
wild-type PDAC (479 versus 255 days,
p = 0.03).
In addition, KRAS wild-type PDAC appears to be sensitive to
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition.
 
 Accordingly, the NOTABLE phase III trial, evaluating gemcitabine plus
nimotuzumab (a humanized anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody) combination
versus gemcitabine plus placebo have shown good results in
the experimental arm with a significant improvement of OS [10.9
versus 8.5 months, HR: 0.50 (0.06–0.94),
p = 0.024] in KRAS wild-type advanced PDACs.
 

Previous studies examining the genomic profiles of KRAS
wild-type PDAC have shown considerable heterogeneity, with
GNAS, BRAF, and CTNNB1
alterations and additional RAS pathway genes identified as oncogenic drivers and
kinase fusions in FGFR2, RAF,
ALK, RET, MET,
neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase 1 (NTRK1),
ERBB4, and FGFR3. , , In
particular, actionable somatic alterations were frequently identified in early
onset pancreatic cancer, enriched in the RAS wild-type
subgroup. For example, in a study performed at Sloan Kettering Memorial hospital
in 132 early-onset PDAC, 15.9% had RAS wild-type PDAC with
actionable alterations, including ETV6-NTRK3,
TPR-NTRK1, SCLA5-Neuregulin 1
(NRG1), as well as ATP1B1-NRG1 fusions,
IDH1 R132C mutations, or mismatch repair deficiencies.
 
 Another whole genome and transcriptome sequencing study that was
performed to identify clinically actionable genomic alterations in young adults
with PDAC alterations identified recurrent NRG1 rearrangements
that are supposed to drive PDAC development through aberrant ERBB
receptor–mediated signaling.
 

## NRG1 fusions
NRG1 is a ligand that binds to human epidermal growth factor receptor 3
(HER3), promoting HER2/HER3 heterodimerization and activation of
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling. Chromosomal rearrangements involving
NRG1 are rare oncogenic drivers in solid tumors,
enriched in KRASwt PDAC and lung invasive mucinous
adenocarcinoma. , 
NRG1 fusion positive (NRG1+) in
vitro and in vivo models are sensitive to
HER2/HER3 directed therapy. , There are over 20
partners of NRG1 fusions in solid tumors and some reports
reveal common partners according to cancer type. CD74 has
been shown to be the most frequent and ATP1B1,
CDH1, and VTCN1 were detected as a
partner of NRG1 fusion in PDAC. , .
In a study by Jones et al.
 
 in 47 patients with PDAC who underwent comprehensive whole genome and
transcriptome sequencing and analysis, two of the three patients with
NRG1 fusion-positive tumors were treated with afatinib
(tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting HER2 and HER3) and had a rapid,
significant response on therapy.
A recent phase II basket trial with zenocutuzumab (MCLA-128), a bispecific
antibody targeting NRG1 fusion signaling, was launched in
patients with NRG1 fusion-positive PDAC, non-small-cell
lung cancer (NSCLC), and other solid tumors (NCT02912949). Schram et
al.
 
 reported a partial response in 42% of patients with MCLA-128 in a
series of PDAC patients in this ongoing trial. Zenocutuzumab induced rapid
and major radiological tumor regression and biomarker responses in heavily
pretreated metastatic KRAS wild-type,
NRG1-positive pancreatic cancer, with a good
tolerance.
The rarity of NRG1 fusions and the diversity of fusion
partners may make their detection challenging. It is important to note that
DNA sequencing is not sufficiently sensitive to detect these fusions. Thus,
RNA sequencing is considered to be the gold standard for this purpose, and
offers the greatest likelihood of identifying NRG1 gene
fusions when the identity of the fusion partner is unknown. 

## NTRK fusion
The genes NTRK1, NTRK2, and
NTRK3, respectively, encode tyrosine kinase receptors
tropomyosin-related kinases A, B, and C (TRKA, TRKB, and TRKC). Fusion of a
variety of different partners with NTRK1,
NTRK2, or NTRK3 results in oncogenic
proteins that act for constitutive activation of the
RAS-MEK-extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK), diacylglycerol-inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate,
and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways. , 
However, these NTRK fusions are uncommon (<0.5% of PDAC),
and mainly found in rare pediatric tumors, although they can also be
encountered in common digestive cancers such as colorectal cancer,
especially in case of RAS/BRAF wild-type dMMR/MSI-H tumors
(with an enrichment in up to 40% of tumors), or in aggressive cancers, such
as PDAC. , , In a study by Allen et al.
 
, whole genome sequencing and RNAseq were performed in a series of 400
patients with resected or locally advanced/metastatic PDAC. The prevalence
of NTRK fusions was 0.8% (3/400), but it was 6.25% (2/32)
in KRAS wild-type tumors. Since the results of the NAVIGATE
trial, these fusions represent a histoagnostic alteration that can be
targeted. In this phase II clinical trial that explores the efficacy and
long-term safety of larotrectinib, 121 (79%) patients with
NTRK fusion-positive solid tumors had an objective
tumor response. One of the two patients with PDAC were responders. , In
another study, two patients with PDAC and NTRK fusions
achieved a partial response to entrectinib.
 

Other targetable fusions have also been described but are uncommon (each
 < 0.5%: RET, enriched in acinar pancreatic cancer, ALK, FGFR2,
etc.).

## KRAS mutations
Direct KRAS blockade remains a challenge, and successful inhibition of a key
downstream effector pathway, the RAF-MEK-ERK cascade has been
limited because of activation of feedback networks that keep the pathway in
check ( ). , Overall, the unsuccessful clinical trials to prevent
localization of the RAS protein to the plasma membrane and inhibit downstream
oncogenic signaling by targeting KRAS effectors in
MEK1/2, ERK1/2, or AKT alone or in
combination have led to the conclusion that KRAS was an ‘undruggable’ target.
 

 G12D (38%) and G12V (28%) are the most common
mutations in PDAC. In recent
years, inhibitors have been developed to target the KRASG12C
mutation (adagrasib, sotorasib), based on the physicochemical particularities of
the cysteine amino acid (G12C). The mutated cysteine resides next to a pocket
(P2) of the switch II region. The P2 pocket is only present in the inactive
GDP-bound conformation of KRAS and has been exploited to
establish covalent inhibitors of KRASG12C. , , They bind
to KRAS-GDP-bound and lock it in its ‘off’ form. , The targeting of this
mutation was initially developed in lung and colorectal cancers. Early clinical
trials of these inhibitors were promising in the KRASG12C
mutant PDAC, which is only found in 1–2% of PDAC, in early clinical
trials. 
Preclinical studies showed that sotorasib (AMG510) inhibited nearly all
detectable phosphorylation of ERK, a key downstream effector of
KRAS, leading to durable complete tumor regression in mice
bearing KRASG12C tumors. Preclinically, AMG510 selectively
targeted KRASG12C tumors, caused durable regression as a
monotherapy, and could be combined with cytotoxic and targeted agents to
synergistically kill tumor cells. Moreover, AMG510 treatment led to an inflamed
TME that was highly responsive to immune checkpoint inhibition.
 

In the phase I study by Hong et al.
 
 in advanced solid tumors, no dose-limiting toxic effects were observed
with sotorasib and no treatment-related adverse events resulted in death. Four
patients with tumor types other than lung or colorectal cancers had a confirmed
partial response, including one with PDAC.
 
 In all, 12 patients with KRASG12C PDAC were enrolled in
the next phase I/II study with sotorasib (NCT03600883). One out of 11 patients
who could be evaluated had a partial response, 8 patients had stable disease,
and 2 patients had progressive disease.
 
 Recently, the combined data from the phase I/II CodeBreaK100 trial in 38
PDAC patients treated with sotorasib, the objective response rate (ORR) was 21%
and disease control rate (DCR) 84.2% among patients who had already received at
least one therapy for PDAC. , 
Adagrasib (MRTX849) is another KRAS G12C inhibitor. At the ASCO
GI 2022, Bekaii-Saab et al.
 
 presented the updated results of the KRYSTAL-1 study (NCT03785249) about
the activity and safety of adagrasib as monotherapy in 30 patients with
previously treated, inoperable or metastatic KRASG12C-mutant GI
tumors other than colorectal cancer. Among the 12 patients with PDAC in this
series (median prior lines of therapy: n = 3; median follow-up
8.1 months), a partial response was obtained in 5 out of 10 patients who could
be evaluated. All patients achieved a DCR and the PFS was 6.6 months (95% CI
1.0–9.7). Adverse events were diarrhea (43%), vomiting (43%), and fatigue (29%)
(grade 3/4: 21%).
More effective combinations of various targeted therapies have been studied
preclinically with KRAS G12C inhibitors in colorectal cancer
(e.g. combination of adagrasib with anti-EGFR cetuximab in the KRYSTAL-1 study)
and NSCLC. , Multiple combinations are now in clinical trials ( ), such as new
combination arms in the CodeBreak 101 trial combining sotorasib with a
MEK inhibitor, PD-1 inhibitor,
SHP2 inhibitor, pan-ERBB inhibitor,
PD-L1 inhibitor, CDK inhibitor, or
mTOR inhibitor (NCT04185883). The KRYSTAL-2 trial of
adagrasib explores the role of the SHP2 inhibitor TNO155
(NCT04330664). Multiple additional promising G12C inhibitors
are currently in clinical development as well, including JNJ-74699157
(NCT04006301), GDC-6036 (NCT04449874), and JDQ443 (NCT04699188)
 
 in PDAC patients. Whether the depth and duration of response will be
comparable to that obtained in lung cancer (up to 40% response rate) remains to
be determined.
KRASG12D is a much more common alteration in PDAC and it
represents a third of KRAS mutations. As shown in recent
attempts, it lacks a reactive residue adjacent to the switch II pocket , and
thus new selected drugs must be designed. The G12D inhibitor
MRTX1133 was discovered through an intensive structure-based search during
adagrasib synthesis and high-resolution X-ray crystal structures. Its efficacy
has been found to be promising in mutant Panc 03-04 xenograft mouse tumor models,
 
 which is important because the KRAS missense mutation
G12D is the most predominant variant in human malignancies
(35%), and 39% of PDAC patients harbor this mutation ( ).
Other inhibitors, such as SOS1:KRAS interaction inhibitors, could be effective on
a larger spectrum of KRAS mutations. BI-3406, a potent and
selective SOS1:KRAS interaction inhibitor, has been shown to decrease the
formation of GTP-loaded RAS and reduce cell proliferation of a large fraction of
KRASG12C and non-G12C-driven cancers in vitro and in
vivo. In mouse models, BI-3406 attenuates feedback reactivation by
MEK inhibitors and enhances sensitivity of KRAS-dependent cancers to MEK
inhibition, resulting in tumor regression at well-tolerated doses.
 

Mutant KRAS drives immune evasion in cancer cells by the upregulation of
inhibitory immune checkpoint expression, the downregulation of MHC-I expression
on tumor cells, the enhancement of cytokines and chemokines, and the recruitment
of suppressive immune cells.
 
 Mutant KRAS neoantigens presented on human HLA and T cells can recognize
mutant KRAS cells and paved the way of strategies for targeting KRAS
immunologically with vaccines alone or in combination.
 
 A highly promising approach using T-cell engineering targeting the KRAS
G12D hotspot mutation will be described further on in the chimeric antigen
receptor (CAR)-T cells in section “CAR-T-cell development.”
 

## Targetable BRAF mutations
BRAF mutations, which are generally mutually exclusive with
KRAS, are present in 3% of PDAC but up to 10% of
KRAS wild-type PDAC.
 

V600E BRAF mutations are prominent. Other alterations, such as
non-V600E BRAF in-frame insertions or deletions or gene
fusions, have been reported in 1% of patients with PDAC.
 

A combination of the BRAFV600E inhibitor vemurafenib and the MEK
inhibitor cobimetinib resulted in an objective tumor response in a patient with
poorly differentiated, V600E mutant PDAC.
 
 In another report, six patients, five with a V600E
mutation and one with CUX1-BRAF fusion, received
vemurafenib single agent.
 
 In a series of the ‘Know Your Tumor’ program, two of 18 PDAC patients
with BRAF-mutant PDAC received the dabrafenib/trametinib
(BRAF/MEK-inhibitor) combination: one patient with tumor
V600E mutation had a sustained response, while treatment failed in the other
with KRASG12A/BRAF K601N.
 

## Immunotherapy in PDAC: microsatellite instability and high tumor mutational
burden
The resistance of PDAC to immunotherapies could be due in part to a paucity of
neoantigen-reactive tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, which can mainly be
explained by the low immunogenicity and non-inflamed phenotype of PDAC. The
abundant stroma generates a hypoxic microenvironment and drives the recruitment
of immunosuppressive cells through cancer-associated-fibroblast activation and
transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) secretion.
 
 Nevertheless, we have begun to identify subgroups of responders to
immunotherapies.

## DMMR/MSI-H tumors
The deficient deficient mismatch repair (dMMR)/ microsatellite
instability-high (MSI-H) phenotype could be an interesting target even in
the presence of sporadic or Lynch syndrome (LS) tumors. , In
a multicenter study of immunohistochemical analyses of 445 PDAC specimens,
1.6% of tumor samples were dMMR/MSI-H.
 
 This rate was 2.61% in a meta-analysis of 34 studies pooling 8323
PDAC patients.
 
 However, the dMMR/MSI-H PDAC rate in the latter study may have been
overestimated, since some studies focused on PDAC subtypes enriched by this
molecular alteration. dMMR/MSI-H in PDAC is strongly associated with the
medullary and mucinous/colloid histological phenotype. This is associated
with a KRAS/TP53 wild-type molecular background and a
higher rate of JAK (JAK1 and JAK3) and
KMT2 (KMT2C and KMT2D) gene mutations, with no benefit
to survival, like in colorectal cancer. The genomes of dMMR/MSI-H tumors
harbor hundreds to thousands of somatic mutations that encode potential
neoantigens. Thus, often immunogenic, triggering upregulation of immune
checkpoint proteins. In the phase II KEYNOTE-158 study testing the
anti-programmed death-1 therapy pembrolizumab in pretreated patients with
advanced non-colorectal dMMR/MSI-H tumors, the primary endpoint was the ORR
according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1, as
assessed by an independent central radiologic review.
 
 While there was a clear clinical benefit using this single
immunotherapy agent, the ORR in the subgroup of patients with PDAC was only
18.2%, which is low compared to endometrial (57.1%), gastric (45.8%),
cholangiocarcinoma (40.9%), small intestine (42.1%), or ovarian (33.3%) cancers.
 
 This could be related to the specific unfavorable immune
microenvironment or the misdiagnosis of PDAC or MSI-H.
 

dMMR/MSI-H PDACs has been shown to have a higher density of CD8+ T cells at
the invasive front (p = 0.08) and expression of the CD274
molecule more often than other PDACs (p = 0.05).
 
 Nearly 10% of PDAC patients harbor germline variants, although most
lack somatic second hits and its therapeutic significance has not been defined.
 
 In a multicenter study of 289 patients with resected PDACs who were
not preselected for age or personal/family cancer history, targeted germline
analysis of 24 genes related to an inherited cancer predisposition
identified pathogenic/probably pathogenic germline variants in nearly 10% of
patients, including 7.3% with variants in genes related to dMMR genes.
Patients with a LS have an 8.6-fold greater risk of developing PDAC than the
general population
 
 with a cumulated risk of PDAC of 3.7% and tumors exhibiting a
medullary appearance with prominent lymphocytic infiltration.
 

The literature on somatic-only dMMR status is more scarce. hMLH1 promoter
methylation was detected in 60.0% of a series of 90 operated patients.
 
 Finally, dMMR/MSI-H is often a genetic alteration enriched in
KRAS wild-type PDAC.
 
 These observations are the reason for the recent guidelines for dMMR
somatic testing in PDAC and universal germline testing of dMMR
tumors. , 

## High tumor mutational burden
Except for MSI tumors, immunotherapy has thus far failed in PDAC, even with
ICI combinations
 
 or chemotherapy.
 
 TMB in PDAC is about one mutation per megabase (mut/Mb), which is
10-fold less than that of melanoma or lung carcinoma. In addition, PDACs are
characterized by low T-cell recruitment and dense desmoplastic stroma
resulting in high interstitial pressure, poor tumor perfusion, and hypoxia.
Activation of fibroblasts then releases cytokines [TGFβ, interleukin (IL)-6,
colony- stimulating factor 1 (CSF1) etc.] leading to immunosuppressive cell
recruitment (M2 macrophages, regulatory T cells (TREG), myeloid derived
suppressor cells (MDSC), as well as exclusion and effector T-cell anergy,
which may explain the failure of immune CPI treatments.
 

Response rates with pembrolizumab have been shown to be significant on tissue
TMB (tTMB) data The rate in the KEYNOTE-158 study was approximately 30% for
tTMB-high tumors (at least 10 mutations per megabase) ( ).
 
 This response rate could mainly be due to the potential of tumor
mutations to generate immunogenic neoantigens. There was no benefit to OS in
the recent PA.7 randomized phase II trial evaluating
gemcitabine-nab-paclitaxel with durvalumab and tremelimumab. However, tTMB
and ATM were identified as predictive biomarkers of response.
 
 Nevertheless, results are contradictory. In another study, data from
over 10,000 tumors from patients included in The Cancer Genome Atlas were
analyzed to evaluate the association of t-TMB with CPI treatment outcomes.
This analysis did not support the use of TMB-H as a biomarker for treatment
outcomes of several cancer types with CPI.
 
 Further studies are needed to evaluate other tumor-specific types
especially in PDAC for which data are lacking. , 

## Immunotherapy proficient MMR tumors
Except for dMMR/MSI-H PDAC, single-agent immunotherapy has not been found to
be effective in PDAC because this entity combines poor tumor immunogenicity
with a low mutation rate ( ).
 
 Nevertheless, immunotherapy agents are being tested in numerous
combinations with various molecules including tyrosine kinase inhibitors or
classic gemcitabine-nab-paclitaxel (NCT04498689, NCT04181645, and
NCT03989310) or FOLFIRINOX schemas (NCT04324307, NCT03977272, and
NCT04181645) ( ). It is interesting to note that T-cell reactivity to
high-quality tumor neoantigens has been shown to be a characteristic in
long-term survivors thus could lead to reposition immunotherapy in a subset
of patients with MMR PDAC. To illustrate this, a promising approach using
T-cell engineering will be described further on in this review (cf section
“CAR-T-cell development").
 

## Emerging targets of interest

## Metabolic pathways
The harsh PDAC microenvironment explains why tumor cells must find alternative
nutrient sources.
 
 Tumor cells become dependent upon the activity of an oncogene for
survival and proliferation via the mitochondrial metabolism and
ATP production. This is mainly fueled by glutamine.
 
 and KRAS signaling, which promotes extracellular glucose
avidity and capture via upregulation of the glucose transporter
GLUT1 and hexokinase.
 
 This oncogene addiction may be the ‘Achilles’ heel’ of tumor cells and
represent a potential therapeutic target.
 

Devimistat selectively inhibits the tricarboxylic acid cycle in the mitochondria
of tumor cells by impairing pyruvate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase enzyme activity. Production of the anabolic intermediates required
for effective DNA damage repair is decreased as a result of the impact on
mitochondrial metabolism. In a phase I study, the combination of devimistat and
modified FOLFIRINOX (mFOLFIRINOX) in 20 patients led to a high tumor response
rate (61%).
 
 However, the phase III study did not show any improved OS in the
mFOLFIRINOX plus devimistat arm compared to FOLFIRINOX alone (HR = 0.95, median
OS: 11.1 versus 11.7 months).
 

Constitutive KRAS signaling leads to addiction to metabolites such as glutamine
and asparagine, used by non-canonical metabolic pathways. , 
Glutamine deprivation and/or inhibition of enzymes downstream of KRAS result in
suppression of PDAC cell growth. As PDAC are hypovascular tumors, enhanced
asparagine synthetase expression is a key mechanism of adaptation to hypoxia and
glucose deprivation.
 
 Thus, modulation of glutamine and asparagine levels may be critical in
these cells. l-Asparaginase hydrolyzes the amino acid asparagine into
aspartic acid and ammonia. Its systemic administration decreases the amino acid
in proliferating cancer cells that use exogenous asparagine.
 
 The results of erythrocyte-encapsulated l-ASNase (eryaspase)
tested in a phase IIb study combined with chemotherapy as a second line of
treatment in patients with PDAC were positive.
 
 However, it failed to improve survival in the phase III study.
 

These findings add to the negative results from other trials targeting metabolism
in PDAC with metformin,
 
 evofosfamide,
 
 or hydroxychloroquine (HCQ).
 
 Nevertheless, other metabolic strategies are still being explored.
Autophagy involves the degradation and recycling of damaged organelles and
protein aggregates after autophagosome and lysosome fusion, which promote
damaged cancer cell survival.
 
 Autophagy is elevated in PDAC cells.
 
 It promotes immune evasion by degrading the major histocompatibility
complex class I (MHC-I) and decreasing tumor infiltration by CD8+ T cells.
 
 MHC-I molecules are located in autophagosomes and lysosomes rather than
on the cell surface and are targeted for degradation by an autophagy-dependent
mechanism. Thus, inhibiting autophagy with drugs such as HCQ could sensitize
PDAC cells to immune checkpoint blockade.
 
 The ERK inhibitor LY3214996, which has shown some
activity in BRAF- and KRAS-mutant models, administered as a single-agent or
combined with HCQ (NCT04386057), and the paricalcitol, HCQ and
gemcitabine-nab-paclitaxel combination (NCT04524702) have also been tested in
two phase II trials in advanced PDAC patients.
The alpha-hydroxylated polyunsaturated fatty acid ABTL0812 induces sustained
endoplasmic reticulum stress via induction of tribbles-3
pseudokinase expression, which results in inhibition of
AKT-MTORC1 and dihydroceramide accumulation in human PDAC
cell lines leading to autophagic activation and cell death. , The
combination of ABTL0812 with FOLFIRINOX is being tested for the first-line
treatment of metastatic PDAC in a phase I-II trial (NCT04431258).

## Stroma

## Recombinant human hyaluronidase
PDACs have a dense and abundant stroma, which is known to be a critical
mediator of disease progression through direct effects on cancer cells and
indirect effects on the immune microenvironment of the tumor. The three
major entities in the PDAC stroma are the extracellular matrix (ECM),
vasculature (poorly developed in PDAC which are highly hypoxic), immune
cells (mainly, pro-tumoral, inflammatory M2 and MDSC and low number of
cytotoxic T cells), and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs). , 
PDAC is a highly chemoresistant cancer which may be because desmoplasia
impedes drug delivery. This suggests that stromal modifying agents, such as
pegvorhyaluronidase alfa (PEGPH20), an enzyme that temporarily degrades
hyaluronic acid (HA), could decrease tumor pressure and vascular
compression, thus penetrating the ‘halo’ surrounding the tumor cells.
PEGPH20 has been developed and investigated in phase I-III studies.
 
 This drug was assessed in a phase Ib/II clinical trial in combination
with modified FOLFIRINOX (mFOLFIRINOX). A unexplained detrimental effect was
reported in the PEGPH20 arm with a median OS that was nearly 50% lower
(7.7 months versus 14.4 months in the chemotherapy alone
group) and an increase in the rate of severe treatment-related adverse
events (45% versus 9% in the mFOLFIRINOX alone arm).
 
 Otherwise, in a phase III trial, the addition of PEGPH20 to
gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel backbone chemotherapy did not improve survival.
 

Other ECM targets are currently under clinical investigation.
 
 For example, the normalization of tumor vasculature by blocking the
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)–VEGF receptor 2
axis can improve pericyte coverage and tumor perfusion, leading to decreased
hypoxia, increased drug delivery and CD8+ T-cell trafficking into the tumor
through the action of the leukocyte adhesion molecules, intercellular
adhesion molecule and vascular adhesion molecule.
 

Moreover, the PDAC TME has distinct CAFs populations.
 
 There is an overwhelming body of evidence showing that CAFs are not
mere cellular bystanders in cancer, but active players in the process of
cancer initiation, progression, and metastasization.
 
 CAFs have long been considered to be pro-tumoral cancer cell partners
in PDAC.
These data have led to a paradigm suggesting that stroma and in particular
CAFs promote PDAC tumor growth and metastases and contribute to the
extensive resistance to therapies. This mechanistic model promoted the
clinical development of anti-tumor strategies to deplete the stroma by
disrupting the signaling pathways involved in intercellular communication
between PDAC tumor cells and CAFs. These include the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) or
TGFβ pathways, or direct targeting of the ECM, such as HA – the main ECM
component responsible for the elevated interstitial fluid pressure, or
collagen I. Preclinical studies in murine models showed that SHH inhibition
reduced stromal abundance, increased tumor perfusion, and thus, improved
chemotherapy delivery.
 
 However, phase II studies with SHH inhibitors in PDAC were negative.
 
 Similarly, although several clinical trials, including the phase III
MAESTRO study, have targeted TGFβ in a variety of cancers including PDAC,
and which is overexpressed in 35% of PDAC, patient OS was not improved.
 
 Melisi et al.
 
 have presented preliminary results of a phase Ib study (NCT02734160)
testing the TGFβ receptor I kinase inhibitor galunisertib plus the
anti-PD-L1 antibody durvalumab. DCR was of 25%.
Other ongoing trials with other agents such as bintrafusp (M7824) in a phase
I/II trial plus stereotaxic body radiation therapy (NCT04327986) or LGK974
(NCT01351103) are being tested. As mentioned above, PEGPH20 has also been
evaluated with negative results.
 
 Preclinical studies further highlighted the deleterious effects of
stromal depletion. Non-selective suppression of CAFs from the stroma, either
by genetic αSMA-positive cell depletion
 
 or by pharmacological inhibition of the SHH pathway,
 
 adversely modulated immunity (increase in immunosuppressive
regulatory T cells) and angiogenesis (increased tumor vascularization) in
PDAC TME and led to undifferentiated, more invasive tumors. , 
Moreover, deletion of the Col1a1 gene in αSMA-positive CAFs led to a
significant decrease in total stromal collagen type I deposition and
acceleration of disease due to the suppression of CD8+ T cells.
 
 Overall, these negative results (i) highlighted the limited
predictability of preclinical models and (ii) suggested that some CAF
subpopulations or ECM components may play a protective role in blocking the
progression of PDAC. Despite certain disappointing results in this poorly
vascularized, hypoxic microenvironment, clinical trials targeting
angiogenesis and CAFs subtypes are needed.
 

## FAK
Nuclear focal adhesion kinase (FAK) regulates the transcription of chemokines
that drive recruitment of tumor-associated regulatory T cells (Tregs), which
contribute to an immunosuppressive TME in PDAC by inhibiting cytotoxic CD8+
T-cell activity.
 
 Thus, FAK inhibition may modulate the cellular and molecular
composition of immuno-suppressive TME.
 
 On the other hand, stromal depletion by FAK inhibitor therapy may
provoke treatment resistance through STAT3 signaling activation.
 
 The results of a phase II trial combining GSK2256098 and trametinib
(NCT02428270) in advanced PDAC patients were disappointing.
 
 The FAK inhibitor defactinib is currently being tested in combination
with the anti-PD-1, pembrolizumab and gemcitabine
(NCT02546531, NCT02758857, and NCT03727880), or trametinib
(NCT02428270).

## BTK
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) is a non-receptor enzyme from the Tec kinase
family expressed in hematopoietic cells (B, myeloid and mast cells, and
platelets). BTK-dependent signaling in mast cells and myeloid cells plays an
important role in peri-tumoral inflammatory stroma. Ibrutinib specifically
inhibits the release of IL-8, MPC-1, and tumor necrosis factor α from mast
cells leading to decreased fibrosis and extended survival, and improves the
response to clinical standard-of-care therapy in mouse models.
 
 In the phase III RESOLVE trial, the addition of ibrutinib to
nab-paclitaxel plus gemcitabine failed to improve OS (9.7
versus 10.8 months; p = 0.3225) and
provided an even shorter PFS (5.3 versus 6.0 months;
p < 0.0001) in the ibrutinib arm than in the placebo arm.
 
 The efficacy of the combination of ibrutinib with the anti-PDL-1 durvalumab,
 
 and acalabrutinib alone or combined with pembrolizumab
 
 was found to be limited in PDAC patients.

## CTGF
Connective tissue growth factor is strongly expressed in CAFs and tumor
cells. Pamrevlumab (FG-3019) enhances the chemotherapy response without
increasing drug delivery in murine ductal pancreas cancer by decreasing
expression of the X-linked mammalian inhibitor of apoptosis protein gene.
 
 In a phase I/II trial, patients with locally advanced PDAC who
received a combination of gemcitabine/nab-paclitaxel plus pamrevlumab
achieved surgical resection in 33% of cases versus 8% in
those with gemcitabine-nab-paclitaxel alone.
 
 The combination of pamrevlumab plus gemcitabine-nab-paclitaxel or
FOLFIRINOX has been evaluated in patients with advanced PDAC in a phase III
trial and the results are pending (NCT03941093 and NCT04229004).

## Tumoral and stromal signatures
The choice of systemic therapy using combined, potentially toxic drugs is mainly
based on the patient’s performance status and biological/liver tests. Thus,
diagnostic tests should be used to guide the choice of individualized therapy
for patients.
 
 Combined genomic, transcriptomic, and therapeutic profiling using
patient-derived organoids (pharmacotyping) could help identify molecular and
functional subtypes of PDAC for this purpose.
 
 ORGANOTREAT-01 (NCT05267912) is a clinical trial establishing organoid
models from the patient’s biopsy to test the chemosensitivity of available drugs
(‘chemogram’). Even if pharmacotyping is promising as surrogate tumor models for
personalized oncology, this strategy has several limitations for a highly
aggressive disease such as PDAC: (1) because the delay required for
pharmacotyping is long (usually several weeks), patients may receive treatments
that modify tumor sensitivity; 2) in non-experienced centers the quality of the
organoid cultures may be suboptimal (<60%) because this approach is
technically challenging. On the other hand, the predictive multigene signatures
based on RNA expression measurement can be obtained rapidly from patient
biopsies in breast, prostate, and pancreatic cancers. In practice prediction
of drug sensitivity despite the lack of defined molecular targets seems to be
more useful than predicting the risk of recurrence. The predictive value of
transcriptomic signatures in PDAC, in particular the basal-like and classic
epithelial subtypes, is of great interest.
 
 In the COMPASS trial (NCT02750657), Aung et al.
 
 identified 30% of actionable mutations (ARID1A, BRAF,
CDK4/6, PIK3CA PTEN, and RNF) in
their series of patients with PDAC. The efficacy of modified (m)FOLFIRINOX and
gemcitabine-nab-paclitaxel combinations was assessed according to the molecular
subtype of the tumor on RNA-sequencing.. ‘Basal-like’ and ‘classic’ modified
Moffitt subtypes were identified in 20% and 80% of cases, respectively. The
basal-like subtype was associated with a lower objective response rate than the
classic phenotype in patients who received mFOLFIRINOX (10%
versus 33%, respectively, p = 0.02) and
median OS (5.9 versus 9.3 months, respectively, HR = 0.47; 95%
CI: 0.32–0.69; p = 0.0001).
 
 Nevertheless, no alternative to mFOLFIRINOX has been found to be more
effective for the basal-like subtype. Another transcriptomic signature is the
Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma Molecular Gradient. Unlike all other stratification
schemas, this signature classifies PDAC along a continuous gradient with a
prognostic value that also predicts the response to mFOLFIRINOX. , GATA6
RNA expression is lower in basal-like tumors. GATA6 acts as a tumor suppressor
by blocking KRAS G12V-driven pancreatic tumorigenesis and
enforcing differentiation. GATA6-low cell lines derived from patient-derived
xenografts were resistant to 5-fluorouracil but not gemcitabine patient-derived
organoids. , 
Nicolle et al. , have identified a
RNA-based whole transcriptome signature that predicts sensitivity to gemcitabine
(‘GemPred’) in the adjuvant setting after surgical resection of PDAC.
 
 Among gemcitabine-treated patients, OS was significantly higher in
GemPred-positive patients than in GemPred-negative patients [91.3 months (95%
CI: 61.2–not reached) versus 33 months (95% CI: 24–35.2); HR
0.403 (95% CI: 0.221–0.735, p = 0.00216), respectively].
Genome-wide RNA profiles were also obtained from routine formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded samples of fine-needle aspirate material. This is valuable for
routine use, as pancreatic biopsies are performed using fine-needle aspiration
under endoscopic ultrasound control.
 
 Finally, this signature could help reposition gemcitabine in frail PDAC
patients who are not eligible for FOLFIRINOX, whatever the indication.

## High replicative stress
Genomic instability is a key hallmark of cancer, occurring due to defects in the
DNA damage response and/or increased replication stress. , 
ATR and ATM are key components to the DNA
damage response and are prime targets for DNA damage response inhibitors,
because of their central regulatory function in activating the response to both
single-strand breaks and DSBs. Both of these proteins work through distinct but
overlapping pathways to halt the cell cycle and initiate DNA damage response pathways.
 

There is an interest in using ataxia–telangiectasia and ATR protein kinase
inhibitors in cancer, especially in high replicative stress cancers.
ATR inhibition leads to replication fork collapse as well
as the loss of the G2-M checkpoint in cancers with increased levels of
replication stress (defined by slowing or stalling of replication forks, e.g.
with TP53 loss or CCNE1 amplification),
allowing cells with damaged DNA to progress prematurely into the M phase,
leading to mitotic catastrophe and cell death. , Thus, ATR inhibition
causes unresolved replication stress that leads to the induction of DNA DSBs
causing cell death.
 
 ATR inhibitors such as berzosertib have already been evaluated in
preclinical studies.
 
 Most PDAC display high replicative stress. A recent study based on whole
exome sequencing datasets reported that the ‘squamous’ transcriptomic subtype of
PDACs shows signs of high replicative stress, which may make them sensitive to
ATR inhibitors. The authors of this study showed that a novel DNA replication
stress transcriptomic signature predicts the response to new
ATR and WEE1 inhibitors. High replication
stress and the presence of DNA repair gene deficiencies appear to be distinct
entities, which may exist independently and could be targeted by different drugs.
 

In particular, this ‘squamous’ subtype is enriched in TP53 and
KRAS mutations. Indeed, tumor cells with TP53 mutations (a
major cell cycle checkpoint) are subject to DNA damage, while those with
KRAS mutations are exposed to replicative stress. , Thus,
replicative stress may be increased in the presence of a double
KRAS and TP53 mutation, which is found in
more than 50% of pancreatic cancers.

## Others

## CAR-T-cell development
Adoptive T-cell therapy, which redirects a patient’s own T cells against a
tumor antigen using CAR gene transfer technology, has been remarkably
successful in hematological tumors in the past several years.
 

The complex TME of PDAC, as well as the stromal obstacle limiting the immune
response, and the expression of checkpoint blockade on T cells are obstacles
to this approach.
 
 CAR-T cells face major difficulties due to the aggressiveness of the
disease and the usually late stage diagnosis with extensive tumor
dissemination. CAF-depletion, remodeling approaches using CAR-T cells or
pharmacological substances such as ATRA or nab-paclitaxel might help limit
the influence on the TME.
 

Some of these obstacles may be overcome or turned into a specific targeting
strategy, and clinical trials to overcome the physical and environmental
barriers in the TME are ongoing.
 

Target antigens in these trials include mesothelin, prostate stem cell
antigen, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), HER2, MUC1, and CD133. The best
results from clinical trials in CAR-T cells in PDAC have been obtained from mesothelin
 
 and CEA targets.
 

Mesothelin is expressed in 80% of PDACs, , and 25%–100% of the
cells in positive tumors express the antigen.
 
 Positive results in a phase I study in chemotherapy-refractory
metastatic PDAC provide evidence for the potential antitumor activity of
autologous mesothelin-specific CAR-T cells, as well as PDAC resistance to
the immune response.
 
 A more recent phase I trial investigated the safety and activity of
lentiviral-transduced CAR-T-meso in 15 patients with malignant pleural
mesothelioma, ovarian carcinoma, and PDAC. Patients with PDAC showed the
greatest percentage of lesions with a disease progression within 28 days.
 
 Other results in patient-derived xenograft models from patients with
stage IV PDAC suggest that a switchable CAR-T system to target the antigen
HER2, upregulated on tumor cells is effective against aggressive,
disseminated PDAC.
 
 This strategy is ambitious because historically, when a CAR-T
HER2/NEU was tested, the patient died from cardiopulmonary toxicity within days.
 
 The CEA is a glycoprotein expressed in nearly 75% of pancreatic cancers
 
 and it can also be targeted in PDAC. There are ongoing trials
evaluating the role of CAR-T cells activated with the CEA for this indication.
 
 While there are no reports of pancreatic cancer-specific CAR T-cell
trials targeting CEA, there are preliminary results from a phase I study
evaluating the feasibility of delivering first-generation CAR-T-cell therapy
to patients with advanced CEACAM5+ tumors. No objective clinical responses
were observed and this trial was stopped due to pulmonary toxicity.
 
 A recent trial identified CEACAM7 (CGM2), a member of the CEA family
of proteins expressed in a large subset of PDAC tumors, as a potential CAR
T-cell target for PDAC. CAR-T cells targeting CEACAM7 can target
antigen-expressing tumor cells, and mediate remission in patient-derived
xenograft tumors.
 
 Thus, clinical trials are ongoing. Recently, Leidner et
al. reported the results of a patient who was treated with her
own autologous T cells that were genetically engineered to clonally express
two allogeneic HLA-C*08:02–restricted T-cell receptors (TCRs) targeting the
mutant KRAS G12D expressed in her tumor. This resulted in an impressive
regression of PDAC metastases. These very promising results suggest that TCR
gene therapy targeting the KRAS G12D hotspot mutation merits further study
in prospective clinical trials.
 

## Restoring the immunity by vaccines
Although cancer vaccines have been evaluated in clinical settings and an
antitumor immune response has been shown in PDAC,
 
 there is no clear proof that they will be used in clinical practice
in the near future.
 

GVAX, an irradiated allogeneic whole tumor cell vaccine in which PDAC cells
are engineered to express granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), was evaluated in a small study including 30 previously treated
PDAC patients.
 
 Disease control with the combination of GVAX and CPIs was promising
in that study.
 
 In another more recent study, GVAX and ipilimumab maintenance therapy
did not improve OS compared to the continuation of chemotherapy and resulted
in poorer survival in metastatic PDAC. However, clinical responses and
biological effects on immune cells were observed.
 
 Therapeutic cancer vaccines also include DC, DNA, and peptide
vaccines that provoke the presentation of immunogenic cancer antigens to the
immune system, resulting in activation of cancer antigen-specific CTLs
in vivo (and a subsequent anti-cancer immune response).
 
 In this context, the results of mesothelin, Mucin-1 (MUC1) and
telomerase-based vaccine trials were disappointing.
 
 For example, tolerance was good and some efficacy was shown in a
phase I/II trial of a combination of telomerase peptide GV1001 with GM-CSF
for nonresectable PDAC.
 
 However, after these promising results, no benefit was found in a
phase III trial evaluating a combination of chemotherapy with a telomerase
vaccination (GV1001 or TeloVac).
 
 In another recent study, a new concept was proposed involving
screening of PDAC antigens to develop an mRNA vaccine. A series of
targetable antigens including ADAM9, EFNB2, MET, TPX2, TMOD3, and WNT7A were
found to be promising mRNA vaccine candidates.
 
 Therapeutic cancer vaccines targeting KRAS were also
developed to elicit a KRAS-specific immunological response
and seem to be promising and safe with some clinical benefit.
 
 Although results are not highly encouraging several vaccine trials
are still ongoing to evaluate non dMMR/MSI-H PDAC immune responders, either
whole cell or peptide-vaccines, according to HLA-A2 status
(TEDOPAM-PRODIGE63 trial, NCT03806309).

## Role of microbiota
Oral and gut microbiota, the intratumoral microbiome, that is, the bacterial
and fungal microorganisms present in the tumor, has recently been shown to
be a new partner of PDAC TME, modulating pancreatic carcinogenesis,
intratumoral immune infiltrates, and the response to chemotherapy.
 
 Geller et al.
 
 showed that intratumoral gammaproteobacteria (e.g. Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Escherichia coli K12,
Mycoplasma Hyorhinis) expressing long isoforms of CDA,
an enzyme involved in the metabolism of gemcitabine, were found in 76% of
resected PDAC samples. These bacteria could degrade gemcitabine in
vitro, and induced therapeutic resistance to this drug in a
mouse colorectal cancer model. Resistance to gemcitabine was suppressed when
this enzyme was deleted or by co-treatment with ciprofloxacin. Thus,
bacteria might be responsible for the poor clinical response to gemcitabine
in PDAC.
 
 In addition, Nejman et al.
 
 found that intratumoral bacteria are predominantly intracellular and
present in both cancerous and immune cells (macrophages and others). In
tumor tissue, the correlation between bacterial species or their predicted
functions and response to immune therapy have been established in a large
spectrum of tumors. A retrospective study of 211 patients with PDAC
supported this hypothesis showing that adjuvant treatment with gemcitabine
improved PFS in patients without Klebsiella pneumoniae in
the bile culture. Similarly, quinolone administration improved OS in
patients with quinolone-sensitive Klebsiella pneumoniae.
 

Based on this evidence, manipulation of the intratumoral microbiota is
emerging as a potential new therapeutic approach to PDAC. To enhance their
efficacy, these strategies are usually developed in combination with other
therapeutic options such as chemotherapy or immunotherapy. Among them, fecal
microbiota transplantation, diet-based interventions, antibiotics, and
probiotics are under investigation.
 

Two studies are currently recruiting to explore the role of gut microbiota
(PDAC patients or healthy controls) on anti-MSLN (mesothelin protein) CAR-T
treatment (NCT04203459) or fecal microbiota transplantation (in patients
with resectable PDAC) (NCT04975217).

## Conclusion
The number of actionable molecular targets for PDAC is significantly increasing,
offering promising potential treatments and emphasizing the importance of continued
intensive clinical and basic research in this field. Olaparib paved the way in the
subset of patients with BRCA 1/2 germline mutations. Somatic
analysis of tumors by next generation sequencing is now more accessible allowing a
theragnostic approach to this rapidly progressing disease. The effective targeting
of KRAS mutations is clearly a major challenge because this gene
drives up to 90% of PDAC and explains most cases of therapeutic resistance. Although
targeting metabolic pathways is theoretically promising, results have been
disappointing until now. The stroma signatures may help improve selection of
patients for a given chemotherapy in the near future. While immunotherapies are not
effective as single agent, new combinations with other drugs or T-cell engineering
may bring them to the forefront once again. Finally, these promising trends in the
therapeutic landscape are indissociable from all aspects supportive care.

Dale Roche-Lebrec for the manuscript English language editing.
ORCID iD: Anthony Turpin 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2282-0101

## Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate: Not applicable.
Consent for publication: Not applicable.
Author contribution(s):
Anthony Turpin: Conceptualization; Formal analysis; Writing –
original draft; Writing – review & editing.
Cindy Neuzillet: Formal analysis; Validation; Writing – review
& editing.
Elise Colle: Formal analysis; Validation; Writing – review &
editing.
Nelson Dusetti: Formal analysis; Validation; Writing – review
& editing.
Remy Nicolle: Formal analysis; Validation; Visualization.
Jérôme Cros: Formal analysis; Validation; Visualization.
Louis de Mestier: Formal analysis; Validation;
Visualization.
Jean-Baptiste Bachet: Formal analysis; Visualization; Writing –
review & editing.
Pascal Hammel: Conceptualization; Formal analysis; Supervision;
Validation; Visualization; Writing – original draft; Writing – review &
editing.
Funding: The authors received no financial support for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article.
Competing interests: The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
Availability of data and materials: Not applicable.