SOURCE URL: https://www.qiagen.com/us/products/discovery-and-translational-research/functional-and-epigenetic-analysis/gene-silencing/antisense-lna-gapmers
FINAL URL: https://www.qiagen.com/us/products/discovery-and-translational-research/functional-and-epigenetic-analysis/gene-silencing/antisense-lna-gapmers
HTTP: 200
CONTENT-TYPE: text/html; charset=utf-8
======================================================================
Antisense LNA GapmeRs 

 .

 .

 .

 .

 Clear search

 Press Enter to perform search.

 0 
 Order Status 
 Quick Order 
 0 

 icon_0147_cc_gen_global-s US 
 Products 
 Applications & Insights 
 Knowledge & Support 
 About QIAGEN 

 Help Center 

 Product Finder 
 Experiment Configurator 
 Discovery & Translational Research 
 Diagnostics & Clinical Research 
 Human ID & Forensics 
 Next-Generation Sequencing 
 Instruments & Automation 
 Informatics & Data 
 Services 
 Strategic partnerships 
 Top Sellers 
 New Solutions 
 Shop 
 Applications & Insights Overview 
 Applied & Industrial 
 Research & Technology 
 Diagnostic & Clinical 
 Digital Tools & Platforms 
 Plan your experiment 
 Strategic partnerships 
 Knowledge & Support Overview 
 Service Solutions 
 Events & Webinars 
 Knowledge Hub 
 Quality, Environmental, Health & Safety 
 Product & Technical Support 
 Ordering Support 
 Safety Data Sheets 
 About Us 
 Careers 
 Investor Relations 
 Newsroom 
 Customer stories 
 Sustainability 
 Compliance 
 Contact Us 
 TB Management 
 QuantiFERON-TB Gold Plus 
 
 Transplant 
 QuantiFERON Transplant 
 artus Viral Load 
 
 Infectious Disease 
 QIAstat-Dx Syndromic Testing 
 
 Oncology 
 therascreen Solid Tumor 
 ipsogen Leukemia 
 Circulating Tumor Cells 
 DNA Damage Response 
 
 Sexual & Reproductive Health 
 Cervical Cancer Screening 
 Maternal/Fetal Testing 
 STI Testing 
 
 Sample Processing 
 
 Solutions for Laboratory-Developed Tests 

 QIA Agent: A smarter way to search
 Compare products and build your method with our AI tool. Find what you need in seconds – on one page. 
 
 Enzymes for molecular biology
 Explore high-quality enzymes; now available as individual product s . 
 
 Products and tools for your targets
 Explore targets and pathways in their scientific context, find and customize products to study them, analyze data and plan follow-up studies – all in GeneGlobe.

 Looking for a quick way to design experiments? 
 Try the Workflow Configurator. A convenient tool to build experimental workflows and find products to match your needs.

 Welcome to My QIAGEN 

 Dashboard 
 Account 
 Orders 
 Log Out 

 RNA Silencing Home Products Discovery & Translational Research Functional & Cell Analysis RNA Silencing Antisense LNA GapmeRs Antisense LNA GapmeRs
 For highly effective knockdown of mRNA and lncRNA using LNA-enhanced antisense oligonucleotides

 Antisense LNA GapmeR Premium (5 nmol) 

 Cat no. / ID. 339517 
 5 nmol Custom Antisense LNA GapmeR, Premium cell-culture grade, provided in tube format

 Copy order details Browse product options to see pricing 

 Oligonucleotides Control 
 Antisense LNA GapmeR 

 Antisense LNA GapmeR Controls 

 Type 
 Premium 

 in vivo Ready 

 in vivo Large Scale 

 Standard 

 Quantity 
 5 nmol 

 15 nmol 

 Your RNA Target. Your In Vivo Model.
 Antisense LNA GapmeR in vivo Large Scale is designed to order, with QIAGEN's LNA experts optimizing GapmeR design, chemistry, and scale to meet the requirements of your animal study. Each GapmeR is precisely matched to your mRNA or lncRNA target, with LNA positioning tailored for potent, strand-specific RNase H–dependent knockdown. Work with our experts to define the right synthesis scale, purification grade, and delivery format for your in vivo application. Enable functional silencing of mRNA and lncRNA in physiologically relevant animal models–without the limitations of RISC-dependent approaches.
 Contact us 

 Features

 Function by RNase H-dependent degradation of complementary RNA targets 
 Provide strand-specific knockdown with no RISC-associated off-target activity 
 Active in vivo and in vitro , enabling the analysis RNA function in a wide range of model systems 
 Excellent alternative to siRNA for knockdown of mRNA and lncRNA 
 Taken up by cells without need for transfection reagents
 Variety of controls support transfection or unassisted uptake protocol optimization

 Product Details

 Antisense LNA GapmeRs are highly potent, single-stranded antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) for silencing of lncRNA and mRNA in cell cultures and even in animal models. Antisense LNA GapmeR Positive Controls enable optimization of conditions for lipid-based transfection, electroporation or unassisted delivery. The GapmeRs are enhanced with LNA technology and are designed using sophisticated and empirically developed algorithms and offer excellent performance and high success rates. 
Need a quote for your research project or would you like to discuss your project with our specialist team? Just contact us! 

 Performance

 Potent knockdown of mRNA or lncRNA
 The efficacy of mRNA knockdown using Antisense LNA GapmeRs rivals that of siRNA-based methods (see figure Antisense LNA GapmeRs have higher success rate and potency than siRNAs ), providing an excellent alternative for researchers looking for a technique that works independently of RISC and has no miRNA-like, off-target effects.
 Tool-of-choice for silencing of lncRNA
 lncRNA loss-of-function studies can be particularly challenging for several reasons. Many lncRNAs are involved in transcriptional regulation by attracting chromatin-modifying enzymes to certain DNA targets. Since they are confined to the nuclear compartment, these lncRNAs are inefficiently targeted by siRNA. In contrast, RNAs retained in the nucleus are particularly sensitive to Antisense LNA GapmeRs, because they share the nuclear compartment with RNase H, the endonuclease responsible for Antisense LNA GapmeR activity (see figure Silencing of mRNA and long non-coding RNA using Antisense LNA GapmeRs ). In addition, lncRNAs often derive from transcriptionally complex loci with overlapping sense and antisense transcripts. Strand-specific knockdown is therefore crucial, and this is guaranteed with Antisense LNA GapmeRs, because they are single stranded. Antisense LNA GapmeRs provide effective knockdown of various lncRNAs, regardless of their intracellular localization (see figure Efficient knockdown with Antisense LNA GapmeRs, regardless of RNA target type and subcellular localization ). 
 No transfection reagent needed
 Antisense LNA GapmeRs are efficiently taken up by cells directly from the culture medium due to their small size and exceptional potency and stability. This makes it possible to achieve potent knockdown of target RNA in many cell lines with unassisted delivery (see figure LNA GapmeRs can be used without a transfection agent ), avoiding the cytotoxic effects associated with transfection reagents. Non-assisted uptake does require higher concentrations of the Antisense LNA GapmeR than would be needed with lipid-based transfection, and the knockdown kinetics are slower. Usually, knockdown is observed after only 48 H of culture in the presence of the Antisense LNA GapmeR. 
 Potent positive controls with optimal specificity
 Antisense LNA GapmeR Positive Controls are experimentally validated and feature very potent activity against different types of RNA targets expressed in a broad range of cell types. The controls are available for different types of RNA with different subcellular localization (see figure Performance of Antisense LNA GapmeR Positive Controls ), making it possible to identify an appropriate control for most applications. Every Antisense LNA GapmeR Positive Control was designed for optimal specificity and was selected based on experiments demonstrating highly potent activity against its intended target.
 Study RNA function in live animal models
 Excellent pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties of Antisense LNA GapmeRs have been demonstrated in many different tissues and organs. These LNA antisense oligonucleotides are well tolerated and show low toxicity in vivo . In addition, short, high-affinity Antisense LNA GapmeRs are active at lower concentrations than other antisense oligonucleotides. The incorporation of LNA also increases the serum stability of the ASO. 
 Antisense LNA GapmeRs have high potential to penetrate the cell membrane barrier and successfully interact with intracellular and even nuclear-retained targets. They also provide effective and long-lasting knockdown of mRNA and lncRNA in a broad range of tissues in live animal models. Plus, the workflow is easier, because specific formulation using liposomes or cationic complexes, for example, is not required for efficient in vivo delivery. See figure Efficient in vivo knockdown with LNA GapmeRs in a broad spectrum of tissues for an example of in vivo knockdown of a highly abundant, nuclear-retained lncRNA. 
 
 Principle

 Efficient silencing of mRNA and lncRNA with fewer off-target effects

 Antisense LNA GapmeRs are powerful tools for protein, mRNA and lncRNA loss-of-function studies. These single-stranded, antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) catalyze RNase H-dependent degradation of complementary RNA targets. The Antisense LNA GapmeRs are 16 nucleotides long and are enriched with LNA in the flanking regions and DNA in an LNA-free central gap, hence the name "GapmeR" (see figure A unique short, single-stranded antisense design ). The LNA-containing flanking regions confer nuclease resistance to the antisense oligo, while also increasing target binding affinity, regardless of the GC content. The central DNA "gap" activates RNase H cleavage of the target RNA upon binding. Antisense LNA GapmeRs have fully modified phosphorothioate (PS) backbones, which ensure exceptional resistance to enzymatic degradation.

 Sophisticated design parameters

 Antisense LNA GapmeRs are designed using our empirically derived design tool that incorporates more than 20 years of experience with LNA design. For each RNA target, the tool evaluates thousands of possible designs against more than 30 design parameters to identify the Antisense LNA GapmeRs most likely to provide potent and specific target knockdown. 
The primary design parameters include the following:

 Optimal target sequence accessibility to ensure high potency. The design tool selects target sequences based on local secondary structure prediction.

 Antisense off-target evaluation. GapmeR sequences are aligned against ENSEMBL to enable selection of the most specific Antisense LNA GapmeRs with minimal off-targets in the spliced and unspliced transcriptomes.

 Optimal oligonucleotide design, including length, T m , gap size, self-complementarity, LNA positions, etc.

 Coverage

 Antisense LNA GapmeRs can be designed for any RNA target >210 nucleotides and are available in several different grades, depending on your application:

 Antisense LNA GapmeR Standard: cost-effective LNA GapmeRs in tubes for initial testing of multiple designs using standard cell lines.

 Antisense LNA GapmeR Premium: HPLC-purified LNA GapmeRs with guaranteed purity suited for most cell assays; also available with 5’ or 3’ fluorescent labels.

 Antisense LNA GapmeR in vivo Ready: high-quality, animal-grade LNA GapmeRs recommended for any projects with in vivo testing as the ultimate goal. Also recommended for difficult-to-transfect cell lines, such as B cells, primary cell lines, cells in suspension, etc.

 Antisense LNA GapmeR in vivo Large Scale: high-quality, animal-grade LNA GapmeRs available in a range of scales with various purification and labeling options.

 Antisense LNA GapmeR Custom Plates: Standard LNA GapmeRs delivered in convenient 96-well plate format for screening projects.

 Highly purified Antisense LNA GapmeRs for in vivo studies

 We also offer higher-purity Antisense LNA GapmeRs for use in in vivo studies. These Antisense LNA GapmeRs have excellent pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties and offer effective and long-lasting RNA silencing in a broad range of tissues. They are well-tolerated and show low toxicity in vivo , due to the following unique features:

 High target affinity: LNA nucleotides positioned at the extremities increase affinity for the target.

 Excellent stability: the combination of LNA nucleotides and phosphorothioate backbone modifications lead to high stability. The LNA GapmeRs are highly resistant to nucleases and have a long half-life in serum.

 Short length: LNA modifications enable design of short (15–16mer) gapmers with high target affinity. This is much shorter than conventional gapmers, which are typically around 20 nucleotides long. Shorter oligonucleotides are generally taken up much more efficiently via natural cellular uptake mechanisms, so Antisense LNA GapmeRs are highly effective in live animal models. Short oligonucleotides are also less prone lead to toxicity from binding proteins, such as Toll-like receptors and components of the complement system.

 Excellent biodistribution: oligonucleotides with standard phosphodiester backbones are lost into the urine. However, PS-modified oligonucleotides bind with albumin in the bloodstream. This extensive but low-affinity binding helps prevent loss of PS-modified oligonucleotides by renal filtration and facilitates rapid uptake in a broad range of tissues.

 GapmeRs for all stages of an inhibition study 

 Stage 
 Design 
 Screening 
 in vitro Optimization 
 in vivo Studies 

 Requirement 

 High hit rate

 Potent design

 Optimal T m 

 Cost-effective screening

 Fast and easy procedure

 Normal cell lines

 Transfection

 High quality

 Difficult cell lines

 Gymnosis

 Pre- in vivo optimization

 Animal-grade purity

 Large-scale synthesis

 Solution 
 Online GapmeR design tool 
 Antisense LNA GapmeR Standard or GapmeR Custom Plates 
 Antisense LNA GapmeR Premium 
 Antisense LNA GapmeR in vivo Ready 
 Antisense LNA GapmeR in vivo Large Scale 

 Overview of Antisense LNA GapmeR products 

 Product 
 Cat. no. 
 Purity 
 Amount 
 PS 
 Standard
desalting 
 HPLC 
 Na+
exchange 
 Available with
3' and 5' FAM 

 Antisense LNA GapmeR Standard 
 339511
339512 
 No purity guarantee 
 5 nmol
15 nmol 
 yes 
 yes 
 no 
 no 
 yes 

 Antisense LNA GapmeRPremium 
 339517
339518 
 ≥75% 
 5 nmol
15 nmol 
 yes 
 no 
 yes 
 no 
 yes 

 Antisense LNA GapmeR in vivo Ready 
 339523
339524 
 ≥75% 
 5 nmol
15 nmol 
 yes 
 no 
 yes 
 yes 
 yes 

 Antisense LNA GapmeR in vivo Large Scale 
 339532 
 Custom 
 Custom, from
5 mg to 1 kg 
 yes 
 yes/no 
 yes/no 
 yes/no 
 yes 

 Procedure

 Antisense LNA GapmeRs are primarily used to study the functions of mRNA or lncRNA by assessing the biological consequences of inhibiting their expression. The effect of silencing an mRNA or lncRNA can be studied in numerous ways, such as using cellular assays to monitor cell proliferation, cell differentiation, or apoptosis. The effect on gene expression can also be measured at the level of RNA or putative protein targets. Following resuspension, Antisense LNA GapmeRs are introduced into cells using a transfection reagent or via unassisted uptake (gymnosis), and phenotypic effects are assessed at an appropriate time afterwards. 
 ​The in vivo grade of Antisense LNA GapmeRs is available with fluorescein or other custom modifications. They are delivered dried down in Na salt, ready to be dissolved in PBS. If needed, they can be delivered in the quality required and with the necessary documentation for preclinical toxicity studies and human trials. After resuspension, these GapmeRs can be directly injected systemically with no need for expensive formulation in nanoparticles or liposomes. LNA GapmeRs can be administered via various routes (subcutaneous, intravenous, intraperitoneal, etc.). For more information, refer to the in vivo guidelines.
 
 Applications

 Antisense LNA GapmeRs are powerful tools for loss-of-function studies of proteins, mRNA and lncRNAs. 
 When delivered effectively to cell cultures, Antisense LNA GapmeR Positive Controls are certain to provide very significant knockdown of their RNA targets, so they are very useful for optimizing conditions for lipid-based transfection or electroporation. They can also be used to test the susceptibility of a particular cell line to unassisted uptake.
 ​RNA function in animal models can be inferred by studying the biological consequences of RNA silencing with Antisense LNA GapmeRs. Such studies have revealed the important role played by lncRNAs in several human diseases.

 Supporting data and figures 
 Silencing of mRNA and long non-coding RNA using Antisense LNA GapmeRs.
 Antisense LNA GapmeRs are single-stranded LNA oligonucleotides that hybridize and catalyze degradation of their target RNA. We exploit the fact that DNA:RNA duplexes are recognized by RNase H1 in the nucleus, creating an endonucleolytic cleavage in the RNA strand. The two generated fragments are then degraded by exonucleases. The Antisense LNA GapmeR is released and will continue on, guiding degradation of another RNA strand.

 Resources
 Brochures and Guides (1)
 
 RNA Functional Analysis EN EN 
 
 PDF (1MB) 
 Download 

 Kit Handbooks (1)
 
 Antisense LNA GapmeRs Handbook EN EN 
 
 PDF (168.1KB) 
 Download 

 Safety Data Sheets (1)
 
 Safety Data Sheets EN EN 

 Download Safety Data Sheets for QIAGEN product components.

 Certificates of Analysis (1)
 
 Certificates of Analysis EN EN 

 Publications
 p53 induces formation of NEAT1 lncRNA-containing paraspeckles that modulate replication stress response and chemosensitivity. 
 Adriaens C; Standaert L; Barra J; Latil M; Verfaillie A; Kalev P; Boeckx B; Wijnhoven PW; Radaelli E; Vermi W; Leucci E; Lapouge G; Beck B; van den Oord J; Nakagawa S; Hirose T; Sablina AA; Lambrechts D; Aerts S; Blanpain C; Marine JC; 
 Nat Med; 2016; 22 (8):861-8 2016 Jul 4 PMID:27376578 
 
 Melanoma addiction to the long non-coding RNA SAMMSON. 
 Leucci E; Vendramin R; Spinazzi M; Laurette P; Fiers M; Wouters J; Radaelli E; Eyckerman S; Leonelli C; Vanderheyden K; Rogiers A; Hermans E; Baatsen P; Aerts S; Amant F; Van Aelst S; van den Oord J; de Strooper B; Davidson I; Lafontaine DL; Gevaert K; Vandesompele J; Mestdagh P; Marine JC; 
 Nature; 2016; 531 (7595):518-22 2016 Mar 24 PMID:27008969 
 
 Long noncoding RNA Chast promotes cardiac remodeling. 
 Viereck J; Kumarswamy R; Foinquinos A; Xiao K; Avramopoulos P; Kunz M; Dittrich M; Maetzig T; Zimmer K; Remke J; Just A; Fendrich J; Scherf K; Bolesani E; Schambach A; Weidemann F; Zweigerdt R; de Windt LJ; Engelhardt S; Dandekar T; Batkai S; Thum T; 
 Sci Transl Med; 2016; 8 (326):326ra22 2016 Feb 17 PMID:26888430 
 
 The LINK-A lncRNA activates normoxic HIF1α signalling in triple-negative breast cancer. 
 Lin A; Li C; Xing Z; Hu Q; Liang K; Han L; Wang C; Hawke DH; Wang S; Zhang Y; Wei Y; Ma G; Park PK; Zhou J; Zhou Y; Hu Z; Zhou Y; Marks JR; Liang H; Hung MC; Lin C; Yang L; 
 Nat Cell Biol; 2016; 18 (2):213-24 2016 Jan 11 PMID:26751287 
 
 Long noncoding RNA MALAT1 regulates endothelial cell function and vessel growth. 
 Michalik KM; You X; Manavski Y; Doddaballapur A; Zörnig M; Braun T; John D; Ponomareva Y; Chen W; Uchida S; Boon RA; Dimmeler S; 
 Circ Res; 2014; 114 (9):1389-97 2014 Mar 6 PMID:24602777 
 
 Show more 

 FAQ
 Does QIAGEN offer an anti-GFP gapmer control?
 
 These are the available controls.

 https://www.qiagen.com/us/shop/pcr/primer-sets/antisense-lna-gapmers/?akamai-feo=off&clear=true#orderinginformation 

 FAQ-3739

 Country and Language
 Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Brunei Darussalam (Brunei) Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo Cook Islands Costa Rica Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar (Burma) Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island North Macedonia Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Pitcairn Islands Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Rwanda Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tokelau Timor-Leste Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Türkiye Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu U.S. Virgin Islands Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Minor Outlying Islands United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe 
 Select Language English Chinese (Simplified, PRC) French German Japanese (Japan) Korean (Korea) Spanish 
 
 Follow Us
 icon_0065_instagram-s 
 icon_0064_facebook-s 
 icon_0340_cc_gen_x-s 
 icon_0077_youtube-s 
 icon_0066_linkedin-s 
 
 Contact Us
 icon_0072_phone-s 
 icon_0063_envelope-s 
 
 This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

 Sample to Insight
 © QIAGEN 2013–26. All rights reserved
 Trademarks & Disclaimers Terms & Conditions Privacy Consent Manager Accessibility Cancellation and Returns