pmcCellCell319nihpaCell0092-86741097-4172pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC13281610PMC13281610.11328161013281610NIHMS21697074204901910.1016/j.cell.2026.03.044NIHMS2169707NIHPA21697071ArticleGlobal genetic interaction network of a human cell maps conserved principles and informs functional interpretation of gene co-essentiality profiles
BillmannMaximilian CostanzoMichael ZhangXiang HassanArshia Z. RahmanMahfuzur BrownKevin R. ChanKatherine S. TongAmy Hin Yan PonsCarles WardHenry N. RossCatherine van LeeuwenJolanda AreggerMichael LawsonKeith A. MairBarbara RothAmy F. SenNesli E. ForsterDuncan T. TanGuihong MeroPatricia MasudSanna N. LeeYoonkyu Aguilera-UribeMagali UšajMatej AlmeidaSylvia M.T. AulakhKamaldeep BhojooUrvi BirkadzeSaba BudijonoNathaniel CaiXunhui CaumannsJoseph J. ChalmersJordan J. ChandrashekharMegha ChangDaniel ClimieRyan DasguptaKuheli DrazicAdrian EcheniqueJose I. Rojas GacesaRafael FariasAdrian Granda HabsidAndrea HoreckaIra KantautasKristin JiFenghu KimDae-Kyum LeeSeon Yong LiangWendy LimHyobin Julianne LinKevin LuXueyibing MaierMichael NamiBabak NixonAllison MikolajewiczNicholas MokhtaridoostMilad NedyalkovaLyudmila RohdeThomas RodriguesMaria Sartori SosteMartin SchultzEric WangWen SeetharamanAshwin ShuteriqiErmira SizovaOlga TaylorDavid Thomson TereshchenkoMaria TieuDavid TurowecJacob UbhiTajinder VarlandSylvia WangKyle E. WangZi Yang WeiJiarun XiaoYu-Xi MaassPhilipp G. ReversadeBruno BrownGrant W. CravattBenjamin F. DixonScott J. WyattHaley D.M. RöstHannes L. RothFrederick P. XiaTian BaderGary D. LoewithRobbie DavisNicholas G. AndrewsBrenda MyersChad L. MoffatJason BooneCharles 1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA2Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine and University Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany3Donnelly Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada4Program in Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada5Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), The Barcelona Institute for Science and Technology, Barcelona, Spain6Graduate Program in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology (BICB), University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA7Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA8Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland9Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada10Institute of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China11Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway12Department of Surgery, McGill University, Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada13Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada14Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada15Department of Chemistry, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA16Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA17Department of Computational and Systems Biology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA18School of Software Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China19RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan20Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR), Toronto, ON, Canada21Genome Institute of Singapore (GIS), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore22These authors contributed equally23Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, B.A., C.B., M. Costanzo, J.M., and C.L.M.; methodology (cell line construction, analysis, and screening), K.S.C., A.H.Y.T., J.v.L., M.A., K.A.L., B.M., P.M., S.N.M., M.A.U., S.M.T.A., K.A., U.B., S.B., X.C., J.J. Caumanns, M. Chandrashekhar, R.C., K.D., A.D., R.G., A.G.F., A.H., K.K., F.J., S.Y.L., W.L., H.J.L., B.N., A.N., N.M., L.N., M.S.R., M.S., A.S., E. Shuteriqi, O.S., D.T.T., M.T., D.T., J.T., S.V., K.E.W., Z.Y.W., J.W., Y.X.X., S.J.D., H.D.M.W., and T.X.; methodology (qGI score development), M.B., M.R., H.N.W., X.Z., A.Z.H., M. Costanzo, and C.L.M.; investigation (network analysis), M.B., M. Costanzo, X.Z., A.Z.H., M.R., K.R.B., C.P., H.N.W., C.R., D.T.F., Y.L., M.U., N.B., D.C., I.H., K.L., X.L., T.R., E. Schultz, W.W., H.L.R., and G.D.B.; investigation (follow-up biology), C.B., A.F.R., N.E.S., G.T., J.J. Chalmers, J.I.R.E., D.K.K., M. Maier, M. Mokhtaridoost, T.U., P.G.M., B.R., G.W.B., B.F.C., F.P.R., R.L., N.G.D., S.Y.L., and M. Costanzo; visualization, M.B., M. Costanzo, A.Z.H., C.R., M.R., H.N.W., and X.Z.; funding acquisition, B.A., C.B., J.M., and C.L.M.; supervision, B.A., C.B., J.M., and C.L.M.; writing—original draft, M. Costanzo, C.B., and C.L.M.
*Correspondence: brenda.andrews@utoronto.ca (B.A.), chadm@umn.edu (C.L.M.), jason.moffat@sickkids.ca (J.M.), charlie.boone@utoronto.ca (C.B.)116202627420261891251591437363759.e5814052026190620262006202622062026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Deciphering how genes interact within human cells is essential for understanding their functional wiring and for developing targeted therapeutic strategies. In this study, we present a genome-scale map of genetic interactions in the human haploid cell line HAP1, based on CRISPR-based perturbation of ~4 million gene pairs. The resulting network comprises ~89,000 high-confidence gene-gene interactions, organizing genes into hierarchical modules corresponding to protein complexes and pathways, biological processes, and cellular compartments, mirroring principles observed in yeast and highlighting the functional architecture of a human cell. This large-scale genetic network complements the DepMap gene co-essentiality network by capturing unique functional information, uncovering roles of previously uncharacterized genes, and identifying molecular determinants of cancer-cell-line-specific genetic dependencies. This study presents a general data-driven strategy for systematically exploring the roles of genes and their functional connections in human cell lines.

## In brief
CRISPR perturbation of ~4 million gene pairs in human HAP1 cells maps ~89,000 genetic interactions, revealing a hierarchical network that links genes to complexes, pathways, and cellular processes and elucidates the genes underlying cancer cell genetic dependencies.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC

## INTRODUCTION
Genetic interactions identify functional connections between specific genes and their genetic modifiers, which impact the genotype-to-phenotype relationship. Understanding the general principles of genetic networks in cells and organisms is critical for advancing precision medicine, as these networks influence disease manifestation by determining both its severity (expressivity) and likelihood of occurrence (penetrance). Moreover, genetic interactions provide opportunities to uncover novel therapeutic strategies, including target identification for synthetic lethal cancer treatments or druggable suppressors of disease genes and their pathways. 
Negative genetic interactions, such as synthetic lethal or sick interactions, occur when a double mutant shows a fitness defect greater than the expected effect of the combined single mutants. Positive genetic interactions, including suppression interactions, are scored in double mutants that grow better than expected. Systematic analysis in the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, mapped a global network of ~1,000,000 gene-gene interactions among its set of ~1,000 essential and ~5,000 nonessential genes. – Yeast genetic interactions connect functionally related genes, and network analysis of genetic interaction profile similarities clusters genes into an organized hierarchy of modules of increasing size corresponding to protein complexes or pathways, biological processes, and cellular compartments. The resultant global genetic interaction profile similarity network reveals the functional architecture of a cell. 
Genome-wide pooled CRISPR-knockout (KO) and gene trap mutagenesis screens have defined a core set of essential genes required for the proliferation of most human cell lines, as well as selectively essential genes that support the growth of specific cancer cell lines. – This forms the basis of gene-cell line networks, such as the Cancer Dependency Map (DepMap: depmap.org/portal), which systematically identifies cancer cell-specific genetic vulnerabilities. Selectively essential genes are particularly relevant to our understanding of genetic interactions because their essential roles may depend on genome variation within a specific genetic background, potentially revealing synthetic lethal interactions that can be exploited for therapeutic intervention. – However, the genetic mechanisms underlying these dependencies are mostly unknown and are likely complex, involving multiple variants and other cell-line-specific factors. , – Constructing a genetic interaction network in an isogenic cell line can help bridge this knowledge gap by identifying dependencies between specific pairs of genes.
The DepMap gene-cell line network can also be transformed into a gene-gene co-essentiality network, which connects gene pairs that are essential in overlapping subsets of cancer cell lines. Like the global yeast genetic interaction profile similarity, the DepMap co-essentiality network provides a particularly powerful resource for inferring gene function. – 
In addition to single gene perturbation analyses, combinatorial RNAi and CRISPR screens based on multiplexing short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) and guide RNAs (gRNAs), respectively, have identified genetic interactions among subsets of human genes in a single cell line. – CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) generates knockdown phenotypes and has been applied on a large scale to map genetic interactions among thousands of gene pairs. , Similar methods promise to expand the scale and efficiency of genetic interaction screens in human cells. , Complementary approaches used genome-wide CRISPR-KO or gene trap mutagenesis methods to introduce secondary KO mutations into engineered cell lines, each carrying a stable “query” mutation of interest. , – Collectively, these studies, along with the yeast genetic network, suggest that a genome-scale genetic network mapped in a single cell line should organize a large fraction of human genes into functional modules to map the functional architecture of a human cell.
Here, we report analysis of ~4,000,000 gene pairs to construct a genetic network consisting of 88,933 genetic interactions in the human haploid cell line, HAP1. Like the global yeast genetic interaction profile similarity network, the corresponding HAP1 network organizes human genes into hierarchical structured subsets of functional modules and provides a data-driven representation of human cell function that complements the DepMap co-essentiality network, revealing roles for previously uncharacterized genes and molecular factors underlying specific cancer cell line genetic dependencies. From a systematic comparative analysis, we conclude that the general principles and topology of genetic networks are conserved from yeast to human cells.

## RESULTS

## Genome-scale genetic interaction analysis in human HAP1 cells
To systematically map a reference human cell genetic network, we selected HAP1 as a model cell line because it lacks aneuploidies and is amenable to loss-of-function (LOF) genetic screens. , , , – Quantitative genetic interaction (qGI) analysis requires accurate single-mutant fitness phenotypes, which we generated by performing 39 genome-wide, pooled CRISPR-Cas9 KO screens with the Toronto KnockOut version 3 (TKOv3) gRNA library in HAP1 wild-type (WT) cells ( ; and ; ). , In total, we measured single mutant fitness for ~17,800 genes in two growth conditions and identified 1,524 genes (~15% of expressed genes) that were essential for HAP1 cell proliferation. The majority of HAP1 essential genes are core essential genes ( ; ; ). – , Consequently, they are required for the viability of most human cell lines and exhibit physiological and evolutionary properties commonly associated with essential genes identified in other human cell lines and model organisms ( and ; and ; ). , , – 
To quantify genetic interactions, we developed a qGI score that compares the abundance of TKOv3 gRNA barcodes (i.e., genomically integrated gRNA expression cassettes) in screens using HAP1 WT cells compared with congenic query mutant cells that carried a stable mutation in a gene of interest ( ). , , gRNA barcode abundance in a query mutant cell line provides an estimate of double-mutant fitness ( ). Negative interactions identify genes with gRNA barcodes that show significantly decreased barcode abundance in a query mutant relative to WT, whereas positive interactions reflect genes with increased gRNA barcode abundance in a query mutant relative to WT ( and ). We focused on functionally diverse genes that showed a range of gene expression levels and single mutant fitness defects in HAP1 cells ( ) and constructed 222 query gene mutant cell lines, most of which carried a confirmed complete LOF allele. These query cell lines were used in 298 genome-wide CRISPR screens to score genetic interactions among 3,934,506 unique gene pairs ( , , and ).

## Assessing qGI score quality
We performed several analyses to ensure reproducibility of our genetic interaction measurements.
Seven different query genes were each screened 4–5 times and analyzed using a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) estimation approach to estimate false negative and positive rates over a wide range of qGI score and false discovery rate (FDR) significance thresholds, which enable customized filtering of the complete dataset ( ; ; ). 
Because specific query gene mutant alleles have the potential to influence genetic interaction profiles, we examined the robustness of our platform by performing independent replicates using the same query cell lines, allowing for accurate evaluation of our qGI scoring method, while also controlling for batch and experimental artifacts. In total, independent replicate screens were performed for 50 query genes (n = 2–5 screens/query cell line) ( and ; ), each using a different batch of a lentiviral pooled TKOv3 CRISPR library prepared over the course of the project, which translated to qGI scores for ~766,000 independent replicate gene pairs ( , , and ). qGI scores were reproducible, with the strongest correlation observed for query genes that showed higher numbers of genetic interactions ( and ; ). Importantly, replicate correlation increased substantially when comparisons were focused on genetic interactions that satisfied our defined qGI score and FDR significance thresholds, highlighting the effectiveness of our scoring method to identify high-confidence interactions ( ). Moreover, for a subset of query genes, we also performed screens using different clones ( ). While replicate correlation tended to be higher for screens performed using the same clone, we found that different LOF mutations in the same query gene (i.e., different clones) often generated overlapping genetic interaction profiles ( ). In addition, we examined replicate interactions in both rich and minimal medium and found that they were also highly correlated ( ), indicating that, like in yeast, HAP1 genetic interactions were generally robust to environmental differences.
Despite independent construction of query and library mutant alleles, we also observed agreement among reciprocal gene pairs (i.e., query A-library B versus query B-library A) ( ).
As a consequence of our screening approach, a subset of positive interactions involved apparent “self” interactions, where a library gene was targeted in a query cell line already harboring a mutation in that same gene ( ). These cases are expected to score as positive interactions because additional CRISPR-mediated perturbation should not exacerbate the fitness defect of the query mutant cell line. This indicates that the cell line already carries a complete LOF allele of the targeted query gene, such that further disruption does not produce an additional fitness effect. The strength of positive self-interaction was inversely correlated with single mutant fitness, which is consistent with the expectation that further disruption of a fully inactivated gene has no additional impact ( ). This pattern supports the integrity of our HAP1 query mutant cell lines because ~94% of query genes (209/222) showed expected self-interactions. A minor subset of query genes (~6%, 13/222) exhibited unexpected self-interactions, suggesting that they carry partial LOF query gene alleles ( ). 
Interactions for 5 query genes were recapitulated using an independent and nonoverlapping gRNA library, demonstrating that qGI scores were not driven by gRNA-specific phenotypes ( ; ).
We benchmarked negative interactions for the PTAR1 query gene to those previously identified in a HAP1 retroviral gene trap-based screen ( ; ) and found ~68% (40/59, p < 7 × 10−59, hypergeometric test) of previously reported interactions were also identified by our CRISPR screen ( ; ). 
PTAR1 encodes a geranylgeranyl transferase (GGTase-III) that modifies and activates the Soluble NSF attachment protein receptor (SNARE) protein YKT6, which mediates membrane fusion during intracellular transport. Notably, negative interactions uniquely identified by our study (~87%, 276/316) were enriched for genes involved in vesicle trafficking, suggesting that our CRISPR-KO approach is precise and sensitive ( ; ).

We note that genetic interaction data generated in HAP1 cells exhibited similar quality and reproducibility to genetic interactions previously mapped in yeast. , , Based on these analyses, we applied a standard threshold (|qGI| > 0.3 and FDR < 0.1) that optimized precision and recall of gene pairs co-annotated to the same Gene Ontology (GO) biological process term ( ; and ; ) to generate a dataset of 88,933 genetic interactions, including 47,052 negative and 41,881 positive interactions. Correlation of replicate gene pairs supports the high quality of the dataset identified at this confidence threshold (r = 0.93) ( ), which forms the basis of all analyses in this study unless otherwise specified.

## A functionally informative genetic interaction profile similarity network for a human cell
The genetic interaction profile of a gene represents its unique signature of negative and positive interactions, reflecting its biological function ( – , , and ). For example, profiles for FANCG, PDCD5, and VPS52 query genes mapped interactions with library genes that were consistent with known roles of these genes in DNA recombination, tubulin function, and vesicle trafficking, respectively ( and ). Hierarchical clustering of the complete HAP1 genetic interaction dataset, based on 298 genome-wide screens, grouped together genes that shared similar interaction profiles, identifying subsets of genes that function together in the same bioprocess, pathway, or protein complex ( ; ). In total, we identified 412 clusters involving ~4,400 library genes, most (~93%, 384/412) of which were enriched for specific GO bioprocess terms that spanned diverse cellular functions ( ; ).
We also used library gene interactions derived from the complete set of 298 screens to construct a genome-scale HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network ( ; ). Nodes in this network represent unique library genes, and edges connect gene pairs that share similar genetic interaction profiles ( ). The distance between connected gene pairs reflects their profile similarity. Proximally located genes share more similar patterns of genetic interactions, while genes positioned farther apart in the network display more divergent profiles ( ). The HAP1 network is relatively sparse because library gene profiles are based on genetic interactions with only 222 unique query genes. Nonetheless, ~74% (2,787/3,784) of genes on the network belonged to large, discernible network clusters. By applying spatial analysis of functional enrichment (SAFE), with a GO bioprocess functional standard, we identified 17 densely connected network clusters, each enriched for related GO terms corresponding to a different bioprocess, such as DNA replication and repair or vesicle trafficking ( ; ). Combining SAFE with a protein localization standard highlighted seven larger network regions of neighboring bioprocess-enriched modules, each enriched for proteins localized to the same subcellular compartment ( ; ). Nested within bioprocess-enriched network regions were smaller modules corresponding to 71 protein complexes ( – ; ). Thus, the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network exhibits a topology similar to the global yeast network, , revealing a functional hierarchy of human gene modules corresponding to protein complexes and pathways, biological processes, and cellular compartments. The complete dataset is provided in different formats ( and ) and can also be accessed from our companion databases, https://thecellmap.org , or https://crisprdb.ccm.sickkids.ca/.
A genetic interaction profile similarity network provides a resource for annotating human gene function because a gene’s location on the network connects it to specific biological functions. , Indeed, we linked 113 genes associated with relatively few citations and/or GO annotations to specific bioprocesses ( and ; ; ). This general approach also facilitates functional characterization of different human gene datasets. For example, genes that confer sensitivity or resistance to a bioactive molecule cluster in distinct regions of the network, identifying the specific bioprocesses targeted by the compound and thus providing a strategy to predict the mode-of-action of novel bioactive compounds ( ; ; ). Similarly, subsets of genes associated with shared disease traits or genome-wide association study (GWAS) phenotypes clustered together on the HAP1 genetic profile network, highlighting shared functional relationships among genes identified through statistical genetic analysis of disease cohort data ( ).

## Features of highly connected genetic network hubs
The nonredundant dataset, based on 222 unique query gene screens, was used to explore the functional distribution of genetic interactions. While the number of genetic interactions per library gene ranged between 0 and ~70, the average library gene interacted with ~2% of all query genes, exhibiting ~2–3 negative and ~2 positive interactions ( and ; ). Some genes participated in many interactions and serve as genetic network hubs. The top 5% most connected genes exhibited ~6-fold more interactions than the average gene ( ; ). Although hub genes spanned various functions ( – ), those involved in mitochondrial processes were among the most highly connected, exhibiting many interactions, especially positive interactions ( and – ; ). In a previous study, we identified experimental factors that can confound the scoring of mitochondrial gene co-essentiality profiles from DepMap data. Based on this analysis, we explored HAP1 genetic network properties using all available genes as well as a subset of data that excluded mitochondrial-related genes ( ).
Physiological and evolutionary properties characteristic of yeast genetic network hub genes were also associated with highly connected human genes in the HAP1 genetic network ( – , , and ). , , For example, genetic interaction density (i.e., interactions/gene pairs tested) was related to single mutant fitness in HAP1 cells ( , , and ). Nonessential genes with fitness defects showed ~2-fold more interactions relative to the average library gene, and the number of interactions was positively correlated with the severity of the library gene KO fitness defect ( , , and ).
Genetic interaction density was also correlated to gene fitness phenotypes measured across the DepMap panel of cancer cell lines ( and ). DepMap core essential genes showed fewer genetic interactions, while selectively essential genes exhibited higher genetic interaction density ( and ). Among HAP1 essential genes, most (~78%, 1,188/1,524) had average or below average network connectivity ( ) and were more likely to be classified as DepMap core essential genes ( ). However, a subset of HAP1 essential genes (~22%, 336/1,524) exhibited above-average interaction density and were more likely to be selectively essential, displaying variable fitness defects across the panel of DepMap cancer lines ( and ; ; ). Thus, DepMap fitness metrics are predictive of genetic connectivity in the HAP1 network, which in turn can help distinguish core from selectively essential genes in the DepMap co-essentiality network.
Gene expression levels in HAP1 and other cancer cell lines were also positively correlated with genetic network connectivity ( and ). The most highly expressed genes in HAP1 cells exhibited ~2-fold more interactions compared with the average gene, while genes ranked in the bottom 40% by expression level had fewer interactions, as did genes with variable expression across different cell lines ( and ). Moreover, essential genes and nonessential gene mutants associated with fitness phenotypes were significantly enriched at common trans-chromosomal contact regions (binomial testing essential genes p < 1.6 × 10−21; nonessential genes p < 2.67 × 10−15), indicating that these genes cluster in transcriptionally active regions of human genome topology ( ; ). Genes that exhibited many genetic interactions also concentrate in these constitutive anchor regions, further supporting a relationship between genetic interaction density and gene expression ( ). Thus, HAP1 genetic network hub genes tend to be highly and stably expressed across many different cell types.
Network hubs also tend to include older genes that are conserved across the phylogenetic tree, as well as genes that are less tolerant to mutation ( and ). In total, we identified over 30 gene features associated with genetic interaction density in HAP1 cells ( ), which can be leveraged to develop predictive models for identifying hub genes likely to participate in extensive genetic interactions in other cell lines or model organisms. 

## Genetic interactions involving duplicated genes
Due to intrinsic functional redundancy, duplicated genes generally showed fewer genetic interactions across the genome compared to other genes ( and ). However, consistent with observations in yeast and other human cell lines, , – paralog pairs expressed in HAP1 cells were often connected to each other by negative interactions but rarely by positive interactions ( and ). Paralog pairs sharing ≥20% sequence identity were over 7-fold enriched for negative interactions (hypergeometric test, p < 4.5 × 10−30), and those sharing ≥90% identity showed over 60-fold enrichment (hypergeometric test, p < 2.7 × 10−16), whereas paralogs from larger gene families exhibited fewer interactions ( and ).
We also observed an asymmetric pattern of interactions among paralog pairs, where one paralog exhibited significantly more negative interactions than its duplicate, often exceeding a 5-fold difference ( ). The observed asymmetry was greater than expected by chance (p < 0.001, empirical test), as previously shown in yeast, , suggesting that the paralog with more negative interactions may be under stronger evolutionary constraint.

## Relating genetic and physical interactions
Gene pairs that are co-expressed and/or whose products physically interact, either as individual protein-protein interactions (PPIs), as part of protein complexes (co-complex), or as part of biological pathways (co-pathway), overlapped significantly with genetic interactions. For example, gene pairs whose products share a PPI were ~3-fold enriched for negative interactions and ~2-fold enriched for positive interactions ( ). While negative interactions involving either nonessential or essential genes overlapped PPIs to a similar extent, the overlap between PPIs and positive interactions depended on gene essentiality ( ). Similar to yeast, , positive interactions between nonessential genes overlapped significantly with PPIs, reflecting that simultaneous perturbation of two genes encoding members of the same nonessential pathway or protein complex, such as the Golgi-Associated Retrograde Protein (GARP) complex, does not further enhance the fitness defect associated with the corresponding single mutants ( and ). Mitochondrial genes participated in many positive genetic interactions with each other, and while most functional trends were not impacted, an enrichment for positive interactions connecting essential genes whose protein products physically interact was observed when mitochondrial genes were included in the analysis, but a similar pattern was not observed when mitochondrial genes were excluded ( ).
We also examined negative and positive interactions among members of 40 protein complexes that were represented as both library and query genes ( ). About 10% of complexes were enriched for within-complex interactions, representing ~5-fold higher interaction density compared with the average gene ( and ). Additionally, many pairs of complexes (~1.5%, 124/8,250) were enriched for between-complex interactions ( and ; ). Genetic interactions that occur within a complex or between pairs of complexes were strongly biased for a single type of genetic interaction, either negative or positive ( and ; ). For example, negative interactions linked the GARP complex to the Conserved Oligomeric Golgi (COG) and Homotypic Fusion and Protein Sorting (HOPS) complexes involved in vesicle trafficking, while positive interactions connected GARP to the RETROMER complex, suggesting shared roles in retrograde transport ( ). In total, we identified 45 complex pairs connected exclusively by either negative or positive interactions, reflecting a highly organized and coherent network structure resembling the yeast genetic network ( , , and ; ). 

## Functional distribution of negative genetic interactions
Most negative interactions occurred between gene pairs annotated to the same GO bioprocess term, with the interaction density increasing with functional specificity of modules defined by the profile similarity network ( and – ; ). For example, we observed strong negative interactions between the query gene PELO, which encodes a component of the PELO-HBS1L no-GO mRNA decay pathway, and library genes encoding all members of the SKI mRNA surveillance complex (i.e., SKIC2/SKIV2L, SKIC3/TTC37, SKIC8/WDR61, FOCAD, and AVEN) ( ). A reciprocal screen using a SKIC2 query mutant cell line identified negative interactions with PELO and HBS1L, confirming a genetic relationship between these related functional modules ( ; ). Notably, we also reproduced the negative interaction between PELO and SKIC2 in a HC3716 liver cell line ( ), sup-porting the conservation of genetic interactions across different human cell lines and confirming a recently identified synthetic relationship between the SKI complex and the no-GO mRNA decay pathway in cancer. , Overall, ~33% of negatively interacting gene pairs shared a functional relationship, such as localization to the same cellular compartment, involvement in the same bioprocess, or membership in the same pathway or complex ( , , and ).
The qGI score also provided a quantitative indicator of functional relatedness, as stronger negative interaction scores were associated with gene pairs that shared closer functional relationships. For example, gene pairs within the same pathway or complex tended to show the strongest negative interactions, followed by pairs in the same bioprocess, and then those that shared the same subcellular localization ( and ).
We further analyzed connections within and between bioprocess-enriched modules. Negative interactions were enriched both within individual bioprocesses and between distinct bioprocess clusters, with stronger enrichment observed within the same bioprocess ( , on diagonal versus off diagonal; ). Although overall connectivity was relatively sparse, the pattern of negative interactions among human bioprocesses resembled that of the global yeast network when restricted to an equivalent number of query genes ( ). These findings further highlight the conserved architecture of genetic networks.

## Functional distribution of positive genetic interactions
The highest positive interaction density and strongest positive qGI scores were observed among genes in the same pathway or complex ( , , and – ; ). Notably, gene pairs involved in mitochondrial- or Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) biosynthesis-related roles were enriched for positive interactions ( , on diagonal). However, only ~19% of positive interaction gene pairs were functionally related as defined by the HAP1 genetic profile similarity network ( and ; ), indicating that most positive interactions connected genes from different bioprocesses, a pattern also observed in yeast ( and , off diagonal). 
For example, while negative interactions for the VPS52 query gene were enriched for related vesicle trafficking genes (~3-fold, FDR < 5.3 × 10−43, hypergeometric test, BH-corrected), its positive interactions were enriched for genes involved in sterol biosynthesis (~3-fold, FDR < 2.4 × 10−18, hypergeometric test, Benjamini-Hochberg [BH]-corrected) ( ). Studies in yeast, mouse, and human cells showed that GARP complex function is connected to cholesterol homeostasis. – GARP mediates sorting and localization of NPC2, a protein critical for lysosomal cholesterol export. , NPC2 is missorted in GARP-deficient mutants, leading to accumulation of cholesterol, a hallmark of Niemann-Pick type C disease, a neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in NPC2. , Consistent with these findings, VPS52 exhibited strong positive interactions with genes in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway genes ( ), most of which we classified as suppression interactions because the relative double-mutant fitness was greater than the fitness of the VPS52 query mutant ( and ; ). Similar suppression interactions were observed for VPS54 ( ; ), suggesting that GARP-associated fitness defects may result from toxic accumulation of cholesterol, which can be mitigated by reducing cholesterol biosynthesis.
Additionally, GARP mutant fitness defects were suppressed by disrupting sphingolipid biosynthesis genes ( and ; ). Mutations in VPS53 and VPS54 have been linked to cerebello-cerebral atrophy type 2 and ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), respectively. – Both neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by cellular accumulation of sphingolipid intermediates, and, accordingly, inhibition of sphingolipid biosynthesis rescues mutant phenotypes in relevant disease models. , 

## Systematic analysis of positive genetic suppression interactions
Extreme positive genetic interactions classified as suppression often provide mechanistic insight into gene function ( and – ; ). , Our genetic suppression analysis in HAP1 cells previously uncovered novel functional insights into protein acetylation ( and ). More recently, we showed that LOF mutations in ABHD18, encoding a novel component of cardiolipin biosynthesis, rescued the fitness defect of HAP1 cells carrying a LOF mutation in TAFAZZIN, a disease gene linked to Barth Syndrome, and this suppression interaction was validated in both cell line and mouse disease models ( and ). To systematically assess the prevalence of suppression interactions, we compared double and single mutant fitness for all gene pairs connected by positive interactions in the HAP1 genetic network. Approximately 4% (1,843/41,881) of positive interactions were classified as potential suppression interactions, where the fitness of the double mutant exceeded that of the most severely affected single mutant ( – ; ). Consistent with findings in yeast , and reported human gene suppression interactions, our set of HAP1 suppression interactions was more functionally informative than positive interactions overall, capturing ~2-fold more gene pairs annotated to the same GO biological process compared with positive interactions that were not classified as suppression ( ).
Approximately 17% of yeast essential genes can be rendered dispensable by spontaneous extragenic bypass suppressor mutations, and these genes are more likely to be nonessential across different yeast species compared with core essential genes. In HAP1 cells, despite screening only 222 unique query genes, ~3% (50/1,524) of HAP1 essential library genes exhibited at least one potential bypass suppression interaction ( ). Notably, these genes tend to be essential in fewer DepMap cancer cell lines and are more likely to be classified as selective essential genes ( and ).

## Conservation of genetic network structure and topology
Genetic interactions appear to be broadly conserved at the level of network structure. , – To investigate this conservation further, we compared genetic interaction density within and between bioprocess modules mapped by the yeast and HAP1 profile similarity networks. Remarkably, negative interaction density, both within individual bioprocesses and between related bioprocess pairs, was significantly correlated across species ( ; ). For example, genes within the DNA replication and repair bioprocess show a relatively high density of interactions in yeast and human cells. Because there are relatively few orthologs represented in the yeast and HAP1 networks, these findings reflect deep conservation of network structure and topology despite divergence at the level of individual interactions.
By contrast, positive interaction density was not correlated between yeast and HAP1 networks ( ; ). In yeast, positive interactions among essential genes often reflect broad regulatory mechanisms, such as mRNA degradation or protein turnover. In HAP1 cells, positive interactions may also represent regulatory relationships specific to human cell proliferation. For instance, tumor suppressor genes showed a bias toward positive interactions ( ; ), suggesting that their disruption enhances cell proliferation in many query mutant cell lines. Genes involved in mTOR signaling served as positive interaction hubs, highlighting how disruption of central regulatory pathways can influence numerous genes ( ; ). Notably, HAP1 genetic interaction profiles identified several query cell lines with distinct dependencies on either mTORC1 or mTORC2 pathways, which we validated by monitoring mTORC1 and mTORC2 activity in several query cell lines ( ; ).
Of the ~4 million gene pairs tested in HAP1 cells, only 146,664 (~4%) have corresponding yeast orthologs ( ; ). Nevertheless, conserved gene pairs with negative interactions in HAP1 cells were more likely to show negative interactions in yeast and vice versa ( , , and ). Gene pairs with roles in vesicle trafficking, mitosis, and DNA replication and repair were enriched for conserved negative interactions ( ). Overall, a modest fraction of genetic interactions (~7%, 289/4,189) among conserved gene pairs in HAP1 were also observed in yeast. Negative genetic interactions were significantly conserved, while orthology was not predictive of positive interactions ( , , , and ; ). This contrasts with genetic network structure and topology, which appear to be highly conserved across species.

## Functional insights from comparative analysis of yeast and human genetic interaction profiles
Although most genetic interactions identified in HAP1 cells were unique to human genes, some human genes shared overlapping genetic interaction profiles with their corresponding yeast ortholog ( ). For example, human PTAR1 interactions mapped in HAP1 cells overlapped significantly with those of yeast YKT6, a conserved SNARE protein ( ). PTAR1 forms a heterodimeric GGTase-III complex with RABGGTB to activate target proteins, including YKT6. , – Sequence conservation and functional analyses identified a previously uncharacterized yeast essential gene, ECM9, as a distant ortholog of PTAR1 ( and ; ). , We screened a temperature-sensitive ECM9 query mutant allele to identify negative interactions enriched for vesicle trafficking genes that overlapped significantly with the negative interaction profile of PTAR1 ( , , , and ; ).
Although positive interaction overlap was not significant ( and ), some ECM9- and PTAR1-positive interactions were conserved and biologically informative. In particular, PTAR1 query mutant fitness defects were suppressed by LOF mutations in ABHD16A or ABHD17B, which encode depalmitoylase enzymes ( , , and ; and ). Analogously, we previously showed that the lethality of an ECM9 deletion mutant is suppressed by disruption of yeast ABH1 (YNL320W), which also encodes a putative depalmitoylase. , Expression of human ABHD16A, ABHD17B, or related gene family members rescued the bypass suppression phenotype of an ecm9Δ abh1Δ yeast double mutant, suggesting that these human abhydrolase genes act as functional orthologs of yeast ABH1 ( ).
GGTase-III modifies mono-farnesylated yeast Ykt6 (yYkt6) and human YKT6 (hYKT6) to produce a dual-prenylated, active SNARE. , , Our results imply that in the absence of GGTase-III, farnesylated yYkt6/hYKT6 can instead be palmitoylated, generating an alternative dual lipid-modified and active SNARE. Mutations in depalmitoylases, such as yeast ABH1 or human ABHD16A or ABHD17B, which negatively regulate palmitoylation, may promote yYkt6/hYKT6 activation ( ). Indeed, yeast Ykt6 was palmitoylated in an ecm9Δ abh1Δ double mutant but not in abh1Δ single mutant or WT cells ( ). Moreover, a chemical-genetic screen in HAP1 cells with ABD957, a small molecule inhibitor of the ABHD17 family of depalmitoylases, identified a strong positive chemical-genetic interaction with a HAP1 PTAR1 query mutant cell line, suggesting that chemical inhibition of ABHD17B enzyme activity suppresses the fitness defect associated with a PTAR1 mutant ( ; ). 
These findings were further supported by the DepMap dataset because cancer cell lines that are more dependent on PTAR1 for growth tend to express YKT6 at lower levels, consistent with the PTAR1-YKT6 negative interaction in HAP1 cells and suggesting a role for PTAR1 as a YKT6 activator ( ). Conversely, PTAR1-dependent cell lines often expressed higher ABHD16A levels, consistent with a PTAR1-ABHD16A positive interaction in HAP1 cells and suggesting that ABHD16A antagonizes PTAR1 function ( ). YKT6 and ABHD16A expression levels were the strongest predictors of PTAR1 dependency across DepMap cancer cell lines (DepMap: depmap.org/portal).

## Deciphering molecular mechanisms underlying cancer cell line genetic dependencies
To systematically examine the relationship between DepMap cancer cell line genetic dependencies and HAP1 genetic interactions, we developed an expression dependency (ED) score, which quantifies the correlation between gene expression and LOF fitness phenotypes ( ). A negative ED score indicates that the fitness associated with LOF of gene A is more detrimental when gene B is highly expressed, while a positive ED score suggests that LOF of gene C is less detrimental when gene D is highly expressed ( ).
We computed ED scores for ~4 million gene pairs tested for genetic interactions in HAP1 cells to identify ~218,000 significant negative ED gene pairs and ~247,000 significant positive ED gene pairs (|ED| > 0.1, p < 0.01) ( and ; ). Notably, ~1% of negative ED gene pairs (~2,600) were enriched for HAP1-positive genetic interactions (1.2-fold, p < 4.7 × 10−22, hypergeometric test) ( and ; ), including PTAR1-ABHD16A and TAFAZZIN-ABHD18 genetic suppression interactions ( , , , and ; ). We also noticed that the TP53 tumor suppressor gene followed this pattern with numerous other genes ( ), many of which showed higher rates of co-mutation with TP53 in tumors, suggesting that their disruption may enhance TP53-associated cancer phenotypes ( ).
Approximately 1% of positive ED gene pairs (~3,400) were enriched for HAP1 negative interactions (1.2-fold, p < 4.6 × 10−37, hypergeometric test) and often involved duplicated genes ( and ; ). Gene pairs with positive DepMap ED and HAP1 negative qGI scores were over 100-fold more enriched for paralogs compared with gene pairs with a positive ED score alone, highlighting the ability of paralogs to functionally compensate for one another, such as UAP1 and UAP1L1 glycosylation genes ( , , and ). , The PELO-FOCAD gene pair exhibited the same pattern, supporting recent studies that identified a synthetic lethal relationship between PELO and 9p21.3 deletions ( and ). , 

## Integrating HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity and DepMap co-essentiality networks
Like genetic profile similarity networks, the DepMap co-essentiality network identifies genes that work together in functional modules. , , , To compare functional content captured by HAP1 genetic interaction profiles and DepMap co-essentiality profiles on a similar scale, we constructed 10 DepMap co-essentiality subnetworks using 298 randomly sampled DepMap cell lines, matching the number of genome-wide screens used to map the HAP1 profile similarity network ( ). At stringent thresholds (PCC > 0.4), we observed a relatively high overlap (Jaccard index of ~0.5) between DepMap subnetworks, but low overlap with the HAP1 network, indicating that the DepMap co-essentiality and HAP1 genetic profile similarity networks largely capture orthogonal functional information ( ).
We identified 412 gene modules in the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network ( and ; ). Of these, 22% (92/412) comprised functionally related genes that were significantly connected in the complete DepMap co-essentiality network and shared similar characteristics ( , , , and ; ). – However, most HAP1 network modules (~78%, 320/412) were not supported by strong evidence in the complete DepMap network and involved genes with more moderate fitness defects ( – ; ). HAP1 network-specific modules were slightly more enriched for functionally related genes and PPIs than DepMap-specific modules ( ), suggesting that the HAP1 genetic network captures functional relationships among nonessential genes with more subtle fitness defects, perhaps because the phenotypic effect of their disruption can be detected more sensitively in the context of a single genetic background.
A reciprocal comparison showed that most of the ~1,100 modules derived from the complete DepMap co-essentiality network were unique to the DepMap network and involved genes with low expression and modest fitness effects in HAP1 cells ( – ; ). These findings show that the two networks capture complementary features of gene function. While DepMap modules highlight essential gene relationships across diverse genetic backgrounds, the HAP1 network uncovers gene-specific interactions in a single genetic background, which captures nonessential genes with subtle fitness effects.
We combined a novel method for processing CRISPR screen data, Onion normalization, with a deep learning-based approach for network integration, BIONIC, to generate an integrated network based on the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity and DepMap co-essentiality input networks. In the resulting integrated network, functionally related gene pairs with roles in the same GO-annotated bioprocess or whose products interact physically were connected more frequently than in either input network alone ( and ). Furthermore, modules derived from the integrated network identified new functions and protein complexes that were not represented in the individual input network ( and ; ). Thus, integrating data derived from our HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network with the DepMap co-essentiality network provides a more comprehensive view of human gene function.

## DISCUSSION
A systematic genetic interaction map for a HAP1 human cell line uncovers fundamental principles of cellular organization and reveals conserved network features that transcend species. Integrating this map with existing datasets like the DepMap cancer cell line co-essentiality network, we provide a rich framework for understanding gene function, disease gene modifiers, and therapeutic vulnerabilities.
Our findings show experimental evidence that the overall structure of genetic interaction networks is conserved from yeast to human cells, which should enable predictive modeling of genetic interactions, identification of network hubs, and efficient, large-scale genetic interaction analysis across different cell lines and model organisms. As demonstrated with the global yeast genetic network, , , , the HAP1 genetic network should also serve as a reference for exploring higher-order interactions involving more than two genes, as well as allele-, cell line-, and condition-specific genetic interactions.
Genetic interactions highlight the potential to modulate the phenotypic consequences of genetic variation. We identified ~1,500 genes that are individually essential for HAP1 cell fitness. Based on our mapping of ~89,000 genetic interactions in HAP1 cells, we estimate that a global HAP1 genetic network may encompass ~1.4 million gene-gene interactions, including ~85,000 extreme negative synthetic lethal interactions and ~45,000 extreme positive suppressor interactions (see ). The prevalence of genetic interactions in HAP1 cells is relevant to human disease and population genetics, where most phenotypes reflect quantitative traits shaped by individual genetic backgrounds. Even Mendelian disorders show variable disease phenotypes due to genetic modifiers that enhance or suppress a disease mutation. Our HAP1 genetic network identified over 1,000 HAP1 synthetic lethal interactions involving more than 350 nonessential disease genes annotated in the OMIM database ( ), offering insights into potential disease gene modifiers and opportunities for variant effect mapping. Approximately 9% (~287/3,341) of synthetic lethal interactions involved LOF mutations in known tumor suppressor genes ( ) that can be explored for potential targeted cancer therapy. , – 
In rare cases, healthy individuals can harbor mutations that normally cause severe Mendelian diseases. This resilience may be associated with modifiers that suppress the effects of a disease gene. In total, we mapped ~1,800 suppression interactions in HAP1 cells, including ~600 suppression interactions involving an OMIM-associated disease gene ( ).
The DepMap project catalogs gene dependencies across hundreds of cancer cell lines to generate a gene-cell line dataset, – , which complements our gene-gene HAP1 genetic interaction network. DepMap fitness metrics were predictive of HAP1 genetic interaction network connectivity, suggesting that these data can guide query gene or cell line selection for efficient genetic interaction mapping. Although DepMap genetic perturbation analyses identify single gene fitness phenotypes across genetically diverse cancer cell lines, this approach does not directly identify genetic interactions between specific gene pairs. For high-frequency mutations or expression effects, interactions can sometimes be inferred through analysis of recurrent dependencies, but the sensitivity of such analyses is limited by the number of relevant cell lines. We demonstrated that combining gene expression and single gene genetic dependency data from DepMap with HAP1 genetic interactions can identify molecular mechanisms underlying cell line-specific phenotypes ( and ). This data integration infers gene pairs that would likely display either positive or negative genetic interactions of various strengths across diverse genetic backgrounds ( and ). For example, we identified gene pairs with negative DepMap ED and positive HAP1 qGI scores that may prioritize suppressors of disease gene phenotypes ( ). Indeed, ~36% (641/1,764) of unique library genes among pairs with negative ED and positive qGI scores are annotated to an OMIM disease term. Conversely, gene pairs with positive ED and negative qGI scores identified cancer-relevant synthetic lethal/sick gene pairs that may be exploited to develop new therapeutic strategies ( and ). , 
Complex diseases often result from combinations of detrimental variants in multiple genes, and different combinations of variants can lead to the same disease. – The conserved and modular topology of genetic networks, where coherent sets of negative or positive interactions connect functional modules, provides a framework to map the genetic architecture of inherited phenotypes. , Functional modules provide prior knowledge that can reduce the statistical burden in disease association studies. , The HAP1 genetic network presents an unbiased resource to identify functional modules and their genetic wiring. Extensive mapping of genetic networks across diverse human cell lines should provide a powerful approach for assigning most human genes into functional modules, thus providing a critical resource for exploring genetic interactions in population-scale biobank datasets, which link genome sequences to a wide range of phenotypes, including human diseases. , – 

## Limitations of the study
This work focused on constructing a systematic, large-scale genetic interaction network involving predominantly nonessential genes in a single human cell line. Previous analyses in yeast showed that essential genes participate in ~5 times more interactions than nonessential genes, and their interaction profiles are rich in functional information, forming the central core of the yeast genetic profile similarity network. Our ability to score genetic interactions for HAP1 essential genes was primarily limited to disrupting a subset of highly expressed library genes and/or those encoding stable or abundant proteins, which likely decay more slowly over the course of a screen ( ). Thus, extending this approach to query cell lines that stably express hypomorphic alleles of essential genes should yield informative genetic interaction profiles for human essential genes. To date, we have assayed <5% of all possible HAP1 gene pairs. Thus, a comprehensive HAP1 GI network has the potential to generate a high-resolution map of human gene function. Moreover, genome-scale analysis in additional cell lines will be highly valuable, as genetic interactions and their biological consequences can depend on genetic background, epigenetic context, and lineage-specific regulatory networks. Each tissue or cell type would likely reveal unique genetic interactions not captured in a single cell line. Large-scale application of combinatorial CRISPR libraries, designed to simultaneously inactivate pairs of genes, also promises to expand genome-wide genetic interaction analysis to include essential genes across diverse cell lines. , , By contrast, the DepMap co-essentiality network appears to be approaching saturation in functional information ( ). Our HAP1 genetic interaction network provides a valuable reference, underscoring the potential for genetic interaction analysis to generate new insights into gene function and the genotype-phenotype relationship.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to the lead contact, Charles Boone (charlie.boone@utoronto.ca).

## Materials availability
All material and data are described and/or available as . The TKOv3 CRISPR library is available from Addgene (catalog no. 90294). HAP1 query mutant cell lines constructed “in house” or purchased from Horizon Discovery (https://horizondiscovery.com) are indicated in . HAP1 query mutant cell lines constructed in house are available upon request and without restriction.

## Data and code availability
All primary data and data from associated analyses are available from https://boonelab.ccbr.utoronto.ca/supplement/billmanncostanzo2026/ and also deposited on Mendeley at https://doi.org/10.17632/bpcpfns6vb.1. All data are publicly available as of the date of publication. The HAP1 genetic interaction dataset can also be accessed and visualized through our companion databases: https://thecellmap.org , or https://crisprdb.ccm.sickkids.ca/.
All original code has been deposited at Zenodo and is publicly available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010 as of the date of publication.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Human Cell lines
Parental human HAP1 cells were obtained from Horizon Discovery (clone C631; sex, male with lost Y chromosome; RRID: CVCL_Y019). Genetic interaction screens were performed in either wild-type HAP1 cells, or HAP1 cells with a defined query gene knockout. HAP1 query mutant cell lines carrying a stable LOF mutation in a query gene of interest were obtained from Horizon Discovery (catalog numbers included in ) or generated in-house. In-house query mutant cell lines were generated by electroporation of single-guide RNAs (gRNA) targeting the gene of interest complexed with Cas9 protein (RNP complexes) into HAP1 parental cells using the Neon electroporation system (Thermo Scientific). For each query gene, a pool of three distinct gRNAs was used to maximize knockout efficiency (Synthego Gene Knockout Kit v2 guide pools or guides selected from TKOv3). RNP complex preparation and electroporation was carried out according to manufacturer’s instructions. Genomic DNA extracted from knockout pools was sequenced by Sanger sequencing using primers proximal to the guide target sites and analyzed using TIDE to estimate editing efficiency. Single clones were selected by limiting dilution and mutations in clonal populations were confirmed using Sanger sequencing of the target region. For every cell line, we carry out STR profiling to ensure that the cells match references for authentication. Moreover, cells are regularly monitored for mycoplasma infection. A complete list of query mutant cell lines used in this study is provided ( ). Cell culture conditions are described in the section below. Query cell lines constructed in house or purchased from Horizon Discovery (https://horizondiscovery.com) are indicated in . HAP1 query mutant cell lines constructed “in house” are available upon request.

## Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains
All strains used for Synthetic Genetic Array (SGA) analysis, yeast two hybrid analysis and complementation assays were derivatives of BY4741 or Y7092, the construction of which was described previously. A temperature-sensitive allele of ECM9, TSQ3052 (MATa ecm9–5002::natMX can1Δ::STE2pr-Sp_his5; lyp1Δ; his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 ura3Δ0 LYS2) was used as a query mutant for SGA analysis. Yeast complementation analysis was performed using Y16258 (MAT
a/a ECM9/ecm9Δ::natMX CAN1/can1Δ::STE2pr-Sp_his5; LYP1/lyp1Δ; HIS3/his3Δ1 LEU2/leu2Δ0 URA3/ura3Δ0) or Y15767 (MATa ecm9Δ::natMX abh1Δ::URA3 can1Δ::STE2pr-Sp_his5; lyp1Δ; his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 ura3Δ0 LYS2) as indicated below.

## METHOD DETAILS

## General information about the datasets

## HAP1 essential gene and single mutant fitness datasets
We provide a list of HAP1 essential genes and a catalog of single mutant fitness measurements for all HAP1 genes targeted by the TKOv3 library in both rich and minimal growth medium, as described below (HAP1 single mutant fitness effects and identification of essential genes). Essential library genes and library gene mutant fitness measurements are provided in .

## HAP1 genetic interaction datasets
Genetic interaction analyses described in this study are based on either the [1] complete or [2] non-redundant HAP1 genetic interaction dataset as describe below and provided in .
Complete genetic interaction dataset (298 query mutant cell lines × 17,804 library genes). The complete dataset comprises 298 genome-wide screens, corresponding to 222 mutant cells lines, each carrying a single loss-of-function (LOF) mutation in a unique query gene of interest. Thus, the complete dataset includes biological replicate screens for a set of 50 query mutant cell lines. The number of replicates/query mutant ranges from 2 to 8 replicates depending on the query mutant cell line. Each query mutant cell line was screened for negative and positive interactions with 17,804 genes targeted by the TKOv3 library. This includes a set of 80 library genes that exhibited highly variable single mutant fitness effects across replicate wild-type screens. A list of query mutant cell lines and genome-wide screens, including biological replicate screens performed as part of this study is provided in . A list of all library genes targeted by TKOv3, including those with variable single mutant fitness, is provided in . The complete genetic interaction dataset was used for all analyses based on genetic interaction profile similarity, unless otherwise indicated. contains single and double mutant fitness (log2 fold change) measurements as well as genetic interactions (qGI scores) derived from the complete dataset, which includes all gene pairs tested in this study, including biological replicates of query mutant cell lines and library genes that showed variable single mutant fitness.
Non-redundant genetic interaction dataset (222 query mutant cell lines × 17,724 library genes). The non-redundant genetic interaction dataset consists of 222 mutant cell lines, each carrying a LOF mutation in a unique query gene. A representative screen was selected for each query gene mutant cell line that was repeated multiple times and replicate screens were excluded from this dataset. Gene pairs involving the set of 80 library genes that exhibited highly variable single mutant fitness in replicate wild-type screens were also excluded from this dataset. Thus, the non-redundant dataset comprised negative and positive genetic interactions derived from 222 unique query genes screened against 17,724 library genes. Lists of query mutant cell lines and library genes that comprise the non-redundant dataset are provided in and , respectively.

The non-redundant genetic interaction dataset was further filtered based on genetic interaction score (|qGI| > 0.3) and statistical significance (FDR < 0.1) thresholds, which we found to strike an optimal balance between false negative and false positives. The quality estimates of data produced at different thresholds was completed as described below (see section, ) and is provided in and . In total, the non-redundant dataset contains fitness phenotypes associated with perturbation of 3,934,506 unique gene pairs and 88,933 high confidence genetic interactions (47,052 negative and 41,881 positive genetic interactions)( ). This dataset was used for all analyses based on direct negative and positive genetic interactions, unless otherwise indicated.

## Mitochondrial genes
Previous studies showed that gene pairs with strongly correlated co-essentiality profiles, required for fitness of the same set of DepMap cancer cell lines, predominantly involved mitochondrial-related genes, especially those encoding components of the electron transport chain (ETC) or the 55S ribosome. The HAP1 genetic interaction profiles for mitochondrial gene pairs were also among the most correlated in the HAP1 genetic network ( and ). ETC and 55S ribosome proteins are highly stable and detection of a growth phenotype resulting from the disruption of these genes may not manifest until the wild-type protein is depleted. Indeed, experimental factors, such as sampling time and cell line doubling rate, were shown to impact fitness measurements and amplify correlation between DepMap co-essentiality profiles associated with ETC and 55S ribosome genes. Given the potential for various experimental factors to confound scoring and interpretation of mitochondrial-related genetic interactions and profiles, we explored network properties for all tested gene pairs as well as for the subset of gene pairs that excluded genetic interactions involving mitochondrial-related genes. To do so, we compiled a list of 1,102 genes targeted by gRNAs in the TKOv3 library that are also associated with mitochondrial function based on 4 sources: [1] Human MitoCarta 3.0, [2] the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG; Oxidative Phosphorylation term), [3] REACTOME database (Electron Transport pathway term), [4] mitochondrial-related protein complexes annotated in the CORUM protein complex database as well as manually curated genes. The list of genes with mitochondrial-associated function is provided in . To exclude mitochondrial signals, the indicated analyses were repeated by excluding gene pairs where both genes appeared on the mitochondrial-associated function gene list. Gene pairs that contained only one gene from the mitochondrial-associated function gene list were not excluded from analyses.

## TKOv3 library, query mutant cell lines and genome-wide CRISPR screens

## HAP1 genome variant calling
To fully characterize the expected editing efficacy of sgRNAs in our TKOv3 library, we generated Illumina whole genome sequencing for the HAP1 parental cell line to identify variants relative to the reference human genome. The sequencing data is summarized as follows:
 
To call variants, we applied the GATK-recommended variant calling workflow with the ploidy parameter for HaplotypeCaller set to 1. Discovered variants were then filtered for exonic variants using ANNOVAR. hg19 was used as the reference genome for all steps. This process resulted in a total of 14,941 exonic variants, which were then analyzed for overlap with TKOv3 guide library target sites ( ). Approximately 0.07% (55 gRNAs) of all gRNAs in the TKOv3 library targeted regions where the HAP1 genome sequence varied from the reference genome ( ). In each of these cases, at least two other gRNAs in the TKOv3 library targeted unaffected regions in the same gene.

## HAP1 query mutant cell line construction.
Parental human HAP1 cells were obtained from Horizon Discovery (clone C631; sex, male with lost Y chromosome; RRID: CVCL_Y019). Screens were performed in either wild-type HAP1 cells, or HAP1 cells with a defined query gene knockout. HAP1 query mutant cell lines carrying a stable LOF mutation in a query gene of interest were obtained from Horizon Discovery (catalog numbers included in ) or generated in-house. In-house query mutant cell lines were generated by electroporation of single-guide RNAs (gRNA) targeting the gene of interest complexed with Cas9 protein (RNP complexes) into HAP1 parental cells using the Neon electroporation system (Thermo Scientific). For each query gene, a pool of three distinct gRNAs was used to maximize knockout efficiency (Synthego Gene Knockout Kit v2 guide pools or guides selected from TKOv3). RNP complex preparation and electroporation was carried out according to manufacturer’s instructions. Genomic DNA extracted from knockout pools was sequenced by Sanger sequencing using primers proximal to the guide target sites and analyzed using TIDE to estimate editing efficiency. Single clones were selected by limiting dilution and mutations in clonal populations were confirmed using Sanger sequencing of the target region. A complete list of query mutant cell lines used in this study is provided ( ). Query cell lines constructed in house or purchased from Horizon Discovery (https://horizondiscovery.com) are indicated in . HAP1 query mutant cell lines constructed “in house” are available upon request.

## TKOv3 library virus production and multiplicity of infection determination.
Genome-wide screens were carried out using the Toronto Knockout version 3 (TKOv3) CRISPR library (Addgene #90294), as previously described. CRISPR library lentivirus production was conducted as previously described. To determine viral titers, 3 million HAP1 cells seeded in 15 cm plates were transduced with different dilutions of the TKOv3 lentiviral gRNA library in medium containing 8 μg / mL of polybrene, in a total of 20 mL medium. After 24 h, the virus-containing medium was replaced with 20 mL of fresh medium containing puromycin (1 μg / mL), and cells were incubated for an additional 48 h. Multiplicity of infection (MOI) of the titrated virus was determined 72 h post-infection by comparing percentage survival of puromycin-selected cells with that of cells that were infected but not selected with puromycin (puro-minus controls) after subtracting the percentage survival of uninfected cells in puromycin-containing medium.

## Pooled, genome-scale CRISPR screens.
Genome-wide genetic interaction screens were performed as previously described. , Briefly, 3 million HAP1 cells per plate were seeded in 15 cm plates in 20 mL of specified medium. A total of 90 million cells were transduced with lentivirus containing the TKOv3 library at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of ~0.3 in the presence of polybrene (8ug/mL), such that each gRNA was represented in ~200–300 cells. Transduced cells were allowed to recover for 24 h, selected using puromycin (1ug / mL) for 48 hours, and then a pellet was collected to represent the T0 starting population. The remaining cells were split into triplicate 15 cm plates (3 million cells per plate, 15 million cells total per replicate, representing ≥200-fold library coverage), and cultured for 10–12 population doublings. Three pellets (one from each technical replicate) were collected to represent the endpoint populations. Screens were performed in either DMEM with 10mM glucose and 1mM glutamine (‘minimal medium’), or IMDM with 25mM glucose and 1mM pyruvate (‘rich medium’), as indicated in . All media was supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin–streptomycin, and cultures were grown at 37°C with 5% CO2 and passaged every 3–4 days while maintaining a library coverage >200-fold throughout.

## Preparation of sequencing libraries and Illumina sequencing.
Sequencing library preparation and Illumina sequencing was performed as described previously. , Genomic DNA was extracted using the Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega). The gDNA pellets were resuspended in TE buffer, and the concentration was estimated by Qubit using double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) Broad Range Assay reagents (Invitrogen). Sequencing libraries were prepared from 50 μg of the extracted gDNA in two PCR steps, the first to enrich gRNA regions from the genome, and the second to amplify gRNA and attach Illumina TruSeq adapters with i5 and i7 indices, as described previously, using staggered primers aligning in both orientations to the gRNA region. , Barcoded libraries were gel purified, and final concentrations were estimated by Qubit or qRT–PCR. Sequencing libraries were sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2500 using single-read sequencing and were completed with standard primers for dual indexing with HiSeq SBS Kit v4 reagents. The first 21 cycles of sequencing were dark cycles, or base additions without imaging. The actual 36-base read begins after the dark cycles and contains 2 index reads, in which i7 is read first, followed by the i5 sequences. The T0 and end time point samples were sequenced at 400- and 200-fold library coverage, respectively.

## HAP1 single mutant fitness effects and essential genes
We estimated robust single mutant fitness effects for all human genes targeted by our TKOv3 gRNA library in HAP1 cells. We also defined a robust set of HAP1essential genes.

## Library gene mutant fitness catalogue
Single mutant fitness (SMF) effects for 17,804 protein-coding genes targeted by the TKOv3 gRNA library were estimated from a collection of 39 independent wild-type control HAP1 screens. Those screens were completed in minimal (n = 21) and rich (n = 18) cell culture medium, and library gene SMF in each medium was estimated separately. First, SMF effects were estimated from each individual wild-type screen by subtracting the sequencing depth-normalized and log2-transformed read-counts representing the abundance of each gRNA in the library at the start of the experiment (T0) from those at the experimental endpoint. For each wild-type control screen, gRNA-level log2-fold changes (LFC) were then adjusted such that the median of all gRNA targeting a gold-standard, nonessential gene set is equal to zero, and mean-summarized across the three technical replicates per screen. Across all wild-type control screens in each media condition, gRNA LFC were then mean-summarized for all gRNAs not flagged by our empirical quality score (see ). Finally, library gene SMF was derived by mean-summarizing across the 2–4 independent gRNAs targeting each library gene. Library gene SMF measure in each media condition is provided in and shown in .

## Random forest model to identify HAP1 essential genes
In addition to library gene SMF, we also defined the subset of library genes that are essential for HAP1 growth in cell culture. The identification of the HAP1 essential gene set was formulated as a binary prediction problem. Features for the predictive model were derived from the complete collection of HAP1 wild-type control (described above) and query mutant genetic interactions screens (described below), and a gold standard set of “core” essential genes that are essential in at least 60% of human cell types examined in the 20Q2 release of Cancer Dependency Map project dataset (DepMap; depmap.org/portal). , , A gene was labeled as core essential if the gene met a CERES score cutoff of < −1 in more than 60% of DepMap cancer cell lines. A CERES score < −1 threshold corresponds to the median score of all essential genes in the DepMap data. We note that this is a relatively stringent criterion as the goal was to identify a set of genes that is highly likely to be essential across most human cell lines as a basis for training our model. This set of high-confidence core essentials resulted in 733 essential genes amongst the 17,804 genes targeted by our library ( ). We reasoned that these core essential genes could be used to learn specific characteristics of essential genes in our HAP1 screen data. The assumption is that the majority of “core” essential genes are also essential in HAP1, but that training a predictive model to recognize the features of those genes based on HAP1 data would identify additional HAP1 essential genes with high accuracy. This provides a more precise definition of HAP1 essential genes by leveraging the wealth of phenotype data collected as part of this study compared to more simple strategies such as applying a single threshold on the average LFC per gene derived from wild-type control screens.
We trained a random forest supervised model to predict HAP1 essential genes. Three different types of features from our HAP1 screen data were used as input to this model, which can be grouped into three general categories: [1] Central tendency (mean/median LFC) features. These reflect average single mutant phenotypes across the 298 genome-wide genetic interaction screens completed as part of this study: [2] Variance features. These reflect variability of individual genes’ phenotypes across the 298 screens. Specifically, the standard deviation and coefficient of variance of LFC values were used as inputs to our model. [3] Screen dynamics features. These features were derived from time-resolved wild-type control screens where we sampled gRNA abundance at different timepoints over the course of the screen, which helped to differentiate essential genes from genes that simply result in a slow growth phenotype in cell culture. Screen dynamics metrics were based on the pairwise slopes between gRNA abundance measured at different time points. The complete set of features, detailed descriptions, and the feature table used for this essential gene model are provided as .
Input features along with the gold-standard core essential gene set was used to build and optimize parameters for a random forest classifier using a 5-fold cross-validation approach. For each gene, the predicted probability of gene essentiality was extracted from the model for which it was in the held-out fold, and a precision-recall curve was used to evaluate overall performance of the model. All genes that met a score threshold corresponding to a 0.95 recall or higher on the gold-standard essential gene set were defined as “HAP1 essential”. This process was conducted separately for HAP1 screens performed in minimal and rich media to predict two essential gene sets, one in each media condition. The overlapping essential genes from the rich and minimal media conditions was used to define the complete HAP1-specific essential gene set, which consists of 1,524 genes. Genes that were not deemed essential by this process but exhibited a statistically significant SMF effect (LFC < 0 or LFC > 0) were deemed “non-essential fitness effect” genes, which included an additional 2,417 genes. The complete set of HAP1 essential library genes and nonessential genes associated with a fitness effect are listed in and shown in and .

## Features associated with HAP1 essential genes
We analyzed the collection of HAP1 essential genes, described above, for differences in several physiological, evolutionary and functional gene features listed in . For continuous-valued and discrete-valued features, we used Wilcoxon rank-sum tests to assess the difference in the HAP1 essential gene set distribution from the distribution of the non-essential gene set. For features that were statistically significant, we plotted the log-ratio of the mean of the essential gene group to the non-essential gene group for that feature (absolute value was first applied to negative means, ). The essential gene set was also tested for enrichment across the Reactome pathways and GO biological process terms ). The results of these analyses are shown in .

## A quantitative genetic interaction (qGI) score
To derive quantitative genetic interactions, we modeled expected combinatorial gene perturbation effects and estimated the deviations from this null model as the quantitative genetic interaction (qGI) score. Each step is described in more detail below, but we provide a brief overview of the process here. We compare the fitness effects of each query mutation screen with a wild-type HAP1 control screen and fit a loess (locally estimated scatterplot smoothing) regression as the null model. This partially adjusts the growth effect distribution of all library genes to the background of a given query. Additional corrections to the data improve this null model. Since genetic interactions are estimated semi-independently for each query screen, those corrections are applied on a per genetic interaction screen basis followed by a network-wide set of corrections for systematic biases that cannot be estimated from individual screens. Each of these steps is described briefly below and in detail in an associated manuscript. All corrections were completed at the gRNA level to increase sensitivity unless stated otherwise.

## Filtering TKOv3 gRNAs
Based on screens completed as part of this study, we identified a small set of guides with clear efficacy issues and removed them from further analysis. Specifically, for every gene targeted in the TKOv3 library, we compared gRNA-level genetic interaction profiles (see qGI score described below) across all screens. For each within-gene gRNA pair, we computed a pairwise Pearson correlation coefficient and median-summarized this for each single gRNA (excluding self-correlation). This score quantified how similar genetic interaction profiles of gRNAs were to those of other gRNA targeting the same gene. Based on this metric, we removed the worst gRNA for 517 of 17,804 genes (2.9%) prior to computing the gene-level genetic interaction scores (qGI scores), the associated FDR, and the single mutant fitness (SMF). More details on the gRNA quality score are provided in. 

## Individual screen corrections

## Hybrid T0 normalization.
First, we measured gRNA abundance by sequencing the library for each screen after the puromycin selection (T0) and balanced this abundance with an average of the T0 gRNA abundances derived from all other screens in the dataset. This prevented gRNA loss during puromycin selection, which can lead to spurious genetic interaction calls.

## MA transformation.
Next, for each wild-type control-query screen pair, we MA-transformed the fitness scores prior to fitting the loess model. This stabilized null model estimates for extreme positive or negative fitness scores.

## Effect size scaling.
Query mutant cell lines with extreme single mutant fitness phenotypes often exhibited strong, non-specific deviations from the null model. These effects were controlled by adjusting residual values for a screen by matching the variance of the central 80% of residual effects.

## Multiple WT-query pairs.
The null model is fit for all pairs of a query screen with all wild-type control screens performed in the same growth medium (21 minimal media screens; 18 rich media screens) and the residual effects are shrunk by providing the highest weight to the pair with the smallest sum of squared residuals.

## Local genetic interaction shift correction.
Finally, residual scores for gRNAs are arranged according to the genomic positions of their target genes, and smoothing is conducted to identify genome regions where a collection of gRNAs that target adjacent genomic regions deviate from the null model either positively or negatively. The median of residual scores of detected shifts was set to 0.

## Network-wide corrections

## Variable single mutant fitness correction.
To specifically isolate screen-to-screen variation due to the query mutation, we computed mock residual fitness scores by comparing wild-type control screens in each media condition to other wild-type control screens conducted in the same medium. Mock residual fitness scores represent “pseudo-genetic interactions”, or genetic interactions that are identified in the absence of a query mutation and thus provide an estimate of expected single mutant fitness variability per library gene in actual query mutant cell line screens. Based on these estimates, we first corrected the per-gRNA variance across query screens to account for the observed variation across wild-type control screens. We also observed reproducible co-variance amongst gRNAs (and the corresponding genes) across multiple control screens, suggesting there are biological factors driving systematic effects in control screens (and query screens). To remove this covariation, we used Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to isolate singular vectors describing the variation observed across control screens then projected the query screen data onto these control screen components and subtracted the resulting projections from the query residual matrix. This effectively removed signal from the query screen data that reflects patterns also observed in control screens. This analysis also identified library genes with highly variable single mutant fitness phenotypes in the control screens. A set of 80 library genes that exhibited the most variable fitness effects (“core” set of highly variable fitness genes) were excluded from all analyses related to genetic interaction degree and density in this study ( ). An “expanded” set of library genes that exhibited more subtle variation in the control screens was also identified, which included 427 additional genes ( ). The complete set of 507 “core” and “expanded” library genes with variable single mutant fitness were excluded from the construction and analysis of the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network (see “ ” section below) to ensure library genes susceptible to variation in controls did not affect our conclusions from these analyses. Information related to all query and library genes is provided in and , respectively.

## Global systematic effect correction.
Minimal and rich medium SVD-corrected “pseudo-genetic interaction” matrices were merged into a global query gene-by-library gene residual matrix. Patterns explaining substantial variation in this matrix are not expected to reflect true genetic interactions (given that GIs are expected to be sparse), and thus, we applied a second SVD normalization to the merged matrix to removed contributions of the first four singular vectors.

## gRNA quality control and gene-level genetic interaction scores.
As described above (see ), based on an empirical gRNA quality score, we removed the lowest scoring gRNA for a total of 517 genes. Additional details on all of these scoring and normalization steps and evaluation of their specific impact on the resulting quantitative genetic interaction scores are available elsewhere. These correction steps produced corrected residual (gRNA-level genetic interaction) scores derived from analysis 324 query screens that comprised 69,474 high-quality gRNAs targeting 17,804 protein-encoding genes. All genes were targeted by at least two gRNAs each, and 90.4% of genes were targeted by four independent gRNAs.
To measure quantitative GI (qGI) scores for query-library gene pairs, the mean of the 2–4 residual values for a given query-library gene combination was computed. Each qGI score was assigned a statistical significance measure using the following procedure. gRNA-level residuals for each query-library gene pair were computed (i) prior to network-wide corrections to preserve experimental uncertainty of the measurements and (ii) resolved to show all contrasts between a given query and the multiple number of wild-type control screens (minimal medium (min) screens, n = 21; rich medium (rich) screens, n = 18). By considering those 18 or 21 gRNA-level values as technical replicates and the 2–4 independent gRNA sequences as biological replicates for the same gene pair, we computed P-values reflecting the deviation from 0 using a moderated t-test followed by multiple hypothesis correction using the Benjamini-Hochberg method to control FDR. As detailed below (see section ), we performed extensive analysis of the reproducibility of genetic interactions at a range of effect size and FDR thresholds ( ). Genetic interactions at a standard confidence threshold were identified using |qGI| > 0.3 and FDR < 10% thresholds, and strict genetic interactions were identified using |qGI| > 0.6 and FDR < 1% thresholds. Sensitivity and precision of the interactions identified at those thresholds are characterized in the “ ” section below.

## Estimating reproducibility of genetic interactions
We applied a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)-based approach to estimate the reproducibility of genetic interactions, as previously described. Briefly, we performed 4–5 biological replicate screens for 7 representative query mutant cell lines (FANCG, FASN, NGLY1, PDCD5, PELO, PTAR1 and VPS52) (see ). First, genetic interactions were scored independently for each biological replicate screen, generating qGI scores and an associated FDR for each library gene targeted in every query gene biological replicate screen. A “consensus profile” was then inferred for each query mutant starting from a thresholded version of the replicate interaction profiles, where a weak confidence threshold is applied (FDR < 50%) to define a set of positive or negative interactions for that screen. An MCMC approach is then used to jointly infer false negative rates (FNR) and false positive rates (FPR), as well as a binary consensus GI profile (separately for positive/negative GI). After this inference process converges, the resulting consensus profile is used to generate a data-derived interaction standard for evaluation of individual screen data (assuming pairs with posterior probability of interaction of > 0.5 are interactions). Finally, this consensus standard is used to evaluate per screen performance characteristics over a range of different qGI score effect size and statistical significance cutoffs (FDRs) on the per screen scores. At each evaluated qGI score effect size and statistical significance cutoff, we measured precision and recall metrics, which were then summarized across this collection of 7 replicated query screens. This evaluation led to the selection of two recommended cutoffs for our dataset. A “strict” cutoff (|qGI score| > 0.6 and FDR < 1%), which results in an estimated precision of per screen called genetic interactions of 0.91 and a recall of 0.12 and a “standard” cutoff (|qGI score| > 0.3 and FDR < 10%), which results in an estimated precision of perscreen called interactions of 0.61 and a recall of 0.37. For all analysis that depended on a thresholded set of genetic interactions, we applied the “standard” cutoff, unless otherwise noted. provides unfiltered qGI scores and FDR statistics for all tested gene pairs. Precision and recall estimates are provided over a range of different qGI score and FDR thresholds highlighting the relative balance between false positives and false negatives such that a user can define thresholds appropriate for future studies. The results of this analysis are presented in and .

## Validating genetic interactions with an independent gRNA library
We constructed an independent gRNA library consisting of ~37,000 gRNAs targeting ~1,200 genes that showed significant negative or positive genetic interactions in at least one of five genetic interaction screens using ARID1A, FANCG, FASN, NGLY1 or PTAR1 query mutant cell lines ( ; ). Candidate gRNA sequences were identified from FASTA files of the hg38 chromosomes using the regular expression pattern ‘[ACGT]{20}.GG’, then filtered to remove guides with polyT stretches and Esp3I restriction sites. Next, genomic coordinates for the filtered guide sequences were overlapped with exons from the desired target ~1,200 genes using bedTools ‘intersectBed’ to produce a list of candidate sgRNAs. Finally, to produce a library that widely covered the target genes, up to 40 sgRNAs per gene were selected randomly from the filtered candidate gRNAs. Of the genes targeted, 743 were targeted by 40 sgRNAs, while the remainder of genes were targeted by fewer. The vast majority (> 95%) of gRNAs in this library were not represented in the TKOv3 library. To calculate differential LFC scores, we performed the following steps: [1] Remove gRNAs with either NA or read count < 30 in any of the WT or query T0 screens; [2] Depth normalize read count data as follows: ; [3] Calculate LFC between each replicate and the reference timepoint; [4] Average across all gRNAs and technical replicates per library gene to obtain the final differential LFC for each query; [5] Calculate the differential LFC for each gene based on its LFC values measured in the query gene mutant cell line and the reference WT control cell line; [6] For each query gene, separate the 1,215 library genes into groups of “negative”, “positive”, and “no interaction” based on the qGI score and FDR associated with the corresponding gene pair derived from genome-wide TKOv3 screens. Raw read counts and differential LFC scores used to independently identify genetic interactions for 5 different query genes of the gRNA tiling library, are provided in and results from this analysis are shown in .

## Hierarchical clustering of HAP1 genetic interaction profiles
We modified a previously described hierarchical clustering algorithm to cluster the complete HAP1 genetic interaction dataset and produce a set of uniformly sized gene clusters across layers of the dendrogram (Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010). Briefly, for each dendrogram layer, an iterative process identified gene clusters based on their size and a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), calculated as the average within-cluster Pearson correlation divided by its standard deviation. Gene clusters that met a minimum size requirement (at least three genes) and ranked in the top percentile of SNR were selected and removed from subsequent clustering iterations. Genes that did not belong to a cluster in the first iteration were re-clustered in subsequent iterations until only one or no genes remained or until remaining clusters did not meet the selection criteria. This process was then repeated at the next layer of the dendrogram. This iterative approach within each layer ensured balanced clustering by preventing a few highly coherent clusters from dominating the hierarchy. We applied this clustering algorithm to the complete genetic interaction dataset (298 query cell lines × 17,804 library genes) to generate two layers of “Global” gene clusters (L2 parent clusters and L1 child clusters), which are provided in . Results of this analysis are also shown in and .
We also applied the algorithm to cluster a smaller subset of 3,784 genes that comprise the high-confidence profile similarity network and used this subset of clusters to define the HAP1 functional hierarchy, as described below (see section: , ).

## Constructing a genetic interaction profile similarity network
To construct the genetic interaction profile similarity network shown in , we performed two additional filtering/normalization steps before constructing the profile similarity network. The purpose of both additional steps was to ensure that the similarity network analysis was focused on the highest confidence set of genes and that any non-specific interaction signal was removed before computing similarity networks. First, excluded an expanded set of 507 library genes associated with variable single mutant fitness phenotypes from the complete HAP1 genetic interaction dataset. The list of library genes with variable mutant fitness is provided in . Second, additional normalization procedures were applied to genetic interaction profiles to construct the profile similarity network. These normalization procedures are described in detail below.

## Genetic interaction profile normalization
We identified two gene expression patterns related to several query mutant cell lines that were distinct from the HAP1 parental cell line gene expression profile based on genome-wide gene expression profiling of 60 selected HAP1 query mutant query cell lines, described below (see section ). In both cases, the group of cell lines that exhibited a similar differential expression signature also exhibited similar patterns of genetic interactions ( ). For most cell lines, the observed differential expression patterns had no clear connection to the query mutation. Thus, we concluded that the observed expression signatures and genetic interaction profiles shared by query mutant cell lines comprising each group may reflect experimental and/or biological factors that were not entirely related to the specific query gene mutation. As a result, we applied additional normalization procedures to the genetic interaction dataset to minimize “non-specific” similarities between genetic interaction profiles prior to constructing the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network.
First, we applied standard two-dimensional clustering analysis to the gene expression and the HAP1 genetic interaction data corresponding to the subset of 60 query mutant cell lines to identify two distinct groups of query genes that shared similar gene expression signatures and genetic interaction profiles ( ). The first group consisted of 5 query mutant screens that shared a similar gene expression and genetic interaction profiles (GSK3A_GIN247, GSK3B_GIN237, FANCA_GIN010, BCL2_GIN338, EMC6_GIN231)( ). The second group involved 5 query gene screens (CRIPT_GIN260, MPV17_GIN230, C5orf34_GIN261, TMEM126A_GIN309 and POLR2A_GIN281)( ) that also shared similar gene expression and genetic interaction profiles but whose profiles were distinct from the profiles associated query genes in the first group. For each group, we defined an “expression centroid” and a “qGI centroid” signature representing the average differential expression pattern and average genetic interaction pattern (based on qGI scores) for each group of query genes, respectively. We next examined the complete set of 298 genome-wide screens to identify additional query genes with genetic interaction profiles that resembled the genetic interaction profiles of query genes belonging to Centroid 1 or Centroid 2. An additional 4 query gene screens (GSK3A_GIN405, PC_GIN219, SLX1_GIN239, KAT7_GIN173) exhibited Centroid 1-related genetic interaction profiles and another 3 screens (POLR2A_GIN395, C5orf34_GIN357, TMEM126A_402) were associated with Centroid-2 related genetic interaction profiles ( ). We then computed final qGI centroid vectors based these expanded query gene screen groups by computing the average qGI signature across the screens in each group, resulting in a 1 × 17,804 qGI vector for each centroid group. The complete genetic interaction dataset was first normalized for the Centroid 1 vector and then subsequently normalized for the Centroid 2 vector, using the following procedure:
Each centroid was unit normalized by dividing by its norm:

Ur×1=Cr×1/‖C‖2

Each centroid unit vector was projected onto the complete qGI score matrix of 298 query screens:

Mr×cprojection=Ur×1×Ur×1T×Mr×c

The resulting centroid projection was subtracted as follows, creating a corrected matrix of qGI scores:

Mr×ccorrected=Mr×c−Mr×cprojection

The resultant centroid-corrected genetic interaction dataset excluding 507 library genes with variable single mutant fitness (listed in ) is provided as a clustered matrix in and shown in . The same dataset was used to construct the profile similarity network shown in and described below.

## Expression profiling of HAP1 query mutant cell lines
Gene expression analysis was performed on 61 HAP1 cell lines (wild-type, and knockout queries) using RNA sequencing (RNAseq). Query cells were grown in the same conditions used for the screens, and pellets containing 2×107 cells were collected when the cells reached 70–80% confluence. Total RNA was extracted from the pellets using Qiagen RNeasy kits. Poly(A)-enriched mRNA libraries were prepared using NEBNext Ultra II Directional RNA library prep kit using the manufacturer’s protocol. Library quality was assessed on an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer, and all samples had an RNA integrity value (RIN) of 9.8 or higher. Samples were sequenced on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 with an S1 flowcell with paired end 151bp reads to an approximate depth of 25 million reads per sample. After checking the sequencing quality with FastQC (v.0.11.9), reads were aligned to human genome build hg38 with Gencode v32 gene annotations using the STAR short-read aligner (v.2.7.9a) using the following parameters: –outSAMtype BAM SortedByCoordinate –quantMode GeneCounts –sjdbGTFfile gencode.v25.annotation.gtf. Per-sample read count matrices were merged with ENSEMBL and Entrez Gene annotations in R. With the bulk RNA sequencing data covering 60 query screens across 16,546 TKOv3 library genes, we calculated their log2-fold-change (LFC) values against the single mutant (WT) expression data as differential expression (DE). Raw FASTQ files and read counts are available through the GEO database with accession GSE296341.

## Mapping the genetic interaction profile similarity network
We constructed a genetic interaction profile similarity network measuring similarity between library genes targeted in our genome-wide screens. First, Pearson correlation coefficients (PCC) were measured between all pairs of library genes using each gene’s profile across 298 queries in the Centroid-normalized qGI score matrix described above ( ). We then removed edges between gene pairs whose profile similarity did not satisfy a PCC > 0.41 threshold. Finally, we removed weak similarity edges for the most highly connected genes thus setting a maximum of 30 edges/connection per gene/node in the profile similarity network. This resulted in a “core” genetic interaction profile similarity network consisting of 1017 genes and 3483 edges. The core network was visualized using the “yFiles Organic” network layout in Cytoscape ( ). A subset of 234 genes was disconnected from the core network, and these genes were manually placed on the periphery of core network closest to the region of the network enriched for functions related to the specific disconnected gene set.
Gene coordinates in the core network were then fixed, and the network was expanded to include additional genes using a K-nearest neighbors (KNN) approach. For each gene in the core network, we ranked all other genes based on their genetic interaction profile similarity (PCC) derived from the complete, centroid-corrected genetic interaction profile similarity matrix and then selected the top K neighbor genes, where K was set to 35, and all connected genes satisfied a minimum correlation threshold (PCC > 0.1). Each node in the core network could add a maximum of K new auxiliary nodes meeting this threshold. To prevent network oversaturation caused by highly connected nodes, only one edge connecting a new gene with the highest profile similarity to another gene in the core network was added to the expanded profile similarity network. This resulted in an expanded genetic interaction profile similarity network consists of 3,784 genes and 6,433 unique edges ( ; ). The core and expanded profile similarity networks are also provided as and . The source code and files for this network construction process are also available from (Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010).

## Biological process annotation of the genetic interaction profile similarity network
The expanded genetic profile similarity network was annotated using a modified version of Spatial Analysis of Functional Enrichment (SAFE). The modified SAFE code is available from (Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010). To functionally annotate the genetic interaction profile similarity network shown in , we applied the modified SAFE method using default parameters with the following exceptions:

node_distance_metric=’shortpath_weighted_layout’ 
neighborhood_radius=0.12 
attribute_distance_threshold=0.65 
enrichment_threshold=0.2
multiple_testing=TRUE

To calculate node distance and define spatial network neighborhoods, we weighted profile similarity edges based on the ratio between the Euclidean distance measured between two genes/nodes in the network and the profile similarity (Pearson Correlation Coefficient, PCC) between the corresponding connected genes (i.e. ). SAFE was combined with a reduced set of Gene Ontology (GO) Biological Process (BP) terms filtered for size (GO BP terms containing between 1–500 genes) to identify functionally enriched regions of the genetic interaction profile similarity network. SAFE analysis identified 42 functionally enriched network domains, which were reviewed and manually merged into 17 larger functional domains ( ; ).

## Subcellular compartment annotation of the genetic interaction profile similarity network
To functionally annotate the genetic interaction profile similarity network shown in , we applied the modified SAFE method using default parameters with the following exceptions:

node_distance_metric=’shortpath_weighted_layout’ 
neighborhood_radius=0.15 
enrichment_threshold=0.001
multiple_testing=TRUE

We used SAFE to identify regions of the profile similarity network enriched for genes that localize to the same subcellular compartment as defined by curated cell compartment annotations 

## Protein complex annotation of the genetic interaction profile similarity network
We projected centroids of manually curated CORUM complexes based on the spatial positions of their member genes. Complexes were retained if at least two of their genes were present in the network, and each gene was assigned to only one complex, favoring the largest in cases of overlap. These criteria yielded a nonredundant set of 71 complexes. Centroids were computed from the Euclidean coordinates of genes in the embedded network layout, with minor jitter added to prevent visual overlap. Complexes were visualized and colored according to biological process as shown in . A list of complexes visualized on the profile similarity network is provided ( ).

## Using the HAP1 interaction profile similarity network to annotate function
To demonstrate the utility of the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity to functionally annotate genes and datasets, we applied SAFE or standard enrichment analysis to identify regions of the genetic interaction profile similarity network that were specifically enriched for genes sets derived from the datasets described below.

## Annotating individual query gene genetic interaction profiles
For a given query gene, we applied the standard genetic interaction confidence threshold (|qGI| > 0.3, FDR < 0.1) to generate a binarized profile of negative and positive genetic interactions for a given query gene. We then used the modified version of SAFE (Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010), described above, to identify regions of the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network that were enriched for genes that showed negative or positive interactions with the query gene of interest. The modified SAFE method was applied using default settings with the following exceptions:

node_distance_metric=’shortpath_weighted_layout’
neighborhood_radius=0.05 
enrichment_threshold=0.001 
multiple_testing=TRUE

This method was applied to identify regions of the genetic interaction profile similarity network that were enriched for negative and positive interactions identified with HAP1 query mutant cell lines carrying LOF mutations in either C1orf112 as shown in or VPS52 as shown in .

## Annotating chemical-genetic interaction profiles
A chemical-genetic interaction refers to a mutant strain that exhibits sensitivity or resistance to a particular bioactive compound and the set of mutants that show differential compound sensitivity generates a chemical-genetic interaction profile reflecting the compound mode-of-action. We performed genome-wide chemical-genetic interaction screens to identify genes that showed differential sensitivity to different bioactive compounds ( ). Chemical-genetic interaction screens were performed as previously described. Briefly, HAP1 cells were grown in suspension format in 100–150mL IMDM medium supplemented with 1:700 dilution of anticlumping reagent (ThermoFisher, Cat# 0010057DG) in Erlenmeyer flasks and maintained in a shaking incubator (150 rpm, 37°C, 5% CO2). At each timepoint, cells were collected by centrifugation and trypsinized with TrypLE.
One hundred million wild-type HAP1 cells stably expressing Cas9, were transduced with the lentiviral TKOv3 library at a low MOI (~0.3), such that each guide is represented in 200–300 cells. 24 hours post infection; cells were selected for viral integration with 1μg/mL puromycin for 48 hours. Cells were then harvested and pooled and 30–50 million cells were collected for subsequent gDNA extraction and calculation of library representation at the initial timepoint, T0. At this stage, the pooled cells were divided into three technical replicates, each consisting of 15 million cells to maintain 200-fold library coverage. Selection screens were performed by subculturing cells after four days (T4), at which point each technical replicate was divided into treatment arms, including an untreated one (DMSO, vehicle control), and sub-cultured every three to four days for up to 15 days (~15 doublings). Compounds were added at predetermined concentrations with ABD957 used at 10uM, resulting in LD30 and NGI-1 was used at 9.5–15uM with an average LD65.
Genomic DNA from pelleted cells at the initial timepoint, T0 and the endpoint, T14 were isolated using the QIAamp Blood Maxi Kit (Qiagen) and DNA concentrations were determined using the Qubit dsDNA Broad Range Assay kit (Invitrogen). To prepare sequencing libraries, 50μg of genomic DNA was processed using a two-step nested PCR approach, to amplify the sgRNA and append Illumina TruSeq adapters with i5 and i7 indices. The barcoded libraries were then purified with the QIAquick PCR Purification and Gel Extraction kits (both from Qiagen). The resulting samples were then sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq2500, using single-read sequencing. Quantitative chemical-genetic interactions were measured used a modified version of the qGI scoring method described above and elsewhere. Chemical genetic interactions for NGI-1 and ABD957 are provided in and shown in for NGI-1 and in for ABD957.
We applied a standard genetic interaction confidence threshold (|qGI| > 0.3, FDR < 0.1) to generate a binarized profile of negative and positive chemical-genetic interactions associated with the bioactive compound, NGI-1. We then used the modified version of SAFE (Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010), described above, to identify regions of the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network that were enriched for genes that showed negative or positive chemical-genetic interactions with the NGI-1, as shown in . The modified SAFE method was applied using the parameters described above (see section ).

## Annotating OMIM disease genes
The OMIM disease set was downloaded from OMIM: https://omim.org/ in July 2021 and filtered to comprise a set of 208 diseases with at least 4 annotated genes. A hypergeometric test was conducted to assess which of the 17 biological process-enriched domains on the genetic interaction profile similarity network ( ) were enriched for a particular disease gene set, assuming the background gene set of all genes present on the profile similarity network. Results pertaining to this analysis are shown in .

## Annotating GWAS phenotype-associated genes
The genome-wide association study (GWAS) trait set was downloaded from the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gwas/ in July 2021. This data was filtered to include a subset of 194 traits with at least 60 associated variants and linked genes that passed a GWAS significance threshold of P < 5×10−7. A hypergeometric test was conducted to assess which (if any) of the 17 biological process-enriched domains on the genetic interaction profile similarity network ( ) were enriched for genes associated with a particular trait, assuming the background gene set of all genes present on the profile similarity network. Results pertaining to this analysis are shown in .

## Genetic interaction degree and network density analysis

## Genetic interaction network hub genes
We defined library genes with a positive genetic interaction degree equal to or higher than the 95th percentile as “positive genetic interaction hub” genes. Similarly, genes were defined as “negative genetic interaction hub” genes if their negative GI degree was equal to or greater than the 95th percentile. Positive and negative GI degrees associated with all library genes are provided in . Reactome pathway enrichment analysis was performed on the hub gene sets against the universe of all library genes, restricting the set of pathways tested to those with more than 10 total genes amongst the library gene universe and less than 300 member genes. The P-values were adjusted with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction and were filtered using an FDR < 0.2 threshold. The enrichment results are provided in . Analysis of genetic interaction network hub genes are shown in and .

## Correlation analysis of genetic interaction degree
We assessed the correlation of the number of negative and positive genetic interactions associated with each library gene derived from the nonredundant dataset with several different physiological, evolutionary and functional gene features. Gene features are described in and include binary-, continuous-, and discrete-valued features. We used Wilcoxon rank-sum tests to determine if binary gene features partitioned genes into two groups such that one group had an average degree that was significantly higher or lower than the other group. Genes for which the value of the binary feature was unknown were excluded from the feature’s test. For continuous- and discrete-valued gene features, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) between genetic interaction degrees of genes and each feature. We considered the degree of genes targeted by the TKOv3 library, by counting the number of interacting query genes, meeting the standard confidence threshold (|qGI| > 0.3, FDR < 0.1) derived from the nonredundant dataset. The correlations for library genes are provided in and shown in , , and .

## Analysis of high- vs. low-genetic interaction degree essential genes
To understand properties associated with essential genes that exhibited high vs. low genetic interaction degree in our screens, we tested for differences between these two groups in terms of the same physiological, evolutionary and functional gene properties described above (see Section )( ). First, we formed a group of “high-density” essential genes (among the set of all library genes) by identifying the top 20% of HAP1 essential genes in terms of total genetic interaction degree. We formed a group of “low-density” essential genes by identifying the bottom 50% of HAP1 essential genes in terms of total genetic interaction degree. The continuous-valued and discrete-valued features listed in were then used to test for differences between these two groups with a Wilcoxon rank-sum test. For each feature, the mean of the high-density group and the low-density group was computed, and the log2 ratio of these means was plotted in , with and without the mitochondrial gene set (see ).

## Analysis of single mutant fitness and genetic interaction degree with the 3D genome
We explored essential and non-essential genes causing a negative impact on fitness in the context of genome topology by comparing both gene sets to genes found among 2,584 common significant trans-contacts (q < 0.05, ≥ 10 Hi-C datasets), that were identified by Signature in 62 human Hi-C datasets. We converted all genes to Ensembl Gene IDs using GENCODE before comparisons. Binomial testing was used to assess the overlap and test for significance in comparison to the rest of genome. The first column of represents a 1 Mb bin of the trans-contacts, and the second and third columns show the number of nonessential genes with fitness defects or essential genes identified in the given bin and their gene ID, respectively.
The topological map was generated from 62 near-diploid Hi-C datasets, methodological details can be found in. Using the same topological map as base, we visualized genetic interactions that overlap with any of the 40,282 significant trans-contacts (q < 0.05, across 62 Hi-C datasets) in grey edges. We next compared genetic interactions to 2,584 common significant trans-contacts, and coloured overlapping trans-contacts based on the qGI_score (calculated as the conservative effect (closer to zero) for the reciprocal interactions). includes the genetic interactions that were also identified as significant trans-contacts by Signature. The first two columns represent the bin IDs in the format [chromosome ID]_[start of the bin in Mb]. The third column shows the qGI_score. The last column indicates whether the GI contact is found in the common significant trans-contacts. To assess the overlap of positive and negative genetic interactions with 53 anchor loci in comparison with the rest of the genome, we used Mann-Whitney testing. The results of this analysis are shown in .

## Genetic interactions involving paralogs

## Genetic interactions within pairs of paralog genes
A list of paralog gene pairs was obtained from the Ensembl database. In addition, a list of paralog genes classified as “Ohnolog” duplicated gene pairs was also obtained. To evaluate the density of positive and negative genetic interactions observed between paralogs as a function of sequence identity, three subsets of Ensembl paralog pairs were selected based on the HAP1 expression level of each gene in a pair ( ): [1] Paralog pairs in which both genes had expression scores of log2 (TPM+1) > 1, [2] Paralog pairs where exactly one gene met this expression criteria, and [3] Paralog pairs where neither gene met the expression criteria. Paralogs were further binned based on their sequence identity to each other; for each sequence ID bin, the sets were filtered to include only pairs having a sequence identity greater than the bin and those pairs screened in our study for a genetic interaction. Finally, the percentage of positive and negative genetic interactions identified at a standard threshold (|qGI| > 0.3 and FDR < 10%) within the filtered set were calculated per bin for all three described subsets. To calculate the density of negative genetic interactions as a function of paralog family size, a subset of paralog pairs was selected for analysis by requiring expression in HAP1 [(log2 (TPM+1) > 1] for both paralogs and requiring that the paralogs’ sequence identity was greater than the indicated cut-off (20%, 50% or Ohnolog set). The family size of each paralog pair was then recalculated with respect to only paralogs that satisfied the expression and sequence identity criteria. Finally, the density of negative genetic interactions (determined by standard cut-off of qGI < −0.3 and FDR < 10%) within the filtered set was calculated among the set of pairs screened in our study and reported for each family size bin. The results of this analysis are shown in , , and .

## Overall genetic interaction density of paralog genes
To calculate the overall density of negative and positive genetic interaction for paralog library genes with all query genes as a function of paralog family size, a subset of paralog pairs was selected for analysis by requiring expression in HAP1 [log2 (TPM +1) > 1] for both paralogs and requiring that the paralogs’ sequence identity was greater than the indicated cut-off (20%, 50% or Ohnolog set). The family size of each paralog pair was then recalculated with respect to only paralogs that satisfied the expression and sequence identity criteria. Finally, the density of library paralog gene negative and positive genetic interactions (|qGI| > 0.3 and FDR < 0.1) with all possible query genes tested within the filtered set was calculated and reported for each family size bin. We also measured the negative and positive interaction density associated with duplicated query genes. Negative and positive interaction density was measured for query genes paralogs that shared greater than 20% sequence identity as well as Ohnolog genes that were screened as a query in this study. Query gene genetic interaction density reflects the number of negative or positive genetic interactions identified at a standard confidence threshold (|qGI| > 0.3, FDR < 0.1) per query gene divided by the total number of tested gene pairs involving the corresponding query gene. Paralog query gene interaction density was compared to negative and positive interaction density associated with non-duplicated query genes screened in this study. Results corresponding to this analysis are shown in and .

## Paralog degree asymmetry analysis
We compared the negative genetic interaction degree associated with each gene of a paralog pair (i.e. the number of negative genetic interactions each paralog exhibited with all tested query genes). Gene pairs from the Ensembl paralog pair set were selected for this analysis where both genes were represented as library gene in the non-redundant genetic interaction dataset ( ), both satisfied a HAP1 expression cutoff of log2 (TPM+1) > 1, and they represented paralog pair with sequence identity greater than 20% or 50%. Only paralog pairs with a negative degree (standard cut-offs of |qGI| > 0.3 and FDR < 10%) of greater than 4 were considered in this analysis. For each pair of library gene paralogs, we measured a negative interaction degree ratio statistic, computed by dividing the negative interaction degree associated with the paralog showing the higher interaction degree by the interaction degree of the sister paralog with fewer negative interactions. Ratios that were greater than 30 were assigned a value of 30. We used simulations to establish a null distribution for this ratio statistic that assumed genetic interactions would accumulate with equal probability for each gene within a paralog pair (i.e. symmetric negative interaction degree). Statistics for random paralog pairs under this null model were created by randomly generating negative interaction degrees for each gene pair from a binomial distribution with probability of 0.5 and the maximum limit of total observed degree for each real paralog pair. One thousand different random scenarios were generated, with ratio statistics measured for all random paralog pairs in each scenario. An empirical P-value was generated using the R ‘qvalue’ package (empPvals function) by comparing the observed average degree ratio and the average degree ratios from 1000 random models. The same analysis was repeated using the Ohnolog paralog list. Results from this analysis are shown in .

## Overlap of genetic interactions with other genomic datasets
We characterized the functional relationships between pairs of genes connected by negative or positive genetic interactions by evaluating their overlap with other types of molecular and functional interactions, described below. The results of this analysis are shown in .

## Protein-protein interactions
Protein-Protein interactions (PPI) were collected from three sources and combined to generate a unified PPI standard that was compared to the HAP1 genetic interaction dataset. These included HuRI, BioPlex, and huMAP. All possible pairs of proteins within this set that did not demonstrate a PPI in any of the datasets were assumed to be non-interacting for the purposes of this analysis.

## Gene Ontology (GO) biological process co-annotated gene pairs
GO term annotations were downloaded in June of 2021 and a functional standard for co-annotation to GO Biological Process (GO BP) terms was built using the FLEX software. Briefly, a set of GO BP terms was curated to include only those terms that contained between 2 and 300 genes. Terms of this size were considered to have enough specificity to be functionally informative. Two genes were considered functionally related if they were co-annotated to one or more of these GO BP terms. Two genes were considered unrelated if both genes were annotated to at least one GO term but the lowest common ancestor to which both genes were annotated was not part of the functionally specific set of GO bioprocess terms defined above. All other gene pairs (e.g., those with one or both unannotated genes), were ignored for the purposes of co-annotation analysis.

## Co-expressed gene pairs
We measured gene co-expression using the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) dataset. To generate a set of co-expressed gene pairs, expression profile similarities were calculated using Pearson correlation (PCC) for all possible gene pairs. The top 0.1% of all the gene pairs (according to PCC values) was considered as co-expressed and the rest were not considered to be co-expressed.

## Co-localized protein pairs
Gene product pairs were considered co-localized if they shared one or more cellular compartment annotation(s) based on a standard we derived from the COMPARTMENTS Subcellular localization database retrieved in July 2021. Specifically, we applied a high-confidence cutoff of > 4.5/5 and focused on the following subset of 9 terms: Nucleus, Nucleolus, Golgi apparatus, Mitochondrion, Peroxisome, Endoplasmic reticulum, Lysosome, Endosome, Cytoskeleton & Plasma membrane.

## Co-complex annotated protein pairs
Co-complex pairs were derived from the CORUM protein complex standard (release 3.0). Any pair of genes whose products were members of the same complex was treated as a positive example while any gene pair for which each of the gene products were annotated to at least one complex, but not the same complex, was treated as a negative example.

## Co-pathway annotated gene pairs
Co-pathway pairs were derived from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB). Any pair of genes whose products were members of the same MSigDB pathway was treated as a positive example while any gene pair for which each of the gene products were annotated to at least one pathway, but not the same pathway, was treated as a negative example.

## Precision-recall analysis
All precision-recall analyses were performed using the FLEX R package along with the corresponding GO BP co-annotation (GO BP) or CORUM co-complex functional standards, described above. Results of precision-recall analyses are shown in , , , and .

## Genetic interactions within and between protein complexes

## Genetic interaction enrichment within and between protein complexes
We performed tests for enrichment of genetic interactions that occur within and between protein complexes annotated to the CORUM protein complex database. 
Within-complex enrichment analysis tests if gene pairs connecting genes that encode members of the same protein complex are enriched for negative and/or positive genetic interactions.
Between-complex enrichment analysis tests if gene pairs encoding members of two different complexes (i.e. interaction between a gene annotated to complex 1 and a second gene annotated to complex 2) are enriched for negative and or positive genetic interactions.
For these analyses, we considered only those CORUM protein complex where at least three genes were represented in our library gene set and at least one gene was represented in the query gene set. A standard threshold (|qGI| > 0.3 and FDR < 0.1) was applied to identify significant negative and positive genetic interactions. When computing enrichment statistics, the library gene universe was reduced to only those genes that overlap with the CORUM complex standard genes, and all query genes in the non-redundant genetic interaction dataset ( and ) were included in the analysis. Enrichments were calculated independently for positive, negative and total interactions (combined positive and negative) genetic interactions. P-values were derived from one-tailed hypergeometric tests, focusing on increased genetic interaction density relative to the background genetic interaction density. P-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method applied to the within-complex and between-complex sets separately. After correction, any enrichment driven by a single interaction was marked insignificant by setting the P-value to 1. Genetic interaction enrichment observed within and between CORUM-annotated protein complexes is provided in . Results pertaining to genetic interaction enrichment within and between protein complexes is shown in – and .

## Genetic interaction purity score
The genetic interaction purity score refers to the fraction of positive or negative genetic interactions relative to the total number of observed genetic interactions within the same complex or between a pair of different complexes. , , The genetic interaction purity score was normalized to the range of [−1,1], where −1 indicates that all genetic interactions within a specific complex or between a particular pair of complexes are exclusively negative. A purity score of 1 indicates all genetic interactions observed with a complex or between a pair of complexes are all positive.
The genetic interaction purity score distribution plots, shown in and summarize the genetic interaction purity for protein complexes consisting of more than 5 screened pairs and that are enriched for genetic interactions (FDR < 0.10, hypergeometric test, Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected). To generate a null (background) purity score distribution, a random positive genetic interaction count was generated for each complex from a binomial distribution given the number of total genetic interactions in the complex and the background probability of observing a positive interaction (fraction of positive genetic interactions measured across all complexes). This analysis was completed both within and without the mitochondrial gene set. In , a set of smaller complexes that were subsets of larger complexes were excluded from the analysis results. This reduced complex set was formed based on overlap index scores computed for all pairs of complexes in the CORUM standard. The overlap index between two complexes is the number of shared genes divided by the size of the smaller complex. An overlap-index cut-off of 0.3 was applied here such that no two complexes with an overlap index of ≥ 0.3 were both included in the non-redundant set. To observe the contribution of mitochondria-related complexes to this result, all analyses were repeated after removing a set of complexes for which more than 50% member genes are mitochondrial. Genetic interaction purity scores are provided in . Results pertaining to genetic interaction purity scores within and between protein complexes are shown in – and .

## A genetic interaction profile similarity-derived functional hierarchy

## Constructing a functional hierarchy
As described above ( ), we modified a previously described hierarchical clustering algorithm to the complete genetic interaction dataset to produce a set of uniformly sized gene clusters across layers of the dendrogram ( ) (Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010). The same algorithm was also used to cluster the subset of 3,784 genes derived from the same centroid-corrected, genetic interaction profile similarity network shown in and described above ( ) to build a genetic interaction profile-based hierarchy of gene function ( ). Initial clustering organized these genes into 4 levels of hierarchically organized modules. Gene modules identified in level 4 of the hierarchy represented parent clusters in the hierarchy, which were separated into smaller child clusters in lower hierarchical levels, with level 1 of the hierarchy consisting of the smallest child gene clusters. Genes that did not belong to a functionally enriched cluster identified at level 2 of the hierarchy, were removed from the analysis. Functionally enrichment was defined as level 2 clusters whose gene members were statistically enriched (FDR < 0.1, hypergeometric test, Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected) for one or more GO bioprocess terms. The resultant functional hierarchy consisted of 1,863 genes associated with functionally rich genetic interaction profiles. These genes were organized into 6 large parent clusters at level 4 of the hierarchy, 18 child clusters of level 3 of the hierarchy, 181 level 2 clusters and finally, 593 level 1 clusters ( ). Importantly all 1,863 genes were represented at each level of the functional hierarchy and a set of 98 genes that did not belong to a cluster at each of the 4 hierarchical levels were excluded from this analysis. This was a critical filtering step because it ensured that the same set of genes was examined at all levels of hierarchical study and that any differences observed (e.g. in genetic interaction density) were due to hierarchical structure at different levels and not differing sets of gene involved in the hierarchy at each level. As a result of these procedures: [1] all genes were members of only one cluster at each level of the hierarchy; [2] all clusters were strict subsets of their parent clusters one level above, and [3] each cluster was comprised of the union of its children clusters one level below. In addition, at the fourth layer, we identified one cluster including 292 genes that are associated with mitochondrial functions, which was later excluded for some analyses (where noted in ).
To functionally characterize each level of the hierarchy, we performed enrichment analysis for co-annotated genes within the clusters at each layer of the hierarchy using the CORUM, GO BP, and cellular compartment functional standards. At each layer, we calculated the fraction of gene pairs within each cluster that are co-annotated to the same term in a functional standard relative to the population of all possible gene pairs (i.e. 1,863 choose 2 = 1,734,453) and then performed a hypergeometric test to assess enrichment of genes within the same cluster to be co-annotated to the same functional term. Note that to distinguish functional signals that were specific and unique to each level of the hierarchy, the hypergeometric test was performed using only the additional gene pairs added by each hierarchical layer compared to the preceding layer. Specifically, this includes those gene pairs that are newly co-clustered at a given level of the hierarchy that were not previously co-clustered based on the descendant clusters. These sets of gene pairs are referred to as the “shell” at each level of the hierarchy, and enrichment fold-change and P-values are reported for these sets. This analysis showed that parent clusters at the fourth level of the hierarchy were specifically enriched for distinct subcellular compartments. Smaller level 3 clusters were enriched for more specific but distinct GO bioprocess terms while clusters identified at levels 1 and 2 of the hierarchy were uniquely enriched for distinct biological pathways and protein complexes ( ; ). This analysis was also repeated after excluding 292 mitochondrial genes ( ). Analyses pertaining to the genetic interaction profile-based functional hierarchy are shown in and .

## Measuring interaction density and magnitude at different levels of the functional hierarchy
The functional hierarchy was used to assess the density of genetic interactions at varying degrees of functional relatedness, where relatedness was defined by the hierarchy level described above. For each screened pair of genes, we noted whether it shared a genetic interaction and a level of functional relatedness of that pair, as defined by the most specific level of the hierarchy in which they shared membership to a common cluster. We used this measure for calculating interaction density at different levels of functional relatedness and assigned each pair to the level of their most specific common cluster. This prevented the density estimate at each level from being dominated by the trends observed at lower levels. Density was defined as the number of significant interactions meeting our standard significance threshold (|qGI| > 0.3; FDR < 0.1), divided by the number of screened pairs. Similarly, after binning all pairs of genes by their qGI score magnitude, we measured the fraction of pairs in each bin belonging to each hierarchy level using the most specific level available for each pair. To alleviate the potential bias introduced by mitochondrial genes, we also performed the same measurement excluding 292 mitochondrial genes identified in one of the 6 large clusters at the fourth layer. The results from this analysis are shown in and .

## Genetic interaction enrichment within and between biological processes
We performed tests for enrichment of genetic interactions that occur within and between different biological process-level gene sets. Gene sets representing functionally coherent groups of genes for this analysis were based on the domains described in the section above “ ”. For each domain, we compiled the list of library genes and query genes associated with that domain. For these analyses, we considered only those domains where at least three genes were represented in our library gene set and at least one gene was represented in the query gene set, which resulted in a total of 15 domains ( ). We tested each domain for enrichment of genetic interactions (within-domain analysis), and we also tested each pair of domains for enrichment of genetic interactions (between-domain analysis).
For each within-domain or between-domain gene pair set, the enrichment test was completed as follows. First, a standard threshold (|qGI| > 0.3 and FDR < 0.1) was applied to identify significant negative and positive genetic interactions. When computing enrichment statistics, the library gene universe was reduced to only those genes that overlapped the domains of interest, and the query gene universe was also restricted to only those genes that overlapped the domains of interest. Enrichments were calculated independently for positive, negative and total interactions (combined positive and negative) genetic interactions. P-values were derived from one-tailed hypergeometric tests, focusing on increased genetic interaction density relative to the background genetic interaction density. P-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method applied to the within-domain and between-domain sets separately. After correction, any enrichment driven by a single interaction was marked insignificant by setting the p-value to 1. Genetic interaction enrichment observed within and between these bioprocess-level domains is provided in , and the related figure is plotted in .

## Genetic Suppression Analysis

## Suppression score
To define the subset of positive genetic interactions that may represent instances of genetic suppression, we formulated a suppression score for all positive interactions that satisfied the standard genetic interaction significance threshold (qGI > 0.3, FDR < 0.1).

Sij=DMFij−SMFminSMFmin,ifSMFmin<(−0.9)&SMFmin<DMFij

Sij=0,otherwise

SMFmin=minimumLi,Qj

DMFij=Li+Qj+qGIij

Where is the library gene single mutant fitness (in log2 fold-change) and is the query gene single mutant fitness (in log2 fold-change). Suppression scores for all positive interacting gene pairs are provided in . Results related to genetic suppression analysis are shown in and .

## Functional enrichment analysis of genetic suppression interactions
To assess if genetic suppression gene pairs were more functionally related compared to gene pairs connected by positive genetic interactions in general, positive genetic interactions were sorted based suppression scores. FLEX was then used to compute the precision of identifying gene pairs annotated to the same GO bioprocess term based on suppression scores at two different thresholds (suppression score > 0.5 and > 0.8) and for all positive genetic interactions (qGI > 0.3, FDR <0.1 and suppression score ≥ 0). Fold-enrichment for co-annotated gene pairs was calculated by dividing precision determined at the suppression score thresholds described above by the background precision (size of positive class divided by total number of gene pairs). The P-values comparing each set relative to background precision were determined by Fisher-exact tests. This analysis was also repeated after excluding mitochondrial genes. These results of this analysis are shown in .

## HAP1 essential gene suppression interactions
We examined if HAP1 essential genes involved in genetic suppression interactions were more likely to be considered core or context-dependent essential genes based on the DepMap 20Q2 dataset (DepMap: depmap.org/portal). Positive interactions with a suppression score greater than 0.5 were defined as genetic suppression interactions. HAP1 essential genes were grouped into the following categories: [1] all HAP1 essential genes, [2] HAP1 essential genes involved in at least one suppression interaction, [3] HAP1 essential genes with positive genetic interactions, and [4] HAP1 essential genes with no suppression interactions. We then determined the percentage of cancer cell lines in the DepMap 20Q2 dataset that also depended on HAP1 essential genes from each category for viability. Cancer cell line essential genes were defined as genes that met a CERES score threshold of < −1, which corresponds to the median score of all essential genes in the DepMap data. Statistical significance was determined by Wilcoxon rank-sum tests between each pair of HAP1 essential gene groups. The same analysis was repeated excluding the mitochondria gene set. The results of this analysis are shown in and .

## Genetic interaction conservation
The following methods were used to evaluate conservation of genetic interactions between human HAP1 cells and the budding yeast, S. cerevisiae. For gene pairs screened more than once, we considered a genetic interaction if at least half of the screened pairs resulted in a significant genetic interaction score (|qGI| > 0.3, FDR < 0.1).

## Conservation of genetic interaction density between biological processes
We classified human and S. cerevisiae genes into 15 distinct bioprocess functional groups ( ). For each pair of bioprocess groups, we calculated the negative and positive genetic interaction density between the corresponding gene sets in the HAP1 genetic network described in this study and the S. cerevisiae genetic interaction network. Genes annotated to more than one bioprocess group were excluded from the analysis, and we only considered pairs of bioprocesses for which at least 100 gene pairs were tested for genetic interactions. Finally, we calculated the Pearson’s correlation coefficient between the interaction density obtained in the HAP1 and S. cerevisiae genetic networks. The results of this analysis are provided in and shown in and .

## Conservation of genetic interactions between human-yeast ortholog gene pairs
We used DIOPT (DIOPT: https://fgr.hms.harvard.edu/diopt) to retrieve orthology mappings between human and S. cerevisiae genes and selected genes with 1:1 orthologs between both species or gene with more than one ortholog in human (i.e. N:1 orthology relationships, such that 1 gene in S. cerevisiae has N orthologs in human). Of all the gene pairs tested in HAP1 cells, 3.7% involved such selected genes. Next, we selected the gene pairs that were tested for genetic interactions in both HAP1 cells and S. cerevisiae and counted the number of genetic interactions identified only in HAP1 cells (i.e. HAP1-specific genetic interactions) and in both species (i.e. conserved genetic interactions). The results of this analysis are provided in and shown in .

## Conservation of genetic interaction profile similarity human-yeast orthologs
We measured the genetic interaction profile similarity for human gene pairs as explained above (see section, ). Genetic interaction profile similarity values for S. cerevisiae gene pairs were downloaded from thecellmap.org. , For yeast gene pairs associated with multiple temperature-sensitive mutant alleles, the correlation values were averaged. We only considered gene pairs involving genes with a 1:1 or N:1 human to S. cerevisiae orthology relationship for which profile similarity data was available in both species. Next, we retrieved gene pairs within the top 5% of HAP1 profile similarity and determined the fraction of those pairs whose orthologs were within the top 5% similarity values in the S. cerevisiae genetic interaction profile similarity network. We calculated the same fraction for the remaining 95% of gene pairs in the HAP1 profile similarity network. Statistical significance was calculated using Fisher’s exact test. The results of this analysis are show in and .

## Genetic interaction enrichment analysis among yeast-human conserved genes
We first selected gene pairs tested for genetic interactions in HAP1 cells whose ortholog pairs (with 1:1 or N:1 orthology relationships, see above) were also tested in S. cerevisiae. For the sets of gene pairs with and without a genetic interaction in HAP1 cells, we calculated the fraction that showed a corresponding genetic interaction in S. cerevisiae. We derived the fold enrichment in the conservation of genetic interactions in yeast by calculating the ratio between both fractions and calculated the statistical significance using Fisher’s exact test.
To calculate the conservation of genetic interaction in HAP1 cells, we used the same approach but starting from gene pair sets with and without a genetic interaction in S. cerevisiae and calculated the fraction of pairs which had a genetic interaction in HAP1 cells. We repeated the same calculations using: [1] 100 randomized genetic interaction networks respecting the network topology and compared the obtained fold enrichments to the result in the real genetic interaction network to obtain an empirical P-value; [2] Process-specific genetic interaction networks involving only pairs with at least a gene annotated to the corresponding biological process.
We followed the same approach to examine the conservation between hPTAR1 and yECM9 genetic interactions but restricted the gene pairs in HAP1 cells to those involving PTAR1, and the gene pairs in S. cerevisiae to those involving ECM9. ECM9 genetic interactions were identified using SGA analysis described in the next section. Only reproducible ECM9 genetic interactions identified in independent biological replicate screens were considered in this analysis. The results of these analyses are provided in shown in – and .

## Follow-up Experiments

## Hc3716 cell proliferation assay
PELO KO hepatocytes were generated by transduction of Hc3716 cells with lentiCRISPR-v2(Puro)-based viral particles carrying the sgRNA sequence GGCTTACCACACACCATCGAGC. After selection with 2.5 ug/ml puromycin, clonal KO lines were isolated by limiting dilution and confirmed by western blotting (PELO antibody, Proteintech 105821–1-AP). To validate the PELO-SKIC2 negative interaction in targeted proliferation assays in Hc3716 cells, 30,000 WT or PELO KO cells were seeded per well in a 24 well plate and infected with lentiCRISPR-v2(Neo)-based lentiviral particles in the presence of 5 ul/ml polybrene. SKIC2 was targeted with a 1:1:1 mixture of viral particles each carrying one of 3 gRNAs (GAGTGCTCCACACCATGCAG, GTAACCCAGTATCTGGCCTG, AACAGATCTGAACACACGGG); control wells received viral particles lacking sgRNA. After 7 days of selection with 8 ug/ml G418, viability was assessed by MTT assay. Statistical analysis was performed using a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test for multiple comparisons.

## mTOR activity assays
For , wild-type and query mutant cell lines (ANGPTL4, EMC6, FANCA, GSK3A, SLX1, C1orf112, PDCD5, TAPT1, VPS52) were cultured in IMDM (Gibco), 10% FBS (Gibco) and 1X penicillin and streptomycin (Gibco) at 37°C with 5% CO2. For immunoblots, 250k cells seeded in 12-well plates were lysed at 70–80% confluency directly in well using RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.0), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS with 1X Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher)]. 10 μg total protein was mixed with 6X loading buffer [375 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.4), 50% Glycerol, 6% SDS, 30% 2-Mercaptoethanol, 0.04% Bromophenol blue], and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were run on pre-cast gels (Bio-rad) and transferred to Nitrocellulose membranes using iBlot 2 Gel Transfer Device (Thermo Fisher). Membranes were blocked in 5% BSA/TBS-T and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody against phospho-S6 Ribosomal Protein Ser240/244 (CST, #2215), S6 Ribosomal Protein (CST, #2317), phospho-Akt Ser473 (CST, #4060), and Akt (CST, #2920). Secondary antibody incubation was done for 1 hour at room temperature in dark using donkey anti-mouse IRDye® 680RD (Li-Cor, 926–68072) and donkey anti-rabbit IRDye® 800CW (Li-Cor, 926–32213). Membranes were visualized with Li-Cor Odyssey Classic instrument and ImageStudio was used for signal quantification. GraphPad Prism v.10 was used for statistical analyses.
For and , HAP1 wild-type and query mutant cell lines (GSK3A, CDKN2B, ANGPTL4) were seeded at a density of 500,000 cells/well in a 6-well plate and cultured for 24 hours. The following day, cells were treated with 250 nM rapamycin (Selleckchem, Cat.#S1039) for 24 hours. On day 2, cells were subjected to amino acid starvation for 50 min using amino acid-free DMEM (Wisent, Cat.#319–004-CL), followed by amino acid refeeding for 10 min. Cells were then washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed on ice using RIPA lysis and extraction buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# 89901) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.#23227). Protein concentrations were quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.#23227). Cell lysates were mixed with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, Cat.# NP0007) and denatured at 95°C for 5 min. Proteins were separated using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris Mini Protein Gels (Invitrogen, Cat.#NP0323BOX) and transferred for immunoblotting. Primary and secondary antibodies and dilutions were as follows: Akt(pan)(40D4) mouse mAb at 1:1000 (Cell Signaling, Cat.#2920; RRID: AB_1147620); phospho-Akt1(Ser473)(D7F10) XP rabbit mAb at 1:1000 (Cell Signaling, Cat.#9018; RRID: AB2629283); p70 S6 kinase (49D7) rabbit mAb at 1:1000 (Cell Signaling, Cat.# 2708; RRID: AB_390722); phospho-p70 S6 kinase (Thr389) (108D2) rabbit mAb at 1:1000 (Cell Signaling, Cat.#9234, RRID: AB_2269803); b-actin (8H10D10) mouse mAb at 1:10,000 (Cell Signaling, Cat.#3700; RRID:AB_2242334); goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) cross-adsorbed secondary Ab, HRP (Invitrogen, Cat.#A16072; RRID: AB_2534745); and goat anti-rabbit (H+L)-HRP conjugate (Bio-Rad, Cat.#170–6515; RRID: AB_11125142). Chemiluminescence was detected using the SuperSignal West Pico PLUS Chemiluminescence Substrate (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.#34580) and images were acquired using the iBright FL1500 Imaging System (Invitrogen) in chemiluminescent mode.

## yECM9/hPTAR1 functional studies
The following sections describe methods to validate ECM9 as a yeast prenyltransferase important for prenylation and activation of Ykt6. The results from these experiments are shown in , , , and .

## Yeast strains
All strains used for SGA, yeast two hybrid analysis and complementation assays were derivatives of BY4741 or Y7092, the construction of which was described previously. A temperature-sensitive allele of ECM9, TSQ3052 (MATa ecm9–5002::natMX can1Δ::STE2pr-Sp_his5; lyp1Δ; his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 ura3Δ0 LYS2) was used as a query mutant for SGA analysis. Yeast complementation analysis was performed using Y16258 (MAT
a/a ECM9/ecm9Δ::natMX CAN1/can1Δ::STE2pr-Sp_his5; LYP1/lyp1Δ; HIS3/his3Δ1 LEU2/leu2Δ0 URA3/ura3Δ0) or Y15767 (MATa ecm9Δ::natMX abh1Δ::URA3 can1Δ::STE2pr-Sp_his5; lyp1Δ; his3Δ1 leu2Δ0 ura3Δ0 LYS2) as indicated below.

## Yeast Two Hybrid Analysis
Genes encoding the alpha and beta subunits of farnesyltransferase, and geranylgeranyl transferase type I-III were amplified by PCR from S. cerevisiae genomic DNA, using sequence specific primers fused to common sequences used for homologous recombination cloning. Genes were cloned into DNA binding domain- and activation domain-fusion plasmids and two hybrid analysis was performed as described elsewhere. 

## Synthetic Genetic Array (SGA) analysis to map genetic interactions for yeast ECM9
We constructed a hypomorphic, temperature-sensitive (TS) mutant of the yeast essential gene, ECM9 (TSQ3052), in the SGA query strain background and screened it for genetic interactions against ordered arrays of 3,827 nonessential yeast deletion mutants and 786 TS alleles representing 560 yeast essential genes, as previously described. , All SGA selection steps were conducted at permissive temperature (22°C) except for the final selection of haploid double mutants, which were incubated at a semi-permissive temperature (26°C) prior to imaging. Genetic interactions were identified and measured using the quantitative SGA genetic interaction score, as described elsewhere. , 
ECM9 genetic interactions are provided in .

## PTAR1-RABGGTB complementation assay
An ECM9 heterozygous deletion strain (Y16258) harboring a low-copy vector control plasmid with a URA3 selection marker (plasmid P13744) or the same plasmid expressing human PTAR1 and RABGGTB (plasmid P13719) genes from the galactose-inducible GAL1 promoter were sporulated in liquid sporulation medium for 1 week, as described elsewhere. Asci were digested with Zymolyase and tetrads were dissected onto YEPD and YEPGalactose and grown 4 days at 30°C. Plates were photographed and replica plated onto selective YEPD or YEPGalactose medium supplemented with neurothrecin as well as synthetic defined medium lacking uracil to follow the segregation patterns of knockout alleles relative to the fitness phenotype, as described elsewhere. 

## ABHD16A and ABHD17B complementation assay
Overnight cultures of an ecm9Δabh1Δ double deletion mutant (Y15767) harboring a low-copy vector control plasmid with a URA3 selection marker or the same plasmid expressing human ABHD16A (plasmid P13708), human ABHD17B (plasmid P13712) or yeast ABH1 (P13713) genes from the galactose-inducible GAL1 promoter, were serially diluted and spotted onto selective agar media lacking uracil supplemented with 2% glucose or 2% galactose as indicated. Strains were grown for 2 days at 30°C and imaged.

## Palmitoylation Detection by mPEG replacement chemistry
Denatured, whole-cell yeast protein extracts were subjected to three chemical steps to replace thioester-linked palmitoyl-modifications with the methoxypolyethylene glycol maleimide (mPEG) (Sigma-Aldrich 712469): [1] blockade of free thiols with N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), [2] treatment with neutral pH hydroxylamine to release thioester-linker modifications (e.g. palmitoylation), restoring thus the cysteinyl thiol and [3] modifying the newly exposed thiols with the 10 kDa thiol-reactive mPEG reagent, resulting in a size-shift for proteins having acylated cysteines. In practice, Steps 2 and 3 were combined, i.e. hydroxylamine treatment and mPEG reaction were done concurrently. The treated extracts were subjected to Tricine SDS-PAGE and then Western blotting, using a rabbit polyclonal anti-Ykt6 antiserum and aHRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody. Final visualization was via enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) and x-ray film exposure.
The early steps of the acyl-mPEG exchange protocol, closely track the previously described small-scale acyl-biotinyl exchange (ABE) protocol. 1 × 108 cells were harvested by centrifugation from log-phase yeast cultures growing in YPD media (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% glucose) with the cell pellet resuspended into ice-cold 200 ul Lysis Buffer (LB: 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris/Cl, 5 mM EDTA pH 7.4), supplemented with 10 mM NEM (Sigma) and 2xPI (1xPI: 1mM PMSF, and 0.25 mg/ml each of antipain, leupeptin, pepstatin, and chymostatin). A 200 ul volume of glass beads (Sigma) was added and lysis was effected with five 45 sec intervals of vigorous vortex mixing, interspersed with 2 min rest periods on ice. The lysate was decanted away and combined with a 300 ul LB/10 mM NEM/1xPI quick wash of the beads. To solubilize cellular membranes, Triton X-100 (Anatrace) was added to 1.7% and the lysates were subjected to gentle mixing at 4°C. Protein from a 150 μl portion of the lysate was collected by chloroform-methanol (CM) precipitation. The scaled-down version of the CM precipitation used here involves 8-fold reduced volumes relative to the previously detailed CM precipitation, allowing the use of 1.5 ml screw-cap centrifuge tubes and a microfuge. The resulting protein pellet was solubilized with 30 ul SDS Buffer (SB: 4% SDS, 50 mM Tris/Cl, 5 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) with 10 mM NEM and incubated at 37°C for 10 min to denature protein. The sample was then diluted with 120 ul LB supplemented with 1 mM NEM, 0.2% Triton X-100, and 1xPI and further incubated for 60 min at 4°C. Three sequential CM precipitations were then used to fully remove residual NEM. After the first two precipitations, protein pellets were dissolved into 30 ul SB and then diluted with 120 ul LB with 0.2% Triton X-100. Following the third CM precipitation, protein pellets were dissolved in 70 ul SB, which was used for the two experimental conditions, + and −mPEG. For the +mPEG condition, a 15 ul of the sample was diluted into 60 ul 0.8 M hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich 467804), 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM mPEG, 0.2% Triton X-100, 1xPI. For the −mPEG control condition, 15 ul was diluted into 60 ul 0.8 M hydroxylamine, 150 mM NaCl, 0.2% Triton X-100, 1xPI. Samples were incubated at room temperature with gentle rotation for 1 hour. Finally, 75 ul LB was added and samples were subjected to a final CM precipitation with the protein pellet being dissolved into sample buffer for gel loading.

## HAP1 chemical-genetic interaction profiling of the small molecule, ABD957
We performed a genome-wide chemical-genetic interaction screens with ABD957, a small molecule inhibitor of the ABHD17 subset of depalmitoylases. Chemical-genetic interaction screens were performed as described above (see section annotating functions using the HAP1 interaction profile similarity network) and elsewhere. ABD957 negative and positive chemical-genetic interactions were scored as previously described. 

## Analysis of genetic interactions underlying cancer gene dependencies

## Expression dependency (ED) score analysis
For each unique gene pair tested in the HAP1 nonredundant genetic interaction dataset ( ), we extracted CRISPR gene effect fitness scores (Chronos score, DepMap 22Q4) and gene expression [log2(TPM+1)] derived from a panel of cancer cell lines examined in the DepMap 22Q4 dataset (DepMap: depmap.org/portal). We then measured the correlation (PCC) between cancer cell line fitness scores associated with one gene and expression of the second gene across the same panel of cancer cell lines. In doing so, we generated two PCC and P-values using scipy.stats.pearsonr for each pair of genes tested based on Gene A fitness-Gene B expression and Gene A expression-Gene B fitness. Gene pairs were filtered based on correlation and statistical thresholds (|PCC|>0.1 and P-value < 0.01)( ). Reciprocal gene pairs that satisfied these thresholds but exhibited PCC values of opposite signs were also removed. We referred to the correlation between gene pair fitness and expression measured across a panel of cancer cell lines as a gene pair Expression Dependency (ED) score.

## Comparing expression dependency (ED) and quantitative genetic interaction (qGI) scores
We performed an overlap analysis to compare gene pairs associated with a significant negative or positive ED score, described above, to the set of 41,773 HAP1 gene pairs that showed a positive genetic interaction and 47,052 gene pairs that exhibited a negative genetic interaction at the standard confidence threshold (|qGI| > 0.3, FDR < 0.1). A small subset of HAP1 query genes (GFPT1, CDKN2B, ITGAV, SGF29, TAPT1, VPS52, SP1, BCL2, NDUFA2) each accounted for a disproportionate fraction (~2%) of gene pairs that exhibited significant qGI and ED scores and gene pairs involving this subset of query genes were excluded from this analysis. Among all tested gene pairs (~4 million) in the HAP1 non-redundant genetic interaction dataset ( ), we identified a total of 246,840 gene pairs with significant positive ED score and 218,484 gene pairs with a significant negative ED score ( ).
A hypergeometric test was used to evaluate the significance of overlap for all possible ED and qGI score combinations (positive ED-negative qGI, positive ED-positive qGI, negative ED-positive qGI, negative ED-negative qGI). In addition, functional co-annotation enrichment analysis was performed using GO biological process, co-complex, and PPI functional standards, and paralog gene lists, described above. The statistical test universe included the set of gene pairs tested for genetic interactions and represented in each functional standard. ED scores for all tested gene pairs are provided in and results pertaining to these analyses are shown in , , and .

## TCGA Pan-cancer analysis of co-occurring mutations with TP53
The cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics repository was used to investigate genetic alterations within the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). A total of 32 distinct cancer types, comprising 10,967 samples (corresponding to 10,953 patients), were subjected to analysis. Our analysis focused on TP53 and 20 genes identified in positive genetic interactions with TP53. Mutation and copy number variant data for those 21 genes were extracted from the cBioPortal database. The co-occurrence of mutations or copy number changes in genes in the positive GI set with TP53 mutations were tested 2 different ways: (1) tracking only co-occurrence of mutations, and (2) tracking co-occurrence of either mutations or copy number. For both approaches, co-occurrence of mutation or copy number deletion in TP53 and each of the candidate genes with positive genetic interactions in HAP1 was tested for enrichment using Fisher’s exact test. The Benjamini-Hochberg method was used to correct for the multiple hypothesis testing and calculate false discovery rate (FDR). Results pertaining to these analyses are shown in .

## COMPARING GENETIC INTERACTION AND CO-ESSENTIALITY NETWORKS

## Jaccard network overlap analysis
To compare functional information captured by the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity and DepMap co-essentiality networks, we first subsampled the DepMap co-essentiality network (20Q2 release) by randomly sampling two groups of cancer cell lines, with each group consisting of 298 non-overlapping cell lines. We then measured Pearson’s correlation coefficients (PCC) based on CERES score essentiality scores for all possible gene pairs in each cell line group. The resultant PCC matrices were binarized at different thresholds (PCC ranging from 0.2 to 0.5 at intervals of 0.01). At each threshold, the Jaccard index between connected genes in the two DepMap networks was computed as follows:

J(N1,N2,t)=E(N1,t)∪E(N2,t)E(N1,t)∩E(N2,t)

Here, is the Jaccard index between networks and at threshold and is the set of edges of a network at threshold .
This process was repeated 10 times using different random resampling of DepMap cancer cell lines. We also computed the Jaccard index between each randomly sampled DepMap co-essentiality network and the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network. The 10 DepMap-DepMap network Jaccard indices and the 20 DepMap-HAP1 genetic profile network Jaccard indices were plotted, where the mean at each threshold is indicated by the solid line and the minimum and maximum at each threshold are indicated with the dotted line. The results of this analysis are shown in .

## Genetic interaction profile- vs. DepMap co-essentiality-derived network clusters.
We evaluated clusters derived from the HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network for support in the DepMap-derived co-essentiality network. To accomplish this, we applied the hierarchical clustering algorithm described in the section “ ” to the complete genetic interaction dataset (298 query cell lines × 17,804 library genes) to generate two layers of “Global” gene clusters (L2 parent clusters and L1 child clusters), which are provided in . For each L1 child cluster from this analysis, we computed a cluster statistic reflecting the normalized within-cluster pairwise similarity. This statistic was computed by applying Fisher’s z-transformation to the pairwise Pearson correlation coefficient for each within-cluster gene pair. The resulting z-transformed similarity statistics were then averaged per cluster to derive a mean correlation z-score for each cluster. This process was completed for each HAP1 network-derived cluster. Analogous statistics were computed in the DepMap co-essentiality network each of the HAP1 network-derived cluster to derive a z-score reflecting the support for that cluster in the DepMap co-essentiality network. Clusters were then grouped based on the combination of their HAP1 z-score and their DepMap z-score for downstream analyses. Data associated with this analysis is provided in and shown in – , , and .
The process described above starts with cluster definitions derived from the HAP1 profile similarity network. We also completed a reciprocal process starting from clusters derived from the same clustering algorithm applied to the DepMap co-essentiality network. The resulting clusters were then evaluated for support in the HAP1 profile similarity network. The figures resulting from this analysis are presented in – and are also included in .
Several other statistics were also computed for each of the clusters derived from the process above. These features include the average SMF for genes in each cluster, the number of publications citing genes in the cluster, degree of annotation for genes in each cluster, enrichment for GO biological processes for each cluster, enrichment for PPI within the cluster, average gene expression level and variance within the cluster, and the DepMap average single mutant phenotype and standard deviation. All cluster statistics related to this analysis are reported in . Gene features used for this are also further described in . The results of this analysis are provided in and shown in – and – .

## An integrated functional network.
The complete DepMap co-essentiality profile similarity network was generated by computing Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) between all pairs of gene essentiality profiles derived from analysis of all cell lines tested in the DepMap 20Q2 dataset (DepMap: depmap.org/portal). NA values were replaced with gene-wise average CERES scores prior to network creation. The HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity network was constructed from the centroid-corrected genetic interaction dataset, as described above (see section .
To construct an integrated network, we normalized the HAP1 GI network using the RPCO method with SNF hyperparameters k=5, α=3. Similarly, we applied RPCO with SNF hyperparameters k=5, α=5 to normalize the complete DepMap co-essentiality profile network. Normalized networks were then filtered at a similarity threshold corresponding to the 99.85th percentile such that gene pairs with similarity values above this threshold were retained as edges, while gene values below this similarity threshold were removed. Finally, RPCO-normalized and filtered HAP1 genetic interaction profile similarity and DepMap co-essentiality profile similarity networks were integrated using the BIONIC network integration method. Briefly, BIONIC was run unsupervised for 10,000 epochs with a batch size of 2048, learning rate .0001, and integrated gene embedding size of 4096. The graph attention network (GAT) encoders were set to have an internal embedding size of 256 with 10 attention heads. One GAT layer was used for each input network encoder. All other hyperparameters were unchanged from the previously described default settings. The resulting matrix contains 19274 genes with embedding dimension 4096.

## Functional evaluation of integrated vs. individual networks.
The resulting integrated network was functionally evaluated using the FLEX tool, as previously described. Briefly, FLEX was used to produce global precision-recall curves based on CORUM complex and GO biological process (BP) functional standards for the integrated network as well as the individual HAP1 genetic interaction profile and DepMap co-essentiality profile networks. Also, FLEX was used to produce per-functional module (defined by specific terms in the GO (BP) and CORUM complex standards) area under the PR curve (AUPRC) scores for each standard. Specifically, for each module in the protein complex or GO BP functional standard, gene pairs with both genes annotated in that module are considered positive examples and gene pairs with only one gene annotated in that module are negative examples in calculating a per-module AUPRC score. A higher per-module score indicates higher pair-wise gene similarities within the module relative to between-module pairs. The results of this analysis are provided in and shown in , , , and .

## ESTIMATING SIZE OF A COMPLETE HAP1 GENETIC INTERACTION NETWORK

## Total number of genetic interactions
To estimate the size of a complete genetic interaction network, we considered only the subset of ~11,000 genes that are expressed in in HAP1 cells [log2(TPM+1) > 1]( ). The number of total genetic interactions (i.e. negative + positive interactions) was estimated by multiplying the total number of possible expressed gene pairs (11,000 choose 2 = ~60,500,000 possible gene pairs) by the average genetic interaction density per library gene ( ). Thus, the estimated size of a complete HAP1 genetic interaction network is ~1.4 million genetic interactions (60,500,000 gene pairs × 0.0226 average interaction density).

## Extreme synthetic lethal and suppressor interactions
The current HAP1 genetic interaction network consists of 3,341 extreme negative, synthetic lethal interactions. Considering the total number of expressed gene pairs tested for genetic interactions (222 query genes × ~11,000 expressed library genes = ~2,442,000 gene pairs), this translates to a synthetic lethal interaction density of ~0.14% (3,341 / ~2,442,000 HAP1 gene pairs × 100%). Thus, we estimate that a complete HAP1 genetic interaction network will consist of ~85,000 extreme synthetic lethal interactions (i.e. ~60,500,000 expressed gene pairs × 0.0014 interaction density).
The current HAP1 genetic interaction network consists of 1,843 extreme positive, suppression interactions (suppression score > 0.5) where the double mutant fitness is at least 50% greater than the fitness associated with the sickest single mutant of a given gene pair. Considering the total number of expressed gene pairs tested for genetic interactions (222 query genes × ~11,000 expressed library genes = ~2,442,000 gene pairs), this translates to a suppression interaction density of ~0.075% (1,843 / ~2,442,000 HAP1 gene pairs × 100%). Thus, we estimate that a complete HAP1 genetic interaction network will consist of ~45,000 extreme suppression interactions (i.e. 60,500,000 expressed gene pairs × 0.00075 interaction density).

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Details of all quantification and statistical analyses are provided within the relevant subsections of the . Custom analytical methods developed in this study are described therein and are available via the link provided in the additional resources section.

## Supplementary Material
Supp.Files2ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Supplementary Information for this manuscript, including supplemental figures, , code and – , are also available from:
Boone lab: https://boonelab.ccbr.utoronto.ca/supplement/billmanncostanzo2026/
Mendeley Data: https://doi.org/10.17632/bpcpfns6vb.1
Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15320010
The HAP1 genetic interaction network and data can be also browsed via our companion databases: https://thecellmap.org , 

https://crisprdb.ccm.sickkids.ca/

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2026.03.044.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We especially thank Jasper Rine for interpreting the yeast ECM9 genetic suppression interactions. We also thank The Centre for Applied Genomics at SickKids Hospital and the Donnelly Sequencing Centre for assistance with sequencing. Finally, B.A., C.B., M. Costanzo, and C.L.M. thank David Botstein for his pioneering work in genetics and genomics, fueled by his boundless enthusiasm for rigorous science, which profoundly shaped our exploration of genetic networks. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants R01HG00583 (B.A., C.B., and C.L.M.), R01HG005084 (C.L.M.), and T32GM008347 (H.N.W.); Canadian Institutes of Health Research grants PJT-180285 (C.B.), PJT-GMX-463531 and MOP_142735 (J.M.), and PJT 173542 (P.G.M.); Ontario Research Fund grants RE09–011 and RE011–006 (B.A., C.B., and J.M.); Canadian Foundation for Innovation grant 39977 (C.B., J.M., and B.A.); McLaughlin Centre Accelerator grants MC-2022–02 and MC-2024–08-02 (B.A., C.B., and J.M.); NSERC Discovery Grant RGPIN-2020–04180 (P.G.M.); National Science Foundation grant MCB1818293 (C.L.M.); German Research Foundation grant DFG Bi 2086/1–1 (M.B.); NIH/NCI Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research F30 Award 5F30CA257227 (K.L.); and U. Minnesota Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship (H.N.W., A.Z.H., and Y.L.). J.M. was a Tier 2 Canadian Research Chair in Functional Genetics and is the GlaxoSmithKline Chair in Genetics & Genome Biology at the Hospital for Sick Children and the University of Toronto. B.A. holds a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Systematic Genetics & Cell Biology. C.B. is the Banting & Best Distinguished Scholar and a CIFAR Fellow in the Fungal Kingdom: Threats & Opportunities program.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
 

## Highlights
Genetic network maps ~89,000 interactions among ~4 million gene pairs in HAP1 human cells
HAP1 genetic network reveals functional relationships among ~3,800 human genes
Genetic network structure and topology are conserved from yeast to human cells
Genetic interactions aid in the interpretation of DepMap cancer cell genetic dependencies