pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpaCell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC12807561PMC12807561.11280756112807561NIHMS21133824084825610.1016/j.celrep.2025.116191NIHMS2113382NIHPA21133821ArticleIntegrative genomic identification of therapeutic targets for pancreatic cancer
GuoJimmy A. GongDennis EvansKyle TakahashiKazuki JambhaleAnanya D. ShiauCarina YuPatrick WangSteven WuWenbo W. ChughSeema KapnerKevin S. DillyJulien ZhaoDaniel ChenPeter SmithEric L. ManciasJoseph D. VazquezFrancisca SinghHarshabad HwangWilliam L. AguirreAndrew J. 1Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA2School of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA3Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA4Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA5Center for Systems Biology, Krantz Family Center for Cancer Research, Department of Radiation Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA6Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA7Grossman School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY, USA8University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA9Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA10New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA11Department of Radiation Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA12These authors contributed equally13Senior author14Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, J.A.G. and A.J.A.; methodology, J.A.G., D.G., K.E., K.T., and A.J.A.; investigation, J.A.G., D.G., K.E., K.T., A.D.J., C.S., P.Y., S.W., W. W.W., S.C., K.S.K., J.D., D.Z., P.C., E.L.S., J.D.M., F.V., H.S., W.L.H., and A. J.A.; writing – original draft, J.A.G. and D.G.; writing – review & editing, D.G., J.A.G., K.T., K.E., E.L.S., H.S., J.D.M., W.L.H., and A.J.A.; funding acquisition, A.J.A. and W.L.H.; resources, A.J.A. and W.L.H.; supervision, A.J.A. and W.L.H.
*Correspondence: whwang1@mgh.harvard.edu (W.L.H.), andrew_aguirre@dfci.harvard.edu (A.J.A.)2392025218202544950522611619111619107012026150120261601202616012026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a deadly disease, and new therapeutic strategies are urgently needed. Here, we conduct an integrative, genome-scale examination of genetic dependencies and cell surface targets using CRISPR-Cas screening and multi-omic data, including single-nucleus and spatial transcriptomic data from patient tumors. We systematically identify clinically tractable and biomarker-linked PDAC dependencies, including CDS2 as a synthetic lethal target in cancer cells expressing signatures of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. We examine biomarkers and co-dependencies of the KRAS oncogene, defining gene expression signatures of sensitivity and resistance associated with response to pharmacological inhibition of KRAS. mRNA and protein profiling reveal cell surface protein-encoding genes with robust expression in patient tumors and minimal expression in non-malignant tissues. Furthermore, we define intratumoral and interpatient heterogeneity of target gene expression and identify orthogonal targets that suggest combinatorial strategies. Collectively, this work identifies multiple targets that may inform therapeutic strategies for patients with PDAC.

## In brief
Guo et al. perform a systematic assessment of genetic dependencies and cell surface targets in pancreatic adenocarcinoma, identifying biomarkers, mapping interpatient and intratumoral heterogeneity, and nominating combination strategies. Experimental validation of dependencies associated with mesenchymal/EMT gene expression signatures identified the CDS2 enzyme as a mesenchymal state selective dependency.

## Graphical Abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a lethal malignancy and accounts for approximately 500,000 annual deaths worldwide. Systemic multi-agent chemotherapy is the standard-of-care for advanced PDAC, , but clinical response rates are modest, and most tumors eventually relapse or progress. , Beyond front-line chemotherapy, treatment options are limited, underscoring a critical need for novel drug targets.
Targeted therapies have yielded significant clinical benefits in many cancer types. However, efforts to adapt these agents (e.g., MEK, EGFR, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase [PI3K], mTOR inhibitors) for PDAC have not been broadly effective to date. – Genomic studies have shown KRAS gain-of-function mutations in over 92% of patients with PDAC. , Although KRAS has historically been challenging to target, mutant-specific inhibitors (e. g., KRAS G12C , KRAS G12D ) have now shown efficacy in non-small cell lung cancer , and other cancers, including PDAC. , Additionally, pan-RAS and pan-KRAS inhibitors targeting both mutant and wild-type RAS isoforms have also entered clinical investigation. , – Nonetheless, acquired resistance to KRAS inhibition is common, , – and combination therapy strategies with RAS inhibition will be required.
Beyond KRAS, mutations and copy number alterations of tumor suppressor genes (e.g., TP53, SMAD4, CDKN2A) are common in PDAC and may identify vulnerabilities by way of synthetic or collateral lethal interactions. – For instance, CDKN2A loss is often accompanied by loss of the MTAP gene at the 9p21 locus, and MTAP loss results in disordered methionine metabolism, conferring dependency on MAT2A and PRMT5. , , , Moreover, tumors with loss of SMAD4 on chromosome 18q often contain collateral loss of VPS4B, which generates a strong dependency on its paralog VPS4A. , , Identification of such synthetic lethal interactions has resulted in development of several clinical-stage therapies, including those targeting PARP and PRMT5. , Integrative analysis of functional genetic screening data, such as from the Cancer Dependency Map Project (DepMap), combined with multi-omic characterization may yield new synthetic lethal interactions and therapeutic vulnerabilities enriched in PDAC.
In parallel, cell surface proteins have emerged as an important class of targets amenable to multiple therapeutic strategies, including bispecific antibodies, antibody drug conjugates (ADCs) or chimeric antigen receptor T cell therapy (CAR-T). – Optimal targets demonstrate tumor-specific expression with selectivity over normal tissues; however, true tumor-selective surface proteins have been challenging to identify, and on-target, off-tumor effects can lead to dose-limiting toxicity of cell-surface-directed therapies. , Moreover, solid tumors such as PDAC demonstrate profound intratumoral heterogeneity that can pose a barrier to the efficacy and durability targeting cell surface proteins. – The pan-tumor approval of fam-trastuzumab deruxtecan-nxki (T-DXd) for previously treated, HER2 strongly positive solid tumors represents one surface targeted approach approved for use in a subset of patients with PDAC. Identification of additional novel cell surface proteins for therapeutic targeting remains a priority.
Here, we performed an integrative analysis of multi-omic data to define potential therapeutic targets in PDAC ( ). Leveraging multi-modal functional genetic and genomic datasets, including CRISPR-Cas9 screening data from DepMap and single-cell and spatial transcriptomic datasets ( ), we defined two major classes of therapeutic targets: (1) cancer cell-intrinsic dependencies nominated through functional genetic screens, many of which are linked to multi-omic biomarkers and (2) cell surface targets with preferential expression in tumors compared to normal pancreas and “critical normal” non-pancreatic tissues where toxicity is commonly observed with cancer therapy. This comprehensive analysis provides key insights into the landscape of potential therapeutic targets in PDAC and will inform future therapeutic development strategies.

## RESULTS

## Genetic dependencies in pancreatic cancer
To define genetic dependencies in PDAC that may be targets for development of small molecule inhibitors or protein degraders, we examined genome-scale functional genetic screening data from DepMap ( ). We developed an analytic workflow for categorizing dependencies in PDAC, starting with defining recurrent PDAC dependencies occurring in at least 10% of patients, a substantial proportion of patients that is comparable to the representation of major molecular subtypes of other cancers, e.g., triple negative breast cancer. , To this end, we chose a Chronos dependency score , < − 0.5 in at least 10% of PDAC cell lines , ( ). This approach identified 2185 recurrent PDAC dependencies.
Within this class of recurrent PDAC dependencies, we further categorized targets into clinically tractable targets, which have existing compounds in clinical trials based on comparison to the OpenTargets database, and PDAC selective dependencies that show selective patterns of dependency, with dependency in some but not all cancer cell lines examined ( ). We reasoned that clinically tractable targets could nominate druggable targets and potential compounds that have been examined in other disease indications and may be readily repurposed in PDAC. In contrast, the class of PDAC selective dependencies prioritizes targets with selective dependency profiles across all cancer cell lines, suggesting underlying biomarker relationships. By extension, selective dependencies may represent targets with a predicted wide therapeutic window between biomarker-selected tumors and normal tissues.
In total, among recurrent PDAC dependencies, we identified 107 genes in the clinically tractable category, 500 in the PDAC selective category, and 49 putative targets within the intersection of both categories ( ). The median PDAC dependency score was higher in magnitude among clinically tractable targets versus PDAC selective targets ( and ), validating our assumption that clinically tractable targets included many pan-essential genes for which genetic deletion results in potent effects on cell viability. Such pan-essential dependencies may represent drug targets with broad activity but narrower therapeutic indices. In contrast, the PDAC-selective targets may identify targets that would be predicted to have wider therapeutic indices. 
Clinically tractable targets were enriched for DNA/RNA processing enzymes (TYMS, DNMT1, PRMT5, TOP1), kinases (PIK3CA, EGFR, CDK4/6, RAF1, MTOR), and membrane proteins (FGFR1, ERBB2, FZD5, IGF1R) but also included a diverse set of other proteins including transcription factors (RXRA, BRD4, RELA), structural proteins (TUBB, ITGAV, ITGB1), and apoptosis regulators (BCL2L1, MCL1, BIRC5) ( and ). We identified multiple oncogenic drivers including CTNNB1 and KRAS and many other genes encoding therapeutically tractable proteins that score as strongly essential in many PDAC cell lines ( ). Comparing PDAC to all other cancer types, we observed that KRAS was the recurrent PDAC selective gene dependency most enriched in PDAC (q = 3.26 × 10−61 ; Mann-Whitney) ( ), consistent with the importance of RAS signaling and the high prevalence (>90%) of KRAS mutations. , We also observed other genetic dependencies with more moderate but significant enrichment in PDAC, including DOCK5, RAB10, ITGA3, and FZD5 ( ).
We performed systems level assessment of PDAC selective dependencies to identify common biological pathways necessary for growth and survival. We identified several gene sets relating to cell cycle regulation and nucleotide biosynthesis (APC, NUP37, VPS4A/B, SMC5, CDK6) as well as proteasome-related gene sets, including ubiquitination genes such as UBE2H, UBA6, UBA52, PEX10, and PEX13. Gene set terms related to cytoskeletal remodeling and cell migration/adhesion were also strongly enriched, evidenced by dependencies in integrin signaling (ITGA3, ITGB1) and RAC1 mediated cell migration signaling (RAC1, ARHGEF7, DOCK5) ( ). Several other members of these pathways appear in the clinically tractable category and are dependencies cell lines across other lineages, including PTK2, ITGAV, and ITGBV. PTK2 encodes the focal adhesion kinase (FAK), a central regulator of these pathways and a target for which multiple therapies are currently in PDAC clinical trials. To specifically highlight PDAC enriched dependencies, we intersected these selective genes with those having a significantly higher magnitude of mean Chronos score in PDAC vs. other lineages. In addition to pathways already highlighted, our analysis of PDAC enriched dependencies included several canonical oncogenic pathways including signaling through MET, Wnt, and transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) ( ).
Next, we sought to determine the most predictive biomarkers of PDAC selective dependencies using multi-omic characterization of cell lines in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) ( ). The strength of biomarkers was approximated by “feature importance,” a statistic derived from random forest machine learning algorithms that measures the impact of any given feature vs. other features for predicting dependency strength ( ). Our approach identified KRAS mutation as a strongly predictive biomarker for KRAS dependency, as well as the guanine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK5 ( ). This analysis also highlighted strongly predictive gene expression biomarkers for dependency on BCAR1 (AXL and DCBLD2 expression), ITGA3 (GJB3 expression), and ARHGEF7 (ARHGEF6 expression), among others ( ). Additionally, we uncovered several paralog interactions, including known synthetic lethal interactions, such as VPS4A dependency in cancers with VPS4B loss on chromosome 18q , and between MAGOH/MAGOHB in cancers with chromosome 1p loss ( ). We also identified dependencies with robust gene expression biomarkers, including genes whose dependencies correlate with self-expression and paralog expression ( ). These synthetic lethal interactions were well-preserved across all lineages and in pancreas lines alone ( ).
Notably, paralog expression typically was correlated with copy number aberrations, providing a genetic basis for targeting and suggesting areas for mechanistic follow-up. For example, the expression of the phosphoprotein phosphatase gene PPP2CB located on chromosome 8 may be commonly diminished via 8p loss in PDAC ( ). Deletion of 8p then confers dependency on its paralog, PPP2CA (p < 0.01) ( ). In certain cancer types, loss of 8p has been shown to coincide with gain of 8q, which contains the oncogene MYC. Indeed, we also observed that lower expression of PPP2CB on 8p is associated with higher copy number of MYC on 8q (p < 0.05) ( ) and furthermore, that dependency on PPP2CA is associated with MYC amplification (p < 0.05) ( and ), suggesting a synthetic lethal interaction enriched in MYC-amplified tumors.

## Common genetic aberrations and transcriptional states in pancreatic cancer predict therapeutic vulnerabilities
We next sought to identify synthetic lethal or other selective dependency interactions with common PDAC mutations such as those in KRAS, TP53, SMAD4, and CDKN2A ( ). We found that KRAS mutations sensitize to knockout of MAPK pathway members including RAF1, but also Rho GTPase guanine nucleotide exchange factor DOCK5, apoptosis regulator CFLAR, and focal adhesion protein FERMT1 ( ). TP53 mutations are associated with dependency on the TP53 binding protein TP53BP1 and the DNA damage-repair protein CHEK2, while cell lines with wild-type p53 are sensitive to disruption of MDM2, as expected ( ). While SMAD4 and CDKN2A mutational status were less predictive of specific gene dependencies ( and ), analysis of copy number alterations at these loci revealed known synthetic lethal targets. These included dependency on PRMT5 and its binding partner, WDR77, predicted by loss of the MTAP gene adjacent to CDKN2A ( ), and the previously described VPS4A dependency that strongly associates with VPS4B/SMAD4 copy number loss , ( ).
Transcriptional profiling of PDAC has identified several gene expression programs with biological and clinical significance. , , – Most notably, classical and basal-like subtypes of PDAC can stratify patient outcomes in primary and metastatic disease, – and mesenchymal cell states are commonly associated with therapeutic resistance. We therefore sought to identify differential dependencies associated with these cell states. First, we examined dependencies differentially enriched in classical and basal-like cell lines ( ) ( and ). The basal-like program has been previously described to be well-represented in PDAC cell lines. Consistent with this, we recovered the strongest associations with the basal-like state, including mediator complex subunit MED24, Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor ARHGEF7, integrin alpha subunit ITGA3, and palmitoylated plasma membrane protein, EFR3A ( and ).
To explore basal-like dependencies further, we stratified cell lines according to their expression of the Moffitt basal-like tumor signature (low, lowest 25 th percentile; medium, middle 50 th percentile; high, top 25 th percentile) and evaluated ITGA3 and EFR3A dependency strength. EFR3A dependency is strongest in PDAC cell lines classified as high basal, followed by medium basal and then low basal ( ). Furthermore, EFR3A is more dependent in other squamous lineages such as head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines than in other lineages ( ), suggesting it may more generally represent a dependency in squamous-like tumors. Given that we observed that EFR3A dependency is associated with EFR3B expression ( ), we hypothesized that there may be an association between expression of the EFR3B paralog and the basal-like state. Indeed, high and medium basal tumors expressed EFR3B at lower levels than low basal tumors ( ). ITGA3 is similarly more dependent in basal PDAC cell lines ( ), as well as cell lines of other squamous morphologies such as cervical squamous cell carcinoma (CSCC), esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), and HNSCC ( ). In addition, expression of the TACSTD2 gene encoding the targetable cell surface antigen TROP2, exhibited a strong association with ITGA3 dependency ( ), suggesting that TROP2 expression may be a biomarker correlated with ITGA3 dependency.
Next, we analyzed the CRISPR-Cas screening data for selective dependencies in PDAC cell lines expressing signatures of mesenchymal identity or epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), phenotypes commonly associated with treatment resistance across multiple contexts. We scored cell lines for four separate mesenchymal/EMT gene sets , – and calculated the correlation coefficient between signature score and gene dependency. We identified several recurrent associations, including the cell motility scaffold protein ELMO2, the phospholipid biosynthetic enzyme CDS2, and the RNA splicing factor TRA2B, which all had increased dependency in mesenchymal cells ( and ). CDS2 scored highly in all analyses with different mesenchymal or EMT signatures.
CDS2 (cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol [CDP-DAG] synthase 2) and its paralog CDS1, are key enzymes involved in phospholipid biosynthesis. These enzymes catalyze the formation of CDP-DAG from phosphatidic acid. CDS1 and CDS2 are the only two mammalian CDS enzymes, which share about 75% homology. These enzymes play key roles in CDP-DAG formation, which supports phospholipid synthesis, including phosphatidylinositol (PI), phosphatidylglycerol (PG), and cardiolipin (CL). These phospholipids play key roles in intracellular signaling, including through the PI3K pathway. – CDS1 expression has previously been reported to be associated with epithelial identity and is negatively correlated with EMT gene expression signatures. – Moreover, CDS1 is negatively regulated by ZEB1, a transcription factor well known to induce EMT. ZEB1 overexpression leads to decreased CDS1 mRNA expression, whereas ZEB1 short interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown results in increased CDS1 mRNA expression. Thus, our analyses of CRISPR-Cas screening data have identified a strong paralog synthetic lethal relationship, with CDS2 being selectively essential in cell lines with expressing a mesenchymal identity that associated with low CDS1 expression.
We performed CRISPR-Cas9 validation of CDS2 as a mesenchymal selective dependency using PDAC cell lines expressing either an epithelial or mesenchymal phenotype ( ). In this panel of cell lines, we observed an association between mesenchymal identity, robust ZEB1 expression, and low CDS1 expression ( ). Furthermore, we found that CRISPR-mediated CDS2 knockout led to significantly greater reduction in viability in mesenchymal cell lines with low CDS1 expression compared to epithelial cell lines with higher CDS1 expression ( and ). To further validate the paralog synthetic lethal relationship in an isogenic system, we evaluated whether CDS2 dependency could be enhanced in the YAPC and Panc 04.03 epithelial cell lines by CRISPR-Cas knockout of CDS1 ( ). We generated CDS1 knockout lines ( ) and treated epithelial cell lines lacking CDS1 with siRNA to knockdown expression of CDS2 ( , , , and ). In both lines, CDS2 siRNA led to substantial reduction in viability of the CDS1 KO lines compared to the negative controls, thus recapitulating the paralog synthetic lethal relationship observed when CDS1 is suppressed in the mesenchymal/EMT state.

## Genetic signatures correlated with KRAS dependency
While most PDAC tumors harbor KRAS mutations, there are heterogeneous responses to pharmacological inhibition in human clinical trials. , We thus examined biomarkers of KRAS dependency and investigated co-dependencies with oncogenic KRAS. We stratified cell lines into KRAS-dependent and -independent groups using the top and bottom quartile of the KRAS dependency score and identified differentially expressed genes associated with dependent or independent cell lines ( ) ( ). Genes associated with the KRAS-dependent group included keratins (e.g., KRT8, KRT19), TSPAN8, MUC13, CEACAM6, and EPCAM, while those associated with the KRAS-independent group included SPARC, ITGA4, SDC2, ZEB2, and NREP ( ). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of the KRAS-independent signature revealed programs previously associated with chemoresistance in PDAC including EMT, , neural signatures, and focal adhesion programs related to biomechanical signaling ( ). Conversely, KRAS-dependent cell lines were enriched in gene sets related to epithelial development and MAPK signaling, including the canonical Hallmark KRAS Up gene set ( ).
Next, we evaluated these gene signatures in an orthogonal dataset to determine their broader applicability. Strikingly, our signatures strongly predicted the drug sensitivity of KRAS
G12D PDAC cell lines to MRTX1133, a KRAS G12D targeting small molecule inhibitor in clinical trials ( ), and to RMC6236, a multi-selective KRAS inhibitor in clinical trials. Expression of the KRAS independence signature was associated with higher AUC (R = 0.82 and R = 0.68 in RMC-6236 and MRTX1133, respectively), while expression of the KRAS dependence signature was associated with lower AUC (R = − 0.76 and R = − 0.94 in RMC-6236 and MRTX1133, respectively) ( ).
Finally, we surveyed the top KRAS co-dependencies to identify potential combination therapy targets with KRAS inhibition. We identified RAF1, DOCK5, SHOC2, and PIK3CA as strong co-dependencies ( ). These genes are known to encode effectors or regulatory proteins in the MAP kinase or PI3K/AKT signaling pathways and may provide rationale for combination targeting. Indeed, we and others previously identified SHOC2 as a synthetic lethal target for MEK inhibition in Ras-driven tumors. , We also identified co-dependencies, such as beta catenin (CTNNB1), Kruppel-like transcription factor KLF5, the intracellular membrane trafficking GTPase RAB10, and cyclin D1 ( ). GSEA of these co-dependencies uncovered gene programs for small GTPase signaling, Ras protein signaling, and Rac protein signaling, consistent with a KRAS addicted phenotype ( ). Conversely, anti-correlated dependencies include cytochrome c oxidase assembly factor COA3, mitochondrial ribosome associated GTPase MTG2, malonyl-CoA-Acyl transacylase MCAT, and the multivesicular body protein CHMP4B ( ). These anti-correlated dependencies are enriched in pathways related to the mitochondria, ribosome, and metabolic processes ( ). These pathways may be targets in cancers that become resistant to Ras inhibition and may provide additivity through non-overlapping mechanisms of action.

## Cell surface protein-encoding genes in PDAC with low expression in normal tissues
Cell surface proteins represent attractive therapeutic targets irrespective of gene dependency. Surface proteins may be amenable to antibody- or cell-based therapies, including monoclonal antibodies, bispecific antibodies, ADCs, and CAR-T cells. Optimal cell surface protein (CSP) targets exhibit robust expression on malignant cells but low or restricted expression on critical normal tissues that may be prone to dose-limiting toxicities. Toward this end, we performed an integrative evaluation of CSP-encoding gene expression using mRNA and proteomic profiling of PDAC tumors, , cell lines, and organoids ; and various non-malignant tissue types from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project ( ).
The most highly expressed CSP genes (top quartile of expression) in PDAC include TACSTD2 (Trop-2), CEACAM6, MSLN, VSIG2, and the broadly expressed HLA-family genes ( ; ). Genes in the second highest quartile include EGFR, MUC16, IGF1R, and the immune checkpoint receptor TIGIT. Proto-oncogenes such as RET, ROS1, and ALK appear to be lowly expressed in PDAC ( ). To identify genes encoding tumor-specific CSPs that may be good targets for therapeutic development, we reasoned that an ideal trait of these CSPs should be enrichment in PDAC tumors relative to (1) a broad range of physiologic tissues (e.g., adrenal glands, blood, colon, esophagus, heart, liver, lungs, small intestine, stomach) as well as (2) non-malignant pancreas ( ). We therefore evaluated differential RNA expression of CSP-encoding genes between primary PDAC tumors (TCGA) and non-malignant pancreas, as well as between primary PDAC tumors and normal tissues from the GTEx portal ( ). Among genes enriched relative to normal tissues and non-malignant pancreas, we observed TACSTD2 and CLDN18, two genes encoding validated ADC targets in triple-negative breast cancer and advanced gastric cancer, respectively ( ). We also identified NECTIN4, a validated ADC target in urothelial cancer, though its enrichment in PDAC was more modest ( ). Other identified cell surface targets included multiple other known CSPs (e.g., CEACAM5, MSLN, CEACAM6, CDH17) – and less well-described proteins (e.g., MUC3A, GPRC5A, GJB3, AQP5) ( ).
We also sought to confirm protein-level expression of a group of tumor enriched targets ( ) using recently collected mass spectrometry data from the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium. Most identified targets exhibited stronger protein expression in PDAC relative to normal pancreas ( ), but several targets such as NPC1L1, CXCL16, IL2RG, ADRA2A, and HLA-DOA lacked protein-level tumor enrichment and were therefore deprioritized for subsequent analyses ( ).
Finally, we sought to confirm that our targets were specifically expressed in cancer cells, as bulk tumor analyses may be confounded by low neoplastic cellularity and mRNA or protein contributions from the stroma. Recent studies examining PDAC , , , with single-cell/nucleus resolution enable us to evaluate gene expression of CSP targets with cell-type specificity. The majority of the prioritized CSP-encoding genes were most strongly expressed in malignant epithelial cells or atypical ductal cells ( ), consistent with the notion that they encode cancer cell-enriched proteins. However, we recovered a few genes (e.g., LRRC15, CD1A, CD248) that may instead reflect cancer-specific stromal contamination ( ). These genes that had greater expression in non-malignant cell types than malignant ductal cells were removed from downstream analyses. Thus, our analysis nominated a list of 18 prioritized CSP genes, including GJB3, TACSTD2, MUC1, MUC13, CLDN18, TM4SF1, SLC44A4, TPBG, MUC3A, SLC6A14, PSCA, LY6E, VSIG2, GPRC5A, DUOX2, MSLN, CEACAM5, and CEACAM6.
Additionally, the use of bulk datasets for healthy normal tissues may obscure potential toxicities due to high expression in rare but critical cell types within a tissue. For this purpose, we defined a set of “critical normal tissues,” representing tissues that often display toxicity with systemic cancer therapy, including blood, skin, lungs, intestinal tissue, and kidneys among others ( ). We interrogated RNA expression in the Human Cell Atlas to increase the sensitivity by which on-target toxicity in normal tissues can be detected by creating a metric accounting for high expression in rare cell types ( ). We identify expression patterns consistent with known on-target toxicities of clinically validated cell surface-targeted therapies, such as skin rash and mucosal inflammation from targeting TROP2, gastric toxicities from targeting CLDN18, and colon toxicities from targeting CEACAM5 ( and ).

## Evaluating intratumoral and interpatient heterogeneity of cell surface targets
We next sought to determine whether there were any associations in expression among our prioritized CSP-encoding genes. Hierarchical clustering of pairwise correlations in PDAC tumors from TCGA revealed grouping of GPRC5A, TM4SF1, MSLN, GJB3, TACSTD2, PSCA, and LY6E, and separately of MUC1, VSIG2, CEACAM6, SLC44A4, CLDN18, DUOX2, MUC3A, and CEACAM5 ( ). The expression of these CSP-encoding genes could be stratified by their underlying transcriptional cell state. In particular, CEACAM6, CEACAM5, MUC1, and CLDN18 are expressed higher in PDAC cell lines with a classical transcriptional state and have been explored as cell surface antigens in adenocarcinomas with classical morphology. , , In contrast, TACSTD2 is highly expressed in the basal-like triple-negative subtype of breast cancer and is similarly associated with a basal-like state in the pancreas cancer ( ), suggesting its possible role as a basal-like antigen irrespective of primary tumor site. We noted that expression of TACSTD2, GJB3, PSCA, and GPRC5A correlated with the basal-like expression program in TCGA tumors, while VSIG2, CLDN18, DUOX2, SLC44A4, MUC3A, and MUC13 were classical correlated ( ). These data suggest that CSP-encoding gene expression patterns may co-evolve with the adoption of transcriptional cell states and offer a subtype-specific targeting strategy.
We experimentally validated therapeutic targeting of cell-state-specific surface markers using CLDN18.2, which is specific for the classical subtype, and TROP2, which has specificity for the basal-like subtype ( ). We utilized patient-derived organoids expressing transcriptional signatures of the respective transcriptional states and documented robust expression of CLDN18.2 in the classical organoid and TROP2 in the basal-like organoid, as measured by flow cytometry ( ). Therapeutic targeting of these organoids with the clinically utilized CLDN18.2 and TROP2 specific antibodies, zolbetuximab and datopotamab, respectively, in combination with an anti-human secondary antibody conjugated to a cytotoxic monomethyl auristatin F (MMAF) payload, inhibited organoid growth in a subtype specific manner ( ). Thus, cell surface targeting strategies can selectively inhibit non-overlapping cell states, suggesting that combined targeting of cell states may be a therapeutic strategy.
Recently, bispecific antibody or logic-gated CAR-T approaches have been shown to bind to multiple surface antigens to improve targeting specificity or coverage. Using single nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA-seq), we explored the co-expression of surface targets on the same cell, as combinations of such targets may enable AND/OR logic gating strategies for engineered therapeutic approaches. Our results highlight expression of GPRC5A in the majority of PDAC cells and more restricted expression of other antigens ( ). As GPRC5A is also expressed at low levels in normal tissues, pairing the target with more specifically expressed targets such as CLDN18.2 ( ) in an AND gated strategy may improve the therapeutic window of such agents and mitigate potential on-target, off-tumor activity in normal gastrointestinal tissues that natively express claudin tight junction proteins. An OR gate analysis of cells with expression of either antigen ( ) suggested that co-targeting of PDAC antigens (e. g., CLDN18 and TACSTD2) expressed in separate subsets of tumor cells may provide additive cell killing beyond a single-antigen strategy. However, we note that these analyses may be constrained by frequent dropout of transcripts in single-cell approaches and imperfect correlation between mRNA and protein expression.
Although snRNA-seq enables consideration of intra-tumoral heterogeneity, it does not elucidate spatially defined patterns of target expression, a feature that may identify subclonal populations with differential target expression. To address this, we leveraged whole-transcriptome digital spatial profiling (DSP) data of 21 untreated and neoadjuvant-treated patients with PDAC ( ). GPRC5A and MUC1 were not only highly expressed in most patients but also showed consistent expression across most fields-of-view (FOVs) from spatially distributed malignant regions within those patients ( ), suggesting that they enable broad coverage of tumor cells in PDAC. Other targets such as MSLN, TACSTD2, PSCA, LY6E, CLDN18, and CEACAM5 were expressed in many, though not all patients ( ) and exhibit high interpatient heterogeneity. In addition, these antigens typically exhibited heterogeneous intra-tumoral expression (e.g., MSLN in T14, CLDN18 in U9) ( ). Next, to globally assess whether gene expression varied more across vs. within patients, we plotted metrics of interpatient and intrapatient heterogeneity ( ) ( ). Most genes exhibited greater variation in expression across patients vs. within patients (e.g., MUC1, MUC13, SLC44A4, PSCA, MUC3A, LY6E), suggesting that certain well-expressed single antigens may generally provide reasonable coverage of cancer cells within a tumor but that biomarker profiling will be helpful to distinguish expressors vs. non-expressors.

## Integrated analysis of putative targets in PDAC
Finally, we integrated observations from dependency and expression analyses to identify avenues for combination therapy targets. While monotherapy activity from single targeted therapeutic agents is often a strong predictor for clinical utility, combination regimens can yield enhanced efficacy and durability of therapy. We thus sought to identify pairs of genetic dependencies for co-targeting with small molecule approaches, as well as combinations of genetic dependencies with expression of cell surface protein-encoding genes that could be targeted with combinations of small molecules and cell surface protein-directed approaches ( ). These therapeutic strategies in addition to previously identified cell surface target combination approaches ( and ) provide a roadmap to nominate new dual targeting regimens.
To estimate the combined potency of dual targeting of genetic dependencies, we generated a “combination dependency score” by computing the median summed Chronos dependency scores of pairs of clinically tractable or PDAC selective targets across pancreatic cancer cell lines, removing common essential genes from this analysis to emphasize single or combination targets for which therapeutic targeting is likely to demonstrate a wide therapeutic index ( ) ( ). KRAS was among the genes with the highest magnitude dependency both as a single gene and in combination. As expected, both the combination dependency score and the proportion of cell lines dependent on at least one of the genes was greater than that observed for a single gene alone ( ). Pairs of PDAC selective dependencies that scored highly included KRAS with the cyclin kinases CDK6 and CCND1, which are druggable and often overexpressed in PDAC, KRAS with the enzyme TYMS, that is the primary site of action for 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), a key agent within the FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy regimen, and KRAS in combination with the focal adhesion kinase encoding gene PTK2.
To further visualize targets that may have combination efficacy with KRAS inhibition, while limiting systemic toxicity, we plotted combined dependency scores against selectivity scores (as determined by LRT score; ) ( ). We identified several targets along a spectrum of potency and selectivity including CTNNB1, the intracellular Wnt signal transducer; ERBB2, a surface protein encoding gene targetable by ADCs recently receiving pan-tumor approval with HER2 as a biomarker ; and CFLAR, a regulator of apoptosis with structural similarities to caspase-8. Roughly one-quarter (500/2,185; 22.9%) of the recurrent dependencies queried in this analysis are classified as strongly selective (LRT > 100; ). However, there was an inverse association between magnitude of the combination dependency score and the selectivity score across all combinations ( ; Spearman R = 0.33, p < 0.0001), suggesting that stronger combined dependencies are associated with less selectivity. Thus, biomarker strategies to identify patients most likely to benefit from these combination targeting strategies will remain critical to maximizing therapeutic efficacy.
Finally, we investigated combinations of cell surface targets with genetic dependencies, examining correlative analyses between gene expression of prioritized CSP-encoding genes and Chronos dependency scores for clinically tractable and PDAC selective genes. We visualized a Pearson correlation matrix describing pairwise relationships between genetic dependencies of genes in the intersection of clinically tractable and PDAC selective genes (gene A) and expression of prioritized CSP-encoding genes (gene B) ( ). Notably, none of the identified cell surface targets score as a strong genetic dependency ( ). The relationships between expression of CSP-encoding genes and genetic dependencies could be categorized into three groups: those with weak dependency-expression correlations, dependencies whose strength is higher at low expression of CSP genes, and dependencies whose strength is higher in cell lines with high CSP gene expression. Relationships such as the increased ITGAV dependency in low GJB3-expressing cells suggest a combination strategy to address intratumoral heterogeneity—using ITGAV inhibitors alongside GJB3-targeted therapies to prevent antigen escape. Conversely, relationships where dependency is enhanced in the context of high cell surface expression may specify an opportunity to combine therapeutic agents to achieve greater efficacy. Additionally, certain CSP expression and gene dependency relationships also align with known transcriptional subtypes and genomic biomarkers (e.g., ITGB1 dependency with high TACSTD2, GPRC5A, and MSLN in basal-like cells).

## DISCUSSION
PDAC remains one of the most challenging solid tumors to treat, and multi-agent chemotherapy regimens have limited efficacy and durability. Improved molecular understanding of the major molecular drivers and transcriptional states of PDAC may reveal important therapeutic targets for the disease. , , – Here, we perform an integrative multi-modal analysis of multiple datasets from cell lines and human specimens, including those with single-cell and spatial resolution. We present a framework for distinct classes of therapeutic targets and identify several targets that have been previously described in the literature or explored in clinical studies, as well as many novel targets to be further explored in PDAC. Such targets include context-selective genetic dependencies as unveiled by genome-scale CRISPR knockout screens and cell-surface targets with enriched expression in tumors relative to normal tissues.
Notably, we confirm that KRAS is the most enriched genetic dependency in PDAC with strong vulnerability across most PDAC cell lines. Direct pharmacological inhibition of the KRAS oncogene has emerged as a viable therapeutic strategy in patients with KRAS mutations. , , , Moreover, molecular profiling of KRAS-inhibitor-treated patient tumors is revealing a rich landscape of resistance mechanisms. , , , Our analysis highlights that while most PDAC tumors harbor KRAS mutations, the extent of functional dependency can vary significantly. In particular, we identify canonical signatures of KRAS independent growth and proliferation, including focal adhesion pathways, EMT, and neural-like signaling, which have emerged in parallel as treatment-resistant pathways enriched after multi-agent chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Defining additional therapeutic targets for combination with KRAS inhibition will be critical to improving the efficacy of these therapies.
While our survey of PDAC enriched targets identifies strong dependencies, therapeutic strategies against these targets will depend on appropriate patient stratification given heterogeneity across transcriptional and genetic backgrounds. Synthetic lethal or paralog dependencies (e.g., VPS4A/B, PPP2CA/B) that commonly arise from chromosome loss have clear mechanistic rationale with predictive biomarker relationships that can likely be readily evaluated using routine tumor-profiling techniques. We identified multiple transcriptional biomarkers of gene dependency, including overexpression and also more complex transcriptional states (e.g., classical, basal-like, and EMT ) that may prove clinically relevant. In particular, we identified CDS2 as a synthetic lethal target that is selective for cancer cells expressing a mesenchymal or EMT state that is associated with reduced expression of the CDS1 paralog gene. Given the role of EMT in drug resistance and aggressive, metastatic cancer cell behavior, CDS2 represents a biomarker-linked target that warrants further investigation for therapeutic development.
Transcriptional and proteomic investigation of the cell surfaceome revealed established therapeutic targets (CLDN18, MSLN, TROP2, MUC1, CEACAM5) and discovered additional PDAC antigens (GPRC5A, TM4SF1) with low or minimal expression in most toxicity-prone normal tissues. Surface targeting modalities such as ADCs or CAR-T therapies have had limited efficacy in PDAC to date, in part due to widespread intra-tumoral heterogeneity. Targeting pairs of cell surface proteins that maximize therapeutic coverage of tumor cells while balancing potential toxicities may be a viable strategy and may inform emerging technologies leveraging AND/OR gate logic within antigen-directed antibody or cellular therapies. While our analysis of patient-derived single cell and spatial transcriptomic datasets suggests that there are opportunities for dual-targeting therapeutic approaches, intratumoral heterogeneity, and dynamic changes in surface target expression after exposure to multi-agent chemotherapy will necessitate diagnostic tools to empirically determine expression of each target antigen in additional patient tumor biopsies.
Finally, we surveyed combinations of targets to search for strategies that may provide an improved therapeutic window and/or broader coverage of tumor phenotypes that may be resistant to targeting single genes. Additive combinations targeting cancer cell essential pathways can provide curative regimens for some patients. For example, in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), a multi-agent chemotherapy with diverse mechanisms of cell killing and non-overlapping mechanisms of resistance has substantially improved remission and cure rates for patients. Given the advent of KRAS inhibitors, future combination regimens with KRAS inhibition in PDAC may overcome therapeutic resistance and yield improvements in patient care.

## Limitations of the study
Our dependency analysis is restricted to cell-intrinsic dependencies, given the nature of the pooled CRISPR-Cas screens used in the analysis. Without functional data in co-culture or more advanced systems, we are unable to infer dependencies resulting from interactions with immune or stromal cells in the microenvironment, which may modulate genetic dependencies or CSP expression. While we utilize multiple cohorts of human data for cell surface target analysis, our dependency and biomarker analysis is restricted to well-characterized 2D in vitro cell lines. Future work in additional cell lines and next-generation models, such as 3-dimensional organoid cultures, or more advanced in vivo contexts that recapitulate aspects of tumor heterogeneity, may help nominate additional targets.
The analysis presented here highlights multiple potential therapeutic targets, and we anticipate that these findings will help prioritize the most promising combination therapy strategies with chemotherapy, KRAS inhibition, and other emerging treatments to improve clinical outcomes for patients with PDAC.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the , Andrew J. Aguirre (andrew_aguirre@dfci.harvard.edu).

## Materials availability
All unique/stable reagents generated in this study are available from the with a completed materials transfer agreement.

## Data and code availability
Genome-wide CRISPR dependency effect sizes, as well as cell line RNAseq data, gene copy number, mutations, and chromosomal aberration data were obtained from the DepMap 24Q2 release: https://depmap.org/portal/tda/. Data for clinical tractability was obtained from the OpenTargets portal’s “Target” dataset: https://platform.opentargets.org/downloads, version 24.09.
Cell surface genes considered for analysis were derived from the Cell Surface Protein Atlas. snRNA-seq data were taken from a study of primary PDAC patient tumors. scRNA-seq data was retrieved from CellxGene: https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/gene-expression.
TCGA PDAC tumor RNA-seq data is available on the GDC data portal. RNA-seq and proteomics data was downloaded from GTEx: https://www.gtexportal.org/home/downloads/adult-gtex/overview.
Scripts and code were written for R and are available on request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
Human cell lines used are reported in the . Human PDAC cell lines were obtained from the Broad Institute Cancer Dependency Map or American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Authentication of cells was performed using STR DNA fingerprinting (Lab Corps). Cell lines were tested every 3 to 4 months and confirmed to be negative for mycoplasma using Mycostrip Mycoplasma Detection Kit (InvivoGene; Cat. # rep-mys-100) or via PCR (Labcorp). Cells were grown in the following media supplemented with 1% penicillin (Gibco) and 10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies): DMEM (PA-TU-8988T), RPMI 1640 (PANC 04.03, YAPC, KP-4, HuP_T4, BxPC-3, SNU-410, TCC-Pan2).

## METHOD DETAILS

## Identification of PDAC-associated dependencies
Genome-wide CRISPR dependency effect sizes were obtained from the DepMap 24Q2 Chronos dataset. These data are publicly available through the DepMap portal. These dependency effect sizes are quantified as Chronos scores, a statistical measure inferred from a population dynamics model that corrects for sgRNA efficacy, screen quality and cell intrinsic growth rates, and bias related to DNA cutting toxicity. Dependency scores are continuous values that range in magnitude but have empirically demonstrated that essential genes commonly have Chronos score < − 1, and unexpressed genes commonly have Chronos score equal to 0. We thus defined a threshold of Chronos score < − 0.5 as a cutoff to classify gene dependencies for our various analyses. A threshold of − 0.5 strikes a balance by capturing genes with meaningful functional impact on cell survival or proliferation, while reducing the risk of false positives from minor fitness effects. 
We categorized dependencies in PDAC, by first defining recurrent PDAC dependencies among the 45 PDAC cell line profiled in DepMap. A threshold of dependency in at least 5 PDAC cell lines, was used to define recurrent dependencies. This approximates the proportion (e.g., 10%) comparable to that for major molecular subtypes of other cancers such as triple negative breast cancer. , While somewhat arbitrary, this reflects a compromise between stringency and inclusiveness: it avoids limiting our analysis only to pan-essential genes (which are less likely to offer tumor selectivity), while still focusing on targets with reproducible dependencies across multiple models, and enough patients to justify a therapeutic development campaign. This approach identified 2185 recurrent PDAC dependencies. We further defined two subgroups within recurrent PDAC dependencies: Clinically Tractable and PDAC Selective. Data for clinical tractability was obtained from OpenTargets. A target was considered clinically tractable if a targeting compound was classified as in the “Advanced Clinical” or “Approved Drug” category. Subunit proteins where multiple subunit members were strongly dependent (median Chronos score < − 1) across PDAC lines were excluded from analyses. Targeting compounds for subunit protein complexes were annotated as specific for all subunit members, and due to the large number of subunit proteins and their frequent essentiality, we removed them. PDAC-selective dependencies were nominated by a skewed likelihood ratio test (LRT), and those which contained a skewed LRT metric of greater than 100 were identified as being ‘strongly selective.’ In brief, the LRT metric is defined as twice the log of the likelihood ratio of a fitted skewed distribution of gene sensitivity (across all lineages) over the likelihood of a fitted normal distribution. Notably, these criteria may not identify essential genes with biomarker relationships observed in other cancer types but not PDAC, e.g., BRAF dependency in BRAF-mutant cancer types. However, such dependencies with therapeutic implications may also be captured in the class of clinically tractable dependencies.
Dependencies were further evaluated for PDAC enrichment by a two-sided Mann-Whitney U test between gene dependency Chronos scores in PDAC vs. non-PDAC cell lines, with a cutoff q value of <0.01 used to classify enrichment. Genes with a negative U-statistic were considered to exhibit stronger dependencies in PDAC relative to non-PDAC lines. p-values were adjusted to account for false discovery rate. Enrichment scores are reported as the -Log10 of the adjusted p-values. To analyze gene set terms associated with PDAC selective genes, we performed an over representation analysis using the g:Profiler web server (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/gost). Gene sets with less than 500 genes were included for analysis, and statistically significant signatures at an FDR-adjusted p-value of less than 0.01 were plotted.

## Biomarkers of PDAC-associated dependencies
Biomarkers associated with dependencies were identified by Pearson correlation coefficients as well as the relative importance of the predictive feature, as detailed by DepMap. In brief, the relative importance is a statistic derived from random forest machine learning models that are built individually for each gene dependency. The relative importance is a continuous value ranging from 0 to 1 that indicates the impact of the feature on prediction accuracy relative to other features in the model. It is computed with Gini importance and is normalized so that the sum of all feature importances add up to 1. Higher feature importance denotes an increased ability to predict dependency from that biomarker. Methods for quantification of biomarkers are detailed by DepMap elsewhere. In brief, gene expression levels were quantified as log2 (TPM+1) and gene copy number was computed relative to the ploidy of the rest of the genome for a given cell line. Mutations and chromosomal aberrations were identified using SNP array chips. RNA expression, copy number, and chromosomal aberration data was retrieved from the 24Q2 DepMap release.

## Gene dependencies associated with common genetic alterations
We sought to identify dependencies associated with common genetic alterations in PDAC (KRAS mutation, TP53 mutation, SMAD4 copy number alteration or mutation, and CDKN2A copy number alteration or mutation. For binary mutation variables, we calculated a moderated effect size statistic using the two-class comparison tool in the DepMap analysis portal. This statistic represents the difference in mean value between two groups (i.e., mutant vs. WT across all 1150 CCLE cell lines), with statistical significance assessed using an empirical Bayes approach using the adaptive shrinkage method. This is implemented in the ‘ashr’ CRAN package. For SMAD4 and CDKN2A copy number alteration, we computed the Pearson correlation coefficient between gene dependency Chronos scores and gene copy number for PDAC lines and CCLE cell lines separately.

## Gene dependencies associated with transcriptional state
To identify dependencies that may be specifically associated with the classical and basal-like states, we computed scores of the Moffitt classical and basal-like signatures using single sample gene set enrichment analyses (ssGSEA). These relationships were computed using gene expression data of PDAC cell lines. To assess genetic dependencies associated with the basal and classical transcriptional states, we performed a two-class comparison in the DepMap analysis portal comparing the top and bottom quartile of signature score across PDAC cell lines for each of the basal and classical signatures. For visualization, we defined bins of low - lowest 25th percentile, medium - middle 50th percentile, and high - top 25th percentile signature expression.

## Biomarkers for KRAS dependency
Cell lines were stratified into KRAS-dependent and -independent groups by CRISPR KO KRAS dependency score (top vs. bottom quartile). Differentially enriched genes were computed using a two-sided Mann-Whitney U test and the top 50 differentially expressed genes in the top vs. bottom quartile were used as signatures for KRAS sensitivity and resistance. To analyze biologic pathways associated with KRAS sensitivity and resistance, gene signatures were inputted into MSigDB with an FDR-adjusted Q-value of less than 0.05. MRTX1133 and RMC-6236 drug viability assays were performed in pooled format using barcoded cancer cell lines as previously described. , Briefly, cell lines were subjected to 5-day viability assay using concentrations of MRTX1133 diluted on an 8-point, 2-fold ascending dose range. Barcodes were sequenced and relative viability was computed to generate an AUC metric.

## Evaluating tumor vs. normal tissue expression
Cell surface genes considered for analysis were taken from lists derived from predictions from mass spectrometry data (Cell Surface Protein Atlas ). Enrichment of gene expression in pancreatic tumors relative to normal tissue was defined in two ways. First, enrichment scores (PDAC enrichment vs. normal tissues) were computed as the log2-fold ratio of a gene’s median expression (TPM) in TCGA PDAC tumors relative to its expression (TPM) in the fourth-highest expressing normal tissue (based on median values) from Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx). In essence, this allows for gene expression in three normal tissues to be unaccounted for. As evident from clinically-approved ADCs, some level of on-target, off-tumor toxicity may be tolerable depending on context. The normal tissue types in this analysis included the aortic artery, coronary artery, tibial artery, bladder, amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex (BA24), caudate (basal ganglia), cerebellar hemisphere, cerebellum, cortex, frontal cortex (BA9), hippocampus, hypothalamus, nucleus accumbens (basal ganglia), putamen (basal ganglia), spinal cord (cervical c-1), substantia nigra, sigmoid colon, transverse colon, gastroesophageal junction, esophageal mucosa, esophageal muscularis, atrial appendage of the heart, left ventricle of the heart, renal cortex, renal medulla, liver, lung, skeletal muscle, tibial nerve, pituitary, non-sun-exposed skin, sun-exposed skin, terminal ileum of the small intestines, stomach, and whole blood. Second, enrichment scores (PDAC enrichment vs. pancreas) were also computed as the log2-fold ratio of a gene’s median expression (TPM) in the TCGA PDAC cohort relative to its median expression (TPM) in normal pancreata from GTEx. Protein enrichment versus normal pancreatic tissue was calculated as a Z normalized log fold change using proteomics from the Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium. 

## Differential expression and heterogeneity analysis using snRNA-seq data
Cell-type annotations from a previously described snRNA-seq study of primary PDAC patient tumors were used. In brief, community detection with the Leiden graph clustering method was performed on 40 principal components derived from the top 2,000 variably expressed genes in the dataset. Distinct cell populations, such as ductal cells, were then annotated with cell type-specific gene signatures and gene markers. Malignant cells were identified from a Python implementation of InferCNV v3.9, using non-malignant pancreas snRNA-seq samples as a non-cancerous reference. Annotated epithelial cells were sub-clustered with the Leiden method, and cells with an average CNA greater than 0.01 were annotated as malignant. Differential expression of prioritized CSP genes was computed as a percentile normalized statistic where the highest mean expression across cell types was assigned 1, and lowest expression was assigned 0. Expression values are count normalized on a per cell basis and log transformed prior to analysis. For assessment of co-expression of targets within the same cell and across populations, we counted the proportion of cells expressing each marker gene.

## Single cell expression of target genes in critical normal healthy tissue
Single cell sequencing data from the Human Cell Atlas was retrieved from the CellxGene web browser (https://cellxgene.cziscience.com/gene-expression) for a set of toxicity prone healthy tissues (adrenal gland, bladder, blood, bone marrow, brain, breast, colon, endocrine gland, esophagus, exocrine gland, eye, heart, kidney, large intestine, liver, lung, lymph node, skeletal muscle, pancreas, prostate gland, skin, small intestine, spinal cord, spleen, stomach). We scored expression of a target gene in each organ by creating a metric based upon the proportion of a given cell type within the overall organ, the proportion of cells within the cell type expressing the target, and the relative expression of the target gene within that cell type. The product of these three factors was taken for each cell type within the tissue and the maximum score across all cell types, normalized by ACTB, was used for visualization. The goal of this approach was to maximize sensitivity for picking up high expression in rare cell types, while weighting expression overall in the tissue.

## Cell surface targets associated with transcriptional state
To determine associations between cell surface target gene expression and classical and basal-like states, we computed the Pearson correlation coefficient between target expression and overall signature score as determined from single sample gene set enrichment analyses (ssGSEA). These relationships were computed using gene expression data of PDAC cell lines, patient derived PDAC organoids from liver biopsies, and TCGA patients.

## Whole transcriptome digital spatial profiling experiments and analysis
Whole transcriptome digital spatial profiling (DSP) of 18,269 mRNA targets was performed with the Nanostring GeoMx platform data of 21 PDAC patient specimens (IRB-approved protocol (2003P001289)) and are described in greater detail in a prior study. In brief, tissue slides of FFPE sections were prepared, hybridized to an RNA in situ hybridization probe set comprised of 18,269 targets, and counterstained with morphology markers to designate distinct cell types. Cell-type protein markers included panCK for epithelial cells, CD45 for immune cells, and αSMA for fibroblasts. SYTO13 was used as a nuclear stain. The GeoMx Digital Spatial Profiling instrument from Nanostring was used to then select circular regions of interest (ROIs), segment into marker-defined areas of interest (AOIs) within, and collect barcodes for downstream sequencing. FASTQ files were distilled into count matrices as described previously. Data were processed using upper quartile (Q3) normalization, and targets which consistently fell below a limit of quantitation were removed.
To evaluate distribution of target expression across ROIs and patients, inter- and intra-patient dispersion of gene expression was computed. To assess a gene’s expression within a patient, intra-patient dispersion was calculated as the patient-level mean of the interquartile range across each patient’s ROIs; conversely, to assess a gene’s expression across patients, inter-patient dispersion was calculated as the interquartile range of the mean expression for each patient. Interquartile range refers to the difference between the upper and lower quartile value. For visualization of target distribution across ROIs and patients, we binarized expression values to score each ROI as positive or negative by setting a cutoff based on each gene’s distribution. Malignant cell expression of a gene was considered positive if the expression was greater than the 80 th percentile of expression in adjacent non-malignant segments. The proportion of positive ROIs across the total number of ROIs sampled was computed and plotted for each patient and cell surface gene.

## Co-dependency analysis
To identify genetic dependencies that may be co-targeted, we calculated a ‘combination dependency score’ by summing gene-wise pairs of Chronos dependency scores for each PDAC cell line and then taking the median across the PDAC cell lines for each gene pair. Using this combination dependency score, we recalculated the proportion of PDAC cell lines dependent on the combination (i.e., combination dependency score < − 0.5). The combination dependency score and proportion dependent for each of the resulting combination pairs was plotted. For visualization of dependencies in combination with KRAS, we filtered the pairs to only include genes in combination with KRAS and plotted the combination dependency score against the LRT selectivity score of the gene paired with KRAS. To identify cell surface targets that may combine well with genetic dependencies, we calculated Spearman correlation coefficients between TPM values and Chronos dependency score values across all PDAC cell lines profiled in the CCLE (n = 45). For pairs of genetic dependencies in the overlapping set between clinically tractable and PDAC selective targets, and prioritized CSP-encoding genes, we visualized correlation coefficients in a heatmap.

## Transcriptional subtype-related cell surface target-specific cytoablation
PDAC organoids were cultured as previously described. Briefly, cells were seeded into growth factor-reduced Matrigel (Corning; Cat. #356231) domes and incubated at 37 ◦ C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator with human complete feeding medium.
For the viability assay, organoids were dissociated using TrypLE Express (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Cat. #12604054), and cells were seeded into ultra-low attachment 384-well plates (Corning; Cat. #4588) at 1,000 viable cells per well in 50 μL of culture media, consisting of 10% growth factor-reduced Matrigel and 90% human complete feeding medium. Humanized anti-TROP2 antibody datopotamab (MedChemExpress; Cat. #HY-P99843), human chimeric anti-CLDN18.2 antibody zolbetuximab (MedChemExpress; Cat. #HY-P99058), or human IgG1 isotype control antibody (Selleck; Cat. #A2051) was added at 9 to 11 concentrations, ranging from 0.01 to 100 nmol/L, in a randomized manner using a Tecan D300e Digital Dispenser (Tecan). Fab-αHFc-NC-MMAF, a Fab fragment of an anti-human IgG Fc-specific antibody conjugated to monomethyl auristatin F (Moradec; Cat. #AH-201-AF), was also added at a 1:3 molar ratio. Cell viability was assessed 3 days post-treatment using the Cell-TiterGlo 3D Cell Viability assay (Promega; Cat. #G9683), performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Luminescence signals were detected with a FLUOstar Omega microplate reader (BMG LABTECH) and normalized to non-treated wells. Three to five technical replicates were carried out for three independent biological replicates.
For cell surface staining, PDAC organoids were dissociated using TrypLE Express and stained with datopotamab, zolbetuximab, or the isotype control IgG1 in Flow Cytometry Staining Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific; Cat. #00–4222-26) for 1 h on ice. The cells were then stained with APC-labeled rat anti-human IgG Fc Antibody (BioLegend; Cat. #410712) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Data were acquired using an LSR Fortessa (BD) and analyzed with FlowJo (BD; version 10.9.0).

## 2D cell lines and reagents
Human PDAC cell lines were obtained from the Broad Institute Cancer Dependency Map or American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). Authentication of cells was performed using STR DNA fingerprinting (Lab Corps). Cell lines were tested every 3 to 4 months and confirmed to be negative for mycoplasma using Mycostrip Mycoplasma Detection Kit (InvivoGene; Cat. # rep-mys-100) or via PCR (Labcorp). Cells were grown in the following media supplemented with 1% penicillin (Gibco) and 10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies): DMEM (PA-TU-8988T), RPMI 1640 (PANC 04.03, YAPC, KP-4, HuP_T4, BxPC-3, SNU-410, TCC-Pan2).

## Generation of isogenic cell lines
Cell lines were infected with virus expressing CDS2 sgRNA, CDS1 sgRNA, or an intergenic control. Guide sequences were indicated in the table below. For infections of cells, 500,000 cells per well were seeded in 48-well plates with 250 μl media with 4 μg/ml of polybrene. 25–200μl of virus was added per well and spun for 2hr at 2250 rpm at 30 ◦ C. 6hrs post-infection, cells were split into a 6 cm dish. 24 h later, cells were selected with puromycin for one week.

## CRISPR-based cell viability assays

## Assay design and cell line optimization
CellTiter-Glo viability assays were performed with stably expressing lentiv2 cell lines in 96 well plates as previously described. Cell lines were seeded and spinfected with sgRNA expressing lentivirus in wells on day 0 for 900 × g for 90 min 24 h post-infection, cells were selected with puromycin for 6 days. Cell titer-glo viability was readout 7 days after infection. Prior to infections, all cell lines were optimized for assay conditions including seeding densities and volumes of virus for each infection. All lentiviral preps for each sgRNA described were batch controlled and titrated on three different cell lines representing cell lines with low, medium, and high lentiviral transduction efficiency. Optimal cell seeding densities and viral volumes were used for all subsequent CRISPR-based viability assays.

## sgRNAs design and rationale
For viability assays, we used 3 negative control guides (sgLacZ, sgAAVS1, and sgChr2), 3 positive control guides targeting pan-essential genes (sgKIF11, sgPOLR2D, and sgSF3B1), and 3 guides targeting CDS2 (sgCDS2–1, sgCDS2–2, and sgCDS2–3) as previously described. For negative control guides, we design two “cutting controls” guides which allow CRISPR-SpCas9 cleaving safe regions of human genomes to control for DNA double-strand breaks. For sgChr2, the sgRNA targets a gene desert on chromosome 2, which is also the least copy number altered chromosome across cancer. For sgAAVS1, this sgRNA targets the safe harbor of AAVS1 integration locus which is an intronic region in PPP1R12C. sgLacZ is a non-targeting sequence not found in the human genome. All sgRNA were cloned into a 3rd generation lentiviral vector (pXPR_023, Broad Institute) encoding for a human U6 promoter followed by hSpCas9 with chRNA backbone and puro-resistance marker. Lentiviral particles were generated by Lipofectamine 3000 (Thermo Fischer Scientific) transfection of sgRNA plasmids with ViralPower lentiviral packaging mix (Thermo Fischer Scientific) into HEK293T cells according to manufacturer’s protocol. sgRNA target sequences with cloning adapters were obtained from Integrated DNA technologies (IDT) as single stranded standard-desalted dsDNA oligos.

## Viability assay data quality control
Each viability assay was performed to meet specific quality control parameters. There were 10 unique conditions, one for each of the 9 guides previously described above, plus a no infection control. Each sgRNA infection had 6 replicates, 3 of which were selected with puromycin and 4 that were not. For quality control of raw luminescence from CellTiter-Glo, we necessitated infection efficiency (puro/no puro selection for each guide) to be ∼80%, and all replicates had to be within 2 standard deviations of the mean for that sgRNA infection. We also accounted for viability reduction from cutting controls for DNA double-strand breaks to be no more than 30% of the non-targeting sgLacZ.

## Viability assay data normalization
As previously described, we wanted to normalize and scale the viability data in a manner comparable to the DepMap dependency scores. Viability scores were normalized on a scale from 0 (average effect of negative sgRNA cutting controls) to − 1 (the average effect of knockout from 3 different pan-essential genes). We first calculated the distance of each well to the average to the two-cutting control sgRNAs (sgAAVS1 and sgChr2). We next scaled the values of each well from 0 to − 1 where 0 represents average viability effect of cutting controls and − 1 represents viability effect knockout of the 4 pan-essential genes. Scaling the cell viability in this manner permits one to compare across cell lines that have differential response to “off-target” effects from CRISPR and differential Cas9 activity when cell lines exhibit differences in maximum number of cells killed by pan-essential gene ablation.

## Immunoblotting
Whole cell protein lysates were collected in cold RIPA buffer ( Thermo Fischer Scientific) supplemented with HALT protease and phosphatase cocktail (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Cell extracts were agitated for 30 min at 4◦ C and then spun for 16,000 × g for 20 min at 4◦ C. The protein concentration for each sample was then quantified via BCA Protein Assay Kit (Pierce) and diluted to desired concentrations. Lysates were then run on Bio-Rad Any kD mini-protean TGX protein gels and transferred to PVDF membranes (Bio-Rad). Membranes were incubated in primary antibodies overnight at 4◦ C, followed by HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h. The images were analyzed using ECL substrates (Pierce) under the ChemiDoc Imaging System (Bio-Rad).

## siRNA transfections
Cells were seeded in a 96- or 6-well format. At Day 0, cells were reverse transfected with 10 nM siRNA and Lipofectamine RNAiMAX, according to manufacturer’s protocol. For RNAiduplex-Lipofectamine RNAiMAX complexes, diluted siRNAs in OptiMEM and RNAiMAX were prepared independently, combined, and then incubated for 15 min at room temperature. After incubations, complexes were added to cells. For 96-wells, cells were kept in knockdown until day 6. siRNA transfections were refreshed at day 3. At day 6, CellTiter glo viability assay was performed. For 6-wells, cells remained in knockdown and knockdown was confirmed by western blot 72-h post-transfection.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Three technical replicates were carried out for quantification of each experiment, indicated in the respective figure legend. Error bar reflects standard error of mean of all the technical replicates. The p-value was calculated using student T test.

## Supplementary Material
123SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116191.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the members of the Hwang and Aguirre lab for their helpful discussions. We thank the following organizations for grant support: National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship (D.G.); National Cancer Institute K08CA270417 (W.L.H.); Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award for Medical Scientists (W.L.H.); Pancreatic Cancer Action Network Career Development Award (W.L.H.); Break Through Cancer (A.J.A.); the Lustgarten Foundation (A.J.A.); the Pancreatic Cancer Action Network (A.J.A.); NIH-NCI P50CA127003, U01 CA274276, and R01 CA276268 (A.J.A.); and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Hale Center for Pancreatic Cancer Research (A.J.A., J.D.M., and H.S.).

## DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
K.T. is an employee of Daiichi Sankyo. E.L.S. has consulted for ArsenalBio, Blackstone Life Sciences, Chroma Medicine, Clade Therapeutics, ImmuneBridge, Legend Biotech, Overland Pharmaceuticals, Predicta Biosciences (including equity), and Sana Biotech; is on the SAB of Bristol Myers Squibb (including patents and royalties), Chrimeric Therapeutics, Sanofi (including research funding, patents, and royalties); and is on the DSMB of Eureka Therapeutics. J.D.M. reports research support from Novartis and Casma Therapeutics and has consulted for Third Rock Ventures and Skyhawk Therapeutics, all unrelated to the submitted work. A.J.A. has consulted for Affini-T Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Blueprint Medicines, Boehringer Ingelheim, Curie.Bio, Incyte, Kestrel Therapeutics, Merck & Co., Inc., Mirati Therapeutics Inc., Nimbus Therapeutics, Oncorus, Inc., Plexium, Quanta Therapeutics, Reactive Biosciences, Revolution Medicines, Riva Therapeutics, Servier Pharmaceuticals, Syros Pharmaceuticals, Taiho Pharmaceuticals, T-knife Therapeutics, Third Rock Ventures, and Ventus Therapeutics; holds equity in Riva Therapeutics and Kestrel Therapeutics; and has research funding from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Deerfield, Inc., Eli Lilly, Mirati Therapeutics Inc., Novartis, Novo Ventures, Revolution Medicines, and Syros Pharmaceuticals. A.J.A., K.S.K., and K.E. acknowledge a pending PCT patent application directed to CDS2 as a novel synthetic lethal target in cancer (published as WO 2024/192141 A1 on September 19, 2024). All other authors have no relevant disclosures.

 

## Highlights
Analysis of genetic dependencies and cell surface targets in PDAC
The CDS2 enzyme is a synthetic lethal target in cancer cells with EMT expression signatures
KRAS biomarkers, co-dependencies, and signatures of pharmacologic sensitivity and resistance
Combination strategies for targeting diverse tumor phenotypes