3954cellrepsmedCell Reports MedicineCell Rep MedElsevierPMC1098304110983041109830413844271210.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101446Germline structural variation globally impacts the cancer transcriptome including disease-relevant genes
ChenFengju ZhangYiqun SedlazeckFritz J CreightonChad J 1Dan L. Duncan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA2Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA3Department of Computer Science, Rice University, Houston, TX 77005, USA4Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA∗Corresponding author creighto@bcm.edu
5These authors contributed equally
6Lead contact
43202453101446101446242024© 2024 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Summary
Germline variation and somatic alterations contribute to the molecular profile of cancers. We combine RNA with whole genome sequencing across 1,218 cancer patients to determine the extent germline structural variants (SVs) impact expression of nearby genes. For hundreds of genes, recurrent and common germline SV breakpoints within 100 kb associate with increased or decreased expression in tumors spanning various tissues of origin. A significant fraction of germline SV expression associations involves duplication of intergenic enhancers or 3′ UTR disruption. Genes altered by both somatic and germline SVs include ATRX and CEBPA. Genes essential in cancer cell lines include BARD1 and IRS2. Genes with both expression and germline SV breakpoint patterns associated with patient survival include GCLM. Our results capture a class of phenotypic variation at work in the disease setting, including genes with cancer roles. Specific germline SVs represent potential cancer risk variants for genetic testing, including those involving genes with targeting implications.
Keywords: cancer, structural variation, structural variants, germline, PCAWG, Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes, Whole Genome Sequencing, GWAS, eQTL, expression quantitative trait loci

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Combined RNA and germline SV analysis using the PCAWG consortium datasets
•Several genes impacted by germline SVs could conceivably contribute to cancer
•Several genes are essential in cell lines or involve patient survival associations

Analyzing tumor gene expression data and whole genome sequencing from the PCAWG consortium, representing 1,218 patients, Chen et al. identify genes with expression influenced by germline structural variation across diverse tissues. These findings have implications for establishing a class of germline variants associated with cancer risk.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Sep 26; Revised 2024 Jan 1; Accepted 2024 Feb 6; Collection date 2024 Mar 19.

## Introduction
Structural variation is a broad class of chromosomal variation that includes copy number variants (deletions and duplications), balanced rearrangements (e.g., inversions and translocations), and insertions (e.g., from mobile-elements). In recent years, structural variants (SVs) have been associated with an increasing number of normal phenotypic variations, as well as common and rare human diseases. , Recent technological advances, including higher resolution microarrays and massively parallel next-generation sequencing, have allowed for more accurate cataloging of structural variation across many thousands of individuals. Cancer is a multistep process involving mutations in multiple genes, to which germline mutations may contribute and provide a head start on the neoplastic process. Moderate-to high-penetrance germline variants in cancer predisposition genes underlie 5%–10% of all cancers, with SVs representing an uncommon cause of cancer susceptibility, underlying perhaps 1.5% of cancer cases by some estimates. SV-impacted genes in cancer would include cancer predisposition genes, DNA damage response genes, and somatic driver genes. , The functional effects of germline SVs on gene expression in normal tissues or cell lines derived from normal tissues have been explored, , , , , whereby SVs can have large effect sizes on adjacent genes and are often constitutive across diverse tissues. , At the same time, the impact of germline SVs on expression variation in human cancers would also be of interest.
Both germline variation and somatic alterations contribute to the molecular profile of cancers. Somatic structural variation exerts a strong influence on gene expression in cancer. , , , , Recently, the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) consortium aggregated whole genome sequencing (WGS) data from 2,658 cancers across 38 tumor types involving 20 major tissues of origin to identify germline variants and somatically acquired mutations. In the PCAWG cohort, integration of somatic SVs with corresponding RNA data identified genes with altered expression associated with nearby SV breakpoints. , , Genes deregulated or disrupted in this way included many oncogenes, such as TERT, MDM2, CDK4, ERBB2, CD274, PDCD1LG2, BCL2, and IGF2; and tumor suppressor genes, such as PTEN, RB1, STK11, and TP53. In the PCAWG-led studies, common and rare germline variants were found to affect somatic mutation patterns, including SVs. , Germline deletion SVs impacting cancer susceptibility genes were cataloged in the PCAWG cohort, e.g., involving BRCA1 and BRCA2. However, the above studies did not systematically explore the potential for germline SVs, including SVs with breakpoints outside of genes, to impact gene expression, as was explored for the somatic SVs.
In the present study, we combined patient germline SV data (taken from a normal blood sample) with tumor RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data across the PCAWG cohort to systematically catalog gene-level associations with altered tumor expression in conjunction with nearby germline SV breakpoints. We took a gene-centric approach to the data, allowing us to focus on genes of interest that were recurrently altered in relation to SVs. The germline SV-expression associations identified cut across tumors from various tissues of origin. Most of the significant genes would not necessarily have specific roles in cancer, but would instead reflect germline variations. However, some genes had known roles in cancer, seemed to be targeted by somatic SVs, were essential in cancer cell lines, or had germline patterns associated with cancer patient survival.

## Results

## Germline structural variation patterns across cancer patients
To explore germline structural variation in cancer, we referred to the PCAWG dataset of germline and somatic SVs calls representing 1,218 patients ( ). Based on the blood normal sample, a median of 1,163 germline SVs was identified per patient (with s SD of 650.4). On average, the numbers of germline SVs detected did not vary widely according to tumor tissue origin ( A). However, four patients had very high numbers of SVs detected in their blood sample, only a fraction of which constituted previously identified SVs. The four patients (one breast cancer, three uterine cancers) might conceivably have undergone clonal hematopoiesis, although the SVs unique to these patients did not contribute to the SV-expression associations described below ( ). Across patients, we observed no strong associations between germline SV numbers and patient age, tumor ploidy, or tumor cellularity ( A). In contrast with the somatic SVs, most germline SVs in the PCAWG dataset were deletions (78%), followed by inversions and duplications (12.5% and 9.3%, respectively) ( B). Of 1,427,378 total germline SVs in the PCAWG dataset, only 68 were inter-chromosomal translocations, and 24% of the 322,734 PCAWG somatic SVs were translocations. In addition, germline SVs were highly recurrent across patients in terms of breakpoint positions, with more than 93% of germline SV calls involving SVs with both breakpoints found for two or more patients, while this applied to only 0.1% of somatic SV calls ( C). For intra-chromosomal SVs, the median distance between breakpoints was much smaller for germline versus somatic SVs, 2.1 kb versus 175 kb, respectively ( D). In addition, the numbers of somatic SVs detected per tumor varied widely across patients ( B), and an increased total number of somatic SVs was significantly associated with higher patient age (Spearman’s r = 0.13; p < 1E−5) and strongly associated with higher tumor ploidy (r = 0.37; p < 1E−40).
 Most of the germline SVs in the PCAWG dataset had been observed elsewhere, with 85% of these SVs being represented in the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV) curated from published studies, while only ∼0.1% of PCAWG somatic SVs were similarly represented in DGV ( C, ). Germline SV events tended to be more frequent within specific genomic regions across patients. For each patient, we assessed cytoband-level enrichment of germline SVs, with a top set of 79 cytoband regions—including 1q23.1, 3q29, 6p22.1, 6p21.33–32, 14q32.33, 19p12, and 19q13.41–42—identified as significant (p < 0.0001 by chi-squared test) for at least 20 patients ( E and D, ). Duplication and deletion SVs with breakpoints spanning genes should be reflected in the corresponding gene copy number. However, for gene copy number levels as measured in the PCAWG tumor samples, somatic SVs but not germline SVs showed the anticipated relationships involving duplications and deletions ( F). This result is likely because tumors exhibit extensive somatic copy number alterations in association with somatic SVs —e.g., as reflected in the relationship between somatic SVs with tumor ploidy ( B)—which would overshadow any germline copy number variants. The PCAWG germline SV call set used here should not include mobile-element insertions (MEIs), most of which would be inactive and unable to retrotranspose, though a subset of MEIs would be somatically active in cancer. 

## Gene-level SV-associated gene expression alterations
We set out to identify the genes for which the proximity of germline SVs was recurrently and significantly associated with altered expression across multiple patients. Using integration approaches between SVs and gene expression, previously demonstrated in tumors for somatic SVs, , , , , , , we assessed gene-level associations between tumor expression and nearby germline SV breakpoints across the PCAWG tumor cohort. As observed for somatic SVs, germline SVs with breakpoints near a gene could lead to altered cis-regulation (e.g., involving enhancer duplication) or gene disruption (e.g., for breakpoints falling within the gene). For each gene with expression data from the tumor, we assessed the pattern of nearby germline SV breakpoints within a given region window (e.g., 100 kb upstream of the gene). From the PCAWG data, we assembled a data matrix of breakpoint patterns for all 22,956 named genes and 1,218 tumors. We then assessed the association between expression and germline SV breakpoint pattern for each gene by linear models correcting for covariates, including tumor tissue of origin. In some respects, our overall approach to associate SVs with expression parallels the concept of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs), but with our approach being gene relative and region specific rather than SV specific.
By integrating transcriptomic data (from tumors) with germline SV data (from blood normal), hundreds of genes showed significantly altered gene expression in relation to nearby germline SV breakpoints (relative to tumors without breakpoints). SV breakpoints associated with altered expression include breakpoints located downstream or upstream of genes or within the gene boundaries ( A, ). For regions 100 kb upstream of the gene, 100 kb downstream of the gene, within the gene body, or 1 Mb upstream or downstream of the gene, the numbers of significant genes at a false discovery rate (FDR) of less than 10% were 95, 119, 76, and 132, respectively, after correction for tumor tissue of origin, tumor ploidy, tumor purity, and gene-level copy number. For each gene set, more genes were positively correlated with SV event (i.e., expression was higher when SV breakpoint was present) than were negatively correlated. Without correcting for tissue or origin, we found even greater numbers of genes with germline SVs associated with increased expression ( A), indicating that the tissue of origin versus the SV breakpoint patterns would better explain the differential patterns observed for those additional genes. Unlike what has been observed for the somatic SVs, , incorporating gene-level copy number and tumor ploidy did not greatly impact the germline SV-expression associations observed. All major SV classes (duplication, inversion, and deletion) were involved in the significant germline SV-expression associations. However, associations with increased expression were significantly enriched for duplication and inversion SVs, while associations with decreased expression were enriched for deletion SVs ( B). A set of 306 genes associated with altered expression in conjunction with nearby germline SV breakpoints (FDR of <10%, after correction for tissue type, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity) for any of the above four genomic region windows examined ( C and 2D).
 Genes with differential expression significantly associated with nearby germline SV breakpoints could each involve a substantial percentage of patients with SVs. For some significant genes, as few as ∼2% of patients could have an SV breakpoint in the associated genomic region, but for other genes, more than 80% of patients may be similarly involved ( D). Examples of significant genes, including NUTM2B and major histocompatibility complex, class II, DQ beta 2 (HLA-DQB2), highlight breakpoint patterns for highly recurrent germline SVs involving increased mRNA levels ( E and 2F). Germline SVs with breakpoints 100 kb upstream of NUT family member 2B (NUTM2B) involved a recurrent inversion event with a size of ∼58 kb in 704 patients ( E; ). Germline SVs with breakpoints 100 kb downstream of HLA-DQB2 involved multiple recurrent SVs and both deletion events and duplication events, with breakpoints in 1,067 patients ( F; ). Notably, all 62 duplication events downstream of HLA-DQB2 spanned an enhancer element. For genes such as NUTM2B, the absolute expression differences between SV-associated and other patients may be relatively small, but still statistically significant, even when correcting for expression differences by tumor tissue of origin ( E). We also found our germline SV-expression associations to share significant overlaps with SV-eQTLs previously cataloged using normal tissues from the Genotype-Tissue Expression project ( A and S2B). A significant number of our SV-expression associations were also present in a breast cancer cell line ( C). Our germline SV-expression associations were not confounded by somatic SV or germline single nucleotide variants (SNVs) patterns ( A).
In contrast with previous observations involving somatic SVs, incorporating tumor tissue of origin into the linear modeling of germline SV breakpoints versus gene expression resulted in a substantial decrease in the numbers of significant genes ( A). This result suggests that some germline SVs would be more represented in patients with specific cancer types, as the tissue type over the SV breakpoint pattern would better explain the differential expression observed. A top set of recurrent germline SVs specific to tumor tissue of origin showed significant enrichment, predominately in patients with leukemia, kidney cancer, head and neck cancer, or liver cancer, with some SVs more enriched in other tissues ( B). As opposed to the genes significant both with and without correction for tumor tissue of origin, most of the genes significant only for the model without tissue type correction had both breakpoint enrichment pattern and corresponding differential expression for at least one tissue type ( C and S3D). All SV-expression associations explored below incorporate tumor tissue type, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity, where the associations would span tumors from multiple tissues of origin. However, recurrent germline SVs enriched by tumor tissue type may warrant further attention elsewhere, e.g., as part of genome-wide association studies (GWASs). Few genes were significant when assessing a 2-kb upstream genomic region window for germline SV-expression associations ( ).

## Germline SV-associated expression involving enhancers or 3′ UTRs
Various mechanisms could be at work in germline SV-associated altered expression. One mechanism evident in the PCAWG datasets involved the duplication of intergenic enhancer regions ( A). In the PCAWG datasets, we cataloged germline duplication SV events with breakpoints 100 kb upstream or 100 kb downstream of a gene, where the SV breakpoints did not fall within the gene nor span the gene. As compared with all genes with associated SVs, the subset of genes with over-expression—but not under-expression—in conjunction with nearby germline SV breakpoints (p < 0.01 by linear model correcting for covariates) were highly enriched (p < 1E−70, chi-squared test) for SVs associated with enhancer duplication ( B). Genes involved in enhancer duplication events combined with higher expression included HLA-DRB6, KANSL1-AS1, NAGK, SOCS2-AS1, HLA-DQB2, crystallin beta B2 pseudogene 1 (CRYBB2P1), and OR7D2 ( C), with the associations spanning various tissues. HLA-DQB2, noted above ( F), involved both duplication SVs spanning a downstream enhancer and deletion SVs not spanning the enhancer, with both SV groups being associated with higher HLA-DQB2 expression. NAGK (N-acetylglucosamine kinase) involved 141 patients with a recurrent duplication SV with breakpoints upstream of the gene and spanning an enhancer element, while other SV deletion events were not associated with higher expression ( D). Similarly, CRYBB2P1 involved 32 duplication SV events—21 spanning an upstream enhancer—and 39 deletion events, where only the enhancer-spanning duplication SVs were associated with higher expression ( E).
 Regulatory regions within the gene 3′ UTR can influence the stability of the corresponding mRNA, e.g., via binding by microRNAs or regulatory proteins ( A). In addition to the above genomic region window examined in relation to genes ( A), we assessed germline SV breakpoints falling within the gene 3′ UTR associated with altered mRNA levels ( ). At an FDR of 10% or lower (linear model correcting for covariates), seven genes—METTL21A, zinc finger protein 100 (ZNF100), HLA-DQB2, zinc finger protein 462 (ZNF462), KRTAP4-8, BTBD19, and TMEM105—had significantly increased expression in relation to 3′ UTR-associated breakpoints spanning various tissues ( B), where the normal degradation or regulatory processes could conceivably be lost in the affected patients. As examples, ZNF100 involved 645 patients with a recurrent deletion SV having one breakpoint located in the 3′ UTR ( C), and ZNF462 involved 38 patients with a recurrent inversion SVs having both breakpoints located in the 3′ UTR ( D). In addition to the above analysis involving germline SVs, we also carried out a similar 3′ UTR analysis for the PCAWG somatic SVs ( ). Only one gene, BCL2, had a significant positive association (FDR of <10%), involving 29 lymphomas and two leukemias, which association involved an already well-known translocation t(14; 18) juxtaposing BCL2 to the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene enhancer at band 14q32, resulting in gene over-expression and inhibition of apoptosis. 
 

## Expression alterations involving both germline and somatic SV breakpoints
Both somatic and germline SVs may contribute to the tumor’s molecular profile. In parallel with the above analyses linking germline SV breakpoint patterns with altered expression of nearby genes, we carried out a similar set of analyses for the PCAWG somatic call set ( ). Many more genes had significant somatic SV-expression associations than had germline SV-expression associations (even with relatively fewer somatic versus germline SVs represented in the PCAWG datasets). For somatic SV breakpoints in regions 100 kb upstream of the gene, 100 kb downstream of the gene, within the gene body, or 1 Mb upstream or downstream of the gene, the numbers of significant genes at a FDR of less than 10% were 1,288, 1,152, 913, and 1,187, respectively, after correction for tumor tissue of origin, tumor ploidy, tumor purity, and gene-level copy number. Notably, there was little overlap in the significant genes between the germline and somatic SV results sets. A set of 57 genes had both germline and somatic SV breakpoints associated with altered expression (p < 0.01 for each by linear modeling correcting for covariates) in the same direction and for the same genomic region window ( A).
 Genes of particular interest within the set of 57 included two genes with well-established cancer associations by COSMIC : alpha-thalassemia mental retardation X-linked (ATRX) and CCAAT enhancer binding protein alpha (CEBPA). ATRX is one of the most frequently somatically mutated tumor suppressor genes in human cancers, with roles in regulating chromatin state, gene expression, and DNA damage repair. Both somatic and germline SV breakpoints within ATRX were associated with lower gene expression, resulting from gene disruption ( B). Of the 1,218 PCAWG patients, 28 had tumors harboring somatic SV breakpoints within ATRX (spanning multiple cancer types), and an additional four patients (two breast cancer and two uterine cancer) had germline SV breakpoints within ATRX, with ATRX expression notably lower in tumors from both patient groups ( B). In contrast, both somatic and germline SV breakpoints spanning the genomic region within 500 kb of the gene start of CEBPA were associated with higher gene expression ( C). Of the 1,218 PCAWG patients, 84 had tumors harboring somatic SV breakpoints for the above genomic region, and an additional 33 patients had germline SV breakpoints, with CEBPA expression elevated in tumors from both patient groups, including liver tumors ( C). Interestingly, CEBPA itself is understood to represent a tumor suppressor gene, particularly in leukemia. However, long non-coding RNA CEBPA-DT, a divergent transcript of CEBPA, has recently been found to promote liver cancer metastasis through DDR2/β-catenin activation. , 

## Germline SV-associated expression involving genes essential in cell lines
To further sift through the germline SV-expression associations for genes of particular interest, we turned to the Cancer Dependency Map (DepMap) CRISPR assays , measuring the essentiality of each gene for each of 1,070 cancer cell lines. A low DepMap-based gene effect score for a given gene in a cell line indicated that the cell line is dependent on the gene for proliferation in vitro. We crossed the DepMap results with the set of 580 genes having germline SV breakpoints associated with increased expression (p < 0.01 for any region by linear modeling correcting for covariates, involving at least three patients with SV breakpoints). Of the 580 genes, 45 genes were found essential (with gene effect score of <−0.75) in more than 5% of cell lines ( A, ). The 45 genes did not represent a statistically significant overlap between the respective results sets, consistent with the notion that most genes involving germline SV-expression association would not pertain directly to cancer, as well as the fact that the CRISPR assays are limited to measuring a specific variable in an artificial model system. Still, the 45 genes represent potential cancer therapeutic targets, including several genes of interest, as explored below. Some genes were essential in more than 90% of cell lines, including genes encoding RNA binding proteins and ribosomal components, while other genes were essential in just a small fraction of cell lines, possibly reflecting genetic variation.
 BRCA1 associated RING domain 1 (BARD1) has often been thought of as a tumor suppressor gene, but recent studies have caused some to re-evaluate its cancer-related role as being oncogenic instead, with the gene having potential as a therapeutic target for cancer susceptibility and testing. 
BARD1 was essential in 24% of cell lines by DepMap, while a germline SV 100 kb upstream of the gene—involving 702 patients—associated with its increased expression ( B). Another gene, insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2), was essential in 9% of cell lines, with an intronic germline SV—involving 89 patients—being associated with increased expression ( C). IRS2 is a transforming oncogene that encodes an adaptor protein in the insulin-like growth factor I receptor pathway, with implications for therapeutic targeting. 
DICER1, encoding the Dicer enzyme that cleaves double-stranded RNA and pre-microRNA into small interfering RNA and microRNA, respectively, had germline SV breakpoints further away from the gene—up to ∼787 kb upstream or downstream and involving 51 patients—associated with its increased expression ( A). However, the DICER1-associated SV breakpoints did not fall into a tight pattern of location as observed for the other genes of interest in this study. Furthermore, greater BARD1 expression associated with worse patient outcome across multiple cancer types ( D and B), as observed across the entire TCGA pan-cancer cohort (n = 10,152 patients, correcting for survival differences by cancer type cancer type), as well as for individual cancer types, including breast cancer (n = 1,302) and bladder cancer (n = 1,035), representing other patient cohorts. BARD1 also trended with worse outcome in pediatric brain tumors ( C). The association of BARD1 expression with worse patient outcome, along with the gene being essential in a large percentage of cell lines, would seem to be consistent with the gene having an oncogenic role.

## SVs and associated genes involving patient survival
While most genes with germline SV-associated altered expression would presumably have no role in cancer, we hypothesized that a subset of genes with potential roles might be uncovered through cancer patient survival analyses across molecular datasets from different cohorts. We, therefore, identified the subset of genes with germline SV-associated altered expression for which the germline SV breakpoint patterns were also associated with patient overall survival in the PCAWG cohort. For each of the 22,956 genes in our PCAWG datasets, we associated the germline SV breakpoint pattern with survival (by Cox analysis, correcting for tumor tissue of origin) for each of the SV breakpoint matrices respectively involving regions 100 kb upstream of the gene, 100 kb downstream of the gene, within the gene body, or 1 Mb upstream or downstream of the gene ( ). For this analysis, we required a positive association between breakpoint pattern and survival, as the absence of a germline SV should presumably not increase risk of a shorter time to adverse event. Consistent with this assumption, we found many more genes with significant positive associations than negative associations of SV breakpoint with survival, with, for example, 1,381 positive versus 218 negative genes significant (two-sided p < 0.05) for the 1-Mb region ( ).
Across the PCAWG patients, we identified a top set of 150 genes for which there was both a positive association (for any region examined) between germline SV breakpoints near the gene and worse overall survival (one-sided p < 0.05, Cox correcting for tissue of origin) and a positive or negative association (two-sided p < 0.05 by linear model, any region) between nearby germline SV breakpoints and altered gene expression ( A). Of the 150 genes, 86 had a positive association between breakpoint pattern and expression, and 64 had a negative association. The above would represent a subset of germline SV-expression associations of potential interest due to the survival associations. However, as we had not used expression associations with survival to derive the 150 genes, we tested whether the 150-gene signature could collectively predict patient outcome in external molecular datasets of cancer gene expression. Taking the direction of the germline SV-expression association as the direction of each gene in the 150-gene signature, we examined the signature association with outcome in the TCGA pan-cancer expression dataset ( B and A) (n = 9379 patients, no PCAWG tumors, and correcting for survival differences by cancer type) and three additional expression datasets ( C and B): breast cancer (n = 1,302), bladder cancer (n = 1,035), and pediatric brain tumors (n = 1,274). For each external dataset, the 150-gene signature could distinguish higher risk from lower risk patients with statistical significance ( B and 7C).
 One example of a gene in the 150-gene signature ( A) that was individually associated with patient overall survival was GCLM (glutamate-cysteine ligase modifier subunit). Germline SVs with breakpoints 100 kb downstream of GCLM involved two distinct recurrent SV deletion events, with breakpoints in 649 patients associated with increased expression ( D). GCLM also showed associations with worse patient survival in terms of both breakpoint patterns and expression ( E and C). A recent study provided experimental support for GCLM as a tumor promoter in bladder cancer. In parallel with the above analyses linking germline SV breakpoint patterns with patient survival ( A), we carried out a similar set of analyses for the PCAWG somatic call set, from which 595 genes had somatic SV breakpoints both positively associated with worse overall survival and positively or negatively associated with altered expression ( A). The 595 genes could also predict patient survival in external patient cohorts based on gene expression ( B–S6E). Unlike the 150 germline SV-associated genes, however, the 595 somatic SV-associated genes could not predict survival in pediatric brain tumors ( C), which related diseases might be expected to have a stronger germline component than that of adult cancers. In addition, only one gene, G protein-coupled receptor 132, was in both the germline SV-related 150-gene set and the somatic SV-related 595-gene set ( ).

## Discussion
Germline structural variation is a major source of gene expression differences in humans. Here, we assembled a catalog of gene-level germline SV-expression associations in human tumors, in contrast to similar types of catalogs previously based on somatic SVs. , , , , , Our study of germline SVs represented an opportunity to characterize a class of normal variation across individuals that extends beyond SNVs. Most of the significant germline SV-associated genes we identified would not necessarily have specific roles in cancer, but, for some genes, the expression variation might have some other phenotype. At the same time, several genes impacted by germline SVs could conceivably contribute to cancer, e.g., through these genes having an established cancer association or an association with patient survival. Cancer-relevant genes involving germline SVs include ATRX, CEBPA, BRD1, IRS2, and GCLM. For germline SVs, we observed here that the absolute expression differences between SV-associated and other patients may be relatively small, but still statistically significant, in contrast with somatic SVs that often involve dramatic expression changes. Somatic SVs represent random mutations with often catastrophic consequences, whereas germline SVs would represent a normal class of genetic variation passed down through generations.
The SVs arising in our study might also be explored elsewhere for any possible cancer risk associations by GWAS and similar studies involving both cases and controls. The subset of genes with cancer-relevant associations arising in our present study would represent strong candidates for further investigation. Historically, GWAS and similar studies have primarily focused on SNVs, not SVs. As WGS is applied more in future studies, germline SVs should receive more attention. The results of this present study can help guide future genomic case-control studies, which studies could benefit from increased statistical power when focusing on a select set of germline SVs from our study versus examining all variants. , Conversely, any significant germline SVs that may arise in case-control association studies can be crossed with our results to determine any related expression changes that might plausibly explain the association. In our previous studies of somatic SVs, we first identified many associations later established in subsequent studies, such as those involving TERT , , and programmed cell death 1/programmed cell death ligand 1 genes. , In the clinical setting, any established cancer risk variants could potentially aid in genetic testing, with a subset of variants found here to also involve essential genes with targeting implications. Many germline SV-expression associations identified in the PCAWG cohort could also be relevant in other cellular or phenotypic contexts outside of cancer.
While some SVs may involve gene duplication, deletion, or disruption, others involve cis-regulatory alterations. Like the eQTL approach, our approach to SV-expression associations does not assume the mechanism for altered gene cis-regulation. However, specific mechanisms would be discoverable by mining our associations to identify patterns of enrichment, e.g., as we did here regarding enhancer duplication events. For somatic SVs, mechanisms of SV-mediated altered cis-regulation are diverse and would include disruption of topologically associated domains, enhancer hijacking, and altered DNA methylation. In contrast, germline SVs would have fewer possibilities for altering the regulatory landscape, as germline SVs involve very few translocations and are smaller in size than somatic SVs. Most of the germline SV-expression associations we identified did not have a likely mechanism assigned, representing an avenue for future work. Outside information can shed light on possible mechanisms, although germline SV-expression associations show but modest enrichment at regulatory elements and remain difficult to predict from current annotations. Still, as additional annotations or information emerge, our results, which represent a resource, can be re-examined in this light.

## Limitations of the study
While cancer-relevant genes would be included in our results, our present study cannot definitively link a specific germline SV to increased cancer risk. Any disease or phenotypic relevance regarding our germline SV-expression associations remains to be elucidated. Future case-control studies focusing on our study’s top SVs of interest could help to establish any hypothesized cancer risk associations. Whether the observed small expression changes in cancer-relevant genes over the course of a patient’s life could contribute to cancer remains a question for further study. As cancer genomics datasets with combined WGS and expression data and much greater patient numbers become available, a more refined catalog of SV-expression associations can be assembled with the benefit of increased statistical power. Germline SV-expression associations involving specific cancer types could also be explored using greater patient numbers and more extensive outcomes data.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Chad J. Creighton (creighto@bcm.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
This paper analyzes existing, publicly available data. Details on accessing the datasets are listed in the . This paper does not report original code. No custom computer code was used for data collection, which was performed using open-source software. Additional processing involved in-house scripts that are available upon request. All analyses used previously published software or methods.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Experimental model and study participant details
Regarding human subjects, cancer molecular profiling data were generated through informed consent as part of previously published studies and analyzed in accordance with each original study’s data use guidelines and restrictions. The results here are based on data from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Research Network and the International Cancer Research Consortium (ICGC).

## Method details

## Patient datasets
Datasets of germline and somatic structural variants (SVs), RNA expression, and copy number were generated as part of the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes (PCAWG) project . Germline and somatic SV and gene expression data were compiled and harmonized by the PCAWG initiative from 29 previous studies ( ). Of the 2658 PCAWG donors, 1220 had RNA data, of which 1218 had corresponding WGS-based germline somatic SV calls by both Delly and Snowman (SvABA) algorithms ( , two TCGA cases of the 1220 not having germline SV calls by Snowman algorithm). Tumors profiled spanned a range of cancer types (bladder, sarcoma, breast, liver-biliary, cervix, leukemia, colorectal, lymphoma, prostate, esophagus, stomach, central nervous system, head/neck, kidney, lung, skin, ovary, pancreas, thyroid, uterus), as detailed in . In the minority of patients with multiple tumors profiled, we selected one tumor to represent the patient.
Germline SV variant call files, generated by the PCAWG consortium, were downloaded from the Cancer Genome Collaboratory (Collab, ICGC cases) and the Protected Data Cloud (PDC, TCGA cases). We compiled germline SV calls in the final analysis set after filtering for calls by both of two algorithms. Germline SV calls from Snowman (Broad pipeline) and Delly (DKFZ pipeline) were pairwise joined based on SV position, allowing 200 bp slop at the breakpoints. For this merged germline SV call set, we used the Snowman SV genomic coordinates throughout the study. For somatic SVs, calls were made by three different data centers using different algorithms; calls made by at least two out of four algorithms were used in the downstream analyses, along with additional filtering criteria as described by the PCAWG consortium. Somatic SVs were defined by comparison between the tumor and matched normal. For copy number, the calls made by the Sanger group using the Ascat NGS algorithm with default parameters, which data are available at the ICGC Data Portal (https://dcc.icgc.org/releases/release_28). Tumor ploidy and purity (tumor cell fraction) values were provided by PCAWG6. For RNA-seq data, alignments by both STAR (version 2.4.0i,2-pass) and TopHat2 (version 2.0.12) were used to generate a combined set of expression calls. Quantification on a per-transcript level was performed with Kallisto (v.0.42.1), and Gencode v.19 was used as the gene annotation reference. PCAWG consortium performed quantification of consensus expression by taking the average expression based on STAR and TopHat2 alignments. Gene counts were normalized by adjusting the counts to Fragments Per Kilobase per Million mapped fragments (FPKM) as well as FPKM with upper quartile normalization (FPKM-UQ) in which the total read counts in the FPKM definition has been replaced by the upper quartile of the read count distribution multiplied by the total number of protein-coding genes. Alignment parameters and other methodology details are provided at ref. 53. FPKM-UQ values were used in the present study (dataset available at https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn5553991).

## Integrative analyses between SVs and expression
Using SVExpress, we defined genes with altered RNA expression associated with nearby SV breakpoints. These analyses were carried out separately for both germline and somatic SV call sets. Relative to each gene, genomic region windows considered included the within-gene regions and within 100kb upstream or 100kb downstream of the gene, as well as gene 3′UTR. For the above regions, SVExpress constructed a gene-to-sample matrix with entries as 1 if a breakpoint occurs in the specified region with respect to the given gene in the given sample, and 0 if otherwise. We also used SVExpress to examine a 1Mb region surrounding each gene (1Mb upstream or downstream of the gene start), using the “relative distance metric” option, whereby breakpoints close to the gene will have more numeric weight in identifying SV-expression associations, while breakpoints further away but within 1Mb can have some influence. Gene-level SV-expression association analyses included 22956 uniquely identified genes (with Entrez gene identifier). Using the geneXsample SV breakpoint matrix, SVExpress assessed the correlation between expression of the gene and the presence of an SV breakpoint using a linear regression model (with log-transformed expression values). Linear regression models separately evaluated significant associations without any correction for covariates, or when correcting for tumor tissue type, or when correcting for tissue type, gene-level copy number, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity. Genes significant by the third model—correcting for tissue type, gene-level copy number, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity—were carried forward in the downstream analyses.
By SVExpress, a gene shows significant SV-expression associations if the expression and SV breakpoint patterns line up non-randomly with respect to each other across all samples analyzed, after correction for covariates. By design, our integrative analytical approach does not assume the specific mechanism of altered expression, treating SV breakpoints representing different classes (duplications, deletions, inversions, and translocations) and insert sizes the same. For the 1 Mb region, if multiple breakpoints occur near the gene, the breakpoint closest to the gene start is used in the breakpoint matrix. For the analyses involving within-gene, 100kb upstream, and 100kb downstream gene regions, we only considered genes with at least three tumors associated with an SV within the given region when estimating False Discovery Rate. All genomic coordinates were based on the hg19 human reference genome. To identify potential enhancer duplication events involving gene-level SV-expression associations, we used the enhancer annotations provided by Kumar et al. Gene 3′UTR positions were obtained from Ensembl biomart. 
Our analytical approach to associate SVs with gene expression was gene-centric rather than variant-centric. This aspect is in contrast with eQTL-based approaches focusing on variant-level associations. A gene-centric approach simplifies the number of tests performed. Our approach also allows for different variants within a region to collectively contribute to altered expression, which lends itself well to the study of somatic SVs in particular, as somatic SVs are usually not recurrent but can have breakpoints covering a sizable genomic region in relation to genes. In contrast, germline SVs tend to be highly recurrent and common, and in some cases, only certain germline SVs and not others within a given region would be associated with altered expression of nearby genes. Furthermore, our approach would identify associations that cut across tumors of different tissues of origin, whereas eQTL associations are typically within a specific tissue or cell type. , Our approach incorporates tissue of origin as a covariate, allowing any significant genes to have different baseline expression levels between tissues. We observed significant overlap between our results and previous results from the eQTL approach obtained using GTEx. Differences between the respective results sets could involve tumors representing highly aberrant cellular systems, where cell- or tissue-specific programs may be lost, e.g., due to loss of differentiation.

## Survival analyses
We identified gene-level molecular correlates of patient survival associated with nearby germline SV breakpoints in the PCAWG cohort of 1218 patients. For associating nearby SV breakpoints with patient outcome, we utilized the geneXsample relative distance breakpoint matrix, generated by SVExpress, for a given genomic region in relation to the gene (within the gene boundary, 100kb upstream of the gene, 100kb downstream of the gene, or within 1Mb of the gene start, with relative distances involving the 1Mb region being weighted using the “relative distance metric” option ). For each gene, we used a stratified Cox (correcting for cancer type) to associate patient overall survival with the germline SV breakpoint patterns for that gene. We also associated mRNA expression of the gene with overall survival using stratified Cox (corrected for cancer type, using as.factor in R). We compared the set of genes significant for the SV breakpoint survival association analysis with the set of genes with SV-mRNA associations. When overlapping different result sets, we used more relaxed p value cutoffs to limit false negatives, where the overlapping genes were yielded significant expression-based survival associations in multiple external datasets. In addition to the associations of germline SV breakpoint patterns with patient outcome, we carried out an analogous set of analyses for the somatic SV breakpoint patterns.
We also examined genes and gene sets of interest in public cancer transcriptomic datasets for associations between expression and patient outcome. To analyze breast cancer patient survival, we used a compendium expression dataset involving 1302 patients and nine separate datasets assembled previously. To analyze bladder cancer patient survival, we used a compendium expression dataset involving 1035 patients and five separate datasets assembled previously. We used RNA-seq data from the Children’s Brain Tumor Network (CBTN)23 to analyze pediatric brain tumor patient survival. For CBTN, we separately generated results for both the initial RNA dataset and the more recent “X01” dataset; then, we combined the respective results in associating gene signatures with patient outcome. The TCGA pan-cancer RNA-seq dataset, representing 32 major cancer types and 10224 tumors, was assembled as previously described. Patients represented in both TCGA and PCAWG datasets were not included in the TCGA pan-cancer survival analyses, leaving 9379 patients with combined RNA expression and survival data. For analyses involving the TCGA pan-cancer and breast compendium datasets, patient survival was capped at 200 months and 240 months, respectively, except where indicated. For the CBTN dataset, we included only one tumor per patient in the survival analyses.
Given a gene signature (e.g., the 150-gene signature of A), we scored patient profiles in the external expression dataset using our previously described “t score” metric. , This t score represents the two-sided t statistic when comparing, within each external differential expression profile, the average of the signature high genes with the average of the signature low genes. For example, the t score for a given sample profile is high when the genes high and low in the signature are respectively high and low on average in the external sample profile. We assessed the association of the expression of individual genes or the gene signature score with patient outcome using Cox and log rank (dividing the cases according to low, high, or intermediate signature scoring). In addition, for analyses utilizing the TCGA pan-cancer dataset, stratified Cox models or stratified log rank tests were used to evaluate survival association when correcting for tumor type.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
All p values were two-sided unless otherwise specified. We relied on a stricter FDR cutoff for defining top genes when carrying out gene-level global molecular associations for a single analysis (e.g., gene-level SV-mRNA associations). When overlapping different top-gene results sets (e.g., gene-level SV-expression associations involving enhancer duplication or gene-level SV-expression associations involving both germline and somatic SV analyses), we used a more relaxed p value cutoff to limit false negatives, helping us identify significant overlap patterns. Visualization using heat maps was performed using JavaTreeview (version 1.1.6r4) and matrix2png (version 1.2.1). Boxplots represent 5% (lower whisker), 25% (lower box), 50% (median), 75% (upper box), and 95% (upper whisker). Figures represent biological and not technical replicates.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant P30CA125123 (C. Creighton). We thank Chris Amos for critical review of the manuscript.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization: C.J.C.; methodology: C.J.C., Y.Z., and F.C.; formal analysis: C.J.C., Y.Z., F.C., and F.J.S.; data curation: C.J.C.; visualization: C.J.C.; writing: C.J.C.; Manuscript review: F.J.S., Y.Z., and F.C.; supervision: C.J.C.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Published: March 4, 2024

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101446.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Table S1. Patient sample annotation table, related to Figure 1
Provided as an Excel file. By patient, sample annotation, with corresponding molecular data and comparisons for genes of interest, is provided for the PCAWG cohort of 1218 patients with combined data by WGS (both tumor and blood normal) and RNA-seq (tumor only). The numbers of SVs per cytoband region for each patient are provided in a separate tab, involving 811 cytoband regions (not including chromosomes X and Y).

## Table S2. Germline SVs for genes and samples with recurrently altered expression, related to Figure 2
Provided as an Excel file. Germline SVs and associated samples and genes, for which the genes had a significant association of altered expression with SV breakpoints (linear model, correcting for tissue type by TCGA or ICGC project, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity) and for which the tumor sample had differential expression in the same direction as the association (greater or less than the median across samples). Germline SV calls of the PCAWG samples were based on detection by both Delly and Snowman algorithms. Corresponding patient identifiers are not provided. For each SV-gene-sample entry, the SV coordinates, gene-level statistics, and relative expression in the sample are indicated. Results are provided for the genomic region windows 100 kb upstream of the gene, 100 kb downstream of the gene, and within the gene. Also noted are any SVs found in one of the four patients with very high numbers of SVs and not in any other patients and not found in DGV, representing only 0.3% of the SV events in this Excel file.

## Table S3. Gene-level associations between expression and nearby germline SV breakpoint, related to Figure 2
Provided as an Excel file. Complete set of gene-level associations between mRNA expression and nearby germline SV breakpoint in the PCAWG cohort, according to region examined (e.g., 100 kb upstream, 100 kb downstream, within the gene body, 1 Mb upstream or downstream, gene 3′ UTR, and 2 kb upstream). Results provided using linear regression models evaluated significant associations without any correction for covariates or when correcting for tumor tissue type or for tissue type, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity. Also provided for each gene is the percentage of the 1070 cell lines in DepMap for which the gene is essential (gene score<−0.75).

## Table S4. Germline SV breakpoint patterns for selected genes, related to Figure 2
Provided as an Excel file. Germline SV breakpoint patterns, with associated expression, provided for genes highlighted in the study, including ATRX, CEBPA, CRYBB2P1, GCLM, HLA-DQB2, NAGK, NUTM2B, ZNF100, ZNF462, BARD1, IRS2. Corresponding patient identifiers are not provided.

## Table S5. Gene-level associations between expression and nearby somatic SV breakpoint, related to Figure 5
Provided as an Excel file. Complete set of gene-level associations between mRNA expression and nearby somatic SV breakpoint in the PCAWG cohort, according to region examined (e.g., 100 kb upstream, 100 kb downstream, within the gene body, 1 Mb upstream or downstream, gene 3′ UTR, and 2 kb upstream). Results provided using linear regression models evaluated significant associations without any correction for covariates or when correcting for tumor tissue type or for tissue type, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity.

## Table S6. Gene-level correlations with patient overall survival, related to Figure 7
Provided as an Excel file. By stratified Cox, correcting for cancer type, associations with both nearby germline SV breakpoints and patient overall survival are provided, according to region examined (e.g., 100 kb upstream, 100 kb downstream, within the gene body, 1 Mb upstream or downstream), as well as associations with somatic SV breakpoints and survival. For SV breakpoints, positive Cox beta indicates that nearby breakpoints are associated with worse outcome; negative Cox beta, associated with better outcome. Also provided are gene expression associations with survival for the PCAWG cohort. For expression, positive Cox beta indicates that higher expression is associated with worse outcome; negative Cox beta, associated with better outcome. The 150 genes from are indicated, for which was found both a positive association between germline SV breakpoints near the gene and worse overall survival and a positive or negative association between nearby germline SV breakpoints and altered gene expression.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Table S1. Patient sample annotation table, related to Figure 1
Provided as an Excel file. By patient, sample annotation, with corresponding molecular data and comparisons for genes of interest, is provided for the PCAWG cohort of 1218 patients with combined data by WGS (both tumor and blood normal) and RNA-seq (tumor only). The numbers of SVs per cytoband region for each patient are provided in a separate tab, involving 811 cytoband regions (not including chromosomes X and Y).

## Table S2. Germline SVs for genes and samples with recurrently altered expression, related to Figure 2
Provided as an Excel file. Germline SVs and associated samples and genes, for which the genes had a significant association of altered expression with SV breakpoints (linear model, correcting for tissue type by TCGA or ICGC project, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity) and for which the tumor sample had differential expression in the same direction as the association (greater or less than the median across samples). Germline SV calls of the PCAWG samples were based on detection by both Delly and Snowman algorithms. Corresponding patient identifiers are not provided. For each SV-gene-sample entry, the SV coordinates, gene-level statistics, and relative expression in the sample are indicated. Results are provided for the genomic region windows 100 kb upstream of the gene, 100 kb downstream of the gene, and within the gene. Also noted are any SVs found in one of the four patients with very high numbers of SVs and not in any other patients and not found in DGV, representing only 0.3% of the SV events in this Excel file.

## Table S3. Gene-level associations between expression and nearby germline SV breakpoint, related to Figure 2
Provided as an Excel file. Complete set of gene-level associations between mRNA expression and nearby germline SV breakpoint in the PCAWG cohort, according to region examined (e.g., 100 kb upstream, 100 kb downstream, within the gene body, 1 Mb upstream or downstream, gene 3′ UTR, and 2 kb upstream). Results provided using linear regression models evaluated significant associations without any correction for covariates or when correcting for tumor tissue type or for tissue type, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity. Also provided for each gene is the percentage of the 1070 cell lines in DepMap for which the gene is essential (gene score<−0.75).

## Table S4. Germline SV breakpoint patterns for selected genes, related to Figure 2
Provided as an Excel file. Germline SV breakpoint patterns, with associated expression, provided for genes highlighted in the study, including ATRX, CEBPA, CRYBB2P1, GCLM, HLA-DQB2, NAGK, NUTM2B, ZNF100, ZNF462, BARD1, IRS2. Corresponding patient identifiers are not provided.

## Table S5. Gene-level associations between expression and nearby somatic SV breakpoint, related to Figure 5
Provided as an Excel file. Complete set of gene-level associations between mRNA expression and nearby somatic SV breakpoint in the PCAWG cohort, according to region examined (e.g., 100 kb upstream, 100 kb downstream, within the gene body, 1 Mb upstream or downstream, gene 3′ UTR, and 2 kb upstream). Results provided using linear regression models evaluated significant associations without any correction for covariates or when correcting for tumor tissue type or for tissue type, gene-level copy, tumor ploidy, and tumor purity.

## Table S6. Gene-level correlations with patient overall survival, related to Figure 7
Provided as an Excel file. By stratified Cox, correcting for cancer type, associations with both nearby germline SV breakpoints and patient overall survival are provided, according to region examined (e.g., 100 kb upstream, 100 kb downstream, within the gene body, 1 Mb upstream or downstream), as well as associations with somatic SV breakpoints and survival. For SV breakpoints, positive Cox beta indicates that nearby breakpoints are associated with worse outcome; negative Cox beta, associated with better outcome. Also provided are gene expression associations with survival for the PCAWG cohort. For expression, positive Cox beta indicates that higher expression is associated with worse outcome; negative Cox beta, associated with better outcome. The 150 genes from are indicated, for which was found both a positive association between germline SV breakpoints near the gene and worse overall survival and a positive or negative association between nearby germline SV breakpoints and altered gene expression.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement
This paper analyzes existing, publicly available data. Details on accessing the datasets are listed in the . This paper does not report original code. No custom computer code was used for data collection, which was performed using open-source software. Additional processing involved in-house scripts that are available upon request. All analyses used previously published software or methods.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.