pmcJ Med ChemJ Med Chem822acssd9716531jmJournal of Medicinal Chemistry0022-26231520-4804pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC11284803PMC11284803.111284803112848033895534710.1021/acs.jmedchem.4c001131PerspectiveNew Horizons
of
Synthetic Lethality in Cancer: Current
Development and Future Perspectives
PrevitaliViola BagnoliniGreta CiamaroneAndrea https://orcid.org/0009-0004-1656-2961FerrandiGiovanni RinaldiFrancesco MyersSamuel Harry https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9807-2886RobertiMarinella CavalliAndrea aComputational
& Chemical Biology, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, 16163 Genova, ItalybDepartment
of Pharmacy and Biotechnology, University
of Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy*marinella.roberti@unibo.it.020720242507202467144677011148811521140120241106202407062024290720243007202430072024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2024The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
In recent years,
synthetic lethality has been recognized as a solid
paradigm for anticancer therapies. The discovery of a growing number
of synthetic lethal targets has led to a significant expansion in
the use of synthetic lethality, far beyond poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
inhibitors used to treat BRCA1/2-defective tumors. In particular,
molecular targets within DNA damage response have provided a source
of inhibitors that have rapidly reached clinical trials. This Perspective
focuses on the most recent progress in synthetic lethal targets and
their inhibitors, within and beyond the DNA damage response, describing
their design and associated therapeutic strategies. We will conclude
by discussing the current challenges and new opportunities for this
promising field of research, to stimulate discussion in the medicinal
chemistry community, allowing the investigation of synthetic lethality
to reach its full potential.

Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro10.13039/50110000501021386Ministero dell''UniversitÃ  e della Ricerca10.13039/50110002185620227S3BM7Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia10.13039/501100009531NAUniversitÃ  di Bologna10.13039/501100005969NAAssociazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro10.13039/50110000501025239pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9jm4c00113document-id-new-14jm4c00113ccc-price1

## Introduction
Synthetic lethality (SL)
was first observed in fruit flies and
later confirmed in yeast, defining it
as a consequence of the combined alteration
of individually viable genes. SL has emerged as a promising strategy
for anticancer drug discovery, particularly for targeting challenging
tumor suppressor genes. Via exploitation
of the concept of SL, cancer cells with mutated or inactivated driver
genes can be selectively targeted, potentially reducing the side effects
of therapy. The successful implementation
of SL in drug discovery is fueled by the identification of new SL
pairs in cancer cells. Recent comprehensive reviews of this field
encompass a broad spectrum of analyses, ranging from phenotypic profiling to experimental methodologies and predictive models facilitated by computational techniques. Leveraging innovative big data strategies in
SL drug discovery, researchers can now methodically scrutinize every
gene across hundreds of cancer cell lines. This enables the identification
of cancer-specific vulnerabilities and, consequently, synthetic lethal
relationships that might otherwise remain elusive. However, as our understanding of the original genetic-based
definition of SL expands, newer subclasses such as “collateral
SL” and “metabolic SL” , have emerged, underscoring the inherent complexity of the SL definition.
Moreover, the heterogeneity observed in tumor cells and their microenvironment
can significantly impact genetic interactions, thereby prompting the
recognition of condition-dependent forms of SL, often termed as “contextual”
or “conditional” SL. , 
Herein,
we build upon our previously published Perspective in the Journal of Medicinal Chemistry( ) to describe the latest trends in drug development campaigns exploiting
SL interactions. This Perspective focuses on the classical definition
of SL in drug discovery, emphasizing its use in identifying novel
drug targets (e.g., alteration in gene A justifies targeting gene
B), developing synergistic drug combinations [e.g., drugs targeting
a SL pair of genes (A and B) or synergistic drug combinations that
exploit a mutation in a third gene, C], and stratifying cancer patients
for tailored therapies. A majority of SL targets have been found in
DNA repair pathways; we therefore dedicate a large part of this Perspective
to this area of research. Nevertheless, we highlight exciting new
scientific rationales, particularly SL outside the DNA repair pathways
and “contextual SL”, which provide promising directions
for future drug discovery campaigns.

2

## Targeting
SL in the DNA Damage Response (DDR)
2.1

## PARP
and BRCA1/2
The concept of SL
in the clinic is best exemplified by the use of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibitors (PARPi) to specifically target tumors deficient
in the homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair factors, BRCA1 or
BRCA2 (BRCA1/2). PARP is a family of proteins involved in the repair
of DNA single-stranded breaks (SSBs) and exerts its function through
binding to the DNA damage site and using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NAD+) as a cofactor to mediate poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
(PARylation) on target proteins, including PARP itself. 
PARPi act by binding and trapping the
PARP enzyme on the chromatin, which results in the conversion of the
SSB into a DSB, a lesion that necessarily requires HR repair. The use of PARPi prevents the tumor from repairing
single-strand DNA breaks and increases the incidence of DSBs. Therefore,
upon administration to a tumor that already has an underlying HR defect,
e.g., BRCA1/2 deficiency, the tumor cells are unable to survive and
die because of SL, while normal cells remain unharmed ( ). 
Since the theory was postulated by two pivotal publications, , the number of studies of PARPi- and BRCA1/2-deficient tumors has
exponentially increased. PARPi reached the first major milestone in
2014, when the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European
Medicine Agency (EMA) approved AstraZeneca’s olaparib (Lynparza)
for the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer as a single agent in
patients with germline BRCA mutations (gBRCAm). In the past decade, the PARPi class has continued
to be used successfully, as proven by the increasing number of PARPi
in clinical trials or approved for the treatment of BRCA1/2- and/or
somatic HR-deficient tumors, including ovarian, pancreatic, breast, and prostate cancers,
either as monotherapy or in combination. The following PARPi have
been authorized in the United States and/or European Union: rucaparib
(Rubraca), niraparib (Zejula), and talazoparib (Talzenna). In addition, fuzuloparib (AiRuiYi) and pamiparib (Partruvix) have been
authorized in China ( ).
 Despite these breakthrough approvals, the success
of PARPi in the
clinic has been hindered by mechanisms of toxicity and resistance. , Recent research has thus turned to exploring promising combination
approaches utilizing PARPi, with the aim of leveraging synergistic
effects to improve efficacy and sensitize PARPi-resistant tumors to
the treatment. While the combination of PARPi with DNA-damaging chemotherapy
(a strategy that can be considered related to “contextual SL”
that will be expanded in ) faces issues due to the overlapping of hematological
toxicities, newer and more targeted therapies have shown promising
results and are progressing in clinical development. 
In this context, PARPi have been studied at the preclinical
level
in combination with agents that induce a BRCAness phenotype or, more
broadly, a homologous recombination-deficient (HRD)-like phenotype
by interfering either directly or indirectly with HR ( ). An example is the combination
of PARPi with inhibitors of receptor tyrosine kinase receptors (e.g.,
EGFR, VEGFR, and FLT3-ITD), which have been shown to modulate DDR
genes through their downstream signaling partners, such as the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK
and PI3K/mTOR pathways. Additionally,
PARPi have been studied in combination with modulators of epigenetic
mechanisms, as they regulate chromatin mobility and thus affect the
accessibility of the DDR protein to DNA damage sites, particularly
DSBs. Indeed, inhibiting certain epigenetic proteins (e.g., BRD4)
has been demonstrated to downregulate fundamental DDR proteins. To leverage this synergism, in the past several
years various combinations of PARPi and targeted tyrosine kinase receptor
or epigenetic inhibitors have been studied for their potential with
promising preclinical evidence ( ). In addition, other
combination strategies make use of inhibitors of alternative DDR pathways,
which are used because of PARP inhibition ( ). Examples of this approach include the
long-time investigated combination of PARPi-ATR inhibitors or the
newest targets Polθ and USP1. Lastly,
the promising synergism of PARPi and immunotherapy ( ) is worth highlighting. PARPi,
as result of the inhibition of DNA repair, cause the release of dsDNA
fragments into the cytosol, and this in turn activates cGAS/STING
signaling. PD-L1 upregulation positively
correlates with the accumulation of DNA breaks. Indeed, PARPi upregulate
PD-L1, as a downstream effect of impairing DDR, and also correlate
with cancer resistance. More broadly, this confirms the therapeutic
relevance of the combination of anti-PD-1/PD-L1 therapies with the
available modulators of PARP (and DDR in general). Phase 1/2 clinical
trials of such combinations have been widely reviewed by Huang et
al. 
 In addition, strategies for overcoming toxicities
associated with
PARPi have instead focused on the development of new classes of PARP
modulators (e.g., PARP selective inhibitors, dual inhibitors, PROTAC
degraders, and prodrugs). − In the following section, we
detail the most recent advancements in PARP selective inhibitors,
which represent the forefront of progress in clinical development
for overcoming toxicities associated with PARPi.
2.1.1

## PARP1
Selective Inhibitors
Although
first-generation PARPi have been significantly effective in clinical
settings, they often cause hematological toxicities such as anemia,
neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia. Research
suggests that while PARP1, which plays a primary role in the DNA damage
response (DDR), is essential for efficacy, PARP2 is linked with these
side effects. Existing first-generation
PARPi competitively inhibit both PARP1 and PARP2; for example, the
PARP1/2 selectivity fold for Olaparib is 1. Despite similar enzymatic inhibition activities, they vary significantly
in their ability to trap PARP enzymes and induce cytotoxic effects
(with talazoparib being the most potent PARP1 trapping inhibitor and
veliparib the least potent). Because the trapping capability significantly
influences efficacy and toxicity, modifying the trapping ability could
have impact on clinical efficacy. Additional
studies indicate that SL with BRCA mutations is solely mediated by
PARP1, suggesting that trapping of PARP2 to DNA is unnecessary. Accordingly,
a PARP1 selective inhibitor may reduce toxicity while maintaining
antitumor activity, offering a higher therapeutic index and more combination
treatment options. In 2015, Nerviano Medical Sciences introduced the
selective PARP1 inhibitor NMS-P118 ( ). This molecule featured an isoindoline-4-carboxamide
core substituted with a 4,4-difluorocyclohexyl group, which better
fits into the catalytic domain of PARP1, filling an induced pocket
and establishing favorable hydrophobic interactions with Tyr889. NMS-P118
showed moderate potency against PARP1 (PARP1 IC50 = 0.079
μM) with a promising PARP1/2 83-fold selectivity. As the first PARP1 selective inhibitor with in vitro and in vivo anticancer activity,
NMS-P118 demonstrated that inhibiting PARP-1 alone, rather than PARP-2,
is sufficient for achieving high antitumor efficacy in BRCA-deficient
tumor settings.
 The development of NMS-P118 led
to the development of NMS-P293
( ), which exhibited
potent in vitro activity (PARP1 IC50 <
0.01 μM, and PARP1/2 selectivity fold > 200) and in
vivo efficacy in HRD tumors (BRCA- and PTEN-deficient) and
did not induce DNA trapping. Although the structure of NMS-P293 is
undisclosed, a patent by the same authors describes a series of isoindoline-4-carboxamide
derivatives with different linear/cyclic chains replacing the 4,4-difluorocyclohexyl
substituent (Patent WO2014/064149A1). Remarkably, NMS-P293 is not
a substrate of PgP efflux, a mechanism of resistance attributed to
current PARPi, and can penetrate the blood–brain barrier. Moreover,
this molecule demonstrates potent synergistic efficacy and tolerability
in combination with temozolomide (TMZ) in glioblastoma (GBM) tumor
models, thereby paving the way for the use of PARPi in central nervous
system (CNS) tumors. These favorable properties led to NMS-P293 entering
a phase 1 clinical study in adult patients with selected advanced
and metastatic solid tumors (NCT04182516).
Building upon these
findings, AstraZeneca introduced AZD5305 ( ), a more potent
(PARP1 IC50 = 0.003 μM) and even more selective (PARP1/2
selectivity fold > 460) PARP1 inhibitor with excellent in
vivo pharmacokinetic (PK) and efficacy properties in a BRCA
mutant PDX model. Although AZD5305 partially mimicked NMS-P118’s
binding pose (interaction with Gly863), it demonstrated the ability
to trap PARP1-DNA complexes. Nevertheless,
data from its ongoing phase 1/2 PETRA trial (NCT04644068) demonstrated
compelling and promising evidence of safety. 
In its latest generation of PARP1 inhibitors, AstraZeneca
managed
to lower efflux for CNS penetration by masking hydrogen bond (HB)
donors and introducing core modifications, resulting in the development
of AZD9574 ( ). This molecule represents the first brain penetrant PARP1 selective
inhibitor (PARP1 IC50 < 0.005 μM, and PARP1/2
selectivity fold > 19 107) and PARP1-DNA trapping agent
in
clinical trials (NCT05417594). 
Concurrently with the advancement of PARP1 inhibitors, it is necessary
to mention the controversial studies emerging about previously unexpected
toxicity in normal tissues. These include evidence of toxicity in
human healthy bone marrow cells, linked
to the trapping activity of PARP1 inhibitors, and the embryonic lethality
due to PARP1 loss in a dominant-negative manner in a mouse model. Ultimately, this may weaken the therapeutic
potential and safety of the trapping mechanism mediated by PARP1 inhibitors,
eventually hampering their future in the clinic.

2.2

## PARG
Poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase
(PARG) is an enzyme that preserves genome integrity from replication
stress by catalyzing de-PARylation, offering an exciting and intriguing
point of therapeutic intervention within DDR. Interestingly, PARG is often upregulated in cancer and positively
correlates with resistance to PARPi. PARG
inhibitors (PARGi) were initially predicted to be active in BRCA2-deficient
tumor cells, hinting at a possible SL
parallelism with PARPi. However, recently it has been reported that
the consequences following inhibition of PARG or PARP may suggest
different pharmacology and genetic dependencies linked with HRD status. The application of the majority of reported
small molecules targeting PARG is limited due to their modest low-micromolar
IC50 and low cell permeability. Recently, a potent and cell-permeable PARGi, PDD00017273 ( ), was identified
through a homogeneous time-resolved fluorescence (HTRF) high-throughput
biochemical screen (1.4 million compounds), conducted by AstraZeneca. This discovery was followed by iterative chemical
modifications and optimization of its chemotype. Although the addition
of a cyclopropyl group improved the in vitro potency
of the initial hit (EC50 values of 3.9 and 0.019 μM
for compounds dubbed 2 and 3, respectively,
in the reference paper), it hindered its solubility (<10 μM
in 1% DMSO/PBS). Further optimization by substituting the cyclopropyl
ring with a dimethyl-pyrazol led to the development of the potent
(EC50 = 0.026 μM) and soluble compound PDD00017273,
allowing investigation into PARG cellular pharmacology. Despite these
promising results, PDD00017273 could not be studied in vivo due to its poor metabolic stability [intrinsic clearance (CLint) of 211 and 78 μL min–1 mg–1 in mouse and human microsomes, respectively]. Ideaya
built upon these discoveries and developed IDE161, an orally bioavailable
PARGi. While the structure of IDE161 is undisclosed, it is likely
a 4-substituted indole and indazole sulfonamide derivative, as outlined
in a company patent (Patent WO2021/055744A1). Biochemical and cellular
assays have demonstrated that IDE161 effectively inhibits PAR chain
hydrolysis and exhibits antiproliferative activity in breast and ovarian
cancer cell lines, including those resistant to PARPi. Consistent with these in vitro findings, IDE161 has shown antitumor activity in PARPi-resistant
xenograft models, which has facilitated its entry into clinical trials
as the first PARGi (NCT05787587). According to the results from this
first clinical trial, it will be possible to evaluate the therapeutic
relevance of PARG in tackling BRCA1/2-deficient and HR-defective tumors.
 
2.3

## USP1
Ubiquitination and deubiquitination
are recognized as key mechanisms for maintaining cellular homeostasis,
and their alterations contribute to tumor development. The enzymes
that participate in these processes, in particular E3 ubiquitin ligase
and deubiquitinase (DUBs), have been regarded as potential targets
for anticancer therapy. One of the best characterized human DUBs is
ubiquitin-specific protease 1 (USP1), which plays an important role
in the cellular response to DNA damage. Indeed, the complex of USP1 with USP1-associated factor 1 (UAF1)
acts in two important DDR pathways, namely, translesion synthesis
(TLS) and interstrand cross-links (ICLs), through the deubiquitination
of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and Fanconi anemia complementation
group 2D (FANCD2). Inhibition of USP1 causes the impairment of the
reversible protein ubiquitination regulation mechanism, resulting
in increased levels of monoubiquitinated PCNA and FANCD2, leading
to DNA repair damage ( ). Importantly, USP1 is frequently
overexpressed in certain human tumor types such as cervical and gastric
cancer, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), melanoma, and sarcoma,
suggesting that USP1 could represent a valid target in cancer therapy. 
 In 2001, Chen et al. identified pimozide
and GW7647 as the first inhibitors of the human USP1-UAF1 complex
with low micromolar affinity. These compounds demonstrate the possibility
of inhibiting the USP1-UAF1 complex with small molecules and synergize
with cisplatin in cisplatin-resistant cells. However, both compounds are known to bind several DUBs, deSUMOylase,
and cysteine proteases, which has limited their utility as USP1-UAF1
chemical probes. For this reason, the same authors developed ML323
through quantitative high-throughput screening (qHTS) and subsequent
medicinal chemistry optimization of the hit compound ( and ). This nanomolar inhibitor of the USP1-UAF1
deubiquitinase complex demonstrated remarkable selectivity and was
reported to exert its effect through an allosteric mechanism, binding
far from the USP1 active site ( ). 
 A recent report of the cryo-EM
structure of USP1 bound to ML323
[Protein Data Bank (PDB) entry 7ZH4] shed light on the binding of the inhibitor
to the enzyme for the first time. This
structure showed the interaction of the inhibitor in the USP-1 binding
site with many hydrophobic residues and through two HBs mediated by
the triazole ring with glutamine 160 (Q160) and the pyrimidine ring
with glutamine 97 (Q97) ( ). This potent and selective effect against USP1 translated
into the inhibition of TLS and Fanconi anemia (FA) pathways in cells,
making ML323 the best-in-class chemical probe for investigating the
role of USP1 in the cellular response to DNA damage. Moreover, ML323 potentiates cisplatin cytotoxicity in NSCLC
H596 cells and U2OS osteosarcoma cells. This finding suggested that
USP1-UAF1 is a key regulator of DDR and a potential target for overcoming
resistance to the platinum-based anticancer drugs. 
Recently, a study published by Tango Therapeutics
showed that USP1
inhibition is effective in BRCA1/2 mutant tumors and in a subset of
BRCA1/2 wild-type lung and ovarian tumors, underlying the USP1 dependency on PCNA ubiquitination and consequent protein
degradation. They demonstrated that,
in BRCA1 mutant cells, the inhibition of USP1 by I-138 ( ) causes the accumulation of
mono- and polyubiquitinated PCNA, associated with decreased levels
of DNA synthesis and DNA damage. I-138 is a patented (Patent WO2017/087837A1)
small molecule structurally related to ML323. In I-138, the benzyl
and isopropylphenyl groups of ML323 are kept in place, the aminopyrimidine
is cyclized in a purinone core, and the triazole substituent is converted
into a methyl-imidazole substituted with -CF3 at position
4 ( ). These
characteristics instilled I-138 with improved potency and physicochemical
properties ( ). Further studies suggested that I-138 binds to USP1-UAF1 at an
allosteric site, thought to be the same ML323 binding site ( ). To validate USP1
as an SL target, the authors determined the effect of USP1 inhibition
on the viability of BRCA1/2 mutant and BRCA1/2 wild-type tumor cells.
The inhibition of USP1 by I-138 selectively reduced the viability
of BRCA1 mutant breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-436, but not that of
wild-type breast cancer cell line HCC195. Similarly, USP1 inhibition caused the loss of viability of BRCA1
mutant ovarian cancer cell line UWB1.289. BRCA1 re-expression in UWB1.289
cells rescued USP1 inhibitor sensitivity, consistently with an SL
interaction. Moreover, the combination was tested across a panel of
BRCA1/2 wild-type and mutant cells to study whether USP1 and PARPi
synergize in cells. The USP1-PARPi combination was preferentially
synergistic in BRCA1/2-mutated compared to wild-type cells. To test
the efficacy of USP1-PARPi combination in vivo, I-138
was dosed in mice with MDA-MB-436 tumors, either alone or in combination
with niraparib. Administration of both compounds resulted in a complete
tumor regression and an improved efficacy compared to that of niraparib
or I-138 alone ( ). In summary, these findings demonstrated the benefit of combining
USP1 and PARPi in BRCA1/2 mutant tumors in vitro and in vivo. 
On the basis
of these findings, Tango Therapeutics has also been
focusing on the development of TNG348 ( ), a highly selective allosteric USP1 inhibitor
(USP1i) for the treatment of BRCA1/2 mutant tumors and other HRD tumors.
TNG348 strongly synergizes with PARPi in patient-derived xenograft
(PDX) cancer cell models of BRCA1/2 mutant breast and ovarian cancers.
The synergy between USP1i and PARPi was observed in both PARPi-sensitive
and -resistant models. Additionally, TNG348 showed strong antitumor
activity in HRD BRCA1/2 wild-type xenograft models, thus potentially
expanding USP1i indication. TNG348 is now being evaluated in a phase
1/2 clinical trial as a monotherapy or in combination with olaparib
in patients with BRCA1/2 mutant or HRD solid tumors (NCT06065059)
( ). 
Meanwhile, KSQ Therapeutics has also developed
a series of small
molecules, potent, and highly selective USP1i. Notably, among these
molecules, compound KSQ-4279, structurally related to both I-138 and
TNG348 ( ),
triggered the accumulation of monoubiquitinated substrates of USP1
in cell lines with BRCA mutations or HRD alterations ( ). The activity of KSQ-4279 was evaluated in both ovarian- and TNBC-derived
tumor xenograft models, in which it showed a dose-dependent inhibition
of tumor growth. Combining KSQ-4279 with olaparib resulted in greater
and more durable tumor regression than monotherapy in tumors with
only partial sensitivity to PARPi. KSQ-4279 exhibited favorable in vitro ADME properties and a favorable PK profile in different
preclinical species, with no evidence of dose-related blood toxicity.
These results led to KSQ-4279 entering a phase 1 clinical trial for
patients with tumors carrying BRCA mutations or other HRD impairment,
either as a single agent or in combination with PARPi (NCT05240898).

2.4

## Polθ
In the search for additional
SL interactions involving BRCA mutations, DNA polymerase θ (Polθ,
or POLQ) emerged as an exciting target. Polθ is a versatile
DNA repair enzyme that is central in the error-prone Polθ-mediated
end joining (TMEJ) pathway, serving as a vital backup pathway to repair
DSB when NHEJ or HR is compromised. Polθ
consists of an N-terminal helicase-like domain (HelD) and a C-terminal
DNA polymerase domain (PolD) linked by a large unstructured central
region. This unique structure enables
Polθ to perform DNA synthesis through its polymerase function
and to compete with HR through its helicase domain in an ATPase-dependent
manner. Interestingly, Polθ is
overexpressed in a variety of human cancers, including colorectal,
breast, ovarian, lung, and gastric cancer, whereas in most normal
cells, it is expressed at low level or completely absent, making this
enzyme an ideal target for oncology. − Depletion of Polθ by siRNA
and shRNA was effective in BRCA1-deficient cells
in combination with PARPi, leading to a synergistic antitumor effect
and a possible delay of PARPi resistance. Additionally, Polθ depletion improved the radiosensitization
of different HR-proficient tumor cells − and sensitized cancer
cells to other chemotherapeutic agents. , 
Considering
this evidence, Polθ inhibition could provide a novel therapeutic
strategy in several tumors, including HR- and NHEJ-deficient cancers.
On the basis of these considerations, the identification of Polθ
inhibitors (Polθi) and their application with SL interactions
is a research field that is currently attracting a great deal of interest
from the scientific community, as thoroughly reported in the recent
perspective of Pismataro and co-workers. Herein, we therefore report on only the latest updates in the field.
Compounds are classified according to their mechanism of action, i.e.,
Polθ-Hel or Polθ-Pol domain inhibitors.
Novobiocin
is described as a Polθ HelD inhibitor, but despite
the promising preclinical results ( ), caution should
be used when assessing its suitability as a Polθi for SL strategies,
as its phase 1 clinical trial in solid tumors has recently been suspended
(NCT05687110). In 2023, Ideaya announced clearance of an IND application
for GSK101 (IDE705), another Polθ HelD inhibitor, for the treatment
of patients with HRD tumors in association with niraparib (PARPi). The disclosure of the structure is currently
limited to patent applications that describe the development of thiadiazolyl
derivatives (Patents WO2020/243459A1 and WO2022/118210A1). In addition,
Repare Therapeutics has recently announced the start of a clinical
trial in the second half of 2024 for RP-3467 (structure undisclosed),
described as a potential best-in-class Polθ HelD inhibitor,
which is SL with BRCA loss and capable of synergism in PARPi resistance
models. 
 In 2021, Lord and colleagues
reported the discovery of the Polθ-Pol
domain inhibitor ART558 ( ), after a screening of approximately 165 000
inhibitors of Polθ polymerase activity. ART558 is a small molecule-substituted pyrrolidine with an IC50 of 7.9 nM against the full-length enzyme and binds to the
allosteric binding site of the catalytic domain of Polθ polymerase
with high specificity and selectivity ( ). The authors obtained the cocrystal of
Polθ-ART558 (PDB entry 7zx1) and were able to rationalize the binding pose of
the inhibitor ( ). Interestingly, ART558 interacted through its hydroxyl group at
position 4 with glutamic acid 2365 (E2365) via a HB interaction ( ), which the authors
suggested as being crucial for explaining its improved potency.
 Inhibition of Polθ by ART558
shows SL with BRCA1/2 mutant tumor cells, resulting
in more DNA damage in knockout cells
than in wild-type cells and enhanced effects of PARPi. Moreover, the
authors showed that defects in the 53BP1/Shieldin complex, known to
cause PARPi resistance, resulted in in vitro sensitivity
to ART558 ( ).
Despite the ART558 good solubility (0.16 mg/mL) and moderate logD
(pH 7.4 = 3.5), it showed poor metabolic stability in rat microsomes.
Therefore, a second Polθ-Pol inhibitor, ART812, was developed,
which possessed better drug-like properties ( ). ART812 resulted in significant BRCA1/SHLD2 (Shieldin complex subunit 2)-defective tumor
inhibition and was found to be efficacious in vivo in a model of PARPi-resistant TNBC ( ). Further studies
have led to ART4215 (undisclosed structure), the first Polθi
to enter clinical evaluation that is currently undergoing a phase
2 clinical trial by Artios Pharma in combination with talazoparib
(PARPi) in advanced solid tumors (NCT04991480).
Recently, Repare
Therapeutics published a study reporting another
Polθi that targets the polymerase domain, namely RP-6685 ( ). To identify a small molecule inhibitor, a high-throughput
screen (HTS) was carried out, leading to a fused N2-substituted pyrazole
that proved to be an interesting starting point for further development,
with the aim of optimizing ADME properties ( ). Reducing the size of the fused cyclohexyl
to cyclopentyl was well tolerated, and the replacement of the amide
with a thioamide group led to a significant enhancement in the potency,
without an improvement in the metabolic stability. Replacing the fused
N2-substituted pyrazole ring with a 2,4-bis-trifluoromethyl aryl moiety
improved the potency 10-fold compared to that of the hit compound.
Moreover, this aryl replacement enabled more effective SAR exploration
due to the accessibility of the chemistry. Introduction of a fluorine
atom on a phenyl group and substitution of the methyl with a propargyl
group increased the microsomal stability and potency. Replacing the
bistrifluoromethyl phenyl core with a bistrifluoromethyl pyridyl core
optimized the logP value of the compound. Finally, the introduction
of a basic amino group on the propargyl function led to RP-6685, the
best candidate for further profiling in xenograft studies. RP-6685
showed promising in vivo efficacy in HCT116 BRCA2–/– mouse tumor xenograft models ( ). 
 Very recently, Ding and
colleagues reported the development of
3-hydroxymethyl-azetidine derivatives as a novel class of Polθ-Pol
domain inhibitors. To explore new cores
and optimize the ADME profile of previously developed Polθi,
the authors employed their proprietary molecular generative AI platform
(Chemistry42) followed by a structure-based drug design. Deuterated
compound C1 showed the best profile. It exhibited robust cellular
target engagement and antiproliferative effects in BRCA-compromised
cells. Moreover, promising drug-like properties, e.g., solubility,
permeability, and metabolic stability exhibited by C1, corroborates
its potential as a therapeutic agent ( ). 

2.5

## RAD51
RAD51 recombinase is a central
HR factor, and its activity is critical for maintaining genome stability
and cancer prevention. Once loaded by
BRCA2 onto the ssDNA strand, RAD51 catalyzes strand invasion on a
homologous DNA template initiating HR repair. In addition to its role in the repair of DSBs, RAD51 exerts its
function also at stalled or collapsed replication forks during the
replication stress response. RAD51 is
overexpressed in several cancers, including pancreatic, breast, prostate,
non-small cell lung cancer, leukemia, and glioblastoma. Overexpression of RAD51 enhanced DNA repair,
helping cancer cells to survive and develop resistance to DNA-damaging
agents, while its depletion or inhibition
increases sensitivity to DSB-inducing agents, including ionizing radiation
(IR). 
RAD51 impairment proved to
be SL with PARPi. Specific miRNAs were
found to sensitize tumor cells to olaparib by weakening the expression
of RAD51, thus highlighting the importance of RAD51 inhibition to
achieve SL outside BRCA deficiencies. Furthermore, this also raised
the possibility of using such miRNAs and RAD51 expression levels to
identify patients that might benefit from treatment with PARPi. Interestingly, functional assays, measuring
the formation of RAD51 foci as an indirect measurement of HR activity,
have been shown to predict the PARPi response, thus expanding their
clinical application. − 
Beyond the potential of RAD51 as a biomarker
for HRD and PARPi
sensitivity, pharmacological RAD51 inhibition has also been investigated
as a strategy for inducing SL with PARPi. Several compounds that modulate
RAD51 activity in vitro have been identified, most
of which modulate its binding to ssDNA, and have been summarized in
recent reviews. , However, the translation of RAD51
inhibitors (RAD51i) to the clinic has been slow, with no clinical
RAD51i in clinical trials to date. The
mechanism of action of the only purported RAD51i, CYT-0851, entering
clinical trial (NCT03997968), has recently been disclosed and attributed
to the inhibition of the monocarboxylate transporter (MCT), therefore
ruling it out as a RAD51i. 
Recently,
our group proposed a new anticancer paradigm dubbed “fully
small molecule-induced SL”. This paradigm is based on the hypothesis
that it could be possible to mimic the effect of BRCA2 germline mutations
by using small organic molecules disrupting RAD51-BRCA protein-protein
interaction. This could potentially expand the population of patients
eligible for treatment with olaparib and other PARPi, especially in
otherwise difficult to treat pancreatic cancers. − BRCA2 interacts with RAD51 through eight homologous
sequences known as BRC repeats. In particular, the BRC4 peptide interacts
with RAD51 through two different domains: the FXXA domain, critical
also for RAD51 multimerization, and the LFDE domain, also known as
zone I and zone II, respectively ( ). The X-ray crystallographic structure of
the BRC4 repeat in complex with the catalytic domain of RAD51 has
been reported (PDB entry 1N0W). − On the basis of this structure, to obtain BRCA2-RAD51
disruptors, our group conducted virtual screening campaigns based
on high-throughput docking upon both pockets followed by SAR optimization. − The most promising results were observed with a zone II binding
dihydroquinoline pyrazoline derivative ARN24089 ( and ) that disrupts BRCA2-RAD51 protein-protein
interaction, thus mimicking the effects of BRCA2 impairment. The compound
inhibits HR activity and synergizes with olaparib to trigger SL in
pancreatic BRCA2-proficient cancer cells (BxPC-3). RAD51 possesses an intrinsic tendency to form oligomeric
structures, which makes it challenging to conduct biochemical, biophysical,
and drug discovery investigations. The recent isolation of a fully
human monomeric RAD51 has allowed us
to validate ARN24992, a BRCA2-RAD51 inhibitor, which resulted from
a 19F nuclear magnetic resonance fragment screening performed
on human wild-type RAD51, followed by medicinal chemistry optimization
( and ). ARN24922 showed HR inhibition in BxPC-3 cells. Remarkably,
the combination of ARN24922 with PARPi talazoparib showed efficacy
also in three-dimensional (3D) pancreatic cancer models, specifically
PT291 organoids in which the co-administration of both compounds caused
a 50% reduction of cell viability in comparison with that of the single
talazoparib treatment. Likewise, Scott
and colleagues developed CAM833 ( and ), an inhibitor
of BRCA2-RAD51 interaction binding zone I. This discovery was made
through a structure-led fragment-based approach utilizing a humanized
RadA-RAD51 construct developed in house (HumRadA22F). The crystal structure shows that CAM833 binds to the RAD51
oligomerization pocket and consequently reduces RAD51 foci and filaments,
preventing DNA repair through HR. Ultimately, CAM833 increases cytotoxicity
induced by IR and synergizes with PARP1i ( ). Despite promising
preclinical results, the therapeutic potential of BRCA2-RAD51 interaction
inhibitors and their combination with PARPi in the clinic has been
stymied due to the mechanism-related toxicity in normal tissues that
can result from the systemic inhibition of both RAD51 and PARP. Nevertheless,
cancer cells depend more strongly on DNA repair mechanisms than do
healthy cells, due to their genetic instability. Consequently, the
combination of PARPi and BRCA-RAD51 inhibitors may affect healthy
cells far less than cancer cells, offering a chance for selectivity.
Indeed, this specific chemically induced SL can be leveraged in different
scenarios: (i) to treat patients with acquired resistance to PARPi,
mostly due to the restoration of the mutated BRCA2 gene or RAD51 overexpression,
(ii) to treat tumors with mutations that have a SL relationship with
BRCA impairment. Moreover, beyond the specific PARP-BRCA SL pair,
this approach forms the basis for future combination strategies targeting
SL pairs involved in DDR.
 
2.6

## RAD52
Human RAD52 is involved in
various DNA repair pathways, including HR, single-strand annealing
(SSA), and RNA-dependent DNA repair. Moreover,
RAD52 is involved in solving stalled replication forks. Human RAD52 appears to be nonessential for the
viability of normal cells , but becomes essential
under cancer conditions when other DSB repair-related proteins are
mutated. , Therefore, RAD52 has emerged as a novel
target to aid chemically induced SL therapies, avoiding resistance
and severe side effects. Inhibiting RAD52 induces SL in many cancer
cells with defective DNA repair-related proteins, such as BRCA1/2,
PALB2, XAB3, and RAD51 paralogues. − 
Researchers have
devoted considerable effort to identifying and characterizing RAD52
inhibitors (RAD52i), but none have reached clinical development. Notably, targeting the RAD52 structure represents
a remarkable challenge because of the organization of RAD52 into an
undecameric protein ring that also results in multivalent interactions
with ssDNA. , Another important challenge
is the development of inhibitors selective for RAD52 over other ssDNA
binding proteins to avoid secondary target binding toxicity. 
A few examples of small molecule RAD52i
and their SL applications
are reported below. In 2013, Cramer-Morales and colleagues developed peptide aptamer F79 ( ) as a RAD52i. F79 exerts
SL in BRCA2 and/or HR-mutated tumor cells. F79 selectively killed
BRCA-deficient leukemia cells with a low risk toward normal cells
and showed SL also in breast, pancreatic, and ovarian cancer cells. Moreover, F79 showed encouraging results in vivo (SCID mice with BCR-ABL1 positive leukemia). , Despite these promising results, there have been no further reports
on the subsequent development of this peptide aptamer ( ).
 In 2016, Huang et al. identified
a new series of RAD52 small molecule inhibitors through an HTS with
a fluorescence quenching assay. Among them, D-I03 ( ) was the most potent compound
in biochemical and cellular assays. Later,
Sullivan-Reed and colleagues reported that D-I03 was effective in
slowing the growth of BRCA1-deficient xenograft tumors in mice. Despite these promising in vitro and in vivo studies, the thiourea scaffold of D-I03
had several drawbacks, including poor solubility and metabolic and
chemical instability. 
In 2016,
Hengel and colleagues reported
the development of a novel FRET-HTS assay that led to the identification
of epigallocatechin (EGC) ( ), a natural compound that competes with ssDNA to bind
to RAD52, but not to RPA. EGC dysregulated DSB repair and caused a
reduction in cell viability in BRCA1/2-depleted and MUS81-depleted
cells. Once more, despite promising in vitro biological results, EGC and its analogues were
characterized by poor ADME properties, largely due to low gut absorption,
which was found to be further reduced when accompanied by food. Additionally,
the very high hydrophilicity of EGC analogues created homogeneity
problems in lipid formulations. , Very recently,
Bhat and co-workers tried to overcome
ADME challenges associated with EGC to produce new RAD52i. Pharmacophore information about the RAD52 complexation
with EGC allowed for scaffold hopping into a drug-like synthetically
accessible space. Six distinct chemical scaffolds that occupy the
same physical space of RAD52 as EGC were identified. The six compounds
were all efficient RAD52i, in particular against the RPA-RAD52-ssDNA
complex (IC50 ∼ 8–96 μM). Among the
selected inhibitors, Z56 and Z99 ( ) were especially attractive as they showed
enhanced activity in cell viability assays. Z56 was selective for
RAD52 over RPA in vitro and selectively killed BRCA
mutant cells. In contrast, Z99 inhibited both proteins in
vitro and displayed toxicity toward BRCA-complemented cells.
Z99 showed excellent drug-likeness and was selected for scaffold expansion,
resulting in potent and selective RAD52i Z58-54 and Z58-87 ( ) with IC50 values in the low micromolar range against RAD52 that were able
to discriminate between BRCA1/2 mutant and BRCA-proficient cells ( ). Because of the
selectivity for RAD52 over RPA of both Z56 and derivatives from Z99
expansion, additional rounds of chemical exploration may be a promising
strategy for achieving more potent and selective RAD52i. 

2.7

## Nuclear Kinases Associated
with Genomic Stability
Nuclear kinases play a pivotal role
in orchestrating signaling
pathways in response to DNA damage. These specialized enzymes act
as key regulators by phosphorylating target proteins involved in DNA
repair, cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis. Upon sensing DNA lesions,
these kinases are activated and initiate a cascade of events that
ensure genomic stability and cell survival. Key players include the
ATR/CHK1/WEE1 axis, the ATM/CHK2/p53 axis, PKMYT1, and DNA-PK ( ). , PLK1 and Aurora kinase A (AURKA) are also involved in damage checkpoint
regulation ( ). 
 Despite the development of various inhibitors,
the toxicity of
CHK1/2 inhibitors, stemming from a lack of selectivity, has prevented
their clinical application and further drug development. However, the improving understanding of SL interactions
presents an opportunity to repurpose existing inhibitors tailored
to specific tumor profiles, thereby optimizing their clinical evaluation.
In this regard, it is worth mentioning the AURKA inhibitor alisertib,
the most advanced AURKA selective (>200-fold more selective than
AURKB)
inhibitor in clinical studies. This molecule found new applications
after Takeda’s announcement to terminate its phase 3 trial
in relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma due to a lack
of efficacy. The drug is now being investigated in phase 1/2 clinical
trials in Rb-deficient head and neck squamous cell cancer in combination
with pembrolizumab (NCT04555837) and in combination with osimertinib
in metastatic EGFR mutant lung cancer (NCT04085315). These trials
leverage AURKA SL interactions with tumor suppressor deficiencies, even though balancing risk and benefit in patients
remains difficult.
In this context, we focus on the extensively
studied ATR, ATM,
and DNA-PK kinases, along with emerging players like WEE1, PKMYT1,
and others such as PLK1, which are attracting attention because of
their roles in controlling DNA damage checkpoints.
2.7.1

## Trinity
of DDR: ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK
ATM, ATR, and DNA-PK are three
closely related kinases of the phosphoinositide
3-kinase-related kinase (PIKK) family. , , These kinases orchestrate DDR at the very early stages,
acting as sensors that recognize DSBs and activate the signaling cascade
by interacting with many different downstream players ( ). , − These kinases have been covered extensively
by the literature in various reviews. , − This work aims to give a brief overview of their function to support
the discussion about medicinal chemistry strategies, which has led
to recent clinical progress. With regard to detailed clinical trial
data, we refer readers to the excellent recent publication by Groelly
et al. 
2.7.1.1

## ATR
ATR is activated by a wider
range of genotoxic stresses, expanding from DSBs. Rapidly dividing
cells undergo high levels of replication stress and tend to be highly
dependent on the ATR pathway. , ATR activation takes
place in RPA-coated ssDNA through the interaction with the ATR interacting
protein (ATRIP) and other factors (i.e., TopBP1) ( ). One crucial function of ATR is to induce G2/M arrest by phosphorylating
the downstream kinase CHK1 to provide sufficient time for DNA repair
( ). This process is covered in greater detail by
Neizer-Ashun et al. Briefly, CHK1 induces
cell cycle arrest by phosphorylating a series of CDC25 phosphatases
targeting them for degradation or sequestration, causing a signaling
cascade, which results in cell cycle arrest at the intra-S and G2/M
checkpoints ( ).
ATR inhibition is lethal with the ATM pathway. Indeed, ATR
inhibitors (ATRi) cause the increase in the level of formation of
DSBs, which in turn augments the reliance of cells on ATM and its
associated proteins activity. This relationship explains why the inhibition
of ATR through small molecules seems to be synthetically lethal in
cells with ATM or p53 deficiency. In ATM- or p53-deficient pancreatic cells, ATR inhibition causes the accumulation
of DNA damage with the induction of mitosis prior to the completion
of DNA repair, causing subsequent mitotic catastrophe. Furthermore, ATRi show synergism when combined
with therapeutic agents that increase replication stress such as traditional
chemotherapeutics (i.e., DNA topoisomerase I or IR). , Additionally, the recent combination study of ATR inhibition with
immunotherapeutic targeting PDL1 resulted in a successful synergistic
antitumor activity in mouse models of castration-resistant prostate
cancer. Lastly, the link between ATR
inhibition and PARP is well established, which perhaps represents
the most promising prospect for ATRi in the clinic. PARP inhibition,
as mentioned in this Perspective, has shown remarkable success in
the clinic in BRCA1/2-deficient cancers. However, acquired resistance
occurs with high frequency where alternative DNA repair pathways are
leveraged to bypass BRCA1/2 pathway and PARP inhibition. Remarkably,
the use of ATRi has been shown to block this event and resensitize
tumor cells to PARP inhibition. Inhibition
of ATR has progressed from the highlighted in vitro/in vivo studies into clinical trials, with a number
of ATRi identified. An extensive description of ATRi development and
their clinical trials has been thoroughly reported in recent reviews. , , , Herein, we narrow the description to a selection of medicinal chemistry
strategies that led some ATRi entering clinical trials.
The
structures of ATRi fall into two classes. The first class is
the groups of the morpholine hinge binders exemplified by AZ20 ( ). Compounds grouped
in this class are ATP-competitive and bind to the hinge region of
the protein through their methyl-morpholine substituent. Moreover,
the heterocycle attached to the pyridine or pyrimidine central core
establishes important HB with the protein backbone ( ). AZD6738 (also known as
ceralasertib, developed by AstraZeneca) was developed from AZ20 to
improve the aqueous solubility and eliminate CYP3A4 time-dependent
inhibition. Despite the moderate inhibition against mTOR, which eventually
may hamper its selectivity, AZD6738 has been the first oral ATRi to
reach clinical trials ( ). Interestingly, AZD6738 has
recently showed a clinical therapeutic benefit by underpinning broad
immunomodulation that suggests a wider antitumor therapeutic potential. BAY1895344 (elimusertib, Bayer) and RP-3500 (camonsertib, Repare Therapeutics,
now developed in collaboration with Roche) are two other oral ATRi in clinical trials as single agents in DDR-deficient
tumors ( ). The
equivalent cell-based potency and selectivity over mTOR of the two
compounds ( )
translated into a similar preclinical efficacy when administered on
a weekly (3 days on/4 off) intermittent schedule both at their respective
maximum tolerated doses (MTDs, 50 mg/kg BID for BAY1895344, and 30
mg/kg QD for RP-3500). , However, when both
were administered on an intermittent dosing schedule in phase I clinical
evaluation, the two compounds, with different ADME properties, particularly t1/2 (BAY1895344 t1/2 = 11.5 h, and RP-3500 t1/2 = 5.8 h),
led to the induction of a higher rate of anemia with BAY1895344 than
with RP-3500. , 
 The second class of ATRi encompasses
the aminopyrimidines discovered
by Vertex ( ). Berzosertib (previously known as M6620 or VX-970, developed by
Vertex and Merck) was the first ATRi to enter clinical investigation.
Berzosertib was the result of a medicinal chemistry optimization aimed
at maintaining an intramolecular hydrogen bond (IMHB) interaction
between the hydrogen of the pyrazin-2-amine and the oxygen of the
oxazole ring, resulting in a bioactive conformation that avoids the
unwanted steric clash between the molecule and Tyr2775 ( ). Furthermore,
functionalization of the benzyl ring with a methylamine enabled the
exploitation of a negatively charged area of the ATP binding site,
resulting in a potent molecule (IC50 = 0.074 μM)
with favorable physicochemical properties (aqueous solubility of 52
μM) ( ). Despite being under clinical evaluation,
both as monotherapy and in combination, berzosertib suffers from limited
selectivity toward mTOR ( ). For this reason, Vertex and Merck have recently reported
gartisertib (M4344 or VX-803), a more potent (IC50 = 0.005
μM) and selective aminopyrimidine derivative ( and ). In its first
in-human phase I study, gartisertib has been tested in patients bearing
loss-of-function mutations, specifically, ARID1A, ATRX, DAXX, and
ATM genes, known to be synthetically lethal with ATR inhibition. However,
the study reported unexpected liver toxicity, which prevented further
advancement of gartisertib and led to its recent discontinuation. In any case, the use of loss-of-function mutations
as biomarkers offered an efficient patient stratification, along with
the opportunity to leverage SL as an anticancer strategy.
 ATRN-119 (Aprea Therapeutics) is another recent
molecule that belongs
to the aminopyrimidine class of ATRi. Preclinical evaluation data
for ATRN-119 are limited, but it is described as a potent (IC50 = 0.004 μM) and orally bioavailable derivative ( ) that could get its
high selectivity (>2000-fold for mTOR) from its macrocyclic structure
( ). ATRN-119 is in an ongoing phase 1/2a dose escalation
trial in solid tumors with DDR deficiencies ( ).
Medicinal chemistry campaigns have
been hindered by the lack of
a crystal structure with an appropriate resolution for drug discovery
campaigns, therefore relying on only
the ATR homology models built on PI3K-γ as a structural template.
Nevertheless, continuing research efforts are focused on finding a
highly selective ATRi possessing favorable ADME characteristics to
find the optimal clinical dosing schedule. In this regard, ART0380
(Artios) and IMP9064 (IMPACT Therapeutics) are two other recently
developed small molecule ATRi in clinical trials but for which preclinical
data and structure are undisclosed so far ( ).

2.7.1.2

## ATM
ATM can be activated by two
different mechanisms, either in reaction to afford reactive oxygen
species (ROS) or more commonly in response to DSBs. In this latter
mechanism, the MRN (MRE11-RAD50-NBS1) complex recruits the ATM homodimer,
which in turn monomerizes with the MRN complex, subsequently promoting
the interaction between the DNA break and the ATM monomer ( ). The activation of ATM is finely regulated by
post-translational modifications, including the acetylation of Lys3016
by acyltransferase TIP60 that in turn promotes Ser1981 autophosphorylation,
known as a marker of activated ATM, as it occurs immediately after
the formation of DSBs ( ). Activated ATM in turn phosphorylates MDC1 or γH2AX
to amplify repair signaling. The ATM/CHK2/p53 pathway controls the
G1/S checkpoint in addition to being partially involved with G2/M
checkpoint regulation through phosphorylation and degradation of CDC25A,
responsible for the removal of the inhibitory phosphorylation of CDKs. 
For its role in DDR, ATM has been identified
as a potential druggable target, with SL partnerships being observed
with PARP, BRCA1, DNA-PK, Polθ, XRCC1, APE1, and the Fanconi
anemia pathway. Consistently, success
has been seen in phase I clinical trials using PARPi (e.g., NCT02975934)
and ATRi (e.g., NCT04657068) to treat ATM-deficient tumors. In turn,
it follows that tumors defective in one or more of those genes may
be candidates for therapy using ATM inhibitors (ATMi). AZD0156 was
the first inhibitor developed by AstraZeneca to enter clinical trials. However, the company removed it from its pipeline
after severe hematological toxicities in patients treated with a combination
of AZD0156 and olaparib ( ). Moreover, AZD0156
turned out to be a substrate for efflux transporters, hindering its
eventual development for CNS malignancies. Subsequently, AstraZeneca
developed AZD1390, an orally bioavailable ATMi with improved BBB properties
in several preclinical models (efflux ratio in MDCK cells of 1.8 at
0.1 μM and Kp,uu in cynomolgus monkey
brain of 0.33), making it a suitable clinical candidate for CNS malignancies
( ). Currently, M4076 (Merck KGaA) has been the
most potent and selective ATMi (ATM IC50 = 0.2 nM) so far
in clinical trials. It shares an imidazo[5,4-c]quinolin-2-one
core with AZD0156 and AZD1390 and an analogous substitution pattern
(Patent WO2020/193660A1) ( ). The cryo-EM structure of ATM in complex with M4076
revealed structural insights into its mode of action ( ). In fact, the high selectivity of M4076 is attributed to the stacking
interactions with W2769 in the hinge region and to the close contact
between the 1,3-dihydro-imidazo[4,5-c]quinolin-2-one
moiety of M4076 and C2770, also located in the hinge region ( ). Cryo-EM technology can support structure-based
drug design (SBDD), especially to help with the challenge of ATM mutations,
which are common tumor features. In
conclusion, despite the fact that the clinical evaluation is proceeding,
ATM have proven to be targetable and ATMi appear as a promising treatment
option in DDR-mutated cancers.
 
2.7.1.3

## DNA-PKcs
DNA-PK
comprises a catalytic
subunit (DNA-PKcs) and a regulatory heterodimer known as Ku (composed
of Ku70 and Ku80). Upon localization on DSB, Ku70/Ku80 recruits DNA-PKcs
to form an active DNA-PK complex ( ). In contrast
to the other PIKK members, it plays a key role in NHEJ, a DSB repair
mechanism used by cells outside the G2/S phase or when HR is impaired
( ). In addition, DNA-PK has a multifaceted role,
including participation in the replication stress response and DNA
damage checkpoints. 
DNA-PKcs have
been reported to be synthetically lethal with many genes in the DDR
process. The primary SL partnership is the aforementioned ATM due
to the complementary nature of these two genes with inactivation of
both genes causing embryonic lethality. , Furthermore, as simultaneous inhibition of NHEJ and HR tends to
cause SL in tumors overly reliant on HR, synthetic lethality can be
seen between DNA-PKcs and the main drivers of HR such as BRCA1, BRCA2,
CHK2, RAD50, PTIP, PAXAP, and MSH3. 
Due to the aforementioned SL relationships, drug discovery efforts
have attempted to inhibit DNA-PKcs activity. This has proven to be
challenging as selectivity issues have arisen between DNA-PKcs and
the other PIKK members due to structural similarities between the
various kinases. M3814 (peposertib,
Merck KGaA, Patent WO2020/193660A1) and
AZD7648 (AstraZeneca) are two extensively
described DNA-PKcs inhibitors (DNA-PKcsi) with demonstrated selectivity
over other PIKKs ( ). Despite both molecules potentiating radiation and chemotherapy
both in vitro and in vivo (remarkably,
AZD7648 sensitized ATM-deficient cancer cells to both radiation therapy
and PARPi), their clinical translation was not successful. , Indeed, targeting DNA-PKcs is not without risks. Systemic radiosensitization
of healthy cells in addition to tumor cells has led to side effects,
which were not counterbalanced with sufficient satisfactory patient
responses, ultimately leading to program discontinuation for both
molecules. 
 Among the newest strategies for pursuing DNA-PKcsi
is the recent
development of XRD-0394, an ATM/DNA-PKcs dual inhibitor that shares
the imidazo-2-one core as a common motif between DNA-PKcsi and ATMi
and leverages the SL between the two targets, by XRad Therapeutics
( ). This
orally available small molecule is described as a potent inhibitor
of both proteins, without significant inhibition of structurally related
PIKK kinases in human tumor cells, including ATR and mTOR. In vitro and in vivo efficacy showed marked dose-proportional radiosensitization, with
no toxicity in the absence of IR. Additionally, in cells lacking BRCA1/2,
XRD-0394 showed synergism in combination with PARPi, therefore potentially
expanding their application in the case of resistance. Because of these promising results, XRD-0394
has recently entered a clinical trial for the treatment of solid tumors
in combination with palliative radiotherapy (NCT05002140).

2.7.2

## PLK1
Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1)
is a serine/threonine nuclear kinase with different functions in controlling
genome stability. Its primary role regards the progression of mitosis,
maturation of the centrosome, and spindle assembly. Moreover, recent
evidence suggests it is involved in DNA damage and the replication
stress response ( ). The primary physiological
function of PLK1 that has been extensively studied is its involvement
in the G2/M checkpoint. Following activation by AURKA, PLK1 facilitates
inhibitory phosphorylation on WEE1 and PKMYT1, leading to their degradation
and subsequent activation of CDK1, inducing cell cycle arrest ( ). PLK1 overexpression in cancers is often correlated with
poor prognosis, identifying PLK1 as a promising drug discovery target.
PLK1 consists of two domains, a kinase domain (KD) and a polo-box
domain (PBD), which provide druggable targets for the design of PLK1
inhibitors (PLK1i). As summarized in recent reviews, considerable
effort has been spent on the development of new PLK1i, with at least
10 PLK1i reaching clinical trials. , However,
the promising results of the preclinical studies did not translate
into clinical efficacy because of PLK1i limited effects, resistance,
and hematological toxicities often arising from the lack of selectivity
mostly toward PLK2/PLK3. Worth reporting
is the FDA designation in 2013 of breakthrough therapy to volasertib
[BI6727 ( )], an ATP-competitive dihydropteridinone PLK1i (IC50 =
0.78 nM, and PLK2/PLK3 selectivity fold = 6/64) developed by Boehringer
Ingelheim for the treatment of patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Although early results of volasertib in AML patients seemed
promising, the reported clinical efficacy following a phase 3 trial
of volasertib, monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapy, failed
to reproduce positive results, leading to the discontinuation of its
development. In this context, the search
for PLK1 SL pair partners could therefore be an efficacious strategy,
although it is still in its infancy. Promising SL interactions were
reported between PLK1 and BRCA1, TP53-mutated tumors, CCND1-driven, or KRAS mutation, suggesting possible clinical application of PLK1i in specific subgroups
of patients. Indeed, in 2020, the FDA assigned the fast-track designation
to onvansertib [NMS-1286937 ( )], another potent and more selective ATP-competitive
PLK1i (IC50 = 3 nM, PLK2/PLK3 selectivity fold = 5000) for patients with KRAS-mutated
metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) (NCT03829410). Recent preclinical
research suggests revisiting previously established PLK1i and evaluating
their potential in exploiting SL in specific mutated tumors. This
approach has gained traction following findings such as the application
of volasertib and GSK978744A, a thiophene-based PLK1i developed by
GlaxoSmithKline (with an IC50 of 1 nM and a PLK3 selectivity
fold of 61), in BRCA1-deficient cancer
models. This exploration holds promise for potentially effective therapeutic
interventions targeting specific genetic vulnerabilities in cancer
cells. 
 
2.7.3

## WEE1/PKMYT1
Due to p53 mutations,
many human cancer cells suffer from a deficient regulation of the
G1/S checkpoint and thus rely heavily on G2/M checkpoint regulation. Among the many kinases responsible for orchestrating
cellular responses, WEE1 is involved in cell cycle progression ( ). WEE1 functions
as a key suppressor of the G2/M checkpoint through phosphorylation
of CDK1 and CDK2, causing G2/M arrest and allowing time for DNA repair
( ). Therefore,
inhibition of WEE1 leads to premature entry into mitosis and subsequent
mitosis catastrophe. WEE1 is strongly
expressed in many cancers, and therefore, its inhibition has emerged
as an appealing strategy in cancer therapies, especially in SL strategies
in p53 mutation cancers and in combination with other DNA-damaging
agents or kinase inhibitors (e.g., ATRi). , 
Several different WEE1 inhibitors (WEE1i) have so far been
reported in the literature, bearing different scaffolds and developed
through various medicinal chemistry approaches. , 
The WEE1i adavosertib [AZD1775 ( A)], developed by AstraZeneca, has recently
been discontinued due to a poor toxicity profile ( ). Indeed, the correlation between the activity of AZD1775 and p53
status seemed to be controversial, as it exhibited cytotoxic effects
in sarcoma cells regardless of their p53 status. One possible explanation is that AZD1775 was discovered
to target multiple kinases and exhibits comparable potency against
both WEE1 and PLK1, suggesting a more intricate mechanism of action
than a simple dual SL pair. 
 IMP7068 (Impact Therapeutics) is another WEE1i that
has recently
entered clinical trials, specifically in tumors with p53 mutations.
The structure of IMP7068 has not been disclosed, but a company-related
patent application (WO2018/090939A1) describes a compound belonging
to a class of 2,3-dihydropyrimido[4,5-d]pyrimidin-4(1H)-ones as AZD1775 ( A). IMP7068 possesses a superior WEE1/PLK1 selectivity
(>435-fold) compared to that of AZD1775 with a favorable PK profile
in preclinical species ( ). 
Recently, there has
been significant interest in a novel SL approach
that exploits vulnerabilities in cancer cells reliant upon CCNE1 amplification. The CCNE1 gene encodes cyclin E1, which forms complexes with
CDK2 and facilitates cell progression from the G1 phase to the S phase,
thereby promoting DNA replication. Increased levels of cyclin E have
been observed across various cancers and are correlated with unfavorable
outcomes. This overexpression of cyclin E induces DNA replicative
stress and triggers DNA repair responses, rendering cells more susceptible
to the WEE1 inhibitor AZD1755. Consequently, cyclin E overexpression
has emerged as a valuable prognostic biomarker for AZD1775 therapy
in tumors exhibiting high cyclin E levels. 
The recently reported azenosertib [ZN-c3 ( A)], developed by Zentalis
Pharmaceuticals,
shares with AZD1775 both the 1,2-dihydro-3H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidin-3-one central core and the (4-methylpiperazin-1-yl)phenylamino
tail group. ZN-c3 showed higher selectivity for WEE1 over other kinases,
with efficacy similar to that of the parent AZD1775 in vivo. Interestingly, the chiral ethyl moiety in the bicyclic headgroup
of ZN-c3 provided an improvement in WEE1 potency, maintaining excellent
ADME and PK properties. Its promising
preclinical results and selectivity profile allowed ZN-c3 to enter
the clinical evaluation with a continuous dosing regimen and achieving
promising clinical efficacy in a phase 2 trial ( ). Notably, ZN-c3 was shown to be more sensitive
in cyclin E1 overexpression in ovarian cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. 
CCNE1 has been exploited to investigate SL with
other protein kinases involved in cell cycle control. In particular, the WEE1-like kinase PKMYT1
was identified through a CRISPR-Cas9 screen as a SL partner with cyclin
E in cancers overexpressing CCNE1. This is particularly relevant also because it was found
that a mechanism of acquired AZD1775 resistance is mediated by the
upregulation of PKMYT1 kinase. This
mechanism of resistance relies on PKMYT1’s intrinsic biological
role as a negative regulator of CDK1, allowing cells to avoid mitotic
catastrophe ( ). , To address the need of selective inhibitors
that would allow for investigation of the pharmacological role of
PKMYT1, very recently Repare Therapeutics conducted a focused screen
of known kinase inhibitors using a fluorescence polarization-based
competitive displacement assay. Among the inhibitors identified as
hits, the 3-phenol compound [dubbed 1 in the reference
paper ( B)]
appears to be an excellent lead structure, particularly considering
the 50–60-fold selectivity observed over the highly homologous
enzyme WEE1. SBDD supported by multiple
cocrystal structures enabled the optimization of keys properties,
including PKMYT1 cell-based potency and kinase activity. The medicinal
chemistry campaign took a fortunate turn with the introduction of
a dimethylphenol substituent into the azaindole core. The resulting
molecules, existing as specific atropoisomers, could be separated
and assessed as single enantiomers, one of which with increased potency
on PKMYT1. Parallel optimization of ADME properties led to identification
of the orally available lunresertib [RP-6306 ( B)]. RP-6306 showed nanomolar cell-based
potency against PKMYT1, excellent selectivity toward a panel of kinases,
including WEE1, favorable PK, and ultimately efficacy in an ovarian CCNE1-amplified xenograft model ( ). The first-in-class
clinical candidate RP-6306 reported by Repare Therapeutics is currently
being evaluated in phase 1 clinical trials for the treatment of various
solid tumors alone or in combination therapies with FOLFIRI (NCT05147350),
gemcitabine (NCT05147272), and the ATR selective inhibitor RP-3500
(NCT04855656). 
Most recently,
Repare Therapeutics has partnered with Debiopharm
to explore SL combination of PKMYT1 and WEE1 in cancer. The collaboration
aims to explore the synergism between RP-6306 and Debio0123, a potent
and brain penetrant WEE1i ( A and ), , in a new arm of Repare’s
ongoing clinical trial NCT04855656.
Overall, the data suggest
that WEE1/PKMYT1 inhibition is suitable
for SL strategies in cancer therapy. The broad spectrum of activities
exerted by the two kinds of kinases across the cell cycle makes them
good candidates for a diverse array of therapeutic combinations. However,
preclinical and clinical studies should be conducted to identify specific
molecular applications in which WEE1/PKMYT1 inhibitors may be recommended. 

3

## SL beyond
DDR
While >70% of oncology trials in SL focus on genes
within DDR pathways,
there are emerging opportunities in SL associated with pathways outside
DDR (non-DDR). Particularly of note
is the significant presence of non-DDR studies in preclinical research,
indicating a growing interest in SL beyond DDR. 
Distinguishing between SL pairs inside or outside
the DDR context
can sometimes be challenging because one gene may be associated with
DDR while the other is not. Examples falling into this category have
been discussed in the previous section, typically involving the use
of specific DDR protein inhibitors in mutated tumors (such as KRAS, MYC, RB-1, or ARID1A) or exploiting tumor deficiencies (through gene loss
of function or protein inhibition) to afford a HRD phenotype, thereby
enhancing sensitivity to PARPi. Notably in this regard, PARPi talazoparib
has been shown to be effective in polybromo-associated BAF complex
(PBRM1)-deficient cancer cells or in combination with BET inhibitors (epigenetic factor). 
Nevertheless, there are many examples
of SL pairs in which neither
gene is a DDR gene, with a reassuring trend of increased application
in clinical trials over the past decade. Herein, we describe two exclusive non-DDR SL interaction examples,
one between MTAP deletion and PRMT5 or MAT2A and
the other between SMARCA4 and SMARCA2. Both of these stand out as
extensively studied and well-defined SL pairs in terms of medicinal
chemistry campaigns, with neither gene belonging to the DDR category.
3.1

## MTAP and PRMT5 or MAT2A
The chromosome
9p21 (chr9p21) locus contains the CDKN2A gene, a
gene encoding critical tumor suppressors and homozygously deleted
in ∼15% of all human cancers. Due to the proximity of the genes, CDKN2A deletion
is generally associated with the homozygous deletion of the methylthioadenosine
phosphorylase (MTAP) gene, which encodes a critical
enzyme in the methionine and adenine salvage pathway. MTAP metabolizes 5′-methylthioadenosine
(MTA), a byproduct of polyamine synthesis; therefore, deletion of MTAP results in the accumulation
of MTA and the blockade of the methionine salvage pathway ( ). The deletion
of these passenger genes creates therapeutically tractable cancer
vulnerabilities, exploiting what is termed “collateral SL”. So far, research around MTAP SL partners has
identified, through RNAi screenings, two metabolic enzymes, the protein
arginine methyltransferase (PRMT5) and the methionine adenosyl transferase
II α (MAT2A) as SL targets with MTAP deletion
( ). , , PRMT5 belongs to the family
of protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) and acts by transferring
a methyl group from the S-adenosyl-l-methionine
(SAM) to coordinate multiple regulatory programs, including cell growth. The role of PRMT5 has been documented in the
pathogenesis of different diseases, including cancer. The accumulation of MTA in MTAP-deficient cells exerts an inhibitory effect on PRMT5, creating a
vulnerability that can disrupt cell viability. Indeed, PRMT5 inhibitors
(PRMT5i) leverage this dysregulated metabolic state and in turn induce
apoptosis in cancer cells. The reader is advised to refer to the cited
reviews for a more thorough summary of other PRMT5i. , The essential role of PRMT5 for cell survival, as demonstrated by
knockout mouse models, explains the issue of toxicity commonly observed
with PRMT5i in clinical or preclinical studies. To counteract this
toxicity, inhibitors, named MTA-competitive inhibitors, that preferentially
bind the target only in the presence of MTA have been designed, to
reduce MTA-independent inhibition. 
 Following this research hypothesis, Mirati Therapeutics
recently
reported MRTX1719 (M)-27, a small molecule that stabilizes
the interaction between PRMT5 and MTA. The development of MRTX1719
(M)-27 is an example of fragment-based lead discovery
(FBLD). An initial fragment screening with SPR identified fragment
F1, which underwent fragment growth via SBDD guided by the crystal
structure of F1 in complex with PRMT5·MTA, giving MRTX1719 ( ). Subsequently, MRTX1719 (M)-27
was identified as the active and stable atropoisomer ( ). MRTX1719 (M)-27 is a potent and selective binder
of the PRMT5·MTA complex and selectively inhibits PRMT5 in MTAP-deleted cells at low nanomolar concentrations, compared
to those of MTAP wild-type cells. Importantly, MRTX1719 (M)-27 avoids the
hematopoietic toxicity issues of previous PRMT5i. Given the promising preclinical in vivo efficacy results, in which MRTX1719 (M)-27 elicited
strong antitumor activity across a panel of MTAP-del
cell line-derived xenograft (CDX) and PDX models, phase 1/2 trials
of this drug are proceeding in a subset of cancers, including lung
and mesothelioma ( ). 
 Similarly, phase 1/2 clinical trials
are currently ongoing for
TNG908, a MTA-cooperative PRMT5i developed by Tango Therapeutics ( ). TNG908 is a brain penetrant small molecule,
and its oral administration drives dose-dependent, selective activity
against MTAP-null tumors in xenograft models, including
glioblastoma ( ). 
Recently, Amgen Inc. has been
proceeding with phase 1/2 dose escalation
studies of AMG193, a second-generation MTA-cooperative PRMT5i, to
treat advanced MTAP-null solid tumors with an improved
toxicity profile ( and ). AMG193’s structure, currently
undisclosed, has been indicated in the company patent (Patent WO2021/163344A1).
The PRMT5 methyl source, SAM, is produced by the enzyme MAT2A ( ). In parallel,
another strategy for the inhibition of PRMT5 has been the inhibition
of MAT2A, the enzyme responsible for producing SAM, which is the main
methyl source of PRMT5. Indeed, the inhibition of MAT2A results in
the reduction of SAM and in turn the starving of PRMT5 of its substrate.
With this aim, Ideaya has advanced this approach, developing MAT2A
inhibitors (MAT2Ai), such as IDE397 that prevents the production of
SAM ( and ). However, SAM is
a common substrate used broadly by multiple methyltransferases. Thus,
there are concerns about the potential off-tissue effects of these
drugs. Nevertheless, IDE397 has been reported as the best-in-class
MAT2Ai, with a tolerability profile greater than those of existing
nontargeted treatments. For this reason, IDE397 is now in phase 1/2
clinical trials, as a monotherapy and in combination with classical
chemotherapy in advanced solid tumors harboring MTAP deletion ( ). , Promisingly, MAT2Ai could represent an additional
class of drugs with which to exploit the paradigm of SL in MTAP-deleted cancers. This is even more important if we
consider that most SL pairs studied in the clinic so far involve DDR
players. If successful, those recent examples would make SL significantly
leap forward in anticancer therapy.

3.2

## SMARCA2
and SMARCA4
The SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complexes are highly conserved ATP-dependent multiprotein
epigenetic regulators that allow bonding of transcription factors
through opening of a tightly packed chromatin structure in the nucleus. The SWI/SNF complex contains two mutually exclusive
catalytic ATPase paralog subunits: SMARCA2 (also known as BRM) and
SMARCA4 (BRG1). The other subunits are
defined by the specific biological role required, resulting in many
variations in the final composition. Mutations in SWI/SNF complexes have been linked to cancer growth
and resistance; in particular, cancer cells with a loss of SMARCA4
expression via mutation are highly dependent on SMARCA2 for survival,
characterized as an SL interaction. , 
These
findings have inspired extensive efforts to develop inhibitors targeting
the ATPase activity of SMARCA2. As a
result, Novartis previously disclosed an optimized small molecule
[compound dubbed 14 in the reference paper ( A)] that demonstrated in vivo antitumor efficacy in SMARCA4-deficient cancers.
The compound is described as an allosteric inhibitor of both SMARCA2
(IC50 < 0.005 μM) and SMARCA4 (IC50 < 0.005 μM), binding to a pocket near the ATP site (Glu852).
Despite the rather specific trans conformation guaranteed
by the sulfur–oxygen distance required for activity, the lack
of selectivity against the two paralogs hampered its development,
resulting in dose-limiting tolerability issues when administered in vivo. Nevertheless, another
enzymatic inhibitor of both SMARCA4 and SMARCA2, FHD-286 ( A), has reached
the clinic, possibly with the intent of recapitulating the corresponding
genetic SL interaction, despite potential toxicity issues. The small molecule developed by Foghorn Therapeutics
is described as highly potent and orally available and is now in a
phase 1 clinical trial in combination with decitabine or cytarabine
in patients with relapsed and/or refractory AML (NCT04891757). Despite
the binding mode of FHD-286 not being disclosed, it shares with compound 14 the sulfur–carbonyl motifs, hinting at a similar
binding behavior ( A).
 An alternative strategy for targeting SMARCA2 in
the treatment
of SMARCA4 mutant cancers involves leveraging small molecules that
target the SMARCA2 bromodomain region (Asn1464) as a handle for their
development into PROTACs, as demonstrated by the growth inhibition
of SMARCA2-dependent (SMARCA4 mutant) cancer cells after intracellular
knockdown of SMARCA2. This approach
capitalizes on the unique advantages of PROTACs over traditional small
molecule inhibitors, allowing for selective degradation of a specific
protein while sparing its closely related homologues and therefore circumventing the selectivity challenges
encountered with inhibitors that target the ATPase activity of the
protein.
In 2019, Farnaby et al. introduced ACBI1, the first
PROTAC degrader
of SWI/SNF complex subunits, SMARCA2 and SMARCA4, swiftly followed by ACBI2 ( B), a notable achievement as an oral VHL-based
PROTAC, a domain typically associated with CRBN-recruiting bifunctional
degraders. A factor contributing to
the success of this molecule is the more compact arrangement of the
branched linker, which afforded a smalle 3D polar surface area ( B). ACBI2 displayed selective degradation of SMARCA2
over SMARCA4 in ex vivo and in vivo assays, though it achieved tumor stasis only in vivo despite efficient SMARCA2 degradation (for SMARCA2, DC50 = 1 nM and Dmax = 81%; for SMARCA4,
DC50 = 32 nM and Dmax = 67%). Subsequent reports unveiled A947 (for SMARCA2,
DC50 = 0.039 nM and Dmax =
96%; for SMARCA4, DC50 = 1.1 nM and Dmax = 92%) and SMD-3040 (for
SMARCA2, DC50 = 12 nM and Dmax = 91%; for SMARCA4, DC50 > 1000 nM and Dmax = 44%), SMARCA2 selective
VHL-based PROTAC degraders with notable selectivity for SMARCA2 over
SMARCA4, showing stronger efficacy in SMARCA4 mutant cancer cell lines
and xenograft models than in SMARCA4 wild-type cells. An interesting
expansion of the VHL-SAR for SMD-3040 introduced the morpholine group
onto the VHL-methyl benzyl core, resulting in SMD-3236, which features
improved DMPK properties and further increased degradation selectivity
against SMARCA4 (full structure undisclosed; DC50 = 0.5
nM, and Dmax = 96%; for SMARCA4, DC50 > 1000 nM and Dmax = 41%),
thus
representing a promising candidate for further advanced preclinical
studies possibly overcoming DMPK issues often associated with SMARCA2
degraders. 
While potential differences
in cellular adaptation as a cause for
the often observed tumor stasis rather than regression in in vivo models have been acknowledged, more potent PROTACs
(Dmax > 95%) or rational drug combinations are being explored as a means of potentiating
the activity of PROTACs against tumor cells. In this regard, MCL1
protein is being evaluated as a synergistic partner for SMARCA2 degradation
across various SMARCA4 mutated models, underscoring broader applicability
beyond specific cellular contexts. 
Nevertheless, the therapeutic rationale of SMARCA2 degraders in
SMARCA4 mutant tumors suggests a promising clinical future, as demonstrated
by the VHL-based PROTAC undisclosed by Prelude Therapeutics (PRT3789)
that recently entered a phase 1 clinical trial (NCT05639751). 

4

## Expanding the Definition
of SL to Contextual
SL
Contextual SL is a concept that has recently been added
to the
classic genetically based SL. In fact, the effects of classic SL can
be weaker or unattainable due to particular tumor conditions, such
as the heterogeneity of tumor cells, their metabolic state, and the
tumor microenvironment, which ultimately contribute to the onset of
resistance to therapy. In this context,
contextual SL represents a strategy that aims to target both genetic
vulnerabilities and nongenetic abnormal conditions to achieve a more
decisive anticancer effect ( ).
 Tumor tissue promotes neoangiogenesis to grow new
vessels for nutrient
demand, in particular glucose to sustain the abnormally hyperactivated
glycolysis. However, tumor tissue is
not efficiently vascularized, and this creates hypoxic regions. Generally,
hypoxia correlates with cancer aggressiveness and resistance to chemotherapy.
Interestingly, cancer hypoxia connects to SL as it is linked to DDR
deficiency; thus, as they are likely HR-deficient, hypoxic tumor cells
can be sensitive to PARPi. As a proof
of concept, Chan et al. observed that
repair-defective hypoxic cancer cells experience SL with PARPi, in
a RKO (human colon carcinoma cell line) xenograft model, which encourages
further investigation of hypoxia as an inducer of the HR-defective
phenotype. 
Moreover, the hyperactivity
of the tumor hypoxia-induced pH regulator
carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX) is seen to block the lethal mechanism
of ferroptosis by maintaining an alkaline intracellular pH. Taking
into account this evidence, Chafe et al. performed a SL CRISPR screen in hypoxic TNBC cells and discovered
that CAIX-NFS1/xCT axis are genetic SL pairs that when dysregulated
enhance ferroptosis and limit tumor growth. CAIX is a recognized anticancer target and, with CAIX inhibitors,
is advancing in the clinic (e.g., SLC-0111). Therefore, this SL strategy could be implemented as a tool for the
treatment of hypoxic cancer cells.
Cancer cells generally face
complex metabolic reprogramming. This
makes them more dependent on a variety
of pathways and metabolites, opening up contextual SL applications
that could be considered in addition to genetic SL. For instance,
in KRas-driven cancer cells, the deprivation of glutamine is SL in
combination with the ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) inhibitor, SB-204990,
as reported by Hatipoglu et al. This
SL exploits the addiction of KRas-driven cancer cells to glutamine
due to their metabolic reprogramming. Moreover, the same authors proved
that the combination of SB-204990 with an inhibitor of transaminase,
aminooxyacetate, exerted an even stronger SL effect on KRas mutated
cells, opening up the application of this relationship as a therapeutic
combination. 
Increased levels
of ROS are a characteristic feature of cancer. While increased ROS concentrations are crucial
for cancer development and progression, levels surpassing a cytotoxic
threshold lead to cancer cell death. As anticipated above, through metabolic reprogramming, cancer cells
can adapt also to high ROS concentrations through mechanisms such
as antioxidant production and often rely on tumor-specific dependencies
like antioxidant glutathione (GSH) to neutralize ROS. Consequently, restricting GSH availability
can selectively induce tumor cell death and contribute to the development
of targeted treatment strategies. For example, Ogiwara et al. demonstrated how cancer cells lacking ARID1A are particularly sensitive to inhibition of antioxidant
GSH and the key enzyme in GSH synthesis, glutamate-cysteine ligase
synthase catalytic subunit (GCLC). Inhibiting GCLC significantly reduces
GSH levels in ARID1A-deficient cancer cells, thereby
enhancing apoptotic cell death triggered by excess ROS. The susceptibility
of glutathione metabolism in ARID1A-deficient cancers
can thus be considered in the context of genetic SL pairs, as previously
discussed in this Perspective.
The examples described above
provide a mere hint of this expanding
field; a detailed overview of the state of the art is outside the
scope of this Perspective. We therefore suggest the recent review
by Ge et al. for a more comprehensive
analysis. Nevertheless, it is worth emphasizing how careful consideration
of tumor heterogeneity could overcome some of the difficulties that
SL strategies have had regarding translation from cellular to in vivo models and, ultimately, patients. This reflection calls for the attention of the medicinal
chemistry community, providing new potential strategies for drug development.

5

## Final Thoughts and Future Perspectives
SL therapies
have paved the way to personalized therapies, with
the hope of treating specific types of cancers with a very rational
approach. In this context, PARPi and their use in BRCA1/2 mutation
tumors led to a true revolution in anticancer therapy. Nevertheless,
the wide use of PARPi in clinics has highlighted PARPi limitations.
In particular, the acquired resistance to PARPi represents the most
frequent event that threatens the effectiveness of the treatment and
its prolonged use. In this context, aid can come from the identification
of genes and proteins involved in DDR, to be either predictive biomarkers
or SL molecular targets. This helps in predicting the effectiveness
of prescribed therapy and establishing patient eligibility. Furthermore,
it provides a fresh source of targets for medicinal chemistry campaigns
in drug discovery, in particular to investigate the druggability of
said targets and lead to the development of newer DDR-targeting agents
as
monotherapy or in combination therapies. In addition to the examples
previously described in this Perspective, worth mentioning is the
chemoproteomic approach employed by Vividion Therapeutics. Importantly,
it yielded VVD-214, an allosteric covalent inhibitor of the Werner
(WRN) DNA helicase with an important SL application in tumors with
microsatellite instability (MSI), a common hallmark of cancers with
DNA mismatch repair deficiency. Beyond
direct DDR inhibition, SL paradigm is also effective through the inhibition
of DDR adjacent targets, such as epigenetic regulators and transduction
signaling mediators, i.e., tyrosine kinase receptors, achieving an
HRD-like status that can confer sensitivity to PARPi. Targeting those
indirect players of DDR increases the scope for medicinal chemists
and expands the use of SL to more varied cohorts of oncological patients.
Knockout screens to catch new SL pairs have focused so far on two-way
interactions, silencing one gene across a specific cancer cell line.
Newly developed double-knockout CRISPR-Cas9 screening approaches are
under development, opening the way to paralogue knockout to provide
proteins with redundant activity. Some
promising SL interactions between paralogue pairs have been reported,
including some tumor suppressors such as the described SMARCA4, but also ARID1A and CREBBP. In some cases, structural similarity can be
exploited to achieve a paralogue pair knockout in genetically altered
cancer cells. An example is the paralog SL interaction of VRK1 nuclear
kinase in glioblastoma deficient of VRK2 reported by Tango Therapeutics, supporting the VRK1 case as a promising drug
discovery target using recently developed pyridine-based inhibitors. In other cases, paralogue inhibition discrimination
is essential for avoiding toxicities and achieving selectivity. In
this regard, the use of PROTACs can afford a selectivity better than
that of small molecule inhibitors. As described above for SMARCA2
degraders, the same approach is being applied to other targets, among
which the effort of Beactica Therapeutics should be mentioned. They
developed YAP/TEAD protein–protein interface degraders, where
one of the four TEAD paralogs (TEAD1) is proven to be SL in certain
altered genetic settings. 
RNAs
are increasingly garnering interest from the medicinal chemistry
field as a renewed source of clinically relevant targets. Upon determination
of multiple roles in the regulation of pathological processes, including
cancer, the identification of RNAs will offer the opportunity to leverage
SL paradigm using RNA targeting agents, including small molecules
and RNA-based therapeutics. For example, an option may be the modulation
of the spliceosome to induce SL in splicing factor-altered cancers.
Indeed, the dysregulation of the splicing of pre-mRNAs is involved
in the development of different malignancies, and frequent somatic
mutations are found in components of the spliceosome in myeloid malignancies. For instance, mutations in SF3B1, a spliceosome component of mRNA of DDR genes, induce a BRCAness-like
phenotype that confers SL to DNA-damaging agents and PARPi. Whether
drugs in development that target the SF3B complex can achieve this
with minimal toxicity remains to be seen. We therefore expect that the number of SL strategies focused on
RNA will increase in the future.
Beyond the genetic-based principle,
SL can evolve into a more versatile
paradigm (“contextual SL”) to tackle tumor-induced conditions
and environment, often poorly addressed by the classical combination
strategies based on SL pairs. Indeed, cancer complexity has been widely
embraced in the past decade, as it significantly undermines the efficacy
of current therapeutic strategies.
In this regard, an exciting
field that is emerging is the phenomenon
of “metabolic SL”, defined as an SL relationship not
only for targeting gain-of-function and loss-of-function mutations
but also for metabolic vulnerabilities. Another definition of “metabolic SL” is the one given
by Li et al. that define it as the SL
dependency of organelles (e.g., mitochondria) and genes/proteins involved
in maintaining the metabolic state of the cell. Caution needs to be
used when describing these relationships as SL, because they often
fall into the definition of cancer dependencies rather than genetic
SL. Nevertheless, metabolic reprogramming is an emerging hallmark
of cancer cells, and large-scale metabolic networks can fruitfully
open the way to novel combinatorial strategies, expanding the concept
of SL. , 
Finally, the growing collection of
genomic data from oncological
patients, coupled with artificial intelligence and machine learning
algorithms, will enable the identification of potential SL targets,
within or outside DDR. Together with the advent of groundbreaking
medicinal chemistry approaches, the toolbox of SL therapeutics is
set to undergo a great expansion. For this reason, we hope that this
work will provide inspiration for the medicinal chemistry community
to capitalize on those innovative approaches and accelerate the development
of drug-like compounds to exploit anticancer SL.

## Author Present Address
‡ CECAM, EPFL, Avenue Forel 3, CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland

## Author Contributions
∇ V.P. and
G.B. contributed equally to this work.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.
Viola Previtali completed her doctoral
studies in
medicinal chemistry at Trinity College Dublin (TCD, Ireland) under
the guidance of Prof. Isabel Rozas. After completing her postdoctoral
research in medicinal chemistry and chemical biology with Prof. Mads
H. Clausen’s group at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU,
Denmark), she joined the research group of Prof. Cavalli at the Italian
Institute of Technology (IIT) in 2019. Currently, her research is
focused on designing and developing drugs for synthetic lethality
strategies in precision oncology.
Greta Bagnolini received her Ph.D. in biocomputational,
biotechnological, pharmaceutical, and pharmacological science at the
University of Bologna (Italy) in affiliation with the Italian Institute
of Technology (IIT) in 2021. After postdoctoral studies at Duke University
(USA) working on RNA targeting, she joined the University of Bologna
as a postdoc in medicinal chemistry in 2023. Among the different projects
on which she works, the design and synthesis of protein-protein inhibitors
for synthetic lethality and RNA targeting by small molecules are the
center of her research activity.
Andrea Ciamarone received his M.S. in organic chemistry
from the University of Bologna (Italy) in 2021. In the same year,
he joined the Italian Institute of Technology (IIT) as Ph.D. student
in biotechnological, biocomputational, pharmaceutical, and pharmacological
sciences. His research is mainly focused on the design and synthesis
of small molecules for cancer treatment.
Giovanni Ferrandi is a Ph.D. student in biotechnological,
biocomputational, pharmaceutical, and pharmacological sciences from
the University of Bologna in collaboration with the Italian Institute
of Technology (IIT). He received his M.S. in 2021 in organic synthesis
and bio-organic chemistry from the University of Bologna with a thesis
on the synthesis and biological evaluation of organometallic complexes
with potential anticancer activity at the University of Brussels ULB.
In 2021, he started his Ph.D. working in drug discovery projects mainly
focused on the design and synthesis of small molecules to chemically
induce synthetic lethality in cancer cells.
Francesco Rinaldi studied Pharmacy at the University
of Bologna (Unibo, Italy), carrying out his M.S. work at ETH Zurich
(Switzerland). In 2023, he obtained his Ph.D. in biotechnological,
biocomputational, pharmaceutical, and pharmacological sciences at
Unibo, after developing his three-year work at the Italian Institute
of Technology (IIT), where he is currently acting as a postdoc. Since
2021, his work has been supported by the Italian Association for Cancer
Research (AIRC), thanks to a three-year fellowship.
Samuel H. Myers received his Ph.D. in medicinal
chemistry
from the University of Edinburgh (U.K.) in 2016. After postdoctoral
work in medicinal chemistry and chemical biology at University College
London (UCL, U.K.), in 2018 he joined the Italian Institute of Technology,
Genova (Italy), where he worked as a postdoc in medicinal chemistry
for 5 years. He has since moved into industry having joined Lo.Li
Pharma srl, Roma (Italy), in 2023.
Marinella Roberti is Professor of Medicinal Chemistry
at the University of Bologna. Her research field regards the design
and the synthesis of biologically active small molecules that can
be either innovative lead candidates for drug discovery or valuable
chemical tools for studying molecular pathways. The therapeutic field
of main interest is cancer. Within the different strategies applied
for the design of new molecular entities, the development of protein-protein
interaction inhibitors to chemically induce synthetic lethality is
the center of her most recent research activities. The scientific
research activity is documented by >100 publications in peer-reviewed
journals.
Andrea Cavalli is
a professor at the University of
Bologna and the director of CECAM/EPFL. He was the Director of Computational
Sciences and the Vice-Scientific Director of IIT. He combines computational
chemistry with drug discovery. He designed algorithms and protocols
to accelerate the discovery of new lead candidates. He pioneered molecular
dynamics and related methods to (multitarget) drug discovery, creating
algorithms for dynamic docking, allosteric modulation, residence time
prediction, free energy estimation, etc. He has also led oncogenomics
programs with clinics and hospitals that aim to find actionable drug
genes through next-generation sequencing, bioinformatics, and machine
learning. New targets from omics analyses support new drug discovery
programs focusing on synthetic lethality. He has published >300
scientific
papers and delivered >150 lectures.

## Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Italian Association
for Cancer Research (AIRC, IG 2018, id 21386), PRIN Project 2022 (Prot.
20227S3BM7), the Italian Institute of Technology (IIT), and the University
of Bologna. F.R. is the recipient of an AIRC Fellowship 2020 “Ignazia-La-Russa”
(id 25239). Images were created with Biorender.com.

## Abbreviations Used
ACLYATP-citrate lyase
APE1apurinic/apyrimidinic
endonuclease
ARID1AAT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1A
ATMataxia telangiectasia mutated
ATMiATM inhibitor
ATRataxia telangiectasia
and Rad3-related protein
ATRiATR inhibitor
ATRIPATR-interacting protein
AURKAAurora kinase A
BETbromodomain and extra-terminal domain
BRCA1/2breast cancer type
1 susceptibility protein
BRDbromodomain
CCND1cyclin D1
CDC25Acell division cycle 25 A
CDKN2Acyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A
CDXcell line-derived xenograft
cGAScyclic GMP-AMP synthase
DDRDNA damage response
DNA-PKcsDNA-dependent
protein kinase catalytic subunit
DNA-PKcsiDNA-PKcs inhibitor
DSBdouble-strand break
DUBdeubiquitinase
EGCepigallocatechin
EMAEuropean Medicine Agency
FAFanconi anemia
FANCD2Fanconi anemia
complementation group 2D
FBLDfragment-based lead discovery
FLT3-ITDFms-like tyrosine receptor kinase 3
GBMglioblastoma
gBRCAmgermline BRCA
mutation
HBhydrogen
bond
HelDhelicase-like
domain
HRhomologous
recombination
HRDhomologous recombination-deficient
ICLinterstrand cross-links
IMHBintramolecular hydrogen bond
IRionizing radiation
ITDinternal tandem
duplication
KDkinase
domain
KRASKirsten
rat sarcoma
MAT2Amethionine adenosyltransferase 2A
MAT2AiMAT2A inhibitor
MCL1myeloid cell leukemia-1
MCTmonocarboxylate transporter
MDC1mediator of DNA damage
checkpoint 1
MEKmitogen-activated protein kinase kinase
METTL16m6A methyltransferase
miRNAmicroRNA
MRNMRE11-RAD50-NBS1
MSH3MutS homologue 3
MTDmaximum tolerated dose
MTAmethylthioadenosine
MTAPmethylthioadenosine
phosphorylase
mTORmammalian target of rapamycin
NFS1iron–sulfur cluster enzyme
NHEJnonhomologous end joining
PALB2partner and localizer
of BRCA2
PARGpoly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase
PARGiPARG inhibitors
PARPpoly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
PARPipoly(ADP-ribose) polymerase inhibitor
PBDpolo-box domain
PBRM1polybromo-associated BAF complex
PCNAproliferating
cell nuclear antigen
PDXpatient-derived xenograft
PD-1programmed cell death protein 1
PD-L1programmed cell death ligand 1
PIKKphosphoinositide 3-kinase-related
PLK1iPLK1 inhibitor
PKMYT1membrane-associated
tyrosine- and threonine-specific cdc2-inhibitory kinase
PolDpolymerase domain
Polθpolymerase
θ
PolθiPolθ inhibitor
PRMTsprotein arginine methyltransferases
PRMT5protein arginine methyltransferase
5
PRMT5iPRMT5 inhibitor
PROTACproteolysis
targeting chimera
qHTSquantitative high-throughput screening
RAD52iRAD52 inhibitor
Rafrapidly accelerated fibrosarcoma
RB-1retinoblastoma
protein 1
RPAreplication
protein A
SAMS-adenosyl-l-methionine
SF3Bsplicing factor 3B
SDLsynthetic dosage lethality
SFCsupercritical fluid
chromatography
shRNAshort RNA
siRNAsilencing RNA
SLsynthetic lethality
SMARCA2/4SWI/SNF-Related, matrix-associated, actin-dependent regulator
of chromatin, subfamily A, member 2/4
SSAsingle-strand annealing
SSBsingle-stranded break
ssDNAsingle-strand DNA
STINGstimulator of
interferon genes
TBNCtriple-negative breast cancer
TEADtranscriptional enhanced associated domain
TLStranslesion synthesis
TMEJPolθ-mediated
end joining
TMZtemozolomide
UAF1USP1-associated factor 1
USP1ubiquitin-specific protease 1
USP1iUSP1 inhibitor
VHLVon Hippel–Lindau
VRKVaccinia-related kinase
WEE1iWEE1 inhibitor
xCTcystine-glutamate antiporter
XRCC1X-ray repair
cross-complementing protein 1
YAPyes-associated protein 1