pmcCancer ResCancer Res358wtpa2984705RCancer research0008-54721538-7445pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleUKPMC Funders Author ManuscriptsPMC7618455PMC7618455.176184557618455EMS2112034127015310.1158/0008-5472.CAN-24-3753EMS211203WTPA211203WTMS211203UKMS2112031ArticleSingle-Cell Lineage Tracing Uncovers Resistance Signatures and
Sensitizing Strategies to FLT3 Inhibitors in Acute Myeloid
Leukemia
ErikssonJohanna ZhengShuyu PopaMihaela BaoJie DaiJun WangWenyu McCormackEmmet VähärautioAnna TangJing 
1Research Program in Systems Oncology, Research Programs Unit,
Faculty of Medicine, https://ror.org/040af2s02University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
2Precision Oncology Research Group, https://ror.org/03zga2b32University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway
3Kinn Therapeutics AS
4Department of Clinical Science, https://ror.org/03zga2b32University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway
5Department of Hematology, https://ror.org/03np4e098Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway
6Centre for Pharmacy, Department of Clinical Science,
https://ror.org/03zga2b32University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway
7Centre for Cancer Biomarkers (CCBIO),
https://ror.org/03zga2b32University of
Bergen, Bergen, Norway
8Foundation for the Finnish Cancer Institute, FinlandCorresponding authors: Johanna Eriksson & Jing
Tang; Research Program in Systems Oncology, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63
(Haartmaninkatu 8), FIN-00014 Helsinki, Finland;
johanna.t.eriksson@helsinki.fi;
jing.tang@helsinki.fi02420268675021841724173828112025101220251012202506042026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This work is licensed under a BY
4.0 International license.While FLT3 inhibitors have significantly improved the treatment of
aggressive FLT3-mutated acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the emergence of
resistance remains as a major challenge. Here, we applied our recently developed
single-cell lineage tracing method ReSisTrace to identify cells that are
intrinsically resistant or sensitive to the FLT3 inhibitors midostaurin and
quizartinib in AML with FLT3-ITD mutations. Comparison of the gene expression
profiles of these cells revealed transcriptional resistance signatures,
including upregulation of GSPT1. Depletion of GSPT1 with CRISPR-Cas9-mediated
knockout resulted in increased sensitivity of AML cells to quizartinib
treatment. Further, targeting GSPT1 with the small molecule CC-90009 exhibited
strong synergistic effects when combined with FLT3 inhibitors in the FLT3-ITD
cell lines and primary AML patient samples. In addition, in an FLT3-ITD-positive
AML patient-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse model, the CC-90009 and quizartinib
combination showed significantly higher anti-tumor efficacy and prolonged
overall survival compared to either treatment alone. Furthermore, compounds that
induced transcriptomic changes opposite to the resistance signatures prompted
cells to acquire FLT3 inhibitor-sensitive states. Vistusertib (mTOR inhibitor),
linsitinib (IGF1R and insulin receptor inhibitor), and meisoindigo (IGF1R and
Src family kinase inhibitor), all inhibiting pathways parallel to or downstream
of oncogenic FLT3 signaling, were predicted and validated to sensitize
FLT3-mutated cell lines and primary cells to FLT3 inhibitors. Collectively,
these findings demonstrate the ability of ReSisTrace to unveil pre-existing
transcriptional features of treatment vulnerability in hematological cancers and
elucidate strategies for enhancing FLT3 inhibitor treatment efficacy in
FLT3-ITD-mutated AML.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY

## Introduction
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a highly aggressive and heterogeneous
hematological malignancy marked by the infiltration of blood, bone marrow, and
tissues by proliferative and abnormally differentiated cells of the myeloid lineage
( ). The FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3)
is a type 3 receptor tyrosine kinase crucial for the expansion of normal
hematopoietic stem cells and it plays a pivotal role in the proliferation and
anti-apoptosis of most primary AML cells. FLT3 is activated by binding of the FLT3
ligand (FL), which results in a signaling cascade activating multiple downstream
signaling pathways, including PI3K/protein kinase B (AKT) and mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathways ( ). FLT3 is
also one of the most commonly mutated genes in AML, with activating internal tandem
duplications (ITD) or point mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD) occurring
in approximately 20% and 7% of AML patients, respectively ( , ). In contrast to
wild-type FLT3 signaling, FLT3-ITD not only activates PI3K and MAPK signaling but
also triggers STAT5 signaling ( ). The
presence of FLT3-ITD mutations also serves as a prognostic marker, indicating a
shorter disease-free and overall survival ( ).
Development of FLT3 inhibitors has changed the standard of care for
FLT3-mutated AML. Midostaurin ( ) and the
recently approved quizartinib are the only FDA-approved FLT3 inhibitors as a
first-line treatment in combination with chemotherapy for adult patients with
newly-diagnosed FLT3-ITD-positive AML. Notably, quizartinib was also approved as
maintenance monotherapy for up to 3 years in patients who do not undergo subsequent
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. In addition, gilterinib has been approved
as a monotherapy for adults with relapsed or refractory AML with FLT3 mutation
( ). Although FLT3 inhibitors have
significantly improved the survival of FLT3-mutated AML patients, primary
therapeutic resistance and short-lived responses remain still as a frequent
problem.
Resistance to FLT3 inhibitors can arise from specific FLT3-TKD mutations or
mutations in other oncogenes ( – ), resulting in activation of proliferation
and pro-survival signaling pathways. Nonetheless, emerging evidence indicates that
non-genetic factors, such as epigenetic, transcriptional, and metabolic states, also
play a crucial role in resistance to chemotherapy and targeted therapies in AML
( , ). Recent studies propose that early resistance to cancer therapies
might also be mediated by non-genetic mechanisms, particularly through drug-tolerant
persister (DTP) states encoded by pre-existing intrinsic transcriptional
heterogeneity ( – ). These DTP cells, closely resembling
clinical measurable residual disease (MRD), can subsequently undergo further
evolution to acquire diverse drug-resistance mechanisms, including mutations ( ). Novel therapeutic strategies aimed at
targeting drug-tolerant persister cells are crucial to prevent the development of
drug resistance and achieve MRD-negative complete remission, thereby reducing
relapse rates and prolonging survival. However, the mechanisms behind this early
resistance to FLT3 inhibitors in AML patients remain poorly understood.
In this study, we employed our recently established lineage-tracing method
ReSisTrace ( ) to investigate the
transcriptional states preceding resistance against FLT3 inhibitors midostaurin and
quizartinib in an FLT3-ITD-positive MOLM-13 cell line. We show that targeting a
pre-resistance signature gene G1 to S phase transition 1 (GSPT1)
with a selective degrader (CC-90009) exhibits strong synergy when combined with FLT3
inhibitors in FLT3-ITD-mutated AML cell lines and primary patient samples. In vivo,
CC-90009 and quizartinib combination also shows higher anti-tumor effect and
prolongs survival in an FLT3-ITD-positive AML PDX mouse model compared to the single
treatments. We further searched the L1000 database ( ) for compounds inducing gene expression changes opposite to the
pre-resistance signatures. Linsitinib (insulin receptor inhibitor), vistusertib
(mTOR inhibitor), and meisoindigo (Src family kinase inhibitor), all targeting
pathways downstream of or parallel to oncogenic FLT3 signaling, were predicted and
validated to pre-sensitize FLT3-ITD-positive cell lines and primary patient samples
to FLT3 inhibitors. In conclusion, our study demonstrates the effectiveness of
ReSisTrace in uncovering targetable, pre-existing transcriptional features of
treatment resistance in hematological cancers. Importantly, the approach allowed us
to identify synergistic and pre-sensitizing drugs that have the potential to
increase FLT3 inhibitor treatment efficacy in FLT3-ITD-positive AML by preventing
emergence of treatment resistance.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
AML cell lines MOLM-13 (RRID:CVCL_2119; kind gift from prof. Caroline
Heckman; authentication of the cell line was performed with the Promega
GenePrint24 System) and MV4-11 (#CRL-9591, ATCC, RRID:CVCL_0064), as well as the
bone marrow mesenchymal stromal cell line HS-5 (RRID:CVCL_3720; kind gift from
prof. Caroline Heckman) were grown in RPMI-1640 (#31870025, Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal
bovine serum (FBS) (#10500064, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 1%
penicillin-streptomycin (#15140122, Gibco), and 1% GlutaMAX (#35050038, Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Conditioned medium used for culturing primary AML patient
samples was collected from 60% to 80% confluent HS-5 cell cultures after 72
hours of incubation, cleared by centrifugation, filtered through a
0.22-µm filter, and stored at -80°C. Cell lines were tested
regularly for mycoplasma contamination with Venor GeM Classic mycoplasma
detection kit (#11-1025, Minerva Biolabs, Berlin, Germany).

## Patient sample processing
Fresh-frozen bone marrow mononuclear cells from two FLT3-ITD-mutated AML
patients at diagnosis, pre-treatment phase were obtained from the Finnish
Hematology Registry and Clinical Biobank (FHRB; https://www.fhrb.fi/) with
appropriate ethical approval. Patient characteristics are described in . Samples were
selected based on high blast cell percentage and a high variant allele frequency
of the FLT3-ITD mutation. Following thawing, cells were cultured for 2 to 3
hours in a mixture consisting of 25% HS-5 stromal cell-derived conditioned
medium and 75% RPMI-1640, supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin-streptomycin,
and 1% GlutaMAX, before seeding for drug combination testing. Mononuclear Cell
Medium (MCM, #C-28030, PromoCell, Heidelberg, Germany) was also evaluated as a
culturing medium for the primary AML cells. Protocols for processing the samples
were approved by the Ethics Committees of Helsinki University Central
Hospital.

## Small molecules
CC-90009 (#HY-130800), ENOblock (#HY-15858), meisoindigo (#HY-13680),
pralatrexate (#HY-10446), vistusertib (#HY-15247), quizartinib (#HY-13001) were
purchased from MedChemExpress (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA), and AZD5438
(#S2621), methotrexate (#S1210), midostaurin (#S8064), and OTS167 (#S7159) from
Selleckchem (Houston, TX, USA). Linsitinib (#CT-O906-2) was from ChemieTek
(Indianapolis, IN, USA).

## ReSisTrace experimental workflow
Lineage barcode library (pBA439_UMI20) was synthesized, and lentiviruses
were packaged as previously described ( ). Two million MOLM-13 cells were transduced with the lentivirus
library to obtain 20% transduction efficiency. Cells were centrifuged with the
lentiviral particles at 800 x g for 30 minutes and incubated at normal growth
conditions o/n, after which cells were washed and grown for 3 days before adding
0.5 ug/ml puromycin (#sc-108071, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) for
9 days to remove cells without barcodes. Barcoded cells (1.2 x106)
were synchronized by incubating with 2 mM thymidine (#T1895, Merck, Darmstadt,
Germany) for 24 hours, after which the cells were released from the thymidine
block by washing, and 20,000 cells/well in 50 ul of growth medium were seeded on
round-bottom 96-well plates. After 24 hours of incubation, 4 of the replicate
wells were used for cell counting to ensure that the cells have approximately
doubled, and 3 of the replicate wells were used as samples for the subsequent
experiment. Each of these 3 samples were resuspended, and half of each sample
(~20,000 cells) was analyzed by scRNA-seq as pre-treatment samples, while
25 ul of growth medium was added to the remaining half of each sample, after
which the cells were treated with midostaurin (100 nM), quizartinib (10 nM), or
DMSO (0.05%, # 0219605525, MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA, USA) for 72 hours. The
drug concentrations were chosen to kill ~70% of cells compared to
DMSO-treated cultures. After the treatment, cells were washed 4 times, each time
by adding 200 ul of medium, centrifuging the plates 300 x g 5 min, and removing
200 ul of medium. Cells were then allowed to recover for 3 (midostaurin), 4
(quizartinib), and 7 days (DMSO/growth control), after which ~20,000
cells from each sample were analyzed by scRNA-seq as post-treatment samples.

## Single-cell RNA-sequencing library preparation
Single-cell RNA sequencing libraries were generated with 10x
Genomics’ Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3' Kit v3.1 (#PN-1000269,
10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA, USA), Chromium Next GEM Chip G Single Cell Kit
(#PN-1000127), and Dual Index Kit TT Set A (#PN-1000215). Libraries were
quantified with Agilent TapeStation (High Sensitivity D5000 ScreenTape system,
Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and qPCR (KAPA Library
quantification kit KK4835, Roche, Basel, Switzerland), and sequenced with
NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).

## Lineage label mapping and processing
The lineage barcode sequence
(5’-CTGGGGCACAAGCTTAATTAAGAATTCANNNNTGNNNNACNNNNGANNNNGTNNNNCTAGGGCCTAGAGGGCCC
GTTTAAAC-3’) was incorporated as an individual gene
pBA439_UMI_20 into the GDCh38.d1.vd1 human reference genome
alongside GENCODE v25 (RRID:SCR_014966) annotation to build the reference for
running the Cell Ranger (v 5.0.1, RRID:SCR_017344) ( ) pipeline to perform alignment and UMI quantification
using a customized reference.
From the “possorted_genome_bam.bam” file generated by the
“cellranger count” command, we extracted lineage label sequences
for each cell. Specifically, we considered sequences mapped to the
pBA439_UMI_20 gene and the sub-pattern
“CANNNNTGNNNNACNNNNGANNNNGTNNNNCT.” To account for sequencing
errors, we applied the directional network-based method from UMI-tools (v1.0.1,
RRID:SCR_017048) ( ) to correct
sequences that differed by a single base from the representative sequence.
Additionally, we filtered out non-unique lineage label sequences expressed by
more than four cells in the pre-treatment samples. We categorized cells from
each pre-treatment sample into two groups: 1) pre-resistant cells with lineage
labels matching those of corresponding post-treatment samples, and 2)
pre-sensitive cells assigned to lineages not detected after treatment.

## Preprocessing of the scRNA-seq data
We used the Seurat (v4.0.4, RRID:SCR_016341) ( ) to perform the data quality control, normalization, top
variable gene selection, scaling, dimensionality reduction, and differentially
expressed gene (DEG) analysis. For each ReSisTrace sample, the genes expressed
in less than three cells were removed. We filtered the cells based on the
distribution of the UMI counts ([20000, 200000] for pre-treatment sample;
[10000, 100000] for post-treatment sample), the number of genes ([2500, 12000]
for pre-treatment sample; [2000, 10000] for post-treatment sample), and
percentage of mitochondrial transcripts (less than 15%). We used the
“NormalizeData” function (default parameter setting) to normalize
gene counts.
For clustering purposes, we merged the pre-treatment samples, including
lineages with only one cell. After normalization and finding the top 3,000
variable genes by using the “FindVariableFeatures” function
(default parameter setting), we assigned each cell a cell-cycle score based on
its expression of G2/M and S phase markers by using the
“CellCycleScoring” function. Then, we used the
“ScaleData” function to scale gene counts, regressing out multiple
variables, including the cell cycle scores, number of UMIs per cell, and
percentage of mitochondrial gene expression. We used 30 principal components for
UMAP projection and clustering, with Louvain algorithm and resolution 0.5.

## Sister cell similarity and sister-concordant genes
We pooled four pre-treatment samples together and defined the cells with
matching labels within each treatment group as sister cells. Lowly expressed
genes whose total normalized expressions are less than 0.61 (10% quantile) were
removed. The Euclidean distances from top 1000 variant genes were calculated to
evaluate the similarity between 1499 sister cell pairs and 1.44 x 108
random cell pairs. The similarities for all sister cell pairs and 100 000
randomly selected random cell pairs were visualized in .
For extracting the sister concordant genes, we considered only the
lineages with two sister cells and removed the sister cells with the Euclidean
distance of their transcriptomes larger than 17.86 (90% quantile). The genes
with log2FCs significantly lower in the sister cell pairs compared to random
cell pairs were defined as the sister-concordant genes (two-tailed t-test with
an FDR-adjusted P-value threshold of 0.05).

## Pre-resistance gene expression signatures
The “FindMarkers” function (test.use =
“wilcox”, logfc.threshold = 0, min.pct = 0) from Seurat R package
was used to determine the differentially expressed genes by Wilcoxon rank sum
test between pre-resistant and pre-sensitive groups in each sample. To minimize
experimental noise from cases where both sisters were sampled in the scRNA-seq
analysis before the treatment, we performed the differential analysis only on
the cells lacking sisters in the same pre-treatment samples.

## Pathway analysis
Gene expression signature gene lists were first ranked by adjusted
p-value, then by non-adjusted p-value, and finally by log2FC. The ranked gene
lists were subjected to Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using the classic
enrichment statistic implemented in GSEA software (v4.3.2, University of
California San Diego and Broad Institute, RRID:SCR_003199) to inspect the MSigDB
(RRID:SCR_016863) ( , ) v2023.2.Hs KEGG_LEGACY and BIOCARTA
gene sets.

## Predicting drugs to target primed resistance
Four variants of pre-resistant gene expression signatures for both
treatments were generated, including: 1) pre-resistance signature log2FC, 2)
pre-resistance signature log2FC (gene list filtered by the Wilcoxon rank sum
test P-value <0.05), 3) contrast log2FC between
treatment and non-treatment control (pre-resistance signature log2FC -
pre-fitness signature log2FC), and 4) contrast log2FC between treatment and
non-treatment control (gene list filtered by bootstrapping test
P-value < 0.05). Only sister-concordant genes were
included in the analysis. Connectivity score defined in the Connectivity Map
project ( ) was used to assess the
similarity of these signatures and the drug-induced consensus gene expression
signatures, constructed using LINCS L1000 Connectivity Map data
(RRID:SCR_016204), following the procedures described in previous work ( , ). Function “connectivityScore” (method =
“fgsea”, nperm = 1000) from PharmacoGx R package (v3.0.2) ( ) was used to calculate the connectivity
scores. Drugs were ranked by their connectivity scores and filtered by
P-value threshold <0.05 in all four pre-resistance
signature variants.

## Drug combination testing and synergy scoring
Cell lines (600 or 800 cells/well for MOLM-13 and MV4-11, respectively)
and primary patient samples (7500 cells/well) were seeded in 384-well plates in
25 µl of respective culture media using BioTek MultiFlo FX RAD (5
µl cassette) (Biotek, Winooski, VT, USA). Indicated concentrations of
small molecules were added for 24 hours, after which indicated concentrations of
midostaurin or quizartinib were added and incubated for 72 hours. Concentration
ranges for drugs were chosen to induce 10% to 50% inhibition as single agents.
As positive (total killing) and negative (growth control) controls 100 µM
benzethonium chloride (#0522166110, MP Biomedicals) and 0.2% DMSO were used,
respectively. Cell viability was then determined using CellTiter-Glo 2.0 assay
(#G9243, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol.
Each concentration and combination was tested in triplicate, and experiments
were performed at least three times for cell lines and once or twice for patient
samples. Representative results are shown.
Dose-response matrices were analyzed with SynergyFinder+ (https://tangsoftwarelab.shinyapps.io/synergyfinder/) (R package
v3.8.2, RRID:SCR_019318) ( ) using four
different reference models, HSA (Highest Single Agent), Bliss (Bliss
independence), Loewe (Loewe additivity), and ZIP (Zero Interaction Potency) to
evaluate synergy between the drugs. HSA synergy scores were visualized as 3-D
landscapes over the dose matrices. Mean synergy scores ≥ 5 were
considered as synergistic. Significance of the mean synergy scores was assessed
by bootstrapping (10 iterations).

## Generation of GSPT1-knockout cells
Two guide RNAs (gRNAs) targeting GSPT1 were independently designed using
the Benchling software (https://www.benchling.com/, RRID:SCR_013955): gRNA_GSPT1_1:
5’ AATCCCAAAACCTAAGTCTG 3’, targeting exon 4, and gRNA_GSPT1_2:
5’ GGTATCAGTCTCTACATCAT 3’, targeting exon 12. Both
GSPT1-targeting and non-targeting control gRNA pairs (Ctl_22: 5’
GAGTGATGCTTAGACTCCGT 3’ and Ctl_23: 5’ TTCGCACGATTGCACCTTGG
3’; ( ) were cloned into the
Lenti-CRISPR-V2 (https://www.addgene.org/52961/, RRID:Addgene_52961) vector by
the Genome Biology Unit supported by HiLIFE and the Faculty of Medicine,
University of Helsinki, and Biocenter Finland. Lentivirus packaging was provided
by the Biomedicum Virus Core (HelVi-BVC) supported by HiLIFE and the Faculty of
Medicine, University of Helsinki, and Biocenter Finland. MOLM-13 cells were
transduced with the lentiviruses by centrifugation at 800 x g for 2 hours,
followed by overnight incubation under standard culture conditions. The
following day, cells were washed and cultured for an additional 24 hours before
puromycin selection. After five days of selection, pooled populations of
GSPT1-knockout and control MOLM-13 cells (expressing Cas9 and non-targeting
gRNAs) were seeded in 96-well plates at 8,000 cells per well in 100 µl of
culture medium and treated with either DMSO or quizartinib at concentrations of
1, 2, or 2,5 nM quizartinib in five to six replicates. After 72 hours, viable
cell numbers were quantified using the TC20 Automated cell Counter (#1450102,
Bio-Rad). Statistical significance was determined using two-tailed t-tests, with
Holm’s method applied to adjust for multiple comparisons. Adjusted
P-values <0.05 were considered statistically
significant.

## Western blotting
Cells were harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with cold PBS, and
lysed with RIPA buffer (#89900, Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 2x Pierce
protease inhibitor mixture (#A32955, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 1 mM EDTA on
ice for 30 min. Lysates were sonicated and cleared by centrifugation. Protein
concentration was determined with Pierce BCA protein assay kit (#23227, Thermo
Fisher Scientific). Then, samples were boiled for 5 min in 1x Laemmli sample
buffer and 5% 2-mercaptoethanol. Proteins were resolved on 4–20%
Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ precast protein gels (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA,
USA) and transferred to Immobilon-FL PVDF membranes (#IPFL00005, Merck). After
blocking with 2% BSA, membranes were incubated with the primary antibodies for
2h at RT or overnight at +4°C. Rabbit polyclonal antibody against GSPT1
(#10763-1-AP, Proteintech, Rosemont, IL, USA, RRID:AB_2115506), and as a loading
controls mouse monoclonal antibodies against alpha-tubulin (DM1A, #ab7291,
Abcam, Cambridge, UK, RRID:AB_2241126), alpha-actin (JLA20, #CP01, Merck,
RRID:AB_566293), and beta-actin (#66009-1-Ig, Proteintech, RRID:AB_2687938) were
used as primary antibodies. Immunodetection was performed with Azure 500 imager
(Azure Biosystems, Dublin, CA, USA) using IRDye secondary antibodies (LI-COR
Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA). Protein band signals were quantified using
ImageJ (1.53c, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA, RRID:SCR_003070).

## In vivo testing of drug combination efficacy in an AML PDX mouse
model
The protocol for animal studies was approved by The Norwegian Animal
Research Authority and conducted according to The European Convention for the
Protection of Vertebrates Used for Scientific Purposes, in an AAALAC accredited
institution. The PDX model (AML-PDX1) was developed from peripheral blood from a
59-year-old female with FLT3-ITD-positive AML using a previously described
protocol ( ). Female NSG mice
(n = 32, 6 to 10 weeks old, JAX™ mice strain
#005557, Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA, USA, RRID:IMSR_JAX:005557)
were inoculated intravenously via tail-vein with 1x106 AML-PDX1 cells
per animal using a 30-gauge insulin needle. Cells were administered as a
suspension in phosphate-buffered saline with a final volume of 120 μL per
syringe. Seven days after transplantation, the mice were allocated to control
(vehicle), quizartinib (10 mg/kg daily, in 20% Hydroxypropyl-Beta-Cyclodextrin
in sterile water, per os), CC-90009 (5 mg/kg daily, in 5% N-methyl-2-
pyrrolidone (NMP) / 45% PEG 400 / 50% sodium chloride, subcutaneously), and
combination treatment groups (n = 8 mice per group; randomized
by weight and bioluminescence intensity). CC-90009 treatment was started a day
before quizartinib treatment, to pre-sensitize leukemic cells. Animals were
treated for two weeks, continuously. Disease progression was monitored through
weekly bioluminescence imaging starting from the baseline, prior to the
initiation of treatment. Optical images were acquired using an IVIS Spectrum
system (PerkinElmer-Revvity, Waltham, MA, USA). For imaging purposes, mice with
engrafted cancer cells received a contrast reagent, D-Luciferin (150 mg/kg, 250
mg/mL), via intraperitoneal injection. Data was analysed using the Living Image
4.7.3. software (PerkinElmer-Revvity). At the end of the study, mice were
sacrificed following institutional guidelines as defined by weight loss, ruffled
fur, and hind limb paralysis. Statistical significance was determined using
two-tailed t-tests, with Holm’s method applied to adjust for multiple
comparisons. For comparing Kaplan Meier curves, pairwise log-rank tests (also
known as pairwise comparisons of survival curves) were performed using the
pairwise_survdiff() function from the survminer R package (v0.5.0,
RRID:SCR_021094), with Holm’s method applied to adjust for multiple
comparisons. Adjusted P-values <0.05 were considered
statistically significant.

## Results

## Establishing primed resistance signatures using lineage tracing
To elucidate transcriptional cell states that are primed to resist
treatment with the FLT3 inhibitors quizartinib and midostaurin, we applied
ReSisTrace in an FLT3-ITD-mutated AML cell line MOLM-13. In this approach,
uniquely labeled and synchronized cells undergo one duplication before being
randomly divided into two populations. One population is subjected to
single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) analysis directly, while the other
undergoes drug treatment ( ). Cells
subjected to drug treatment were exposed to either 100 nM midostaurin or 10 nM
quizartinib for 72 hours to kill ~70% of the cells. Subsequently, the
surviving cells were allowed to recover, and scRNAseq-analysis was performed to
identify the drug-resistant lineages within the post-treatment samples. The
lineage information was used to annotate corresponding sister cells in the
pre-treatment sample as pre-resistant cells. Cell lineages present in the
pre-treatment sample but absent in the post-treatment sample were annotated as
pre-sensitive. We further analyzed a control sample treated with DMSO only,
mimicking the growth conditions of the drug treatment experiments, to
differentiate between transcriptional states associated with experiment-specific
growth fitness and those specifically linked to primed resistance.
In pre- and post-treatment scRNA-seq samples, lineage labels consisting
of 20 random bases were detected in approximately 85% of the cells passing
quality control ( ). On average, 71% of the lineages were unique for each treatment
( ). In the
pre-treatment samples, approximately 88% of the cells with lineage labels
represented lineages with only one cell ( ). We used only these cells in the downstream
analyses to exclude lineages with increased basal growth rate and to reduce the
rate for false-negative findings due to both sister cells ending up in the
pre-treatment sample because of random sampling. We further validated that cells
sharing the same lineage labels, i.e. sister cells, have significantly more
similar transcriptomes than random cell pairs ( ), suggesting
that the sister cells can be used as proxies to study lineage-specific treatment
resistance, in line with our results in the solid cancer setting ( ).
We then explored the pre-treatment samples in the transcriptomic space.
In the UMAP embedding, all cells within the pre-treatment samples were clustered
together, indicating that the samples destined to undergo different treatments
showed similar composition ( ). Notably, no distinct subclones were found,
indicating the homogeneity of the MOLM-13 cell line. Next, in the midostaurin
pre-treatment sample, we determined 544 lineages as pre-resistant and 2015
lineages as pre-sensitive, based on the lineage labels observed or lacking in
the post-treatment sample, respectively. Similarly, in the quizartinib
pre-treatment sample, we annotated 344 lineages as pre-resistant and 3848
lineages as pre-sensitive. In the control pre-treatment sample, we found 801
lineages that remained in the respective post-treatment sample, and thus
annotated as pre-fit cells, while 2840 lineages were annotated as pre-unfit
cells. A UMAP projection did not reveal a clear separation between the
pre-resistant and pre-sensitive cells, nor the pre-fit and pre-unfit cells
( ),
suggesting that there were no discernible subclonal patterns indicative of
resistance.
We then performed differential gene expression analysis between the
pre-resistant and pre-sensitive cells using the non-parametric Wilcoxon rank sum
test, to obtain the midostaurin and quizartinib pre-resistance signatures ( ; full gene lists are shown in
 and ). Additionally, we
compared the expression profiles of the pre-fit and pre-unfit cells in the
DMSO-treated growth control experiment to elucidate the pre-fitness signature
( ). To
determine the potential pathways associated with primed FLT3 inhibitor
resistance, we ran gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) on the pre-resistance and
pre-fitness signature gene lists, ranked by adjusted P-value,
P-value, and log2 fold change (log2FC). We found that many
KEGG pathways linked to cell cycle, DNA replication, and DNA repair were
enriched among the genes up-regulated in both pre-resistant and pre-fit cells
(full lists of significant KEGG pathways are shown in ). Moreover,
KEGG pathways related to carbohydrate metabolism, including fructose and mannose
metabolism, inositol phosphate metabolism, pentose phosphate pathway, as well as
amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, were enriched among genes
specifically up-regulated in the pre-resistant cells ( ). When comparing the midostaurin and quizartinib
pre-resistance signatures, we found that the Wnt signaling pathway was
up-regulated in both of them, consistent with previous findings that activation
of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling decreases the potency of FLT3 inhibitors in
FLT3-ITD-mutated cells ( ). In contrast,
phosphatidylinositol signaling system and mTOR signaling pathway were
up-regulated only in the quizartinib pre-resistance signature. The analysis of
the BioCarta pathways also indicated the up-regulation of mTOR signaling in
quizartinib pre-resistance signature, while MAPK and ERK signaling pathways were
up-regulated in the midostaurin pre-resistance signature ( ; full lists of significant BioCarta pathways are
shown in ).

## Targeting individual pre-resistance signature genes with inhibitors
As we observed an overlap between the top up-regulated genes in the
pre-resistance signatures and those in the growth control (pre-fit versus
pre-unfit cells), we sought to identify genes exhibiting increased expression
specifically within the pre-resistance signatures compared to the pre-fitness
signature. To accomplish this, we employed permutation and bootstrapping tests
to assess the significance of the fold change differences between the
signatures. Our analysis revealed that 41 genes were significantly (adjusted
P-value < 0.05 in pre-resistant vs pre-sensitive)
and specifically (permutation and bootstrapping test between pre-resistance and
pre-fitness log2FC, P < 0.05) up-regulated in
midostaurin pre-resistant cells, and 7 genes in quizartinib pre-resistant cells
when compared to both their respective pre-sensitive cells and the pre-fit
signal within the DMSO control ( ; and ;
full results are shown in and ).
We selected one gene, G1 to S phase transition 1
(GSPT1), which was the only targetable gene present among the
top genes in the pre-resistance signatures for both midostaurin and quizartinib
treatments ( 
and ), to
investigate whether combining a GSPT1 inhibitor with FLT3 inhibitors could
enhance treatment efficacy. GSPT1 encodes a protein involved in
translation termination, and it could be targeted for selective
ubiquitin-mediated degradation with a molecular glue CC-90009 ( ). Our experimental approach involved
pre-treating MOLM-13 cells with CC-90009 for 24 hours, followed by the addition
of midostaurin or quizartinib for an additional 72 hours. CC-90009 showed
synergy with both midostaurin and quizartinib according to the common synergy
scoring methods, including Bliss (Bliss independence), HSA (Highest Single
Agent), Loewe (Loewe additivity), and ZIP (Zero Interaction Potency) ( ; dose-response matrices in ). Importantly,
the combination was synergistic also in another FLT3-ITD-positive cell line,
MV4-11 ( and ). To confirm the
expected mechanism, we verified by western blotting that CC-90009 treatment led
to the degradation of GSPT1 in both MOLM-13 and MV4-11 cells ( ). In MOLM-13, we
observed predominantly low expression of the long isoform (~80 kDa) and
elevated levels of a shorter (~40 kDa) isoform/fragment. Following
CC-90009 treatment, there was a 73% to 80% reduction in the shorter
isoform/fragment compared to the DMSO-treated control ( ). In turn,
MV4-11 cells exhibited elevated expression of the long GSPT1 isoform,
accompanied by the presence of the shorter fragment. Both isoforms were
significantly reduced by 39% to 58% after CC-90009 treatment ( ). To further
investigate the role of GSPT1 in primed resistance to FLT3 inhibitors, we used a
CRISPR-Cas9 system with double guide RNAs (gRNAs) to knockout GSPT1 in MOLM-13
cells. To minimize confounding effects of clonal variation, we analyzed pooled
populations of GSPT1-knockout (KO) cells and non-targeting double
gRNA-expressing control cells. Knockout led to a 65% reduction in GSPT1 protein
levels ( ).
According to the DepMap Chronos data (https://depmap.org/portal/), GSPT1 depletion has a strong
negative fitness effect in MOLM-13 cells (Chronos gene effect -1.59), which
likely contributed to the difficulty in generating stable high-efficiency
GSPT1-KO pools. Consistent with this, GSPT1-KO cells exhibited a transient
reduction in growth rate compared to controls ( ), lasting
approximately for one week post knockout. This suggests the cells may undergo
adaptation in response to GSPT1 loss. When treated with quizartinib for 72
h—one week after transduction—GSPT1-KO cells showed a
dose-dependent increase in sensitivity to the drug when compared to the control
cells ( ). Taken
together, these results support a functional role for GSPT1 in mediating primed
resistance to FLT3 inhibitors and suggest that GSPT1 degraders may enhance the
efficacy of FLT3 inhibitor therapy in FLT3-ITD-mutated AML.
In our search for specific combination therapies for quizartinib, we
further selected a top gene enolase 1 (ENO1) from the
pre-resistance signature ( ). ENO1 is a gene encoding a glycolytic
enzyme alpha-enolase, which can be targeted by ENOblock ( ). Again, we pre-treated the cells with ENOblock before
adding quizartinib. In both MOLM-13 and MV4-11 cell lines, ENOblock showed
synergy with quizartinib according to Bliss, HSA, and ZIP scores ( ; dose-response matrices in ), suggesting that
ENO1 may play a role in primed resistance against FLT3 inhibitors in
FLT3-ITD-mutated AML.

## Targeting pre-resistant states by drugs with opposite gene expression
signatures
In addition to targeting individual genes in the pre-resistance
signature, we employed a systematic strategy to target primed resistance in a
more comprehensive manner. This involved the use of small molecules that would
shift cancer cells toward the pre-sensitive states, thereby enhancing their
responsiveness to FLT3 inhibitor treatment. To this end, we leveraged the
pre-resistance signatures obtained from the ReSisTrace analysis to predict such
compounds. We queried the L1000 database ( ) for drugs that would induce gene expression changes opposite to
the pre-resistance signatures (i.e. similar to the pre-sensitivity signatures).
To obtain more robust results, we used multiple variants of the pre-resistance
signatures, two of which were adjusted for gene expression patterns associated
with experimental growth fitness (see ). The drugs were filtered by negative connectivity scores
with P-value < 0.05 across all the pre-resistance
signature variants ( ; ). Notably, some
of the identified drugs target kinases downstream of FLT3, such as vistusertib,
which inhibits mTOR, GDC-0068 inhibiting AKT, and meisoindigo inhibiting
multiple SRC family kinases along with IGF1R. Additionally, some of the
identified drugs inhibit kinases activating the same signaling pathways as FLT3,
such as CGP-52411 (EGFR inhibitor) and linsitinib (IGF1R and insulin receptor
inhibitor). According to our scRNA-seq data and the DepMap Portal (https://depmap.org/), only the insulin receptor is expressed in
MOLM-13 cells, whereas IGF1R and EGFR are not. Among the other potential
pre-sensitizing drugs were CDK inhibitors, a CHEK1 inhibitor, and OTS167, which
targets MELK and has been reported to inhibit FLT3 protein translation and
synergize with the FLT3 inhibitor gilterinib in FLT3-ITD-mutated AML ( ). When combined with midostaurin,
linsitinib (insulin receptor inhibitor) and vistusertib (mTOR inhibitor)
demonstrated synergism across all four synergy scoring methods ( ; Dose-response matrices in ). In turn, in
combination with quizartinib, AZD5438 (CDK inhibitor) displayed synergism only
according to the HSA scores ( ,
and ), while OTS167
(MELK inhibitor) exhibited additive effect or low synergism according to three
synergy scoring methods ( , and
 ). Notably,
meisoindigo (SRC family kinase and IGF1R inhibitor) demonstrated higher
synergism with quizartinib according to Bliss, HSA, and ZIP methods ( , and ). We then evaluated
the effect of the combinations, which showed the highest synergism, in the other
FLT3-ITD-positive cell line, MV4-11. We found that vistusertib consistently
displayed the highest synergism with midostaurin, while linsitinib with
midostaurin and meisoindigo with quizartinib demonstrated synergism according to
HSA and Loewe methods ( and
 ).
Interestingly, all the top-performing predicted drugs, linsitinib, vistusertib
and meisoindigo, inhibit pathways downstream or parallel to FLT3 signaling
( ). Our results indicate that
these pathways are activated in the pre-resistant cells and inhibiting these
pathways pre-sensitize FLT3-ITD-mutated cells to FLT3 inhibitors.

## Validating drug combinations in FLT3-ITD-mutated patient samples
We then evaluated the efficacy of the drug combinations in two
diagnosis-stage FLT3-ITD-mutated AML patient samples ( ), with blast cell percentage ≥ 58% and an
FLT3-ITD variant allele frequency ≥ 70% ( ). Initially, we
cultured the samples in both Mononuclear Cell Medium (MCM) and 25% HS-5 stromal
cell-conditioned RPMI-1640 medium. Despite previous reports showing that HS-5
cell-conditioned medium protects FLT3-ITD-mutated primary AML cells from FLT3
inhibitors ( ), we chose this medium for
our experiments as it more closely mimics the in vivo environment and supported
the growth of the primary cells. MCM, in contrast, did not support primary cell
growth for the required 4 days ( ).
In single-drug treatments, midostaurin and meisoindigo were less
effective in primary AML samples compared to MOLM-13 and MV4-11 cell lines.
Interestingly, primary cells were more sensitive to CC-90009 than the cell lines
( and ). Quizartinib did not
achieve 50% inhibition in the primary AML cells even with the highest
concentration tested (2 µM), while ENOblock was either ineffective or
promoted growth at concentrations up to 15 µM ( ). Among the drug
combinations, CC-90009 consistently exhibited high synergy with quizartinib and
midostaurin in both samples, as confirmed by all four synergy scoring methods
( , ; dose-response
matrices in ).
Vistusertib combined with midostaurin, and meisoindigo with quizartinib showed
synergism in both samples according to all synergy scores ( , ; dose response ). Linsitinib and
midostaurin combination displayed significant synergy according to all synergy
scoring methods but only in sample AML_2 ( , ;
dose response )
suggesting that certain resistance-conferring pathways may be activated in a
subset of patients. Meanwhile, ENOblock combined with quizartinib showed synergy
in both samples ( , and ) but the overall
inhibition levels remained low, likely due to the ineffectiveness of both drugs
as single agents ( ).

## Validating the synergistic effect of CC-90009 and quizartinib in an AML PDX
mouse model
To evaluate the in vivo efficacy of CC-90009 and quizartinib—the
combination demonstrating the highest synergy in ex vivo cultures of AML patient
samples—we utilized a pre-established luciferase-expressing
FLT3-ITD-positive patient-derived xenograft (AML-PDX1) mouse model. AML-PDX1
cells were intravenously injected into NSG mice, and seven days post
engraftment, the animals were randomized by weight into four treatment groups:
vehicle, quizartinib (10 mg/kg), CC-90009 (5 mg/kg), or the combination. Tumor
burden was assessed through bioluminescence imaging, and mice were monitored for
weight loss and overall survival until they were euthanized due to symptomatic
disease progression. Treatments were administered daily for 14 days, with
CC-90009 initiated one day prior to quizartinib to pre-sensitize leukemic cells.
The treatments were generally well tolerated, with no significant weight loss
observed throughout the study ( ). Apart from transient ruffled fur, no other
treatment-related clinical signs were noted. The weight loss observed in all
groups during the later stages of the experiment was attributed to advanced
leukemic progression rather than treatment-related toxicity. CC-90009
monotherapy showed low antitumor activity, while quizartinib monotherapy
displayed stable disease throughout the treatment phase ( ). However, this effect was not sustained after
treatment cessation, indicating limited durability of the single-agent FLT3
inhibition. Importantly, the combination therapy significantly reduced tumor
burden during treatment, demonstrated a sustained anti-leukemic effect
post-treatment, and improved the overall survival compared to all other groups
( and ).
Taken together, targeting GSPT1 with a molecular glue degrader exhibits
strong synergy with FLT3 inhibitors in FLT3-ITD-positive AML both in vitro and
in vivo and represents a promising approach to enhance treatment efficacy in
FLT3-ITD-mutated AML. Furthermore, the three top-performing drugs, vistusertib,
linsitinib and meisoindigo, predicted to pre-sensitize cells to FLT3 inhibitors,
demonstrated synergy with the FLT3 inhibitors in both FLT3-ITD mutated patient
samples and cell lines. These findings validate the effectiveness of our
ReSisTrace lineage-tracing method for identifying new, rational drug
combinations targeting primed treatment resistance in hematological cancers.

## Discussion
Despite considerable progress in developing more potent and selective FLT3
inhibitors, the emergence of resistance persists as a significant challenge. Studies
investigating AML patient relapses after FLT3 inhibitor therapy have consistently
identified alterations in genes within the RAS/MAPK pathway, particularly NRAS and
KRAS, as the most prevalent genetic aberrations associated with acquired resistance,
alongside novel FLT3 mutations ( – ). Moreover, FLT3-independent activation of
RAS/MAPK and/or PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways, along with the sustained
expression of genes involved in FLT3-mediated cellular transformation, has been
observed in FLT3 inhibitor-resistant cell lines and primary samples ( , ).
Additionally, non-genetic mechanisms, such as soluble factors from the bone marrow
microenvironment, can activate the downstream RAS/MAPK, PI3K/AKT, and mTOR signaling
in AML cells, contributing to early treatment resistance against FLT3 inhibitors
( – ). Furthermore, intrinsic transcriptional heterogeneity can
also induce drug tolerance in cancer cells ( ). Our ReSisTrace lineage-tracing method offers a means to unbiasedly
detect pre-existing transcriptional states leading to resistant fates. Short-term
drug treatment is used to identify transcriptional states associated with early
intrinsic drug-tolerance present prior to the treatment, without capturing possible
stable resistance clones harboring resistance-conferring mutations that outgrow
during prolonged drug exposure ( ). Applying
the method on FLT3-ITD-positive cells unveiled transcriptional states characterized
by increased signaling of the aforementioned resistance-conferring pathways, priming
cells for resistance against FLT3 inhibitors within the treatment-naïve cell
population. Reverting these cell states that are predisposed to survive the
treatment, already before more stable resistance emerges, could represent a viable
strategy to enhance long-term remission rates in FLT3-ITD-positive AML patients.
Our lineage-tracing method not only allows characterization of resistant
populations prior to the treatment but also reveals the vulnerable states that could
be induced via pre-treatments. We targeted primed resistance with drugs that were
predicted to pre-sensitize cells to FLT3 inhibitors based on the similarity between
our pre-sensitivity signature and the L1000 drug-perturbed consensus signatures.
Among these drugs, many target pathways that are parallel to or downstream of
oncogenic FLT3 signaling ( ). For
instance, vistusertib inhibits mTOR activity, attenuating any FLT3-ITD-independent
resistance-promoting mTOR signaling when combined with an FLT3 inhibitor. Consistent
with this, a dual PI3K/mTOR inhibitor PF-04691502 has been found to display
synergistic cytotoxicity with quizartinib in FLT3-ITD AML cells ( ). Another predicted drug, linsitinib,
selectively targets the insulin receptor and IGF1R ( ). Notably, only the insulin receptor is moderately expressed in the
MOLM-13 and MV4-11 cell lines, according to our scRNA-seq data and the DepMap Portal
(https://depmap.org/portal), suggesting that linsitinib elicits its
effect through inhibiting insulin receptor and not IGF1R. Upon binding of insulin or
IGF1, INSR activates multiple downstream pathways, including PI3K/AKT/mTOR and
RAS/MAPK/ERK signaling ( ). IGF1R is also
targeted by meisoindigo, but since IGF1R is not expressed in the MOLM-13 and MV4-11
cells, meisoindigo’s main mechanism of action in these cell lines likely
involves inhibition of several non-receptor tyrosine kinases, including FES, FER,
and the SRC family kinases LYN, FYN, YES1, LCK, and SRC ( ). Among these, LYN and FES are expressed in MOLM-13 and
MV4-11 and play key roles in oncogenic FLT3 downstream signaling ( , ).
In primary AML cells, meisoindigo demonstrated strong synergy with quizartinib in
both samples, with synergy scores even higher than in the cell lines. Interestingly,
meisoindigo has been used to treat chronic myeloid leukemia in China for decades
( ) and has also been reported to induce
apoptosis in AML cell lines and primary AML cells ( ). Notably, vistusertib and linsitinib, when combined with
midostaurin, also showed enhanced synergy in the two samples. Together, these
findings suggest that the resistance-conferring pathways targeted by these
pre-sensitizing drugs may play an important role in at least a subset of
FLT3-ITD-mutated AML patients. Further studies are needed to elucidate the
mechanisms driving the activation of these pathways and the precise actions of these
drug combinations, as well as their effects on normal hematopoietic and other
healthy cells. In phase I trials, vistusertib and linsitinib were generally well
tolerated, with dose-limiting toxicities of fatigue and mucositis (vistusertib)
( ) and hyperglycemia, vomiting,
fatigue, and QTc prolongation (linsitinib) ( ). In a phase III trial, meisoindigo was also well tolerated in
chronic myeloid leukemia, with bone, joint, or muscle pain as the main side effects
and no cases of severe myelosuppression ( ).
Among the drugs predicted to pre-sensitize cells to FLT3 inhibitors, some
showed low synergy or even antagonistic effects when tested in MOLM-13 in
combination with FLT3 inhibitors. This discrepancy might stem from decreased
accuracy of predictions when comparing our pre-resistance signatures against the
L1000 phase 1 consensus signatures, generated from drug-perturbed gene expression
profiles of cell lines derived from solid cancers, not including data from blood
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, the detection of subtle transcriptional changes that
mediate primed resistance against FLT3 inhibitors, while considering the
accompanying growth fitness-related alterations, presents several challenges. The
up-regulation of pathways downstream of oncogenic FLT3 signaling could 1) confer
resistance to the FLT3 inhibitors, indicated by our GSEA findings and pathways
targeted by the validated pre-sensitizing drugs, and 2) promote increased
proliferation and fitness in the non-treatment control, given that FLT3-ITD acts as
the oncogenic driver of MOLM-13 cells. This dual effect complicates the distinction
between resistance-related alterations and those providing growth advantage.
Additionally, cell cycle synchronization via thymidine block introduces stress and
imposes a non-random selection pressure to all samples, potentially inducing noise
that obscures the pre-resistance signal, and thus warrants careful consideration
when analyzing sensitive cancer models. As a further note, technical factors
contribute to underestimating the number of true pre-sensitive and pre-unfit cell
lineages. These include 1) random loss of lineages during sample
splitting—when dividing cells into two samples for sequencing and drug
treatment, both sister cells from some lineages may end up in the same sample, 2)
cell loss of during scRNA-seq preparation, and 3) partial sampling of the recovered
post-treatment sample. Consequently, the pre-sensitive and pre-unfit categories
likely include false negatives, which dilute the differential gene expression signal
between groups. Importantly, however, all identified pre-resistant and pre-fit
lineages represent true positives.
As a model for FLT3-ITD-mutated AML, MOLM-13 cell line is heterozygous for
the FLT3-ITD mutation, also expressing the wild-type FLT3 receptor. It has been
shown that the ligand-dependent activation of wild-type FLT3 is only minimally
affected by quizartinib and midostaurin ( ),
and that the co-existence of wild-type FLT3 can dampen the efficacy of FLT3
inhibitors in FLT3-mutated AML cells in vitro and in vivo ( ). As a result, signaling through wild-type FLT3 in MOLM-13
cells could contribute to resistance mechanisms not observed in
FLT3-ITD+/+ AML cells. However, most drug combinations that
demonstrated synergistic effects in MOLM-13 cells also showed synergy in the
homozygous FLT3-ITD+/+ MV4-11 cell line, as well as in FLT3-ITD-mutated
primary AML patient samples with a high FLT3-ITD variant allele frequency,
indicative of a homozygous mutation. These findings suggest that the drug
combinations are effective in both genetic backgrounds and that the underlying
primed resistance mechanisms are not unique to the MOLM-13 cell line.
We observed an up-regulation of GSPT1 in both midostaurin and quizartinib
pre-resistance signatures. GSPT1 degraders have emerged as promising candidates for
novel AML therapies, showing efficacy across various genetic backgrounds ( , ).
The CD33-targeting antibody-drug conjugate BMS-986497, which delivers the GSPT1
degrader SMol006 specifically to CD33-expressing cells, is currently under clinical
investigation for relapsed or refractory AML—both as monotherapy and in
combination with azacitidine and venetoclax (ClinicalTrilas.gov:
NCT06419634). This trial follows the early termination of clinical studies involving
the GSPT1 degrader CC-90009 (ClinicalTrials.gov:
NCT02848001 and NCT04336982), reportedly due to an unfavorable change in the
risk-benefit profile. Mechanistically, pharmacological degradation of GSPT1 leads to
impaired translation termination, activation of the integrated stress response
pathway, and TP53-independent cell death in AML cells, with minimal effect on normal
hematopoietic stem cells ( ). Further, GSPT1
depletion attenuates translation initiation and cell cycle progression by inhibiting
mTOR signaling downstream of AKT activation, independent of the Erk1/2 pathway
( ). Whether increased GSPT1 expression
directly up-regulates mTOR signaling and partly explains how GSPT1 could confer
resistance against FLT3 inhibitors, warrants further investigation. Interestingly,
hyperactivation of the mTOR signaling pathway has been found to attenuate the
response to CC-90009 by blocking GSPT1 degradation ( ). Therefore, the synergistic effect of CC-90009 and quizartinib or
midostaurin may partly stem from FLT3 inhibitors reducing downstream mTOR signaling,
thus enhancing the efficacy of CC-90009 in FLT3-ITD-positive AML cells. Importantly,
we also observed enhanced sensitivity to quizartinib following CRISPR-Cas9-mediated
GSPT1 knockout, even when GSPT1 was depletion was incomplete, underscoring its role
in mediating resistance to FLT3 inhibition. Moreover, while quizartinib alone was
largely ineffective in primary AML patient samples at clinically relevant
concentrations (peak serum concentration range from 250 nM during induction therapy
to 945 nM at maintenance therapy with VANFLYTA®; https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2023/216993s000lbl.pdf),
its combination with low doses of CC-90009 led to strong inhibitory effects across
all samples. In addition, in an AML PDX model, CC-90009 alone showed limited
efficacy at the tested dose, but its combination with quizartinib significantly
enhanced anti-leukemic effects and improved overall survival compared to quizartinib
alone. Further studies are warranted to clarify the mechanism underlying the
observed drug synergy and to assess effects on normal hematopoietic cells. In the
PDX mouse model, apart from transient ruffled fur, no other treatment-related
clinical signs were noted, indicating that the treatments were well tolerated.
Moreover, no evidence of clinical signs (paleness or bruising) of impaired
hematopoiesis (anemia or thrombocytopenia) were observed. Together, these findings
highlight the therapeutic potential of combining GSPT1 degraders with FLT3
inhibitors to enhance treatment efficacy while reducing the toxicities and
side-effects associated with high-dose FLT3 inhibitor treatments.
In summary, ReSisTrace lineage-tracing offers a powerful tool for
elucidating intricate cellular states that prime treatment resistance also in
hematological cancers, as demonstrated here in the context of FLT3-ITD-mutated AML.
Furthermore, our study unveils novel synergistic and pre-sensitizing drugs that
could potentially be used to increase FLT3 inhibitor treatment efficacy and prevent
emergence of treatment resistance against FLT3 inhibitors in FLT3-ITD-positive
AML.

## Supplementary Material
Fig. S1Fig. S2Fig. S3Fig. S4Fig. S5Fig. S6Fig. S7Table S1Table S2Table S3Table S4Table S5Table S6Table S7Table S8Table S9

## Acknowledgements
We thank prof. Caroline Heckman (University of Helsinki) for providing the MOLM-13
cell line. Authentication of the cell line was performed at Institute for Molecular
Medicine Finland (FIMM) Genomics Unit of Technology Centre supported by Helsinki
Institute of Life Science (HiLIFE) and Biocenter Finland. Recombinant virus work was
performed at Biomedicum Virus Core (HelVi-BVC) supported by HiLIFE and the Faculty
of Medicine, University of Helsinki, and Biocenter Finland. Single-cell
transcriptomics was performed at FIMM Single-Cell Analytics unit supported by HiLIFE
and Biocenter Finland. , , and 
were created with BioRender.com. ChatGPT (OpenAI) was used with careful consideration
to improve language and readability of the manuscript text. This work was supported
by The Sigrid Jusélius Foundation (A. Vähärautio, J. Tang), The
Cancer Foundation Finland (J. Tang, A. Vähärautio, S. Zheng),
Foundation for the Finnish Cancer Institute (K. Albin Johansson Cancer Research
Fellowship for A. Vähärautio), Research Council of Finland projects
289059 (A. Vähärautio), 319243 (A.Vähärautio), 317680
(J. Tang), 320131 (J. Tang), 351165 and 351196 (J. Tang, A.
Vähärautio), ERA PerMed JTC2020 PARIS/Research Council of Finland
project 344697 (A. Vähärautio), University of Helsinki Research
Foundation (J. Dai, S. Zheng), K. Albin Johanssons stiftelse (S. Zheng), Ida
Montinin Säätiö (S. Zheng), Biomedicum Helsinki Foundation (S.
Zheng). This study was co-funded by the European Union (J. Tang: European Research
Council project DrugComb No. 716063 and EATRIS-CONNECT No. 101130349; A.
Vähärautio: European Research Council project STRONGER, No.
101125261). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and
do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research
Council. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held
responsible for them.
The authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.

## Data availability
The ReSisTrace scRNA-seq raw data are publicly accessible through the NCBI
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, RRID:SCR_005012) under accession number GSE306484. The
L1000 data analyzed in this study were obtained from a previously published work
( ); the corresponding raw data are
available in GEO under accession numbers GSE92742 and GSE70138. All additional raw
data generated during this study are available upon request from the corresponding
author.

## Code availability
The source code for data analysis is available at GitHub (https://github.com/TangSoftwareLab/ReSisTrace_AML).

## Abbreviations
AMLacute myeloid leukemia
DTPdrug-tolerant persister
FBSfetal bovine serum
gRNAguide RNA
GSEAGene Set Enrichment Analysis
HSAHighest Single Agent
ITDinternal tandem duplication
MCMMononuclear Cell Medium
MRDmeasurable residual disease
PDXpatient-derived xenograft
scRNA-seqsingle-cell RNA-sequencing
TKDtyrosine kinase domain
ZIPZero Interaction Potency
 

## Statement of significance
Single-cell lineage tracing with ReSisTrace reveals cellular states that prime
treatment resistance and identifies approaches to sensitize FLT3-ITD-positive acute
myeloid leukemia to FLT3 inhibitors.