822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC1081175410811754108117543816615510.1021/acsnano.3c08738Ultrasound Stimulation
of Piezoelectric Nanocomposite
Hydrogels Boosts Chondrogenic Differentiation in Vitro, in Both a Normal and Inflammatory Milieu
RicottiLeonardo CafarelliAndrea ManferdiniCristina TruccoDiego VannozziLorenzo GabusiElena FontanaFrancesco DolzaniPaolo SalehYasmin LenziEnrico ColumbaroMarta PiazziManuela BertacchiniJessika AlipertaAndrea CainMarkys GemmiMauro ParlantiPaola JostCarsten FedutikYirij NessimGilbert Daniel TelkhozhayevaMadina TeblumEti DumontErik DelbaldoChiara CodispotiGiorgia MartiniLucia TschonMatilde FiniMilena LisignoliGina †The
BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33, 56127 Pisa, Italy‡Department
of Excellence in Robotics & AI, Scuola
Superiore Sant’Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà 33, 56127 Pisa, Italy§Laboratorio
di Immunoreumatologia e Rigenerazione Tissutale, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy∥Piattaforma
di Microscopia Elettronica, IRCCS Istituto
Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy⊥Istituto
di Genetica Molecolare “Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza”, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (IGM-CNR), 40136 Bologna, Italy#IRCCS Istituto
Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy¶Department
of Surgery, Medicine, Dentistry and Morphological Sciences with Interest
in Transplant, Oncology and Regenerative Medicine, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41125 Modena, Italy∇Electrosciences
Ltd., Farnham, Surrey GU9 9QT, U.K.●Center
for Materials Interfaces, Electron Crystallography, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Viale Rinaldo Piaggio 34, 56025 Pontedera, Italy×PlasmaChem
GmbH, Schwarzschildstraße
10, 12489 Berlin, Germany◇Department
of Chemistry and Institute of Nanotechnology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat
Gan 52900, Israel∞Image Guided Therapy, 33600 Pessac, France○Struttura
Complessa Scienze e Tecnologie Chirurgiche, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, Via di Barbiano 1/10, 40136 Bologna, Italy◆Scientific Director, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy*Phone: +39 050 883074. Email: leonardo.ricotti@santannapisa.it.
21202418320472047–20652712024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 The use of piezoelectric nanomaterials combined with
ultrasound
stimulation is emerging as a promising approach for wirelessly triggering
the regeneration of different tissue types. However, it has never
been explored for boosting chondrogenesis. Furthermore, the ultrasound
stimulation parameters used are often not adequately controlled. In
this study, we show that adipose-tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal
cells embedded in a nanocomposite hydrogel containing piezoelectric
barium titanate nanoparticles and graphene oxide nanoflakes and stimulated
with ultrasound waves with precisely controlled parameters (1 MHz
and 250 mW/cm2, for 5 min once every 2 days for 10 days)
dramatically boost chondrogenic cell commitment in vitro. Moreover, fibrotic and catabolic factors are strongly down-modulated:
proteomic analyses reveal that such stimulation influences biological
processes involved in cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix organization,
collagen fibril organization, and metabolic processes. The optimal
stimulation regimen also has a considerable anti-inflammatory effect
and keeps its ability to boost chondrogenesis in vitro, even in an inflammatory milieu. An analytical model to predict
the voltage generated by piezoelectric nanoparticles invested by ultrasound
waves is proposed, together with a computational tool that takes into
consideration nanoparticle clustering within the cell vacuoles and
predicts the electric field streamline distribution in the cell cytoplasm.
The proposed nanocomposite hydrogel shows good injectability and adhesion
to the cartilage tissue ex vivo, as well as excellent
biocompatibility in vivo, according to ISO 10993.
Future perspectives will involve preclinical testing of this paradigm
for cartilage regeneration.
Keywords: ultrasound, hydrogel, mesenchymal stromal cell, piezoelectric, nanomaterial, chondrogenesis, inflammation

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Sep 12; Accepted 2023 Dec 14; Revised 2023 Dec 11; Collection date 2024 Jan 23.

## Introduction
The wireless activation of piezoelectric
nanomaterials through
ultrasound (US) stimulation, locally generating electrical charges
via the direct piezoelectric effect, has recently emerged as a promising
paradigm for noninvasively triggering beneficial effects on cells
and tissues. − 
From 2010, when this technology was applied
to neural-like PC12
cells observing enhanced differentiation, the applications of piezoelectric nanomaterials triggered by US
waves have proliferated in the past decade, tackling neural tissue
engineering and neuromodulation, − skeletal muscle tissue engineering, , bone regeneration, − wound healing, and cancer
treatment. − However, this paradigm has never been explored for
cartilage regeneration so far.
There are hints in the state-of-the-art
reporting that implanted
piezoelectric scaffolds can induce higher chondrocyte activity and
collagen type 2 production. , However, these works
were focused not on nanomaterials but rather on macroscopic scaffolds.
Furthermore, they did not explore any US stimulation. On the other
hand, low-intensity pulsed ultrasound stimulation (LIPUS) has been
proposed as a tool to promote the chondrogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). , However, it has never
been combined with piezoelectric nanomaterials to synergistically
direct stem cell fate. It is also worth mentioning that, in general,
US stimulations (alone or in synergy with piezoelectric materials)
are typically poorly controlled in the state-of-art: in most of the in vitro studies, the setups used for stimulating cells
are affected by poorly standardized configurations, lack of proper
calibration, and lack of control on US wave reflections/attenuations.
These aspects jeopardize the reliability of many studies and slow
down their possible future clinical translation. A few studies focused on electric charges generated by
vibrating quartz coverslips to induce MSC chondrogenesis. , However, the exploited mechanism was quite different in this case.
Thus, overall, the synergic use of piezoelectric nanomaterials
(alone or embedded in polymeric matrices) and US stimulation for promoting
cartilage regeneration has been only argued and proposed as a speculative
hypothesis, , but no studies focused on its
experimental validation. Even less explored is dose-controlled LIPUS
for this purpose.
In the field of cartilage tissue engineering,
other nanomaterial
types have also been proposed for boosting MSC chondrogenesis. , In this arena, graphene oxide (GO) is a particularly attractive
material. Indeed, GO has shown chondroinductive properties, through
different mechanisms. − 
In this study, we hypothesized that nanocomposite hydrogels
embedding
piezoelectric barium titanate nanoparticles (BTNPs) and GO nanoflakes,
stimulated with dose-controlled US waves, can synergistically boost
the chondrogenic differentiation of adipose tissue-derived stromal
cells (ASCs) laden in a three-dimensional scaffold. A depiction of
the possible future target therapeutic paradigm grounded on this hypothesis
is shown in and Supporting Information Movie S1.
 

## Results and Discussion

## Nanocomposite Cell-Laden Hydrogel
The hydrogel used
in this work was based on a two-component bioinstructive matrix (VitroGel-RGD)
doped with BTNPs and GO nanoflakes. This choice was based on the interesting
properties of VitroGel-RGD, recently proved to be a suitable matrix
for hosting ASCs and sustaining their chondrogenic commitment, on the exciting properties (high piezoelectricity
and high biocompatibility) of BTNPs, and
on the chondrogenicity of GO, as mentioned in the Introduction. 
BTNPs were featured by an average diameter
of ∼60 nm, as shown in Figure S1a. Their piezoelectric nature was confirmed by a series of peaks in
the Raman spectrum typical of a tetragonal structure (Figure S1b). These nanomaterials showed good
piezoelectricity, with a d33 coefficient
of ∼118.6 pm/V (Figure S1c). To
enhance their stability in an aqueous solution and thus facilitate
their homogeneous incorporation into the hydrogel, BTNPs were coated
with propylene glycol alginate (PGA) (Figure S2). XPS measurements confirmed the presence of PGA on the coated samples,
highlighted by the higher intensity of the C and O elements, due to
the presence of PGA carboxyl, hydroxyl, and ester groups (Figure S3). The coated BTNPs showed a smaller
hydrodynamic radius than the noncoated counterparts (median value
of 245 nm vs 2130 nm in water and 217 nm vs 2064 nm in Dulbecco’s
modified Eagle medium (DMEM) on day 0), and azeta potential of −23.8
mV once coated vs −11.8 mV of the uncoated ones in water, supporting
the presence of the polymer wrapped around the particles. Indeed,
the use of PGA promoted a homogeneous dispersion of BTNPs during the
sonication phase, whereas uncoated particles tended to remain aggregated
in clusters with a size larger than 1000 nm. Overall, the coated BTNPs
showed excellent stability in water and DMEM over 7 days (Figures S4 and S5). The PGA coating did not influence
the piezoelectric response of BTNPs, as shown in Figure S6.
We assessed the cell tolerance to BTNPs at
different concentrations
through DNA quantification, metabolic activity, and LDH release, highlighting
their safety for concentrations up to 100 μg/mL (Figures S7 and S8). PGA has been recently proposed
as an FDA-approved coating for BTNPs. Here we have reported a complete XPS and DLS characterization as
well as cytocompatibility data on human chondrocytes.
GO nanoflakes
had a lateral size of 8.8 ± 4.6 μm and
a thickness of 1.6 ± 0.7 nm (Figure S9). To enhance their stability in aqueous solution and thus facilitate
their homogeneous incorporation in the hydrogel, GO nanoflakes were
coated with polydopamine (PDA) (Figure S10). As expected, XPS measurements suggested
that the PDA covered the surface of GO, noticeable by the presence
of the C–N peak (Figure S11). The
coated nanomaterials hada smaller hydrodynamic radius than the noncoated
counterparts (median of 1789 nm vs 3021 nm in water and 1786 nm vs
2831 nm in DMEM on day 0), which slightly increased after 3 and 7
days, yet keeping a smaller size than the uncoated nanoflakes. The
zeta potential of the coated GO resulted in −22.2 mV, vs −54.5
mV for the uncoated one also confirming the presence of the PDA coating,
which contributed with a positive charge to the overall nanoflakes
zeta potential. The PDA also guaranteed higher stability of the nanoflakes
over time (Figures S12 and S13). PDA-coated
GO nanoflakes showed excellent safety up to 25 μg/mL (Figures S14 and S15).
Based on these results
and on the state-of-the-art available, − we selected 25 μg/mL
as GO nanoflake concentration and 50
μg/mL as BTNP concentration to build the nanocomposite hydrogel
(named Nanocomp), in which two million ASCs/mL were
embedded. Interestingly, after 2 days of ASC culture in the Nanocomp, the GO nanoflakes remained confined outside the
cells, whereas BTNPs tended to be internalized and accumulated in
intracellular vacuoles (Figures S16 and S17). The different internalization of GO nanoflakes and BTNPs is mainly
due to the considerably different dimensions of those nanomaterials
(∼9 μm for the GO nanoflakes and ∼60 nm for the
BTNPs). Indeed, large nanomaterials, having a dimension comparable
to the cell size are hardly internalized, as confirmed by the state-of-the-art. , This was also confirmed at the experimental level: both noncoated
and PDA-coated GO nanoflakes remained confined outside the cells (Figure S18, top), while for BNTPs the PGA coating
played a role. In fact, noncoated BTNPs largely remained aggregated
in clusters outside the cells, with a few ones internalized (Figure S18, bottom). Thus, in the case of BTNPs,
the PGA coating facilitated internalization by increasing the nanoparticle
dispersion in the liquid environment.
The nondoped hydrogel
(named Hydrogel) and the Nanocomp were characterized in terms of physicochemical
and mechanical properties. Consistently with previous reports , (although focused on different nanomaterial types), we found that
the addition of the nanofillers produced a significant increase of
the compressive modulus and a decrease in the swelling ratio and sol
fraction ( a).
Instead, no relevant differences were found between the two materials
in terms of storage and loss moduli (Figure S19). A flow curve (viscosity vs shear rate) analysis ( b) allowed calculating the Hydrogel and Nanocomp consistency index
(K) and flow behavior index (n)
( c) and, consequently,
estimating the shear stress acting on cells during material injection
(see ), for different
needle diameters: 18, 20, 22, and 24 G ( d). Shear stress values reached up to ∼35
Pa, a value that is well below the critical threshold of 5 kPa that
may hamper cell viability during extrusion or injection. The nanocomposite mass considerably decreased
after 60 days, and the hydrogels entirely dissolved after three months
( e). Although
the VitroGel-RGD was featured by chemical groups reflecting the ones
of alginate, its degradation properties were rather different. 
 We found that the force needed to inject the nanocomposite
in its
pre-crosslinked status was smaller than 10 N, a value considered suitable
for the injection of materials for in vivo applications
(EN ISO 7886-1:2018), for the needle sizes of 22, 20, and 18 G, whereas
it resulted larger for 24 G ( a). In view of an in situ delivery
of this material on the cartilage surface, we also verified that the
nanocomposite stably remained on the cartilage surface at any angle
except for 90° ( b); furthermore, the mechanical stress needed to detach the
material from the cartilage was higher than 10 kPa, considered a clinically
acceptable threshold ( c). Interestingly, we found
that BTNPs did not actively contribute to enhancing adhesion for any
concentration ( d), while GO nanoflakes played a crucial role ( e). This result seems in contradiction with
previous reports, claiming that smaller particles enable larger adhesion
forces. This is probably due to the flake-like
shape of GO, which possesses a larger reactive surface area than spherical
BTNPs and thus promotes the adhesion to the cartilage tissue.
 

## Stimulation of Nanocomposite Hydrogel through Dose-Controlled
Ultrasound Waves
To activate the piezoelectric nanoparticles
and create local electrical inputs, we stimulated the Nanocomp with US waves using a setup that allowed precise control of the
dose delivered to materials and cells, and the exploration of different
frequencies (38 kHz to 5 MHz) and intensities (0–1000 mW/cm2) ( a,b and Supporting Information Figure S20 and Movies S2 and S3). Previous reports in which piezoelectric nanomaterials
were stimulated with US waves adopted US sources and setups , , , that did not guarantee reliable control of the dose at the target. However, this aspect is crucial to precisely
know the amount of energy corresponding to the desired biological
effects and to facilitate future clinical translation. 
 The viability of ASCs embedded in the Nanocomp for up to 7 days resulted in a high percentage of viable cells (Figure S21), associated with a significant decrease
in the rate of cytotoxicity on day 7 with respect to day 2 (Figure S22).
As a first US stimulation
regime, we applied a frequency of 1 MHz,
an intensity of 250 mW/cm2, a pulsed repetition frequency
of 1 kHz, a 20% duty cycle, and a stimulation time of 5 min. This
choice emerged from considerations derived from the state-of-the-art:
although the dose-controlled US stimulation of piezoelectric nanocomposites
is still unexplored, it is known that the above-mentioned parameters
fit the typical LIPUS regime broadly used for in vitro and in vivo applications , and also the safety limits in the physiotherapy domain. 
Four experimental groups (Hydrogel or Nanocomp with or without US, named −US
and +US, respectively)
were considered, and we applied the US stimulation to the samples
once every 2 days for an overall duration of 10 days. ( a). We first checked whether
the presence of such a stimulus raised undesired effects on the cells.
Results highlighted on day 10 a homogeneous cell distribution (Figure S23) and no negative effects induced by
the nanoparticles or the US stimulus. Cytotoxicity analyses showed
even an LDH reduction mainly in Nanocomp+US samples
(Figure S24) on day 10, whereas the metabolic
activity was not modulated (Figure S25).
Finally, the evaluation of senescent and apoptotic cells confirmed
the same percentage of positive cells from day 2 to day 10 in all
experimental groups (Figures S26 and S27).
 Results on day 10 also showed an evident overexpression
of cartilage-related
markers COL2A1 and ACAN in the Nanocomp+US, compared with the other groups. Furthermore,
the transcription factor SOX9, the proliferating
gene MKI67, and the fibrotic gene COL1A1 were significantly downregulated in Nanocomp+US, whereas the COL10A1 hypertrophic gene was not
modulated ( b). Immunohistochemical analyses of collagen type 2 and proteoglycans
confirmed a marked increase of these cartilage-related protein markers
in the Nanocomp+US compared to the other groups,
on day 10 ( c). Interestingly, on day 10, US stimulation in the nanocomposite
reduced ECM degradation by inducing the TIMP1 anabolic
factor by decreasing the MMP13/TIMP1 ratio ( d).
To verify if the selected nanomaterial concentrations were the
optimal ones or if we could decrease them, yet keeping the same chondrogenic
effect, we assessed the biological response of ASCs laden in a nanocomposite
hydrogel embedding 12.5 μg/mL of GO nanoflakes and 25 μg/mL
of BTNPs (half of the concentrations previously used). Results highlighted
that such a reduced concentration of nanomaterials produced a much
less evident chondrogenic effect on cells, at both gene and protein
levels, on day 10 (Figure S28).
Furthermore,
the impact of a more prolonged US stimulation on the
samples was verified: we performed an additional experiment in which
we applied US stimulation to samples once every 2 days, for an overall
duration of 10 days, and then the samples were kept in culture until
day 28 without stimulating them from day 10 to day 28 (priming group). In parallel, we analyzed the behavior of a control group, in which US stimulation was not provided, and the one of
a chronic group, in which US stimulation was continued
once every 2 days for the whole period of 28 days (Figure S29a). We found that chondrogenic markers were more
expressed in the priming group with respect to the
control one and to the chronic one, on day 28. Furthermore,
the chronic group showed overexpression of collagen
type 1, which is undesirable when cartilage regeneration is targeted (Figure S29b). No
difference was observed between the two groups in terms of cytotoxicity
and cell viability (Figure S30), as well
as in the hydrogel integrity at the end of the experiment. These results
highlight that the additional dose of mechanical energy provided through
the US in the chronic condition was excessive, with adverse effects
on chondrogenic markers and promotion of the expression of fibrotic
ones. This finding is in agreement with previous evidence, although obtained on bone marrow-derived MSCs
laden in a 3D agarose matrix, without the addition of any nanomaterial,
and using cyclic hydrostatic pressure instead of US waves.
To
better elucidate the role of the different nanomaterials embedded
in the nanocomposite, we performed an experiment stimulating with
US hydrogels containing single nanomaterials (GO nanoflakes or BNTPs),
as well as their combination. We found that on day 28, a certain amount
of collagen type 2 protein was expressed in the hydrogels containing
the single nanomaterials (such an expression was comparable between
GO and BTNPs). Interestingly, the combined presence of the two nanomaterials
induced a much higher expression (Figure S31). This demonstrated that the combination of the two nanomaterials
produced a synergetic effect, which boosted differentiation.

## Screening of Other US Frequencies and Intensities
The
dose-controlled US stimulation setup described above ( ) allowed exploring other stimulation
regimes in a controlled way. This enabled us to find the most suitable
US dose among the ones explored, which maximized the chondrogenesis
boost. First, we varied the US frequency, adding to 1 MHz (previously
investigated) also 38 kHz and 5 MHz ( a). Results showed that 38 kHz could not
be used for this purpose, since such a frequency produced mechanical
damage to the hydrogel ( b), probably due to an excessive mechanical index (that is
maximized at low frequencies). US-induced modifications of the polymer
structures at low frequencies are often exploited for promoting drug
delivery. , However, in our case, the interference with
the cross-linked hydrogel matrix hampered the construct integrity.
Comparing the results obtained with 1 and 5 MHz applied to the Nanocomp, we found that, on day 10, 1 MHz was more effective
than 5 MHz in inducing the expression of the chondrogenic genes COL2A1 and ACAN, without affecting the
proliferating gene MKI67 and keeping the SOX9 gene higher ( c). Collagen type 2 immunostaining on day 28 confirmed
the positive effect of 1 MHz compared with 5 MHz ( d).
 Then, we kept the frequency fixed at 1 MHz and
varied the US intensity,
adding to 250 mW/cm2 (previously investigated) also 125
and 500 mW/cm2 ( e). Results showed that on day 10, the intensity of
250 mW/cm2 was more effective than 125 and 500 mW/cm2 in inducing the expression of COL2A1 and ACAN genes, without modulating the proliferative gene MKI67 and still keeping the SOX9 gene higher
( f). Immunohistochemical
analyses on day 28 of collagen type 2 confirmed that 250 mW/cm2 was the most effective intensity to induce chondrogenesis
( g).
Once the optimal US dose was identified, transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) imaging performed on day 28 on the Nanocomp+US samples revealed the presence of both single cells with a round
morphology or associated to form a chondron-like structure (Figure S32) and collagen fibers showing the typical
banding characteristics of collagen type 2 ( h), confirming the positive chondrogenic
effects of this stimulation regime.
Overall, these results show
the chondrogenic potential of the combined
piezoelectric nanoparticle + US stimulus. In fact, as mentioned in
the , previous reports highlighted
the possible benefits of this paradigm on bone regeneration , , , but never on the differentiation of cartilage. In the state-of-the-art,
the implant of piezoelectric scaffolds has demonstrated to promote
the production of collagen type 2. , This is probably
due to physiological mechanical loads that, acting on the implanted
piezoelectric biomaterial, generate local charges, producing such
effects. Although some similarities can be found with our results,
these works exploited a substantially different effect, being based
on macroscopic implanted scaffolds rather than cell-internalized nanomaterials.
Furthermore, these works did not combine US stimulation with these
materials. Our results show that, combining injectable nanocomposites,
it is possible to boost chondrogenesis by applying a finely controlled
remote and wireless stimulus, which results in a considerably more
controllable stimulation regimen with respect to a natural loading
of the joint.
Our results also substantially differ from the
ones of Chu and
colleagues, who delivered US to MSCs seeded on quartz coverslips,
whose vibration generated localized electric charges having chondrogenic
effects. , In these works, the accumulation of electrical
charges on the substrate on which cells are cultured is considerably
different from the one achieved in our study, which concerns BNTPs
internalized in ASC vacuoles. Our approach, being not tied to a rigid
2D substrate like a coverslip, is compatible with an intraarticular
injection of the proposed hydrogel and its wireless stimulation (Supporting Information Movie S1).
It is
worth mentioning that in the state-of-the-art of piezoelectric
nanomaterials activated by US, no studies explored different frequencies
and intensities in a dose-controlled way. In our work, we show the
exploration of different frequencies (38 kHz, 1 MHz, and 5 MHz) and
different intensities (125, 250, and 500 mW/cm2), identifying
the most effective one to trigger the desired phenomenon. Furthermore,
we achieved this goal by using a setup that avoided the typical errors
affecting US-based studies, due to US wave reflections, attenuations,
scattering, and standing wave formation and thus by carefully controlling
the dose of energy delivered.

## Proteomic Analysis To Explore the Underlying Mechanisms
We explored more in-depth the mechanisms responsible for the ASC
response to the generated piezopotential in vitro by performing a proteomic analysis comparing the nanocomposite without
US stimuli (as a control) and the nanocomposite stimulated with US,
on day 10 of differentiation. A total of 960 proteins were identified
for Nanocomp–US and 604 for Nanocomp+US. Among those proteins, 572 were common to both data sets, as illustrated
in the Venn diagram ( a), of which 32 were differentially regulated
in the Nanocomp+US sample. Gene ontology analysis
showed that US stimulation influenced biological processes involved
in mechanotransduction, such as cytoskeleton and extracellular
matrix organization, collagen fibril organization, and collagen metabolic
processes. Cell adhesion and migration processes were also enriched.
Notably, signaling pathways such as noncanonical Wnt, regulating the
cytoskeleton, and integrin-mediated signaling pathway were enriched
in US-stimulated samples ( b,c and Table S1).
 The enrichment of differentially expressed proteins
and the ones
identified only in the Nanocomp+US samples confirmed
that cells were committed to chondrogenic differentiation (e.g., negative
regulation of cell proliferation, negative regulation of the G2/M
transition of mitotic cell cycle). Terms related to mechanosignaling
were significantly enriched ( c), for instance, regulation of focal adhesion and
ECM organization. Other pathways that play a role in the mechanosignaling
processes were enriched after the US stimulation, such as those related
to cell migration and regulation of PAK2p34, NOTCH4, and TNFR2/NFkB
( d). Interestingly,
ITGA5, a protein involved in the regulation of focal adhesion and
ECM organization was considerably up-regulated in the Nanocomp+US samples; ITGA activates FAK and thus the downstream signaling pathways
PI3K/Akt, WNT, and MAPK, balancing cellular homeostasis between cell
proliferation and cell survival. 

## Evaluation of Chondrogenic Commitment in an Inflammatory Environment
In several pathological conditions, e.g., osteoarthritis, the joint
is affected by a general inflammatory state. Thus, to assess if the chondrogenic effect of the piezoelectric
nanomaterials + US paradigm could still be effective even under such
conditions, we designed an experiment as depicted in a. We used the Nanocomp and we simulated an inflammatory environment by using the catabolic
cytokine IL1β, with and without US (named Infl+US and Infl–US, respectively), compared to
the counterparts exposed to a physiological environment (Norm+US and Norm–US). Results highlighted that the
inflammatory milieu induced the release of IL6, CXCL8, TNF-α,
CCL2, CCL4, and CCL5 on day 2 ( b). The US treatment significantly down-modulated all
cytokines already on day 3 (after one US stimulation); this effect
was even more evident on day 10 (after five US stimulations) ( c). We also found
that both NF-κB and its inhibitor NF-κBIA were significantly
down-modulated by US (Figure S33). Interestingly,
on day 10, when the US treatment considerably reduced the inflammatory
cytokines, bringing them to levels close to a normal condition, we
evidenced an increase in the COL2A1 cartilage-specific
gene ( d). On
day 28, we confirmed the presence of areas positive for collagen type
2 ( e). These
results highlight that the specific US stimulation regime used, in
combination with the nanocomposite, exerted a dual effect: it was
effective in inhibiting inflammatory cytokines and at the same time
in boosting ASC chondrogenesis.
 To the best of our knowledge, an experiment involving
piezoelectric
nanomaterials and LIPUS conducted in an inflammatory milieu, proving
an anti-inflammatory effect, has not been shown before. Recently,
Wu and colleagues showed that a Ti6Al4V scaffold coated with a uniform
piezoelectric BaTiO3 layer, stimulated with LIPUS, drove
macrophage M2 polarization, and facilitated bone regeneration. Although tested on a different system (a macroscopic
scaffold uniformly coated with a piezoelectric layer), these pieces
of evidence are consistent with our results. Future adoption of this
technology could target the modulation of acute or chronic inflammatory
states in addition to (or better in synergy with) the regeneration
of the target tissue.

## Modeling of US Wave–Nanoparticle Interaction and Estimation
of Intracellular Voltage
After collecting the in
vitro evidence described above, we aimed to estimate the
intracellular voltage generated by the interaction between the BTNPs
and US waves. Modeling the interaction between US waves and piezoelectric
nanomaterials is a rather under-explored aspect. An analytical model
of a single nanoparticle invested by US was developed by Marino and
colleagues. For the same purpose, finite
element model (FEM) simulations have also been recently proposed. , , We developed a simplified analytical
model based on Gauss’s law (Supporting Information, section S1), finding that the voltage generated
(V) can be expressed as
1 where R is
the nanoparticle radius, dh is the piezoelectric
hydrostatic coefficient (related to the more usually observed d33 or d31/d32 coefficients of barium titanate), PUS is the ultrasound pressure amplitude, εR and ε0 are the dielectric constants of the
material (relative dielectric constant) and the free space, respectively
( a).
 Then, a FEM model was implemented (see the ). First, the single particle was modeled, showing that
individual BTNPs yielded a piezoelectric charge proportional to the
applied hydrostatic pressure, exhibiting a good correspondence between
the analytical model and the FEM simulations ( b,c).
Afterward, the entire
cell-laden nanocomposite was modeled. As
shown in Figure S16, the BTNPs tend to
be internalized and accumulated in intracellular vacuoles. A more
detailed analysis was conducted by acquiring a series of TEM images
showing the relative positions and distances of cells and BTNPs in
the system. Data are reported in Supporting Information, section S2. This allowed creating a set of BTNP clusters, representative
of particle density and distribution within the cell. Finally, a FEM
model of the entire nanocomposite was developed ( d). Results showed that larger
nanoparticle clusters generated greater electrical fields when excited
by the US wave. We found that the voltage reached values up to 43.1
μV when a peak-to-peak pressure (Ppk-pk) of 172 kPa was applied (corresponding to 250 mW/cm2,
which was found as the optimal stimulation intensity). Interestingly,
the electric field streamlines spread into the cell cytoplasm well
beyond the diameter of the single nanoparticle cluster ( e and Supporting Information Figure S37 and Movie S4). Overall, our model proved to be a useful tool to estimate the
voltage generated in a cell based on the experimental distribution
of nanoparticles and their clusters within the cell cytoplasm, also
evaluating the streamline distribution in the cell cytoplasm.
It is known that electrical stimuli have a beneficial effect on
the chondrogenic commitment of different stem cell types, including
ASCs. , In this context, voltage-gated Ca channels
seem to play a key role. , Local voltage generation
increases the probability that a Ca channel opens. A few tens of mV
are sufficient to open such channels; however, it has been shown that
even 2 mV can produce the opening of a relevant fraction (∼
30%). It has been shown that such probability
is a continuous function of the local voltage, with no threshold. Thus, a small intracellular potential (even
tens of μV), as in the case of this work, could determine the
opening of a fraction of voltage gate channels, thus contributing
to the enhanced chondrogenic effect, probably in synergy with a series
of other intracellular events (e.g., pathway activation/deactivation;
see ) triggered
by such small intracellular voltages.

## In Vitro Genotoxicity and in Vivo Biocompatibility Assessments Following ISO 10993
As mentioned,
this work is focused on demonstrating in vitro the
potential of piezoelectric nanocomposites and LIPUS, to boost chondrogenesis.
The confirmation of such a paradigm through in vivo efficacy tests will be the objective of future work. However, in
this work, the safety and biocompatibility of the proposed material
have been assessed through in vitro genotoxicity
and in vivo safety assessments on the Nanocomp, according to ISO 10993-1 (2018) standards, by assuming the Nanocomp as an implant medical device in long-term contact
(>30 days) with the target tissue. This should facilitate future
translation
of this technology. Overall, results indicate that the nanocomposite
hydrogel did not induce chromosomal damage in TK6 cells under the
experimental conditions. In vivo skin irritation
tests performed in rabbits evidenced a negligible irritation response
induced by the Nanocomp. Acute systemic toxicity
tests performed in rats showed no signs of toxicity. Finally, delayed-type
hypersensitivity tests performed on guinea pigs highlighted the safety
of the Nanocomp. A detailed description of these
results is reported in Supporting Information, section S3.

## Conclusions
Our results showed that ASCs embedded in
a nanocomposite hydrogel
including piezoelectric nanomaterials and graphene oxide nanoflakes,
and stimulated with US at 1 MHz and 250 mW/cm2, dramatically
boosted their chondrogenic commitment in vitro, already
on day 10. Furthermore, the optimal US stimulation parameters triggering
the nanocomposite showed a considerable anti-inflammatory effect and
maintained a chondrogenic effect in an inflammatory milieu. These
results were achieved after an exploration of different frequencies
(38 kHz, 1 MHz, and 5 MHz) and different intensities (125, 250, and
500 mW/cm2), identifying the most effective one to trigger
the desired phenomenon and using an in vitro stimulation
setup allowing good control of the energy dose at the target. An analytical
model to predict the voltage generated by piezoelectric nanoparticles
invested by US waves was proposed as well as a computational tool,
which took into consideration the nanoparticle clustering within the
cell vacuoles and predicted the distribution of electric field streamlines
in the cell cytoplasm. The proposed nanocomposite hydrogel showed
good injectability and adhesion to the cartilage tissue, exvivo. It also showed excellent in vivo biocompatibility, following ISO 10993. This work did not focus on in vivo demonstration of cartilage regeneration, an effort
that will be the objective of future work. However, the extensive in vitro results and biocompatibility-focused in
vivo evidence shown in this paper will facilitate future
translation of the proposed technology. Such translation will require
not only the demonstration of efficacy in appropriate preclinical
models but also computational models to predict US wave attenuations,
reflections, and scattering due to the tissue interfaces found invivo, thus bringing the optimal US dose
found in vitro to the in vivo scenario.
This step is not straightforward but will be a crucial one to guarantee
reliability and future possible translation of these results for cartilage
regeneration. An experimental assessment of the electrokinetic properties
of piezoelectric nanomaterials under ultrasonic stimulation constitutes
another exciting perspective, which would describe the time response
of the generated local electrical fields and the connection between
charge kinetics and the biological effects triggered.

## Experimental Methods

## Nanomaterial Synthesis
BTNPs were synthesized by hydrothermal
synthesis. Briefly, titanium hydroxide precursors were washed with
CO2-free, deionized water. Then, the gels were suspended
together with Ba(OH)2·8 H2O in a 1,4-butanediol/water
mixture (1:2). The resulting suspension was placed in a 700 mL Teflon
container within a stainless-steel pressure vessel. The reaction vessel
was then heated at a rate of 5 °C/min to 220 °C and kept
for 48 h. The resulting powders were washed with pH-adjusted (pH
= 10) CO2-free deionized water to remove the unreacted
barium present in the solution and to prevent the incongruent dissolution
of barium ions from the BaTiO3 particle surface. GO nanoflakes
were synthesized as previously reported. BTNPs and GO were autoclaved through vapor steam (30 min at 121
°C) to ensure their sterilization according to ISO standard 17665-1:2006.

## Nanomaterial Characterization
The size and morphology
of the BTNPs were analyzed through transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). A drop of autoclaved BTNPs in a water suspension (100 μg/mL)
was deposited onto a 300-mesh carbon-coated copper grid (TedPella).
TEM analysis was carried out using a Libra 120 Plus microscope (Carl
Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) operating at an accelerating voltage of
120 keV, equipped with an in-column omega filter for energy-filtered
imaging and with a bottom-mounted 12 bit 2k × 2k CCD camera (TRS).
The piezoelectric properties of autoclaved BTNPs were investigated
through piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM), performed using an Icon
Bruker AFM system (Dimension Icon, Bruker Co., USA), in the Peak Force
PFM modality. A silicon probe (DDESP-V2, Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA),
with a measured spring constant of 132.5 N/m, a resonant frequency
of 486 kHz, and a deflection sensitivity of 57.4 nm/V, was used. The
amplitude of the piezoelectric signal and the hysteresis (sample bias
from −10 to 10 V) were acquired in the vertical direction via
lock-in detection by applying to the tip an alternating current voltage
(Vac) of 2 V at 300 kHz, outside the tip
resonance frequency. Five independent samples were analyzed with a
scan frequency of 0.25 Hz, and the average value of the d33 piezoelectric coefficient was calculated as follows:
 where A is the amplitude
signal (pm). A reference sample made of polyvinyl fluoride in the
form of a thin film (Goodfellow, thickness 28 μm, d33 ∼ −20 pC/N) was also analyzed to properly
calibrate the PFM amplitude signal.
Atomic force microscopy
(AFM) measurements were carried out on
GO nanoflakes, deposited on Si/SiO2 wafers, using a Bio
FastScan scanning probe microscope (Bruker, Dimension Icon & FastScan
Bio, Karlsruhe, Germany). All images were obtained using PeakForce
Quantitative Nanomechanical Mapping mode with a Fast Scan C (Bruker)
silicon probe (spring constant: 0.45 N/m). The images were captured
in the retrace direction with a scan rate of 1.5 Hz. The resolution
of the images was 512 samples/line.

## Nanomaterial Coating
A PGA (degree of esterification
<80%, Carbosynth, Staad, St. Gallen, Switzerland) solution was
prepared at a concentration of 2.5 mg/mL in deionized water and then
filtered (filter size, 0.22 μm) at room temperature (RT). The
autoclaved BTNPs were added in a ratio of 1:1 w/w to the polymeric
solutions. Then, a sonication process with an ultrasound probe (power,
25 W; time, 30 min; frequency, 20 kHz; Bandelin SonoPuls HD4050, Berlin,
Germany) allowed enhancing the interaction between the polymer and
the BTNPs, favoring nanomaterial dispersion in aqueous media.
The coating of GO nanoflakes with PDA was performed as follows: autoclaved
GO (5 mg/mL) was suspended in an aqueous solution made of dopamine
hydrochloride (Sigma-Aldrich) at a concentration of 5 mg/mL in deionized
water, previously filtered (filter size, 0.22 μm; material,
PES) and adjusted in terms of pH by drop addition of a 1 M NaOH solution
(Sigma-Aldrich) to achieve a value of 8.5. The solution was sonicated
with an ultrasound probe (power, 25 W; time, 300 s; frequency, 20
kHz). Finally, the mixture was stirred vigorously for 24 h at room
temperature in the dark.
Dynamic light scattering (DLS) and
zeta potential measurements
were performed using a Zetasizer NanoZS90 (Malvern Instruments Ltd.,
Worcestershire, U.K.), analyzing the average size and polydispersity
index (PDI) immediately after sonication and 3 and 7 days from the
nanomaterial preparation. The samples were dispersed in deionized
water and cell culture medium (Chondrocyte growth medium without phenol
red, Cell Applications Inc.), setting the concentration for all sample
types to 100 μg/mL. Six independent samples were analyzed for
each sample type.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis
was carried out
to verify the coating presence on the BTNPs and GO nanoflakes. XPS
was performed using a Nexsa spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale,
USA) equipped with a monochromatic, microfocused, low-power Al Kα
X-ray source (photon energy, 1486.6 eV). High-resolution spectra were
acquired at a pass energy of 50 eV. The source power was 72 W. The
measurements were carried out under ultrahigh-vacuum conditions, at
a base pressure of 5 × 10–10 Torr (not higher
than 3 × 10–9 Torr). The obtained spectra 
were analyzed and deconvoluted using the Vision software (Kratos).
Overlapping signals were analyzed after deconvolution into Gaussian/Lorentzian-shaped
components.

## Assessment of Nanomaterial Cytotoxicity on Human Chondrocytes
The nanomaterial cytotoxicity was preliminarily evaluated on human
articular chondrocytes (Cell Applications Inc., Boston, MA, USA),
by carrying out live/dead assay, DNA quantification, metabolic activity
analysis, and LDH release quantification. The detailed protocols used
for these tests are described in Supporting Information, section S4.1.

## Nanocomposite Hydrogel Preparation
VitroGel-RGD was
purchased from Well Bioscience (North Brunswick, NJ, USA) and prepared
following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, the VitroGel-RGD
solution was mixed at RT with dilution solution type 1 (The Well Bioscience,
North Brunswick, NJ, USA) at the ratio 1:2 up to obtain a uniform
mixture. Then, DMEM (Life Technologies, Bleiswijk, The Netherlands)
with a suspension of ASCs to reach the final cell density into the
hydrogel of 2 × 106 cells/mL was added at the ratio
of 4:1 (pre-cross-linked solution:DMEM with cells) at RT and mixed.
Hydrogels doped with GO nanoflakes and BTNPs (referred as Nanocomp) were obtained following the same procedure but
adding the nanomaterials at concentrations of 25 and 50 μg/mL,
respectively, and mixing at RT until obtaining a uniform solution.
Finally, 300 μL of both cell-laden nondoped or nanocomposite
mixtures were gently transferred into a cell crown (Scaffdex, Finland),
and inserted into a 24-well plate. After 20 min of stabilization at
RT, further 150 μL of DMEM was placed over the hydrogel for
1 h to allow saturation of the ionic cross-linking. Finally, 1.5 mL
of DMEM was added to each well and the samples were incubated at 37
°C and 5% CO2.

## TEM Imaging of the Nanocomposite Hydrogel
For ultrastructural
evaluation, the hydrogels were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1
M cacodylate buffer (pH = 7.4) for 1 h at RT and then for 3 h at 4
°C. Afterward, samples were postfixed with 1% osmium tetroxide
in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer for 2 h at 4 °C, dehydrated in an
ethanol series, infiltrated with propylene oxide, and embedded in
Epon resin. Cross sections of each hydrogel were cut to allow for
internal analysis. Ultrathin sections (80 nm thick) were stained with
uranyl acetate and lead citrate (15 min each) and observed with a
Jeol Jem 1011 transmission electron microscope (Jeol Jem, USA), operating
at 100 kV. Images were captured using an Olympus digital camera and
iTEM software. Unstained ultrathin sections were observed with a Zeiss
Libra 120 plus TEM operating at 120 keV and equipped with a Bruker
XFlash 6T-60 SDD detector for energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDX).

## Characterization of the Nanocomposite Hydrogel
The
nanocomposite hydrogel properties were assessed by rheometry (which
also allowed estimating the shear stresses acting on the cells during
injection), uniaxial compression tests, and degradation tests in different
media. The detailed protocols are described in Supporting Information, section S4.2.

## Assessment of Material Injectability
Injectability
tests were performed by compressing a syringe piston loaded with the
hydrogel solution by using a traction/compression machine (model 2444,
Instron, Norwood, MA, USA). The syringe (6 mL) was equipped with different
needle sizes (18, 20, 22, and 24 G, length of 3.8 cm) and pushed using
a speed of 2.5 mm/s, compatible with EN ISO 7886-1:2018, which regulates
the use of syringes. The force needed to allow material injection
was recorded in the load cell of the instrument.

## Assessment of Nanocomposite Hydrogel Stability on the Cartilage
Tissue
The stability of the hydrogels onto the cartilage
tissue was assessed upon injecting the material solutions while varying
the angle that the injector tip formed with respect to the cartilage
tissue. The tissue was harvested from an adult bovine knee. A drop
of ∼20 μL was poured onto the cartilage, and a photo
was taken after 2 s to assess its stability. Five trials were performed
for each angle.
To evaluate the adhesion strength of the hydrogels
to the cartilage tissue, a custom setup was used, as reported in Trucco
et al. Cartilage samples from the knee
of an adult bovine were cut using a surgical instrument for bone/cartilage
biopsies (Longueur) with an inner diameter of 6.4 mm and fit the setup.
Then, 400 μL of hydrogel was delivered onto the cartilage and
left cross-linking. After hydrogel cross-linking, the hydrogel-hosting
part was hooked to the load cell of the traction test machine, and
the test was performed in traction modality (speed, 1 mm/min) until
reaching the mechanical failure of the interface. Force curves as
a function of the displacement were obtained from each test, and the
adhesion strength (in kPa) was determined by dividing the force by
the contact area between the hydrogel and the cartilage tissue. From
each adhesion strength curve, the maximum adhesion strength value
(kPa) was obtained.

## Controlled Ultrasound Stimulation
Two US systems, one
for 38 kHz low-frequency stimulation and the other one for high-frequencies
(1 and 5 MHz) stimulation, were used in this work ( ). The detailed protocols are
described in Supporting Information, section S4.3.

## FEM Simulations of the BTNP–US Wave Interaction
FEM analyses were carried out using COMSOL Multiphysics (V6.0), run
on a MacBook Pro M1 Max ARM64 processor, with 64 GB RAM. The COMSOL
“MEMS” and “Acoustics” modules were chosen
to include the relevant physics of the acoustic pressure wave and
the piezoelectric and dielectric response of the BTNP. The detailed
methods are described in Supporting Information, section S4.4.

## In Vitro Culture of Human ASCs
ASCs
were purchased from Lonza (Pharma&Biotech, Switzerland) (N = 6) and were expanded by seeding 7500 cells/cm2 in T150 culture flasks and culturing them in α-MEM containing
5% isogrowth (IsoCellsGROWTH, Euroclone, Pero, IT) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin
(Life Technologies) at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Before encapsulation in the hydrogel, ASCs were phenotypically
characterized for the CD markers CD31, CD34, CD45, CD73, CD90, CD105,
CD166 as previously reported and were
analyzed for differentiation capability by using specific osteogenic
and chondrogenic media as previously described , to check that they satisfied the minimal criteria for defining multipotent
mesenchymal stem cells. 
ASCs encapsulated
in the bare material (Hydrogel) or in the Nanocomp were cultured with chondrogenic medium (high-glucose
DMEM supplemented with 50 mg/mL ITS + premix, 10–7 M dexamethasone, 50 μg/mL ascorbate-2phosphate, 1 mM sodium
pyruvate, and 100 U/mL–100 μg/mL penicillin–streptomycin,
Sigma-Aldrich) containing chondrogenic factors TGF-β3 (10 ng/mL)
and BMP6 (10 ng/mL), both from Miltenyi Biotech, Auburn, CA, USA ( a) or in inflammatory
conditions (+ IL1β, 10 ng/mL) (R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis,
MN, USA) ( a).
The cell culture medium was changed three times a week.
ASC-laden
hydrogels treated with or without US (+US and −US)
following specific experimental designs ( a, Figure S29a, a, e, a) were cultured for 2, 3,
10, and 28 days and evaluated for cell viability, cytotoxicity, metabolic
activity, gene expression, released factors, protein analysis and
immunohistochemistry.

## Viability of ASCs in the Nanocomposite Hydrogel
The
viability of ASCs encapsulated in the Nanocomp was
evaluated by a live/dead kit (Life Technologies). Samples were washed
in D-PBS (Aurogene Srl, Rome, IT) and incubated with live/dead solution
for 35 min at 37 °C. Then, hydrogels were washed again with D-PBS
and imaged, to discriminate live cells (in green) and the nuclei of
dead cells (in red) with a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Instruments
Europe BW). Quantitative analysis of stained slides was performed
on five microscopic fields (×200 magnification) for each section.
The analysis was performed using a Red/Green/Blue (RGB) tool within
the software NIS-Elements, at an Eclipse 90i microscope (Nikon Instruments
Europe BV). The total number of green cells stained and the total
number of positive-stained red cells were acquired. Data were expressed
as a percentage of viable cells.
Cytotoxicity was assessed with
an LDH assay kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) as indicated by the manufacturer’s
data sheet. The supernatant was collected after 2 and 10 days and
tested for the absorbance values at 490 nm by a microplate reader
TECAN Infinite 200 PRO (Tecan Italia S.r.l., Cernusco Sul Naviglio,
Italy). The results were expressed as a percentage of cytotoxicity.
Cell metabolic activity was analyzed by the Alamar Blue test. Briefly,
the samples were incubated with 10% Alamar Blue (Life Technologies),
and after 5 h, the absorbance was read at 570 and 600 nm using an
automated spectrophotometric plate reader TECAN Infinite 200 PRO (Tecan).
The results were expressed as percentages of Alamar Blue reduction,
as indicated by the manufacturer’s data sheet (BioRad Laboratories).
For evaluating cell distribution within the hydrogels, the samples
were fixed in 10% formaldehyde in D-PBS for 40 min, washed in D-PBS,
dehydrated in ethanol, and embedded in paraffin. Thin sections (5
μm) were cut and stained for hematoxylin–eosin (Bioptica,
Milan, Italy), and then the slides were analyzed through a light microscope
(Nikon Instruments Europe BW).

## RNA Isolation and Quantitative PCR
Total RNA was extracted
by treating all samples with 1 mL of Eurogold RnaPure (EuroClone S.p.a.).
The samples were then immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen (−196
°C) and stored in a freezer at −80 °C. RNA extraction
was performed by homogenizing samples and following the Eurogold manufacturer’s
instructions. The samples were then treated with DNase I (DNA-free
kit) and the RNA was quantified using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer
(EuroClone S.p.a). Reverse transcription was performed using Super
Script Vilo cDNA synthesis kit (Life Technologies), according to the
manufacturer’s protocol.
qRT-PCR was performed using
TBGreen Premix ExTaq (Takara Bio Inc. Shiga 52-0058, Japan) with LightCycler2.0
(Roche Molecular Biochemicals). The gene markers quantified were aggrecan
(ACAN), collagen type 1 α1 chain (COL1A1), collagen type 2 α1 chain (COL2A1), collagen
type 10 α1 chain (COL10A1), the proliferation
marker Ki-67 (MKI67), matrix metalloproteinase
13 (MMP13), SRY-Box transcription factor 9 (SOX9) and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP1), nuclear factor NF-κB p105 subunit (NFKB1), and IKB-α (NFKBIA) (see Supporting Information, section S4.5). The efficiency
of all primers was confirmed as high (>90%) and comparable. For
each
target gene, crossing point (CP) values were calculated and normalized
to the CP of the housekeeping reference gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) according to the formula 2–ΔCt.

## Immunohistochemistry and Cytokine Release Measurements
On day 10 or 28, both Hydrogel and Nanocomp treated with or without US were fixed in 10% formaldehyde in D-PBS
for 40 min, washed in PBS, dehydrated in ethanol, and embedded in
paraffin. Immunohistochemistry techniques were used to evaluate collagen
type 2, proteoglycan, collagen type 1 and β-galactosidase protein
expression. Serial sections of 5 μm were incubated for 60 min
at RT with monoclonal mouse anti-human collagen type 2 (10 μg/mL),
anti-human proteoglycan (5 μg/mL), anti-human collagen type
1 (5 μg/mL), all from Chemicon International, Temecula, CA,
USA, and polyclonal rabbit anti-human β-galactosidase (1 μg/mL)
(from Proteintech Group, Rosemont, Illinois, USA), rinsed, and then
sequentially incubated at RT for 20 min with multilinker biotinylated
secondary antibody and alkaline phosphatase-conjugated streptavidin
(Biocare Medical, Walnut CreeK, CA, USA). The colorimetric reactions
were developed using fast red (Biocare Medical) counterstained with
hematoxylin and mounted with glycerol jelly. The sections were evaluated
with a bright field microscope (Nikon Instruments Europe BW). Negative
and isotype-matched control sections were performed.
Apoptotic
cells were detected using the in situ cell death detection kit, AP
(Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Semiquantitative analyses of the stained slides were performed by
acquiring 20 microscopic fields (×200 magnification) for each
section. The analysis was performed using RGB with the software NIS-Elements
and an Eclipse 90i microscope (Nikon Instruments Europe BV). Briefly,
we acquired the total number of blue-stained nuclei and the total
number of positive-stained red cells, and data were expressed as a
percentage of positive cells.
The analysis of IL6 and IL8 cytokine
release in the supernatant
was performed through multiplex bead-based sandwich immunoassay kits
(BioRad Laboratories Inc., Segrate, Italy) following the manufacturer’s
instructions.

## Proteomic Analysis, Liquid Chromatography–Tandem Mass
Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) and Bioinformatic Analysis
The total
proteins were extracted and analyzed to assess the differential protein
expression between the samples (Nanocomp with and
without the application of US). The detailed protocols for sample
treatment, data collection, and analyses are reported in Supporting Information, section S4.6.

## In Vitro Genotoxicity Tests and in
Vivo Biocompatibility Tests
In vitro genotoxicity tests were performed by following ISO 10993-3:2015
(Biological evaluation of medical devices—Part 3: Tests for
genotoxicity, carcinogenicity, and reproductive toxicity) by applying
the Ames and micronuclei tests. The Ames bacterial reverse mutation
assay (Ames MPF Penta II kit, Xenometrix AG, Switzerland) was performed
on four Salmonella typhimurium strains and one Escherichia coli strain, evaluating revertant colonies after
a 90 min exposure to the nanocomposite hydrogel and a 48 h culture
period. The cell micronuclei assay was performed on the human lymphoblastoid
TK6 cell line (ATCC, lot 59429029), for 3 and 24 h exposure periods,
after which the relative population doubling (RPD) and the micronuclei
frequencies were assessed.
All in vivo procedures
were conducted strictly following the Italian law on animals used
for scientific purposes (Decree no. 26/2014): the project was authorized
by the Italian Ministry of Health (n. 777/2021- PR) on the third November
2021. Skin irritation tests were carried out following ISO 10993-23
(2021) on New Zealand SPF white male rabbits. Nanocomposite hydrogel,
negative control, and a positive known sensitizer were topically applied
on the shaved dorsum region. After 4 h exposure, the treated sites
were scored for erythema and edema at 1, 24, 48, and 72 h. The primary
irritation index (PII) (minimum 0 to maximum 8) was calculated according
to the ISO 10993-23 standard. Acute systemic toxicity tests were carried
out following ISO 10993-11 (2018) by single-dose intramuscular nanocomposite
injections on Sprague Dawley male rats. Clinical observations, signs
of illness, pain, injury at the main apparatuses and systems, any
behavioral alteration, and weight, water, and food intake measurements
were registered at baseline and at 24, 48, and 72 h after treatment.
Delayed type hypersensitivity tests were carried out following ISO
10993-10 (2010) on Dunkin Hartley guinea pigs, scoring erythema and
edema by Magnusson and Kligman grading scale after 24 and 48 h. The detailed protocols are reported in Supporting Information, section S4.7.

## Statistical Analyses
All data were analyzed using GraphPad
Prism version 9.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego, California
USA, www.graphpad.com).
D’Agostino–Pearson normality test was performed on all
data. Data showing a normal distribution were analzyed using parametric
tests, while data showing a non-normal distribution were analzyed
using nonparametric tests. Experimental data concerning DNA, LDH,
metabolic analyses, DLS measurements, rheological indexes (K and n), estimated shear stress to the
cells (using different needles), degradation rate, injection force,
and adhesion strength were analyzed by applying a nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis’s
test and Dunn’s multiple comparison test to analyze significant
differences between groups. Data concerning compressive modulus, swelling
ratio, and sol–gel fraction were analyzed by applying a nonparametric
Mann–Whitney U-test to compare nondoped and
doped hydrogels. Experimental data derived from in vitro tests on ASCs were analyzed by applying a Mann–Whitney test
or Wilcoxon test or Kruskal–Wallis one-way ANOVA and Dunn’s
multiple comparison tests or Friedman and Dunn’s multiple comparison
tests to analyze significant differences between groups. Data from in vitro genotoxicity and in vivo biocompatibility
tests were analyzed by applying a Shapiro-Wilk test and a Student’s t test when comparison versus CTR was needed; otherwise,
a two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple comparison test
was conducted. For all tests, the significance threshold was set at p < 0.05.

## Sample Size, Randomization, and Blinding
For in vitro tests, the sample size was chosen based on previous
laboratory experience considering a minimum of at least two independent
experiments and a triplicate of independent samples. For genotoxicity
and in vivo tests, the sample size was established
based on the OECD guidelines and UNI EN ISO 10993 standard, which
define the minimum number of samples/animals per group and test and
guarantee the statistical validity of the results. No method of randomization
was followed, and no animals were excluded from this study. For in vitro tests, investigators were not blinded to sample
allocation during the experiments and assessment of results. For in vivo tests, caregivers and the veterinary doctor were
not blinded, whereas outcome assessors were blinded to the subject’s
allocation.

## Acknowledgments
This work received funding from
the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program, Grant Agreement 814413,
Project ADMAIORA (Advanced Nanocomposite Materials for in Situ Treatment
and Ultrasound-Mediated Management of Osteoarthritis). The authors
acknowledge the contribution of Laura Riacci and Lorenzo Arrico for
their technical support during nanocomposite preparation and testing,
Liliana Agresti for her technical support during nanomaterial cytotoxicity
assessment, Mariana Oliveira for her technical support during material
adhesion strength assessment, Nadeshda Severina for her technical
support during barium titanate nanoparticle synthesis and characterization,
Pasqualantonio Pingue for his support during PFM data acquisition,
Katia Samoggia, Luca Fergnani, Daniel Fota, Salvatore Pellini, and
Umberto Bonanno for their technical support in the activities at Complex
Structure Surgical Sciences and Technologies.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
ASCsadipose
tissue-derived stromal
cells
BTNPsbarium
titanate nanoparticles
CPcrossing point
DLSdynamic light scattering
DMEMDulbecco’s modified Eagle medium
EDXenergy dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy
FEMfinite element model
GOgraphene oxide
Hydrogelnondoped hydrogel
Inflinflammatory environment
LC-MS/MSliquid chromatography–tandem
mass spectrometry
LIPUSlow-intensity pulsed ultrasound stimulation
MSCsmesenchymal stem cells
Nanocompnanocomposite hydrogel
Normphysiological environment
PDApolydopamine
PDIpolydispersity index
PFMpiezoelectric force
microscopy
PGApropylene
glycol alginate
PRFpulsed repetition frequency
RPDrelative population doubling
RTroom temperature
TEMtransmission electron microscopy
USultrasound
Vvoltage
XPSX-ray photoelectron spectroscopy

## Data Availability Statement
The data sets
generated and analyzed during the current study are available from
the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Mass spectrometry
and proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium
via the PRIDE partner repository with
the data set identifier PXD038147 and 10.6019/PXD038147. Username: reviewer_pxd038147@ebi.ac.uk. Password: PipAjUfZ.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.3c08738.
Additional tables and figures showing supplementary
results supporting the ones shown in the main manuscript, as well
as additional experimental details, materials, and methods (PDF)
Movie S1 depicting
the key phases of the future targeted
clinical procedure envisaged for the cell-laden nanocomposite material
proposed in the paper, from stem cell harvesting to preparation of
the nanocomposite hydrogel, its surgical application, and its stimulation
through ultrasound waves (MP4)
Movie S2 highlighting the main features
of the controlled
ultrasound in vitro stimulation setup, which guarantees
a predictable ultrasound dose at the target and the consequent opportunity
to optimize the ultrasound treatment parameters (MP4)
Movie S3 showing the biological
sample retaining system
assembly procedure and operations followed by the user to perform
controlled ultrasound stimulations in vitro (MP4)
Movie S4 showing
FEM analysis results of the electric
field (left) and electric potential (right) generated by BTNPs in
representative 2D planes at different ultrasound pressures (MP4)

## Author Contributions
+ A.C., C.M., D.T., and L.V. contributed equally. L.R., A.C., C.M.,
D.T., L.V., L.M., M.Ts., and G.L. planned and designed the main experiments
and elaborated and interpreted the results. M.G. and P.P. performed
TEM and EDX analyses. Y.F. and C.J. planned and performed the synthesis
and BET/DLS characterization of BTNPs. G.D.N, E.T., and M.Te. planned
and performed the synthesis and characterization of GO nanoflakes.
A.C., F.F., E.D., and L.R. conceived and developed the setup design
for controlled ultrasound stimulation in vitro. M.Ca.
and A.C. developed the analytical and numerical models of the interaction
between BTNPs and ultrasound. L.V. and D.T. performed nanomaterial
coating, hydrogel preparation, assessment of nanomaterial stability,
and characterization of the nanocomposite hydrogels. L.V. performed in vitro assessment of BTNPs and GO cytocompatibility on
human chondrocytes and performed piezoelectric force microscopy analyses
on BTNPs. D.T. was involved in the sample management for in
vitro experiments on ASCs and in the materials preparation
for in vivo experiments. C.M., G.L., and E.G. planned
and designed the in vitro experiments. C.M., E.G.,
P.D., Y.S., and E.L. performed in vitro viability
and chondrogenic assays and collected and elaborated data. M.Co. performed
electron microscopy analyses. M.P. and J.B. performed proteomic analysis
and data elaboration. M.Ts., L.M., and M.F. were involved in obtaining
ethical authorizations for in vivo tests. L.M. and
M.Ts. planned in vivo tests. M.Ts., C.D., and G.C.,
performed in vitro and in vivo biocompatibility
tests and data analysis. A.A. interpreted experimental data and elaborated
them to create the figures and videos. L.R. wrote the manuscript with
input from all authors.

A version of this work
is available as a preprint: Ricotti L.; Cafarelli A.; Manferdini C.; Trucco D.; Vannozzi L.; Gabusi E.; Lisignoli G.; et al. Ultrasound stimulation of piezoelectric
nanocomposite hydrogels boosts cartilage regeneration. Research Square 2022, DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2326785/v1; URL: https://www.researchsquare.com/article/rs-2326785/v1 (accessed
on November 30, 2022).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
nn3c08738_si_001.pdf
nn3c08738_si_002.mp4
nn3c08738_si_003.mp4
nn3c08738_si_004.mp4
nn3c08738_si_005.mp4

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn3c08738_si_001.pdf
nn3c08738_si_002.mp4
nn3c08738_si_003.mp4
nn3c08738_si_004.mp4
nn3c08738_si_005.mp4

## Data Availability Statement
The data sets
generated and analyzed during the current study are available from
the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Mass spectrometry
and proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium
via the PRIDE partner repository with
the data set identifier PXD038147 and 10.6019/PXD038147. Username: reviewer_pxd038147@ebi.ac.uk. Password: PipAjUfZ.