pmcJACS AuJACS Au4063jacsau101775714auJACS Au2691-3704American Chemical SocietyPMC10751780PMC10751780.110751780107517803815563610.1021/jacsau.3c007071ArticleDefining the Cell Surface Cysteinome Using Two-Step
Enrichment Proteomics
YanTianyang https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0757-4982BoatnerLisa M. CuiLiujuan TontonozPeter J. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8541-1404BackusKeriann M. †Department
of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States‡Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States§Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States∥DOE
Institute for Genomics and Proteomics, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States⊥Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States#Eli
and Edythe
Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095, United States*E-mail: kbackus@mednet.ucla.edu.131220232512202331245175935063523131120232011202317112023131220232812202301022026© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2023The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Defining the Cell Surface Cysteinome using Two-step Enrichment Proteomics
191020232023.10.17.562832bioRxiv10.1101/2023.10.17.562832PMC1061487537904933 
The plasma membrane
proteome is a rich resource of functionally
important and therapeutically relevant protein targets. Distinguished
by high hydrophobicity, heavy glycosylation, disulfide-rich sequences,
and low overall abundance, the cell surface proteome remains undersampled
in established proteomic pipelines, including our own cysteine chemoproteomics
platforms. Here, we paired cell surface glycoprotein capture with
cysteine chemoproteomics to establish a two-stage enrichment method
that enables chemoproteomic profiling of cell Surface Cysteinome. Our “Cys-Surf”
platform captures >2,800 total membrane protein cysteines in 1,046
proteins, including 1,907 residues not previously captured by bulk
proteomic analysis. By pairing Cys-Surf with an isotopic chemoproteomic
readout, we uncovered 821 total ligandable cysteines, including known
and novel sites. Cys-Surf also robustly delineates redox-sensitive
cysteines, including cysteines prone to activation-dependent changes
to cysteine oxidation state and residues sensitive to addition of
exogenous reductants. Exemplifying the capacity of Cys-Surf to delineate
functionally important cysteines, we identified a redox sensitive
cysteine in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) that impacts
both the protein localization and uptake of low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) particles. Taken together, the Cys-Surf platform, distinguished
by its two-stage enrichment paradigm, represents a tailored approach
to delineate the functional and therapeutic potential of the plasma
membrane cysteinome.

Cell surfaceCysteinesChemoproteomicsOxidation statesT cell activationDavid and Lucile Packard Foundation10.13039/100000008NADivision of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases10.13039/1000064925P30 AI028697Tobacco-Related Disease Research Program10.13039/100005188T31DT1800National Institute of General Medical Sciences10.13039/1000000575T32GM00818533NIH Office of the Director10.13039/100000052DP2 OD030950-01National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute10.13039/1000000501P01HL146358-01pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9au3c00707document-id-new-14au3c00707ccc-price

## Introduction
The cell surface proteome regulates nearly
all aspects of cellular
function, spanning, cell–cell communication, − signal transduction, − and changes to cell state, including
activation, − proliferation, , and death. Consequently, nearly 50% of modern drug targets
are found in the membrane proteome, which is also rich in biomarkers
indicative of disease. − Notably, over 200 cell surface proteins have been reported as overexpressed
in human cancers. Despite their prominence
as high value therapeutic targets, the hydrophobicity and low abundance
of most cell surface proteins complicates functional characterization
and therapeutic targeting of this important fraction of the proteome. − 
A number of high value biochemical and mass spectrometry-based
proteomic techniques have been developed to improve capture and identification
of the cell surface proteome, most notably cell surface biotinylation − and cell surface capture (CSC). − As the N-hydroxysuccinimidobiotin (NHS-biotin)
reagent used in cell surface biotinylation has been shown to label
intracellular proteins, , CSC has emerged as
a favored method for specifically enriching membrane bound glycoproteins.
CSC leverages the heavy glycosylation of nearly all membrane proteins—90%
of the proteins on the cell surface have been reported to be glycosylated —to afford high specificity capture of
the cell surface proteome. In the CSC method, cis-diols found on all
glycans are first oxidized to aldehyde groups in the presence of sodium
periodate. Subsequently, these aldehyde moieties are trapped with
aminooxy- or hydrazide-biotin reagents, which afford robust biotinylation
of cell surface proteins via formation of a stable oxime or hydrozone.
Biotinylated protein groups are then identified via established enrichment-based
proteomic workflows. Showcasing the widespread utility and adoption
of the CSC, recent studies have implemented this chemistry to identify
and quantify surfaceome alterations in cancer cell lines, , − such as overexpression of CD166 in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma and carbonic anhydrase 12 in colon
cancer. 
Cysteine residues are a
ubiquitous, functionally important, and
therapeutically relevant feature of cell surface proteins. Membrane proteins are particularly rich in structural
disulfides, and redox-active cysteines are widely known to regulate
membrane protein function. − Multiple cell surface cysteines are reported to be redox active,
including C53 of aquaporin-8 AQP8, persulfidation of which is known
to gate H2O2 to regulate cell stress, and C23, C45, and C106 of high mobility group
box 1 protein HMGB1, reduction of which are known to be crucial for
anti-inflammatory processes. , Activation-induced
changes to cysteine oxidation have been linked to enhanced T cell
activitation, − and cysteines on CD4 and GP120 have been implicated
in the entry of HIV in T cells and in the regulation of HIV infection
of T cells. , Cell surface cysteines have also
been targeted by drugs and drug-like molecules, as showcased by Afatinib
and Ibrutinib, blockbuster anticancer agents, that function by selectively
and irreversibly labeling conserved noncatalytic cysteines found within
kinase active sites. , Consequently, identifying redox
sensitive and potentially druggable cysteine residues in membrane
proteins is of high value for expanding the scope of the druggable
proteome.
Mass spectrometry-based cysteine chemoproteomics is
one such method
that is well positioned to pinpoint such residues in membrane proteins.
As shown by previous reports, − including our own, the human proteome harbors thousands of cysteines
amenable to modification by druglike molecules—each cysteine–ligand
pair represents the potential starting point for a drug development
campaign. Similar to small molecule screening platforms, redox-directed
chemoproteomic methods, including biotin-switch, OxICAT, SP3-Rox, QTRP, and Oximouse, robustly report the relative and absolute oxidation
states of cysteines analyzed from bulk proteomes. By pairing these
methods with proximity labeling, recent methods including our own
Cys-LOx have begun to shed light on subcellular compartment-specific
cysteine oxidation states, which can vary markedly depending on protein
localization. , Whether analogous approaches
can be extended to the cell surface proteome remains to be seen.
Here, we establish cell Surface Cysteine enrichment (Cys-Surf), which pairs cell surface
capture (CSC) with cysteine chemoproteomics to reveal the redox and
ligandable cell surface cysteinome. Cys-Surf analysis of Jurkat and
primary T cells identified 2,836 reactive cell surface cysteines on
1,046 proteins, which represents a >4-fold improvement of cell
surface
specificity as compared to bulk proteome analysis. Of these residues,
821 were not previously identified by cysteine chemoproteomics as
reported by CysDB, and we find that 211
proteins are ligandable by cysteine reactive compounds. By pairing
Cys-Surf with our previously reported cysteine redox proteomic method
SP3-Rox, we quantify the absolute oxidation
states of 1,246 cell surface cysteines on 489 proteins, reveal marked
cysteine reduction during T cell activation, and stratify membrane
cysteines sensitive to addition of exogenous oxidants and reductants.
Guided by this Cys-Surf analysis, we pinpoint a heretofore uncharacterized
reduction-sensitive cysteine in an EGF repeat of the low-density lipoprotein
receptor (LDLR), which impacts receptor localization and lipoprotein
uptake.

## Results

## Establishing an SP3-Enabled Aminooxy-Biotin
Cell Surface Platform
To establish our cell Surface Cysteine enrichment platform (Cys-Surf)
( A), we envisioned
pairing cell
surface capture (CSC) , with cysteine peptide enrichment.
Guided by our prior study, which paired TurboID proximity labeling
with similar cysteine peptide enrichment to achieve subcellular redox
proteomics, we expected that efficient
protein recovery throughout the Cys-Surf workflow would be essential
to achieve high cysteine coverage.
 Therefore, we first prioritized establishing and
enhancing the
CSC portion of our method. We observed saturable labeling for aminooxy-biotin
with maximal labeling achieved with 1 mM treatment conditions (Figure S1A). As we had previously found that
the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) method afforded enhanced recovery of biotinylated samples, , we opted to incorporate SP3 into the CSC workflow. We established
an SP3-based protein cleanup method in which the SP3 resin is employed
to decontaminate samples prior to protein enrichment on streptavidin
resin (Figure S1B). By comparing wash and
protein elution conditions, we found that EtOH outperformed MeCN as
the washing solvent and that addition of detergent (e.g., 0.2% SDS,
which is not required for peptide elution , ) is essential for protein recovery from SP3 resin (Figure S1C,D). Addition of SP3 to the CSC method afforded
a modest yet significant improvement in the peptide coverage (Figure S1E). As further confirmation that our
implementation of CSC was robustly capturing cell surface glycoproteins,
we additionally subjected enriched peptides to the PNGase F digest
(Figure S2A). We used the unique mass shift
(0.98 Da) that remains on glycosylated asparagine residues after digest
to identify the glycosylation sites. ∼53% of detected peptides
feature putative glycosylation sites, and of these, ∼93% belong
to proteins annotated as localized to the cell surface (Figure S2B).

## Establishing Cell Surface Cysteine Enrichment (Cys-Surf)
We next paired
our established CSC platform with cysteine labeling to establish our
Cys-Surf workflow, shown in A. We expected that the sodium periodate used to oxidize
glycans in the CSC workflow likely would also oxidize exposed cysteine
thiols. Confirming this likelihood, we observed a decrease in cysteine
reactivity toward iodoacetamide rhodamine (IA-Rho) following treatment
with sodium periodate; in contrast, the IA-Rho signal remained unchanged
when sodium periodate was applied after cysteine capping ( B). To circumvent
this oxidation, we opted to first cap all cysteines in situ with the
pan-cysteine reactive probe iodoacetamide alkyne (IAA; 1).
The subsequent two-stage Cys-Surf capture workflow then
proceeded smoothly. Following streptavidin-based CSC and on-resin
digestion, cell surface peptides were collected and subjected to peptide-level
biotinylation via click conjugation. After a second round of enrichment
on neutravidin resin, the biotinylated peptides were analyzed by liquid
chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In aggregate,
Cys-Surf analysis of Jurkat cells captured a total of 4,364 unique
cysteines in 1,889 total proteins. This coverage compares favorably
to our previously reported two-stage enrichment platform using TurboID,
in which we typically captured 500–1,500 total cysteines found
on 300–800 proteins. 
To
facilitate evaluation of the cell surface specificity of the
Cys-Surf platform, specifically the fraction of captured cysteines
that are localized to cell surface proteins, we generated a comprehensive
cell surface protein database aggregating the localization information
from the Human Protein Atlas, UniProtKB, and CellWhere (Table S1). In aggregate, 99,811 cysteines found
in 7,018 proteins were annotated as localized on the cell surface
by one or more databases analyzed. Consistent with our previous study
in which we performed similar localization analysis for intracellular
compartments, we observed that a substantial
fraction of the proteins with cell surface localization are also annotated
as localizing to one or more additional subcellular compartments (4,339
total). As these multilocalized proteins could confound our analyses,
we generated an additional data set of glycosylated proteins generated
from UniProtKB annotations as orthogonal evaluation of the method,
which includes 85,933 cysteines on 5,139 proteins (Table S1). In total, 3,929 proteins are shared between both
data sets.
Overall, Cys-Surf identified 1,980 cysteines in 700
proteins with
annotated cell surface localization and 1,934 cysteines in 633 proteins
annotated as glycoproteins ( C and S3). ∼75% of
the glycoprotein cysteines (1,466/1,934) are also annotated as cell
surface cysteines (1,466/1,980) ( C), which is consistent with the CSC enrichment
of glycoproteins on the cell surface. Altogether, 56% (2,448/4,364)
of cysteines identified with Cys-Surf are annotated either on the
cell surface or in glycoproteins. By comparison, only ∼15%
of cysteines are annotated as on the cell surface in prior cysteinome
data sets generated from whole cell proteomes ( D). Further
showcasing the value of this dual capture method for identifying tough-to-detect
residues, when compared with our CysDB database, which aggregated a total of 62,888 cysteines in nine high
coverage cysteine chemoproteomic data sets, 708 cysteines in proteins
annotated as cell surface or glycosylated identified by Cys-Surf have
not been previously identified ( E).

## Cys-Surf Captures Ligandable Cell Surface
Cysteines
Motivated by the robust capture of cell surface
cysteines, we next
set out to enable quantitative measurements of subcellular cysteine
ligandability by incorporating isotopic labeling into the Cys-Surf
workflow. We envisioned that our previously reported isotopically
labeled light- and heavy-isopropyl iodoacetamide alkyne (IPIAA-L 4 and IPIAA-H 5), which had enabled high coverage
bulk redox proteomics, would prove compatible
with competitive electrophilic small molecule screening. In a manner
highly analogous to the widely utilized competitive chemoproteomic
profiling platform, isotopic Tandem Orthogonal Proteolysis–Activity-Based
Protein Profiling (isoTOP-ABPP), , we treated
samples in a pairwise manner with either scout fragment 3,5-bis(trifluoromethyl)aniline
chloroacetamide KB03 or vehicle (DMSO) followed by either
light- or heavy-IPIAA ( A). After CSC and peptide level cysteine enrichment, FragPipe
search and IonQuant were utilized to
calculate the competition ratio (ratio (R) of IPIAA-H
over IPIAA-L).
 Out of the 2,194 cysteines quantified,
530 cysteines belonging
to 452 proteins were found in peptides that showed elevated MS1 ratios
(Log2(H/L) > 1), indicating covalent labeling by KB03 ( B). Out of the 530 ligandable cysteines, 211 cysteines are annotated
as from proteins on the cell surface or glycosylated. Cys-Surf identified
unique ligandable cell surface proteins that differ from those already
targeted by FDA approved drugs ( C). More than 350 ligandable cell surface cysteines
identified by our study are unique and have not been previously identified
in CysDB ( D). While we do not identify C797 in EGFR—this
is the cysteine labeled by targeted tyrosine kinase (TKIs) inhibitors
(e.g., afatinib) —we do observe
an elevated ratio (Log2(H/L) = 2.74) for C1058 in EGFR.
This cysteine has been previously
identified as a palmitoylation site located in a disordered loop,
which has been implicated in the palmitoylation-dependent regulation
of EGFR activity. , Gene ontology (GO) analysis of proteins that harbor liganded cysteines demonstrated
an enrichment of proteins involved in processes including integrin-mediated
signaling pathway, membrane organization, and biosynthesis (Figure S4). We expect that many of these ligandable
cysteines, including C6 of CD81 and C132
of CD320, represent intriguing potential
targets for immunomodulation. 
 Among the integrin-related ligandable cysteines, C363 from
HLA-A
(HLA class I histocompatibility antigen; A-3 alpha chain) was identified
as labeled by KB03 (Log2(H/L) = 1.26). Inspection
of the AlphaFold , structure of HLA-A (AF-P04439-F1)
revealed that C363 is located in a putatively unstructured c-terminal
portion of the HLA protein (Figure S5A).
Given the potential opportunities for targeting MHC complexes for
immunomodulatory applications, , we opted to further
assess the ligandability of this cysteine through a gel-based activity-based
protein profiling (ABPP) assay. We established
an immunoprecipitation-based ABPP assay in which cells were first
treated in situ for 1 h at 50 μM compound with one of three
compounds, chloroacetamide (KB03), acrylamide (KB14), or propynamide (6). After lysis, lysates
were labeled with IA-rhodamine and HLA-A protein was enriched by immunoprecipitation,
which revealed that 6 labeled HLA-A, as indicated by
the near-complete blockade of IA-Rho-labeling; more modest partial
competition was observed of KB03 and KB14 (Figure S5B). Taken together, these findings
support the idea that Cys-Surf can faithfully identify ligandable
cysteines within membrane-associated proteins.

## Quantitative MS Analysis
of Oxidation States of Cysteines on
the Cell Surface with Cys-Surf
As the HLA-A Cys363 cysteine
had been previously reported as redox active, , we next asked whether Cys-Surf would extend to quantification of
site-specific cysteine oxidation. Building upon our previously reported
SP3-Rox and Cys-LOx redox proteomics platforms, we modified our Cys-Surf platform
to capture the cell surface redox proteome ( A). Similar to many redox proteomic methods, , , , we calculated the cysteine percentage oxidation state based on the
relative cysteine labeling by our isotopically enriched IPIAA reagents,
with IPIAA-L labeling reduced cysteines and IPIAA-H labeling oxidized
cysteines following global reduction with DTT. In support of the robustness
of our method, we also generated data sets in which the cysteine capping
reagents were swapped, with IPIAA-H capping reduced cysteines and
IPIAA-L capping the oxidatively modified cysteines after reduction.
A high concordance (R2 = 0.8942, n = 1,538 unique cysteines identified in both data sets)
was revealed for the precursor ion intensity ratios calculated by
FragPipe IonQuant (Figure S6).
Demonstrating the uniquely oxidizing environment
of the cell surface cysteinome, 1,173 out of the 1,246 cysteines (89%
of cysteines) with cell surface annotations quantified from 489 proteins
were found to have elevated ratios (Log2(H/L) > 1),
corresponding
to >50% percent oxidation ( B). In aggregate, cysteines in cell surface proteins
showed an average oxidation state of 83%; this high degree of overall
oxidation is in stark contrast to the 10% mean cysteine oxidation
state previously reported for whole cell proteome, , , , − which supports Cys-Surf’s capacity to assay the subcellular
oxidation state of cysteines in the plasma membrane ( C).
Given the markedly
oxidized nature of most cysteines identified,
we next asked whether these residues were known to be involved in
the formation of disulfide bonds. We find that 495 of the identified
cysteines from 192 total proteins were annotated as disulfide sites
by UniProtKB. This coverage (40% of residues identified) represents
a marked enrichment for cysteines involved in disulfides when compared
to bulk proteome analysis—in CysDB, 17% (n = 1,077) of identified cysteines are annotated as involved in disulfides.
Exemplary cysteines involved in disulfide bonds include Cys177 of
NPC intracellular cholesterol transporter 1 (NPC1), Cys296 of cluster
of differentiation (CD) 38 antigen, and Cys113 of CD166 antigen ALCAM
( B,D).
Looking beyond these anecdotal examples, we find that the cysteines
with annotated disulfide involvement showed a 93% mean oxidation,
which reflects increased oxidation compared with all identified cell
surface cysteines and those lacking disulfide annotations (83% and
78% mean oxidation, respectively; E). Notably, 453 additional cysteines, which
lacked UniProtKB disulfide annotations, were also detected with >90%
percent oxidization (Table S3). We expect
that a number of these sites are likely cysteines involved in heretofore
unannotated disulfides.
Given the predominance of highly oxidized
cysteines in our data
set, we next asked whether Cys-Surf would have sufficient sensitivity
to identify domain specific differences in cysteine oxidation. Using
UniProtKB topological domain feature annotations, we identified that
our data set contained 175 cysteines located within annotated intracellular
protein domains and 589 cysteines in annotated extracellular domains.
Consistent with a high degree of oxidation of cysteines in the plasma
membrane, we observe mean oxidation states of 92% for extracellular
and 58% for intracellular domain cysteines ( F). For the aforementioned ligandable cysteine
Cys363 in HLA-A, which is located in an annotated intracellular topological
domain, we observe substantially reduced oxidation of 61% when compared
with the three HLA-A extracellular cysteines (Cys188, Cys227, and
Cys283; G).

## Cys-Surf Identifies Adaptive Immune Cell State-Dependent Changes
to Cysteine Oxidation
During activation, T cells are exposed
to reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS),
derived from both intracellular mitochondrial ROS production and extracellular
neighboring phagocytes. Intriguingly, this oxidative environment has
been connected with both T cell hypo-responsiveness and T cell activation,
including increased IL2 and NFAT expression. − These seemingly antithetical activities of ROS as both pro- and
antiproliferative have been ascribed to both dose-dependent activity
(low ROS is pro-proliferative and higher ROS-negatively impacting
growth) and compartmentalized redox signaling. Intriguingly, while
bulk proteome redox analysis revealed increased cysteine oxidation
during T cell activation for a number of immunomodulatory targets, , , an increase in cell surface
cysteine free thiols is strongly associated with immunological stimuli. , , − 
Inspired by these intriguing observations, we deployed Cys-Surf
to pinpoint T cell activation-dependent changes to the plasma membrane-associated
cysteine oxidation state. Healthy donor T cells (bulk CD4+ and CD8+)
were subjected to the Cys-Surf workflow ( A) pre- and poststimulation (anti-CD3 and
anti-CD28). In aggregate, the oxidation states of 2,402 cysteines
on 1,190 proteins were quantified, in which 1,466 cysteines from 638
proteins are annotated as on the cell surface or are glycosylated
(Table S4). Consistent with the aforementioned
reports of activation-dependent increases in plasma membrane free
thiol content, T cell stimulation afforded a modest, yet significant,
decrease in the measured mean percentage cysteine oxidation state
( B). Out of
821 cysteines from 471 proteins quantified in both unstimulated and
stimulated T cell proteomes, 100 cysteines were significantly reduced
(difference < −1, p-value < 0.5) upon
T cell stimulation ( C). GO analysis of genes that
harbor significantly reduced cysteines revealed an enrichment of proteins
involved in processes including regulation of T cell tolerance induction,
lymphocyte differentiation, and integrin-mediated signaling, which
are all closely related to T cell activation ( D). Exemplary reduced cell surface cysteines
involved in adaptive immune response include a number of disulfide-bonded
cysteines ( E and S7), including C41 from the T cell
surface glycoprotein (CD4), which functions as a coreceptor for the
MHC class II molecule:peptide complex, , C70, C83,
and C170 from the T cell differentiation antigen (CD6), , and C385, C472, and C551 from the dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4),
which is a known positive regulator of T cell activation. − For the receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase C (PTPRC or CD45),
which is a DPP4 interactor that also acts as a positive regulator
of T cell coactivation, active site C853 that forms a phosphocysteine
intermediate was markedly reduced. Notably,
the disulfide-rich extracellular domains of CD45 have been implicated
in increased domain rigidity and formation of heterodimers. , For CD4 , (Cys41) and Tapasin (TAPBP) (Cys91), the reduced disulfides are potential
RHStaple bonds—these are allosteric disulfides that link adjacent
strands in the same β sheet, , which aligns
with the comparatively labile nature of these bonds. , Exemplifying the value of subcellular redox measurements, for C551
of DPP4 and C170 of CD3, which were identified by both our previous
bulk proteomic and our cys-Surf analysis
of T cell activation, we observe markedly divergent state-dependent
changes to thiol oxidation ( E).
 

## Cys-Surf Identifies Cysteines
Sensitive to Exogenous Reductants
and Oxidants
Inspired by the seeming ubiquity of labile disulfides,
we opted to broaden the scope of redox sensitive cell surface cysteines
by pairing Cys-Surf with cell treatments with exogenous oxidoreductants.
For oxidants, we chose the exemplary oxidizing agents H2O2 and S-Nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), with the goal of pinpointing
cell surface cysteines sensitive to ROS and RNS-mediated cysteine
oxidative modifications. For reductants, we selected both the pan-cysteine
reactive Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) reducing agents as well
as N-acetylcysteine (NAC), which is a clinically administered reductant
that is also widely taken as a dietary supplement. , 
We subjected Jurkat cells to in-gel fluorescence analysis
using the cell-impermeable cysteine-reactive Alexa Fluor 594 C5 Maleimide (Maleimide-Alexa594) , to visualize treatment-dependent changes in cell surface cysteine
reactivity ( A, top). For the H2O2- and GSNO-treated cells,
we observed a modest decrease in the reactivity of free thiols toward
Maleimide-Alexa594 (Figure S8A). In contrast,
lysates derived from TCEP- and NAC-treated cells exhibited increased
Maleimide-Alexa594 labeling, consistent with reduction-dependent increased
availability of free thiols. When compared to NAC, samples treated
with TCEP exhibited a more substantial increase in Maleimide-Alexa594
reactivity, consistent with TCEP’s greater reduction potential
( B).
 As our gel-based analyses confirmed treatment-dependent changes
to cysteine oxidation, we next extended these analyses to Cys-Surf
characterization of the oxidation- and reduction-sensitive cell surface
proteomes. Following the workflow shown in A (bottom), we identified treatment-dependent
changes to cysteine oxidation state based on the difference in MS1
intensity ratios comparing additive- and vehicle-treated samples.
Consistent with the comparatively small decrease in Maleimide-Alexa594
labeling observed for oxidant treated samples (Figure S8A), Cys-Surf analysis of H2O2- and GSNO-treated cells revealed no significant treatment-dependent
changes in the aggregated mean percentage of oxidation of the cysteines
identified (Figure S8B). These findings
are consistent with our aforementioned observation ( B,C) that, at basal state,
most cell surface cysteines are already highly (mean >80%) oxidized
and thus insensitive to additional oxidant. This observed insensitivity
is in stark contrast to that observed for whole proteome, where we found that >51.0% of cysteines were
significantly oxidized with GSNO. Out of 1,310 cysteines identified
in both samples treated with vehicle and H2O2, 16 cysteines showed significant ratio changes (difference >
1, p-value < 0.05) sensitive to H2O2, including C590 of integrin beta-2 ITGB2, which has been
reported
as ligandable in human T cells (Figure S8C). Out of 305 cell surface cysteines
identified in both samples with control and GSNO treatment, 3 cysteines
showed significant GSNO induced oxidation (difference > 1, p-value < 0.05), including C109 of platelet endothelial
cell adhesion molecule PECAM1, a protein that is required for leukocyte
transendothelial migration (TEM) under most inflammatory conditions , (Figure S8D).
Guided by the observed
comparative insensitivity to exogenous oxidations
and high degree of baseline oxidation state of cell surface cysteines,
we next asked whether a more substantial fraction of the cell surface
cysteinome would be sensitive to exogenous reductants TCEP and NAC.
Consistent with our in-gel fluorescence analysis ( B), Cys-Surf analysis revealed
a modest yet significant decrease in the measured bulk mean cysteine
oxidation state after TCEP and NAC treatment, decreasing from 93.4%
to 90.0% and 91.0%, respectively ( C). Out of the 916 cysteines from 618 proteins
identified in both samples with control and NAC treatment, 15 cysteines
showed significant NAC induced reduction (difference < −1, p-value < 0.05), including C173 of signaling threshold-regulating
transmembrane adapter 1 SIT1, which has been reported as immune-enriched
and hyperreactive in activated human T cells (Figure S9). Out of the 1,189 cysteines
from 698 proteins identified in both samples treated with control
and TCEP, 39 cysteines were sensitive to TCEP-induced reduction (difference
< −1, p-value < 0.05), of which 32 has
cell surface annotation. We initially were surprised by the low overlap
between the NAC and TCEP data sets, with 534 shared total cysteines.
Together with the difference in reducing potentials for TCEP and NAC,
we expect that the comparatively modest coverage (1,573 total cysteines)
together with the stochastic nature of data dependent acquisition
(DDA) likely rationalizes the modest overlap between data sets.
Several intriguing reduction labile cysteines were identified only
in the TCEP data sets. Annotated disulfides in multiple CD antigens
were identified as reducible, including C145 of CD55, which has been
identified as significantly reduced during T cell activation in our
previous bulk proteome data set ( D and S10). C311 of the epidermal growth factor receptor
kinase (EGFR) was found to be markedly sensitive to TCEP (difference
= −2.55). This cysteine is localized to a disulfide bridge
(C311–C326) in a cysteine-rich region of EGFR that is required
for kinase activation. Notably, disulfide
breaking mutations at C326 were recently reported to be gain-of-function
for Lhermitte-Duclos Disease. 
Similarly, a large number of mutations at disulfide bonded extracellular
cysteines in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) have been
implicated in Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH), one of the most
common genetic disorders. , In our TCEP data set,
we identified two cysteines from LDLR, highly reduced C75 (difference
= −1.5) and comparatively reduction insensitive C34 (difference
= −0.3). While variants of these two cysteines have been reported
in ClinVar, with clinical significance
as likely pathogenic and associations with familial hypercholesteremia,
the impact of these variants on low-density lipoprotein (LDL) uptake
is, to our knowledge, unknown. Notably, mutation at the proximal C46
has already been demonstrated to reduce LDL uptake, which inspired
us to further characterize Cys75. 
Using fluorescently labeled LDL with GFP tagged on the C-term of
LDL, we next assayed the impact of TCEP and C75 mutations on LDL uptake
and LDLR activity. TCEP treatment attenuated both basal HEK-293T cellular
LDL uptake and LDLR-dependent uptake with heterologously overexpressed
LDLR ( E,F
and S11). Guided by these findings, we
then generated point mutations in our LDLR-GFP construct, including
at C75 (LDLRC75W) and the double mutant (LDLRC75W/C34W), with the latter chosen to assess whether C75 mutations would synergize
with the reduction-insensitive C34 residue. Of note, we chose the
comparatively bulky tryptophan mutation both because it is reported
in ClinVar and is a mutation that mimics small molecule labeling at
this site, which could help guide future efforts for the development
of labile-disulfide-directed covalent modifiers.
HEK293T cells
overexpressing the LDLRC75W mutant showed
markedly attenuated LDL uptake. In contrast to the substantial plasma
membrane localization observed for the wild-type LDLR construct, we
observed increased intracellularly localized LDLRC75W,
consistent with mutation-induced changes in protein translocation
to the plasma membrane. The double mutant (LDLRC75W/C34W) afforded a similar decrease in LDL uptake and intracellular protein
retention ( G,H and S12). The lack of synergy between
these two mutations supports that the single C75W mutation is sufficient
to block LDL uptake. Taken together, our findings support the pairing
of Cys-Surf with exogenous reductant treatments to pinpoint functional
and reduction-labile disulfides. They also point toward future opportunities
for therapeutic targeting of this comparatively underexplored portion
of the cysteinome.

## Discussion
By establishing the cell Surface Cysteine enrichment (Cys-Surf)
platform, here we achieved
unprecedented local cysteinome analysis, including the identification
of ligandable and redox sensitive membrane cysteines. Cys-Surf features
a unique two-step biotinylation method: after in situ IAA capping
to protect cysteines from oxidation, cell surface glycoproteins are
then subjected to CSC on streptavidin followed by peptide-level click
conjugation and neutravidin capture of cell surface-associated cysteine
peptides. While our method draws inspiration from our recent pairing
of TurboID proximity labeling with cysteine chemoproteomics, to our knowledge, such sequential rounds of
enrichment for cell surface proteins is unprecedented. Application
of Cys-Surf to primary immune cells and immortalized cell lines identified
in aggregate 2,836 total cell surface cysteines from 1,046 proteins,
including 211 ligandable cysteines and 153 redox sensitive cysteines.
For more translational applications, we expect that our rich data
set of ligandable cell surface cysteines will be of particular interest,
as demonstrated by the blockbuster status of several covalent kinase
inhibitors that target cell surface-associated kinases (e.g., EGFR
and HER2).
Enabled by our pairing of Cys-Surf with isotopically
enriched cysteine
capping reagents, we stratified the cell
surface redoxome. Consistent with prior studies, we find that the
redox state of membrane associated cysteinome differs markedly from
bulk proteomic analysis, both at the basal state and for cells subjected
to stimuli and exogenous oxidants and reductants. We find a mean oxidation
state of ∼90% for the 1,246 cell surface cysteines for which
quantitative measures of absolute oxidation were achieved. This striking
oxidation contrasts with the previously reported 10% median cellular
cysteine oxidation state, as measured by bulk redox proteomics. , , Consistent with this marked
oxidation and the highly oxidizing extracellular environment, we find
that comparatively few cell surface cysteines are prone to oxidation,
both with the addition of exogenous oxidants and under cellular activation
conditions. This latter finding is in contrast with the marked activation-induced
oxidation observed for bulk proteomes. These findings are consistent with previous reports of compartmentalization
of redox-mediated signaling , and highlight the
value of subcellular measures of cysteine oxidation, as bulk proteome
analysis will likely mask compartment-specific changes.
In contrast
with the comparative insensitivity of the plasma membrane
cysteine to oxidation, Cys-Surf revealed a prevalence of reduced labile
cysteines, including many sensitive to T cell activation. While the
plasma membrane is known to become more reduced during T cell activation, , , , the specific cysteines sensitive to this cell state change remain
overwhelmingly uncharacterized. As such, our study provides a roadmap
to identify functional cysteines involved in T cell activation. Further
showcasing Cys-Surf’s capacity to pinpoint high value reduction-labile
cysteines, we also identify 53 total cysteines sensitive to exogenous
reductants TCEP and NAC. A number of noteworthy residues stood out,
including those found in -RHStaple bonds. In total, we identified
21 disulfides sensitive to the exogenous reductants TCEP and NAC.
Noteworthy examples of labile bonds included those found in multiple
clusters of differentiation proteins implicated in cellular activation,
a cysteine (C311) within an activation-associated region of EGFR,
and a cysteine (C75) within the LDLR protein. While this cysteine
(C75) of LDLR has been reported to be mutated in cases of Familial
Hypercholesterolemia (FH), the functional impact of these mutations
has not, to our knowledge, been probed previously. Providing compelling
proof-of-concept evidence of the likely functional importance of these
reduction-labile disulfide bonds, here, by combining mutational analysis
and LDL uptake studies, we reveal that C75W mutations lead to retention
of LDLR in the cytoplasm and decreased LDL uptake. As C75W has been
reported in ClinVar, we expect that our finding should help to aid
in interpretation of the clinical significance of this variant and,
more broadly, will add to the growing body of deleterious genetic
variants in the cysteine-rich extracellular domain of LDLR that impact
LDLR activity. , Given that both the TCEP treatment
and C75W mutation block LDL uptake, we expect that the C75–C95
disulfide is likely important for LDLR activity. However, as the point
mutation also causes decreased LDLR plasma membrane localization,
we cannot rule out the possibility that the TCEP-induced decreased
lipoprotein uptake could also be due to a reduction of additional
functionally important plasma membrane cysteines. Looking beyond LDLR,
we anticipate that our work will help guide ongoing and future efforts
to characterize the functional significance of labile disulfides,
particularly in the context of receptor-mediated cell signaling. We
expect that many of the residues identified here may prove sensitive
to reductive stress, which is an area of emerging interest and a critical
modulator of many human diseases. − Thus, we expect our work to help inform
disease pathogenesis for reductive-stress-sensitive conditions, spanning
metabolic disorders to cancer.
Achieving a more comprehensive
analysis of this intriguing fraction
of the cysteinome will likely require improvements in the coverage
for future iterations of Cys-Surf. While the Cys-Surf coverage exceeded
that of our TurboID-based platforms, Cys-Surf
cysteine peptide identification remained comparatively modest, with
∼1,000–2,000 cysteines captured per experiment. Thus,
when compared with the typical >10,000 cysteines captured from
bulk
proteomic analysis, Cys-Surf is likely still substantially undersampling
plasma membrane cysteines. Exemplifying this limitation, while we
do identify cysteines from EGFR, we fail to capture C797, which is
the cysteine modified by EGFR-directed covalent kinase inhibitors.
Analysis of additional cell lines, including EGFR overexpressing cells,
together with implementation of Cys-Surf with additional sequence
specific proteases to improve coverage of cleave site poor transmembrane
regions should afford enhanced coverage. Notably, despite this modest
coverage, across the study, ∼30% (821/2836) of the cysteines
identified by Cys-Surf were not found previously in CysDB, our database
of high coverage cysteine chemoproteomic data sets.
Looking
beyond the current study, we expect that Cys-Surf analysis
should synergize with genetic and proteogenomic approaches aimed at pinpointing functional
and therapeutically relevant cysteines, including those impacted by
genetic variation. Given the seeming ubiquity of reduction-labile
disulfide bonds identified by Cys-Surf, we expect that a subset of
these cysteines should be susceptible to covalent inhibitor development
efforts, including a fraction of the >500 ligandable cysteines
identified
here. While covalent inhibition of labile-disulfide-bonds is precedented
by molecules targeting oxidoreductase enzymes, , the scope and functional impact of targeting redox environment-dependent
cysteine proteoforms remain to be realized. The accessibility of extracellular
cysteines identified by Cys-Surf to biologic agents with poor cell
penetrance, including peptides and antibodies, offers a unique opportunity
for the future development of cysteine-directed biological agents
as well as proteoform-specific therapies.

## Methods

## Cell Culture
Cell culture reagents including Dulbecco’s
phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS), Roswell Park Memorial Institute
(RPMI) media, Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) media,
and penicillin/streptomycin (Pen/Strep) were purchased from Fisher
Scientific. Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) was purchased from Avantor Seradigm
(lot # 214B17). All cell lines were obtained from ATCC, routinely
tested for mycoplasma, and maintained at a low passage number (<20
passages). Jurkat (ATCC: TIB-152) cells were cultured in RPMI-1640
supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotics (Penn/Strep, 100 U/mL).
HEK293T (ATCC: CRL-3216) cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented
with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotics (Penn/Strep, 100 U/mL). Media were
filtered (0.22 μm) prior to use. Cells were maintained in a
humidified incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2.
Blood
from a healthy donor was obtained from UCLA/CFAR Virology Core (5P30
AI028697) after informed consent. After Trima filter isolation, peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were purified over Ficoll–Hypaque
gradients (Sigma-Aldrich) and T cells were purified via negative selection
with magnetic beads (EasySep Human T Cell Iso Kit, 17951, STEMCELL).
The purified T cells were washed with sterile PBS. Unstimulated cells
were harvested by centrifugation. The remaining cells were then resuspended
in RPMI-1640 supplemented with FBS, penicillin, streptomycin, and
glutamine (2 million cells per mL), and 200,000 cells per well were
seeded on nontreated tissue culture, 96-well transparent plates that
had been coated with anti-CD3 (1:200, BioXcell) and anti-CD28 (1:500,
Biolegend) in PBS (100 μL per well). After 72 h, the cells were
harvested by centrifugation (4500g, 5 min, 4 °C),
washed 3 times with cold DPBS, and prepared as described below.

## Proteomic Sample Preparation for Cys-Surf, Protein Level Enrichment
After cells were treated as indicated, harvested by centrifugation
(4500g, 5 min, 4 °C), and washed with DPBS 3
times, they were resuspended in DPBS and labeled with 2 mM IAA for
1 h at room temperature (RT). For cysteine oxidation quantification,
cells were labeled with 2 mM L-IPIAA for 1 h at RT, reduced with 1
mM DTT for 15 min at 37 °C, and labeled with 2 mM H-IPIAA for
1 h at RT, with a PBS wash between the IPIAA labeling. For cysteine
ligandability quantification, cells were labeled with either compound
or vehicle for 1 h at RT, followed by treatment of 2 mM L-IPIAA or
H-IPIAA for 1 h at RT, respectively, and then combined. Following
cysteine capture, cells were oxidized with 1.6 mM NaIO4 in 1 mM NaAc (pH = 6.5) for 20 min at RT in the dark. After washing
with DPBS, cells were labeled with 1 mM aminooxy-biotin in PBS for
1 h at 4 °C. Cells were then washed with DPBS, lysed in RIPA
buffer (Fisher, Cat# AAJ62885AE) for 30 min at 4 °C, and clarified
by centrifuging (21,000g, 10 min, 4 °C). Protein
concentrations were determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo
Fisher, catalog no. 23227), and the lysate was normalized to 500 μL
of 1.5 mg/mL. 50 μL of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Carboxyl Magnetic
Beads, hydrophobic (GE Healthcare, 65152105050250), and 50 μL
of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Carboxyl Magnetic Beads, hydrophilic (GE Healthcare,
45152105050250), were mixed and washed with water three times. The
bead slurries were then transferred to the lysate and incubated for
5 min at RT with shaking (1000 rpm). EtOH (1 mL) was added to each
sample, and the mixtures were incubated for 10 min at RT with shaking
(1000 rpm). The beads were then washed (3 × 1 mL of 80% EtOH)
with a magnetic rack. Proteins were eluted from SP3 beads with 500
μL of 0.2% SDS in PBS for 30 min at 37 °C while being shaken
(1000 rpm). 50 μL of Pierce streptavidin agarose beads were
washed with 0.2% SDS/PBS and incubated with the eluted lysates for
2 h at RT. The proteins bound to beads were washed once with 1 mL
of 0.2% SDS/PBS, 3 times with 1 mL of PBS, and 3 times with 1 mL of
H2O. The beads were resuspended in 200 μL of 6 M
urea, either reduced with 1 mM DTT for 15 min at 65 °C and labeled
with 2 mM IAA for 1 h at RT for Cys-CS identification or reduced with
10 mM DTT for 15 min at 65 °C and labeled with 20 mM IA for 30
min at 37 °C for Cys-CS oxidation and ligandability quantification.
Then, beads were washed with PBS and resuspended in 200 μL of
2 M urea. 3 μL of 1 mg/mL trypsin solution (Washington) was
added. Proteins were digested off the beads overnight at 37 °C
with shaking.

## Proteomic Sample Preparation for Cys-Surf,
Peptide Level Enrichment
After digestion, CuAAC was performed
with biotin-azide (4 μL
of 200 mM stock in DMSO, final concentration = 4 mM), TCEP (4 μL
of fresh 50 mM stock in water, final concentration = 1 mM), TBTA (12
μL of 1.7 mM stock in DMSO/t-butanol 1:4, final
concentration = 100 μM), and CuSO4 (4 μL of
50 mM stock in water, final concentration = 1 mM) for 1h at RT. 20
μL of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Carboxyl Magnetic Beads, hydrophobic,
and 20 μL of Sera-Mag SpeedBeads Carboxyl Magnetic Beads, hydrophilic,
were mixed and washed with water three times. The bead slurries were
then transferred to the CuAAC samples, incubated for 5 min at RT with
shaking (1000 rpm). Approximately 4 mL of acetonitrile (>95% of
the
final volume) was added to each sample, and the mixtures were incubated
for 10 min at RT with shaking (1000 rpm). The beads were then washed
(3 × 1 mL acetonitrile) with a magnetic rack. Peptides were eluted
from SP3 beads with 100 μL of 2% DMSO in MB water for 30 min
at 37 °C with shaking (1000 rpm). The elution was repeated again
with 100 μL of 2% DMSO in MB water. For each sample, 50 μL
of NeutrAvidin Agarose resin slurry (Pierce, 29200) was washed three
times in 10 mL of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate,
and 50 mM NaCl buffer) and then resuspended in 800 μL of IAP
buffer. Peptide solutions eluted from SP3 beads were then transferred
to the NeutrAvidin Agarose resin suspension, and the samples were
rotated for 2 h at RT. After incubation, the beads were pelleted by
centrifugation (2000g, 1 min) and washed (3 ×
1 mL of PBS, 3 × 1 mL water). Bound peptides were eluted twice
with 60 μL of 80% acetonitrile in MB water containing 0.1% FA.
The first 10 min incubation was at RT and the second one, at 72 °C.
The combined eluants were dried (SpeedVac), then reconstituted with
5% acetonitrile and 1% FA in MB water, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

## Database Construction
Subcellular location annotations
and glycosylation annotations from CellWhere Atlas (accessed 2208),
Human Protein Atlas (HPA) version 21.1, and UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2208_release)
were aggregated. Unique proteins were established by using UniProt
protein identifiers. Aggregated annotations were mined for specific
keywords (ex. “Cell Surface” or “Glycosylation”).
Proteins containing these keywords are reported in Table S1.

## Gene Enrichment Analysis
Enrichment
of Kyoto Encyclopedia
of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) 2021 and Gene Ontology (GO) Biological
Processes 2021 gene set library terms was performed using the GSEApy
package. Proteins identified by our
chemoproteomics studies were used as the background protein set. UniProtKB
protein identifiers were mapped to Entrez gene symbols as inputs for
Enrichr. p-values were computed from Fisher’s
exact test to determine the significance of each enriched term. The
negative logarithm of these p-values was calculated
using R.

## Cell Treatment
The treatments were as follows. H2O2: Cells were treated with 500 μM H2O2 for 1 h at 37 °C. S-Nitrosoglutathione
(GSNO): Cells were treated with 500 μM GSNO for 1 h at 37 °C.
Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP): Cells were treated with 5 mM
TCEP for 20 min at 37 °C. N-Acetylcysteine (NAC): Cells were
treated with 10 mM NAC for 1 h at 37 °C. 3,5-Bis(trifluoromethyl)aniline
chloroacetamide (KB03), acrylamide (KB14), and propynamide (6): Cells were treated with 50 μM
compound for 1 h at 37 °C.

## Gel and Western Blot
For streptavidin blot, lysates
after Cell Surface Capture (CSC) were normalized to 2 mg/mL and separated
on a 4–20% SDS-PAGE gel. Gels were transferred to nitrocellulose
membrane (Bio-Rad) and blocked in 2% (w/v) BSA in TBS-T (Tris-buffered
saline, 0.1% Tween 20) for 1 h at RT. Membranes were incubated with
a streptavidin-fluorophore conjugate overnight at 4 °C. Membranes
were imaged on a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc. For fluorescent gel, cells were
treated as described and labeled with 5 μM IA-Rho or 5 μM
Maleimide-Alexa594. After lysis, lysates were normalized to 2 mg/mL
and separated on a 4–20% SDS-PAGE gel. Gels were imaged on
Bio-Rad ChemiDoc. Reagents can be found in Table S6.

## Immunoprecipitation
Cell lysates
were incubated with
the antibody overnight at 4 °C. 25 μL of Protein G beads
was washed, added to the lysate, and incubated at 4 °C for 2
h with rotation. After washing the beads with lysis buffer 3 times,
25 μL of SDS loading dye was added to the sample and incubated
at 95 °C for 5 min. Supernatant was collected for gel analysis
after centrifugation at 12 000g for 2 min.

## Construction of LDLR Plasmids
Human LDLR gene was cloned
from HepG2 cell cDNA and was then sequentially subcloned into pEGFP-N1
using Gateway technology (Invitrogen). The LDLR mutations for the
pEGFP-N1-LDLR construct were introduced via site-directed mutagenesis.

## LDL Uptake Assay and Microscopy
HEK293T cells were
plated in a standard 24-well plate, with each well containing a poly d-lysine-coated glass coverslip (NC0672873, Fisher Scientific).
Cells were transfected with LDLR-GFP (WT, C75W, and C75W/C34W) for
48 h with Fugene 6 (Promega). Cells were starved in 5% LPDS medium
(MilliporeSigma, S5519) for 12 h. Cells were then incubated with 10
μg/mL Dil-LDL (Kalen Biomedical, 770230-9) for 50 min. After
Dil-LDL incubation, cells were washed three times with DPBS and fixed
with 4% PFA for 20 min at room temperature. After fixation, the cells
were washed three times with DPBS and incubated with Hoechst 33342
(H3570, Fisher Scientific). Cells were mounted on slides with Prolong
Diamond Antifade Mountant (P36961, ThermoFisher). Images were acquired
using an Inverted Leica TCS-SP8 Confocal Microscope (CNSI) and analyzed
by ImageJ.

## Liquid-Chromatography Tandem Mass-Spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) Analysis
The samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography
tandem mass
spectrometry using a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass
spectrometer. Peptides were fractionated online using an 18 cm long,
100 μM inner diameter (ID) fused silica capillary packed in-house
with bulk C18 reversed phase resin (particle size, 1.9 μm; pore
size, 100 Å; Dr. Maisch GmbH). The 70 min water–acetonitrile
gradient was delivered using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 system
at different flow rates (Buffer A, water with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic
acid; buffer B, 80% acetonitrile with 3% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid).
The detailed gradient includes 0–5 min from 3% to 10% at 300
nL/min, 5–64 min from 10% to 50% at 220 nL/min, and 64–70
min from 50% to 95% at 250 nL/min buffer B in buffer A (Table S7). Data was collected with charge exclusion
(1, 8, >8). Data was acquired using a Data-Dependent Acquisition
(DDA)
method consisting of a full MS1 scan (resolution = 120,000) followed
by sequential MS2 scans (resolution = 15,000) to utilize the remainder
of the 1 s cycle time. Precursor isolation window was set as 1.6,
and normalized collision energy was set as 30%. The MS data have been
deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner
repository , with the data set identifier
PXD042403. File details can be found in Table S8.

## Protein, Peptide, and Cysteine Identification
Raw data
collected by LC-MS/MS were converted to mzML and searched with MSFragger
(v3.3) and FragPipe (v19.0). The proteomic
workflow and its collection of tools was set as default, and PTMprophet
was enabled. Precursor and fragment
mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Missed cleavages were allowed up
to 1. Peptide length was set at 7–50, and peptide mass range
was set at 500–5000. For Cys-Surf identification, cysteine
residues were searched with differential modification C+463.2366.
For Cys-Surf oxidation and ligandability quantification, MS1 labeling
quantification was enabled with the Light set as C+463.2366 and the
Heavy set as C+467.2529. MS1 intensity ratio of heavy and light labeled
cysteine peptides was reported with Ionquant (v1.8.9). Calibrated
and deisotoped spectral files produced by FragPipe were retained and
reused for this analysis. The MS search data have been deposited to
the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with
the data set identifier PXD042403. File details can be found in Table S8. Custom python scripts were implemented
to compile labeled peptide data sets. Unique proteins, unique cysteines,
and unique peptides were quantified for each data set. Unique proteins
were established based on UniProt protein IDs. Unique peptides were
found based on sequences containing a modified cysteine residue. Unique
cysteines were classified by an identifier consisting of a UniProt
protein ID and the amino acid number of the modified cysteine (ProteinID_C#);
residue numbers were found by aligning the peptide sequence with the
corresponding UniProt protein sequence. When there are multiple cysteines
in one peptide, all of the modified cysteine residue numbers will
be reported as ProteinID_C#_C#.

## Data Analysis
For the cell surface annotation, our
customized localization database was used to cross-reference with
the proteins or cysteines identified. For isotopical quantification,
the medium of heavy over light ratios for the same cysteine residue
from cysteine peptides of different charges and miscleavages in the
same sample was calculated. Means of reported logged ratio values
for each condition (± H2O2 or ± GSNO
or ± TCEP or ± NAC or activated/naive T cells) were calculated
for all replicates per condition. Percentage oxidation for a cysteine
was calculated based on heavy to light ratio via the following formula:
(R/(1 + R)) × 100, using unlogged
ratios. When calculating the oxidation difference, relative oxidation
changes between two cellular conditions were reported by calculating
the change of heavy to light ratios between treated and untreated
samples.

## UniProtKB Disulfide and Domain Analysis
Counts of how
many identified proteins had UniProtKB annotations for disulfide bonds
and topological domain annotations were calculated based on matches
between the position of the identified residue and UniProtKB functional
region. Further parsing of UniProtKB disulfide bond site annotations
was extracted to obtain specific residues and amino acid numbers.
Exact amino acid positions of UniProtKB cysteines involved in disulfide
bonds or within regions of annotated domains were cross-referenced
with those of our cysteine identifiers. Cysteines with “extracellular”
topological domain annotations were classified as cysteines in extracellular
domains, while cysteines with “cytoplasmic”, “mitochondrial
intermembrane”, “mitochondrial matrix”, and “perinuclear
space” were classified as cysteines in intracellular domains.

## Statistics
For box plots in C,E,F, B, C, and S8B, the average
of replicates was reported as indicated. Statistical significance
was calculated with unpaired Student’s t tests
using R stats (v 3.6.2) if applicable. For bar plots in D, F,H, S1E, S2B, and S3, error bars were
calculated using standard deviation. Statistical significance was
calculated with unpaired Student’s t tests
using R stats (v 3.6.2) if applicable. For volcano plots in C, D, S8C,D, and S9A, variances were
calculated for each sample–condition pairing, and a corresponding
two-sample t test was performed using R stats (v
3.6.2) to generate p-values. p-values
were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini-Hochberg
procedure.

## Data Availability Statement
We have submitted
all data sets associated with this manuscript to the PRIDE repository
with the following identifying information: ID: PXD042403

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/jacsau.3c00707.Streptavidin blot of cell
surface capture (CSC), schematic
workflow of protein level SP3 clean up and CSC, stain free blot of
the input and eluted lysates of SP3 clean up with different conditions,
number of cell surface peptides captured with or without SP3 clean
up, unique counts of proteins, peptides, PSMs, and cysteines, top
10 GO biological processes enriched with proteins harboring ligandable
cell surface cysteines, predicted structure of HLA-A, IA-Rho gel and
western blot of HLA-A, Log2(H/L) data, difference of redox
states for representative cysteines quantified with Cys-Surf during
T cell activation, gel of cell surface cysteines, redox state data,
LDL uptake, antibodies and fluorescent probes used in this study,
LC conditions, and PRIDE data sets (PDF)
Table S1: Aggregated data set for (XLSX)
Table S2: Aggregated data
set for (XLSX)
Table S3:
Aggregated data set for (XLSX)
Table S4: Aggregated data set for (XLSX)
Table S5: Aggregated data set for (XLSX)

## Supplementary Material
au3c00707_si_001.pdf
au3c00707_si_002.xlsx
au3c00707_si_003.xlsx
au3c00707_si_004.xlsx
au3c00707_si_005.xlsx
au3c00707_si_006.xlsx

## Author Contributions
T.Y. and K.M.B.
conceived of the project. T.Y. and L.C. collected data. T.Y. and L.M.B.
performed data analysis. L.M.B. wrote software. T.Y. contributed to
the figures. T.Y. and K.M.B. wrote the manuscript with assistance
from all authors.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This study was supported by a Packard Fellowship
(K.M.B.), DP2 OD030950-01 (K.M.B.), National Institutes of Health
1P01HL146358-01 (P.T., K.M.B.), TRDRP T31DT1800 (T.Y.), and NIGMS
System and Integrative Biology 5T32GM008185-33 (L.M.B.). We thank
all members of the Backus laboratories for helpful suggestions and
the CFAR virology core 5P30 AI028697 for providing healthy donor blood.