319nihpaExtracellular vesicleExtracell VesiclePMC127077231270772312707723NIHMS21282064140950910.1016/j.vesic.2025.100098Systematic characterization of mammalian extracellular vesicles using nano-flow cytometry
VyzourekBenjamin T AndersonDirk SkrabalLuke HumphreyChristine E RomeroEduardo SchweigerBrittany KievitForrest MilesJeremy R PannierAngela K aDepartment of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USAbNebraska Center for Biotechnology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USAcDepartment of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, 68588, USAdNebraska Center for Biomolecular Communication (CIBC), University of Nebraska-Lincoln, USAeUSDA, U.S. Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, NE, USA*Corresponding author. apannier2@unl.edu (A.K. Pannier).
14112025610009810009817122025This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Extracell Vesicle

## Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanoscale, membrane-enclosed particles that transport bioactive cargo between cells and are increasingly studied for their potential in diagnostic and therapeutic applications. Advancing EV-based technologies for these applications depend on the ability to consistently isolate and characterize vesicle populations with defined biophysical and molecular properties. Efforts to obtain pure EV populations from cell culture systems are limited by inherent EV heterogeneity, exogenous particle contamination introduced by media supplements, and the co-isolation of non-vesicular contaminants. These challenges are further compounded by the limitations of conventional EV characterization platforms, which often lack the resolution to distinguish EVs from similarly sized non-vesicular particles or to capture molecular heterogeneity at the single-vesicle scale. Together, these limitations highlight the need for analytical approaches capable of resolving EV heterogeneity and enabling comparisons across EV production conditions and isolation strategies. In this study, we used nano-flow cytometry (nFCM) for high-resolution analysis of individual EVs, enabling simultaneous measurement of particle size, concentration, and tetraspanin expression. This approach revealed substantial amounts of exogenous particle contamination in media supplements commonly used to culture EV-producing cells, and quantified differences in EV purity and yield between methods used to isolate EVs from the media of the producing cells. Additionally, analysis of EVs derived from HEK293T, U-87 MG, and hMSC mammalian cell cultures revealed cell type-specific differences in EV production and expression of tetraspanin markers CD9, CD63, and CD81. Collectively, these results demonstrate that careful selection of media compositions and isolation strategies, combined with nFCM analytical techniques can resolve biological differences in EV populations.
Keywords: Extracellular vesicles, Nano-flow cytometry, Tetraspanins, Cell culture

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 Dec.

1.

## Introduction
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are cell-derived, non-replicating nanoparticles comprised of a lipid bilayer, measuring in sizes ranging from 40 to 1000 nm in diameter. EVs, including exosomes, microvesicles, and apoptotic bodies, are actively produced by all cell types in varying quantities. The biogenesis of exosomes (30–100 nm diameter) involves the formation of multivesicular endosomes (MVEs) through mechanisms including the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT) pathway, ceramide pathway, or syntenin-syndecan pathway. Alternatively, microvesicles (50–1000 nm diameter) and apoptotic bodies (100 nm–5 μm diameter) are generated through an outward protrusion and cleavage of the plasma membrane, driven by changes in the actin cytoskeleton or responses to cellular stress. , Unique biogenesis pathways of the various vesicle subtypes lead to the selective sorting of biomolecular cargo including nucleic acids, lipids, and proteins into EVs, resulting in a highly diverse particle population. , 
Interest in EVs has rapidly expanded due to their ability to encapsulate and transport these diverse biomolecules, facilitating communication to nearby and distant cells. , Among the cell models studied, human embryonic kidney 293T (HEK293T) cells have served as a standard system for EV research, owing to their rapid proliferation, high EV output, and ease of genetic modification. – Beyond studies to understand their native roles in cellular communication, extensive research has explored their applications in disease diagnostics , and therapeutics. , For instance, EVs hold promise as liquid biopsy tools for non-invasive diagnosis and monitoring of challenging diseases like glioblastomas, , where glioblastoma-derived EVs reflect the cellular state of their parental cells and can cross the blood-brain barrier, enabling access to diagnostically relevant material in circulating blood. Therapeutically, EVs derived from human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) replicate beneficial anti-inflammatory and regenerative properties of parental cells, which can be used as a cell-free therapy, but also making them attractive delivery vehicles for drugs or nucleic acids. – However, variations in EV size, membrane composition, and cargo, along with the presence of non-vesicular contaminants and exogenous particles present in complex biological sources of EVs (e.g., blood, tissues, cells), have complicated efforts to obtain well-defined EV populations for either of these applications.
Ex vivo, the production and isolation of pure EV populations remain a major challenge due to EV heterogeneity and the lack of reliable criteria to distinguish EVs from contaminant particles. While EVs have been derived from various biological sources, including urine, milk, and plasma, the most widely used source of EVs for research and therapeutic applications is tissue culture supernatant, also referred to as conditioned media, which is media used to culture EV-producing cells in vitro. However, this source often presents a challenge, as fetal bovine serum (FBS) supplementation to culture media introduces substantial amounts of FBS-derived EVs that compromise the purity of cell-derived EVs needed for downstream applications. To address this issue, various cell culture conditions have been explored for EV production, including reduced-serum media, serum-free media, and combinations of both. , Despite these efforts, no consensus exists on the optimal approach, as each method presents trade-offs, and the choice likely depends on the cell type and intended downstream applications.
The use of different media conditions for EV production in cell culture systems has contributed to parallel efforts aimed at refining EV isolation strategies that can improve sample purity, enhance preparation consistency, and support interstudy reproducibility. These investigations have explored techniques including ultracentrifugation, ultrafiltration, polymer-based precipitation, size-exclusion chromatography, immuno-magnetic extraction, density gradient ultracentrifugation, and tangential flow filtration, with some studies evaluating combinations of these approaches. – However, the lack of universal molecular markers for EVs and their subtypes limits the ability to selectively enrich the EV population during isolation. Commonly used isolation methods rely on nonspecific physical properties such as size or density to separate putative EVs from contaminating particles. In addition, the choice of isolation method is also often influenced by the biological source material, , although optimal pairings of isolation methods to source materials have not been clearly established. As a result, different isolation methods often yield compositionally distinct EV populations, which strongly influence downstream functional and diagnostic readouts and ultimately complicate comparisons across studies. 
Due to the wide variation of approaches to EV production and isolation, there is a pressing need for standardized characterization metrics that can assess EV yield and purity across diverse culture conditions and isolation techniques. However, widely used characterization strategies are often limited in their ability to comprehensively evaluate EVs within the context of non-vesicular co-isolated particles (e.g., protein aggregates, lipoproteins, nucleoproteins). Size is one of the most commonly used parameters for EV identification, but non-vesicular contaminants such as lipoproteins often overlap in both size and density with EVs, limiting the specificity of size-based approaches. Electron microscopy (EM) techniques can provide morphological validation of EV identity and approximate size, but these approaches are inherently low-throughput and typically capture only a small subset of the total particle population. In addition to morphological assessment by EM, other super-resolution microscopy techniques like direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (dSTORM) have been applied to assess EV surface marker clustering, but this method is similarly low-throughput for characterizing entire EV populations. Protein-based methods such as Western blots are commonly used to assess EV identity, through detection of tetraspanins CD9, CD63, or CD81, as these proteins are implicated in EV formation, uptake, and cargo transfer. – In these assays, isolated EVs are lysed, total protein is extracted, and then specific proteins are probed through antibodies, enabling the detection of tetraspanins across the entire EV population and confirming the presence of EV-associated proteins in the bulk sample. However, EV heterogeneity indicates that some vesicles may lack these markers, limiting the ability of bulk analysis techniques, like Western blotting, to capture the molecular diversity of the entire EV population. As a result, increasing attention has been directed toward efficient single-vesicle characterization methods that can resolve individual EVs within heterogeneous samples. 
Common single-vesicle characterization platforms used for profiling EVs include nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) and flow cytometry (FCM). , Each platform presents specific limitations in throughput, sensitivity, and phenotyping capabilities. For instance, NTA and fluorescence NTA (fl-NTA) are frequently used for high-throughput measurement of EV size and concentration based on particle diffusivity. However, the low scattering efficiency of EVs imposes a lower detection threshold of approximately 60–70 nm, limiting the sensitivity for smaller EVs. Additionally, conventional fl-NTA supports only single-marker detection per particle, restricting its use for comprehensive phenotypic profiling. FCM approaches offering enhanced phenotypic resolution have been increasingly applied to EV analysis at the single-vesicle scale. These instruments enable multiparametric analysis by simultaneously measuring light scatter and multiple fluorescent markers on individual EVs. , Compared to NTA, flow cytometers optimized for submicron detection offer improved resolution for quantifying EV size distributions. However, the flow cell dimensions and light scatter sensitivity of traditional FCM is intended for cells, causing nano-sized EVs to approach the lower limit of detection, which ultimately complicates measurement reproducibility. 
The optical limitations associated with NTA and FCM have led to the development of nano-flow cytometry (nFCM), a platform that combines improved optical sensitivity with high-resolution particle sizing and multiparametric phenotypic analysis at the single-vesicle scale. Evolving from the core principles of conventional FCM, nFCM incorporates optical and fluidic modifications such as reduced probe volumes, extended dwell times, and high-sensitivity detectors to enable measurement of EVs as small as 40 nm. Simultaneous measurement of EV size, concentration, and surface marker expression via nFCM allows for assessment of EV yield, purity, and population heterogeneity at the single-vesicle scale. In this study, we used the Flow NanoAnalyzer (NanoFCM) to measure size, concentration, and surface expression of tetraspanins CD9, CD63, and CD81 on EVs derived from standard HEK293T cells, along with clinically relevant U-87 MG glioblastoma cells and hMSCs. Through the generation of well-defined EV populations from cell cultures and development of characterization metrics that allow for comparisons of EV populations across distinct isolation methods and cell types, these measurements establish a reproducible analytical framework for comprehensive characterization of EV yield, purity, and subpopulation heterogeneity.

2.

## Materials and methods
2.1.

## Preparation and characterization of cell culture media
Before any interaction with cell cultures, four variations of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) (Gibco, Billings, Montana, USA) were prepared to evaluate the levels of exogenous particle contamination from the different media formulations based on FBS supplementation. The media included: 1) traditional media, containing 10 % FBS (Gibco, 10 % FBS); 2) commercial EV-depleted FBS containing 10 % Exo-FBS™ (System Biosciences, Palo Alto, CA; 10 % EF-FBS); 3) laboratory EV-depleted FBS described below (10 % EV-D FBS); and 4) media containing no FBS (Serum-Free). Preparation of EV-D FBS followed a method previously described by Kornilov et al. (2018), which has been shown to more effectively remove EV-like particles from FBS, when compared to other methods that make use of overnight ultracentrifugation for purification. Briefly, FBS (Gibco) was processed using Spin-X 20 mL Ultrafiltration Concentrators with a 100 kDa molecular weight cutoff (MWCO) PES membrane (Corning, England, UK). FBS was centrifuged at 3000×g until approximately 50 mL had passed through the filter. The filtrate was collected and sterilized by passing through a Nalgene 50 mL Rapid-Flow Conical Tube with an 0.22 μm αPES membrane filter (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and EV-D FBS was supplemented at 10 % by volume in final media preparation. All four media types contained sterile-filtered DMEM with 1 % penicillin-streptomycin and 1 % sodium pyruvate. Without any prior exposure to cell culture, each media type was subjected to EV isolation via ultracentrifugation and subsequent particle analysis using the Flow NanoAnalyzer (NanoFCM, Nottingham, UK), as described below.

2.2.

## Analysis of cytotoxicity in serum-free media
HEK293T cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) were cultured, as described below, until approximately 70 % confluence, before incubation in Serum-Free media for 5, 10, 15, or 20 h. Similarly, U-87 MG (ATCC) and adipose-derived hMSCs (Lonza, Walkersville, MD, USA) were cultured, as described below, until approximately 70 % confluence, before incubation in Serum-Free media for 20 h. After the designated incubation periods, cells were processed for live/dead staining using the Zombie Violet Fixable Viability Kit (BioLegend, San Diego, California, USA). Following the manufacturer’s protocol, Zombie Violet dye was diluted at 1:400 in sterile-filtered phosphate buffered saline (PBS), and 1 × 106 cells were resuspended in the diluted solution. Samples were incubated in the dark for 30 min at 4 °C, then centrifuged at 300×g for 8 min to pellet the cells. The staining solution was removed, and cells were resuspended in BD Cytofix Fixation Buffer (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) to preserve fluorescence intensities. Cell viability was measured using a CytoFLEX LX (Beckman Coulter, Indianapolis, IN, USA) equipped with a violet laser (405 nm). Flow cytometry data was analyzed using CytExpert software (Beckman Coulter) and a total of 30,000 cells were assessed per sample.

2.3.

## Mammalian cell culture for EV production
HEK293T cells were cultured in the 10 % FBS media type (see above). Cells were seeded at a density of 300,000 cells/mL in 75 cm2 tissue culture treated flasks (ThermoFisher) and incubated at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 for 24 h until reaching 70 % confluence. For EV production, the media was replaced with the Serum-Free media type (see above). For characterization of EVs produced by cells, cells were incubated for an additional 20 h and then media was collected, filtered through a Nalgene 50 mL Rapid-Flow Conical Tube with an 0.22 μm αPES membrane filter (ThermoFisher), and subjected to EV isolation via ultracentrifugation or ultrafiltration, as described below.
U-87 MG cells were cultured similarly in the 10 % FBS media type, seeded at a density of 80,000 cells/mL in 75 cm2 tissue culture treated flasks, and incubated at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 for 24 h until reaching 70 % confluence. Media was then replaced with the Serum-Free media, followed by an additional 20-h incubation. Media was then collected and filtered through a Nalgene 50 mL Rapid-Flow Conical Tube with an 0.22 μm αPES membrane filter (ThermoFisher), and subjected to EV isolation via ultracentrifugation, as described below.
Adipose-derived hMSCs confirmed to be positive for CD13, CD29, CD44, CD73, CD90, CD105, CD166, and negative for CD14, CD31, CD45 cell surface markers, were cultured in Minimum Essential Medium α (MEMα; Gibco) supplemented with 10 % FBS, 6 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), and 1 % penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were seeded at a density of 200,000 cells/mL in 75 cm2 tissue culture treated flasks and incubated at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 for 72 h, with a media change after 72 h. Cells were allowed to incubate for an additional 72 h until reaching 70 % confluence. For EV production, the media was then replaced with the equivalent Serum-Free media consisting of MEMα supplemented with only 6 mM L-glutamine, and 1 % penicillin-streptomycin followed by an additional 20-h incubation. Media was then collected and filtered through a Nalgene 50 mL Rapid-Flow Conical Tube with an 0.22 μm αPES membrane filter (ThermoFisher), and subjected to EV isolation via ultracentrifugation, as described below.
All human cells were acquired with informed consent using established ethical methods approved by appropriate authorities. All experiments and methods were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. All experimental protocols were approved by the University of Nebraska-Lincoln Institutional Biosafety Committee.

2.4.

## Isolation of EVs by ultracentrifugation
For quantification of HEK293T particle production under varying incubation periods, the conditioned serum-free media from HEK293T cells was filtered using a Millex-GP 0.22 μm PES membrane (Merck Millipore, Cork, Ireland) with a 10 mL plastic syringe (ThermoFisher). For characterization studies of EVs derived from HEK293Ts, U-87 MGs, and hMSCs, the conditioned serum-free media was collected and filtered through a Nalgene 50 mL Rapid-Flow Conical Tube with an 0.22 μm αPES membrane filter (ThermoFisher). Following the removal of cell debris and large apoptotic bodies through either filtration method, approximately 12 mL of cell media was transferred to 16 × 102 mm Ultra-Clear Centrifuge Tubes (Beckman Coulter). To achieve a total volume of 15 mL, 3 mL of sterile-filtered PBS was added to each tube. Samples were centrifuged at 32,000 RPM (~126,000×g at ravg = 10.97 cm) for 120 min at 4 °C using a SW-32-Ti rotor with SW-32.1-Ti buckets (Beckman Coulter).
After ultracentrifugation, the supernatant was aspirated, and the EV pellets were resuspended in sterile-filtered PBS. For the HEK293T serum-free time trial, EVs from each tube were resuspended in 200 μL of PBS and stored at 4 °C in separate aliquots for analysis by nFCM as described below. For HEK293T, U-87 MG, and hMSC-derived EVs intended for lipid and tetraspanin enrichment studies, pellets were resuspended in 100 μL of PBS, pooled into a single aliquot (600 μL total), and stored at 4 °C until characterization by nFCM and Cryo-EM, as described below.

2.5.

## Isolation of EVs by ultrafiltration
To isolate EVs using ultrafiltration, following the initial filtration step after cell culture (see above), 14 mL of culture media was divided between two Spin-X 20 mL Ultrafiltration Concentrators with a 100 kDa MWCO PES membrane (Corning, England, UK). The samples were spun at 5000×g for 10 min at 4 °C. This process was repeated until most of the media volume passed through the filters, leaving concentrated EVs. The concentrated EVs were resuspended in sterile-filtered PBS to a final volume of 600 μL, pooled into a single aliquot, and stored at 4 °C until analysis using nFCM as described below.

2.6.

## EV quantification and characterization using nano-flow cytometry
EVs were quantified and characterized using the Flow NanoAnalyzer (NanoFCM) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln’s Center for Biotechnology Flow Cytometry Core Facility. Prior to sample analysis, the Flow NanoAnalyzer was calibrated with 250 nm quality control beads (NanoFCM) to standardize particle count, and silica nanoparticles ranging from 68 nm to 155 nm (NanoFCM) to standardize particle size. The sampling pressure was set at 1 kPa, SS Decay was set to 10 %, the 488 nm blue laser was set to 10 mW for FITC lipid dye excitation, and the 640 nm red laser was set to 20 mW for APC antibody excitation. The EV solutions were diluted in sterile-filtered PBS to achieve counts of 2000–12,000 events per run, with typical dilutions of 1:20. Concentration and size distribution were calculated using NanoFCM Profession Version 2.304 software, corrected with background adjustment using matched controls that included sterile-filtered PBS prepared with the same concentrations of antibody and dye solution, or Triton X-100, to account for off-target fluorescence and exogenous particle noise.
The total particle concentration and size distribution were measured as described above to ensure that the particle concentration did not exceed 1.25 × 1010 particles/mL before immunofluorescent antibody or lipid dye treatment. For tetraspanin and lipid membrane characterization, EV aliquots were prepared, and immunofluorescent antibodies specific for CD9, CD63, and CD81 (BioLegend, Anti-human APC) were added to obtain working dilutions of 1:20, 1:200, and 1:100, and final working concentrations of 0.3 μg/mL, 1 μg/mL and 2 μg/mL, respectively ( ). Samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C in the dark with continuous shaking. Following antibody incubation, EVs were stained with MemGlow™ 488 Fluorogenic Plasma Membrane Probe (Cytoskeleton, Denver, CO, USA) at a working concentration of 0.04 nmol/mL and incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min ( ). To remove unbound antibodies and dye, samples were purified using Vesi-SEC microcolumns (Vesiculab, Nottingham, UK). Purified samples of approximately 50 μL were collected into sterile microcentrifuge tubes by centrifuging Vesi-SEC microcolumns at 1000×g for 1 min.
 
2.7.

## Characterization of EVs by Cryo-EM
The sizes and presence of EVs were further assessed through cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM) at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln’s Center for Biotechnology Cryo-EM Core Facility. Holey carbon electron microscopy grids (C-Flat 1.2/1.3, 300 mesh) were glow-discharged for 60 s at a negative current of 15 mA (PELCO easiGlow). Three microliters of EV samples from HEK293Ts (9.04 × 108 particles/mL), U-87 MGs (2.41 × 109 particles/mL), and hMSCs (3.59 × 109 particles/mL), with concentrations determined by nFCM, were placed on the glow-discharged grid. The grids were blotted for 5.5 s at 4 °C with 90 % relative humidity before being plunged into liquid ethane at a temperature of −183 °C using a Leica EM GP2 vitrification robot (Leica Microsystems). Images were acquired using a 200 keV Glacios, which is fringe-free corrected, and an energy-filtered cryo-transmission electron microscope, equipped with a Falcon 4i direct electron detector and utilizing the EPU automated acquisition software (ThermoFisher Scientific) with the “Faster Acquisition” mode (AFIS) enabled. A slit width of 10 eV was set for the Selectrics energy filter, along with a 20-μm condenser aperture, allowing for the collection of three shots per hole. Data were collected at an effective pixel size of 0.72 Å/pixel, a defocus of −3 μm, and an exposure time of 3.35 s with a total dose of 60.0 e/Å2.

2.8.

## Purity assessment of EV preparations
The purity of HEK293T, U-87 MG, and hMSC-derived EVs isolated through ultracentrifugation were assessed using Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to lyse vesicle membranes, following the method described by Tian et al. (2020). For each sample, three conditions were prepared in parallel: 1), EV suspensions with 1 % Triton X-100 (EV + Triton X-100); 2) EV suspensions with an equal volume of PBS (EV + PBS); 3) PBS with 1 % Triton X-100 (PBS + Triton X-100). All mixtures were incubated on ice for 60 min and then diluted 1:20 in PBS prior to nFCM analysis, ensuring that EV + Triton X-100, and EV + PBS samples were run at the same expected concentration. The PBS + Triton X-100 control was used to subtract detergent-associated background events. Because NanoFCM requires 2000–12,000 events for reliable concentration estimates, and detergent-treated samples frequently fell below this range, purity was calculated from event rates rather than particle concentrations, as , where C1 represents the event rate of the EV + PBS sample and C2 represents the event rate of the EV + Triton X-100 sample.

2.9.

## Data and statistical analyses
EV quantification and characterization studies were performed with three replicates on two separate days, resulting in (n = 6) for each individual tetraspanin analysis and (n = 18) for lipid studies. Cytotoxicity experiments were performed using three replicates per treatment group, each split into three technical replicates for flow cytometry analysis. The entire experiment was independently repeated on two separate days, resulting in (n = 6) replicates per condition. All data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Comparative analyses were completed using either unpaired t-tests or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey-post-test. The statistical difference is considered at p ≤ 0.05 (*), p ≤ 0.01 (**), p ≤ 0.001 (***), p ≤ 0.0001 (****). All statistics were evaluated using Prism GraphPad software (GraphPad Software, Inc., La Jolla, CA).

2.10.

## Defined Nomenclature for Particle Classification
To maintain accuracy in classification, for experiments lacking immunofluorescent antibody or lipid dye characterization, observed events cannot be definitively classified as EVs and are instead referred to as “particles.” Events positive for a lipid membrane may include EVs, as well as contaminating lipoproteins or other lipid-based non-EV structures and are therefore referred to as “lipid+ particles.” Measured events that test positive for both a lipid membrane and at least one tetraspanin marker (lipid/tetraspanin+) are classified as “EVs” throughout this study.

3.

## Results
3.1.

## Developing a serum-free culture system with minimal EV contamination and sustained cell viability
Fetal bovine serum (FBS) is widely used in cell culture media to provide essential growth factors to cells, but FBS also introduces exogenous EVs that can compromise the purity of downstream analyses. , , nFCM quantification of particles isolated via ultracentrifugation from media containing traditional 10 % FBS, 10 % ultrafiltration- EV-depleted FBS, and 10 % commercial Exo-FBS™ (reported to be free of CD63+ exosomes) demonstrated high particle abundance, whereas Serum-Free media contained statistically significant fewer particles ( ). Because of these low levels of contaminating EV-like particles in Serum-Free media (shown here and in previous publications), Serum-Free media has been used in studies to minimize exogenous particle contamination to cells that produce EVs. However, serum-free culture conditions have been shown to induce cytotoxic effects, leading to alterations in the abundance and molecular profiles of secreted EVs. – To determine how long serum-free conditions could be maintained without compromising cell viability, cytotoxicity levels in HEK293T cells were measured after 5, 10, 15, and 20 h in Serum-Free media. HEK293T cells maintained high levels of viability in Serum-Free media for up to 15 h, with a slight decline observed at 20 h compared to 10 % FBS supplemented controls ( ). Similarly, U-87 MGs and hMSCs retained high viability after 20 h in Serum-Free media compared to 10 % FBS supplemented controls ( ). The effect of serum-free conditions on particle production over time was also evaluated by isolating particles via ultracentrifugation from Serum-Free HEK293T conditioned media, followed by quantification using nFCM. A time-dependent increase in particle concentration was observed, with the highest concentration measured after 20 h of incubation ( ). Given the low levels of exogenous particle contamination, minimal impact on cell viability, and continued particle production, Serum-Free culture conditions were used for cell culture for the remainder of the study.

3.2.

## Evaluation of yield and purity metrics in EV isolation methods via nFCM
To address the need for metrics capable of evaluating yield and purity across isolation methods, we compared two commonly used isolation techniques, ultracentrifugation and ultrafiltration, which have been shown to yield particle populations that differ in these parameters. EVs, isolated from Serum-Free HEK293T conditioned media by ultracentrifugation or ultrafiltration, were stained with the lipid dye MemGlow™ 488 and then labeled with fluorescent antibodies against tetraspanins CD9, CD63, or CD81 to identify lipid+ particles and lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs by nFCM, respectively ( ). These measurements were performed to evaluate the utility of nFCM single-vesicle phenotyping for capturing differences in EV yield and purity between isolation methods.
A comparison of the average percentage of lipid+ particles isolated from conditioned cell media by ultracentrifugation or ultrafiltration demonstrated that ultracentrifugation yielded significantly more (p ≤ 0.0001) lipid+ particles, with an average of 73.7 ± 2.40 % compared to 41.8 ± 2.03 % with ultrafiltration ( ). However, the average lipid+ particle concentration was 5.58 × 108 ± 1.97 × 107 particles/mL for media samples purified by ultracentrifugation, compared to a significantly higher (p ≤ 0.0001) mean concentration of 3.58 × 109 ± 3.65 × 108 particles/mL in media purified by ultrafiltration ( ). Ultracentrifugation yielded lipid+ particles with an average size of 81.1 ± 0.941 nm, while ultrafiltration isolated lipid+ particles with a significantly higher (p ≤ 0.01) average size of 84.7 ± 0.750 nm ( ). The nFCM gating strategies and separation of particle populations are illustrated in the representative flow plots for each technique ( ).
 Analysis of HEK293T-derived particles isolated via ultracentrifugation or ultrafiltration revealed method-dependent differences in the abundance of lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs. Ultracentrifugation purification of media yielded a higher proportion of EVs than ultrafiltration, with mean percentages of 22.9 ± 2.78 % for lipid/CD9+, 14.8 ± 2.20 % for lipid/CD63+, and a significantly higher (p ≤ 0.01) average of 35.2 ± 2.52 % for lipid/CD81+ EVs, compared to yields of 17.5 ± 1.45 % for lipid/CD9+, 10.4 ± 1.34 % for lipid/CD63+, and 23.5 ± 1.08 % for lipid/CD81+ EVs from conditioned media purified by ultrafiltration ( ). Lipid/tetraspanin+ percentages were also used in relation to the total particle yield to calculate the concentrations of lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs obtained from each isolation method. Lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs isolated by ultracentrifugation were lower in concentration than those isolated by ultrafiltration, with an average of 1.83 × 108 ± 3.31 × 107, 1.11 × 108 ± 1.56 × 107, and 2.71 × 108 ± 2.94 × 107 particles/mL for lipid/CD9+, lipid/CD63+, and lipid/CD81+ EVs, respectively ( ). In comparison, ultrafiltration yielded significantly higher concentration of EVs relative to ultracentrifugation, with 1.80 × 109 ± 5.17 × 108 particles/mL for lipid/CD9+ (p ≤ 0.05), 1.13 × 109 ± 3.59 × 108 particles/mL for lipid/CD63+ (p ≤ 0.05), and 2.10 × 109 ± 4.32 × 108 particles/mL for lipid/CD81+ (p ≤ 0.01) EVs ( ). Regardless of tetraspanin labeled, EV isolation by ultrafiltration produced lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs at nearly 10-fold higher concentration compared to isolation by ultracentrifugation. Sizes of lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs from either isolation technique produced populations within the typical size range of EVs, with only slight variations observed. The average sizes of lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs isolated by ultracentrifugation were 92.8 ± 4.55 nm for lipid/CD63+ and 93.1 ± 3.46 nm for lipid/CD81+ EVs. Similarly, isolation of EVs from media via ultrafiltration yielded mean sizes of 87.5 ± 2.48 nm and 90.0 ± 0.760 nm for lipid/CD63+, and lipid/CD81+ EVs, respectively ( ). In contrast, lipid/CD9+ EVs isolated via ultracentrifugation had a significantly larger (p ≤ 0.01) mean size of 86.5 ± 0.482 nm compared to 82.9 ± 0.851 nm observed from ultrafiltration ( ). Finally, particles detected as tetraspanin-only positive (Q3) were interpreted as background signals arising from nonspecific antibody binding or other artifacts. The percentages of contaminating tetraspanin-only positive particles were less frequent in ultracentrifugation isolates than in ultrafiltration isolates, as shown in Q3 of the representative flow plots illustrating gating strategies and particle separations ( ). Because ultracentrifugation yielded particle populations with higher percentages of lipid+ particles and lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs, this method was selected for the remainder of the study.
 
3.3.

## Characterization of EVs from U-87 MGs and hMSCs using nFCM
To examine EV subpopulation differences from distinct cell types, we analyzed EVs derived from U-87 MG glioblastoma cells and hMSCs, both after culture in Serum-Free media. EVs were isolated from Serum-Free conditioned media using ultracentrifugation and labeled using the lipid dye MemGlow™ 488 and fluorescent antibodies targeting tetraspanins CD9, CD63, or CD81 ( ). A high percentage of lipid+ particles was observed in both U-87 MG and hMSC samples, with mean percentages of 92.5 ± 0.827 % and 91.0 ± 0.855 %, respectively ( ). Using the lipid+ percentages and total particle concentrations, the average lipid+ particle concentrations were calculated to be 1.88 × 109 ± 6.75 × 107 particles/mL from U-87 MGs and 3.64 × 109 ± 1.17 × 108 particles/mL from hMSCs ( ). The average diameter of lipid+ particles was 75.9 ± 0.257 nm from U-87 MGs and 68.8 ± 0.646 nm from hMSCs ( ). The gating strategies and corresponding separation of particle populations can be seen in the representative flow plots ( ).
 To quantify EVs positive for both a lipid membrane and a tetraspanin marker (CD9, CD63, or CD81), the lipid and immunofluorescent signals were analyzed collectively. U-87 MG-derived EV populations yielded average percentages of 55.1 ± 1.73 %, 51.2 ± 3.14 %, and 36.2 ± 4.58 % for lipid/CD9+, lipid/CD63+, and lipid/CD81+ EVs, respectively ( ). In contrast, hMSC-derived EVs yielded average percentages of 8.28 ± 0.943 % for lipid/CD9+, 21.2 ± 1.34 % for lipid/CD63+, and 20.8 ± 1.81 % for lipid/CD81+ EVs ( ). The average lipid/CD9+ EV concentration was 1.12 × 109 ± 6.82 × 107 particles/mL for U-87 MG-derived EVs and 3.24 × 108 ± 2.70 × 107 particles/mL for hMSC-derived EVs ( ). Similarly, average lipid/CD63+ EV concentrations were 1.03 × 109 ± 4.97 × 107 particles/mL for U-87 MG-derived EVs and 8.53 × 108 ± 8.35 × 107 particles/mL for hMSC-derived EVs. Finally, lipid/CD81+ EVs were present at average concentrations of 7.78 × 108 ± 1.51 × 108 particles/mL and 8.45 × 108 ± 1.07 × 108 particles/mL for U-87 MG and hMSC EVs, respectively ( ). For U-87 MG-derived EVs positive for lipid/CD9, lipid/CD63, and lipid/CD81, the average diameters were 77.0 ± 0.174 nm, 76.2 ± 0.416 nm, and 77.8 ± 0.519 nm, respectively ( ). Similarly, hMSC-derived EVs measured diameters were 80.2 ± 0.976 nm for lipid/CD9+, 69.7 ± 0.688 nm for lipid/CD63+, and 69.8 ± 1.52 nm for lipid/CD81+ ( ). The representative flow plots illustrate the gating strategies and demonstrate a clear separation of particle populations with lipid/tetraspanin-positive particles located in Q2 ( ).
 
3.4.

## Comparative analysis of purity, tetraspanin distribution, and tetraspanin enrichment in EVs from HEK293Ts, U-87 MGs, and hMSCs
To assess EV purity, we evaluated the sensitivity of EV preparations to Triton X-100 treatment, an established method for distinguishing intact vesicles from non-vesicular contaminants. Particles, isolated via ultracentrifugation of media from HEK293T, U-87 MG, and hMSC cultures, were measured for particle counts using nFCM and then treated with 1 % Triton X-100, and particle counts were measured again. Across all three EV preparations, Triton X-100 treatment resulted in a 4- to 5-fold reduction in particle event rates ( ). Using this approach, the estimated purities were 81.9 ± 2.45 % for HEK293T EVs, 78.5 ± 6.20 % for U-87 MG EV, and 73.6 ± 1.20 % for hMSC EVs ( ).
A comparative analysis of lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs from the three cell lines (HEK293T, U-87 MG, and hMSCs) showed distinct differences in tetraspanin proportion and abundance, along with variations in vesicle size ( ). nFCM analysis of HEK293T-derived EVs, isolated via ultracentrifugation, indicated that CD81 was the most abundant tetraspanin, exceeding the levels of CD9 and CD63 ( ). In contrast, U-87 MG-derived EVs displayed CD81 in the lowest abundance relative to EVs containing CD9 or CD63 ( ). The EVs purified from hMSC cultures also displayed a distinct tetraspanin profile, with CD9 levels nearly 3-fold lower than those of CD63 and CD81 ( ). Quantification of EV concentrations showed variation in secretion profiles among the three cell lines, with the concentration of CD63+ and CD81+ EVs being nearly an order of magnitude lower in HEK293T-derived EVs compared to those from U-87 MG cultures ( ). hMSC-derived EVs exhibited lipid/CD63+ EV concentrations that were intermediate between HEK293T and U-87 MG EV, while lipid/CD81+ EV concentrations in hMSCs exceeded those observed in the other two cell lines ( ). Cryo-EM imaging of EV populations confirmed the presence of phospholipid bilayer-enclosed vesicles in single images from HEK293T, hMSC, and U-87 MG samples ( ). Collectively the average percentages, concentrations, and sizes of lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs isolated from HEK293Ts, U-87 MGs, and hMSCs are summarized in .
 

4.

## Discussion
In this study, nFCM was used to address challenges in EV research, including the production of EV populations, standardized yield and purity metrics across EV isolation methods, and improved resolution of EV heterogeneity at the single-vesicle scale. Optimizing cell culture conditions was a critical first step in generating a well-defined EV population. There is a growing body of literature showing that supplementation of cell culture media with native FBS introduces exogenous FBS-derived EVs, which can compromise the purity of downstream EV isolations. , , nFCM quantification of particles isolated from media without any cell contact measured a 56-fold increase in particle concentration from media supplemented with 10 % FBS compared to Serum-Free media, confirming the substantial contribution of serum-derived particles ( ). While various techniques have been employed to reduce exogenous EV contamination in media, they often fail to achieve complete removal. Compared to Serum-Free media, we observed a 19-fold and 2-fold increase in particle concentrations in media supplemented with 10 % EV-depleted FBS and 10 % Exo-FBS™, respectively ( ). These findings reinforce that FBS-supplemented media unavoidably introduces exogenous EV-like particle contaminants. As an alternative approach, serum-free culture systems may reduce contamination levels, but further analysis is required to assess cell viability and optimize culture conditions.
To address the challenge of minimizing exogenous particle contamination while supporting cell viability, previous studies have cultured cells in serum-supplemented media until reaching approximately 70 % confluence, followed by a change to serum-free media for a defined incubation period for collecting cell-derived EVs without serum contamination. Although particle measurements from Serum-Free media detected some residual impurities ( ), they are in low abundance with size distributions differing from EVs, making serum-free culture an advantageous option for short-term incubation ( ). However, serum-free culture conditions are frequently associated with suboptimal cell growth and viability, – which must be carefully considered when using serum-free media for EV production. Previous studies have also demonstrated that serum-free incubation can induce cellular stress, altering both the quantity and composition of EVs secreted into the culture medium. – To minimize cytotoxicity in Serum-Free incubation, we performed a time-course study measuring HEK293T cell viability after 5, 10, 15, and 20 h of incubation. Our results indicate that HEK293T cells experience minimal cytotoxicity during Serum-Free incubation for up to 15 h and exhibit only a slight decline in viability after 20 h ( ). U-87 MG and hMSCs also maintained comparable viability in both Serum-Free and 10 % FBS control media conditions after 20 h of incubation ( ). Evaluation of HEK293T particle concentrations also revealed that EV production was maintained through the 20-h serum-free incubation period ( ). Together, these findings suggest that cells can tolerate serum-free conditions for a limited period during EV production, with cell type and incubation duration being critical factors. While our findings support the use of short-term serum-free culture to minimize exogenous contamination, the impact of these conditions on EV molecular composition remains unresolved in this study due to technical challenges, which will be important to address in future investigations.
Another major challenge in EV research is the inconsistency of EV preparations across studies driven by both the intrinsic heterogeneity of EVs, and methodological differences in isolation protocols. Given this challenge and the need for reproducible cross-study comparisons, we applied nFCM phenotyping to directly compare ultracentrifugation and ultrafiltration in metrics of lipid+ particle and lipid/tetraspanin+ EV recovery and purity ( and , respectively). These two widely used isolation methods were selected based on prior reports indicating differences in EV yield and purity, and were expected to produce distinct particle populations reflective of their respective separation mechanisms. The nFCM analysis demonstrated that samples purified by ultracentrifugation contained approximately 30 % more lipid+ particles than samples concentrated by ultrafiltration ( ), suggesting that ultracentrifugation isolates a significantly larger population of EV-like particles. Compared to ultrafiltration, purification by ultracentrifugation also produced higher average percentages of lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs ( ). However, compared to ultracentrifugation, purification of HEK293T EVs through ultrafiltration yielded approximately 6-fold higher concentrations of lipid+ particles ( ) and 8- to 10-fold higher concentrations of lipid/CD9+, lipid/CD63+, and lipid/CD81+ EVs ( ). These findings not only reinforce the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) position on tradeoffs in purity and yield between isolation methods, but also demonstrate that such tradeoffs can be quantified at the single-vesicle scale. Establishing a quantitative link between purity and recovery provides a framework for evaluating how isolation strategies may influence functional readouts, which may enhance reproducibility across EV studies.
Although overall yield and purity differed, the relative proportions of lipid/CD9+, lipid/CD63+, and lipid/CD81+ EVs from HEK293Ts were comparable between the two isolation methods ( ), suggesting that neither approach selectively enriches specific EV subpopulations based on tetraspanin expression. This finding is consistent with the known limitations of currently used isolation techniques, which cannot comprehensively purify all EVs due to the lack of universal markers. Instead, approaches like ultracentrifugation and ultrafiltration rely on nonspecific physical characteristics such as density and size, enriching for vesicle-sized particles without distinguishing between EV subtypes. Even so, these results demonstrate that phenotypic characterization via nFCM enables quantitative assessment of EV yield and purity, which may facilitate more consistent cross-study comparisons.
To evaluate EV heterogeneity between biologically distinct sources, we quantified lipid+ particles and lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs derived from U-87 MG glioblastoma cells and hMSCs ( and , respectively). By comparing tetraspanin expression profiles at the single-vesicle scale, we aimed to assess how EV subpopulations differ by cell source and to establish a framework for phenotypic characterization of EVs with diagnostic, , and therapeutic , relevance. This analysis revealed distinct tetraspanin abundance and distribution patterns between the two cell lines ( ). Consistent with Cifola et al. (2022), high percentages of tetraspanins CD9 and CD81 were detected in U-87 MG-derived EVs, with lipid/CD9+ EVs slightly more abundant than lipid/CD81+ EVs ( ). Expression of CD9, a tetraspanin associated with metastasis, has been shown to be upregulated in the U-87 MG cell line. Consistent with these findings, our results demonstrate a higher abundance of lipid/CD9+ EVs from U-87 MG cells compared to non-cancer cell lines HEK293T and hMSCs ( ).
Conversely, hMSC-derived EVs displayed higher percentages of lipid/CD63+ and lipid/CD81+ EVs compared to lipid/CD9+ EVs ( ). Previous studies have reported substantially lower CD9 levels in adipose-derived hMSC EVs compared to CD63 and CD81, as shown using Luminex-based multiplex bead-based immunoassays and traditional flow cytometry. , Our results confirmed this finding, with approximately 3-fold higher concentrations of lipid/CD63+ and lipid/CD81+ EVs compared to lipid/CD9+ EVs from adipose-derived hMSCs ( ). The minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles (MISEV2018) guidelines similarly note that compared to other cell types, CD9 is absent or present in low quantities in the plasma membrane and endosomes of some MSCs. This expression pattern is further supported by our findings, as the average percentage of lipid/CD9+ EVs from U-87 MG and HEK293T cells were substantially higher than that from hMSCs ( ). Collectively, these results reinforce that tetraspanin marker distributions are not uniform within or across cell types. The variability in tetraspanin expression highlights the limitations of treating CD9, CD63, and CD81 as universal EV identifiers and points to the need for application-specific marker selection in both diagnostic and therapeutic contexts.
Finally, the results presented here also support the current ISEV position, which states that not all EVs contain tetraspanins CD9, CD63, or CD81. For example, HEK293T EV purification via ultracentrifugation yielded a particle population in which 73.7 % were lipid+, yet only 22.9 %, 14.8 %, and 35.2 % were positive for both lipid and CD9, CD63, or CD81, respectively ( ). A similar trend was observed in hMSC-derived EVs, where the percentage of lipid+ particles exceeded that of lipid/CD63+ or lipid/CD81+ EVs by approximately 70 % ( ). The NanoFCM platform is limited to two fluorescence channels, which prevents simultaneous detection of multiple tetraspanins in addition to a lipid probe. Consequently, because individual vesicles may express multiple tetraspanins, the combined percentages of lipid/CD9+, lipid/CD63+, and lipid/CD81+ EVs do not reflect the total EV population, leaving the fraction of EVs that carry any tetraspanin unresolved in this study. However, the relative proportions of lipid+ particles and lipid/tetraspanin+ EVs measured here suggest that fluorescent antibody tagging of tetraspanins identifies specific EV subpopulations, but is insufficient to define the total EV population. Given the potential presence of protein aggregates and lipoproteins, as well as the possibility of lipophilic probe transfer, , we speculate that some of the lipid+ particle signals could be attributed to these impurities. However, detergent lysis with Triton X-100 indicated that the majority of particles detected by nFCM were EVs with estimated purities of 81.9 ± 2.45 %, 78.5 ± 6.20 %, and 73.6 ± 1.20 % for HEK293T, U-87 MG, and hMSC EVs, respectively ( ). Collectively, these results reinforce the need for single-vesicle resolution when characterizing EV populations. While bulk methods such as Western blots can confirm the presence of tetraspanins across a sample, they cannot measure the heterogeneity of surface marker expression among individual EVs or resolve the abundance of co-isolated contaminants.
In this study, a framework was established for the systematic characterization of mammalian EVs at the single-vesicle scale using nFCM. Our findings highlight the impact of FBS supplementation on exogenous particle contamination, which can be mitigated by a brief incubation of cells producing the EVs in serum-free media. Additionally, we quantified the tradeoffs between isolation methods in terms of EV purity and yield, which may offer a useful reference point for future efforts aimed at improving consistency across studies. Furthermore, these results demonstrate that different mammalian cell lines cultured in vitro secrete varying amounts of EVs and exhibit distinct distributions of the tetraspanin EV markers CD9, CD63, and CD81. In conclusion, this study provides not only comparative data on EV yield, purity, and tetraspanin distribution, but also a methodological foundation for single-vesicle characterization of EV populations. By quantifying tradeoffs in isolation methods and revealing subpopulation-specific tetraspanin marker patterns between distinct cell lines, this framework enables more reproducible cross-study comparisons and lays the groundwork for improved interpretation of EV functional and diagnostic studies.

## Supplementary Material
1

## Acknowledgements
This study was supported by federal funding from USDA-NIFA-AFRI Grant Number 2021-67015-34416 and National Institutes of Health (1 DP2 EB025760, 3 DP2 EB025760-01S1, 4 DP2 EB025760-02). We thank the Cryo-EM core facility (RRID: SCR_025012) and the Flow Cytometry core facility (RRID:SCR_024711), part of the Nebraska Center for Biotechnology at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The facilities and their instrumentation are supported by the Nebraska Research Initiative and NIH COBREs (NCBIC) GM113126. The authors would like to thank Sarah Plautz and Dr. Ivan Vechetti for technical assistance and Dr. Clay Lents and Dr. Lea Rempel for critical review of the manuscript. Mention of trade names or commercial products in this publication is solely for the purpose of providing specific information and does not imply recommendation of endorsement by the USDA. The USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Benjamin T. Vyzourek reports financial support was provided by University of Nebraska-Lincoln. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vesic.2025.100098.

## Footnotes
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Benjamin T. Vyzourek: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Dirk Anderson: Resources, Investigation, Formal analysis. Luke Skrabal: Investigation. Christine E. Humphrey: Investigation. Eduardo Romero: Resources. Brittany Schweiger: Resources. Forrest Kievit: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Jeremy R. Miles: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Angela K. Pannier: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
1