pmcJ Bone OncolJ Bone Oncol2843jboJournal of Bone Oncology2212-13662212-1374ElsevierPMC11460493PMC11460493.111460493114604933938163310.1016/j.jbo.2024.100635S2212-1374(24)00115-51006351ReviewThe efficacy and applicability of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell-based regimens for primary bone tumors: A comprehensive review of current evidence
BarzegariAtefehatefehbarzegari75@gmail.com SalemiFatemefatemesalemi77@gmail.com KamyabAmirhosseinahkamiab@gmail.com AratikatlaAdarshAdarsharatikatla21@rcsi.ie NejatiNegardr.nejati1998@yahoo.com ValizadeMojganmojgan.valizadeh1995@gmail.com EltounyEhabeeltouny@mgh.harvard.edu EbrahimiAlirezaaebrahimi@mgh.harvard.edu aCell Science Research Center, Kian Immune Cell Co, Tehran, IranbHematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation Research Center, Research Institute for Oncology, Hematology and Cell Therapy, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, IrancFaculty of Medicine, Fasa University of Medical Sciences, Fasa, IrandSchool of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, County Dublin, IrelandePediatric Cell and Gene Therapy Research Centre, Gene, Cell & Tissue Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, IranfSchool of Medicine, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, IrangDepartment of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States⁎Corresponding author at: School of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, County Dublin, Ireland. Adarsharatikatla21@rcsi.ie102024229202448470317100635216202417920241792024220920240810202402022026© 2024 The Author(s)2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Primary bone tumors (PBTs) have a low incidence, but cause significant patient burden.
•CAR T-cell therapy has been used in treating hematological malignancies.
•CAR T-cells may be used in solid tumors to improve survival in patients with PBTs.
•This review summarizes findings on CAR T-cell therapy for PBTs.

Primary bone tumors (PBT), although rare, could pose significant mortality and morbidity risks due to their high incidence of lung metastasis. Survival rates of patients with PBTs may vary based on the tumor type, therapeutic interventions, and the time of diagnosis. Despite advances in the management of patients with these tumors over the past four decades, the survival rates seem not to have improved significantly, implicating the need for novel therapeutic interventions. Surgical resection with wide margins, radiotherapy, and systemic chemotherapy are the main lines of treatment for PBTs. Neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy, along with emerging immunotherapeutic approaches such as chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy, have the potential to improve the treatment outcomes for patients with PBTs. CAR-T cell therapy has been introduced as an option in hematologic malignancies, with FDA approval for several CD19-targeting CAR-T cell products. This review aims to highlight the potential of immunotherapeutic strategies, specifically CAR T cell therapy, in managing PBTs.

## Keywords
Primary bone tumors (PBT)Osteosarcoma (OS)Ewing’s sarcoma (ES)Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR)CAR T cellpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY

## Abbreviations
PBTPrimary Bone Tumor
CARChimeric Antigen Receptor
TMETumor Microenvironment
TAATumor-Associated Antigen
TSATumor-Specific Antigen
OSOsteosarcoma
ESEwing Sarcoma
DFSDisease-Free Survival
FDAFood and Drug Administration
ICIsImmune Checkpoint Inhibitors
ACTAdoptive Cell Transfer
scFvSingle-Chain Variable Fragment
TRUCKsT Cells Redirected for Universal Cytokine Killing
MHCMajor Histocompatibility Complex
CRSCytokine Release Syndrome
ICANSImmune Effector Cell-Associated Neurotoxicity Syndrome
HLHHemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
VEGFR2Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor 2
HER2Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2
GD2Disialoganglioside
NKG2DNatural Killer Group 2D
ILInterleukin
ROR1Receptor Tyrosine Kinase-Like Orphan Receptor 1
ALPL-1Alkaline Phosphatase-1
PD-1Programmed Cell Death Protein 1
PD-L1Programmed Death-Ligand 1
NKNatural Killer
CAFCancer-Associated Fibroblasts
CRISPRClustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
ANPAtrial Natriuretic Peptide
GM-CSFGranulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor
ICERIncremental Cost-Effectiveness Ratio
QALYQuality-Adjusted Life Year
ALCAMActivated Leukocyte Cell Adhesion Molecule
TCRT Cell Receptor
1

## Introduction
1.1

## Burden of primary bone tumors
Primary bone tumors (PBT) are estimated to account for nearly 0.2 % of all malignant tumors; however, the true incidence is difficult to determine due to the rarity of these tumors . PBTs have an age-specific distribution; chondrosarcoma is the most common PBT among the adult population, while osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma are more commonly seen in children and adolescents , , . Despite the low prevalence and incidence rate of these tumors, the associated mortality and morbidity are extremely high, mainly due to the high risk of lung metastasis in osteosarcomas and Ewing's sarcomas , .
Osteosarcoma, Ewing's sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma are estimated to have around 53.9 %, 50.6 %, and 75.2 % 5-year survival, respectively . This chance of survival might decrease to as low as 20 % in the presence of metastasis . Nearly 30 % of patients with PBT are at risk of developing relapse during the five years post-operatively, with the most commonly reported sites of recurrence reported to be lung and bone metastases , , . Despite significant advances in screening and diagnosis processes, the survival rates of patients with PBT appeared to remain the same during the past forty years , , , highlighting the critical need for novel therapeutic interventions .
Surgical resection, radiotherapy, and systemic therapy constitute the principal modalities for the treatment of primary bone tumors. Enbloc resection with wide margins is the preferred primary therapy for resectable osseous lesions , , . Multiple analyses have demonstrated that achieving negative histological margins correlates with prolonged disease-free survival (DFS) exceeding 5 years postoperatively , . Adjuvant radiotherapy may be utilized to enhance local control and DFS when combined with surgery, while definitive radiotherapy alone could be considered for surgically unresectable tumors , . Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is often used to downstage high-grade bone tumors before resection, whereas adjuvant chemotherapy may be warranted following excision if positive margins are encountered . Standard multi-agent chemotherapy protocols incorporating doxorubicin, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide, and high-dose methotrexate are among the main options , . Emerging immunotherapeutic-based regimens have also exhibited potential in the treatment of PBTs.
Scientists have been trying to utilize different immunotherapeutic treatments for several types of hematological malignancies and solid tumors, including PBTs, over the past decades . This approach to fighting against cancer cells could be categorized into different methodologies, including, but not limited to, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), tumor vaccines, oncolytic virotherapy, and adoptive cell transfer (ACT). One of the strategies that has shown potential, particularly in hematological malignancies, is the use of ACT utilizing chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) engineered T-cells able to detect tumor-associated/specific antigens (TAAs/TSAs) and mount potent anti-neoplastic responses , , .

1.2

## Current indications of CAR T cell therapy
CAR T cell therapy has been approved to use in lymphoma, leukemia, and multiple myeloma . Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has authorized six total CAR T-cell products, four of which target cluster of differentiation 19 (CD19) including Tisagenlecleucel for refractory adult lymphoma, Axicabtagene ciloleucel for adult non-Hodgkin lymphoma and diffuse large B cell lymphoma, Brexucabtagene autoleucel for refractory mantle cell lymphoma and adult B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and lisocabtagene maraleucel for adult large B cell lymphoma , , , ; two non-CD19 CAR T cells have also been indicated in multiple myeloma, including Ciltacabtagene autoleucel and Idecabtagene vicleucel , , .

1.3

## Generations of CAR T cells
CAR-T cell therapy, a variation of ACT in which T cells are designed to target TSAs or TAAs to bypass human leukocyte antigen restrictions, has different types of designs . A CAR is a synthetically engineered receptor containing an extracellular antigen recognition domain, made of a single-chain variable fragment (scFv) with variable light (VL) and heavy (VH) chains made from one monoclonal antibody, one transmembrane domain, and intracellular signaling domain(s) originating from the T cell receptor CD3-z chain, that can interact with co-stimulatory molecules such as CD28 or 41BB to activate T cells , , , . In contrast to conventional T cells that require attachment of the T cell receptor (TCR) to peptide-major histocompatibility complex (pMHC) ligands for activation, CAR-engineered T cells incorporate extracellular scFv, conferring antigen specificity in an MHC-unrestricted manner, allowing CAR T cells to recognize and elicit cytotoxicity against tumor cells expressing the TSA/TAAs , . Following adoptive transfer, CAR-engineered T cells demonstrate potent proliferation and can establish long-term memory with sustained cytotoxic functionality against malignant cells displaying the antigens .
The first generation of CARs contains only a TCR-derived CD3 constant signaling domain that is incapable of maintaining stability on the T cell membrane, resulting in poor persistence and efficacy . Second and third generations incorporated one or more co-stimulatory signaling domains like CD28 or 4-1BB for full activation and survival signals, dramatically improving CAR T cell expansion, persistence, and anti-tumor role . Currently, second-generation CARs are the most common format used clinically . Fourth-generation CAR T cells, known as T cells redirected for universal cytokine killing (TRUCKs), enhance second- and third-generation platforms by incorporating a construct that enables the inducible production of proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-12, IL-15, IL-18, or IL-21 . TRUCKs, delivering a substantial amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines to the tumor location, stimulate T cells and recruit immunologic cells to the tumor microenvironment (TME) ( ) , , . Fifth-generation CARs have the same frame as those of the 2nd generation as well as a shorter cytoplasmic IL-2 receptor chain domain, which links to the transcription factor STAT3, enabling immunosuppressive-resistant CAR T cells . 

1.4

## Obstacles to broader application of CAR T cell therapy
While promising, broader clinical applications of CAR T cell therapy encounter significant challenges that have so far limited its utility. The clinical success of CAR T cell treatments has been constrained by adverse events, such as on-target, off-tumor toxicity arising from the recognition of healthy tissue expressing the target antigen . CAR T cell activation and an excessive immunological response might create a condition known as cytokine release syndrome (CRS), known by significantly high levels of inflammatory cytokines , . Additional toxicities of CAR T cell therapy are immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS), defined by cerebral edema and encephalopathy, as well as delayed immune-mediated effects such as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), resulting from unconstrained activation the T cells . While CD19-directed CAR T cell therapy was outstandingly successful in hematologic cancers, outcomes in solid tumors have been more limited, attributed to multiple challenges, including paucity of TSAs, intratumoral and intertumoral antigen heterogeneity and antigen loss, defective migration and tumor invasion of the T cells, immunosuppressive networks in the TME comprising cytokines, immunosuppressive cell subsets, and physical barriers impeding access to tumor cells , , . Further enhancements in suicide gene platforms, cytokine-signaling disruption, and CAR T cell engineering are imperative to improve therapeutic indices. To overcome TME-imposed limitations, next-generation armored CAR T cells co-expressing immunostimulatory cytokines and fourth-generation CARs incorporating custom costimulatory domains have been developed , . Local delivery of the T cells and employment of oncolytic viruses encoding chemotactic factors to enhance tumor-homing are also under evaluation , , . Continued refinement of case models recapitulating the TME, together with efforts to enhance CAR T cell engineering, represent critical priorities to achieve meaningful clinical efficacy against solid tumors.

1.5

## Study objective
CAR T cell therapy is a promising immunotherapy for targeting neoplastic cells in PBTs, enhancing anti-tumor immunity, and potentially extending patient survival. Various TSAs and TAAs have been identified as potential targets for CAR T cell approaches in PBTs, such as VEGFR2, IGF1R, ROR1, GD2, IL-11 receptor chain, B7-H3 (CD276), EphA2, attIL-12, HER2, ALP-1, and NKG2D ligands ( ) , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , . CAR T cells targeting TAAs could directly kill PBT cells expressing these antigens and prevent metastasis by recognizing disseminated cancer cells with the same antigens .While several studies have investigated CAR T cell therapy for bone malignancies, there is no comprehensive evaluation comparing findings across different target antigens and CAR constructs. This systematic review aimed to consolidate data and identify the most promising antigen and CAR construct combinations to optimize clinical outcomes, addressing the challenges of improving patient outcomes and managing disease burden , , . 

1.6

## Search strategy
Our query was conducted across PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, Web of Science (ISI), and Google Scholar databases. Using medical subject headings (MESH) and non-MESH terms, the query was changed to match each database format without date restriction until November 2023 (Supplementary S1). Following the entry of each paper into the reference management tool and the removal of duplicates, the bibliographies were manually explored to find further applicable sources. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statements were employed to present the results . The study protocol was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) database (registration code: CRD42024507352).

1.7

## Eligibility criteria
All studies evaluating the application of CAR T cells in PBTs were included in this systematic review. The entry requirements were to report the outcomes related to CAR T cell-based therapeutics, including efficacy, safety, and survival. The studies that focused on other ACT approaches, such as engineered natural killer cells and those reporting irrelevant outcomes, were excluded. Additionally, the publication type is limited to full-length articles, excluding systematic reviews, meta-analyses, letters, editorials, commentaries, conference abstracts, and case reports.

1.8

## Data extraction
Two independent researchers (A.B. and F.S.) retrieved the first author's name, publication date, location, type of cancer, target antigen, CAR-T cell generation, co-stimulatory domain, combination therapy, and T cell culture medium interleukins. Specific assay results that evaluated cytotoxicity and cytokine secretion were extracted from in vitro studies. For in vivo studies, the following items were extracted: mouse strain, randomization, all models of experiment conduction, control group, type of tumor cell and cancer cell injection, number of injected tumor cells and cancer cells, tumor size before and after CAR-T cell therapy, cytotoxicity and cytokine release assays implicated, tumor infiltration and metastasis, and survival evaluation.

1.9

## Quality assessment
Two authors (A.B. and N.N.) separately evaluated all the included papers and discussed the controversies with the third author (F.S. and A.E.). Animal studies were rated according to SYRCLE’s risk of bias . Due to the lack of a standard quality assessment tool for in vitro studies, a checklist was designed based on Tran et al.’s systematic review and meta-analysis .

2

## Results
2.1

## Study characteristics
The initial scan yielded 3301 potentially relevant references, including 564 from PubMed, 2170 from Scopus, and 209 from Web of Science ( ). Following the deletion of 358 duplicates, the titles and abstracts of the residual 2943 cases were evaluated for relevance to PBT and CAR T cell therapy. This filtering process led to 297 articles for full-text review. Studies were excluded if they examined non-CAR T cell immunotherapies (n = 19) , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , dendritic cell (n = 4) , , , or natural killer cell therapies (n = 5) , , , , non-osseous solid tumors (n = 3) , , , , , hematological malignancies (n = 1) , or were non-English language publications (n = 1) . Twenty-eight papers had the qualifying requirements and were incorporated into this study. Of the 28 eligible studies, 16 were performed both in vitro and in vivo experiments , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , 7 were performed in vitro , , , , , , , 4 were in vivo animal studies , , , , and one was a clinical trial . 
To date, the only phase I/II clinical trial (NCT00902044) evaluating the efficacy of CAR T cell therapy in eradication of PBT has utilized HER-2 as target antigen . Nineteen patients with recurrent/refractory HER2-positive osteosarcoma (n = 16) or Ewing sarcoma (n = 1) received escalating doses (1 × 104–1 × 108 cells/m2) of HER2-targeted CD28-containing CAR T cells . Fourteen of 16 patients administered ≥1 × 105 HER2-CAR T cells demonstrated detectable peripheral blood levels for at least 3 h post-infusion . Furthermore, durable HER2-CAR T cell engraftment (>6 weeks) was observed in 7 of 9 evaluable patients receiving ≥1 × 106 cells . HER2-CAR T infiltration into tumor sites was confirmed in two resected lesions. Of evaluable cases, 23 % experienced stable disease for 3–14 months, including one patient with 90 % tumor necrosis after surgical resection. The median survival rate across all treated individuals was 10.3 months (range 5.1–29.1 months) .
 , , provide an overview of the qualifying studies' attributes. They were published from 2008 to 2023 in the United States (n = 14) , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Germany (n = 8) , , , , , , , , China (n = 4) , , , , Norway (n = 1) and Spain (n = 1) . 

2.2

## Quality assessment
SYRCLE’s risk of bias was utilized for checking the quality of the animal studies, and the findings revealed that 19 cases had good quality and one case was of moderate quality ( ). For in vitro studies, a checklist was designed and showed 20 high and 3 moderate qualities ( ). 

3

## Discussion
3.1

## Primary bone tumor-associated antigens
The identification and exact targeting of the tumor, which minimizes damage to healthy tissue, is a vital stage in the production of CAR-T cells. The following antigens were evaluated as a potential target of CAR T cells in PBTs:
3.1.1

## Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)
HER2 is overexpressed in up to 60 % of primary osteosarcomas, causing aggressive disease and poor prognosis . The HER receptor tyrosine kinase family (HER1-4) can signal as homo- and heterodimers when attached to epidermal growth factor, changing growth factor beta, and other ligands, propagating downstream oncogenic cascades . Notably, HER2 lacks a cognate ligand but participates in aberrant signaling through heterodimerization . Recent studies highlight that targeting HER2 could be a promising strategy for PBT treatment.
In a study by Rainusso et al., CAR T cells targeting HER2 were found to eliminate the growth and metastasis of chemo-resistant osteosarcoma cells that had high HER2 and CD133 expression . They also demonstrated that HER2 CAR T cells have the potential to eradicate osteosarcoma tumor-initiating cells (TICs), using sarcosphere assays and orthotopic tumor models . These findings suggest that incorporating HER2-targeted immunotherapy could help overcome drug resistance by eliminating TICs. According to Ahmed et al., HER2 CAR T cells increased survival by shrinking tumors in mice with localized tumors . This led to rapid shrinkage of lung metastasis in all treated animals in the systemic model, and no recurrence was seen after 6 months . The HER2 CAR-T cells without DNMT3A or GM18 in their structure also showed strong anti-tumor activity, as shown by improved survival rates in LM7 model with intraperitoneal locoregional osteosarcoma , . These findings were further supported by clinical evidence.
In a phase I/II trial utilizing HER2-CAR T cells, Ahmed et al. observed that this approach has the potential to eradicate the tumor without causing dose-limiting side effects . The study showed that 4 out of 19 subjects had stable disease, and one had 90 % tumor necrosis on histology after resection, resulting in an overall survival of 29 months for the cohort . Collectively, these results substantiate HER2 as an emerging immunotherapy candidate to combat drug-resistant and metastatic osteosarcoma.

3.1.2

## Disialoganglioside (GD2)
GD2 is a surface glycolipid antigen that is only found in certain solid tumors, like osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma , . A third-generation GD2-targeted CAR with CD28, OX40, and CD3z signaling domains was developed by Long et al. and was shown to kill GD2-positive sarcomas in vitro . However, the accumulation of immunosuppressive myeloid cells hampered the anti-tumor effects in vivo . Wiebel et al. noted that greater GD2 expression in osteosarcoma cells is associated with cell confluency, boosting the efficacy of GD2-specific CAR T cells in vitro . Additionally, CAR T cells targeting GD2 were able to lower pulmonary metastasis and delay tumor growth in human Ewing sarcoma xenografts in mice , . Noteworthy to mention, elevated PD-L1 on tumor cells can limit GD2-CAR T cell activity by stimulating PD-1-mediated T cell apoptosis . Chulanetra et al. demonstrated that sub-therapeutic doxorubicin could synergistically enhance GD2-CAR T cell potency against osteosarcoma in vivo by alleviating cell cycle arrest , .
Altvater et al. found that HLA-G1 on myeloid bystander cells decreased GD2-specific CAR T cell degranulation, opposing Ewing sarcoma cells . Charan et al. revealed that co-administration of GD2-CAR T cells with an HGF-neutralizing antibody effectively controlled both primary and metastatic Ewing sarcoma growth by overcoming deleterious c-Met/HGF signaling . Meanwhile, epigenetic or genetic manipulations upregulating GD2 expression in Ewing sarcoma were found to improve GD2-CAR T cell therapy . Finally, Park et al. confirmed bispecific antibody engagement of GD2 elicited T cell-mediated antitumor effects against osteosarcoma in vivo, further improved by PD-L1 checkpoint blockade . These results suggest that GD2 could serve as an effective target for CAR T cell therapy for PBTs, enhancing its effectiveness through methods that surpass immune resistance within the tumor microenvironment.

3.1.3

## Natural killer group 2D (NKG2D)
The expression of NKG2D ligands on various tumor types and immunosuppressive cells inside TME makes them potential targets for cancer treatments . Several immune cells, including CD8+T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells, express NKG2D receptors . NKG2D and NKG2D receptor interactions are necessary for NK-cell destruction of osteosarcoma TICs . In recent years, the role of NKG2D and its ligands in malignancies has garnered more attention.
One of the main ligands for activating the immunological receptor NKG2D is MHC class I chain-related molecule A (MICA) . In osteosarcoma, MICA expression was higher than in benign tumors and healthy bone tissue . Lehner et al. demonstrated that NKG2D CAR T cells efficiently destroyed Ewing sarcoma cells that expressed NKG2D-L . The use of mRNA transfection or lentiviral transduction to create CAR T cells contributed to higher surface expression of chNKG2D . Nevertheless, the introduction of mRNA resulted in reduced ligand-triggered receptor down-regulation while also leading to elevated TNF-α secretion and enhanced Fas ligand expression in CAR T cells .
Lucía Fernandez et al. designed CAR T cells derived from CD45RA cells engineered to express an NKG2D, exhibited cytotoxicity against osteosarcoma cells, in vitro . In an orthotopic osteosarcoma model, NKG2D-redirected memory CAR T cells succeeded in restricting tumor growth and extending longevity without evidence of toxicity . The selectivity against malignant cells and safety profile substantiated the potential of retargeting memory T cell subsets towards NKG2D ligands frequently overexpressed in osteosarcomas and Ewing sarcomas . Although more evidence is needed to assess the efficacy and safety of NKG2D-redirected CAR-T cell therapy, this approach has the potential to eradicate osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma cells.

3.1.4

## B7-H3 (CD276)
B7-H3 (CD276) is an immunologic checkpoint ligand aberrantly expressed across numerous solid tumor types, including osteosarcoma, associated with metastatic progression and poor prognosis . This immunomodulator's surface-bound and soluble isoforms both contribute to immune evasion . Specifically, B7-H3 triggers STAT3 signaling cascades in tumor cells, promoting proliferation and metastasis, while interacting with counter-receptors like TLT-2 on T cells antagonizes activation , . This cancer-selective profile and function have spurred translational interest in targeting B7-H3 by CAR T cell therapy in solid tumors. Preclinical studies have shown that locally applying B7-H3-targeted CAR T cells could effectively kill orthotopic and metastatic tumors in a number of cases, such as pancreatic cancer and neuroblastoma, without causing any obvious side effects .
Biazzi et al. found that anti-B7-H3 CAR T cells have the potential to eradicate chordoma cells and prevent multicellular spheroid outgrowth . In osteosarcoma, Majzner et al. revealed that B7-H3-redirected CAR T cells achieved dose-dependent ablation of disseminated tumors in vivo, eliminating lesions and prolonging survival using both local and systemic T cell administration in aggressive and immunosuppressive xenograft models . It has also been shown that CD28 costimulatory domains in these constructs could lead to rapid proliferation while 4-1 BB had greater persistence, suggesting that aggressive tumors may require CD28 co-stimulation due to its rapid expansion, while tumors with a slow progress rate could be controlled with 4-1BB CAR-T cells .
Zhang et al. conducted in vitro cytotoxicity tests on osteosarcoma cell lines using third-generation CAR-T cells that specifically targeted the B7-H3 antigen, demonstrating a significant tumor-suppressive effect . Furthermore, mice given intermediate high and high dosages of CAR T cells targeting B7-H3 in a metastasizing orthotopic model of osteosarcoma resulted in longer than six-month survival . Initial results suggest that evaluating B7-H3 as a potential CAR target for osteosarcoma in more realistic models that replicate the clinical conditions of these tumors is warranted.

3.1.5

## Interleukin 11 receptor alpha subunit (IL-11Rα)
Interleukin-11 (IL-11) is an inflammatory cytokine implicated in osteosarcoma pathogenesis based on the aberrant overexpression of its cell surface cognate receptor, IL-11Rα, in tumor tissues . Lewis et al. used an orthotopic model to show that osteosarcoma lesions in mice and humans had higher amounts of IL-11Rα than healthy bone-forming and lung areas . Subsequent investigations by Huang et al. revealed that IL-11Rα-targeted CAR T cells could cause existing lung metastases of osteosarcoma to recede in vivo, reducing metastatic tumor burden and improving survival compared to controls . An alternate strategy explored by Zhao et al. involved identifying a cyclic IL-11Rα binding peptide able to initiate cancer cell death upon receptor engagement through direct mitochondrial membrane disruption rather than immunogenic modulation . Both approaches underscore the clinical relevance of disrupting IL-11/IL-11Rα signaling as an emerging therapeutic vulnerability in osteosarcoma.

3.1.6

## Ephrin type-A receptor 2 (EphA2)
EphA2 is a key receptor in Ephrin signaling that has a crucial function in embryonic growth and is also involved in different cancers, such as osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma . Kenneth Hsu et al. tested the efficiency of CAR T cells that target EphA2 for the selective killing of human osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma tumor cells . EphA2 CAR T cells demonstrated significant cytotoxicity to sarcoma cell lines that expressed EphA2 and produced more cytokines than control cells . In animal experiments, they showed that EphA2 CAR T cells could induce cell death in tumor cells that expressed EphA2, leading to reduced tumor size and prolonged survival . They also showed that EphA2-targeting CAR T cells could migrate and locate the metastatic tumor sites . These outcomes indicate that EphA2-directed CAR T cells are specific and could be used as a potential target to eradicate Ewing sarcoma and osteosarcoma .

3.1.7

## Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2)
VEGFR2 is a vital membrane protein in endothelial cells, involved in the process of angiogenesis . VEGFR2 is activated by the binding of VEGF ligands, which trigger intricate signaling pathways that regulate cell growth, movement, and survival . In Ewing sarcoma, VEGFR2 has a critical role, as it is expressed in both endothelial and tumor cells of some patients , . Preclinical investigations showed that VEGFR2-specific CAR T cells could penetrate solid tumors and inhibit tumor growth in several syngeneic mouse models . The transfer of VEGFR2-redirected CAR T cells is currently being assessed in early-phase trials, including patients with solid cancers (NCT01218867) .
Englisch et al. created CAR T cells that target VEGFR2, a key protein in endothelial cells linked to Ewing sarcoma tumors . When they encountered target cells, these CAR T cells had clear antigen-specific degranulation and cytokine generation . Interestingly, the study showed that CARs with shorter or medium-length hinge domains had better functional performance . The antigen-specific responses observed in this study demonstrate the potential of this approach and also emphasize the relevance of VEGFR2 as a therapeutic target in the complex scenario of Ewing sarcoma treatment.

3.1.8

## HLA-G and HLA-E
HLA-G and -E, in contrast to typical HLA molecules, are not involved in the presentation of peptides to T cell receptors and have little genetic variability . With just seven isoforms (HLA-G1 to G7), HLA-G has a restricted polymorphism , . These isoforms interact with inhibitory receptors expressed on T cells, NK cells, and myeloid cells, thereby reducing the multiplication and activities of effector cells , , . HLA-E interacts with the inhibitory receptor NKG2A/CD94, which has a detrimental effect on the cytotoxic activity of CD8+T cells and NK cells , , . Tumor cells frequently overexpress HLA-G and HLA-E, and inflammatory cytokines can induce expression , , . Experimental data indicates that HLA-G and HLA-E play significant roles in immune escape in a variety of malignancies , , .
Altvater et al. found that while HLA-G1 on myeloid bystander cells reduces CART degranulation responses to Ewing sarcoma cells, HLA-G1 expression on endothelial stem cells does not directly inhibit cytolysis by GD2-specific CAR T cells . Also the most human Ewing sarcoma biopsies showed HLA-E on tumor or infiltrating myeloid cells, induced in Ewing sarcoma cells by IFN-stimulation and GD2-specific CAR T cell therapy . However, neither myeloid bystander cells nor Ewing sarcoma tumor cells could produce HLA-E to reduce the anticancer effector activities of CAR T cells . This implies that antigen-specific T lymphocytes are mostly unaffected functionally by non-classical HLA molecules.

3.1.9

## Activated leukocyte cell Adhesion Molecule (ALCAM) CD166
Type I transmembrane protein CD166, also known as Activated Leukocyte Cell Adhesion Molecule (ALCAM), is from the immunoglobulin family . It is thought that ALCAM is involved in several biological processes, such as hematopoiesis, inflammatory reactions, and neuronal outgrowth . Prior research has indicated that it is linked to the development of many different cancers, including osteosarcoma , , , .
Wang et al. found that several osteosarcoma cell lines express CD166, and that CD166-targeted CAR-T cells integrated with 4-1BB cytotoxically treated osteosarcoma both in vitro and in vivo . CD166-specific CAR-T cells eradicated osteosarcoma cells by the release of cytotoxic molecules like granzyme B and perforin . The application of CD166-specific CAR-T cells causes a tangible drop in tumor growth and a concomitant extension of survival . Moreover, the 4-1BB co-stimulation played a crucial role in fostering the generation of Th1 cytokines, pivotal for attracting antigen-presenting cells and augmenting the overall immune response . These findings underscore the multifaceted potential of CD166-specific CAR-T cells in combating osteosarcoma, not only through direct cytotoxicity but also by leveraging co-stimulatory mechanisms to enhance T cell functionality . This research contributes valuable insights to the ongoing optimization of CAR-T cell therapies, providing a foundation for further refinement and potential applications in the targeted treatment of osteosarcoma. However, the expression of CD166 by normal tissues might hinder the clinical translation of this approach.

3.1.10

## Receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1)
Tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 1 (ROR1) is a type I transmembrane protein . Researchers have linked its overexpression to several malignancies, including B-CLL, mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), breast cancer, B-ALL, lung adenocarcinoma, melanoma, and ovarian cancer , , , , . ROR1 participates in the migration and invasiveness of tumor cells , . In recent years, ROR1 has gained significant attention as an immunotherapeutic target. Cirimtuzumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody that blocks ROR1 signaling, showed promise and safety in a phase I trial for individuals with relapsed, progressed, or unresponsive chronic lymphoblastic leukemia .
Huang et al. provided evidence that ROR1 exhibits significant expression levels in sarcoma cell lines, including Ewing sarcoma, osteosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, and fibrosarcoma . Transferring ROR1 and IGF1R CAR T cells from a patient with sarcoma also slowed down the growth of osteosarcoma xenograft models that were already set up and placed in NSG mice . Furthermore, IGF1R and ROR1 CAR T cell infusion increased survival in a localized sarcoma model of NOD/SCID mice . Their findings suggested that SB-modified CAR T cells can efficiently target both IGF1R and ROR1, and these CAR T cells have potential for treatment of high-risk sarcoma .
While Preclinical studies indicate that ROR1-targeted CAR-T cells are potentially effective in the treatment of osteosarcoma, the safety of ROR1-targeted CAR-T cells should be clearly evaluated. ROR1 expression has been found in normal human tissues, including the body and the gastric antrum , .

3.1.11

## Cell-surface vimentin (CSV)
Vimentin, a protein in the intermediate filament family, is essential for cell integrity and stress resistance . However, overexpression of this protein in various epithelial malignancies, including prostate, gastrointestinal tract, central nervous system, breast, melanoma, and lung cancer, accelerates tumor growth and invasion, leading to a poor prognosis , , . The CSV-targeted peptide VNTANST was fused before the stop codon of the IL-12 p40-encoding sequence to create tumor-targeted IL-12 (ttIL12) , . The administration of ttIL12 therapy was demonstrated to be more effective than wtIL12 therapy in both murine and canine tumor models, resulting from the accumulation of ttIL12 protein at the tumors sites , .
Hu et al. studied the efficacy and security of intrathecal infusions of tumor-targeted T lymphocytes armed with TtIL-12 (attIL12) for the treatment of xenograft tumors generated from osteosarcoma patients . The study demonstrated that attIL12-T cells selectively attacked tumor cells that expressed cell-surface vimentin . This led to more effector T cells and more interferon γ generated in the tumor environment, leading to the increased number of dendritic cells and secondary T-cell responses . Both attIL12- and aIL12-T-cell transfer removed the harmful effects of peripheral cytokine release . This approach clarifies the secure use of IL-12-based T-cell therapy for bone tumors, as it can also enhance anticancer activity and lower the toxicity of already available T-cell therapies .

3.1.12

## Alkaline phosphatase-1 (ALPL-1)
The protein ALPL-1, also known as Alkaline Phosphatase Isoform 1, is a member of the alkaline phosphatase family, which contains enzymes that participate in dephosphorylation reactions . Within primary bone tumors, particularly osteosarcoma (OS), ALPL-1 is widely and specifically localized to the outer layer of OS cells, including both primary and metastatic bone tumors , . The identification of this target was achieved by the use of target protein antibodies (TP-1 and TP-3) that specifically react to ALPL-1, therefore defining it as a specific and applicable marker for osteosarcoma .
A higher level of ALPL-1 in osteosarcoma tissues, but its low cross-reactivity with other healthy tissues, especially those not associated with bone, confirms its significance as a useful therapeutic target . Significantly, whereas serum alkaline phosphatase is frequently increased in bone disease, the distinct membrane location of ALPL-1 in osteosarcoma sets it apart from other isoforms and non-tumor tissues .
Employing CAR T cells to target ALPL-1 offers a highly promising approach because of its high tumor specificity and low off-target toxicity . In preclinical settings, Mensali et al. that CAR T cells, which were modified to identify ALPL-1, exhibited significant cytotoxicity against OS cells . Furthermore, these CAR T cells had not any adverse effects on healthy tissues such as normal stem cells . Hence, ALPL-1 presents a convincing ratio between tumor specificity and safety, so allowing additional clinical exploration in CAR T-cell treatment for osteosarcoma .

3.2

## Tumor microenvironment in the context of primary bone tumors
TME is an intricate ecosystem comprised of cells that coevolve with cancer cells and offer assistance during malignant transformation . TME is composed of both cancerous and non-cancerous tumor cells, including cells derived from bone marrow, immune and inflammatory cells, endothelial and pericytes that constitute the tumor vasculature, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), and extracellular matrix (ECM) that interacts intricately with the tumor , . These interactions lead to the production of growth factors, chemokines, and matrix-degrading enzymes, which aid in the growth and invasion of the tumor . ECM is a multifaceted system made up of macromolecules with unique biomechanical, biochemical, and physical characteristics . This system becomes dysregulated during the process of carcinogenesis, which promotes the development of a microenvironment that is conducive to tumor angiogenesis and inflammation . Immunologic phenotypes and capacities of TME cells impact the course of the disease , .
To overcome the immunosuppressive TME, one approach is to create modified CAR-T cells that release immune-stimulating cytokines like IL-12, IL-18, or IL-15 , . This modification helps to change the immunomodulatory environment, leading to improved survival of CAR-T cells . It also promotes the recruitment of natural immune cells like T-memory cells and central-memory T cells, which are more suited to survival, and long-term presence .
Tregs essentially effect immune suppression within the TME by producing TGF-β, which reduces the effectiveness of immune cells . Consequently, several methods have been created to block the TGF-β receptor on the outside of CAR-T cells. Using CAR-T cells with dominant negative receptors (DNRs) for TGF-β is one such tactic . Furthermore, by activating the receptor that has been modified to convey signals via co-stimulatory domains, including 4-1BB or IL-12 stimulatory signals, swing receptors with chimeric signaling domains can change TGF-β signals . Similarly, by joining the extracellular domain of IL-4 and the endo-domain of IL-7, cytokine receptors can transform inhibitory impulses into stimulating signals , . The native TGF-β receptor-II (TGFBR2) gene in CAR-T cells was rendered inactive using the CRISPR/Cas9 technique, which increased the efficacy of CAR-T cells . As a result, TGF-β activity was suppressed, which decreased the production of Treg cells and stopped the exhaustion of CAR-T cells .
TME is made up of tumor cells that support stromal cells, microvasculature, cytokines, and chemokines . Tumor-associated macrophages, regulatory T cells, and Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are examples of suppressive immunological components that are more prevalent in the TME than in normal tissues and can limit T cell activation . Tumor-associated macrophages, regulatory T cells, and MDSCs are examples of suppressive immunological components that are more prevalent in the TME and can limit T cell activation . Furthermore, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) generate an intercellular matrix on the outer edge of the TME and in the surrounding microvasculature, forming a physical barrier that prevents CAR-T cell penetration . Both the “chemical barrier” and the “physical barrier” hinder the CAR-T cells’ ability to enter and invade, reducing their efficacy.
Tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) and T lymphocytes proliferate in the particular microenvironment of osteosarcoma due to its porous extracellular matrix and copious blood flow, which creates an immune-tolerant milieu that is conducive to tumor chemotaxis , . One way to overcome this barrier is to use immune antibodies, like TAM, MDSC, and regulatory T-cell antibodies, to diminish suppressive immune elements . Fourth-generation CAR-T cells are currently believed to regulate the TME because of their capability to release cytokines that enhance the immune response close to tumor cells .
Some studies suggest that increasing the number of immunological checkpoints on T cells with a combination of PD-L1 inhibitors will reduce immunosuppression . Additionally, chemotherapeutic drugs have the ability to lower TME immune factor levels . Targets such as FAP and CSPG4 that affect the microvasculature or tumor mesenchyme may also help CAR-T cells penetrate the TME . Furthermore, local CAR-T cell injection could boost the cells' concentration and enhance their ability to infiltrate . In addition, according to Li et al., employing porous microneedle patches during local injection may enhance infiltration even more without compromising activity, offering a path forward for useful therapeutic applications , .
T cells that have reached T-cell exhaustion have altered transcriptional patterns, including persistent overexpression of inhibitory receptors, as well as diminished effector activity , . T-cell anergy is a common condition in TME and can work similarly to T-cell depletion, resulting in an inability to respond to antigens . The main factors influencing CAR T-cell depletion in the TME are low oxygen and nutrition levels . T cells are attentive to their metabolic surroundings, and research indicates that the metabolic state of the TME has a significant impact on T-cell efficacy . It is probable that the same metabolic factors that decrease the immune system will also affect the efficacy of CAR T cells in primary bone tumors. Furthermore, large concentrations of cancer cells in tumors lead to an extreme increase in antigen stimulation . As a result, CAR T cells are continuously activated by antigens, which influences the onset of fatigue , . Research suggests that frequent exposure to antigens downregulates effector gene expression and inhibits mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, leading to epigenetic modifications . These alterations in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation drive T cells towards terminal exhaustion and also influence mitochondrial depolarization . Constant activation also causes CAR T cells to produce more PD-1, which interacts with PDL-1 on cancer cells, raising the risk of death and pushing the cells into fatigue . Furthermore, metabolic reprogramming could be changed to cause T cells to become fatigued even when PDL-1 expression on cancer cells is not directly interacting with T cells , , . Several pieces of evidence suggest that using less differentiated T cells to create CAR T-cells would lead to persistence in the TME as producing long-term memory response would be easier for these cells , .

3.3

## Side effects
Developing effective strategies to reduce and manage side effects associated with CAR T cell therapy is crucial for the successful clinical translation of this approach. Preventing and addressing cytokine release syndrome (CRS), immunological effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS), and cytopenias are of the utmost importance in this regard .
Patients who receive CAR T cells may experience neurologic toxicities such as disorientation, delirium, aphasia, obtundation, myoclonus, and seizures . The exact underlying mechanism causing these neurological side effects is still unknown . Early identification of CRS is a key factor. In CAR T-cell, the time frame for onset of CRS is days to weeks after infusion, when T-cell expansion is at its peak . The FDA recently approved tocilizumab for the treatment of severe or life-threatening CAR T-cell-induced CRS in adults and pediatric patients ≥2 years old . Tocilizumab is a monoclonal antibody that competes with IL-6 to bind its receptor, IL-6R, thereby inhibiting IL-6 signaling in effector cells . Steroids are the initial treatment for isolated ICANS . Tocilizumab exhibits a limited ability to pass the blood–brain barrier, demonstrates restricted effectiveness in treating neurological toxicity, and has been linked to severity of neurotoxicity . Therefore, the administration of tocilizumab should only occur in cases of ICANS in conjunction with ongoing CRS. .
CRS, caused by the fast activation of the immune system triggered by CAR-T cells, is the primary and most important complication associated with this treatment . CRS presents with an initial fever and may develop into a dangerous condition characterized by capillary leakage, low oxygen saturation, and lower blood pressure . The clinical manifestations of CRS are correlated with the activation of T cells and elevated levels of cytokines, such as IL-6 and IL-1 . The use of Anakinra, an IL-1 receptor (IL-1R) antagonist that has shown success in CRS treatment, is one of the several medications that have been developed to prevent CRS . Additionally, previous reports suggest that CAR-T cells secreting an IL-1R antagonist can mitigate CRS-related death . Another strategy for treating CRS and neurotoxicity could be to neutralize granulocyte–macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), a significant monocyte activator . A novel study has demonstrated that catecholamine blocking using atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) can prevent the production of cytokines and catecholamines that arise from the interaction of CAR-T cells and tumors .

3.4

## Cost considerations and practicality of CAR-T cells
Despite its potential, the cost-effectiveness of CAR T-cell therapy remains a subject of controversy due to its high price and the uncertainty surrounding the clinical evidence . Beyond the significant cost associated with producing CAR T-cell therapy, the process and facility costs further intensify the financial burden, especially given the frequent occurrence of adverse events such as CRS. Compared to conventional treatments, clinical studies employed relatively brief follow-up periods . Furthermore, there is a lack of head-to-head comparative effectiveness data, which is a crucial consideration when assessing the cost-effectiveness of a novel treatment . Further evidence is required to mitigate the uncertainty surrounding the current clinical data to thoroughly assess the long-term effectiveness, safety, and comparative efficacy .
The FDA granted approval for the utilization of CAR T-cell therapy in patients diagnosed with relapsed or refractory (R/R) follicular lymphoma (FL) who have undergone at least two prior lines of therapy . However, its cost-effectiveness in comparison to other contemporary therapeutic approaches for relapsed or refractory follicular lymphoma (R/R FL) remains uncertain . Idecabtagene vicleucel (Ide-cel) and cilta-cel were found to have higher quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) compared to salvage chemotherapy, with Ide-cel showing an incremental increase of 1.19 QALYs and Cilta-cel showing an incremental increase of 3.31 QALYs . The incremental costs associated with Ide-cel were US$140,693, resulting in an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of $118,229 per QALY . Similarly, Cilta-cel had incremental costs of $119,806, leading to an ICER of $36,195 per QALY . The difficulties of cross-trial comparison and the use of artificial or historical control arms have hampered many of these analyses, as all CAR T-cell treatments first received approval through single-arm clinical trials .

3.5

## Strategies to enhance the efficacy of CAR T cell therapy
The application of CAR-T cell-based cell therapy in the treatment of hematological malignancies is an emerging field that has provided optimism to patients previously believed to be incurable. CAR T cell therapies aimed at solid tumors encounter substantial difficulties because of the scarcity, reduced persistence, and impaired functionality of T cells within the immunosuppressive TME , . Prolonged exposure to antigens results in T cell fatigue and a transformation of CD8 + T cells into a condition resembling NK-like cells, consequently limiting their efficacy . Furthermore, dose-limiting toxicities (DLTs), such as off-target effects when normal tissues with low amounts of the target antigen are erroneously targeted, limit the capacity to increase therapeutic doses . In an attempt to address these problems, the implementation of regional delivery of CAR T cells directly to the tumor site, alongside immunological checkpoint inhibitors such PD-1 inhibition, was carried out . It showed promising results by reducing systemic toxicity and achieving consistent clinical and metabolic responses in particular patients . However, it is still crucial to improve the effectiveness of CAR T cells in solid tumors. Next-generation CAR T cells adopt various approaches to address key limitations in cancer immunotherapy .
Antigen escape, in which tumors downregulate or lose expression of the targeted antigen, is another challenge that could result in tumor recurrence. An effective approach is the dual administration of CAR T cells that targets distinct antigens. Applying this approach increases the probability of achieving effective elimination of tumors, even in cases when one antigen is no longer detectable . Alternatively, it is possible to modify a single T cell by incorporating dual CAR constructions or a single CAR construct specifically engineered for recognition two distinct antigens. This novel dual or tandem CAR strategy allows T cells to specifically target cancers that express either one or both antigens, so it decreases the risk of tumor evasion and recurrence .
Optimizing CAR T cells functions can be accomplished through the use of a number of techniques. T cells Redirected for Universal Cytokine Killing (TRUCKs) are designed to secrete cytokines, such IL-12 or IL-18, through activation . These cytokines play a crucial role in enhancing the overall antitumoral immune response by recruiting and activating additional immune cells within the TME . Also switch receptors are designed for transforming inhibitory signals from the tumor, into stimulatory signals . Furthermore, another targeted approach which minimizes the incidence of systemic adverse effects is orthogonal cytokine receptors like the orthogonal IL-2 receptor (oIL2R) . These receptors are tailored to respond exclusively to specific cytokines by proliferating CAR T cell selectively .
Advanced approaches are required to mitigate the on-target/off-tumor toxicities associated with CAR T cell therapies, particularly when healthy and malignant cells display similar antigens. In the context of hematological malignancies, CAR T cells are used in combination with genetically modified hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), where the stem cells lack the target antigen (for instance CD33 knock-out HSCT) . Thereby, healthy cells from CAR T cell-mediated destruction will be safeguarded . The synNotch receptor allows T cells to differentiate between normal and tumor cells through combinatorial antigen recognition . In “AND-gated” circuits, activation of one receptor induces transcription of a second, guaranteeing that tumor cells expressing both antigens are targeted but normal cells are spared . “NOT-gated” circuits include an inhibitory receptor, which prevents T cell activation when antigens unique to normal cells are recognized. , , . However, this approach does not fully eliminate the risk of tumor relapse due to antigen escape, such as antigen loss or downregulation .
Additionally, gene editing and gene ablation techniques using highly specific, and effective tools have opened up new possibilities. In order to minimize the need for personalized T cell modifications, universal CAR-T cells were made through advanced genome editing techniques such as Zinc Finger Nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and CRISPR/Cas9 . These tools can create universal off-the-shelf CAR T cells, are pre-manufactured, genetically modified T cells that can be used in multiple patients without the need for personalization. They target the native TCR to reduce graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and native HLA to prevent graft rejection . Engineered Zinc Finger Nucleases (ZFNs) eliminate the endogenous TCR, effectively lowering the risk of GVHD . Meanwhile, in order to target and disrupt the TCRα and CD52 genes the TALEN technology was developed which led to production of UCART19, an allogeneic, off-the-shelf CAR T cell product designed to be TCR-negative . The CRISPR/Cas9 system enables precise and efficient disruption of multiple gene loci, therefore can affect CAR T efficiency in various aspects .
CRISPR/Cas9 modalities allow for accurate elimination of native TCRs in T cells, therefore promoting the expression of transgenic receptors specific to malignancy. As a consequence, there is an enhanced and highly responsive anti-cancer reaction, which greatly enhances the efficiency of modified T cells in specifically targeting and eradicating cancer cells , . Also, this novel approach facilitates the generation of allogeneic donor cells and highly effective effector T cells resistant to tumor-induced inhibitory pathways such as PD-1 and CTLA4 . To optimize targeting of multiple genetic sites, a protocol incorporating several guide RNAs within a CAR lentiviral vector was employed. In conjunction with an adeno-associated virus (AAV) repair matrix, it was used to directly insert CAR-encoding DNA into the TCR alpha chain locus , . This strategy yielded TCR-negative, CAR-positive T cells with enhanced potency compared to conventional lentivirally transduced CAR T cells, attributed to their more physiological, TCR-like regulation of CAR expression, promising outcomes in targeting solid tumors .
TCR-negative off-the-shelf CAR T cells face the challenge of rejection by the patient’s T cells due to HLA mismatches, leading to immune recognition and elimination. Lymphodepletion through chemotherapy or irradiation prior to CAR T infusion may delay this rejection until immune recovery . The persistence of universal HLA-positive CAR T cells is expected to be limited . Since prolonged CAR T cell persistence, as seen with CART19, has been linked to increased responses in multiple studies, early rejection of these cells could result in reduced and short-lived therapeutic responses , . To address this, gene-editing technologies, such as beta-2-microglobulin and TCR knockout have been developed to generate HLA class I-negative CAR T cells, preventing rejection . In the absence of TCR, HLA class I, and PD-1, triple gene-edited CAR T cells demonstrate decreased alloreactivity, preserve functional potency, and alleviate (GVHD) . Enhanced resistance to apoptosis without compromising efficacy has been achieved by engineering Fas-resistant CAR T cells , . Although the lack of HLA class I on allogeneic CAR T cells can inhibit T cell rejection, it may still result in detection and elimination by natural killer (NK) cells as a consequence of the “missing self” reaction . To tackle this issue, the implementation of mandatory expression of non-classical HLA molecules, such HLA-E and HLA-G, has been proposed as a method to protect CAR T cells against death caused by NK-cells . Additionally, recent approaches include the overexpression of Siglec-7 and Siglec-9 ligands to reduce NK-cell toxicity toward HLA-negative CAR T cells . Making a bank of universal CAR T cells from HLA-homozygous donors is another way to reduce rejection . Although gene-editing technologies show potential for developing universally reproducible CAR T cells, additional study is required to include them into expansion procedures of therapeutic quality. Thorough evaluation of both effectiveness and safety is also necessary in early-phase trials.

3.6

## Strengths and limitations
This study had some strengths. This initial systematic review study investigated CAR T cells' efficacy in PBTs and specified the challenges and opportunities for improving the overall survival of patients with such difficult-to-manage conditions. However, our study had some limitations in the preparation and interpretation of findings. First, the number of investigated studies and patients was limited. Second, the quantitative data synthesis was not reachable to conclude the superiority of one target antigen over another. Moreover, further clinical trial studies with clinical reports of overall survival, tumor recurrence, and response to treatment are highly required.

3.7

## Current state and future directions
CAR-engineered T-cell therapy presented tremendous promise for certain hematologic malignancies, leading to regulatory approvals targeting CD19-positive diseases . However, the application of this approach for patients with solid tumors, such as PBTs, has proven challenging thus far. Impediments likely include a paucity of target antigens, dynamic neoantigen expression, curtailed engineered T cell fitness and tumor infiltration, and profound immunosuppressive mechanisms propagated by the bone TME .
This study has tried to systematically review the CAR construct designs, giving a methodical look at the potential of CAR-redirected T cell approaches against PBTs. Across evaluated antigens such as HER2, GD2, and VEGFR2, preclinical activity has been documented to varying extents in osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma models, providing impetus for continued investigation. However, pronounced therapeutic effects in patients have yet to be achieved, underscoring the likely need for combinatorial modalities to mitigate immunosuppressive mechanisms and further empower CAR effector cell function. The early-phase investigation analysis reveals promising antigen candidates and emphasizes the need for next-generation CAR T cells resistant to stromal inhibition to achieve clinical gains against bone malignancies. Emerging technologies and strategies hold promise for overcoming these challenges and expanding the applicability of CAR T-cell therapies.

## Availability of data and material
All the data utilized for this study is available in the published literature, and the curated Excel files related to this systematic review will be available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author.

## Funding
The authors did not receive any financial support for the research and authorship. The article processing charges (APCs) related to the publication of this study were supported by the corresponding author’s institution (School of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, County Dublin, Ireland).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Atefeh Barzegari: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Fateme Salemi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Amirhossein Kamyab: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Resources, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Adarsh Aratikatla: Writing – review & editing. Negar Nejati: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Software, Formal analysis, Data curation. Mojgan Valizade: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. Ehab Eltouny: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Methodology, Data curation, Conceptualization. Alireza Ebrahimi: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbo.2024.100635.