3686acsomegaACS OmegaACS OmegaAmerican Chemical SocietyPMC1239198812391988123919884089330410.1021/acsomega.5c01135Hydrogel-Mediated
Sustained Delivery of Corneal Epithelial
Extracellular Vesicles: A Strategy for Enhanced Corneal Regeneration
Rosenquist LybeckerJenny Van de VenAnn Braesch-AndersenKen JurigaDavid NoreinNorein HanssonPer SamantaAyan 
†
Macromolecular
Chemistry, Department of Chemistry–Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, Box 538, 751 21
Uppsala, Sweden

‡
Thoracic
Surgery, Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, 751
85
Uppsala, Sweden

§
Pharmaceutical
Physical Chemistry, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Uppsala University, Box 574, 751 23
Uppsala, Sweden
*
Email: ayan.samanta@kemi.uu.se.
148202510333708137081–370952982025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

## Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from corneal epithelial
cells
have shown great promise in promoting corneal wound healing and stromal
regeneration, but they face challenges with rapid clearance from the
eye. This study addresses these challenges by developing a biocompatible
collagen-hydrogel sustained delivery system. We successfully isolated,
purified, and characterized corneal epithelial EVs (CE-EVs), assessed
their efficacy in corneal epithelial healing in vitro, and demonstrated
their sustained delivery over 10 days followed by an on-demand release
through enzymatic degradation of the hydrogel, which mimics the in
vivo scenario. To develop a microscale understanding of the EV diffusion
inside the hydrogel matrix, we probed the hydrogel network with several
model compounds and nanoparticles by using advanced confocal microscopy
analyses, followed by fitting our results to established diffusion
models. Our findings suggest this innovative approach offers a safe
and effective strategy to promote corneal wound healing. This technology
has the potential to revolutionize corneal injury treatment and improve
patient outcomes. Moreover, the possibility to tailor EV-release kinetics
broadens the scope of EV research in clinical practices, as varying
short- and long-term release profiles will be required for diverse
medical applications.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Feb 6; Accepted 2025 Jul 23; Revised 2025 May 1; Collection date 2025 Aug 26.

1.

## Introduction
The cornea is the transparent
outermost layer of the eye and its
primary functions are to serve as both a physical barrier for the
interior of the eye and contribute to the refraction and focusing
of light onto the lens and retina. The
cornea comprises five distinct layers: the epithelium, Bowman’s
layer, stroma, Descemet’s membrane, and endothelium. The structural
integrity and the intricate cellular communication within and between
these layers are critical for maintaining the transparency and functionality
of the corneal tissue. Corneal injury
may arise from chemical or thermal burns, mechanical trauma, infections,
or underlying pathological conditions. Minor corneal abrasions can typically heal by itself within a couple
of days. On the contrary, in the event
of more severe injuries, such as corneal lacerations and perforations,
the cornea’s transparency may be compromised which can lead
to corneal blindness. Corneal perforation
is an emergent condition requiring prompt treatment to seal the eye
and restore the eye’s anatomy. The
treatments range from corneal gluing to corneal transplantation by
donor corneas. For small perforations (up to ∼2–3 mm),
gluing is the most common treatment and there are two major variants;
cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive (CTA, nonbiologic) and fibrin glue (biologic).
,
 CTA is the stronger one of the two but the drawbacks include tissue
toxicity due to an unreacted monomer and release of formaldehyde due
to degradation, rapid polymerization leading to a very short time window for application
during surgery, highly exothermic reaction, nonbiodegradability, foreign-body
reactions, and inconsistent adhesion on wet surfaces. Further, CTA often induces neovascularization which also
can lead to corneal blindness. Fibrin
glue on the other hand is nontoxic and completely biodegradable. However,
as it originates from donor blood, there is a risk of transmitting
viral or prion diseases.
,
 It has also been shown
that fibrin glue inhibits corneal epithelialization, delaying the
healing process. An adhesive possessing
the biocompatibility of fibrin glue without impeding epithelialization
would therefore be highly advantageous. In the event of larger perforations
(>2–3 mm), keratoplasty becomes necessary. However, due to donor shortages, a considerable number
of patients are unable to access this treatment emphasizing the crucial need for innovative methods.
The process of corneal wound closure is a complex and not entirely
understood phenomenon, which includes apoptosis, cell migration, proliferation,
differentiation, and restructuring of the extracellular matrix. Communication between the epithelium and the
stroma is of great importance for these events to proceed in the correct
way and this communication involves both the secretion of soluble
proteins
−

 and the release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) carrying
specific signaling molecules.
−

 EVs are lipid bilayer structures
released by virtually all cell types, serving as important mediators
in intercellular communication. The cargo can be a diverse array of
macromolecules, including proteins, RNA, and DNA, with their composition
being intricately regulated by the cellular source and for the intended
recipient.
,
 EVs have been proposed as potential
therapeutic agents in various corneal diseases such as glaucoma, dry
eye disease, and corneal scarring.
,,

In our earlier work on cell-free implants in
pigs, we observed that EVs were released
from the regenerating
epithelium. These observations led us to believe that these EVs play
a role in corneal epithelial wound healing and stromal regeneration.
This is supported by other studies which demonstrated that mouse corneal
epithelial cell-derived EVs mediate the cell–cell communication
between corneal epithelial cells, keratocytes, and endothelial cells,
indicating the potential role of corneal epithelial EVs (CE-EVs) in
corneal regeneration. They also demonstrated
that these EVs fuse with keratocytes in vitro to induce myofibroblast
differentiation, which plays a crucial
role in the process of wound closure. This was further studied by
McKay et al. who demonstrated that EVs originating from immortalized
human corneal epithelial cells promote the differentiation of fibroblasts
into myofibroblasts. More recently, Desjardins
et al. isolated EVs from primary corneal epithelial cells, corneal
endothelial cells, and corneal fibroblast and demonstrated that the
process of corneal epithelial wound healing was accelerated by the
addition of all types of corneal EVs, but particularly by corneal
epithelial EVs (CE-EVs). Nonetheless,
to achieve complete healing, often multiple doses of EVs were needed,
which emphasizes one major drawback associated with administrating
EVs. When administered alone, they exhibit a short half-life and are
rapidly cleared from the body. For administration
in the eye, the tear film is replaced every 5 min under normal conditions,
and in the case of topical application of drugs, the tear secretion
is increased. Hence, the concern is that
EVs will be quickly washed away through the nasolacrimal duct leading
to low bioavailability. To address this
issue, it has been proposed to utilize delivery scaffolds from which
EVs can be released sustainably.
,,
 Nonetheless, so far, there are no reports of EVs
being sustainably delivered to the eye. We hypothesized that a sustained
release of EVs from a prefabricated corneal implant or an adhesive
biodegradable corneal sealant could be of great importance for corneal
regeneration in case of keratoplasty with a corneal implant and during
repairing corneal perforations or in situ molding of corneal defects
in a sutureless keratoplasty. We previously developed a loadable,
chemically cross-linked adhesive hydrogel with adhesion strength comparable
to fibrin glue, suitable for repairing corneal perforations and in
situ molding of corneal defects in its as-prepared state. Additionally, when fully cured, these hydrogels
hold potential as prefabricated corneal implants for use in keratoplasty.
Herein, we report the isolation, purification, and comprehensive characterization
of corneal epithelial EVs (CE-EVs) as well as their loading in the
aforesaid hydrogel for sustained release. A fraction of the encapsulated
CE-EVs could be released from the hydrogel over 10 days by diffusion
through the hydrogel matrix, and the remaining can be released on
demand through enzymatic degradation of the hydrogel. This represents
a significant advancement in the field of corneal EV delivery. A perforation
or epithelial wound healing would benefit from a moderate EV-release
profile, while stromal regeneration after keratoplasty with a corneal
implant would be supported by a very slow EV-release profile, occurring
as the implant gets remodeled in vivo. Moreover, we have developed
a microscale physical understanding of the EV movements within the
hydrogel network and their subsequent release from the hydrogel. This
is accomplished by initially fitting the experimental EV-release data
to a mathematical model of one-dimensional diffusion to determine
the empirical self-diffusion coefficient of the EVs within the hydrogel.
Subsequently, the hydrogel network is probed with model compounds
and nanoparticles, and the resulting experimental data are fitted
to two distinct established microscale physical models of diffusion.
Such a physical understanding will enable the future design of hydrogels
suitable for various EV-release profiles as required in different
medical applications. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
report on sustained EV delivery spanning weeks to months or even longer.
Such an EV-delivery system holds tremendous potential for significantly
advancing the treatments involving EVs in general but especially for
repairing corneal injury.

2.

## Experimental Section
2.1.

## Materials and Methods
Immortalized
human corneal epithelial cells (IM-HCEpiCs) (P10871-IM), IM-ocular
epithelial cell medium (P60189), and collagen type-I cell culture
surface coating kit (P8188) were purchased from Innoprot (Spain).
Collagen-coated cell culture flasks (collagen type-I CELLCOAT) and
a sterile syringe filter with a 0.22 μm cellulose acetate membrane
were purchased from VWR (Sweden). Disposable poly­(ether sulfone) (PES)
bottle top filters, Invitrogen LIVE/DEAD viability/cytotoxicity kit,
and Gibco Opti-MEM I reduced serum medium were purchased from Fisher
Scientific (Sweden). Micro BCA protein assay kit, Pierce BCA Protein
Assay Kit, Gibco TrypLE Express Enzyme, Gibco Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered
saline (DPBS) (no magnesium, no calcium), CellTrace CFSE Cell Proliferation
Kit, TBS with Tween (TBST), 20× Solution, Molecular Biology grade,
Ultrapure, Blocker BSA (10%) in PBS, fetal bovine serum (FBS), and
Invitrogen iBlot 2 Transfer Stacks (PVDF) were purchased from Thermo
Fisher Scientific (Sweden). MACSPlex EV Kit IO (human) was purchased
from Miltenyi Biotec Norden AB. 10× Tris/Glycine/SDS, 2×
Laemmli Sample Buffer, 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Stain-Free Protein
Gels, Clarity Western ECL substrate, Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG (H + L)-HRP
Conjugate, and Goat Anti-Mouse IgG (H + L)-HRP Conjugate were purchased
from Bio-Rad. Anti-CD81 antibody [M38] (ab79559), Anti-CD63 antibody
[TS63]BSA and Azide free (ab59479), Anti-Calnexin antibodyER
Marker (ab22595), and Anti-Fibronectin antibody [F14] (ab45688) were
purchased from Abcam (Netherlands). Anti-Collagen Type-I Rabbit pAb,
fluorescence isothiocyanate-labeled dextran (FITC-dextran, various
molecular weights), Amicon ultra-15 centrifugal filter unit 10 kDa
molecular weight cut off (MWCO), Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter 2
mL, 10 kDa MWCO, and Vivaspin 20 centrifugal concentrator MWCO 300
kDa were purchased from Merck (Sweden). Silica NPs were purchased
from Micromod particle technology GmbH (Germany).

2.2.

## Cell Culture of IM-HCEpiC
IM-HCEpiC
cells were cultured following the protocol of the supplier with minor
modifications. In short, the cells were cultured using an ocular epithelial
cell medium supplemented with 5% of FBS, 1% of epithelial cell growth
supplements, and 1% of penicillin/streptomycin solution and kept in
an incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Subculturing was done when
cells were ∼90% confluent by adding a TrypLE Express Enzyme.
When all cells were detached, culture medium was added to inactivate
the enzyme. Cells were collected by centrifuging at 200 RCF (Eppendorf
Centrifuge 5810 R) for 5 min, and the pellet was resuspended in culture
medium. The number of cells was counted by using an EVE automated
cell counter (NanoEntek). Cells were seeded at a minimum density of
10,000 cells/cm2 in collagen-coated cell culture flasks
(either purchased or coated in-house according to supplier’s
instructions).

2.3.

## Isolation of EVs from IM-HCEpiC
IM-HCEpiCs
were cultured in collagen-coated flasks until a large number of cells
were achieved (passage 4–7) to be able to obtain a volume of
50–500 mL of collected media with EVs. Opti-MEM (0.1 mL/cm2) was added to the IM-HCEpiC when they reached ∼80%
confluency. The cells were incubated with Opti-MEM for 48 h and then
the supernatant was collected and centrifuged (Eppendorf Centrifuge
5810 R) at 700 RCF for 5 min at 11 °C. The new supernatant was
collected and centrifuged at 1450–2000 RCF for 10–15
min (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810 R). The supernatant was then filtered
through a 0.22 μm syringe filter, the final volume was noted
down, and a sample for NTA (1000 μL) was collected and stored
in the fridge.

2.4.

## Cell Viability after EV Isolation
The ratio of live to dead cells was investigated after EV isolation
by detaching the cells with TrypLE, followed by a centrifugation step
at 200 RCF (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810 R), the pellet was then resuspended
in fresh medium, and the cells were counted using an EVE automated
cell counter (NanoEntek).

2.5.

## Tangential Flow Filtration (TFF)
The setup for the tangential flow filtration included a Cole Parmer
MasterFlex L/S Economy Drive 7554-90 pump, Cytiva (formerly Pall Lab)
Minimate; TFF system reservoir kit, TFF system fitting kit, and a
pressure gauge (4 bar, 60 psi) connected to a 300 K Minimate tangential
flow filtration capsule with an omega membrane (Cytiva formerly Pall
Lab). The water and DPBS used for TFF were autoclaved and sterile
filtered through a 0.22 μm vacuum filter before use. The 300
kDa cut off membrane was first washed with water to remove storage
buffer and salt particles. Then, the buffer was exchanged to DPBS
before the isolated supernatant from IM-HCEpiC was run through the
membrane in the TFF. First, the sample was concentrated down to between
100 and 200 mL. Then, the sample was run through at a high speed but
with low pressure (the waste tubing flow was limited to ∼1–1.5
drop/s and the speed of the pump was 60–100 mL/min and pressure
was kept at ∼0.5–1.5 bar). To achieve a good purity
(99.9%), seven times the amount of DPBS relative to the concentrated
sample was run through. The sample was then concentrated down to <50
mL and collected. The volume was noted down and the sample was filtered
through a 0.22 μm filter. A sample (1000 μL) for NTA was
collected and stored in the fridge.

2.6.

## Filtration through an Amicon Filter
For further purification and concentration, a 10 kDa Amicon filter
was used. Fifteen mL portions of the sample were centrifuged at 1450–3000
RCF for 40 min (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5810 R). To collect the EVs,
the filter was rinsed several times with the concentrate, and the
bottom of the filter was scratched with a 200 μL pipet tip.
Afterward, 200 μL of DPBS was added, and the procedure was repeated.
The collected EVs were stored in an Eppendorf Biopur in the fridge
to avoid degradation, and 10 μL was put aside for NTA measurements.

2.7.

## Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA)
NTA was performed with either a NanoSight NS500 with an NS500 G532
nm Laser Module (Malvern Panalytical) or a Nanosight NS300 with a
488 nm (Blue) laser module (Malvern Panalytical). The water and DPBS
used for NTA were autoclaved and sterile filtered through a 0.22 μm
vacuum filter before use. Samples were diluted in DPBS to achieve
∼50–100 particles per frame. The temperature of the
experiment was set to 23.3 °C and 5 videos of 30 s were recorded
and analyzed by the Nanosight software NTA version 3.2 or 3.4.

2.8.

## Surface Epitope Labeling of the EVs with the
MACSPlex EV Kit
Labeling of the EVs was performed according
to the MACSPlex EV kit instructions. In short, 6.43 × 1010 particles (EVs) were used in 120 μL total volume (diluted
with MACSPlex buffer). Only MACSPlex buffer was used as the blank.
The MACSPlex EV capture beads were vortexed and 15 μL was added
to both the sample and the blank. The sample and blank were then incubated
overnight at room temperature and protected from light using a VWR
tube rotator on a permanent run (18 rpm). The next day, 500 μL
of buffer was added and centrifuged at 3000 RCF (High-speed Microcentrifuge
CT15RE, VWR Hitachi) for 5 min. 500 μL of the supernatant was
then aspirated. Five μL of each MACSPlex EV detection reagent
CD9, CD63, and CD81 was added to each tube and mixed by pipetting
up and down. The samples were incubated for 1 h at room temperature
protected from light using a VWR Tube Rotator on a permanent run (18
rpm). Then, 500 μL of buffer was added and the samples were
centrifuged at 3000 RCF for 5 min (high-speed Microcentrifuge CT15RE,
VWR Hitachi), followed by aspiration of 500 μL of the supernatant.
An additional 500 μL of buffer was added and incubated for 15
min protected from light using a VWR tube rotator on a permanent run
(18 rpm), followed by centrifugation at 3000 RCF for 5 min (High-speed
Microcentrifuge CT15RE, VWR Hitachi) and aspiration of 500 μL
of the supernatant. The sample was then measured by using FACS.

2.9.

## Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS)
FACS was performed on a CytoFLEX, Beckman Coulter instrument using
the MACSPlex EV kit. All samples containing beads were vortexed at
least 30 s before measuring. The CytoFLEX was first calibrated with
MACSQuant calibration beads. Then, the blank and EV samples (bound
to the MACSPlex capture beads) were measured. Events per second were
kept at around 100. The gain was set to FSC 133, SSC 58, FITC 20,
PE 20, PC5.5 30, PC7 100, APC 100, APC-A700 1298, APC-A750 1195, PB450
76, and KO525 47. During analysis, the signal from the blank was subtracted
as the background, CD63 was set as 100%, and the other surface markers
were compared to CD63.

2.10.

## Cleaning of Cells for BCA, Western Blot,
and Proteomics
Cells of passage six were thawed and diluted
with PBS to reach a final volume of 15 mL. It was then centrifuged
at 300 RCF for 7 min (Eppendorf centrifuge 5810R) and the pellet was
collected (∼35 μL) and diluted to 15 mL again in PBS.
The procedure was repeated 2 more times and then the final pellet
was diluted in PBS to a final volume of 135 μL.

2.11.

## Micro BCA Assay
The micro BCA assay
was performed according to the supplier’s instructions with
slight modifications. In short, albumin standards were prepared by
dilution of the 2.0 mg/mL bovine albumin serum (BSA) with DPBS. The
final concentrations were 200, 100, 50, 25, 10, 5, 2.5, and 1 μg/mL.
Working reagent (WR) was prepared by mixing 25:24:1 of the Micro BCA
reagent A/Micro BCA reagent B/Micro BCA reagent C. The EV sample was
diluted 1:72 with DPBS to achieve a concentration in the range for
the assay. Then, 150 μL of each standard and sample was pipetted
into a 96-well plate, and an equal amount of WR was added. The well
plate was then placed on an orbital shaker (KS 260 basic, IKA) for
30 s to mix the samples, followed by incubation at 37 °C for
2 h. The well plate was then cooled to room temperature, and the absorbance
at 562 nm was measured using a Tecan Microplate Reader Spark. The
absorbance of the BSA standards was then plotted against the BSA concentration
to obtain a standard curve and a standard curve equation. The concentration
of the EV sample could then be calculated from the standard curve
equation.

2.12.

## BCA Assay
For determining the protein
amount in cells and in EVs, the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit was used
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In short, albumin
standards (2000, 1500, 1000, 750, 500, 250, 125, 25, 0 μg/mL)
were prepared by dilution of the 2.0 mg/mL bovine albumin serum (BSA)
with PBS. Working reagent (WR) was prepared by mixing 50 parts BCA
Reagent A with 1 part BCA Reagent B. The cleaned cell solution was
diluted 1:5 to achieve a concentration in the range of the assay,
and EVs were measured as prepared. The samples and standards were
mixed with WR at a ratio of 1:8 in a 96-well plate and placed on a
shaker to ensure proper mixing. The well plate was then incubated
at 37 °C for 30 min before measuring the absorbance at 562 nm.
The absorbance of the BSA solution was plotted against the concentrations
to achieve a standard curve and a standard curve equation. The amount
of protein in the cell sample could then be calculated from the equation.

2.13.

## Western Blot
Cells (cleaned from
FBS) and purified EVs were mixed with 2× Laemmli Sample Buffer
and boiled for 5 min at 95 °C. To a 4–20% Mini-PROTEAN
TGX Stain-Free Protein Gel, 2 μL of the cell (∼7 μg)
and EV sample (∼5.8 ± 1.7 μg) was added, and 2.5
μL of all blue precision plus protein standard (ladder) was
added. The gel was initially run at a lower speed (20 V) for samples
to enter the gel, and after 15 min, the speed was increased to 120
V and ran for 45 min in a Mini-PROTEAN Tetra Vertical Electrophoresis
Cell. The protein bands were then transferred to an iBlot 2 PVDF membrane
in the iBlot 2 Gel Transfer Device and the membrane was cut into 5
pieces each one containing cells, EVs, and ladder. The membranes were
then blocked with either 5% NFDM/TBST (for fibronectin), 5% FBS/TBST
(for collagen and CD63), or 0.5% BSA/TBST (for calnexin and CD81)
for 45 min. Then, the primary antibody was added; anticalnexin (rabbit),
anticollagen (rabbit), anti-CD63 (mouse), anti-CD81 (mouse), and antifibronectin
(rabbit) at 1/1000 and incubated overnight at 4 °C (except for
antifibronectin which was incubated at RT for 1 h). The next day,
the samples were washed 5 times with TBST and then secondary antibodies
(Goat antirabbit igG (H + L)-HRP conjugation or Goat antimouse igG
(H + L)-HRP conjugation) were added at 1/1000 and incubated for approximately
1 h. The samples were then washed 5 times with TBST and then washed
in only TBS before being added to a Clarity Western ECL Substrate
for 5 min before measuring the chemiluminescence in a ChemiDoc imaging
system (Bio-Rad).

2.14.

## Proteomics
Isolated EV samples and
cells (cleaned from FBS) were freeze-dried and sent to Proteome Center
Tuebingen where the proteins were degraded with SDS, reduced by DTT,
cleaned with S-trap cleaning, and digested with trypsin before loading
approximately 500 ng of the sample onto the Thermo Scientific Q Exactive
HF Orbitrap LC–MS/MS System and measured with a 60 min gradient,
top7, sensitive method. Analysis was done using Max Quant version
2.2.0.0 against human database from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/). Proteins
were then categorized according to their cellular locations, which
can be seen in the Supporting Information Table S1. The different locations were: (1) cell membrane, (2) cytoplasm
(cytoskeleton/motor), (3) Cytoplasm (Soluble), (4) ER/Golgi, (5) Extracellular
(Secreted), (6) Lysosome, (7) Mitochondria, (8) Nucleus, and (9) Unknown.
Many of the proteins are found at several locations. The classification
was done using the subcellular location at UniProt (uniport annotion
and GO annotation) (https://www.uniprot.org/).

2.15.

## Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)
TEM was performed on the BioVis platform of Uppsala University.
A 5 μL drop of the sample was placed on a Formvar- and carbon-coated
200-mesh copper grid (Ted Pella). The excess solution was removed
by blotting with a filter paper. The sample was briefly washed with
MQ water and then directly contrasted with 2% uranyl acetate. Excess
uranyl acetate was removed by blotting on filter paper. Images were
acquired with a Tecnai G2 Spirit BioTwin transmission electron microscope
(Thermo Fisher/FEI) at 80 kV with an ORIUS SC200 CCD camera and Gatan
Digital Micrograph software (both from Gatan Inc./Blue Scientific).

2.16.

## Scratch Assay
IM-HCEpiCs were seeded
in collagen-coated 48-well plates with a seeding density of 15 000
cells/cm2. The cells were left until approximately 90%
confluency was achieved (2 days). Then, a 200 μL pipet tip was
used to scratch the monolayer in a cross. The cells were washed twice
with DPBS to remove debris and smoothen the edges. 250 μL of
solutions containing 20 μg/mL (1 × 109 particles),
100 μg/mL (1 × 1010 particles), or 200 μg/mL
(2 × 1010 particles) EVs in Opti-MEM was added. Wells
with only Opti-MEM were used as a negative control. Opti-MEM was used
to avoid proliferation and look only at the healing of the scratched
epithelium. Brightfield/phase contrast photographs were taken right
after scratching and 24 h after the addition of EVs in Leica DMi8.
Live/dead staining was performed on wells after 24 h to see the healing
of the scratched epithelium and studied in a fluorescence microscope
(Leica DMi8).

2.17.

## Release Studies
Corneal epithelial
EVs were isolated and purified, as described above. The EVs were then
stained using carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE). One μL
of CFSE (1 μL) was diluted in PBS and incubated 5 min at RT.
The EVs were then added to the CFSE solution to reach a final concentration
of 5 μM CFSE and the mixture was incubated for 25 min at 37
°C. After the incubation, the sample was then centrifuged at
1000 RCF in a 300 kDa Vivaspin 20 Centrifugal Concentrator using PBS
to wash off excess CFSE (in total 6500 times diluted). Due to low
fluorescence, the sample was stained an additional time following
the same procedure but using a Amicon Ultra Centrifugal Filter 2 mL,
10 kDa MWCO, and centrifuging at 2000 RCF using PBS to wash off excess
CFSE (in total 730 times diluted). The stained EV solution was measured
in NTA, fluorescence spectroscopy, and confocal microscope.
Thiolated collagen was prepared as described elsewhere. A collagen/PEG hydrogel was prepared by mixing
thiolated collagen with PEG-maleimide at 1:1 ratio between thiol and
maleimide in a syringe mixing system.
,
 EVs at a concentration
of 8.55 × 109 particles/mL were added to the hydrogel
and mixed. Approximately 125 mg of gel was added to each cuvette (which
corresponds to ∼1.07 ×·109 EVs) and left
to cure the O/N with a lid at RT. Hydrogels without EVs were used
as a negative control. The next day, 3 mL of PBS was added on top
of the gels, and fluorescence of the solution on top of gels was measured
on days 0, 1, 2, 10, 14, 20, 30, and 35. A calibration curve of fluorescently
stained EVs was used to determine the percentage of release. Gels
containing stained EVs were done in quadruplicates and gels without
EVs were done in triplicates.

2.18.

## Collagenase Assay after Release Studies
After 35 days of incubation at RT, collagenase at a final concentration
of 5 U/mL and 5 mM CaCl2 was added to the cuvettes with
gels. The cuvettes were kept at 25 °C for the first 4 h and were
then placed at 37 °C. On day 3, additional collagenase was added
to a final concentration of 30 U/mL. The degradation was studied until
the hydrogels were completely degraded, and photos were taken on days
1, 2, 3, and 6.

2.19.

## Confocal Microscopy and Fluorescence Recovery
after Photobleaching
To investigate the mesh size of the
gel, the distribution, and the diffusion of dextrans with different
sizes, confocal microscopy and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP) measurement were carried out. To carry out these measurements,
gel discs were immersed into 1 mg/mL PBS solution of fluorescence
isothiocyanate-labeled dextran with different molecular weights (4,
70, and 500 kDa). After 2 days, the samples were measured with a ZEISS
LSM-700 fluorescence microscope (Oberkochen, Germany) using different
setups for the different investigations.
The three-dimensional
distribution of the nanoparticles in the gel matrix was carried out
using silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) and the previously mentioned EVs.
Nanoparticle suspensions were added to the gel precursor solution
and mixed thoroughly to homogenize the mixture. The gels were kept
under humid conditions to avoid drying and the release of the nanoparticles.
The samples were investigated after 2 days using the previously mentioned
ZEISS microscope.
To analyze the three-dimensional distribution
of the FITC-dextrans
and the nanoparticles in the gel matrix, a 25× water immersion
objective was used, and Z-stack image acquisition was carried out.
In each measurement, 40 images were taken with 1.1 μm steps
in the Z direction about a 600 × 600 μm
area from the edge and the bulk phase of the gel samples.
To
measure the diffusion of the different FITC-dextrans, a 20×
air objective was used. A 100 × 100 μm rectangular region
of interest (ROI) was selected on a 600 × 600 μm image
for bleaching. Six parallel measurements were carried out both in
the gel matrix and in solutions. Bleaching was applied in the ROI
for different time intervals to reduce the average intensity by 25%
and recovery measured up to 95% of the original average intensity
in the ROI. The data were analyzed by Frapsolver software (https://gitlab.com/jgernandt/frap-solver) earlier developed by us. The diffusion coefficients were obtained
by fitting a rectangular FRAP pure diffusion implemented into the
software.

To track the EV and SiNP
motion, time series measurement was carried
out using the previously mentioned ZEISS microscope with a 20×
magnification objective. In each measurement, 50 images were taken.
To acquire the particle tracking data, ImageJ was used. The first
brightness and contrast adjustment and background subtraction were
applied by setting the rolling ball radius to 2 pixels. Afterward,
particle tracking was carried out by using MTrackJ plugins. The snap feature was set to maximum intensity,
and a 5 × 5 pixel snap range was used. The maximum distance to
the start point was exported and plotted as a histogram using GraphPad
Prism 8.

2.20.

## Image Processing and Analysis
Three-dimensional
image construction and determining the distribution of the different
FITC-dextrans between the gel matrix and the surrounding medium were
done using Huygens Professional software (Hilversum, The Netherlands).
For the three-dimensional images, the Z-stack images were first
deconvolved by using the deconvolution wizard of the Huygens Professional
software (signal-to-noise ratio: 50, maximum iteration steps of 150).
Afterward, the 3D images were constructed by using the maximum intensity
projection (MIP) rendering option.

2.21.

## Calculation of the Polymer Volume Fraction
in the Hydrogel
The polymer volume fraction of the hydrogel
was calculated from the polymer mass fraction of 0.0206, as reported
earlier, for shape-retaining hydrogels
considering the density of collagen and water as 1.3 g/mL and 0.997
g/mL, respectively.

2.22.

## Fitting of the Theoretical Model
EV in vitro release profiles showing fraction released as a function
of time were analyzed with the following expression describing the
release from an initially homogeneous gel slab of thickness l, valid when the concentration is maintained equal to zero
at the gel surface (sink condition)

1MtM∞=1−∑n=0∞8(2n+1)2π2exp{−D(2n+1)2π2t/4l2}where M

t
 is the amount of the diffusing substance released after time t and M
∞ is the corresponding
quantity after infinite time, and D is the diffusion
coefficient. To account for a fraction of immobilized EVs in the gel,
the function f
mob
M

t
/M
∞ was
fitted to the release profiles, where f
mob is the mobile fraction. In the model fit, l was
set to be equal to the experimentally determined gel thickness (1.26
mm).
Self-diffusion coefficients (D
g) for FITC-labeled dextran diffusion probes measured with FRAP in
the hydrogels were used to estimate the “mesh size”
( ) of the network by means of the Ogston–Amsden
obstruction theory

2aDgD0=exp{−π4(Rh+Rfr̅+Rf)2}2br̅=Rf2φ/πwhere D
0 is the
self-diffusion coefficient in an aqueous solution, R
h is the hydrodynamic radius of the diffusion probe, R
f is the radius of the polymer network fibers,
φ is the volume fraction of the network. In the model, the diffusion
probe is assumed to be spherical and the network is described as a
random meshwork of randomly distributed straight fibers; is calculated as the largest radius of
sphere that on the average can fit into the network structure without
touching fibers.
 and were used to
calculate D
g as a function of R
h for R
f equal to
1 and 10 nm, respectively. In the calculation, the polymer network
volume fraction in the hydrogel was set to 0.016, as determined experimentally,
and D
0 was calculated by means of the
Stokes–Einstein equation
3D0=kBT6πηRhwhere k
B is Boltzmann’s
constant, T is the temperature (307 K), η is
the viscosity of water (7.34 × 10–4 N s/m2).
For comparison with a model describing the combined
effect of obstruction
and hydrodynamic interactions, the same calculation was made with
the Clague–Phillips theory

4aDgD0=(1+2α3)−1exp{−πφ0.174ln(59.6Rf/Rs)}4bα=φ(Rs+RfRf)2The pre-exponential term in and is the contribution from
obstruction effects derived by Tsai and Streider, and the exponential term is from a regression analysis
based on simulation results of hydrodynamic effects on spherical solute
diffusion through a random network of cylindrical fibers.
,

2.23.

## Viscoelastic Stress Relaxation
A
dynamic oscillatory frequency sweep was performed on a strain-controlled
ARES rheometer (TA Instruments, Sollentuna, Sweden) at 25 °C
from 0.01 to 10 Hz at 0.267% oscillation strain amplitude using an
8 mm parallel plate stainless steel geometry. Oscillatory measurement
was performed under a constant axial load of 0.1 N to prevent wall-slip.
Continuous relaxation time spectrum, H(τ),
was calculated from the dynamic storage and loss moduli, G′(ω) and G″(ω), by using
the built-in nonlinear regression functions of the rheometer software
(Trios version 5.4.0.300). Relaxation
modulus G(t) was obtained from H(τ). The highest G(t) value was normalized to 1, and a normalized G(t) over time was plotted.

2.24.

## Statistical Analysis
The statistical
analysis was performed in R using the “lme4”, “stats”,
and “emmeans” packages. A simple general linear model
was constructed followed by a post hoc test where the estimated marginal
means (emmeans) and the standard error were calculated with a Bonferroni
correction. Significant differences are shown by “*”
in the graphs, “*” represents a p-value
of <0.05, “**” a p-value of <0.01,
and “***” a p-value of <0.001. Error
bars in the graphs represent the standard deviation.

3.

## Results and Discussion
3.1.

## Isolation and Characterization of Corneal
Epithelial Extracellular Vesicles
Corneal epithelial extracellular
vesicles (CE-EVs) were isolated by treating a semiconfluent layer
with a starvation medium (Opti-MEM) for 48 h to trigger EV production.
After starvation treatment with Opti-MEM, one-third of the treated
flasks were analyzed for the live/dead cell ratio using trypan blue
staining, which showed 97–99% cell viability. Additionally,
cell counts after treatment revealed a nearly 4-fold increase (378%)
compared to initial seeding, indicating proliferation (in normal growth
media) and robust survival (in the Opti-MEM) during the treatment.
The medium was then collected and purified by tangential flow filtration
(TFF), followed by concentration of the sample with an Amicon Ultra
Centrifugal Filter. TFF was used for EV-purification instead of the
more commonly employed ultracentrifugation (UC) due to the reported
higher yield in TFF purification. Purified
CE-EVs were stored in the fridge and used within 1–2 weeks
or otherwise frozen at −20 °C in freezing media containing
PBS with HEPES, Albumin, and Trehalose as described elsewhere.

Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) was
then performed to determine the concentration and size of the CE-EVs.
NTA was measured of samples before, during, and after purification
to see how the size, distribution, and number of particles were affected
(Figure S1). In a, the size distribution of the purified
CE-EVs (from 9 batches) is presented and the main peak for the samples
was found to be in the range of 110 ± 12 nm which correlates
to the size range of EVs.
,
 The size and morphology
of CE-EVs were also studied by transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
( b). The size
was found to be slightly smaller (around 60–70 nm) compared
to NTA and aggregation could be observed.
 
3.2.

## Epitope Profiling of CE-EVs
To further
characterize the CE-EVs, fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)
was performed to determine the surface markers on the CE-EVs. The
complete FACS data are shown in Figures S2–S4, and the most expressed markers are shown in a. For all batches (n =
8), the most common surface markers were the EV-specific markers CD63
(most expressed, set to 100%), CD9 (59.4 ± 24.4%), and CD81 (62.5
± 10.2%). Aside from the EV-specific
markers, the most expressed surface protein was CD29 (integrin β1)
with 32.8 ± 13.8%. CD29 is part of many cell surface receptors
which are responsible for the interaction of cells with ECM proteins. Moreover, in most of the batches, CD49E (integrin
α5) was also highly expressed (average 32.6 ± 23.6%) which
together with CD29 constitutes the fibronectin receptor (integrin
α5β1). CD29 can constitute
receptors with multiple other integrin α subunits that are not
included in the MACSPlex EV kit, such as CD49C (integrin α3). Another highly expressed protein was the CD44
(17.9 ± 8.6%); a transmembrane cell surface receptor responsible
for both cell–cell adhesion and cell–matrix interaction,
which is usually upregulated after tissue injury. Further abundantly expressed surface markers were CD142
(17.6 ± 4.5%), CD40 (16.3 ± 3.9%), CD105 (14.1 ± 12.5%),
CD146 (12.1 ± 12.6%), HLA-ABC (11.0 ± 6.5%), CD326 (7.4
± 4.8%), MSCP (5.5 ± 5.1%), and HLA DRDPRDQ (4.8 ±
4.5%). These proteins are known to have crucial roles in cell adhesion
and immunomodulation ( a).
 For Western blot, proteomics, and scratch assay
analyses, it was
necessary to determine the total protein amounts in CE-EVs and CE-cells.
This was done by using the BCA assay. For CE-EVs, the total amount
of proteins was determined to be approximately 5 × 10–9 μg protein/particle and for CE-cells, it was approximately
7 μg/mL.
Western blotting was performed to study the expression
of some
of the proteins of interest ( b). CD63 and CD81 were investigated due to their EV-specific
nature and to confirm the presence of these which was indicated from
FACS. It was observed that both CD63 and CD81 were much more abundant
in the CE-EVs compared to the CE cells ( b), supporting the presence of membrane-bound
vesicles in the sample.
,
 Calnexin, on the other
hand, is an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein used as a negative
staining since it should not be present
in the CE-EVs. As can be seen in b, the CE cells expressed much higher levels
of calnexin compared to the CE-EVs. The low levels of calnexin in
the CE-EV sample could indicate low levels of residual cell debris.
Furthermore, collagen type I and fibronectin were investigated since
ECM proteins are considered to be important for corneal wound healing. Collagen type I was not very abundant in either
CE cells or CE-EVs and the levels seemed to be similar in both, suggesting
that collagen is not accumulated in the CE-EVs. However, fibronectin
was significantly more abundant in the CE-EVs compared to the CE-cells,
suggesting its importance. This is in agreement with the literature
which suggests that fibronectin and other provisional ECM proteins
are important in the first stages of wound healing in the cornea and
that collagen type I is formed at a later stage of wound healing.

3.3.

## Proteomics of CE-EVs
To study the
overall protein composition of the CE-EVs, protein identification
proteomics using LC–MS/MS was performed. All proteins found
in the CE-EVs are presented in Table S1 and the proteins with the highest intensity-based absolute quantification
(IBAQ) values are shown in Figure S5. Previous
studies have investigated the protein
content of CE-EVs and suggested that thrombospondin-1 (TSP-1), fibronectin,
and other provisional extracellular matrix proteins are important
components for corneal wound healing. Herein, we have studied the difference in protein abundance for
CE-EVs and CE cells to assess which proteins have been enriched in
the EVs and, therefore, indicate their importance as signaling molecules.
The most enriched proteins are shown in c and all enhanced proteins are presented
in Figure S6. TSP-1, 2, and 3 were the
most enriched proteins in the CE-EVs (1874 times). TSP-1 has been
demonstrated to be highly expressed in the early stages of corneal
wound healing and is known to activate the latent form of transforming
growth factor β (TGF-β) which in turn can promote myofibroblast
differentiation.
−

 TSP-2 has also been linked to corneal wound healing
but is instead involved in the remodeling of the ECM at the later
stages of healing by modulation of MMP-2 (72 kDa type-IV collagenase)
and MMP-9 (92 kDa type-IV collagenase) which were both also found
in the CE-EVs (Table S1).
,
 The second most enriched protein was the Complement C3, which is
a key component of the complement system and has a role in inflammation
induction and immune cell recruitment. The complement system is a part of the immune defense, which not
only protects the body against foreign pathogens but has also been
suggested to play a significant role in wound healing. In the CE-EVs, complement C3 was enriched 993
times ( c),
and several other components of the complement system (Complement
C1r, C 1s, factor I, factor H, factor B, C4-A, and C4-B) were exclusively
found in the CE-EVs (Table S1), suggesting
their importance for wound healing. This is supported by the literature
that has demonstrated complement C3 to be involved in tissue regeneration (e.g., in the retina of chicks). Moreover, serotransferrin was enriched 860 times in CE-EVs
( c) and is
an important iron transporter in the body. Iron is involved in several
biological processes such as cell proliferation and proper functioning
of immune cells, both of which are processes involved in corneal wound
healing and could potentially explain
the abundance of serotransferrin in the CE-EVs. In accordance with
previous studies of corneal epithelial EVs and with the Western blot results, fibronectin was highly enriched
(264 times) in the CE-EVs compared to CE cells according to proteomics
( c). Fibronectin
has been proven important for corneal wound healing acting as a temporary
scaffold for migrating epithelial cells. Another enhanced protein in the CE-EVs was the galectin-3 binding
protein (LGALS3BP) (enriched 106 times; c). LGALS3BP has been demonstrated to enhance
cell adhesion through integrin-mediated interactions (specifically
α5β1). Follistatin-related
protein 1 (FSTL1), which was enriched 99 times in the CE-EVs, is known
to play a role in the regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation,
and migration in both physiological and pathological processes. However, the exact and direct role of this protein
in corneal wound healing is not well understood. FSTL1 is a glycoprotein
that belongs to the family of secreted proteins acidic and rich in
cysteine (SPARC). SPARC also called osteonectin
(ON) was enhanced 59 times in CE-EVs compared with CE cells ( c). SPARC has been
demonstrated to inhibit epithelial cell proliferation by binding to
TGF-β receptors. It has also been
demonstrated that SPARC is strongly expressed during the middle and
later stages of corneal wound healing to facilitate remodeling and
that SPARC increases the wound closure rate.
,
 Another protein that regulates TGF-β signaling is CD109. In
contrast to TSP-1, CD109 has an antagonistic effect on TGF-β
signaling and inhibits extracellular matrix deposition by binding
to TGF-β. CD109 was enhanced 97
times in the CE-EVs compared to CE cells ( c), suggesting the need for a counterbalance
of TGF-β signaling to avoid excessive extracellular matrix (ECM)
deposition. Transforming growth factor beta-induced protein (TGFBIp)
was enhanced 67 times in CE-EVs compared to CE cells ( c) and it is known to be highly
abundant in the cornea and highly expressed by epithelial cells. TGFBIp has been demonstrated to be upregulated
in case of corneal damage in rabbits and
some studies suggest that TGFBIp promotes corneal wound healing by
increased cell migration, adhesion, and proliferation.
,
 CD166 (enriched 49 times in CE-EVs compared to CE cells) ( c), also known as
an activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM), is known to
be a marker for corneal stromal stem cells and is involved in ocular
regeneration. Immunoglobulin heavy constant
gamma 1 (IGHG1), which is enriched 43 times in the EVs ( c), is part of the immunoglobulin
G1 (IgG1) antibody. Several other components for immunoglobulins (such
as IgG2, IgG3, IgA1, and IgA2) were found exclusively in CE-EVs suggesting
that the adaptive immune system is important for wound healing. IgG1
(and IgG3) has also been shown to activate the complement system,
which plays an important role in wound healing.
Some of the
surface markers detected in the FACS analysis could be confirmed with
the proteomics data; CD63, CD81, and CD142 (Tissue factor) are found
exclusively in CE-EVs (Table S1), whereas
the CD146/MUC18 (enriched 2.8 times) and CD44 (enriched 4.8 times)
were found both in CE-EVs and CE-cells but were enriched in CE-EVs
(Table S1). On the other hand, HLA-ABC
is slightly altered in the CE-EVs compared to CE cells (ratio 0.42
for HLA-A and C and 0.84 for HLA-B, Table S1). Moreover, the components for the fibronectin receptor (α5β1)
were also present and slightly enriched in the CE-EVs (∼2 times)
(Table S1). Integrin β1 is known
to be important during corneal wound healing for promoting the cellular
attachment of migrating cells to the provisional matrix. Additionally, several other integrins, such
as α3, β6, αv, and α6, were identified in
the proteomics data (Table S1). Integrin
α3 (CD49C) (enhanced 1.34 times, Table S1) together with integrin β1 (CD29) (enhanced 1.8 times, Table S1) constitutes the integrin α3β1
which is a receptor for laminin, fibronectin, collagen, and TSP-1.
,
 Furthermore, the integrins αv and β6, which were both
found in the CE-EV sample (Table S1), together
make a receptor that can also bind fibronectin.
,
 The integrin αvβ6 is exclusively found on epithelial
cells
,
 and previous studies have shown the importance
of the integrin αvβ6 receptor for corneal wound healing
by its activation of TGF-β. Additionally,
several subunits of laminin were found, some of which are exclusively
present in CE-EVs (Table S1), and together
can constitute laminin 411 and laminin 511; the latter is known to
be important at the initial stage of corneal epithelial regeneration. Similarly, several subunits of collagen types
I, V, and VI were found exclusively in CE-EVs (Table S1). Collagen VI has been shown to promote adhesion
and spreading of corneal fibroblasts in chicks and in rabbits, it is increased during corneal wound healing
and is suggested to be important for the formation of the corneal
lamellar structure.

Calnexin was
also detected in the proteomics data; however, its
ratio in CE-EVs compared with CE cells was 0.029. This significant
reduction in CE-EVs is consistent with the Western blot results ( b and Table S1).
Corneal healing is a highly
orchestrated process involving intricate
intercellular communication between epithelial cells, stromal keratocytes,
and endothelial cells to restore tissue integrity and transparency. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) serve as critical
mediators in this communication network, transferring a diverse cargo
of proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids between cells.
,
 Our comprehensive analyses of CE-EV proteins using FACS, Western
blot, and proteomics, along with the assessment of their relative
enrichment compared with CE-cells and integration with the current
literature, illuminate several plausible mechanisms through which
CE-EVs can promote corneal regeneration. Rapid re-epithelialization
is crucial for restoring the cornea’s barrier function, and
CE-EVs appear well equipped to facilitate this process. Effective
epithelial cell migration requires dynamic regulation of cell adhesion
to the underlying matrix and neighboring cells. Our proteomic analysis
revealed that CE-EVs are enriched with proteins known to mediate these
interactions, such as fibronectin (Table S1), which acts as a provisional matrix
promoting epithelial cell migration and attachment, as demonstrated
in earlier studies.
,
 CE-EVs also contain integrin
subunits (e.g., β1, α3, α5, Table S1) and their ligands,
which are crucial for cell movement and maintaining epithelial sheet
integrity during migration.
,
 For instance, integrin
α5β1 facilitates movement on the fibronectin-rich matrix,
while α3β1 mediates cell–cell and cell–ECM
adhesion.
,
 Transforming growth factor beta-induced
protein (TGFBIp/Big-h3), identified in CE-EVs (Table S1), directly promotes
adhesion via the α3β1 integrin. Furthermore, other enriched proteins like LGALS3BP (Table S1) and TSP-1 (Table S1) mediate adhesion through interactions with integrins and
other receptors.
,,
 CE-EV cargo might also influence the necessary disassembly of hemidesmosomes
(involving the α6β4 integrin) for migration initiation. Beyond adhesion and migration, CE-EVs contain
factors modulating the balance between cell proliferation and differentiation
required to restore the epithelial thickness. For example, SPARC,
enriched in CE-EVs (Table S1), can inhibit
epithelial proliferation, partly by stimulating TGF-β signaling, while factors promoting adhesion indirectly
support proliferation once the defect is covered. Communication between
the epithelium and stroma via EVs becomes particularly important following
injuries that compromise the epithelial basement membrane, allowing
EVs direct access to stromal keratocytes. Stromal wound healing involves the transformation of quiescent keratocytes
into activated fibroblasts and potentially myofibroblasts, which are
crucial for wound contraction and initial matrix deposition. This
process is heavily regulated by TGF-β signaling. CE-EVs can influence this pathway significantly.
TSP-1, highly enriched in CE-EVs (Table S1), is a major physiological activator of latent TGF-β1,
,,
 and its delivery via CE-EVs could
directly promote myofibroblast differentiation in the stroma. Concurrently,
CE-EVs carry proteins that modulate TGF-β activity; SPARC can
stimulate TGF-β signaling, while
CD109 (Table S1) acts as a negative regulator. This balance within CE-EVs could be crucial
for controlling myofibroblast activity and limiting fibrosis. CE-EVs
also contribute to ECM deposition and remodeling, both directly by
carrying components like fibronectin and collagen fragments (Table S1) and indirectly
through modulators like TGFBIp,
,
 TSP-1, LGALS3BP, and SPARC, often via TGF-β pathways. MMPs or regulators
like TSP-1 within CE-EVs may also contribute to later-stage matrix
remodeling (Table S1). Finally, wound healing involves controlled inflammation,
and CE-EVs contain factors like Complement C3 and LGALS3BP (Table S1), that modulate immune cell activity,
potentially influencing the resolution phase. In summary, CE-EVs encapsulate a complex repertoire of bioactive
molecules, including adhesion proteins, ECM components, signaling
molecules, and their modulators, that collectively promote corneal
wound healing by facilitating epithelial migration and adhesion while
also modulating stromal keratocyte activation, ECM deposition, and
remodeling, primarily through intricate interactions with integrin
and TGF-β signaling pathways. The enrichment of specific factors
like TSP-1, fibronectin, LGALS3BP, SPARC, and CD109 within CE-EVs,
as revealed by our analyses (Table S1),
highlights their targeted role in orchestrating the multifaceted cellular
responses required for successful corneal regeneration (Figure S7).
,,,,,,,

3.4.

## Efficacy of CE-EVs in Healing the Corneal
Epithelium
To further evaluate the potential of CE-EVs in
corneal epithelial wound healing, an in vitro wound healing assay
(scratch assay) was carried out. Human corneal epithelial cells were
grown on a collagen-coated surface to form a confluent monolayer and
then scratched using a pipet tip to create a wound mimic. Then, CE-EVs
in different concentrations (20, 100, and 200 μg/mL) were added
and left to incubate for 24 h before studying the closure of the scratched
area ( a and S8). All CE-EV concentrations showed significantly
higher healing compared with the negative control (Opti-MEM) ( b). However, the
results for 20 μg/mL were more varying (66.8 ± 8.3%) and
significantly lower (p <0.05) than 100 μg/mL
(78.8 ± 3.8%). Both 100 μg/mL and 200 μg/mL (72.3
± 4.7%) showed significantly higher (p <0.001)
healing compared to the control (55.8 ± 1.9%) but not significantly
different from each other. The data indicate that higher concentrations
of CE-EVs enhance healing up to a certain threshold, beyond which
no additional benefits are observed. This finding highlights the potential
for scale-up and GMP production for future clinical applications,
as the optimal effective concentration can be achieved relatively
easily and is suitable for integration with a delivery matrix.
 
3.5.

## Sustained and On-Demand Delivery of CE-EVs
Using the Hydrogel Matrix
EV delivery to the eye presents
several significant challenges. Topical delivery methods often face
rapid clearance due to blinking and tear production, whereas systemic
delivery approaches are unsuitable due to cornea being immune-privileged,
making localized delivery methods more crucial. Our earlier developed cross-linked collagen hydrogel showed
promise in corneal perforation due to its injectable and adhesive
nature. Furthermore, due to the shape-retaining
nature of this hydrogel and the cytocompatibility of the cross-linking
reaction, it would be possible to use such a hydrogel for in situ
molding of corneal defects. Additionally, since these hydrogels can
be stored in buffers without swelling and allow the proliferation
of corneal epithelial cells, they are potentially useful as corneal
implants during Deep Anterior Lamellar Keratoplasty (DALK). Sustained
delivery of EVs during corneal perforation, in situ molding of corneal
defects, and keratoplasty using corneal implants would be highly desirable.
However, a prerequisite would be the wide range of delivery time scales;
a perforation would require a relatively fast-to-moderate release
rate as the hydrogel was supposed to act only as a temporary scaffold
lasting over a few weeks, an in situ
molding of stromal defects would require a release time over a few
months as stromal remodeling is slow, and complete stromal regeneration
after keratoplasty with a hydrogel stromal substitute could take even
longer. Although it is impossible to
mimic the exact in vivo scenario in vitro and nearly impossible to
achieve all of these release time-scales through one hydrogel, it
would be highly valuable if the release time-scales could be as broad
as from days to years. For this purpose, we further evaluated the
release of encapsulated CE-EVs from our previously reported collagen
hydrogel as well as the distribution and mobility of these EVs inside
the hydrogel matrix.
To better assess the release kinetics of
EVs from the hydrogel matrix and to make fluorescence microscopy possible,
EVs were fluorescently labeled. This was achieved by covalently attaching
a fluorescent dye, carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE), to
the protein cargos of the EVs. Such fluorescence detection of released
CE-EVs from the hydrogel can provide a more accurate quantitative
assessment compared to NTA as shredded polypeptide fragments released
from the cross-linked hydrogel can potentially appear as particles
during NTA, leading to misinterpretation of the data.
The release
experiment is depicted schematically in a. To mimic a more in vivo
scenario, a collagenase degradation step was also included ( a). EV release primarily
through diffusion was monitored and was found to plateau at 36 ±
5% after 10 days ( b). Following this initial phase, the remaining EVs can only
be released via an on-demand enzymatic degradation of the hydrogel,
closely mimicking the in vivo scenario where host matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) gradually remodel the hydrogel matrix. The cumulative EV release
is presented in Figure S9 and was found
to be within a range similar to that observed in the scratch assay.
Notably, the incorporation of CE-EVs neither interferes with the hydrogel
cross-linking mechanism nor alters its viscoelastic properties; thus,
it would be feasible to encapsulate varying amounts of CE-EVs as required
for potential in vivo studies in the future. The enzymatic degradation
of the hydrogels can be seen in Figure S10.
 The release profile was fitted to a mathematical
1D-diffusion model, yielding an empirical
self-diffusion coefficient
(empirical D
g) of 2.5 μm2/s for encapsulated EVs in the hydrogel matrix ( b).
To further investigate
the hydrogel network structure and its influence
on EV distribution and diffusion within the hydrogel network, fluorescently
labeled EVs and silica nanoparticles (SiNPs) of similar sizes were
encapsulated in the hydrogel. Several aggregates with significantly
larger sizes can be seen in the 3D images ( a). This aggregation can be induced by the
interaction with the hydrogel matrix since neither the NTA nor the
fluorescent microscopy in PBS showed similar structures. However,
the majority of both EVs and SiNPs were found to be evenly distributed
within the hydrogel and not released into the surrounding solution
within the microscopy time scale ( a).
 To understand better the release mechanism of the
EVs and the effect
of the solute size on the diffusion parameters, Fluorescent Recovery
after Photobleaching (FRAP) measurements were conducted using FITC-dextrans
of varying molecular weights (4, 70, and 500 kDa). The distribution
of these dextrans within the hydrogel and at the gel–solution
interphase is shown in Figure S11, with
two-dimensional images taken in fluorescence and merged (brightfield
and fluorescence) channels. Additionally, 3D images constructed through
z-stack analyses illustrated dextran distribution inside the hydrogel
that shows each dextran probe is homogeneously distributed in the
hydrogel matrix which is crucial to interpret the diffusion data acquired
by FRAP (Figure S12). The diffusion coefficients
determined via FRAP were 232 ± 12, 64.6 ± 0.5, and 36.7
± 2.7 μm2/s for 4, 70, and 500 kDa dextrans,
respectively, with reported hydrodynamic diameters of 1.4, 6.0, and
15.9 nm in an aqueous solution.

Utilizing the dextran probe diffusion data, the mesh size of the
hydrogel was estimated to be 14 and 140 nm corresponding to a collagen
fiber radius of 1 and 10 nm, respectively, using the Ogston–Amsden
model of diffusion in hydrogel networks ( b).
,
 The Clague–Philips
model, which includes combined effects of obstruction and hydrodynamic
interactions, gave similar results ( b).
,
 Moreover, the empirical D
g of the encapsulated EVs was found to be lying
slightly outside of the fitted Ogston–Amsden model curve ( b). However, if this
empirical D
g is moved onto the fitted
Ogston–Amsden model curve, the radius of the released solute
should have been ∼60 nm ( b), which is in very close agreement with the minor
peak observed in the NTA of the labeled EVs ( c). To further validate the assumption of
rigid fibers in the Ogston–Amsden model, a viscoelastic stress–relaxation
experiment was performed which revealed no major decay in the normalized
relaxation modulus over time (Figure S13). This modeling revealed a physical obstruction effect exerted by
the hydrogel network on EVs, resulting in the preferential release
of smaller particles through diffusion ( d). To support this hypothesis, we tracked
the EV motion both in PBS and in the hydrogel matrix and compared
the results with the silica nanoparticle (SiNP) motion in the hydrogels
(Supporting Information Videos 1, 2, and 3). In Figure S14, the distribution of the maximum distance
to the starting point of the particle is presented. These results
show that the EVs are able to move freely in PBS, while this mobility
is significantly reduced when the EVs are incorporated into the hydrogel
matrix. By comparing the EVs with the SiNPs, we can observe that the
maximum distances from the start point are slightly smaller in the
case of SiNP compared to the EVs and only one population can be observed
(Figure S14). On the other hand, the distribution
graph of the EVs represents two populations (Figure S14). These data can support the EV-release data and explain
why only 36% of the encapsulated EVs were able to be released from
the hydrogel matrix through diffusion. The integration of quantitative
assessment techniques and theoretical modeling enhances our understanding
of EV-release dynamics and thereby facilitates the design of future
ocular drug delivery platforms.
In vivo degradation dynamics
of biomaterials within the corneal
environment are largely governed by host enzymatic activities. While
our collagenase assay indicates the hydrogel’s susceptibility
to enzymatic breakdown, the process following implantation involves
intricate host responses, including cell infiltration and the localized
secretion of various enzymes, primarily matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs), which orchestrate tissue remodeling. Key MMPs implicated in corneal wound healing and matrix turnover
include gelatinases (MMP-2, MMP-9), collagenases (MMP-1, MMP-8, MMP-13),
stromelysins (MMP-3, MMP-7), and membrane-type MMPs (MT1-MMP/MMP-14).
−

 The activity profile of these MMPs varies significantly throughout
the healing phases; for instance, MMP-2 and MMP-9 levels often peak
during early epithelial migration (within hours to days postinjury),
whereas others like MMP-8 and MT1-MMP can remain elevated for longer
periods, contributing to sustained remodeling.
,
 This remodeling process is necessary for the integration of the
implant and regeneration of the native tissue and often spans weeks
to months and even years. Our earlier studies involving collagen and
peptide-based implants demonstrated successful integration and tissue
remodeling occurring over periods ranging from 3 to 12 months or even
longer in vivo. Therefore, the enzymatic
degradation susceptibility observed in our in vitro assay, though
a simplified system, is consistent with the hydrogel’s potential
for gradual resorption and replacement by the host tissue in vivo,
mediated by endogenous MMP activity during the essential long-term
remodeling phase of corneal regeneration. Furthermore, the observed
biphasic release profile, initial diffusion-limited release over 10
days followed by the potential for subsequent release upon enzymatic
matrix breakdown, suits well with the expected in vivo scenario involving
early host cell integration followed by slower, MMP-mediated implant
remodeling.

4.

## Conclusions
In conclusion, this study
presents the first comprehensive characterization
of corneal epithelial extracellular vesicles (CE-EVs) and provides
significant insights into their role in corneal wound healing. By
elucidating the interactions between various signaling proteins within
the CE-EVs, we have advanced our understanding of the corneal wound
healing pathway. Our findings demonstrate the potent efficacy of CE-EVs
in promoting corneal epithelium wound healing in vitro and, therefore,
highlight their potential as a therapeutic tool.
Moreover, we
have addressed critical challenges in corneal drug
delivery by developing a hydrogel-based delivery system that offers
a broad time span for release. This system initially follows diffusion-controlled
release, transitioning to an enzymatic (collagenase) digestion-controlled
release on demand. Such release system is also a close mimic of the
in vivo scenario where drug release occurs through the diffusion at
the beginning followed by enzymatic degradation of the implant during
the implant-remodeling phase. Our study provides a physical understanding
of the release mechanisms at a microscopic level, supported by quantitative
evaluation and microscale insights into EV diffusion within the hydrogel
matrix. Utilizing established physical diffusion models, such as the
Ogston–Amsden and Clague–Phillips models, we have achieved
a detailed microscale understanding of these processes.
This
foundational knowledge paves the way for the development of
advanced hydrogel platforms tailored for EV release that accommodate
diverse medical applications with varying release profiles. We believe
these findings would equip researchers with a robust chemistry toolset
to design hydrogels with predictable and controllable EV-diffusion
and -release characteristics, thereby broadening the scope of therapeutic
applications for extracellular vesicles in regenerative medicine.

## Supplementary Material

## Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. J. Gernandt for developing
the Frapsolver software and Prof. F. Heindryckx for helpful discussions
on exosome characterization.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.5c01135.
Nanoparticle tracking analyses, FACS, proteomics data,
interactions of proteins, scratch assay, cumulative EV release, collagenase
degradation of hydrogels, confocal microscope images, viscoelastic
stress relaxation, tracking histograms, and list of proteins identified
by proteomics (PDF)
Supplementary video of EV in hydrogel (AVI)
Supplementary video of EV
tracking in PBS (AVI)
Supplementary video of nanoparticle tracking in hydrogel
(AVI)

The manuscript
was written through the contributions of all authors. All authors
have approved the final version of the manuscript.

This work was
supported by Stiftelsen Promobilia (F18512, 20056), Kronprinsessan
Margaretas Arbetsnämnd för synskadade (ref id 125),
Strategiska forskningsområden (2009-1035), the Swedish Drug
Delivery Forum (SDDF), the Swedish Drug Delivery Center (SweDeliver),
and institutional funding from the Macromolecular Chemistry Research
Program.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials