822acssdBioconjugate ChemistryBioconjug ChemPMC1065505110655051106550513782109910.1021/acs.bioconjchem.3c00374The Evolving
Landscape of Antibody–Drug Conjugates:
In Depth Analysis of Recent Research Progress
SassoJanet
M TenchovRumiana BirdRobert IyerKavita A RalhanKrittika RodriguezYacidzohara ZhouQiongqiong Angela †CAS,
A Division of the American Chemical Society, Columbus, Ohio 43210, United States‡ACS
International India Pvt. Ltd., Pune 411044, India*Email: qzhou@cas.org.
11102023341119511951–200017112023© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits the broadest form of re-use including for commercial purposes, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Antibody–drug conjugates (ADCs) are targeted immunoconjugate
constructs that integrate the potency of cytotoxic drugs with the
selectivity of monoclonal antibodies, minimizing damage to healthy
cells and reducing systemic toxicity. Their design allows for higher
doses of the cytotoxic drug to be administered, potentially increasing
efficacy. They are currently among the most promising drug classes
in oncology, with efforts to expand their application for nononcological
indications and in combination therapies. Here we provide a detailed
overview of the recent advances in ADC research and consider future
directions and challenges in promoting this promising platform to
widespread therapeutic use. We examine data from the CAS Content Collection,
the largest human-curated collection of published scientific information,
and analyze the publication landscape of recent research to reveal
the exploration trends in published documents and to provide insights
into the scientific advances in the area. We also discuss the evolution
of the key concepts in the field, the major technologies, and their
development pipelines with company research focuses, disease targets,
development stages, and publication and investment trends. A comprehensive
concept map has been created based on the documents in the CAS Content
Collection. We hope that this report can serve as a useful resource
for understanding the current state of knowledge in the field of ADCs
and the remaining challenges to fulfill their potential.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2023 Aug 18; Revised 2023 Sep 27; Collection date 2023 Nov 15.

1.

## Introduction
Antibody–drug conjugates
(ADCs) are currently among the
most promising drug classes in oncology because of their ability to
deliver cytotoxic agents to specific tumor sites, combining the selectivity
of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and the efficacy of chemotherapeutic
drugs. − Cancer is a major global health threat, causing millions of fatalities
yearly. , Chemotherapies based on cytotoxic drugs
have been the main strategy for treating of a wide assortment of cancers
for decades. , Cytotoxic drugs include a large
variety of compounds such as alkylating agents, antimetabolites, antitumor
antibiotics, topoisomerase and mitotic inhibitors, and corticosteroids
among many others. − Most of these antitumor drugs, however, exhibit low therapeutic
index and cause severe side effects due to nonspecific drug exposure
to off-target tissues. To address these
challenges, intense research has been carried out, aimed at developing
novel cancer therapeutics with better targeting ability and less harmful
side effects.
ADCs are targeted immunoconjugate constructs that
integrate the
potency of cytotoxic drugs with the selectivity of monoclonal antibodies
( ), minimizing
damage to healthy cells and reducing systemic toxicity. The structure
of an ADC consists of three main components: a monoclonal antibody,
a cytotoxic drug payload, and a linker molecule. − The monoclonal antibody is engineered
to bind specifically to a target antigen that is overexpressed on
cancer cells. This allows the ADC to selectively target cancer cells
while sparing normal cells. The cytotoxic drug payload is a potent
chemotherapeutic agent that is highly effective in killing cancer
cells. The linker molecule attaches the cytotoxic drug to the antibody,
and its stability is crucial in controlling the release of the drug
within the target cell. , − Once the ADC binds to the cancer cell surface, it is internalized
through receptor-mediated endocytosis. Within the cancer cell, the
linker molecule is designed to release the cytotoxic drug payload
either by enzymatic cleavage or through chemical degradation. Once
released, the cytotoxic drug exerts its therapeutic effect by disrupting
key cellular processes and inducing cancer cell death.
 ADCs offer several advantages over conventional
chemotherapy. By
selective targeting of cancer cells, ADCs reduce damage to healthy
tissues and minimize side effects. This allows for higher doses of
the cytotoxic drug to be delivered to the tumor, potentially increasing
efficacy. Additionally, the antibody component of ADCs can elicit
an immune response against the cancer cells, further enhancing their
antitumor activity. Therefore, ADCs have become a major approach in
the research and development of antitumor drugs. , , 
The German scientist Paul Ehrlich
is credited with coining the
term chemotherapy to indicate the use of chemical compounds to treat
disease. Following his experience with
antibodies, Ehrlich also proposed the concept of a “magic bullet”
( ) that would
bring about a selective targeting of pathogens without injuring the
rest of the organism, one of the most notable notions of modern medicine. Ehrlich’s idea of targeted therapy was
first materialized almost 50 years later, with methotrexate linked
to an antibody targeting leukemia cells. The innovative development of hybridoma technology to produce mouse
mAbs greatly advanced the field. It took
nearly eight decades until Ehrlich’s visionary concept was
advanced to achieve the first human trial of ADC therapy using an
anticarcinoembryonic antigen antibody-vindesine conjugate. Subsequent advances in technologies for the
ADC constituent building blocks–the antibody, the linker, and
the payload–have resulted in the development of greater number
of ADCs with enhanced potency, improved pharmacokinetics, reduced
immunogenicity and overall toxicity, and upgraded specificity for
cancer cells. Early ADC prototypes were
created but they suffered from issues such as limited stability and
inadequate target specificity. In the 1990s preclinical studies demonstrated
the potential of ADCs in improving the therapeutic index of cytotoxic
drugs by targeting specific antigens expressed on cancer cells. − However, early clinical trials encountered challenges including
toxicity and insufficient efficacy. In the late 1990s to early 2000s
advances in antibody engineering and linker technologies contribute
to the development of more stable and effective ADCs. − Several ADC candidates have entered clinical trials, showing promising
results in terms of efficacy and safety.
 The early, first-generation, ADCs used clinically
approved drugs
with well-documented mechanisms of action, including the antimetabolites
methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil, the DNA cross-linker mitomycin and
the antimicrotubule agent vinblastine. First-generation ADC, however, showed insufficient drug efficacy,
linker instability, targeted antigens expressed in both normal and
cancerous cells, and triggered undesired immune responses. Further developments, including higher drug
efficacy and thoroughly selected targets, eventually led to the first
ADC, Mylotarg (gemtuzumab ozogamicin), to get approval from the US
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2000 for the treatment of CD33-positive
acute myelogenous leukemia. , Regardless of the hopeful
clinical results, Mylotarg was withdrawn from the market because it
did not exhibit progress in overall survival. The second ADC to be
developed, Adcetris (brentuximab vedotin), received approval from
the US FDA in 2011 for the treatment of Hodgkin’s lymphoma
and anaplastic large-cell lymphoma. , The next ADC,
Kadcyla (trastuzumab emtansine), used a construct combining the humanized
antibody trastuzumab with a powerful microtubule inhibitor cytotoxic
drug via a highly stable linker. It was approved for the treatment
of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive breast
cancer in 2013. , 
Recent advancements have
resulted in a new generation of ADCs with
better chemistry, manufacturing, and control (CMC) properties, including
linkers with optimized stability and powerful cytotoxic agents. Currently,
there are 15 approved ADCs, which have received market endorsement
worldwide, with over 150 candidates being investigated in various
stages of clinical trials at present. Out of these, ∼12% are
in the late-phase (Phase III/IV) owing to rapid advancements in technology
required for generating ADCs. Thus, ADCs as an anticancer treatment
strategy is leading a new era of targeted cancer defeat. Additionally,
ADCs are being increasingly applied in combination with other agents.
The growing diversification of target antigens as well as bioactive
cytotoxic payloads is rapidly extending the range and scope of tumors
targeted by ADCs. However, toxicity continues to remain a key issue
in the development of these agents, and a better understanding and
management of ADC-related toxicities will be essential for further
optimization. Although numerous challenges remain, recent clinical
accomplishments have produced intense interest in this therapeutic
class reflected in a rapidly growing number of publications ( ). The development
of ADCs continues to be a particularly active area of research and
development, with ongoing efforts to optimize the design of antibodies,
linkers, and cytotoxic drug payloads. The goal is to improve the efficacy
and safety profile of ADCs and apply them to a wider range of cancers
and to other diseases.
 This report provides a detailed overview of the
recent advances
in antibody–drug conjugate research and considers future directions
and challenges in advancing this promising platform to widespread
therapeutic use. We examine data from the CAS Content Collection, the largest human-curated collection of published
scientific information, and analyzed the ADC publication landscape
of recent research (2000 onward) to uncover the trends in published
documents (both journals as well as patents) and to provide insights
into scientific advances in the area. We also discuss the evolution
of key concepts in the field as well as the major technologies and
the development pipelines of ADCs with a particular focus/emphasis
on company research, disease targets, and development stages. We hope
this report can serve as a useful resource for understanding the current
state of the field of ADCs and the remaining challenges to fulfill
and achieve their full potential.

2.

## ADC Basics
2.1.

## Selection/Optimization of Antibodies
Antibodies are an essential building block of ADCs ( ) that possess characteristic
requirements. It should have a high affinity and avidity for the target
antigen but no or insignificant binding to off-target sites and it
is important to have selective binding to the target antigen leading
to the accumulation and retention of ADCs at the target site. − In addition, the antibody should have low immunogenicity, low cross-reactivity,
optimum-linker binding, and a long half-life. , It is interesting to note that the antibody component of many ADCs
retains its activity profile and can therefore interfere with target
cell function, alter downstream signaling, and/or cause immune effector
cells to elicit payload-independent antitumor immunity, thereby acting
beyond mere payload carrier. For example, the Fab region of the antibody
in ADCs can disrupt target function by blocking ligand binding, interfering
with dimerization and/or endocytosis, and target protein degradation. , Likewise, the Fc region of the antibody can induce antibody-dependent
cell cytotoxicity (ADCC). Most ADCs such as Kadcyla (T-DM1), Enhertu
(T-DXd), Polivy, Padcev, Trodelvy, just to mention a few, rely upon
the ADCC-competent IgG1 backbone. , , , , The Fc region is also responsible for complement-dependent cytotoxicity
and antibody-dependent cellular phagocytosis.
A significant
and long-recognized challenge in the field is the heterogeneous distribution
of the antibodies when administered systemically. Antibody internalization and clearance obstruct uptake
in solid tumors, limited by tumor vascular permeability and diffusion. Mathematical analysis of antibody distribution
through tumors applying simple scaling relationships can help understanding
the tumor physiology and antibody tumor penetration. , Fundamental understanding of the mechanisms and time scales of antibody
transport and clearance are essential for the prediction of the distance
an antibody may permeate through tumor tissue, with the balance between
these processes controlling the antibody penetration into a tumor
and therefore its optimal efficacy. Thus,
for solid tumors, optimal binding affinity has been suggested to depend
on the level of target expression. 
Initially, first-generation ADCs used murine antibodies, but they
elicited a robust immune response with some patients producing antihuman
antibodies, leading to the generation of second-generation chimeric
antibodies. These mouse/human chimeric antibodies contain the variable
regions of mouse light- and heavy-chains linked to human constant
regions. Recent developments in the field have moved toward fully
humanized mAbs which do not produce immunogenic responses. , Many innovative strategies are being used to maximize the efficacy
of ADCs including the use of biparatopic antibodies. These antibodies
target two different epitopes of the same target antigen and can help
cluster the antigenic receptors, leading to the rapid internalization
of ADCs.
For designing present-day ADCs, immunoglobulin G (IgG)
is the most
widely used antibody isotype. ADCs must have similar pharmacokinetic
properties to those of normal human IgGs. Human IgG comprises four
subclasses: IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4, which differ in their constant
and hinge regions. Despite being the most immunogenic, use of IgG3
is avoided in ADC design due to its short serum circulating half-life
(∼7 days) when compared to other subclasses (∼21 days). , Though IgG1, IgG2, and IgG4 have suitable serum half-lives, IgG2
is rarely used owing to its tendency to dimerize and aggregate in vivo. Most ADCs are developed
on IgG1 platforms because of improved solubility, greater complement-fixation,
low nonspecific immunity, and better immune effector cell receptor
(FcγR)-binding efficiencies of IgG1, which can play a crucial
role in anticancer activity of ADCs. , Though IgG4
can also induce antibody-dependent phagocytosis (ADCP), its dynamic
nature due to Fab-arm exchange contributes to reduced efficacy. Despite
this, a few ADCs, such as Gemtuzumab ozogamicin and Inotuzumab ozogamicin,
use IgG4 as the platform to target CD33 and CD22, respectively. − Gemtuzumab ozogamicin contains an IgG4 core-hinge mutation that
blocks Fab-arm exchange. 
″Biparatopic”
or “bispecific antibodies”
are antibodies designed to simultaneously bind to two different epitopes
(binding sites) on the same target antigen or two different antigens. , This dual binding capacity can offer several advantages in terms
of therapeutic applications. Thus, having two antigen-binding sites
allows them to target either two distinct epitopes on the same antigen
or two different antigens altogether. Their advantages include (i)
enhanced targeting–bispecific antibodies can engage two binding
sites on the same antigen, potentially increasing binding affinity
and specificity; (ii) versatility–they can target multiple
antigens simultaneously, which is particularly valuable in cancer
therapy or immunological diseases; (iii) cross-linking–in the
context of cancer therapy, bispecific antibodies can cross-link cancer
cells and immune cells, such as T cells, leading to targeted cell
killing. 
Antibodies with masked
binding domains have been engineered to
have one or more of their antigen-binding sites temporarily inactivated
or “masked”. , These antibodies can
be designed to change their binding properties under specific conditions.
Their applications include conditional activation, for instance, an
antibody may only become active when exposed to specific environmental
factors or cellular cues; reduced off-target effects—in some
cases, masking can be used to prevent antibody binding to nontarget
tissues or cells until it reaches the desired site. CytomX’s
Probody technology is one example where the binding domains of antibodies
are masked by a peptide, which is selectively cleaved by proteases
present at the tumor site. This allows
for the activation of the antibody’s binding and therapeutic
functions specifically within the tumor microenvironment.
Both
biparatopic/bispecific antibodies and antibodies with masked
binding domains are innovative strategies in antibody engineering,
offering greater control and versatility in targeting diseases while
minimizing off-target effects. These approaches continue to advance
in the field of immunotherapy and targeted therapies with potential
applications in cancer, autoimmune diseases, and other medical conditions.
The antibodies used in ADC design are large compared to the actual
cytotoxic payload, which implies that much of the actual formulation
is being utilized to deliver the antigen to the target rather than
to execute its pharmacological activity. The large size of the antibody
(∼150 kDa) can also cause issues with target penetration in
solid tumors. The targeting capacity of antibodies is achieved through
its small variable loop structures (VH) present at the
terminal portion of Fab fragments; therefore, fragments of native
antibodies can be used to develop smaller binding motifs such as F(ab)2, Fab′, Fab, and Fv fragments. In addition, engineered
scaffolds, such as single-chain variable fragments (scFv-Fc), single
domain antibodies (sdAbs), and diabodies, are being explored. Furthermore,
humanized fragments of unusual IgGs, such as heavy chain variable
domain(VHH) and heavy chain variable domain-based antibody
(VNAR) fragments from camelids and shark antibodies, respectively
known as nanobodies, are being studied. Owing to their small size, ease of production, manipulation, conjugation,
high solubility, stability, and delayed serum clearance, these antibody
fragment conjugates or FDCs have various advantages compared to their
antibody precursors. 
For example,
Fan et al. developed an epidermal growth factor (EGFR)-targeting
nanobody-drug conjugate that displays potent anticancer activity in
solid tumor models. In recent years,
ASN004, an scFv-Fc ADC, has been developed that targets 5T4 oncofetal
antigens expressed on a wide range of malignant tumors. It is designed
by conjugating a novel scFv-Fc antibody with an Auristatin F hydroxypropylamide
(AF-HPA) payload using Dohtlexin drug-linker technology. The developed
ADC has a high drug-antigen ratio (DAR) of approximately 10–15
and has shown tumor repression in preclinical models. ANT-045 and ANT-043 are other scFv-Fc conjugated
ADCs being developed by Antikor Biopharma that have shown successful
results against solid tumors. While ANT-043 has tumor ablation effects
in gastric, breast, and cancer xenograft models, ANT-045 has high
stability, excellent in vitro cell-kill potency,
and is successful in in vivo tumor cures. 
With the advancement in molecular biology
techniques, site-specific
antibody conjugation is being introduced into ADC development to increase
the therapeutic efficacy. Antibodies can be engineered using genetic
engineering, chemoenzymatic modifications, or metabolic labeling through
their Fab or Fc region to introduce specific reaction sites for ease
of conjugation. A few modifications include introducing natural amino
acids such as cysteine (Cys) or glutamine (Gln). − Apart from natural amino acids, unnatural amino acids (UAA) (also
referred to as noncanonical amino acids) containing orthogonal side-chain
functional groups are also introduced at different positions in the
antibody for generating sites for stable conjugation. For example,
tubulin inhibitor payload AS269 is conjugated to a HER2- targeted
mAb incorporated with a UAA, pAF. The resulting anti-HER2 ADC (ARX788)
has a DAR of 1.9 and exhibits a high serum stability and half-life.
ARX788 showed strong antitumor activity in mice and is currently undergoing
Phase III clinical trials. , Recently, other ligands
such as short peptide tags, modified glycans, and small molecule-based
affinity ligands are also used to generate conjugation sites for antibody
payloads. , , Some ADCs in preclinical/clinical development have attenuated effector
functional activity, with the intention for reducing off-target off-tumor
toxicity. − 
Similar to ADCs, peptide-drug conjugates
(PDCs) consist of a peptide
two-five amino acids in length bound to the cytotoxic payload via
a linker. A key difference between ADCs and PDCs is the substantially
smaller size of the peptide component (2–20 kDa) of PDCs than
the antibody component (∼150 kDa) of ADCs (5–25 amino
acids vs ∼1000 amino acids in peptides and antibodies, respectively) , This allows for better absorption and uptake than conventional ADCs,
which is especially important for drugs that need to cross the BBB. , ADCs and PDCs show a great degree of overlap in terms of linker
chemistry and types of cytotoxic payloads. A variety of peptides have
been utilized in PDCs, including bicyclic toxin peptides and dendritic
peptides. Bicyclic peptides are small,
constrained peptides, many of which have high affinity for target
antigens. An example of a PDC is BT8009, which consists of a bicyclic
peptide linked to MMAE. BT8009 binds cell adhesion molecule, nectin-4
with high affinity (∼3 nM) and specificity and has shown promise
in NSCLC and pancreatic ductal xenograft models. Currently, several PDCs are in clinical trials or being
actively explored. 

2.2.

## Linkers for Use in Antibody–Drug Conjugates
Linkers connect the active molecule in an ADC to the antibody that
determines the target for the drug. To be effective, a linker should
be stable in plasma. It should not alter
the behavior of either the drug or the antibody to which it is attached.
The linker should be sufficiently hydrophilic to moderate or mitigate
the solubility effects of warheads, which, in most cases, are lipophilic.
The linkers should not aggregate; since aggregation is likely to impair
the activity of the antibody and may reduce the stability of the ADC.
Finally, the linker should release the drug completely and selectively
under appropriate conditions. The choice of linker will be determined
by the functionality present on the drug and the antibody.
2.2.1.

## Linker Types
Linkers can be divided
into two major classes: cleavable and noncleavable. Cleavable linkers
allow the drug to be separated from the antibody without proteolytic
cleavage of the antibody, while noncleavable linkers require proteolysis
of the antibody for the drug to diffuse to its site of action.
2.2.1.1.

## Cleavable Linkers
Cleavable linkers
allow the drug attached to an antibody to be freed from the ADC without
destroying the antibody. Most commonly,
cleavable linkers can be severed by acid, reducing agents, or enzymes.
Acid-sensitive linkers are chosen because the microenvironment
of tumors is often acidic and hypoxic; with parenteral administration ensuring that the drug is released
selectively only in the tumor. Acid-cleavable linkers are most commonly
hydrazones; for example, a hydrazone is used in the linker for the
first USFDA-approved ADC Mylotarg. One
disadvantage of acid-sensitive linkers is premature or nonselective
release; Mylotarg was withdrawn in part because of nonselective toxicity
(which was mitigated by changes in ADC dosing). 
Reductive linkers allow the release of the drug under
reducing
conditions; the hypoxic environment of tumors makes release of the
drug at the tumor site more likely than elsewhere. Reductive linkers
have most commonly been disulfides; disulfides can be cleaved either
by reduction of the sulfur–sulfur bond or by exchange of thiols
(such as glutathione, present in high concentrations in cancer cells)
with disulfides to release a thiol (either the antibody or the drug). Cysteines or other thiols comprise the linker,
but when the disulfide is attached to unhindered carbon atoms, nonselective
cleavage of the disulfide is more likely. This can be mitigated significantly
by two α-methyl groups on one of the carbons at the disulfide. , 
Finally, as the name suggests, enzyme-cleavable linkers incorporate
linkages that are selectively cleaved by enzymes. Enzyme-cleavable
linkers most commonly use amides as the linking moieties because of
the prevalence of enzymes in organisms that process and cleave amide
bonds in proteins. Amides are thermally and hydrolytically stable,
reducing the likelihood of premature or nonselective drug cleavage.
The availability of a wide variety of enzymes and enzyme targets allows
linkers to be tuned to avoid hydrolysis by enzymes in normal cells
and to facilitate hydrolysis in tumor cells. Initially, di- and tripeptide
linkers were used; one of the most common linkers contain the valine-citrulline
(Val-Cit) linkage, a target for cathepsin B which is overexpressed
in some tumor cells. Phenylalaninylvaline,
valinylalanine, and tetrapeptide linkers have been deployed as well. The valine-citrulline linker is used in the
approved ADC Adcetris, while the terminated clinical candidate T-Rova
uses a valine-alanine linker. While
amides are the most common in enzyme-cleavable linkers, other motifs
have also been used. For example, substituted ortho-hydroxybenzyl
β-glucuronides and β-galactosides are susceptible to hydrolysis by β-glucuronidase
and β-galactosidase, respectively. Alternatively, substitution
of the hydroxybenzyl phosphate-containing linkers yields linkers susceptible
to hydrolysis by phosphatases. Cleavage of the acetal or phosphate
linkage generates an ortho-hydroxybenzyl group, which subsequently
undergoes dealkylative cleavage via an ortho-quinone methide to split
the linker. The protected ortho-quinone methide linker is termed a
self-immolative linker; while it is
stable under physiological conditions, rapid cleavage occurs when
the hydroxy group is unveiled. The self-immolative linker can be altered
to incorporate a variety of groups sensitive to various enzymes, allowing
linker cleavage to be tailored to the necessary selectivity.

2.2.1.2.

## Noncleavable Linkers
Noncleavable
linkers are designed to remain intact until the antibody is proteolyzed
in lysosomes after internalization. One example of a noncleavable
linker is the maleimido thioether linker in Kadcyla; , while retro-Michael reaction of the β-thioether amide is possible,
the modes of cleavage common under physiological conditions are limited.
Since conditional cleavage of ADC containing noncleavable linkers
is rare to nonexistent, premature release of the drug moiety should
be limited to cleavage of the antibody itself, an unlikely event.
The off-target toxicity of ADC using noncleavable linkers should thus
be minimal. In addition, proteolytic cleavage of the ADC yields a
drug moiety substituted with a remaining fragment of the antibody;
the peptide fragment is likely polar and charged, preventing the escape
of the drug from the cell. The peptide-substituted drug is thus retained
within the cell, limiting its ability to kill neighboring cells or
to enter circulation and kill nontarget cells; the antibody fragment
may also limit transporter-mediated resistance to the drug (though
it is unlikely to reduce the effects of other resistance pathways).
Exemplary cleavable and noncleavable linkers used in ADCs are shown
in .
 
2.2.1.3.

## Branched Linkers
Branched linkers
have been devised for ADC to access ADC with higher DAR. The closest technology to clinical use is that
developed by Mersana Therapeutics in which a glycerol-glycolaldehyde
condensation polymer (Fleximer) with pendant esters of mercaptocarboxylic
acids and drug moieties is prepared and attached to an arylmaleimide-substituted
antibody. , The method can produce ADC with
a DAR of 10–15. A vincristine-functionalized trastuzumab using
the technology had antitumor activity similar to and lower toxicity
than the corresponding conventionally generated ADC. Two ADC using
this technology have entered clinical trials. Upifitomab rilsodotum , uses MMAF as the warhead; in a Phase 1/2 trial, it did not show
improvement over control against platinum-resistant ovarian cancer.
A second ADC, XMT 2056, uses the same platform but uses an STING agonist
as the warhead. It is in Phase 1 clinical trials for treating metastatic
HER2-positive tumors; unfortunately, its trials are in clinical hold
due to a severe adverse event. Other
branched linker methodologies use transglutaminase-mediated coupling
of trisubstituted piperidine-containing amines with sequence-modified
antibodies, , the preparation and use of carbamoylethyl-
and carbamoylethoxy arylmaleimides by Firefly Bio as branched linkers
for ADC, the use of pentaerythritol-derived
linkers containing amine or oxime moieties for antibody conjugation,
fluorescent linkers, and three azide moieties for attachment pf payloads
by Sapozhnikova et al., and the preparation
and use of disubstituted tetrahydropyrazinoindoles as antibody
linkers via condensation of aldehyde-containing antibodies with trisubstituted
indolemethanehydrazines by R.P. Scherer Technologies. Linkers that carry two drug units per linker
have been also reported for typical hinge cysteine-based conjugation. , 

2.2.2.

## What Types of Linkers Are Used in ADCs?
Why?
Of the currently approved ADCs, cleavable linkers (particularly
enzyme-cleavable linkers) predominate, with 11 out of 13 USFDA-approved
ADCs having cleavable linkers (and eight
of the ADCs having enzyme-cleavable linkers). Thus, while premature
release of the payload (as seen in Mylotarg) in ADC possessing cleavable
linkers can lead to unacceptable off-target toxicity and reduced exposure
that potentially affects efficacy, the benefits of selective linker
cleavage appear to outweigh the liabilities. One way in which this
may occur is by the “bystander effect”. If the payload is released either near a target
cell or is transported from (or diffuses from if the drug lacks charged
groups such as carboxylates), then the drug can be taken up by neighboring
cells, resulting in their death. In most cases, cells in the vicinity
of a tumor cell are likely to be tumor cells; thus, the bystander
effect allows the ADC to affect cells in the vicinity of an antigen-presenting
cell. Since one of the many ways that cancer cells evade treatment
is to downregulate the production and expression of surface antigens,
ADCs using cleavable linkers can take advantage of the bystander effect
and circumvent some of the resistance modes of tumor cells.

2.3.

## Drugs Incorporated into ADCs
2.3.1.

## What Are the Requirements for Drugs To Be
Incorporated as Payloads into ADCs?
First, antibodies such
as IgG (approximately 150 kDa) are large; attachment of many drug
molecules to an antibody often makes it more lipophilic, causing aggregation
of the ADC and subsequent degradation and inactivation. The number
of drug molecules linked to an antibody is small (in most cases, four
or fewer), making the effective dose of the drug in an ADC small.
In addition, the low numbers of antigens per cell and the imperfect
delivery of ADC to cells further reduces the likely dose of drug from
ADC. Thus, because only a small dose
of drug is possible, the drug chosen for use in an ADC needs to be
highly potent (exhibiting its effects at nM to pM concentrations)
to boost efficacy. However, the effective dosage of drug to cells
from ADCs has shown a plateau in mice, indicating that a sufficient
ADC can be delivered to a tumor to oversaturate it with the drug (with
the caveat that the drugs delivered in this case were highly potent
and adapted for the ADC). Second, drugs
in ADCs are attached to antibodies and are not free to diffuse into
cells. If the linker between a drug and an antibody remains intact
until delivery, the antibody controls where the drug is released,
allowing less selective drugs to be used in ADCs than those given
systemically. Finally, the drug needs to be stable both to storage
and to administration; since ADCs are administered parentally, the
drug in an ADC needs to be stable in blood and plasma (though attachment
to an antibody may provide steric shielding for a drug and thus may
reduce its reactivity and increase its stability). A secondary consideration
is if the ADC is being used in combination with other drugs, the ADC
warhead should act on a different target, a different biological pathway,
or at a different phase of the cell cycle than the other drugs being
used. 

2.3.2.

## What Types of Drugs Are Used as Payloads
for ADCs?
Auristatins are tubulin polymerization inhibitors derived
from the marine natural product dolastatin 10, with potencies of 50–100
pM. Monomethyl auristatins F and E have
been used as warheads for ADCs such as Adcetris, Polivy, and Blenrep. 
Maytansinoids
are ansa-macrolide natural products isolated
from the shrub Maytenus serrata. They bind tubulin and prevent its assembly into microtubules,
thus inhibiting mitosis and cell replication. Maytansinoids were tried as antitumor agents but were not
effective at tolerable concentrations. The maytansine DM1 is the warhead
of the ADC Kadcyla. 
Camptothecin and its analogs such as irinotecan, topotecan,
govitecan, SN-38, exatecan, and deruxtecan inhibit topoisomerase 1,
an enzyme that unwinds and cuts a single strand of supercoiled DNA,
allowing it to be repaired and replicated; its inhibition leads to DNA cleavage and cell death. A variety of
camptothecin analogs have been tried as antitumor agents, but their
aqueous solubilities and side effects have hindered their use as antitumor
agents. Some of the camptothecins have
also been susceptible to export by ABC transporters; annulation of
an additional ring as in exatecan prevented transport but caused myelotoxicity,
which was reduced further by addition of a maleimide-terminated peptide
to form deruxtecan. Camptothecin analogs are warheads in the USFDA-approved
ADC Enhertu and Trodelvy. 
Pyrrolobenzodiazepines such as tesirine and talirine
were derived from the natural product anthramycin. They alkylate DNA with extremely high potencies (as low
as 100 fM). One pyrrolobenzodiazepine
(SJG-136) was tried as an antitumor agent but progressed only to Phase
I trials due to significant toxicity with no antitumor response. Their high potency makes them attractive warheads
for ADCs. A variety of ADCs with pyrrolobenzodiazepine
warheads have been tried, with one (Zylonta) having been approved
as of December 2021 for the treatment of B-cell lymphomas. Their dimeric
nature and the presence of two alkylating moieties allows them to
cross-link DNA, which creates DNA damage that is difficult to repair.
However, these same features are also likely responsible for undesired
off-target toxicity. Structurally related indolinobenzodiazepine
dimers have also been studied as warheads for ADC; incorporation of monoamine indolinobenzodiazepines
has been used to generate antitumor ADC with reduced off-target toxicities. , 
Calicheamicin γ and
related natural products such as dynemicin contain strained enediyne
moieties. Under reductive conditions, DNA-bound calicheamicin undergoes
Bergmann cyclization to generate diradicals which cleave both strands
of DNA, leading to damage which is difficult or impossible for cells
to repair. It inhibits DNA replication at pg/mL concentrations but is also toxic as a result. The combination
of potency and toxicity suggested the potential use of calicheamicin
γ in ADCs. The first approved ADC,
Mylotarg, incorporated calicheamicin as a warhead; it was approved
in 2001 but withdrawn in 2010 because of its toxicity. Development
of modified dosing allowed Mylotarg to be reapproved in 2017 with
an expanded patient population. The
ADC Besponsa also uses a calicheamicin derivative as a warhead.
Many other compounds have been tried as
warheads for
ADC. Duocarmycins such as CC-1065 and seco-DUBA are DNA-alkylating
agents effective at nanomolar to picomolar concentrations. Tubulysins are noncanonical peptides containing
thiazole moieties that act as microtubule polymerization inhibitors
and are active against cancer cells at nanomolar to picomolar concentrations, making them attractive candidates for ADCs. However, some of the tubulysins are unstable
in aqueous environment and can show unselective toxicity in cancer
cells. Cryptophycins are macrolides which inhibit tubulin polymerization
at picomolar concentrations; however, trials against cancer showed
toxicity but not efficacy. , Despite this, their
potency has made them attractive payloads for ADCs. The spliceostatins and thailanostatins are natural products
that inhibit the spliceosome, modifying mRNA sequences and thus influencing
protein expression. They have shown inhibition of cancer cells at
nanomolar concentrations and hence are
potential ADC payloads. Doxorubicin
is an intercalating agent for modification of DNA which was used as
one of the first payloads for ADCs but was not effective because of
its low potency. However, if the DAR of doxorubicin conjugates can
be increased by newer conjugation methods, it may prove to be an effective
warhead for ADCs. Alternatively, more potent anthracycline drugs have
been developed. For example, PNU-159682 is an anthracycline acting
by a similar mechanism to doxorubicin which was found to be nearly
1000 times more potent than doxorubicin. , This enhanced potency enables ADCs incorporating it to be highly
effective. α-Amanitin, a fungal
toxin which inhibits RNA polymerase II, is a significant cause of
liver failure and death from toxic mushroom ingestion. Its toxicity, robustness, and moderate size
make it a reasonable choice as a warhead for ADC. Protein toxins have been used as warheads for ADCs; for
example, Pseudomonas exotoxin A is the
warhead for the USFDA-approved ADC Lumoxiti. Diphtheria exotoxin has also been
used as a payload for ADC. 
Finally, immunomodulating agents have been tested as
antibody payloads, either to suppress immune responses for anti-inflammatory
or immunosuppressant activities or to enhance the immune response
to cancer. − In addition, an ADC with antibiotic warheads have been designed
for use as an antibacterial agent. 

2.4.

## Conjugation Methods for Antibody–Drug
Conjugates
2.4.1.

## What Are the Important Features of a Conjugation
Method?
As with the linking moiety, it is important that
the method of attaching a drug to an antibody through a linker does
not alter the activity or stability of the drug or the antibody. In
addition, conjugation should be efficient, proceed in high yield (so
that as little as possible of the reagents are used per unit of ADC)
and proceed as rapidly as possible. It should also be selective and
predictable so that the locations of attachment of a drug to the antibody
are controllable, known, and consistent. While it would be optimal to have a single species generated by
a method, it is not necessary as long as the ADC is composed of a
consistent mixture of species with consistent stability, biological
and physical properties, and biological activity.

2.4.2.

## What Is the Structure of an Antibody? Where
Can It Be Functionalized?
Most antibodies used for ADC are
immunoglobulins, of which the most commonly used is immunoglobulin
G (IgG) ( ). IgG contains two heavy chains and two light
chains. The heavy chains are attached to each other and to the light
chains through four (interchain) disulfide S–S bonds that hold
the antibody together. Twelve other intrachain disulfide bonds control
the tertiary structures of the light and heavy chains. There are also
roughly 80 lysine residues in a typical antibody, of which 40 may
be functionalized. In addition, one of the heavy chain glutamine residues
is substituted with a branched-chain heptasaccharide which improves
the ability of the antibody to trigger an immune response. 

2.4.3.

## Conjugation Methods to Native Antibodies
2.4.3.1.

## Lysine
Under most circumstances,
however, the reactivity of specific residues is rarely controlled,
unless the basicity of a residue is significantly altered by its position
in the protein sequence or by the side chains of nearby residues.
In most cases, the average number of residues functionalized can be
controlled by stoichiometry but not the position of functionalization.
The lysine ε-amine forms stable amides with acylating agents
such as N-hydroxysuccinimidyl esters (particularly
sulfonated N-hydroxysuccinimidyl esters, which have better aqueous solubilities), benzoyl
fluorides, and acid anhydrides. Acylating agents can form esters with tyrosine,
threonine, or serine residues, but the esters are not stable; thus,
if not prevented, some of the acylating agents will be consumed, decreasing
the amount of drug attached to the antibody. Affinity peptides have
been used to control the location of conjugation with antibodies; for example, binding of a peptide-containing
acylating agent to the Fc domain of an antibody directs the acylation
reaction to nearby residues and the
conjugation method has been performed on gram scale using a peptide-substituted
thioester. Cleavage of the peptide yielded
a thiol available for further reaction.

2.4.3.2.

## Cysteine
Cysteine is the most
common residue functionalized in antibodies because the sulfur atom
of its side chain is highly nucleophilic. Cysteine’s thiol
moiety is acidic enough for its anion to be accessible under physiological
conditions; the resultant anion is more reactive toward electrophiles
than other residues but is not basic enough to cause side reactions.
IgG does not natively contain free cysteine residues, requiring some
of the disulfide bonds of the antibody to be cleaved in order to allow
functionalization. The four interchain disulfide bonds are most often
used; while this preserves the structure
and function of the individual antibody fragments, the stability of
the antibody may be compromised. Selectivity among the cysteine residues
is difficult; while a single species can be formed if all eight cysteines
are functionalized (as for the approved ADC Troldelvy and Enhertu),
most methods yield mixtures of products.
The most common monofunctionalization
reagent used is the maleimide. Maleimides undergo Michael additions
of thiols readily under ambient conditions to yield alkylthiosuccinimides. The thiol-succinimide adducts, however, can
undergo retro-Michael addition, which could lead to either incomplete
functionalization of the antibody or premature release of the drug
from the antibody and undesired toxicity. Ring opening of the imide
to form a carboxylate-containing amide reduces retro-Michael reactions
substantially. Exposure of the imide
product to mildly basic conditions can be used to form the carboxylate; the presence of nearby positively charged residues
facilitates imide ring opening and stabilizes the maleimide adducts.
Intramolecular reactions can also be used to stabilize the cysteine
adducts. Other monofunctionalization
reagents for cysteine include palladium aryl complexes to yield aryl
thioethers, disulfides derived from
exogenous thiols (particularly acidic thiols), and alkenyl and alkynyl phosphorus , and iodine reagents. The known reactions
of haloacetamides with cysteine residues can also be used; while stable thioether linkages are formed,
their reactivity may lead to difficulty in controlling the number
of appended drug moieties or their residue selectivities.
Disulfide
rebridging can be used to reduce the potential instability
caused by complete functionalization of the cysteines generated by
reduction of the four interchain disulfide bonds. Reaction of the intermediate octathiols with biselectrophiles
yields bisthioethers in which two of the cysteines are connected by
alkyl or aryl groups; the thioether linkages are robust and can stabilize
the dimeric antibody structure. The number of bridges formed (and
thus the number of drugs incorporated) is easily controlled; the structure
of the alkylating agent and the number of available sites for drug
conjugation on it determine the carrying capacity of the ADC. One
disadvantage of the method is that the biselectrophiles are likely
to not be commercially available and thus require synthesis. A variety
of reagents has been developed for disulfide rebridging. Abzena developed
bis(sulfonylmethyl)methyl ketones (ThioBridge) which undergo
sequential elimination and Michael reactions to yield thioether-substituted
ketones. The payload can then be attached
with alkoxyamines or by reductive amination. A similar method for
rebridging has been used by Novartis with dichloroacetone as the biselectrophile. Maleimides with bromo-, iodo-, or arylthiol-substituents
undergo Michael/retro-Michael reactions to yield substituted maleimides; − incubation at pH 8.4 yields maleimidic acids which are resistant
to Michael and retro-Michael reactions at the linker. Dihalo- or bis(phenylthio)pyridazines
undergo analogous reactions to dihalo- or bis(arylthiol)maleimides
but are resistant to linker cleavage by retro-Michael reactions. The pyridazines can incorporate multiple drug
moieties; in addition, their reactivity can be controlled by temperature.
Other biselectrophiles used for disulfide rebridging are aryl di(bromomethyl)quinoxalines
(C-Lock, Concortis Therapeutics ), cis-platinum
diamine complexes (Invictus Oncology), and divinylpyrimidines. 

2.4.3.3.

## Other Residues
The N-terminal
amino group of peptides is less basic than the ε-amino groups
of lysine residues, making selective reactions at the N-terminus of
the antibody heavy chains possible. The proximity of the N-termini
to the receptor binding site of the antibody may complicate functionalization.
While reaction at the C-terminus would be preferable (because the
C-terminus of the heavy chains is distant from the antigen- or receptor-binding
sites of the antibody), chemical methods for doing so are uncommon.
Transamination at an N-terminal glutamine residue with a formylpyridinium
salt followed by reaction with an alkoxyamine yielded a stable N-terminal
oxime ether. Oxidation of an N-terminal
serine moiety yields a formylglycine residue, which can react with
an alkoxyamine to form an oxime ether or can form nitrogen heterocycles
by condensation with carbonyl compounds.
Arginine residues are
unreactive under physiological conditions because the guanidine conjugate
base of the native guanidinium ion is highly basic, inhibiting reaction.
However, dicarbonyl compounds can react with amidines or guanidines
to yield stable imidazoles. An azidophenylglyoxal was designed
for reaction with arginine residues to form azidophenylaminoimidazole
moieties; azide–alkyne cycloaddition with a terminal alkyne-substituted
warhead yields the functionalized antibody. Finally, Ugi reactions of a lysine residue, a nearby aspartate or
glutamate residue, an azidoaldehyde, and an isonitrile formed azide-functionalized
macrocycles amenable to drug attachment via azide–alkyne cycloaddition. 

2.4.4.

## Conjugation Methods for Non-Native Antibodies
If an ADC with a precisely known structure is desired, native antibodies
may not allow sufficient selectivity. Incorporating non-native functional
groups by modification of the heavy chain sequence makes selective
antibody conjugation with existing chemistry possible. Antibodies
can be produced either by inoculation of mice with an antigen, by
phage display, or by biopanning, separation
of the cells producing the antibody and hybridization with cancer
cells, cloning of the antibody sequence, and insertion into CHO cells. Since the antibody DNA and protein sequences
are known, they can be modified to obtain antibodies with non-native
sequences. Multiple methods of sequence
modification may be useful.
2.4.4.1.

## Cysteine Incorporation
IgG normally
does not possess free cysteine residues; the cysteines are connected
by oxidation to intra- and interchain disulfides. Because the reactivity
of cysteine is distinct from other residues, a non-native cysteine
residue should be readily functionalizable, and has been used in technologies
such as THIOMAB. Incorporation of an
N-terminal cysteine allows reaction with aldehydes to form thiazolidines which slowly releases the aldehyde payload
and enables the adducts to be effective as ADC. The position of insertion
of the cysteine into the antibody sequence, however, needs to be chosen
to minimize perturbation of antibody structure; in addition, as noted
earlier, the presence of positively charged residues nearby facilitates
ring opening of maleimide conjugates and improves their stabilities
to deconjugation. Another caveat of cysteine incorporation is that
cysteines form disulfides with glutathione during antibody production
which must be reductively cleaved, but methods have been developed
to address this issue. Recent studies
have shown that antibody engineering methods are used to add two or
three unpaired Cys residues, boosting the DAR of ADCs to >2 per
antibody. 

2.4.4.2.

## Noncanonical Amino Acids
The
use of amino acids containing functionality not normally present in
peptides or antibodies allows facile, biocompatible, and selective
reactions such as azide–alkyne cycloaddition and oxime ether
formation to be used for linking to drugs. However, the biosynthesis
of antibodies containing noncanonical amino acids (NCAA) is difficult.
NCAA incorporation normally requires one of the stop codons in translation
(most commonly, the amber codon UAG) to be suppressed and instead
be used to encode the desired amino acid. Amber codon suppression,
however, is believed to harm the cells in which it is deployed, requiring alterations to the expression methods.
Cell-free systems can be used to generate NCAA-containing antibodies,
but they lack the ability to glycosylate the finished antibody, which reduces its ability to summon an immune
response. In addition, the site of incorporation requires optimization
to avoid altering the stability or function of the antibody. Antigen-
and receptor-binding sites and the hinge regions must be avoided,
while solvent-exposed sites are preferred to increase the rate of
drug attachment.
p-Acetylphenylalanine, , p-azidophenylalanine, , p-azidomethylphenylalanine, , and azidolysine − are stable in cells and do not alter protein
structure significantly. p-Acetylphenylalanine reacts readily
with alkoxyamines, while p-azidophenylalanine, p-azidomethylphenylalanine,
and azidolysine undergo either copper-catalyzed or strain-promoted
azide–alkyne cycloadditions with terminal alkynes or cyclic
alkynes, respectively. All can be incorporated into peptides in reasonable
yields. N-Propargyllysine is stable and amenable to copper-catalyzed
azide–alkyne cycloaddition but
differs enough in structure from lysine to inhibit its incorporation
into peptides. Cyclopropene- and cyclopentadiene-substituted
amino acids undergo cycloaddition reactions with tetrazines or maleimides
to form stable pyrazine or bicycloheptene adducts. , Selenocysteine is a rare but natural amino acid; the selenol group
is more acidic and yields an even better nucleophile than a cysteine
residue. Incorporation of selenocysteine into an antibody was achieved, despite low yields because of undesired termination
at the erstwhile stop codon. Finally, suppression of two of the three
stop codons allows peptides to be translated with two NCAA, which
allows two different warheads to be attached to a single ADC. The difficulty of incorporating NCAA into an
antibody likely means that the use of NCAA-based conjugation reduces
the possible drug capacity of the ADC.

2.4.4.3.

## Incorporation of Additional Amino Acids
Addition of amino acid sequences to the C-terminus of the heavy
chain of an antibody can be used to selectively conjugate drugs. (While
the addition of amino acids increases the size of the ADC, large addends
are required to perturb the antibody’s movement because it
is already large, 150 kDa in the case of IgG). The cysteine in a π-clamp
sequence (FCPF) selectively reacts with perfluorinated benzenes to
yield substituted fluoroaryl thioethers. The cysteine in a different cysteine-containing sequence (LCYPWVY)
undergoes reaction with dibenzocyclooctynes to yield stable
dibenzocyclooctenyl thioethers. Both reactions can thus be used to attach drugs to an antibody.
Appending a receptor to the C-terminus of an antibody can be used
to attach drugs to the antibody if a covalent or irreversible inhibitor
of the receptor exists; this method was used with CD38. Finally, a catalytic antibody sequence (38C2)
was incorporated into an IgG1 antibody (without significant alteration
of its properties); the antibody alters the basicity of nearby lysine
and arginine residues, making their selective functionalization possible. The size and position of added sequences are
likely to limit the drug loading of an antibody.

2.4.5.

## Enzymatic Methods for Conjugation
Enzymatic methods can circumvent some of the limitations that exist
in chemical methods to conjugate drugs to antibodies. The evolutionary
constraints for enzyme function are well-suited for chemoselective
attachment of substrates to antibodies, and the development of bioorthogonal
chemistries to interrogate protein function has further enhanced their
capabilities.
Some enzymic modifications allow moieties to be
directly attached to an antibody; while they require specific chemical
matter to be present or may require mutant or additional sequences
to be added to an antibody, the methods need only one step to functionalize
antibodies. In most cases, the need for a single residue or functional
handle for specificity limits the number of warheads that can be easily
attached to an antibody. Transglutaminases exchange the amino group
of a glutamine’s amide moiety for another amine, allowing for
facile attachment of amino-containing payloads or linkers. A glutamine
residue (Q295) in the heavy chain possesses a carbohydrate moiety
that helps to determine the physical properties and immune responses
of the antibody; removal of the carbohydrate can have negative consequences
for ADC performance but provides a reliable
attachment point for payloads. Alternatively,
inclusion of glutamine residues (either by extension or by mutation
of the antibody sequence) allows transglutaminase-mediated coupling
reactions to attach payloads without perturbing the immune effects
of the antibody. A large variety of
amine-containing linkers can be used; with mutant transglutaminases,
hydrazones (acyl hydrazines) can also be exchanged with glutamine
residues. Prenyltransferases attach
farnesyl or geranylgeranyl (15- or twenty-carbon) pyrophosphates to
cysteine residues followed by two aliphatic amino acid residues. One of the prenyl methyl groups can be substituted;
when a ketone or azide moiety is included, bioorthogonal coupling
methods are applicable to attachment of linkers or payloads. Sortases attach N-terminal substituents to
peptides or antibodies with the C-terminal sequence LPXTG–OH
(effectively coupling an amine to the C-terminal glycine), allowing
attachment of N-terminal substituents to an antibody where they are
less likely to interfere with other functions. Butelase 1 appends dipeptides to C-terminal asparaginylhistidylvaline
moieties to form dipeptidyl asparagine amides; the enzyme has been
used with sortase A and modification of the antibody light chains
to provide doubly modified antibodies. SpyLigase attaches a peptide containing an N-terminal tag to a peptide
with a corresponding C-terminal tag, eliding the intervening peptide
and forming a new substituted antibody. Phosphopanteinyltransferases acylate serine residues with
CoA thioesters; while the functionality
that can be incorporated is broader (requiring only a CoA thioester,
the ester linkage formed may not be sufficiently stable or persistent.
Other enzymic methods convert native peptides or amino acid residues
to reactive moieties that are amenable to conjugation with a variety
of linkers or warheads but do not directly attach substituents to
antibodies. Formylglycine-generating enzyme (FGE) reacts with peptides
with the N-terminal sequence H-CXPXR (X = any amino acid), again requiring
mutation of the antibody sequence. FGE generates formylglycine residues
from the N-terminal cysteine; the aldehyde
moiety is amenable to condensation with oxime ethers or with electron-rich
arylmethylhydrazines in iso-Pictet-Spengler reactions to form
aryl-fused tetrahydropyridazines. FGE-mediated conjugation may be useful when conjugation with cysteines
is not compatible with the linker chemistry or when different requirements
for linker stability are necessary. Tyrosinases and horseradish peroxidases
oxidize tyrosine residues to form ortho-quinones which can undergo
either Michael addition of amines to the quinones and rearomatization
to yield stable 3-aminotyrosine residues or Diels–Alder reactions. While
aminotyrosine residues are potentially oxidizable, the carbon–nitrogen
bond formed is robust.
Finally, the sugar moieties present in
the antibodies can be remodeled
to yield attachment points for conjugation. Fucose, sialic acid, and
galactose moieties contain vicinal cis-hydroxyl groups
which can be oxidatively cleaved by sodium periodate to yield dialdehydes;
condensation with oxime ethers or hydrazines yields oxime ethers and
hydrazones. While the oxidation provides
multiple attachment points for payloads, it also can oxidize methionine
residues of the antibody, which increases clearance and decreases
efficacy. An alternative method is to
alter the sugar moieties by incorporating sugars with non-native functionalities
into the pendant sugar moieties. For example, endoglycosidases catalyze
the exchange of the terminal aminosugar moieties of saccharides, incorporating
2-N-acetylglycosamines into saccharides via oxazoline intermediates. Glucosyl-, galactosyl-, and thiofucosylamines
with azide or ketone substituents (or, with thiofucosylamine, a thiol
group) can thus be swapped into the sugar moieties of antibodies; reaction of azides with alkynes (using copper
catalysis or strained alkynes), of ketones with alkoxyamines, or of
thiofucose moieties with maleimides immobilizes payloads onto antibodies.
Both methods may alter the immune functions of the antibody–drug
conjugate by sugar modification and thus the activity of the conjugate.

2.4.6.

## Drug–Antibody Ratio
Drug–antibody
ratio (DAR) characterizes how many drug molecules an ADC can carry;
theoretically, it should characterize the ability of an ADC to deliver
drug to a tumor and thus positively correlate to effectiveness. However, the presence of large numbers of drugs
(and thus large numbers of linkers) on an ADC perturbs the properties
of the antibody. Lipophilic drugs and linkers increase the aggregation
of ADC, preventing them from reaching their site of action; they may
also hinder access to binding sites necessary for antigen recognition
or binding, reducing the activity of the ADC. Reducing the lipophilicity
of linker moieties has been used to reduce the negative consequences
of antibody functionalization, but not
the alteration in ADC properties. In addition, significant toxicity
has been noted for ADC with high DAR (DAR ≥ 8) and high DAR
may increase the clearance of ADC (reducing their residence time and
effectiveness). DAR is an important
analytical property of ADC; the ability to produce ADC with consistent
DAR is likely to lead to ADC with consistent properties and biological
activity and thus is likely a critical attribute for ADC synthesis
and production.

2.4.7.

## What Types of Drugs, Linkers, and Conjugation
Methods Have Been Used for Approved ADCs?
A variety of types
of drugs are used in clinically approved ADCs and in ADCs in clinical
trials (discussed further in the text). Calicheamicin, maytansinoids,
auristatins, duocarmycins, and pyrrolobenzodiazepines have been
used, while tubulysin-, eribulin-, and amberstatin-containing ADCs
are being researched in clinical trials. The drugs in ADCs are highly potent (effective at nM to pM concentrations);
the difficulty in delivering significant amounts of drug to tumors
with an ADC (as noted earlier) may explain the prevalence of potent
drugs in ADC.
Most of the currently approved drugs and nearly
all ADCs in clinical trials use cleavable linkers, and in most cases,
enzyme-cleavable linkers. The preference
for cleavable linkers indicates (as noted) that the contribution of
bystander effects to the ADC clinical effectiveness is critical. In
addition, the continued development of enzyme-cleavable linkers is
likely important. While the toxicity of Mylotarg and its subsequent
withdrawal and reapproval provided concern for chemically reactive
linkers, the incorporation of chemically stable linkers allows the
best of both worlds. The controlled drug release provides safety assurance
as well as increased antitumor response via the bystander effect.
The use of cleavable linkers also may prevent or reduce the resistance
of tumors to ADCs by decreasing the effect of antigen loss on toxicity
and releasing ADCs from the requirement for lysosomal cleavage.
As of mid-2023, all of the approved ADCs used conjugation to lysine
or cysteine residues; none of the currently approved ADC used site-selective
functionalization methods, while few
of the ADCs use site-selective conjugation methods. It is unclear
why site-selective methods have not been more effective; knowledge
of antibody structure and function should be sufficient to avoid antibody
inactivation or a loss of function. Methods to site-specifically conjugate
drugs to antibodies were less advanced and may have been insufficient
for incorporation into a drug (or may have had insufficient data and
thus too much risk to incorporate into a clinical candidate). The
reasons for the failures in the current trials, however, appear unclear.
ADCs currently approved and in clinical trials vary significantly
in their DAR as well; DAR between 1.8 and 8 have been tried (see below enlisting
approved ADCs), with most possessing DAR around 4. The DAR may be
an artifact of the conjugation method; immobilization using the interchain
bridging disulfides should yield ADC with a DAR of roughly 4. The
presence of larger linker and drug moieties may also require a lower
DAR to avoid aggregation or inactivation of the ADC. ADCs with higher
DARs and less-potent drugs have not yet reached clinical trials; it
is not clear whether this is due to limitations on DAR, ineffectiveness
in previously tried high-DAR ADCs with less potent payloads, or some
other reason.

2.5.

## Selection/Optimization of Target Antigen Moiety
The efficacy of an ADC depends on the expression levels of target
antigens. ADCs are designed to release the payload upon interaction
with cognate antigens. , As the field continues to grow,
over 50 antigens have been identified as successful ADC targets under
various clinical evaluation stages. , To achieve
optimal therapeutic efficiency, antibody–antigen binding affinity
can be optimized on a case-by-case basis depending on the tumor size,
target antigen concentration, and receptor-mediated internalization
kinetics.
The most used antigenic targets are CD19, erb-b2 receptor
tyrosine kinase 2 (ERBB2), HER2, CD22, CD30, CD33, CD79b, and Mesothelin
(MSLN). These antigenic markers vary
depending on the tumor type. Antigens such as HER2, EGFR, 5T4, trophoblast
cell-surface antigen 2 (TROP2), and nectin 4 are commonly used ADC
targets in solid tumors due to their higher level of expression in
malignant cells when compared to the nonmalignant ones. , , For hematological cancers, markers
such as CD30, CD22, CD79b, CD19, CD138, and B-cell maturation antigen
(BCMA), which are distinct from solid tumor markers, are commonly
used. For example, CD30, the target of
brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris by Seattle Genetics), is mainly expressed
by the malignant lymphoid cells of Hodgkin lymphoma and anaplastic
large cell lymphoma (ALCL). Likewise, for specifically targeting B
cell lineages, markers such as CD22, CD79b, and BCMA are used. These
markers have successfully been used as the targets of inotuzumab ozogamicin
(for the treatment of relapsed or refractory (R/R) B cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia), polatuzumab vedotin (for R/R diffuse large B cell lymphoma),
and belantamab mafodotin (for R/R multiple myeloma), respectively. , Apart from these well-known targets, work to identify suitable antigenic
targets in the tumor microenvironment, such as in the stroma and vasculature,
is ongoing.
A successful antigenic target of an ADC should be
uniformly and
heterogeneously expressed on the surface of target cells or other
components of the tumor microenvironment and have minimal to no expression
in off-target sites. , Other essential factors include
the internalization and processing of ADCs that help in their cellular
uptake and increase the efficiency of the cytotoxic drug. In addition,
it is advantageous that ADCs are designed against functional/oncogenic
targets as they can have higher antitumor activity; for example, data
from preclinical studies suggest that HER2-targeted ADCs T-DM1 and
T-DXd having anti-HER2 mAb trastuzumab’s Fab region prevents
ligand-independent HER2 dimerization, inhibiting HER2 downstream signaling.
Once the antibody in an ADC binds to the target antigen, it is
internalized via the early endosome, and the internalization rate
and efficiency depend on the target antigen and the payload. Affinity
correlates well with internalization with higher affinity often resulting
in rapid internalization up to a ceiling limit. However, a very strong binding affinity between the antibody
and target antigen can lead to uneven distribution of ADCs in solid
tumors due to the presence “binding site barrier”. This
leads to stronger binding of antibodies with the antigens presents
on cells near blood vessels and less penetration away from the tumors. , 
Once ADCs are inside the cell, the endosomes containing them
mature
into late endosomes and finally fuse with lysosomes. This is followed
by the release of cytotoxic payloads in the lysosome upon linker cleavage
or antibody degradation. The payload eventually escapes into the cytosol
to exert its effects. ADCs with cleavable linkers can release drug
to neighboring cells both with and without ADC internalization. , ADC with noncleavable linkers require proteolysis of the ADC for
drug release. Proteolysis yields drugs with an attached amino acid
residue (lysine or cysteine) which is charged at cellular pH. The ability of drugs to diffuse out of the
cell depends on their lipophilicity; charge impairs their ability
to diffuse across the membrane and thus leave the cell through passive
transport. ABC transporters prefer neutral and hydrophobic compounds
and export neutral hydrophobic drugs out of the cell, so drugs with
amino acid residues derived from ADC catabolism are poor substrates
for ABC and require help to leave the
lysosome and the cell. The susceptibility
of payloads to active transport decreases the effectiveness of ADC
but also makes cells that do not take up the antibody subject to its
effects. In particular, the bystander effect depends on how much drug
can escape a cell and then accumulate in neighboring cells and if
it is sufficient to kill them. 
ADCs are used to treat solid tumors, but a heterogeneous expression
of antigenic targets in these tumors may be overcome by the ’bystander-killing
effect’, , , where the payload is transferred from the antigen-positive cells
to the antigen-negative cells in the tumor microenvironment. The lipophilic
payload for internalized ADCs diffuses across cell membranes and significantly
contributes to ADC activity against tumors. For some ADCs, the payload
release might happen extracellularly, killing antigen-negative cells
located in proximity. 
 summarizes
antigens used as targets of ADCs in development and in the clinic. , , , 
 

3.

## Landscape View of Antibody–Drug Conjugate
Research–insights from the CAS Content Collection
The CAS Content Collection is the
largest human-compiled collection of published scientific information,
which represents a valuable resource to access and keep up to date
on the scientific literature all over the world across disciplines
including chemistry, biomedical sciences, engineering, materials science,
agricultural science, and many more, thus allowing quantitative analysis
of global research publications across various parameters including
time, geography, scientific area, medical application, disease, and
chemical composition. Currently, there are over 25,000 scientific
publications (mainly journal articles and patents) in the CAS Content
Collection related to ADC research and development. There has been
a steady growth of these documents over the last three decades, with
an >30% increase in the last three years ( ). Noteworthy, while in the earlier years
scientific journal publications dominated, after around the year 2000
the number of patents clearly outnumber them, correlating well with
the initial accumulation of scientific knowledge and its subsequent
transfer into patentable applications.
United States, China,
Japan, United Kingdom, Germany, and South
Korea are the leaders with respect to the number of published journal
articles and patents related to ADC research with the United States
having ∼3- and ∼2.7-fold greater number of journal and
patent publications, respectively, as compared to China ( ). Genentech, the
Scripps Research Institute, University of California, and the Chinese
Academy of Sciences have the largest number of published articles
in scientific journals ( A). The journal Bioconjugate Chemistry publishes
the most articles related to ADC research ( A) and is the most-cited journal for ADC
research ( B).
Unsurprisingly, patenting activity is dominated by corporate players
as compared to academics ( B,C). Genentech, Immunomedics, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals,
and Seattle Genetics have the highest number of patents among the
companies ( C), while University of California leads among the universities,
having nearly double the number of patents as University of Texas,
ranked second ( B).
 A presents
the distribution of patents among the top patent offices receiving
ADC-related patent applications. The World Intellectual Property Organization
(WIPO) patent office clearly dominates accounting for about 2/3 of
patents filed, followed by the patent offices of the United States
(US), China (CN), Japan (JP), and S. Korea (KR), and the European
patent office (EP).
 Patent protection is territorial, and therefore
the same invention
can be filed for patent protection in several jurisdictions. We thus
searched for all related files pertaining to ADCs. Certain patent
families might be counted multiple times when they have been filed
in multiple patent offices. B presents the flow of patent filings from various
applicant locations to a variety of patent offices of filing. Most
of the applicants tend to have a comparable number of filings in their
home country and at the WO, while also having a sizable number of
filings at other patent offices such as the US, European Patent Office
(EP), and others.
We further explored distribution and trends
in the published documents
(journals and patents) dealing with various ADC-related concepts. presents a number
of the ADC-related documents in the CAS Content Collection concerning
neoplastic (A) and other diseases (B). The highest number of documents
pertain to breast cancer (mammary gland neoplasm) and lymphoma for
solid tumors and hematological malignancies, respectively. This data
correlates well with approved ADCs used in the treatment of cancers
that are currently on the market. , Breast cancer
and myeloma exhibit the highest growth rate in the last five years
with respect to the number of documents related to them ( A, inset). Most ADCs
developed thus far, aimed at treating various types of cancer (solid
and hematological), have nonetheless been restricted to treating cancer.
Challenges in designing ADCs for noncancerous diseases include identifying
targeting cell types, a specific surface marker expressed on the targeting
cells, and an effective payload drug. So far, not many ADCs have been
designed for noncancerous indications, with none yet having successfully
progressed through clinical trials to market. With the advancement
of ADC platforms and technology, more ADCs for nononcology indications
are being developed. A search in the
CAS Content Collection showed that among the noncancerous diseases,
autoimmune diseases, inflammations, and infections are the top pathologies
with respect to the number of documents related to ADCs ( B). Despite obvious
complications such as difficulty in penetration through the blood-brain
barrier (BBB), our data indicate a growing interest in development
of ADCs targeting the brain. The number of documents pertaining to
ADCs in the context of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s,
Parkinson’s and Huntington’s disease ( B) are on the rise. Recent
approvals of antibody treatments for Alzheimer’s disease by
the US FDA , also stimulate ADC development
for neurological diseases.
 presents
the number of ADC-related documents in the CAS Collection concerning
various types of therapies. Immunotherapy understandably accounts
for the highest number of documents. Indeed, a sound biological rationale
supports the research into combining ADCs with immunotherapy to overcome
the incidence of resistance and improve patient outcomes. Most immunotherapy-related papers involve passive
immunotherapy ( , inset pie chart). Passive immunotherapy agents produce rapid antitumor
responses by direct administration of immune-cell factors, such as
cytokines or antibodies. With passive immunotherapy, continued dosing
may be required for a prolonged response since immune system memory
is not engaged. , 
 Targeted intravenous drug delivery systems for
nanoparticles are
the most common drug delivery systems explored for ADCs ( ). Indeed, intravenous
administration into the bloodstream is the preferred route for ADCs
in order to avoid digestion of antibodies by gastric acid and proteolytic
enzymes with oral administration. At
present, all approved ADCs are administered via the intravenous route,
and the therapeutic capacity of other routes of ADC administration
is rarely explored. Subcutaneous, intramuscular, intravitreal, inhalable,
intra-articular, and intratumoral drug delivery methods have all been
used to improve the therapeutic indexes of antibodies, with subcutaneous and intratumoral routes considered
especially promising. , However, with respect to ADCs,
there is still a need to explore and evaluate the therapeutic potential
of alternative routes of administration.
 Cytotoxic payloads are major components of ADCs,
with the tubulin
inhibitors and DNA damaging agents being the most widely explored,
and until recently the major classes of compounds used in ADCs. , , , , With the approval of trastuzumab deruxtecan
(Enhertu) in 2019, the diversification of ADC payloads has been appreciated
as a key approach in the ADC development, and a number of new classes
of compounds have been examined as potential payloads. In the CAS Content Collection, in terms of
the number of published documents, auristatins and calicheamicins
are the major representatives of tubulin inhibitors and DNA damaging
agents, respectively ( A). As a sign of the payload diversification efforts, STING
agonists, glucocorticoid receptor modulators, and topoisomerase I
inhibitors exhibit the fastest consistent yearly growth in the number
of documents ( B). The success of immune checkpoint inhibitors targeting the adaptive
immune system has greatly stimulated interest in exploring immune-stimulating
ADC payloads such as STING agonists and TLR agonists. Glucocorticoid receptor modulators are the
primary treatment for various immune diseases, and targeted delivery
via an ADC may provide significant efficacy at doses that do not lead
to unwanted side effects. Topoisomerase
I inhibitors, particularly camptothecin analogs, constitute a successful
ADC payload family, and are a part of two recently FDA approved drugs,
trastuzumab deruxtecan, and sacituzumab govitecan. , 
 The number of documents and growth trends related
to target antigens
of ADCs according to the CAS Content Collection are listed in . While HER2 and
EGFR remain the most widely explored target antigens for solid tumors
( A), Trop-2
and Nectin-4 antigens have exhibited consistent and steady growth
in the last five years ( B). , For hematological malignancies,
CD30, CD19, CD22, and CD33 are the most extensively examined with
almost triple the number of patents as compared to journal articles
( A), while
CD79B shows the fastest growth in number of documents over the last
five years ( B).
 We also examined the distribution and trends in
published documents
pertaining to antibodies used in ADCs, especially the immunoglobulin
G (IgG) isotype, which is the most frequently used isotype for cancer
immunotherapy ( ). IgG1 and IgG4 are the IgG subtypes that are used in most formulations
(and the only ones used in approved ADCs) in line with established
knowledge, with the number of patents clearly dominating journal
articles by ∼4- and 25-fold, respectively ( A). Although the four subclasses
of IgG have >90% homology, they exhibit distinctive profiles with
respect to the hinge region length, the number of interchain disulfide
bonds, and Fc-effector functions. IgG3
displays the highest affinity binding to most Fc-γ receptors,
but is susceptible to proteolysis and aggregation and is avoided in
ADC design due to its short circulating half-life. Of the remaining subclasses, IgG1 demonstrates the highest
affinity for all Fc-γ receptors. Publications discussing the
use of IgG2 and IgG3 in ADCs have increased more rapidly in recent
years than those discussing the use of IgG1 ( B).
 shows
the antibody-payload linker types as represented in the CAS Content
Collection. The cleavable linkers markedly dominate; they are the
preferred linker type in the therapeutic ADCs because of their versatility,
providing possibility for a controlled payload release.
 presents
correlations in the examined documents between various cancers and
ADC target antigens ( A and B), ADC antibodies ( C), and ADC payloads ( D), calculated as the percentage
of documents related to the given disease. With solid tumors ( A), the strongest
correlation is between breast cancer and HER2 as target antigen, while
among hematological malignancies ( B) lymphoma correlates strongly and comparably
with CD19, CD22, and CD30, leukemia–with CD33 and CD19, and
myeloma, with BCMA. With respect to ADC payloads ( D), the strongest correlation
is between breast cancer and the class of maytansinoids, followed
by auristatins with similar trends observed for lymphoma.
 Among the ADC-related concepts in the CAS Content
Collection, monoclonal
antibodies is clearly the major one, along with antibody–drug
conjugates, and antigens ( A). Bispecific antibodies and nanobodies, along with
the antibody–drug conjugates, exhibit the fastest growth rate
with respect to the number of published documents ( B).
 represents
a map of the ADC-related concepts with an indication of the number
of documents in the CAS Content Collection related to the given concept/topic.
 
4.

## ADC-Based Combination Therapies
Development
of ADC resistance is a major drawback to their therapeutic
potential. Many mechanisms of resistance exist including:
Downregulation of/change in antigen expression , – decreases the binding of an ADC to the target antigen and
might even increase toxicity due to prolonged presence of ADC in the
bloodstream.
Decreased internalization
of the ADC-bound antigen , – could result
from increased recycling of the target antigen
preventing release of cytotoxic load in desired locations.
Inefficient binding of the ADC to its target
antigen , – resulting from changes in the target
(such as truncation)
or increased interactions with other binding partners reducing affinity
of ADC for target antigen.
Inefficient/incomplete/improper
degradation of ADCs
inside lysosomes leading to poor release profiles of cytotoxic payloads
and reducing therapeutic effectiveness. 
Poor release from lysosomes – many cytotoxic drugs tend to be charged
molecules that
require active transport from the lysosome into the cytoplasm and
change in expression of lysosomal transporters which can affect concentration
of payloads achieved in the cytoplasm. 
Overexpression of efflux pumps such
as multidrug resistant
transporter 1 (MDR1) that actively transport the released cytotoxic
payload from the cytoplasm to outside of the tumor cell reducing therapeutic
effectiveness of ADC. 
These resistance mechanisms reduce the effectiveness
of ADCs in
cancer therapy. The simplistic but vital reasoning behind use of combination
therapy is to circumvent drawbacks (such as resistance mechanisms)
of both types of therapies (including reducing toxicities associated
with them) to boost the overall therapeutic efficacy and is especially
true for an aggressive illness such as cancer with a high mortality
rate. 
4.1.

## ADC and Conventional Chemotherapy
Conventional cancer therapies tend to include a combination of chemotherapeutic
drugs, radiation therapy and surgery. Classical chemotherapeutic drugs such as altretamine and gemcitabine exert their antitumor effects by alkylating or cross-linking DNA. , or by shutting down DNA synthesis by competing with endogenous nucleotides. While effective, conventional chemotherapeutic
drugs are toxic, show significant side effects because of insufficient
selectivity and are subject to a variety
of resistance mechanisms. All of these
factors greatly reduce their effectiveness. Combining a targeted approach
such as ADCs with standard or conventional untargeted chemotherapeutic
approaches has been shown to overcome the drawbacks and improve survival
rates. Perhaps the most well-known chemotherapeutic-ADC
combinations involve gemcitabine, a nucleoside analog that exerts
antitumor activity by interfering with DNA synthesis. An early study of an ADC-chemotherapeutic drug
combination involved gemcitabine and brentuximab vedotin (SGN-35),
a CD30 targeted ADC and this combination
is still being tested for the treatment of various types of cancers. − While no rationale has been given for the effectiveness of the gemcitabine/brentuximab
vedotin combination, one hypothesis is that brentuximab vedotin and
gemcitabine target neoplastic Reed Sternberg cells and stromal cells,
respectively and exert synergistic effects. Expression levels of surface antigens are crucial for the success
of ADC therapy, and changes in their levels are associated with decreased
therapeutic efficacy. Gemcitabine administration has been linked to
increased expression of HER2 by as much as 2.5-fold. Co-administration of gemcitabine with trastuzumab emtansine,
a HER2-specific ADC, boosted the antitumor effect achieved by the
ADC in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Other instances of synergistic effects have been observed when gemcitabine
was coadministered with camidanlumab tesirinean (ADCT-301), an ADC specific for CD25 (interleukin-2 receptor
alpha chain) or with Oba01 ADC, an ADC
targeting death receptor 5 (DR5). Other
chemotherapeutic drugs that are being explored include alkylating
agents cisplatin, − carboplatin − and cyclophosphamide
(ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT01042379) and topoisomerase II inhibitor doxorubicin in combination with ADCs whose targets are cell surface glycoproteins
such as LYPD3, CD205 and LRG1 among others.
ADC combinations with not only chemotherapeutic agents but also
antibody-based therapy have been also explored. Thus, antiangiogenic
agents can stimulate ADC penetration and tumor cell exposure. Combination
of anetumab ravtansine or mirvetuximab soravansine with bevacizumab
has enhanced efficacy in preclinical models of ovarian cancer. A recent
study combined mirvetuximab soravtansine and bevacizumab in ovarian
cancer patients with encouraging results in the pivotal AURELIA trial. Anetumab ravtansine in combination with bevacizumab
has been tested for treatment of ovarian cancer. Clinical trials such as KAITLIN, KRISTINE, and MARIANNE
were designed on the basis of synergistic antitumor activity with
trastuzumab emtansine in combination with pertuzumab. 

4.2.

## ADC and Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
Immune checkpoint molecules are proteins that regulate the magnitude,
type and duration of immune response , they are
classified as either inhibitory or stimulatory depending upon the
pathways they influence. Meant to act
as guards against excessive immune response, they can also act as avenues for tumor cells to escape immunosurveillance. , A few well-known examples of inhibitory immune checkpoint molecules
include programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1), cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4; also
known as B7, CD152), B and T lymphocyte
attenuator (BTLA; also known as CD272), and lymphocyte-activation gene 3 (LAG-3; also known as CD223) , among others. For the stimulatory pathways, glycoproteins such as
OX40 receptors (also known as CD134 and TNFRSF4) , and 4–1BB (also known as CD137) are few well-known examples of immune checkpoint molecules. Expressed
on cell surface, immune checkpoint molecules modulate the activity
of T cells and it is this feature that
can be exploited to our advantage. Inhibition of immune checkpoint
inhibitors reduces the suppression of immune response to cancers,
activating T cells to kill cancer cells. , Alternatively, activating stimulatory immune checkpoint molecules
either by preventing interactions with their endogenous ligands or
by directly activating them achieves the same effect, i.e., T cell
activation and proliferation resulting in increased antitumor effects. − Immune checkpoint molecules are successful targets for FDA approved
immunotherapeutic drugs such as the PD-1 inhibitors pembrolizumab
(Keytruda) and cemiplimab (Libtayo), and the CTLA-4 inhibitors ipilimumab (Yervoy) and recently approved tremelimumab (Imjudo). In addition, CA-170 (a small molecule targeting
PD-L1, PD-L2 and VISTA), ieramilimab/LAG252
(targeting LAG-3) (ClinicalTrials.gov
ID: NCT02460224 ), and sabatolimab/MBG453
(targeting TIM-3) , (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT04266301 ) are examples of immunotherapeutic agents currently
in clinical trials.
The development of immune checkpoint modulators
has been immensely useful especially in the treatment of solid cancers
such as nonsmall cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) and melanoma , among others. Long-term remission,
a feat that was considered very hard if not impossible to achieve,
has been made possible by immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) therapy. Unfortunately, the fraction of patients that
actually show such long-term remission remains small. A recent study suggests that immune checkpoint inhibitor therapies become ineffective
against chemotherapy-treated triple-negative breast cancer because
TP53 mutations alter the expression levels of immune checkpoint molecules,
allowing tumor cells to undergo “immune exclusion”.
As with other treatment modalities, resistance reduces the effectiveness
and utility of immune checkpoint inhibitors. As such, they are often used in combination , with either other immune checkpoint modulators or conventional chemotherapeutic agents to boost their
therapeutic efficacy. More recently,
there has been an increasing use of ADCs in combination with immunotherapeutic
agents. , The ability of ADC to trigger immune responses
to cancer cells suggests that they could exhibit synergism with immune
checkpoint modulators. 
The most
often used immunotherapeutic agents in combination with
ADCs appears to be confined to PD-1 inhibitors with pembrolizumab , − and nivolumab − dominating and followed by atezolizumab, , durvalumab − and toripalimab − and are currently in various stages of clinical trials. A few representative
examples of patents for ADC immunotherapy combination therapy are
WO2018160538, US20220133902, WO2022242692, WO2018110515. Most ADCs used in these
combination therapies appear to be directed toward HER2 , , − with a smaller number directed toward targets such as LIV-1, nectin-4, TROP2 , and B7–H3 (also known as CD276). Recently, ADCs have been developed to target immune checkpoint molecules
such as PD-L1 and B7–H3 by acting both to prevent immune suppression
by binding directly to the immune checkpoint molecules and to carry
cytotoxic payloads. A recent example of such a bifunctional ADC was
a small molecule immunomodulator attached to an anti-PD-L1 antibody
via a cleavable disulfide linker, dubbed an immune modulating ADC
(IM-ADC). The released payload was found
to exert its antitumor effect by inducing CD8+ and CD4+
T cytotoxic lymphocyte infiltration. In addition, the payload increased PD-L1 expression, especially
in tumor cells, thereby increasing the effectiveness of subsequent
rounds of treatment with the same ADC.
Tumor associated macrophages
(TAMs) are an important part of the
tumor microenvironment (TME) and have been linked to protumor effects
including initiation − and progression among others. The presence of TAMs has been linked to the antitumor
efficacy of the anti-CD-30 antibodies, SGN-30 and SGN-40. TAMs have been
shown to enhance the uptake of a nontargeted ADC and the release of
its payload, leading to an enhanced bystander effect which enhances its toxicity to tumor cells with low or
variable antigen expression. A major difference between the two macrophage
subtypes – M1 and – M2 lies in their functional activities.
M1 and M2 macrophages are associated with antitumor (cell death) and
pro-tumor (cell proliferation) effects, respectively. Efforts have been made to reprogram M2 TAMs
to act similar to antitumor M1 TAMs by utilizing a peptide. 

4.3.

## Sequential/Staggered Therapy
While
combination therapies use multiple drugs or therapies simultaneously,
sequential or staggered therapies use the sequential administration
of multiple anticancer therapies in a specific order interspersed
with pauses to maximize their antitumor effects while minimizing their
toxicities. Growing literature evidence
suggests that in some instances sequential therapy may be more effective
than combination therapy, especially immunotherapies, and that the order of administration plays
a crucial role in its success. Sequential
therapy have shown promise in breast cancers, renal cell carcinomas, and
lung cancers. The cBR96-doxorubicin
ADC was shown to be more effective when administered before the tubulin
inhibitor paclitaxel when compared to coadministration. The ADC consisting of a doxorubicin payload
attached to the BR96 antibody via a cleavable hydrazone linker, increased
the sensitivity of tumor cells to paclitaxel. The increased effectiveness of sequential therapy over
combination therapy might be attributed to reduced internalization
of the ADC by paclitaxel. 

5.

## ADCs beyond Oncology
Until recently,
ADCs in preclinical and clinical development have
been applied exclusively for oncology indications, with cytotoxic
warheads targeted to antigen-expressing cancer cells. However, the
concept of site-specific release of pharmacologically active small
molecules for alleviating pathogenic cellular activities with minimal
off-target effects by using an ADC-mediated delivery platform might
also be effectively applicable for any disease area. Thus, over the
recent years, researchers have examined opportunities to develop ADCs
beyond cancer, for other disease indications including autoimmune
disease, inflammatory and immune disorders, difficult-to-treat bacterial
infections, and atherosclerosis, with payloads varying from glucocorticoid
receptor modulators and kinase inhibitors to antibiotics and siRNA. − Multiple factors may affect the effective development of an ADC
including the choice of target, payload efficiency and mode-of-action,
linker design, and conjugation method. With the growing knowledge
of the mechanism of action of ADCs, it is highly anticipated that
the development of such compounds in therapeutic areas outside of
oncology and hematology will rapidly intensify.
5.1.

## ADCs against Infectious Diseases: Antibody–Antibiotic
Conjugates
The effectiveness of antibiotic treatment for
bacterial infections has been compromised by the development of widespread
drug resistance. In response, antibody–antibiotic conjugates
(AAC) were developed as a countermeasure. Analogously to ADCs where the antibodies are used to deliver cytotoxic
drugs to the antigen-expressing cells, AACs use antibodies to deliver
antibiotics to the target bacteria. These AACs combine the specificity
of a bacterial antigen-specific monoclonal antibody with the bactericidal
capacity of a potent antibiotic − via a linker which
ensures an efficient release of antibiotics at the target site. This
design takes advantage of the improved absorption, distribution, metabolism,
and elimination (ADME) properties of the antibodies. Antibiotics used for developing AACs must be highly potent,
nonimmunogenic, soluble, and stable under physiological conditions. 
For example, Genentech has developed
an AAC to combat hard-to-treat, invasive Staphylococcus aureus infections named DSTA4637S – an IV-administered THIOMAB-type
AAC. It is composed of an IgG-type b-GlcNAc-WTA
monoclonal antibody. The light chain of this antibody is connected
to a rifamycin class antibiotic (dmDNA31) via a protease cleavable
MC-ValCit-PABQ linker. , This linker has a
lysosomal protease-cleavable site, which helps in releasing the antibiotic
payload inside the bacteria. Upon administration, the AAC prodrug
enters the circulation; subsequently, the antibody portion of the
AAC binds to bGlcNAc modification of teichoic acid (a polyanionic
glycopolymer present in the peptidoglycan layer of the bacterial cell
wall). This leads to the formation of a phagolysosome; the AAC is
then opsonized into the intracellular environment. Once inside, host
proteases cleave the linker releasing the dmDNA31 antibiotic exhibiting
a strong bactericidal action against intracellular S. aureus bacteria (Clinical trial ID#: NCT03162250). Unfortunately, this AAC has been discontinued in clinical
trials for undisclosed reasons, but provides inspiration for further
antibacterial development.
More recently, AACs are being developed
against bacterial biofilms, the hypothesis
being that an antibody can be
used to anchor the antibiotic to the surface of the bacteria within
the biofilm. Using a trigger, such as an external small molecule,
releases the antibiotic at the bacterial cell surface. Studies were
done using mitomycin C, an antibiotic with a well-known antitumor
effect , which was found effective in controlling S. aureus biofilms in vitro and in vivo. Reduction of biofilms is important in reducing
the population of persistent (difficult to kill) bacterial cells (rendering
infections more treatable) and in preventing nosocomial infections
from medical implants such as i.v. tubing, catheters, and other medical
equipment. While research in antibody–antibiotic
conjugates is limited, they appear to have significant promise as
antibacterial agents.

5.2.

## ADCs as Immunomodulatory Agents
Glucocorticoids
are efficient anti-inflammatory drugs, yet their use is dose-limited
by systemic toxicity, causing severe side effects such as immunosuppression
and metabolic disorders. It has been suggested that applying the ADC
strategy developed for oncological malignancies may provide a solution
for avoiding glucocorticoid toxicity.
Glucocorticoids exert
their anti-inflammatory effects by suppressing the release of tumor-necrosis
factor-α (TNF-α) and other cytokines by macrophages. Thus, an anti-CD163 dexamethasone conjugate
that selectively delivers the glucocorticoid to macrophages has been
designed and tested. It elicited reduced TNF-α secretion in vitro and was 50-fold more active in vivo than the nonconjugated dexamethasone in animal models. − Another glucocorticoid, a fluticasone propionate analog, was conjugated
onto an anti-CD74 mAb targeting B-cells and was reported to exhibit
immuno-suppressive activity in human B cells. A glucocorticoid-based ADC, ABBV-3373, has been developed
by conjugation of a proprietary dexamethasone derivative on the anti-TNF-α
adalimumab, against autoimmune disease , and specifically
rheumatoid arthritis. The glucocorticoid
released after cell internalization and lysosomal escape activates
the glucocorticoid receptor pathway and provokes an anti-inflammatory
cascade in nucleus. The data indicate
that anti-TNF ADC delivering a glucocorticoid receptor modulator (GRM)
payload into activated immune cells may provide enhanced efficacy
against immune mediated diseases while minimizing systemic adverse
effects associated with standard glucocorticoid treatment.
 provides
some examples of ADCs tested for nononcological indications, with
their targets and payloads. , , − 
 
5.3.

## ADCs across Different Indications
Aiming at neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s diseases is complicated by the existence of the
blood–brain barrier (BBB). To augment brain delivery of antibody
therapeutics, endogenous macromolecule transportation pathways such
as receptor-mediated transcytosis and carrier-mediated transport have
been explored recently. Invasive strategies,
such as ultrasound, microbubbles, and direct injection into the brain
(e.g., intracerebroventricular delivery), have also been used to deliver
ADC across the blood-brain barrier. , 

6.

## Private Investment
Analyzing the collective
international private investments in the
ADC sector offers a valuable understanding of the business fascination
with the commercial potential of this domain. Conducting a search
for ADCs on PitchBook, an online platform
for investment data, reveals comprehensive capital undertakings in
this field. The search revealed that capital investments showed a
dramatic and substantial increase after 2017 in this field ( A). Subsequent
years show more or less sustained interest in ADCs with the amount
of capital invested being > $600 M ( A). A breakdown across global regions reveals
that the lion’s share of investments are from Asia, followed
by United States with Europe and Canada making up the rest ( B). The venture
capital investment data in this area clearly shows significant recent
interest in ADCs, endorsing their therapeutic and commercial potential.
 
7.

## ADC Clinical Development
7.1.

## Preclinical Development
Examination
of preclinical ADC development reveals that over 50 worldwide organizations,
mainly from the United States, Europe, and Asia, are currently conducting
research on over 160 ADC preclinical candidates (Supporting Information, Table S1). Table S1 reveals organizations conducting preclinical ADC research, their
ADC drug candidates, and target antigens, along with target indications. is a visual representation
of these organizations and their number of ADC candidate drugs, target
antigens, and disease indications. A few of these companies have disclosed
the target antigens for their ADC. Antigens HER3, Nectin-4, Folate
receptor α, B7H3, CD99, and IGF1R are leading the way with the
most ADC drug candidates utilizings these targets for disease treatment.
Of disclosed preclinical indications ∼50% are categorized into
the broader solid tumors and hematological malignancy indication with
the other 50% attributed to more specific indications. Solid tumor
research is heavily favored currently for preclinical development
with the largest number of ADC drug candidates focused on this indication.
Disclosed solid tumors with the largest research focus include, lung,
breast, gynecologic, brain, pancreatic, and gastric cancers. In general,
hematological malignancies appear to have lesser research efforts
being directed toward them, with acute myeloid leukemia and lymphoma
being the exceptions. Outside of oncology, Duality Biologics is performing
preclinical research for the use of ADCs in the treatment of autoimmune
disease.
 
7.2.

## Clinical Development
A representative
selection of ADC clinical trials has been examined within this section
to gain an overall view of the past, present, and future states of
clinical development. A selection of approximately 1,500 ADC clinical
trials from https://clinicaltrials.gov are examined against time, clinical trial phase, status, and disease
indications. These trials reveal that ADCs are slowly growing in clinical
development, with showing an oscillating curve starting in 1997 with more
consistent and steady growth starting around 2012 and continuing beyond.
 Examination of all ADC clinical trials against
their indications
further revealed that nearly all clinical trials target the treatment
of both solid tumors and hematological malignancies. ADC clinical
trials targeting solid tumors make up 55% of all ADC clinical trials,
with hematological malignancies making up 44%. Only 1% of all ADC
clinical trials target a disease beyond oncology ( A). With ADCs historically
targeting cancers, much room is available for expansion into other
disease treatment indications, such as autoimmune diseases, rheumatoid
arthritis and diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis, which are in current
active clinical trials. , 
 Analysis of ADC clinical trial phases reveals that
most oncology
clinical trials are in early phase development. Solid tumors have
88% of their trials in early stage clinical trials from early Phase
I trials through Phase II trials with hematological malignancies encompassing
86% ( B).
Examining these clinical trials, a step further, by status, shows
ADC clinical trials treating solid tumors have a higher percentage
of trials in the not yet recruiting, recruiting, and active statuses
than trials treating hematological malignancies. 75% of current clinical
trials for solid tumor indications are currently active or getting
ready to be active in the clinical trial pipeline ( C) versus 51% for hematological
malignancy indications. While ADC clinical trials focused on oncology
are largely equal when it comes to phases of study, currently solid
tumor indications have a more active presence in the clinical trial
pipeline over hematological malignancy indications.
Clinical
trials that disclose a specific tumor indication are characterized
by the trial phase and stage in and . Prostate,
melanoma, brain, bone, and pancreatic cancer are the solid tumor indications
with the largest percentage of trials in early stage clinical development
from early Phase I trials through Phase II trials. On the other hand,
breast, gastric, bladder, and lung cancer are more established in
the clinical pipeline with the highest percentage of late-stage trials.
In respect to hematological malignancies, myeloma has the largest
percentage of clinical trials in early phase development with leukemia
and lymphoma having the largest percentage of late-stage trials.
 Examining the above clinical trials, by status,
shows ADC clinical
trials treating bladder, esophageal, head and neck, melanoma, and
gynecologic cancer have the highest percentage of trials in the not
yet recruiting, recruiting, and active statuses for solid tumor indications.
79–84% of current clinical trials for solid tumor indications
are currently active or getting ready to be active in the clinical
trial pipeline ( ). Pancreatic, lung, gastric, bone, and colorectal cancer
have the greatest percentage of completed trials ranging from 35 to
65%, respectively. The hematological malignancy indication myeloma
has the highest percentage of trials (81%) in the not yet recruiting,
recruiting, and active statuses contrasting with myelodysplastic syndrome,
which has 44% of its trials in the completed status.
A selection
of ADC clinical trials focusing on the treatment of
solid tumors is highlighted in to display the variety of ADC candidates in clinical
development along with their sponsors, targeted solid tumor indications,
target antigen, and phases. Only clinical trials currently in recruiting
or active status are showcased to reveal the most current and promising
ADC candidates. Over 135 ADC candidates are currently in clinical
development for solid tumor indications (Supporting Information, Table S2). ADC candidates focusing on the treatment
of lung, gastric, pancreatic, colorectal, breast, gynecologic, prostate,
and bladder cancers, along with head and neck cancers, are all currently
highly represented in the clinical pipeline ( ). Bispecific ADC candidates are also included
as they have entered Phase I and II clinical trials for the treatment
of various solid tumors including breast, lung, and esophageal cancer.
 A more exhaustive list of ADC candidates in clinical
development
for all indications, along with their companies and target antigens,
can be located in Table S2. The most utilized
target antigen for ADCs currently in clinical trials is HER2, followed
by TROP2, Claudin 18.2, cMET, and B7H3, respectively. Also, around
40 ADC candidates currently in clinical trials are topoisomerase I
inhibitors which impact DNA replication in cancer cells, resulting
in cancer cell death.
ADC clinical trials focusing on the treatment
of hematological
malignancies are highlighted in , similar to solid tumors. This table showcases the
variety of ADC candidates currently being researched for the treatment
of hematological malignancies along with their sponsor, hematological
malignancy indication, target antigen, and phase. Clinical trials
in recruiting or active status are highlighted. The total of ADC candidates
currently in clinical development for hematological malignancies is
less than solid tumors at around 30 ADC drug candidates compared to
greater than 135 for solid tumors (Supporting Information, Table S2). ADC candidates focusing on the treatment
of multiple myeloma and various types of leukemia and lymphoma are
all currently being researched in the clinical development pipeline
( ).
 While most ADC clinical trials focus on oncology,
there are a few
studies exploring research in emerging areas of interest. These include
trials looking at the treatment of autoimmune disorders diffuse cutaneous
systemic sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, along with amyloidosis
( ).
 
7.3.

## Approved ADCs
Currently, there are
15 approved ADCs that have received regulatory approval anywhere in
the world ( ).
 7.3.1.

## Hematological Malignancies
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (Mylotarg) contains an anti-CD33
humanized IgG4κ monoclonal antibody connected to ozogamicin,
a calicheamicin derivative payload, via a cleavable hydrazone linker. It binds preferentially to cells expressing
the CD33 surface antigen, leading to the internalization of the gemtuzumab
ozogamicin ADC and cleavage of the linker within the lysosomes via
acid hydrolysis, with the subsequent calicheamicin reduction by glutathione
inducing double-strand DNA breaks, resulting in cell death. , Gemtuzumab ozogamicin was the first ADC to reach the clinic, approved
by the FDA in 2000 for the treatment of relapsed or refractory CD33-positive
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The accelerated
approval required postmarketing trials to be conducted to confirm
treatment efficacy. The negative results from those studies (NCT00085709;
ISRCTN17161961) prompted Pfizer to withdraw gemtuzumab ozogamicin
from the market in 2010. − Later on, based on the positive
results of subsequent trials (NCT00927498; NCT00091234), using reduced
dosing strategies, gemtuzumab ozogamicin was reapproved by the USFDA
in 2017 for treatment of newly diagnosed CD33-positive AML as well
as for relapsed or refractory CD33-positive AML. , , 
Brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris) was the second ADC to
receive accelerated US FDA approval in 2011 based on Phase II trials
in patients with relapsed Hodgkin’s lymphoma or systemic anaplastic
large cell lymphoma. , , It comprises MMAE conjugated to an anti-CD30 antibody via an enzyme
cleavable Val-Cit linker. , Hodgkin’s lymphoma
cells, as well as malignant cells of anaplastic large cell lymphoma
express high levels of CD30. In 2015,
brentuximab vedotin received full approval from the US FDA based on
the results of the Phase III trial. A
recently reported randomized Phase III trial provides compelling evidence
in favor of brentuximab vedotin for treating cutaneous T cell lymphoma. The benefit of brentuximab vedotin has been
examined in randomized studies in combination with approved chemotherapeutic
agents (NCT01712490; NCT01777152), as well as in combination with
immune checkpoint inhibitors (NCT02684292; NCT03138499). , 
Inotuzumab ozogamicin (Besponsa) is
the second ADC using
the calicheamicin ozogamicin payload, linked to a humanized mAb targeting
the B cell antigen CD22, with an average DAR of 5–7. CD22 is
a cell surface antigen in the majority of B-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. , The safety and efficacy of inotuzumab
ozogamicin was evaluated in an open-label, randomized, international,
multicenter Phase III study (INO-VATE 1022). It was approved by the US FDA in 2017 against relapsed or refractory
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. , , 
Moxetumomab pasudotox (Lumoxiti) consists
of moxetumomab
targeting CD22 conjugated to a 38kD fragment of Pseudomonas exotoxin
A (PE38). CD22 is expressed on mature
B cells and to a larger extent on 100% of hairy cells, which provides
an ideal therapeutic target for the treatment of hairy cell leukemia,
a rare hematological malignancy, characterized by splenomegaly, hemorrhage,
and an accumulation of abnormal B lymphocytes. − Upon binding to CD22, moxetumomab pasudotox is internalized, its
mc-VC-PABC linker cleaved by proteases and the catalytic domain of
the exotoxin is released inside cancer cells leading to inhibition
of translation of proteins and apoptosis. US FDA approved Lumoxiti
of AstraZeneca in 2018 for the treatment of patients with hairy cell
leukemia who have previously failed to receive at least two systemic
therapies (including purine nucleoside analogs). Moxetumomab pasudotox was thus the first new drug approved
for the treatment of hairy cell leukemia in the past 20 years. 
Polatuzumab vedotin
(Polivy) contains a humanized antibody
targeting CD79b antigen, linked to microtubule-disrupting MMAE payload
via a protease-cleavable dipeptide linker (mc-VC-PABC) with an average
DAR of 3.5. CD79b is expressed on >90%
of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas and has proven to be a promising antibody
target. , Polatuzumab vedotin selectively binds to
CD79b upon administration, followed by endocytosis and proteolytic
cleavage to release MMAE inducing cell cycle arrest and subsequent
cell death. Polivy was approved by the US FDA in 2019, for use in
treatment of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, the most common type of
non-Hodgkin lymphomas, in patients who have received at least two
prior therapies. 
Belantamab mafodotin (Blenrep) is composed of a humanized
anti-B cell maturation antigen (BCMA) mAb coupled with cytotoxic agent
MMAF, a mitotic inhibitor, through a noncleavable maleimidocaproyl
(MC) linker. Belantamab mafodotin has an average DAR of 4. BCMA is
a transmembrane glycoprotein explicitly overexpressed on the surface
of multiple myeloma cells. Upon internalization
and degradation in lysosomes belantamab mafodotin releases MMAF inside
multiple myeloma cells, which inhibits cell division by blocking microtubule
polymerization, resulting in cell cycle arrest and inducing caspase-3-dependent
apoptosis. As a result, belantamab mafodotin is effective at killing
cancer cells overexpressing BCMA. The US FDA approved Blenrep in 2020
for the treatment of multiple myeloma, based on the results of the
DREAMM-2 clinical trial. 
Loncastuximab tesirine (Zynlonta) comprises a humanized
mAb targeting CD19 conjugated to pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimer
via a cleavable (valine-alanine dipeptide) maleimide type linker,
with an average DAR of ∼2.3. , The PBD dimer
is a novel generation of cytotoxic payload for ADC development. It binds to DNA and causes strong cross-linking
that prevents DNA strand separation, thus preventing DNA transcription
and replication and killing the cell. Zynlonta received accelerated approval by the US FDA in 2021, for
the treatment of patients with large B-cell lymphoma after two or
more lines of systemic therapy. The approval of Zynlonta was based
on data from the LOTIS-2 trial. 

7.3.2.

## Solid Tumors
Trastuzumab emtansine (Kadcyla) includes an anti-HER2
humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody connected to a DM1 payload via
a noncleavable MCC linker. Because of the noncleavable linker present
in trastuzumab emtansine, after entry into the HER2-positive cancer
cell, mAb proteolysis inside lysosomes is necessary to release the
free DM1 payload. , Upon its release from the lysosome,
DM1 binds to tubulin at the vinca-binding site and inhibits tubulin
polymerization, inducing mitotic arrest and cell death. Trastuzumab emtansine was approved by the US
FDA in 2013 as a single-agent treatment for HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer in patients previously administered trastuzumab and
a taxane, either separately or in combination. In 2019, this was extended to include HER2- positive early
breast cancer in patients with residual invasive disease after neoadjuvant
taxane-based chemotherapy and trastuzumab-based treatment. , 
Enfortumab vedotin (Padcev) is approved
by the US FDA
for the treatment of patients with locally advanced or metastatic
urothelial cancer. It comprises a fully
human antinectin-4 IgG1κ monoclonal antibody (AGS-22C3), linked
to MMAE via a protease-cleavable linker (MC-VC-PABC), with an average
DAR of ∼3.8. Nectin-4 is a transmembrane
protein, which is abundantly expressed in several malignancies, especially
in urothelial carcinoma, thus being a compelling target for ADC molecular
design. An accelerated approval was granted by the FDA in 2019, and
a regular approval was further granted in 2021 based on results from
an open-label, randomized, multicenter Phase III study (EV-301). − 
Enfortumab vedotin-ejfv (Padcev, Astellas
Pharma) is
a member of the first approved ADC-based combination therapy formulation:
on April 3, 2023, the US FDA granted accelerated approval to enfortumab
vedotin-ejfv with pembrolizumab (Keytruda, Merck) for treatment of
locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma in patients ineligible
for cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. 
Trastuzumab deruxtecan (Enhertu) is a HER2-targeted
ADC for the treatment of patients with unresectable or metastatic
HER2-positive breast cancer who have received two or more prior anti-HER2
based regimens in the metastatic setting. It includes a humanized HER2 antibody (trastuzumab) conjugated to
a topoisomerase I inhibitor (DXd) as a payload through an enzymatically
cleavable tetrapeptide-based linker with an average DAR of 7–8.
DXd is a very powerful payload, and
the tetrapeptide-based linker technology stabilizes the ADC in plasma
to reduce the risk of systemic toxicity. Enhertu was approved by the US FDA in 2019 based on positive results
from a single-arm, multicenter, Phase II DESTINY-Breast01 study. Subsequently, Enhertu has also been approved
for gastric cancer. 
Sacituzumab govitecan (Trodelvy) comprises a humanized
monoclonal antibody targeting Trop-2 conjugated to a topoisomerase
I inhibitor SN-38 by means of a hydrolyzable linker (CL2A) with an
average DAR of ∼7.6. Overexpression of Trop-2, a 40-kDa glycoprotein
that plays a role as transducer of intracellular calcium signaling, , was observed in the majority of solid tumors, including triple-negative
breast cancer. The payload SN-38 inhibits
DNA topoisomerase I thus causing DNA single strand breaks and eventually
leads to cell death. The CL2A linker
improves the binding ratio of Trop-2 antibody to SN-38, with higher
toxic concentration in tumor but lower concentration in nontarget
tissues. Linker optimization allows
both controlled release of the drug and diffusion through the cell
membrane, enabling the drug to kill neighboring tumor cells (the bystander
effect). Sacituzumab govitecan received
accelerated approval by the US FDA in 2020, for the treatment of patients
with unresectable locally advanced or metastatic triple-negative breast
cancer who have received two or more prior systemic therapies, at
least one of them for metastatic disease. The clinical efficacy of
sacituzumab govitecan was further confirmed in a multicenter, open-label,
randomized trial (ASCENT), which promoted
the US FDA to grant a regular approval. , 
Cetuximab sarotalocan (Akalux) includes
an anti-EGFR
chimeric monoclonal antibody, cetuximab, conjugated with IRDye700DX,
a near-infrared photosensitizing dye. The average DAR of cetuximab sarotalocan was in the 1.3–3.8
range. EGFR is amply expressed on the surface of multiple kinds of
solid tumors, including head and neck squamous cell carcinomas, esophageal
cancer, lung cancer, colon cancer, pancreatic cancer and other solid
tumors. Cetuximab sarotalocan targets
EGFR and is locally activated using a laser to accurately induce the
rapid death of cancer cells without damaging surrounding normal tissues. Cetuximab sarotalocan was approved by the Pharmaceuticals
and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA) of Japan in 2019 as a treatment
product of near-infrared photoimmunotherapy for unresectable locally
advanced or recurrent head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. The approval was supported by the positive data
from a multicenter, open-label Phase IIa trial. 
Disitamab vedotin (Aidixi)
consists of a humanized HER2
antibody, a cathepsin cleavable linker (mc-VC-PABC), and a cytotoxic
agent, MMAE, with an average DAR ∼ 4. In June 2021, disitamab vedotin was conditionally approved by the
National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) of China for the treatment
of patients with locally advanced or metastatic gastric cancer, including
gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma, who have received at least
2 types of systemic chemotherapy. The approval was supported by the
results of the RC48-C008 study, which demonstrated a clinically significant
response and survival benefit for patients receiving the drug. Disitamab vedotin has also conditionally approval
by NMPA in December 2021 for treatment of patients with HER2 positive
locally advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer who have also previously
received platinum-containing chemotherapy treatment. It was also supported
by the results of the RC48-C005 study, an open-label, multicenter,
single-arm, nonrandomized Phase II study. 
Tisotumab vedotin (Tivdak) contains
a fully humanized
mAb binding to tissue factor, a cleavable mc-VC-PABC linker, and an
antimitotic agent, MMAE, with an average DAR of 4. Tissue factor is overexpressed on several solid tumors. Bystander effect, and antibody-dependent cellular
cytotoxicity and phagocytosis have been also reported to be involved
in the mechanism of action of tisotumab vedotin. Tivdak was approved by the US FDA in September 2021, for
patients with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer with disease
progression on or after chemotherapy. The approval was supported by
findings from the innovaTV 204 study, a multicenter, open-label, single-arm,
Phase II trial. 
Mirvetuximab soravtansine (Elahere) comprises a humanized
mAb targeting folate receptor alpha (FRα) conjugated to a potent
cytotoxic DM4 by a cleavable linker (sulfo-SPDB), for the treatment
of ovarian cancer as orphan drug designation. FRα is expressed at high levels in most cases of
epithelial ovarian cancer as well as in endometrial cancer and lung
adenocarcinoma. Most normal tissues
do not express FRα, making it a promising target for ADC. The hydrophilicity of the linker is increased
by the introduction of a sulfonate group, while the addition of methyl
groups α to the disulfide moiety reduces premature release of
the drug in circulation. Mirvetuximab soravtansine was approved by
the US FDA in November 2022 for the treatment of patients with FRα
positive, platinum-resistant epithelial ovarian, fallopian tube, or
primary peritoneal cancer, who have received one to three prior systemic
treatment regimens. , 

7.3.3.

## Combination Therapy
In addition
to the above approved ADCs, on April 3, 2023, the FDA granted accelerated
approval to enfortumab vedotin-ejfv (Padcev, Astellas Pharma) with
pembrolizumab (Keytruda, Merck) for treatment of locally advanced
or metastatic urothelial carcinoma in patients ineligible for cisplatin-containing
chemotherapy. , Another two combination treatments
including pembrolizumab (Keytruda, Merck) are in a late stage of clinical
trials: datopotamab deruxtecan (Dato-DXd) with pembrolizumab (Keytruda)
plus platinum-based chemotherapy, , and sacituzumab
govitecan-hziy (Trodelvy, Gilead) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda), , both for treatment of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).

8.

## Noteworthy Patents
ADC patents within
the CAS Content Collection continue to grow
not only in numbers but also in ADC technological diversity. The diversity
of ADC compounds, linker technology, bioconjugation techniques, target
antigen moieties, and diseases treated are highlighted with a selection
of notable patents presented in .
 
9.

## Outlook and Perspectives
Over the past
decade, ADCs have made tremendous progress as a result
of optimization of the choice of cytotoxic agents, conjugation strategies,
better selection of targeted antigens, and improved antibody engineering.
However, despite their sophisticated design, ADCs are still associated
with certain limitations and the emergence of resistance mechanisms.
To overcome these limitations, new antibody formats, new delivery
systems, antigenic targets, cytotoxic payloads, and site-specific
conjugation methods have continued to be developed and advanced.
9.1.

## Major Challenges and Perspectives for Antibody–Drug
Conjugate Development
The advance of ADCs involves certain
challenges that researchers and developers need to overcome in their
efforts to design successful ADCs:
Complex design and manufacturing. ADCs
are complex molecules that require precise conjugation of the antibody,
linker, and cytotoxic drug payload. The manufacturing process can
be challenging and involves multiple steps, increasing the complexity
and cost of production.
Target
selection: Identifying appropriate
target antigens that are selectively expressed on cancer cells is
a critical challenge. The target antigen should be highly specific
to cancer cells to minimize off-target effects and maximize therapeutic
efficacy. However, not all cancers have well-defined target antigens,
and heterogeneity of antigen expression within tumors can further
complicate target selection.
Heterogeneity
of target expression. Even
when a target antigen is identified, its expression can vary within
and between tumors. Heterogeneous antigen expression may result in
incomplete target binding and reduce the effectiveness of ADC therapy.
Moreover, antigen loss or downregulation can occur during treatment,
leading to acquired resistance.
Payload selection and optimization. Selecting
an appropriate cytotoxic drug payload is crucial for the potency and
effectiveness of ADCs. The cytotoxic drug should have high lethality
against cancer cells while maintaining stability during conjugation
and circulation. Optimizing the delicate balance between drug potency
and linker stability is a complex task that requires careful consideration
of the desired mechanism of action and the specific characteristics
of the target cancer type.
Linker
design and stability. Designing
an optimal linker that balances stability, selective cleavage, and
efficient drug release is a significant challenge. The linker must
be stable during circulation to minimize premature drug release, but
it should also be able to efficiently release the cytotoxic drug inside
the target cell. Achieving the right balance between linker stability
and cleavability is crucial for maximizing therapeutic efficacy.
Pharmacokinetics and biodistribution. Optimizing
the pharmacokinetic properties of ADCs is essential for effective
drug delivery to tumor sites. ADCs need to have appropriate systemic
circulation, tumor penetration, and retention within the tumor microenvironment.
Achieving optimal pharmacokinetics and biodistribution can be challenging
due to factors such as rapid clearance, limited tumor penetration,
and inadequate tumor-specific accumulation.
Maximum tolerated dose (MTD). According
to a recent report, the MTDs of ADCs and the related payload small
molecule drugs in humans are nearly the same after normalization for
cytotoxic agent content, , i.e., current ADCs
do not substantially increase the MTDs of their conjugated drugs regardless
of their broad diversity. Thus, mechanisms that may provide further
improvements in efficacy and tolerability need to be further explored,
with in-depth analysis of the pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic formulation
profiles for optimizing ADC clinical dosing strategies.
Manufacturing complexity and scale-up. ADCs
are complex molecules that require precise conjugation of the antibody,
linker, and payload. The manufacturing process needs to be scalable,
reproducible, and cost-effective. Ensuring consistent quality control
throughout the manufacturing process is a significant challenge, especially
when dealing with multiple components and their interactions.
DAR heterogeneity. Achieving
a consistent
and predictable DAR can be difficult for multiple reasons, including
manufacturing challenges such as conjugation chemistry and purification;
different conjugation techniques leading to higher or lower drug loading
on the antibodies; heterogeneity in antibody population, etc.
Immunogenicity and safety. ADCs
can induce
immune responses, leading to reduced efficacy and potential safety
concerns. Minimizing immunogenicity is a challenge that requires careful
antibody engineering and testing. Ensuring the safety profile of ADCs,
including minimizing off-target effects and potential toxicities,
is also a critical consideration.
Off-target effects. While ADCs are designed
to target cancer cells selectively, there is a possibility of off-target
effects, where the ADC binds to noncancerous cells expressing low
levels of the target antigen. This can lead to undesired toxicity
in healthy tissues and potential side effects.
Resistance mechanisms. Cancer cells can
develop resistance to ADC therapy through various mechanisms, such
as antigen loss, altered drug uptake, or drug efflux pumps. These
resistance mechanisms can limit the effectiveness of ADCs and reduce
treatment efficacy over time.
Regulatory
approval. ADCs involve the combination
of different components, including an antibody, cytotoxic drug, and
linker. Each component may require separate regulatory approval processes,
which can be time-consuming and expensive. Meeting regulatory requirements
for safety and efficacy is a significant challenge in ADC development.
Cost. ADC therapy can be costly
due to
the complexity of manufacturing, including the need for highly specialized
equipment and processes. The high cost can limit accessibility and
affordability for patients.
Addressing these challenges requires continuous advancements
in antibody engineering, linker technology, payload design, and the
understanding of tumor biology. Collaboration among researchers, pharmaceutical
companies, and regulatory agencies is essential to overcome these
challenges and bring effective ADC therapies to patients.
An
important advance in the development and use of ADC is in combination
therapies. , , , , Combining ADCs with other treatment modalities, such as chemotherapy,
radiation therapy, or immunotherapies, is an area of active research.
Researchers investigate synergistic effects and explore combination
strategies to enhance therapeutic outcomes and overcome resistance
mechanisms. Noteworthy, on April 3, 2023, the FDA granted accelerated
approval to the combination of enfortumab vedotin-ejfv (Padcev, Astellas
Pharma) with pembrolizumab (Keytruda, Merck) for treatment of locally
advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma in patients ineligible
for cisplatin-containing chemotherapy. 
Another significant advance in ADC development is companion
diagnostics. , − Biomarker identification and patient stratification based on target
expression levels or other predictive factors can help select the
most appropriate patients for treatment and improve the clinical outcome
of the ADC treatment.
Nanobody-Enhanced ADCs offer
another possibility to
enhance therapeutic effects. Nanobodies are small, stable, and highly
specific, making them suitable for targeting tumor-specific antigens. , When used as the targeting ligands in ADCs, nanobodies offer several
advantages: (i) Reduced immunogenicity: nanobodies are derived from
camelids or engineered from human antibodies, which can lead to reduced
immunogenicity compared to larger antibodies; (ii) Enhanced tissue
penetration: their smaller size can improve tissue penetration within
solid tumors; (iii) Rapid clearance from circulation: this can reduce
off-target effects and systemic toxicity.
Bispecific antibodies
are engineered to simultaneously bind to
two different antigens or epitopes. This
enables them to target two distinct molecular targets, often with
therapeutic advantages. Bispecific antibodies in ADCs can simultaneously target tumor-specific antigens and immune cells,
facilitating immune-mediated killing of cancer cells. , This can enhance therapeutic effects and potentially reduce resistance.
For example, a bispecific ADC can bind to a tumor antigen on one arm
and CD3 on the other, engaging T cells for tumor cell destruction.
Trispecific antibodies are designed to bind to three
different targets or antigens. They offer even greater targeting specificity,
potentially allowing for more precise delivery of cytotoxic payloads
to tumor cells while sparing healthy tissues. 
By integration of these advanced antibody formats
into ADCs, it
becomes possible to achieve several goals simultaneously: enhanced
target specificity, improved tissue penetration, engagement of the
immune system, and reduction in systemic toxicity. These advanced
ADC strategies hold great promise for improving the efficacy and safety
of cancer therapies and other targeted treatments.
ADC design
and use are constantly evolving, driven by advancements
in antibody engineering, linker technology, payload development and
diversification, and improvements in our understanding of the biology
of cancer and other diseases. Enhancements in the specificity, potency,
and safety of ADC are necessary to improve their therapeutic indexes
and clinical effectiveness. 
In
conclusion, ADCs are a promising therapeutic modality, particularly
in combination with chemotherapies, immune checkpoint inhibitors,
or other therapies. In the past decade, the development of novel targets,
linkers, and payloads have fueled advances in ADC, including applications
beyond oncology. ADCs provide the possibility of endowing drugs from
the past with improved pharmacokinetics and reduced toxicity, making
them useful once more.

## Acknowledgments
The authors sincerely appreciate the CAS Data, Analytics
& Insights team for their assistance in data extraction. The authors
are grateful to Manuel Guzman, Gilles Georges, Michael Dennis, Dawn
Riedel, Dawn George, and Hong Xie for executive sponsorship. The authors
also appreciate Dharmini Patal the rest of the Science Connect team
at CAS for the support on project coordination and insightful discussions.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.3c00374.
ADC preclinical trials; ADC clinical trials (PDF)

## Author Contributions
§ Authors J.M.S. and R.T. contributed equally
to this paper.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
bc3c00374_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
bc3c00374_si_001.pdf