4101mcommMedCommMedComm (2020)WileyPMC1255478312554783125547834115914310.1002/mco2.70437Dormant Metastases Exhibit a Unique Phenotype Primarily Promoted by the Ch25h Gene and Are Maintained in Dormancy by T Lymphocytes
ChamorroVirginia AlgarraIgnacio SanzVerónica PulidoMaría RomeroIrene ChicoEstefanía MillánMarina Escaño‐MaestreMaría BotellaPablo LinaresIsabel García‐LoraÁngel M 
1
Servicio De Análisis Clínicos e Inmunología, UGC Laboratorio Clínico, Hospital Universitario Virgen De Las Nieves, Granada, Spain
2
Instituto De Investigación Biosanitaria ibs.GRANADA, Granada, Spain
3
Departamento De Ciencias de La Salud, Universidad De Jaén, Jaén, Spain
4
Servicio De Análisis Clínicos, Hospital De Antequera, Málaga, Spain
5
Plataforma Biobanco ibs.Granada, Nodo Granada, Granada, Spain✉Corresponding author.
26102025611e70437e7043728102025© 2025 The Author(s). MedComm published by Sichuan International Medical Exchange & Promotion Association (SCIMEA) and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## ABSTRACT
During the course of cancer, metastatic cells frequently enter a state of dormancy that can be controlled by the immune system. In our laboratory, we developed a preclinical mouse model of metastatic immunodormancy. Dormant spontaneous metastases are controlled by the immune system of wild‐type mice. Depletion of the host immune system causes these metastases to awaken and progress. Dormant metastases are compared with nude metastases and overt metastases that have never been in dormancy. The findings of the study indicate that the dormant metastases exhibit a unique and differentiated phenotype. This is evidenced by their varied response to nutrient‐restrictive conditions, chemotherapeutic agents, and cytokines in vitro. Furthermore, dormant metastases exhibit a distinctive transcriptional pattern of gene expression, which is predominantly promoted by the Ch25h gene. Additionally, the analysis revealed differential expression of microRNAs, with elevated levels of mir‐142‐3p being expressed de novo. The microenvironment of dormant metastases shows an increase in T lymphocytes (cytotoxic and helper T lymphocytes and γδ T cells) and neutrophils. Immune‐controlled dormant metastases exhibit a unique phenotype that can be exploited to discover new biomarkers, as well as to develop therapies to eradicate them or control overt metastases.
Keywords: dormant metastases, antitumor immunity, gene expression, chemokines, biomarkers, ch25h, t lymphocytes, immune microenvironment

Significance: Immune‐controlled dormant metastases exhibit a unique phenotype, primarily promoted by the Ch25h gene, that can be exploited to discover new biomarkers, as well as the development of therapies to eradicate dormant metastases or control overt metastases.

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Sep 10; Received 2024 Aug 5; Accepted 2025 Sep 16; Collection date 2025 Nov.

1.

## Introduction
The main challenge in fighting cancer is destroying metastases, which are the primary cause of death in most cases [ ]. The progression from primary tumor to metastasis involves several stages, including tumor vascularization, intravasation into blood vessels, extravasation, and dissemination to other organs [ , ]. However, when tumor cells reach new organs, they can enter a period of latency known as dormant metastasis [ ]. Metastatic cells remain dormant during this period, with minimal or no proliferation, and are not destroyed [ , ]. This period can last for years or even decades after the primary tumor has been removed, as is often observed in cases of breast and prostate cancer [ , ]. Metastatic dormancy can occur due to antiangiogenic factors (angiogenic dormancy), proliferation‐suppressing factors (cellular dormancy), or the action of the immune system (immune dormancy) [ , ]. These three types of latency are interrelated and may all contribute to the process of metastatic dormancy [ ].
During immune dormancy, metastatic growth is suppressed by the immune system, but the immune system is unable to eliminate dormant metastatic cells [ , ]. Further research could investigate the phenotype of dormant metastases, as well as the molecular mechanisms and immune cells involved in maintaining this equilibrium [ ]. By understanding the immune mechanisms involved in this balancing process, we may be able to manipulate the immune system to destroy dormant metastases before they become overt. We may also be able to control overt metastases in a state of immunodormancy [ ]. Additionally, understanding the phenotype of dormant metastases may aid in the detection and discovery of new biomarkers of dormant metastatic disease [ ].
Studying dormant metastases in humans is a challenging task since they are undetected and cannot be isolated for study. Therefore, preclinical murine models are necessary to accurately replicate the process of metastatic dormancy [ , ]. Furthermore, it is essential to develop models that accurately depict every stage of tumor progression toward metastatic dormancy. The use of spontaneous metastasis assays in murine preclinical models is the only way to fully replicate these stages. Internationally, there are very few preclinical murine models with the described characteristics. Our laboratory has developed a preclinical murine model of spontaneous immune‐mediated dormant metastasis in wild‐type mice without the use of any additional treatments [ ]. Methylcholanthrene was used to induce a primary tumor in BALB/c mice. The tumor was then removed, cultured, and cloned by limiting dilution, resulting in different cell lines from these tumor clones [ ]. One of the clones was subcutaneously injected into BALB/c mice. Following the removal of the primary tumor, the mice were monitored for the emergence of spontaneous metastases. The study revealed that the mice did not develop overt spontaneous metastases [ ]. However, in immunodeficient BALB/c nude mice, all the mice developed overt spontaneous metastases. In a new assay, this tumor clone was injected into immunocompetent wild‐type mice. The primary tumor was removed, and the mice were observed for 5 months. During this time, no overt metastases were detected. Next, the hosts were depleted of CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes for a period of three months. Finally, the presence of overt spontaneous metastases was revealed through euthanasia of the animals. These metastases, called dormant metastases, had been in a state of immune metastatic dormancy for more than five months and were not awakened until the depletion of the host's T lymphocytes. These metastases should exhibit a phenotype comparable to that of dormant metastases and were cultured [ ].
In this study, we selected two of these dormant metastases and compared their phenotype, gene and miRNA expression, and different biological characteristics with two metastases generated in nude mice, nude metastases (which were not in a state of immune dormancy), and with two other overt spontaneous metastases, overt metastases, produced from another tumor clone of the same primary tumor [ ] (which also were not in a state of immune dormancy). The results show that these dormant metastases have a distinct phenotype in comparison to nude‐met and overt‐met. Additionally, the immune populations involved in the process of metastatic immune dormancy were analyzed.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## GR9‐B11 Dormant Metastatic Murine Model
The GR9‐B11 tumor cell line was derived from a fibrosarcoma induced by methylcholanthrene injection into BALB/c mice using limiting dilution cloning. Spontaneous metastasis assays were conducted using this tumor cell line in wild‐type BALB/c mice, but no overt spontaneous metastasis was observed (Figure  ). However, when the same assays were conducted in BALB/c nude mice, metastases were observed in 80% of the mice (Figure  ). These metastases were referred to as nude metastases (nude‐met). Spontaneous metastasis assays were conducted in immunocompetent mice that were depleted of CD8+ T lymphocytes 5 months after primary tumor removal. The results showed that overt spontaneous metastases occurred in 100% of the mice (Figure  ). The metastases remained dormant for five months in immunocompetent mice until T lymphocytes were depleted. They were then referred to as dormant metastases (dormant‐met). Notably, the only action taken was the depletion of T lymphocytes in the host. No direct intervention was made on the dormant metastatic cells, yet this was sufficient for them to “awaken” and begin to grow. Several metastases of each type were isolated and adapted to cell culture. For this study, we selected two nude metastases, nude‐met‐1 and nude‐met‐2, and two dormant metastases, dormant‐met‐1 and dormant‐met‐2 (Figure  ). It is important to note that both metastasis groups originated from the same B11 tumor clone. One group was generated in immunodeficient BALB/c nude mice, and their metastases had never experienced dormancy, while the other group was generated in immunocompetent mice depleted of T lymphocytes, and their metastases were in dormancy controlled by the immune system. To determine whether dormant metastases retain their ability to remain dormant in vivo, we conducted spontaneous metastasis assays with dormant metastases in immunocompetent mice. This resulted in the generation of primary tumors, producing later metastasis in immunodormancy (Figure  ). These recent assays demonstrated that dormant metastases retain their ability to enter a state of in vivo metastatic dormancy. In summary, the dormancy metastasis model we studied comprises the following cell lines: GR9‐B11, which is a tumor clone; two nude metastases, namely, nude‐met1 and nude‐met2; and two dormant metastases, namely, dormant‐met1 and dormant‐met2 (Figure  ). This study also included two overt spontaneous metastases, overt‐met‐1 and overt‐met‐2, generated in wild‐type BALB/c mice by another clone from the GR9 tumor system, GR9‐A7 (Figure  ) [ ]. There are three groups of metastases: dormant‐met, nude‐met, and overt‐met. The authenticity and validation of the cell lines composing our metastatic tumor model are revealed by the complete gene expression results of each cell obtained by RNA sequencing (Figure ). It is observed that the Spearman correlation between the two metastases forming each group exceeds 0.968, revealing their great similarity. Furthermore, cluster analysis and Venn diagrams of genes expressed differentially revealed that dormant and nude metastatic groups are found to be part of the same cluster as B11, while the overt metastases are identified as belonging to a distinct cluster (Figure ).
 
2.2.

## Proliferation Assays and Treatment with Chemotherapeutic Agents and Chemokines
As dormant metastases are exclusively in a state of dormancy, characterized by minimal or no proliferation, the initial assays aimed to determine whether there were differences in in vitro proliferation capacity among the different metastases. The in vitro growth of the various metastatic cell lines was found to be similar, with no significant differences observed in their growth patterns (Figure  ). The cells were subjected to nutrient‐restricted conditions in culture by reducing 0.5% fetal bovine serum for 5 days. The proliferation rate of the cells was measured and compared with their proliferation rate under normal culture conditions with 10% fetal bovine serum. The results showed that dormant metastastatic cell lines exhibited greater resistance to these restrictive conditions, maintaining greater cell proliferation than did the nude and overt metastastatic cell lines (21.2% vs. 9.8% vs. 8.9%, respectively) (Figure  ). Under nutrient‐restricted conditions, dormant metastases maintained a proliferation rate that was twice as high as that of the other two types of metastases.
 Metastases in dormancy may exhibit greater resistance to chemotherapeutics commonly used for anticancer treatments due to their low proliferation. Although they have equal in vitro proliferation rates, we measured their sensitivity to different chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in the clinic, including paclitaxel, cisplatin, methotrexate, and doxorubicin. The chemotherapeutic agents were used to treat the different metastases in vitro, and their proliferation rate was measured. The sensitivity of the detection of overt metastases was measured to determine a dose/response curve. Concentrations were selected based on the highest sensitivity exhibited by overt‐met, which resulted in 100% inhibition of cell proliferation. Growth inhibition in the other two types of metastases was also measured. Nude metastases exhibited inhibition values similar to those of overt metastases, with no significant differences (Figure  ). In contrast, the sensitivity of dormant metastases to paclitaxel and cisplatin was lower, exhibiting only 47% and 61% growth inhibition, respectively (Figure  ). However, compared with those of overt‐met and nude‐met, dormant metastases showed greater sensitivity to the other two chemotherapeutic agents, methotrexate and doxorubicin, resulting in 199% and 359% growth inhibition, respectively, compared with overt‐met (Figure  ). The results suggest that dormant metastases per se have lower sensitivity to paclitaxel and cisplatin, two commonly used chemotherapeutics, despite having a proliferation rate similar to that of other metastases. In contrast, dormant metastases per se exhibit greater intrinsic sensitivity to methotrexate and doxorubicin.
In other experiments, cells were exposed to TNF‐α, TGF‐β, and IFN‐γ, which are all involved in the immune response, to assess their effect on in vitro proliferation. The proliferation of cells without any treatment was considered 100%, and the percentage of proliferation resulting from different treatments was measured. The results indicated that treatment with TNF‐α did not significantly inhibit growth in overt‐met or nude‐met, with proliferation rates of 99% and 95%, respectively. However, it strongly inhibited growth in dormant‐met, with a proliferation rate of only 24% (Figure  ). Treatment with TGF‐β had a slight stimulatory effect on the growth of overt metastases and nude metastases, with proliferation rates of 110% and 111%, respectively. In contrast, it significantly inhibited the growth of dormant metastases, with a proliferation rate of 68% (Figure  ). Treatment with IFN‐γ inhibited growth in overt and nude metastases by 60% and 58%, respectively. Additionally, IFN‐γ significantly inhibited the growth of dormant metastases by 47% (Figure  ). In summary, dormant‐met exhibited greater in vitro growth inhibition when treated with all three chemokines, particularly TNF‐α, suggesting a greater sensitivity to these treatments.

2.3.

## Comparison of Transcriptional Gene Expression Among Different Metastasis Groups
RNA sequencing was performed to compare differential gene expression at the transcriptional level. The study analyzed the gene expression of different metastasis groups, each consisting of two metastases, including the GR9‐B11 tumor clone. The Pearson correlation coefficient of gene expression between the two metastases in each group was R
2 > 0.968. Additionally, the differential expression of dormant‐met group was compared with that in the other two metastasis groups and the GR9‐B11 tumor clone group, and the expression in these latter cells was used as a control. Ninety‐two genes with differential expression were found in the dormant‐met group (Figure  ; Table ). In the dormant‐met group, 65 genes exhibited overexpression, while 27 genes demonstrated lower expression compared with the other two metastasis groups and the B11 clone (Figure  ). This set of 92 genes exhibited a phenotype of differential gene expression at the transcriptional level for the dormant‐met group. Notably, if a gene exhibited greater expression in the dormant‐met group, it maintains this greater expression when compared with nude‐met and overt‐met. Similarly, if the expression is lower in the dormant‐met group, it remains with lower expression when compared with the other two metastasis groups. The expression of the Rspo1 gene showed the most significant difference between the dormant‐met group and the other two metastasis groups, exhibiting very high expression in the dormant‐met group. Analysis of B11 tumor clone expression revealed that the expression of certain genes increased in the dormant‐met group and decreased in the nude‐met group. These genes included Ch25h, Alcam, Fas, Ccl2, and Ccl7. Gene‑pathway enrichment analysis revealed an enriched chemotaxis, positive regulation of chemotaxis, macrophage activation, neutrophil degranulation, and cell adhesion molecules (Figure )
 Further analysis of these results through real‐time qPCR plates was performed to examine the expression of genes associated with the cholesterol pathway, surface markers, and chemokines. The metastasis groups were compared, and relative expression was calculated by using overt‐met as a control and assigning it a value of 1. Only differences with a value greater than 2 and significant (p < 0.05) were considered. Compared with that of nude‐met group, the RNA sequencing of dorm‐met group showed the greatest increase in expression of the Ch25h enzyme (log2: 11.3). Furthermore, there was an increase in dormant (log2: 5.6) and a decrease in the nude group (−5.7) compared with the overt‐met data (log2: 0). This enzyme is responsible for converting cholesterol into 25‐hydroxycholesterol. Therefore, we measured the expression of genes involved in the cholesterol pathway. The expression of 15 genes significantly increased in the dormant‐met group compared with the other two metastasis groups: Stab1, Mvd, Pmvk, Nsdhl, Tm7sf2, Abca2, Hmgcr, Cyp51, Srebf2, Idi1, Dhcr7, Hmgcs1, Fdft1, Ebp, and Mvk (Figure  ). This finding suggested that there may be an increase in cholesterol synthesis in dormant‐met, which is then converted into 25‐hydroxycholesterol. Gene identification from the GO database was performed (Table ). Gene‑pathway enrichment analysis revealed an enriched cholesterol biosynthesis, cholesterol metabolism, isoprenoid biosynthesis process, and steroid biosynthesis (Figure ).
Analysis of chemokines revealed that only dormant‐met expressed Cxcl15, Ccl11, Slit2, and Ifn‐γ (Figure  ). The results from dormant‐met showed a significant increase in Cxcl5 and PF4, Xcl1, Ccl8, Pbpb, Cmtm3, Cxcl3, Tlr2, Itgb2, Ccl12, and Cx3cl1. Additionally, the study confirmed the increased expression of Ccl7 and Ccl2. In contrast, dormant‐met showed a considerable decrease in IL‐6 expression and a complete absence of Cxcl9 and Ccl20 (Figure  ). Gene identification from the GO database was performed (Table ). Gene‑pathway‐enrichment analysis revealed an enriched granulocyte migration, chemotaxis, and neutrophil migration (Figure ).
There was an increase in the expression of six surface markers (Figure  ). This finding supports the RNA‐seq data for Alcam, which is exclusively expressed in dormant‐met, and for Fas and Vcam1, which exhibited a significant increase. Furthermore, the expression of three additional markers increased: Cd276 (B7‐H3), Cd21 (Cr2), and Cd200r1. All of these markers are involved in interactions with immune cells. In contrast, dormant‐met showed a lack of expression of Cd1d2, Cd3g, and Cd69, whereas the other two metastasis groups exhibited expression (Figure  ). Gene identification from the GO database was performed (Table ). Gene‑pathway enrichment analysis revealed an enriched regulation of T cell activation, negative regulation of immune system processes, adaptive immune response, and cell adhesion molecules (Figure ).
According to the in vitro flow cytometry assays, among three metastasis groups, only the dormant‐met group expressed Alcam on the cell surface among the three metastasis groups (Figure  ). The in vitro surface expression of other markers remained unchanged.
 
2.4.

## Chemokines Secreted by Various Metastases
The analysis focused on the cytokines secreted by different metastasis groups into the culture medium, which could affect immune cells. This study revealed a noteworthy increase in the secretion of the following chemokines by dormant‐met: Ccl2, Ccl7, Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Cxcl5, Tgf‐β1, Ccl8, and Tgf‐β2. Additionally, unlike the other two metastasis groups, the dormant‐met group stopped secreting IL‐6 (Figure  ).

2.5.

## Differentially Expressed miRNAs in Dormant Metastases
MicroRNAs are important regulators of gene expression within cells. the mouse miRNome, which comprises 834 miRNAs, was analyzed for each metastasis group. The expression of miRNAs in dormant‐met or nude‐met was examined using overt‐met as a control, with a value of 1. This study revealed that nine miRNAs had significantly increased expression exclusively in the dormant‐met group compared with the other two metastasis groups. These miRNAs are miR‐142‐3p, miR‐380‐5p, miR‐34b‐3p, miR‐376b‐3p, miR‐21‐5p, miR‐25‐3p, miR‐1930‐5p, miR‐5046, and miR‐7a‐5p. (Figure  ). It is important to note that miR‐142‐3p is expressed de novo exclusively in dormant‐met. In contrast, 11 miRNAs were weakly expressed only in dormant‐met, exhibiting a significant decrease in expression compared with the other two metastasis groups. These miRNAs are miR‐382‐3p, miR‐300‐5p, miR‐669o‐5p, miR‐3060‐5p, miR‐3079‐3p, miR‐21‐3p, miR‐211‐5p, miR‐3094‐3p, miR‐499‐3p, miR‐154‐3p, and miR‐467d‐5p. (Figure  ). Notably, miR‐467d‐5p was not expressed in the dormant‐met group, but was expressed in the other two metastasis groups. Pathway analysis was investigated using the miR enrichment analysis and annotation tool (miEAA) for the miRs differentially expressed in the dormant‐met group. This pathway analysis revealed an enriched autoimmune regulation, such as the regulation of multiple sclerosis and encephalomyelitis (Figure  ).
 We analyzed miRNA databases to identify miRNAs that may contribute to the differential gene expression observed in the dormant‐met group. A reduction in miR‐211‐5p expression may result in increased expression of five genes: Cxcl5, Alcam, Mfsd6, Lrp2, and Stk17b. A decrease in miR‐21‐3p expression may lead to increased expression of three genes: Insig2, Cxcl15, and Neo1. The upregulation of Cxcl15 may also be mediated by the reduced expression of miR‐382‐3p. Consequently, miRNAs tightly regulate the expression of chemokines. This was also observed for Ccl2 and Ccl7, whose increased expression in the dormant‐met group could be regulated by the loss of expression of miR‐499‐3p and miR‐154‐3p, respectively. During the dormant metastasis process, decreased miR‐3094‐3p expression may lead to increased Ch25h gene expression. Conversely, increased miR‐142‐3p expression may cause decreased IL‐6 and Hectd2 gene expression.

2.6.

## Immune Cells in the Microenvironment of Dormant Metastases
In the microenvironment of dormant metastases, an immune response may have originated that could control the metastases, although they cannot be destroyed. We analyzed various immune subpopulations in the lungs of animals with dormant metastases, 25 days after the removal of the primary tumor, and compared them with those of wild‐type animals (control). The gating strategies of flow cytometry analyses are depicted in Figure . In mice injected with B11, there was a significant increase in T lymphocytes (64.5% vs. 51.9%), including both CD4+ helper T lymphocytes (46.2% vs. 40.6%) and CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (17.4% vs. 9.7%) (Figure  ). These cells may be involved in the immune control of dormant metastases. In addition, the results showed a significant increase in neutrophils (9.4% vs. 4.6%) and γδ T cells (13.5% vs. 7.4%) in mice injected with B11 (Figure  ). No significant differences were detected in the other analyzed populations.
 
2.7.

## Identification of Co‐Expression Genes of CH25H in Human Breast and Prostate Cancer
In a high proportion of patients with breast or prostate cancer, progression of the primary tumor results in the development of dormant metastases. We used the breast and prostate dataset (TCGA, Firehose Legacy) from cBioPortal to perform Spearman correlation analysis to identify co‐expression genes between the differentially overexpressed genes in the dormant‐met group. The results indicated that the CH25H gene exhibited the strongest significative correlation coefficients with the highest number of genes in both tumors (Figures and ). A significant Spearman correlation of greater than 0.3 was identified in 37 genes in prostate cancer and 36 genes in breast cancer, with a maximum value of 0.71 being reached in certain cases.

2.8.

## Inhibition of Ch25h Gene Expression in Dormant Metastases
The results obtained in human tumors, together with those obtained in our mouse model, led us to consider stable blocking of the Ch25h gene in cells from the dormant‐met group. The Ch25h gene was blocked through the stable transfection of three distinct sh‐Ch25h vectors in the dormant‐met 1 and dormant‐met 2 cell lines. Of these, one vector produced a 94.6% inhibition of Ch25h gene expression when comparing dormant sh‐Ch25h transfectants with dormant sh‐control transfectants (transfected with the sh‐control vector) (Figure  ). These stable transfectants, dormant sh‐Ch25h and dormant sh‐control, were selected for the subsequent assays.
 The initial assays conducted aimed to evaluate the impact of Ch25h gene inhibition on their in vitro proliferation. As demonstrated in Figure  , the gene blockade resulted in a significant reduction in cell proliferation, with a calculated decrease of 49.5%. As we had previously observed that dormant metastases exhibited increased in vitro proliferation under nutrient deprivation conditions compared with overt metastases and nude metastases, we performed assays comparing their in vitro proliferation under culture conditions restricting fetal bovine serum to 0.5%. Metastatic dormant cells with the Ch25h gene blocked were observed to decrease their proliferation from 21% in dormant‐sh‐control cells to 1.5% in dormant sh‐Ch25h cells (Figure  ). In brief, blocking the Ch25h gene produced a strong decrease in in vitro proliferation and an almost complete loss of proliferation under nutrient‐restricted conditions. As demonstrated in previous assays, dormant metastases exhibit varying degrees of sensitivity to four chemotherapeutic agents. Now, we evaluate the sensitivity of dormant metastasis cells with the Ch25 gene blocked to these chemotherapeutic agents. The results revealed that for the four chemotherapeutic agents, paclitaxel, cisplatin, methotrexate, and doxorubicin, the inhibition of the proliferation of these cells was found to be less effective when the Ch25h gene was blocked, rendering them more resistant to treatment (Figure  ). As dormant metastases had previously exhibited an elevated sensitivity to chemokines such as TGF‐β and TNF‐α, leading to a substantial decrease in their in vitro proliferation, the effect of these chemokines on dormant sh‐Ch25h transfectants was subsequently investigated. TNF‐α treatment produced a greater sensitization in transfectants with the blocked Ch25h gene, decreasing their in vitro proliferation from a value of 42% in dormant‐sh‐control cells to 4.5% in dormant sh‐Ch25h cells (Figure  ). In contrast, treatment with TGF‐β resulted in reduced sensitization, with an increase in in vitro proliferation from 73% in dormant sh‐control cells to 105.5% in dormant sh‐Ch25h cells (Figure  ). In brief, the loss of Ch25h gene expression results in increased sensitivity of cells to TNF‐α and increased resistance to TGF‐β.
To analyze the involvement of the Ch25h gene in the expression of other genes that are differentially expressed in the dormant‐met group, 15 genes were selected. A total of 12 genes were selected for analysis based on their coexpression or lack thereof with the CH25H gene in human prostate and breast tumors. Six of the genes (CASP1, CCL2, ADGRE5, IL3RA, RSPO1, and STAB1) are co‐expressed with the CH25H gene in both cancers, while two genes (ANPEP in breast cancer and CCL8 in prostate cancer) are exclusively co‐expressed with the CH25H gene in one of the tumors. Finally, four genes (ALCAM, CD276, CCXL5, and LRP2) do not co‐express with the CH25H gene in any of the human tumors. Furthermore, three genes (Il6, Cd80, and Vldr) whose expression is known to be repressed in the dormant‐met group were selected for further analysis to determine whether the Ch25h gene can indeed repress their expression. The results showed that blocking the Ch25h gene led to a significant decrease in expression in 9 of the 12 overexpressed genes analyzed in the dormant‐met group: Adgre5, Casp1, Il3ra, Rspo1, Stab1, Anpep, Cd276, Lrp2, and Alcam (Figure  ). In contrast, two genes increased their expression: Ccl2 and Ccl8. Four genes did not change their expression, including the three genes analyzed that decreased their expression in the dormant‐met group: Cxcl5, Il6, Cd80, and Vldr. These results show that 11 of the genes analyzed vary in expression when we block the Ch25h gene, and that in 9 of them, their overexpression in the dormant‐met group is regulated by the expression of the Ch25h gene.

3.

## Discussion
Metastatic dormancy is a crucial stage in cancer progression. At this stage, metastatic cells cease to proliferate and enter a state of quiescence or very low proliferation [ ]. They cannot be entirely eliminated by the immune system and may later develop into overt metastases. Although this process is poorly understood, several groups have recently investigated how these dormant metastatic cells exit this dormant state to resume proliferation [ , , , ]. This study examined dormant metastases before they could escape, aiming to identify their phenotype and the immune cells involved in the dormant metastatic state. To achieve this goal, the study did not directly awaken dormant metastatic cells. Instead, depletion of the host immune system allows the cells to proliferate and progress, resulting in overt metastases. Furthermore, these dormant metastatic cells did not enter a state of quiescence per se, as they exhibited the same in vitro proliferation capacity as did overt metastases. Conversely, when the different metastatic cell lines were subjected to nutrient restriction, the dormant metastases group exhibited increased proliferation compared with the overt and nude metastases group. Moreover, when these dormant metastatic cells were treated in vitro with chemotherapeutic agents commonly used in clinical therapy, varying levels of sensitivity were observed compared with cell lines derived from overt metastases or from nude metastases. Cell lines derived from dormant metastases showed decreased sensitivity to paclitaxel and cisplatin but higher sensitivity to methotrexate and doxorubicin. These findings suggest that although these cells have a similar in vitro proliferation capacity to that of overt metastases, they still inherently maintain greater resistance to specific chemotherapeutics such as paclitaxel and cisplatin. Reactivating the cell cycle in dormant metastases to increase their sensitivity to these chemotherapeutics may not be effective [ ]. However, these results suggest that treatments such as methotrexate and doxorubicin can halt proliferation and even destroy dormant metastases. Furthermore, it was observed that cell lines derived from dormant metastases exhibit greater inhibition of proliferation when treated in vitro with the chemokines TNF‐α, TGF‐β, and IFN‐ɣ. This finding suggested that the secretion of these cytokines by immune system cells could induce a nonproliferative state in these dormant metastatic cells in vivo. Additionally, these chemokines could be used to treat patients and maintain a nonproliferative state of dormant metastases.
The study's findings indicate that dormant metastatic cells can re‐enter metastatic dormancy in vivo even when an intact host immune system is present. The immune system is responsible for maintaining immune‐mediated dormancy in these cells in vivo. Notably, in our model, dormant metastases expressed MHC‐I molecules on their surface, despite originating from an MHC‐I‐negative tumor clone [ ]. This, along with the increase in CD3 T lymphocytes in the lungs, may enable the control of these cells, although complete destruction may not be possible. There is also an increase in neutrophils and γδ T lymphocytes, which may have an immunosuppressive effect on CD3 T lymphocytes [ , , , , ].
Analysis of gene expression through massive mRNA sequencing and qRT‐PCR revealed that the dormant metastasis group exhibited a distinct pattern. This specific phenotype of dormant metastases is characterized by the differential expression at the transcriptional level of a set of genes. Analysis of the co‐expression of the overexpressed genes in human prostate and breast tumors revealed that the CH25H gene shows a significant positive correlation of expression with 37 and 36 of these genes in prostate and breast tumors, respectively. In dormant metastases, the Ch25h gene is highly expressed, being an enzyme responsible for converting cholesterol into 25‐hydroxycholesterol. Blocking the Ch25h gene in the dormant metastasis group led to a decrease in the expression of 9 of the 12 genes studied, showing that at least the overexpression of these 9 genes in the dormant metastasis group is regulated by the Ch25h gene. In human prostate and breast tumors, the CH25H gene shows a very high correlation of coexpression with the CCL2 and CCL8 genes, as is the case in the dormant‐met group. However, when we block the Ch25h gene in the dormant‐met group, the expression of these two genes increases. These results indicate that all these genes are co‐expressed, but that Ch25h acts as a modulator by repressing the very high expression of the Ccl2 and Ccl8 genes, maintaining their expression at lower levels. It is possible that another gene may positively regulate Ch25h, Ccl2, and Ccl8, increasing the expression of all three genes. In this scenario, Ch25h would act as a partial negative modulator of the expression of Ccl2 and Ccl8. Further analysis has indicated the pivotal involvement of the Ch25h gene in two distinct processes. First, it has been observed to play a significant role in the in vitro proliferation of dormant metastasis cells. Second, its action has been found to enhance the in vitro proliferation of these dormant cells in conditions devoid of nutrients. In addition, the expression of the Ch25h gene in the group of dormant metastases is implicated in the reduction of cell sensitivity to TNF‐α and the increase of cell sensitivity to TGF‐β, paclitaxel, cisplatin, doxorubicin, and methotrexate. All these latest results clearly demonstrate the involvement of the Ch25h gene in the unique and distinct phenotype of dormant metastases.
The oxysterol 25‐hydroxycholesterol can bind to LXR receptors and activate the transcription of genes involved in cholesterol flux [ ]. Fifteen highly expressed genes were found to be involved in the cholesterol synthesis pathway. Our dormant metastatic cells increase cholesterol synthesis to transform it into 25‐hydroxycholesterol. This molecule has been implicated in immunosuppressive processes, such as reducing antigen processing by dendritic cells and inhibiting their migration to lymphoid organs [ ]. Recently, it has been demonstrated that extracellular 25‐hydroxycholesterol suppresses cholesterol biosynthesis in activated and proliferating T cells, inhibiting their cellular growth in a paracrine manner [ ]. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that oxysterols promote the recruitment of neutrophils that support tumor growth [ ]. Our results indicate a greater concentration of neutrophils in the lungs of mice with dormant metastases. Additionally, 25‐hydroxycholesterol has been linked to the maintenance and activation of γδ T cells [ ]. Our findings indicate an increase in γδ T cells in the lungs of mice with dormant metastases. These cells, along with neutrophils, may have an immunosuppressive role [ , ]. These results suggest that dormant metastatic cells may prevent their destruction by CD8+ T lymphocytes through increased Ch25h expression and 25‐hydroxycholesterol production. CD8+ T lymphocytes are found in greater proportions in the lungs of mice with dormant metastases. In addition, dormant metastatic cells produce chemokines such as Ccl2, Ccl7, Cxcl1, Cxcl2, and Cxcl5. These chemokines can attract myeloid‐derived suppressor cells [ , , ].
Dormant metastases exhibited a distinctive positive transcriptional expression of the Alcam molecule, which results in a unique surface expression on dormant metastatic cells. Alcam is expressed in human tumors and can serve as a prognostic factor and metastasis predictor [ ]. Furthermore, the interaction of CD166 with the CD6 receptor on γδ T cells has been implicated in their activation [ ]. During the dormancy process in our model, Alcam may perform this function by suppressing cytotoxic T cells. Rspo1 is a soluble ligand that can transform M1 macrophages into an immunosuppressive M2 phenotype, blocking CD8+ T lymphocytes [ ]. This molecule may play an immunosuppressive role in our model. In summary, an increase in T lymphocytes may maintain dormant metastatic cells in a state of dormancy. However, immunosuppressive mechanisms promoted by dormant metastatic cells themselves prevent complete destruction by cytotoxic T lymphocytes. It is widely acknowledged that the immunosuppressive mechanisms mentioned above contribute to the evasion of tumor cells from the immune system. However, in this context, we focused on their role in the dormant metastatic process, before their ability to evade the immune system. These results indicate that inhibiting these immunosuppressive mechanisms during the dormant metastatic state might result in the eradication of dormant metastases in patients.
Notably, miR‐142‐3p was exclusively expressed in the dormant metastasis group. MiR‐142 is a microRNA that is predominantly found in hematopoietic cells [ ]. It plays an important role in the immune system, specifically in Treg cells and macrophages [ , ]. MiR‐142 has an anti‐inflammatory role by downregulating IL‐6, as observed in our dormant metastases [ , ]. In the dormancy phase, the expression of miR‐142‐3p is significantly increased during the latent phase of tuberculosis infection compared with the active phase [ ]. This results in a decrease in IL‐6 expression due to the downregulation of IRAK‐1 [ ].
A limitation of this study is the use of animal models, which may not fully replicate human pathophysiology. Further studies are needed to validate these findings in clinical settings and to explore the regulatory relationships between the key genes involved. A further limitation of this study is that it uses fibrosarcoma, a rare form of human cancer, as a model for generating metastasis. However, given our focus on the study of metastases, and more specifically, on dormant metastases controlled by the immune system, we hypothesize that the mechanisms and genes involved in immune metastatic dormancy should be very similar in dormant metastases generated from other types of tumors. While the present findings demonstrate the crucial role of the Ch25h gene in the phenotype of dormant metastases, further research is required to elucidate the precise mechanism of action of this gene. The detailed transcriptional programme remains to be investigated.
Our study revealed that dormant metastases have a unique and distinct phenotype that differentiates them from overt metastases or nude metastases, which are not in a state of dormancy. This phenotype has various characteristics, including different sensitivities to restrictive nutrient conditions, chemotherapeutic agents, and cytokines; differential expression of genes and miRNAs; distinct expression of surface markers; secretion of different chemokines; and the coexistence of T lymphocytes and immunosuppressive cells in the dormant metastatic microenvironment. The characteristics mentioned above may help develop new biomarkers for dormant metastatic disease in patients where clinically undetectable dormant metastases are present. Tumors can be evaluated by measuring the expression of various genes or miRs, such as Ch25h, Alcam, Rspo1, and miR‐142‐3p. Alternatively, liquid biopsy can detect increased expression of chemokines such as Ccl2, Ccl7, Cxcl1, Cxcl2, and Cxcl5, or of molecules such as 25‐hydroxycholesterol and Rspo‐1, as well as miRNA 142–3p. Even a rise in cholesterol levels in patients might indicate the presence of dormant metastases. Additionally, studying the different immune cell populations in patients, both in the tumor and peripheral blood, could be useful for detecting increases in T lymphocytes and immunosuppressive neutrophils or γδ T cells.

4.

## Materials and Methods
4.1.

## Animals
Eight‐week‐old male or female BALB/c mice (Charles River Laboratories) were used in the experiments. This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the European Community Directive 2010/63/EU and Spanish law (Real Decreto 53/2013) on the use of laboratory animals, and their housing and the experimental procedures were approved by the Junta de Andalucía animal care committee and adhered to the animal welfare guidelines of the National Committee for Animal Experiments. The animals were anesthetized with 0.04 mL of diazepam (Valium, Roche) and 0.1 mL of ketamine (Ketolar, Pfizer). When clear signs of disease were observed, the animals were anesthetized and euthanized by cervical dislocation, followed by complete necropsy.

4.2.

## Cell Lines and Culture Conditions
The GR9 cell line originates from a mouse fibrosarcoma induced by methylcholanthrene in BALB/c mice and has been extensively characterized in our laboratory [ ]. It is composed of cell clones with distinct H‐2 class I expression patterns and metastatic capacities. Two specific clones, GR9‐B11 and GR9‐A7, were isolated from the GR9 cell line using a limited dilution method. The GR9‐B11 and GR9‐A7 cell lines were recloned by picking up individual cells under phase‐contrast microscopy. Spontaneous metastasis assays were performed with these two GR9 cell clones. The dormant‐met 1 and dormant‐met 2 cell lines were derived from spontaneous lung metastases induced by the GR9‐B11 clone in immunodepleted wild‐type BALB/c mice [ ]. Similarly, the nude‐met 1 and nude‐met 2 cell lines were obtained from spontaneous lung metastases induced by the GR9‐B11 clone in nude BALB/c mice [ ]. Overt‐met 1 and overt‐met 2 were derived from spontaneous lung metastases induced by the GR9‐A7 clone in wild‐type BALB/c mice. All cell lines were characterized by PCR assays using short tandem repeat analysis and regular testing for MHC‐I genotype and surface expression. The cell lines were tested for mycoplasma by PCR and were negative as of January 2024. All cell lines were used for less than 10 passages after thawing. The cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (Sigma−Aldrich), supplemented with 10% FBS (Life Technologies), 2 mmol/L glutamine (Sigma−Aldrich), and antibiotics. In some assays, cells were cultured with 0.5% FBS for 5 days.

4.3.

## Cell Seeding and Proliferation Assessment
A total of 3 × 105 or 1 × 106 tumor cells were seeded in T‐25 or T‐75 cell culture flasks. Daily cell counts were performed over 1–4 days using the Trypan blue exclusion method with a hemocytometer. Two independent investigators conducted the cell counts. The cell proliferation rate was determined as the ratio of the final cell number to the initial cell number.

4.4.

## In Vitro Treatment with Chemotherapeutic Agents and Cytokines
For in vitro treatment assays involving chemotherapeutic agents, a dose−response curve was established. Concentrations of each chemotherapeutic were selected to achieve 100% inhibition of proliferation in the overt‐met group. The chosen concentrations for 72 h of treatment were as follows: 200 nM cisplatin; 10 nM doxorubicin; 10 nM metotrexate; and 30 nM paclitaxel (Sigma−Aldrich). In specific experiments, cell lines were subjected to in vitro treatment with 50 U/mL IFN‐ɣ, 12 pg/mL TNF‐α, or 1 ng/mL TGF‐β for a duration of 48 h (Miltenyi Biotech).

4.5.

## RNA Sequencing (RNA‐Seq)
Total RNA was extracted using PureLink RNA Mini Kits (Invitrogen), and any remaining DNA was removed using a DNA‐free DNA removal kit (Invitrogen). The quality and concentration of RNA were assessed using a QuBit 4 Fluorometer and associated kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). The preparation of the RNA library and subsequent transcriptome sequencing were conducted by Novogene Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). Differential expression criteria: Genes with an adjusted p‐value < 0.05 and a |log2(fold change)| > 1 were considered differentially expressed. Service provider: Novogene performed the read alignment, quality control, differential expression analysis, and pathway analysis using a standard pipeline. RNA‐Seq data analysis provides valuable insights into the transcriptomic landscape, allowing the identification of differentially expressed genes and potential pathways involved in the experimental conditions studied.

4.6.

## RT‐PCR and Quantitative Real‐Time PCR
For RT‐PCR, 1 µg of total RNA was converted to complementary DNA (cDNA) using the iScript gDNA clear cDNA Synthesis kit (Bio‐Rad) in a 20 µL reaction volume. The resulting cDNAs were diluted to a final volume of 100 µL. The real‐time PCR assay was performed in a CFXConnect real‐time PCR detection system (Bio‐Rad). One microliter of diluted cDNA was used per reaction. PCRs were conducted in quadruplicate, and the values obtained are expressed as the means ± SDs. Genes with an adjusted p‐value < 0.05 and a fold change >2 were considered to be differentially expressed. Quantitative PCR was conducted with the SsoAdvanced Universal SYBR Green Supermix (Bio‐Rad). The PCR conditions included 40 cycles of 15 s of denaturation at 95°C and 30 s at 60°C. The following predesigned PCRPrime arrays (Bio‐Rad) were utilized: lipoprotein signaling and cholesterol metabolism (SAB Target List) M96 (10034358); chemokines and receptors (SAB Target List) M96 (10034295); and cell surface markers (SAB Target List) M96 (10034292). All primers for qPCR assays were provided by Bio‐Rad.

4.7.

## Gene‑Pathway‐Enrichment Analysis
Metascape (https:// metascape. org/) was used to generate gene ontology (GO) enrichment and pathway networks’ analysis [ ].

4.8.

## Determination of Cytokine/Chemokine Levels
A Bio‐Plex Pro Mouse Chemokine Panel 33‐Plex, a Bio‐Plex Pro Mouse MCP‐2 single‐plex, and Bio‐Plex Pro Mouse TGF‐β 3‐Plex assays (Bio‐Rad) were utilized to profile the concentrations of mouse cytokines and chemokines in the cell culture supernatants. The assays were conducted following the manufacturer's instructions. Analysis of each sample was performed in duplicate and run on two separate occasions. Cell lines were seeded at 106 cells, and after incubation for 24 h, the cells were counted, and the culture supernatants (50 µL) were transferred in duplicate to plates precoated with cytokine‐specific antibodies conjugated with different color‐coded beads. The plates were then incubated for 1 h, washed, and sequentially incubated with 50 µL of biotinylated cytokine‐specific detection antibodies and a streptavidin–phycoerythrin conjugate. Positive and negative quality controls were included in duplicate in each assay. Fluorescence was recorded using a Bioplex 200 instrument. Cytokine/chemokine concentrations were calculated with Bio‐Plex Manager software using a standard curve derived from recombinant cytokines. The results were normalized to million cells/mL.

4.9.

## MiRNA Extraction, RT−PCR, and Quantitative Real‐time PCR
miRNAs were extracted using the PureLinkTM miRNA Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). miRNA concentrations were determined using a QuBit 4 fluorometer and associated kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For cDNA synthesis of extracted miRNA from each cell line, RT−PCR was performed using the All‐in‐One miRNA first‐strand cDNA synthesis kit (GeneCopoeia) and 200 ng/µL of RNA per reaction. The real‐time PCR assay was conducted in a CFXConnect real‐time PCR detection system (Bio‐Rad). One microliter of cDNA was used per reaction, and PCRs were performed in quadruplicate. The values obtained are expressed as the means ± SDs. Genes with adjusted p values < 0.05 and fold changes >2 were considered to be differentially expressed. qPCR of the miRNome was performed using the All‐in‐OneTM miRNA qRT‐PCR Detection Kit 2.0 (GeneCopoeia). The PCR conditions included 1 cycle of 10 min at 95°C, followed by 40 cycles of 10 s of denaturation at 95°C, 30 s at 60°C, and 10 s at 72°C. The miProfileMouse miRNome miRNA qPCR Array (catalog QM002; GeneCopoeia) was used to analyze 834 mouse miRNAs.
To identify miRNAs potentially involved in the regulation of differentially expressed genes by the dormant‐met group, specific mouse miRNome databases, including miRDB and miRTarBase, were utilized. The miRDB is an online database for predicting functional microRNA targets [ ]. miRTarBase was also employed for comprehensive target prediction [ ]. Functional enrichment analysis was performed on the related miRNAs using the miEAA tool [ ].

4.10.

## Isolation of Lung Leukocytes
Lungs were excised and collected 25 days after removal of the primary tumor. Each experimental group comprised 10 mice. The assays were conducted in duplicate. Lungs were dissociated into single‐cell suspensions using a gentle MACS Dissociator (Miltenyi Biotech). Each lung was dissociated by loading a C tube on the machine with a volume of buffer (0.01 mol/L phosphate‐buffered saline [PBS], 0.5% bovine serum albumin [BSA], and 2 mmol/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA]). An installed program was selected for the dissociation process. After the completion of the program, whole‐cell suspensions were centrifuged at 300×g at room temperature for 10 min. The suspensions were collected and filtered through a 70‐µm‐pore‐size nylon cell strainer to remove clumps and generate single‐cell suspensions. Red blood cells were lysed with ACK lysis buffer (Gibco) for 5 min. The lysed cells were then washed twice in PBS. Viable cells were used for the antibody staining reaction.

4.11.

## Flow Cytometry Analysis of Immune Cell Subsets
The following labeled antibodies from Miltenyi Biotec were utilized for the direct immunofluorescence study: CD45‐PerCP, CD45‐FITC, CD3‐FITC, CD3‐PE, CD19‐PE, CD4‐PerCP‐Vio700, CD4‐FITC‐Viobright, CD8‐PE, CD8‐PerCP‐Vio700, CD25FITC‐Viobright, FoxP3‐PE, CD49b‐PE, MHC class II‐PerCP‐Vio700, CD11c‐PE, CD11b‐FITC‐Viobright, F4/80‐PE, Ly6G FITC, LY6C‐FITC, Siglec‐F‐FITC, TCRαβ‐PE, and TCRɣ𝛿‐PerCP‐Vio700. Isotype‐matched nonimmune mouse IgGs conjugated with FITC, PE, or PerCP‐Vio700 served as controls. FcR blocking reagent was used to block unwanted binding of antibodies to mouse cells expressing Fc receptors. Briefly, 5 × 105 cells were washed twice with PBS. The cells were incubated for 10 min at 4°C in the dark with the primary antibodies. For Treg cell determination, cells were incubated for 10 min at 4°C with anti‐CD4 and anti‐CD25 antibodies after permeabilization for 30 min and incubated for 30 min at 4°C with anti‐FoxP3 antibody. Leukocyte subpopulations were determined by gating total leukocytes based on their FSC/SSC profile and selecting CD45+ cells. The percentage of TCRɣ𝛿 T lymphocytes was determined with respect to that of CD3+ T lymphocytes. The percentage of Treg cells was determined with respect to that of CD4+ T lymphocytes. The cells were analyzed on a FACSCanto cytometer (BD Bioscience). Each sample contained at least 5 × 104 cells and was analyzed with CellQuest‐Pro software.

4.12.

## Analysis of Cell Surface Marker Expression on Metastatic Tumor Cells
Briefly, 5 × 105 cells were washed twice with PBS and incubated for 10 min at 4°C with the following primary antibodies: anti‐CD166‐PE (Alcam), anti‐CD95‐PE (Fas), anti‐VCAM1‐PE, anti‐CD21‐FITC, anti‐CD200R‐FITC (Miltenyi‐Biotech), and anti‐CD276‐FITC (Invitrogen). Isotype‐matched nonimmune mouse IgG served as a control. A minimum of 1 × 104 cells were analyzed with CellQuest Pro software.

4.13.

## Analysis to Identify Co‐Expression Genes in Human Tumors
We used the human breast and prostate cancer dataset (TCGA, Firehose Legacy) from cBioPortal [ ] (www.cbioportal.org) to perform Spearman correlation analysis to identify co‐expression genes of CH25H. Values of r
s > 0.3 and p < 0.001 were considered.

4.14.

## Inhibition of Ch25h Gene Expression
To inhibit the expression of the Ch25h gene, we used 3 sh‐Ch25h vectors (MSH028877‐CU6, GeneCopoeia) and one sh‐control vector (scrambled control, CSHCTR001‐CU6, GeneCopoeia). The vectors were used to transform TOP10 bacteria according to the manufacturer's instructions. The transformed bacterial colonies were selected in a medium containing 50 µg/mL ampicillin and expanded for plasmid DNA preparation. The plasmid DNA was extracted and purified using QIAprep plasmid spin columns (Qiagen). Next, dormant‐met cells (1.5 × 105 cells/mL) were cultured in six‐well plates at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere and then transfected with 1 µg of sh‐Ch25h plasmid or sh‐control using Lipofectamine 3000 reagent (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Stable transfected cells were selected by using 5 µg/mL Puromycin (Gibco), and viable cells were cloned by limited dilution, expanded, and cultured; they were designated dormant sh‐Ch25h and dormant sh‐control, respectively. Blocking of the Ch25h gene obtained in the transfected cells was confirmed by qRT‐PCR using specific primers (MQP028877, GeneCopoeia).

4.15.

## Statistical Analysis
Prism Software (Graph Pad Software V5.0) and SPSS Statistical 25.0 (IBM SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) were used for the statistical analyses. Two‐tailed unpaired Student's t‐tests or Mann–Whitney U tests were used for statistical comparisons between two groups. ANOVA followed by the Tukey's post hoc analysis or the Kruskal–Wallis test followed by Dunn's post hoc test was used for multiple comparisons. Fisher's exact test was used to analyze the associations between two qualitative variables. Spearman's rank correlation was applied to analyze the relationships between two variables. All the data are expressed as the means ± standard deviations (SD). p < 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. Significance levels are denoted as follows: *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001.

## Author Contributions
Ángel M. García‐Lora: design and supervision of the study. Virginia Chamorro, Ignacio Algarra, Verónica Sanz, María Pulido, Irene Romero, Estefanía Chico, Marina Millán, María Escaño‐Maestre, Pablo Botella, Isabel Linares, and Ángel M. García‐Lora: Development of methodology, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data, and wrote and revised the manuscript. All authors revised, approved the final version, and agreed to be accountable for the work.

## Ethics Statement
This study was carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the European Community Directive 2010/63/EU and Spanish law (Real Decreto 53/2013) on the use of laboratory animals, and their housing and the experimental procedures were approved by the Junta de Andalucía animal care committee and adhered to the animal welfare guidelines of the National Committee for Animal Experiments.

## Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

## Supporting information

Figure S1: Complete gene expression at the transcriptional level of all metastatic cell lines, obtained by mRNA sequencing. The results show the great similarity between the two cell lines that form each metastatic group. Furthermore, the dormant and nude metastatic groups are found to be part of the same cluster as B11, while the overt metastases are identified as belonging to a distinct cluster. (A) Pearson correlation between simples. (B) Cluster analysis of differentially expressed genes. (C) Sample clustering dendrogram. (D) Venn diagrams of differentially expressed genes. Dormant metastasis (MB11_Dor 1 and MB11_Dor2), nude metastasis (MB11_Nu1 and MB11_Nu2), and overt metastasis (MPA72_2A and MPA73_2A).

Figure S2: The gene‐pathway enrichment in dormant metastases. Gene ontology (GO) function enrichment of the gene found to be differentially expressed in dormant metastases: 92 genes of mRNA sequencing (A); cholesterol synthesis pathway gene(B); chemokine gene (C); and surface marker genes (D) (Metascape).

Figure S3: Flow cytometry gating strategies: a CD3+ x (CD4− CD8−) x TCRγδ+ gate was applied to select γδ T lymphocytes (A); CD3+ x CD4+ y CD3+ x CD8+ to classify CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes (B); CD45+ x CD3+ y CD45+ x CD19+ to separate the T and B lymphocytes (C); CD45+ x CD3‐ x CD49b+ y CD45+ x CD3+ x CD49b+ to differentiate between NK and NKT cells (D); CD45+ x CD11b+ x LY6G+ for selecting neutrophils (E), gate showing as a representation of eosinophils (CD11b+ x SIGLEC‐F+), monocytes (CD11b+ x LY6C+), macrophages (CD11b+ x MHC‐II+), interstitial macrophages (CD11b+ x F4‐80+), alveolar macrophages (CD11c+ x SIGLEC‐F+) and dendritic cells (CD11c+ x MHC‐II+), in which the same gating strategy has been used but with its specific markers; and CD45+ x CD11b+ o CD11c+ x (LY6G− LY6C−) to identify rare myeloid cells (F).

Figure S4: Relationship between CH25H expression and the expression of overexpressed genes in the dormant metastasis group in human breast cancer. TCGA data (breast cancer, Firehose Legacy databases) showing Spearman's correlation and Pearson's correlation between mRNA expression of CH25H and different overexpressed genes in the dormant metastasis group. A p‐value < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

Figure S5: Relationship between CH25H expression and the expression of overexpressed gene in the dormant metastasis group in human prostate cancer. TCGA data (Prostate cancer, Firehose Legacy databases) showing Spearman's correlation and Pearson's correlation between mRNA expression of CH25H and different overexpressed genes in the dormant metastasis group. A p‐value < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

Supplementary Table S1: Differentially expressed genes in dormant metastases obtained by RNA‐seq.

Supplementary Table S2: Gene identification from the GO database

## Acknowledgments
The authors have nothing to report.

Chamorro V., Algarra I., Sanz V., et al. “Dormant Metastases Exhibit a Unique Phenotype Primarily Promoted by the Ch25h Gene and Are Maintained in Dormancy by T Lymphocytes.” MedComm
6, no. 11 (2025): e70437. 10.1002/mco2.70437

Funding: This work was supported by grants co‐financed by FEDER funds (EU) from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (PI15/00528, PI19/01179), Worldwide Cancer Research project 15–1166, Junta de Andalucía (Group CTS‐143). A. M. G. L. was supported by Contract I3‐SNS from Junta de Andalucía and ISCIII.

## Data Availability Statement
The data supporting the findings of this paper are included in this paper and its supplementary file. The datasets used and/or analyzed in this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Figure S1: Complete gene expression at the transcriptional level of all metastatic cell lines, obtained by mRNA sequencing. The results show the great similarity between the two cell lines that form each metastatic group. Furthermore, the dormant and nude metastatic groups are found to be part of the same cluster as B11, while the overt metastases are identified as belonging to a distinct cluster. (A) Pearson correlation between simples. (B) Cluster analysis of differentially expressed genes. (C) Sample clustering dendrogram. (D) Venn diagrams of differentially expressed genes. Dormant metastasis (MB11_Dor 1 and MB11_Dor2), nude metastasis (MB11_Nu1 and MB11_Nu2), and overt metastasis (MPA72_2A and MPA73_2A).

Figure S2: The gene‐pathway enrichment in dormant metastases. Gene ontology (GO) function enrichment of the gene found to be differentially expressed in dormant metastases: 92 genes of mRNA sequencing (A); cholesterol synthesis pathway gene(B); chemokine gene (C); and surface marker genes (D) (Metascape).

Figure S3: Flow cytometry gating strategies: a CD3+ x (CD4− CD8−) x TCRγδ+ gate was applied to select γδ T lymphocytes (A); CD3+ x CD4+ y CD3+ x CD8+ to classify CD4 and CD8 T lymphocytes (B); CD45+ x CD3+ y CD45+ x CD19+ to separate the T and B lymphocytes (C); CD45+ x CD3‐ x CD49b+ y CD45+ x CD3+ x CD49b+ to differentiate between NK and NKT cells (D); CD45+ x CD11b+ x LY6G+ for selecting neutrophils (E), gate showing as a representation of eosinophils (CD11b+ x SIGLEC‐F+), monocytes (CD11b+ x LY6C+), macrophages (CD11b+ x MHC‐II+), interstitial macrophages (CD11b+ x F4‐80+), alveolar macrophages (CD11c+ x SIGLEC‐F+) and dendritic cells (CD11c+ x MHC‐II+), in which the same gating strategy has been used but with its specific markers; and CD45+ x CD11b+ o CD11c+ x (LY6G− LY6C−) to identify rare myeloid cells (F).

Figure S4: Relationship between CH25H expression and the expression of overexpressed genes in the dormant metastasis group in human breast cancer. TCGA data (breast cancer, Firehose Legacy databases) showing Spearman's correlation and Pearson's correlation between mRNA expression of CH25H and different overexpressed genes in the dormant metastasis group. A p‐value < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

Figure S5: Relationship between CH25H expression and the expression of overexpressed gene in the dormant metastasis group in human prostate cancer. TCGA data (Prostate cancer, Firehose Legacy databases) showing Spearman's correlation and Pearson's correlation between mRNA expression of CH25H and different overexpressed genes in the dormant metastasis group. A p‐value < 0.05 is considered statistically significant.

Supplementary Table S1: Differentially expressed genes in dormant metastases obtained by RNA‐seq.

Supplementary Table S2: Gene identification from the GO database

## Data Availability Statement
The data supporting the findings of this paper are included in this paper and its supplementary file. The datasets used and/or analyzed in this study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.