pmcJ Adv ResJ Adv Res2546jareJournal of Advanced Research2090-12322090-1224ElsevierPMC11976410PMC11976410.111976410119764103872956010.1016/j.jare.2024.05.008S2090-1232(24)00184-X1MedicineThe hiPSC-derived corneal endothelial progenitor-like cell recovers the rabbit model of corneal endothelial dystrophy
HsuehYi-Jen ChenHung-Chi PanYu-Yun HsiaoFang-Chi YangShun-Jie LiuMei-Chun LaiWei-Yu LiGuigang Hui-Kang MaDavid James MeirYaa-Jyuhnjmeir@mail.cgu.edu.tw aGraduate Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33305, TaiwanbCenter for Tissue Engineering, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan 333423, TaiwancDept. of Ophthalmology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan 333423, TaiwandDepartment of Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33305, TaiwaneDepartment of Chinese Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33305, TaiwanfDept. of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 33305, TaiwangDepartment of Ophthalmology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430030, China⁎Corresponding author at: Dept. of Biomedical Sciences, Chang Gung University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-Shan, Taoyuan 33305, Taiwan. jmeir@mail.cgu.edu.tw1These authors equally contribute to this work.
42025085202470486199355369181120232442024652024080520240904202517012026© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Cairo University.2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•The corneal endothelium progenitor-like cell (iHCEPLC) was customized from hiPSC induction.
•The iHCEPLC can be further induced to the HCEC-like state via contact inhibition.
•The iHCEPLC restored cornea acuity in rabbits with BAK-mediated corneal endothelial dystrophy.
•Long-term therapeutic efficacy is through iHCEPLCs reconstructing the endothelial monolayer.
•iHCEPLCs' therapeutic effectiveness solves the scarcity of donated cornea.

## Introduction
Corneal endothelial dysfunction results in cornea opacity, damaging sightedness, and affecting quality of life. A corneal transplant is the current effective intervention. Due to the scarcity of donated cornea, such an unmet medical need requires a novel therapeutic modality.

## Objectives
Customizing patients' corneal endothelial progenitor cells with proliferative activity and lineage restriction properties shall offer sufficient therapeutic cells for corneal endothelial dystrophy.

## Methods
The customized induced human corneal endothelial progenitor-like cell (iHCEPLC) was obtained through cell fate conversions starting from PBMC (peripheral blood mononuclear cell), hiPSC (human induced pluripotent stem cell), and hNCC (human neural crest cell), while it finally reached the iHCEPLC state via a series of induction. Several molecular diagnoses were applied to depict its progenitor state, including RNAseq, FlowCytometer, immunostainings, and rtPCR. Significantly, it can be induced to gain differentiation maturity through contact inhibition. In addition, a BAK-mediated rabbit model of corneal endothelial dystrophy was established in the present study to test the therapeutic effectiveness of the iHCEPLC.

## Results
After inducing cell fate conversion, the specific HCEC markers were detected by rtPCR and immunostaining in iHCEPLC. Further, RNAseq was applied to distinguish its progenitor-like cell fate from primary human corneal endothelial cells (HECE). FlowCytometry profiled the heterogeneity subpopulation, consistently displaying a subtle difference from primary HCEC. A terminal differentiation can be induced in iHCEPLC, addressing its progenitor-like fate. iHCEPLC can restore the BAK-based rabbit model of corneal endothelial dystrophy. Immunohistochemistry verified that such acuity restoration of the BAK-treated cornea is due to the introduced iHCEPLC, and such therapeutic effectiveness is observed in the long term.

## Conclusion
Here, we demonstrated that customized iHCEPLC has long-term therapeutic efficacy. As a progenitor cell, our iHCEPLC has a restricted cell lineage nature and can proliferate in vitro, supporting sufficient therapeutic candidate cells. Due to the immune-privileged nature of the cornea, our iHCEPLC proves the principle of therapeutical feasibility in both autogenic and allogeneic modalities.

## Keywords
Human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)Neural crest cell (NCC)Human corneal endothelial cell (HCEC)Human corneal endothelial progenitor-like cells (HCEPLC)Peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC)pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Introduction
Corneal endothelial dysfunctions result in ocular morbidity and, eventually, vision loss. Since Human corneal endothelium arrests in the G1 phase of the cell cycle, it does not proliferate in vivo due to the presence of negative regulators in its residing microenvironment , . At birth, the cell density of the corneal endothelial cell (CEC) reaches approximately 6,000 cells/mm2 while gradually reducing at the rate of 0.6 % annually . Those dead/damaged endothelial cells are replaced via the migration of their neighbor cells and cell enlargement , . As a result of cell density lower than 400 ∼ 500 cell/mm2, the haziness symptom of cornea appears . Traditional treatment is through a penetrating keratoplasty procedure for corneal transplantation, a full-thickness of corneal replacement. Currently, the advanced endothelial keratoplasties introduce partial thickness of the cornea to replace a patient's own Descemet's membrane and diseased endothelial monolayer. Depending on whether it contains partial stromal tissue, the partial keratoplasty can be further distinguished as DSAEK (Descemet's stripping automated endothelial keratoplasty) and DMEK (Descemet's membrane endothelial keratoplasty) , , , . Although both advanced keratoplasties have a shorter visual recovery time and less rejection, they still need the donated corneas. More recently, cHCEC-mediated cell replacement has successfully reconstructed the corneal endothelial monolayer. However, the unneglectable requirement of clinical-grade corneas is also unavoidable because of their limited capability for in vitro cell expansion . Even though those above advanced therapeutic modalities obtain satisfactory results, both treatments still need to use the donated corneas as cell sources.
Due to the scarcity of cornea donation, seeking an alternative treatment for corneal endothelial dysfunction is devastating. Such an unmet medical need can be satisfied if the in vitro production of a healthy and functional endothelial cell is available. Several attempts in the past have been made to expand the cell number in vitro, such as adopting the human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell-derived conditioned medium , . Despite those efforts, however, cultured corneal endothelial cells frequently lose their characteristics through endothelial-to-mesenchymal cell fate change. In addition, the potential disease transmission from those human-derived products and their inconsistency in cell expansion due to their complicated nature poses a tantalizing issue for researchers , . Thus, identifying corneal endothelial progenitors that permit cell proliferation and cell-lineage restriction is imperative.
The cornea has long been considered the privileged immune tissue due to the enclosed anatomy structure with the lack of blood vessels. However, applying topical corticosteroids is a conventional postoperative treatment to reduce the potential risk of immunologic rejection and graft failure, which poses a long-term threat in corneal transplant patients , , , . Such a postoperative threat may relate to the recent reports regarding the appearance of immune cells on the allogeneic transplanted cornea via the procedure of penetrating keratoplasty (PK) and Descemet stripping automated endothelial keratoplasty (DSAEK) , . Although these results do not have a significant correlation between the immune cell grades and the clinical parameters, the elicitation of immunosurveillance indicates that the issue of immune rejection cannot be neglected. To circumvent the cornea donation shortage and the late-onset graft failure, exploring the possibility of autologous endothelium-based cell replacement will be a promising therapeutic approach without further relying on the immunosuppressant regimen.
The present study generated the human corneal endothelial progenitor-like cells (HCEPLCs) from the PBMC-derived hiPSC (hiPSCPBMC) following the ocular development. Such an induced HCEPLC (iHCEPLCiPSC) displays its cell proliferative activity, lineage restriction, and maturation-inducible via contact inhibition. Its long-term therapeutic efficacy by reconstructing corneal endothelial monolayer on the rabbit model demonstrated its functions as endogenous corneal endothelial cells. The progenitor nature of iHCEPLCs could counteract the global cornea donation shortage and provide an alternative solution for the immune incompatibility-derived graft failure in corneal endothelial dysfunctions.

## Material and methods

## Ethics statement
All experiments involving animals were conducted according to the ethical policies and procedures approved by the animal welfare committee of Chang Gung University (Approval No CGU-15–129 & CGU108-098). All studies involved human samples complied with the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the Chang Gung Medical Foundation Institutional Review Board (The approved IRB no. 201701729B0W001).

## Primary corneal endothelial cell isolation and culture
The research-used human corneal tissues were obtained from the Lions Eye Institute (Tampa, FL, USA). The donor was a 59-year-old female. The corneal endothelial density was 2,841 cells/mm2. Firstly, Descemet’s membrane was stripped from the corneas using sterile surgical forceps in the Primary HCEC culture medium under a dissecting microscope. After cutting them into small pieces, the membranes were then treated with 1 g/ml collagenase A (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany) for cell detachment at 37 °C for 16 ∼ 24 h. The next day, the detached cells were rinsed by 1xDPBS and cultured in one well of the FNC-coated 24-well plate (FNC coating mix®, Athena Enzyme SystemsTM, Baltimore, MD, USA) with the Primary HCEC Culture Medium. To prepare the FNC-coated plates, we added 0.2 ml FNC coating mix® per square centimeter of culture area for 30 min at room temperature and aspirated the coating mix with a pipette. When the cells reached confluency, they were harvested by adding 1 ml of 0.5 mM EDTA treated for 2 min at 37 °C. Finally, the fresh medium-resuspended cells were passaged to the FNC-coated plate at a ratio of 1:2 to 1:3.

## Immunofluorescence staining
We followed the manufacturer’s suggestions for the fixation method and dilution of antibodies. Briefly, the 1XPBS-rinsed corneal endothelial cells were subject to fixation either by acid alcohol or 4 % PFA for 20 min, followed by the blocking buffer for 5 min. Then, the primary antibody with a 1:200 dilution in blocking buffer (1XPBS, 0.05 % Tween-20, 3 % BSA, 1 mM NaN3) was added to the samples for 2 hrs at room temperature. The secondary antibody was included after 3-time 1XPBS rinses and reacted for 1 hr at room temperature. Finally, before mounting the sample on the slide, the 1:50 diluted DAPI and the anti-fading reagent were added. The primary and secondary antibodies used in this study are listed in .

## Confocal microscopy and 3D image reconstruction
The Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscopy system produced a series of optical section images on the in vitro cultured iHCECs. Because the thickness of the HCEC layer is approximately 5 μm, the scanning range setting is 7 μm from the apical to the basal part to cover the whole cell image. Each scanning section is 0.68 μm apart. Thus, a total of approx. 15 images were collected from each scan to reconstruct a 3D image by using the zen 2012 SP4 (64bit) software (13.0.2.518 version; Carl Zeiss microscopy GmbH). To make the video, we designated the Y-axis as the rotating axis to have a better visual effect on the observation of juxtaposed cell–cell structures.

## Flow cytometry analysis of iHCECs
The primary HCECs, iHCEPLCs, and B4G12 cells were collected from the culture dish with 0.5 mM EDTA treatment for 2 min. The detached cells were suspended at 2x106 cells/ml concentration in FACS buffer containing 1 % BSA and 0.05 % NaN3. To label with antibodies, we first added an appropriate primary antibody with the concentration according to the manufacturer's suggestion for 2 hrs at 4 °C. All the primary antibodies purchased from BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA) are FITC-conjugated anti-human CD26 mAb, phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-human CD166 mAb, PerCP-Cy 5.5 conjugated anti-human CD24 mAb, and PE-Cy 7–conjugated anti-human CD44, except the allophycocyanin APC-conjugated anti-human CD105 is from eBioscience (San Jose, CA, USA). After rinsing with FACS buffer, the labeled cells were subject to a flow cytometry system for analysis.
To profile various cell states in iHCEPLCs, we first used CD24 and CD166 markers to analyze its subpopulations. A subclass control determined the placement of quadrant markers. Thus, the upper left and right quadrants were designated as R1 and R2, respectively. R1 and R2 regions were further subject to gate by CD44/CD105. In R1 gating, it is further subregions into G1, G2, and G3, whereas subdivided into G4 and G5 in the R2 gating. To consistently apply the selected regions for statistic analysis in different cell lines, we adopted BD AttractorsTM software to conduct cluster selection for data analysis.

## Generating the induced pluripotent stem cell line
We followed the manufacture protocol for the induced pluripotent stem cell (The CytoTune-iPS Sendai Reprogramming kit; ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat. No. A16517). Briefly, the 5 × 105 PBMCs were subject to Sendai-mediated reprogramming in one well of the 24-well plate. The next day, the infected PBMCs were collected and seeded onto the dish containing the mitomycin C-treated ICR feeder. After three days of post-infection, the medium was changed to StemProTM-34 (Cat. No. 10639011). On day 7, swap the half-spent medium for the iPSC medium. From day eight onwards, the cells were cultured in the complete iPSC medium and replaced with the fresh medium daily. Finally, the emerged iPSC clones were clonally isolated for expansion.
To generate the feeder-free iPSC, we passaged the clonally isolated iPSC to the 0.5 % Matrigel (Human-BD #354230) with the E8 medium (Cat. No. A1517001). One day before cell transfer, the medium was changed to 50 % complete iPSC medium and 50 % E8 medium. Then, the tip picked each iPSC clone and gently dissociated the cells by pipetting. To prevent cell death, those dissociated iPSC clones were transferred to the E8 medium containing Rho-inhibitor (Y27632; MedChemExpress, #HY-10583). From the next day onwards, the medium was changed to E8 medium only without having Y27632. As a result, the residual feeders gradually reduced after several passages.

## Teratoma formation assays
All the animal experiments followed “The experimental animal care guidelines” with the approving document No CGU-15–129 & CGU108-098, provided by the animal welfare committee of Chang Gung University. To test the capability of triploblastic formation in the PBMC-derived iPSC, we mixed 2X106 iPSCs in 50 μl 1XPBS with an equal volume of Matrigel. The cell-Matrigel mixture was delivered to the flank sides of the SCID mouse. The teratomas were harvested after three weeks and fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde. After conducting the hematoxylin- and eosin-based histochemical staining, a pathologist examined the appeared cell types in the teratoma.

## Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
5X105 cells were seeded onto the 0.5 % Matrigel-coated 60 mm dish and supplied with the B4G12 medium. After reaching a 90 % confluency, 1 ml of TrizolTM reagent (Thermo, #15596018) was applied to lyse cells, and the RNA isolation was followed by the chloroform extraction (Sigma, # C2432-500ML). Two milligrams of the isopropanol precipitated RNA were used to perform the reverse transcription by the MMLV reverse transcription kit (Invitrogen, #28025–021). The quantitative PCR (polymerase chain reaction) analysis adopted the SYBR green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems, #4367659). The Bio-Rad CFX384 real-time PCR machine analyzed the samples. The list of primers used is shown in . 

## Western blot
To reveal cell fate changes, we adopted Western blots to detect the presence of specific cell fate markers. 2.5X105 cells were seeded onto the 0.5 % Matrigel-coated 6-well plate (CORNING, #354230) and supplied with the B4G12 medium (Human endothelial SFM with 2 % FBS, 10 ng/ml bFGF). The 100 % confluent cells were harvested and lysed with CytoBuster (Millipore, #71009). The cell pellet was removed via 14,000 rpm centrifugation separation for 5 mins. 20 mg lysed samples were applied to each lane in a 10 % SDS-PAGE with 25 mA for 1.5 h. After gel electrophoresis, the separated proteins were transferred onto a PVDF membrane with 100 V for 75 mins (Millipore, # IEVH00005). The membrane was blocked with 5 % skimmed milk for 1 hr to conduct a western blot. Both primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 5 % skimmed milk and were used to stain the membranes overnight at 4 °C and 1 h at RT, respectively. To rinse the membrane, we used 1xPBST (1XPBS with 0.1 % Tween-20) to incubate the membrane three times each for 10 mins. After rinsing the membrane with a 1XPBST buffer, the membrane was placed into the ECL buffer (Biomen, #4367659) for a reaction. The membrane was exposed under the ChemiDocTM MP Imager for image gripping to detect the target proteins on the membrane.

## Introducing iHCEPLCs into the front chamber of the BAK-mediated rabbit corneal endothelial dystrophy
All the animal experiments followed “The experimental animal care guidelines” with the approving document No CGU-15–129 & CGU108-098, provided by the animal welfare committee of Chang Gung University. Two to three-kilogram-weighted New Zealand albino rabbits were adopted as an animal model system for evaluating the efficacy of the iHCEPLC-mediated replacement therapy in BAK-induced corneal endothelial dystrophy. After anesthetizing animals with Xylazine hydrochloride (4 mg/kg; Bayer Korea, Cat. No.23236350) and Zoletil (5 mg/kg; BVAC, Cat. No. 304801) in a 1:1 ratio, the front chamber of the surgery animals' left eyes received 100 μl 0.025 % BAK (Benzalkonium chloride; Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. No. 63249) by using 1 ml syringe with 27-gauge needle. After lightly pressing the injection site with a sterilized Q-tip for 30 s to avoid the backflow of BAK, antibiotic ornaments (Tobradex ornament & Levofloxacin ophthalmic Solution) were applied to the injected eye. The untreated contralateral right eye of the rabbit served as a control.
The BAK-injected corneas became cloudy by gradually gaining thickness daily, which recapitulated the symptom of corneal endothelial dystrophy. On day seventh post-BAK injection, the corneas' thickness is beyond the pachymeter's measurable limit (1200 μm) (Tomey SP-100; Birmingham, UK). A cell mixture containing 1X106 iHCEPLCs in 200 μl 1xDPBS with 10 μM Y27632 (Sigma-Aldrich Y0503-1MG) was introduced into the front chamber of the left eye seven days post-BAK injection. Adjusting the animal's posture allowed the injected left eye to face down until the animal woke up from anesthetizing (approximately 2 h). The thickness of both control (right eyes) and the manipulated (left eyes) corneas was measured by a pachymeter every week.

## The immunohistochemistry of cornea section
The control (right) and manipulated (left) eyes were enucleated and fixed in 4 % PFA overnight at 4 °C. A successive dehydration treatment of the corneas was conducted by soaking into 15 % and 30 % sucrose solution for 24 h each at 4 °C. The tissues were embedded in the optimal cutting temperature compound (OCT) before frozen sectioning on a microtome. A 10 μm thickness of each section was placed onto the slide before perforating with 0.1 % Triton X-100 in 1XPBS. After the treatment of blocking buffer (PBS, 0.05 % Tween 20, 5 % Normal Goat Serum (Jackson Immuno Research 005–0000-121), 1 mM NaN3), the samples were subject to the corresponding primary and secondary antibodies for immunohistochemistry staining. The primary and secondary antibodies used in this study are listed in . After 5 min stained with DAPI, the ProLong™ Gold Antifade Mountant (Invitrogen, Cat. No. P36934) was used to preserve the immunostained samples.

## RNAseq analysis
A confluence of 10 cm-cultured iHCEPLCs for each treatment was harvested for RNA extraction. Total RNA was monitored on 1 % agarose gel and quantified by the RNA Nano6000 Assay kit (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA). The NEB Next® UltraTM RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (NEB, USA) was adopted following the manufacturer's instruction to generate sequencing libraries. The PCR-based RNA library was purified (AMPure XP system, Beckman Coulter) and subject to the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system for analysis. Trimmomatic (v0.38) was used to filter out the raw paired-end reads with low-quality ones. The resulting high-quality data (clean reads) were aligned to the reference genome (i.e., H. sapiens, GRCh38) by the HISAT2 software (v2.1.0). FeatureCounts (v1.6.0) was applied to count the number of the mapped genes. Based on each tested cell's RNAseq profile, we applied the principle component analysis (PCA) to quantitatively analyze the cell identity relationship between each compared cell line. The hierarchical clustering of heatmap and PCA analysis was conducted in R (3.6.0).

## Statistical analysis
The data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation and were analyzed by GraphPad Prism 8.0. Unpaired Student's t-test for normally distributed data was obtained using Excel functions. A P-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Results

## Generation of the neural crest-like cells from the PBMC-derived hiPSCs (hiPSCPBMC)
To customize an individual’s pluripotent cell, we generated a human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) from PBMC (see ). The induction of cell differentiation from pluripotent cells followed the developmental process of cornea endothelium formation to generate the human corneal endothelial cells. Since the corneal endothelial differentiation is from ocular neural crest cells (NCCs), the neural crest cells were generated from the hiPSCPBMC mentioned in methods (see ) via the overexpression of FoxD3, a master regulator of the neural crest. To this end, we adopted piggyBac transposon as a transgene vehicle to carry FoxD3 coding. B shows two transcription units in the piggyBac vector: the FoxD3 coding driven by the cytomegalovirus promoter, and the other unit includes the red fluorescence reporter and the puroDTK transcripts. After transfection, eleven independent clones were isolated and cultured in the neural crest medium. Only eight out of eleven NCC-like clones stably propagated (A027-1, −2, −3, −4, −5, −6, −8 & −10). Furthermore, although various expression amounts of the NCC markers, including Sox10, FoxD3, Twist, and Snail, were observed among independent clones, those markers only specifically appeared in the NCC-like clones but not in the hiPSCPBMC, indicating the cell fate change is driven by the expression of FoxD3 (see C, D & E). 

## Inducing differentiation of neural crest cells into corneal endothelial cells
To induce the differentiation of NCC-like cells toward the corneal endothelium fate, we seeded the NCC-like cells with a density of 1x102 cells/mm2 on the Matrigel-coated plate and cultured them in the Dual Smad inhibition medium for two days and followed by the cornea medium , (see A for the induction scheme). Before obtaining the bona fide corneal endothelium, silencing the FoxD3 transgene will be essential because FoxD3 is a master regulator of NCC. As expected, the emerging clones with hexagonal-shaped cells during the corneal endothelium induction no longer display the red fluorescence signal. In contrast, the surrounding cells that failed to respond to the induction manipulation still were red fluorescence-positive cells ( A). Silencing the FoxD3 transgene expression and the change of cell morphology indicated the cell fate alternation of the NCC-like cells. 
To verify the identity of those cells with a hexagonal shape, we clonally isolated and expanded those cells in the B4G12 medium. As shown in B & C, three hiPSCPBMC-derived HCEC-like clones were established and expressed a comparable amount of corneal endothelial markers, including N-cad, ZO-1 (TJP1), ATP1A1, Col8A1, AQP1 and ALCAM (CD166) compared with the primary HCEC and B4G12 cell line.

## The induced HCEC-like cell is a polarized cell with subcellular localization with different markers
Corneal endothelium forms a monolayer structure in the innermost cornea serving as a barrier to control the water content of the cornea via its pump-and-leak activity. Such water-draining activity relies upon the proper establishment of cell polarity. To ensure the subcellular localization of each biomarker in the iHCEC-like cells was adequately located, we conducted confocal microscopy on the immunostained iHCEC-like cells. The subcellular localization of the examined markers, including ZO-1, ATP1A1, CD56, CD166, N-cad, and Col8A1, were indistinguishable between the iHCEC-like cell and B4G12 (see D).
Further, to examine whether the cell polarity of the iHCEC-like cells was adequately established, we applied confocal microscopy to observe the distribution of each tested marker along the axis of apical-to-basal in the iHCEC-like cells seeded onto the Matrigel-coated plate. As shown in B, the confocal images display the distribution of each examined marker in the subcellular region of the iHCEC-like cells and B4G12, respectively. The indiscernible polarity establishment between the iHCEC-like cells and B4G12 indicated that our iHCEC-like cells adopted the corneal endothelium fate.
Previous reports showed that the cell morphology and marker expression of HCECs are similar to the ARPE-19 cell, a human retinal pigment epithelial cell line. We, therefore, conduct a quantitative analysis by comparing the differential gene expression between the iHCEC-like cells and ARPE-19. Consistent with the prior report, the similarity of gene expression profile in those tested genes is observed, except for the ALCAM (CD166) gene (see A).

## The distribution of the CD marker-dependent subpopulations of the iHCEC-like cells is reminiscent of the cultured primary HCEC
Previous studies showed that the cultured human corneal endothelial cells (cHCECs) contained various combined surface cluster-of-differentiation (CD) marker-based subpopulations , . Such various subpopulations may reflect the natural composition of the corneal endothelial sheet on its physiological activity. However, a reproducible homogeneous population of therapeutic cells is one of the primary criteria for the clinical application devoid of cell-state transition. To this end, we evaluated the subpopulation distribution of our iHCEC-like cells, whereas B4G12 and primary HCEC served as the controls. The clinical trial of Kinoshita’s group has shown that the combinatory CD markers, i.e., CD166+, CD44+/-, CD105-, CD24-, CD26-, represent the effective therapeutic subpopulation in cHCEC. Thus, as shown in A, B & C, the subpopulation of the therapeutic effector cells (CD166+, CD44+/-, CD105-, CD24-, CD26- in the gated G1) was approx. 0.23 %, whereas the counterparts of the cHCEC and B4G12, were 4.03 % and 0.25 %, respectively. The 17.5-fold reduction (0.23 % v.s 4.03 %) of therapeutic effector cells (CD166+, CD44+/-, CD105-, CD24-, CD26- in the gated G1) in our iHCEC-like cells may reflect the difference in cell state. 
As the stemness of the cell state can be indicated by its nucleus versus cytosol ratio, the functional fitness of the therapeutic cell is co-related well with its size; the less effective therapeutic cell is also correlated with a reduced proliferative capacity and, in turn, enlarged via their metabolic alternation . Previous research showed that the cell size of the effector cells is approximately 44 μm in diameter (8). Therefore, we used the standard beads to evaluate the cell size within the G1 subpopulation. As shown in F, the cell size of iHCEC-like cells and B4G12 distributes within the range of 27.0 μm to 64.7 μm, where 58.6 % and 52.5 % cells are approx. 43 μm in diameter, respectively. Due to the primary HCEC donated by a 59-year-old female, the aged primary HCEC displays a wide range of sizes (8.9 μm to 110.3 μm), whereas the cells with 41.7 μm in diameter are approximately 8.7 %. We further identified that 44.5 % of cells have a diameter of 44.25 μm within the gated G1 subpopulation in the iHCEC-like cells. Consistent with the previous report, the components of the G1 subpopulation of the iHCEC-like cells, regarding their CD marker expression and cell size, demonstrated that our iHCEC-like cells might also possess therapeutic capability (8).

## The differential gene expression between the iHCEC-like cell and primary HCEC indicates a progenitor-like state of the iHCEC-like cell
Although our iHCEC-like cell is indistinguishable from the primary HCEC regarding cell morphology, the CD marker profile, and the subcellular localization of several critical markers, it, unlike the post-mitotic primary HCEC, can proliferate in vitro. We profiled its genome-wide gene expression by RNAseq. As shown in , we performed a comparative analysis in which the eighty-nine genes priorly reported in HCEC were selected. This analysis included our iHCEC-like cells, primary HCECs, EMTed primary HCECs, and human fibroblast. As shown in A, the primary HCEC and our iHCEC-like cells were clustered together, whereas the EMTed primary HCEC and human fibroblast were categorized into another group. Even though primary HCEC and the iHCEC-like cells were closer related than the others, the iHCEC-like cells remained different from primary HCEC since the PCA analysis indicates that each test cell represents a discrete group ( B). 
Because of the iHCEC-like cell's self-renewal and lineage restriction properties, we suspected whether our iHCEC-like cells were in a progenitor-like state. To that end, we induced the terminal differentiation of the iHCEC-like cells through contact inhibition as the cell arrangement seen in the corneal endothelium monolayer. A time-course experiment was used to observe the relationship between cell density and the differentiation marker expression. C shows that cell density reached 80 % density on day −2, whereas day 0 represented 100 % confluence. The cell proliferative induction genes, including CD44, Wnt5b, and p16, were downregulated following the increment of cell density. In contrast, the ZP4 and COL8A2, the terminal differentiation markers of HCEC, were gradually upregulated as the cell density increased. Further, the expression of ZO-1 was not affected during the time-course period. Both iHCEC-like cells and B4G12 display a similar pattern. Thus, the state of iHCEC-like cells seems to stay in a progenitor-like state. Hereafter, we defined our iHCEC-like cell according to its proliferative activity and lineage restriction nature as the iHCECP-like cells (iHCEPLC).
Although the iHCEPLC displays progenitor-like characteristics with lineage-restricted proliferative activity, its tumorigenesis may still be possible in the in vivo microenvironment. To this end, three independent lines of iHCEPLC (i.e., iHCEPLC-1, iHCEPLC-2, and iHCEPLC-3) were injected into the flank of the SCID mice, whereas three lines of the hiPSC (i.e., hiPSC-1, hiPSC-2, and hiPSC-3), the iHCEPLC-derived cells, were serving as positive controls. showed tumorigenicity was only observed in the hiPSC, not the iHCEPLC. These results demonstrate the safety of iHCEPLC for potential future clinical applications.

## The iHCEPLC restored the cornea acuity in the rabbit’s BAK-mediated endothelial dystrophy model
To test whether the iHCEPLC possesses therapeutic capability in vivo, we first established the rabbit's BAK-mediated corneal endothelial dysfunction animal model. To that end, the front chamber of the rabbit's left eye received 0.025 % BAK solution to damage the endothelial monolayer , . A shows that one hundred microliters of the 0.025 % BAK solution were introduced into the front chamber of the rabbit's left eye using a bent 27-gauge needle. The opaque cornea appeared within the one-week post-BAK injection (see G, the photo of the seventh day). The opacity of the cornea was maintained, and a Pachymeter could no longer measure the thickness (>1200 μm) if no further treatments were engaged. The hematoxylin & eosin (H&E) stains of the BAK-treated cornea are shown in C, displaying a thickened fibrosis layer on the top of Descemet's membrane with a missing endothelial layer. In contrast, the untreated contralateral right eye ( B) shows the normal monolayer of corneal endothelial cells (the blank arrow) attached to Descemet's membrane. 
The loss of endothelial cells accompanies the forming of a swelling and opaque cornea. In F, the blue empty circle data points (n = 2) display the negative control's thickened cornea, whereas the filled red circles (n = 11) depict the untreated contralateral right eye. To challenge our iHCEPLC's therapeutic capacity for restoring corneal endothelial dysfunction, we introduced 1×106 iHCEPLCs to the front chamber following one week of the BAK treatment, while the untreated right eye served as a positive control to evaluate the recovery. Both long-term and short-term observations were conducted to assess the therapeutic efficacy of iHCEPLC in restoring the BAK-treated cornea's acuity.
 F shows a short-term observation of nine BAK-treated rabbits. All the left eyes received 1×106 iHCEPLCs after seven days post the BAK treatment except the negative control rabbit (the blank circles in blue). All the BAK-treated corneas that received 1×106 iHCEPLCs showed signs of restoration within 7–14 days (except for the #5 rabbit) and gradually recovered to a healthy cornea approximately 30 days after receiving the iHCEPLC. However, the treated eyes may not have a homogeneous thickness and, in turn, show a speckle of opacity. Such a phenomenon may result from the uneven settlement of the injected iHCEPLC, although it will be healed eventually. A representative photo of the H&E staining was shown in D, where the seeded iHCEPLC formed a monolayer onto the Descemets membrane (the blank arrow). To rule out the possibility that the monolayer is formed by the recovered rabbit's endothelial cells instead of the introduced iHCEPLC, we used the antibody specific against the human nuclear antigen to conduct immunohistochemistry to distinguish the possibility (see E). As a result, we confirmed that the endothelial cells on Descemet's membrane derived from the injected iHCEPLC. In addition, the tight junction between the injected iHCEPLC is formed to organize the monolayer (see E, upper left panel).

## The iHCEPLC displays a long-term sustainable therapeutic effect
Despite the immune-privileged in cornea transplant, the mechanism of late endothelial failure post-cornea transplant has yet to be elucidated, posing a long-term postoperative threat [Patel et al., 2012; Okumura et al., 2018]. Thus, a long-term follow-up in our study is imperative and mainly intended to observe the potential occurrence of iHCEPLC-mediated immune rejection. In that vein, we conducted a long-term observation to test the potential long-term sustainable therapeutic effect of iHCEPLC. Following the prior mentioned procedures, three rabbits' left eyes received the BAK treatment for one week and followed by delivering 1x106 iHCEPLCs in two rabbits. As one can see, the effect was similar to the short-term studies; the BAK-treated eyes' recovered acuity improved and held after 210 days post iHCEPLC injection. In contrast, the negative control fails to heal (see A), but one can observe that the eye with the BAK-treated only has been under a recovery process since day 70th with a spreading speckle appearing on the cornea resulting in distinctive spots of clarity. However, we still observed that the introduced iHCEPLC remain on Descemet's membrane in the left eye. The representative photo of immuno- and H&E stains, as shown in B & 6D, depicted the long-term efficacy of iHCEPLC on corneal endothelial replacement. 

## Discussion
Even though corneal transplantation requires no tissue typing and matching, the donated corneas are still far less to satisfy the quantitative needs for cornea transplantation worldwide. Besides, a fraction of transplant-receiving patients may need to repeat such transplant procedures in their lifetime due to the late onset of immunological rejection . Therefore, a topical corticosteroid is usually prescribed to alleviate the risk of immunological rejection and prevent graft failure , , . Such topical treatment, however, has been reported to increase the incidence of glaucoma or infectious complications , , , , , . Thus, developing autogenic corneal endothelial replacement will be the future therapeutic trend for treating corneal endothelial dysfunction by solving the issues of cell source and potential late-onset of immunological rejection.
To prove the feasibility of autogenic cell replacement in corneal endothelial dysfunction, we adopted the somatic reprogramming strategy using PBMC as the cell source to produce corneal endothelial progenitor-like cell (iHCEPLC). The present study followed the ocular developmental process to induce the PBMC-derived pluripotent cells stepwise toward corneal endothelial progenitors through the neural crest cell state , . Like the endogenous corneal endothelial cells, the iHCEPLC displays cell polarity while they form a monolayer; the ZO-1 locates on the apical lateral region comprising a belt-like structure to seal the cell–cell junction, whereas the ATP1A1 and Col8A1 situate respectively on the lateral and basal sides of cells. In addition, a similar heterogeneous composition of cells is also observed in the iHCEPLC population as the primary HCECs; the CD marker-based profiling of iHCEPLC depicting the subpopulation of cells is comparable to primary HCECs, consistent with the previous report but with subtle differences , . We observed that the potential therapeutic effector cells (CD166+, CD44+/-, CD105-, CD24-, CD26- in the gated G1) are also present in our iHCEPLC with approx. 0.23 %, whereas the counterpart of primary HCEC is 4.03 %. Such differences based on subpopulation composition and proliferative activity distinguished iHCEPLC's cell state from the primary HCEC.
The RNAseq analysis further verified the difference in cell state. Eighty-nine active corneal endothelial expression genes were selected for a comparative study between iHCEPLC, primary HCEC, the EMTed-primary HCEC, and human fibroblast. Although both iHCEPLC and primary HCEC were closer related than others, the PCA analysis depicts their gene expression and cell status differences. This observation is double-verified from the heat map results. Consistent with prior reports, the terminally differentiated primary HCECs express higher POU6F2 and COL8A2 than the iHCEPLC (see A) , , . Further, the expression of the fibroblast markers, including CD9, CD49e, CD44, and CD73, is low in both iHCEPLC and primary HCECs. In contrast, the nonfibroblastic makers (i.e., CD98, CD166, and CD340) are comparable in both iHCEPLC and primary HCECs. In addition, because the proliferative capability in iHCEPLC is much higher than primary HCECs, which only have marginal cell division, one can expect that the proliferation markers, e.g., Ki67 and CD44, have a higher amount in iHCEPLC than in primary HCECs (see A). Also, we observed that CD24 and CD26 are low in iHCEPLC avoiding the potential aneuploidy , .
Due to iHCEPLC's ability to proliferate in vitro like a progenitor cell of the corneal endothelium, we induced its maturation through the process of contact inhibition, as seen in the endogenous corneal endothelial sheet. A time course study depicted that the proliferative activity-related genes (i.e., CD44 & WNT5B) decreased their expression along with the gradual crowdedness of the cells. In contrast, those terminally differentiated genes, i.e., ZO-1, COL8A2 & ZP4, increased their expression during the process of contact inhibition. Interestingly, although the decrease of p16 transcript in a whole cell extract was observed during contact inhibition, the nuclear entry of p16 protein was increased, which may inhibit the kinase activity of CDK4/6 from phosphorylating RB resulting in cell cycle arrest (data not shown) . With iHCEPLC's characteristics of proliferative activity and lineage restriction, we, therefore, dictate iHCEPLC as an HCEC's progenitor-like cell.
Despite the similarity in iHCEPLC's marker expression and inducible terminal maturation, one must challenge its therapeutic effectiveness in vivo. To that end, we adopted the BAK-based corneal endothelial dysfunction in rabbits. One can unambiguously observe a homogeneous opaque cornea appearing in a rabbit's eye if the front chamber received 0.025 % BAK solution within a week. Furthermore, due to the unique proliferation property of rabbit's corneal endothelial cells, one can observe a gradual self-healing process starting from a few small regions by forming a speckle pattern in the cornea starting from the 70th day post-BAK treatment onwards. However, if introducing 1×106 iHCEPLCs followed the BAK treatment, a gradual acuity cornea restoration will be observed one-week post-iHCEPLC injection, and acuteness of cornea can be obtained post 2–4 weeks after iHCEPLC administration. Also, we conducted a long-term observation regarding the survival of the introduced iHCEPLC. Although the cornea received BAK-only gradual recovery from the day 70th post-BAK injection, the administrated iHCEPLC still formed a stable monolayer on the top of Descemet's membrane since the human nuclear antigen specifically addresses the cell identity (see B). Furthermore, because of the proliferative characteristics in iHCEPLC can be continuous passages in vitro to provide sufficient cell sources. However, it raises the possibility of tumorigenesis. To this end, we conducted a tumorigenesis assay by introducing 2x106 iHCEPLCs into the flanks of SCID mice and using the original iPSCPBMC as a positive control. We observed that the iPSCPBMC generates teratoma, whereas the iHCEPLC counterparts did not (see ). Thus, at least in the current settings, the iHCEPLC do not develop a tumor.
This study proved the potential autogenic cell replacement therapy principle from a customized hiPSC to iHCEPLC. Additionally, we demonstrated iHCEPLC's long-term therapeutic efficacy in corneal endothelial dystrophy using rabbits as model animals. Different from the prior reports producing HCEC-like cells, which may not provide sufficient cell sources for long-term therapeutic effectiveness. Here, we have demonstrated that our iHCEPLC displays a progenitor-like property with proliferative activity and lineage restriction properties, which is ideal for regenerative purposes in medical settings.
Nevertheless, several issues remain to be addressed. For example, customizing a patient's corneal endothelial cells for autogenic therapy may be costly. Generating the one-for-all iHCEPLC may be more feasible and practical because of the immune-privileged nature of the cornea. Meanwhile, the one-for-all iHCEPLC can exhaust all measurements to ensure its safety and meet the critical regulations of the FDA. However, such a cell replacement treatment for corneal endothelial dystrophy may raise late-onset complications needing further study despite the present study and others not observing , . Another critical issue will be shortening the production time of iHCEPLC to avoid mutation accumulation. In the present study, we adopted FoxD3 overexpression to achieve the neural crest cell fate rapidly and efficiently. Although we here demonstrated the availability of a progenitor-like state of the corneal endothelium, the transgene approach, however, is unsuitable for future clinical applications. Thus, exploring and identifying an adequate mesenchymal stem cell to shortcut or rewire the reprogramming routes warrants a future investigation.

## Conclusion
The scarcity of cornea donation has been an unsolved issue, devastating an alternative treatment. Here, we proved the principle by adopting the reprogramming technology to customize the patient's corneal endothelial progenitor-like cell (iHCEPLC) through small molecule induction. Apart from prior studies, our iHCEPLC demonstrates the progenitor cells' characteristics and is capable of proliferation in vitro, supporting sufficient therapeutic candidate cells and allowing them to perform intensive evaluations in efficacy and safety before clinical applications.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Microscopy Center at 10.13039/501100002836Chang Gung University for their technical assistance and Mr. C.-C. Chen's assistance in cell preparation and flow cytometry analysis. This study was supported by the 10.13039/100012553Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (CMRPD1J0131 ∼ 3 and CMRPD1M0131∼3) and the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST 111-2314-B-182 -042).
Appendix AFigure S1. Generation of the PBMC-derived hiPSC (hiPSCPBMC). A scheme displays the PBMC-derived hiPSC production. The Sendai virus-mediated somatic reprogramming applied to the PBMC was cultured for four days after blood withdrawal. The infected cells were transferred onto the mitomycin C-treated MEFICR feeders on the third day post-infection. The first clones appeared on the 15th day post-infection. We clonally harvested the emerging iPSC clones by changing different induction media at various stages after 3∼4 weeks. (B) The morphology of induced pluripotent stem cells is undiscernible from the H9 human ESCs. The apparent pluripotent markers on those ESC-like clones indicated that those cells acquired pluripotency during somatic reprogramming. The pluripotency markers, Oct4, Sox2, and SSEA4, were immunostained in the hiPSC-S7 line. The live staining of Tra-1-60 showed that the hiPSC-S7 clone reached the pluripotent status. To quantify the component of the acquired pluripotent cells, we adopted the cytometry analysis on the hiPSC-S7 line using SSEA-4 and Tra-1-60 as markers. Both markers demonstrated that over 99.7% of cells reach a pluripotent state. (C) To generate vector-free iPSCs, we cultured the clones at 38.5°C for five days. After passaging and subcloning processes, we duplicated the clones and conducted PCR analysis according to the manufacturer's instructions. The isolated hiPSC-S1 and S7 clones did not detect the SeV, KOS, Klf4, and cMyc transgenes. The right panels displayed a semi-quantitative PCR analysis of the gel. (D) Pathological analysis of hiPSCPBMC –derived teratoma. The cytogenetic analysis of hiPSC-S7 shows a normal karyotype. 2 × 106 hiPSC-S7 cells were injected into the flank sides of SCID mice. On the 22nd day post-injection, teratomas were harvested and histochemically stained for pathological examination. The sectioned tissues stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin served for the histological analysis. Neuronal rosette (N), gland (G), bone(B), the gut epithelium (arrows), smooth muscle(M) in the walls of the gut epithelium, and cartilage (C). (E) The quantitative analysis of pluripotency markers, namely, Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog in hiPSC-S1, hiPSC-S7, and H9. The expression of endogenous pluripotency markers in both hiPSC-S1 and hiPSC-S7 is higher than in the H9 hESC. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.005; ***, P < 0.0005. Figure S2. Subcellular localization of HCEC markers recapitulates primary human corneal endothelium. (A) A comparative analysis of specific gene expressions between ARPE-19 and iHCEC. The blue bars indicate that those specific genes expressed in the iHCECs are higher than in ARPE-19. Conversely, the yellow bar represents the higher expression of those genes in ARPE-19. (B)&(C) is the series of confocal images of each HCEC marker where various makers distribute along the apical-basal axis of iHCEC and B4G12, respectively. From top to bottom of each column (the z-axis), those photos represent the selected optical sections by confocal microscopy from apical to the basal region of each specific marker‘s subcellular localization, including ZO-1, CD166, ATP1A1, CD56, Actin, Col8A1, and N-Cadherin. The small insets on the top and left side of each photograph represent the part images of horizontal (green line) and vertical (red line) lines, respectively. The scale bar represents 10 μm. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.005. Figure S3. Teratoma Assays for testing the tumorigenicity of iHCEPLC. (A) Three independent lines of iHCEPLC, i.e., iHCEPLC-1, iHCEPLC-2, and iHCEPLC-3, were injected into the flank of the SCID mice, whereas three lines of the hiPSC, i.e., hiPSC-1, hiPSC-2, and hiPSC-3), the iHCEPLC-derived cells, were serving as positive controls. The tumorigenicity was only observed in the hiPSCs, but not the iHCEPLC. (B) After one-month post-cell injection, tumor formation was only observed in the hiPSC-introduced groups in which a teratoma was formed. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2024.05.008.