4202crmethCell Reports MethodsCell Rep MethodsElsevierPMC1026190610261906102619063732356610.1016/j.crmeth.2023.100476Subcellular spatially resolved gene neighborhood networks in single cells
FangZhou FordAdam J HuThomas ZhangNicholas MantalarisAthanasios CoskunAhmet F 1Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA2Machine Learning Graduate Program, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA3School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA4Interdisciplinary Bioengineering Graduate Program, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA5Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA∗Corresponding author ahmet.coskun@bme.gatech.edu
6Lead contact
1252023351004761004761562023© 2023 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
Image-based spatial omics methods such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) generate molecular profiles of single cells at single-molecule resolution. Current spatial transcriptomics methods focus on the distribution of single genes. However, the spatial proximity of RNA transcripts can play an important role in cellular function. We demonstrate a spatially resolved gene neighborhood network (spaGNN) pipeline for the analysis of subcellular gene proximity relationships. In spaGNN, machine-learning-based clustering of subcellular spatial transcriptomics data yields subcellular density classes of multiplexed transcript features. The nearest-neighbor analysis produces heterogeneous gene proximity maps in distinct subcellular regions. We illustrate the cell-type-distinguishing capability of spaGNN using multiplexed error-robust FISH data of fibroblast and U2-OS cells and sequential FISH data of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), revealing tissue-source-specific MSC transcriptomics and spatial distribution characteristics. Overall, the spaGNN approach expands the spatial features that can be used for cell-type classification tasks.
Keywords: spatial omics, subcellular transcriptomics, gene neighborhood networks, RNA proximity, RNA-RNA interactions, cell-type classification

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•spaGNN detects the hierarchy of gene proximity relationships
•Clustering algorithm identifies gene neighbors in subcellular patches
•Nearest neighborhood analysis reveals heterogeneous local gene proximity
•Gene proximity relationship outperforms gene expression in cell classification

## Motivation
Spatially resolved transcriptomic technologies such as multiplexed error-robust fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and sequential FISH generate high-dimensional datasets that reflect the organization of cells within tissues but also the organization of molecules within cells. We sought to develop an analysis method for inferring subcellular molecular interaction networks from image-based spatial omics data. This algorithm quantifies the physical proximity of RNA molecules when they are spatially located within the nearest neighborhood distances. Spatially resolved gene neighborhoods are used to generate networks that are distinct at different parts of a single cell. Decoding subcellular gene neighborhood networks enables downstream tasks such as cell classification better than overall gene expression per cell, thus expanding the use of subcellular spatial features for omics analysis.

Fang et al. developed the spaGNN pipeline to extract gene proximity relationships from subcellular spatial transcriptomics data. The algorithm detects the proximity of genes in subcellular compartments while constructing gene neighborhood networks. The gene spatial proximity relationships outperform gene expression in cell classification.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jul 30; Revised 2023 Feb 18; Accepted 2023 Apr 18; Collection date 2023 May 22.

## Introduction
Subcellular localization of RNA molecules and their associated physical mechanisms have previously been quantified and outlined using in situ hybridization methods (fluorescence or chromogenic) in model organisms for the study of neuroscience, development, and mammalian subcellular organization. Emerging spatially resolved and multiplexed gene-expression profiling technologies include two mainstream approaches. Spatial transcriptomics and Slide-seq leverage DNA-barcoded substrates and microbeads to capture multiple RNA targets, providing gene-expression maps of tissues at 10- to100-μm resolution. , The spatial resolution limitation and sample preparation complexity of these platforms are bottlenecks for transcriptomics analysis of single cells. Another approach utilizing image-based barcoding of gene-expression maps is the fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method for the detection of RNA molecules in their native positions within cells and tissues. Sequential FISH (SeqFISH) and multiplexed error-robust FISH (MERFISH) methods have generated single-cell spatial maps of 10–10,000 RNA species in mouse tissues. These maps have since been utilized in neuroscience, developmental biology, and embryonic stem cell biology. , , , 
The subcellular organization of RNA molecules inside individual cells is crucial to position-dependent gene regulatory control of cellular decision-making processes, including stem cell differentiation. Thus, subcellular spatial transcriptomics provides regulatory and functional cell information otherwise masked by traditional molecular analyses. FISH-based multiplexing methods localize single RNA transcripts, enabling the study of the spatial organization of RNA-enriched compartments in subcellular volumes, a feature previously limited to live-cell imaging. For instance, β-actin molecules are observed to be localized at the cell edge and focal adhesion points, allowing cells to efficiently migrate and polarize. However, RNA regulation also occurs compartmentally, within neighborhoods defined by common features spanning 0.1–30 μm. Direct RNA and RNA interaction can also regulate the expression and localization of transcripts. , This work presents a computational method to study RNA neighboring relationships, entitled spatially resolved gene neighborhood networks (spaGNN).
In cells, complex regulatory relationships between genes maintain gene-expression phenotypes. Gene transcription regulation is modulated by a cascade of biochemical processes, leading to the control of transcription levels. Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) have been widely used to describe the regulation of gene expression, and a wide range of tools have been developed to discover the regulatory relationship between genes ( ). , , , GRNs provide intuitive visualization by representing genes as nodes in graphs, and regulatory relationships as edges. Coexpression networks reveal functional and regulatory commonalities between genes. , However, they lack directional connection and miss the regulator or target information. Investigations of transcription factor binding sites in the genome dissect the biochemical process of regulation. , , However, regulatory relationships are frequently confounded by multiple regulatory pathways that lead to imprecise models. Statistical inference models have also been proposed to infer regulatory networks from single-cell transcriptomic profiles. , Spatial transcriptomics data has also been used to infer gene regulatory relationships. , These computational approaches utilize existing transcriptomics data to predict regulatory relationships. Although these expedient methods utilize widely available data, they too lack subcellular spatial resolution ( ). The spaGNN pipeline seeks to examine and visualize the spatial proximity relationships between genes as networks.

## Results

## The spaGNN pipeline reveals subcellular gene neighborhood relationships
Transcripts have been shown to present subcellular spatial patterns. Therefore, we investigated the spatial segmentation of each cell into patches defined by high local RNA density utilizing the Leiden clustering algorithm. By applying the clustering algorithm to the positions of all detected transcripts, the algorithm separates transcripts into local communities based on RNA density. Pearson’s correlation between markers among patches indicates the tendency for genes to colocalize in the same patch. The correlation value, denoted as , is defined as the patch correlation of gene pairs. To demonstrate the pipeline, we analyzed the published MERFISH dataset on fibroblasts ( A and ). Such a dataset contains the subcellular locations of 130 genes in human fibroblasts. The clustering algorithm divides the presented cell into spatially defined patches ( B), and the pairwise correlations of all 130 genes were computed ( C and ). The heatmap ( D) highlights several gene pairs with a range of patch correlations. There are six pairs of genes with high and low patch correlations. To visually validate the patch correlation, the locations of several pairs of genes were plotted ( E). FBN2-FLNA, PRPF8-SRRM2, and SRRM2-MKI67 all have positive patch correlation. The locations of transcripts show that they localize in similar subcellular spaces. MALAT1-FLNA, PRPF8-NUMA1, and THBS1-MALAT1 all have negative patch correlations. The locations of 130 unique transcripts show that they localize in different subcellular spaces of the MERFISH data. To further demonstrate the robustness of the method, we examined patch correlation if fewer genes were studied. The detected patches using 10, 50, and 100 genes are consistent with the patches detected using all 130 genes as shown by the Rand index comparison. The patch correlation also remains consistent, owing to the consistency in patch detection ( ).
 

## Local gene neighborhood network reveals gene proximity relationship
Localized spatial gene neighboring relationships were then analyzed through local neighborhood analysis ( F–1H). Within each patch, the center transcript and its surrounding nine neighbors form a ten-transcript neighborhood as shown by connected dots ( F). Each dot is a detected transcript, and an edge indicates a neighboring event between two genes ( F). Ten-gene neighborhoods were computed for all transcripts in the same patch, and the number of neighboring events was counted. We used a permutation analysis with 1,000 permutations to find the distribution of pairwise gene neighboring events given the gene count. We defined the Z score of the detected number of interaction events given the distribution as the proximity score (denoted Z) between the pair of genes. The proximity score was then visualized using the NetworkX package ( G and 1H). Scatterplots show the locations of several pairs of genes ( I). TEAD1-LRP1, IGF2R-FBN2, and FLN1-FBN2 pairs all have positive proximity scores, indicating that the gene pairs are neighbors of each other more frequently than expected. Meanwhile, TNC-FLNC, PRPF8-COL5A1, and THBS1-MALAT1 all have negative proximity scores. However, because of the nearest-neighbor approach of studying gene neighborhoods, the detected proximity relationship can be affected by the varying number of genes studied ( ). Further analysis indicated that the mean and standard deviation of proximity score between the same pairs of genes were not significantly different when the number of genes studied was changed.

## Subcellular spatial gene neighborhood features are distinct in different cells
In addition to the fibroblast MERFISH dataset, we analyzed the published U2-OS MERFISH dataset using the same methods. The common 84 genes in the two MERFISH datasets were compared. Cells of different types present distinct patch correlations between the same set of genes ( A and 2B; ). For example, the patch correlations between SRRM2 and PRPF8 are similar between fibroblast and U2-OS cells ( C). However, the patch correlations between PRPF8 and IGF2R are different between fibroblast and U2-OS. The two genes have a negative correlation in fibroblast shown by  = −0.33, and a positive correlation in U2-OS shown by ( D). When comparing the patch correlation of both cell populations, both SRRM2-PRPF8 and IGF2R-PRPF8 pairs show significant differences ( E). Therefore, the two genes are more likely to locate in the same subcellular patch in U2-OS than in fibroblast.
 We further investigated the variation of subcellular gene neighboring relationships. The proximity score, which quantifies the likelihood of two genes being neighbors of each other, varies across the same cell ( A and 3B). The networks between the same set of genes, THBS1, FBN2, and SRRM2, show variation across the same cell ( C and 3D). The neighboring relationships between transcripts were also highlighted ( E and 3F). The variation of proximity scores across patches allows the analysis of the mean and standard deviation of proximity scores across the same cell ( G). The mean proximity scores between THBS1-FBN2, THBS1-SRRM2, and FBN2-SRRM2 of the fibroblast are higher than in the U2-OS cell.
 

## Subcellular neighborhood networks classify cells better than RNA expression
With each cell presenting distinct patch correlations and unique distribution of local neighborhood proximity scores, we utilized t-distribution stochastic neighborhood embedding (t-SNE) to visualize the distribution of patch correlations and local proximity scores. First, the cells were clustered based on single-cell RNA count ( A). All detected RNA dots were counted per cell to generate a single-cell expression profile of each cell. Next, the cells were clustered based on subcellular patch expression correlation ( B). Finally, the cells were clustered by the variability of subcellular spatial neighborhood networks as measured by the mean and variance of proximity score between each pair of markers ( C). The t-SNE plots highlight that all three sets of features can separate fibroblasts and U2-OS cells. We used the clustering result for cell-type classification. Cells in the same cluster are predicted to be the same type as the majority of cell types. Confusion matrices show that all three features predict fibroblast and U2-OS with high accuracy ( D–4F).
 

## Spatially resolved subcellular transcriptomics dissects mesenchymal stem cell heterogeneity
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) show strong regenerative and immunoregulatory potential and are tested as cell-based therapies for a wide range of diseases. , Owing to their differentiation potential and immunomodulatory roles, MSCs are widely studied and have been shown to display considerable spatial and temporal molecular heterogeneity. MSCs are isolated from multiple sources including human bone marrow (HBM), adipose tissue (HAT), and umbilical cord (HUC), making it challenging to clinically validate the efficacy and safety of cell-based therapies. , HUCs, for example, show distinct differences in functional characteristics such as proliferation potential, differentiation efficiency, and immunomodulatory character when compared with HBMs. , Donor age and general health status introduce further MSC heterogeneity. Allogeneic MSCs benefit biomanufacturing processes with wide availability. However, autologous MSCs eliminate the issue of immune rejection associated with allogeneic MSCs. The standardization of MSC-based therapies is further complicated by the intra-colony variability of MSCs due to clonal evolution during manufacturing. MSC phenotype is currently defined by the expression of CD105, CD73, and CD90 markers, lack of expression of CD45, CD34, CD14 or CD11b, CD79a or CD19, and HLA-DR, and the potential to differentiate into osteoblasts, adipocytes, and chondrocytes in vitro. , However, deep molecular profiles beyond surface markers are required to understand MSC heterogeneity.
Bulk and single-cell molecular profiling has yielded functional subpopulation differences in differentiation potential, immunoregulatory function, and clinical efficacy at the cost of subcellular spatial details. , , Single-cell RNA sequencing analyses of human MSCs have yielded functional subpopulation differences in differentiation potential, immunoregulatory function, and clinical efficacy at the cost of subcellular spatial details. , , , , Label-free and morphological imaging methods have demonstrated the utility of image-based MSC classification for clinical cell manufacturing pipelines using only a limited number of biomarkers. , , Spatially resolved molecular omics technologies can combine the advantages of imaging approaches and single-cell molecular analyses while providing more detailed spatial molecular profiling of MSCs. While these demonstrations were initially limited to murine models, emerging multiplexed FISH techniques combined with signal amplification assays open doors to the detailed study of human stem cell biology, deciphering subpopulation, donor, and source heterogeneity of MSCs. Utilizing the spaGNN workflow, we examined HUCs (n = 121), HBMs (n = 237), and human chondrocytes (HCHs; n = 247).
MSC samples were obtained from RoosterBio based on clinical quality-control standards (see ) to ensure that the studied cell populations exhibited bulk characteristics similar to those of the therapeutic product. To overcome the imaging limitations of traditional cell-culture methods on plastic substrates, we cultured cells at a density of 500 cells/cm2 on an optically clear 2D glass substrate (100–150 μm thickness) coated with a sub-5-μm-thick layer of collagen. MSCs are structurally intricate stromal cells exhibiting a high cell autofluorescence background due to high subcellular protein density. Therefore, MSCs necessitate the use of the split-probe design and signal amplification of the hybridization chain reaction (HCR) assay, providing bright, single-molecule RNA images with high detection specificity ( A and ). This multiplexing strategy simultaneously labels and images up to three RNA targets per cycle. Each cycle of HCR and imaging is followed by enzymatic digestion of HCR components using a DNase I enzyme. The removal protocol was validated by comparing post-enzyme treatment images with the image with the HCR structure still attached. The removal of diffraction-limited dots indicates the removal of the HCR structure ( ). Subsequent rounds of labeling then target different sets of RNA species, providing a linearly scalable method of cycle-number-dependent multiplexing. For example, six sequential hybridizations with three RNA targets per hybridization would profile 18 unique RNA markers in a single MSC.
 Spatially resolved gene-expression maps of single MSCs were provided in the form of individual images for multiple RNA targets ( A). Observed MSC subcellular heterogeneity suggests region-dependent RNA densities within individual MSCs, a finding contrary to models of RNA distribution utilizing an assumption of the Poisson distribution of RNA within a cell. This observation is akin to chromatin density detected in stem cell differentiation. , Such RNA densities have previously been observed in neuronal cells but not in MSCs.
Twelve RNA markers were measured in HBM and HUC, and four additional RNA markers were measured in HCHs ( ). NANOG, a pluripotency marker, was detected in only a few RNA copies per cell and was predominantly clustered around the nuclear membrane. PDL1, IL6, IL8, and CCL11 are genes related to the immunomodulatory function of MSCs which exhibited differences in their locations relative to cytoplasmic membranes in this experiment. Subsequent cell painting stains demonstrated cell-source-specific RNA densities and Golgi apparatus locations, most likely due to ER enrichment of translational machinery and rapid turnover of collagen secretions through ER-Golgi transport. , 
COL1A1 transcripts were observed to be enriched on ER structures as detected by Concanavalin A (ConA) staining, and were excluded from the Golgi region defined by the Wheat Germ Agglutinin (WGA) stains. Another important observation is that neighboring cells exhibited asymmetric RNA distributions, especially SPP1 and β-actin genes in pairs of HUC ( ). This finding can likely be attributed to asymmetric cell division events leading to a unique differentiation potential for each MSC. The initial observations were further investigated using the spaGNN pipeline.

## spaGNN analysis distinguishes tissue-specific subcellular spatial transcriptomics of MSCs
To further examine the newly generated dataset, we applied the spaGNN pipeline to the spatially resolved transcriptomic profile of MSCs. The average patch correlation of HBM, HUC, and HCH is shown in B, 5C, and . Notable differences include greater IL6 and IL8 colocalization in HUC when compared with HBM. Additionally, IL6 was more colocalized with GAPDH, EEF2, and β-actin in HCHs than HBM and HUC sources ( ). Utilizing the known segmentation of each cell, we also examined the effect of changing cell morphology on patch detection. The same cell was segmented using several different masks. The resulting detected patches remain similar ( ). On further analysis of the patch correlations utilizing principal component analysis, significant differences were detected between HBM, HUC, and HCH ( and ). Principal component 1 (PC1) captures separations between HCH and MSCs, while PC2 captures separations between HBMs and HUCs. All compared HCHs and MSCs in PC1 show statistically significant differences with α = 0.05, except for IL8 and IL6 differences between HBM and HCHs. Noticeably, most differences between HCHs and MSCs were correlations involving IL6, such as IL6 and NANOG, IL6 and GAPDH, and IL6 and EEF2 ( ).
We further applied nearest neighborhood network analysis to the MSC spatial profile dataset. A different approach was used to find the proximity score. After ten-transcript local neighborhoods were detected, the copy number of each gene in each neighborhood was counted and the pairwise correlation computed. The resulting R value is defined as the proximity score ( D and 5E). A patch near the center of the cell displays COL1A1 enrichment ( D). The presented neighborhood includes five copies of β-actin, one copy of GAPDH, three copies of COL1A1, and one copy of RUNX1. The second example demonstrates a patch in the cytosolic region and shows no COL1A1 expression ( E). The neighborhood shown included six copies of β-actin, three copies of GAPDH, and one copy of RUNX1. The same neighborhood connectivity analysis was conducted for all patches among all cells. Across the same cell, patches exhibit varying neighborhood network features ( E). The proximity scores from all patches in each HBM, HUC, and HCH were also visualized, with each patch showing distinct neighborhood networks ( ).
 The cells were then clustered and presented in t-SNE plots ( A–7C and ). We then performed cell-type classification using the same method as for the MERFISH dataset. Confusion matrices indicate that classification based on patch correlation and network variability misclassify fewer HUCs and HCHs as HBMs ( D–7F and ). Such increased cell-type classification allows better detection of subtypes in MSCs and can benefit MSC-based therapies.
 

## Discussion
The presented spaGNN workflow identifies cellular and subcellular heterogeneity in vitro. The methods can also be extended to further analyze subcellular molecule and structure localization. For example, RNA-FISH and immunofluorescence (IF) combined staining can help study the relative localization of RNA and structure. ConA staining enables visualization of the ER, and WGA works similarly for the Golgi apparatus. Using the average intensity of 3 × 3 pixels around each RNA in the IF image, we extended spaGNN analysis to include patch correlation and proximity score of RNA, as well as ConA and WGA. In a COL1A1-enriched patch, COL1A1 was highly colocalized with ConA, while β-actin was highly colocalized with WGA. In a COL1A1 sparse patch, COL1A1 was highly colocalized with WGA and ConA ( ). The discovery was also validated by statistical comparison between COL1A1 enrichment in ConA-positive and WGA-positive regions.
The changes in the patch detection method also allow studies of unique subcellular spatial patterns. Secretion profiles are commonly performed in the culture supernatant using multiplexed antibody arrays and Luminex assays, masking the heterogeneity across MSCs. , Cytokine release mechanisms are coordinated by intricate spatiotemporal mechanisms guided by cell-to-cell interactions and transient secretion dynamics. We studied three key cytokines, IL6, IL8, and CCL11. We observed in some HUCs that cytokine RNAs, especially IL8 and CCL11, are located along the cell membrane ( ). Therefore, a contour patch detection with 5-μm width from the edge of cells was applied. We then computed patch correlation and proximity score using the contour patches. In a cell with IL8 and CCL11 edge colocalization, the outermost patch of the cell presents IL6-negative proximity score between IL8 and CCL11 ( ). The cells with edge-localized cytokine genes were also visualized on the uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) of single-cell gene expression, patch correlation, and network variability ( ).
Other methods were also used to support the gene neighborhood network analysis. Utilizing the raw images of RNA and protein markers, a pixel-wise clustering algorithm was used to visualize the spatial distribution of genes ( ). Images were registered, and pixels were clustered based on the intensity of the image for each gene ( ). Cell images were then recolored after upsampling based on the cluster assignment of each pixel previously determined in the downsampled dataset to visualize gene enrichment regions. The recolored cell images validate that COL1A1 mRNA is more abundant near the nucleus, while ACTb is more abundant in the cytosolic region. Other mRNA molecules are mostly distributed throughout the cell. Similarly, k-means clustering of pixels can also be applied to each image and obtains similar results ( ).
A spatial statistical method was also utilized to show the subcellular spatial distribution of genes ( ). The number of RNA signals as a function of distance from the cell center showed similar patterns between different RNA markers, as most RNA molecules analyzed in this study indicated cytosolic localization. However, different RNA signals exhibited maximum enrichment at different distances. The same analysis was expanded to all HBMs, HUCs, and HCHs; enrichment of each gene versus distance from the cell center was visualized as a heatmap. The subcellular distribution of RNA of different cells was then analyzed using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov hypothesis test, yielding cell-type comparisons. The p values are visualized in a heatmap.
While this MSC study was used to profile and quantify only HBM, HUC, and HCH from one donor per cell type, this image-based screening platform may be fully automated to enable a high-throughput screening assay for comparative analysis of many donors and tissue-specific MSCs. Such an MSC monitoring assay could prove essential in biomanufacturing processes such as endpoint measurements and donor screenings, providing a potential critical quality attribute to standardize functional MSC products. Integrating the aforementioned analytical methods in addition to the spaGNN pipeline would enable the discovery of biological mechanisms in MSCs not observable with bulk transcriptomics. Other stem cell sources such as induced pluripotent stem cells may also benefit from the spaGNN framework as a method to identify cell states, differentiation potential, and immunomodulatory functions. The spaGNN framework is an emerging single-cell spatial omics tool for characterizing stem cells and informing biomanufacturing pipelines.

## Limitations of the study
While the spaGNN pipeline sheds light on the RNA neighborhoods, the biological mechanisms that govern such subcellular RNA organization require further investigation. We reason that several factors may lead to unique subcellular distributions of RNA. Protein secretion and distribution may be influenced by the relative position of the translation unit to one of many possible interacting features. For example, COL1A1 is secreted and deposited into the extracellular matrix; if COL1A1 RNA were colocalized with the ER, utilizing the attached translation enrichment units and subsequent Golgi apparatus delivery may increase secretion efficiency. , Colocalization of RNA could also potentially be attributed to RNA-structural protein binding. These RNA-protein interactions can serve both structural purposes and post-transcriptional regulation purposes, among others. The localization of RNA may also assist the function of the translational product; for example, β-actin mRNA can localize near adhesion points to assist cell migration and adhesion. , Similar effects of localized mRNA have been observed in neurons to maintain neural plasticity, a crucial factor in learning and memory. We also speculate that the specific localization of mRNA may increase energy efficiency. By transporting mRNA to various subcellular locations to translate proteins where they are needed, cells avoid the expensive transport of large, complicated molecules in favor of much smaller mRNA structures.
We computed Pearson’s correlation to quantify the localization of gene pairs in similar subcellular patches. However, the spaGNN pipeline lacks statistical significance testing of correlation values among patches of single cells. The statistical significance can be computed using the following equation:
t=rn−21−r2,where is Pearson’s correlation and is the number of detected patches. |t| > 1.96 indicates statistical significance with alpha = 0.05. In the future implementations of spaGNN, such statistical testing can be incorporated to define the significance of correlation metrics.
In the spaGNN algorithm, the nearest neighborhood network is generated using the k-nearest-neighbor (k-NN) algorithm. Each local neighborhood is defined as the central transcript and the nine nearest neighbors of the central transcript. The k-NN method ensures that each local neighborhood has ten transcripts. However, the distance between transcripts in the same neighborhood can vary. An alternative approach to finding gene neighborhoods is through distance-based neighborhoods. Distance-based local neighborhoods ensure that transcripts within the same neighborhood are in spatial proximity to each other. 
In the permutation analysis, a score was computed to quantify the tendency of a pair of genes to be neighbors of each other. A p value can be calculated by finding the proportion of cases that has a larger -score absolute value. However, the p value needs to be adjusted using Bonferroni correction, since the permutation analysis tries to find pairwise proximity relationships between multiple pairs of genes. 
An alternative approach to compute the proximity score is by counting the copy number of each gene in each neighborhood and computing the correlation between genes among all neighborhoods in the same patch. However, the correlation method is not applicable if a large number of genes are studied. The low number of transcripts in each neighborhood causes the gene copy number per neighborhood in a patch to be sparse. Pearson’s correlation would be high because of a large number of common zeros. In such cases, only the permutation analysis can be used.
Additionally, clonal heterogeneity has not been assessed in the MSC samples, making it difficult to decipher the genetic purity of MSC colonies. Multiplexed RNA imaging methods can be applied to MSCs after engineering each stem cell using a barcoded library of lentiviral vectors. Simple cell trackers can also be used to identify colony-forming units of individual MSCs, but these methods cannot be effectively utilized in the study of clonal mixing and evolution. Alternatively, single-cell time-lapse imaging can map the differentiation process by phase-contrast microscopy followed by multiplexed spatial gene-expression measurements. Synthetic lineage recording methods can also be applied to decipher clonal heterogeneity, but these molecular barcoding methods are difficult to execute in human stem cells. Other molecular analysis methods such as ATAC-seq can also be incorporated into the clonal mapping of single MSCs. 
In the protein-RNA network analysis, the nearest-neighbor relationship was computed using Pearson’s correlation. This is due to the lack of single-molecule localization of ConA, Phalloidin, and WGA staining. Only the image intensity can be analyzed. Therefore, Pearson’s correlation was used to compute the proximity score between RNA and protein.
Complementary RNA sequencing assays may also be used to predict the identity and function of individual stem cells. Data integration can be performed using developing multimodal data-integration techniques. , In short, the spaGNN image-based spatial omics framework assists in the identification of stem cell subpopulations utilized in cell-based regenerative treatments as well as the broader study of stem cell biology.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the , Ahmet Coskun (ahmet.coskun@bme.gatech.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Experimental model and subject details

## Cell line
Bone marrow-derived MSCs (BM-MSCs) and umbilical cord-derived MSCs (UC-MSCs) were purchased from RoosterBio, Inc. Cryopreserved human primary chondrocytes (HCH) (C-12710) and chondrocyte culture media (C-27101) were purchased from PromoCell, GmbH.
 

## Method details

## Cell culture

## Mesenchymal stem cells
The culture media consisted of 89% L-glutamine supplemented ɑ-MEM media (Cat # 12561-049), 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (HI-FBS), and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Cat #P4333). The culture media was first mixed, then filtered before use. HBM and HUC were cultured in T-75 flasks with 15mL of culture media. Cell passages were performed when cells reach 75% confluency using 5mL of Trypsin LE cell detachment media (Cat # 12605-010) per T-75 flask at 37°C for 5 min. After confirming cell detachment, 5mL of media was added to each flask to neutralize the trypsin. The cell suspension was then collected and centrifuged at 280g for 6 min. Cells were then resuspended in their respective culture media. Suspended cells were then seeded on collagen-coated glass coverslips. The cells were then cultured on coverslips for 24 h before fixation.

## Human primary chondrocytes
The media consisted of basal media and supplement mix. The basal media and supplement mix were mixed at a ratio specified by the instruction manual. Cell passages were performed when cells reach 75% confluency using Trypsin LE cell detachment media (Cat # 12605-010) at room temperature and resuspension in respective culture media after centrifugation at 220g for 3 min. Suspended cells were then seeded on collagen-coated coverslips. The seeded cells were cultured for 24 h before fixation.

## Cell fixation
All cell lines were fixed and permeabilized using the same method. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde fixation buffer for 10 min. (To prepare 10mL of fixation buffer, mix 2.5mL 16% paraformaldehyde (Cat # 28908), 1mL 10x DPBS (REF D1408), and 6.5mL DNase, RNase free water (Cat # 10977-015).) The samples were then washed with 1x DPBS (Cat #D8537) twice and stored in cold ethanol at −20°C overnight for permeabilization.

## Multiplexed RNA detection
The HCR staining follows the protocol provided by Molecular Instruments RNA-FISH on mammalian cells on slides protocol. After permeabilization, the samples were air-dried for 10 min and washed with 2x SSC buffer 3 times. The samples were then incubated in a 300μL pre-warmed HCR probe hybridization buffer (LOT# BPH02023) at 37°C for 30 min for prehybridization. 3μL of HCR probes for desired targets were then added to 300μL of pre-warmed probe hybridization buffer. The prehybridization buffer was aspirated, and a probe dilute was added to the samples. The samples were incubated at 37°C for 12–16 h. The samples were then washed with 300μL of pre-warmed probe wash buffer (LOT# BPW02922) for 5 min at 37°C 4 times. Then, the samples were rinsed with 300μL of 5x SSCT for 5 min at room temperature twice. The samples were then incubated with 300μL of amplification buffer (LOT# BAM02422) at room temperature for 30 min for pre-amplification. 6μL of each HCR amplifier hairpin was then snap-cooled to 95°C for 90 s and cooled down to room temperature in a dark drawer for 30 min. The snap-cooled hairpins were then added to 300μL of amplification buffer. The pre-amplification buffer was then aspirated, and diluted hairpins were added to the sample. The samples were then incubated for 1 h and 15 min. The amplification solution was then aspirated, and the samples were washed with 5x SSCT for 5 min at room temperature 5 times (see HCR protocol for cells on slide).
The samples were then mounted in an antifade mounting buffer containing Tris-HCL (20 mM), NaCl (50 mM), glucose (0.8%), saturated Trolox (Sigma, 53188-07-1), pyranose oxidase (Sigma: P4234), and catalase (Sigma, 9001-05-2, 1:1000 dilution).
To remove fluorescent mRNA signals, we used RNase-free DNase I (Sigma, 04716728001). After imaging, the samples were first washed with 2x SSC twice. We then diluted 50μL of 10x concentration incubation buffer in 450μL of RNase-free water to 1x concentration. The samples were then incubated with a 1x incubation buffer at room temperature for 5 min. Then 10μL of DNase I, 50μL of 10x incubation buffer, and 440μL of RNase-free water were mixed. The samples were then incubated in the DNase I mixture for 4 h at room temperature. After incubation, the samples were then washed with 30% formamide in 2x SSC at room temperature for 5 min 3 times. Removal of signals was confirmed under a fluorescent imaging microscope. The samples were then ready to start the next cycle of RNA labeling.

## Cell painting
After DNase I treatment after the last cycle of HCR-FISH, cell painting staining was conducted. Pre-conjugated antibodies were diluted in 1X PBS (Concanavalin A, 1:20; Phalloidin, 1:40; WGA, 1:400). Sufficient volume of the antibody solution was added to the cell. The sample was incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Then the sample is washed with 1X PBS for 5 min three times. The sample is then mounted in 1X PBS and imaged.

## Image preprocessing
Images of cells in 2D culture all underwent the following preprocessing before further analysis. Each image contains multiple channels, and each channel is composed of images collected at various z-levels. The background of each gene-positive channel was first subtracted using a rolling ball method with a radius of 15 pixels. The maximum intensity projection of each channel was then generated. The projected image was the final image used for subcellular clustering and counting analysis. For the DAPI channel, the maximum intensity projection was generated from the raw image. Previous steps were conducted in a script implemented in FIJI, enabling automated high-throughput processing.
To apply clustering analysis, the images across multiple cycles were registered using the phase cross-correlation method in scikit-image. After detecting the translational and rotational shifts of the images, the reversed shifts were then applied to images, and overlapping regions were then cropped and saved.
RNA HCR-FISH signal was detected by finding the local maximum in each image above a manually set threshold. The detection algorithm was implemented using the local_peak_max() function in the scikit-image package. Parameters adjusted in local_peak_max() were the absolute threshold and minimum distance between local peaks. The parameters were adjusted by each gene. The custom-developed code detected all peaks in the image, then applied the segmentation mask to find RNA counts and locations per cell.
The image preprocessing was performed by running codes under the ‘image_processing’ folder. All image processing is performed under the skim environment provided by the skimEnv.yml file The 00_Registration.ipynb file performs multi-cycle image registration. The registered images were then saved. 01_dotDetectionThreCheck.ipynb allows the user to identify the appropriate threshold for detecting RNA. 02_2dDotDetection.ipynb performs dot detection. Thresholds identified by the user are provided to the code. 03_cytokineDetection.ipynb allows transcript detection of fewer genes with higher accuracy. All detected files are saved as.hdf5 files. To allow further processing and analysis of data, 00_dotFiles2pkl.ipynb under the ‘subcellular_analysis’ folder was used to convert the.hdf5 file to a.pkl file containing the position of the transcript of each gene.

## Subcellular patch analysis
Positions of all detected RNA transcripts were combined and clustered using the Leiden clustering algorithm with a resolution factor of 1. The Leiden clustering algorithm was implemented by the scanpy.tl.leiden() function in Scanpy package. RNA transcripts of the same cluster were considered in the same patch. Copy numbers of genes in each patch were then counted. Pearson’s correlation between genes was then computed among patches.
The patch-based analysis is conducted using 01_merFishPatchAnalyss.ipynb notebook running under scenv provided by scanpyEnv.yml file for MERFISH dataset, and 01_subcellularPatches.ipynb for seqFISH data. 02_neighborhoodCorrelationAnalyses.ipynb was used to perform statistical comparison and PCA on patch correlation for the seqFISH dataset.

## Subcellular local neighborhood analysis
Local neighborhoods were detected by applying the k-nearest-neighbor algorithm (k-NN) to the positions of all RNA in the same patch. We utilized sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors package implemented in scikit-learn. Each neighborhood consisted of the transcript and its 9 nearest neighbors. Copy numbers of genes in each local neighborhood were counted. Pearson’s correlation between genes was computed among all local neighborhoods in the same patch. The gene neighborhood network is visualized using the networkx package. 
The analysis is performed using 02_neighborhoodNetworkAnalysis.ipynb notebook running under scenv provided by scanpyEnv.yml file. The notebook calls functions in utils.py script to perform the analysis. The network visualization is performed using 04_networkVisualization.ipynb notebook running under the network environment provided by networkEnv.yml.
03_subcellularNetworkInference.ipynb running under scenv provided by scanpyEnv.yml file was used to infer the gene neighborhood network in the seqFISH dataset. 05_connectivityToNetwork.ipynb running under the network environment provided by networkEnv.yml was used to visualize the network.

## Clustering and visualization of cell spatial transcriptomic profile
In gene expression clustering analysis, the counts of genes were calculated by counting all detected RNA in the same cell mask. In patch correlation clustering, pairwise correlations among patches of each cell were collected. The correlations of different genes were used as features for clustering. In network variability clustering, the mean and standard deviation of proximity scores between each pair of genes of the same cell were used as features for clustering. After the data is compiled, the data were passed into AnnData objects. Visualization and clustering were then performed using the scanpy package.
The cluster assignment and true cell types were then compared using confusion matrices. Confusion matrices were generated using the confusion_matrix() function in sklearn.metrics module.
The clustering analysis is performed using 03_coclusteringAnalysis.ipynb notebook under the scenv environment provided by scanpyEnv.yml file for the MERFISH dataset, and 04_coclusteringAnalysis.ipynb for the seqFISH dataset. The clustering result comparison is performed using 05_clustering_eval.ipynb notebook under the scenv environment.

## RNA-cellular structure colocalization
The enrichment of cellular structure marker around each RNA was extracted by computing the total intensity of 3x3 pixels around the location of the RNA. Mean enrichment around all RNA in the same patch or local neighborhood was computed to indicate marker enrichment of the patch or local neighborhood. Correlations were computed similarly to all previous correlation analyses.
Enrichment of genes in measurement was calculated as follows. ConA and WGA images were manually thresholded and divided into marker-positive regions and marker-negative regions. The proportion of the marker-positive region in the cell is calculated by the following equation:
pmarker=numberofpixelsinmarkerpositiveregionnumberofpixelsincellmaskThen, the proportion of COL1A1 transcript detected in the marker positive regions were calculated by the following equation:
pRNA=RNAcountinmarkerpositiveregiontotalRNAcountThe enrichment of RNA in the protein-positive region was calculated by the following equation:
enrichment=pRNApmarkerThe analysis is performed using 06_rnaProteinNetwork.ipynb notebook under scenv environment provided by scanpyEnv.yml file.

## Cytokine gene spatial distribution
After a cell was segmented, a map of distances from all points inside the cell to the edge of the cell was generated. Distances to the edge of the cell were calculated for each RNA. Cells were then divided into contour patches of 5μm width according to the distance to the edge of the cell. The same local neighborhood correlation analysis as before was conducted for each patch. The local neighborhood was reduced to the transcript and 4 nearest neighbors. Transcripts with a distance to the center transcript greater than 5μm were excluded from the neighborhood. To visualize the distribution of cells with edge-localized cytokine RNA, Pearson’s correlation between all local neighborhoods of the outermost patch was used as a feature to generate UMAP.
The analysis is performed using 07_circularNetworks.ipynb notebook under the scenv environment provided by the scanpyEnv.yml file.

## Subcellular clustering from multiplexed images
After image registration, each pixel was clustered based on the intensity of the pixel of each image. Each image was first min-max normalized to a range of [0,1]. Pixels were then down-sampled to reduce data size. High-dimensional data for each pixel was clustered using the Leiden algorithm. All pixels were then assigned to a cluster based on the clustering result on the down-sampled data. Cells were then pseudo-colored based on cluster labels of each pixel to reveal the spatial distribution of each cluster.
The clustering is performed using codes provided under the HCR_subcellular_clustering folder. 01_extract_pixels.ipynb extracts all the pixels from cell masks into a matrix. 02_data_integration.ipynb combines the pixels and performs batch normalization using the scanaroma pipeline. 03_subsample_clustering.ipynb performs geometric sketching and clustering on the down-sampled data and generates the pseudo-colored cell images.

## Spatial hypothesis testing among pairwise cells
For each cell, the center of mass is defined from the cytosolic mask. The distance of each gene to the center of the mask is recorded as a distribution of spatial distances with respect to the center of mass. The Komologorov-Smirnov Hypothesis Test between pairwise cells of a single gene indicated if the pair of cells expressed the same gene in significantly different spatial patterns.
The spatial statistics were performed using code under the ‘spatial_statistics’ folder. All notebooks in the folder were run under the environment provided by the 1Aug2022.yml file. 01_combine_dataframes.ipynb combines single-cell data from HUC and HBM into a single data frame and exports it as a.pkl file. 02_compute_cell_centers.ipynb computes the center of mass of every cell according to the cell mask. 03_compute_dist_centers.ipynb computes the distance of each RNA to the center of the cell. 04_compute_ksTest_pairwiseCells.ipynb performs the cell-pairwise Komolgorov-Smirnov test. 05_spatial_histograms.ipynb visualizes the density of detected RNA at varying distances from the center of the cell.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Pearson correlations method was used to correct pairwise marker correlation at the single-cell levels. Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test was used for the comparison of patch correlation between cell types. Paired t-test was used for the comparison of the enrichment of COL1A1 in subcellular regions. The Komologorov-Smirnov Hypothesis Test between pairwise cells of a single gene. The level of significance was set at not significant (ns): 0.05 < p, ∗: 0.01 < p ≤ 0.05, ∗∗: 0.001 < p ≤ 0.01 ∗∗∗: 0.0001 < p ≤ 0.001, ∗∗∗∗: p<=0.0001. All data visualization and statistical analyses were carried out using in-house Python scripts.

## Acknowledgments
A.F.C. holds a Career Award at the Scientific Interface from Burroughs Wellcome Fund, Bernie-Marcus Early-Career Professorship, and the National Institutes of Health K25 Career Development Award (K25AI140783). A.F.C. was supported by start-up funds from the Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant number EEC-1648035. This material is partially supported by the 2022–2023 Regenerative Engineering and Medicine Seed grant. A.J.F. is supported by National Science Foundation Center for Cell Manufacturing Technologies Research Experience for Undergraduates program. Research reported in this study was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under award number T32GM142616. We thank Professor Yajun Mei for his feedback and advice on statistical considerations.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, Z.F., A.M., and A.F.C.; methodology, Z.F. and A.F.C.; software, Z.F., T.H., and N.Z.; investigation, Z.F.; supervision, A.F.C.; writing – original draft, Z.F., A.J.F., T.H., N.Z., and A.F.C.; writing – review & editing, Z.F., A.J.F., T.H., N.Z., and A.F.C.; visualization, Z.F., A.J.F., T.H., and N.Z.; funding acquisition, A.F.C.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Published: May 12, 2023

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crmeth.2023.100476.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7, Tables S1–S3, and supplemental references

## Data S1. MERFISH data, related to Figures 1–4

## Data S2. SeqFISH images and data, related to Figures 5–7

## Data S3. Extension of spaGNN, related to Figures 5 and 6

## Data S4. Alternative approaches to study gene colocalization relationships, related to Figures 5, 6, and 7

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data and code availability

•The MSC dataset is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7651412. MERFISH data is existing publicly available data. The link to the data is included in the .
•All original code is deposited to https://github.com/coskunlab/spaGNN. An archival version of the code is freely available via the DOI in the .
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7, Tables S1–S3, and supplemental references

## Data S1. MERFISH data, related to Figures 1–4

## Data S2. SeqFISH images and data, related to Figures 5–7

## Data S3. Extension of spaGNN, related to Figures 5 and 6

## Data S4. Alternative approaches to study gene colocalization relationships, related to Figures 5, 6, and 7

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data Availability Statement

•The MSC dataset is available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7651412. MERFISH data is existing publicly available data. The link to the data is included in the .
•All original code is deposited to https://github.com/coskunlab/spaGNN. An archival version of the code is freely available via the DOI in the .
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.