pmcPLoS PathogPLoS Pathog349plospathplosPLOS Pathogens1553-73661553-7374PLOSPMC11563402PMC11563402.111563402115634023944692510.1371/journal.ppat.1012341PPATHOGENS-D-24-012291Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral ReplicationBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionViral Gene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsMicrobial GeneticsViral GeneticsViral Gene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral GeneticsViral Gene ExpressionBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesDNA virusesHerpesvirusesEpstein-Barr virusBiology and life sciencesMicrobiologyMedical microbiologyMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensHerpesvirusesEpstein-Barr virusMedicine and health sciencesPathology and laboratory medicinePathogensMicrobial pathogensViral pathogensHerpesvirusesEpstein-Barr virusBiology and life sciencesOrganismsVirusesViral pathogensHerpesvirusesEpstein-Barr virusBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyVirus Effects on Host Gene ExpressionBiology and Life SciencesComputational BiologyGenome AnalysisGene OntologiesBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGenomicsGenome AnalysisGene OntologiesResearch and Analysis MethodsSpectrum Analysis TechniquesSpectrophotometryCytophotometryFlow CytometryBiology and Life SciencesMicrobiologyVirologyViral ReplicationLytic CycleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsImmune CellsAntibody-Producing CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsAntibody-Producing CellsB CellsMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsAntibody-Producing CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsBlood CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsBiology and Life SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsMedicine and Health SciencesImmunologyImmune CellsWhite Blood CellsB CellsEpstein-Barr virus reactivation induces divergent abortive, reprogrammed, and host shutoff states by lytic progression
EBV lytic reactivation at single-cell resolutionSoRelleElliott D.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing HaynesLauren E.Data curationFormal analysisInvestigationVisualizationWriting – review & editing WillardKatherine A.Formal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing ChangBethFormal analysisInvestigation Ch’ngJamesFormal analysisInvestigationWriting – review & editing ChristofkHeatherConceptualizationFunding acquisitionResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2964-1907LuftigMicah A.ConceptualizationFunding acquisitionSupervisionWriting – review & editing 1
Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America2
Duke Center for Virology, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America3
Department of Integrative Immunobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina, United States of America4
Department of Biological Chemistry, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, California, United States of America5
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, United States of AmericaGewurzBenjamin E.Editor files.

## Data Availability
We have deposited our single-cell RNA sequencing data with NIH GEO under GSE272763. All other relevant data are in the manuscript and its files.

## Introduction
Viral infections lead to heterogeneous cell fate outcomes including resistance, abortive infection, latency, or full virion amplification often leading to cell death. Cells that resist viral infection often display elevated pre-existing anti-viral responses [ – ]. Likewise, cell responses that enable survival following virus replication can prime for further anti-viral responses [ , ]. Herpesviruses are large double-stranded DNA viruses that provide a unique and complex infection paradigm to model the heterogeneity of viral infection as they reactivate from a latent state in response to diverse stimuli.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was the first oncogenic human virus to be discovered [ ]. Since its isolation from endemic Burkitt Lymphoma (BL) cells in 1964, EBV infection has been linked to an expansive set of human cancers and, more recently, autoimmune diseases [ – ]. EBV infection in immunosuppressed individuals can lead to post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) [ ] and HIV-related diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL) [ ] as well as up to 40% of Hodgkin Lymphoma (HL) [ ]. and rare individuals with chronic active EBV (CAEBV) can develop T and NK cell lymphomas [ , ]. Beyond these hematologic malignancies, EBV infection is associated with epithelial cancers such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) [ ] and gastric carcinomas [ ]. Collectively, EBV causes is or otherwise associated with nearly 2% of all cancers diagnosed annually [ ].
This prevalence in malignant disease vastly underrepresents the success of EBV as a human pathogen. Globally, it is estimated that over 95% of adults are infected with EBV [ ]. EBV is transmitted via saliva, which enables the virus to traverse oral epithelial tissues and infect B lymphocytes within the tonsils [ ]. EBV infects B cells via the surface receptor CD21 (CR2) [ , ] and rapidly induces B cell adaptive immune programs to mimic germinal center (GC)-like dynamics [ – ]. Successful evasion of antiviral defenses, immune tolerance checkpoints, and growth-induced damage [ – ] allows memory B cells latently infected with EBV to exit from this virus-manipulated GC reaction. Viral latency establishment within the memory B cell compartment yields lifelong persistence [ , ]. Lytic reactivation from this latent state triggers the production of new virions and is essential to the replicative cycle and transmission between hosts. The lytic gene program is transcriptionally orchestrated by two immediate early (IE) lytic genes: BZLF1 (encodes for the transcription factor Zta / Z / ZEBRA) and BRLF1 (encodes for the transcription factor Rta / R) [ – ]. While Zta and Rta both play essential roles in lytic reactivation, Zta is the master lytic transactivator in B cells. BZLF1 expression is induced upon cell differentiation and stress [ , ], a prototypical example being post-GC B cell differentiation into plasmablasts [ ]. Host cell transcriptional regulators of plasma cell generation including XBP1 and BLIMP1 (PRDM1) induce EBV lytic reactivation via direct transactivation of the BZLF1 promoter [ – ]. Zta then transactivates subsequent expression of early and late lytic genes by binding at Z-responsive elements (ZREs) throughout the viral genome [ ]. As an AP-1 family homolog [ ], Zta also binds loci throughout the host genome [ ] and has characteristics of a ‘pioneer’ transcription factor. Consistent with this, BZLF1 expression and the early stages of EBV reactivation cause considerable alterations to the host cell epigenome and resulting gene expression [ , ].
Prior work suggests that lytic gene expression is functionally important for tumorigenesis. Notably, viral strains that carry the NFATc1-responsive Z promoter variant Zp-V3 exhibit increased lytic replication and are enriched in EBV-associated cancers relative to strains with prototypical Zp [ ]. In SCID and NSG mouse models with reconstituted human immune systems, significantly fewer animals developed EBV+ lymphomas after infection with BZLF1 knockout virus versus a wild-type (WT) control strain [ ]. Further, infection with a Zta-overexpressing strain that failed to complete reactivation (i.e., abortive lytic) promoted tumor growth in mice similar to WT EBV [ ]. Recent experiments in immunocompromised mice confirmed the tumorigenic role of abortive lytic infection by using EBV lacking the BALF5 gene, which encodes a viral DNA polymerase subunit essential for lytic replication [ ]. These studies demonstrated that expression of BZLF1 (and possibly other early lytic genes) contributes to tumorigenesis in vivo regardless of the potential for horizontal infection of bystander cells by new virions. While detailed insights regarding the oncogenic effects of successful or abortive lytic replication are limited, tumor microenvironment inflammatory conditioning by cytokines secreted from reactivating cells has been proposed [ – ].
Another complication in the relation between viral reactivation and oncogenicity stems from observations that a significant proportion of EBV-infected tumor cells are resistant or otherwise refractory to lytic reactivation. In BL-derived P3HR1 and Akata cells, high expression of the oncoprotein c-Myc promotes viral latency maintenance and suppresses lytic reactivation via direct interaction with the origin of lytic replication (oriLyt) and inhibition of chromatin looping to activate BZLF1 expression [ ]. Accordingly, MYC suppression facilitates BZLF1 expression and the subsequent induction of viral lytic genes. It is noteworthy that constitutive oncogene expression favors viral genome propagation through proliferation of latently infected host cells whereas lytic replication becomes a more advantageous strategy in its absence. Similarly, BL-derived cells refractory to lytic reactivation have also been found to express high levels of STAT3 [ – ], which functions as an oncogene in B cells and inhibits apoptosis via induction of BCL2 expression. Beyond simply being expressed by refractory cells, STAT3 antagonizes lytic reactivation of EBV+ cells through the functions of its transcriptional targets [ ]. In fact, LCLs derived from patients with autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome (AD-HIES), a disease that leads to non-functional STAT3 activity, went lytic at a higher rate than LCLs derived from healthy donors [ ]. Given the therapeutic potential of drug-induced lytic reactivation followed by viral DNA synthesis inhibition to treat EBV-latent cancers, investigators are actively exploring means to make refractory cells more sensitive to lytic induction [ – ]. However, such efforts should be weighed against the known associations between the EBV lytic cycle and oncogenesis, which remain to be fully elucidated.
Many EBV gene products contribute to virus-driven malignancies by mediating functions associated with cancer hallmarks including uncontrolled proliferation, tumor suppressor inhibition, epigenetic reprogramming, genome instability, apoptotic resistance, and immune evasion [ ]. EBV+ cells with cancer stem cell (CSC) features have also been reported in NPC and gastric carcinoma [ , ], suggesting the potential for cellular self-renewal associated with infection. In the CSC model, a small subset of tumor cells retain the capacity for self-renewal and proliferation through activation of signaling pathways (e.g., Wnt, Notch), transactivators of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) transition, and critical regulators of pluripotency (e.g., SOX2, OCT4). CSCs may serve as progenitors for other tumor cells, especially in lymphoid malignancies that are derived from cells of origin that intrinsically retain self-renewal properties to support immunologic memory [ – ]. Aberrant expression of self-renewal genes and other CSC biomarkers [ ] may originate from significant (epi)genomic reprogramming and result in cellular phenotypic plasticity. Lytic replication of EBV (and DNA viruses from several other families [ ]) clearly constitutes a major reprogramming event for the host cell. Nuclear chromatin is globally disrupted by IE gene expression, the formation of viral replication compartments, and the accumulation of viral DNA [ , ]. Moreover, preferential binding of BZLF1 to methylated promoters can reverse epigenetic silencing of both EBV and cellular genes through nucleosome eviction, resulting in heterochromatin-to-euchromatin conversion [ , – ]. While evidence for stem-like reprogramming and CSC gene expression during the EBV lytic cycle has not been reported to our knowledge, it is noteworthy that reactivation of HSV-1 (another herpesvirus) induces embryonic development programs including Wnt/β-catenin activity that licenses late viral gene expression [ ].
These previous studies demonstrate that EBV reactivation from latency is a complex process that culminates in heterogeneous host cell responses germane to the progression of virus-associated cancers. Single-cell sequencing techniques are particularly well suited to dissect the inherent complexity of host-virus interactions and their effects on cell fate [ – ]. In recent studies of early EBV infection [ , ] and established latency [ , ], we have used single-cell sequencing to successfully resolve and study diverse phenotypes arising from complex host-pathogen dynamics. We reasoned that a similar high-resolution experimental and informatic approach would clarify distinct courses of lytic reactivation, provide essential data for future studies of viral pathogenesis, and inform potential therapeutic strategies to address EBV-driven oncogenesis. To this end, we performed time-resolved single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), flow cytometry, and RNA Flow-FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) in P3HR1-ZHT cells to define initial cell state diversity, differential fate trajectories, and previously unknown lytic response phenotypes. We further extended and validated these studies with scRNA-seq in the B958-ZHT LCL and the Akata BL cell line thereby defining common mechanisms across diverse viral strains and reactivation stimuli.

## Results

## Heterogeneous responses to EBV lytic reactivation in individual cells
P3HR1-ZHT cells are an inducible model of EBV lytic reactivation ( ). This model system constitutively expresses the EBV immediate early lytic transactivator Zta (encoded by the BZLF1 gene) fused with a modified murine estrogen receptor hormone binding domain. While the encoded fusion protein is normally rapidly degraded, addition of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT) stabilizes it and promotes its nuclear translocation, whereupon the Zta domain binds and transactivates Zta-responsive elements (ZREs) in both host and viral genomes. Because Zta has positive regulatory control of its own promoter via ZRE binding [ ], 4HT treatment also leads to expression of endogenous BZLF1, thus initiating viral lytic reactivation. Although all cells in the P3HR1-ZHT line express the inducible construct, it has been observed that complete EBV lytic reactivation occurs only in a subset of 4HT treated cells [ , ].
We confirmed inducible yet non-uniform viral reactivation of P3HR1-ZHT cells in response to 4HT treatment using FACS staining for the viral glycoprotein gp350, which was expressed in cells that reached the late stage of lytic reactivation. Unstimulated P3HR1-ZHT cells expressed minimal gp350 (1.1%), but treatment with 100 nM 4HT for 24 hours resulted in gp350 expression in 19.2% of cells. When we simultaneously treated cells with 4HT and PAA, an inhibitor of viral DNA replication, we observed a significant reduction in gp350 expression by 24 hours (Figs and ). These results indicated that cells exhibited heterogenous responses to viral lytic reactivation and that completion of the full lytic cycle was dependent upon successful viral DNA replication, which has been previously described in herpesviruses [ – ]. We expanded upon these gp350 FACS results using RNA Flow-FISH assays to detect viral RNAs from genes expressed at different stages of the lytic cycle: the immediate early lytic gene BZLF1, the early lytic gene BGLF4, and the late lytic gene BLLF1. After 24 hours of 4HT treatment, we observed a significant increase in expression of all three lytic transcripts compared to mock treated cells. However, there was a stepwise decrease in expression level between early and late lytic genes (Figs and ). These results confirmed that a significant proportion of Z-HT induced P3HR1 cells were refractory to full lytic reactivation.
Since we observed heterogeneous responses upon lytic reactivation, we applied time-resolved single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to study the concurrent cellular responses in the P3HR1-ZHT system after 24, 48, and 72 hours of 4HT treatment compared to untreated cells ( ). UMAP projection of samples by timepoint demonstrated that substantial transcriptomic changes occurred after 4HT stimulation ( ). Cells expressing high levels of viral reads clustered together, however there was a distinction between cells expressing immediate early, early, and late viral transcripts ( ). Analysis of all EBV transcripts identified genes with high, moderate, and low expression; however, all 4HT-treated samples expressed more viral transcripts compared to untreated cells ( ). These results confirmed heterogeneous responses to lytic reactivation observed by flow cytometry and enabled subsequent genome-wide analyses.
 

## Identification of distinct EBV reactivation response clusters
Cells from integrated timecourse scRNA-seq libraries were hierarchically clustered by host and viral transcriptome similarity, which led to the identification of five main clusters ( ). Unstimulated cells were mostly present in clusters A and B, while clusters C, D, and E primarily comprised 4HT-treated cells across the experimental time course ( ) and displayed elevated viral gene expression compared to clusters A and B ( ). Further examination of these clusters revealed differences in the number of total and unique RNAs, the percentage of viral RNAs, and the percentage of mitochondrial RNAs ( ). These differences in unique and total RNA features suggested major phenotypic differences both in unstimulated and reactivated cells. Therefore, we scored the clusters based on cell cycle state and found that there was a decrease in G2/M specific gene expression and an increase in G1 gene expression after 24 hours of 4HT treatment, consistent with EBV lytic reactivation occurring in a pseudo-S phase [ , ] ( ). We confirmed this finding using BrdU/7-AAD staining of untreated versus 4HT-treated cells ( ). Consistent with induced cell cycle arrest, lytic reactivation upon 4HT treatment led to a reduction of S phase cells (43.2% vs. 54.3%) and modest increase in G0/G1 cells. Because pulsed BrdU staining does not discriminate cellular and viral DNA synthesis, a portion of S phase 4HT-treated cells were likely undergoing viral but not cellular DNA synthesis. This was further evidenced by a significant fraction of gp350+ cells within the gated S phase population ( ). We also assayed MitoTracker signal stratified by gp350 expression and found that gp350+ cells had lower mitochondrial content ( ).
 

## Cells traverse heterogeneous biological response trajectories during lytic reactivation
Next, we analyzed differentially expressed genes by cluster and grouped them by ontology using a combined approach with software-based annotation tools [ ] and primary literature searches ( ). Unstimulated cells were almost exclusively present in clusters A and B, which were distinguished from each other by total transcripts and unique features per cell ( ). Unstimulated cells with high RNA and feature counts (cluster A) exhibited a germinal center (GC) B cell profile including MME (CD10) [ ], BCL6 [ , ], BCL11A [ ], POU2F2 (OCT2) [ ], and AICDA (AID) [ , ]. Along with high MYC expression, this phenotype is consistent with the profile of endemic BL from which P3HR1-ZHT is derived. In contrast, unstimulated cells with low RNA and features counts (cluster B) exhibited a cell stress expression signature that included slight enrichment of genes for ribosomal subunits (RPL34, RPS27), nuclear-encoded components of mitochondrial respiratory complexes (COX7C), and the apoptotic resistance genes PTMA [ ] and GSTP1, the latter of which also mediates oxidative stress [ ]. Cluster C, which was comprised of 4HT-treated samples, displayed antiviral restriction (APOBEC3G, PPP1R15A, TRIM14, FURIN), inflammatory (CCL4L2, CCL3L1, NKG7), and NF-κB signaling (NFKBIA, ICAM1, CD83, BCL2, BCL2A1) signatures. Cluster D had a similar gene expression pattern to cluster B with the addition of lytic transcripts and several long noncoding RNAs from R-loop “hot spots” (C1orf56, AC092069.1, AC005921.2, AC106707.1) associated with genomic instability related to unscheduled gene expression or DNA synthesis (in contexts including herpesviral reactivation) [ – ]. Finally, cluster E primarily contained cells that had entered the lytic cycle after 4HT treatment. Lytic cells expressed known host biomarkers of reactivation (SGK1, NHLH1, PRDM1) [ ], downregulation of genes targeted by virus-induced host shutoff (HLA-A, ACTB, B2M) [ ] mediated by EBV BGLF5 [ ], expression of genes that escape host shutoff (e.g., GADD45B, IL6, CCND1, JAG1, SERPINB2, FOXC1, ATF3) [ – ], and numerous IE, early, and late lytic genes. Furthermore, an extended list of EBV genes expressed across all clusters highlights that most lytic transcripts are highly expressed in cluster E, while there is some limited expression of select genes in clusters C and D ( ).
We next focused on individual genes that are differentially expressed between the clusters. We specifically chose STAT3 and MYC because they have been established as key regulators of EBV lytic reactivation [ , , , ] ( ). In line with these published results, MYC expression was strongly anti-correlated with BZLF1 induction ( , bottom left panel). STAT3 expression, which has been previously shown to be upregulated in cells refractory to lytic reactivation [ ], was likewise anti-correlated with expression of BZLF1 ( , bottom middle panel). STAT3 and MYC expression were positively correlated and highest in unstimulated (cluster A) and abortive (cluster C) cells ( , bottom right panel). Prediction of transcription factor activities based on gene regulatory network (GRN) enrichment likewise identified enhanced STAT3 (and NF-κB) target expression in cluster C ( ). RNA Flow-FISH detection of BZLF1 and MYC validated scRNA-seq data and provided additional insight with respect to partial versus complete reactivation indicated by expression of the late lytic gene BLLF1 ( ). Specifically, 4HT treatment induced significant increases in BZLF1+and BLLF1+ cells and a concomitant decrease in MYC+ cells relative to DMSO-treated controls ( , top and middle panels). Moreover, the majority of BLLF1+ cells were BZLF1+/MYC- ( , bottom panel).
Given the observed heterogeneity of phenotypic states before and after lytic induction, we aimed to better understand the distinct response trajectories of EBV-infected cells using pseudotemporal ordering ( ). Pseudotime analyses [ ] are preferable over purely chronologic sampling for studying biological state transitions due to initial state variability and asynchronous responses to infection among individual cells [ ]. Root cells (pseudotime = 0) for the reactivation trajectory graph were chosen within clusters A and B since both of these phenotypes were represented by unstimulated cells ( , top panel). As shown by per cell viral fractions of captured mRNA transcripts, reactivation generally progresses in pseudotime, with limited viral expression in abortive cells at intermediate coordinates and high viral expression in fully lytic cells in late pseudotime ( , bottom panel). Notably, trajectories from both clusters A and B pass through incomplete reactivation states (C and D, respectively) before convening within the lytic phenotype (cluster E) at late pseudotime ( ).
Collectively, cluster-resolved expression, MYC and STAT3 profiles, and pseudotime trajectory analysis enabled us to construct a state model for lytic reactivation in the P3HR1-ZHT system ( ). Unstimulated cells express elevated MYC and STAT3 and may undergo abortive reactivation in response to 4HT in which BZLF1 expression is minimal while MYC and STAT3 levels are largely maintained. Alternatively, cells may proceed to lytic reactivation, during which both MYC and STAT3 expression are severely diminished. Although clusters C and E were connected by a bridge of cells in the UMAP embedding, we cannot make definitive conclusions from these data alone regarding possible interconversion between abortive and lytic states. While global mRNA levels decrease along the transition from A to E consistent with host shutoff, the trajectory from cluster B (unstimulated) through D (intermediate) toward E (lytic) was characterized by relative increases in total and unique host and viral mRNA content. However, reduced MYC expression was also observed along the B to E trajectory. Overall, these results indicated that heterogeneity in unstimulated cells and differential responses to BZLF1 induction each contributed to the generation of distinct cell states during lytic reactivation. Analysis of gene expression along state-specific pseudotime trajectories captured these distinct biological response coordinates ( ). For example, trajectories starting from clusters A and B both exhibited upregulated BZLF1 and net MYC reduction. However, STAT3 expression was consistently low across B, D, and E while STAT3 increased from A to C and decreased from A to E. Likewise, dynamic expression of GC B cell and NF-κB signature genes along A➔(C)➔E were not observed along B➔D➔E.

## Abortive lytic cells are characterized by high NF-κB pathway gene expression
Abortive lytic replication, or the initiation of the lytic cycle without expression of late lytic genes / proteins, has been identified in various systems [ , ]. We sought to characterize this replication sub-state further through analysis of the abortive lytic cells in the cluster C phenotype. Using markers identified in we were able to clearly distinguish unstimulated, abortive lytic, and lytic cells using CD38, BCL2A1, and BLLF1 expression, respectively ( ). STAT3+ cells in the BZLF1+ abortive lytic state (cluster C) notably co-expressed BCL2A1 and other NF-κB pathway target genes ( ). RNA Flow-FISH for CD38, BCL2A1, and BLLF1 in cells treated with DMSO (control), 4HT (lytic), and 4HT + PAA (an abortive lytic model due to inhibited viral DNA synthesis) confirmed these distinct response states (Figs and ). This experiment confirmed that CD38 RNA was primarily expressed in unstimulated cells and decreased upon 4HT treatment. BLLF1 (gp350) RNA was almost exclusively expressed in 4HT treated cells, and its expression was blocked upon PAA treatment as expected. BCL2A1 RNA was significantly elevated in 4HT + PAA-treated cells, especially by 48 hours post-treatment ( ). Thus, these markers reliably delineated latent, abortive, and lytic phenotypes identified from scRNA-seq as clusters A, C, and E.
 Because EBV LMP-1 partially mimics the activated CD40 receptor that induces NF-κB signaling, we reasoned that LMP-1 might be associated with the abortive lytic phenotype. However, LMP-1 expression was largely restricted to cluster E ( ), consistent with its transcription during the lytic cycle [ , ]. This observation suggested that the abortive lytic phenotype and associated NF-κB signaling was not dependent upon LMP-1 expression. We confirmed this finding through FACS detection of gp350 (lytic cells) and ICAM1, a surface-expressed proxy for NF-κB pathway transcriptional activation (and in this context, abortive reactivation). Untreated P3HR1-ZHT cells did not express gp350 or ICAM1 (Figs and ). Treatment with 4HT induced expression of both gp350 and ICAM1; notably, expression of these proteins was observed in distinct cell subpopulations, supporting our finding that NF-κB signaling was primarily active in cells that had not entered the full lytic cycle. Accordingly, co-treatment with 4HT + PAA to induce an abortive lytic state by blocking viral DNA synthesis led to increased ICAM1+ cell frequency consistent with the BCL2A1 upregulation observed in . Conversely, co-treatment with 4HT and an inhibitor of IKKβ (a key component of NF-κB signaling) eliminated ICAM1 expression, but did not increase gp350 expression. These results demonstrated that NF-κB signaling is a feature of abortive lytic cells that is independent of LMP-1 activity, but does not restrict late viral gene expression.

## Lytic subpopulations are reprogrammed to stem-like plasticity during EBV reactivation
We next focused on the lytic fate by analyzing cells in cluster E. Paradoxically, lytic cells in cluster E collectively expressed the most unique genes (i.e., transcript diversity) of any cluster despite having low mRNA density per cell consistent with host shutoff ( ). In addition to differences in early and late lytic gene expression across cluster E ( ), this observation was consistent with enhanced cell-to-cell variability in gene expression. We therefore subclustered cells at higher resolution to examine heterogeneity among lytic subpopulations ( ). This yielded three subclusters of BZLF1+ cells–one with high late gene expression corresponding to complete reactivation (cluster E1) and two with comparatively lower late gene expression (clusters E2 and E3). Differential expression analysis by subcluster revealed remarkably broad cellular plasticity and developmental pluripotency signatures in E2 and E3 ( ). Although MYC was downregulated, the master pluripotency regulators POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, KLF4, NANOG, and LIN28A were expressed in E2 and E3 [ – ]. Intriguingly, many essential transcriptional regulators of pluripotency exit and germ layer specification were also co-expressed with BZLF1+ in E2 and E3 lytic subpopulations. Expression of ALDH1A1, ALPL, ITGA6, CD44, PROM1 (CD133), LGR5, and YAP1 upregulated in the E2 and E3 phenotypes was consistent with cancer hallmarks including cell plasticity, self-renewal, and drug-tolerant persistence [ , – ]. Related to YAP1 expression, we identified distinct Hedgehog [ ], Notch [ ], and Wnt [ , ] signaling pathway signatures in E2 and E3 lytic phenotypes as well as Hippo-independent YAP pathway [ ] components reported in cancer. E3 cells also expressed genes encoding several PIWI-like family proteins, which protect germline cell genomes from transposable element insertion, maintain stemness, and are upregulated in some cancers [ – ].
 In total, 6,900 of 26,728 cells (25.8%) across all sampled timepoints expressed BZLF1 transcripts. Co-expression of genes including ALDH1A1 and SOX2 in a subset of BZLF1+ cells demonstrated an association between cellular plasticity and EBV lytic reactivation ( ). GRN analysis further supported a role for SOX2 transcriptional activity in a fraction of lytic cells ( ). RNA Flow-FISH validated ALDH1A1 and SOX2 expression in BZLF1+ cells in 4HT treated P3HR1-ZHT cultures (Figs and ). To validate these findings at the protein level, we performed intracellular flow cytometry for the SOX2 protein and BMRF1 and confirmed that a small percentage of lytic cells express SOX2 ( ). We also used flow cytometry to validate increased expression of the CSC biomarkers CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM) at the protein level in gp350+ cells (late lytic) relative to gp350- subsets across treatment conditions (Figs and ).
We next examined whether lytic cycle initiation was sufficient to induce CSC-associated pluripotency expression or if successful viral DNA synthesis was required. To do so, we used RNA Flow-FISH to detect BZLF1, ALDH1A1, and BLLF1. ALDH1A1 was expressed in BZLF1+BLLF1+ cells following 4HT treatment, consistent with its expression in late stages of lytic reactivation ( , left and middle panels). Consistent with a role for viral DNA replication in CSC gene induction, co-treatment with PAA and 4HT diminished BZLF1+BLLF1+ cell frequency and ablated ALDH1A1 expression ( , right panel). Collectively, these data support a unique program of cellular plasticity induced in the late phase of EBV lytic reactivation.

## Host shutoff escapees in lytic subclusters exhibit distinct ontologies
Because lytic subclusters identified at high resolution displayed distinct cellular transcriptomes, we asked whether host shutoff responses differed among lytic cells. RNA for BGLF5, an early EBV lytic gene that mediates host shutoff [ ], was detected at variable levels across lytic cells and inversely correlated with per cell mRNA feature density as expected ( ). We also observed an increase in expression of BSLF2/BMLF1 (EBV SM) across lytic cells ( ). EBV SM mediates a change from the preferential export of spliced mRNAs to non-spliced viral mRNAs, which leads to an overall reduction in functional cellular gene product expression [ ]. Moreover, transcripts for genes previously found to escape host shutoff [ , ] were identified in each lytic subcluster (E1, E2, and E3) ( ). Host shutoff escapee expression could be broadly categorized by two patterns–some escapees (e.g., C19orf66, CDKN1B) were expressed in unstimulated P3HR1-ZHT cells and retained across abortive and lytic cells, whereas other escapees (e.g., IL6, SERPINB2, LHX1, JAG1) were exclusively expressed in lytic cells ( ). Intriguingly, lytic subclusters exhibited different host shutoff escapee profiles. Anecdotally, we also noted that several escapees in clusters E2 and E3 were related to inflammatory responses and overlapped with CSC and developmental pluripotency signatures ( ). We applied gene ontology (GO) analyses to differentially expressed genes among lytic subclusters to further investigate potential biological differences. Cells in E2 displayed significant enrichment of GO terms related to mRNA splicing and post-transcriptional regulation and epigenetic regulation versus cells in E3 ( , top panel). RNA processing GO terms were also upregulated in E2 when compared jointly against clusters E3 and A to filter out differences related to transcripts basally expressed in unstimulated cells ( , bottom panel). Conversely, the top enriched GO terms in cluster E3 versus E2 were related to cell-cell adhesion, morphogenesis, and diverse tissue-specific developmental programs ( ). Relatively few cellular GO terms were enriched in fully lytic cells (E1), consistent with extensive host shutoff and predominantly viral gene expression ( ).
 

## Phenotype validation across viral strain and host background
Finally, we confirmed key findings through additional independent scRNA-seq experiments capturing responses of B958-ZHT cell lines to 4HT treatment ( ), the BL line Akata to anti-Ig stimulation ( ), and technical replication in P3HR1-ZHT ( ). Unstimulated and 24 h post-4HT B958-ZHT cell libraries were generated and analyzed as in previous experiments ( ). High-resolution cluster annotations from P3HR1-ZHT scRNA-libraries were mapped to B958-ZHT cells by anchor feature identification and transfer to evaluate the preservation of biological phenotypes across cell systems ( ). Cells corresponding to each high-resolution cluster were identified in the B958-ZHT dataset. Viral IE, early, and late gene expression modules were also scored across B958-ZHT cells and compared against scores for the three lytic subclusters ( ). As in the P3HR1-ZHT system, E1 cells exhibited high late gene expression consistent with complete reactivation while E2 and E3 cells displayed reduced late gene scores. In B958-ZHT, the E3 cluster most closely associated with plasticity and self-renewal signatures had the lowest IE, early, and late expression relative to other cells in lytic clusters. Prior findings of viral gene anticorrelation with MYC, STAT3, and BCL2A1 ( ) and lytic cell upregulation of cancer-associated stem-like pluripotency and host shutoff escapees were conserved in B958-ZHT (Figs , , and ).
 In Akata cells, unstimulated and 24 h post anti-Ig cell libraries were generated as in previous experiments ( ). We again mapped annotations from the P3HR1-ZHT scRNA-libraries to Akata cells by anchor feature identification, both at the cluster and subcluster level ( ). As in the P3HR1-ZHT and B958-ZHT systems, STAT3, MYC, and BCL2A1 expression were anticorrelated with successful lytic reactivation ( ). Viral gene expression and expression of plasticity markers like ALDH1A1 were co-expressed ( ). Gene ontology enrichment for differentially expressed genes in the lytic cluster also highlights the presence of plasticity and developmental factors ( ). Thus, our findings in the P3HR1-ZHT system are applicable across EBV strains, host cell genetic backgrounds, and reactivation stimuli.
 

## Discussion
The single-cell data presented herein substantially expand and refine transcriptome-wide contours of host-virus dynamics during the EBV lytic cycle. Prior studies discovered that EBV-infected BL cells are prone versus resistant to reactivation dependent on STAT3 expression, activity, and functions of its downstream transcriptional targets [ , , ]. A population of STAT3-/lo cells in unstimulated P3HR1-ZHT revealed by scRNA-seq (cluster B), which exhibits globally reduced mRNA levels consistent with cellular quiescence, may be more permissive to successful reactivation than cells with basally elevated STAT3 (cluster A). Additionally, cells that undergo abortive lytic reactivation retain STAT3 expression (and predicted transcriptional activity) after stimulation, while STAT3 and host transcript loads are drastically reduced in fully lytic cells, consistent with host shutoff functions exhibited by diverse viruses [ – ]. Single-cell data are also consistent with the functional importance of c-MYC in regulating EBV latency versus lytic reactivation [ ]. MYC expression exhibits cluster-level patterns similar to STAT3, with the notable exception that MYC is more strongly expressed in cluster B cells–likely due to constitutive expression resulting from the chr8:chr14 (Ig-MYC) translocation in BL. Single-cell sequencing and RNA-FiSH results further identify unique upregulation of NF-κB and IRF3 pathway transcriptional targets in abortive lytic cells. Inhibition of viral DNA synthesis by PAA treatment accentuates this abortive phenotype, though we recognize that this model may not truly recapitulate an abortive lytic state in vivo. Regardless, paired with STAT3 and MYC activity, we speculate that this concerted response might sustain viability and reinforce latency in cells that fail to meet the lytic switch threshold.
Acquisition of cellular plasticity within lytic cell subsets in multiple EBV+ B cell models is particularly striking. Several aspects of the lytic cycle could conceivably contribute to host cell plasticity through reversing epigenetic repression of lineage-ectopic genes. As observed across several DNA virus families, EBV genome replication within intranuclear compartments induces dramatic reorganization of host chromatin [ , , , ]. Along with this alteration to nuclear architecture, Zta binding at accessible AP-1 recognition sequences [ ] (particularly methylated sites [ , ]) may reverse epigenetic silencing through supporting nucleosome eviction, enhancement of chromatin accessibility, and recruitment of transactivators to facilitate aberrant gene expression [ , ]. ChIP-seq for Zta has revealed many such potential sites throughout the host genome, including POU5F1 (Oct-4) [ , ]. From the viral perspective, Zta binding across the cellular genome may function as a “sink” that supports bimodal control of the switch between latency (Zta absence or noise-level expression) and lytic reactivation (high Zta) [ ]. From the host perspective, our findings suggest that these BZLF1 interactions with cellular DNA and nuclear chromatin remodeling during later stages the lytic cycle have substantial–and potentially pathogenic–collateral effects on biological reprogramming. Along these lines, developmental reprogramming associated with Wnt/β-catenin signaling has been observed in a single-cell study of HSV-1 lytic infection [ ].
Additionally, DNA damage, antiviral nucleic acid sensing, cytoskeletal rearrangements, and other major mechanobiological changes that manifest during reactivation may activate intrinsic responses to cellular injury leading to NF-κB and IRF3 signaling in the abortive population [ – ]. Paired with lytic-mediated growth arrest [ , ], we speculate that this process may engage cellular senescence and injury responses that promote autocrine and paracrine cellular reprogramming. An essential feature of damage-associated induction of cellular pluripotency is upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 [ ]. In both P3HR1-ZHT and B958-ZHT scRNA-seq datasets, IL6 expression was exclusive to fully lytic cell subsets. However, IL6R was expressed in abortive cells in P3HR1-ZHT and most latently infected cells in B958-ZHT. In the Akata scRNA-seq dataset, IL6R was exclusively expressed in the lytic cluster. Expression of JAK1/2 and STAT3 in latently infected cells from both lines was suggestive of an IL-6 response axis (IL6(R)/JAK/STAT3) known to be activated in hematologic malignancies [ ]. This raises the intriguing possibility that cells from one reactivation trajectory and viral replication mode (fully lytic cells) might reinforce the survival and proliferation of tumor cells resulting from an alternative response (abortive, latently infected) through paracrine mechanisms. In addition to its escape from host shutoff [ ], IL-6 autocrine support for latent EBV+ B cell proliferation and its depletion in BZLF1- and BRLF1-deificient tumors in murine models of EBV-driven lymphoproliferative disease are especially noteworthy [ , , ]. A similar effect has been observed during infection with KSHV, which encodes a viral IL-6 homolog. Thus, the developmental pluripotency profiles and responses of lytic cell subsets may be associated with cellular DNA damage responses that have inadvertent pathogenic effects in EBV+ tumors. Notably, cytokine production by EBV-infected tumor cells (including abortive lytic cells) has also been proposed to support oncogenesis through microenvironment conditioning, polarization of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, and evasion of T-cell surveillance [ , ].
In summary, our findings support a model of differential response trajectories to EBV lytic induction. The first determinant in this model is initial cell state, where ground-state STAT3 and MYC expression and activity predict a ‘high-resistance’, low-probability path to full reactivation. Conversely, cells with globally reduced transcription and reduced expression of STAT3 (and MYC) at the time of lytic reactivation traverse a ‘low-resistance’ path with high probability of complete reactivation. These data have potentially important clinical implications, as they suggest that quiescent EBV+ tumor cells may be more sensitive to lytic induction therapies. However, a critical second fate determinant that manifests in lytic cells may complicate this pursuit. To this point, our scRNA-seq and RNA Flow-FISH results are consistent with the previously identified role of lytic cycle induction in tumorigenesis [ , , ]. Most cells that undergo full reactivation and new virion release are likely to die. However, some lytic cells undergo profound reprogramming to plastic CSC-like states that may promote malignancy through multiple mechanisms, even independent of their own survival. For example, we found transcript-level evidence that lytic cells could reinforce viral latency and survival of abortive or refractory cells via IL6/JAK2/STAT3 signaling. Additional studies are necessary to explore, dissect, and therapeutically perturb the IL-6/JAK/STAT3 pathway in EBV+ lymphomas.
Furthermore, it is important to note that while there were many overlapping findings between our three datasets, there are key differences to be acknowledged for studies moving forward. The P3HR1-ZHT model is a BL-derived line with constitutive MYC expression that lacks functional EBNA2. The B958-ZHT line was transformed in vitro with a strain of EBV that contains functional EBNA2. These differences will lead to natural variation in phenotypes present in each model. Additionally, both lines are engineered to express a mutant estrogen receptor binding domain fused to the Zta protein. While this model is useful for studying lytic reactivation, we recognize that it is not a true physiologic trigger for lytic reactivation. To add breadth to our observations, we compared Z-HT to stimulation of the Akata BL cell line with anti-Ig, which leads to reactivation through BCR signaling. While reactivation efficiency was relatively low in the Akata system, we confirmed our overarching findings in all three models.
Given these findings, subsequent examinations of the epigenetic consequences of early EBV reactivation at high resolution should be prioritized, and the possibility of double-edged consequences of oncolytic therapies should be specifically examined in detail. Future single-cell approaches should interrogate the frequency of viable abortive lytic cells [ ] and the particular changes in chromatin accessibility as well as other epigenetic features of this phenotype. Similar experimental approaches should be applied to study clinical EBV+ tumor specimens to understand oncogenic correlates of lytic reactivation in situ.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
Human cell lines used in this study were not accompanied with HIPAA identifiers or PHI. All experiments were thus categorized as non-human subjects research and approved by a Duke University IRB “Mechanisms of Epstein-Barr virus transformation using adult peripheral blood from the Red Cross” (eIRB #Pro00006262).

## Cell lines, culture, and treatments
P3HR1-ZHT cells (derived from the Type 2 EBV+ [P3 strain] Jijoye eBL line) and B958-ZHT (a marmoset lymphoblastoid cell line transformed with Type 1 EBV [B95-8 strain]) were used in this study. Each cell line was cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2 in RPMI + 10% FBS (R10) media (Gibco RPMI 1640, ThermoFisher). To induce lytic gene expression, 4x105 cells/mL for a given cell line in log-phase growth were treated with 25 nM, 50 nM, or 100 nM 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT) in methanol (4HT, Millipore Sigma). Phosphonoacetic acid (PAA, 1 μM) was included in parallel with lytic induction treatments to inhibit viral DNA synthesis and prevent complete reactivation in separate experimental groups (i.e., abortive lytic replication). Control groups were prepared via treatment with 0.1% DMSO (and DMSO + PAA). All treatments for flow cytometry and RNA Flow-FISH experiments described below were performed in triplicate (technical replicates) in 6-, 12-, or 24-well culture plates.

## Flow cytometry
Flow cytometric cell cycle analysis of unstimulated and 4HT-treated P3HR1-ZHT cells was performed using pulsed BrdU incorporation (20 min) and nuclear staining with 7-AAD in fixed cells (Invitrogen eBioscience BrdU staining kit, cat #8811-6600-42; 7-AAD, cat #00-6993-50) in addition to surface staining for gp350 (mouse anti-gp350 antibody clone 72A1 prepared in house then conjugated to Alexa 647 by Columbia Biosciences). Mitochondrial content versus gp350 expression in 4HT-induced cells was assayed using MitoTracker Green (ThermoFisher, cat #M46750). Flow cytometry was also used to assay surface expression of gp350, CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM). With the exception of the gp350 antibody, antibodies were purchased from BioLegend (anti-CD44_FITC, cat #397517; anti-CD133_PE, cat #397903; anti-CD166_PE-Cy7, cat #343911). In these experiments, removal of lytic inducing and control treatments at 6, 12, or 24 h via media replacement all yielded similar results. Cell were also stained and gated by viability (ZombieAqua, ThermoFisher, cat #L34965).

## RNA Flow-FISH
RNA Flow FISH analysis of unstimulated and 4HT-induced P3HR1-ZHT cells (24 and 48 h post-treatment) was performed using RNA PrimeFlow reagents (ThermoFisher RNA PrimeFlow Kit Catalog #: 88-18005-210) and validated RNA probes (ThermoFisher. Type 1 probes: BLLF1_A647. Type 4 probes: BZLF1_A488, BCL2A1_A488. Type 10 probes: BGLF4_A568, CD38_A568, ALDH1A1_A568, SOX2_A568). PrimeFlow sample preparation was completed per ThermoFisher protocol with no adjustments. Briefly, cells were washed, fixed, and permeabilized. Cells were then incubated with target probes for 2 h in a 40°C water bath. Cells were washed and stored overnight at 4°C and then incubated with a Pre-amplification buffer for 1.5 h in a 40°C water bath followed by a 1.5 h incubation in amplification buffer. Cells were then incubated in label probes for 1 h in a 40°C water bath, washed with FACS buffer and subsequently analyzed on a Cytek Aurora. Spectral flow unmixing was performed with SpectroFlo software and uniformly applied to all samples. Further analysis and gating was completed in FlowJo.

## Single-cell sample and library preparation
P3HR1-ZHT cells were plated at 4 x 105 cells/ mL in 5 mL R10 then treated with methanol (mock- 0 h) or with 25 nM 4HT (4-hydroxytamoxifen). The cells incubated in 4HT for 72, 48, and 24 hours then all cells were harvested for library preparation at the same time. The viabilities of the 0, 24, 48, and 72 h samples at time of collection were approximately 90%, 80%, 75%, and 75%, respectively. Harvested cells were resuspended at the recommended concentration to collect approximately 10,000 cells per sample during GEM generation. Single-cell transcriptomes from all four samples were captured and reverse transcribed into cDNA libraries using the 10x Genomics Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3’ gene expression kit with v3.1 chemistry and Chromium microfluidic controller according to recommended protocols (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA). All cDNA gene expression libraries were pooled for sequencing.

## Sequencing, read alignment, and QC
Pooled single-cell libraries were sequenced across two lanes of an S2 flow cell on a NovaSeq6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA) with 50 bp paired-end reads at a target sequencing depth of 50,000 reads per cell. Output base calls (.bcl) were assembled into sample-demultiplexed reads (.fastq) using cellranger mkfastq with default settings (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA). Reads were mapped to a concatenated reference genome package (hg38 + NC_009334 [type 2 EBV]; prepared via cellranger mkref) to generate single-cell expression matrices by running cellranger count (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA). Cellranger output files (genes.tsv, barcodes.tsv, matrix.mtx) were used to create Seurat data objects in R [ – ], which were subsequently pre-processed using QC filters. Cells and features were included if they met the following criteria: feature (gene) expression in a minimum of three cells; mitochondrial genes accounting for < 25% of all transcripts; a minimum of 200 unique expressed genes; < 65,000 total transcripts to exclude non-singlets. The elevated mitochondrial transcript and total transcript cutoffs relative to those used for resting PBMC samples [ ] were chosen because of the highly proliferative nature of the P3HR1 cell line, the expectation of apoptosis as one outcome to lytic reactivation, and the implementation of viability enrichment prior to library preparation described above. A total of 26,728 cells across the timecourse passed all QC filters (nuntreated = 10,196; n24h = 7,905; n48h = 5,841; n72h = 3146).

## Data pre-processing, dropout imputation, analysis, and visualization
A complete list of loaded packages and versions (RStudio sessionInfo() output) is provided as a supplementary file ( ). Single-cell expression data were analyzed and visualized with R (v4.0.5) / RStudio (v2022.07.1+554) using Seurat v4.1.0. Data from each timepoint were analyzed, separated, and merged into a single object to support time-resolved analysis. Raw count data were normalized and scaled prior to feature identification (NormalizeData and ScaleData functions). Cell cycle scores and phases were assigned based on annotated gene sets provided in the Seurat package (CellCycleScoring function). Expression data were dimensionally reduced using principal component analysis of identified variable features (RunPCA), and the first 30 principal components were used for subsequent UMAP dimensional reduction (FindNeighbors, RunUMAP). Cell clusters were identified at multiple resolutions for phenotype identification and comparative analysis (FindClusters).
Biological zero-preserving imputation was applied to correct technical read dropout using adaptive low-rank approximation (ALRA) of the RNA count matrix [ ]. Data presented throughout this study was generated from imputed read data. Differential gene expression analysis of the merged timecourse RNA and imputed (ALRA) assays was performed at multiple clustering resolutions. Outputs from this analysis are provided as supplementary tables ( – Tables). Single-cell gene expression, co-expression, and cluster-averaged expression were visualized with Seurat functions (e.g., DimPlot, FeaturePlot, FeatureScatter, VlnPlot, DotPlot, DoHeatmap). Additional visualization of multi-gene co-expression was generated with the UpSetR package [ ].

## Pseudotime analysis
Pseudotime trajectories were calculated for day 0 and merged timecourse datasets using Monocle3 [ , ]. Briefly, Seurat objects were adapted as cell dataset objects and used to learn and order cells along pseudotime graphs anchored at manually determined root cells. Calculated pseudotime values were added as a feature to original Seurat objects and used for subsequent gene expression analyses. Pseudotime-gene correlation was plotted and fit via smoothing splines to visualize expression dynamics across clusters (cell phenotypes).

## Gene ontology and gene regulatory network analyses
Low and high-resolution cluster gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis for biological processes was performed using the enrichGO function in clusterProfiler [ ]. Statistically significant enrichment results were visualized using the barplot, pairwise_termism, and emapplot functions. Cluster-level gene regulatory network (GRN) inference of transcription factor activities was conducted using CollecTRI in the R package decoupleR [ , ].

## Statistical analyses
Raw and adjusted p values (Bonferroni correction) were calculated and provided for all identified differentially expressed genes from scRNA-seq data ( – Tables). For conventional flow cytometry and RNA flow-FISH experiments, statistically significant differences between treatment groups were determined via two-tailed Welch’s t test (n = 3 replicates per condition).

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Flow cytometry replicates for gp350 expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(A) Lymphocyte, singlet, live-cell, and gp350+ gating for unstimulated cells. (B) The same gating strategy as above applied for 4HT-treated cells. (C) The same gating strategy as above applied for cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.
(TIF)
S2 Fig

## RNA Flow-FISH replicates for IE, early, and late lytic gene expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(A) Co-expression of BZLF1 with BGLF4 or BLLF1 in DMSO control treatment and 4HT-induced reactivation. (B) Co-expression of BZLF1, BGLF4, and BLLF1 (red cells) in DMSO control treatment and 4HT-induced reactivation.
(TIF)
S3 Fig

## Dot plot of cluster-resolved EBV expression annotated by latent and lytic genes.
(TIF)
S4 Fig

## Cell cycle and mitochondrial features of P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(A) Cell cycle phase annotations in P3HR1-ZHT scRNA-seq data. (B) Flow cytometry cell cycle analysis in unstimulated and 4HT-treated P3HR1-ZHT cells with gp350+ cells highlighted. (C) MitoTracker staining by gp350 status in 4HT-treated P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(TIF)
S5 Fig

## Transcription factor activity prediction in abortive P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(TIF)
S6 Fig

## Extended dot plot of EBV transcripts expressed across all clusters.
(TIF)
S7 Fig

## RNA Flow-FISH replicates for CD38, BCL2A1, and BLLF1 expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(A) Technical controls, 24 h, and 48 h responses to DMSO, 4HT, and 4HT+PAA for BCL2A1 versus BLLF1 expression. (B) Technical controls, 24 h, and 48 h responses to DMSO, 4HT, and 4HT+PAA for CD38 versus BLLF1 expression. (C) Technical controls, 24 h, and 48 h responses to DMSO, 4HT, and 4HT+PAA for BCL2A1 versus CD38 expression.
(TIF)
S8 Fig

## Quantification and statistical analysis of gp350+ cell frequencies in P3HR1-ZHT dependent on 4HT-induced reactivation, PAA inhibition of viral DNA synthesis, and NF-κB pathway inhibition.
Statistical comparisons between groups (n = 3 replicates per treatment condition) were evaluated via Welch’s two-tailed t tests (***p<0.001)
(TIF)
S9 Fig RNA

## Flow-FISH replicates for ALDH1A1 and SOX2 expression in BZLF1+ P3HR1-ZHT cells with and without 4HT treatment.
(TIF)
S10 Fig

## Prediction of transcription factor activity associated with reprogrammed pluripotency in lytic P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(A) SOX2 scRNA-seq expression and gene regulatory network activity. (B) Hierarchical clustering of predicted TF activities by P3HR1-ZHT subcluster. (C) Flow plots of untreated and treated P3HR1-ZHT cells 24 h post stimulation. Flow plots show that a small percentage of induced cells express SOX2 and that most of these cells are lytic (BMRF1+). (D) Bar graph depicting the percentage of cells that expressed SOX2 between treatment groups, in biological triplicate.
(TIF)
S11 Fig

## Flow cytometry replicates for CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM) expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(A) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in unstimulated cells. (B) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in 4HT-treated cells. (C) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.
(TIF)
S12 Fig

## Flow cytometry replicates for gp350 expression in B958-ZHT cells.
(A) Controls, gating, and gp350 expression in unstimulated cells. (B) Controls, gating, and gp350 expression in 4HT-treated cells. (C) Controls, gating, and gp350 expression in cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.
(TIF)
S13 Fig

## Flow cytometry replicates for CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM) expression inB958-ZHT cells.
(A) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in unstimulated cells. (B) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in 4HT-treated cells. (C) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.
(TIF)
S14 Fig

## Independent scRNA-seq replicate validation of key heterogeneous responses in P3HR1-ZHT cells.
(A) Overview of P3HR1-ZHT replicate experiment treatments (methanol control and 4HT) and identified clusters. (B) UMAP visualization of global QC metrics (top row), differential abortive and lytic responses correlated with STAT3 and MYC levels (2nd and 3rd rows), and upregulated pluripotency signature in lytic cell subsets (4th and 5th rows).
(TIF)
S1 Table

## Differentially expressed genes by cluster.
List of differentially expressed genes separated by each unique cluster. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes gene name, average log2 fold change, percentages of cells expressing the gene in the cluster versus all other clusters, and adjusted p value.
(XLSX)
S2 Table

## Differentially expressed genes by cluster imputed with ALRA.
List of differentially expressed genes separated by each unique cluster and data was imputed with ALRA in Seurat. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes gene name, average log2 fold change, percentages of cells expressing the gene in the cluster versus all other clusters, and adjusted p value.
(XLSX)
S3 Table

## Gene ontology by cluster.
List of GO terms separated by each unique cluster. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes GO ID, description, adjusted p value, counts, and gene IDs.
(XLSX)
S4 Table

## Gene ontology by cluster imputed with ALRA.
List of GO terms separated by each unique cluster and data was imputed with ALRA in Seurat. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes GO ID, description, adjusted p value, and gene IDs.
(XLSX)
S1 File

## List of R packages and versions used in the analysis of scRNAseq data.
(R)

We would like to acknowledge the Heaton Lab at Duke for their assistance with preparing the 10X single cell libraries. We also thank the staff of the Duke Center for Genomic and Computational Biology (GCB) for sequencing support.
 10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.r001Decision Letter 0
KalejtaRobert F.Section EditorGewurzBenjamin EAcademic Editor© 2024 Kalejta, Gewurz2024Kalejta, Gewurzhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0

## Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.

11 Jul 2024

Dear Dr. Luftig,
Thank you very much for submitting your manuscript "Epstein-Barr virus reactivation induces divergent abortive, reprogrammed, and host shutoff states by lytic progression" for consideration at PLOS Pathogens. As with all papers reviewed by the journal, your manuscript was reviewed by members of the editorial board and by several independent reviewers. In light of the reviews (below this email), we would like to invite the resubmission of a significantly-revised version that takes into account the reviewers' comments.
Three referees have reviewed the manuscript, each of whom appreciated strengths of the study, but each of whom have specific, focused points that will be important to address in a revised submission. In particular, reviewer #3 suggests additional supporting evidence from an additional model system (separate from the conditional P3HR-1 model).
We cannot make any decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is also likely to be sent to reviewers for further evaluation.
When you are ready to resubmit, please upload the following:
[1] A letter containing a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a description of the changes you have made in the manuscript. Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out.
[2] Two versions of the revised manuscript: one with either highlights or tracked changes denoting where the text has been changed; the other a clean version (uploaded as the manuscript file).
Important additional instructions are given below your reviewer comments.
Please prepare and submit your revised manuscript within 60 days. If you anticipate any delay, please let us know the expected resubmission date by replying to this email. Please note that revised manuscripts received after the 60-day due date may require evaluation and peer review similar to newly submitted manuscripts.
Thank you again for your submission. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive so far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Benjamin E Gewurz, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Robert Kalejta
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************
Three referees have reviewed the manuscript, each of whom appreciated strengths of the study, but each of whom have specific, focused points that will be important to address in a revised submission. In particular, reviewer #3 suggests additional supporting evidence from an additional model system (separate from the conditional P3HR-1 model).
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: This manuscript from the Luftig lab uses single cell analysis to profile changes in B cells that occur upon reactivation of EBV from latent to lytic infection. This is an important question since EBV-positive B cells do not efficiently reactivate, but the reasons for this have not been clear. Using single cell analysis, they have been able to determine correlations between full reactivation and expression of various cellular proteins, suggesting which cellular proteins suppress reactivation. The results support previous studies that Myc suppress reactivation and that full EBV reactivation results in cell cycle arrest in early S. It also provides additional information, including upregulation of NF-kB and IRF3 occurring in abortive lytic cells and correlations of EBV protein expression with host shut-off. Finally, this study identifies stages of reactivation based on expression of EBV genes, showing that some cells enter the lytic cycle partly but not fully, referred to as abortive lytic infection. This is an interesting concept since previous dogma suggested that expression of EBV immediate early genes would be sufficient to activate full lytic infection. I only have minor comments for improvement.
Reviewer #2: This study attempts to address a very interesting mystery in gammaherpesvirus biology, the impact of the host cell environment on the fate of productive viral replication. The authors performed single cell sequencing of two EBV+ B cell lymphoma cell lines, both during latency and following lytic induction. Cells at different stages of lytic replication were identified and pseudotime analysis was performed to interpret the dynamics of host cell gene expression at and between different stages of lytic progression. The authors identify subpopulations of fully lytic cells with a cancer stem cell gene expression program, as well as cells that are a. refractory to lytic entry and b. abortive following lytic entry. Each subpopulation is studied to better understand the underlying host gene expression programs that influence the fate of induced cells. In addition to the important conclusions drawn from this analysis, the data has the potential to serve as a valuable resource for researchers in the field.
The key conclusions of this work, however, hinge on accurate identification of refractory and abortive cells. Complementary approaches to validate subpopulations will provide more convincing evidence of their existence and lead to a more confident interpretation of their underlying characteristics.
Reviewer #3: The manuscript uses scRNAseq methods to analyze the viral and host gene and protein expression patterns upon reactivation of EBV latency. The study focuses primarly on one highly engineered model P3HR1-ZHT where the BZLF1 immediate early transcriptional activator is constitutively expressed and under the regulation of 4-hydroxytamoxifen.
They identify 5 different response clusters. They find that abortive lytic cells have high NF-kB activity, lytic cells with stem-like pluripotency features, and genes that escape the transcriptional host-shut off during lytic reactivation. Finally, they provide corroborating data using a second model utilizing the B958-ZHT.
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: - Cells are called refractory if they don’t express lytic genes following induction with 4HT. The authors detect high MYC expression in cells considered refractory, confirming a previous study (Guo et. al., 2020) that MYC expression prevents lytic reactivation. At the same time, MYC expression is reduced by host shut off after lytic commitment, which would also explain finding relatively low MYC levels in reactivating cells. Is the stochasticity of the system an explanation for the population that remain latent? Or is there a population of cells that are inherently refractive to reactivation, and cannot efficiently be induced?
- Cluster C was labeled as “abortive” based on early lytic gene expression. It is unclear if these cells were in a final abortive state or if at the time of collection, they were in an early reactivation stage and would have continued their progression to viral replication. An experiment that follows the trajectory of cells deemed abortive would be helpful to validate the identification of this population.
- The authors find that a number of cancer related genes are induced in a cluster of cells with late lytic gene expression (Figure 4) and suggest the potential for fully lytic cells to be reprogrammed. They confirm expression using RNA Flow-FISH. However, during reactivation, others have reported substantial cellular transcription alterations, many of which are induced unproductive, non-coding transcripts which overlap annotated genes. It would be important to 1. demonstrate protein expression of SOX2 and/or ALDHA1 in late lytic subpopulations, and 2. show evidence that these subpopulations survive lytic replication.
Reviewer #3: Overall
This is an impressive and impactful study that identifies new gene pathways, and confirms previously identified pathways implicated in the control of EBV lytic-latent balance. The application of single cell RNA-seq and Flow FISH are technically strong and appropriate for this type of study. The major limitation and concern is that the data relies primarily, if not exclusively, on one highly engineered model system using P3HR1 BL cell and viral strain, and the BZLF1 conditional ER fusion gene. How well does this system capture critical regulation of BZLF1 and other aspects of physiological cell response to various reactivation stimuli? This limitation should be addressed more directly and extensively in the Discussion section. The authors should consider providing additional experimental evidence that some of these major findings are also true in natural reactivation systems, such as anti-Ig stimulated Akata or other cell systems, particularly non-engineered LCLs or other EBV lymphoid tumor cell lines.
Further, the B958-ZHT cell line is stated to be a marmorset line so it is difficult to understand how the genes are mapped to the human genome effectively.
Specific Comments
Fig 6. Relating to the analysis of the B958-ZHT model as a corroborating system for EBV reactivation. First, this is a marmoset cell line, so that is a question of concern. Second, the activation of BZLF1 remains through the 5-HT system, which may be very different than natural physiological signals. Perhaps related to this, is that the UMAP for the B958-ZHT looks very different than that for the P3HR1-ZHT. While many of the gene correlations are conserved, the authors should also highlight the aspects that are different between these two cell and viral types, and why.
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: 1. The authors conclude that clusters C and D are incomplete reactivation states, as compared to cluster E, which is complete lytic infection, and refer to this as abortive lytic infection. However, I am unclear as to exactly which EBV genes are turned on in these clusters, and whether clusters C and D only express some immediate early and early genes without late gene, as suggested by the name abortive lytic. It appears that there is some BLLF1 (gp350) detected in C and D, indicating some late protein expression. Figure 2D is a very nice presentation of some of the changes occurring in the different clusters but only shows 5 EBV genes, whereas I assume most EBV genes would have been detected in cluster E. To better understand the different stages/subtypes of EBV lytic infection, it would be informative to include a representation similar to Fig 2D that shows all the EBV transcripts detected.
2. The authors discuss their single cell profiles in relation to host shutoff and genes that escape host shutoff. However, it is not clear to me what they are using as a measure of host shutoff itself. Is this total cellular mRNA levels? This needs more explanation. Also they state that BGLF5 expression correlates with host shutoff, in keeping with a previously reported role of this protein in shutoff. However there is evidence that other EBV proteins might also play a role in host shutoff. Was BGLF5 the only EBV transcript that correlated with host shutoff in their data? If not a more complete analysis of the relationship of EBV proteins to host shutoff should be presented.
Reviewer #2: - The authors use PAA to model an abortive lytic cellular environment. Although PAA treatment blocks lytic progression, it is unlikely to mimic the underlying cellular environment that promotes abortive lytic replication.
- It would have helped to have had both the raw sequencing data and a gene expression matrix from the single cell sequencing experiments
Reviewer #3: Lines 103-119. References may need to be re-aligned with statements.
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Lori Frappier
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No

Figure Files:

While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email us at figures@plos.org.

Data Requirements:

Please note that, as a condition of publication, PLOS' data policy requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions outlined in your manuscript. Data must be deposited in an appropriate repository, included within the body of the manuscript, or uploaded as supporting information. This includes all numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.. For an example see here on PLOS Biology: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5.

Reproducibility:

To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option to publish peer-reviewed clinical study protocols. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
12 Sep 2024

AttachmentSubmitted filename: scLytic_PLoS_Path_author_responses_20240909.docx
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.r003Decision Letter 1
KalejtaRobert F.Section EditorGewurzBenjamin EAcademic Editor© 2024 Kalejta, Gewurz2024Kalejta, Gewurzhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 Oct 2024

Dear Dr. Luftig,
We are pleased to inform you that your manuscript 'Epstein-Barr virus reactivation induces divergent abortive, reprogrammed, and host shutoff states by lytic progression' has been provisionally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
Before your manuscript can be formally accepted you will need to complete some formatting changes, which you will receive in a follow up email. A member of our team will be in touch with a set of requests.
Please note that your manuscript will not be scheduled for publication until you have made the required changes, so a swift response is appreciated.
IMPORTANT: The editorial review process is now complete. PLOS will only permit corrections to spelling, formatting or significant scientific errors from this point onwards. Requests for major changes, or any which affect the scientific understanding of your work, will cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript.
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, you will automatically be opted out of early publication. We ask that you notify us now if you or your institution is planning to press release the article. All press must be co-ordinated with PLOS.
Thank you again for supporting Open Access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens.
Best regards,
Benjamin E Gewurz, M.D., Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Robert Kalejta
Section Editor
PLOS Pathogens
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064

***********************************************************
Reviewer Comments (if any, and for reference):
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Part I - Summary

Please use this section to discuss strengths/weaknesses of study, novelty/significance, general execution and scholarship.
Reviewer #1: The authors have adequately responded to my previous comments so I think this manuscript is now suitable for publication in Plos Pathogens.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********

Part II – Major Issues: Key Experiments Required for Acceptance

Please use this section to detail the key new experiments or modifications of existing experiments that should be absolutely required to validate study conclusions.
Generally, there should be no more than 3 such required experiments or major modifications for a "Major Revision" recommendation. If more than 3 experiments are necessary to validate the study conclusions, then you are encouraged to recommend "Reject".
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********

Part III – Minor Issues: Editorial and Data Presentation Modifications

Please use this section for editorial suggestions as well as relatively minor modifications of existing data that would enhance clarity.
Reviewer #1: (No Response)
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Lori Frappier
Reviewer #2: No
10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.r004Acceptance letter
KalejtaRobert F.Section EditorGewurzBenjamin EAcademic Editor© 2024 Kalejta, Gewurz2024Kalejta, Gewurzhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
18 Oct 2024

Dear Dr. Luftig,
We are delighted to inform you that your manuscript, "Epstein-Barr virus reactivation induces divergent abortive, reprogrammed, and host shutoff states by lytic progression," has been formally accepted for publication in PLOS Pathogens.
We have now passed your article onto the PLOS Production Department who will complete the rest of the pre-publication process. All authors will receive a confirmation email upon publication.
The corresponding author will soon be receiving a typeset proof for review, to ensure errors have not been introduced during production. Please review the PDF proof of your manuscript carefully, as this is the last chance to correct any scientific or type-setting errors. Please note that major changes, or those which affect the scientific understanding of the work, will likely cause delays to the publication date of your manuscript. Note: Proofs for Front Matter articles (Pearls, Reviews, Opinions, etc...) are generated on a different schedule and may not be made available as quickly.
Soon after your final files are uploaded, the early version of your manuscript, if you opted to have an early version of your article, will be published online. The date of the early version will be your article's publication date. The final article will be published to the same URL, and all versions of the paper will be accessible to readers.
Thank you again for supporting open-access publishing; we are looking forward to publishing your work in PLOS Pathogens. 
Best regards,
Michael Malim
Editor-in-Chief
PLOS Pathogens

orcid.org/0000-0002-7699-2064