822acssdChemical ReviewsChem RevPMC1261661912616619126166194098521110.1021/acs.chemrev.5c00041Colorectal Cancer at the Crossroads: The Good, the
Bad, and the Future of Platinum-Based Drugs
KeeJia Xuan YauJia Ning Nicolette Kumar MuthuramalingamRam Pravin WangXinyi ChngWei Heng Lopez-SanchezAlvaro TayKevin Kuang Wei DengLih-Wen GibsonDan BertrandHelene C AdrianiGiulia AngWee Han PastorinGiorgia 
†
Department
of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, National
University of Singapore, Singapore
117544, Singapore

▲
Department
of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117544, Singapore

§
Integrative
Sciences and Engineering Programme, NUS Graduate School, National University of Singapore, Singapore
119077, Singapore

∥
Laboratoire
Chimie Physique et Chimie du Vivant CPCV, Département de Chimie,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, PSL University,
Sorbonne Université, CNRS, 24 rue Lhomond
75005
Paris, France

⊥
Gleneagles
Hospital, 6A Napier Road
Singapore
228510, Singapore

#
Department
of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore
117596, Singapore

∇
NUS
Center for Cancer Research, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, 14 Medical Drive, Singapore
117599, Singapore

○
Institute
for Drug Research, School of Pharmacy, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91120, Israel

◆
Singapore
Immunology Network (SIgN), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 8A Biomedical Grove, Immunos, Singapore
138648, Singapore

¶
Department
of Biomedical Engineering, National University
of Singapore, 4 Engineering
Drive 3, Singapore
117583, Republic of Singapore

■
Lee
Kong Chian School of Medicine (LKC Medicine), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
308232, Singapore

●
Mount Elizabeth Hospital, 3 Mount Elizabeth, Singapore
258500, Singapore
*
Phone: +6565161876. Email: phapg@nus.edu.sg.
*
Phone: +6565165131. Email: ang.weehan@nus.edu.sg.
2392025125211024810248–1034115112025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyThis article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

## Abstract
Colorectal cancer
(CRC) remains a significant global health challenge,
ranking third in incidence and second in mortality among cancers worldwide.
This review addresses the complex landscape of CRC, focusing on incidence,
mortality trends, preventive strategies, and the evolving therapeutic
approaches, particularly highlighting the role of platinum-based drugs
like oxaliplatin (OXP). It also underscores the increasing burden
of CRC, with factors such as westernized diets, aging populations,
and genetic predispositions contributing to its prevalence. Therapeutically,
early detection greatly enhances survival rates, emphasizing the importance
of regular colonoscopies and stool tests. For advanced CRC, chemotherapy
remains pivotal, with OXP as a cornerstone treatment despite its associated
chemotherapy-induced peripheral neurotoxicity (CIPN). The review explores
innovative strategies to overcome challenges related to chemotherapy,
such as drug resistance and side effects, highlighting recent developments
in the field, such as Pt­(IV) prodrugs and immunotherapeutic approaches
to enhance efficacy while minimizing toxicity. Additionally, this
manuscript examines experimental models for drug screening, emphasizing
the role of murine models and advanced 3D in vitro systems in CRC research. Overall, the review advocates for a comprehensive
approach, integrating prevention, early detection, and personalized
treatments to alleviate the global burden of CRC.

 
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jan 16; Accepted 2025 Aug 11; Revised 2025 Aug 7; Collection date 2025 Nov 12.

1.

## Global Burden of Colorectal Cancer (CRC)
1.1.

## Incidence and Mortality Trends Associated
with CRC
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is among the most lethal
and prevalent cancers globally, ranking third in incidence and second
in overall mortality, with similar incidences and mortality rates
in both genders ( ). CRC accounted for 1.9 million new cases in 2020, and is projected to exceed 3 million cases by 2040. CRC incidence and mortality vary considerably
among different countries. Generally, cases have increased in tandem
with socioeconomic development, particularly in countries with an
increasing human development index (HDI), due to growing risk factors such as a more westernized diet, population
aging, smoking and physical inactivity. Consequently, in Asia, the incidence and mortality of CRC have also
been increasing steadily and were the highest globally in 2018. Of note, the incidence of CRC is significantly
higher in Chinese populations compared to other ethnicities in multiracial
countries within Southeast Asia, suggesting
genetic factors might predispose Chinese to CRC more than other ethnicities.
However, no specific genetic markers have been found exclusively or
significantly more expressed in Chinese CRC patients. Other factors contributing to this higher incidence of
CRC in Chinese population (i.e., host, environmental, and endogenous
factors) are currently under investigation.

 
1.2.

## Clinical Guidelines on
the Treatment of CRC
CRC slowly develops from an abnormal
growth, often referred to
as a polyp, on the inner lining of the rectum or colon. Polyps can
form a tumor and expand into blood vessels, facilitating cancer metastasis. CRC cases can be subdivided based on the location
of the developed tumor such as colon and rectal cancer or left-sided
and right-sided tumors ( ). These classifications help to systematically guide diagnosis,
identify suitable treatment options, and provide estimated prognosis
based on comprehensive clinical practice guidelines issued by leading
oncology networks, such as the National Comprehensive Cancer Network
(NCCN). Right-sided tumors, for instance, are more common in females
whereas left-sided tumors are more predominant in male patients.

 The standard of care for detection and treatment of CRC in early
stages (i.e., stage I–III) is surgical resection with curative
intent ( , ) for the removal
of polyps (i.e., polypectomy) and tumors (i.e., colectomy).
−

 These surgeries are often supplemented with neoadjuvant, adjuvant,
or perioperative systemic therapies in order to reduce recurrence
risk and improve patient survival by up to 90% ( ). Advanced
CRC cases that are diagnosed at late stages (i.e., stage IV), when
the disease is symptomatic and has metastasized to other tissues and
organs,
,
 are associated with poorer prognosis ( ).
,
 For advanced metastatic CRC (mCRC), systemic therapies such as chemotherapy
(ca., 66–67%, ) and immunotherapy ( ) are the cornerstones of treatment, aiming for outcomes
ranging from potential cure to palliation and life prolongation.
−

 Platinum (Pt)-based chemotherapeutics ( ), particularly oxaliplatin (OXP)­( ), play a crucial role in current clinical regimens owing to their
unique mechanisms of action ( ). On the other hand, immunotherapies using
immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) offer an effective alternative
for specific advanced CRC patient subsets (i.e., deficient DNA mismatch
repair (dMMR)/ microsatellite instability (MSI)-high) ( –).
 In addition, EGFR inhibitors (such as
cetuximab and panitumumab)
are best used in metastatic colorectal cancer patients whose tumors
are KRAS and NRAS wild-type and located on the left side of the colon,
as these patients benefit most; they are ineffective in tumors with
KRAS or NRAS mutations and less effective for right-sided tumors.
VEGF and VEGFR inhibitors (such as bevacizumab, ramucirumab, and aflibercept)
can be used in metastatic colorectal cancer regardless of RAS or BRAF
mutation status or tumor location, and are typically given in combination
with chemotherapy, provided there are no contraindications such as
bleeding risk or uncontrolled hypertension.
Despite these
advances, significant challenges remain ( ). The efficacy
of current CRC chemotherapeutics (e.g., OXP) for mCRC
is often diminished by major dose-limiting toxicities (e.g., OXP-induced peripheral neuropathy) and the emergence of drug
resistance ( –), which restrict therapeutic options
and impact patients’ quality of life. Additionally, the differences
in the tumor microenvironment (TME) between primary and metastasized
tumors affect tumor sensitivity toward systemic treatments such as
chemotherapies and immunotherapies.
,
 As a result,
the majority of the advanced CRC patients do not benefit from ICI
therapies due to low response rates, resistance development as well
as immune-related adverse events ( ). Consequently, treatment decisions are
increasingly reliant on patient-specific molecular profiling for optimal
treatment regimens ( –). These limitations
underscore the critical need for innovative therapeutic strategies
that can enhance efficacy, overcome resistance mechanisms, reduce
systemic toxicities, and potentially offer novel combination approaches.
Emerging strategies include targeted Pt-based chemotherapeutics ( ), Pt-based
chemoimmunotherapeutics ( ), and innovative drug delivery strategies ( ) which could
represent promising alternatives to overcome these challenges. Furthermore,
the development and application of suitable experimental models are
crucial for optimizing the evaluation and accelerating the discovery
of novel Pt-based drug candidates with clinical potential ( ).

2.

## Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is often provided either
before (neoadjuvant therapy)
or after (adjuvant therapy) surgery to reduce the risk of recurrence
and improve patients’ survival ( ). In stage
IV CRC (i.e., mCRC) and in patients with unresectable tumors, chemotherapy
becomes the primary treatment, essential for increasing overall survival
(OS) rates.
,
 Chemotherapeutic drugs typically
suppress tumor growth by interfering with cellular function, which
eventually induces apoptosis in cancer cells. Patients abstaining from chemotherapy typically observe a short
median survival, ranging from 0 to 5 months. The main classes of chemotherapeutics approved for treating CRC
include fluoropyrimidines, folic acid derivative, deoxyribonucleic
acid (DNA) topoisomerase I inhibitors, angiogenesis inhibitors and
platins ( and ).
 Other classes of drugs including
nucleosides, antibiotics, anthracyclines,
and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway inhibitors,
while approved for other cancers, are still under clinical evaluation
for treating CRC patients ( ). Recently, drugs that target specific cancer-associated
gut microbiota have been proposed as a new approach to treating CRC.
The Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum) bacteria in tumor tissue, for instance, have been linked to increased
chemoresistance, reduced T-cell infiltration, and poor patient survival. Consequently, targeting F. nucleatum using
an antibiotic like metronidazole can reduce cancer cell proliferation
and tumor growth. However, this approach
is still preliminary and has yet to reach clinical trials.
For
the clinical management of CRC, various chemotherapy drugs
that target different cellular pathways are available ( ), such as 5-fluorouracil (5-FU),
irinotecan (Camptosar), oxaliplatin (OXP, Eloxatin),
trifluoridine–tipiracil (Lonsurf), and capecitabine (Xeloda).
However, single-agent chemotherapy regimen is not commonly used for
advanced CRC management. Instead, combination
therapies such as FOLFOX (leucovorin calcium + 5-FU + OXP),
,
 FOLFIRI (leucovorin calcium + 5-FU + irinotecan),
−

 FOLFOXIRI (leucovorin calcium + 5-FU + OXP + irinotecan),
,
 and CAPOX (capecitabine + OXP)
,
 are more routinely used as first-line treatment for advanced CRC
to improve their overall efficacy by working synergistically or additively
according to their mechanisms of action ( ).
,,

One example is the combination of 5-FU, a commonly used chemotherapeutic
agent for CRC treatment, with leucovorin (LV) (i.e., a reduced folate
compound). 5-FU is a fluoropyrimidine that interferes with ribonucleic
acid (RNA) synthesis as well as DNA synthesis and repair.
,
 However, the reported response rate of 5-FU is less than 20%, with
median survival time of less than 9 months. As a result, LV is added
on top of 5-FU to enhance its cytotoxicity by acting as an external
source to increase the intracellular levels of reduced foliate cofactors,
which can stabilize the binding of 5-FU metabolite (i.e., 5-fluorodeoxyuridine
monophosphate) to thymidylate synthase, resulting in pronounced and
prolonged inhibition of DNA synthesis.
,
 Indeed, a
meta-analysis of 3300 patients from 19 randomized trials found that
a combined treatment of 5-FU and LV was more likely to induce at least
a 50% reduction in tumors and statistically improve the OS rate when
compared to 5-FU alone in CRC patients. The addition of the Pt­(II) drug OXP further improved
the mean survival from 17.4 (FOLFIRI) to 21.9 months (FOLFOXIRI) ( ). Complementary to chemotherapy, targeted therapies are available
in CRC such as antibodies targeting Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF)
or the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) ( ).
2.1.

## Pt­(II)
Chemotherapeutics for CRC
Since their discovery in the 1960s–1970s,
,

cis-Pt­(II) drugs, in which at least 2 identical
ligands are on the same side of the molecule, have been highly effective
in treating various solid tumors ( , ). Cisplatin (CDP), carboplatin (CBP), and oxaliplatin (OXP) are first-line chemotherapeutic agents for various
cancers. Nearly half of all chemotherapeutic
regimens involve the use of these Pt­(II) drugs.

 2.1.1.

## Cisplatin (CDP)

CDP is a first-generation
Pt compound with a simple cis-square planar structure
consisting of two chlorido and two ammine
ligands ( ).
It is used to treat several cancers through intravenous (IV) administration
( ). However, the lack of specificity for cancer
cells also makes CDP highly toxic, being associated with
severe side-effects (e.g., chronic nephrotoxicity, ototoxicity, gastrointestinal
toxicity and neuropathy) that can persist long after chemotherapy
ends (please refer to for more details).

2.1.2.

## Carboplatin (CBP)

CBP is
a second-generation cis-Pt compound that replaces
the chlorido ligands in CDP with a cyclobutane-1,1-dicarboxylate
leaving group ( ).
,
 This makes CBP less reactive
than CDP, resulting in milder toxicity mainly in the
form of myelosuppression in patients and higher maximum tolerated
dose (MTD) by the patients ( ).
CBP treatment
is comparable to CDP treatment both as a single agent
and in combination chemotherapy for lung and ovarian cancers.
−

 However, CDP treatment has been shown to remain superior
to CBP for germ cell tumor, bladder, head and neck cancers
despite its poorer toxicity profile.
,

CBP is typically used in treating ovarian cancer with combination chemotherapy
and is selected over CDP in palliative care to maximize
the patients’ quality of life.
−

2.1.3.

## Oxaliplatin (OXP)

OXP is a cis-Pt compound containing trans-(1R,2R)-diaminocyclohexane (DACH)
( ) and oxalate
ligands. The oxalate ligand reduces the reactivity of OXP compared to CDP, resulting in much fewer associated
toxicities than CDP ( ). However,
acute chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN), a persistent
pain sensation from peripheral neurons, is a key challenge to the
therapeutic use of OXP (please refer to for more details).
OXP has been more effective for
treating CRC compared to other Pt­(II) drugs, but the molecular mechanisms behind the higher CRC-specificity is
not well-understood.
,
 Several studies suggest that OXP is more efficiently transported into CRC cells due to
its higher affinity for the organic cation transporters.

,
 Additionally, OXP forms bulkier and more hydrophobic Pt-DNA adducts via its DACH ligand, enhancing its ability to inhibit DNA
synthesis and cellular proliferation as well as reducing its cross-resistance
with CDP and CBP.
−

 Consequently, OXP has demonstrated to be more effective
than CDP and CBP in inhibiting cellular
proliferation in 6 out of 8 CRC cell lines (i.e., DLD-1, HCT116, HCT-15,
HT-29, KM20L2, SW620) taken from the National Cancer Institute (Bethesda,
Maryland, USA) automated screening panel. Currently, chemotherapy regimens for treating mCRC include FOLFOX,
the systemic administration of OXP, 5-FU, and LV ( ). The addition of OXP to the cocktail improved the average response rate and
OS rate of patients.
,

OXP alone demonstrated
low responses rates of around 20% in clinical trials, but in combination
with LV and 5-FU (i.e., FOLFOX), the responses rates increased up
to ca. 60%, with an increased progression-free survival (PFS) and
OS. OXP can be used both as first-line and adjuvant therapy
in CRC. The combination regimen depends on factors such as tumor type,
stage, and burden. Unlike FOLFIRI ( ) treatment, FOLFOX is effective in an adjuvant
setting, leading to its use in postoperative therapy. FOLFOX and CAPOX
( ) regimens
are the most frequently used in metastatic conditions. In addition, OXP is also being evaluated in clinical trials for the treatment
of gastric, pancreatic, breast and non-small cell lung cancers, though
no official outcome has been made available yet. The detailed mechanisms and advantages of OXP for CRC treatments have been extensively discussed by O’Dowd
et al.

2.1.4.

## Other
Clinically Relevant Pt­(II) Drugs
Other Pt­(II) drugs that
have been approved for use in other countries
include nedaplatin in Japan (for esophageal, ovarian,
cervical, bladder, lung, head and neck cancers) ( and ), lobaplatin in China (for
chronic myelogenous leukemia and inoperable, metastatic breast and
small cell lung cancer) and heptaplatin in Korea (for
advanced gastric cancer).
picoplatin is another promising Pt­(II) drug candidate designed to circumvent
glutathione-mediated cellular resistance mechanism.
Picoplatin demonstrated promising preclinical
efficacy in CDP- and OXP-resistant ovarian
and colorectal cell lines (i.e., A2780, CH1, 41M, HCT116, HT-29),
respectively, and can be administered orally, which is attractive
for improving patient compliance.
,
 While picoplatin
has undergone various phase I–II clinical trials (e.g., NCT00465725
and NCT00478946) for the treatment of CRC, it has yet to demonstrate
significant improvement to warrant clinical approval.

2.2.

## Mechanisms of Action of Pt­(II) Drugs in CRC
2.2.1.

## Uptake and Efflux Mechanisms
Passive
diffusion across the cell membrane was initially proposed as the main
mode of internalizing Pt­(II) drugs in cells. However, physical characterizations
of Pt­(II) drugs (e.g., CDP, CBP, and OXP) indicated that they are hydrophilic, which disfavors
their diffusion across the lipophilic cell membrane. Membrane transporters have been implicated as key players
in the cellular accumulation of Pt drugs, directly influencing the
anticancer efficacy of Pt­(II) drugs.
,
 Several membrane
transporters, in particular, have been recognized as common transporters
for all Pt­(II) compounds.

The
copper transporter 1 (CTR1) is the most well-known substrate transporter
for CDP, OXP and CBP in mammalian
cells.
,
 The genetic knockout and reduced expression
of the SLC31A1 gene that encodes for CTR1 are associated
with decreased cellular accumulation of and sensitivity to CDP, OXP, and CBP in cancer cell lines.
−

 Clinically, the efficacy of Pt chemotherapy correlates well with
the expression level of CTR1, suggesting that the CTR1 expression
can be used as a prognostic marker of patient response to Pt chemotherapy.
For example, CDP treatment was more effective, extending
PFS by 20 months, in ovarian cancer patients with a 2-fold increased
of CTR1 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in tumor tissue.

Other copper transporters involved in
cellular uptake of Pt­(II)
drugs include the copper transporter 2 (CTR2) and the P-type ATPase
copper transporters (e.g., ATP7A and ATP7B), which utilize energy
from adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis to transport copper­(I)
across cellular membranes by conductance. Pt agents bind to the N-terminus of the methionine-rich
motifs of CTR1/2 and are transported into cells via endocytosis.
In vitro, in vivo, and clinical studies found that decreased
CTR2 expression correlated to increased intracellular Pt and greater
efficacy of Pt chemotherapy.
,,
 Conversely, overexpression of ATP7A and ATP7B on the cell surface
is associated with increased Pt resistance in ovarian cancer cell
lines (e.g., 2008/EV and 2008/MNK) and patients with ovarian cancer.
,
 These findings suggest that the overexpression of ATP7A and ATP7B
represent a cellular response when developing resistance mechanisms
to Pt. As transporters, CTR2, ATP7A and ATP7B are likely responsible
for the efflux of Pt out of the cell, thereby reducing the sensitivity
of the cells to Pt.
The volume-regulated anion channels (VRACs),
a membrane transporter
family that facilitates the exchange of osmolytes, such as chloride,
to maintain cellular homeostasis,
,
 have recently
been found to play a major role in the cellular uptake of CDP and CBP. The VRACs are formed by at least 2 different
leucine-rich repeat containing 8 (LRRC8) subunits, one of which is
LRRC8A. Specific combinations of LRRC8 augment the permeability of
the resulting pore, thereby modifying the regulated osmolyte for which
the channel is responsible. Planells-Cases and co-workers found that
up to 50% of cellular CDP and CBP entered
cells via the VRACs, and the cellular Pt content
was significantly reduced in cells with malformed VRACs. Consequently, increased LRRC8A and LRRC8D expression
correlated with increased survival in ovarian cancer patients undergoing
Pt-based chemotherapy. While the importance
of the VRACs for cellular uptake of OXP was not evaluated,
the authors postulated that VRACs could accommodate any molecular
compound small enough to fit through the 12–14 Å channel
diameter.

Organic cation transporters
1–3 (OCTs 1–3), which
facilitate the transport of a broad spectrum of organic cations of
60–350 kDa, represent another class of transporters for Pt­(II)
drugs. Although the OCTs are not as well-investigated as the copper
transporters, current studies suggest that each Pt­(II) drug has a
preferred OCT for transport into the cell. For example, CDP relies on OCT1 for cellular transport. Studies by Yonezawa et al.
and Zhang et al. showed improved intracellular accumulation of CDP and CBP in human embryonic kidney (HEK-293)
cells overexpressing human (h) OCT1 but no change was observed upon
overexpression of hOCT3.
,
 Interestingly, Yonezawa
et al. found that overexpression of hOCT2 improved the cellular accumulation
of CDP, whereas Zhang et al. found no significant influence
of the same channel on CDP accumulation. Critically,
Yonezawa et al. performed Pt accumulation studies using much higher
concentrations (i.e., 100–1000 μM) than Zhang et al.
(i.e., 6 μM). These differences account for the distinct kinetics
of transport via the OCTs. OXP is a
good substrate for all OCTs, displaying improved accumulation in the
cells overexpressing OCT1, OCT2, and OCT3, which have been reported
to be overexpressed in CRC tumors, contributing to the greater efficacy
of OXP in treating CRC compared to the other Pt compounds.
,

2.2.2.

## Pt-DNA Adduct Formation
After cell
entry, Pt compounds undergo aquation to form electrophilic Pt­(II)
aqua species that preferentially react at nucleophilic N7 positions
of purine residues ( ). Reactivity with guanine is preferred due to H-bonding interactions
between the ammine ligands and the exocyclic guanine-O6, giving rise
to a majority of 1,2-d­(GpG) and 1,2-d­(ApG) intrastrand Pt-DNA adducts
(ca., 80–90%) in the major groove, with the remaining Pt-DNA
adducts constituted by 1,3-intrastrand and interstrand cross-links
(ca., 10%).
−

 These adducts distort DNA through local
unwinding and interfere with cell function by inhibiting RNA transcription
and DNA replication.
,

 While nuclear DNA has long been regarded as the
primary target
of Pt drugs, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has been recently implicated
in the mechanism of action of CDP. Unlike nuclear DNA, mtDNA lacks histones, making the structure
more vulnerable to oxidative damage. Additionally, absence of the nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway
in mtDNA makes it more sensitive to damage induced by Pt drugs. LeDoux and co-workers observed that, while
nearly 70% of Pt-DNA adducts were removed from nuclear DNA within
24 h, there was comparatively minimal repair of the same damage in
mtDNA of Chinese hamster ovary cells. The distortion of the mtDNA compromises mitochondrial function (e.g.,
hydrolysis of ATP), thereby activating apoptotic pathways.

2.2.3.

## Nucleolar Stress Induction
Certain
Pt­(II)-based drugs have recently been found to cause cell death by
triggering nucleolar stress. Nucleoli are the largest subnuclear structures
in eukaryotic cells. Their primary role is the biosynthesis of ribosomes,
the intricate cellular machines pivotal for translating mRNA into
proteins. This complex process involves the coordination of approximately
200 proteins to synthesize ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and assembles it with
ribosomal proteins. However, the homeostasis of ribosome biogenesis
can be impaired by morphological alterations in nucleoli, such as
segmentation or disruption, a condition recently termed “nucleolar
or ribosomal stress”. These changes can ultimately trigger
the activation of the p53 signaling pathway, leading to cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis.
,
 Pt­(II) drugs containing a cyclic
diamino bidentate ligand, like OXP and other Pt­(II)-DACH
derivatives, have been observed to induce nucleolar stress by inhibiting
rRNA transcription. On the other hand,
Pt­(II) complexes with monodentate or alkyl-based bidentate amino ligands,
such as CDP or CBP, have been predominantly
seen to operate by DNA-adduct formation.

2.2.4.

## Oxidative
Stress Induction
A third
axis to comprehend the cellular activity of Pt­(II) complexes is oxidative
stress, characterized by an imbalance between the production and accumulation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as hydroxyl radical (•OH),
superoxide anion (O2•–) or hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2), and the ability to detoxify
these byproducts by antioxidant defenses.
,
 ROS are known to have a two-edged sword-like behavior in cancer:
malignant cells usually display higher ROS levels than healthy cells,
and the homeostasis of these species, regulated by generally overexpressed
antioxidant defenses, can promote proliferation and tumor growth. However, a sharp increase in the intracellular
levels of ROS can easily overwhelm the inefficient antioxidant arsenal
of cancer cells and induce oxidative stress-mediated apoptosis.

After aquation, the formed Pt­(II) center
is a soft Lewis acid, providing a highly electrophilic species prone
to react with several nucleophilic biological targets, especially
sulfur-containing moieties. For example, glutathione (GSH), an important
metabolite for maintaining intracellular redox potential and nonenzymatic
ROS scavenger, can be depleted through Pt-GSH binding, resulting in
oxidative stress induction. Oxidative
stress can also be generated due to the formation of adducts with
mtDNA. Due to the lack of repair mechanisms, OXP-DNA
adducts formed within mitochondria cannot be repaired. This ultimately
leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and the generation of ROS.

2.2.5.

## Immunogenic Cell Death (ICD)
Immunogenic
cell death (ICD) is a form of regulated cell death (RCD) that induces
the activation of both innate and adaptive immune responses. It involves
the release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) from dying
cells and their subsequent recognition by pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs) on immune cells, generating specific antitumor immune responses. Doxorubicin was the first ICD inducer found
to regress tumor in immunocompetent mice through ICD-mediated immune
responses. Since then, extensive research
has been done to elucidate the molecular and cellular mechanisms of
ICD. One of the key factors that initiates ICD is organelle and cellular
stress. In particular, ROS overgeneration by various means, such as
photogeneration or redox reactions, is strongly associated with the
onset of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, which in turn triggers
ICD.
−

 Once initiated, ICD leads to the orderly exposure and release of
DAMPs or alarmins from dying cancer cells, in a time- and space-dependent
manner. Some of the key DAMPs and biological hallmarks found to be
responsible for ICD include the exposure of calreticulin (CRT) on
the cell membrane,
−

 heat-shock proteins (HSPs) on the cell membrane or released passively,
,
 the passive release of high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1),
−

 surface exposure of annexin A1 (ANXA1),
−

 and the active or passive release of ATP.
,,
 These DAMPs interact with their
respective PRRs on antigen-presenting cells such as dendritic cells
(DCs), which ultimately leads to the activation of both the innate
and adaptive immune systems through a network of cytokines and chemokines.
−

 This can lead to the activation and recruitment of immune cells
to the site of the cancer, which helps in tumor elimination. For example,
the main “eat me” signal is represented by the cell
surface exposure of CRT, which interacts with low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) on DCs. ICD inducers can be broadly divided into two groups: (a) Type I
inducers, which primarily target intracellular organelles excluding
the ER, initiating DAMP-related signaling via subsequent
ER stress responses; and (b) type II inducers, which involve ER as
the primary target organelle. As it
was observed that Type II ICD inducers generally display higher levels
of DAMPs and require simpler DAMPs trafficking, they are presumed
to be more efficient ICD inducers than their type I counterparts.
,

OXP is the first metal-based chemotherapeutic
shown to elicit ICD-mediated immune response in CRC and has been classified
as a type I ICD inducer. Besides DNA-adduct
formation, it is widely accepted that the other determinant for OXP’s anticancer efficacy is ICD induction.
,
 In contrast, CDP does not induce preapoptotic CALR
exposure via the PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase
(PERK)/eukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha (eIF2α)/caspase
8/ B-cell receptor-associated protein 31 (Bap31) that is required
for ICD induction.
,

OXP treatment has
also shown to have longer lasting antitumor protection in CRC in vivo as compared to CDP, consistent with the ICD-inducing ability of OXP.
−

CDP only induces extracellular release of HMGB1 protein,
which is similar to OXP, but it does not cause ICD unless
combined with ER stress inducers such as thapsigargin.
OXP treatment has been found to
reverse immunosuppressive TME by (a) enriching TME with infiltration
of innate and adaptive immune cells such as CD8+ T cells,
−

 natural killer (NK) cells,
,
 and DCs, and (b) depleting immunosuppressive cells such
as tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) and myeloid-derived suppressor
cells (MDSCs).
,

The importance of trans-(1R,2R)-DACH ligand
structure on OXP immunomodulatory
activity has been explored by substituting it with different cis-1,3-diaminocycloalkanes. The results show that Pt­(cis-1,3-diaminocyclobutane)­Cl2 displays comparable
cytotoxicity and ICD features with OXP in microsatellite
stable (MSS) CT26 cell line. Macrophage-mediated
antigen presentation to effector cells such as helper T cells (Th)
is a key factor in tumor immunity. While OXP can effectively
induce ICD DAMPs, it has been shown in various in vitro phagocytosis assays that OXP does not induce macrophage
phagocytosis.
,
 Interestingly, Pt­(cis-1,3-diaminocyclobutane)­Cl2 increased J774 macrophage
phagocytosis markedly, implying that it could be a better ICD inducer
than OXP, since macrophage-mediated antigen presentation
to effector cells such as Th cells is a key factor in tumor immunity.
In addition to the favorable immunostimulatory effect associated
with the structural change of trans-(1R,2R)-DACH ligand, substitution using other isomers
such as cis-1,4-DACH and trans-1,2-diamino-4-cyclohexene (DACHEX) has also demonstrated comparable or superior
cytotoxicity against a range of cancer cell lines, including OXP-resistant CRC cells, relative to CDP and OXP. These improvements, particularly in overcoming OXP resistance, are likely driven by altered mechanisms of
action resulted from ligand substitution. These include the formation
of distinct DNA adducts that are less efficiently recognized and repaired
by cellular DNA repair pathways, enhanced
inhibition of DNA polymerases, and induction
of metabolic stress. Moreover, Pt­(IV)
complexes incorporating DACHEX-based ligands demonstrate that axial
ligands modifications can further enhance cellular uptake and activation,
through modulation of lipophilicity and reduction potential, ultimately
leading to an increased in vitro potency against
both OXP-sensitive and OXP-resistant CRC
cell lines. Notably, the chirality of
these DACH ligands has also been found to have significant impact
on their anticancer efficacy, depending on the final structure of
the Pt­(II) or Pt­(IV) complexes.

3.

## Immunotherapy
3.1.

## Immunoediting and Immune
Escape Process of
CRC
Immunotherapy for CRC has shown promise, yet its effectiveness
can be significantly influenced by the immune escape process, which
highlights the complexity of the interplay between tumor cells and
the immune system within the cancer-immunity cycle. The theory of
cancer immunosurveillance, which was
first formalized by Sir Frank MacFarlane Burnet in 1970, proposes
that the host’s immune system has the capacity to identify
and eliminate emerging tumor cells. However, subsequent evidence demonstrated
that tumors can still develop in immunocompetent hosts. More recently, evading immune destruction has
been identified as one of the main hallmarks of cancer. This phenomenon arises because the immune system
functions as a double-edged sword. On one hand, it protects the host
by eradicating tumors through immunogenic mechanisms. On the other
hand, it exerts immune pressure on genetically unstable tumor cells,
leading to the emergence of immunosuppressive variants through a process
called immunoediting. Immunoediting results in tumor cells capable
of thriving and progressing by avoiding immune recognition (i.e.,
low immunogenicity), increasing immunity resistance, or suppressing
immune responses (i.e., immunosuppressive TME). The dynamic process of immune escape unfolds in five phases:
(1) homeostasis, (2) elimination; (3) equilibrium, (4) immunoediting,
and (5) immune escape ( ).

 Unsurprisingly, the tumorigenesis
of CRC also involves different
phases of the immune escape process. In the elimination phase, tumor
cells express stress-induced molecules such as surface CRT, peptide-major
histocompatibility class I (MHC-I), and NK group 2 member D (NKG2D)
ligands that can attract immune cells to undergo cytotoxic activities.
Tumor cells that survive the elimination phase then progress into
the equilibrium phase, marked by a delicate balance between cancer
cells and the immune system. These surviving cancer cells eventually
transition from equilibrium phase into the escape phase, driven by
the immunoediting process under constant immune pressure. For instance,
it has been found that MSI-High CRC with intact antigen presentation
machinery can survive immune selection by producing immunogenic frameshift
peptides that are less detectable by the immune system. Furthermore, highly immunogenic MSI CRC has
also been reported to overcome the innate and adaptive immune systems
by overexpressing immune checkpoints such as programmed cell death
protein 1 (PD-1), programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1), cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte associated protein 4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte-activation
gene 3 (LAG-3), and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), compared to
CRC with higher microsatellite stability. As a result, the high immune cells infiltration in CRC with MSI
is counteracted by the overexpression of immunosuppressive immune
checkpoints, resulting in “exhausted” immune cell populations,
and consequently the depletion of antitumor immunity.
Other
studies also revealed that CRC subpopulations associated
with more favorable prognosis exhibit elevated expression levels of
chemokines such as chemokine (C–C motif) ligand (CCL) 5, chemokine
(C–X–C motif) ligand (CXCL) 9, and CXCL10 as well as cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-7,
IL-8, IL-15, IL-18, and IL-1β that
promote the immune inflammatory profile as compared to other CRC subpopulations.
Therefore, it is evident that the immunoediting process generates
tumor cells that are poorly immunogenic, rendering them more “invisible”
to the immune system and facilitating their immune escape.

3.2.

## CRC Consensus Molecular Subtypes and Their
Immune Landscape
The prognosis and treatment outcome of CRC
immunotherapy are strongly linked with its phenotype and immune status.
Therefore, stratifying CRC into distinct subpopulations based on their
variations in genetic and immune landscape would greatly enhance the
clinical decision-making process ( ). The CRC consensus molecular subtypes (CMSs)
represent one such approach in classifying CRC subpopulations. In
CMSs, CRC is divided into four major subtypes that remain the current
best transcriptome-based descriptor for CRC.

 CMS1 “MSI Immune” phenotype, which accounts for about
14% of early stage CRC cases, has a faulty DNA mismatch repair (MMR)
system due to the loss of function of genes such as MLH1, MLH3, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6 or PMS2, similar to other dMMR/MSI-High tumors. This results in
hypermutation and hypermethylation of CpG islands. CMS1 CRC also has
significant mutations in ring finger protein 43 (RNF43), R-spondin
 and BRAF

V600E
 genes. CMS1 CRC is considered to be immunologically
‘hot’ as it exhibits strong activated immune cell infiltration
in the TME, especially by CD8+ T cells, CD4+ Th1 cells, NK cells, and CD68+ macrophages.

Other CRC subtypes are categorized into
CMS2 to CMS4, which originate
from chromosomal instability (CIN) and have a MSS status. They follow
the classical model of CRC progression, involving “driver”
mutations in APC, KRAS, TP53, SMAD4, and PIK3CA genes.
−

 The highest proportion (ca., 37%) of CRC
patients falls into the category of CMS2 “canonical”.
While CMS2 is indistinguishable from CMS4 in terms of CIN and MSS,
CMS2 is differentiated from CMS4 due to the aberrant activation of WNT and MYC pathway (i.e., canonical pathway) as well as overexpression of oncogenes (e.g., EGFR, HER2, IGF2, IRS2, HN4FA). CMS2 is also known as an immune desert subtype due to its reduced
immune cell activation and low number of infiltrating lymphocytes
and monocytes, explained by minimal transcription of leukocyte chemotaxis
and activation genes.
,
 Only a few memory B and Th cells
and naive CD4+ cells were found in these tumors, albeit
without the ability to mount an antitumor response. Moreover, low-level expression of PD-1 and PD-L1, which
are common traits among immunodeficient tumors, also characterizes
the CMS2 molecular phenotype.

CMS3 “metabolic” subtype contributes to about 13%
of CRC cases and is identified by prominent metabolic dysregulation
and KRAS-activating mutations. These mutations and alterations are thought to occur early
in CRC tumorigenesis, with a unique combination of KRAS mutations and copy number events resulting in distinct metabolic
deregulation profile. Like CMS2, CMS3
possesses a quiescent tumor immune microenvironment (TIME). Th17 and
resting T cell infiltrations reinforce the immunological dormancy
of this subtype and mark it as “immune excluded”. Unlike
CMS2, intratumoral cells of CMS3 tumors reveal PD-1 upregulation.
,
 CMS4 “mesenchymal” tumors, which represents about
23% of CRC, are driven by the unusual activation of the transforming
growth factor-β (TGF-β) signaling pathway, which induces
angiogenesis, tissue remodeling, and epithelial–mesenchymal
transition.
,
 CMS4 tumors have a high stromal
content and a complex immune landscape, with a predominance of immunosuppressive
cells (e.g., MDSCs, Treg, Th17), cytokines (e.g., TGF-β, CXCL12),
and chemokines (e.g., IL-23, IL-17).
,
 As a result,
despite high levels of immune infiltration, CMS4 tumors are considered
as immunologically “cold” and have low sensitivity toward
mono-ICI therapy. Finally, 13% of early
stage CRC have no clear subtype classification and show mixed features
from the other subtypes, suggesting that they are either transitional
or heterogeneous tumors.

3.3.

## Tumor Immune Microenvironment (TIME) in CRC
Development and Progression
One of the key strategies that
tumor cells use to evade immune surveillance is to modify the TME
to achieve suppression of antitumor immunity. The CRC TME, as with
many other solid tumors, comprises of both cellular and noncellular
components, each with distinct functions that also interact to make
the TME a dynamically evolving entity throughout different stages
of cancer progression. As our comprehension of the TME in CRC progression
and metastasis advances, the significance of each constituent within
this complex system is increasingly recognized. Therefore, studying
of the roles and mechanisms governing the interplay between TME remodeling
and CRC evolution has received substantial attention over the past
decade, as it holds promise for enhancing current anticancer strategies,
particularly in the development of novel immunotherapies.
The
TME comprises key elements like the extracellular matrix (ECM) and
cellular components including stromal cells (e.g., cancer-associated
fibroblasts, pericytes), immune cells, endothelial cells (e.g., blood
vessels), and lymphatic vascular networks. In addition, these cellular components also secrete noncellular
soluble products to the extracellular environment such as chemokines,
cytokines, growth factors, and extracellular vesicles to communicate
immunostimulatory or immunosuppressive signals. Notably, CRC cells interface with the gut microbiota, consisting
of trillions of microorganisms, and
are considered essential for understanding CRC development and treatment
response. Indeed, some microbial species
and microbial metabolites, such as Enterotoxigenic Bacteroides
fragilis, Escherichia coli, and Fusobacterium nucleatum have been implicated in promoting
colorectal carcinogenesis and therapy resistance.
−

Immune cells, fibroblasts, and endothelial cells play pivotal
roles
within the CRC TME. Tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes, comprising CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells,
B cells, and NK cells, contribute to both immune evasion and tumor
elimination. Notably, the Immunoscore, developed for routine clinical
assessment, enables a prognosis by characterizing cytotoxic and memory
T cell infiltration into TME of individual CRC patients.
,
 Additional studies have also shown the roles played by a specific
subtype of T cells in the prognostic outcome of CRC patients.
−

 For example, in addition to the traditional lymphoid cells, another
subset known as group 3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3) has been shown
to regulate the balance between the immune system and gut microbes
to prevent CRC progression and resistance to immunotherapy. Unlike CD8+ T cells, naïve
CD4+ T cells require priming by antigen-presenting cells
displaying peptide-major histocompatability class II (MHC-II) complexes
before they can expand and differentiate into various CD4+ Th cell subsets. The main Th cell subsets identified in the TME
of CRC are Th1, Th2, Th17, Th22, follicular helper T (Tfh) cells,
and regulatory T (Treg) cells, which can be either immunostimulatory
or immunosuppressive. For example, Th1 cells and their cytokines can
infiltrate CRC and suppress cancer cell proliferation through mechanisms
such as CD8+ T cells recruitment, apoptosis induction,
angiogenesis reduction, and senescence induction.
−

 Moreover, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and IL-6 can
promote the differentiation of naïve CD4+ T cells
into Th22 cells, which are correlated with better outcome in human
CRC. High Tfh cells abundance has also
been associated with positive CRC prognosis. Another study in mice demonstrated that IL-21, produced by Tfh cells,
can regulate CD8+ T cell responses and enhance interferon
gamma (IFN-γ) and granzyme B production.

TAMs are another key cellular component of the CRC
TIME that communicates
with tumor cells through exosomes or cytokines to influence tumor
immunity.
−

 Based on their phenotype and function, TAMs
are divided into two major distinct subsets, namely, M1- and M2-like
macrophages. Depending on the immunomodulatory
signal received from the tumor, the TME, and external treatments such
as chemotherapy and radiation, macrophages rapidly polarize between
M1 and M2 phenotypes. In contrast to other tumors, the contribution
of TAMs to CRC outcome is controversial. TAMs have been shown to support
CRC progression through interactions with cancer cells, supporting
cancer cell stemness and modulation of the immune response.
−

 However, TAM density and their prognostic role change with tumor
stage. Despite the documentation of
phospholipase D4 (PLD4) from TAMs and protein kinase C alpha (PKCα)
from CRC in promoting M1-like macrophage polarization and CRC regression,
,
 most solid tumors, including CRC, have a TME that favors the M2-like
polarization of TAMs, which facilitates tumor growth. For instance,
EGF secreted by CRC can induce M2 polarization of TAMs via the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)/Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
(PI3K)/protein kinase B (AKT)/ mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)
pathway. Likewise, paxillin can activate
the PI3K/AKT pathway and increase the proliferation and invasion of
CRC cells by modulating M2 polarization. Moreover, the “Warburg effect” in proliferating tumor
cells can trigger the expression of VEGF and arginase 1 (ARG1) in
TAMs, resulting in macrophage recruitment and M2 polarization. In addition, TAMs can secrete CCL2 to attract
Treg cells, which inhibit antitumor function of T cells and NK cells,
−

 and interfere with immune cell interactions, creating an immunosuppressive
TME in CRC.
−

A crucial component of the innate
immune system is represented
by the NK cells, which are cytotoxic lymphocytes that can recognize
and eliminate foreign cells, similar to the cytotoxic T cells of the
adaptive immune system. NK cells are divided into two main subsets:
(a) immature CD56+CD16– cells that secrete
cytokines such as IFN-γ and TNF-α, and (b) mature CD56–CD16+ cells that perform cytotoxic functions.
,
 The cytotoxic function of NK cells is a well-established prognostic
factor in reduced cancer risk and CRC
recurrence. Several studies have also
demonstrated that a high infiltration of NK cells within the tumor
was associated with a favorable prognosis in CRC.
,,
 However, some CRC patients show
modified NK cell phenotypes in the tumor and peripheral blood, with
reduced expression of activating receptors and increased expression
of inhibitory receptors, which compromise their cytotoxic functions.
−

 These receptors, such as killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors,
and their ligands, are part of the complex network that regulates
NK cells activities.
−

 If this network is disrupted, the tumor cells may evade the immune
system more easily.
MDSCs control antitumor immunity by restricting
T cell growth and
promoting Treg differentiation. MDSCs
found in the blood of CRC patients can restrain T cells proliferation in vitro,
,
 and neutralizing MDSCs activity
restored IFN-γ secretion by T cells. This is because T cell proliferation and activity is negatively
affected by the depletion of l-arginine in the TME, which
is being consumed by high levels of ARG1 expressed on MDSCs.
,
 Similarly, MDSCs have also been found to affect T cell activation
through regulation of O2 production and inducible nitric
oxide synthase (iNOS) activities.
,,

Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in CRC
are plastic cells that
respond to cytokines and are influencing matrix remodeling and supporting
cancer stemness through Wnt signaling.
,
 Interleukin-1
receptor type 1 (IL1R1)+ CAFs in CRC contribute to an immunosuppressive
environment and T cell exclusion. Tumor-associated
endothelial cells (TECs) produce factors, significantly contributing
to angiogenesis in the TME and influencing CRC stemness, metastasis,
and chemoresistance.

Noncellular
components within the ECM, consisting of proteins like
collagen and fibronectin, shape the TME stiffness and cellular functions,
ultimately influencing CRC progression. Within the TME there are many
signaling molecules that modulate tumor progression, such as the cytokine
TGF-β that is released by various cells including macrophages
and fibroblasts with immunoregulatory activity in CRC. Exosomal microRNAs (miRNAs) also mediate cellular
communication within the TME, affecting CRC development, antitumor
immunity and serving as potential biomarkers.
,

3.4.

## Current Immunotherapy Landscape for CRC
The first clinical success of immunotherapy (NCT00094653) with
ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4) for metastatic melanoma in 2010 marked the rise of ICIs as a promising immunotherapeutic
strategy, compared to other methods such as IL-2 or α-interferon-based
cancer vaccines, or chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapies
that have shown limited effectiveness along with high toxicities.
−

 Unlike the conventional approval of other anticancer regimens, the
fast-track approval granted by US FDA for ICIs to treat advanced solid
tumor such as mCRC is based on tumor-agnostic,
dMMR/MSI-high biomarker-driven approach, irrespective of the tumor
origin or type ( ).

 The efficacy
of pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1), nivolumab (anti-PD-1)
plus ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4), and dostarlimab (anti-PD-1), in dMMR/MSI-high
advanced CRC were substantiated by positive data from several clinical
trials including KEYNOTE-016 (NCT01876511),
,
 KEYNOTE-028 (NCT02054806), KEYNOTE-164
(NCT02460198),
,
 KEYNOTE-177 (NCT02563002), Checkmate 142 (NCT02060188),
−

 GARNET (NCT02715284), and NICHE (NCT03026140), which demonstrated that these ICIs could induce
lasting responses in patients with dMMR/MSI-high advanced CRC. Furthermore,
ICIs treatments have also shown promising results in addressing dMMR/MSI-high
tumors of other types, as evidenced by the findings from KEYNOTE-012
(NCT01848834), KEYNOTE-158 (NCT02628067), and GARNET (NCT02715284). Beyond therapeutic benefits, pembrolizumab
exhibited low immunogenicity and favorable safety profile for advanced
solid tumor patients. Notably, the increased
tumor mutational burden (TMB) and T-cell
inflamed gene-expression profile have
been associated with clinically significant improvement in the efficacy
of pembrolizumab monotherapy. The compelling efficacy demonstrated
across various clinical trials unequivocally establishes the capability
of ICIs in inducing durable and safe responses in patients with dMMR/MSI-high
CRC.
It is unfortunate that the majority of CRC patients (ca.,
85%) that are characterized by proficient
MMR (pMMR),
MSS, or MSI-low tumors have poor responses to ICI treatments.
,,,−

 MSS CRCs are usually considered to be immunologically “cold”
tumors, with lower TMB than MSI CRCs, posing a major challenge for
ICI therapy. However, some studies have
suggested otherwise: some MSS tumors are reported to have intermediate
(75% MSS vs 83% MSI) and high (21% MSS vs 45% MSI) immunoscore,
,
 albeit lower than MSI tumors. Moreover, some patients with large
immune infiltrates have shown a pathological response to ICI therapy.
,,,
 Additionally, POLE mutations affecting DNA polymerase
ε, which facilitate lead strand DNA replication, have been found
in MSS mCRC patients who respond to pembrolizumab treatment. The tumor regression observed in CRC patients
with POLE mutation may be due to greater CD8+ T cell infiltration and enhanced expression of effector cytokines
and cytotoxic T-cell markers. However,
clinical efficacy of ICI therapy is still limited in MSS tumors, with
only up to 25% patients responding positively, potentially due to
low immunogenicity.
,,,
 Immunologically “hot”
MSI CRC also suffers from moderate outcomes from treatment with ICIs
with about 50% patients responding positively. MSI CRC could develop resistance to immunotherapy via various mechanisms, such as low neoantigen presentation,
expression of multiple immune checkpoints, neutrophil and Treg immunosuppression,
and inflammation and immunosuppression.
,,
 To address these challenges,
efforts have been made toward developing combinatorial therapies and
identifying predictive biomarkers to maximize the benefits of ICI
therapies. Currently, suitable patients to receive ICI therapy are
selected based on three FDA-approved predictive biomarkers, namely
dMMR/MSI status, TMB, and immune checkpoint PD-L1 expression, as well
as emerging biomarkers such as the immunoscore and the hematology
index, to achieve optimal therapeutic efficacy.

3.5.

## Combination Therapy to
Enhance CRC Immunotherapy
Efficacy
Due to the limited eligibility of CRC patients for
immunotherapy, current research mainly focuses on investigating the
combination of immunotherapy with other treatments such as chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, targeted therapy, and vaccines. This strategy seeks
to address treatment resistance and broaden the scope of potential
benefits to a more extensive CRC patient population, ultimately improving
overall treatment outcomes.
The synergy between chemotherapy
and immunotherapy is based on the observation that chemotherapeutic
drugs can lead to the overexpression of tumor-associated antigens
and stimulate tumor antigen-specific T-cell responses. Clinical trials
combining chemotherapy with immunotherapy, such as the GOLFIG regimen
(i.e., granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor and low-dose
interleukin-2, following gemcitabine + FOLFOX-4), have shown promising
results in terms of response rates, disease control, and PFS.
−

 These studies reported the effect of chemotherapy on immune cells,
specifically the reduction in Treg, and enhanced tumor-specific T-cell
responses. However, conflicting results have emerged regarding the
impact of chemotherapy on intratumoral T-cell densities, emphasizing
the necessity for further clinical trials to elucidate the precise
mechanisms involved.
The integration of radiation therapy with
ICI therapy has shown
potential in overcoming immune resistance of pMMR mCRC. Studies have also demonstrated improved survival
rates for CRC patients undergoing complete liver metastasis resection
when treated with radiotherapy combined with monoclonal antibodies
against carcinoembryonic antigens.

Recent advancements in targeted therapies, particularly antiangiogenic
drugs, are being integrated into the clinical treatment of various
tumors, including CRC. These therapies have demonstrated immune-enhancing
effects offering a potential improvement in clinical outcomes in combination
with immunotherapy for resistant MSS tumors. For example, studies
have shown increased immune cell infiltration in CRC patients responding
to bevacizumab (VEGF inhibitor) or chemotherapy with cetuximab (EGFR
inhibitor), both of which are antibodies rather than small molecules.
,
 In contrast, results from trials involving MAPK/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK) (MEK) inhibitors and PD-L1 inhibitors have failed to
achieve improved outcomes,
,
 emphasizing the need
for further investigation and optimization of the combination strategies
for low immunoscore tumors. Cetuximab, in combination with NK cells,
has also demonstrated antitumor effects by inducing antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC), representing another promising
combination approach for CRC patients.
,

Promising
outcomes from human clinical trials of therapeutic cancer
vaccines are prompting investigations into whether combining ICI therapy
with vaccination could enhance efficacy beyond ICI monotherapy in
dMMR/MSI-high CRC and potentially induce responses in pMMR/MSS CRCs,
which are typically unresponsive to ICI therapy alone.

3.6.

## Combining CRC Immunotherapy with Clinical
Pt Drugs
A variety of combination strategies have been investigated
to enhance the efficacy of ICI therapy in MSS CRC patients who have
low response rates, and in MSI CRC patients who could develop resistance
to ICI therapy. These strategies include combining ICI therapy with
another ICI, chemotherapy, anti-VEGF therapy, anti-EGFR therapy, antiangiogenic
therapy, radiotherapy, oncogenic pathway inhibitors, bispecific antibodies,
and cancer vaccines. Many of the clinical trials for these combinations
have been thoroughly discussed in previous reviews,
−

 hence we will focus on the attempts in combining ICI therapy with
Pt-based chemotherapy to enhance the response rate of CRC patients
to ICI immunotherapy, especially for pMMR/MSS phenotype.
As
previously mentioned in , the primary clinical treatment for advanced CRC typically
involves combinatorial chemotherapies ( ). These cocktail regimens aim to enhance
overall chemotherapy efficacy through synergistic or additive effects.
Another reason for the combination of chemotherapeutics of different
classes is that their combination can enhance immunomodulation in
various ways, on top of their cytotoxic effects. For instance, the
combination of 5-FU and OXP in FOLFOX regimen can improve
tumor immunity by selectively inhibiting MDSCs
,
 and inducing tumor cells ICD, respectively.
In a CT26 murine CRC model, FOLFOX treatment increased CD8+ T cell infiltration and decreased exhausted CD8+ T cell
population. FOLFOX therapy also reversed
the immunosuppressive TME by reducing the expression of inhibitory
receptor such as PD-1 and T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-containing
protein 3 (TIM-3) to enhance the cytotoxic
IFN-γ and TNF-α secretion. At the same time, an in vivo CT26 model exposed
to FOLFOX showed upregulation of PD-L1 induced by high levels of IFN-γ
and TNF-α, indicating that FOLFOX treatment could trigger tumor
adaptive immune resistance.

Therefore,
it is conceivable that these immunostimulatory effects
induced by OXP combination chemotherapy regimens may
expand the potential beneficiaries of ICI therapy among CRC patients,
including those with pMMR/MSS CRC or dMMR/MSI-high CRC that do not
respond to ICI immunotherapy. In particular, CT26 cell line, representative
of pMMR/MSS tumors, has been extensively studied for its immunological
response to chemotherapy and demonstrated encouraging antitumor effects
when combined with ICIs. Recently, it was found that immune checkpoints
CD47 and PD-L1 were upregulated in CT26 cells post-treatment with
either FOLFOX or OXP alone, both in vitro and in vivo. Remarkably,
the combination of anti-CD47, anti-PD-L1, and FOLFOX in vivo demonstrated a significant improvement in mice survival and tumor
regression. This combination also promoted immunoinflammatory TME
through reduction in Tregs and MDSCs, as well as elevation in CD8+ INF-γ+ lymphocytes and M1/M2 macrophage
ratio. Similar positive outcomes were also observed in the studies
combining OXP with anti-PD-L1 antibodies in the CT26
mice model, showing an increase in survival, inhibition of tumor growth,
and a favorable TME for antitumor immune responses.
,
 Furthermore, a synergistic effect was noted when FOLFOX was combined
with anti-PD-1 treatment, leading to a complete tumor regression in
both CT26 and MC38 CRC mouse models that were resistant to monoanti-PD-1
therapy. The synergism observed was
associated with enhanced tumor infiltration by activated PD-1+CD8+ T-cells and increased IFN-γ induced
PD-L1 expression on tumor cells. Notably, CRC patients in the same
study also displayed induced PD-L1 expression and high CD8+ T-cell infiltration in the TME. In another MC38 in vivo mice model that is resistant to ICI therapy, the combination of
ICI therapy (i.e., anti-CTLA-4 plus anti-PD-1) with OXP treatment successfully invoked an antitumor response. Moreover, trifluridine/tipiracil with OXP demonstrated the ability to induce ICD in a panel of murine
and human pMMR/MSS CRC cell models, namely CT26, SW620, Caco-2, and
Colo-320, both in vitro and in vivo. This combination resulted in improved
CD8+ T-cell infiltration and activation through M2 TAMs
elimination. The adaptive immune resistance involving PD-L1 expression
on tumor cells and PD-1 induction on CD8+ T cells was overcome
when anti-PD-1 was coadministered with trifluridine/tipiracil and OXP, resulting in enhanced antitumor efficacy. These preclinical
findings provide compelling evidence that the synergy between Pt-based
chemotherapeutics and ICIs can offer significant benefits to cancer
patients currently unresponsive to ICI therapy, not only in CRC but
also in other cancers such as lung cancer
,
 as well as head and neck cancer.

To comprehend and investigate the safety and efficacy of employing
Pt-chemotherapeutics for sensitizing pMMR/MSS mCRC patients toward
ICI therapy, numerous clinical trials have been initiated, exploring
diverse combinatorial treatment regimens involving both Pt-based chemotherapeutics
and ICIs ( ).
 As a start, METIMMOX (NCT03388190)
assessed the efficacy of FLOX
(5-FU + leucovorin + OXP) with or without nivolumab (anti-PD-1)
in pMMR/MSS mCRC patients. Preliminary results revealed a modest improvement
in median PFS (i.e., 5.6 months vs 6.6 months) between control arm
and experimental arm, suggesting that short-course OXP-based chemotherapy could indeed sensitize pMMR/MSS mCRC patients
to ICI therapy. Another study, COLUMBIA-1
(NCT04068610) investigated the combination of FOLFOX and bevacizumab
(anti-VEGF) with or without durvalumab (anti-PD-L1) and oleclumab
(anti-CD73) in pMMR/MSS mCRC patients. Although the addition of durvalumab and oleclumab to FOLFOX plus
bevacizumab in the experimental arm significantly increased the objective
response rate (ORR) (44.0% vs 61.5%), median PFS remained unaffected
(11.1 months vs 10.9 months) compared to the control arm. Additionally,
cohorts B and D in KEYNOTE-651 (NCT03374254), which received the combination
of mFOLFOX7 and pembrolizumab with or without beinimetinib, reported
median PFS of 8.6 months and median OS of 28.6 months with no new
safety concerns emerged for using this regimen in pMMR/MSS mCRC patients.

AVETRIC (NCT04513951) examined the combination
of mFOLFOXIRI, cetuximab
(EGFR inhibitor), and avelumab (anti-PD-L1) in pMMR/MSS mCRC patients
with wild-type RAS, and met its primary end point with median PFS
of 14.1 months, a ORR of 82%, a disease control rate (DCR) of 98%,
and a R0 recession rate of 21%. AVETUX
(NCT03174405) trialed the combination of mFOLFOX6, cetuximab, and
avelumab as a novel strategy to increase the immunogenicity of pMMR/MSS
tumors in mCRC patients with wild-type rat sarcoma viral oncogene
homologue (RAS)/B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase (BRAF),
and achieved a final median PFS of 11.1 months, median OS of 32.9
months, ORR of 79.5%, and DCR of 92.3%.

Notably, follow up analysis of AVETUX found that tumor clonality
and diversity could serve as potential biomarkers for predicting the
response to chemo-immunotherapy combination in pMMR/MSS mCRC treatment.

Several clinical trials have investigated
the efficacy and safety
of combining immunotherapy with chemotherapy and/or targeted therapy
in patients with mutant variants of pMMR/MSS mCRC. For example, the
triple combination of durvalumab (anti-PD-L1), tremelimumab (anti-CTLA-4),
and mFOLFOX6 for RAS mutant pMMR/MSI-Low mCRC patients in MEDITREME
(NCT03202758) demonstrated favorable PFS of 90.7% and 60% for 3 months
and 6 months, respectively.
,
 MEDITREME also reported
higher median PFS (6 months vs 8.2 months) and ORR (63%) in the treatment
group compared to historical FOLFOX control group. Immunological analysis
also demonstrated that this triple combination regimen could enhance
the tumor-specific neoantigen immune response in both tumor and peripheral
tissues. BBCAPX (NCT05171660) assessed the combination of sintilimab
(anti-PD-1), CAPOX, and bevacizumab in RAS/BRAF mutant pMMR/MSS mCRC
patients, reporting an impressive ORR of 84%, disease control rate
of 100%, and median PFS of 18.2 months with a tolerable safety profile.
−

 Biomarker assessment analysis indicated that some patients transitioned
to an immunologically “hot” subtype after receiving
the combination therapy. Furthermore, heavily pretreated chemorefractory
patients with pMMR/MSS mCRC were treated with combinatorial therapy
of pembrolizumab and pemetrexed with or without OXP in
NSABP FC-10 (NCT03626922) and achieved
clinical benefit rate (CBR) of 50% and ORR of 12.5%, comparable to
those reported in KEYNOTE-016 (NCT01876511).
,

HCRN GI14-186 (NCT02375672) evaluated the efficacy and safety
of
mFOLFOX6 and pembrolizumab in mCRC patients.
,
 The trial reported median PFS of 8.8 months, median OS of 19.9 months,
and ORR of 56.7%, which are similar to the historical data of FOLFOX
alone (i.e., median PFS = 9.0 months, median OS = 16.2 months). This
suggests that the combination is well tolerated and does not compromise
the activity of FOLFOX. CheckMate 9 × 8 (NCT03414983) compared
mFOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab with or without nivolumab in mCRC patients. The trial did not meet its primary end point
of median PFS (11.9 months vs 11.9 months), but it revealed that the
addition of nivolumab causes improvements for PFS, median OS (i.e.,
29.2 months), ORR (i.e., 46% vs 60%), and DCR (i.e., 84% vs 91%) after
12 months, when compared to the control arm. AtezoTRIBE (NCT03721653)
tested FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab with or without atezolizumab in
mCRC patients.
−

 The trial demonstrated that the combination of atezolizumab was
safe and increased both ORR (i.e., 59.0% vs 64.0%) and median PFS
(i.e., 11.5 months vs 13.1 months) against the control arm. Moreover,
the trial identified potential responders for this combination from
the patient pool based on high immunoscore or high TMB. NIVACOR (NCT04072198)
investigated the combination of FOLFOXIRI, bevacizumab, and nivolumab
in RAS/BRAF-mutated mCRC patients regardless of their MSI status,
and achieved a high ORR of 76.7%, median PFS of 10.1 months, DCR of
97.3% and median duration of response (DOR) of 8.4 months.
,

Efforts to enhance therapeutic efficacy and overcome resistance
to ICI therapy among CRC patients persist with ongoing clinical trials,
such as METIMMOX-2 (NCT05504252, FLOX + nivolumab), APHRODITE (NCT04653480, OXP/irinotecan + surufatinib + toripalimab), POCHI (NCT04262687,
XELOX + bevacizumab + pembrolizumab), COBP (NCT05585814, CAPOX + pembrolizumab + bevacizumab), BASKETII (NCT04895137, mFOLFOX6 + bevacizumab
+ sintilimab), NCT05588297 (CAPOX + nivolumab + bevacizumab), ATOMIC
(NCT02912559, FOLFOX ± atezolizumab), and COMMIT (NCT02997228,
atezolizumab ± (mFOLFOX6 + bevacizumab)). Even though the combination
between immunotherapy and chemotherapy is still not a standard treatment
option in patients who are MSS or TMB-low, as well as many trials
have yet to report their results, the synergistic potential of combining
Pt-based chemotherapeutics with ICIs seems to be promising in addressing
challenges associated with ICI therapy.

4.

## Other CRC
Treatment Modalities
4.1.

## Surgery
Surgery
is the primary treatment
for localized and regional CRC cases ( and ). Most patients
with early stage (stage I–II) CRC can be treated with polypectomy
(ca. 3%) or colectomy (ca. 84%), surgical removal of polyps and diseased
part of the colon, respectively ( ). Surgical resection
of primary tumors and affected tissues can achieve complete remission
in approximately 50% of CRC patients. However, the benefit and effectiveness of surgery decrease as the
disease progresses, with the 5-year survival rate dropping to as low
as 30% at stage III. At stage IV, surgical
resection of the primary tumor is typically reserved for treating
symptoms such as bowel obstruction, although this palliative benefit
is offset by the increased mortality and risk of postoperative complications
in mCRC patients with weakened immune systems. As this review focuses on discussing Pt drugs for treating
CRC, please refer to reviews by Shinji et al. for recent advances
in surgical techniques for CRC patients.

4.2.

## Radiotherapy
Various radiotherapy
techniques, such as stereotactic ablative radiotherapy and selective internal radiotherapy, are commonly
employed for CRC patients to achieve local control of inoperable liver
and lung colorectal metastases, respectively.
−

 In addition, neoadjuvant radiotherapy, either in a short course
(SC-RT, 5 × 5 Gy) or long course with concurrent chemotherapy
(LC-CRT, 45–50.4 Gy, 25–28 fractions), are the current
standard-of-care for locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC, stage II–III),
which carries a higher risk of local recurrence and a poorer overall
prognosis.
−

 SC-RT has demonstrated a significant reduction in local recurrence
rates (LRR) from 26% to 9% (p < 0.001) and an
increased OS from 30% to 38%. Furthermore,
preoperative SC-RT has been shown to improve the quality of total
mesorectal excision surgery by substantially reducing LRR as compared
to just surgery alone.
,
 Similarly, long-course
chemoradiotherapy, often followed by total mesorectal excision surgery,
is associated with improved curative surgery and reduced LRR. Typically, patients receive chemoradiotherapy
that utilizes fluoropyrimidine-based (e.g., 5-FU or capecitabine)
chemotherapy as a radiosensitizer in combination with radiotherapy,
followed by total mesorectal excision surgery.
,

Despite the evident benefits of providing preoperative chemoradiotherapy
in conjunction with total mesorectal excision surgery for rectal cancers,
this combination does not completely eliminate local recurrences and
distant metastasis in patients. Furthermore,
radiotherapy can result in unwanted side effects, including radiation
injury and hematological toxicity. Moreover,
the application of Stereotactic ablative body radiotherapy in CRC liver metastasis is constrained due
to its suboptimal efficacy and potential harm to healthy liver cells. For greater insights into the advances and
efficacy of radiotherapy for CRC patients, please refer to a review
by Tam et al.

5.

## Experimental Models for CRC Drug Screening and
Development
5.1.

## 3D in Vitro Cancer Models
Currently, conventional chemotherapeutic drug development strategies
follow progressive evaluations of lead compounds in vitro, then preclinical in vivo models and, finally,
clinical trials. However, this lengthy
process has a low 6.7% success rate of developing a clinically approved
drug from phase I. This is largely attributed
to the inadequate recapitulation of true pathological conditions in
preclinical two-dimensional (2D) in vitro models,
causing poor predictions of the patient outcomes. 2D cell cultures present an oversimplified scenario, where
cells are uniformly exposed to nutrients or drugs due to a high surface
area-to-volume ratios. This neglects
the complex reality of solid tumors, where drugs must navigate through
tumor vasculature and penetrate tissue to reach all cancer cells.
These processes delay drug exposure, significantly impairing the anticancer
efficacy of short half-lives therapeutics. Furthermore, 2D cell culture lacks key characteristics of the TME
that can be mimicked in 3D culture ( ), such as 3D spatial arrangements within
the ECM of different cell types and the presence of an hypoxic environment,
which influence drug sensitivity.
 Local inflammation is a significant promoter
of CRC tumorigenesis, attracting stromal
cell populations which,
along with immune cells, tumor-associated vasculature and the ECM
( , ), form the CRC
TME.
,
 In turn, interactions between tumor, stromal
and immune cells further promote CRC progression.
−

 For example, CAFs adjacent to CRC cells overexpress IL-6 and serine
protease inhibitor Kazal type 3 (SPINK3), which promote tumor angiogenesis
and cancer cell growth while suppress tumor inhibition.
,
 The inability of 2D cell cultures to recapitulate these critical
TME elements represents a significant limitation, contributing to
discrepancies between in vitro drug efficacies and
clinical outcome with inevitable failures of clinical trials. Therefore,
3D in vitro CRC models were developed to better mimic
the complex tumor TME.
,−

 These 3D
models, such as spheroids and organoids, offer improved
recapitulation of cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, as well
as spatial organization of tumors. Further, they allow for the incorporation
of multiple cell types, including stromal and immune cells, to more
accurately represent the heterogeneous nature of tumors. To further
bridge the gap between in vitro models and in vivo conditions, organ-on-a-chip or microphysiological
systems (MPS) have emerged as advanced platforms that integrate microfluidics
with 3D cell culture techniques.
−

 CRC tumor MPS provides
additional human-relevant complexity to the TME, ultimately aiming
at improving the rate of success in translation of preclinical findings
to clinics.
−

 Moreover, advancements in bioprinting technologies,
in which tissues or organs are manufactured additively layer by layer,
enable greater customization over biological characteristics in 3D
cultures.
,
 For more extensive reviews on
3D models for CRC, please refer to the following reviews by Vitale
et al. and others for 3D models to better emulate the complexity of
the tumor tissues;
,
 and reviews by Reidy et al.
and others for 3D models for screening novel therapeutics.
,,

5.2.

## Why Murine
as an Experiment Model for CRC?
Despite the fact that extensive
research has been done on CRC in
the past decades, there are still substantial issues that need to
be addressed, like difficulties in early detection of micrometastases
and resistance to treatment. The animal models are therefore crucial
assets to address these challenges. Since the rodent models enable
researchers to concurrently assess and measure a complicated disease
including CRC, they provide a valuable contribution to knowledge advancement.
The affordability, ease of management, short gestation period, anatomical
similarities, and accessibility of genetic modification, as well as
their classification as mammals are among the benefits when utilizing
murine models. The current understanding
of tumor biology, carcinogenesis, and the effects of specific molecular
processes on colon biology might all be enhanced by the use of murine
models. These murine models make it
possible to comprehend and track the disease progression, as well
as to find and create novel preventive measures that could potentially
be implemented in clinical trials in the future. An ideal murine model
of a human disease should be easy to understand, inexpensive, and
able to replicate the disease’s pathology, the biological behaviors
and the biochemical changes. Although
animal research cannot take the place of human clinical trials, it
can be employed as a prescreening approach in order to make human
trials more targeted in view of their key recapitulative features.

The development, structure, and functions
of the murine and human intestinal tracts are almost identical ( A). The rectum, anus,
colon, and cecum are components of the large intestine, which is in
charge of absorbing salt and water from digested food before preparing
the faecal matter. A curled blind bag
called the cecum discharges into the proximal colon, supporting bacterial
fermentation. Compared to murine, the cecum in humans is significantly
smaller and forms a continuous portion of the proximal colon located
distal to the ileocecal valve. Histologically, the murine mucosal
folds vary by region; the cecum and proximal colon mucosa are transverse,
distal colon and rectum mucosa are longitudinal, and midcolon mucosa
has no folds and is flat. Also, the human mucosal fold is transverse
in all regions. The murine anal canal is bordered by a keratinized,
stratified squamous epithelium, while the human anal canal is bordered
by a stratified squamous epithelium and nonkeratinized lines. Despite the comparable histology between rodents
and humans, rats and mice lack adipose tissue in their submucosa,
in contrast to humans.

 The first model that successfully used carcinogens
to induce CRC
was the APC (Adenomatous polyposis coli) Min/+ model,
where chemical mutagenesis was used to create the diseased animal. These models are useful in recapitulating the
early phases of tumor carcinogenesis, due to their low rate of developing
tumors. However, only a small percentage of the mice under such circumstances
develop tumors, and even if they do, their location, dissemination,
and differentiation vary greatly.

5.2.1.

## Diet Induced Models (DIMs)
Compelling
epidemiological data associate obesity resulting from diet, excess
body and abdominal fat with a higher incidence of colon cancer and
a lower prognosis following diagnosis. The relationship between eating
a high-fat diet and obesity and the incidence and spread of colon
cancer has been studied in murine models in an effort to simulate
the human condition. The intake of a high-fat diet leads to obesity,
which is associated with elevated tumorigenesis, reduced apoptosis
and rapid proliferation of tumor cells. The main advantage of this model is the development of carcinoma
in the proximal colon, cecum, and small intestine. Nonetheless, the
time required for tumor development is long, and there is a high risk
of failure to develop tumors. Also, there is currently no description
of dietary mutations, and few animals acquire neoplastic cancers.

5.2.2.

## Chemical Induced Models
(CIMs)
The first mouse intestinal tumor model was successfully
established
by feeding mice with methylcholanthrene. Later, colon carcinoma was
induced in rats by feeding them with radioactive yttrium (Y).
,
 A decade after these models, hydrazines were found to be colon carcinogenic
agents and adenocarcinoma was induced to rats upon treatment with
excessive amount of cycad flour, which contains a form of methylazoxymethanol
(MAM), often referred as cycasin. In
general, chemically induced models (CIMs) are noninvasive and do not
metastasize; tumors formed in this way represent the transition of
adenoma to adenocarcinoma from aberrant crypt foci. They have an advantage
of enabling different routes of administration, including oral gavage,
intraperitoneal (IP), intramuscular (IM), and subcutaneous (SC) injections.
Even though the CIMs are easy and good models of CRC, they are not
thought to be relevant for recapitulating the immune response and
the TME. The chemically induced tumors
in rodents randomly exhibit pathological and genetical similarities
with human CRC. Since the tumor progression must occur from normal
cells to adenocarcinoma or carcinoma in this model, establishing a
successful model requires a significant amount of time. Apart from
this, the development of adenocarcinoma or carcinoma is highly influenced
by the rodent’s age, gender and genetic background. Furthermore,
the effective local concentration of carcinogenic substances might
result in interference with their metabolism caused by the gut flora,
diet, and immune status of rodents. The
different chemicals used to induce the CRC model, their doses and/or
concentrations, routes of administration to murine and the strain/species
used are reported in .
 
5.2.3.

## Limitations of Induced Models
Various
risk factors, such as poor eating habits, the environment, exposure
to carcinogenic substances, and other variables, are associated with
higher incidence of CRC. Even though the chemically induced rodent
models of CRC are useful for exploring new therapy strategies and
for the identification of diagnostic and prognostic markers, generating
these models requires longer experimental cycles and duration. These models have a low carcinogenic efficiency,
a low modeling rate, and a variable molding time. Also, CIMs cannot
be used alone as they have low carcinogenic effect and require multiple
administrations. Since the quantification of treatment volume is challenging,
they usually cannot be utilized to analyze CRC metastases, and the
induced mutations are random.

5.3.

## Metastasis Models
Understanding the
etiology of CRC and the roles that various genetic and genomic alterations
play in its onset and progression is necessary for target authentication
( ).
 To comprehend
how mutations behave in the natural environment,
most of the research has focused on developing genetically engineered
mice models (GEMMs) that precisely represent late-stage diseases.
Researchers are now able to identify a gene’s pathophysiological
significance by creating genetically engineered autochthonous mouse
models (GEAMMs) using clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats (CRISPR)-associated Protein 9 (CRISPR-Cas9) technology, in
which a tumor develops from healthy cells.

Despite these advances, the lack of a mouse model that accurately
mimics the course of human disease, from adenoma and adenocarcinoma
to metastasis or changes in the microenvironment remains a common
issue. The most widely employed models of GEMMs and GEAMMs include
adenomatous polyposis mouse models (APMM) and hereditary nonpolyposis
colon cancer mouse models (HNPCC). While HNPCC is the consequence
of genetic changes to the MMR genes, APMM is mainly caused by germline
mutations of the APC gene, a tumor suppressor gene.
When it comes to comprehending the molecular pathways and therapeutic
targets involved in the onset and evolution of CRC, APMM has proven
to be particularly valuable. Hereditary nonpolyposis CRC, or Lynch
syndrome (LS), is a prevalent syndrome predisposing to cancer that
is caused by germline pathogenic mutations in MMR genes. HNPCC models
provide a platform for researching the processes underlying drug resistance
and for testing novel combinations of immunotherapies and targeted
therapies. However, the creation of these models is costly and time-consuming,
and environmental influences may cause variations in the mice’s
phenotypes. In these APMM and HNPCC
models, various genes such as oncogenes like C-myc, SRC, Kras, etc., tumor suppressor
genes like DCC, MDD, p53, Apc, etc.,
and DNA repair genes like hMsh1, hMsh2, hMlh6, hPms1,and hPms2 are used to create a successful CRC model.
Each of the genes plays a distinct role in the development of CRC,
and mutations in two or more of those genes are commonly linked to
the malignant phenotype of CRC. The
most prevalent model, which accounts for 86% of human CRC cases, is
a mouse with a mutant Kras gene. This model is used to explore the onset, course, and efficacy
of possible therapies for CRC. Mice with mutations in the Apc gene, which is present in 90% of human CRC and mice with mutations in the p53 gene, which is present in 60% of human CRC, are the other common GEMMs that are used in CRC research.
The advantages and disadvantages of modifying the different genes
to induce CRC model in murine species are summarized in .
Taking into
account all the genes involved in the development of
the genetic model, these GEMMS and GEAMMs aid in the growth of in situ tumors and replicate the early phases of oncogenesis
including stage I and II. Since gene alterations occur at the biological
level, these models depict the clinical circumstances of cancer in
terms of the natural immune system. This is because of a well-known
genetic event, and the cancer cells and stroma are from the same species.
However, the creation of these models is costly and time-consuming,
and metastases are seldom created. The complete replication of human
cancer differs from that of the animal model due to secondary mutations,
even though the immune system remains untouched. Since the imaging
of disease assessment in these models requires costly and user-dependent
(i.e., high skill required) techniques like magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography (PET),
endoscopy and so on, one of the primary limitations of these models
is their limited noninvasive imaging options.

5.4.

## Xenograft Models
Human tumor cells
or tumor fragments are grafted into immunocompromised animals to create
xenograft models. Xenograft refers to the transplantation of tissue
including fresh human tumor, intact or single cell from one species
into another. SC, intrasplenic, and orthotopic transplantation are
the three types of transplantation routes. Orthotopic transplantation
involves delivering cancer cells to the same tissue or anatomic site
where a tumor type originated. To create
syngeneic models, animal tumor cell lines like CT26 or any commercially
available immortalized cells are transplanted into animals that share
the same genetic heritage as the cell line. It is also feasible to distinguish between orthotopic and heterotopic
models in this context.
5.4.1.

## Cell Derived Xenograft
Model (CDX)
Owing to its ease, accessibility, and high tumor
growth, SC injection
(i.e., heterotopic model) is one of the most popular techniques; however,
the TME differs from that of the colon, and metastases do not form.
Considering its low level of technical requirements, ease of seeing
tumor growth, low cost of maintaining colonies, high yield generation,
and tolerable tumor latency, CDX model is widely used at the injection
site. Commonly used mice are typically naked (i.e., athymic) mice
strains and the severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice, which
are devoid of either T cells or both B and T lymphocytes, respectively.
Moreover, NOD/SCID animals lack NK cells in comparison to SCID mice. However, this model cannot replicate the genetic
heterogeneity of the original tumor because of the loss of original
inheritance and the absence of relevant TME components during in vitro passage. Additionally, modifications at the genomic
and epigenetic levels may arise from repeated passaging with enrichment
for specific subclones. There are advantages
of injecting cells into the intestinal serosa of immune-deficient
animals for orthotopic xenografts of CRC cell lines. The advantages
of this approach are comparable to those of the SC model; however,
certain cell lines metastasise to the liver, and the CRC cells are
housed in a more natural milieu. Nonetheless, a significant limitation
of these models for immuno-oncology investigations is their inability
to support studies on checkpoint blockade treatments, cytotoxic T
cells, or adaptive immunity.

5.4.2.

## Patient Derived Xenograft Model (PDX)
To address the
weaknesses of the CDX model, PDX models have been
established to deepen the understanding of tumor biology and to develop
novel medicines for the treatment of cancer. PDX models are developed
by grafting human tumors or tumor cells onto murine species. The outcomes
of drug evaluation using PDX model is the most similar to clinical
settings, and the kind of immunodeficient mice employed and the mode
of administration influence the engraftment rate. Evidence has shown
that in CRC, PDX models maintain the heterogeneity of the underlying
tumor and the most popular method for promoting engraftment is to
monitor and treat the tumor after SC implantation. The most frequently employed original source is surgical
specimens since the quantity of initial tumor material greatly influences
the outcome of PDX engraftment. The highest percentage of engraftment
(ca., 60–100%) in CRC is observed in PDX models with 89% of
the hosts being Balb/c nude mice with orthotopic implantation; however,
nonobese diabetic (NOD)/SCID and NOD/SCID/IL2rγnull (NSG) mice are used as hosts in the PDX model with 76% with subcutaneous
injection.
−

 Compared to 2D cultured cancer cell lines,
the PDX model has a higher stromal component, which could be useful
for studying the interactions between cancer cells and TME. Studies
have shown that PDX preserves the human donor tumor’s global
gene-expression patterns, mutational status, metastatic potential,
histological differentiation, and histopathological subtypes. The CRC humanized PDX model has been utilized
in numerous studies to evaluate the efficacy of immunotherapy medications
and other systemic chemotherapeutic medicines. It has also been used
to identify drugs and biomarkers, generate cell lines, construct colospheric
structures, and gain additional insights into the biology of tumor.
A strong foundation for examining the biology of metastases and the
response to treatment in CRC is offered by PDX orthotopic models.
However, orthotopic implantation requires a high level of technical
skills, and this model’s capacity and reproducibility are limited.
Recently, fluid from malignant ascites or pleural effusions, circulating
tumor cells (CTCs), or both have been used to construct PDXs that
maintain tumorigenicity in mice. Therefore, it is possible to analyze
the genetic evolution of tumors and evaluate how new therapies are
responding to tumors using CTC-derived PDX models. The PDX model has some drawbacks, such as high costs, longer
tumor production time and poor engraftment rate. Establishing a viable
PDX model is challenging, and the possibility of gene mutations further
complicates the process.

5.4.3.

## Patient Derived Organoid
Xenograft Model
(PDOX)
Since the PDX model is known to be a tedious and expensive
process, patient-derived organoid xenograft (PDOX) may be able to
help with these problems. Patient derived organoids (PDOs) are created
from patients’ stem cell collections or isolated organ progenitor
cells, which result in clusters of three-dimensionally cultured multicellular
aggregates. Investigations have demonstrated that PDOX model preserves
the original matrix’s characteristics as well as the functions
of the tissues. Also, PDOs perfectly replicate the in vivo tissues in both the healthy and diseased conditions, including CRC.
This model can be genetically edited and is easy to maintain. It has
been shown that PDOs preserve the parental tumors’ histological,
transcriptomic, and genetic characteristics. In other words, the PDOX model preserves the essential cell signaling
pathways to sustain the growth of the tumor cells while removing any
chance of the tumor cells being rejected because it lacks an adaptive
immune system. The PDOX model’s capacity to precisely mimic
the tumor biology and histology in patients, as well as preserve driver
mutations from the original tumor, represent key advantages. As a
result, pharmacological efficacy and toxicities can be realistically
evaluated in an in vivo model that closely mimics
the clinical setting. Since PDOX implantation has a tumor formation
rate of 60% in the colon wall and 100% in the cecum, respectively,
it offers a strong basis for more accurate CRC murine models. Since the concept is still in its infancy,
PDOX technology validation and standardization processes are still
lacking. These models might not be appropriate for producing results
that can be applied to other patient populations because they are
based on individual patients. Nonetheless, it is still less costly
to establish a PDOX setup compared to PDX models.

5.5.

## Inferences and Implications on Murine Models
Animal
models play a critical role in biomedical research, particularly
in understanding disease mechanisms and evaluating therapeutic interventions.
Their performance depends on how well they mimic the pathophysiology,
progression, and treatment responses of human diseases. The overview
of the performance of various models has been discussed in ( ).
 Understanding the advantages
and disadvantages of CRC models, as
well as how to apply them most effectively for medication development
and studies into the origins and evolution of tumors, is essential
for CRC researchers. Even though there are a few animal models available
for the study of CRC, none can be considered as a perfect model; rather,
they are all valuable resources for understanding the etiology of
colon cancer in humans and other animals as well. Nonetheless, the
selection of the model should take into account the objectives of
the study, the costs, and the benefits and drawbacks of each model,
animal strain, and gender.
Over the past few decades, human
cell lines and xenograft models
have been widely used because they are inexpensive and simple to use.
However, the heterogeneity of CRC tumors cannot be replicated by these
models used individually. Every animal model has benefits and drawbacks.
While certain models are effective at inducing carcinogenesis on their
own, in other situations combining two induction methods yields the
most representative results for human carcinogenesis. By combining
two induction methods, researchers can create models that more accurately
represent human diseases, improving the predictive value of preclinical
studies. An example is the combination of genetic mutation plus carcinogen
exposure. Such a combination can be achieved through the use of an APC gene mutation model, such as the Apc Min/+ mouse, which predisposes animals to develop tumors and Administration
of a chemical carcinogen like azoxymethane (AOM), which induces DNA
damage and accelerates tumor formation. As discussed, certain individual
animal models are considered particularly suitable for research on
CRC because they closely replicate the pathophysiology of the disease
in humans. These models provide valuable insights into tumor initiation,
progression, and metastasis, as well as responses to various therapeutic
strategies. It should be highlighted, nonetheless, that the majority
of models necessitate the combination of at least two CRC strategies.
This is because CRC is a complex condition, meaning that a number
of variables, including hereditary and environmental factors, can
contribute to its development. To summarize, a model that fully captures
the pathophysiology of CRC is still needed. Murine CRC models remain
a valuable resource for advancing our knowledge and management of
this disease.

5.6.

## Other in Vivo CRC Models
5.6.1.

## Fruit Fly Model (Drosophila melanogaster)

Drosophila melanogaster, a common fruit
fly, has evolved into a useful tool for research on cancer ( ). WNT, HIPPO, JAK/STAT,
RAS, NOTCH, HEDGEHOG, BMP, and TGF-β are just a few of the important
elements in cancer-related pathways that have been successfully identified
using Drosophila as a pathway discovery platform. About 75% of the genes associated with human diseases are
reported to have functional homologues in Drosophila. The fruit fly contains important genes related
to the cell cycle, differentiation, migration, polarity, adhesion,
and apoptosis in the setting of cancer. It is important to note that,
compared to mammals, Drosophila exhibits less genetic redundancy,
which results in a lower frequency of these genes. Therefore, compared to conventional 2D in vitro cell culture systems, fruit flies can more precisely reflect the
cancer state. The organism can produce a lot of offspring and has
a quick life cycle (ca.,10 days). It is also reasonably priced and
simple to care for. Furthermore, 96-well microtiter plates can accommodate
both larvae and mature adults because of their small size and also
the organism may be used to screen wide pharmacological libraries
at high throughput screening. Despite
lacking a colon, Drosophila can be used as a model to study the cellular
and genetic processes that contribute to CRC. By altering APC, Ras, and other genes linked to cancer,
gene-editing techniques can shed light on the origin of epithelial
tumors. Owing to their short life cycles and low cost, Drosophila
models are especially useful for high-throughput screening and fundamental
mechanistic research.
 
5.6.2.

## Platy
Fish Model (Xiphophorus Fish)
Classically, Xiphophorus fish
were used to successfully develop melanoma
models ( ).
Xiphophorus hybrids have been used in a number of attempts to model
cancer development following exposure to toxins. Utilizing well-known
carcinogens with potent mutagenesis properties, the tests successfully
induced a wide range of distinct cancer histotypes, which replicated
numerous known human tumor entities. Even in the absence of carcinogens,
certain strains of Xiphophorus produce other forms of neoplasia, such
as thyroid and ocular tumors, although these results were not investigated
further. Smaller models of xiphophorus
fish that display both naturally occurring and environmental-induced
tumors are helpful in comprehending the genetics of CRC and the biology
of malignancies. Understanding how genetic and environmental factors
combine to generate CRC is made possible by the ease with which species
with different susceptibilities to the disease can be crossbred.

5.6.3.

## Zebrafish Model (Danio rerio)
The zebrafish, or Danio rerio, is an
animal model that was first employed in studies of developmental biology
in the early 1980s ( ). As early as 1982, it was also used in studies on cancer.
Numerous factors, including high fecundity and external fertilization,
rapid growth, and optical clarity throughout the larval stage, made
zebrafish one of the most widely used animal models in study. Furthermore, the genomes of zebrafish and humans
have 70% of similarities, including the preservation of even some
epigenetic markers. Zebrafish provides
numerous opportunities for the research of invasion and dissemination
by enabling in vivo imaging to track the interactions
among the implanted cancer cells. Furthermore, the interaction between
endothelium and cancer cells can be studied in vivo using angiographic zebrafish models, such as the Tg­(fli:eGFP) zebrafish
line, a transgenic animal containing GFP-labeled blood vessels. Because of their transparent embryos, which
enable real time viewing of tumor growth, zebrafish
are being used more and more in CRC research. Research into gene functions,
metastasis, and treatment responses is made possible by genetic modification
and xenografts, particularly PDXs. Zebrafish models are perfect for
high-throughput drug screening because of their quick reproduction
and genetic resemblance to humans.

5.6.4.

## Dog
Model
One of the most significant
animal models of human cancer is spontaneous cancer in dogs ( ). Unlike most genetically modified or xenograft mouse models,
they capture the essence of human cancer since they are naturally
occurring, diverse, and their immune system is intact. Additionally,
dogs are more biologically similar to humans than mice, with similar
telomere and telomerase activity and a higher incidence of spontaneous
malignancies of epithelial origin. In
an effort to support the dog-human molecular similarity, researchers
identified copy number aberrations (CNAs) in the genomes of canine
CRC. Furthermore, they have successfully
developed a novel dog–human comparison technique for cancer
driver and passenger amplified/deleted gene discrimination. The significance of canine models in promoting
drug discovery for personalized oncology is shown by the fact that
a number of targeted medicines created for humans are linked to a
favorable prognosis when applied to canine tumors with certain genomic
abnormalities. Given that some dog breeds
are more naturally prone to spontaneous CRC, researchers can examine
CRC pathology in a setting more similar to human diseases, particularly
with relation to spontaneous tumor growth. Dogs with CRC are a good
model to investigate tumor growth and treatment responses because
they share genetic and environmental risk factors with humans.

5.6.5.

## Pig Model
Considering the numerous
similarities to humans in terms of longevity, size, organ anatomy,
physiology, drug metabolism, genetics, and immunology, the pig is
a promising alternative model organism ( ). Pigs and
humans have comparable small intestinal structure, but the pig’s
large intestine differs slightly because of its bigger cecum, absence
of an appendix, and spiral colon. Crucially,
since pigs are larger than rodents, there are more options for longitudinal
sampling and, consequently, for tracking the progression of tumors
throughout therapy. The onco-pig model is an intriguing disease model
for intestinal types of cancer, since it provides a variety of opportunities
for long-term research on intestinal cancer development, metastatic
conditions, and treatment response. Pigs
are valuable in CRC research for their anatomical and physiological
similarities to humans, especially in the digestive system. These
models help study CRC carcinogenesis and chemoprevention. CRISPR-Cas9
has enabled the creation of genetically engineered pigs with mutations
in APC and other CRC-related genes, providing a unique
approach to understanding tumor progression and drug effects.

5.6.6.

## Nonhuman Primates Model
The heterogeneous
environment of cancer requires a validated and reliable preclinical
model for the successful clinical translation of the research. Rhesus
and cynomolgus macaques are examples of nonhuman primates (NHPs),
which are similar to humans in many ways, including physiology, genetics
and, most importantly, immune cell populations, immune regulatory
systems, and protein targets ( ). NHPs have been a vital
tool for analyzing pathogenic pathways and evaluating the effectiveness
of vaccines against a variety of human infections, highlighting significant
parallels between the immune systems of humans and NHPs. In rhesus macaques, palpable abdominal mass,
intermittent diarrhea, weight loss, hypoproteinemia, microcytic anemia,
and fecal occult blood are typical clinical indications of CRC. Since tumor targeting, tumor regression, PKPD
biodistribution, intratumoral metabolic activity, and immunogenicity
can all be similarly examined in tumor bearing monkeys, the evaluation
of drug candidates in these preclinical models is similar to that
done clinically in patients. Nonhuman
primates offer a high degree of genetic, physiological, and immunological
similarity to humans, providing a unique model for studying CRC’s
pathology and immune response. Though ethical and logistical limitations
reduce their frequent use, NHPs are valuable for preclinical validation
of therapies where translational fidelity is critical. Monkeys with
tumors could help close the experimental gap between clinical patients
and preclinical models.

6.

## Challenges
for Current Treatment Modalities
in CRC
6.1.

## Toxicities and Side Effects of Pt­(II) Drugs
Apart from the emergence of acquired resistance, particularly notable for CDP, Pt­(II)-based
chemotherapy is associated with severe dose-limiting systemic side
effects, that can persist long after
chemotherapy ends. This results from
the lack of specificity of Pt­(II) drugs for cancer cells. Pt­(II) complexes
are highly reactive toward both cancerous and healthy cells, and interact
with biomolecules beyond DNA, such as proteins (e.g., metallothioneins
(MTs), albumin) or small molecules (e.g., GSH). It has been shown
that less than 10% of the Pt administered intravenously, whether through
bolus IV injection or slow IV infusion, attaches to nuclear DNA.

While various toxicity profiles are associated
with different Pt­(II) complexes ( ), they arise from the aforementioned mechanisms of
action within healthy cells. An illustration
can be given with CDP-induced nephrotoxicity. Nephrotoxicity
can manifest in various ways, with the most critical and prevalent
form being acute kidney injury (AKI), affecting roughly 20–30%
of all patients. Pt accumulation in
kidneys, stemming from variations in the expression of OCT2 or CTR1
transporters, is a factor contributing to CDP-induced
nephrotoxicity by facilitating CDP-transport to renal
tubular cells after filtration at the glomerulus.
−

 Subsequently, CDP can disrupt cellular function by
interfering with the cell cycle through Pt-DNA adduct formation, and/or by inducing the production of ROS. This activates MAPK, inducing apoptosis, and stimulates inflammation and fibrogenesis, causing nephrotoxicity. Mitochondrial dysfunction
has been identified as a contributor to nephrotoxicity, given the
high mitochondrial density in kidney cells. Notably, a correlation has been established between intracellular
Pt levels and mitochondrial content in ovarian cancer cells. Other factors, including inflammation and interactions
with components of the immune system, may also contribute to the development
of AKI. Apart from renal cells, CDP can disrupt similar processes in other healthy cells that
give rise to ototoxicity, gastrointestinal toxicity and so on. Consequently,
the tubular damage and tubular dysfunction with Na+, K+, and Mg2+ wasting can progress from acute to chronic
even after the suspension of treatment. However, in the context of CRC, a focus will be given to OXP-induced peripheral neuropathy (OIPN), a major challenge in the treatment
of CRC, in .

6.2.

## Drug Resistance Mechanisms in CRC against
Pt­(II) Drugs
Although significant progresses have been made
in systemic combination of chemotherapy and targeted therapy, resistance
to chemotherapy and tumor recurrence remain the main issues and challenges
in CRC treatment and management. The
resistance phenomena in tumors can be intrinsic or acquired. Intrinsic resistance is associated with factors
such as tumor heterogeneity, drug inactivation, and genetic mutations. Acquired resistance occurs in a large majority
(ca., 90%) of patients with metastatic cancer. The associated mechanisms can differ depending on the chemotherapy,
but acquired resistance to one cytotoxic agent can confer resistance
to other drugs, leading to multidrug resistance. An increase in the
tumor size typically leads to an increase in the occurrence of metastases
and resistance. The constant evolution of cancer cells drives heterogeneity
in tumors, with cell populations showing differences in metabolism,
proliferation or morphology. It is accompanied by various modifications
at molecular levels, driving the acquisition of resistance. In the context of this review, CRC is characterized
by a high intratumor and intertumor heterogeneity.
Resistance
to Pt-based chemotherapy is a multifactorial process and can be acquired
through general mechanisms such as a decrease in the cell uptake,
an increase in the drug efflux, changes in metabolic enzymes, or reduced
sensitivity to the drug(s) caused by genetic or epigenetic modifications
( ). Acquired
resistance is also associated with changes in the TME (please refer
to . for more details). The cellular uptake
of Pt drugs is mediated/regulated by ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters
and P-type ATPase copper transporters such as ATP7A and ATP7B. Additionally,
Pt drugs are substrates of the copper transporter CTR1 and of the
organic cation transporters OCT1–3, members of the solute carrier
family 22 (SLC22) transmembrane transporters family, that contribute
to Pt cellular uptake. OCT1–3 transporters and their expression
levels are involved in Pt accumulation in CRC cells, and thus they
have a role in acquired resistance mechanisms.

 Additionally, Pt drugs form covalent conjugates with GSH, which
contributes to the inactivation of the drug. Enhanced GSH levels are
often encountered in resistant cells. It has been shown that upon
conjugation of OXP with GSH, the expression level of
multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) increases, contributing
to enhanced drug efflux.
,

The NER mechanism
relies on proteins such as excision repair cross-complementation
group 1 (ERCC1) and excision repair cross-complementation group 2
(ERCC2) for DNA-adducts recognition and base excision. ERCC1 has been
shown to be upregulated in OXP-resistant tumors. High
levels of ERCC1 mRNA is observed in 5-FU resistant tumors with poor
response to FOLFOX. This supports the
notion that enhanced DNA repair diminishes sensitivity to Pt drugs
and may be an acquired resistance mechanism. The NER system can therefore be considered a predictive factor in
the treatment of CRC. However, the resistance mechanisms of OXP slightly differ compared to those of CDP and CBP. For example, inactivation
or mutation of p53 alters CDP’s
cytotoxic activity, but such an effect is observed to a lesser extent
for OXP-treated CRC lines.

Deregulation of signaling pathways, such as nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer
of activated B cells (NF-κB), is another mechanism leading to
resistance. This transcription factor regulates the expression of
genes involved in numerous pathways involved in CRC progression, such
as apoptosis, proliferation, inflammation, angiogenesis, invasion,
and metastasis. NF-κB is constitutively activated in CRC and
other tumors, leading to antiapoptotic genes upregulation. Consequently,
NF-κB and its associated survival pathway have been considered
as therapeutic targets for resistance reversion. For a more in-depth discussion on the cellular mechanisms
of resistance to Pt­(II) chemotherapeutics, please refer to the review
by O’Dowd et al.

6.2.1.

## Resistance and TME
Apart from cancer
cells, the TME comprises multiple other types of cells such as stromal
cells such as CAFs, epithelial, immune cells such as TAMs and MDSCs,
and blood vessels ( ). CAFs have been linked to the development of resistance.
The activation of the TGF-β pathway in these stromal cells is
a hallmark of poor prognosis in CRC. In addition, the secretion of
soluble factors such as IL-6, associated with an increase in CAFs,
activates pathways (e.g., PI3K/AKT and JAK/STAT) that cause apoptosis
inhibition. Accumulation of Pt in CAFs upon long-term exposure to
Pt drugs was proposed to facilitate drug resistance. The TME also contains other elements such as ECM and growth
factors. The components of the TME enable the development of the tumor
and their response to anticancer drugs significantly impacts the development
of resistance. These contributing components include a hypoxic environment,
pH, levels of growth factors, inflammatory factors, and angiogenic
factors.

 
6.2.2.

## Resistance and Epigenetic Modifications
Besides alterations
in genes expression, epigenetic changes have
been shown to be involved in the development of resistance (i.e.,
intrinsic and acquired), in CRC and other types of tumors ( ). For example, DNA methylation of cytosine, which is one
of the epigenetic regulations, catalyzed by DNA methyltransferases
in CpG dinucleotides, is known to induce resistance to 5-FU in CRC.
DNA hypermethylation is another hallmark in CRC and considered as
a predictive biomarker. In the context of resistance, epigenetic modifications
affect drug efflux and the ability of the cells to evade chemotherapy-induced
cell death (e.g., apoptosis, autophagy and ferroptosis). For example,
the inactivation of the BRCA1 interactor SRBC gene
by DNA methylation is associated with OXP-resistance
and shorter PFS in CRC.

Epigenetic
changes can occur in other TME-associated cells (e.g., CAFs, TAMs,
and MDSCs), leading to TME reprogramming and contributing to immune
evasion, survival, and resistance. In
the context of tumor heterogeneity, epigenetic modifications can promote
the development of drug-tolerant cells that are able to survive chemotherapies.
Epigenetic modulations of some signaling pathways regulate the generation
of cancer stem cells (CSCs) that are described as an important factor
in chemotherapy resistance. CSCs are
a subpopulation of cells (ca. 5% of tumor cells) with the ability
of self-renewal and differentiation. Epigenetic processes facilitating
the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) such as epigenetic regulation of EMT markers (e.g., E-cadherin)
or EMT-inducing transcription factors (EMT-TFs), contribute to resistance
mechanisms and to the formation of cells with a mesenchymal phenotype
generally more resistant to chemotherapy in CRC.

6.2.3.

## Resistance Reversion
Numerous compounds
and formulations were evaluated in the reversion of OXP-acquired resistance. Curcumin, for example, was shown to enable
reversion in CRC cell lines mediated by CXC-chemokine/NF-κB
signaling pathway. Epigenetic drugs
have also been evaluated in CRC treatment, in preclinical and clinical
trials, with some success. 5-Aza-2′-deoxycytidine (decitabine)
and 5-azacytidine are FDA-approved inhibitors of DNA methyltransferases
(DNMTs) to treat myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Decitabine was shown
to improve the activity of OXP on CRC cells in an in vitro study.
,
 Some clinical activity
of azacytidine along with CAPOX was also described in mCRC patients
(NCT01193517).
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) were also
explored in CRC treatments. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are often
overexpressed in CRC, and are one of the main mechanisms of resistance
to OXP in CRC cells. The combination of the HDACi suberoylanilide
hydroxamic acid (SAHA or Vorinostat) with OXP reduced HDAC2 levels and induced mitotic cell
death, suggesting that HDACi could potentially be used to revert chemotherapy
resistance. Other targets for epigenetic
drugs to potentially reverse chemotherapy resistance in CRC include
histone methyltransferases (HMTs) and histone demethylases (HDMs),
as deregulated histone methylation in CRC has been linked to tumor
recurrence and poor survival rates. Consequently, proliferation of OXP-resistant CRC cells was significantly reduced upon treatment
with a combination of OXP with the KDM6A/6B histone demethylase
inhibitor GSK-J4. Targeting dysregulated
miRNAs is also explored as a therapeutic strategy to overcome resistance.
As an example, dichloroacetate (DCA) inhibits the miR-543/PTEN/Akt/mTOR
pathway and improves OXP sensitivity in CRC cells.
,
 Mimicking the downregulated tumor-suppressive miRNAs, such as miR-483-3p,
is also another interesting approach to revert OXP resistance
in CRC.

6.2.4.

## Prediction
of Response to OXP Resistance
Predicting the response to OXP-based therapy in CRC
is challenging due to the complex molecular and genetic heterogeneity
of tumors. Generally, variations in DNA repair pathways such as MMR
and NER influence OXP sensitivity, while factors like
immune infiltration and EMT further complicate prediction ( ).
Advancements
in multiomics have led to the identification of various biomarkers
in CRC, including genomic, epigenetic, transcriptomic, proteomic markers,
and those related to the gut microbiome (e.g., metagenomics) and metabolomics. Liquid biopsies, which detect CTCs and nucleic
acids, have emerged as promising noninvasive tools for early detection
and predicting treatment outcomes. However, translating these biomarkers
into clinical practice remains difficult. Despite the discovery of
numerous biomarkers, only a few have been FDA-approved for clinical
use. Comprehensive overviews of established,
promising, and potential biomarkers, along with omics technologies
used in CRC, are provided in recent reviews.
−

 This discussion focuses on biomarkers related to OXP-based therapy in CRC.
While FOLFOX regimen is a standard first-line
therapy for mCRC,
many advanced CRC patients develop chemoresistance, reducing the 5-year
survival rate to 14%. Understanding
the mechanisms behind OXP-resistance is crucial for improving
treatment outcomes. Guinney et al. identified four CMSs for colon
cancer, which are useful for predicting patient prognosis. Cancers classified as CMS4 (i.e., mesenchymal
tumor) are linked to the poorest OS and relapse-free survival (RFS).
,
 Although standard adjuvant therapies (e.g., FOLFOX) for stage III
are recommended, CMS4 cancers do not benefit from systemic adjuvant
treatments.

Few studies have developed
gene signatures to predict OXP-resistance. Lin et al.
identified 495 resistance-related genes by
analyzing data from resistant and nonresistant cell lines in the Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) database and developed a four-gene (i.e., ALCAM, CD22, CASP1, and CISH) signature that predicted OS. High-risk patients showed poorer outcomes, with a 5-year OS prediction
area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.72.
Using a similar systems biology approach, Cheraghi-shavi et al. analyzed
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between sensitive and OXP-resistant CRC cells, identifying upregulation of transglutaminase
2 (TGM2) and high-mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) and downregulation
of FXYD domain containing ion transport regulator 3 (FXYD3) and Galectin
4 (GALS4), which may serve as novel therapeutic targets. A recent study by Zhang et al. in 2024 integrated
data from a microarray data set of CRC patients, an OXP-resistant CRC cell data set from GEO, and RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq)
data from The Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) to establish a prognostic
model for OXP-resistant CRC. This model evaluated both the immune landscape and prognostic risk.
Notably, prostate transmembrane protein androgen induced 1 (PMEPA1),
CD8+ T cells, and M0 macrophages emerged as key biomarkers,
suggesting potential therapeutic targets for overcoming OXP resistance and reducing disease progression in CRC patients.

OXP-resistance is associated with DNA repair mechanisms,
particularly NER and MMR pathways. High expression levels of ERCC1,
X-ray cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1) and xeroderma pigmentosum
group D (XDP) correlate with OXP resistance and can serve
as drug sensitivity indicators. Studies
suggest that patients with dMMR or MSI-high in colon cancer have better
survival rates than those with pMMR or MSI-Low.
,
 Additionally, activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway
and TGF-β1-induced EMT contribute to FOLFOX resistance.
−

 KIAA1199 promotes resistance by inhibiting apoptosis through poly­(ADP-ribose)
polymerase 1 (PARP-1) upregulation and reducing endoplasmic reticulum
stress. Other biomarkers, such as pyruvate
kinase M2 (PKM2) and Williams–Beuren syndrome chromosomal region
22 (WBSCR22) protein, further predict resistance and outcomes.
,

miRNAs, long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) and circular RNAs (circRNAs)
have gained significant attention as predictive factors for CRC due
to their roles in gene regulation.
−

 For instance, miR-128-3p is
a key regulator in tumorigenesis and a potential marker for OXP-based chemotherapy, as it decreases B cell-specific Moloney
murine leukemia virus integration site 1 (BMI1) and MRP5, enhancing
chemosensitivity in CRC. Li et al. reported
that miR-34a is significantly downregulated in OXP-resistant
CRC patients and multidrug-resistant cells. Similarly, Ning et al. found that exosomal miR-208b promotes Treg
expansion by targeting programmed cell death 4 (PDCD4), contributing
to tumor growth and OXP resistance. Circulating miR-208b is a promising noninvasive biomarker
for predicting FOLFOX sensitivity and a potential immunotherapy target.
Zhuang et al. also identified miR-5000-3p as upregulated in CRC and OXP-resistant cells, modulating drug resistance by targeting
ubiquitin-specific peptidase 49 (USP49).

Several oncogenic lncRNAs, including lncRNA GIHCG and lncRNA
ARSR,
regulate OXP resistance in CRC.
,
 Another lncRNA, lnc-RP11-536 K7.3, is associated with OXP resistance and poor prognosis by recruiting SRY-box (SOX) 2 to activate
ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7) expression and stabilize hypoxia-inducible
factor 1-alpha (HIF-1α). Knockdown
of lnc-RP11-536 K7.3 improves chemosensitivity and reduces tumor proliferation,
making it a potential therapeutic target for reversing OXP resistance. Moreover, lncRNA cancer susceptibility candidate 15
(CACS15), which promotes the expression of ATP-binding
cassette, subfamily C, member 1 (ABCC1) involved
in Pt drug efflux, was shown to be upregulated in OXP-resistant CRC cells and associated with poorer prognosis in patients. Furthermore, lncRNA taurine upregulated gene
1 (TUG1) induces OXP resistance in CRC
stem cells and inhibits apoptosis by interacting with GATA-binding
factor 6 (GATA6). Colorectal cancer-associated
lncRNA (CCAL) and lncRNA H19, found enriched in exosomes generated
from CAFs, play a role in the regulation of the extracellular matrix
and contribute to OXP-resistance in CRC. The expression of circRNAs has also been linked
to CRC progression and drug resistance. circHIPK3 promotes OXP resistance in CRC cells by inhibiting autophagy and activating the
B-cell lymphoma (Bcl)-2/Beclin-1 signaling pathway through signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) expression. Lin et al. demonstrated that OXP-resistant CRC cells express higher levels of oncogenic circRNA CCDC66,
and its expression is mediated by OXP-induced cellular
stress via DHX9 phosphorylation. Moreover, Pan et al. showed that circATG4B is upregulated
in OXP-resistant CRC cells, increasing autophagy.

Developing reliable biomarkers to predict
treatment outcomes is
essential for stratifying patients based on their likelihood of response,
personalize treatments, and improving clinical outcomes. However,
the clinical relevance of many emerging biomarkers is still under
investigation, requiring further research and validation in larger
patient cohorts.

6.3.

## Chemotherapy-Induced Peripheral
Neuropathy
(CIPN)
CIPN is one of the main
off-target toxicities of systemic chemotherapies, affecting the peripheral
nervous system (PNS). Generally speaking, the peripheral neuropathy
leads to numerous highly debilitating symptoms that may differ with
the type of affected nerve fibres. Damages of small nerve fibres,
either unmyelinated such as C-fibres (related to the perception of
heat, thermal pain) or thinly myelinated such Aδ (related to
cold thermal pain), which are involved in the conduction of information
associated with mechanical and thermal pain, are associated with burn
sensations, tingling, hyperalgesia or allodynia. Damages of myelinated
fibres of larger diameters (e.g., Aβ fibres) are associated
with sensory dysfunctions such as numbness and loss of balance or
motor impairments. CIPN patients show paraesthesia and dysesthesia
with a typical “sock-and-glove” distribution.
The PNS targets of CIPN are the dorsal root ganglia (DRG), the nerve
fibers, and their components, until the distal nerve terminations.
The main targets, the neurotoxicity mechanisms and the symptoms vary
according to the chemotherapeutic agent ( ).
 The prevalence of CIPN depends on factors such as age, environmental/habit
factors or genetic conditions/factors. The severity of the symptoms depends on the administered chemotherapeutic
drug, the injection schedule and the cumulative dose. In general,
the higher the dose and the frequency of the administered neurotoxic
agent, the higher the incidence of CIPN.
Its evaluation also
varies with the clinical assessment method.
Due to the variety of symptoms, diagnoses and evaluations are still
difficult and a matter of debate. The clinical evaluations include
sensory and motor clinical examinations and neurophysiology studies
of sensible nerve conduction velocity (NCV), where a reduction of
sensible nerve action potential amplitude (SNAP) reflects axonal damage.
Different grading scales are used in clinical diagnosis of CIPN, such
as the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
(EORTC) QLQ-CIPN20, among others.
,

Around
68% of cancer patients receiving chemotherapy develop CIPN
in the first month of treatment. CIPN
severely affects the patients’ quality of life and often leads
to the reduction of administered doses or even to treatment discontinuation,
jeopardizing the treatment outcome. Managing and reducing CIPN through
treatment or prevention is therefore a major public health issue.
Despite intense efforts to decipher the multifactorial mechanisms
of CIPN and identify molecular strategies toward their reduction,
no preventive or therapeutic clinically approved solution is currently
available, although clinical practice guidelines are available.
,

6.3.1.

## OXP-Induced Peripheral Neuropathy (OIPN)
Among the Pt-based anticancer agents, OXP shows the
highest neurotoxicity, associated with an acute form of OIPN possibly
evolving in a chronic OIPN. The OXP-specific acute, transient peripheral neuropathy appears
during or a few hours after administration, and typically disappears
48–72 h post treatment but it recurs with subsequent administrations. Acute OIPN affects around 85–95% of
all patients. Its main symptoms are cold allodynia along with paresthesia
and dysesthesia in both hands and feet. Although not dose-limiting, the degree of acute peripheral neuropathy
has been thought to correlate with the development of chronic peripheral
neuropathy.
,
 This observation is important
since it may lead to dose limitation or arrest. Continuous administration
of OXP and subsequent bioaccumulation can lead to the
development of chronic peripheral neuropathy, in approximately 40–93%
of patients (at cumulative doses superior to 780–850 mg/m3), its incidence and severity
depending on the cumulated OXP dose. Comparable to CDP-induced peripheral neuropathy but occurring in a more
prominent and larger extent, as described by Joseph et al. in a rat
model, its main symptoms include numbness,
tingling in hands and feet, and motor dysfunctions (e.g., loss in
proprioception) leading, in some cases, to disability. The reversibility of these symptoms is rare,
and they can persist years after the cessation of the treatment, severely impacting the patients’ quality
of life. In chronic OIPN, a “coasting” phenomenon (i.e.,
a worsening of the symptoms after the cessation of treatment) is also
often observed. Different mechanisms are believed to be involved in
acute or chronic OIPN.

6.3.2.

## OIPN Mechanisms
The neurotoxicity
of OXP derives from its lack of specificity for cancer
cells and a preferential accumulation in the DRG sensory neurons,
facilitated by the absence of blood–nerve barrier in the DRG.
Different transporters have been involved in the accumulation of OXP in DRG neurons ( ). OCT transporters, particularly OCT2, expressed in
DRG neuronal cells, were shown to play a role in the uptake. Huang et al. reported that, after a single
injection of OXP (10 mg/kg), wild-type mice (C57BL/6,
FVB, or DBA strains) reported acute OIPN-like symptoms, while the
mice deficient in OCT1/2 transporters did not display such symptoms.
This was not the case for OCT3-deficient mice, suggesting that this
transporter is less implicated in the accumulation of OXP in DRG. The same results were obtained in a model of chronic OIPN,
supporting the hypothesis that OCT1/2 transporters could be a valuable
therapeutic target. CTR1 and multidrug and toxin extrusion protein
1, efflux (MATE1) were also shown to
be involved in OXP’s cellular accumulation in vitro. Organic cation transporter novel types 1 and 2
(OCTN1/2) were recently suggested as
key mediators for the preferential accumulation of OXP in PNS components, particularly in DRG.
In vitro, both OCTN1 and OCTN2 impacted OXP’s uptake in cells, and their knockout led to reduced toxicity
in neurite PC12 and primary cultured DRG cells. In vivo, only OCTN1 levels seemed to affect OXP’s accumulation
in rats’ DRG, its inhibition reducing Pt accumulation in DRG
and improving OXP-induced mechanical hypersensitivity.

 Once internalized in the neuronal cells, mechanisms
of action similar
to those in cancer cells occur. Having less efficient DNA repair systems,
DRG sensory neurons display a strong sensitivity to the generation
of DNA adducts. Targeting of mitochondrial DNA and subsequent events
including mitochondrial swelling, dysfunction and damage, eventually
leads to caspase activated apoptosis.
OXP also provokes the generation of elevated ROS levels
in neurons. Additionally, Calls et al.
reported, in 2022, an increase in the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
and NF-κB p65 protein (implicated in cellular responses to stress,
among others) in DRG neurons upon treatment with OXP,
suggesting that a transient inflammatory response is involved in OIPN. Through activation of glial cells, OXP induces the activation of immune cells and an increase in the levels
of pro-inflammatory markers and cytokines such as IL-6 and IL-1β
or TNF-α. Oxidative stress and neuroinflammation are therefore widely accepted mechanisms in
the case of chronic OIPN as a result of Pt accumulation in peripheral
nerves and dorsal root ganglia.
,

OXP also targets sensory axons, where it leads to
a disruption of ion channels activation. Acute OIPN would arise from
axonal hyperexcitability leading to the described symptoms of acute
neurotoxicity. Acute OIPN has been reported to directly depend on
Nav voltage-gated sodium channel activation impairments, that were suggested to be induced by oxalate,
a byproduct resulting from the nonenzymatic degradation of OXP,
,
 which acts as a well-known calcium chelator.
Disrupting calcium levels homeostasis alters the function and kinetics
of voltage-gated sodium channels, leading to increased sodic currents
and both neuronal and peripheral nerve hyperexcitability.
,
 Sodium oxalate alone was shown to induce cold allodynia (acute neuropathy)
in animal models but no mechanical allodynia contrary to chronic OIPN. Other ion channels have been involved in OXP-induced neuron toxicity. Transient receptor potential
(TRP) channels are nonselective cationic channels involved in the
detection of mechanical, thermal and chemical signals. The overactivation
of these channels leads to an axonal hyperexcitability. Members of
this family such a transient receptor potential ankyrin 1 (TRPA1),
transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) and transient receptor
potential melastatin 8 (TRPM8) were shown to be overexpressed after OXP treatment in DRG sensory neurons in rats, and thought
to be associated with cold hyperesthesia.

Long-term exposure to OXP induces axonal demyelinisation
and degenerescence, leading to mechanical allodynia. Chronic OIPN
has often been associated with a loss in the density of intraepidermal
nerve fibres (IENF), small nociceptive nonmyelinated fibres located
in the extremities, in mice (from skin in hind paws). Demyelinization
in sciatic nerves is also a neuropathic marker. However, the mechanisms involved are not yet fully uncovered
and additional mechanisms might be involved in both acute and chronic
peripheral neuropathy. A summary of the key mechanisms contributing
to OIPN is depicted in .

6.4.

## Role of CRC TME in Response
and Resistance
to Cancer Immunotherapy
In the CRC TME, various cell types
play crucial roles in shaping the response to immunotherapy. In the
context of dMMR CRCs, some sensitivity to immunotherapy is attributed
to the high TMB and the generation of multiple neoantigens resulting
from genomic mutations due to defective MMR genes (e.g., MLH1, SH2, MSH6, PMS2) that fail to rectify errors in the DNA microsatellite regions during
replication. CD8+ T cells
have the capability to recognize these neoantigens as foreign, allowing
them to selectively target and attack cancer cells while sparing healthy
cells. Furthermore, T cells, macrophages, and NK cells are abundant
in dMMR/MSI-high tumors, where cell surface inhibitory checkpoint
molecules, such as PD-1 on lymphocytes and PD-L1 on tumor cells, are
increased, enhancing the tumor response to ICI therapies. In contrast, pMMR/MSS CRCs that are found in
the majority of patients, present a significant lower antitumor immune
response. This is because they are unable to be recognized by cytotoxic
immune cells, a consequence of the low mutational profile of these
tumors, ultimately leading to resistance to ICI therapies. In addition to T cells, MDSCs enriched in pMMR/MSS
CRCs also contribute to the creation of an immunosuppressive state
through various mechanisms, including
the release of immunosuppressive cytokines, such as TGF-β. This is consistent with in vivo data, where mice injected with MSI-high CRC experienced greater
tumor regression and T-cell infiltration than MSI-low or intermediate
CRC when treated with anti-PD-1 therapy. While dMMR CRCs are generally more sensitive to immunotherapy than
pMMR/MSS CRCs, it is still possible for dMMR CRC patients to develop
immunotherapy resistance.
−

TAMs are also involved
in immunosuppression by releasing cytokines, such as IL-10 and TGF-β,
inducing the expression of immune checkpoint molecules, and modulating
metabolism that may compromise the energy and function of antitumor
T cells. These mechanisms lead to a reduction of immunotherapy effectiveness,
although the prognostic significance of TAMs exhibits great variability
based on both the stage and type of cancer, necessitating the evaluation
of their functionality. Ongoing research focuses on reprogramming
TAMs toward a pro-inflammatory phenotype or inhibiting their immunosuppressive
functions to enhance the success of immunotherapy. Recent studies
on tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) have also suggested that B
cells contribute to creating an intratumor immunity cycle that increases
tumor sensitivity to immunotherapies for solid tumors, including CRC,
and are considered as potential prognostic markers.
−

Beyond immune cells, CAFs and endothelial cells (ECs), that
constitute
a large part of the cancer in CRC CMS4 (“mesenchymal”)
tumors, may also influence immunotherapy responses through secretion
of immunosuppressive and angiogenic factors such as TGF-β, CXCL12,
or VEGF.
,
 These factors support an inflammatory
environment and impact immune cell function and tumor growth. Research
targeting the interaction between CAFs/ECs and immune cells aims to
enhance immunotherapy responses.

The ECM and its components play a significant role in influencing
sensitivity or resistance to immunotherapy in several ways within
the TME. First, the ECM can act as a physical barrier, limiting the
infiltration of immune cells into the tumor. The composition and stiffness
of the ECM can impact immune cell function. Certain ECM components,
such as collagen and fibronectin, can create a stiffer matrix, that
promote CRC progression, affecting the
behavior and function of immune cells and ultimately contributing
to immune suppression and resistance to immunotherapy. Understanding
the complex cell–cell and cell–ECM interactions within
the CRC TME is crucial for overcoming potential resistance and developing
comprehensive and effective immunotherapeutic strategies in CRC.

7.

## Opportunities for Emerging Treatment Modalities
in CRC
7.1.

## Targeted Chemotherapeutic Approaches Using
Pt­(IV) Prodrug Strategy
The Pt­(IV) pro-drug strategy has
been propelled as a solution to address the high systemic toxicities
associated with Pt­(II) drugs. Pt­(IV)
complexes, containing two additional axial ligands, are relatively
inert outside cells and are activated mainly intracellularly by endogenous
small molecular (e.g., ascorbate, glutathione, L-methione, L-cysteins,
deoxyguanosine monophosphate, metallothionein, serum albumin) or macromolecular
reducing agents. Upon reduction, the
Pt­(II) moiety and the two axial ligands are released ( ).
 The resulting active
Pt­(II) species interferes with cell survival
by inducing DNA damage. The two axial ligands can be utilized to improve
the pharmacological properties of the prodrugs. These ligands can,
for instance, enhance lipophilicity, solubility, facilitate tumor
or intracellular targeting, impart imaging properties, inhibit cellular
processes, or display antiproliferative properties, making them multitargeting
prodrugs.
−

 The tumor targeting strategies using Pt­(IV)
scaffold is further discussed in greater details in .
7.1.1.

## Pt­(IV)
Prodrugs in Clinical Trials
Currently, a few Pt­(IV) compounds
have reached clinical trials, the
most notable being ormaplatin (phase I), iproplatin (phase III), and satraplatin (phase III) ( , ). Of the three, satraplatin
has demonstrated the most promising potential, as patients displayed
a decrease in Pt-associated toxicity compared to CDP in
clinical trials. Moreover, satraplatin can be administered orally, significantly improving patient compliance
and quality of life compared to IV administration of Pt­(II) drugs. However, satraplatin did not offer
any improvement in OS compared to existing clinical treatments for
prostate cancer and therefore did not receive FDA approval for clinical
use. Similarly, other Pt­(IV) compounds
in clinical trials did not receive approval due to the lack of longer
OS compared to existing Pt drugs, despite
some improvements in oral stability,
,
 cellular
uptake, and toxicity profiles. Satraplatin is also rapidly reduced in whole
blood, with a half-life of about 1–2 h, largely due to efficient
reduction by hemoglobin. This process converts satraplatin into its
active Pt­(II) form.
 One potential
explanation for the limited success of the Pt­(IV)
compounds reported in is that the Pt­(IV) compounds were easily reduced extracellularly,
resulting in premature release of the bioactive Pt­(II) drug. Studies
have demonstrated that the complexity of the axial groups determines
the resulting reduction mechanism and half-lives of each Pt­(IV) complex:
compounds carrying less electrophilic axial ligands are the most resistant
to reduction.
−

Ormaplatin, for instance, is
reduced within 1 min ( ), thereby releasing the active Pt­(II) species rapidly, contributing
to high systemic toxicity. In comparison,
satraplatin and iproplatin are less easily reduced, as evident from
their comparatively longer half-lives (1.2 and 5.3 h, respectively)
and consequently they are less associated with systemic toxicities
( ). Despite
their longer half-lives, these Pt­(IV) compounds were still discontinued,
indicating that there are additional contributing factors to the limited
success of these Pt­(IV) compounds in clinical trials.
Another
hypothesis to the observed lack of improvement in the OS
stems from the simplicity of the axial ligands, with no functionality
to improve the efficacy of the drugs. As such, recently developed
Pt­(IV) compounds contain more complex axial ligands that confer benefits
to their anticancer efficacies such as targeting to disease areas, synergistic activity to Pt, overcoming of chemoresistance, complementing photodynamic therapy (PDT) as well as expanding the molecular targets of Pt.

7.1.2.

## Dual- and Multi-Action
Pt­(IV) Complexes
for CRC
Pt­(IV) prodrugs represent a promising strategy to
enhance therapeutic efficacy and circumvent resistance mechanisms,
leveraging on improved cellular accumulation facilitated by lipophilic
axial payloads as well as the capacity for synchronous targeting of
multiple biological pathways offered by bioactive axial ligands. The
conjugation of ancillary or “innocent” ligands such
as halides, hydroxides, or carboxylate derivatives or onto Pt­(IV)
scaffold results in increased cellular uptake and eventual enhancement
in anticancer efficacy.
−

 Other than “innocent” ligands, a diverse array of
bioactive agents have also been conjugated onto the Pt­(IV) scaffold,
including cytotoxic drugs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
−

 epigenetic modulators (e.g., histone deacetylase inhibitors),
−

 metabolic enzyme inhibitors (e.g., glutathione S-transferase inhibitor,
,−

 pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase inhibitor,
,
 carbonic anhydrase IX inhibitor), DNA
repair inhibitor (e.g., nucleotide excision repair inhibitor), signaling pathway modulators (e.g., NF-κB
inhibitor),
,
 antimetabolites,
,
 antimetastatic agents,
−

 antimicrotubule agents,
−

 vitamin analogues, and even proteolysis
targeting chimeras (PROTACs).
,
 Advancement in novel
Pt­(IV) scaffold synthesis and linker technologies continues to support
future expansion on repertoire of conjugatable molecules, further
enhancing the versatility of the Pt­(IV) prodrug approach.
,,
 While numerous excellent comprehensive
reviews have covered multiaction Pt­(IV) complexes,
−

 this section will specifically highlight several prominent examples
that have demonstrated promising efficacy and mechanisms of action
relevant to CRC models. ( )
 Being one of the hallmarks
of cancer, chronic inflammation not
only promotes the proliferation and progression of tumors, but also
causes a immunosuppressive TME. As a result, NSAIDs have become a
popular choice for conjugation onto Pt­(IV) scaffold with examples
include aspirin,
,
 carprofen, etodolac, diclofenac, flurbiprofen,
,
 ibuprofen,
−

 indomethacin,
,
 ketoprofen,
,
 naproxen,
,−
,
 and sulindac. These Pt­(IV)-NSAID conjugates generally exhibited comparable
or enhanced antiproliferative efficacy against CRC cell lines (i.e.,
HCT116, SW480, CT26), as compared to their corresponding Pt­(II) precursors.
−

,,,
 While improved cellular accumulation via increased lipophilicity or nanostructure formation was
initially thought to be the primary contributor to the enhanced potency,
−

,
 recent studies revealed more
complex mechanisms of action.
,
 Notably, recent in vitro and in vivo investigations using
CT26 CRC model demonstrate that 1 and 2 possess
reduced systemic toxicity and significant antimetastatic properties
compared to their parent compounds.
,
 The antimetastatic
effect is likely attributed to the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibition
exerted by the NSAID payload, leading to the downrefulation of matrix
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9).
,

HDACi constitutes
another prominent class of bioactive axial payloads
incorporated into dual-action Pt­(IV) prodrugs, with examples including
valproic acid (VPA),
−

 octanoic acid (OA),
,
 2-(2-propynyl)­octanoic acid
(POA),
−

 4-phenylbutyric acid (PhB),
−

 and SAHA. Similar to Pt­(IV)-NSAIDs,
the increased lipophilicity of these Pt­(IV)-HDACi conjugates translates
to enhanced antiproliferative efficacy compared to the parent compounds
across various cancer cell lines, including CRC models (i.e., HCT116,
HCT-15, HT-29, SW480, LoVo).
,,,,
 Intriguingly, Osell and Brabec found that their Pt­(IV) octanoato
compound (3) can induce global DNA methylation independent
of the enzymatic activity of HDAC on CRC model. This discovery is similar to what have been found on another
Pt­(IV)-VPA complex on human ovarian cancer cells. Furthermore, the therapeutic potential of these Pt­(IV)-HDACi
complexes extends to overcoming drug resistance, as exemplified by
Pt­(IV)-POA (4 and 5) conjugates that effectively
circumvented OXP resistance in OXP-resistant
LoVo-OXP CRC cell line. Contrastingly, some other types of Pt­(IV)-HDACi complexes with PhB
as bioactive axial payload have successfully demonstrated significant
HDAC enzymatic activity inhibition.
The development of resistance
to Pt-based chemotherapeutics is
frequently mediated by cancer-associated metabolic enzymes, such as
glutathione S-transferases (GSTs),
,−

 pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDK),
,
 and Carbonic
anhydrase IX (CAIX), among others. These
enzymes employ distinct resistance mechanisms such as GST-mediated
drug inactivation and efflux via glutathione conjugation,
PDK-mediated metabolic reprogramming toward glycolysis influencing
cellular energy production and stress responses, and CAIX-mediated
modulation of the TME to promote cancer cell survival and adaptation.
Therefore, incorporating inhibitors of these metabolic enzymes as
bioactive axial payloads within Pt­(IV) prodrugs presents a rational
strategy to enhance therapeutic efficacy and potentially circumvent
Pt-drug resistance. For example, two Pt­(IV)-GSTi complexes have successfully
demonstrated improved potency against CRC cell lines (i.e., HT-29
and HCT116) in antiproliferative assays using ethacrynic acid (6) and 6-(7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazol-4-ylthio)­hexanol (NBDHEX)
(7) as the axial payload.
,
 Notably, 6 was observed to exhibit a faster onset of cytotoxic activity
compared to its parent Pt complex.

In recent times, PROTACs has emerged as a new class of anticancer
agent through targeted protein degradation (TPD) rather than conventional
target inhibition. PROTACs offer advantages over traditional small
molecule inhibitors including the targeting of “undruggable”
molecules and the ability to overcome resistance caused by target
protein overexpression or mutations. Very recently, PROTACs for two
protein targets (i.e., BRD4 and PARP-1) have been attached onto the
Pt­(IV) scaffold in order to improve the potency of Pt­(IV) prodrugs
and overcome Pt-based chemoresistance.
,
 In particular, CW-2 (8) has demonstrated about 4-fold increase
in antiproliferative efficacy when tested in HCT116 CRC cell line. Furthermoer, CW-2 conjugated with
olaparib PROTAC as PARP-1 degrader has also managed to resensitized CDP-resistant cell line to Pt-based therapy. This is likely
attributed to the degradation of PARP-1 that plays a crucial role
in cellular DNA repairs.
The octahedral geometry of the Pt­(IV)
prodrug scaffold features
two modifiable axial ligands that open up possibilities for multiaction
prodrugs designs. A common approach involves the conjugation of two
or more bioactive ligands with distinct mechanisms of action, in order
to achieve enhanced therapeutic effects. Combinations incorporating
previously discussed classes such as NSAIDs, HDACi, and metabolic
enzyme inhibitors have been reported and shown improved anticancer
efficacy.
,,
 Alternatively, these axial sites can be exploited for targeted delivery,
where one position is occupied by a therapeutic payload while the
other incorporates a tumor-targeting moiety, such as biotin, intended
to promote selective accumulation within cancer cells.
,
 Furthermore, the versatility of the axial sites has been leveraged
in more complex designs, including the development of bimetallic Pt­(IV)
complexes aimed at achieving superior anticancer activity or enabling
stimuli-responsive prodrug activation.
,

7.1.3.

## Photoactivatable Pt­(IV) Complexes for CRC
Enhancing
the clinical effectiveness of Pt­(IV) chemotherapeutic
prodrugs can be achieved by controlled activation using external physical
stimuli. Light, as a stimulus, stands out due to its convenience and
noninvasive nature, offering a considerable edge over other forms
of stimuli for prodrug activation. Furthermore, the precise spatiotemporal
control offered by photoactivation further allows for site-directed
activation of Pt­(IV) prodrugs at the tumor site while maintaining
high dark stability. This targeted approach not only enhances therapeutic
efficacy but also minimizes adverse side effects and systemic toxicities
to healthy tissues. Advancement in the field of photoactivated prodrugs
has also been propelled by developments in light delivery technologies,
including laser- or light emitting diodes (LEDs)-based planer, injectable,
and optical-fiber devices. These technologies
can cater for tumors located superficially or within internal organs,
such as the colon, head, neck, esophagus, lung, bladder, and cervix.
Many photoactivatable Pt­(IV) complexes have been synthesized through
modifications in their axial, leaving, and nonleaving ligands, a topic
that has been extensively reviewed in many literatures.
,,
 Here, our review is focused
on photoactivatable Pt­(IV) complexes that have demonstrated effectiveness
in CRC models ( ). For instance, Coumaplatin (9), that is axially conjugated to a coumarin derivative
and incorporates OXP as the Pt­(II) scaffold, has shown
remarkable dark stability and significant photocytotoxicity in vitro when compared to OXP. This is particularly evident in CRC models
such as HCT116 p53+/+ and HT-29, where the half-maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) values are 32- and 14-fold
lower, respectively, than those of OXP. Additionally, Coumaplatin displayed the ability to overcome Pt drug resistance
in HCT116 p53–/–, with an IC50 value that is 96 times lower than that of OXP. When
activated with blue light at 450 nm, Coumaplatin, which
accumulates in the nucleolus, releases OXP. OXP released in the nucleolus induces cellular senescence and initiates
ICD through a p53-independent mechanism involving E2F1, in addition
to causing p21-mediated cell cycle arrest and apoptosis.
 Another example of photoactivatable
Pt­(IV) drugs was developed
by conjugating rhodamine B to the axial position on CBP and OXP-derived Pt­(IV) precursors (10 and 11). The design was based on the hypothesis that the oxidation
potential of photoexcited rhodamine B is sufficient to reduce the
majority of traditional Pt­(IV) prodrugs.
−

 Subsequent experiments confirmed that rhodamine B conjugation can
significantly enhance the activation of both CBP- and OXP-based Rhodaplatins. This is evidenced by
the marked increase in their photocytotoxicity in HCT116 CRC model
under low-dose visible light irradiation (400–760 nm, 4 mW·cm–2), as compared to CBP and OXP. Notably, the OXP-based variant of Rhodaplatins demonstrated selective mitochondrial accumulation, which in turn
induced mtDNA damage and subsequently cell apoptosis.

7.1.4.

## Incorporation of Targeting Ligands
The efficacy of
Pt drugs in the treatment of CRC depends on the level
of accumulation at the tumor site. The biodistribution of Pt drugs
can be altered to favor tumor accumulation by taking advantage of
the structural differences between normal physiological tissues and
tumors. By directing the Pt drugs to their intended site of action,
it is possible to reduce off-target accumulation and, consequently,
their associated side effects. Moreover, the genetic differences between
healthy cells and cancer cells can also be exploited to increase the
uptake of Pt drugs by CRC cells.
There are several strategies
to enhance the efficacy of Pt drugs: (1) incorporating targeting ligands
on the chemical structure of Pt­(II) and/or Pt­(IV) compounds, (2) loading
of Pt drugs into nanoparticle-based formulations (including surface
engineering of these nanoparticles), and (3) administering Pt drugs
through alternative routes.
The incorporation of tumor targeting
ligands into anticancer Pt
complexes offers a promising strategy for enhancing selectivity toward
cancer cells while minimizing toxicity to healthy tissue. In the case
of square-planar Pt­(II) complexes, which typically feature two nonleaving
and two leaving ligands, tumor-targeting functionality can be introduced
through chemical modification of the leaving groups. On the other
hand, the octahedral geometry of Pt­(IV) complexes presents additional
opportunities for functionalization; specifically, the axial positions
offer expanded chemical space for the conjugation of tumor-targeting
moieties. The targeting properties arise from the differences between
normal healthy cells and cancerous cells. Some of these differences
include the overexpression of membrane proteins. For instance, there
are reports that glucose membrane transporters, such as GLUT1, is
overexpressed in CRC. The overexpression
of glucose membrane transporters can be attributed to increased glycolysis
of cancer cells. As such, Pt­(II) drugs can be designed to incorporate
ligands of these overexpressed proteins to improve the selectivity
toward the tumor. Some of the substituents include sugars to target
glucose membrane transporters (12–15). Specifically, 12–15 have shown
significant improvement in in vitro antiproliferative
activity against HT-29 CRC cells (ca., 4- to 6-fold lower IC50).
,

15 shows further efficacy in in vivo HT-29 CRC xenograft with superior therapeutic index
and growth inhibitory activity.
 shows a list of certain Pt­(II) compounds that were designed
to improve selectivity toward the tumor. While some of the examples
such as folate receptors targeting (16 and 17)
,
 and biotin targeting (18) were not directly tested on CRC, it is expected
that similar targeting mechanisms could make these tumor-targeting
drugs accumulate in CRC tumors.
 Among these examples,
it is interesting to note that the conjugation
of folate ligands did not give rise to an increase in anticancer efficacy.
Despite the introduction of folate ligands to target the folate receptors
on the cancer cells, the cytotoxicity of the folate-targeted Pt drug 16 was lower than CBP and the nontargeting Pt
drug. To explain this phenomenon, Aronov
et al. quantified the cellular Pt content, and the formation of Pt-DNA
adducts in vitro. Despite a higher accumulation of
Pt, there was less formation of Pt-DNA adducts. It was then hypothesized
that the folate receptor-mediated endocytosis may inhibit the release
of the drug to the cytosol and hence affect the overall efficacy of
the drug. Despite the efforts to modify the structure of Pt drugs
chemically to target the tumor cells, it is also important to consider
the biological implications (in terms of drug uptake mechanism and
intracellular release of the drug). Moreover, the pharmacokinetics
of the modified drugs may also be altered depending on the hydrophobicity
of the new chemical structure, which may affect the overall efficacy
of the Pt drug. This may explain the difficulty encountered when designing
next generation Pt-based drugs with higher efficacy and lower toxicity
as well as the reasons why, despite the development of novel Pt-based
compounds with tumor-targeting features, none of them has been translated
into the clinics yet.
Moreover, peptides can also be introduced
to increase the efficacy
of Pt­(II) compounds. For instance, Singh et al. synthesized OXP conjugated with a cell-penetrating peptide (CPP) (peptide
sequence: RRRRRRRR) (19 and 20). The addition of CPP drastically increased the
accumulation of Pt in vitro and improved the efficacy
of treatment both in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, Sepay et al. also showed that OXP conjugated
with a cell-penetrating, cancer-specific peptide BR2 (peptide sequence:
RAGLQF­PVGRLL­RRLLR) (21) could improve selectivity
toward cancer cells over normal healthy cells. As a result of this selectivity, there was an increased
accumulation in the tumor, leading to a greater tumor suppression in vivo.
Targeting ligands can be incorporated to
direct the compounds to
their intended site of action. Similar to Pt­(II) compounds, these
ligands could target the overexpression of membrane proteins on the
cancer cells ( and ). For instance,
sugars, such as glucose, galactose, or mannose, can be conjugated
onto the Pt drugs. Interestingly, Pt­(IV) prodrugs conjugated with
the unacetylated sugars can enhance cellular uptake by targeting GLUT1
transporters on cancer cell lines, unlike Pt­(IV) drugs that are conjugated
with acetylated sugars (22 and 23).
,
 The introduction of a glucoside group (targeting the overexpression
of GLUT-1 on tumor cells) and a hexadecanoic chain (that could bind
to human serum albumin) (22) reduced the toxicity while
maintaining the efficacy of the chemotherapeutic treatment in vivo. It should be noted
that GLUT1-targeting Pt­(II) complexes are not specific for CRC. They
are designed to target any malignancy with high GLUT1 expression,
which includes but is not limited to CRC. Their use in human patients
is experimental and not limited to a particular cancer type. Besides
the addition of a sugar molecule, biotin was also conjugated onto
the Pt­(IV) structure (24–27) to target
the biotin receptors on tumor cells. Similar to the Pt­(II) counterparts,
the incorporation of biotin increases the cytotoxicity against tumor
cells with an overexpression of biotin receptors (27).
,
 A recent study involved the introduction of bis-organosilane groups
to improve selectivity toward cancer cells and lower toxicity. With the addition of tri­(ethylene glycol) silane
groups, the resultant complex is more hydrophobic, which facilitates
the transport across biological membranes. The cytotoxicity of Pt­(IV)-biSi-2
(28) was higher toward HCT116 CRC cells compared to HIEC6
nontumorigenic intestinal cells. Pt­(IV)-biSi-2 was also effective
in inhibiting HCT116 xenograft tumor growth while reducing renal and
hepatic toxicity, which are commonly associated with CDP treatment.
 Similarly, peptides can also be introduced on the axial positions
to improve the accumulation and uptake of these drugs. It was discovered
that tumor cells, including CRC cells, have a selective expression
of HSP70. These HSP70-positive cancer cells can be targeted with a
14-mer tumor penetrating peptide (TKDNNL­LGRFEL­SG). McKeon
et al. conjugated this 14-mer peptide onto a Pt­(IV) complex (29), which showed a higher cytotoxicity toward HT-29 CRC cells
with a high membrane expression of HSP70.

The capacity to include additional ligands also provides the
opportunity
for multiple functionalized Pt­(IV) drugs. Other chemotherapeutics,
such as gemcitabine, paclitaxel and estramustine, can be conjugated
onto the axial positions of Pt­(IV) structures. The conjugated complex showed a higher tumor growth inhibition
as compared to a coadministration of the individual drugs, implying
some synergistic effects. Similarly, niflumic acid, a NSAID, conjugated
onto CDP and OXP Pt­(IV) scaffold, can increase
cell apoptosis, reduce cell migration and have the potential to work
on metastases of HCT116 CRC cells.

Besides improving the selectivity toward tumor cells, ligands can
be introduced to target other intracellular components that could
further inhibit cell proliferation. These Pt­(IV) prodrugs have additional
mechanism of actions and could overcome Pt resistance. As various
organelle-targeting Pt complexes have been extensively discussed in
previous reviews,
−

 we will focus on new Pt complexes that have been reported recently
to localize in the ER and Golgi apparatus. For instance, a Pt­(II)
complex containing an aminophosphonate ester ligand was found to selectively
enrich in the ER, likely due to the high affinity of this type of
ligand toward the high Ca2+ levels in the ER (30).
,

Similar to Pt-NHC and PlatinER, this
complex could effectively trigger ER stress and display ICD DAMPs,
likely due to its mitochondria targeting properties. The antitumor
activity and vaccination effect of Pt­(II)-aminophosphonate were validated in vivo using an immunocompetent mouse bearing MB49 bladder
cancer model, which also exhibited increased CD3+CD8+ T-cells infiltration compared to OXP treatment.
This example demonstrated that the rational design of Pt­(II) complex
ligand is another promising way to achieve desired subcellular targeting
properties. More recently, a Pt­(IV) complex that can undergo oxygen-independent
activation using near-infrared (NIR) irradiation has been developed
and shown to selectively accumulate in the ER (31).

The ER targeting capability of this complex
synergises with its
ability to act as a photooxidant, to induce severe oxidative stress
and disrupt intracellular pH balance. The generation of a large amount
of ROS causes the rapid oxidation of intracellular biomolecules, which
subsequently triggers ER stress and initiates ICD. This has been evidenced
by the detection of ICD DAMPs, and the enhancement of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell infiltration in a 4T1 mouse xenograft
model.

A novel Pt­(II) compound
that selectively targets Golgi apparatus
has also been recently developed and exhibits a potent anticancer
activity by inducing Golgi stress and modulating the balance between
autophagy and apoptosis (32). This monochlorinated Pt­(II) compound incorporated monoaza phenanthrene
and N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHC) as ligands. Interestingly,
the complex showed remarkable anticancer activity when encapsulated
in lipid-based nanovesicles called liposomes. It completely eradicated
LLC tumors in immunocompetent mice, but only inhibited A549 tumors
growth in immunocompromised mice. This suggests that the complex could
stimulate the host immune response and demonstrates the potential
of modulating Golgi-related signaling pathways for cancer treatment,
offering a novel design strategy for the development of new Pt-based
drugs by working synergistically with immunotherapies.
Previously,
some of us reported the development of a library of
mitochondria-targeting Pt­(IV) compounds for human ovarian cancer cells
(A2780). These Pt­(IV) compounds, based
on either a CDP or OXP scaffold, were modified
with the inclusion of a chemosensitizer which are PhB or dichloroacetic
acid (DCA) and a mitochondria-targeting
triphenylphosphonium (TPP) ligand (33–36). These modifications enhanced the sensitivity of cancer cells toward
the chemotherapeutics and increased Pt-induced DNA-damage to mtDNA.
Although these Pt­(IV) drugs demonstrated similar anticancer efficacy
as the parent Pt­(II) drugs in vitro (CDP and OXP, respectively), they were more efficient in
inhibiting tumor development in vivo than CDP by abrogating mitochondrial function. Consequently, by enhancing mtDNA damage, these drugs could be effective
in suppressing tumorigenesis in a CRC mice model, where the fidelity
of mtDNA (decreased mutagenesis) is enhanced (due to the reduction
of ROS in cancer cells) and is better correlated with disease progression.

7.2.

## Activation of CRC TME Using
Immunochemotherapeutic
Pt Complexes
Pt complexes are versatile compounds that can
exhibit both cytotoxic and immunomodulatory effects in cancer therapy. Although classical cytotoxic Pt­(II)-based anticancer
drug such as CDP or CBP were considered
to impair the immune system due to their immuno- and myelosuppressive
nature that negatively affect the numbers of lymphoid and myeloid
cells,
−

 growing evidence has led to the belief that
anticancer Pt complexes can also exploit the host immunity to enhance
their antitumor efficacy. Some of the immunomodulatory effects of CDP that have been discovered
−

 include (1) decreased
frequency of MDSCs; (2) upregulation
of immune stimulatory molecules (e.g., MHC-I); (3) modulation of STAT signaling;
,
 and (4) regulation of tumor-specific antigen (e.g., PD-L1).
,
 Besides immunomodulatory Pt­(II) complexes, several advantages offered
by the Pt­(IV) platform including better biological inertness, lower
side effects, reduced systemic toxicities, and greater utilization
of chemical spaces, could prove to be a silver bullet in tackling
issues with conventional immunotherapy of CRC. Other than being useful
for tuning chemical properties, the extra chemical spaces in the Pt­(IV)
complexes can be used to integrate bioactivate molecules that can
influence the antitumor immunity or alter the immunosuppressive TME.
As a result, new Pt­(IV) complexes with different modes of action that
target immunologically “cold” tumors have been developed.
Therefore, we envision that Pt-based chemo-immunotherapeutics could
be the novel way forward for improving the treatment of immunologically
“cold” tumors such as pMMR/MSS CRC.
7.2.1.

## OXP-
and CDP-Based Pt­(IV) Complexes

OXP can paradoxically
promote immune escape by upregulating
IDO expression, an enzyme that causes
local immune suppression via kynurenine production. Upregulation of IDO also resulted in tryptophan
depletion to trigger amino-acid sensing signal-transduction pathways
such as GCN2 kinase and mTOR, which are responsible for inhibiting
proliferation and differentiation of cytotoxic T cells (e.g., CD8+ and CD4+) and activating Treg.

Recently, an OXP-based triplet prodrug
( ) (37) was
designed to overcome immunosuppression induced by kynurenine biosynthesis
through incorporating aspirin (i.e., COX-2 inhibitor) and 1-methyl-tryptophan (i.e., IDO inhibitor).
While there are already several other publications with IDO-Pt­(IV)
complexes in literature, compound 37 enhanced the anti-PD-1
immunotherapy in the CT26 mouse model by increasing the infiltration
and activation of CD8+ T cells, NK cells, and effector
memory CD8+ T cells, as well as the production of IFN-γ
and TNF. It also reduced the number of Treg cells in the tumor. These
effects were not observed when OXP and inhibitors were
treated simultaneously. Similar approaches using dual-functional liposomes
with OXP (IV)-conjugated phospholipid (38) and IDO inhibitor (i.e., NLG919) or
metformin also achieved effective ICD
induction and reversal of immunosuppressive TME in CT26 mouse models
such as enhanced DC maturation, increased intratumoral CD8+ T-cells infiltration, decreased Treg, and secretion of TNF-α
and IFN-γ. Met-OXP­(IV)-liposome was also found
to stimulate M1-like macrophage polarization and synergise with anti-PD-1
immune checkpoint blockade therapy.

 Another approach that has shown to be effective in enhancing the
phagocytic clearance of OXP-treated cancer cells is compound 39, which combines RRx-001, a nitric oxide donor, with OXP. RRx-001 modulates TAM polarization
from immunosuppressive M2 to immunoinflammatory M1, and reduces the expression of CD47, a “do not eat
me” signal, on cancer cells. Compound 39 significantly reduced CD47 levels and increased the ratio
of CRT/CD47 on the surface of CT26 cells in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, compound 39 effectively reduced the hypoxic TME mediated by HIF-1α, increased
the ratio of M1/M2 macrophages, enhanced the infiltration of CD3+ and CD8+ T cells, decreased Treg cells, and increased
the production of immunostimulatory cytokines such as IL-12, TNF-α,
and IFN-γ, thereby reversing the immunosuppressive hypoxic TME
of CT26 in vivo.
A novel nanomedicine approach,
compound 40, was developed
to overcome the immunosuppressive TME that limits the effectiveness
of ICI therapy. Compound 40 is composed of polymeric all-trans-retinoic acid
(ATRA) and a Pt­(IV) prodrug of OXP. The design rationale
is to combine OXP with the immune activation by ATRA,
which has been previously reported to stimulate inflammatory TME by
promoting CD8+ T Cell proliferation and inhibiting MDSCs.
,,

In vitro, compound 40 delivered OXP to MC38 cells and induced all
ICD hallmarks. In vivo, treatment of compound 40 in MC38 mouse model significantly reduced the immunosuppressive
MDSCs and increased the pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages and CD8+ T cells. It has been found that the antitumor effect of compound 40 was mainly mediated by CD8+ T cells rather than
direct cytotoxicity and was enhanced by cotreatment with anti-PD-L1
immune checkpoint blockade. Refer to for other examples of Pt drug encapsulation
in delivery systems.
An OXP-based prodrug that
combines OXP with a triggering receptor expressed on
myeloid cells 2 (TREM2)
inhibitor (i.e., artesunate) to target and inhibit TREM2 expression
on TAMs was reported (41). This concept of exploting
therapeutic activation of pro-inflammatory macrophages to enhance
antitumor immunity is similar to a formyl peptide receptors (FPRs)
binding ligand conjugated CDP-based prodrug Pt­(IV)-WKYMVm
 (42) that has been previously
developed by Ang and coworkers.

Compound 41 demonstrated that it can effectively inhibit
TREM2 expression on macrophages both in vitro and in vivo for CRC. TAMs in human
tumors express high levels of TREM2, which triggers immune reprogramming
that favors tumor survival and reduces antitumor immunity. Patients
with high TREM2 expression have worse outcomes and survival rates.
Even though the reduction efficiency of compound 41 under
chemical reductive environment is low, it can still cause significant
DNA damage to HCT116 cells. Compound 41 also reshapes
the immunosuppressive TME in MC38 in vivo mouse model
by inducing THP-1 macrophage M1 polarization, encouraging DCs maturations,
and enhancing immune infiltration of CD8+ T cells and NK
cells.
In addition to IDO upregulation, OXP and CDP treatments were also found to upregulate PD-L1 and PD-L2
expression
in various cancer and myeloid cells.
,,,,,
 High PD-L1 levels can impair
the T-cells cytotoxicity and antitumor immunity of tumor cells and
DCs, but also sensitize tumor cells
to ICI therapies. As a result, PD-L1 is currently a FDA-approved prognostic
marker for ICI therapies. Flurbiprofen,
a COX inhibitor and NSAID, can bind to PD-L1 and reverse immunosuppressive
TME to enhance cancer treatment efficacy. A CDP-based
Pt­(IV) prodrug (43) with flurbiprofen on both axial positions
was developed and found to inhibit tumor growth and spread by suppressing
inflammation. Other than activating
the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway, this complex can also stimulate
T-cell immunity by increasing CD8+ T cell infiltration
and reducing PD-L1 expression in CT26 tumors in vivo.
Tranilast, a drug approved clinically for inflammatory disorders
and allergies, has been reported for its efficacy in preventing human
breast cancer metastasis and cytostatic activity in various cancers.
Although unclear, the antiproliferative mechanism of Tranilast is
suspected to be involving inflammatory pathways such as TGF-β
pathway, MMP-2/9 production, or activation of NF-kB, PKC and MAPK.
Compound 44 is a Pt­(IV) prodrug derived from CDP and Tranilast. Compound 44 exhibited enhanced cytotoxicity against colon and lung cancer cells in vitro compared to CDP, but reduced toxicity
against immune cells. Moreover, compound 44 was evaluated ex vivo using tumor explants from CRC patients and demonstrated
strong induction of intratumoral cytotoxicity and increased the infiltration
of CD45+ immune cells.

7.2.2.

## Immunogenic
Cell Death (ICD) Inducers

PT-112 (Imifoplatin)
is a novel Pt­(II) anticancer
agent that is structurally analogous to OXP, but with
the oxalate ligand replaced with pyrophosphate. Despite its lower intracellular uptake,
,

PT-112 exhibits higher potency against CDP- and CBP-resistant cell lines due to its unique mode
of action.
,−

 Notably, PT-112 efficiently induces ICD in HCT116 human
colon cancer cells in vitro by emitting ICD-associated
DAMPs. The ability for PT-112 to act as an ICD inducer was further demonstrated in CT26 and MC38 in vivo, which resulted in enhanced immune infiltrations
and synergism with anti-PD-1 blockade immunotherapy.
,
 The antiproliferative and immunostimulatory effects of PT-112 is likely to be the result of nucleolar stress and ribosomal biogenesis
(RiBi) interruption, which led to nucleolar protein relocalization
and increase of free ribosomal proteins, respectively. Additionally, these effects can also cause
ER stress and pro-apoptotic protein transportation to the mitochondria. PT-112 has been tested in clinical trials (i.e., NCT02266745
and NCT03409458) and has shown remarkable and durable responses in
patients with advanced lung, liver, and prostate cancers who did not
respond to other standard treatments.
−

 This may be due to
the fact that the pyrophosphate ligand confers greater biochemical
stability, resulting in enhanced pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
properties, as well as accumulation in the lung, liver, and bones.
,,,
 This could also explain the reduced side effects of PT-112 when administered to patients. Furthermore, PT-112 has
shown promising results in combination with avelumab, an ICI that
targets PD-L1, in clinical trials.
−

The ability of
a series of Pt-based anticancer drugs, both existing and emerging,
to trigger ICD was screened based on CT26 in vitro assays performance such as J774A.1 macrophage phagocytosis efficacy,
ICD-related DAMPs expression, and ER ROS production. Among the library, Pt-NHC, an ER targeting
compound that was originally designed to cause ER stress, emerged as the most potent ICD inducer, as
it significantly increased the uptake of tumor cells by cocultured
J774 macrophages compared to other Pt complexes. Pt-NHC also exhibited all three biological markers of ICD induction (e.g.,
ecto-CRT exposure, extracellular HMGB1 and ATP release). It was then
discovered that ER ROS, rather than cytotoxicity, was correlated with
phagocytosis ability. Furthermore, phagocytosis activity could be
modulated by coating recombinant CRT on the surface or blocking it
with a CRT blocking peptide.
After successfully identifying Pt-NHC as a potent
type II ICD inducer, structural optimization of Pt-NHC led to the discovery of PlatinER with superior ICD
properties. By using similar in vitro testing strategies in CT26 cells, PlatinER displayed comparable performance with equipotent Pt-NHC in terms of phagocytotic ability, extracellular HMGB1 release and
ecto-CRT exposure. Similar to Pt-NHC, PlatinER triggered partial ER stress response through the PERK/eIF2a pathway.
However, PlatinER additionally elicited ecto-HSP90 expression
as an additional “eat-me” signal, which was not observed
from Pt-NHC.
Another Pt­(IV) complex that has been found to be
able to induce
ICD in CRC is the photoactivable trans,trans,trans-[Pt­(N3)2(OH)2(py)2] (46). Other than its DNA binding ability,
,
 compound 46 can release products such as azidyl radicals, hydroxyl
radicals, nitrene, and singlet oxygen that can trigger other biochemical
pathways.
,
 Furthermore, ROS and reactive
nitrogen species (RNS) produced during the photoactivation of compound 46 could also contribute to the ICD induction. While the biological
ICD hallmarks were confirmed on human ovarian A2780 cell line, the
irradiation of 420 nm blue light on trans,trans,trans-[Pt­(N3)2(OH)2(py)2] treated CT26 cells significantly
induced phagocytosis by cocultured J774.A1 macrophages.

7.3.

## Drug Delivery Strategies for CRC
7.3.1.

## Encapsulation
into Drug Delivery Systems
Conventional development of chemotherapeutics,
including Pt drugs,
is challenged by the lack of replication of drug efficacy between in vitro and in vivo models.
,,,
 For instance, 56MESS, a Pt­(II) scaffold of compound 24, was significantly more potent than CDP in inhibiting
cellular viability in vitro but demonstrated no significant
antitumoral activity compared to CDP
in vivo. Similarly, another Pt­(II) complex
demonstrated nearly 8-fold improved anticancer potency compared to CDP
in vitro but observed no significant
improvement of the antitumor efficacy in vivo. An attributing reason to this discrepancy between in vitro and in vivo efficacy is the limited
amount of active that reaches the tumor site. In order to address
this limitation, alternative strategies are required to enhance the
availability of the drug at the diseased area and thus the in vivo efficacy of Pt­(IV) complexes. Nanoparticles have
been used clinically for the treatment of various forms of cancers.
By virtue of their dimensions (i.e., 50–200 nm), intravenously
injected nanoparticles are able to accumulate at the tumor tissue
passively over time through the enhanced permeability and retention
(EPR) effect ( ). This phenomenon
arises from the rapid angiogenesis of tumor tissue, creating leaky
vasculature through which nanoparticles are able to extravasate from
the circulatory system and reach the tumor tissue. The poor lymphatic
drainage system at the tumor also reduces the clearance of the nanoparticles,
allowing them to accumulate over time. Moreover, nanoparticles can impart beneficial attributes to otherwise
unfavorable drugs such as increased aqueous solubility, longer circulation
time, increased bioavailability,
,
 and codelivery
of several bioactive agents for combination therapy.

 Several nanomedicines have been successfully developed
and received
FDA approval for treating various cancers ( ). Doxil was one of the first successful nanoparticle
formulations that is used for the treatment of solid tumors from ovarian
cancer, Kaposi’s sarcoma, and myeloma.
Doxil is able to mitigate the cardiotoxicity
of doxorubicin (DOX) through distinctively increasing the relative
accumulation of DOX at the tumor compared to the heart. Likewise,
other nanoparticle formulations approved by the FDA significantly
reduce the toxicity as well as improve the plasma availability and
circulation time of the chemotherapeutic drugs ( ), resulting in improved overall
survival and quality of life for patients.
 Interestingly,
nanoformulation that includes Pt drugs as the chemotherapeutic
agents have yet to be approved by the FDA. However, several CDP-encapsulated nanoparticles, such as LiPlaCis and Nanoplatin, are undergoing clinical trials for
various solid tumors ( ).
−

LiPlaCis, a novel liposome for CDP, was
designed to be degraded by secretory phospholipase A2 that is relatively
abundant in tumor tissue. The selective
and targeted release of CDP in tumor tissue enabled by
this formulation was designed to significantly reduce the associated
systemic toxicity from off-target Pt accumulation.
 Besides those in clinical trials, further developments are being
made for the loading and delivery of Pt drugs in other forms of nanoparticles
( ). These include lipid-based nanoparticles (e.g., nanostructured
lipid carriers), polymer-based nanoparticles (e.g., polymersomes),
carbon-based nanoparticles (e.g., graphene-based nanoparticles), and
gold-based nanoparticles ( ). For instance, Tummala et
al. delivered OXP using hybrid lipid-polymer nanoparticles
conjugated with anti-TRAIL antibodies. The nanoparticle formulation
demonstrates strong tumor growth inhibition as compared to free OXP. Moreover, the anti-TRAIL antibodies on the surface of
the nanoparticles result in a synergistic antiapoptotic effect by
both targeting the HT-29 CRC cells and activating the death receptors.

 Besides solely loading Pt-based
drugs, multiple drugs can be coloaded
into nanoformulations for synergistic effects. For instance, Li et
al. coloaded CBP and paclitaxel into phosphonated calixarenes,
which are a macrocycles or cyclic oligomers. Interestingly, Guo et al. formulated a nanoprecipitate of OXP and folinic acid into a PEGylated lipid nanoparticle. The lipid nanoparticles were also decorated
with aminoethyl anisamide to target the CRC cells. The targeted nanoformulation
with 5-FU was able to induce stronger synergistic chemo-immunotherapy
without significant toxicity as compared to the free drugs mixture.
Moreover, the anticancer mechanism is not limited to the promotion
of cell death of cancer cells. These loaded Pt-based nanoformulation
can also suppress the growth of blood vessels within the solid tumor.
Abu-Lila et al. utilized the PEGylated cationic liposomes loaded with OXP to suppress angiogenesis in dorsal air sac model. Additionally, the use of metal nanoparticles,
such as gold-based nanoparticles, provides the potential for photothermal
therapy. Lee et al. utilized gold nanoshells loaded with Pt­(DACH)­Cl

2
 for the treatment of HT-29 xenograft tumor. The tumors were irradiated with 1W/cm2 NIR (808 nm) for 10 min after the IV administration of the loaded
gold nanoshells. The combination of chemotherapy and photothermal
therapy suppressed the growth of tumor over a period of 30 days. Gold
nanoparticles can also contribute to radiosensitization. In a separate
study, liposomes loaded with gold nanoparticles and CBP, together with 10 Gy of radiation, significantly slowed HCT116 human
CRC xenograft tumor growth progression.

Additionally, surface functionalization of nanoparticles can
enhance
their delivery capabilities. Targeting ligands on the nanoparticles’
surface to target cells facilitates preferential uptake of nanoparticles
through diffusion and/or receptor-mediated endocytosis, potentially overcoming chemoresistance mechanisms
by disfavoring cellular uptake. Some of these receptors overexpressed
by CRC cells include transferrin receptors, EGFR and hyaluronic acid
(HA) receptors. The incorporation of transferrin on the OXP-loaded liposomal surface reduced Colon-26 tumor growth progression in vivo. Liposomes can also
be decorated with cetuximab or cetuximab-Fab′ fragments to
target EGFR-overexpressing CRC cells. OXP encapsulated
in cetuximab-Fab′ fragment-liposomes exhibited higher accumulation
in the tumor. Moreover, the use of EGFR-targeted
liposomes inhibited the growth of SW480 colorectal xenograft tumor. HA is also used as a targeting molecule to
target HA-overexpressing CRC cells. HA-coupled chitosan nanoparticles
loaded with OXP showed enhanced accumulation in the colon
and tumor within 24 h of oral administration, effectively delaying
HT-29 tumor growth in the colon.

However, surface functionalization can often be expensive and challenging
to perform, depending on the specificity of the ligand chosen and
its physical and chemical compatibility with the nanoparticles. In
this regard, nanoparticles originated from biological sources (e.g.,
cells) can demonstrate intrinsic targeting toward cancer cells and
could represent an attractive option in drug delivery.
,
 These biomimetic systems include extracellular vesicles and cell-derived
vesicles, where the cell membranes of natural cells are used to imbue
nanoparticles with characteristics of the original cell. Erythrocyte-cloaked
nanoparticles (e.g., polymeric nanoparticles, iron oxide nanoparticles,
mesoporous nanoparticles, and gold nanocages), for instance, enable
long circulation time by “camouflaging” the nanoparticles
from the mononuclear phagocytotic system.
,
 Extracellular vesicles isolated from milk have been used to deliver OXP to SNU-C5 colorectal tumor xenograft. Additionally, these biomimetic systems can be further engineered
to enhance the accumulation within the tumor. The addition of GE11
peptide targeting EGFR has shown to improve the therapeutic efficacy
of OXP-loaded milk extracellular vesicles in the treatment
of SNU-C5 colorectal tumor xenograft.

7.3.2.

## Targeted Administration and Delivery

OXP, which is currently FDA-approved for the treatment
of CRC, is administered by IV infusion. OXP is administered
to patients over a 2 h period, often in combination with other chemotherapeutics
such as 5-FU and LV. Although IV injections ensure the highest blood
concentrations, patients are subjected to rounds of injections during
treatment. The efficacy of the treatment is also dependent on the
biodistribution of the drugs and their uptake and accumulation inside
the cancerous cells. There are also associated hematological harmful
effects and toxicity to healthy organs caused by off-target accumulation.

Besides the IV route, it could be advantageous
to administer Pt drugs through alternative means to target the colorectal
area more efficiently. The administration of Pt drugs through alternative
methods has been tested in clinical trials for other forms of cancer.
For instance, a sustained release lipid inhalation releasing CDP was evaluated for the treatment of lung cancer. Recent developments also demonstrate that CDP aerosol therapy can be delivered to the lymph nodes in
Stage II lung cancer patients.

Instead of the parenteral route, administration through the enteral
route could allow a direct targeting to the colon and rectum. Although
it is not well-studied clinically, we propose that the oral administration
of Pt-based chemotherapeutics may have added advantages in the treatment
of CRC. The design and development of colon-targeted oral formulations
for Pt-based chemotherapeutics could target the colon directly, increasing
the efficacy while reducing off-target side effects. Some strategies include designing Pt compounds that could
survive the gastrointestinal tract or the loading of Pt compounds
into colon-targeted oral drug delivery systems. Such colon-targeted
oral drug delivery systems take advantage of the physiological conditions
of the colon and have a pH-triggered (e.g., Eudrajit), microbiota-triggered
(e.g., polysaccharides or azo polymers) or time-controlled release
(e.g., hydroxypropyl methylcellulose) of the active drug.
,

A few Pt-based chemotherapeutics have been designed and developed
for oral administration. Even if it was not tested for CRC, Satraplatin was the first orally active Pt drug to be used
in clinical trials.
,
 The lipophilicity and stability
of satraplatin allows for oral administration. Moreover, the efficacy of satraplatin is comparable to CDP and CBP with a reduced
toxicity. Satraplatin has been tested in the treatment
of various cancers in clinical trials, including prostate cancer,
metastatic breast cancer, lung cancer, and brain tumors. Similarly,
Ang and colleagues have developed and screened a series of asymmetric
mono/bis-carboxylated Pt­(IV) complexes ( ), which have shown potential in preclinical
studies involving CRC, both in vitro and in vivo. The effectiveness
of the Pt­(IV) complexes in the colitis-induced in vivo CRC model is likely attributed to their retention in a prodrug form
postoral administration, thereby enhancing cellular uptake and thus
therapeutic effectiveness.
Additionally, other clinically approved
chemotherapeutics (e.g.,
capecitabine and trifluridine/tipiracil) have demonstrated the feasibility
to use orally administered tablets for CRC treatments. Using similar
approach, Pt-based drugs can also be formulated into oral dosage forms.
For instance, Urbanska et al. loaded OXP into lipidoid
encapsulated in alginate microcapsules. The oral delivery of OXP-loaded capsules increases
the OS rate. Another study by Kim et al. demonstrated that tablets
containing OXP loaded using fat employing supercritical
nano system was able to further reduce HT-29 xenograft tumor growth
as compared to IV route. More recently,
Pangeni et al. developed a solid formulation of OXP for
oral administration to treat CRC. A
permeation enhancer was used to complex with OXP and
then mixed with dispersing agents to form a solid amorphous oral formulation.
With this oral formulation, there is a further inhibition in CT26
and HCT116 xenograft tumor growth as compared to the maximum tolerable
dose by IV injection. This signifies the potential of oral administration
in the treatment of CRC while reducing the adverse side effects associated
to chemotherapy.

7.3.3.

## HIPEC and PIPAC for mCRC
Peritoneal
metastases (PMs) are common for late-stage gastrointestinal cancers,
including mCRC, and associated with poor prognosis. PMs respond poorly to systemic chemotherapy and adversely
affect patients’ quality of life. Intraperitoneal chemotherapy
(IPC) has been developed as an alternative delivery modality to treat
PMs that could improve drug concentrations at the affected tissue
and reduce systemic toxicities. In IPC,
chemotherapeutic drug solutions are typically administered at high
concentrations directly into the peritoneal cavity via catheters and irrigated using a perfusion machine. In the case of OXP, the drug solutions are also heated to 41–43 °C
during treatment as higher temperature has been shown to improve therapeutic
outcomes through increasing cytotoxicity and ensuring better tissue
penetration. This modality of delivering OXP at elevated
temperatures is known as hyperthermic intraperitoneal perioperative
chemotherapy (HIPEC), and it is typically performed in conjunction
with cytoreductive surgery (CRS). This
is in part due to the need to install catheters, which would require
surgical access to the patient’s abdomen. A typical HIPEC procedure
ranges from 30 to 120 min and the peritoneal cavity is flushed with
saline after treatment. It should be noted that there are conflicting
data on the effectiveness of OXP-based HIPEC for treatment
of PMs arising from mCRC following CRS vs CRS alone, despite its wide
adoption.
−

The invasive nature of HIPEC has led
to the development of other ways of delivering OXP into
the peritoneal cavity. One such technique known as pressurized intraperitoneal
aerosol chemotherapy (PIPAC) involves nebulizing OXP solution
into an aerosol and then introducing it into the patient’s
abdomen via laparoscopy.
,
 It is a significantly less invasive procedure since only small incisions
are required for the trocar and nebuiliser injector. Several clinical
trials have established the efficacy, safety and tolerance of PIPAC,
with minimal systemic uptake.
−

 At this time, PIPAC is only
indicated for patients with advanced peritoneal carcinomatosis when
other options such as CRS or systemic chemotherapy are not viable.

7.4.

## Chemoradiotherapy as an
Emerging Strategy
The hypoxic TME is known to contribute
significantly to the development
of radioresistance for cancer radiotherapy.
,
 Consequently, a variety of radiosensitizers have been integrated
into clinical treatment regimens to enhance therapeutic efficacy of
radiotherapy. For instance, 5-FU was among the first compounds recognized
for its enhanced efficacy in conjunction with radiotherapy compared
to radiotherapy alone for the treatment of CRC. On top of it, transition metal compounds have also been
designed to be radiosensitizers for cancer radiotherapy. In addition to radiosensiting effects, chemoradiotherapeutic
agents could be designed to maximize eradication of tumor cells while
simultaneously minimize the negative impacts on surrounding healthy
tissues.
A novel class of chemoradiotherapeutic prodrugs activated
by radiotherapy has emerged in recent times.
−

OXP has shown promise as a chemoradiotherapeutic agent
as supported by in vitro and in vivo results from preclinical studies,
−

 although the clinical outcomes
have been inconsistent.
,−

 Recent discovery found that hydrated electrons (e–
aq) generated from radiotherapy dose of X-ray can be used
as a reliable source of reductant to efficiently reduce and activate
Pt­(IV) prodrugs (47). Upon
X-ray irradiation, these Pt­(IV) prodrugs can readily release their
active Pt­(II) precursors (e.g., CDP, OXP, CBP, nedaplatin, picoplatin, lobaplatin, transplatin), along with
their associated axial ligands such as (3-carboxypropyl) triphenyl
phosphonium (CTPP), coumarin, succinic acid in physiologically related
solvents. Moreover, OXP-derived Pt­(IV) compounds have
demonstrated markedly enhanced anticancer activity when exposed to
radiotherapy-dose X-ray (i.e., 4 Gy) on CRC models like HCT116 and
HT-29 both in vitro and in vivo,
outperforming the non-irradiated controls. Additionally, the hypoxic
TME appears to have minimal impact on the release of active OXP from the Pt­(IV) prodrugs by radiation. These discoveries
underscore the potential of radiotherapy-induced Pt­(IV) prodrugs activation
as a compelling strategy for in situ prodrug activation,
complementing chemotherapy’s efficacy when combined with radiotherapy.

7.5.

## Therapeutic Strategies Against OIPN
The
onset of OIPN in patients depends on numerous factors, among
which the administered dose at each cycle and the cumulative dose.
In patients with acute OIPN, depending on the neurological assessment
between consecutive cures and to avoid the appearance of chronic OIPN,
the administered dose may be diminished, the chemotherapy protocol
changed or the treatment stopped. While no clinically approved preventive
or therapeutic solution exists, numerous approaches to prevent, treat,
or alleviate OIPN and its symptoms have been evaluated over the last
decades, including both pharmacological ( ) or nonpharmacological methods, following the identification
of OIPN mechanisms.
,,
 To mitigate the systemic toxicities caused by Pt­(II) drugs, a wide
range of strategies, including combination therapies, have been explored.
In the context of CRC, various medications have been developed to
prevent or manage OIPN, among which antioxidants, anti-inflammatory
agents or ion channel modulators have been proposed. Although significantly
less explored, other strategies, such as the use of Pt­(IV) prodrugs,
are also being actively developed for this purpose.
 7.5.1.

## Nonpharmacological Approaches against OIPN
Several nonpharmacological approaches have been evaluated against
CIPN. Among those that have reached clinical evaluations, reviewed
elsewhere recently, could be cited,
for example, acupuncture (NCT­0588­2396, NCT­0585­0130,
NCT­0450­5553), ultrasound therapy (NCT­0395­8747),
physical exercise (NCT­0351­5356), or compression therapy.
A short focus will be given here to cryotherapy.
Before being
evaluated in the context of CIPN, cryotherapy received attention for
its beneficial effect in alleviating other chemotherapy-induced side-toxicity,
in particular alopecia, oral mucositis and nail toxicity. After decades of studies, scalp cooling devices
received FDA approval to reduce chemotherapy-induced hair loss. Cryotherapy
consists in cooling the extremities of the patients while they receive
chemotherapeutic treatment. The vasoconstrictive effect of the cooling
is hypothesized to limit the local delivery and accumulation of the
chemotherapy and therefore its toxicity to the nerves in the extremities.
Several studies and clinical trials evaluated the efficacy and the
safety of different cryotherapy implementations, mostly involving
taxane-based chemotherapies (e.g., paclitaxel, docetaxel). Most of the studies support the use of cryotherapy
to reduce CIPN symptoms in paclitaxel-receiving patients, leading
this method to progress in clinical practice and considered as a preventive
approach.
,

In the context of Pt-based
chemotherapies, a recent trial involving
breast cancer patients that received CBP reported that
patients using ice gloves and boots showed milder CIPN symptoms than
patients not receiving cryotherapy.

Relative to taxanes, and because of the induced cold hypersensitivity
(the patients being advised to avoid cold touch), the available data
on the use of cryotherapy in the context of OXP treatment
is more limited ( ). In a study evaluating the use of frozen gloves in OXP-treated patients, no significant beneficial effects were
observed but the discontinuation rates of the patients receiving cryotherapy
(one-third in total due to discomfort) was not different whether they
received OXP or taxanes. A recent phase II clinical trial on OXP-receiving patients
with cancers in the digestive system evaluated cryotherapy using a
continuous cooling of hands and feet at a constant temperature, named
hilotherapy. This approach was described
to be well tolerated and to reduce acute OIPN symptoms. More work
is needed to further evaluate the potential benefits of cryotherapy
in the context of OIPN and to develop cryotherapy methods combining
patients’ compliance and ease of implementation.
 
7.5.2.

## Rodent Models for OIPN Studies
This section briefly
discusses the most widely used in vivo immunocompetent
rodent models in the study and assessment of OIPN.
,
 Detailed information on these models can be found in the 2020 review
from Calls et al.

Different animal
strains have been used in in vivo models of OIPN,
among which C57BL/6 and Balb/C mice are the most frequent and Balb/C
mice being the most susceptible to neurotoxicity development. Rat models, generally more prone to OXP’s toxicity than mice, include Wistar and Sprague-Dawley strains.
Intraperitoneal (IP) injections are more frequent although IV administration
was also described. There is little established consensus on OIPN
models and evaluation, and models differ in animals’ species,
strains, age, sex, cumulated dose, and injection schedules ( ). Because of this variation,
phenotypic outcomes obtained with behavioral tests can be contradictory
for the same species. In the case of Balb/C mice, most experiments
have been performed on healthy animals without a tumor xenograft,
and cumulated doses typically vary from 30 to 90 mg of OXP/kg of body weight. The durations of the experiments also vary depending
on injection schedules and range from 2 weeks to 3 months. Most experiments
were performed on adult male individuals, even though it has been
reported that female individuals are more sensitive to OIPN.

 Classically
performed behavioral tests comprise the Von Frey test
to evaluate mechanical hypersensitivity,
,
 and the cold plate and acetone test to measure cold hypersensitivity
(acute symptoms). Contradictory results
between hyperalgesia and hypoesthesia have been published and such
behavioral tests only reflect some of the OIPN clinical symptoms associated
with pain. Neuropathy assessment includes the quantification of the
loss in IENF density in skin biopsies of hind paws (immunohistological
IHC studies with PGP9.5 antibody), studies
on DRG samples and sections (IHC studies), and isolated sciatic nerves
to characterize axonal damage and demyelination (IHC with Luxol Blue
staining, determination of G-ratio, shown to increase, confocal microscopy).
Important features are nerve conduction studies, which are however
not systematically carried out and if so, with significant variability
across studies. The variability in the described models including
variations in the injection schedules and administration route, the
cumulative total doses, the animal strains/age/sex that show different
sensitivities and behaviors, and the
different neuropathy assessment methods (behavioral tests, molecular
characterizations of OIPN) ( ), makes systematic comparisons between studies unrealistic.
Finally, most of the in vivo models consist of
healthy animals and very few models have been used to evaluate neuropathy
in rodents with tumors (CT26 xenograft in Balb/C mice).
,,
 The presence of a solid tumor
can alter the evaluated drugs’ pharmacokinetics and such a
model appears more clinically relevant. The same administration schedules,
duration of the experiments and therefore accessible stages of neuropathy,
are however more restrained in tumor-bearing models. We believe both
healthy and tumor-bearing mice models provide complementary information
and the latter should be further implemented in order to determine
the systemic side effects of the newly developed chemotherapeutic
agents.

7.5.3.

## Combination Treatments for OIPN
The combination treatments’ approaches against OIPN include
targeting molecular mechanisms and pathways, such as sodium, potassium
or TRP channels, glutamate or monoamine nervous systems, oxidative stress, inflammatory responses and Pt transporters,
and have been extensively reviewed.
,,,

A number of in vitro models using tumor-derived neuron-like cells of
human or murine origin have been described and used for the study
of the mechanisms of OXP neurotoxicity and to evaluate
therapeutic approaches against OIPN. Different in vivo models for preclinical studies
of OIPN have also been described,
,
 as briefly
introduced above in .
Na+ and K+ have been
reported to display
crucial roles in the development of acute peripheral neuropathy. Na+ channels have been traditionally related to the induction
of acute cold hypersensitivity, and K+ channels regulate
sensory neuronal pain and excitability. The expression of K+ channels such as TWIK-related K+ channel 1 (TREK-1) and
TWIK-related arachidonic acid-stimulated K+ channel (TRAAK)
has been shown to be altered by OXP in the DRG of rodents.
,
 Ion channel modulators are therefore potential therapeutic options
for alleviating OIPN. In this regard, several drugs known for their
voltage-gated sodium or calcium channels inhibitory properties, have
been reported to display neuroprotective activities in the context
of CIPN.
,,,
 Analgesics like capsaicin, lidocaine, and
morphine, antidepressants such as amitriptyline, cholinesterase inhibitors such as donepezil,
,
 renin–angiotensin system modulators such as Ramipril, among others, can reduce symptoms by acting
on neurotransmission. Anticonvulsants such as carbamazepine or gabapentine
reduce excitatory neurotransmitters and target voltage-gated calcium
channels. However, all these drugs show secondary deleterious effects.
More recently, Alberti et al. reported prevention of OXP-induced both acute and chronic peripheral neuropathy in female Wistar
rats when treated in combination with topiramate, another voltage-gated
sodium channel modulator. In this study,
acute neuropathy was assessed through sensory nerve’s threshold
observation, while chronic neuropathy was evaluated at neurophysiological,
behavioral, and neuropathological levels. Since topiramate is already
clinically approved for the treatment of epilepsy and migraines and
shows minimal detrimental effects, it
presents a promising candidate for further preclinical investigations
in the context of OIPN.
As extensively covered by Stankovic
et al. in 2020, exogenous antioxidants
usually employed as
supplementation treatments were investigated, including vitamins (e.g.,
C, E, or K), minerals (e.g., manganese, selenium or zinc), carotenoids,
and other molecules such as lipoic acid, d-methionine, carnosine
or omega-3-fatty acids. Supplementation of ROS scavengers in combination
with OXP might compensate for OXP-induced
glutathione depletion and re-establish redox homeostasis in healthy
cells.
Antioxidants of synthetic origin have also been largely
evaluated
to reduce oxidative stress in neurons in rodent models, with some
encouraging results. Among them, (Mn)-based
complexes, mimicking superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme and therefore
able to catalyze the dismutation of two superoxide anions (O2
·–) into H2O2 and dioxygen, have been widely studied in anticancer strategies
,
 and in OIPN prevention (48–51).
Mangafodipir, an MRI contrast
agent also displaying SOD-mimicking properties, has been shown to
improve the therapeutic index of OXP and prevent OIPN
under both preclinical and clinical studies.
,
 The preventive use of SOD mimics based on different scaffolds was
further explored in OIPN animal models by Guillaumot et al. in 2019 and Prieux-Klotz et al. in 2022. The open-chain diamine complex Mn1 (49) was an excellent candidate due to its antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory properties in various in vitro and in vivo models.
,
 Remarkably, when combined with OXP in CT26-bearing
Balb/C mice, Mn1 displayed neuroprotective activity as observed in
behavioral tests and electrophysiological recordings. This Mn­(II) complex and its derivatives, all
bearing a positive charge, could display improved cell penetrative
properties with respect to mangafodipir and are therefore excellent
candidates for further preclinical investigations. and present selected examples of antioxidants that have shown a neuroprotective
activity in preclinical models of OIPN in mice or rats.
 Nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), a transcription
factor that regulates the expression of antioxidant enzymes and detoxification
proteins, is an interesting target in the prevention of OIPN. Dimethyl
fumarate, an electrophilic Nrf2 activator approved for multiple sclerosis,
was shown to protect against axonal degeneration of rats’ sciatic
nerves.
−

 Anti-inflammatory agents such as minocycline
or rapamycin prevented neuronal damage in rats. Inhibitors of Pt transporters
involved in Pt accumulation in DRG were also evaluated. Cimetidine
and dasatinib, OCT2 inhibitors, showed
some prevention of mechanical allodynia in mice, and ergothioneine, an OCTN1 inhibitor, showed a beneficial effect
on mechanical allodynia in rats. Of note, inhibition of OCTN2 by L-carnithine,
failed to do so. A significant number of clinical trials involving
molecular approaches mentioned above were also conducted without much
success, and are covered in a few recent reviews.
,

A list of pharmacological treatments evaluated in clinical
trials
of OXP-based chemotherapy-treated patients is proposed
in . Among these, Duloxetine, a serotonin–norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitor used to treat depressive disorders, is the only
recommended drug (moderately recommended) by the American Society
of Clinical Oncology, to treat neuropathic pain, although its efficacy
is still debated. To counteract oxalate’s
effect on sodic channels, calcium/magnesium infusions were evaluated
without success.
,−

 Goshajinkigan, a traditional Japanese medicine acting on TRP channels,
gave contradictory results.
−

Antioxidants such as α-lipoic
acid, glutathione or vitamin
E, or the anti-inflammatory minocycline failed to show any improvement
in neuropathy or pain score. The Ca2+ channel inhibitor
pregabalin was studied in several clinical trials that gave differential
results. Further validation of its potential efficacy is therefore
needed. Calmangafodipir reached phase III trials (POLAR A and M) in
CRC patients, although it gave negative results, with no OIPN reduction
after 9 months. The negative charge
of the complex was suspected to cause low cell penetration and possible
redox reactions between the Mn­(II) and Pt­(II) centers, due to a very
close in time administration, were presumably the causes of the negative
effect in the last clinical trial.
,
 Riluzole,
which inhibits the accumulation of glutamate, has entered a phase
II trial.

In summary, many strategies
have been studied in animal models
of OIPN, with some success, most of them alleviating acute OIPN symptoms
and only a few showing preventive activity. These drugs must neither
reduce OXP antitumoral efficacy nor generate additional
side effects. There remains a gap between preclinical animal studies
and clinical trials, where only a few compounds have been evaluated
with very limited positive outcomes. Although efficient solutions
have yet to be developed, some target candidates for neuroprotection
and prevention of nerve damage have been identified. More efforts are necessary to evaluate and
characterize the mode of action of potential preventive strategies
and to develop assessment methods in animal models that better reflect
clinical symptoms in order to bridge that gap.

7.5.4.

## Pt­(IV) Strategy in the
Context of OIPN
Although vastly less explored, other strategies,
such as the use
of Pt­(IV) prodrugs are also under current development. The Pt­(IV)
strategy can also be exploited in the context of OIPN prevention for
several reasons. First, mediated uptake of Pt­(IV) prodrugs might differ
from that of their Pt­(II) counterparts. The toxicity profiles of Pt­(IV)
prodrugs are far from being completely deciphered and their neurotoxicity,
including accumulation in DRG, has been poorly characterized so far.
For instance, unlike CDP, it has been reported that dicarboxylato CDP-based Pt­(IV) prodrugs are not substrates
for CTR1 transporters. However, OXP and its Pt­(IV) derivatives seem to be equally internalized via OCTs. Furthermore, the
uptake of CDP-based Pt­(IV) complexes via OCT2 might be dependent on the symmetric or unsymmetric functionalization
of such complexes. The role of solute
and membrane transporters for Pt­(IV) complexes is, nevertheless, less
explored than for their Pt­(II) analogs. Overexpression of transporters
in certain tissues (e.g., OCT2 is typically expressed in neurons and
is thought to play an essential role in OXP accumulation
in DRG) might drastically modify the
therapeutic consequences of said prodrugs. Such parameters are key
for understanding Pt­(IV) complexes’ off-target effects.

On the other hand, the further functionalization
achieved by the introduction of two additional axial ligands enables
the introduction of neuroprotective moieties ( ). In this regard, the only
Pt­(IV) prodrugs described for this purpose up to date were reported
by Prieux-Klotz et al. in 2022 and were bearing a Mn­(II) complex derived
from SOD mimic Mn1 (PtC1Mn
x) (50 and 51). Although
poor stability upon Mn­(II) coordination was shown, PtC1Mn1 reported lower antitumoral activity mainly due to a lower effective
Pt dose but an improved therapeutic index (in terms of asthenia, alopecia,
diarrhea and weight loss).
 The evaluation of Pt­(IV) complexes in the context of neurotoxicity
and peripheral neuropathy is still in its infancy. They present a
very interesting opportunity to combine optimized antitumoral activity
along with a better toxicity profile with reduced neurotoxicity arising
from reduced accumulation in the PNS components and protective activity
in healthy cells provided by the axial ligands. This deserves active
investment from Pharma companies.

8.

## Conclusion
and Outlook
In this review, we have described the current
approaches in treating
colorectal cancer (CRC) and the drawbacks and shortcomings of the
various methods, focusing on the roles that Pt anticancer agents play
as first-line treatment in several malignancies. Although Pt­(II) anticancer
drugs are simple cytotoxic agents that lack selectivity for cancer
cells and cause severe side effects, they have been effectively used
in the clinic for over four decades. Remarkably, even today, amid
the era of targeted drugs, precision medicine and immunotherapy, nearly
half of all chemotherapy regimens include at least one Pt drug.
Nonetheless, the primary challenges with traditional Pt drugs include
the lack of selectivity, severe side effects (e.g., nephrotoxicity
and neurotoxicity), and the development of drug resistance. OXP, commonly used for CRC, is particularly associated with
peripheral neuropathy. The severity of the undesirable side effect
is further complicated by the interplay among TME, TIME, and Pt drugs.
This is because TME and TIME play significant roles in influencing
the efficacy of Pt-based drugs in CRC. For instance, the dense structure
and abnormal vasculature of the TME can impede drug delivery to tumor
cells and the extracellular matrix (ECM) can act as a physical barrier,
while hypoxia can alter cellular metabolism and promote survival pathways
that counteract the effects of Pt drugs. Moreover, tumors can create
an immunosuppressive TIME by recruiting Tregs, MDSCs, and producing
inhibitory cytokines, which can reduce the effectiveness of chemotherapy.
Recent strategies that modify the TME or TIME to enhance drug delivery
and immune response are being explored. These include using agents
that normalize blood vessels, modify ECM components, or modulate immune
cell activity. Understanding and targeting these environments can
potentially improve treatment outcomes and overcome resistance.
The discovery of immunomodulatory roles of OXP and
other clinical Pt agents has led to numerous clinical trials exploring
the combination of Pt chemotherapeutics with immunotherapeutics. This
discovery has also broadened the potential use of immunologically
active Pt compounds as small molecule chemo-immunotherapeutics. Contrary
to previous beliefs that classical cytotoxic Pt­(II) anticancer drugs
are detrimental to the patients’ immune system, recent evidence
that have surfaced support their roles in promoting anticancer immunity.
For instance, several Pt­(II) complexes (e.g., OXP, Pt-NHC, PlatinER, and PT-112) have
been found to activate the TIME as immunogenic cell death (ICD) inducers
effective against CRC.
Recent research has focused on developing
Pt­(IV) prodrugs which
are designed to be more stable and less toxic compared to their Pt­(II)
counterparts. These prodrugs can be reduced in the cancer cell to
release the active drug, potentially targeting tumors more effectively
while reducing damage to healthy cells. New strategies involve designing
Pt­(IV) complexes that not only deliver the cytotoxic Pt but also release
additional therapeutic agents (e.g., inhibitors of specific cancer-promoting
pathways) upon reduction. Researchers are also exploring new Pt complexes
with modified ligands to increase efficacy, reduce toxicity, and overcome
resistance. These new analogs are designed to have better pharmacokinetic
properties and target specific cancer cell mechanisms. This multiaction
approach aims to enhance anticancer efficacy and reduce resistance.
In addition, the Pt­(IV) platform extends the potential application
of immunomodulatory Pt­(II) anticancer agents by adding pro-inflammatory
payloads that can reverse the immunosuppressive TIME or compliment
and enhance the immunological effects of the Pt­(II) active core. Therefore,
chemo-immunotherapeutic Pt­(II) and Pt­(IV) complexes appear to be promising
candidates in targeting immunologically “cold” tumors
that are inherently resistant to immunotherapy, such as pMMR/MSS or
dMMR/MSI-Low CRC.
Advances have also been made in developing
nanoparticles and other
delivery systems that encapsulate Pt drugs to improve their selectivity
for cancer cells. These systems can exploit the EPR effect in tumors
or utilize targeting ligands to direct the drugs specifically to cancer
cells. Moreover, combining Pt-based drugs with other treatments, such
as immunotherapies or targeted therapies, is being explored to overcome
resistance and improve efficacy. For instance, combining OXP with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) is under investigation
to enhance immune response against tumors such as lung, head and neck
cancers. With regards to the latter, traditional chemotherapy works
by targeting rapidly dividing cells, which include cancer cells. It
generally lacks specificity, affecting both cancerous and healthy
cells, which leads to side effects. Immunotherapies instead enhance
the immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells in a more
targeted approach. Hence, while chemotherapy remains the standard
treatment for many types of CRC, particularly in the adjuvant and
metastatic settings, immunotherapy has shown to be particularly effective
in dMMR/MSI-High CRCs. For these subtypes, immunotherapy can lead
to durable responses and potentially better outcomes, with side effects
that are no longer associated with the intrinsic toxicity of the compounds,
but rather to immune activation (e.g., skin rashes, diarrhea, fatigue
etc.). Nonetheless, Pt-based drugs remain suitable (and more affordable!)
for a broad range of CRC patients, including those with stable disease
and various molecular profiles. On the other hand, immunotherapy has
the potential to lead to long-term remission in specific subsets of
patients (particularly those with specific genetic markers like MSI-High
or dMMR). Hence, future research should focus on expanding the use
of immunotherapy to a broader range of CRC patients, including those
with MSS CRC tumors. This will involve combining immunotherapy with
other treatments like chemotherapy, targeted therapies, or radiation
to improve efficacy.
While developing new therapeutic modalities
that could address
the shortcoming of Pt drugs, it is also imperative to address some
of the crucial challenges of current treatments: specifically for
CRC, a key priority would be to overcome oxaliplatin-induced peripheral
neuropathy (OIPN). Possible approaches could include reducing the OXP dose or altering the treatment schedule to mitigate the
severity of OIPN without significantly compromising efficacy, as well
as coadministering neuroprotective agents such as calcium (Ca) and
magnesium (Mg) infusions to reduce acute neurotoxicity. More recently,
glutamate modulators like riluzole have shown a promising role by
modulating neuronal excitability, and even vitamin E and glutathione
proved to be beneficial by reducing the oxidative stress associated
with OIPN. In addition, compounds with central effects, including
antidepressants (duloxetine and venlafaxine) and antiepileptic drugs
such as gabapentin seem to help alleviate neuropathic pain and improve
quality of life for patients with OIPN. Emerging strategies have also
been explored by our team, including SOD mimetics that reduce oxidative
damage to nerves.
,
 Alternative approaches, such
as gene therapy, acupuncture and physical therapy hold some promise,
too. Overall, overcoming OIPN requires a multifaceted approach involving
preventive strategies, symptomatic treatments, and ongoing research
to develop more effective therapies. The goal is to maintain the efficacy
of Pt drugs in treating CRC while minimizing its impact on patients’
quality of life.
Very recently, several biomarkers have been
studied to predict
the response to Pt-based chemotherapy in CRC. These biomarkers can
help tailor treatments to improve efficacy and reduce unnecessary
toxicity. Among these, the DNA MMR status and MSI are of particular
relevance as dMMR/MSI-High CRC tumors are known to have a better prognosis
and are typically more sensitive to immunotherapy, but their response
to Pt-based chemotherapy can vary. Alternatively, ERCC1 is involved
in the NER pathway, which repairs Pt-induced DNA damage. High levels
of ERCC1 expression may be associated with resistance to Pt-based
chemotherapy, as the cells can effectively repair the DNA cross-links
caused by the drugs.
Alternatively, specific miRNAs have been
linked to chemotherapy
resistance or sensitivity. They can modulate gene expression post-transcriptionally
and have been explored as potential biomarkers for predicting response
to Pt-based drugs. Lastly, tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes and immune markers, in which certain immune
signatures may correlate with better responses to Pt-based treatments,
represent a valuable tool to predict treatment responses. While these
biomarkers show promise, it is important to note that their clinical
application requires further validation through research and clinical
trials. Only the successful integration of these biomarkers into clinical
practice, combined with personalized treatment plans, will be able
to improve the overall outcomes for CRC patients.
Taken all
these aspects into consideration, the underlying question
is whether we can develop a novel Pt complex that on the one hand
will retain the efficacy of the current Pt drugs and on the other,
will overcome their shortcomings, particularly toxicities and acquired
resistance. This is quite a formidable challenge and, despite many
attempts and several clinical trials of Pt­(IV) complexes, the FDA
has not approved a new Pt drug for over two decades. So how should
chemists go about designing such novel drugs? The structure–activity
relationship (SAR) rules for developing square planar Pt­(II) anticancer
drugs, described in 1973, resulted in seven Pt­(II) drugs approved
for use in humans. Conversely, because no Pt­(IV) complexes were approved
for use in humans, to date, there is no roadmap for the design of
octahedral Pt­(IV) prodrugs. The Pt­(IV) complexes that entered the
clinical trials were all unpretentious prodrugs of the Pt­(II) complexes
with simple axial ligands that were devoid of any anticancer activity.
They were not multitargeting prodrugs. Nevertheless, there are some
important take-home lessons for the design of novel drugs that can
be obtained from the clinical trials of satraplatin, which completed
phase III. Satraplatin was administered orally, attesting
to the stability and inertness of Pt­(IV) compared with more reactive
Pt­(II) drugs that are administered intravenously. A logical starting
point to treat CRC would be to design and prepare dual-action Pt­(IV)
derivatives of OXP with 5-FU, irinotecan or capecitabine
that are coadministered with OXP in the clinic. Designing
reduction-resistant, light-activated dual-action Pt­(IV) derivatives
of OXP, is another attractive approach. Photo- or radio-activable
Pt complexes are designed to become activated only upon exposure to
light or radiation, which can trigger the release of the Pt species
directly at the tumor site. There is ongoing research to optimize
these complexes in terms of their activation wavelengths, tissue penetration,
and stability. Advances in this area could lead to more effective
and safer chemotherapy options.
Taken together, the ability
to enhance efficacy by incorporating
the appropriate bioactive ligands in the axial positions of Pt­(IV)
complexes, coupled with reduced side effects, makes multiaction Pt­(IV)
prodrugs good candidates for treating CRC. Pt­(IV) prodrugs can also
be modified to make them amenable to encapsulation in drug delivery
systems, which should further enhance their efficacy and reduce toxicities.
While promising, these technologies are still in the experimental
stages and they are not yet ready to replace small molecule Pt agents
entirely. Instead, they may complement existing therapies as part
of a broader arsenal of treatment options. Hence, it is unlikely that
small molecule Pt agents will be completely replaced in the near future.
Instead, they may be integrated with new therapies to enhance outcomes.
For instance, combining Pt drugs with immunotherapy or using them
as part of a multimodal approach involving photo- or radio-activation
could improve efficacy. The future likely involves a more personalized
approach, where treatment is tailored based on the genetic and molecular
makeup of the tumor, as well as patient-specific factors. This could
mean selecting the most appropriate therapy or combination of therapies
for each individual patient. Advances in personalized medicine and
combination therapies are expected to shape the future landscape of
CRC treatment. Until then, Pt-based chemotherapy remains a cornerstone
of treatment for most CRC patients.

## Acknowledgments
This work
was supported by the National University
of Singapore, GAP funds (GAP2002023-03-01/A-8001819-00-00 and GAP2002023-03-23/A-8002435-00-00)
and the Ministry of Education (MOE), Singapore, under AcRF Tier 2
grants (T2EP30220-0039/A-0008496-00-00 and T2EP30122-0027), Tier 1
grant (A-8002936-00-00 and A-8002492-00-00) and NAMIC (M23N2K0035/A-8001601-00-00),
the Sorbonne Université (Emergence EMRG-24/2023 (TOTEM)), Ecole
Doctorale de Chimie Moléculaire Paris Centre (ED406), Ligue
contre le Cancer (DOULEUR2024.LCC/HeB), Merlion Project, CNRS International
Emerging Action, and the Singapore Immunology Network, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR).

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
2Dtwo-dimensional
5-FU5-fluorouracil
ABCadenosine triphosphate-binding
cassette
ABCC1ATP-binding
cassette,
subfamily C, member 1
ADCCantibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
AKIacute kidney injury
AKTprotein kinase
B
ANXA1annexin
A1
AOMazoxymethane
APMMadenomatous polyposis
mouse models
ATPadenosine triphosphate
ATRAall-trans-retinoic acid
Bap31B-cell receptor-associated protein
31
BclB-cell lymphoma
CACS15cancer susceptibility
candidate 15
CAFcancer-associated fibroblast
CAIXcarbonic anhydroase IX
CARchimeric antigen receptor
CBPcarboplatin
CBRclinical benefit rate
CCALcolorectal cancer-associated
long noncoding ribonucleic acid
CCLchemokine (C-C motif) ligand
CDPcisplatin
CDXcell derived xenograft model
CIMchemical induced model
CINchromosomal instability
CIPNchemotherapy-induced
peripheral neuropathy
circRNAcircular ribonucleic acid
CMSconsensus molecular subtype
CNAcopy number aberration
COX-2cyclooxygenase-2
CPPcell-penetrating
peptide
CRCcolorectal
cancer
CRISPR-Cas9clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-associated
protein 9
CRScytoreduction
surgery
CRTcalreticulin
CSCcancer stem cell
CTcomputed tomography
CTCcirculating tumor
cell
CTLA-4cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte associated protein 4
CTPP(3-carboxypropyl)­triphenylphosphonium
CTR1copper transporter 1
CTR2copper transporter
2
CXCLchemokine
(C-X-C motif) ligand
DACHdiaminocyclohexane
DACHEXdiamino-4-cyclohexane
DAMPdamage-associated molecular pattern
DCdendritic cell
DCAdichloroacetic acid
DCRdisease control
rate
DEGdifferentially
expressed gene
DIMdiet induced model
DMH1,3-dimethylhydrazine
dMMRdeficient DNA mismatch repair
DNAdeoxyribonucleic acid
DNMTDNA methyltransferase
DORduration of response
DOXdoxorubicin
DRGdorsal root ganglia
DSSdextran sulfate
sodium
ECendothelial
cell
ECMextracellular
matrix
EGFepidermal
growth factor
EGFRepidermal growth factor receptor
eIF2αeukaryotic initiation factor 2 alpha
EMTepithelial–mesenchymal
transition
EORTCEuropean Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
EPRenhanced permeability
and retention
ERendoplasmic reticulum
ERCC1excision repair cross-complementation group 1
ERCC2excision repair cross-complementation
group 2
ERKextracellular
signal-regulated kinase
FPPformyl peptide receptor
FXYD3FXYD domain containing ion transport regulator
3
GALS4galectin
4
GATA6GATA-binding
factor 6
GEAMMgenetically
engineered autochthonous mouse model
GEMMgenetically engineered mice model
GEOGene Expression Omnibus
GSTglutathione S-transferase
HAhyaluronic acid
HDAChistone deacetylase
HDACihistone deacetylase
inhibitor
HDIhuman
development index
HDMhistone demethylase
HIF-1αhypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha
HIPEChyperthermic intraperitoneal perioperative
chemotherapy
HMGA2high-mobility group AT-hook 2
HMGB1high-mobility group box 1
HMThistone methyltransferase
HNPCChereditary nonpolyposis
colon cancer mouse model
HSPheat-shock protein
IGintragastric
IMintramuscular
IPintroperitoneal
IRintrarectal
IVintravenous
IC50
half-maximal inhibitory concentration
ICDimmunogenic cell death
ICIimmune checkpoint inhibitor
IDOindoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase
IENFintraepidermal
nerve fiber
IFN-γinterferon gamma
ILinterleukin
ILCinnate lymphoid cell
iNOSinducible nitric oxide synthase
IPCintraperitoneal chemotherapy
LAG-3lymphocyte-activation
gene 3
LARClocally
advanced rectal cancer
lncRNAlong noncoding ribonucleic acid
LRP1low-density lipoprotein receptor-related
protein 1
LRRlocal
recurrence rate
LRRC8leucine-rich repeat containing 8
LSLynch syndrome
LVleucovorin
MAMmethylazoxymethanol
MAPKmitogen-activated protein kinase
MATE1multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 1,
efflux
mCRCmetastatic
colorectal cancer
MDSmyelodysplastic syndrome
MDSCmyeloid-derived suppressor cell
MHC-Ipeptide-major histocompatibility class I
MHC-IIpeptide-major
histocompatibility class II
miRNAmicroribonucleic acid
MMP-9matrix metalloproteinase-9
MMRDNA mismatch repair
Mnmanganese
MNNG
N-methyl-N-nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine
MNUmethyl nitroso urea
MPSmicrophysiological
system
MRImagnetic
resonance imaging
mRNAmessenger ribonucleic acid
MRP2multidrug resistance-associated protein 2
MSImicrosatellite instability
MSSmicrosatellite
stable
MTDmaximum
tolerated dose
mtDNAmitochondria DNA
mTORmammalian target of rapamycin
NCCNNational Comprehensive Cancer Network
NERnucleotide excision repair
NF-κBnuclear
factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cell
NHC
N-heterocyclic
carbene
NHPnonhuman
primate
NIRnear-infrared
NKnatural killer
NODnonobese diabetic
Nrf2nuclear factor-erythroid
2-related factor 2
NSAIDnonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
OGoral gavage
OAoctanoic acid
OCTorganic cation transporter
OCTN1organic cation transporter novel
type 1
OCTN2organic
cation transporter novel type 2
OIPNoxaliplatin-induced peripheral neuropathy
ORRobjective response rate
OSoverall survival
OXPoxaliplatin
PARP-1poly­(ADP-ribose) polymerase
1
PD-1programmed
cell death protein 1
PD-L1programmed cell death ligand 1
PDCD4programmed cell death 4
PDKpyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
PDOpatient derived
organoid
PDOXpatient
derived organoid xenograft model
PDXpatient derived xenograft model
PERKPKR-like endoplasmic reticulum
kinase
PETpositron
emission tomography
PFSprogression-free survival
PhB4-phenylbutyric acid
PhIP2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo­(4,5-b)­pyridine
PI3Kphosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
PIPACpressurised intraperitoneal
aerosol chemotherapy
PKCαprotein kinase C alpha
PKM2pyruvate kinase M2
PLD4phospholipase D4
PMperitoneal metastasis
PMEPA1prostate transmembrane protein
androgen induced 1
pMMRproficient deoxyribose nucleic acid mismatch repair
PNSperipheral nervous system
POA2-(2-propynyl)­octanoic
acid
PROTACproteolysis
targeting chimera
PRRrattern-recognition receptor
Ptplatinum
RCDregulated cell death
RFSrelapse-free survival
RiBiribosomal biogenesis
RNArinobucleic acid
RNA-Seqribonucleic acid sequencing
RNSreactive nitrogen species
ROCreceiver operating
characteristic
ROSreactive oxygen species
rRNAribosomal ribonucleic acid
SCsubcetaneous
SAHAsuberoylanilide hydroxamic acid
SC-RTshort-course radiotherapy
SCIDsevere combined immunodeficient
SLC22solute carrier
family 22
SNAPsensible
nerve action potential amplitude
SODsuperoxide dismutase
SOXSRY-box
SPINK3serine protease inhibitor Kazal type 3
STAT3signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3
TAMtumor-associated macrophage
TCGAThe Cancer Genome Atlas Program
TECtumor-associated endothelial cell
Tfhfollicular helper
T cell
TGF-βtransforming growth factor-β
TGM2transglutaminase 2
Thhelper T cell
TIM-3T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-containing
protein 3
TIMEtumor
immune microenvironment
TLStertiary lymphoid structure
TMBtumor mutational burden
TMEtumor microenvironment
TNBS2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic
acid
TNF-αtumor necrosis factor alpha
TPDtargeted protein degradation
TPPtriphenylphosphonium
TRAAKTWIK-related arachidonic acid-stimulated
K+ channel
Tregregulatory T cell
TREK-1TWIK-related K+ channel 1
TREM2triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells
2
TRPtranscient
receptor potential
TRPA1transcient receptor potential ankyrin 1
TRPM8transient receptor potential melastatin
8
TRPV1transient
receptor potential vanilloid 1
TUG1taurine upregulated gene 1
USP49ubiquitin-specific peptidase 49
USP7ubiquitin-specific
protease 7
VEGFvascular endothelial growth factor
VPAvalproic acid
VRACvolume-regulated anion channel
WBSCR22Williams–Beuren syndrome
chromosomal region 22
XDPxeroderma pigmentosum group d
XRCC1X-ray cross-complementing group 1

## Biographies
Jia Xuan Kee graduated with a B.Sc. (Hons) in Chemistry
from the
National University of Singapore (NUS) with the Singapore National
Institute of Chemistry Prize (2020). He is currently a Ph.D. candidate
in Prof. Wee Han Ang’s lab at NUS under the President’s
Graduate Fellowship, focusing on the development of novel Pt­(IV) prodrugs
and the elucidation of their mechanisms of actions.

Jia Ning Nicolette Yau received her Ph.D. in Pharmacy
in 2024 from
the National University of Singapore. She is currently an internal
editor of the Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.

Ram Pravin Kumar Muthuramalingam is a Ph.D. candidate
at the Department
of Pharmacy, National University of Singapore. His research focuses
on platinum­(IV) prodrugs and biohybrid nanocarriers for targeted cancer
therapy. He holds a Master’s in Pharmacology and a Bachelor’s
in Pharmacy from The Tamil Nadu Dr. M.G.R. Medical University, India.
With prior experience as a Research Assistant at NUS and Lecturer
at PSG College of Pharmacy, his expertise spans in vivo pharmacology,
extracellular vesicle-based delivery systems, and molecular techniques.
He has coauthored several interdisciplinary publications in nanomedicine,
oncology, and drug delivery, and is a recipient of the NUS-IRP scholarship.

Xinyi Wang graduated from Ocean University
of China with a bachelor’s
degree in biotechnology. Currently she is a Ph.D. student in Prof.
Giorgia Pastorin’s lab, focusing on developing patient-derived
immune-competent in vitro 3D models for colorectal
cancer drug screening.

Wei Heng Chng received
his Ph.D. from the National University of
Singapore (NUS) in 2023. As a research fellow at NUS Department of
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, he conducted research on the
use of nanodrug delivery systems to deliver various drugs, including
platinum-based compounds, to treat colorectal cancer. His area of
research also includes the use of various nanoparticles, such as extracellular
vesicles, for both therapeutic and drug delivery purposes.

Alvaro Lopez-Sanchez earned his Ph.D. in Molecular
Chemistry in
2024 from Sorbonne Université, under the supervision of Dr.
Hélène Bertrand. He is currently an American Cancer
Society Postdoctoral Fellow in the laboratory of Prof. María
Contel at Brooklyn College, The City University of New York. His research
focuses on the design and biological evaluation of transition metal
complexes as chemotherapeutic agents.

Dr. Kevin Kuang Wei Tay is a Senior Consultant Medical Oncologist
at the Oncocare Cancer Center since 2013. He currently holds American
Board certifications for the practice of Internal Medicine and Medical
Oncology. Dr. Tay completed his medical oncology training in 2009
at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) in USA. Upon returning to Singapore,
Dr. Tay joined the Department of Medical Oncology at National Cancer
Center in Singapore from 2010 to 2013. He was part of the core translational
research group at the National Cancer Center Singapore, that was awarded
the prestigious center grant by the National Medical Research Council
of Singapore. His main interests are in hematological cancers (lymphoma
and multiple myeloma), women’s cancers (breast and gynaecological
cancers), and rare cancers such as sarcomas and melanomas.

Lih-Wen Deng received her Ph.D. in Biochemistry
from the University
of Cambridge in 2000 and completed her postdoctoral training at Harvard
University. She joined the National University of Singapore in 2004
and is currently an Associate Professor at the Yong Loo Lin School
of Medicine at National University of Singapore. She also serves as
Co-Research Director at the NUS Centre for Cancer Research and is
an affiliated member of the National University Cancer Institute of
Singapore. Her research focuses on genomic instability, therapy resistance,
and targeting cancer metabolism and the tumor microenvironment for
therapeutic intervention.

Dan Gibson received
his Ph.D. in Chemistry in 1983 from the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem (Israel). From 1983 to 1986, he was a postdoctoral
fellow with Prof. S. Lippard at MIT. He joined the Department of Medicinal
Chemistry in the School of Pharmacy in the Faculty of Medicine at
the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 1986. He retired as a full professor
of Medicinal Chemistry in 2020. His research focuses on the development
of novel multitargeting platinum based anticancer agents.

Helene C. Bertrand received her Ph.D. in Molecular
Chemistry at
Sorbonne University in 2008 with Dr. M.-P. Teulade Fichou and D. Fichou.
She carried out her postdoctoral research at the School of Pharmacy
(University College London) with G. Wells between 2009 and 2011 and
at the Institut des Sciences Moléculaires in Bordeaux (2011)
with S. Quideau, before joining Sorbonne University as an Assistant
Professor in 2011. She is currently a Full Professor at Sorbonne University
at the Laboratoire Chimie Physique et Chimie du Vivant (https://ens-bic.fr/). Her research
interests lie in the field of bioinorganic medicinal chemistry and
include chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy.

Giulia Adriani received her Ph.D. in Engineering of
Machines under
the Biomedical and Biomechanical Engineering program from the Polytechnic
of Milan, Bari, and Turin (Italy) in 2012, with research at The Methodist
Hospital Research Institute in Houston (USA). She held positions at
the National University of Singapore (NUS) and the Singapore–MIT
Alliance for Research and Technology. Currently, she is Principal
Scientist at the Singapore Immunology Network, by the Agency for Science,
Technology, and Research, with adjunct appointments at NUS and Nanyang
Technological University. Her research includes advanced human-relevant
microphysiological systems to model the tumor microenvironment and
improve cancer therapy screening.

Wee
Han Ang received his B.Sc. (Hons) from Imperial College of
London (1995) and Ph.D. from Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne
(2007) under the supervision of Prof. Paul Dyson. After a postdoctoral
stint with Prof. Stephan Lippard at Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
he joined the National University of Singapore (2009) as a principal
investigator and has been there since. His current research focusses
on the investigation and development of metal complexes, particularly
those based on platinum group metals, for chemo- and immunotherapy.

Giorgia Pastorin received her Ph.D. in Medicinal
Chemistry in 2004
from the University of Trieste (Italy). After being a research fellow
at the Centre National De La Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) in Strasbourg
(France), she joined the Department of Pharmacy at the National University
of Singapore in 2006 as Assistant Professor. She is currently a Full
Professor and Head of the Department of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences in the same university. Her area of research includes platinum-based
prodrugs and their release through innovative drug delivery systems.
For the work performed by her BioNanoTechnology team, she has received
both National and International awards.

‡.J.X.K. and J.N.N.Y. contributed equally. The manuscript was written
through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval
to the final version of the manuscript.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## References