pmciScienceiScience3532isciiScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC12818071PMC12818071.112818071128180714156815110.1016/j.isci.2025.114548S2589-0042(25)02809-31145481ArticleFree-floating long-term vascularized mesenchymal organoids
de JanonAlejandro KazaPranitha YoshidaKaede LeeSooJung DeRyckereDeborah GrahamDouglas K. TakayamaShuichitakayama@gatech.edu 1W. H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA2Aflac Cancer & Blood Disorders Center, Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, and Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA3Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Bioscience, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA∗Corresponding author takayama@gatech.edu4Lead contact
161202626122025291503543114548121120251711202522122025261220252101202622012026© 2025 Published by Elsevier Inc.2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
The vasculature is essential for tissue function and pathology. Spheroid co-cultures of endothelial and marrow/mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) form consistent structures, but the vascular components are short-lived. iPSC-derived vascular organoids can establish complex vasculature but often have variable cell maturation and low reproducibility. This article presents consistently formed, free-floating, long-term vascularized mesenchymal organoids (VMOs), by co-culturing human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and MSCs in a pre-gelled minimal Matrigel scaffold. VMOs support 60-day stable vasculature, exhibiting tissue maturation involving inflammation, extracellular matrix remodeling, and endothelial development. Compared to traditional spheroids, VMOs showed enhanced vascular complexity, sustained extracellular matrix production, and higher cell viability. The system preserved MSC heterogeneity including perivascular cell types, offering physiological relevance. Engraftment of breast cancer cells revealed stromal-tumor niches, enabling modeling of bone marrow metastasis. This robust platform offers an alternative model for studying vascular biology, stromal dynamics, and cancer progression, with potential applications in drug testing.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Free-floating VMOs form across EC:MSC ratios with stable 60-day vasculature
•Organoids display temporal shifts with heterogeneous MSCs and perivascular cells
•VMOs outperform spheroids in vascularization, ECM assembly, and cell viability
•VMOs support breast cancer cell engraftment and stromal-tumor niche formation

Vascular remodeling; Stem cells research; Tissue Engineering

## Subject areas
Vascular remodelingStem cells researchTissue Engineeringpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesPublished: December 26, 2025

## Introduction
Vasculature is a critical component of tissue architecture, performing essential functions such as nutrient exchange and waste removal, and facilitating cellular communication. Beyond its role in normal tissue homeostasis, the vasculature also plays a role in the progression of various diseases. Pathological alterations in vascular structure and function are implicated in conditions such as vascular leakage, endothelial dysfunction, and chronic inflammation. Vascular alterations are particularly important in understanding physiology and developing effective therapies against cancer metastasis.
Microchannel-based systems that use preformed channels to guide extracellular matrix (ECM) gel formation, endothelial cell and fibroblast seeding, and fluid flow-supported vessel formation are currently regarded as one of the most representative systems. , , Vascularized organoids are emerging as another technique that allows endothelial cells (ECs) to interact dynamically with their surrounding environment to self-organize into interconnected vessels. This self-organizing process replicates an aspect of in vivo vascular remodeling. Vascularized organoids can provide a practical and physiologically relevant system that reflects how blood vessels form and function in tissues. , 
Vasculature development involves supporting cells such as pericytes and mural cells that promote angiogenesis, stabilize vessels, and maintain vascular integrity, in part by providing an appropriate ECM for ECs. Co-culturing ECs with supporting cells such as pericytes, mural cells, and marrow/mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (MSCs) therefore creates a more functional model. , , MSCs are particularly important in reconstructing the bone marrow stroma, where they regulate angiogenesis and provide structural support. , , 
Space-filled, MSC-endothelial co-cultures, generally referred to as spheroids, simulate aspects of the bone marrow microenvironment but generally fail to develop a long-lived vasculature. , , , , , These spheroids consist of aggregates of elongated ECs and MSCs with or without hydrogel, but the vessel diameters are small and have few branching networks. Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) vascular organoids form a vascularized tissue with supporting cells and ECM production and are becoming an important tool to study vascularized tissues , ; however, their use can involve challenges such as taking several weeks to achieve tissue maturation, having heterogeneous maturation, or low functionalization. , 
Previously, we developed minimal Matrigel-based organoid models that provide consistently shaped, free-floating structures with unconventional cellular organization compared to traditional matrix embedded systems. , , Here, we combine ECs and MSCs to engineer vascularized mesenchymal organoids (VMOs), a platform capable of developing and maintaining long-term vasculature, preserving progenitor cells, and incorporating supporting MSCs. We compare our platform to established cell-aggregate spheroid systems, characterize the cell populations, and monitor suspended organoid evolution over 60 days. Our results offer a robust, physiologically relevant, more endothelial cell proliferative, and long-term model for studying vasculature compared to space-filled spheroids while retaining the convenience of being consistently shaped and readily accessed by cells and drugs because they are not embedded in ECM gel the way many organoids are cultured. As one potential application we also demonstrate the potential of VMOs to model an aspect of breast cancer metastasis to the bone marrow.

## Results

## Vascularized mesenchymal organoids formed at different endothelial cell:mesenchymal stromal/stem cells ratios allow long-term culture and preserved morphology
We generated VMOs by seeding bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) and HUVECs in pre-gelled Matrigel at a total of 3,000 cells per VMO. Learning from previous co-culture systems, we tested EC:MSC ratios of 75:25, 50:50, and 25:75 ( A). The VMOs were cultured for 60 days with regular media changes. The cells and minimal Matrigel self-organized into spherical structures within the first three days at all tested seeding ratios ( B). Immunofluorescence staining confirmed the presence of CD90+ MSCs and VE-CAD+ ECs across all conditions ( C). We also analyzed cell distribution on day 3 (D3), D14, and D60 by staining with actin ( B), most cells localized within the organoid border, with few cells in the center, over at least 60 days circumventing necrotic cores that are often reported for space-filled spheroids of similar or even smaller diameters. 
VMOs maintained circularity (>0.8) throughout the 60-day culture, with no significant differences between seeding ratios ( D and A). The 50:50 EC:MSC ratio exhibited the largest cross-sectional area, followed by 75:25, with 25:75 showing the smallest ( E). Cross-sectional area marginally decreased over time, but organoid morphology was preserved.
To characterize cell growth kinetics over time, ATP luminescence was measured every 7 days starting from day 3 ( F). Total luminescence, commonly considered a readout of viable cells, peaked between D14 and D21 for all ratios, then steadily decreased, with luminescent signal on day 60 being >75% of that measured on D3. The 50:50 EC:MSC ratio presented the highest total luminescent cell viability signal through day 35. From day 42 to day 60, both 50:50 and 75:25 EC:MSC ratios exhibited the highest luminescence, while 25:75 VMOs were the least proliferative. At the same time, cell viability was assessed in-situ using calcein AM and ethidium bromide staining of live organoids ( C). On D3, the majority of dead cells, still relatively few in number, were localized at the center. Over time, cells that stained positive for ethidium bromide became more evenly distributed, with a large number of viable cells remaining at D60.
Based on these results, we selected the 50:50 EC:MSC ratio for further experiments.

## Vascularized mesenchymal organoids display long-term vascular network, endogenous extracellular matrix secretion, stimuli-responsiveness, and multipotent marrow/mesenchymal stromal/stem cells
We evaluated the VMO architecture by immunofluorescence analysis of D14 50:50 organoid mid-sections ( A). CD90+ MSCs spread throughout the organoid, with a higher density near the edges. VECAD+ ECs were found deeper within the organoid, forming blood vessel-like structures. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining revealed a predominately acellular network inside the organoid, suggesting extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, along with large spaces void of cells ( B). To further characterize the vasculature, we stained blood vessels with VECAD and performed z stack imaging ( C). Blood vessels formed an elongated and interconnected mesh. Tunnel-like structures formed by ECs were also observed within the organoid ( A). Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction indicated that these structures may serve as connections between the organoid’s interior and exterior. We then characterized vascular development over time. On D3, initial structures were formed, with long vessels visible by D14 and remaining evident at D60 ( D; B). CD34+ endothelial progenitors were observed throughout the culture. Immunofluorescence and confocal imaging of the ECM revealed collagen I and laminin V expression, primarily localized at the VMO borders ( E). As laminin V is absent in Matrigel, this suggests autologous ECM secretion. Both collagen I and laminin V were also detected in organoids formed at 25:75 and 75:25 ratios ( C). 
We next assessed responsiveness to external stimuli. First, D3 VMOs were cultured for an additional 10 days in medium supplemented with IL-1β and TGF-β to induce inflammation in the vasculature. qPCR analysis showed the downregulation of PECAM1 ( F), indicating loosening of tight junctions as expected under inflammatory conditions. Immunofluorescence also revealed the upregulation of E-selectin in cytokine-supplemented medium ( D; F).
Next, we explored the differentiation of MSCs, which are multipotent cells and thus can generate multiple lineages. , We cultured VMOs in osteogenic media for 28 days to induce bone differentiation. On D14, qPCR analysis revealed the downregulation of the early osteogenic transcription factor RUNX2 in osteogenic media compared to controls, suggesting decreased immature osteoblasts ( G). Expression of the mature osteoblast marker osteopontin (OPN) was similar between conditions. By D28, RUNX2 was further downregulated, and OPN was upregulated in osteogenic media, indicating mature osteoblast formation. Alizarin red staining at D28 confirmed osteogenesis with calcium nodules in osteogenic organoids ( E and S2F), and immunofluorescence confirmed OPN-positive bone matrix ( G). These findings show that both MSCs and ECs within VMOs respond to external agents, including inflammatory stimuli and osteogenic differentiation cues, highlighting the dynamic interaction between cell types in the system.

## Vascularized mesenchymal organoids exhibit higher total viable cells, enhanced vascularization, extracellular matrix assembly, and inflammation compared to spheroids
Since MSCs and ECs have been previously combined to form spheroid models (without pre-gelled minimal Matrigel), , , we compared our D14 VMOs to D14 co-culture spheroid models generated using established methods. Spheroids were formed using 3,000 total cells in a 50:50 EC:MSC ratio, similar to VMOs. The vasculature in VMOs forms a mesh-like network with vessel diameters ranging from 4 to 20 microns ( A). In contrast, spheroid vasculature consists of spindle-shaped vessels with diameters between 4 and 8 microns. Quantitative analysis confirmed that VMOs exhibit a broader and more diverse lumen size distribution ( A), with most lumens between 5 and 15 μm and a notable fraction >15 μm, while spheroids are largely restricted to smaller lumens (<10 μm). Furthermore, VMOs exhibit a significantly larger total vascular area despite having the same number of ECs seeded ( B). This increased vascular complexity is reflected in a substantially higher number of branches and junctions in VMOs compared with spheroids ( B). While both systems maintain similar overall circularity ( C), VMOs display a larger cross-sectional area over time ( D) and a higher luminescent cell viability signal, indicating increased cell number with enhanced cell survival ( E). 
We then compared both systems at the molecular level by performing bulk RNA-seq on D14 VMOs and spheroids. Differential gene expression (DGE) analysis identified 478 genes that were upregulated in spheroids, while 1,024 genes were upregulated in VMOs ( C; ). We examined the top 10 upregulated genes in each system and found that these genes were involved in a wide range of biological processes, including inflammation and immune response, cell signaling, ECM remodeling, gene regulation, tissue development, transport, and metabolism ( F). Prominent upregulated genes in VMOs highlight vascular activation and development including MMP8, a proteinase involved in ECM degradation, GJA5, which regulates gap junctions, ITGA8, an integrin associated with cell adhesion, and SELE, which plays a role in the expression of E-selectin adhesion molecule expressed in inflammation. In contrast, the top upregulated genes in spheroids highlight vascular stress response, including NPTX1 and MT1M, endothelial toxin/stress response proteins, MYBPH, involved in muscle contraction, PDPN associated with blood vessel integrity, CHI3L1, a gene associated with endothelial dysfunction, IL24, an anti-angiogenic inflammatory cytokine.
Subsequently, we investigated the role of differentially expressed genes in biological pathways in both systems using Gene Ontology (GO) analysis. VMOs displayed several pathways associated with angiogenesis, blood vessel development, and endothelium development ( G; ). Upregulated pathways included extracellular matrix organization, vascular development, endothelial cell differentiation, and heart morphogenesis, highlighting the organoids’ association with vascularization and ECM development. In contrast, spheroids were enriched in pathways related to fatty acid metabolism, detoxification, and cellular maintenance. Upregulated spheroid GO terms included response to fatty acid, platelet activation regulation, copper ion detoxification, and lipid localization, highlighting metabolism and stress responses. Reactome analysis, which provides a more in-depth understanding of signaling networks and molecular mechanisms, revealed that the top 25 enriched pathways in VMOs were involved in ECM organization, Notch (angiogenesis), RhoA GTPase (stretching and migration), and IL-2 signaling (inflammation), while the top 10 enriched pathways in spheroids confirmed their association with cell maintenance and protein translation ( H and D; ).
In parallel, we performed a targeted DGE analysis focusing on genes involved in angiogenesis, sprouting, and ECM remodeling, including Wnt, VEGF, Notch, Epha, Ephb, FGF, EGF, TGFβ, laminin, and collagen ( E). The VMO system is enriched in pathways related to Notch signaling (DLL4, NOTCH4), VEGF signaling (FLT1, KDR), FGF signaling (FGF12), ephrin signaling (EFNA1, EPHB1), ECM remodeling (COL12A1), and TGF-β signaling (TGFΒ2). The spheroid system is enriched in pathways associated with ECM organization (COL14A1, LAMA2, ITGA1), cell adhesion molecules (EPHA3), and fibroblast growth factor signaling (FGF7). These data indicate that VMOs model vascular development and signaling, while spheroids represent ECM remodeling through more diverse ECM molecules and cell-cell interactions.
These analyses collectively indicate that D14 VMOs are transcriptionally more active for vascular development, angiogenic signaling, inflammation, and ECM remodeling, mirroring their structural complexity and enhanced viability ( I). While D14 spheroids exhibit gene expression patterns associated with cellular maintenance, metabolic regulation, and broader matrix organization, reflecting a more homeostatic and less vascularized environment.

## Vascularized mesenchymal organoids preserve cellular diversity with endothelial cells and heterogeneous marrow/mesenchymal stromal/stem cell subpopulations
To characterize cellular diversity within the VMO system, we performed single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) on cells isolated from organoids at D3 and D14. Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) visualization identified 8 distinct clusters ( A, B–S4D; ), with their composition shifting from D3 to D14 ( E). The EC cluster was characterized by the expression of canonical markers PECAM1, CDH5, and CD34 ( B and A), while additional top upregulated genes included VWF (involved in blood clotting and endothelial function), CD93 (an endothelial cell marker involved in angiogenesis and vascular integrity), and CLEC14A (a C-type lectin involved in endothelial cell signaling and blood vessel formation, A). GO analysis further confirmed endothelial identity, showing enrichment in pathways related to angiogenesis, cell-cell junctions, and tube development ( C; ). Furthermore, comparison of the EC cluster to signature markers of human bone marrow sinusoidal and arterial ECs demonstrated a tendency toward the sinusoidal phenotype that further increases from day 3 to day 14 ( D). 
We also defined 7 MSC-derived clusters using pan-MSC markers CD44 and THY1. An MSC progenitor cluster is characterized by high expression of other MSC markers, particularly those from the parental MSCs used to form the organoid, including NT5E, ALCAM, LEPR, PDGFRB as well as some genes from other MSC lineages such as RUNX2 and ENPP1, suggesting a multipotent MSC population ( B and B). Co-expression of the MSC markers LEPR, CD44, and THY1 with RUNX2 has been observed in mesenchymal stem cells cultured within microfluidic devices. Additionally, CYPB1, previously identified as an MSC progenitor marker, was also highly expressed in this cluster. Other top upregulated genes within this cluster included TGFΒR3 (regulator of MSC differentiation and stemness), CUEDC1 (involved in MSC maintenance and differentiation), and PRMT9 (a key regulator of epigenetic regulation in stem cells, B), GO analysis further highlighted enrichment in pathways related to tissue development, underscoring the multipotent potential of this MSC population ( C).
An MSC fibroblastic sub-population was identified by high levels of COL1A2, COL1A1, FN1, and COL6A1 ( B and C), suggesting a fibroblastic population involved in ECM production. Additional upregulated genes associated with ECM remodeling, such as PIGT (involved in anchor biosynthesis), ERRFI2 (regulator of EGFR signaling related to ECM production), THBS1 (glycoprotein that modulates ECM organization), LOXL2 (involved in cross-linking collagen and elastin), and TIMP3 (inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinases, regulating ECM turnover), were also observed ( E). GO analysis confirmed enrichment in pathways related to ECM organization, further validating the fibroblastic identity of this cluster ( C). Immunofluorescent staining for fibronectin revealed the localization of this population on the borders of the organoid, consistent with their role in ECM production ( F).
We also found a distinct minor MSC population (8% of cells on D3 and 4% on D14) characterized by high differential expression of MKI67, CDKN3, and CDK1, which are associated with cell proliferation ( B and D). Additionally, several other genes involved in the cell cycle were upregulated ( C), with GO analysis showing enrichment in pathways related to mitosis and cell cycle regulation ( C). Based on these features, we annotated this cluster as MSC proliferative. Immunofluorescent staining confirmed Ki67 expression and indicated the localization of this population slightly deeper within the MSC external layer, suggesting its role as a reserve of proliferating MSCs ( G).
We also distinguished a cluster expressing markers indicative of myofibroblastic or smooth muscle cells, including ACTA2, ACTG2, CCN1, CDCP1, LUM, and DCN ( B and E), and genes related to tissue remodeling and inflammation, such as CXCL12 and CCL2. Further supporting myofibroblast identity, genes such as SFRP1 (a modulator of Wnt signaling) and MATN2 (a matrilin protein involved in ECM organization) were highly expressed, indicating significant involvement in ECM deposition and remodeling processes ( H). GO analysis revealed enrichment in pathways related to ECM organization, chemokine-mediated signaling, and immune response, confirming the myofibroblast and inflammatory role of this cluster ( C). Immunofluorescence demonstrated α-SMA co-localization with ECs, suggesting a perivascular position, consistent with a myofibroblast phenotype often found in tissue repair ( I). Additionally, the cluster showed high expression of KRT8, KRT18, KRT19, TMEM88, and LMO3, genes typically associated with umbilical cord-derived MSCs ( D). The overall gene expression profile, especially the high levels of fibrotic markers, led us to annotate this cluster as myofibroblasts.
Additionally, 3 transitional clusters only expressed pan-MSC markers. One cluster upregulated NMNAT2 ( F and E), a gene involved in NAD+ biosynthesis and stress response, leading us to annotate it as MSC NMNAT2, possibly reflecting an adaptive or energy-demanding state. The other two clusters were characterized by the expression of TAGLN, ATP5F1E, and ATP5PD genes ( B and G). Trajectory analysis with the Monocle3 package revealed these clusters to be MSC clusters that may have links to endothelial cells ( J), which we annotated as Transition 1 and Transition 2. Transition 1 was enriched in pathways related to mitochondrial respiration and ATP production ( C), with the upregulation of genes suggesting an active metabolic, transcriptional, and stress-responsive state ( F). Transition 2, which was the only cluster observed at D3 and not D14 ( E), showed upregulation of GAPDH and several ribosomal genes ( G), and GO analysis demonstrated the upregulation of ribosomal RNA-related pathways, indicating more involvement in protein production ( C).

## Vascularized mesenchymal organoids develop dynamic communication networks driving angiogenesis and extracellular matrix remodeling
As physiological systems should exhibit cell-cell interactions, , we used CellChat to analyze receptor-cognate expression between clusters. The total number of interactions increased from 542 on D3 to 1614 on D14, reflecting a more robust communication network ( A). We identified 9 pathways exclusive to D3, 15 exclusive to D14, and 52 shared pathways ( B). In angiogenic pathways, we observed ANGPT, VEGF, CDH5, WNT, PDGF, HGF, and FGF pathways upregulated on D14, while PECAM1, ncWNT, EGF, NOTCH, TGFβ, EPHB, and SLIT were equally expressed on both days. Regarding ECM pathways, Fibronectin, THBS, SEMA7, and TENASCIN were upregulated on D14, while COLLAGEN and PERIOSTIN were equally expressed on both days. 
We assessed the top angiogenic and ECM pathways based on their relative contribution to the communication network ( A). At D14, several angiogenic pathways, including ANGPT, VEGF, IGFBP, and WNT, were notably active ( C and A). ANGPT and VEGF were primarily stimulated by ECs through autocrine signaling, with contributions from Progenitor and Myofibroblast clusters. WNT and IGFBP were also activated by ECs and shared with progenitors and myofibroblasts. IGFBP was also autocrine in progenitors, while WNT signaling in an autocrine manner was minimal or not observed. HGF is secreted by progenitors and myofibroblasts and taken up by progenitors, indicating a role in regulating progenitor cell behavior rather than angiogenesis (not shown). At D3, most of the shared pathways were activated in Progenitor cells through autocrine signaling. By D14, ECs and Myofibroblasts were more involved in cell to cell communication networks in combination with MSC Progenitors ( C and A). Specifically, ECs stimulated PDGF, EGF, NOTCH, EPHB, and TGF-β pathways, which were activated on progenitors and myofibroblasts, while FGF and ncWNT were activated on ECs and stimulated from progenitors and myofibroblasts ( C and A). IL1 was exclusive to myofibroblasts at D14, suggesting a contribution to angiogenesis, possibly through inflammation and ECM remodeling.
Regarding ECM pathways, we observed a similar pattern where most of the pathway components are secreted by progenitors and MSC fibroblastic clusters ( D and A). However, at D14, myofibroblasts and ECs became more involved in these signaling networks. Notably, ECs are more prominently associated with laminin and fibronectin pathways, while their involvement in other ECM pathways is less pronounced.

## Vascularized mesenchymal organoids cultured over 60 days reveal temporal shifts in inflammation, extracellular matrix organization, and endothelium development pathways
As cell-cell communication analysis indicated, the organoids evolve over time. To further investigate temporal changes, we performed bulk RNA-seq on VMOs at D3, D14, D28, and D60. Hierarchical clustering and PCA analysis revealed that D14 and D28 samples clustered together, indicating similar stages in organoid evolution, while D3 and D60 formed distinct clusters, each representing separate developmental stages ( A).
DEG analysis showed shifts in gene expression across transitions: from D3 to D14, 895 genes were upregulated, and 1,226 genes were downregulated. From D14 to D28, 765 genes were upregulated, and 150 genes were downregulated, and from D28 to D60, 800 genes were upregulated, and 1,114 genes were downregulated ( A; , , and ). These genes broadly clustered into categories including inflammation and immune response, cell signaling, gene regulation, ECM remodeling, tissue development, and transport and metabolism. During the D3 to D14 transition, genes such as IL1RL1, LBP, SELL, SELP, TRBC2, and TNFSF15 were downregulated, reflecting a reduction in inflammatory signaling ( B). Expression of ECM remodeling genes, including ADAMTS18, FREM3, and CRTAC1, decreased, whereas COL15A1 and ASPN were upregulated. Genes involved in tissue development also showed dynamic changes. Notably, RANBP3L (associated with MSC differentiation) and OMD (bone formation) were upregulated, while SHISA3 (WNT antagonist), CRTAC1 (chondrogenesis), GDF3 (cell growth), SCUBE1 (vascular development), and FRMD3 (Notch activator) were downregulated. GO analysis of the top 10 upregulated and downregulated genes revealed the enrichment of ECM organization and cell adhesion pathways on D14, alongside increased activity in hypoxia-related, mitosis, chemotaxis, and endothelium development pathways on D3 ( B; ). KEGG pathway analysis using the same ranking criteria revealed a shift in signaling, marked by the downregulation of PI3K, RAP1, MAPK, HIF-1, and TGF-β pathways, along with inflammatory pathways such as cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, rheumatoid arthritis, and TNF, suggesting the attenuation of these processes from D3 to D14 ( C; ). In contrast, pathways such as focal adhesion, ECM receptor interaction, calcium signaling, Hippo signaling, and Wnt signaling were upregulated. Together, these results suggest a transition from an inflammatory and angiogenic environment toward a more stable state characterized by tissue maturation and structural remodeling. 
During the transition from D14 to D28, we observed the upregulation of genes associated with tissue development (PDGFRL, FGF7), including those involved in Wnt signaling (WNT4, ROR2, RORB, and SHISA3) and cell adhesion (CDH10, CDH23, and CDH3) ( C). Metabolism-related genes, such as SLC38A3 (amino acid transport), LIPH (lipid hydrolysis), CYP4X1 (fatty acid metabolism), and ADH1B (alcohol metabolism), were also upregulated. Inflammatory genes, including CXCL11, were downregulated, while major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II genes HLA-DRA, HLA-DRB5, and HLA-DRB1, along with HTR2A (inflammatory response modulator) were upregulated. GO and KEGG analyses were conducted in parallel to characterize the D14 to D28 transition ( D and S10E; and ). Both analyses also revealed downregulation in immune-related pathways and upregulation in pathways related to cell adhesion and tissue maturation, consistent with the high degree of similarity between D14 and D28 VMOs observed in hierarchical clustering and PCA analysis.
Finally, we explored the D28 to D60 transition. The top 50 DEGs revealed a shift in the inflammatory profile, with the upregulation of IL33, C7, CXCL12, FGL1, and CNR1, and downregulation of IL2RB, IL36RN, TBX21, IL1RARPL1, and S1PR4 ( F). Changes in genes associated with tissue development were also observed, including the downregulation of PLPPR5 (angiogenesis), CCSER1 (cell cycle), TMC8 (EC migration), and TCF15 (MSC differentiation), and the upregulation of SMOC2 (cell proliferation), CHL1 (differentiation), RSPO3 (Wnt signaling), and WIF1 (Wnt signaling).
GO analysis of the top 10 upregulated terms indicated increased activity in immune-related pathways, including complement activation (classical pathway), humoral immune response, response to xenobiotic stimulus, cell chemotaxis and leukocyte migration, reflecting heightened immune and signaling processes at D60 compared to D28 ( D; ). In contrast, the top 10 downregulated pathways were associated with ECM organization and endothelium development, including small GTPase-mediated signal transduction. Consistent with these transcriptional changes, VE-cadherin staining showed reduced endothelial signal intensity at D60, indicating diminished endothelial integrity ( G). KEGG analysis of the top 10 up- and downregulated terms supported these trends, highlighting immune activation through pathways such as neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, pertussis, complement and coagulation cascades, viral protein interaction with cytokine-cytokine receptors, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and cell adhesion molecules, the latter likely reflecting inflammation-induced upregulation ( E; ). Additionally, KEGG analysis identified downregulation in pathways linked to cell adhesion and ECM interactions, including cell adhesion molecules, ECM-receptor interaction, Rap1 signaling and Notch signaling pathway, reinforcing the reduction in cellular adhesion and tissue remodeling. Together, these results suggest a shift toward an immune-activated state accompanied by reduced endothelial and extracellular matrix maintenance at D60.
Given the extended duration of our culture, we sought to investigate the potential accumulation of cellular stress over time, specifically focusing on reactive oxygen species (ROS) and cellular senescence. To contrast the two extremes of the culture timeline, we conducted gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to compare gene expression profiles at D3 versus D60. The HOUSTIS_ROS gene set showed moderate enrichment at D60 ( A), indicating some elevation of oxidative stress at the later time point as might be expected in such extended cultures. Interestingly, a very significant decrease in TANG_SENESCENCE_TP53_TARGETS_DN gene set was observed at D60 relative to D3 ( B).

## Applying vascularized mesenchymal organoids as a potential in vitro platform for breast cancer invasion in bone marrow
We compared VMOs and the corresponding spheroids in a preliminary evaluation of their suitability to model metastatic breast cancer (BC). GFP+ MCF7 cells were seeded into wells containing either D7 VMOs or spheroids. Both VMOs and spheroids are not gel-embedded and readily accessible by exogenously seeded cells. Accordingly, BC cells successfully engrafted within the first 3 days after seeding (D8 to D10) in both systems ( A). At D14 (7 days after cancer cell seeding), BC cells were confined to specific locations on the VMOs and spheroids ( B). At D21, however, while VMOs still displayed BC niches, spheroids were often overrun by and entirely covered by BC, indicating a more extended niche architecture in VMOs. 
As BC cells in peri-vascular niches can have reduced proliferation compared to BC alone, we measured Ki67 in BC cells cultured in VMOs versus BC cells in 2-dimensional (2D) cultures after 1 week. Flow cytometry revealed a decrease in the fraction of BC cells expressing Ki67 ( C) and decreased mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) in BC cells cultured in VMOs ( D), indicating decreased proliferation compared to 2D cultures. Thus, the endothelial-stromal environment within VMOs influences BC cell proliferation.
Representative biomimicry should also desensitize the VMO-embedded BC cells to drug therapy. Thus, we used the VMO system to test the response to doxorubicin (DOX). VMOs and spheroids were cultured for 1 week, GFP+ MCF7 BC cells were added for an additional week, and then cultures were treated with DOX for 3 days ( E). GFP fluorescence was measured and normalized to PBS vehicle-treated control cultures (no DOX) and quantified across a dosing range from 0.01 to 100 μM, as previously tested for MCF7 spheroids. Analysis revealed more viable BC cells in VMOs compared to spheroids between 0.01 and 10 μM, while 100 μM elicited a similar response in both systems ( F and 7G). This suggests that VMOs offer more chemoprotection to BC cells compared to spheroids.

## Discussion
In the pursuit of a convenient and physiological vasculature, spheroid models have been widely used to co-culture ECs and MSCs. Co-culturing these cell types has been shown to improve angiogenesis and proliferation, as both populations produce soluble factors that promote these processes. , , , , Furthermore, MSCs cultured in spheroids produce more soluble factors, including angiogenic factors, compared to their 2D counterparts. , , Despite these advantages, spheroids struggle to develop a fully formed vasculature, often remaining in a pre-vascular state. Thus, they are preferentially used as transplantable models, where they can display functional vasculature in vivo. Incorporation of hydrogels has improved vascularization in spheroids, leading to the formation of spindle-shaped vessels , ; however, these vessels often fail to form a complete network or are overtaken by mesenchymal support cells, and typical culture times are limited to ∼21 days.
Since the minimal Matrigel-based organoid technique has previously been used to combine different cell populations, , we hypothesized that it could also be applied for EC and MSC co-culture. Our platform demonstrated both customization and robustness, as VMOs can be formed using different EC:MSC ratios, and both populations coexist without one overtaking the system, confirming the VMO multicellular compatibility. VMOs also maintained a homogeneous and stable architecture for 60 days ( D), while MSC spheroids have only shown stability for up to 30 days. Moreover, the vasculature exhibited sensitivity to external agents, making the VMO platform promising for studying vascular pathologies such as acute or chronic inflammation and endothelial dysfunction.
Serial 2D passaging of MSC cultures limits their differentiation capacity. MSCs cultured in VMOs appear to preserve their multipotency and were able to differentiate into mature osteoblasts ( G). MSCs exhibit enhanced osteogenesis and multipotency when cultured in spheroids, , and this process is further improved when co-cultured with ECs , in agreement with our results. Notably, VMOs cultured in the absence of osteogenic stimuli exhibited increased RUNX2 expression on Day 28. 3D EC-MSC co-cultures have demonstrated natural osteogenesis driven by media composition and paracrine factors secreted in the co-culture. , These findings are consistent with the intrinsic osteogenesis signatures we observed in VMOs.
The architecture displayed in VMOs shows MSCs both inside and outside ( A), while ECs are located inside, forming the vasculature. Cell localization is influenced by growth factors in other organoid models, where high concentrations tend to keep ECs at the borders, while the absence of growth factors allows ECs to penetrate and form EC islets inside. Our culture utilizes eight-times lower concentrations of growth factors compared to these models, which could explain ECs localizing inside and forming a vasculature rather than islets.
HUVECs, which have been previously used to model bone marrow vasculature, , , integrate into our VMO platform, enabling the formation of a complex mesh-like vascular network that extends around the Matrigel core ( C) and demonstrates a more extensive vascularized area than spheroids, despite being seeded with the same number of ECs and MSCs. Moreover, it displays greater vascular complexity. While vessel diameters in spheroids are less than 10 microns, corresponding to capillaries, VMO vessels can reach up to 20 microns ( A), mimicking the size of venules or small arterioles. This enhanced vascular network development could be attributed to the Matrigel, as previous studies have reported its role in modifying tubule structures in both EC-MSC and EC-only cultures. , Furthermore, hydrogel composition and stiffness play crucial roles in controlling vasculogenesis and network formation. ECs in our studies expressed genes indicating an inclination toward bone marrow sinusoidal ECs. Although HUVECS are not typically sinusoidal, in the VMO system, they shift toward this phenotype. We note that the 60 days stability of vascular structures is rare, not only compared to spheroids but in comparison with microchannel-based vascular systems as well. 
VMOs were enriched in several pathways involved in angiogenesis, vasculature, and endothelium development ( G) when compared to spheroids, suggesting that VMOs are more conducive to angiogenesis. We also observed the upregulation of RhoA GTPase pathways ( H), which are associated with EC migration, tubule stress, and, indirectly, angiogenesis through VEGF secretion suggesting a mechanosensing aspect in the vasculature development in VMOs. Enrichment of Notch-related pathways ( H) suggested that Notch signaling, likely promoted by MSCs, plays a role in endothelial development and sprouting, , further supported by Notch downregulation observed simultaneously with D60 endothelium development decline. A plausible explanation for the enhanced angiogenesis in VMOs could be the Matrigel scaffolding. 3D co-cultures with scaffolds tend to exhibit improved angiogenesis, as they produce more soluble factors and demonstrate better spatial organization. , , This is particularly important because cell proximity influences angiogenesis and vascularization in 3D cultures, further supporting the role of the Matrigel core scaffolding in facilitating angiogenesis. Similarly, matrix stiffness regulates MSC proliferation as softer ECM translates into less proliferation. Thus, Matrigel stiffness may influence MSC proliferation and, consequently, support EC angiogenesis. As more Matrigel is degraded while transitioning from D3 to D14, fewer proliferative MSCs are observed in the single-cell RNA sequencing data.
Beyond comparisons with spheroids, VMOs demonstrated long-term vasculature preservation, with CD34+ progenitors present throughout the culture period ( D), indicating that the vasculature has the potential for continued growth. The results suggest that angiogenesis begins as soon as the organoid forms, as evidenced by the upregulation of endothelial development on day 3, which coincides with the activation of hypoxic pathways and a fraction of dead cells at the organoid core, probably due to a lack of nutrients, oxygen, or soluble factors. Cell-cell communication analysis ( ) identified MSCs as the primary contributors to angiogenic signaling at D3, consistent with previous studies demonstrating their role in tubule formation and early vascular development. Day 14 immunofluorescence revealed a more developed vasculature on D14 compared to D3 ( D), consistent with continued endothelial expansion and remodeling. Day 14 exhibits a transition point where angiogenic activity began to decline, while markers of vascular maturation and stabilization increased. We observe the upregulation of the Hippo signaling pathway ( C), which is linked to angiogenesis regulation and junction formation. This observation suggests that the Hippo pathway might contribute to vasculature maturation in VMOs by regulating cell junctions and vascular integrity. Moreover, enrichment in membrane potential regulation and cell-cell adhesion, processes that are critical for the stabilization and maturation of vasculature junctions during vessel development, suggested enhanced endothelial junction formation, critical for vessel stability ( B).
Cell-cell communication analysis showed that by D14, ECs became more engaged in angiogenic pathways ( C and A), signaling a shift from MSC-driven initiation to EC-mediated maturation and maintenance of the vascular network. Additionally, Myofibroblasts exhibit enhanced predicted communication with endothelial cells, prominently via the Notch and PDGF pathways, both implicated in the regulation of myofibroblast during fibrosis, contributing to the maintenance of an immune-enriched perivascular microenvironment. The predicted angiogenic pathways though MSC-EC interactions mirror those observed in bone marrow microfluidic models supporting our findings, including VEGF, EGF, and PDGF stimulation from MSCs to ECs, and mutual activation of Notch signaling. Our system additionally shows high IGFBP, Wnt, and non-canonical Wnt signaling.
Temporal gene expression changes suggest a peak in angiogenesis during the first two weeks, followed by vascular stabilization as the organoids matured over the final month of culture. Despite the reduced expression of genes associated with endothelial development and GTPase signaling observed at D60 ( D), the vasculature remains stable, as shown by day 60 immunofluorescence ( D), indicating organoid maturation rather than endothelial regression. Concurrently, the decline in endothelial developmental pathways at D14 and D60 coincides with the downregulation of the Rap1 signaling pathway ( C and 6E). Rap1 signaling has been shown to regulate endothelial adhesion and angiogenic sprouting in HUVECs, consistent with VMOs that are constructed using primary HUVECs, suggesting that Rap1 may mediate the effects of mechanical forces in promoting vascular maturation and stabilization in our system rather than supporting continued angiogenesis.
The ECM plays a critical role in the vascular microenvironment by providing structural support, stabilizing the vasculature, and promoting angiogenesis. In our system, ECM molecules were secreted (e.g., E) across all tested ratios, with VMOs demonstrating a superior capacity to produce ECM compared to spheroids. A specialized MSC subpopulation responsible for ECM production and remodeling was identified ( C and 4E). On days 14 and 28, pathways related to ECM organization, ECM interaction, and focal adhesion were significantly upregulated ( D and S10E), marking the peak of ECM remodeling. ECM remodeling was accompanied by tissue development pathways observed on day 28 ( D and S10E), suggesting ongoing system maturation during the first month. The Wnt pathway was also upregulated on D14 ( C), and has been previously correlated with enhanced MSC proliferation and with ECM formation, as shown in studies where Wnt overexpression promoted wound repair and ECM regeneration. In contrast, ECM-related pathways were downregulated on day 60 ( D and 6E), indicating maturation.
One notable difference between VMOs and spheroids is the presence of an inflammatory microenvironment in VMOs, as indicated by the upregulation of E-selectin and the IL2 signaling pathway ( H). This upregulation suggests an inflammatory response, in contrast to the anti-inflammatory properties typically displayed by MSC spheroids. , In microchannel devices, ECs often exhibit an inflammatory phenotype due to the shear wall stress and mechanical forces exerted on them. Similarly, while a stiff ECM can induce angiogenesis and proliferation, prolonged exposure to a substrate with a high level of stiffness has been linked to inflammation and vascular dysfunction. , In VMOs, spreading of ECs around the Matrigel core could initially cause mechanical stretch on the ECs, leading to an inflammatory response as soon as it gets formed. Upregulation of RhoA GTPase pathways in VMOs aligns with previous studies that reported similar upregulation in ECs subjected to cyclic stretch and resulting in the expression of an inflammatory phenotype. 
As the Matrigel is gradually digested and sprouting occurs, inflammation decreases as observed at D3 versus D14 ( B and 6C) and D14 versus D28 ( D and S10E). On D14, TGF-β and cytokine related inflammation are decreased ( C) and several chemotaxis-related pathways are decreased on D28 ( D and S10E) indicating lower inflammation as the system matures. However, inflammation associated gene expression increased between D28 and D60 ( D and 6E). Unlike ECs, it has been reported that MSCs cultured on soft ECM become more inflammatory. Several ECM pathways were downregulated between D28 and D60 and, along with increased Matrigel degradation, could explain the observed shift toward inflammation as the ECM undergoes remodeling and degradation, resulting in a softer matrix that may contribute to the inflammatory environment.
Increased expression of inflammation-associated genes at D60 may also be driven by elevated oxidative stress. We observed moderate the upregulation of ROS-related pathway at D60 ( B). Long-term culture under normoxic conditions has been associated with ROS accumulation and DNA damage, both of which are known to sustain chronic inflammatory responses. Along with ECM changes, cellular stress responses might contribute to the resurgence of inflammation during long-term culture, and subtly impair endothelial function, contributing to the loss of perivascular cells, potentially undermining vascular integrity and angiogenic responsiveness in VMOs, despite overall structural stability. These observations suggest that prolonged culture beyond 60 days may gradually affect endothelial and perivascular functionality, highlighting a potential limitation for extended VMO experiments. At the same time, ROS can also enhance angiogenic signaling, indicating a dual role in long-term vascular maintenance. Future studies will be needed to further explore ROS effects in VMOs.
Senescent cells are known to adopt a senescence-associated secretory phenotype, characterized by the release of pro-inflammatory factors. Interestingly, senescence signatures were observed at early time points but decreased substantially over time ( A). Reduction in senescence signatures has been reported in other 3D cultures and reflects the more supportive and physiological culture environment provided by VMOs compared to the conventional cultures where senescence signatures generally increase with culture time. , 
Bone marrow contains heterogeneous MSC populations, , , and we identified several MSC subpopulations in our system ( A). The presence of proliferative and fibroblastic subpopulations has been previously reported and aligns with our findings. , , The Progenitors cluster exhibits markers from different MSC subpopulations and could represent a combination of smaller subtypes that are not distinct enough to be separated. Two clusters appear to be intermediate between ECs and MSCs ( A and 4J), suggesting a possible transitional or bidirectional state between these cell types. Previous studies report, for example, that bone marrow-derived MSCs can differentiate into endothelial-like cells when cultured in the presence of vascular VEGF, FGF, IGF, EGF, and ascorbic acid, all of which are components of the culture medium used in our study. , 
Pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are mural cells that play key roles in vascular stability and proliferation. In our VMOs, we identified a subpopulation of perivascular myofibroblast-like cells ( I). Under fibrotic conditions, VSMCs and pericytes can adopt a myofibroblast-like phenotype and localize to perivascular regions in a process orchestrated by the endothelium. , Since myofibroblasts can originate from mural cells, distinguishing between these populations is challenging, as intermediate states share features of both cell types, making it difficult to define clear boundaries between cell types. A small subset of cells in the myofibroblast cluster expresses CNN1 ( B and E), which is more commonly associated with VSMCs, suggesting a mix of both myofibroblast and VSMC. Smooth muscle-related pathways were also enriched ( C), further supporting the possibility of a mixed population. iPSC-derived organoids, known for developing a complex vasculature, contain perivascular cells expressing α-SMA and PDGFRB. , Similarly, VMO vasculature has α-SMA expressing perivascular cells ( I), and the progenitors cluster contains a PDGFRB+ subpopulation ( B), suggesting the presence of mural cells.
To summarize the comparison of VMOs against other vascularized culture systems, spheroid-based EC-MSC cocultures are cheaper and easier to form without requiring ECM hydrogels but rarely progress beyond a pre-vascular state, show limited structural stability, lack vascular complexity, and produce less ECM. Both VMOs and iPSC-derived vascular organoids form mature vessel-like structures with perivascular cells, and support long-term culture. VMOs are assembled from primary cells that are ready to use more quickly, achieving functional vasculature in a shorter time than iPSC organoids, whereas iPSC organoids allow more customization of cellular diversity but require extended differentiation protocols, , often display heterogeneous maturation, and some cell populations remain poorly functional. , Nevertheless, VMOs can be rapidly and high-throughput assembled from primary cells, are reproducible, and generate extensive self-assembled vascular networks with enhanced angiogenesis, ECM deposition, and longer vascular stability compared to spheroids and microfluidic systems. 
One disease that involves the vasculature is breast cancer metastasis to the bone marrow. The involvement of different cellular components in the bone marrow niche in BC bone metastasis is well-established. Investigating alterations in the bone marrow microenvironment during tumor cell invasion and in response to therapy is an emerging area of research, thus, a robust endothelial-MSC platform may benefit the investigation of breast cancer-stromal interactions in a controlled, physiologically relevant setting. In our experiments, we used VMOs to engraft MCF7 BC cells. The cancer cells formed niches that may help model bone marrow metastasis beyond 2D cultures. , Accordingly, expression of Ki67 by MCF7 cells was reduced in VMOs compared to 2D cultures ( C and 7D), indicating decreased proliferation. Previous studies showed that MSC spheroids and HUVEC/MSC spheroids exhibit progressively lower Ki67 expression over 7 days of culture. , Furthermore, MSC/breast cancer coculture in spheroids resulted in a higher fraction of G0/G1 cells compared to 2D cocultures. Similarly, MSC spheroids cultured on soft hydrogels also exhibited increased quiescence, suggesting that the Matrigel used in VMOs may contribute to reduced proliferation. This reduced proliferation is particularly relevant for modeling in vivo physiology, where tumor cells are highly heterogeneous, with a large proportion of quiescent cells capable of surviving therapy and contributing to tumor recurrence. Reduced BC cell Ki67 activation in our VMO model suggests a more physiologically relevant environment provided by 3D culture systems.
VMOs were more effective mediators of chemoresistance than spheroids ( F and 7G). Cancer cells are known to hijack specific niches to provide chemoprotection through mechanisms involving MSCs and ECs. , In contrast, breast cancer spheroids lacked niches that suppressed BC cell proliferation ( B), leading to the eventual formation of larger cell aggregates that resemble breast cancer spheroids. 
Finally, standardization and the ability to obtain single organoid readouts are common challenges in traditional organoid cultures, compared to spheroids, which generally form consistent structures in a one-well one-spheroid format. In this regard, VMOs mimic the convenience and consistency of spheroids by providing free-floating one-well one-organoid format structures in a 384 well plate format compatible with high-throughput single organoid-based studies. , 
In conclusion, our EC-MSC VMO model combines the convenience and standardization advantages of traditional spheroid models with the higher physiological relevance of vascularized organoids. The VMO platform supports surprisingly long-term endothelium stability and MSC multipotency. As one potential application, the VMO was compared against its spheroid counterpart for its ability to model BC bone marrow metastasis and cancer progression. The proof-of-principle demonstration of anti-cancer drug testing using single VMOs opens the way for further exploration for their use in mechanistic and therapeutics research.

## Limitations of the study
Our VMO system uses HUVECs, which, although widely employed in vascular biology, are a differentiated endothelial derivative that does not fully capture the complexity of natural vascular niches. Similarly, MSCs constitute a heterogeneous stromal population rather than a single defined niche cell type, providing only a simplified approximation of the native perivascular environment. Additionally, as with other vascularized organoids, VMOs lack an open, perfusable vascular network, limiting their ability to model fully functional vasculature. Integration of VMOs into microchannel platforms could potentially address this limitation by enabling perfusion and expanding their utility for vascular studies, though further optimization is required. We performed a proof-of-concept demonstration by co-culturing MCF7 breast cancer cells with VMOs. Future experiments will be needed to characterize cancer cell migration and engraftment, and to optimize VMOs as a physiologically relevant model for metastasis. Finally, while our study provides predictive insights into organoid biology, additional investigations will be necessary to validate these interactions and uncover novel functional consequences, complementing the descriptive transcriptomic analyses presented here.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the corresponding author, Shuichi Takayama (takayama@gatech.edu).

## Materials availability
All unique/stable reagents generated in this study will be made available on request with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement.

## Data and code availability

•RNA-seq data were uploaded to GEO under accession codes GEO: GSE297680 (single-cell mRNA sequencing) and GEO: GSE297746 (bulk sequencing).
•All data reported in this article are publicly available at Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17956129. 
•All custom scripts and codes used in this study are publicly available at Zenodo: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.17956129. 
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this article is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the 10.13039/100006778Georgia Institute of Technology for institutional support. We acknowledge the Histology Core Lab, Genomics Core, and Optical Microscopy Core at Georgia Tech for their valuable technical assistance and access to essential instrumentation. We would also like to thank Emory Integrated Genomics Core for their assistance in RNA-sequencing. This project was supported by the Price Gilbert Jr Chair Fund, 10.13039/100001311Regenerative Engineering and Medicine (REM)-10.13039/100008065Georgia Research Alliance (GRA) Seed Grant, A.d.J. 10.13039/100001422American Society of Hematology Minority Hematology Graduate Award (MHGA). Illustrative diagrams were created with Biorender.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, performed major experiments, and analyzed data, A.d.J. and S.T.; methodology, A.d.J and S.T.; investigation, A.d.J., P.K., S.L., and K.Y.; writing – original draft, A.d.J. and S.T.; writing – review and editing, A.d.J., D.D., D.K.G., and S.T.; funding acquisition, D.D., D.K.G., and S.T.; resources, D.K.G. and S.T.; supervision, D.D., D.K.G., and S.T.

## Declaration of interests
S.T. is an inventor on a pending U.S. patent application (No. 17/925,998) related to organoid technology described in this study. The authors declare no other competing interests.

## Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT to control grammar and text readability. After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## 2D cell culture
Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSC) were purchased from RoosterBio and cultured in RoosterNourish-MSC medium (RoosterBio). Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were purchased from ATCC and cultured in Vascular Cell Basal Medium (VCBM; ATCC) supplemented with the Endothelial Cell Growth Kit-VEGF (containing 5 ng/mL VEGF, 5 ng/mL EGF, 5 ng/mL FGF, 15 ng/mL IGF-1, 10 mM L-glutamine, 0.75 U/mL heparin sulfate, 1 μg/mL hydrocortisone, and 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid; ATCC), 2% FBS (ATCC), and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Gibco). MCF7 GFP+ cells were purchased from Genecopoeia and cultured in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM; Corning) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gemini) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Cultures were maintained in T75 culture flasks at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells in 2D culture were passaged at 70–80% confluence. HUVECs and MSCs were used between passages 2–3 and MCF7 cells were used at passage 11. Prior to seeding in 3D cultures, cells in monolayer were washed with PBS (Gibco) and detached by incubation with warm TrypLE Express (Gibco). After a 5-min incubation at 37°C in 5% CO2, the cell suspension was quenched by diluting in PBS, centrifuged at 200 g for 5 min, and resuspended in VCBM medium for organoid seeding. HUVECs were authenticated by the supplier based on growth characteristics, morphology, and expression of endothelial markers such as VE-cadherin and PECAM1. MSCs were authenticated by the supplier through verification of cell surface marker expression (CD73, CD90), tri-lineage differentiation potential, and expansion capacity, meeting ISCT criteria for hMSC identity. All cell lines were regularly tested for mycoplasma contamination and found negative.

## 3D organoid cell culture
HUVECs and MSCs were combined at different ratios (25:75, 50:50, 75:25) at a final density of 120 cells/μL. The cell count for each type was determined using an automatic cell counter (Bio-Rad). The cell suspension was supplemented with 0.24% Methocel (Sigma-Aldrich), 1.5% ice-cold Matrigel (Corning) added to warm media, and 10% FBS, as previously described. , , Three thousand cells per well were seeded onto a 384-well ultra-low attachment plate (ULA; sBIO) in 25 μL drops per well with frequent vigorous cell suspension mixing during seeding to ensure uniform cell density per well. The plate was then centrifuged at 1,000 g for 5 min and placed in an incubator at 37°C in 5% CO2 to promote aggregation. On D3, the medium was exchanged three times with fresh VCBM medium to remove the seeding supplements, using a CyBio FeliX liquid handling machine (Analytik Jena) and topped to 50 μL culture volume. Organoids were cultured for 60 days in complete VCBM medium with medium exchanges every 3 days. As control, spheroids were seeded following the same protocol previously described without the addition of Matrigel to the seeding solution.

## Method details

## Evaluation of cell viability in VMOs and spheroids using luminescent ATP assay
On selected days, VMOs and spheroids were evaluated for viable cells using a luminescent ATP assay. Individual organoids and spheroids were transferred to a 96-well plate and combined with CellTiter-Glo (Promega) in a 1:1 ratio. The plate was rocked for 5 min to lyse the cells and then incubated for an additional 25 min to stabilize the signal. Luminescence was measured using a BioTek Synergy H1 plate reader (Agilent). Data was background corrected using PBS.

## VMO cryosectioning
Organoids (15–20 VMOs) were removed from the ULA plate using a wide-bore P200 tip, washed three times with PBS, and fixed in 4% PFA (16%, Electron Microscopy Sciences) in PBS for 30 min, followed by three PBS washes. Organoids were stored at 4 C for whole mount staining or proceeded directly to cryosectioning. Fixed organoids were incubated overnight at 4°C in 20% sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS to prevent crystal formation, stained with 0.5% methylene blue (RICCA) for 10 min, and washed several times. Organoids were then embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT (Sakura), frozen in dry ice, and cryosectioned at 10–20 μm using a cryostat (Thermo Scientific, CryoStar NX70). Sections were attached onto Poly-L-Lysine coated coverslips (Electron Microscopy Sciences) and stored at −20°C for subsequent H&E or immunofluorescence staining.

## Whole mount immunofluorescence staining
Whole mount fixed organoids were blocked in 10% donkey serum (Abcam) for 1 h, followed by permeabilization with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich), then incubated overnight with primary antibodies: rabbit anti-Collagen I (Novus), rabbit anti-Laminin V (Abcam), mouse anti-α Smooth Muscle Actin (α-SMA; Dako), goat anti-VECadherin (R&D Systems), rabbit anti-E Selectin (Abclonal), mouse anti-Fibronectin (Abcam), goat anti-Osteopontin (R&D Systems), mouse anti-CD34 (Invitrogen), goat anti-Pecam 1 (Invitrogen), mouse anti-CD73 (Invitrogen), and rabbit anti-CD90 (Invitrogen). On the following day, organoids were washed and incubated overnight with secondary antibodies: donkey anti-Mouse AF555 (Invitrogen), donkey anti-Rabbit AF647 (Invitrogen), donkey anti-Goat AF488 (Abcam), or donkey anti-Goat AF647 (Abcam). Some whole mount organoids were additionally counterstained with Phalloidin AF647 (Invitrogen). After secondary antibody incubation, whole mount organoids were rinsed and cleared by sequential immersion in increasing concentrations of ethanol (50%, 70%, 80%, 96%, and two rinses at 100%) followed by dehydration in benzyl alcohol/benzyl benzoate (BABB, 1:2 v/v; Sigma-Aldrich). Organoids were then transferred to chambered glass slides (ibidi) for imaging. Imaging was performed using a spinning disc confocal microscope (Nikon W1) with Z-stacks acquired using a 20× objective and 3-micron spacing. Confocal stacks were analyzed using Volocity software (Quorum Technologies) and ImageJ. All incubations and washes were performed with gentle rocking.

## Immunofluorescence staining of organoid sections
For organoid sections on coverslips, blocking, permeabilization, and antibody incubation steps were performed as described for Whole Mount Immunofluorescence. Sections were incubated overnight with primary antibodies: goat anti-VECadherin (R&D Systems), mouse anti-Fibronectin (Abcam) and rabbit anti-CD90 (Invitrogen). On the following day, the corresponding secondary antibodies—donkey anti-Goat AF488 (Abcam), donkey anti-Mouse AF555 (Invitrogen) and donkey anti-Rabbit AF647 (Invitrogen) were applied. Sections were then incubated with DAPI (Thermo Fisher) for 15 min at room temperature, rinsed, and mounted using ProLong Diamond Antifade mounting media (Thermo Fisher).

## Live organoid staining
Non-fixed organoids were stained for viability. LIVE/DEAD kit (Invitrogen) was used to stain viable cells with Calcein AM and dead cells with Ethidium Bromide. Organoids were pooled from the ULA plate, (n = 8) incubated for 1 h following manufacturer instructions and imaged using spinning disk confocal microscope.

## Organoid imaging, morphology and image analysis
Organoids were monitored using the EVOS FL Auto 2 high-throughput imaging system (Thermo Scientific) with a 4× objective. For morphology, ImageJ and custom Python code were utilized. Images were scaled, converted to binary, and the area and circularity of the organoids were calculated. For vasculature area analysis and E-Selectin quantification, custom Python code was applied to loop through each slide of the z stack. The organoid edges were masked to eliminate background, and the images were converted to binary. The area expressing signal was then calculated. For E-Selectin, area was normalized to control. For vasculature complexity analysis, images were skeletonized and branches and nodes quantified using ImageJ, as well as lumen diameters.

## Hematoxylin and eosin staining and imaging
H&E staining was performed using an ST5010 autostainer system (Leica). Slides with VMO sections were first brought up to room temperature and H&E staining was conducted. Coverslips were applied to stained slides with Cytoseal 60 (Richard-Allan Scientific) and slides were imaged in color using a Leica DMi8 microscope.

## VMO inflammatory treatment
During the second media exchange on D3, IL-1β (R&D Systems) and TGFβ (R&D Systems) were added to each well at a final concentration of 10 ng/mL each. Organoids were then cultured for 10 days with regular media changes, using complete VCBM medium supplemented with IL-1β and TGFβ (10 ng/mL each).

## Osteogenesis induction and evaluation
To induce osteogenesis organoids were seeded at D0 in osteogenic medium consisting of VCBM: Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium/F12 (DMEM; Gibo) at 1:1 ratio supplemented with 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid (Fisher), 10 mM β-glycerophosphate (Cayman Chemical Company), and 100 nM dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich). VMOs were cultured in osteogenic medium for 28 days with media changes every 3 days. Osteogenesis was assessed using the Osteogenesis Quantitation kit (Sigma-Aldrich). Stained organoids were examined using a Leica DMi8 microscope or processed for cryosectioning as previously described.

## RNA extraction and RT-qPCR
Total RNA was extracted from whole organoids (8–12 organoids per sample) by lysing in RLT lysis buffer (Qiagen) containing 1.0% β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich) and using RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA was converted to cDNA using SuperScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen). Gene expression was quantified on a QuantStudio 3 (Applied Biosystems) using TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Primers used were (Invitrogen): RUNX2 (Hs01047973_m1), SPP1 (Hs00959010_m1), PECAM1 (Hs01065279_m1), SELE (Hs00174057_m1) and housekeeping gene GAPDH (Hs02786624_g1). Reactions were performed with three technical replicates. Transcript levels were measured using the QuantStudio qPCR Analysis software (Thermo Fisher) with fold change of gene expression calculated as the ΔΔCT normalized to GAPDH housekeeping gene, and fold changes were further normalized to the D14 RUNX2 control for osteogenesis and to PECAM1 control for inflammation analysis.

## Bulk RNA sequencing
For bulk RNA sequencing, organoids from four independent experiments were harvested at different time point (D3, D14, D28 and D60) and RNA was isolated using the Quick-RNA Microprep Kit (Zymo Research). RNA was quantified using a Nanodrop (Thermo Fisher) and RNA integrity was assessed using a BioAnalyzer (Agilent). Samples passing the QC proceeded to sequencing. Sequencing was carried out using the NextSeq 2000 P3 XLEAP (Illumina). Library construction used 200 cycles with a 1.2B read yield. Fastq files were subjected to quality control employing FastQC. Raw reads were processed and aligned to the reference human genome (GRCh38.p13) using STAR algorithm.
Differential gene expression (DGE) analysis was conducted with the DESeq2 package in R. Briefly, raw reads were filtered for low count genes (<10 reads) and normalized by the DESeq2 median of ratios method. Log2 fold change (LFC) values were computed, and genes with an LFC | > 1| and a p-value <0.05 were considered significantly differentially expressed. Statistical significance was determined using the Wald test provided by DESeq2. To refine results, genes with invalid values in either the adjusted p-value or log2FoldChange were removed, ensuring that only genes with valid statistical measures were retained. A combination of heatmaps and volcano plots were generated using the ggplot2 package. Gene set enrichment analysis and enrichment analysis were performed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Gene Ontology (GO), from ClusterProfiler and C2 and C5 databases from msigdbr package to further explore biological pathways and gene sets associated with differentially expressed genes. Results from each database analysis can be found in supplementary tables.

## Sc-RNA sequencing processing
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) of VMOs was performed using the PIPseq pipeline (PIPseq T20 3′ Single-Cell RNA kit v4.0, Fluent BioSciences). Organoids collected at D3 and D14 (organoids from two independent experiments were combined for each time point analyzed) were digested in TrypLE for 20–60 min at 37°C with vigorous pipetting every 20 min. The resulting cell suspension was filtered through a 40 μm cell strainer (Greiner Bio-One) to remove undigested Matrigel and large cell clumps. The Dead Cell Removal Microbubble Kit (Akadeum Life Sciences) was used to separate viable from dead cells based on buoyancy. Viable cells were then spun down to the required concentration and submitted to core facilities for processing according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The PIPSeq T20 kits were used to capture mRNA, synthesize cDNA, and construct libraries. Libraries that passed QC were sequenced in paired-end mode using a 138-cycle NovaSeq X SP kit (Illumina), with read lengths specified by the user guide. The resulting FASTQ files underwent QC preprocessing, and alignment was performed using PIPSeeker software (V 3.2.0). Downstream analysis was performed using Seurat (v5.0.0) for data normalization, clustering and visualization.
Subsequent analysis was performed for cluster annotation using a combination of manual and automated approaches. Automatic annotation was conducted using GSEA with human tissue-specific markers from the MSigDB C8 collection, which further refined the annotation ( A), and the SingleR package. Manual annotation was performed by identifying canonical markers previously reported for different MSC and endothelial populations, , , , , , combined with GO and top gene analysis for each cluster. Extended information for each annotation analysis can be found in supplementary tables. Developmental pseudotime and trajectory plot were predicted by monocle3 in Bioconductor package. To characterize cell-to-cell communication between different cell types in VMOs, we analyzed ligand–receptor interactions using the CellChat tool (v2.1.2), following the official workflow with standard parameters. The analysis leveraged ligand–receptor pairings from the CellChat human database and included secreted signaling, and ECM–receptor interactions.

## Breast cancer invasion assay
Three hundred MCF7 GFP+ BC cells were added to each well and seeded onto D7 VMOs and spheroids. Engraftment and development were monitored using an EVOS microscope for 2 weeks following the addition of BC cells, resulting in a total culture period of 3 weeks. One week after the addition of BC cells, organoids were digested and filtered as previously described. MCF7 cells cultured in 2D flasks for 1 week were also detached and used as controls. Both cell suspensions were stained with GloCell Viability Dye Red 780 (StemCell Technologies) to assess cell viability, then washed in PBS and incubated in Foxp3 (Invitrogen) buffer for intracellular staining, following the manufacturer’s protocol. Cells were stained with anti-Ki67 Pe Cy7 antibody (Invitrogen) and analyzed using a Cytoflex S flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter). MCF7 cells were detected using the B525 filter for GFP fluorescence, dead cells were excluded using the R780 filter, and Ki67 was measured using the Y780 filter.

## Doxorubicin dose response assay
Organoids and spheroids were cultured for one week following the addition of BC cells and then doxorubicin (MedChem Express) was added at various concentrations (0–100 μM) and the cells were incubated for and additional 3 days. The response of the organoids and spheroids to the drug was monitored using the EVOS system to visually observe tumor shrinkage and changes in morphology. Drug response was assessed by measuring changes in green fluorescence using a plate reader with a 485/20 excitation filter and a 528/20 emission filter. Calculated values were divided by average control (no drug PBS vehicle-treated) measurement to normalize results.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 10.0.2. Comparisons were performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s multiple comparisons, or unpaired t test for two-group comparisons (α = 0.05). For dose-response analysis, a two-way ANOVA with Šidák’s multiple comparisons test was used. Statistical significance is denoted by asterisks as follows: ∗p < 0.05, ∗∗p < 0.01, ∗∗∗p < 0.001, and ∗∗∗∗p < 0.0001. All statistical details of experiments can be found in the Figure legends.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S11

## Table S1. Differential gene expression VMO vs. spheroid related to Figure 3

## Table S2. Differential pathway analysis VMO vs. spheroid gene ontology related to Figure 3

## Table S3. Differential pathway analysis VMO vs. spheroid reactome related to Figure 3

## Table S4. Single-cell RNA sequencing differential gene expression per cluster related to Figure 4

## Table S5. Single-cell RNA sequencing differential pathway analysis per cluster related to Figure 4

## Table S6. RNA-seq differential gene expression D14 vs. D3 related to Figure 6

## Table S7. RNA-seq differential gene expression D28 vs. D14 related to Figure 6

## Table S8. RNA-seq differential gene expression D60 vs. D28 related to Figure 6

## Table S9. RNA-seq differential pathway analysis D14 vs. D3 Gene ontology related to Figure 6

## Table S10. RNA-seq differential pathway analysis D28 vs. D14 Gene ontology related to Figure 6

## Table S11. RNA-seq differential pathway analysis D60 vs. D28 Gene ontology related to Figure 6

## Table S12. RNA-seq differential pathway analysis KEGG related to Figure 6

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.114548.