319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC108404931084049310840493NIHMS19419003785846810.1016/j.celrep.2023.113293Single-cell and spatial analyses reveal a tradeoff between murine mammary proliferation and lineage programs associated with endocrine cues
GrayG Kenneth GirniusNomeda KuikenHendrik J HenstridgeAylin Z BruggeJoan S 1Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA2The Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA3Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
G.K.G. designed, performed, and analyzed all experiments and datasets. N.G. and A.Z.H. assisted in imaging data acquisition. H.J.K. contributed to marker expression analyses. G.K.G. and J.S.B. conceived this study and wrote the manuscript with input from all the other authors.
*Correspondence: joan_brugge@hms.harvard.edu
171020234210113293113293522024This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Although distinct epithelial cell types have been distinguished in glandular tissues such as the mammary gland, the extent of heterogeneity within each cell type and the degree of endocrine control of this diversity across development are incompletely understood. By combining mass cytometry and cyclic immunofluorescence, we define a rich array of murine mammary epithelial cell subtypes associated with puberty, the estrous cycle, and sex. These subtypes are differentially proliferative and spatially segregate distinctly in adult versus pubescent glands. Further, we identify systematic suppression of lineage programs at the protein and RNA levels as a common feature of mammary epithelial expansion during puberty, the estrous cycle, and gestation and uncover a pervasive enrichment of ribosomal protein genes in luminal cells elicited specifically during progesterone-dominant expansionary periods. Collectively, these data expand our knowledge of murine mammary epithelial heterogeneity and connect endocrine-driven epithelial expansion with lineage suppression.

## In brief
Gray et al. generate a protein and spatial atlas of the murine mammary gland. Distinct epithelial subtypes are associated with puberty, the estrous cycle, and male tissue. Suppression of epithelial lineage programs accompanies endocrine-driven proliferative expansion and de novo structure formation. Progesterone signaling is connected to ribosomal protein gene transcription.

## Graphical Abstract

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2023 Oct 31.

## INTRODUCTION
The murine mammary gland is composed of a fat pad filled with epithelial ducts with an inner luminal cell layer surrounded by a basal cell layer. It is distinct among organs owing to its multiphasic, primarily postnatal morphogenesis, which makes it ideally suited to model organ development. A rudimentary epithelial ductal tree forms during embryogenesis and thereafter remains quiescent until pubertal hormones induce proliferation and fat pad invasion, which is led by terminal end bud (TEB) structures. Once the mammary fat pad has been filled, TEBs subside, and the mammary gland achieves relative quiescence but experiences proliferative expansions and retractions synchronized with the hormonal waves of the estrous cycle.
Although mammary development has been well annotated histologically, – the extent of functional mammary epithelial heterogeneity is under intense investigation, as this diversity has profound implications for breast tumorigenesis, the nature of stem cells and their differentiation hierarchies, and the economics of milk production. Postnatal epithelial populations include three independent, self-sustaining lineages: basal myoepithelial (BA) cells, luminal alveolar progenitors (APs), and luminal hormone sensors (HSs). – However, rare bipotent stem cells and/or pan-luminal progenitors with minimal contributions to cell turnover have been hypothesized to persist into adulthood at low frequencies. – In addition, despite an expansive literature on intra-lineage heterogeneity, how various cell subtypes interrelate, are spatially distributed, or execute distinct functions is unclear. – Finally, the mechanisms underlying the establishment and maintenance of nulliparous epithelial heterogeneity are still being unraveled. Estrogens and progesterone are key drivers of ductal expansion, ductal branching, proliferation, and terminal differentiation during puberty, the pregnancy cycle, and the estrous cycle , , , – and thus likely contribute to the maintenance of epithelial heterogeneity, yet their roles in this process are not understood.
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) studies of the murine mammary gland support and enrich the three-lineage model of the mammary epithelium. , – Unfortunately, because relatively few cells can be analyzed with this technology, identifying rare cell types and assessing intra-lineage heterogeneity are hindered. Mass cytometry, or cytometry by time of flight (CyTOF), complements scRNA-seq on several fronts. In this technique, antibodies conjugated to isotopically pure metals are used to stain single-cell suspensions analogously to flow cytometry. Approximately 50 parameters can be robustly and reproducibly measured in parallel on millions of cells. Because CyTOF gives protein-level data, the results of these experiments can be more easily translated to flow cytometry and immunofluorescence (IF). In addition to suspension methods such as CyTOF and scRNA-seq, multiplexed imaging techniques have facilitated evaluations of numerous markers on one tissue section. One such technique, cyclic IF (CycIF), uses a stain-and-bleach approach to evaluate a few dozen markers. Although single-cell technologies such as scRNA-seq, CyTOF, and CycIF are powerful individually, combining transcriptomic, protein, and imaging data may provide more powerful insights into a given biological system than can be appreciated by any single technique alone. , – 
Single-cell profiling studies of the human mammary gland, the breast, have also yielded numerous insights into mammary composition with implications for human health. – Notably, these efforts have demonstrated that interindividual heterogeneity in breast composition is influenced by numerous interconnected variables, including age, parity, the menstrual cycle, menopausal status, germline breast cancer mutation status, racial/ethnic origin. Parsing the effects of these interacting variables remains a challenge for the field, and, furthermore, evaluating breast biology during puberty and the pregnancy-lactation-involution cycle (two periods heavily influencing breast cancer risk) , using single-cell approaches is stymied by the intrinsic difficulty in acquiring the requisite tissue. Highly controlled studies of mammary development and life history factors in the murine context remain a powerful tool to reveal informative biology and guide future studies in the human context.
In this study, CyTOF and CycIF antibody panels were developed to comprehensively synthesize mammary epithelial heterogeneity, differentiation, and spatial organization not only in adult female nulliparous mice but also throughout puberty, across the estrous cycle, during the pregnancy cycle, and of the adult male. We uncovered numerous epithelial subtypes with distinct marker profiles, proliferative potentials, and spatial distributions. Our analyses also linked endocrine-driven expansion with pervasive lineage program suppression possessing distinct transcriptional programs when driven by estrogens versus progestogens. Collectively, our data provide valuable insights into the nature of epithelial diversity and endocrine control of mammary epithelial dynamics, heterogeneity, and spatial organization.

## RESULTS

## CyTOF and CycIF identify mammary epithelial and stromal cell types
To construct a high-resolution atlas of the nulliparous murine mammary gland, CyTOF and CycIF were performed in parallel to provide robust analyses of heterogeneous subpopulations of mammary cells and their spatial localization ( and ). Using 47 antibodies measuring mammary epithelial and stromal lineages, CyTOF was performed on 40 pairs of abdominal mammary glands from the inbred FVB/NJ mouse strain representing (1) early puberty (3 weeks; n = 6), (2) mid-puberty (5 weeks; n = 6), (3) female adulthood (8–10 weeks; n = 24), and (4) male adulthood (9–10 weeks; n = 4) ( and ; ). For the adult female mice, three mice from each estrous cycle stage were selected per batch. In addition, iododeoxyuridine (IdU) was administered to each mouse 2 h prior to euthanasia in order to provide an estimate of the proliferative activity of different cell types in different physiological contexts. , After applying strict quality controls (see ), high-quality cells (n = 7,547,448 cells) were subjected to clustering and visualized via Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) ( and ).
 Major mammary cell types were identified by CyTOF ( , , , and ; ; Data S1), including epithelial cells (cadherins, keratins), immune cells (CD45), vascular cells (CD31/PECAM1), and fibroblasts (PDGFRb, EGFRhi) (adipocytes were lost during dissociation due to their low density.) Epithelial cells were further annotated based on canonical markers as either luminal AP cells (EPCAM, CD61, CD14, KIT), luminal HS cells (EPCAM, CD133, SCA1), or BA myoepithelial cells (PCAD, SMA, K14) ( , , and ; Data S1). In addition to these classic markers, previously unreported markers were found for each lineage, such as SSEA1/CD15 in AP cells, ALCAM in HS cells, and CD73/NT5E in BA cells. CD73 is particularly noteworthy, as this ectonucleotidase exclusively marks rare plastic luminal cells in human mammary epithelium, , indicating a previously unrecognized species difference. Interestingly, BA cells also expressed PDGFRb (which is typically considered a stromal marker), albeit at far lower levels than observed in fibroblasts ( , , and ; Data S1).
Concurrently with CyTOF, CycIF was performed on seven abdominal mammary glands from 3-, 5-, and 10-week-old FVB/NJ mice (two, two, and three glands, respectively) using a panel of 21 antibodies geared toward identification of major mammary cell types ( and ; ). For each sample, a slide of the entire gland was imaged, and cells were segmented to permit cell type classification based on marker expression (yielding 581,077 cells; , , , and ; see ). In the adult gland, the epithelium is restricted to bilayered ducts with a thin outer BA layer (keratin 14 [K14], smooth muscle actin [SMA], p63) and a thicker layer of cuboidal luminal cells (K8/18), which can be further divided into AP (SSEA1, CD14, FOXA1−) and HS (K7, estrogen receptor α [ER], progesterone receptor [PR], FOXA1+) cells ( and ), concordant with CyTOF. Among stromal cells identified were adipocytes (CD36), fibroblasts (α1 type 1 collagen [COL1A1], vimentin), vascular/pericyte cells (K14− SMA+), and immune cells (CD45). The pubertal samples contained the same major cell types and structures as outlined above but additionally contained multilayered TEBs ( ).
Given the radically distinct organizations of ducts and TEBs, we reasoned these two structure types would also form distinct cellular neighborhoods (CNs) based on the major cell types present in each structure type. To interrogate this, we utilized a latent Dirichlet allocation modeling approach to identify distinct CNs across all samples. In addition to eight stromal CNs, this analysis revealed two epithelial CNs ( ), one with a relatively even balance of epithelial cells (Epi-Bal) and one with an enrichment of AP cells (AP-rich). The pubescent epithelium was mostly comprised of the Epi-Bal CN ( – ), whereas the adult was dominated by the AP-rich CN. Quantifications of interaction strengths among major cell types orthogonally validated the increased spatial prominence of AP cells in the adult ( ).
The temporal distinction between these two CNs supported our initial hypothesis of a distinction between TEBs and ducts. To further confirm this, we computed the proportion of each cell type and CN type of the cells found in each epithelial structure and embedded these data as a UMAP to visualize the changing cell and CN composition changes that occurred with maturity ( – ). These analyses showed that the transition to maturity featured a transition from the Epi-Bal CN to the AP-rich CN ( – ) and a commensurate increase in the proportion of AP cells in a structure. Following these analyses, each structure was annotated morphologically as either a TEB or duct, and the majority CN composition of each structure was measured. Unexpectedly, although TEBs were uniformly made up of the Epi-Bal CN, pubescent ducts could be of either CN ( ). These results highlight a hitherto unappreciated aspect of pubertal development in the mammary gland in which a TEB-like neighborhood composition of epithelial cells persists temporarily in bilayered ducts prior to acquiring an adult ductal configuration.
Collectively, these parallel mass cytometric and spatial analyses provided a strong baseline atlas of mammary cell types, which laid a foundation for more detailed analyses of intra-lineage heterogeneity.

## Intra-lineage heterogeneity of the nulliparous mammary epithelium
As the CyTOF antibody panel was designed to evaluate intra-lineage heterogeneity more deeply than the CycIF panel, the diversity within epithelial lineages was investigated in the full CyTOF dataset. Epithelial cells (n = 2,411,411 cells) were extracted in silico and then sub-clustered (see ) ( ). Clusters were initially annotated by canonical marker expression as described above, and the three major epithelial lineages (AP, HS, BA) were again identified. Twelve clusters were revealed in this analysis: five AP (AP1–5), five HS (HS1–5), and two BA (BA1 and 2) clusters, broadly distributed among samples of all ages and both sexes and identifiable in various mouse strains ( , , – ; ; Data S1).
 Among AP cells, 75% expressed CD61 (ITGB3/Integrin-β3; encompassing the AP1 and AP2 clusters; , , and ), a putative progenitor marker in this lineage based on in vitro colony-forming assays. CD61+ cells were divided between the CD14+ KIT+ AP1 and CD14− KIT− AP2 clusters; these two markers have also been reported to enrich for progenitors, with CD14+ CD61+ cells reportedly possessing the greatest in vitro colony-forming capacity. , The AP3–5 clusters lacked expression of these progenitor markers (CD14, CD61), with AP4 expressing low levels of nearly all markers. The rare AP5 cluster also lacked some widely expressed AP markers (CD49B, SSEA1) but not others (TSPAN8) while also having high expression of a subset of luminal markers (CD66A, ECAD, CD24) and the HS marker LY6D.
Within the HS lineage, the CD49Bmed HS2 and CD49Blo HS3 clusters ( , , , and ; Data S1) were most abundant and resembled previously reported HS populations differing in their in vitro progenitor activity, with HS2-like cells reported to be more progenitor-like. However, HS2 cells also expressed more CD200, CD133 (PROM1), and ALCAM, indicating more substantive molecular differences between these two HS subsets than previously appreciated. A previously unrecognized HS population, the HS1 cluster, constituted <1% of HS cells ( ; ) and was noteworthy owing to its expression of BA markers CD104 (ITGB4), CD47, and CD54 (ICAM1). Of note, HS1 cells in our data do not appreciably express SMA or K14 ( ), demonstrating that they are distinct from previously reported basal-like HS cells from puberty identified by scRNA-seq. Finally, HS4–5 cells constituted small HS populations lacking expression of key HS lineage markers (CD133, SCA1, LY6D); HS5 cells were distinguished by high expression of CD61, akin to HS1 cells.
Over 80% of BA cells fell into the BA1 cluster, which expressed higher levels of most BA markers than BA2 cells ( , , and ). Notably, the TSPAN8+ population of putative BA stem cells , was located wholly within the BA1 cluster. Despite the TSPAN8 expression pattern being unique with such high dispersion as to warp the underlying UMAP embedding, this population exhibited relatively minor molecular differences from other BA cells besides expression of TSPAN8 ( – ), explaining its grouping with the broader BA1 cluster. Similar to TSPAN8+ BA cells, the PROCR+ population of putative BA stem cells was also a subset of the BA1 cluster ( and ; Data S1), although this population did display greater molecular differences from other BA cells owing to the correlation of PROCR expression with several other BA markers ( and ). PROCR- and TSPAN8-expressing BA cells were largely non-overlapping ( ). Similar to previous reports, PROCR+ BA cells were proliferative, whereas TSPAN8+ BA cells were comparatively quiescent ( ). TSPAN8+ BA cells were quiescent irrespective of PROCR status, indicating TSPAN8 is a more informative indicator of proliferative capacity than PROCR. These results highlight the intrinsic technical strengths of CyTOF as well as the complex nature of putative stem-like cells in the mammary gland. 
An overarching trend in the CyTOF data was the coordinate, continuous decrease in nearly every marker’s expression level within each lineage such that the AP4, HS4, and BA2 clusters constituted a “low-expressing” (LE) state within their respective lineages compared to their high-expressing (HE) counterparts ( , , and ; Data S1). Calculating the proportion of IdU+ cells in each cluster from adult females revealed that the LE AP4, HS4, and BA2 clusters exhibited high rates of IdU incorporation ( and ), with the AP4 cluster being nearly 30% IdU+. Furthermore, these cells were particularly proliferative during follicular phases of the estrous cycle ( and ). However, their relative abundance did not change across the estrous cycle ( ), suggesting they are responsive to the hormonal milieu of follicular phases but are not an immediate consequence of endocrine-induced proliferation. While these LE clusters were among the most proliferative clusters identified, their relative scarcity meant that the majority of IdU+ cells were in fact HE cells ( ), thus arguing against the LE phenotype’s being a simple readout of proliferation.

## Distinct spatial segregation of AP subtypes in the adult female mammary gland
The association between LE cell subtypes and proliferation during the estrous cycle suggested these phenotypes may be associated with the primary sites of proliferation in the mammary gland across the estrous cycle, namely the tertiary branching ducts. To begin to interrogate this, the adult CycIF data were subjected to further spatial analyses. CD14+ SSEA1+ AP1, CD14− SSEA1+ AP2/3, and CD14− SSEA1− AP4 cells were identified ( ); however, suitably sensitive and specific antibodies to distinguish HS and BA subtypes could not be validated. Nevertheless, spatial interaction and CN analyses were performed using the AP subtypes (see ).
Calculations of interaction strength showed that cells from each AP subtype most strongly associated with other AP cells of that subtype ( ), indicating that they occupy separate CNs away from other AP subsets. Indeed, CN analyses identified three epithelial CNs largely defined by their relative proportions of the AP subtypes ( and ), and individual ducts were typically dominated by a single AP subset and composed of a single CN ( – ). For example, in , a large duct composed of AP1 cells is pictured, but, in another duct from the same gland, AP cells were largely categorized as AP2/3 cells ( ). In a final example, several small neighboring ducts were composed of AP4 cells ( ). Notably, in those structures that did contain more than one AP subset, AP1 and AP4 cells largely co-localized with only AP2/3 cells but not with one another ( ).
 To further characterize the aforementioned ductal types, we assessed how CD14 and SSEA1 expression correlated with ductal size and localization. The expression of these two key markers was measured per structure and found to be lower in small tertiary ducts with narrow lumens (consistent with the presence of AP4 cells) and higher in primary ducts with large lumens (consistent with the presence of AP1 cells) ( – ). Large, established primary ducts predominate in the nippleproximal region of the mammary gland, and smaller branching ducts radiate from them such that they predominate in the nipple-distal region. Consistent with this, CD14hi SSEA1hi ducts were preferentially located near the nipple ( – ), thus confirming a hitherto unappreciated connection between microanatomical duct type and resident AP subtype.
Finally, as LE epithelial cells are highly proliferative ( and ) and as tertiary branches are the primary site of proliferation in the nulliparous gland, differential marker expression analyses were performed to determine whether epithelial cells in the AP4-rich CN were more proliferative. These analyses confirmed that AP, HS, and BA cells in the AP4-rich CN had higher expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) compared to cells of their lineage in other CNs (1.9-, 2.4-, and 2.5-fold higher, respectively) ( – ), indicating they are more proliferative, as would be expected for cells of the tertiary branches. Of note, HS cells in the AP4-rich CN had only two-thirds as much expression of K7, and BA cells in such areas had 15% lower SMA levels and 65% lower K14 levels than BA cells in other CNs. Although the antibody signals from K7, SMA, and K14 were not sufficient to gate LE HS and BA cells, their lower expression in the AP4-rich CN is consistent with the presence of HS4 and BA2 cells ( ).
Taken together, these results indicate that distinct AP subtypes segregate spatially to form distinct neighborhoods, and this spatial patterning of AP subtypes may provide useful molecular markers for primary, secondary, and tertiary ducts. Further, these data suggest that the putative differentiation gradient evident by CyTOF exists along a defined spatial gradient radiating from nipple-proximal primary ducts to more distal tertiary ducts.

## Distinct epithelial population structure of the pubescent mammary gland
To assess the relative abundance of different epithelial cell types and subtypes across puberty, we analyzed the mammary glands of the 3- and 5-week-old animals (early and mid-puberty, respectively) with respect to the adult. Although no differences in major epithelial lineage abundance were identified across puberty ( ), epithelial subtypes exhibited more dynamic differences ( – ).
 First, the AP5 cluster, which is an LE phenotype expressing the HS marker LY6D, was found to be almost completely restricted to 3-week-old glands ( and ). Furthermore, in contrast to other LE phenotypes, AP5 cells were largely quiescent compared to other AP subtypes from pubescent samples ( ). The restriction of this cluster to glands at the earliest stage of puberty and their relative quiescence suggested that this phenotype may be associated with the rudimentary ductal trees, which are established in late embryonic mammogenesis and persist in relative stasis until the onset of puberty. To evaluate this, AP cells from scRNA-seq data performed on 2-week-old mammary epithelium (i.e., from the rudimentary ductal tree just prior to puberty) were compared to pubescent 5-week-old and adult 10-week-old animals. This analysis showed that AP5 markers (LY6D/Ly6d, TSPAN8/Tspan8, ECAD/Cdh1) were uniformly more highly expressed in 2-week-old cells compared to cells from older samples ( ), consistent with the CyTOF data ( ). Interestingly, the BA keratin K14 was expressed at low levels in AP5 cells ( ), and Krt14 was also expressed in prepubescent AP cells ( ). Furthermore, the BA marker CD73 was expressed in a small subset of AP5 cells ( ; Data S1); the co-expression of K14 and CD73 in an AP subtype resembles the basal-luminal AP subtype reported in humans. Altogether, these data highlight a degree of low lineage fidelity in AP5 cells.
Similar to the LE AP5 cluster, the LE HS5 cluster was significantly enriched in pubescent glands ( ) but was found at high levels in both 3- and 5-week-old animals. Also contrasting with AP5 cells was the high degree of IdU incorporation in HS5 cells ( ). Their enrichment at both puberty ages and their proliferative nature suggested HS5 cells may be associated with the main site of proliferation in the pubescent gland TEB. To test this, scRNA-seq data on micro-dissected 5-week-old ducts versus TEBs were evaluated, and HS5 markers were found to be more highly expressed in TEB HS cells compared to ductal HS cells ( and ). Most notably, the CD51-CD61 integrin pair (ITGAV-ITGB3 or integrins-αV and -β3) was more highly expressed in TEB HS cells, consistent with the presence of HS5 cells ( ); these results highlight a potential opportunity to study TEB-resident HS cells without relying on the technically onerous micro-dissection approach.
The relatively proliferative, basal-like HS1 cluster was also found to be highly enriched in early pubescent glands ( and ). This strong association with pubertal onset suggested HS1 cells may be associated with the beginnings of TEB invasion of the fat pad. To test this, IF was performed on a cohort of 3-week-old mammary glands using the HS1 marker CD54 (ICAM1), the HS marker FOXA1, and the luminal epithelial marker K8 ( – ). Three types of structure were identified: ducts, TEBs, and nascent budding structures (NBSs). NBSs were distinctive nipple-proximal ducts with a luminal multilayer and numerous budding structures emerging from them; only one per gland was identified. HS1 cells were found to be nearly three times as abundant in ducts and NBSs compared to TEBs ( ), suggesting these cells may be involved in branch initiation. Interestingly, in contrast to AP5 and HS5 cells, HS1 cells clearly persisted into adulthood ( and ), raising the possibility they may be also involved in adult branching, although their rarity precluded definitive spatial resolution in older animals. Future functional validation may focus on whether these cells have a bona fide role in branch initiation.
Finally, the LE AP4, HS4, and BA2 clusters were enriched in pubescent glands ( ), whereas most HE clusters generally became more prominent in adult animals ( ). Similar to the adult, the LE AP4, HS4, and BA2 cells were among the most proliferative clusters in their respective lineages in pubescent glands ( , , and ), again suggesting the LE state is associated with endocrine-driven proliferative expansion. Consistent with the presence of LE AP4 and BA2 cells, SSEA1 expression in AP cells ( – ) and K14 and SMA expression in BA cells were markedly lower in TEBs compared to ducts ( ). Interestingly, although LE clusters (AP4–5, HS4–5, BA2) were enriched in pubescent samples generally, the TSPAN8+ subfraction of the HE BA1 cluster was also enriched in 3-week-old samples ( ).

## Suppression of lineage programs as a consistent feature of endocrine-induced expansion
The association between LE cells and hormonally driven proliferative expansion in both adult ( and ) and pubescent ( ) glands suggested that lineage program suppression may be a shared feature of epithelial cells in different development phases of the mammary gland. In order to investigate this hypothesis and to expand the molecular annotation of LE cells generally, previously published scRNA-seq data of adult and pubescent mammary epithelium were evaluated. , 
Unbiased clustering of scRNA-seq data from the adult mammary gland (see ) revealed six epithelial clusters, three of which corresponded to LE AP4, HS4, and BA2 cells based on their low expression of most (but not all) gene equivalents of the CyTOF markers ( and ). Although the CyTOF antibody panel covered many canonical markers of each epithelial lineage, we sought to rule out the possibility that the LE phenotype was an artifact of the relatively low number of markers and/or the method of antibody selection. To address this and to further probe the extent of transcriptomic lineage suppression in the LE cells, gene signatures for each lineage were developed to identify those genes most specifically associated with a given lineage compared to both of the other lineages (see ; ), and the cells of each lineage were scored with respect to their corresponding lineage signature. As shown in , the LE clusters displayed significantly lower signature scores for each lineage (0.7-, 0.6-, and 0.7-fold lower in LE AP, HS, and BA cells, respectively, compared to their HE counterparts), suggesting that the lineage suppression evident via CyTOF is also pervasive in their transcriptomes. Notably, the LE cells did not have consistently lower count depth or number of genes detected than their HE counterparts ( and ); thus, the LE cells did not have lower gene expression overall prior to normalization but had lower expression specifically of those genes unique to their respective lineages.
 To further determine the extent of lineage suppression in adult LE cells, differential gene expression analyses were performed to generate signatures associated with both the HE and LE phenotypes of each lineage ( ; see ), and these signatures were then used to perform enrichment analyses using publicly available gene signature databases. As predicted by the CyTOF and CycIF data, LE cells displayed greater proliferative activity compared to their HE counterparts, as determined by cell cycle phase prediction, predicted transcription factor (TF) activity (FOXM1, E2F1, MYC), and Gene Ontology (GO) terms ( ; ). However, more HE cells in total were predicted to be in S/G2/M phases than LE cells ( ), again arguing against this phenotype being purely a readout of proliferation. In HE cell signatures, there was much higher predicted activity of TFs specifying the AP (ELF5, ELF3, FOXC1), HS (ER, GRHL2, FOXA1, SPDEF, GATA3), and BA (SNAI1/2, SOX9, ZEB1) lineages ( – ; ). – Interestingly, despite this predicted difference in TF activities, the protein levels of the HS TFs FOXA1 and ER were not lower in HS cells in the AP4 CN ( ), nor was master BA TF p63 expressed at a lower level in BA cells in the AP4 CN ( ), suggesting that lower protein levels of these TFs may not be at the root of this phenomenon. In contrast, HS cells in the AP1 CN expressed 3-fold higher levels of the ER target gene PR ( ), suggestive of enhanced ER activity consistent with the transcriptomic data ( ). Together, these results underscore the higher lineage program expression of HE cells relative to LE cells.
Following the annotation of LE phenotypes in the adult, scRNA-seq data of micro-dissected TEBs and ducts from 5-week-old mice ( ) were investigated to determine whether systematic lineage program suppression was also associated with pubescent LE cells. Consistent with the CyTOF and CycIF data, the TEB epithelial cells were markedly more proliferative than ductal cells ( ; ) , and exhibited lower levels of expression of CyTOF-lineage marker gene equivalents ( ). Furthermore, like adult LE cells, TEB cells exhibited a pervasive suppression of lineage programs when lineage-specific signatures described above were analyzed ( ). To further annotate the specific features of TEB and ductal cells, differential gene expression was performed to generate lineage-specific signatures of cells in both anatomic locations for downstream analyses. These analyses revealed that the predicted activity of lineage-specifying TFs was higher in ductal AP (ELF3/5) and BA (TWIST1/2, SNAI1/2) cells than in their TEB counterparts ( and ; ). In TEB HS cells, there was significant enrichment in Wnt5a levels and transforming growth factor (TGF) β and OVOL2 gene signatures ( ), a suite of programs that have been shown to prevent precocious ER-driven ductal elongation while maintaining the epithelial character of TEB cells. – 
The scRNA-seq analyses performed herein took a minimalist approach to the normalization of technical and biological sources of variation, which may have affected our results vis à vis the LE phenotype. For example, although more total proliferative cells were located in the HE adult epithelial cells, the lower lineage signature scores observed in LE adult and TEB pubescent mammary epithelial cells ( and ) may have been an artifact of differential proliferation. To address this possibility, several standard sources of variation (S phase score, G2M phase score, total counts, and percentage counts from the mitochondrial genome) were regressed from the scRNA-seq data. In each comparison, the LE clusters maintained a lower lineage signature score than their HE counterparts ( and ).
In the mammary gland, endocrine-driven proliferative expansion occurs during puberty, the estrous cycle, and gestation. Given that lineage suppression was a feature of epithelial cells during the former two phases, we hypothesized that epithelial cells during gestation would also display this pattern. To test this, we again leveraged CyTOF to determine whether lineage suppression was a feature of gestational mammary development. Using our CyTOF panel, mammary glands from FVBN/J mice from adult nulliparity (10 weeks old, n = 3; 18 weeks old, n = 2), mid-gestation (gestation day 12 [Gest12], n = 3), the first day of lactation (Lac1, n = 3), mid-involution (7 days following weaning; Inv7, n = 3), late involution (Inv21, n = 3), and pseudopregnancy (n = 1) were analyzed (see ). As expected, the gestation-lactation-involution cycle produced major changes in differentiation status comparable to those reported by other single-cell approaches ( – ). , , , In each lineage, the transition from nulliparity to mid-gestation or pseudopregnancy was characterized by significant declines in the expression of most of the lineage markers identified in and ( – ; Data S1). In BA cells, a subset of markers followed this pattern ( ), although many adhesion proteins enhanced in expression from nulliparity through lactation, possibly reflecting the increased strength of cell-cell junctions that occurs from mid-gestation to parturition. 
Taken together, these data illuminate a commonality between cells with high proliferative potential in different differentiation phases in which expression of classic lineage markers is lowered in association with a specialized, phase-specific transcriptome and proteome.

## Association of ribosomal synthesis programs with physiological progesterone signaling
Although united by lineage program suppression, these three expansionary periods in the mammary gland are, of course, quite distinct from one another, and thus we reasoned there may be distinct features of each LE state that characterizes a given phase. To evaluate this, we reexamined the differential gene expression analyses for programs specifically associated with adult LE cells. These analyses revealed a striking pattern in which ribosomal protein genes dominated the LE gene signatures, particularly of luminal cells ( ; ). Furthermore, GO-term analyses revealed that terms related to ribosomal assembly, translation, and mitochondrial energy production dominated the top 50 terms for the LE luminal cells ( ; ). In contrast, the LE BA cell terms were almost wholly related to the cell cycle, indicating a distinction between the two epithelial layers. This ribosome-replete state in adult LE luminal cells is reminiscent of the poised-activation states of other tissues. , HE and LE cells of each lineage were also identified in other datasets in addition to the Pal et al. data ( – ). Despite their shared feature of lineage suppression, pubescent LE gene signatures notably lacked an enrichment of ribosomal synthesis signatures ( ).
 The stark contrast in the ribosomal synthesis signatures between adult and pubescent LE luminal cells highlighted the lack of equivalence among LE phenotypes and indicated that they are specialized for different periods of proliferative development. As specific endocrine cues are required to induce proliferation and formation of new structures in the mammary gland in each expansionary period, we reasoned that such systemic signals are involved in the distinction. To effect ductal elongation during puberty, estrogen signaling is required, whereas progesterone is dispensable. , , In contrast, the proliferative bloom seen during the estrous cycle is progesterone dependent. Thus, we hypothesized that the ribosomal signatures associated with LE cells of the adult were a consequence of progesterone-driven signaling compared to the estrogen-driven signaling of the pubescent gland.
To evaluate this, we examined whether adult LE cells expressed markers canonically associated with PR signaling. Comprehensive efforts to determine PR target genes in mammary epithelial/-oid cells have historically focused on human luminal breast cancer cell lines stimulated in vitro, and, consequently, physiological PR signaling in normal epithelium is poorly understood. , Because of this gap, we focused on genes (Tnfsf11, Areg, Wnt4) that have been rigorously validated to be PR dependent in murine mammary epithelium in vivo. – These genes were found to be strongly expressed in LE HS cells ( ; ). – This result contrasted with ER signaling, which was higher in adult HE HS cells and low in LE HS cells based on gene set enrichment and predicted TF activity algorithms ( ; ). As AP and BA cells also express several genes specifically in response to paracrine factors produced by HS cells after progesterone stimulation, we evaluated whether LE AP and BA cells exhibited such transcriptional activity indirectly elicited by PR activity, and we identified high expression of such genes in both LE AP cells (Igf1, Rspo1, Ccnd1) and LE BA cells (Pthlh, Nrg1, Ccnd1) ( ). , – 
In addition to estrous cycle blooming, progesterone signaling is required for development of the mammary gland in early lactogenesis, , – raising the possibility that the adult LE luminal signatures would be enriched during gestation. Therefore, we again leveraged published scRNA-seq , , to determine whether ribosome biogenesis was a feature of gestational mammary development. Cells from across the gestation, lactation, and involution cycle were scored with respect to the HE and LE signatures. These analyses showed that the LE signature scores significantly increased from nulliparity to gestation day 14 (Gest14) in their respective lineages ( – ). Furthermore, between Gest14 and Gest18, the LE signature scores declined ~35% in each lineage, corresponding to the reported drop in progesterone after Gest15. Notably, gestational proliferation rates are highest in the first week of pregnancy and decrease thereafter, , but the ribosome-rich LE luminal signature scores did not peak until the end of the second week ( and ), concurrent with maximum circulating progesterone levels. 
In contrast to the LE signatures, the HE signature scores declined 30%–66% in each lineage from nulliparity to Gest4 ( – ). In AP and BA cells, the HE signature scores increased approximately linearly from Gest4 to lactation, but the HE HS signature score did not increase until involution. The HE AP and BA signatures are rich with milk and contractility genes ( ), respectively, suggesting their enhancement is related to their ultimate functions during lactation. 

## Induction of a ribosome synthesis program is progesterone specific
The analyses above identified lineage program suppression as a feature of proliferative expansion in periods of endocrine-driven development and suggested that progesterone may be specifically required for the ribosomal signatures activated in LE luminal cells. As exogenous hormone administration to ovariectomized (OVX) mice is a common reductionist tool useful to mammary biologists, , , , , , scRNA-seq data on OVX mice administered either estradiol (E) alone or E with progesterone (EP) were mined to directly probe the differential roles of ER and PR in driving distinct LE programs. Of note, ER activity is required for PR expression in the mammary gland, , thus requiring combined treatment in the progesterone group.
In each lineage, the E and EP treatments caused a similar rate of proliferation ( ). However, differential gene expression between these two groups identified a pervasive enrichment for ribosomal protein genes in AP and HS cells from the EP group ( ), and extensive enrichment for gene sets related to ribosome assembly and translation were seen in these cells ( ; ). In BA cells, very few genes were differentially expressed between the two treatments ( ), although a few ribosomal genes were among them.
 These scRNA-seq data on OVX animals constitute a controlled perturbation experiment that could be leveraged to predict progesterone responses in intact (non-OVX) animals in silico. The perturbation prediction algorithm scGEN was utilized to determine whether a predicted PR stimulation of HE epithelial cells from intact animals would produce an LE-like state (see ). The OVX scRNA-seq data were used to construct a model of progesterone stimulation, and this model was then used to predict the transcriptomes of HE cells from intact animals if they were stimulated with progesterone ( ). In silico progesterone stimulation induced major shifts in the transcriptomes of each lineage ( ), the most salient of which was the increased expression of genes found in the LE signatures in each lineage ( , , , and ). The LE signature scores of AP and HS cells increased ~2-fold ( ); however, the LE BA signature score increased only slightly (20%; ). Using the true LE cells from this dataset as the ground truth of progesterone stimulation, the predicted cells’ mean expression of LE genes correlated significantly with the mean expression of these genes in the ground truth ( and ). Collectively, these data support the conclusion that progesterone is capable of eliciting ribosome synthesis, particularly in luminal epithelial cells.
These data demonstrate that PR signaling enhances transcription of ribosomal genes, but, as PR expression is restricted to HS cells in the epithelium, paracrine signaling likely plays a role in effecting the LE signatures of AP and BA cells. One candidate paracrine interaction is the receptor activator of NF-κB (RANK) pathway, by which HS cells secrete RANK ligand (RANKL; encoded by Tnfsf11) to induce proliferation and differentiation of AP and BA cells. , , , In bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data of luminal cells in an AP-specific RANK overexpression mouse model, the LE and HE AP gene signatures were significantly enhanced and suppressed by RANK overexpression ( and ), respectively, but no significant effect was observed on the HS signatures ( ). Similarly, Wnt pathway activation is strongly and specifically activated by PR signaling, , while EGF signaling may be induced by either ER or PR. , , In bulk RNA-seq datasets from mammary organoids treated with EGF, a synthetic Wnt agonist, or both, the LE AP signature was enhanced 30% by Wnt stimulation irrespective of EGF co-treatment ( ), but, perhaps unexpectedly, suppression of the HE AP signature was reversed by EGF co-treatment ( ). The LE BA signature was enhanced only in the combined treatment ( ), possibly indicating EGF and Wnt signaling cooperate to induce BA proliferation. These analyses further support the conclusion that the ribosome signature of AP cells is induced by PR-driven paracrine factors. What factors elicit the LE signature of HS cells remains unclear, as HS cells respond little or not at all to the pathways evaluated here ( and ). Future work will be necessary to determine whether induction of ribosome synthesis is induced by PR directly, by PR-induced growth factors acting in an autocrine fashion, by paracrine factors from non-HS cells, or by some combination thereof. Altogether, these data yield insights into the physiological role of PR signaling in the mammary gland.

## DISCUSSION
The atlas presented herein serves as a vital compendium of murine mammary epithelial diversity, activity, and identity throughout postnatal life. Our study highlights the strength of a multipronged approach to uncover various facets of development and differentiation, and our findings related to lineage suppression, ribosomal synthesis, and intra-lineage heterogeneity provide insights into mammary development.
A key contribution of our mammary taxonomy is the identification of lineage suppression as a consistent facet of proliferative epithelial expansion. BA cells in the TEB (termed cap cells) have long been annotated as cytologically undifferentiated, and BA cells in new structures have been shown to express lower levels of markers such as SMA and K14. , Our study expands these features to luminal cells while demarcating a more systematic suppression of lineage programs at both the mRNA and protein levels in all three lineages. Interestingly, though, we and others have shown comparable expression of key BA TF p63 in TEB and ductal BA cells, and we additionally show similar HS expression of FOXA1. This similarity in lineage-specifying TF expression suggests that lineage suppression is mediated by other components of the transcriptional network. Lineage suppression may function to optimize cell division in periods of rapid expansion, a hypothesis with an intuitive bioenergetic rationale. This tradeoff between proliferative differentiation and lineage expression has intriguing implications for cancer, as proliferation and lineage are dominant features of breast cancer transcriptomes transcending specific genetic alterations, suggesting tumors may usurp this feature of normal development. Importantly, while tumors often have attenuated lineage fidelity in a hyperproliferative context, they maintain dependencies on lineage-specific genes ; understanding of how tumors manage this delicate balance may be unveiled by further studies of how normal cells execute such a strategy.
Another insight from our study is the elucidation of distinct proliferative differentiation states driven by E and progesterone in luminal epithelial cells. Although united by lineage suppression, they are distinguished by a ribosome-rich transcriptome in progesterone-driven states. This ribosome-replete state resembles the poised-activation states of T cell subsets, neural precursor cells, and muscle stem cells, which enable rapid responsiveness to infection or injury. , – This resemblance could reflect the similar burden of the murine mammary gland to produce numerous, highly biosynthetic progeny in the short period (~3 weeks) leading up to lactation. Given the fact that this ribosomal state is observed during gestation but not puberty, one might hypothesize that the ribosomal transcription is reflective of a need to meet the extraordinary metabolic burden of milk production, but, interestingly, the ribosomal signature of AP cells (which produce milk in their mature form) declines in late gestation and is low during lactation. The transience of this ribosome-replete phenotype is reminiscent of the temporary enhancement in ribosome biogenesis and global translation that is necessary for differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells and Drosophila germ stem cells , and suggests that ribosome biogenesis is likely not solely related to milk protein production, which is underscored by the higher mRNA expression of milk protein genes in HE AP cells. Ribosome production may also facilitate rapid proliferation as it does in differentiating germ and hair follicle stem cells, , although proliferation itself is insufficient to increase translation in the hair follicle or hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). This finding in HSCs and the hair follicle highlights an important subtlety in our own data: while LE cells (whether pubescent or adult) are typically more proliferative than HE cells, proliferation is not restricted to these cells, nor is proliferation itself sufficient to elicit the ribosome-rich signatures defined herein. Notably, LE mammary cells are particularly proliferative during follicular phases of the estrous cycle coincident with ovulation, but their relative abundance does not change across the cycle, indicating that they exist in a “primed quiescence” in luteal phases akin to a similar translation-controlled phenomenon observed in muscle stem cells and neural precursors prior to overt activation. , The lactogenesis and proliferative hypotheses are also not mutually exclusive: fatty acid synthesis elevates relatively early in pregnancy to produce membrane lipids before switching to milk lipid production around parturition. , A similar dual role could exist for ribosomes. , Altogether, while further inquiry is required to elucidate the precise role of the translation machinery in regulating mammary epithelial differentiation, our study expands a growing literature suggesting translational regulation of differentiation. 
Although many epithelial subtypes have been identified, , few have been connected to specific regions of the murine mammary microanatomy, and our ductal taxonomy based on resident AP subtype is thus an important contribution of our study. In humans, less differentiated AP cells have been suggested to reside preferentially in ducts compared to lobules, , and, as CD14+ CD61+ AP1-like cells have been reported to possess the greatest progenitor activity in vitro, our linkage of AP1 cells to large primary ducts suggests an analogous pattern may exist in the mouse, despite major differences in mammary organization between these species. The restriction of AP1 cells to primary ducts may additionally suggest AP1 cells are the least differentiated AP subtype. Among BA cells, TSPAN8+ BA cells, which have a stem-like potential and resemble prepubescent BA cells, preferentially reside in the primary ducts, , providing precedence for a similar pattern in neighboring AP cells. Additionally, primary ducts resist regression upon loss of hormonal signaling, , , and resistance to hormone deprivation is a hallmark of luminal progenitors of the prostate and basal stem cells of the vaginal epithelium. , Beyond differentiation status, AP1-like cells have been suggested to possess immunosurveillance properties, , and the mammary gland has been hypothesized to be the site of a mucosal immunity, which would presumably be most useful for reacting to potential mastitis-inducing pathogens entering through the nipple. Future studies should seek to unravel a possible AP hierarchy using lineage tracing, to explore in vivo functions beyond putative progenitor activity, and to determine the mechanisms by which AP differentiation state is maintained differentially in different structure types.

## Limitations of the study
In this study, we reinforce the utility of combining single-cell protein, transcriptomic, and spatial techniques to discover biology. This utility is highlighted by the LE cells themselves, which were relatively similar in CyTOF marker expression whether from adult or pubescent glands but have phase-specific transcriptomes and spatial localizations. However, given that we were unable to evaluate the protein, mRNA, and spatial properties of a given cell concurrently, we could not fully resolve the spatial localization of every epithelial subtype or fully annotate the similarities and differences between transcriptome and proteome for every subtype. In the future, utilizing combined single-cell protein-mRNA techniques , and/or spatial transcriptomics , will undoubtedly expand our findings. 
Altogether, the level of synthesis and resolution achieved herein is exceptionally high, and the insights related to hormonal control of mammary epithelial diversity, identity, and function open multiple avenues to further research, particularly as related to how cells maintain lineage fidelity in periods of mass proliferative expansion and how individual hormones work alone or in concert with others to drive development.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information or for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the , Joan S. Brugge (joan_brugge@hms.harvard.edu).

## Materials availability
This study produced no new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Original and processed CyTOF and CycIF data have been deposited in Mendeley Data and Omero, respectively, and are publicly available as of the date of publication. DOIs are listed in the .
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.
 

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Murine mammary tissues
All animal protocols were approved by the Harvard University IACUC (IS00000990–3), and experiments were performed in accordance with Harvard University’s institutional guidelines concerning mouse work. All murine mammary tissue samples are listed in . All mice used in this study were purchased directly from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). Two batches of CyTOF were performed on dissociated cells taken from the abdominal mammary gland pairs from FVB/NJ mice to evaluate early pubescent (3 weeks old; n = 3 per batch; 6 samples total), mid-pubescent (5 weeks old; n = 3 per batch; 6 samples total), early female adulthood (8–11 week old; n = 3 per estrous cycle stage per batch; 24 samples total), and early male adulthood (8–10 weeks old; n = 2 per batch; 4 samples total). From the second batch of this experimental design, the 3-week-old samples and adult female diestrus samples were run a second time with a modified CyTOF panel containing antibodies to intracellular antigens. The second experimental design evaluated 2 adult female mice from diestrus from multiple inbred mouse strains, including the A/J, BALB/cJ, C3H/HeJ, C57BL/6J, CBA/J, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ, SJL/J, and 129S1 strains. The final CyTOF experiment evaluated FVB/NJ murine abdominal mammary tissues from mice in early adulthood (9 weeks old; n = 3), mid-gestation (Gest12; n = 3), early lactation (Lac1; n = 3), mid-involution (Inv7; n = 3), late involution (Inv21; n = 3), and later adulthood (18-weeks-old; n = 3). See the section below for further details. The CycIF experiment was performed on the abdominal mammary glands of FVB/NJ mice at 3-, 5-, and 10 weeks of age (n = 3 for 10 weeks; n = 2 otherwise). Although this study focused on female tissue owing to the nature of the organ at hand, an evaluation of male tissue is available in Data S1.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Mouse work
In order to label proliferative cells, mice were administered 150 mg IdU per kg body weight (Sigma-Aldrich 17125) dissolved in PBS (Mediatech 21–031-CV) intraperitoneally 2 h prior to euthanasia.
Using published protocols, – all adult female mice were staged with respect to the estrous cycle via vaginal cytology. Specifically, for each mouse, a vaginal smear was collected every day at approximately 0700 h for 5–10 days until the individual mouse had undergone at least one complete estrous cycle and entered the desired stage for collection. Proestrus was defined as containing nucleated epithelial cells; estrus was defined as containing cornified epithelial cells; metestrus was defined as containing approximately equal numbers of cornified epithelial cells and leukocytes; and diestrus was defined as containing leukocytes. In addition, if collected for a specific estrous cycle stage, an animal had to have been in the previous stage on the previous day. For example, animals may occasionally be in diestrus for several days, but all samples collected at diestrus were collected on the first day of diestrus, when the previous day was determined to be metestrus, thus ensuring consistency. All samples were collected and evaluated by the same investigator. Mice from the strain comparison experiment were all collected at diestrus.
For the pregnancy-lactation-involution experiment, individual females to be collected at lactation or involution were paired with individual males until the female was visibly pregnant, at which point the male was removed. Cages were checked daily at 0800 h until the first day pups were observed, at which point lactation (Lactation Day 1; i.e., Lac1) samples were collected. Involution samples were allowed to nurse their pups until 14 days after parturition, at which point the pups were weaned. Inv7 and Inv21 samples were collected 7 and 21 days following weaning, respectively. Finally, for the Gest12 samples, timed mating was carried out as follows: external genitalia were evaluated for signs of heat at approximately 1600 h as previously described, – and an individual female was paired with an individual male until approximately 1200 h the following day, at which point the male was removed. Potentially mated females were weighed daily to assure they gained at least 2 g of body weight 8 days following mating. If so, the female was collected 12 days following separation from the male, at which point pregnancy is easily observable. All nulliparous samples for this experiment were collected at diestrus.

## Dissociation of mammary glands to single cells
To derive single cells from mammary glands, the lymph nodes of each pair of abdominal mammary glands were removed, and the remaining tissue was incubated overnight in 2.5 mL 10x Gentle Collagenase/Hyaluronidase (Stemcell 07919) diluted in DMEM/F12 (Life Tech 11330057) with 5% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (HI-FBS; Gibco 14025–076) and 5 μg/mL gentamicin (Gibco 15750–060) at 37°C. The following day, samples were vortexed and diluted with 5 mL PBS and centrifuged at 600xg for 4 min. After removing the supernatant, samples were resuspended in 2 mL warm trypsin-EDTA (Corning 25–053-CI) for 2 min with constant pipetting and then washed with 5 mL HBSS [Gibco 14025–076] with 2% HI-FBS (hereafter called HF buffer). Samples were then resuspended in 1.5 mL warm Dispase (Stemcell 07913) with 100 μg/mL DNAse I (Stemcell 07900) for 1 min with constant pipetting and then washed with HF buffer. The now-single cells were resuspended for 1 min in ~2 mL cold red blood cell lysis buffer (Biolegend 420301) diluted in distilled water. Five mL HF buffer was added to each sample, and the suspension was filtered through a 40 μm filter before being centrifuged again. Samples were next stained for 5 min with a viability stain (either Live/Dead Amine Aqua Fixable Far Red Dead Cell Stain Kit [Life Tech L-34973] for flow cytometry or cisplatin [Fluidigm 201064] for mass cytometry). After washing with HF buffer, the samples were fixed with 1.6% PFA (EMS 15710) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature (RT). Samples were then washed with HF buffer and either used directly or stored in liquid nitrogen in a solution of 80% HF buffer and 20% DMSO. Of note, because of their low density, adipocytes were aspirated from samples following centrifugation and were consequently lost.

## Antibody testing for the mass cytometry panel via flow cytometry
Single-cell preparations of mammary gland tissue were stained for 20 min at RT with Alexa Fluor 488 (AF488)-conjugated anti-CD45 (Biolegend 103108), AF488-conjugated anti-CD31 (Biolegend 102405), PE-Cy7-conjugated anti-CD24 (Biolegend 101822), and a PE-conjugated clone of an antibody of interest. After washing with PBS+2% HI-FBS, cells were analyzed using a FACSCalibur (BD Biosciences). In FlowJo, forward scatter, side scatter, and the viability stain were used to isolate in silico single, live cells. Epithelial cells were defined as live, single cells that were CD45−CD31−CD24+. An antibody of interest was considered for inclusion in the mass cytometry panel if it yielded, in epithelial cells, a nonnormal distribution or a normal distribution whose range was at least ten times that of an unstained control. These criteria were chosen in order to assure that each antibody ultimately included in the CyTOF panel would provide impactful information concerning epithelial heterogeneity. Antibodies to CD45, CD31, CD90, PDGFRβ, and I-A/I-E were also included as they are classic probes of non-epithelial populations. The antigens targeted by the CyTOF panel developed herein have generally been implicated as mammary epithelial markers or functional proteins in the mammary gland. , , , , , – 

## Mass cytometry antibody preparation
All antibody conjugation kits and metals were purchased from Fluidigm (see and ) with the exception of 113In and 115In, which were generous gifts from Dr. Margaret Shipp of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. Antibodies were conjugated according to manufacturer’s instructions. Conjugated antibodies were titrated in five serial dilutions using the staining protocol listed below.

## Mass cytometry sample preparation
Samples to be evaluated by mass cytometry were thawed on ice (if necessary), transferred to a BSA-coated 2 mL Eppendorf tube, and barcoded with a unique combination of palladium barcodes using the Cell-ID 20-Plex Pd Barcoding Kit (Fluidigm #201060) following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then pooled together, resuspended in HBSS (Gibco 14025–076) with 100 μg/mL DNAse I (Stemcell 07900) for 15 min in a 37°C water bath, and washed once with Cell-Staining Medium (CSM; Fluidigm 201068). Next, the pooled sample was stained at room temperature for 30 min with an antibody cocktail containing the appropriate volume of each antibody with CSM. Following this incubation, the sample was washed two times in CSM, fixed for 30 min at room temperature in 4% PFA (EMS 15710) in PBS, and washed once with CSM (centrifugation at 1300xg for 4 min). The sample was then suspended in 0.5 mL Intercalator Solution (300 μL CSM with 50 μL 16% PFA, 50 μL Fix-Perm Bufer [Fluidigm 201067], and 0.67 μL Cell-ID Intercalator-Ir [Fluidigm 201192A]) per 1 million cells overnight at 4°C. The following day, the sample was washed once with CSM and then twice with Milli-Q water. The sample was then resuspended in bead water (1:10 4-Element EQ Beads [Fluidigm 201078] in Milli-Q water) to a concentration of ~750,000 cells/mL solution. Samples were run using the Helios Mass Cytometer.

## Mass cytometry data analysis
Following acquisition, CyTOF data were normalized to the bead signal, converted to an FCS file format from an IMD format, and then debarcoded using the CyTOF Software v7 from Fluidigm. Debarcoding yielded one FCS file per sample. These samples then underwent hand-gating quality control in Flowjo. Samples were gated on Event Length, Gaussian Parameters, 140Ce-Beads, DNA content 191Ir, DNA content 193Ir, and Viability 195Pt. Additionally, in order to be included in the presentation of the data, a given lineage was required to express at least 5 markers from the CyTOF panel. One major cell type, of unknown provenance, was removed owing to this last criterion, although these cells are included in the deposited data. This gating scheme yielded live single cells. All single cells were then imported into the toolkit Scanpy, embedded as a UMAP, and clustered using the Leiden algorithm to perform lineage gating. Cells from separate experiments were co-embedded following batch correction with the Combat algorithm. The batch correction efficiency was measured using the scIB function pcr_comparison, and the efficiency was found to be .78, indicating a high degree of efficiency (as 1 is perfect integration). Batch correction efficiency was relatively high for epithelial cells, which were well-covered by the antibody panel, but lower for cell types with less coverage, such as T cells.
Following isolation of epithelial cells, data were imported into Vortex with noise suppression (1.0), minimum Euclidian distance thresholding (1.0), and arcsinh transformation. These data were then clustered using the X-shift algorithm, which was designed specifically to identify biologically meaningful clusters in CyTOF data. , The X-shift algorithm clusters iteratively using various k values and chooses the elbow point of cluster number as the optimal clustering scheme; in this analysis, the optimal k was 15. Only a subset of epithelial cells (~750,000) was clustered owing to the computationally intensive nature of X-shift, and the clusters identified in those analyses were generalized to all epithelial cells using the label-transfer algorithm Ingest in Scanpy using the non-batch-corrected data. Following clustering, cells were embedded as a UMAP in Scanpy using a PAGA abstraction based on the X-shift clusters to initiate the embedding. All matrix plots, dot plots, violin plots, and UMAPs were generated in Scanpy. Differential marker expression was performed using Scanpy’s tl.rank_genes_groups function with default settings on the non-batch-corrected data.
Correlation matrices were generated in Python using pandas, seaborn, and matplotlib. R-squared values were calculated using the Spearman’s Rank-order Correlation Method in pandas, and dendrograms were constructed utilizing the “average” clustering algorithm in seaborn. All biaxial plots were generated in FlowJo 10, and all hand-gating for a given parameter (TSPAN8, PROCR, IdU, etc.) was also performed in FlowJo.

## scRNA-seq data analyses
All mouse scRNA-seq data , – , , , were retrieved from SRA using the fasterq-dump command in sratoolkit (2.10.7). Reads were aligned in CellRanger (6.1.0) using the cellranger count function with the include-introns flag. The output was then run through Velocyto’s run10x command using an expressed repeat mask in order to yield a loom file of the count matrix for each sample.
Quality controls were performed in Python (3.8.12) using Scanpy, Anndata, and Scrublet. , , Loom files were converted to anndata objects, quality control metrics were calculated via the Scanpy calculate_qc_metrics function, and cells were filtered if 1) they had greater than 10% mitochondrial reads, 2) they expressed fewer than 200 genes, and/or 3) they were predicted to be doublets (as determined by Scrublet using default parameters). Genes were filtered if they were expressed in fewer than 5 cells in a given dataset. Read counts per cell were normalized to 10,000 and then log1p transformed. Highly variable genes were determined using the default settings in Scanpy and then used to calculate PCA (n_comps = 200). Cells were embedded by UMAP, and clustering was performed using the Leiden algorithm (resolution = 1). Cell type or subtype designations were made according to marker gene expression. Non-epithelial cells were removed for subsequent analyses. Cell subtype designation in the adult was facilitated by using the MAGIC imputation algorithm (t = 3) to improve visualization of key CyTOF marker genes and other lineage genes whose expression was very low and thus susceptible to dropout. Of note, the distinction between the low- and high-expressing cells was clear also in the non-imputed data, and so differential gene expression analyses for these cell types were performed using the non-imputed data.
Differential gene expression analyses were performed using the Scanpy function tl.rank_genes_groups using default settings followed by removing genes with Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted p < 0.05 and/or fold difference less than 2. From these gene lists, signatures for a given cluster were derived by choosing the top 100 genes differentially expressed in a given cluster as ranked by Z score. GO-term analyses were performed with the Scanpy function queries.enrich, which is a convenience wrapper of g:Profiler, and gene signature scores were determined by the tl.score_genes function using a control gene list of equivalent length to the gene signatures. Enrichr analyses were performed using GSEApy, and ChEA analyses were performed using the online ChEA3 tool. Lineage-specific signatures were derived by identifying genes significantly more highly expressed (at least 2-fold) in one lineage compared independently to both the other lineages. For example, to be added to the BA signature, a gene had to be more highly expressed in BA cells than in AP cells or in HS cells. This process was iterated across the young nulliparous epithelial cells of several studies, , – , , and only the intersection of genes was utilized for a given signature to improve the robustness of the resulting signatures. To account for technical and biological sources of variation in the Pal et al., 2017 data as described in , cell cycle scores were calculated using the Scanpy function tl.score_genes_cell_cycle, and then cell cycle and quality control metrics (S phase score, G2M score, total counts, and percent counts from the mitochondrial genome) were regressed out simultaneously using the Scanpy function pp.regress_out.
To model progesterone stimulation in silico, a model was generated using ovariectomized mice treated with estradiol (E; control) or estradiol+progesterone (EP; stimulated) using the scGEN package with default settings. Then, the HE clusters identified in the Pal et al., 2017 dataset and described in were stimulated in silico, and the result was compared to LE clusters from the same dataset.

## If and CycIF staining
FFPE tissue sections were subjected to IF staining as previously described. , To assess CD14 expression in adult glands, six 10-week-old female FVB/NJ glands were stained for DAPI (5 mg/mL stock; diluted 1:5000), CD14 (EPR21847; Abcam; ab221678; 1:100), and AF647-conjugated K8 (EP1628Y; Abcam; ab192468; 1:500). CD14 primary antibody was stained overnight, and the following day, washed and stained with an AF488 anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Goat Polyclonal; ThermoFisher A-11034). After washing, the slides were stained overnight with the K8 antibody. To assess the localization of HS1 cells in 3-week-old glands, six FVB/NJ glands of that age were stained with DAPI, AF488-conjugated K8 (EP1628Y; Abcam; ab192467), CD54 (EPR22161–284; Abcam; ab222736; 1:100), and AF647-conjugated FOXA1 (EPR10881; Abcam; ab196908; 1:500). CD54 was stained overnight on the glands, and they were subsequently stained with an AF555 anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Goat Polyclonal; ThermoFisher A-21429). After washing, the slides were stained overnight with the K8 and FOXA1 antibodies.
For multiplex immunofluorescence staining (CycIF), 5 mm FFPE tissue sections were treated as previously described. Briefly, tissue sections were pre-processed using the automated Leica BOND RX instrument before blocking with Intercept (PBS) Blocking Buffer (Li-Cor Cat# 927–70001) for 1 h at room temperature. Slides were incubated with fluorophore-conjugated primary antibodies overnight, stained with Hoechst 33342 (1 mg/mL) and imaged to determine background fluorescence. Slides were bleached between cycles using a PBS-based solution containing 4.5% H2O2 and 30 mM NaOH and exposed to LED lights for 1 h at room temperature. Following bleaching, slides were washed in 1x PBS and incubated with the subsequent cycle of antibody staining. See for antibody information.

## IMAGING ANALYSIS
ASHLAR , was used to stitch and register raw images acquired on a Rarecyte CyteFinder to generate an OMETIFF file. Sample integrity was confirmed by visually inspecting the images prior to analysis.
Prior to quantification, CycIF images were background-correct using a given channel’s corresponding unstained, autofluorescent channel from Cycle 0 and a Gaussian blur subtraction using scikit-image and pyometiff. IF images were corrected with only the Gaussian blur subtraction. In order to segment epithelial structures, images were segmented with scikit-image using a histogram-guided threshold of the K8 signal intensity in combination with filters.sobel, segmentation.watershed, and binary_fill_holes. Structures were thus identified and labeled, and relevant signal intensity was quantified per structure. In cases where a binary designation was applied to a given channel (such as calling a pixel as FOXA1+ vs. FOXA1–), histograms from each image were used to determine a threshold. For the IF evaluation of HS1 cell localization, structures were manually annotated as TEBs, NBSs, or ducts based on DAPI signal while blinded to all antibody-based signal. For the CycIF evaluation of TEB versus duct signal of SSEA1 and CD14, TEBs were chosen based on a manually determined threshold of mean PCNA signal. In order to determine whether a given epithelial structure was nipple-proximal ordistal, the outputs from scikit-image described above were converted to anndata for analysis using Scanpy and Squidpy. Structures were clustered based on spatial neighbors (n_neigh = 5) using Leiden. Clusters were merged with one another into a proximal or distal section based on gland morphology.
To perform neighborhood analyses of the CycIF data, cells were segmented by producing three metadata channels corresponding to Hoescht expression overlapping with BA cells (p63), HS cells (PR + FOXA1), or other cells (p63– PR− FOXA1–) and then segmenting on each of these channels separately. This step was necessary to produce distinct epithelial cell types in the resulting data owing to the high density of murine epithelial cells, which tended to produce poor segmentation of luminal cells and merging of basal cells with luminal neighbors. After producing these three nuclear channels, each was segmented separately using a modified watershed approach in scikit-image. Nuclear segmentations were produced using Otsu thresholding followed by watershed segmentation, and nuclear edges were calculated with the Scharr method. The edges were enhanced by a hysteresis threshold, and the result was used to correct slight over-segmentation using a RAG boundary hierarchical merging. Following this step, the segmentations from the BA, HS, and Other channels were merged and labeled. The labels were expanded by 4 pixels to additionally generate an approximated cytoplasmic mask. Mean intensity for each channel in the image was then calculated for each labeled cell, and these data were converted to anndata. In the resulting anndata, the data matrix was then processed using Scanpy’s pp.log1p (base = 2), pp.neighbors (n_neighbors = 15), tl.umap, and tl.leiden (resolution = .5). Before assigning cell type, cells were filtered based on nuclear area (15–140 pixels). A large range was chosen to account for variation in nucleus size across cell types. In addition, cells which did not have nuclear signal for at least the first five rounds of CycIF were filtered to remove cells which fell off the slide too early in the cyclic staining process to be confidently phenotyped.
Cell types were phenotyped based on canonical marker expression, which is more sensitive in imaging data where neighbor signal and other technical artifacts may confound unbiased approaches. Key markers were used to determine cell types, including BA cells (p63), HS cells (FOXA1+ K8+), AP cells (FOXA1– K8+), ER+ adipocytes (CD36+ ER+), ER− adipocytes (CD36+ ER−), pericytes (SMA+ K14–), stromal-associated immune cells (CD45+ keratin−), epithelium-associated immune cells (CD45+ keratin+), and fibroblasts (vimentin, COL1A1). In order to account for image-to-image variability in antibody performance, each image was phenotyped individually utilizing histograms of key markers to guide identification of cell type. Results were compared to the ground truth (the image), and gates were adjusted until cell type assignment was optimized in this comparison.
Using these cell type designations and spatial coordinates, cellular neighborhood analyses were performed by running the SciMap function tl.spatial_lda (n_motifs = 15, radius = 50 pixels [32.5 μm]) ; the radius was increased from the default 30 pixels (19.5 μm) in order to maximize the coherence score of the resulting LDA model. The per-cell spatial LDA motif description for each cell was then used to identify CNs using the SciMap tl.cluster function (method = ‘k-means’, k = 10). Interaction strengths were calculated using Squidpy and default settings.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES

## Statistical analyses
For differential gene or marker expression, statistical analyses were performed in Python (v3.8) using Scanpy. Differential expression analysis was determined by unpaired t test with a Benjamini-Hochberg correction. For all other statistical analyses, Graphpad Prism (v9) was used. Groups of data were compared using unpaired parametric tests (unpaired t test for two-group comparisons; one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test otherwise), paired parametric tests (paired t test for two-group comparisons; repeated-measures ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons test otherwise), or unpaired nonparametric tests (Mann-Whitney U-test for two-group comparisons; Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparisons test otherwise). Correlation was calculated with Pearson’s test unless otherwise noted. Generally, p < 0.05 was considered significant, and bars indicate mean and standard deviation unless otherwise indicated. Specific statistical analyses, sample size information, and data presentation details are indicated in the figure legend corresponding to a given figure.

## ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Data S1–S3 have been deposited in Mendeley Data: https://doi.org/10.17632/fpmd439chh.2.

## Supplementary Material
123456

## Highlights
Single-cell analyses identify murine mammary epithelial subtypes
Spatially distinct subtypes are associated with puberty and the estrous cycle
Lineage suppression accompanies proliferative expansion

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge the invaluable assistance of the staff of the Dana Farber (DFCI) Mass Cytometry and Flow Cytometry Cores, including Nicole Paul, Eric Haas, Noa Schork, Suzan Lazo, and John Daley, and of the HMS Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, particularly Connor Jacobson and Dr. Jerry Jia-Ren Lin. We are grateful to all the members of the Brugge lab who have provided insights on this work, in particular Dr. Ron Schackmann for his mass cytometry expertise, Dr. Laura M. Selfors for her bioinformatics advice, and Dr. M. Angelica Martinez-Gakidis for her editorial efforts. We also thank Drs. Myles Brown (DFCI), Sandra McAllister (Brigham and Women’s Hospital [BWH]), David Livingston (DFCI), Kornelia Polyak (DFCI), Jean Zhao (DFCI), Deborah Dillon (BWH), and Benjamin Spike (University of Utah) for their feedback and guidance on this work. The graphical abstract of this paper was generated in BioRender. This work was supported in part by an NCI F31 CA22820 (G.K.G.), a Komen Scholar Award SAC180002 (J.S.B.), a gift from the Goldberg Family Research Fund (J.S.B.), the Ludwig Center at Harvard (J.S.B.), and a gift from the Gray Foundation (J.S.B.).

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
J.S.B. is a member of the scientific advisory boards (SABs) of Frontier Medicines and eFFECTOR Therapeutics and was a member of the SAB of Agios Pharmaceuticals until January 2022. These roles do not constitute any conflicts of interest with this work. G.K.G. is of no relation to the Gray Foundation leadership.
INCLUSION AND DIVERSITY
One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as an underrepresented ethnic minority in their field of research or within their geographical location. One or more of the authors of this paper received support from a program designed to increase minority representation in their field of research. One or more of the authors of this paper self-identifies as a member of the LGBTQIA+ community. While citing references scientifically relevant for this work, we also actively worked to promote gender balance in our reference list.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2023.113293.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
123456

## Data Availability Statement
Original and processed CyTOF and CycIF data have been deposited in Mendeley Data and Omero, respectively, and are publicly available as of the date of publication. DOIs are listed in the .
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.