319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC128602731286027312860273NIHMS21109804090655610.1016/j.celrep.2025.116213Temporal control of eating and body weight by GHSR-expressing suprachiasmatic nucleus neurons
SinghOmprakash Sheybani-DelouiSepideh KulkarniSoumya LyuMoyu LiBingbing VarshneySalil ShankarKripa GuptaDeepali MercadoLuis Leon BursteinAvi W RichardCorine P LawrenceConnor Osborne-LawrenceSherri ZigmanJeffrey M 1Center for Hypothalamic Research, Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA2Peter O’Donnell Jr. Brain Institute, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA3Division of Endocrinology & Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA4Department of Psychiatry, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA5Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
O.S. performed chemogenetics, histochemistry, and ELISA studies. S.S.-D. performed transcriptomics. S.K., M.L., B.L., and O.S. performed ghrelin-administration studies. C.L., C.P.R., and S.O.-L. supervised animal husbandry. S.V., K.S., D.G., L.L.M., C.L., and S.O.-L. assisted. S.O.-L. coordinated purchases and approvals. L.L.M. and A.W.B. helped troubleshoot. O.S. and S.S.-D. plotted the data. O.S. and J.M.Z. conceptualized the study. O.S., S.S.-D., M.L., and B.L. performed formal data analyses. O.S., S.S.-D., M.L., and J.M.Z. wrote the original draft. O.S., S.S.-D., and J.M.Z. finalized the draft.
*Correspondence: jeffrey.zigman@utsouthwestern.edu
392025449116213116213122026This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Food consumption impacts body weight differently depending on the time of day. Here, we investigated whether suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) neurons responsive to the hormone ghrelin temporally regulate eating and body weight in mice. The chemogenetic stimulation of GHSR (growth hormone secretagogue receptor)-expressing SCN neurons during the mid-rest phase—when mice are most sensitive to ghrelin’s orexigenic effects—increased food intake. Repeated chemogenetic inhibition of these neurons during this same time of day reduced the corresponding, typically low amount of food intake; it also reduced the cumulative feed efficiency and body weight. These effects were not observed at other times of day. The chemogenetic stimulation of GHSR-expressing arcuate hypothalamic nucleus neurons increased food intake independently of time of day. GHSR-expressing SCN neurons represented subpopulations of six distinct SCN neuronal clusters, which were predominantly GABAergic and exhibited light-sensitive, time-of-day-dependent transcriptomic profiles. Thus, our study identifies GHSR-expressing SCN neurons as a neuronal population that regulates eating, feed efficiency, and body weight in a mid-rest phase-dependent manner.

## In brief
Singh et al. identify ghrelin-sensitive neurons in the suprachiasmatic nucleus as a population that regulates food intake, metabolism, and body weight in a time-dependent manner, revealing a novel link between circadian biology, hormone signaling, and energy balance.

## Graphical Abstract

 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 Sep 23.

## INTRODUCTION
Food consumption impacts body weight differently depending on the time of day. – Exemplifying this concept, providing mice maintained in a standard 12 h light:12 h dark environment with high-fat diet exclusively during the light cycle (their usual rest phase) leads to greater body weight gain than providing it exclusively during the dark cycle (their usual active phase); this occurs despite similar caloric intake and activity. Late dinner eating by children is associated with more overweight/obesity than early dinner eating. Later circadian timing of eating by college-aged individuals is associated with increased adiposity. Late eating in adults with overweight/obesity increases hunger and decreases energy expenditure. Night shift work increases overweight/obesity risk despite similar total daily caloric intake as day workers. , Further, a recent clinical trial showed that late eating in adults with overweight/obesity increases hunger, decreases daytime energy expenditure, and induces a pro-adipogenic gene expression profile, all of which promote positive energy balance. In contrast, providing women enrolled in a low-calorie diet weight-loss program or low-calorie diet clinical trial with the main meal at their usual breakfast or lunch times leads to greater weight loss than providing the main meal at their usual dinner time. , These types of observations have led to proposals for time-based eating interventions to promote metabolic health, including those restricting meals to early parts of the active phase. , 
These observations also suggest the existence of specific neurocircuitry that impacts eating and body weight in a manner dependent on diurnal phase. One such neurocircuit may reside in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the body’s central circadian pacemaker. The SCN synchronizes subordinate cellular clocks throughout the body to regulate daily rhythms of physiology and behavior, including physical activity, hormone secretion, and various metabolic processes. – Highlighting this latter effect on metabolism and lesioning of the SCN increases body weight and fat mass, induces a mis-timing of food intake such that it is distributed nearly equally between the rest and active phases instead of mostly during the active phase, and eliminates typical diurnal changes in energy expenditure. A similar shift in diurnal rhythm of food intake is observed in mice harboring a loss-of-function mutation of Clock, which encodes an essential circadian system regulatory transcription factor that is highly expressed in the SCN. , 
Here, we investigated whether the hormone ghrelin directly engages SCN neurons to regulate eating and body weight in a time-of-day-dependent manner. Ghrelin, which is made primarily in the stomach and duodenum, circulates to the brain where it directly impacts metabolism by binding to and activating its receptor, GHSR (growth hormone secretagogue receptor). GHSRs are expressed in several key feeding- and body weight-related neurons in the arcuate hypothalamic nucleus (ARC), caudal brainstem, hippocampus, and midbrain, among other regions. Unlike most centrally acting, gastrointestinal tract-derived “metabolic” hormones, which are anorexigenic and reduce body weight, ghrelin increases body weight via orexigenic actions and limits energy expenditure. 
As recently reviewed, several studies have already linked ghrelin to the SCN and to processes with circadian rhythmicity. For instance, similar to the ARC, the SCN exhibits abundant Ghsr expression. , , Additionally, plasma ghrelin levels exhibit circadian rhythmicity and are tied to sleep-wake cycles; when sleep is disturbed, ghrelin levels rise and correlate with increased appetite. – Late isocaloric eating by individuals with overweight/obesity shifts the balance of circulating levels of ghrelin and the anorexigenic hormone leptin. Higher plasma ghrelin is found in chronic night shift workers when they are studied under simulated night shift vs. day shift conditions. Furthermore, administered ghrelin modulates SCN neuronal activity, although the exact changes depend on the light conditions in which the animals are housed and the time of day ghrelin is administered. – Collectively, these findings suggest that ghrelin might exert temporal control over eating and body weight via engagement of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons—a hypothesis which we tested here.

## RESULTS

## Orexigenic effects of chemogenetic stimulation of GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity are dependent on the time of day
To investigate the SCN as a direct mediator of ghrelin’s metabolic actions, we first used a Cre recombinase-dependent chemogenetic system to stimulate GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity in Ghsr-IRES (internal ribosome entry site)-Cre mice at different times-of-day and measured food intake ( and ). Its previously reported , strong Cre activity in the SCN was confirmed by examining the histologic pattern of brain YFP (yellow fluorescent protein) expression in Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice crossed to Cre-dependent YFP reporter mice ( and ). Although not previously emphasized, Cre activity also was observed in the SCN-adjacent subparaventricular zone (SPZ). The SPZ acts as a relay within the circadian timing system, receiving direct SCN input and sending projections to regions that overlap with SCN neuronal targets. – For the current study, the term “SCN” is used to collectively refer to both “SCN” and “SPZ.”
 Stereotaxic surgery was used to bilaterally deliver the stimulatory DREADD (designer receptor exclusively activated by designer drugs) virus hM3Dq to the SCN of Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice, as was used previously to target GHSR-expressing mediobasal hypothalamic neurons. , Cre-expressing neurons infected with hM3Dq express a designer receptor that activates downstream Gq-coupled signaling cascades upon pharmacological engagement by clozapine-N-oxide (CNO), stimulating neuronal activity. Mice with ad libitum exposure to a standard chow diet were administered either CNO (1 mg/kg body weight, intraperitoneally [i.p.]) or saline 30 min prior to four different time periods. Zetigeiber time 0 (ZT0) and ZT12 mark the start of the rest and active periods, respectively, for mice. Four-hour food intake was monitored starting 30 min following CNO or saline. The protocol was repeated every 3–5 days for each time point using a crossover design, alternating between CNO and saline. At study completion, mCherry expression was assessed histologically to distinguish cases with correctly targeted injections (“hits,” with unilateral or bilateral mCherry expression in the SCN; all “hits” except for one case also expressed mCherry within the SPZ but no mCherry in the retrochiasmatic area [Rch] or ARC) from cases with two different types of mis-targeted injections (“misses/ARC,” without mCherry expression in the SCN and SPZ but with unilateral or bilateral mCherry expression in the ARC; “misses/other,” without mCherry expression in the SCN, SPZ, Rch, and ARC). See – for mCherry expression in representative “hit,” “miss/ARC,” and “miss/other” cases. and ; and show mCherry expression in all cases (four “hits,” three “misses/ARC,” and four “misses/other”). details the number of mCherry-expressing neurons on each side of the SCN at two different coronal levels for each “hM3Dq hit,” as well as the estimated percentage of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons targeted by hM3Dq.
Although 4-h food intake was unchanged in “hits” following CNO at ZT0, ZT12, and ZT16, CNO at ZT4 increased food intake by 144% ( – and ). This ZT4-specific effect distinguished activation of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons from activation of GHSR-expressing ARC neurons: food intake was increased in “misses/ARC” following CNO at all four time points; this increase was 530% at ZT4 ( – and ; 0.05 ≤ p < 0.1 [indicating a statistical trend] for three time points). Food intake was not affected by administering CNO to “misses/other” at any time point ( – and ). The degree to which food intake was stimulated by CNO in “hM3Dq hits” was positively correlated with the number of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons targeted by hM3Dq ( ). Separately, we evaluated SCN c-fos induction in the “hits” 2 h after CNO at ZT4: 59.5% of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons (marked by mCherry expression) exhibited c-fos immunoreactivity, suggesting neuronal activation ( – ).

## Anorexigenic effects of chemogenetic inhibition of GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity are dependent on the time of day
We used chemogenetics to inhibit GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity in Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice at different times-of-day ( and ). The inhibitory DREADD virus hM4Di was used. Cre-expressing neurons infected with hM4Di express a designer receptor that activates Gi-coupled signaling cascades upon CNO administration, inhibiting neuronal activity. Mice were administered either CNO (1 mg/kg BW i.p.) or saline 30 min prior to six different time periods, during which food intake was measured. Upon study completion, histological analysis demonstrated six “hits” and eight “misses/other” that were tested at ZT0–4, ZT4–8, ZT12–16, and ZT16–20 (see – for representative cases; and ; and for all cases). There were no “misses/ARC” cases. details the numbers of mCherry-expressing neurons on each side of the SCN at two different coronal levels for each “hM4Di hit,” as well as the estimated percentage of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons targeted by hM4Di. The corresponding SCN Ghsr expression in a C57BL/6N mouse is shown for comparison ( and ). For ZT8–12 and ZT20–24, a separate set of four “hits” and nine “misses/other” (which were also used to generate the data) was tested.
 Food intake was unchanged in “hits” following CNO at all six time points checked except ZT4, when a 45% reduction in food intake was noted ( – ). Food intake was not affected by administering CNO to “misses/other” at any time point ( – ). The degree to which food intake was inhibited by CNO in “hM4Di hits” was positively correlated with the numbers of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons targeted by hM4Di ( ).

## GHSR-expressing SCN neurons send dense projections to the PVH, DMH, and VMH and co-express AVP
We visualized mCherry expression in the “hits” described above to map hypothalamic projections of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons. Dense innervation was observed in the paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus (PVH), dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus (DMH), and ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus (VMH) in sections from both “hM3Dq hits” ( and ) and “hM4Di hits” ( and ; ). Most cases had isolated mCherry-expressing fibers in the ARC. One case showed dense innervation of the median eminence (ME), although most other cases showed only sparse projections to the ME. These regions correspond to the one previously identified as SCN neuronal targets. – Separately, we showed Avp (arginine vasopressin) in 27.5% of mCherry-expressing GHSR SCN neurons ( – ). AVP is a marker for one of the major SCN neuronal populations (see section ). 

## Repeatedly inhibiting GHSR-expressing SCN neurons specifically in the mid-rest phase reduces body weight
To assess the long-term impact of GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity on metabolism, we used chemogenetics to inhibit them daily for 15 days during the mid-rest phase vs. the active phase. This involved using a 2nd set of mice with SCN-targeted hM4Di injections, CNO administration 30 min prior to ZT4 for 15 successive days, a 7-day injection-free recovery period, and then 15 successive days of administering CNO 30 min prior to ZT16 ( and ). – show mCherry expression in a representative “hit” and a representative “miss/other” in this cohort; and and include a survey of mCherry expression within all four “hits” and nine “misses/other” in this cohort.
Repeated inhibition of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons at ZT4 lowered food intake during ZT4–8 daily by ∼35% on average, although food intake in the remaining 20 h of each 24-h day was not affected ( and ). Over the course of the study, these small daily effects to reduce food intake in the mid-rest phase accumulated such that 15-day cumulative food intake by “hits” was lower than that of “misses/other” ( ). Also, over the course of 15 days, “misses” increased the body weight (by ∼2.5%), whereas “hits” dropped the body weight (by 4.3%), leading to an overall ∼6.8% decrease in the body weight as a result of repeated inhibition of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons during ZT4–8 ( ). A lower cumulative feed efficiency suggests an additional effect to increase energy expenditure ( ). In contrast, repeated inhibition of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons at ZT16 had no effect on food intake between ZT16–20 each day, food intake in the subsequent 20h, cumulative food intake, body weight, or feed efficiency ( – ).

## The magnitude of ghrelin-induced food intake and hypothalamic c-fos induction depends on the diurnal phase/time of day
We examined food intake and hypothalamic c-fos induction following ghrelin administration at the same six 4-h time periods examined above (in section Anorexigenic effects of chemogenetic inhibition of GHSR-expression SCN neuronal activity are time-of-day-dependent). Ghrelin (1 mg/kg body weight subcutaneously [s.c.]) increased 4-h food intake (over that induced by saline) only when administered during the rest phase (ZT0, ZT4, and ZT8; – ). These effects were primarily restricted to the first 2 h post-administration ( ). As expected, saline-treated mice exhibited lower food intake during the rest phase than the active phase; further, among the three different 4-h time periods of the rest phase, food intake was lowest during the mid-rest phase (ZT4–8) ( ). This mid-rest phase also corresponded to the period with the greatest % increase in food intake induced by ghrelin ( ).
 Similarly, c-fos in the SCN, SPZ, and ARC was observed after ghrelin administration at ZT4 but not ZT16, as had been reported previously for the SCN (at ZT1 but not ZT13) ( – ). Further, c-fos positively correlated with 2-h food intake in the SCN, SPZ, and ARC upon ghrelin administration at ZT4 but not ZT16 ( – ).

## Plasma ghrelin, plasma LEAP2, and hypothalamic Ghsr exhibit daily rhythmicity
We assessed changes to circulating ghrelin and LEAP2 (liver expressed antimicrobial peptide-2) every 4 h. LEAP2 is an endogenous GHSR antagonist/inverse agonist ( ) that blocks ghrelin action and reduces food intake and body weight. , Lowering the plasma LEAP2:ghrelin molar ratio lowers ghrelin resistance. , For the mice here with ad libitum standard chow diet access on a 12-h:12-h light:dark cycle, diurnal rhythmic patterns for both plasma ghrelin and LEAP2 were observed. A continuous rise in ghrelin occurred from the start of the rest phase (ZT0) to ZT8 ( ). By the start of the active phase (ZT12), ghrelin had fallen again (nearly to its level at ZT0); it continued to drop slightly, to its lowest level by ZT16, and rose only slightly by ZT20 and again by ZT0. This pattern is similar to previous reports. , In contrast, LEAP2 peaked at ZT0 and fell to its lowest level by ZT12, after which it again began to rise ( ). The corresponding LEAP2:ghrelin molar ratio was highest from ZT20 to ZT0 ( ). The ratio dropped precipitously from ZT0 to ZT4. It remained at this low level at ZT8 and ZT12. By ZT16, it was noted to rise dramatically and then continue to rise to its highest level at ZT20. This LEAP2:ghrelin molar ratio curve trajectory suggests that the greatest ghrelin resistance occurs between ZT20 and ZT0; the period with the greatest ghrelin sensitivity starts at ZT4 and persists until at least ZT12.
 We used in situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH) to compare hypothalamic Ghsr expression at ZT4 vs. ZT16 ( – ). Ghsr signal intensity was lower in the SCN than in the ARC at both time points. Ghsr signal intensity in the SCN increased by 90% from ZT4 to ZT16 ( ). Ghsr signal intensity also increased in the ARC (by only 43%) from ZT4 to ZT16 ( ). No significant differences in Ghsr signal intensity between ZT4 and ZT16 were noted for the VMH or DMH ( – ).

## Ghsr-expressing SCN neurons represent subpopulations of six different SCN neuronal clusters, are light-sensitive, and are predominantly GABAergic
We re-analyzed datasets from two recent studies that transcriptionally profiled the SCN. The 1st dataset (GEO: GSE167927) included 30,320 cells from free-running organotypic SCN slices collected during the subjective day (during peak neuronal activity levels; circadian time 7.5 [CT7.5], which corresponds to the rest phase) or the subjective night (when the activity of SCN neurons enters its quiescent interval; CT15.5, which corresponds to the active phase). After integrating data from CT7.5 and CT15.5, we resolved six neuronal populations (Avphigh, Vip [vasoactive intestinal polypeptide]high, Grp [gastrin releasing peptide]/Alcam [activarted leukocyte cell adhesion molecule], Sncb [synuclein beta]/Gad2 [glutamate decarboxylase 2], Syt1 [synaptotagmin-1]/Mef2c [myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2C], and Trh [thyrotropin releasing hormone]/Bdnf [brain-derived neurotrophic factor] neurons; all co-expressed the neuronal marker Celf4 [CUGBP Elac-like family member 4]) and three expressed markers of well-described peptidergic SCN neurons (Avp, Vip, and Grp). ( , , and ). Ghsr expression occurred predominantly in the six neuronal populations, although it was also found in several of the other identified cell types ( ). Within individual SCN neurons, the highest Ghsr expression levels occurred in Grp/Alcam neurons; as a group, Trh/Bdnf neurons had the lowest mean Ghsr expression levels ( and ). Of the 299 identified Ghsr-expressing neurons, most (28.9%) were Avphigh; 22.5% were Grp/Alcam, 16.6% were Syt1/Mef2c, 14.8% were Sncb/Gad2, 11.3% were Trh/Bdnf, and 6.0% were Viphigh neurons. Dual-label ISHH confirmed SCN co-expression of Ghsr with Avp and Grp ( and ).
 No significant shifts in neuronal population marker gradients or SCN cell type proportions were observed between CT7.5 and CT15.5 ( and ). However, Ghsr expression was consistently lower at CT7.5 within Avphigh neurons (by 25.7%), Viphigh neurons (by 37.1%; p = 0.081 [indicating a statistical trend]), and Syt1/Mef2c neurons (by 24.1%; p = 0.086 [indicating a statistical trend]) ( ), similar to the above ISHH findings ( , , , and ). Subset re-clustering and UMAP (uniform manifold approximation and projection) visualization of Ghsr-expressing SCN cells revealed four transcriptionally distinct clusters ( ). Ghsr clusters 1 and 2 segregated exclusively by circadian phase: Ghsr cluster 1 at CT7.5 and Ghsr cluster 2 at CT15.5. Ghsr clusters 3 and 4 included cells from both CT7.5 and CT15.5. Visualization of the individual cells within these Ghsr clusters by their original identities revealed that Ghsr cluster 1 predominantly comprises Avphigh neurons, Ghsr cluster 2 includes mainly Avphigh, Syt1/Mef2c, and Viphigh neurons, Ghsr cluster 3 mostly comprises Grp/Alcam neurons, and Ghsr cluster 4 includes mainly Trh/Bdnf, Sncb/Gad2, and Syt1/Mef2c neurons ( ). See for a corresponding heatmap representation of the top marker gene expression patterns for these four Ghsr clusters.
Since all Ghsr-expressing Avphigh neurons were found in Ghsr clusters 1 and 2 and expressed distinct, time-of-day-dependent transcriptomic signatures, we more closely inspected the genes of potential interest that distinguish Ghsr clusters 1 and 2 ( and ). The lower Ghsr expression in cluster 1 (at CT7.5) than in cluster 2 (at CT15.5) recapitulates the abovementioned findings. Expression levels of Gabrg3 (gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptor-γ3) and Pclo (Piccolo; presynaptic cytomatrix protein), the gene products of which help regulate GABAergic synaptic activity and serve as a scaffolding protein that facilitates neurotransmitter release, respectively, , were both lower in GHSR-expressing SCN neurons at CT7.5 (in cluster 1). Similarly, the expression levels of both Rasd1 (Ras-related dexamethasone-induced protein 1) and Gnas (Gsα), the gene products of which are key intracellular signaling molecules, also were lower at CT7.5 (in cluster 1). , As Avphigh neurons comprise slightly over two-third of cluster 1 cells and slightly over one-third of cluster 2 cells, it is likely that at least in part, these changes to Ghsr, Gabrg3, Pclo, Gnas, and Rasd1 expression represent differential transcriptional states of the same neurons.
We also observed high GABAergic marker expression within GHSR-expressing SCN neurons: Slc32a1, Gad1, and Gad2 expression occurred in at least 75% of each of the six GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal populations ( ). Far fewer GHSR-expressing SCN neurons expressed dopaminergic markers Th and Slc18a2 or glutamatergic markers Slc17a6 and Slc17a7 ( ). The calculation of the module scores (which reflect the average expression of genes annotated to the corresponding GO terms) for G-protein coupled receptor activity (GO:0004930), GABAergic synapse (GO:0098982), and feeding behavior (GO:0007631) across the four Ghsr clusters demonstrated a significantly higher score for GABAergic synapse compared to the other two module scores ( ). This suggests that a primary mode of function for GHSR-expressing SCN neurons involves GABAergic signaling.
 The 2nd dataset (GEO: GSE148252) profiled 144,806 SCN nuclei from five mice kept in constant darkness for 10 days and five mice exposed to 1 h of light following constant darkness for 10 days. After an initial screen to remove low-quality nuclei and nuclei from non-neuronal cells (leaving 112,000 nuclei), we resolved seven neuronal clusters ( and ). Four corresponded to the previously identified SCN neuronal populations from the 1st dataset (Avphigh, Viphigh, Grp/Alcam, and Syt1/Mef2c neurons) ( ). Two were marked by strong Trh or Ghr expression and most likely were contaminants that originated in the nearby PVH, as suggested by their high co-expression with Sim1 (single-minded homolog 1). , The last, marked by Th expression, most likely was a contaminant that originated in the nearby periventricular hypothalamic nucleus. , 
Ghsr was observed in all four SCN neuronal clusters in the 2nd dataset, and was most frequent in the Avphigh cluster ( and ). Light exposure decreased Ghsr expression in Avphigh neurons only ( ). Light exposure downregulated only five genes in Ghsr-expressing AVP neurons: Ghsr, Pcsk1n (proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 1 inhibitor), Magi2 (membrane-associated guanylate kinase 2), Syt17 (synaptotagmin 17), and Zfp618 (zinc finger transcription factor 618) ( ).
Differential expression of Pcsk1n in these neurons is notable for several reasons. The gene products of Pcsk1n include proSAAS [pro-(Ser-Ala-Ala-Ser-containing protein)] and its cleavage products BigSAAS, LittleSAAS, GAV, PEN, BigLEN, and LittleLEN. Intense Pcsk1n staining occurs along the ventromedial SCN. , 
In vitro studies show that proSAAS potently inhibits prohormone convertase 1/3, which is responsible for converting the prohormone forms of several hormones, including several with food intake-relevant activity, to their mature forms. Administration of anti-BigLEN and anti-PEN antibodies reduces food intake in fasted mice. Transgenic mice overexpressing proSAAS develop late-onset obesity, whereas proSAAS-knockout mice exhibit reduced body weight or an increased respiratory quotient. – Several proSAAS cleavage products are secreted, including LittleSAAS. The release of LittleSAAS is induced by electrophysiological stimulation of the retinohypothalamic tract, the afferent pathway mediating SCN phase-setting light cues. Further, little SAAS induces a phase delay in the firing rate of SCN neurons, and light is unable to restore circadian rhythmicity of locomotor activity in mice kept in constant darkness without proSAAS. , 
Regarding the other light-regulated genes in Ghsr-expressing AVP SCN neurons, Magi2 and Syt17 gene products both play important roles in synaptic regulation, while the precise function of Zfp618 remains largely unknown. – In addition, GO term analysis characterized GHSR-expressing AVP SCN neuronal genes differentially regulated by light as belonging to one or more pathways of potential interest, including those related to GABAergic synaptic function (as observed in the 1st dataset), long-term potentiation, and dopaminergic synaptic function ( ).

## DISCUSSION
There are several noteworthy implications regarding the current findings, the most prominent stemming from the chemogenetics experiments. In particular, we showed that stimulating GHSR-expressing SCN neurons increases food intake, inhibiting these neurons decreases food intake, and that these effects of feeding are distinctly dependent on the time of day. Notably, the effects on food consumption were limited to the mid-rest phase (ZT4–8). To our knowledge, this represents the first description of such a time-of-day-dependent phenomenon in a specific neuronal population. This mid-rest phase-dependent effect was unique to GHSR-expressing neurons in the SCN. It was not observed for GHSR-expressing neurons in the ARC, for which chemogenetic stimulation increased food intake in both the start and mid-portions of both the rest and active phases. Importantly, the functional significance of these temporal effects of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons on food intake became highlighted upon their repeated daily inhibition during the mid-rest phase. Not only was mid-rest phase food intake reduced every day of the 15-day protocol but also cumulative feed efficiency and body weight were reduced. Specifically, body weight dropped by 4.3% upon chemogenetic inhibition, whereas it rose by 2.5% in mice without chemogenetic inhibition. This suggests that the impact of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons on body weight maintenance is not trivial. Rather, their baseline activity during the mid-rest phase is typically responsible for nearly 7% of body weight in mice (or perhaps even more, as discussed below). The lack of change in feeding, feed efficiency, or body weight upon repeatedly inhibiting these same neurons 12 h later (during the mid-active phase) highlights the importance of the temporal nature of this effect.
As mentioned, the time-of-day dependence for GHSR-expressing neurons in the SCN contrasts with the time-of-day independence for GHSR-expressing neurons in the ARC. Certainly, the observed orexigenic effects of GHSR-expressing ARC neuronal stimulation, in general, confirm many prior studies. , , – For instance, prior studies have shown that chemogenetic stimulation of AgRP (agouti-related protein)-expressing ARC neurons or GHSR-expressing mediobasal hypothalamic neurons increases food intake, whereas chemogenetically inhibiting them reduces food intake. , , Yet, a potential temporal element of these orexigenic effects has not, to our knowledge, previously been investigated, as was done here. Nonetheless, the activity of AgRP ARC neurons (which as a group highly expressing Ghsr) exhibits a circadian rhythmicity, which is indirectly driven by the SCN. – These findings highlight a complex interplay between SCN and ARC neuronal populations, with distinct temporal dynamics shaping their roles in regulating feeding behavior.
The new pharmacologic studies with ghrelin at different times-of-day demonstrate that ghrelin’s effects to stimulate food intake and hypothalamic neuronal activity are restricted to the rest phase. These time-of-day-dependent effects correspond with prior work showing that SCN c-fos induction by administered ghrelin is restricted to the rest phase. They also correspond with prior work showing that the pattern of peak firing of SCN neurons in cultured brain slices is a phase advanced by ghrelin only when applied at ZT6 but not ZT14. It is likely relevant that the baseline activity of SCN neurons as a population is highest during the mid-rest phase. Also, it is likely not a coincidence that the mid-rest phase is the most sensitive time period for food intake as induced by administered ghrelin and as affected by chemogenetic modulation of GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity. Altogether, these findings suggest changes in the internal or external milieu of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons during the mid-rest phase that may account for this temporal specificity. These data also highlight the relatively low amount of baseline food intake during the rest vs. active phase, with the mid-rest phase having the lowest amount. The average amount eaten by saline-administered mice during the mid-rest phase represented ∼12% of their total daily food intake. To us, the amount and nature of this low amount of baseline food intake during the mid-rest phase is reminiscent of the type of mis-timed snacking that might contribute to the increased prevalence of overweight/obesity in night shift workers. Although the reduced food intake resulting from chemogenetic inhibition of GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity was limited to curbing this rather small amount of food intake during the mid-rest phase, it nonetheless contributed to a lowering of body weight approaching 7%. Further, based on the positive correlation between food intake and viral penetrance that we observed for the acute DREADD studies, we assume that this observed body weight reduction may have been even more robust had more GHSR-expressing neurons been targeted.
Our studies confirming daily rhythmicity for plasma ghrelin and defining daily rhythmic patterns for plasma LEAP2 may help explain the increased sensitivity to ghrelin’s orexigenic effects during the rest phase (particularly at ZT4) and the observed time-of-day-dependent effects of manipulating GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal activity. As a low plasma LEAP2:ghrelin molar ratio corresponds with low ghrelin resistance, it is likely consequential that the start of an extended period of low plasma LEAP2:ghrelin coincides with the timing of the heightened orexigenic response to administered ghrelin and the time of day at which stimulating or inhibiting GHSR-expressing SCN neurons alters food intake. More studies are needed to determine the functional significance of the observed rhythmicity of SCN Ghsr expression. Indeed, we had expected Ghsr expression to be the highest during the mid-rest phase when the mice had the greatest responses to administered ghrelin. Future studies should also confirm whether the rhythmic pattern of Ghsr expression in the SCN in response to time of day/light exposure observed here in mice, which are nocturnal, is conserved in people.
The transcriptomics analyses provide additional clues regarding processes underlying the time-of-day-dependent effects. For example, the GABAergic nature of the GHSR-expressing SCN neurons, combined with the neuronal projection data, suggests that their typical mode of action includes providing inhibitory tone to hypothalamic regions, including the PVH, DMH, and VMH (and to a lower degree, the ME and ARC). Since all six SCN neuronal populations express Ghsr, it is possible that one or more of them might be involved. Of these, the AVP neuronal population sets itself apart in two main ways. First, not only was Ghsr expression lower during the rest phase but light exposure also initiated the reduction in SCN Ghsr expression. These changes only occurred in AVP neurons, which were the most highly represented population among GHSR-expressing SCN neuronal subtypes. Second, GHSR-expressing AVP SCN neurons exhibited distinct, time-of-day-dependent transcriptomic signatures. The presence of Pcsk1n within the short list of five genes downregulated by light exposure within GHSR-expressing AVP SCN neurons is of interest, given the known roles for its gene products to modulate prohormone convertase 1/3 activity (and thus the maturation of hormones with metabolic actions), to directly impact feeding upon their release as neuropeptides, and to alter circadian rhythms. Thus, the GHSR-expressing AVP SCN neuronal population is of particular interest to the mid-rest phase-specific effects on food intake, feed efficiency, and body weight. Future studies that probe roles for AVP, Pcsk1n gene products, and/or GABA released from GHSR-expressing SCN neurons as mediators of this effect are warranted, especially in light of the new findings herein. Further supportive of roles for AVP and GABA, prior work has demonstrated that ghrelin increases Avp expression and AVP release in cultured rat hypothalamic cells and that GABA mediates actions of GHSR-expressing neuronal populations based in other brain regions. , 
Finally, it will be critical to confirm the specific involvement of ghrelin, LEAP2, and/or GHSR in the newly described temporal metabolic effects. Logically, all three are likely to be involved, as this neuronal population is chemically defined by Ghsr expression and as GHSR serves as the receptor for ghrelin and LEAP2. Also, our data indicate that the onset of the mid-rest phase coincides with the start of a prolonged period of heightened ghrelin sensitivity. Yet, GHSR also exhibits significant ghrelin-independent, constitutive activity (at least in vitro) , and influences the function of other GPCRs with which it heterodimerizes (such as GPR83, the receptor for the Pcsk1n gene product PEN). , These features of GHSR biology suggest the possibility of ghrelin- and/or LEAP2-independent effects of GHSRs expressed by SCN neurons. Future studies employing selective deletion or re-expression of GHSR in SCN neurons or specific subsets of SCN neurons would go far in resolving whether ghrelin, LEAP2, and/or GHSR themselves mediate the mid-rest phase-specific effects of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons on metabolism. Regardless of the mechanism, our study newly identifies GHSR-expressing SCN neurons as a novel neuronal population that temporally regulates food intake and feed efficiency during the mid-rest phase and accounts for a small but not insignificant proportion of a mouse’s body weight.

## Limitations of the study
While the chemogenetics experiments collectively involved 38 mice, some final cohort sizes, after histological separation into correctly targeted cases (“hits”), off-target to the ARC cases (“misses/ARC”), and off-target to neither the SCN nor ARC cases (“misses/other”), were smaller than anticipated. We encourage readers to consider not only the sample sizes but also the magnitude of the observed effects, the associated p values, the comparison types (e.g., within-subjects for and ; between-subjects for ), and prior literature (e.g., studies showing that chemogenetic stimulation of AgRP-expressing ARC neurons or GHSR-expressing mediobasal hypothalamic neurons increases food intake). , , 
This study relied on the mouse as a model. As opposed to humans, mice are nocturnal. Also, mice with ad libitum access to food eat throughout the day, unlike most humans, albeit the amount eaten by the mice depends on the time of day. Thus, the findings observed here will need to be confirmed in humans.
As previously reported, , , occasional Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice exhibit an asymmetric pattern of Cre activity (with more reporter expression on one side of the brain) and/or a less extensive bilateral pattern of Cre activity (in which reporter expression is reduced or missing from some of the usual sites of Ghsr expression). Also, mice heterozygous for the Ghsr-IRES-Cre allele exhibit a slight reduction in Ghsr expression, at least when assessed in the ARC, albeit without changes to ghrelin-induced food intake or ghrelin-induced c-Fos induction. These caveats may contribute in part to the asymmetric pattern of viral penetration observed among DREADD-injected cases.
The estimated viral penetration of the SCN for our “hits” was low. Had we targeted more GHSR-expressing SCN neurons, more robust physiologic effects may have been observed.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to Jeffrey M. Zigman (jeffrey.zigman@utsouthwestern.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new, unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
All analyzed data are included
No new code was generated in this study.
Source data ( ) are provided with the paper.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of UT Southwestern (UTSW) Medical Center. Male Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice (containing one copy of the Ghsr-IRES-Cre allele), , , , , male mice derived from crosses between Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice and ROSA26-YFP mice [B6.129X1-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(EYFP)Cos/J] (The Jackson Laboratory; stock number 006148) containing one copy of the Ghsr-IRES-Cre allele and one ROSA26-YFP transgene, and male C57BL/6N mice (Charles River; Wilmington, MA) were used. All lines previously had been backcrossed >10 generations onto a C57BL/6N genetic background. Mice were housed at standard room temperature (22°C–24°C) under a 12h light:12h dark cycle with ad libitum access to water and standard chow diet [2016 Teklad Global 16% protein diet (Envigo, Indianapolis, IN)], except as indicated. Lights on (ZT0) occurred at 6 a. m.; Lights off (ZT12) occurred at 6p.m. Diagrammatic representations of the experimental protocols were prepared using CorelDraw 11 software (Corel Inc., Austin, TX).
Although examination of both Cre activity and Ghsr expression within the same SCN brain sections from Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice (e.g., with dual label histochemistry for both Ghsr mRNA signal and Cre-driven YFP signal within the SCN of Ghsr-IRES-Cre X ROSA26-YFP reporter mice) has not yet been attempted, dual labeling has shown that 100% of Cre-driven YFP expression is localized to Ghsr-expressing cells within the same mediobasal hypothalamus sections. The patterns of Cre activity in this Ghsr-IRES-Cre line and in a separate, Ghsr-p2A-Cre line also match. Further, Cre activity within the brains of the Ghsr-IRES-Cre line, as determined using Ghsr-IRES-Cre X ROSA26-YFP and Ghsr-IRES-Cre X ROSA26-ZsGreen reporter mice, , aligns well with the known pattern of Ghsr expression as determined by in situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH) in C57BL/6 mice and eGFP signal in Ghsr-eGFP mice , ; this includes the SCN (see also and ).
Two previously-reported caveats of the Ghsr-IRES-Cre line also deserve mention , , : 1) occasional mice exhibit an asymmetric pattern of Cre activity (with more reporter expression on one side of the brain) and/or a less extensive bilateral pattern of Cre activity (in which reporter expression is reduced or missing from some of the usual sites of Ghsr expression). 2) mice heterozygous for the Ghsr-IRES-Cre allele exhibit a slight reduction in Ghsr expression, at least when assessed in the ARC, albeit without changes to ghrelin-induced food intake or ghrelin-induced c-Fos induction. These caveats may contribute in part to the asymmetric pattern of viral penetration observed here among DREADD-injected cases.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Stereotaxic surgeries and viral injections
Stereotaxic surgery was performed as previously described with some modifications, , on 10–14 wk-old Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice under 1.5% isoflurane gas anesthesia while restrained in a Kopf stereotaxic apparatus. Following standard disinfection procedures, a small incision (∼1.0 mm) was made into the skin overlying the skull, a small hole was drilled into the skull using a high-speed rotary micromotor (Foredom, Bethel, CT), and 100 nL of virus was injected into one side of the brain (see coordinates below) over a period of 10 min using a pulled glass micropipette connected to an air pressure injector system. A micromanipulator (Model S48 Stimulator, Grass Technologies, West Warwick, RI) was used to control injection speed at 10 nL min−1. After a 10 min waiting period, the micropipette was slowly retracted and the procedure was repeated on the contralateral side. The incision site was closed using a surgical suture. The mice were monitored on a warming pad until awake, after which they were singly-housed and administered buprenorphine 1 mg/kg BW s.c. every 12h for 24h and carprofen 5 mg/kg BW s.c. daily for 3d to relieve pain. Mice were allowed to recover for 3–4 wks prior to undergoing behavioral/physiological testing. Cre-dependent AAV5-hSyn-DIO-hM3D(Gq)-mCherry virus (hM3Dq; Cat#; 44361; Addgene, Watertown, MA) or Cre-dependent AAV2-hSyn-DIO-hM4D(Gi)-mCherry virus (hM4Di; Cat# 44362; Addgene, Watertown, MA) was targeted bilaterally to the SCN by use of the following brain coordinates based on a mouse brain atlas : Distance from bregma: −0.22 mm; Lateral from midline: +/−0.10 mm; Ventral from brain surface: −5.75 mm. These mice were used to generate the data in , , and . Illustrations of the stereotaxic injections into the SCN were made using CorelDraw 11 software, and are inspired by the mouse brain atlas of Paxinos and Franklin. 

## Time-of-day patterns of food intake and body weight
Ghsr-IRES-Cre mice were handled for 3 days prior to the food intake experiment to acclimatize them to the experimental setup. On the day of the experiment, the mice were administered either saline or CNO (1 mg/kg BW i.p.; Cat# C0832, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in a crossover design 30 min prior to the start of food intake measurements of standard chow diet (Teklad Global Diet [2916]). Food intake was measured at 1h, 2h, and 4h post-injection, beginning at four time points (ZT0, ZT4, ZT16, ZT20) for hM3Dq-injected mice and at six time points (ZT0, ZT4, ZT8, ZT12, ZT16, ZT20) for hM4Di-injected mice; 4h data are reported here. An interval lasting 3–5 d was introduced between each injection of either CNO or saline (with ∼half the mice receiving CNO and ∼ half the mice receiving saline on each injection day) and between each time point. A red-filter flashlight and headlamp were used as light sources during the studies performed during lights-off. For these DREADD studies, mice had ad lib access to chow. This included during the time immediately following CNO or saline injections, even though food intake measurements were not started until 30 min following those injections. This 30 min delay was chosen to allow enough time for CNO to reach the SCN and take effect, and is modeled after prior publications. , 
A separate group of hM4Di-injected mice was administered CNO (1 mg/kg BW i.p.) at the same time each day for 15 consecutive days, at a time 30 min prior to either ZT4 or ZT16. Each day, food intake was measured for 4h beginning 30 min after the CNO injection, and then for the subsequent 20h. After the first 15d of daily ZT4 injections, mice were allowed to recover for 7d prior to another 15d of daily ZT16 injections.
The calculation of cumulative feed efficiency (feed efficiency over time) was determined by comparing the body weight at each day with the body weight on the first day of CNO administration and then dividing this body weight gain value by the energy content of the diet consumed over the same duration.

## Ghrelin-induced food intake and c-fos induction
Thirty-two C57BL/6N mice were singly housed beginning at 7 wks-of-age. When they reached 8 wks-of-age, they were acclimatized to handling and eating food placed on the cage floor for 3d. On the day of experimentation, food was removed 2h before an injection of either ghrelin (1mg/kg BW s.c., SP-GHRL-1, Innovagen, Lund, Sweden) or saline, at which time a weighed amount of standard chow diet was re-introduced to the cage (two pellets on the cage floor and two pellets on the rack). Food intake was measured at 1h, 2h, and 4h after the injection; the 2h and 4h are reported here. These injections were performed at 6 timepoints (ZT0, ZT4, ZT8, ZT12, ZT16, ZT20). A red-filter flashlight and headlamp were used as light sources during the studies performed during lights-off. A 1st cohort of 16 mice was tested at timepoints ZT4, ZT20, and ZT0. Half of the cohort received saline at ZT4, saline at ZT20, and then ghrelin at ZT0. The other half of the cohort received ghrelin at ZT4, ghrelin at ZT20, and then saline at ZT0. A 2nd cohort of 16 mice was tested at timepoints ZT16, ZT8, and ZT12. Half of the cohort received saline at ZT16, saline at ZT8, and then ghrelin at ZT12. The other half of the cohort received ghrelin at ZT16, ghrelin at ZT8, and then saline at ZT12. Each of the 3 injections was separated by 12–16d. As such, each mouse received 3 injections, each at a different timepoint: either two saline injections + one ghrelin injection or two ghrelin injections + one saline injection.
A separate cohort of 10–14 wk-old C57BL/6N mice was used to compare food intake and c-fos in response to ghrelin vs. saline at one of two different timepoints (ZT4 and ZT16). The above general protocol was followed, except mice received one treatment at one timepoint: either ghrelin or saline at either ZT4 or ZT16, and then 2h standard chow diet intake was measured. One wk later, the mice again received the same injection (of either ghrelin or saline) at the same timepoint (either ZT4 or ZT16), were kept in their cages for 2h without food, and then were immediately anesthetized with chloral hydrate (500 mg/kg BW i.p.) and transcardially perfused.

## Determination of plasma hormone levels
C57BL/6N mice aged 10–12 wks-old mice were used. Tail vein blood was collected into two separate EDTA-coated Microvette CB300 collection tubes kept on ice at each of 6 timepoints. On Day 1, samples were taken at ZT0. On Day 2, samples were taken at ZT4. On Day 3, samples were taken at ZT8. This was repeated on Days 4, 5, and 6 at ZT12, ZT16, and ZT20, respectively. The tubes contained one of the following protease inhibitors: p-hydroxymercuribenzoic acid (Sigma-Aldrich-; final concentration 1 mM; for ghrelin measurement) or aprotinin (Sigma-Aldrich; final concentration 250 KIU/mL; for LEAP2 measurement). The samples were immediately centrifuged at 4°C at 1,500 g × 15 min. For ghrelin stabilization, HCl was added (final concentration 0.1 N). Ghrelin concentrations were determined with the Rat/Mouse Ghrelin (active) ELISA kit (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MD; Catalog #EZRGRA-90K) after plasma samples were diluted 4X in assay buffer. LEAP2 concentrations were determined with a LEAP2 (37–76) (Mouse) ELISA kit (Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Burlingame, CA, Catalog # EK-075–40) after plasma samples were diluted 4X in assay buffer. Endpoint calorimetric measurements were performed using a BioTek PowerWave XS Microplate spectrophotometer and KC4 junior software (Winooski, VT).

## RNAScope in situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH)
C57BL/6N mice aged 12–14 wks-old were deeply anesthetized with chloral hydrate (500 mg/kg BW i.p.) and perfused transcardially at ZT4 and ZT16 with diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated 0.9% phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by 10% neutral buffered formalin, using a high precision multichannel pump (Ismatec; USA). , Brains were removed and post-fixed in 10% formalin for overnight at 4°C and then cryoprotected in 25% sucrose solution in DEPC-treated PBS overnight at 4°C. After embedding in Tissue-Tek OCT compound, serial 25-μm thick coronal sections extending from the olfactory bulb to the cervical spinal cord were obtained using a cryostat (Leica), immersed in DEPC-treated PBS buffer, and separated into five equal series. One series of hypothalamic sections containing the SCN (extending from −0.46 mm to −0.70 mm past bregma) and ARC (extending from −1.46 mm to −2.06 mm past bregma), was rinsed in DEPC-PBS, treated with 0.9% hydrogen peroxide for 10 min at room temperature, rinsed, mounted onto SuperFrost slides (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA), and then dried overnight in a vacuum oven at 37°C. The next day, ISHH was performed using the RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Kit v2 assay (Advanced Cell Diagnostics), as per the manufacturer’s instructions: Slides were rinsed 2 times in PBS and placed in an oven for 30 min at 60°C. Afterward, slides were post fixed in 10% formalin for 15 min at 4°C then gradually dehydrated in ethanol (50, 70 and 100%, 5 min each) before target retrieval for 15 min at 98°C–102°C. Slides were incubated in protease III (#322337, ACD) for 30 min at 40°C then washed in distilled water and incubated in RNAscope probes for Ghsr (Mm-GHSR; #426141, ACD) for 2h at 40°C. For dual-label ISHH of Ghsr + Avp and Ghsr + Grp ( and ), separate sections of the SCN from mice perfused transcardially at ZT16 were processed using methods similar to those described above. The sections were incubated with RNAscope probes for Ghsr, Avp (Mm-AVP; #401391, ACD), and Grp (Mm-GRP; #317861, ACD) for 2h at 40°C ( and ). Series of free-floating coronal sections containing SCN ranging from approximately −0.46 to −0.70 mm past bregma from hM3Dq-injected “Hit” GHSR-IRES-Cre mice underwent dual-label histochemistry ( – ) using RNAse-free conditions. Sections were incubated with RNAscope probes for Avp for 2h at 40°C. Following incubation, sections were processed using the RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent Detection Reagents v2 kit (#323110, ACD) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Slides were immediately coverslipped with EcoMount medium (Biocare; EM897L).

## Processing of brain sections for histochemistry
Mice were deeply anesthetized with chloral hydrate (500 mg/kg BW i.p.) and transcardially perfused with DEPC-treated 0.9% PBS followed by 10% neutral buffered formalin, using a high precision multichannel pump, as described previously , with some modifications. Brains were dissected, post-fixed in the same fixative overnight at 4°C, and then cryoprotected by immersing in 25% sucrose solution in PBS overnight at 4°C. After embedding in Tissue-Tek OCT compound, serial 25-μm thick coronal sections extending from the olfactory bulb to the cervical spinal cord were obtained using a cryostat, immersed in antifreeze solution, separated into five equal brain series, and then stored at −20°C until further processing. A series of hypothalamic sections containing the SCN to ARC from hM3Dq-injected and hM4Di-injected mice, extending from −0.46 mm to −1.82 mm past bregma, were washed with PBS, mounted on SuperFrost slides, dried overnight, and coverslipped with Vectashield mounting medium containing 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) [Cat # H-1200, Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA]. mCherry fluorescence was analyzed at the end of the study to classify cases with correctly-targeted virus injections as “Hits” or mis-targeted injections as “Misses/ARC” or “Misses/Other” as defined in the section.
Separate series of free-floating coronal sections containing the SCN of “hM3Dq Hit” mice (approximately −0.46 mm to −0.70 mm posterior to bregma; – ) and free-floating coronal sections containing the SCN (−0.46 mm) and ARC (−1.82 mm to −2.06 mm posterior to bregma) from C57BL/6N mice, subjected to ghrelin-induced neuronal activation ( – ), were processed for c-fos immunohistochemistry as previously described, with minor modifications. Sections were rinsed in PBS, immersed in 0.5% Triton X-100 solution in PBS for 30 min, and blocked in 3% normal donkey serum (Cat # 017–000-121, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc., West Grove, PA) in PBS for 2 h. Sections were incubated either in diluted rabbit anti-c-fos antibody (Cat # ab190289; Abcam, Waltham, MA; dilution 1:1000) for 24 h at room temperature. After washing in PBS, the sections were incubated in Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (Cat # A21206, Invitrogen; dilution 1:500) for 2h at room temperature, and following additional washings in PBS, sections were mounted onto SuperFrost slides, dried overnight and coverslipped with Vectashield mounting media with DAPI.
Separate series of free-floating coronal sections ranging from approximately −0.46 to −0.70 mm ( and ) past bregma from mice carrying one Ghsr-IRES-Cre allele and one ROSA26-YFP transgene underwent immunohistochemistry for YFP. The same protocol as described above was followed except that the primary antibody used was chicken anti-GFP antibody (Cat # GFP-1010; Aves Labs, Davis, CA, dilution 1:1000) and the secondary antibody used was Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-chicken IgG (Cat # A11039, Invitrogen; dilution 1:500).

## Determination of viral penetrance
To determine viral penetrance, we first counted the number of YFP-positive neurons present bilaterally in 2 different levels of the SCN from coronal brain sections of Ghsr-IRES-Cre x ROSA26-YFP reporter mice to estimate the numbers of GHSR-expressing neurons at those levels. As there is variability in Cre expression in the Ghsr-IRES-Cre mouse line (described above), our estimate is based on the best case (the one with the most YFP neurons throughout the brain) out of 3 cases. In this best case, we counted 204 GHSR-expressing SCN neurons at −0.46 mm from bregma and 123 GHSR-expressing SCN neurons at −0.70 mm from bregma. Next, we counted all GHSR-expressing SCN neurons targeted by hM3Dq or by hM4Di (or rather, all mCherry-expressing SCN neurons) in each “hM3Dq Hit” and each “hM4Di Hit” in and , respectively. We divided the total number of targeted GHSR-expressing SCN neurons for each case at two different levels of the SCN bilaterally by the total number of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons at those same two levels from the best case Ghsr-IRES-Cre x ROSA26-YFP reporter mouse (and multiplied that number by 100) to estimate the percentage of GHSR-expressing SCN neurons targeted. Further, while no cases of targeting of virus to only one side of the SCN were observed, there were some cases in which one of the levels was unilateral while another level showed targeting to both sides, albeit in a very lopsided fashion. This lopsided expression might result not only from asymmetric targeting of the virus but also from the two aforementioned caveats of the Ghsr-IRES-Cre mouse line.

## Image capture
Images were captured with either 10X or 20× objectives of a fluorescence microscope (Leica DM6 B digital research microscope equipped with Leica DFC 9000 GT digital microscopy camera; Leica Microsystems Gmbh, Wetzlar, Germany) plus LAS X software. Single-, double-, or triple-labeled fluorescence images were captured using suitable filter sets for Alexa Fluor 488 (green), Alexa Fluor 594/mCherry (red), and DAPI (blue). Neuroanatomical co-localization between cells containing mCherry fluorescence (red) and c-fos-immunoreactivity or Avp mRNA (green) appeared as an overlap of these two fluorophores (yellow). In dual-label ISHH, co-localization between cells expressing Ghsr mRNA (red fluorescence) and Avp or Grp (green fluorescence) appeared as an overlap of the two fluorophores, resulting in yellow fluorescence. DAPI counterstaining (to identify nuclei) and comparisons to a mouse brain atlas were used to identify the regional boundaries between different SCN and other hypothalamic regions. Cells showing clear, round DAPI-stained nuclei surrounded by mCherry were identified as being mCherry-positive. c-fos-immunoreactive cells were identified by the presence of green nuclei with DAPI counterstaining. Cells with clear, round DAPI-stained nuclei were identified and analyzed for the presence of Ghsr and Avp or Grp. The overlapping red fluorescence from Ghsr and green fluorescence from Avp or Grp indicated co-localization, which appeared as yellow fluorescence. The RNAscope signal represented the antisense Ghsr, Avp, and Grp riboprobes. Manual counting of cells was performed with the assistance of the Adobe Photoshop 22.3.0 software (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA) counting tool bilaterally for each mouse ( – ; – ). See above for the levels of the SCN that were analyzed for c-fos and Avp. The size and brightness of all the captured photomicrographs were adjusted uniformly with Adobe Photoshop.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## Image analysis
To compare the magnitude of ghrelin-induced c-fos neuronal induction depending on diurnal phase/time-of-day in C57BL/6N mice ( – ), image analysis was performed on coronal sections containing the SCN (−0.46 mm) and ARC (−1.82 mm to −2.06 mm posterior to bregma). These sections were stained for c-fos immunohistochemistry (green) and with DAPI counterstaining (blue; to identify nuclei) and then were compared to a mouse brain atlas. Each individual section containing the SCN and ARC was opened using newly designed programs interfacing with Fiji Is Just ImageJ software (NIH). Boundaries for the SCN, SPZ, and ARC were manually determined for each section and drawn on the images using the freehand tool in Fiji ImageJ. The images were then split into channels and converted to 8-bit grayscale to create monochromatic images. A threshold for the green channel was set between 115 (minimum) and 255 (maximum), and background fluorescence was subtracted. Using the ImageJ “Analyze” and “Analyze Particles” tools, c-fos-positive cells were counted. The c-fos-positive cells on each side of the SCN and SPZ was determined for each of the one coronal level described above and then averaged together for each animal. The c-fos-positive cells on each side of the ARC were determined for each of the two coronal levels described above and then averaged together for each animal. The data were averaged for saline-administered mice (n = 3) and separately for ghrelin-administered mice (n = 4).
To assess changed to levels of Ghsr mRNA expression in both the SCN and ARC depending on time-of-day (ZT4 vs. ZT16) in C57BL/6N mice, images of coronal sections containing SCN (approximately −0.46 mm to −0.70 mm posterior to bregma; , , , , and ) and ARC (−1.82 mm and −2.06 mm posterior to bregma; , , , , – ) from those mice were stained for Ghsr mRNA by RNAscope (red) and with DAPI counterstaining (blue; to identify nuclei) and then were compared to a mouse brain atlas to identify the boundaries between ARC, VMH, and DMH, as described previously. No adjustments to intensity or exposure were made to the images. The SCN, ARC, VMH, and DMH were analyzed bilaterally at two different distances from bregma (described above), using newly-designed programs that interface with Fiji Is Just ImageJ software (NIH). Boundaries for the SCN, ARC, VMH, and DMH were determined for each individual section and manually drawn on the images using the freehand tool in Fiji Is Just ImageJ: Images were opened into Fiji ImageJ and split channels and converted to 8-bit gray scale to create a monochromatic image. A threshold for the red channel was set between 125 (min) and 255 (max). Afterward, with the assistance of the ImageJ ‘Analyze’ and “Measure” tools, the following parameters were determined: area, area faction, integrated density, and minimum + maximum gray values. The % fluorescent area of Ghsr expression on each side of the SCN, ARC, VMH, and DMH was determined for each of the two coronal levels described above and then averaged together for each animal. The data were averaged separately for mice at ZT4 (n = 4) and ZT16 (n = 3).

## Single cell RNA-seq data analysis
Raw data were downloaded from the gene expression Omnibus (GEO; accession numbers: GSE167927, GSE148252). , Rstudio package Seurat v5.1.0 was used for data analysis. After quality control (confirmation that mitochondrial gene percentage is <5%; removal of doublets), gene expression was normalized by dividing by total gene expression, multiplying by 10,000, and log-transformation. The top 2,000 highly variable features were selected for downstream analysis. Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) was used to integrate data from GSE167927. ‘FindIntegrationAnchors()‘ and ‘IntegrateData()’ were used to identify and integrate anchors between datasets. The integrated data were then used for downstream analyses, enabling direct comparison of cell populations between the conditions while accounting for batch effects. The GSE148252 dataset was already integrated and did not require further processing. Gene expression data were scaled using the ‘ScaleData()’ function. PCA (Principal Component Analysis) was performed on the top variable features, with the first 15 principal components selected for analysis based on the ‘elbowplot()’. K-nearest neighbor (KNN) graph construction and clustering were performed with ‘FindNeighbors()’ and ‘FindClusters()’, respectively, with resolution between 0.1 and .5 depending on the number of cells. UMAP was used for dimensionality reduction and visualization. Differentially-expressed genes for each cluster were identified using ‘FindAllMarkers()’. Cluster identities were assigned based on known markers from the literature and PanglaoDB. Celltype proportions were calculated using ‘table ()’ in RStudio and visualized using GraphPad Prism 6. To compare the proportions of cells in each cluster between conditions, we performed a two-proportion Z-test using prop.test() in R, followed by FDR correction to account for multiple comparisons. Subsetting and reclustering were performed using the ‘subset()’ function, followed by re-scaling the data to normalize feature expression within the subset. PCA dimensionality reduction and clustering were then re-applied, enabling the identification of finer subpopulations while retaining cluster-specific biological variability. Differential expression between conditions was performed using ‘FindMarkers()’, with Seurat’s standard log2 fold change threshold of ±0.25. Significance of differential expression was assessed using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test, a non-parametric method ideal for comparing gene expression with non-normal distributions. To control for false positives, a stringent Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) threshold of 0.01 was applied. Module scores for pre-defined gene sets were calculated using the AddModuleScore function in Seurat, which computes the average expression of feature sets subtracted by the aggregated expression of randomly selected background genes. Statistical comparisons between conditions were performed using a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test for pairwise comparisons using Rstudio package stats v4.4.2. ShinyGo v0.77 was used for GO term enrichment analysis, with terms having an FDR ≤0.05 considered significant. Fold enrichment was calculated by comparing the proportion of genes in the differentially-expressed gene list to the proportion in the entire mouse genome. Bar graphs, boxplots, and volcano plots were generated using Rstudio package ggplot2 v3.5.1. 

## Statistics
Data are presented as mean ± SEM and are analyzed by paired student’s t-test, unpaired student’s t-test, one-way ANOVA, or two-way ANOVA, as indicated in the Figure legends. Šidák post hoc testing was used to further investigate differences if significant ANOVA effects were found. Correlations were done by Pearson’s correlation and simple linear regression analysis. All data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism version 10.4.1 (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA). Outliers were detected by Grubb’s test. p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant. p values ≥0.05 and <0.1 were considered to be evidence of a statistical trend. For full transparency, we include the actual p values in the statistical trend range within the graphs, Tables, and Results section narrative so that the readers can determine for themselves the relevance of the findings. The Results section narrative specifically characterizes those comparisons for which the p values fall within the 0.05 ≤ p < 0.1 range as reflecting a statistical trend. ns represents no statistical significance. Statistical Methods for single cell RNA-seq data analysis are included above.

## Supplementary Material
12SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116213.

 

## Highlights
Mid-rest phase stimulation of suprachiasmatic nucleus GHSR neurons increases eating
Repeated mid-rest phase inhibition of these neurons lowers eating and body weight
These effects are lost when SCN GHSR neurons are modulated at other times of day
GHSR-expressing SCN neurons show time-of-day-dependent transcriptional profiles

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Kevin Williams and Joel Elmquist (UT Southwestern) for helpful discussions and Li Li (UT Southwestern Medical Center) for technical assistance. This work was supported through UT Southwestern Medical Center’s Peter O’Donnell Jr. Brain Institute (OBI) Sprouts Program (to O.S.); an American Diabetes Association Postdoctoral Fellowship (#1–25-PDF-88) to O.S.; and the NIH (R01DK119341 to J.M.Z. and P30DK127984), a gift from Fehmi and Elizabeth Karahan, the Diana and Richard C. Strauss Professorship in Biomedical Research, the Mr. and Mrs. Bruce G. Brookshire Professorship in Medicine, and the Kent and Jodi Foster Distinguished Chair in Endocrinology, in Honor of Daniel Foster, M.D. (to J.M.Z.).

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
J.M.Z. owns shares of Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly, and Medtronic.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
12

## Data Availability Statement
All analyzed data are included
No new code was generated in this study.
Source data ( ) are provided with the paper.