3437canccommsCancer CommunicationsCancer Commun (Lond)WileyPMC1262986312629863126298634108419110.1002/cac2.70068CD24 is a promising immunotherapeutic target for enhancing efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs on EGFR‐mutated lung cancer
LiangJiaqi BiGuoshu HuangXiaolong XuZhijie HuangYiwei BianYunyi ShanGuangyao GuoWei YanYuanliang SuiQihai YangXiaodong ChenZhencong LuTao ZhangHuan WangQun JiangWei ZhanCheng 
1
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China
2
Cancer Center, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China
3
Department of Pathology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, P. R. China
4
Department of Thoracic Surgery, National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, P. R. China
5
Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, P. R. China
6
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China
7
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanxi Province Cancer Hospital/Shanxi Hospital Affiliated to Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Cancer Hospital Affiliated to Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, Shanxi, P. R. China
8
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Sichuan Clinical Research Center for Cancer, Sichuan Cancer Hospital & Institute, Sichuan Cancer Center, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China
9
Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Geriatric Medicine Center, Shanghai, P. R. China*

Correspondence
, Cheng Zhan (lead contact); No. 180 Feng Lin Road, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China.; 86‐021‐64041990. Email: czhan10@fudan.edu.cn
, Wei Jiang; No. 180 Feng Lin Road, Shanghai, 200032, P. R. China.; 86‐021‐64041990. Email: jiang.wei1@zs-hospital.sh.cn

✉Corresponding author.
13102025451115471547–157821112025© 2025 The Author(s). Cancer Communications published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Sun Yat‐sen University Cancer Center.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ License, which permits use and distribution in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, the use is non‐commercial and no modifications or adaptations are made.

## Abstract

## Background
Third‐generation epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) show initial efficacy in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer, but residual disease persists. This study aimed to investigate cluster of differentiation 24 (CD24) as a translational immunotherapeutic target for enhancing third‐generation EGFR‐TKI efficacy.

## Methods
We conducted RNA‐sequencing (RNA‐seq) on drug‐responsive, drug‐tolerant persister, and drug‐resistant cells to identify therapeutic targets to pair with EGFR‐TKIs. For validation, we integrated single‐cell RNA‐seq data from 29 lung cancer specimens and used single‐nucleus RNA‐seq and immunohistochemistry on clinical residual tumor samples following TKI therapy (TKI‐residual). With CRISPR/Cas9, we studied the effect of CD24 on proliferation and phagocytic clearance during EGFR‐TKI treatment. We tested CD24 knockout or ATG‐031 (a first‐in‐class CD24 antibody) with EGFR‐TKIs in vitro, xenografts, and spontaneous lung cancer models. To explore mechanisms, we used DNA affinity precipitation, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing, and luciferase assays to identify transcription factors regulating CD24. Co‐immunoprecipitation combined with mass spectrometry and phosphoproteomics were used to study YIN‐YANG‐1 (YY1) S247 phosphorylation's expression and function, while kinase inhibitors assessed upstream phosphorylation of YY1 S247 and its regulation of CD24.

## Results
CD24 expression rose in drug‐responsive, ‐resistant, and ‐tolerant lung cancer cells and post‐EGFR‐TKI treatment clinical specimens. This elevation promoted cell proliferation and shielded tumor cells from macrophage‐mediated phagocytosis. Genetic depletion of CD24 or treatment with ATG‐031 significantly enhanced phagocytosis and tumor eradication in vitro, in xenografts, and in mice harboring EGFRL858R·T790M‐driven spontaneous lung tumors. Furthermore, we revealed that YY1 S247 phosphorylation was responsible for the upregulation of CD24 upon EGFR‐TKI treatment, facilitating YY1 dimerization and the formation of promoter‐enhancer loops that regulate CD24 expression.

## Conclusions
CD24 is a promising target in EGFR‐mutated lung cancers, potentially enhancing efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs.

Keywords: ATG‐031, CD24, drug‐tolerant persister cell, EGFR‐TKI, lung cancer, osimertinib, phagocytosis, YY1, JNK

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Jul 21; Received 2025 Mar 14; Accepted 2025 Sep 29; Collection date 2025 Nov.

## List of abbreviations
3Cchromosome conformation capture
TKItyrosine kinase inhibitors
AAK1adaptor‐associated kinase 1
AAVadeno‐associated virus
AktAKT serine/threonine kinase
ALCAMactivated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule
ALDH1A1aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family member a1
ALKanaplastic lymphoma kinase
Afr6ADP‐ribosylation factor 6
BSAbovine albumin
CACNB3calcium channel voltage‐dependent beta 3 subunit
CD163cluster of differentiation 163
CD206cluster of differentiation 206
CD24cluster of differentiation 24
CD44cluster of differentiation 44
CD47cluster of differentiation 47
CD55cluster of differentiation 55
CD59cluster of differentiation 59
CD68cluster of differentiation 68
CD70cluster of differentiation 70
CD73cluster of differentiation 73
CDKcyclin‐dependent kinase
CDXcell‐derived tumor xenograft
CFSEcarboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester
ChIPchromatin immunoprecipitation
CK7cytokeratin 7
CNVcopy number variation
CoIPco‐immunoprecipitation
CSCcancer stem cell
CTcomputed tomography
CTLA‐4cytotoxic T‐lymphocyte‐associated antigen 4
DAPI4‐amidinophenyl‐6‐indolecarbamidine dihydrochloride
DMEMdulbecco's modified eagle's medium
DMSOdimethyl sulfoxide
DTPdrug‐tolerant persister
EGFRepidermal growth factor receptor
EMSAelectrophoretic mobility shift assay
Erkextracellular signal‐regulated kinase
FITCfluorescein isothiocyanate
GTPguanosine triphosphate
HER2human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
IC50half maximal inhibitory concentration
ICIimmune checkpoint inhibitor
IHCimmunohistochemistry
ILinterleukin
JNKc‐Jun N‐terminal Kinase
KRASkirsten rats arcomaviral oncogene homolog
LAMB2laminin beta 2
LCliquid chromatography
LGR5leucine‐rich repeat‐containing g‐protein‐coupled receptor 5
M‐CSFmacrophage colony‐stimulating factor
MAPKmitogen‐activated protein kinase
MAXMYC associated factor X
mCD24membrane‐bound CD24
MNPmean number of particles per cell
MSmass‐spectrometry
MYCv‐Myc avian myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog
NANOGnanog homeobox
NSCLCnon‐small cell lung cancer
PBMCperipheral blood mononuclear cell
PBSphosphate‐buffered saline
PCRpolymerase chain reaction
PD‐1programmed cell death protein 1
PD‐L1programmed death‐ligand 1
PDXpatient‐derived tumor xenograft
PGAP3post‐GPI attachment to proteins factor 3
PIphagocytosis index
PMAphorbol 12‐myristate 13‐acetate
POU5F1POU domain class 5 transcription factor 1
POU5F1BPOU5F1 pseudogene B
PPphagocytic cell
PROM1prominin 1
PSAPprosaposin
qPCRquantitative real‐time PCR
qRT‐PCRquantitative reverse transcription and real‐time PCR
RFSrelapse‐free survival
RHBDF1rhomboid 5 homolog 1
RhoAras homolog gene family member A
RNA‐SeqRNA‐sequencing
Scgb1a1secretoglobin, family 1A, member 1
scRNA‐seqsingle‐cell RNA sequencing
SDS‐PAGEsodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
Siglecsialic acid binding Ig‐like
SIGLEC10sialic acid binding ig‐like lectin 10
siRNAsmall‐interfering RNA
SLC44A2solute carrier family 44‐member 2
snRNA‐seqsingle‐nucleus RNA sequencing
SOX2sex determining region Y‐box 2
STRshort tandem repeat
TAMtumor‐associated macrophage
TFtranscription factor
TGF‐βtransforming growth factor β1
THBS3thrombospondin 3
TMEM8Btransmembrane protein 8b
tSNEt‐distributed stochastic neighbor embedding
TUFT1tuftelin 1
VTCN1V‐set domain containing T cell activation inhibitor 1
YY1YING‐YANG‐1
ZNF143zinc finger protein 143
TCGAThe Cancer Genome Atlas
1.

## Background
Lung cancer persists as the most pervasive cancer type and the leading cause of cancer‐related mortality worldwide, with non‐small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounting for approximately 85% of newly diagnosed cases [ , , ]. Notably, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations, which are particularly prevalent in NSCLC, trigger the relentless activation of downstream EGFR cascades, thereby augmenting tumor cell proliferation [ , , ]. In response to this critical health issue, the development of EGFR‐tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR‐TKIs) has been a significant breakthrough. Among them, third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs have emerged as the current global first‐line therapy for EGFR‐mutated lung cancer patients [ , ].
However, despite their notable initial success, third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs often fail to achieve a complete response, leading to residual tumors that contribute to tumor progression within a median duration of 15 to 19 months [ , , , ]. The incomplete tumor response highlights the need for additional therapeutic strategies to enhance the efficacy of these inhibitors.
One promising approach is the combination of immunotherapy, which aims to reduce residual tumor burden by increasing immune response, and thereby strengthen the effectiveness of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in the treatment of NSCLC patients. Nevertheless, suboptimal outcomes were observed when immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), most current immunotherapy drugs, were combined with EGFR‐TKIs [ , ]. Therefore, in the present study, we undertake an in‐depth exploration of novel immune targets, aiming to provide new insights and therapeutic strategies for enhancing the efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs.

2.

## Materials and Methods
2.1.

## Cell lines and cell culture
Human EGFR mutated lung cancer cell lines (PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975), human monocytic leukemia cell line THP‐1, and human embryonic kidney cell line 293T, were provided by the Chinese National Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures situated in Shanghai, China. Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; high glucose; KeyGEN, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Every Green, Huzhou, Zhejiang, China), 100 U/mL of penicillin (Beyotime, Shanghai, China), and 0.1 mg/mL of streptomycin (Beyotime), and the environment consisting of 95% air and 5% CO2 at 37°C were used to culture the cells other than THP‐1. THP‐1 were cultured in antibiotic‐free RPMI media (KeyGEN) with the similar condition to the above cell lines. Short tandem repeat (STR) profiling and regular testing for mycoplasma were performed to authenticate the identity and integrity of the cells [ ]. Cells were replaced after a maximum period of 12 months to reduce bias caused by genetic drift.
Meanwhile, we established osimertinib‐resistant (OR) cell models (PC‐9‐OR, HCC827‐OR, and H1975‐OR) by progressively escalating drug doses over two weeks, followed by 3 months of maintenance at 200 nmol/L for PC‐9 and HCC827 cells or 1 µmol/L for H1975 cells.

2.2.

## Chemical reagents
A range of reagents were procured from TargetMol (Boston, Massachusetts, USA), MedChemExpress (Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA), and Beyotime. Among them were EGFR‐TKIs, including osimertinib (AZD‐9291), almonertinib, furmonertinib, befotertinib, gefitinib, erlotinib, and afatinib; clodronate liposomes; ATG‐031, several kinase inhibitors such as SCH772984, MK‐2206, BMS‐986176, LP‐935509, SY‐5609, YKL‐5‐124, SR‐4835, THZ531, JNK‐IN‐8, and JNK‐IN‐11. The details are listed in Supplementary Table .

2.3.

## Animals
Four‐week‐old male BALB/c nude mice were purchased from GemPharmatech (Nanjing, Jiangsu, China). The Cre‐inducible Rosa26:CAG‐LSL‐hEGFR L858R/T790M‐IRES‐Luc‐2A‐tdTomato mice and humanized Cluster of Differentiation 24 (CD24) mice were purchased from Shanghai Model Organisms Center, Inc. All rodents were bred and housed in specific pathogen‐free (SPF) housing conditions in Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan university, with a controlled temperature of 24°C and a regular 12‐h light/dark cycle. Mice were euthanized via carbon dioxide inhalation when meeting any of the following criteria to prevent suffering: ≥ 20% body weight loss relative to baseline, or tumor volume exceeding 1,500 mm3—measured by caliper using the ellipsoid formula 0.5 × length × width2 for subcutaneous tumors, or approximated via computed tomography (CT) as 0.5 × (maximum diameter)3 using the largest axial tumor slice for spontaneous lung tumors. All procedures involving animals were pre‐approved and aligned with the institutional guidelines for animal welfare, and the experiments were carefully designed to reduce the number of animals utilized.

2.4.

## Human NSCLC clinical specimens
Clinical samples were obtained via surgical resection of primary lung adenocarcinoma tissues from patients undergoing curative‐intent surgery at Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University. All specimens were collected fresh during surgery and immediately flash‐frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to ‐80°C storage until processed for single‐nucleus RNA sequencing (snRNA‐seq), or immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis.
Patients were included if they met all the following criteria: histopathological confirmation of primary lung adenocarcinoma; documented EGFR‐sensitive mutations (exon 19 deletion or L858R) diagnosed by next‐generation sequencing or amplification refractory mutation system polymerase chain reaction (PCR), with preoperative treatment consisting exclusively of 2‐4 months of third‐generation EGFR‐TKI monotherapy, while patients who did not undergo preoperative third‐generation EGFR‐TKI monotherapy served as controls; and availability of complete preoperative contrast‐enhanced CT imaging (within 1 week before surgery) and structured postoperative follow‐up data (including clinical visits every 3 months and CT scans every 6 months). Patients were excluded for any of the following reasons: prior systemic therapy other than third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs (including other generations of EGFR‐TKIs, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or immunotherapy); synchronous multiple primary malignancies (defined as ≥2 distinct primary tumors diagnosed within 6 months) or previous malignancy history; incomplete resection.
In terms of survival analysis, relapse‐free survival (RFS) was calculated as the interval between surgery and the date of disease recurrence, metastasis, or disease‐related death (which occurs first). Disease recurrence or metastasis was confirmed through CT scans, or via pathological examination of biopsy samples, as assessed by the investigator. All tumor samples analyzed were collected in accordance with protocols approved by the institutional review board, with informed consent obtained from each patient under the guidance of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Approval No. B2023‐258). Full compliance with all relevant ethical guidelines was ensured.

2.5.

## Cell function assays
Cell growth and cellular responses to different drugs were estimated by cell viability or cell proliferation assays as follows. Briefly, cells were seeded in 96‐well assay microplates at an appropriate density (2,500 for PC‐9 cell line and 1,500 for HCC827 and H1975 cell lines) per well in a total volume of 100 µL per well and incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2 overnight. For cell viability assays, cells were exposed to drug of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO; Beyotime) for 5 days, with medium change and fresh drugs at the third day. 5‐day viability assays were performed by adding AlamarBlue (Yeasen, Shanghai, China) to each well and incubating at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 3 h. Cell viability was measured using fluorescence detected at 545 nm excitation and 590 nm emission wavelengths with a FlexStation6 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA).

2.6.

## RNA analysis
TRNzol Universal (TIANGEN, Beijing, China) was employed to extract total RNA from cells and tissues. Subsequently, reverse transcription was performed using Hifair® III 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis SuperMix for Quantitative Real‐time PCR (qPCR) (Yeasen). Quantitative Reverse Transcription and Real‐time PCR (qRT‐PCR) was conducted using the Hieff® qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix (Low Rox Plus) (Yeasen) and the QuantStudio 5 Real‐Time PCR System (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA). The expression was determined using the 2−ΔΔCt method and normalized against β‐actin. Sangon Biotech (Shanghai, China) provided the primers, and their sequences are reported in Supplementary Table .

2.7.

## snRNA‐seq and data processing
snRNA‐seq was performed as previously reported [ ]. Briefly, fresh tumor specimens from 6 patients with EGFR‐mutated lung cancer were obtained. Following rapid freezing, lysis, and filtration procedures, cell nuclei for snRNA‐seq were collected and resuspended. Subsequently, snRNA‐seq libraries were constructed and sequenced utilizing the MobiNova®‐100 platform (MobiDrop, Jiaxing, Zhejiang, China), adhering to the manufacturer's guidelines, by OE Biotech Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China).
Further analysis with snRNA‐seq data, including normalization, log‐transformation, top variable gene identification, and batch effect removal were conducted using the R package Seurat. Cell clustering was initially performed based on their nuclear gene expression profiles, ultimately leading to the identification of eight distinct cell types using the CellMarker 2.0 database [ ]. To validate the accuracy of cell identification, copy number variation (CNV) levels were assessed in each cell using the R package inferCNV. Cells within the cancer and epithelial clusters exhibiting significantly elevated CNV levels compared to reference cells were designated as cancer cells [ ]. For stemness index calculation, the AddModuleScore function from the Seurat R package was used together with ten genes, including Activated Leukocyte Cell Adhesion Molecule (ALCAM), Aldehyde Dehydrogenase 1 Family Member A1 (ALDH1A1), Cluster of Differentiation 44 (CD44), Leucine‐Rich Repeat‐Containing G‐Protein‐Coupled Receptor 5 (LGR5), v‐Myc Avian Myelocytomatosis Viral Oncogene Homolog (MYC), Nanog Homeobox (NANOG), POU Domain Class 5 Transcription Factor 1 (POU5F1), POU5F1 Pseudogene B (POU5F1B), Prominin 1 (PROM1), and Sex Determining Region Y ‐Box 2 (SOX2), as a stemness gene panel [ ].

2.8.

## Small‐interfering RNA (siRNA) and CRISPR/Cas9
Negative controls (si‐NC 1# and 2#) and siRNAs for silencing human CD24, MYC Associated Factor X (MAX), YING‐YANG‐1 (YY1), Zinc Finger Protein 143 (ZNF143), and EGFR were purchased from RIBOBIO (Guangzhou, Guangdong, China) (5’‐GGCATTTCCTATCACCTGTTT‐3’ for si‐CD24 #1; 5’‐GTTTCGACAGCACTAATTTAA‐3’ for si‐CD24 #2; 5’‐GCATCCTGAGCAACTCTTGAT‐3’ for si‐CD24 #3; 5’‐GTTTCAATCTGCGGCTGACAA‐3’ for si‐MAX #1; 5’‐GCTGACAAACGGGCTCATCAT‐3’ for si‐MAX #2; 5’‐GCCACAGAATATATCCAGTAT‐3’ for si‐MAX #3; 5’‐GGGATAACTCGGCCATGAGAA‐3’ for si‐YY1 #1; 5’‐GCTTCGAGGATCAGATTCTCA‐3’ for si‐YY1 #2; 5’‐GCAAGAAGAGCGGCAAGAAGA‐3’ for si‐YY1 #3; 5’‐GATGGTCAAGCAGTACAGTTA‐3’ for si‐ZNF143 #1; 5’‐GCAGCAAAGGTGTCCATTGAT‐3’ for si‐ZNF143 #2; 5’‐GAGAAGGCATTTCGATGTGAA‐3’ for si‐ZNF143 #3; 5’‐GCAGTCTTATCTAACTATGAT‐3’ for si‐EGFR #1; 5’‐GAAGAAGTGTCCCCGTAATTA‐3’ for si‐EGFR #2). siRNAs were transfected at 200 nmol/L final concentration using Lipo8000TM Transfection Reagent (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer's instruction.
To knock out the human CD24 gene using CRISPR/Cas9, we transfected cells with lentivirus encoding sgRNA (5’‐ATGGTGGCCAGGCTCGGGCT‐3’) and Cas9, followed by puromycin (Beyotime) selection. Single‐clone isolation was then performed, and successful CD24 knockout was verified by western blot and sanger sequencing (which involves denaturing the DNA template, annealing a sequencing primer, and performing polymerase chain reaction with deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates and trace amounts of fluorescently labeled dideoxyribonucleoside triphosphates. Then the nucleotide sequence is determined by detecting the fluorescent signals emitted by the labeled PCR fragments). To knock in the human YY1S247A
 mutation, we transfected cells with lentivirus encoding sgRNA (5’‐GTGGTTGAAGAACAGATCAT‐3’) and Cas9, as well as plasmids carrying the template for homology directed repair. After puromycin (Beyotime) selection and single‐clone isolation, successful knock‐in was verified by sanger sequencing. The lentiviruses and plasmids were purchased from GENECHEM (Shanghai, China). The primers used in sanger sequencing are reported in Supplementary Table .

2.9.

## Preparation of cell lysates and western blots
Proteins were extracted using RIPA Lysis Buffer (Beyotime) with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol), and their concentrations were measured using the BCA Protein Quantification Kit (Yeasen). Then about 25 µg protein was separated using sodium dodecyl sulfate‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS‐PAGE) and transferred onto polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Beyotime). Subsequently, the membranes were blocked using 10% skim milk and incubated with specific primary and horseradish‐peroxidase‐labeled secondary antibodies. Ultimately, the protein bands were detected using a Moon chemiluminescence reagent kit (Beyotime). Membranes were stripped using Restore™ PLUS Western Blot Stripping Buffer (ThermoFisher) several times to detect different proteins. β‐actin was used as reference. The antibodies used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table .
It is worth highlighting that we customized the phospho‐YY1S247 antibody (#E25310[P], Abclonal) with the support of Abclonal Technology (Wuhan, Hubei, China). The process involved synthesizing a phosphorylated peptide with the sequence IGEN‐(p‐S)‐PPD‐C, and immunizing rabbits 5 times with this peptide before collecting their sera. Following this, the sera underwent both positive and negative purification, utilizing the phosphorylated peptide and a control peptide (IGENSPPD‐C), respectively. A dot blot assay was then performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the antibody. Briefly, small volumes of the phosphorylated peptide are directly spotted onto a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane, which is then blocked to prevent non‐specific binding. The membrane is incubated with the customized primary antibody targeting the antigen, followed by a labeled secondary antibody for detection.
Furthermore, the full‐length amino acid sequence of YY1 was retrieved from the National Center for Biotechnology Information database, and we discovered that the SPP motif (Ser‐Pro‐Pro) is uniquely located at position S247 within the YY1 sequence. Therefore, to ascertain the phosphorylation level of YY1 at S247, we also employed the p‐Ser‐Pro‐Pro antibody (#46395S, CST, Danvers, MA, USA) to detect the co‐immunoprecipitation (CoIP) product of YY1.

2.10.

## Macrophage generation, stimulation, and phagocytosis assays in vitro
THP‐1 cells were counted and seeded at appropriate density in 96‐well or 12‐well assay microplates per well in a total volume of 100 µL or 1,000 µL per well. Phorbol 12‐myristate 13‐acetate (PMA) (100 µg/mL, Sigma‐Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added to RPMI media to prime the THP‐1 monocytes into macrophage‐like cells (M0) for 48 h followed by washing the PMA off and a 24 h rest period in fresh media prior to exposure to polarizing cytokines. THP‐1 cells were differentiated into M2a and M2c with exposure to 20 ng/mL interleukin (IL)‐4 (Proteintech, Wuhan, Hubei, China) and IL‐13 (Proteintech) or IL‐10 (Proteintech) and transforming growth factor β1 (TGF‐β1) (Proteintech) for another 48 h.
To generate M2 macrophages from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), we first isolated PBMCs from whole blood samples donated by healthy volunteers using Human Peripheral Blood Lymphocyte Separation Medium (Beyotime). Next, we enrich CD14 positive monocytes from isolated PBMCs via Human CD14 MicroBeads UltraPure (Miltenyi Biotech, Cologne, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Then the purified monocytes were cultured with 100 ng/mL recombinant human macrophage colony‐stimulating factor (M‐CSF) (Proteintech) for 7 days to differentiate them into M0 macrophages, and an additional 48 h with 20 ng/mL IL‐4 (Proteintech) and IL‐13 (Proteintech) for M2 macrophages.
Baseline phagocytotic ability of THP‐1 derived macrophages were assessed using Zymosan particles (Sangon). Zymosan particles were added to the cells at a Zymosan to macrophage ratio of 10:1. Phagocytosis could proceed for 1 h at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator. Phagocytosis was terminated by vigorously washing off non‐ingested particles with warm phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS) 3 times. Macrophages and Zymosan particles were finally fixed with 4% formaldehyde (Servicebio, Wuhan, Hubei, China) and stained with 0.5% crystal violet (Beyotime). Phagocytosis was determined photomicrographs at 100× by counting at least 100 macrophages in at least 4 different fields of view for each experimental treatment. Phagocytosis was assessed as percentage of phagocytic cells (PP), mean number of particles per cell (MNP) and as phagocytosis index (PI).
EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells were carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester‐labeled (CFSE, Sigma‐Aldrich) as previously described [ ] and incubated with THP‐1‐derived macrophages or human PBMC‐derived macrophages for appropriate time period. CFSE fluorescent labeling was used because it can stay in cells stably and be passed on when cells divide. Macrophages can phagocytose CFSE‐labeled lung cancer cells and inactivate the CFSE due to protein degradation, which results in a reduction or complete absence of fluorescence intensity. For phagocytosis measurements, we used a fluorescent microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) to record the fluorescence state of cells in culture plates every 10 min, and also used the FlexStation6 microplate reader (Molecular Devices) capable of detecting fluorescence changes (detected at 485 nm excitation and 535 nm emission wavelengths) under various experimental circumstances, allowing for statistical comparisons of macrophage phagocytosis of lung cancer cells between groups. In addition, cells were harvested and stained with human macrophage marker (CD14b) and phagocytosed lung cancer cells were identified by flow cytometry as CD14b+CSFE+ cells. To account for innate variability in raw phagocytosis levels among PBMC‐derived macrophages, phagocytosis was normalized to the highest technical replicate per donor. All biological replicates indicate independent human macrophage donors.

2.11.

## Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses
To investigate the post‐translational modifications (PTMs) of YY1 in PC‐9 parental and OR cells, we conducted liquid‐chromatography/mass‐spectrometry (LC/MS) analysis on the immunoprecipitated products of YY1 antibody (#46395S, CST), with support from Shanghai Luming Biological Technology, China. In brief, the immunoprecipitated proteins underwent digestion, and the resulting peptides were subsequently separated using a liquid chromatography (LC) system (Easy‐nLC 1200, ThermoFisher). These peptides were then detected by a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). The acquired mass spectrometry (MS) data were analyzed using Proteome Discover software, version 2.5 (ThermoFisher). The MS spectra were cross‐referenced against the Uniprot database, which was updated in February 2023 [ ].
The 4D‐Label Free phosphoproteomics approach was utilized to identify phosphorylated peptides in both PC‐9 parental and OR cells, also with assistance from Shanghai Luming Biological Technology, China. In brief, total cellular proteins were extracted, quantified, and digested with trypsin (Beyotime). Following this, phosphorylated peptides were enriched using an IMAC Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (ThermoFisher). Subsequently, these phosphorylated peptides were separated by Nanoflow reversed‐phase chromatography using an EASY‐nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher), and then detected using a timsTOF Pro 2 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). For the identification of MS/MS spectra, the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0; Max‐Planck‐Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Bavaria, Germany) was employed, along with the Uniprot database that was updated in February 2023 [ , ].

2.12.

## Cell‐derived tumor xenograft (CDX) model
CDXs were established through subcutaneous injection of 1 × 106 control Luciferase+ PC‐9 cells suspended in 100 µL of PBS into the right flank of 4‐week‐old male BALB/c nude mice. For macrophage depletion, 150 µL liposomal clodronate (MedChemExpress), or control liposomes (MedChemExpress) were injected intravenously via the retro‐orbital sinus 2 days prior to tumor engraftment, and subsequent maintenance doses of 100 µL liposomal clodronate (MedChemExpress) or control liposomes (MedChemExpress) were injected every 3 days throughout the duration of the experiment. Two weeks post‐tumor engraftment, mice were orally administered osimertinib (5 mg/kg) or the vehicle used for dissolving the drug daily for 21 consecutive days via gavage. Additionally, from day 17 to day 32 post‐cell injection, the mice received intraperitoneal injections of either 60 µg of ATG‐031 (MedChemExpress) or a control IgG1 (Beyotime) every 3 days. Tumor growth was monitored and analyzed through bioluminescence imaging on days 14, 25, and 34. For the bioluminescent imaging assay, the mice were intraperitoneally injected with 150 mg/kg of D‐luciferin (Yeasen) within 15 min prior to imaging. Following induction of general anesthesia, images were captured using the NightOWL II LB 983* In Vivo Imaging System manufactured by Berthold Technologies (Bad Wildbad, Germany).

2.13.

## Patient‐derived tumor xenograft (PDX) model
To generated PDX models (PDX #1, PDX #2, and PDX #3), fresh resected tumor samples from 3 advanced patients with EGFR exon 19 deletion or L858R mutations and treated with osimertinib before surgery, were collected and transplanted on the back of 4‐week‐old male nude mice. Briefly, fresh surgical tumor tissues were washed with PBS with 10× penicillin‐streptomycin (Beyotime) before cutting into 2 mm3 sections. Tumor sections were mixed with Ceturegel Matrix (Yeasen) and PBS at a ratio of 1:1 and transplanted (P0). The graft tumors were removed and dissected to small pieces after reaching 200 mm3 and passaged to another passage of nude mice (P1). Subsequently, P2 PDX models were established and used in the treatment experiments.
When tumor volumes reached about 200 mm3, mice were orally administered osimertinib (5 mg/kg; TargetMol) or the vehicle used for dissolving the drug daily for 21 consecutive days via gavage. Additionally, the mice received intraperitoneal injections of either 60 µg of ATG‐031 or control IgG1 every three days. For macrophage depletion, 150 µL liposomal clodronate (MedChemExpress), or control liposomes (MedChemExpress) was injected intravenously via the retro‐orbital sinus 2 days prior to tumor engraftment, and subsequent maintenance doses of 100 µL liposomal clodronate (MedChemExpress) or control liposomes (MedChemExpress) were injected every 3 days throughout the duration of the experiment. The xenografts were harvested and tumor weights were determined.

2.14.

## Spontaneous lung cancer model
Eight‐week‐old male C57BL/6 mice genetically engineered to express human CD24 and harbor a Cre‐LoxP‐mediated LSL human L858R/T790M mutant EGFR (hEGFRL858R/T790M
/hCD24) were intranasally administered with 5 × 1010 copies of mouse Secretoglobin, family 1A, member 1 (Scgb1a1)‐Cre adeno‐associated virus (AAV) (GENECHEM). This viral administration served to remove the stop elements and activate the oncogenic EGFR expression, thereby induce the development of lung adenocarcinomas. Two months post‐AAV administration, the mice were treated by gavage with osimertinib (5 mg/kg) or the vehicle used for dissolving the drug daily for 21 consecutive days. Furthermore, the mice received intraperitoneal injections of either 60 µg of ATG‐031 (MedChemExpress) or a control IgG1 (Beyotime) every 3 days for a total of 6 injections. To monitor the progression of lung cancer in these mice, chest CT scans were performed using Quantum GX2 Micro‐CT Scanner (PerkinElmer, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA).

2.15.

## DNA affinity precipitation assay
DNA affinity precipitation assay was performed as previously reported [ , ]. Briefly, biotin‐labeled and non‐biotin probes were synthesized by PCR, in which the firefly luciferase reporter plasmids containing the promoter (‐1000 bp to +1000 bp) or enhancer (‐4400 bp to ‐3900 bp) of CD24 gene (GENECHEM) were used as the template, and 5’ biotin‐labeled or non‐biotin primers were provided by Sangon. Meanwhile, PCR was also employed to synthesize biotin‐labeled probes containing corresponding mutated sequences at the YY1 target sites predicted by JASPAR in YY1 binding peaks. The sequences of wild‐type and mutant promoter‐enhancer regions are available in the Supplementary information S1‐S2.
Gel electrophoresis and the MiniBEST Agarose Gel DNA Extraction Kit (Takara, Kusatsu‐shi, Shiga, Japan) were employed to purify the probes. The cell nuclear proteins were extracted using the Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Protein Extraction Kit (Beyotime) with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol).
A total of 200 µg nuclear proteins were subsequently incubated with streptavidin magnetic beads (CST) coupled with 1 µg purified biotin‐labeled probes overnight at 4°C. Blank control was employed using magnetic beads without probes, whereas competitive control was established by introducing 20 µg non‐biotin probes into the incubation process. During the incubation, a final concentration of 100 µg/mL of salmon sperm DNA (Solarbio) and 10 µg/mL of bovine albumin (BSA) (Sangon) were added to mitigate nonspecific binding. After thorough washing, the beads were subjected to proteome profiling or boiled with SDS‐PAGE Sample Loading Buffer (Beyotime) for western blot analysis. For proteome profiling, the proteins bound to the beads underwent digestion, and the resulting peptides were subsequently separated using a liquid chromatography (LC) system (Easy‐nLC 1200, ThermoFisher). These peptides were then detected by a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher). The acquired mass spectrometry (MS) data were analyzed using Proteome Discover software, version 2.5 (ThermoFisher).

2.16.

## Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
Biotin‐labeled and non‐biotin CD24 promoter probes (‐1000 bp to +1000 bp) were synthesized by PCR as mentioned above, along with biotin‐labeled CD24 promoter probes in which YY1's potential binding sites were mutated in YY1 binding peaks (sequences available in the Supplementary information S1). The cell nuclear proteins were extracted using the Nuclear and Cytoplasmic Protein Extraction Kit (Beyotime) with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol), and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol).
The experiment's groups were set up as follows: (1) Negative Control (0.1 pmol biotin‐labeled probes); (2) Sample Reaction (0.1 pmol biotin‐labeled probes and 10 µg nuclear protein); (3) Cold Competition (0.1 pmol biotin‐labeled probes, 10 pmol non‐biotin probes, and 10 µg nuclear protein); (4) Super‐shift Reaction (0.1 pmol biotin‐labeled probes, 10 µg nuclear protein, and 1 µL YY1 antibody); (5) Cold Competition with Mutant Probe (0.1 pmol biotin‐labeled probes, 10 pmol non‐biotin mutant probes, and 10 µg nuclear protein); (6) Sample Reaction with Mutant Probe (0.1 pmol biotin‐labeled mutant probes and 10 µg nuclear protein).
Then 2 µL EMSA/Gel‐Shift Binding Buffer (Beyotime) and an appropriate amount of nuclease‐free were also added in each group. Subsequently, the reaction mixture was incubated for 20 min at room temperature, separated by electrophoresis, and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Beyotime). The membrane was treated with microwave at 700 W power for 2 min, then incubated with Streptavidin‐HRP Conjugate (Beyotime) for 30 min. Finally, the biotin‐labeled probes on the membrane were detected using a Moon chemiluminescence reagent kit (Beyotime).

2.17.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
The ChIP protocol was carefully executed utilizing the SimpleChIP® Plus Enzymatic Chromatin IP Kit (CST) following previously established procedures [ , ]. Initially, 5 × 106 cells underwent cross‐linking using 1% formaldehyde and 3 mmol/L ethylene glycol bis (succinimidyl succinate) for 30 min and then were treated with 0.125 mol/L glycine solution for 30 min to terminate the cross‐linking. Subsequently, the cell membranes were lysed using the buffer in the kit. The obtained cell nucleus was then treated with 0.125 µL micrococcal nuclease (CST) for 20 min to fragment the chromatin, and sonicated after 8 sets of 10 s pulses at 87.5 W using UP250 Ultrasonic Sonicator (Qiqian, Shanghai, China) to break the nuclear membranes and release the cross‐linked chromatin.
Following that, the cross‐linked chromatin was incubated with the YY1 antibody (1:100, #46395S, CST), H3K27ac antibody (1:100, #8173S, CST), H3K4me3 antibody (1:100, #9751S, CST), H3K27me3 antibody (1:100, #9733S, CST), or H3K9me3 antibody (1:100, #13969S, CST) overnight at 4°C. For validation purposes, a positive control was established using the Histone H3 antibody (1:100, #4620S, CST), while a negative control was established with IgG (1:100, #2729S, CST). A total of 30 µL Protein G Magnetic Beads (CST) were then introduced to each immunoprecipitation reaction and incubated overnight at 4°C to capture the antibody‐chromatin complexes. Following thorough washing, DNA immunocomplexes were separated from the reaction mixture using magnetic separation, and then eluted from the beads using the elution buffer in the kit. Finally, DNA was purified with the treatment of 0.4 mg/mL RNAse A (CST) at 37°C for 30 min and 0.8 mg/mL Proteinase K (CST) at 65°C for 2 h, and detected by qPCR using the Hieff® qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix (Low Rox Plus) (Yeasen) and the QuantStudio 5 Real‐Time PCR System (ThermoFisher). Sangon Biotech provided the primers, and their sequences are reported in Supplementary Table .

2.18.

## Multiplex immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence staining
For immunohistochemistry, human clinical lung tumor specimens, xenografts, and murine lung tumor tissues were fixed at 4% Paraformaldehyde Fix Solution (Servicebio) for 2 h, then sliced into 5‐µm sections after being embedded with paraffin. The paraffin sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a graded alcohol series, boiled with 10 mmol/L of citrate buffer (pH 8.0) (Beyotime) for 20 min and treated with Endogenous Peroxidase Blocking Buffer (Beyotime) for 10 min. For multiplex immunofluorescence, sections that had been treated were incubated with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight, then with secondary antibodies conjugated to Fluorescein Isothiocyanate (FITC), Cy3, Cy5 for 1 h at room temperature. The details of antibodies are listed in Supplementary Table . Finally, 2‐(4‐Amidinophenyl)‐6‐indolecarbamidine dihydrochloride (DAPI) (Beyotime) was used to stain the nuclei in the sections. Images were captured using a BX51 Fluorescence Microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).
Cells were fixed using 4% paraformaldehyde (Beyotime) for 5 min, permeabilized using 0.1% Triton X‐100 (Beyotime) for 5 min, and blocked using Immunol Staining Blocking Buffer (Beyotime) for 1 h at room temperature. Then cells were incubated with the YY1 antibody (1:100, #CY5160, Abways, Shanghai, China) at 4°C overnight, and subsequently incubated with Alexa Fluor 555‐Labeled Donkey Anti‐Rabbit IgG (1:500, #A0453, Beyotime) for 1 h at room temperature. Ultimately, the cell nucleus was stained with DAPI at a final concentration of 0.5 µg/mL. Images were also captured using the BX51 Fluorescence Microscope (Olympus).
For staining analysis, a random capture of 20 fields of view at 100× was performed for each tissue section regarding clinical human tumor tissues or CDX samples. The immunofluorescence signals from CK7 and CD68 or F4/80 were used to define the lung tumor cells or macrophages in human or murine lung tumor tissues. The percentages of tumor cells co‐stained with CD24 and Cytokeratin 7 (CK7) relative to all tumor cells and macrophages co‐stained with Cluster of Differentiation 163 (CD163) and Cluster of Differentiation 68 (CD68) or F4/80 relative to all macrophages in each field of view were calculated and averaged for plotting. Regarding spontaneous lung tumors in murine models, paraffin sections from all 5 lung lobes of each mouse were collected and randomly selected 2 fields containing lung cancer nests from each section at 40×, resulting in a total of 10 fields per animal. We classified cells with a nucleus diameter above 3.5 µm, corresponding to a DAPI fluorescence area higher than 9.5 µm2, as tumor cells, while defining the remainder as non‐tumor cells, due to the pronounced enlargement and heterogeneity of the nuclei in the tumor cells. The percentages of tumor cells co‐stained with CD24 or Ki‐67 and DAPI as well as macrophages co‐stained with Cluster of Differentiation 206 (CD206) and F4/80 were calculated and averaged for plotting.

2.19.

## Flow cytometry analysis
To quantify the expression levels of membrane‐bound CD24 (mCD24), cells were harvested and incubated with anti‐CD24 antibody (1:100, #A25380, ABflo® 488 Conjugatr, Abclonal) for 1 h on ice. The distribution of postive cells were then detected using the FACSAria III flow cytometry (BD). The acquired data were recessed and visualized using FlowJo Software (version 10) (TreeStar, Woodburn, OR, USA).

2.20.

## Dual‐luciferase reporter assay
The promoter (‐1000 bp∼1000 bp) sequences of CD24, along with the corresponding mutated sequences on the YY1's target sites predicted by JASPAR (https://jaspar.elixir.no/) in YY1 binding peaks (sequences available in the Supplementary information S1), were cloned into the firefly luciferase reporter plasmids by GENECHEM, respectively. The plasmids were transfected into 293T cells with Renilla luciferase reported plasmids (Genomeditech, Shanghai, China), respectively, using Lipo8000TM Transfection Reagent (Beyotime). The Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay Kit (Beyotime) was utilized to conduct the dual‐luciferase reporter assays 48h after transfection using a FlexStation6 microplate reader (Molecular Devices).

2.21.

## CoIP assay
CoIP was used to enrich YY1 and investigate its PTMs. Briefly, parental and OR cells of PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975, were lysed using NP‐40 Lysis Buffer (Beyotime) with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol) and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (TargetMol), and then incubated with protein A/G magnetic beads (ThermoFisher) which had been preincubated with Mouse anti‐YY1 antibody (1:100, #abs100386, Absin, Shanghai, China) overnight at 4°C. Following thorough washing, the beads were subjected to proteome profiling or boiled with SDS‐PAGE Sample Loading Buffer (Beyotime) for western blots.
To examine the dimerization of YY1, flag and HA‐tagged wild type, S247A mutation, and ΔI242‐S252 (without 11 amino acid residues surrounding position 247) of human YY1 were cloned into GV341 vector (Ubi‐MCS‐SV40‐puro) (GENECHEM), and then transfected into 293T cells using Lipo8000TM Transfection Reagent (Beyotime), respectively. Cells were lysed with NP‐40 Lysis Buffer (Beyotime) 48 h after transfection and then incubated with protein A/G magnetic beads (ThermoFisher) that had been preincubated with Flag antibody overnight at 4°C. Following thorough washing, the beads were boiled with SDS‐PAGE Sample Loading Buffer (Beyotime) to elute the bound proteins. The proteins were then analyzed using HA antibody (1:3000, #3724S, CST) in western blots.

2.22.

## Chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay
Chromosome conformation capture (3C) assay was performed as previously reported [ ]. Briefly, 1 × 107 cells were digested and resuspended, fixed using formaldehyde (Servicebio) at a final concentration of 2% for 10 min. Then, a final concentration of 0.125 mol/L glycine (Sangon) was added to stop the fixation. The cell pellet was subsequently incubated with a cell lysis buffer (10 mmol/L Tris‐HCl [pH 8.0], 10 mmol/L NaCl, 0.2% NP‐40, and protease inhibitor cocktail [TargetMol]) for 10 min to release nuclei.
Following this, the pellet was treated with Mbo I restriction enzyme (Takara) for 1 h at 37°C and 20 min at 65°C. The products digested by the enzyme were diluted using T4 DNA ligase buffer (Takara), and then incubated overnight at 16°C with T4 DNA ligase (Takara). Protein cross‐linking was eliminated through an overnight incubation with proteinase K (CST) at 16°C, while RNA was digested with RNase A (CST) for 30 min. Then DNA was extracted using the TIANamp Genomic DNA Kit (TIANGEN), and finally amplified using Hieff® qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix (Low Rox Plus) (Yeasen) on the QuantStudio 5 System (ThermoFisher). The amplification process involved an initial denaturation step lasting 5 min at 95°C, followed by 40 cycles of 10 s at 95°C and 30 s at 60°C. Primers are listed in Supplementary Table .

2.23.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical evaluations, including paired Student's t‐tests, two‐way ANOVA, multiple comparisons test, and log‐rank analysis were conducted utilizing GraphPad Prism 9 (GraphPad Software). P <0.05 was established as the threshold of statistical significance. The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) metrics were determined using four‐parameter dose‐response curve models. The number of samples or biological replicates employed is listed in the accompanying figure captions.

3.

## Results
3.1.

## CD24 was upregulated across drug‐responsive, resistant, and tolerant lung cancer cells to third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs
We established EGFR‐TKI responsive cell models by culturing three distinct EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cell lines (PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975) with osimertinib, the most used third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs for patients with advanced lung cancer at IC50 for 48 h (Figure  ). We also modeled acquired resistance to osimertinib by progressively increasing drug doses over two weeks [ ], followed by maintenance in 200 nmol/L (for PC‐9 and HCC827 cell lines) or 1 µmol/L (for H1975 cell line) concentrations for 3 months (Figure  ). The resulting osimertinib‐resistant (OR) models (denoted as PC‐9‐OR, HCC827‐OR, and H1975‐OR) exhibited a greater than 10‐fold increase in the IC50 values for osimertinib and cross‐resistance to the other 3 third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, almonertinib, furmonertinib, and befotertinib (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ).
 To identify potential targets for antibody‐based therapy combined with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, we performed RNA‐seq on osimertinib‐responsive cells, resistant cells, and their respective parental cells. We filtered the gene expression data to include only genes encoding proteins localized to the cell surface or secreted into the extracellular matrix. Eleven genes, including Calcium Channel Voltage‐Dependent Beta 3 Subunit (CACNB3), CD24, Laminin Beta 2 (LAMB2), Post‐GPI Attachment to Proteins Factor 3 (PGAP3), Prosaposin (PSAP), Rhomboid 5 Homolog 1 (RHBDF1), Solute Carrier Family 44 Member 2 (SLC44A2), Thrombospondin 3 (THBS3), Transmembrane Protein 8B (TMEM8B), Tuftelin 1 (TUFT1), and V‐Set Domain Containing T Cell Activation Inhibitor 1 (VTCN1), were consistently upregulated in drug‐responsive and ‐resistant cells (Figure  ).
To avoid potential off‐target effects of antibody‐based therapy, we further integrated our previously published single‐cell data from 204,157 cells across 29 lung cancer specimens to identify protein molecules specifically expressed on the surface of tumor cells within lung cancer tissues [ ]. The expression of the eleven candidates were assessed across 9 single‐cell subsets (cancer, alveolar, T, B, myeloid, mast, fibroblast, epithelial, and endothelial cells) [ ]. We found that 7 of the 11 genes (CACNB3, CD24, PGAP3, RHBDF1, SLC44A2, TMEM8B, and TUFT1) were specifically expressed on cancer cells and almost absent on hematopoietic cells, and CD24 was the one with the highest expression in tumor cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Further validations using qPCR assays revealed consistent upregulation of CD24 mRNA expression but not the other five potential targets across all drug‐responsive models when treated with osimertinib, almonertinib, furmonertinib, and befotertinib, (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Consequently, CD24 was selected as the top candidate protein target for further study.
CD24 expression levels were next assessed at protein level. Using western blot assays, we observed a marked and consistent increase of CD24 protein expression in drug‐responsive as well as resistant EGFR‐mutated cells to the third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Flow cytometry analysis also demonstrated a consistent and significant elevation of cell surface CD24 in drug‐responsive as well as OR cells (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure ). To determine the role of CD24 upregulation in the evolution of EGFR‐TKI resistance, EGFR‐mutated cells were treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs for 10 days to generate a drug‐tolerant persister (DTP) states that survives and rapidly adapts to therapy with an important role in the emergence of resistance to targeted therapies [ ]. We found that DTP PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells displayed significantly increased expression of CD24 at both mRNA and protein levels (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ).
To elucidate the role of CD24 as a dynamic and an actionable biomarker for adaptive resistance, longitudinal time‐course studies of CD24 expression across PC‐9 and H1975 cell variants, including parental, responsive, DTP, and resistant phases were conducted by western blot assays. Our results demonstrated that CD24 protein expression commenced to increase within 12‐24 h of third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatment and remained consistent until the resistant phase (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, these findings indicate CD24 expression rises during the evolution of drug resistance the third‐generation of EGFR‐TKIs in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.

3.2.

## CD24 was elevated in clinical TKI‐residual samples and served as an adverse prognostic factor for treatment efficacy
To investigate whether CD24 expression is upregulated in clinical cases following EGFR‐TKI treatments, we analyzed specimens from six patients with advanced EGFR‐mutated tumors (Figure  ). These included baseline tumors collected prior to any treatment (TKI‐naïve, n = 3, labeled N7, N8, and N9), and residual tumors from patients after osimertinib treatment (TKI‐residual, n = 3, labeled R7, R8, and R9). Residual tumor patients had mediastinal lymph nodes or blood vessel or bronchi invasion, making surgery unfeasible at the initial diagnosis. Their preoperative EGFR‐TKI therapy had lasted 2 to 7 months to minimize tumor burden and local metastatic stage so it could be surgically removed. All tumors had resulted in a notable trend of shrinkage, signifying as the DTP state, which has been reported to be plastic, allowing cells to transition between dormant, senescent, stem‐like, and epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition (EMT) cells, which may have adaptive resistance to therapy [ ].
 The 6 clinical tumor specimens were sequenced using snRNA‐seq and a total of 74,232 cell nuclei was processed following rigorous quality control measures (Supplementary Table ). Next, cells were categorized into 8 distinct single‐cell populations based on the expression of characteristic genes and the status of CNVs (Supplementary Figure ): cancer cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, stromal cells, T cells, myeloid cells, epithelial cells, and B cells (Figure  ‐ ). The results demonstrated that CD24 were greatly upregulated in TKI‐residual samples (Figure  ).
In the single lung cancer cell clusters, we observed a notable CD24 mRNA increase in the TKI‐residual tumors compared to the TKI‐naïve tumors (Figure  ). Considering CD24 has been reported to serve as plausible biomarker for cancer stem cells (CSCs) [ , , , ], we further quantified the stemness characteristics of individual tumor cells via calculating stemness indices based on the known CSC‐related gene set (Supplementary Figure ). Our results revealed no significant correlation between the stemness index and CD24 expression (Pearson correlation coefficient R = ‐0.105) (Supplementary Figure ). Together, our results indicate that CD24 is elevated in TKI‐residual tumor cells and the potential selection of CSCs by TKI treatment is not responsible for this elevation.
We next sought to investigate the CD24 protein expression in clinical lung tumor specimens. Consistent with the findings in snRNA‐Seq at the mRNA level, TKI‐residual tumor specimens demonstrated a significant increase in CD24 expression positivity as compared to TKI‐naïve tumors (Figure  ‐ ). To evaluate the association between CD24 expression and clinical outcomes of patients, we tentatively selected a cohort of 40 patients with advanced lung cancer who had undergone surgery at our institution and received adjuvant third‐generation EGFR‐TKI therapy afterward (clinical baseline information is available in Supplementary Table ). Our results indicated that high CD24 protein expression in the resected tumors prior to EGFR‐TKI therapies was significantly associated with worse RFS compared to those with low CD24 protein expression, with a 2.58‐fold risk (95% CI, 1.18‐5.66, P = 0.018) (Figure  ). Together, our findings indicate that CD24 expression elevates in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer and its expression serves as an adverse prognostic factor for the efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs.

3.3.

## CD24 elevation in residual tumor cells was responsible for enhanced cell proliferation and macrophage‐mediated immune escape
To examine effects of CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells on EGFR‐TKI efficacy, we employed CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology to knockout the CD24 gene (ΔCD24) in the EGFR‐mutated cell lines (Supplementary Figure ). Cell viability results revealed that knockout of CD24 significantly attenuated baseline cell proliferative capabilities and reduced the relative cell viability in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure ). Given that knockout of CD24 reduced the cell growth and the initial cell responsiveness to EGFR‐TKIs, we hypothesized that CD24 might also be necessary for the formation and survival of DTP cells. We next treated PC‐9 and H1975 cells expressing ΔCD24 or wild‐type (WT) CD24 as control cells with EGFR‐TKIs over a period of 10 days and measured the proportion of surviving cells as well as the rate of outgrowth of resistant clones. We observed that knockout of CD24 led to a consistently stronger initial reduction in tumor cell proliferation sustaining for 60 days upon different third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatments. In contrast, CD24 re‐expression in CD24‐knockout cells (ΔCD24 + CD24) diminished these above effects (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure , Supplementary Figure ).
 To further determine the effect of CD24 expression in OR cells, we also knocked down CD24 expressing in drug‐resistant cells using siRNAs (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Cell viability results revealed that knockdown of CD24 resulted in a decrease in the proliferation rate of the resistant PC‐9‐OR, HCC827‐OR, and H1975‐OR cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). These results indicate that elevated CD24 has an important role in maintaining the outgrowth of surviving tumor cells during the formation of drug resistance.
In the light of the fact that several studies have shown that CD24 regulates the EGFR downstream survival pathways, such as AKT serine/threonine kinase (AKT) and extracellular signal‐regulated kinase (ERK) [ , , ], we next sought to assess whether EGFR downstream pathways were involved in the mechanisms of CD24‐mediated cell survival. Using western blot assays, we observed that knockout of CD24 further decreased both activity of the AKT and ERK pathways that had been inhibited by third‐generation EGFR‐TKI in all EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells. In contrast, restoring CD24 expression in the CD24‐knockout cells reversed this effect. Consistently, knockdown of CD24 in the OR cells markedly diminished the activity of the AKT and ERK signaling pathways (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, these observations indicate that the proliferative reduction in surviving cells induced by CD24 expression may be explained by its capacity to work in concert with EGFR‐TKI to prevent the activation of EGFR downstream signaling pathways.
Given that CD24 also functions as an anti‐phagocytic checkpoint molecule, or so‐called a don't eat me signal [ ], we next sought to investigate whether CD24 upregulation plays a role in the tumor immune escape during third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs treatment. Several studies have consistently demonstrated that the association between CD24 on host cells and sialic acid binding Ig‐like (SIGLEC) family proteins on antigen‐presenting cells regulates innate immune responses [ , , ]. Barkal et al. [ ] expanded this association to tumor immunity, revealing that CD24 on the surface of diverse tumor cells can interact with sialic acid binding Ig‐like lectin 10 (SIGLEC10) on tumor‐associated macrophages (TAMs).
Given the previous studies, we hypothesized that CD24 upregulation in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells might poses effects on TAMs in the tumor microenvironment treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs. To test this, we re‐analyzed the snRNA‐Seq data of clinical lung tumors. We observed a higher proportion of myeloid cells in TKI‐residual samples compared to TKI‐naïve samples (Figure  ). Next, we calculated the M1 and M2 polarization scores using the previously reported marker gene sets [ ]. Notably, the proportion of M2‐polarized macrophages, considered as pro‐tumoral TAMs, was significantly increased in TKI‐residual samples compared to TKI‐naïve samples, while there was no significant change in the proportion of M1‐polarized macrophages, considered as anti‐tumoral macrophages (Figure  ).
 We next sought to investigate the macrophage infiltration and polarization in clinical lung tumor specimens and PC‐9 cell line‐derived murine xenografts. Consistent with results from the snRNA‐seq, multiplex immunohistochemistry analysis on TKI‐residual and TKI‐naïve clinical tumor specimens and PC‐9 cell line‐derived murine xenografts revealed a significant increase in CD24 protein expression on tumor cells as well as an increased proportion of macrophages and, specifically, M2‐polarized macrophages within the tumor tissue following third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatment (Figure  ). Together, these results indicate increased proportion of M2‐polarized macrophages in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer specimens after TKI treatment. Considering the connection between macrophages and CD24, it is plausible to hypothesize that macrophages may contribute to the CD24‐mediated tumor resistance.

3.4.

## CD24 genetic depletion or ATG‐031 exhibited in vitro synergy with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs by enhancing the phagocytosis of lung cancer cells
We next sought to evaluate the effect of CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells on their antiphagocytic ability. Using our snRNA‐Seq data, we observed that SIGLEC10, which encodes the primary ligand to CD24, is predominantly expressed in M2‐polarized macrophages (Figure  ), which was consistent with the previous study [ ]. To measure phagocytic clearance in vitro, EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells were labeled with CFSE and co‐cultured with M2‐like macrophages derived from human leukemia THP‐1 cell line or PBMCs. Before the experiment, we observed that stimulation with the M2‐polarizing cytokines IL‐4 and IL‐13 was sufficient to induce SIGLEC10 expression in THP‐1 cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Moreover, THP‐1 derived M2‐like macrophages possessed similar baseline phagocytic capacity to the unstimulated THP‐1 cells, which was suitable for our phagocytosis evaluation (Figure  ).
 In our study, phagocytosis was measured by fluorescence reduction brought by the inactivate the CFSE due to protein degradation in phagocytosed CFSE‐labeled lung cancer cells (Figure  ). We first compared the effects of CD24 expression in parental EGFR‐mutated cells on phagocytosis by macrophages. Our results revealed that M2‐like macrophages exhibited heightened phagocytic capacity to PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells knocked‐out with CD24 (ΔCD24) (Supplementary Figure ). Notably, when CD24 expression was restored in these knockout cells through targeted mutagenesis of the sgRNA‐binding site (ΔCD24 + CD24), the phagocytic capacity of M2‐like macrophages also reverted (Supplementary Figure ). Subsequently, we assessed the antiphagocytic ability of parental and OR EGFR‐mutated cells. Results revealed that OR cells were less readily engulfed into M2‐like macrophages derived from the THP‐1 cell line than their parental cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). However, this effect could be abolished by knocking down CD24 with siRNAs or the blockade of CD24 using monoclonal antibody, ATG‐031 (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Similar results were obtained using M2‐like macrophages derived from human PBMCs (Supplementary Figure ). Together, our findings indicate the CD24 induction in drug‐responsive and OR EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells inhibit their phagocytosis by macrophages.
To further investigate the effect of CD24 expression on phagocytosis during the evolution of EGFR‐TKI resistance, we examined whether knockout of CD24 or using ATG‐031 could synergize with EGFR‐TKIs on initial clearance of EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells. As demonstrated by an attenuated green signal over time, CD24‐knockout PC‐9 and H1975 cells or treating them with ATG‐031 in combination with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs exhibited significantly heightened phagocytic ability by macrophages (Supplementary Figure ). These results indicate that targeting CD24 may be efficacious in lung cancer that show resistance to third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs.

3.5.

## ΔCD24 and ATG‐031 synergized with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs to enhance cancer clearance in CDXs and spontaneous lung cancer, and PDX murine models
To extend our findings in models in vivo, we established CDXs by injecting PC‐9 cells expressing WT CD24 or ΔCD24 and luciferase subcutaneously onto the left flanks of nude mice. To determine the role of macrophages in CDX models, TAM had been depleted in certain groups of mice bearing PC‐9 xenografts expressing WT CD24 using liposomal clodronate by intravenous injection via the retro‐orbital sinus 2 days prior to tumor engraftment and throughout the duration of the experiment every 3 days. Tumors had become detectable after 2 weeks of formation and we treated with osimertinib, ATG‐031 antibody, IgG1 antibody, or vehicle as control. Tumor growth in was monitored and analyzed by bioluminescence (Figure  ).
 Results showed that tumors in mice injected with CD24‐knockout PC‐9 cells grew significantly slower than the control group in the absence of any treatments (Group C vs. Group A, P = 0.002). CD24‐knockout PC‐9 xenografts shrank significantly faster than the WT group in response to osimertinib treatment (Group D vs. Group B, P = 0.004). We further compared tumor responses to osimertinib mono‐therapy and therapy in combination with the ATG‐031, an anti‐CD24 antibody. We found that the anti‐CD24 therapy with ATG‐031 resulted in significant reduction of CD24 WT tumor growth compared to the IgG1‐treated control (Group F vs. Group E, P = 0.007). Notably, depletion of TAMs largely abrogated this reduction that was observed in the combination therapy with osimertinib and ATG‐031 therapy (Group G vs. Group F, P = 0.004), indicating that TAM‐mediated tumor clearance was responsible for the synergy (Figure  ). Together, these findings indicate that knockout of CD24 or CD24 blockade with antibody synergize with osimertinib in EGFR‐mutated CDX models.
However, nude mice lack adaptive immunity which could bias the function of macrophages. To better recapitulate the clinical tumor microenvironment, we utilized a genetically engineered immunocompetent mouse model expressing human CD24 and harboring EGFRL858R/T790M
 mutations (hCD24/hEGFRL858R/T790M
) (Figure  ). Spontaneous lung tumors were successfully formed after being induced by AAV expressing lung‐epithelial‐specific Cre recombinase (Scgb1a1‐Cre) in 8 weeks. Mice were then treated with osimertinib mono‐therapy or therapy in combination with the ATG‐031 or IgG1 control antibody following the tumor formation.
In our results, we found that the combination therapy of osimertinib and ATG‐031 antibody exhibited a significantly greater anti‐tumor effect than osimertinib monotherapy as well as a significant survival advantage (Figure  ). Furthermore, using multiplex immunohistochemistry, osimertinib‐treated tumors exhibited significantly decreased tumor proliferative capability but increased CD24 expression and M2 polarization compared to tumors without osimertinib treatment, which was consistent with the results observed in clinical tumor specimens described above (Supplementary Figure ). Together, these findings indicate that CD24 blockade using ATG‐031 antibody synergizes with osimertinib in murine models bearing spontaneous lung tumors.
We next sought to determine the clinical potential of ATG‐031 in residual lung tumors after osimertinib treatment to mimic tumor heterogeneity. We established 3 PDX models (PDX #1, PDX #2, and PDX #3) in nude mice to maintain the functions of myeloid immune cells and the synergistic effect of ATG‐031 and osimertinib was evaluated (Figure  ). Consistent with observation in CDXs and spontaneous lung tumors, the combination therapy of osimertinib and ATG‐031 antibody exhibited synergistic effect on tumor reduction and TAM depletion abrogated the reduction (Figure  ). Together, these findings suggest that anti‐CD24 therapy could be a viable combination strategy to promote tumor responses to third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer.

3.6.

## Third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs promoted CD24 expression via phosphorylating YY1 at serine 247
Given that CD24 commenced to elevate at both the mRNA and protein levels under the treatment of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in 24 h and maintained to resistant phase, we hypothesized that transcription factors (TFs) may be responsible for the rise of CD24 expression following the treatment. To determine potential TFs that regulates CD24 expression, probes containing CD24 gene promoter sequences were generated for DNA affinity precipitation assay combined with mass spectrometry. Twenty‐three candidates were identified with significant binding to CD24 gene promoter (Figure  , Supplementary Table ). We further integrated ChIP‐sequencing data from the ENCODE database [ ], and finally found that MAX, YY1, and ZNF143 were the only 3 TFs with binding peaks among the 23 candidates (top peak count ≥ 10) (Figure  , Supplementary Table ). To test if MAX, YY1, or ZNF143 has a regulatory function on CD24 gene expression, they were silenced using siRNAs in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells, respectively, and CD24 expression was assessed by qPCR and western blot assays. Results demonstrated that knockdown of YY1, but not MAX or ZNF143, led to a significant decrease in both CD24 mRNA and protein expression in lung cancer cells. Given that YY1 exhibited a most pronounced impact on CD24 expression among the three TFs, we selected YY1 for further evaluation (Supplementary Figure ).
 We next sought to examine whether YY1 binding to the CD24 promoter had an impact on CD24 gene expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells. Using the ChIP‐sequencing data from the ENCODE database, CD24 promoter regions were analyzed and the YY1 binding sites were shown in Figure  . ChIP‐qPCR assays in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cell lines revealed similarly significant recruitment of YY1 to the CD24 promoter region (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). To determine the regulatory elements responsible for YY1 targeting in the CD24 gene promoter, 2 probes containing WT and mutant YY1 targeting sites were designed for DNA‐affinity precipitation assay. Results demonstrated that YY1 bound to the oligonucleotides spanning the WT but not the mutant CD24 promoter region (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ; sequences available in the Supplementary Information S1). Dual‐luciferase reporter assay further revealed that YY1 significantly activated the transcriptional activity of the CD24 promoter (Figure  ). Together, these results indicate that YY1 specifically binds and transactivates CD24 gene expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.
Given that YY1 plays a role in regulating CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells, we next sought to decipher the mechanisms through which YY1 mediates CD24 expression during EGFR‐TKI treatments in lung cancer cell. We first re‐analyzed our RNA‐seq data on EGFR‐mutated drug‐responsive cells, resistant cells, and their respective parental cells described above and validated with experiments to determine its expression upon third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatments. Results revealed that no significant change was occurred in YY1 after treatment of the EGFR‐TKIs (Supplementary Figure ).
Since PTMs of proteins play a key role in DNA‐based processes and contribute to gene function by adding an extra layer of regulation [ , ], we next assessed whether PTMs of YY1 altered in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells upon EGFR‐TKI treatments. We utilized anti‐YY1 antibodies to precipitate the YY1 protein in PC‐9‐OR and PC‐9 parental cells, followed by LC‐MS and label‐free quantification analysis. Phosphorylation analysis of Ser/Thr kinases on YY1 protein revealed that the S247 site of YY1 (YY1S247) was the most dramatically upregulated in OR cells subjected to parental cell (Figure  , Supplementary Tables ), which has also been reported to be present in a variety of human tumor cells and other species but has not been explored [ , ]. The elevation of phospho‐YY1S247 in OR cells was further validated in HCC827 and H1975 cell lines using a customized phospho‐YY1S247 antibody and an antibody specific for the phospho‐Ser‐Pro‐Pro motif, which is unique to YY1 around the S247 residue (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, our findings indicate that third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs induce YY1 phosphorylation at S247 but not alterations on YY1 gene expression.
We next sought to decipher whether phospho‐YY1S247 was responsible for the CD24 elevation. YY1S247A was knocked in the YY1 gene using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cell lines to abrogate the phosphorylation of YY1S247 (Supplementary Figure ). Using qPCR and western blot assays, we observed that the S247A mutation in YY1 greatly decreased CD24 expression in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells as well as abrogated the TKI‐induced CD24 upregulation upon EGFR‐TKI treatments (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, our findings identify YY1 phosphorylation at S247 as a key driver of CD24 upregulation during EGFR‐TKI therapy, highlighting a novel regulatory axis contributing to drug resistance.

3.7.

## EGFR‐TKI‐induced phospho‐YY1S247 was involved in YY1 dimerization
We next sought to investigate how YY1 phosphorylation at S247 regulates CD24 expression. Prior study has been reported that YY1 binds to the consensus sites in gene promoters and specific DNA structures to regulate gene transcription [ ]. To assess whether the YY1S247 is involved in the regulatory function of YY1, we performed dual‐luciferase assay to compare the CD24 promoter activation status in cells expressing S247A mutation and WT S427 expression. We found that YY1 S247A mutation did not significant diminish the activation of the CD24 promoter brought by WT YY1 (Supplementary Figure ).
Given that YY1 S247A mutation could inhibit the CD24 gene expression, but not via suppressing the transactivation of the promoter directly, we next sought to figure out if the S247A mutation has any indirect effects, such as whether it changes binding capability to DNA strands or the nuclear translocation of YY1. We used EMSA to detect the DNA‐binding capability of WT and YY1S247A proteins in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cell. Results revealed no significant difference between the WT YY1 and YY1S247A in their ability to bind DNA (Supplementary Figure ). Additionally, immunofluorescence assays demonstrated that both YY1WT and YY1S247A proteins were exclusively present in the nucleus without significant difference and regardless of the treatment of EGFR‐TKIs (Supplementary Figure . Together, our findings indicate that the S247A mutation inhibits the expression of CD24 but was not attributed to regulation of gene promoter, DNA binding capability, or nuclear distribution.
Apart from the direct transcriptional regulation, recent studies provided strong evidence to reveal a pivotal role of YY1 in contributing to the enhancer‐promoter loop formation brought by the YY1 dimerization [ , , ]. To test whether YY1 has a similar effect on CD24 gene, we re‐explored the binding profiles of YY1 on the CD24 gene locus utilizing ChIP‐Seq data sourced from the ENCODE database. An additional YY1‐specific binding peak positioned 4.1 kilobases upstream of the CD24 transcriptional start site was identified (Figure  ), where enriched with gene enhancer elements [ ]. We next validated this finding using ChIP‐qPCR and DNA affinity assays in EGFR‐mutated cell lines (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). These dual interactions suggest an important role for YY1 in bridging the promoter and enhancer, consistent with its established function in chromatin looping.
 Importantly, we found that the S247 residue is remarkably conserved when we perform a homology analysis of YY1 genes across diverse species, indicating that YY1 S247 is a functional site in the YY1 protein sequence (Supplementary Figure ). Therefore, we next sought to investigate whether the S247A mutation in YY1 affects the function on chromatin looping. For this purpose, we used the AlphaFold 2 prediction model to predict the structure of YY1 [ , ]. AlphaFold2 modeling predicted that S247 laid within a helical interface critical for homodimer stabilization, which strongly supports a structural role in dimerization (Figure  ).
To further decipher the molecular basis of the dimerization of YY1, WT, S247A mutant, and ΔI242‐S252 truncated YY1 proteins were constructed and tagged with Flag or HA, as depicted in the schematic diagram of the YY1 protein domains (Figure  ). Given the fact that the EGFR signaling pathway in cells expressing WT EGFR could not be inhibited by EGFR‐TKIs, we proceeded to treat the cells with AKT and ERK inhibitors, two major downstream signaling molecules of EGFR, to see if they could induce phosphorylation of the YY1 S247 region in the same way that EGFR‐TKI did. The results showed that an ERK inhibitor, SCH772984, replicated the effect of EGFR‐TKIs on YY1 in cells, while an AKT inhibitor, MK‐2206, exerted minimal impact on YY1 phosphorylation at serine 247 (S247) (Supplementary Figure ). Therefore, 293T cells were transfected with plasmids containing WT or truncated YY1 sequences before treated with SCH772984, to recapitulate the changes in YY1 phosphorylation at the S247 site in lung cancer cells treated with EGFR‐TKIs. Subsequently, dimerization between YY1 monomers was assessed by CoIP assays. As shown in Figure  showed precipitated bands with high intensity but was impaired by S247A mutation or ΔI242‐S252 in the presence of ERK inhibitor. In addition, compared to the WT YY1, YY1S247A and YY1ΔI242‐S252 both showed a weaker binding affinity to the proteins themselves. Together, our findings indicate that the YY1 S247 site plays an essential role in the YY1 dimerization which is necessary for the enhancer‐promoter looping of CD24 gene.

3.8.

## Phospho‐YY1S247 contributed to formation of the enhancer‐promoter loop of CD24 and was regulated by the JNK pathway
We next sought to determine whether the phospho‐YY1S247 promotes the expression of CD24 by forming the enhancer‐promoter loop mediated by the YY1 dimer. To test this, we performed 3C assay to evaluate the chromatin‐looping events in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells treated with third‐generation EGFR‐TKI (Figure  ). We observed increased interaction frequency between the enhancer and the promoter regions in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells treated with osimertinib compared with cells treated with DMSO control. However, these increased interactions were significantly abolished by the YY1 S247A mutation in EGFR‐mutated cells (Figure  ‐ , Supplementary Figure ). These results indicate that third‐generation EGFR‐TKI promotes enhancer‐promoter looping of CD24 gene in a YY1‐dependent manner.
To explore the potential upstream kinase of phospho‐YY1S247 under the treatment of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, a substrate atlas of human serine or threonine kinases previously published was used to identify candidates that can phosphorylate YY1 at the S247 site as substrates [ ]. A total of 22 kinases serving as regulators of phospho‐YY1S247 with significant phosphorylation changes in PC‐9‐OR cells compare to the parental cells. To verify whether these molecules play a similar role in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells, we integrated our above‐described phosphoproteomic data in the PC‐9‐OR cells (Supplementary Table ). The integration analysis revealed that five kinases, including adaptor‐associated kinase 1 (AAK1), cyclin‐dependent kinase 7 (CDK7), CDK12, CDK13, and mitogen‐activated protein kinase 8 (MAPK8, also known as c‐Jun n‐terminal kinase 1 or JNK1), were activated in the resistant cells and were selected as upstream candidate kinases to activate phospho‐YY1S247 (Figure  , Supplementary Tables ).
 To evaluated whether these 5 kinases could phosphorylate YY1 S247 in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells and promote CD24 expression, we treated cells with different inhibitors (BMS‐986176 and LP‐935509 targeting AAK1; SY‐5609 and YKL‐5‐124 targeting CDK7; SR‐4835 and THZ531 targeting CDK12 and CDK13; JNK‐IN‐8 and JNK‐IN‐11 targeting JNK) and the CD24 expression at mRNA level was assessed using qPCR. We observed that JNK inhibition nearly completely abolished the osimertinib‐induced increase in CD24 mRNA levels among the 5 pathways (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Western blot assays further revealed that the phospho‐YY1S247 was activated simultaneously with phosphorylation of JNK in EGFR‐TKI‐ residual lung tumor specimens and OR lung cancer cells compared to their counterparts (Figure  ). Together, our findings indicate that JNK could activate the phosphorylation of YY1S247 and thus the CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.

3.9.

## EGFR‐JNK‐YY1‐CD24 regulation axis mediated resistance to third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs
We next sought to test whether suppression of JNK‐YY1 axis reverses CD24 induction or restores EGFR‐TKI sensitivity in resistant cells. We knocked down YY1 or treated cells with osimertinib in combination with JNK inhibitors. Western blot assays demonstrated that knockdown of YY1 or JNK inhibition similarly reversed CD24 induction by osimertinib treatment (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Cell viability assays revealed that JNK inhibition or knockdown of YY1 significantly restored osimertinib sensitivity in resistant PC‐9‐OR, HCC827‐OR, and H1975‐OR cells (Figure  , Supplementary Figure ). Together, these results indicate that JNK pathway is responsible for promoting phospho‐YY1S247 and CD24 expression in EGFR‐mutated lung tumors, driving the evolution of drug resistance to the third‐generation of EGFR‐TKIs.
To extend our findings, we further used first‐ and second‐generation EGFR‐TKI agents as well as siRNAs to suppress the EGFR pathway in order to assess whether suppression of EGFR signaling similarly induces the JNK‐YY1 phosphorylation and CD24 elevation. We observed that the phospho‐JNK and YY1S247 as well as CD24 protein expression were all heightened in PC‐9 and HCC827 cells treated with first‐ or second‐generation EGFR‐ TKIs (Supplementary Figure ). Similarly, Knockdown of EGFR resulted in heightened phospho‐JNK and YY1S247 and CD24 protein expression in PC‐9, HCC827, and H1975 cells (Supplementary Figure ). These results supported the link between CD24 induction and EGFR signaling in EGFR‐mutated lung cancer cells.
Moreover, given the known role of epigenetic mechanisms in regulating DTP cells and the rapid upregulation of CD24 induced by third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in 12‐24 h, we further explored whether levels of histone H3 methyl and acetyl marks associated with chromatin remodeling were changed following EGFR‐TKI treatments. We selected 2 repressive histone marks, H3K27me3 and H3K27me3, along with the permissive marks, H3K4me3 and H3K27ac, to represent the histone modifications and chromatin state of the CD24 gene. ChIP‐qPCR results demonstrated that there were no significant changes in the epigenetic modifications of the CD24 gene promoter in cells across different cell states following EGFR‐TKI treatments, including responsive, DTP, and resistant phases (Supplementary Figures ). These results indicate that the CD24 induction by EGFR‐TKIs is not mediated by chromatin remodeling or histone modifications.
Furthermore, to evaluate the potential applicability of anti‐CD24 therapy in lung cancer, we utilized available publicly data [ , , , ] to investigate whether lung cancer undergoes changes in response to chemotherapy and other targeted therapies. We showed that platinum‐based chemotherapy dramatically downregulated CD24 expression in lung cancer cells 48 h after treatment; however, this effect was not significant in lung cancer cells resistant to platinum‐based chemotherapy (Supplementary Figure ). In contrast, under the effect of Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK)‐targeted inhibitor (alectinib) or Kirsten Rats Arcomaviral Oncogene Homolog (KRAS)‐targeted inhibitors (fulzerasib, garsorasib, and sotorasib), CD24 expression showed a significant increase in almost all cases, extending from the initial response phase through to the DTP and resistant phases, except alectinib‐resistant cells (Supplementary Figure ). These findings indicate that the combination of anti‐CD24 therapy may also have potential roles in ALK or KRAS targeted therapies in lung cancer, warranting additional investigation.
To summarize, in our investigation on EGFR‐mutated lung cancer, we discovered a marked increase in CD24 expression following the third‐generation EGFR‐TKI treatments, which was facilitated by the JNK/phospho‐YY1S247 signaling pathway. We found that the CD24 elevation conspicuously impeded macrophage phagocytosis, thus reducing the therapeutic advantages of these EGFR‐TKI treatments. Importantly, the combination uses of the ATG‐031, an anti‐CD24 monoclonal antibody under testing in clinical trials, significantly enhanced the phagocytic ability of macrophages towards tumor cells both in vitro and in vivo. This synergistic effect greatly improved the therapeutic efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs in the treatment of lung cancer harboring EGFR mutations (Figure  ).

4.

## Discussion
The combination use of immunotherapy with EGFR‐TKIs in the treatment of lung cancer has garnered considerable attention and potential. The current immunotherapy strategies, such as ICIs that target programmed cell death protein 1 (PD‐1) or programmed death‐ligand 1 (PD‐L1), has not, however, shown a satisfactory synergistic benefit with EGFR‐TKIs. In significant clinical trials like CAURAL [ ] and TATTON [ ], the combination of osimertinib with ICIs shown a reduced response rate and an elevated toxicity profile, especially regarding side events linked to interstitial lung disease, in contrast to osimertinib alone. Multiple studies have demonstrated that EGFR‐TKI therapy significantly downregulates PD‐L1 expression in tumor cells, aligning with the transcriptome sequencing results obtained in this research [ , , ]. These findings may account for the suboptimal efficacy observed when ICIs were combined with the EGFR‐TKIs. Therefore, identifying new immunotherapy targets beyond PD‐1/PD‐L1 is crucial for enhancing the therapeutic efficacy of EGFR‐TKIs in patients with EGFR‐mutated lung tumors.
Using our snRNA‐seq and transcriptome sequencing, we delved into the alterations in membrane‐bound and secretory protein expression in EGFR‐mutated lung tumor cell lines and clinical tissues after administering third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, aiming to uncover potential immunotherapy targets. In our study, we observed that CD24 commenced to increase 12‐24 h after EGFR‐TKI treatment and kept increasing in drug‐responsive, DTP, and resistant phases. Furthermore, decreasing its expression re‐challenged the remaining cells that have developed resistance to EGFR‐TKI to regain sensitivity. CD24 has been implicated in modulating EGFR downstream signaling across cancer types, including ERK activation via ADP‐ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6)‐guanosine triphosphate (GTP) stabilization [ ], concurrent PI3K/AKT/ERK pathway activation driving cisplatin resistance [ ], and EGFR surface persistence through ras homolog gene family member A (RhoA) inhibition [ ]. Therefore, our results indicate that CD24 serves an adaptive feedback regulatory function in the resistance of lung cancer to EGFR‐TKIs. In addition, CD24 has also been reported to act as a “don't eat me” signal, interacting with SIGLEC10 to inhibit macrophage phagocytosis and facilitate tumor immune evasion [ , , , , , ]. Our findings also revealed that knocking out CD24 significantly enhances the efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs by promoting macrophage‐mediated phagocytosis both in vitro and in vivo.
In this study, we comprehensively demonstrated the synergistic enhancement effect of ATG‐031, a first‐in‐class and novel CD24 antibody, on the efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs, not only through in vitro experimentation and xenograft models, but also in mice bearing human EGFRL858R·T790M‐driven spontaneous lung tumors expressing humanized CD24. ATG‐031 has exhibited robust preclinical antitumor efficacy and is currently being evaluated in patients with advanced solid tumors or B‐cell non‐Hodgkin's lymphoma in the ongoing phase I PERFORM trial [ ]. Our research provides a theoretical basis for the combination use of ATG‐031 or other CD24‐targeted immunotherapies with EGFR‐TKIs, and we eagerly anticipate further validation in future clinical trials.
Consistent with our results, Shiiya et al. [ ] previously reported an increase in CD24 expression in tumor cells and patient tissues following EGFR inhibition, and combining anti‐CD24 antibodies with EGFR‐TKIs in vitro significantly enhanced macrophage phagocytosis. However, according to another report, the combination of anti‐CD24 with osimertinib does not enhance the phagocytosis of PC‐9 cells by macrophage, which may be related to the specific CD24 antibody used in that study [ ]. Additionally, blocking various other immune targets, such as Cluster of Differentiation 44 (CD44), Cluster of Differentiation 47 (CD47), Cluster of Differentiation 55 (CD55), Cluster of Differentiation 59 (CD59), Cluster of Differentiation 70 (CD70), Cluster of Differentiation 73 (CD73), and Cytotoxic T‐lymphocyte‐associated Antigen 4 (CTLA‐4), has been also shown to enhance the efficacy of EGFR‐TKIs, offering a promising perspective for the integration of immunotherapy with EGFR‐TKI treatments [ , , , , , , ].
Through several phosphoproteomic analyses, we discovered that third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs enhance CD24 expression through phospho‐YY1S247, which facilitates the enhancer‐promoter loop of CD24. When analyzing the phosphoproteomic data from the The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database [ ], we observed that phospho‐YY1S247 is prevalent in tumors, yet its functional implications remain largely unexplored. Consistent with our results, Agarwal et al. [ ] reported that YY1 interacts with the androgen receptor to drive CD24 expression, and Rizkallah et al. [ ] reported that phospho‐YY1S247 had only minor effects on the DNA‐binding activity or subcellular localization of YY1. However, our findings elaborate, for the first time, the crucial role of phospho‐YY1S247 in facilitating YY1 dimerization and YY1‐mediated enhancer‐promoter loop of CD24, while the mutation at YY1S247 significantly abrogated the third‐generation of EGFR‐TKI‐induced CD24 expression. YY1 is characterized by its dualistic functionality in gene transcription, either suppressing or activating a range of downstream genes, hence its nomenclature as YING‐YANG‐1 [ , , ]. Our research indicates that PTMs of YY1, such as phospho‐YY1S247A, may underlie its dualistic behavior [ , ]. Notably, despite the profound homology between human YY2 and YY1, the S247 residue is absent in YY2, potentially offering crucial insights into the functional divergence between these two genes [ ]. However, we did not explore the spatial localization of CD24 or YY1 activity in this study and we believe that further integration of data, such as spatial transcriptomics, could help to assess the tumor CD24 co‐localization with activated macrophages or phospho‐YY1 expression.
Based on the results of phosphoproteomics and inhibitory experiments, we identified JNK as the upstream kinase of phospho‐YY1S247 under the treatment of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs. JNK, activated by various cellular stimuli, including EGFR inhibition, differs from other MAPK family members in that its primary targets for phosphorylation are nuclear transcription factors, such as YY1 in this study, thereby mediating numerous gene expressions in response to cellular stimuli [ , , , , ]. However, its precise role in the resistance to EGFR‐TKIs remains a matter of ongoing debate [ , , , , ]. Meanwhile, we also observed a marked phosphorylation of AAK1, CDK7, CDK12, and CDK13 in OR cells. Although there have been only a few reports regarding their function in EGFR‐TKI resistance, their potential contribution deserves further in‐depth examination [ , , , ].
There are some limitations in our study. Firstly, our study did not provide pre‐ and post‐treatment specimens from patients for analysis. The reason for this was that the tissue collected during the initial diagnosis through percutaneous or bronchoscopic puncture biopsy was typically small. To prioritize the clinical diagnosis of the patients, it was difficult to obtain sufficient paired TKI‐naïve tumors for experimental studies. In addition, the current post‐TKI‐treated surgical tumor samples we obtained began in January 2023, resulting in the median survival time has not yet been reached for survival analysis. As a compensation, we tentatively selected a cohort who had undergone surgery at our institution and received adjuvant TKI therapy afterward. The results served as an alternative foundation for the expression level of CD24 in the tumor prior to TKI therapy and the efficacy of TKI therapy. Therefore, we believe that retrospective and prospective studies assessing CD24 expression in pre‐ and post‐treatment tumor biopsies should be expanded to help determine the prognostic and predictive value of CD24.
Secondly, we primarily focused on third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs due to their widespread applications and superior clinical efficacy compared to previous generations [ , ]. We revealed a strong applicability of anti‐CD24 therapy in combination with third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs. However, the synergistic effect of anti‐CD24 observed in this study with other generations of EGFR‐TKIs and EGFR antibodies awaits further confirmation. Additionally, other common targets in lung cancer, including ALK, Human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2 (HER2), and KRAS, are located within the same signaling pathways as EGFR [ ]. In our study, we preliminarily revealed that lung cancer cells exhibit increased CD24 expression following treatment against some of these targets. Therefore, it is worth exploring whether the synergistic effect of anti‐CD24 also applies to these targeted therapies [ ].
Thirdly, the functional role of SIGLEC10 molecule in the CD24‐SIGLEC10‐EGFR regulatory axis was not elaborated in our work. The CD24 and SIGLEC protein family signaling axis has been extensively demonstrated to be an innate immune checkpoint regulating host response to tissue injuries [ , , ]. Barkal et al. [ ] expanded the contact between the CD24‐SIGLEC to tumor immunity, revealing that CD24 on the surface of diverse tumor cells can interact with SIGLEC10 on TAMs. Following this, an increasing number of research have demonstrated the significance of the interaction between CD24 and SIGLEC10 in tumor immune microenvironment [ , , ]. Since previous studies have already sufficiently demonstrated the role of the interaction between CD24 and SIGLEC10 in macrophage phagocytic capacity, we did not further validate the role of SIGLEC10. However, further research in this area could help to fill in the conceptual leap on our study.
Last but not least, in our nude mouse xenograft models, the lack of adaptive immunity, especially T cell‐macrophage crosstalk, such as the M1 skewing induced by T‐helper 1 cells, could bias the macrophage polarization toward an M2‐like phenotype and underrepresent M1 responses to some extent [ , ]. In addition, in murine models bearing spontaneous lung tumors, we did not humanize the SIGLEC10 expression, the receptor for CD24 on macrophages. These factors could potentially introduce bias in assessing the blocking capability of CD24 antibodies, despite previous studies suggesting that human CD24 can bind to mouse Siglec10 to inhibit macrophage phagocytosis [ , ]. Therefore, further studies using models mimicking immune interactions is warranted to validate the anti‐CD24 therapeutic efficacy in lung cancer.

5.

## Conclusions
Overall, CD24 is a promising target in EGFR‐mutated lung cancers, potentially enhancing third‐generation EGFR‐TKI efficacy.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, and Xiaolong Huang contributed equally to the study. Qun Wang, Wei Jiang, and Cheng Zhan contributed the conception of the work. Zhijie Xu, Wei Guo, Yuanliang Yan, Wei Jiang, and Cheng Zhan contributed to the design of the work. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Xiaolong Huang, Yiwei Huang, Yunyi Bian, Guangyao Shan, and Qihai Sui contributed to the acquisition of data. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Qihai Sui, Xiaodong Yang, Zhencong Chen, and Tao Lu contributed to the analyses of data. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Xiaolong Huang, Yiwei Huang, Guangyao Shan, Wei Guo, Tao Lu, and Huan Zhang contributed to the interpretation of data. Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, Xiaolong Huang, Zhijie Xu, Wei Guo, Yuanliang Yan, and Qun Wang drafted the work. All authors revised the manuscript critically and approved the final version.

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE
All tumor samples analyzed were collected in accordance with protocols approved by the institutional review board under the guidance of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Approval No. B2023‐258). Full compliance with all relevant ethical guidelines was ensured. Written informed consent to participate and to publish was obtained from participants before inclusion in the study. The Animal Ethics Committee of Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University (Approval No.: 2023‐451) approved the experimental design. All procedures involving animals were pre‐approved and aligned with the institutional guidelines for animal welfare, and the experiments were carefully designed to reduce the number of animals utilized.

## Supporting information
Supporting information
Supporting information

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank OE Biotech Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) and MobiDrop Co., Ltd (Huzhou, Zhejiang, China) for helping us with the single‐nucleus and bulk RNA sequencing, Shanghai Luming Biological Technology (Shanghai, China) for their support in proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses, BioMed World (Shanghai, China) for their assistance in multiplex immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence staining assays, as well as Abclonal Technology (Wuhan, Hubei, China) for their aid in customizing the phospho‐YY1S247 antibody. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82473184), the Shanghai Sailing Program (24YF2704100), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (82403100), the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (24ZR1409900), and the Beijing Xisike Clinical Oncology Research Foundation (No, Y‐2024AZ(EGFR)MS‐0048).

Liang J, Bi G, Huang X, Xu Z, Huang Y, Bian Y, et al. CD24 is a promising immunotherapeutic target for enhancing efficacy of third‐generation EGFR‐TKIs on EGFR‐mutated lung cancer. Cancer Commun.
2025;45:1547–1578. 10.1002/cac2.70068

Jiaqi Liang, Guoshu Bi, and Xiaolong Huang contributed equally to this work and shared the co‐first author.

## Contributor Information
Wei Jiang, Email: jiang.wei1@zs-hospital.sh.cn.
Cheng Zhan, Email: czhan10@fudan.edu.cn.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available in the Figshare repository (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.29561897). Other data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Supporting information
Supporting information

## Data Availability Statement
The datasets generated and analyzed during the current study are available in the Figshare repository (https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.29561897). Other data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.