pmciScienceiScience3532isciiScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC12757541PMC12757541.112757541127575414148878910.1016/j.isci.2025.114219S2589-0042(25)02480-01142191ArticleAge-dependent immune responses and resident cell dynamics in young mice following pneumonia
MichkiSylvia N. PerezJavier V. VarapulaDharma A. ThomasAaron J. VincentTiffaney L. SingerBenjamin D. ZeppJarod A. McGrath-MorrowSharon A.mcgrathmos@chop.edu 1Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Division of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA2Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Division of Cardiology, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA3Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA∗Corresponding author mcgrathmos@chop.edu4Lead contact
1612026261120252915035431142192542025118202521112025261120250301202605012026© 2025 The Author(s)2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Summary
Infancy represents a unique period of immune vulnerability. This study investigated age-specific immune dynamics associated with differential health outcomes in the immature lung. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and bulk RNA sequencing were employed to comprehensively map the transcriptional landscapes of lung-resident cells. Marked differences in gene expression and cell-type distributions were observed between neonates and juveniles. Acute inflammatory responses in neonatal lungs were associated with decreased alveolar epithelial type 2 (AT2) cell proliferation, as well as a transient disruption of ligand-receptor interactions (Fgf1 and Fgfr4) between AT2 cells and secondary crest myofibroblasts. In contrast, juvenile immune and lung-resident cells were transcriptionally poised to respond to lung injury, dampening the acute inflammatory effects of E. coli on the lung. This study highlighted how early-life immune ontogeny impacts disease susceptibility, opening avenues for future research to identify therapeutic targets to enhance resistance to respiratory infections for the most vulnerable populations.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Single-cell sequencing of the lung’s response to E. coli pneumonia in young mice
•Innate immune responses to pneumonia differ between neonates and juveniles
•Alveolar epithelial cell proliferation is impacted by E. coli in the lungs of young mice
•Lung fibroblast inflammation is induced by E. coli and LPS-stimulated macrophages

Immunology; immune response; transcriptomics

## Subject areas
immunologyimmune responsetranscriptomicspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NCPublished: November 26, 2025

## Introduction
Infancy represents a unique period of immune vulnerability. Newborns and infants possess little antigenic memory and have naive adaptive immune responses, increasing the likelihood of greater disease severity when exposed to infectious pathogens. Dependence on the innate immune system can lead to delayed pathogen clearance and persistent inflammation. Lower respiratory tract infections are a leading cause of death worldwide in children less than five years of age. , Gram-negative bacteria have been associated with severe pneumonia in children. Furthermore, pneumonia during early life can elevate the risk of early-onset airflow obstruction and chronic obstructive lung disease in adult life. , Understanding immune responses to pneumonias in the young may help better direct therapy to improve both short- and long-term outcomes.
Our study seeks to determine if age-dependent changes in the lung’s innate immune system can account for variations in recovery following airway infections in the young. In prior studies, we and others have shown that myeloid cells from neonatal lung fail to express major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II molecules when challenged with airway pathogens. , , We also found that an intact CCL2-CCR2 axis improves outcomes to gram-negative pneumonia in young mice, and that DNA methylation regulates CD4+ T cell responses to E. coli pneumonia. Other studies have found that neonatal neutrophils are less responsive to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and have slower clearance of bacteria compared to adults; likely contributing to longer recovery and chronic inflammation in the immature lung. , It has been speculated that the neonatal immune response to low pathogen burdens allows ongoing alveolar epithelial type 2 (AT2) cell proliferation during a critical period of postnatal alveologenesis. However, in the absence of a mature immune system, the neonate is less equipped to respond to high pathogen loads, driving the higher mortality in this age group.
Alveologenesis is the final period of lung development and primarily occurs postnatally both in humans and mice. The majority of postnatal alveolar growth takes place during the first two years of life, with slower rates of growth into late adolescence. , We hypothesize that immune responses to gram-negative bacteria, like E. coli, can disrupt homeostatic growth of resident cells necessary for normal postnatal alveologenesis. To address this, we challenged immature mice at postnatal day (PND) 5, a time roughly equivalent to infants <11 months of age, and PND12, a time roughly equivalent to children between 2 and 11 years of age. We used a combination of histologic, transcriptomic, and in vitro modeling techniques to compare the transcriptional landscape of murine lung at homeostasis, peak inflammation (48 h post-infection), and during recovery (96 h post-infection) in both groups of immature mice. We identified age-dependent changes in lung-resident lymphoid cell population sizes and macrophage activation states to E. coli. Using RNA velocity analyses, we not only observe similarities in the dynamical transcriptional changes underlying neutrophil activation between juveniles and neonates but also discovered differences in the endpoint of this activation process. Using EdU labeling and bulk RNA-seq of primary AT2 cells, we found significant age-related differences in the proliferative responses of AT2 cells to E. coli infection. We further uncovered differences in lung fibroblast inflammatory activation at peak inflammation between the two age groups. At 48 h post E. coli, neonates had ligand-receptor disruption between AT2s and the developmentally transient secondary crest myofibroblasts (SCMFs). , Finally, utilizing an in vitro fibroblast-macrophage co-culture system, we demonstrated that macrophages stimulated with LPS are sufficient to induce an inflammatory activated fibroblast state, indicating that fibroblast homeostasis can be altered by external inflammatory stimuli.

## Results

## Injury response of young mice to E. coli pneumonia
Following E. coli or PBS aspiration, we measured systemic growth, lung injury score, and lung inflammation in neonates and juveniles ( A). Peak inflammation occurred at 48 h post E. coli in both age groups ( B). No significant mortality was associated with this sublethal E. coli injury in either age group, in contrast to a more severe model of E. coli pneumonia associated with significant mortality in neonates. Neonatal mice infected with E. coli gained less weight over the course of infection than age-matched controls ( C) but still gained weight overall, in contrast to a more severe E. coli pneumonia model where neonatal mice did not gain weight within 48 h of infection when aspirated with E. coli. Total lung injury scores for infected mice were greater at all time points through 72 h when compared to age-matched controls ( D). Injury score variance was significantly different between neonates and juveniles at 72 h post-infection (p = 0.031, Levene’s test), indicating that neonatal mice were less likely to fully recover from E. coli infection at this time compared to juvenile counterparts. Significant increases in lung Ifng, Ccl2, Tnfa, and Il6 expression were found in neonates and juveniles post E. coli compared to age-matched controls. Juveniles, compared to neonates, had significantly higher expression of Ccl2 at 72 h post-infection (p < 0.05) ( E–1J). 

## Structural changes in adult lung in young mice challenged with E. coli
To determine if young mice challenged with E. coli led to structural changes in the adult lung, we aged-out neonatal and juvenile mice to 6–8 weeks of age. We found that adult mice, previously aspirated with E. coli as either neonates or juveniles, had significantly larger mean chord lengths (MCLs) compared to age-matched control mice ( K; A and S1B). These findings indicate that acute lung injury in young mice caused by E. coli pneumonia can lead to airspace enlargement in adult lung.

## Dynamic changes in immune cell populations post E. coli in lungs of young mice
To determine if age-dependent differences in lung immune responses existed in young mice, we employed droplet-based scRNA-seq at 48 and 96 h post-aspiration with E. coli or PBS from lungs of neonatal and juvenile mice ( A). These time points were based on prior studies establishing peak infection and recovery periods. , , A third group of unaspirated PND5 and PND12 mice was sacrificed at PND7 and PND14, respectively. We identified stronger similarity in cell-type proportions and global Pearson correlation metrics in unaspirated (room air) and PBS aspirated mice at 48 and 96 h post-aspiration than between any of these conditions and E. coli aspirated mice at either 48 or 96 h post-aspiration ( A–S2D), though some gene expression differences can still be identified among these control conditions, likely due to a mixture of batch-to-batch and sample-to-sample variability ( ). Despite these small differences, we merged these control conditions together to serve as a larger unified control group (“unaffected”) for each age group ( E). Thus, six groups were used for comparisons that included neonatal and juvenile “unaffected” (48–96 h air/PBS), “affected” (48 h E. coli), and “recovered” (96 h E. coli) ( B and 2C). 
After quality control filtering, 90,883 cells were manually annotated into a joint scRNA-seq atlas with cell-type labels based on the expression of known marker genes ( A–S3E; ). All major cell-type compartments were represented in the scRNA-seq data ( C), and all cell types were well represented in both ages and under all experimental conditions ( F–S3I), except for the developmentally transient SCMFs, which have been shown to undergo apoptosis before P12. , Activated macrophages and neutrophils were also not present in any significant proportion in the unaffected neonatal and juvenile mice.
At 48 h post-infection, myeloid cells in both neonatal and juvenile lungs were increased in total number ( D) compared to both unaffected and recovered lungs. This total increase in myeloid cell number was driven primarily by increases in activated neutrophil and interstitial macrophage population sizes. Interstitial macrophages have previously been shown to expand in response to bacterial DNA and are highly phagocytic. , Resting alveolar macrophages were largely ablated by 48 h post-infection, with some recovery at 96 h post-infection. This transient ablation of resident macrophages during the early stages of inflammation has been previously described as “macrophage disappearance reaction.” M1-activated alveolar and interstitial macrophages were present in similar proportions at both 48 and 96 h post-infection. These results correspond with previous flow cytometric observations of myeloid cell population changes in this system and confirm that both neonatal and juvenile mice mount a robust but transient myeloid cell immune response to sublethal E. coli infection in the lung. 
In contrast, lymphoid cells were less well represented in neonatal lungs across all experimental conditions, relative to juvenile lungs ( E). We found that B cells and CD4+ T cells were the primary drivers of this observed difference, both found in higher quantities in juvenile lungs. In response to infection, NK cells and Th17 cells expanded in both neonates and juveniles at 48 h post-infection with persistent expansion at 96 h, suggestive of a pro-recovery milieu. 

## Dynamic myeloid cell responses to E. coli
Using scRNA-seq, we characterized the dynamic transcriptional changes of alveolar and interstitial macrophages post E. coli infection and recovery. We re-projected alveolar macrophages, interstitial macrophages, M1-activated alveolar, and interstitial macrophages from the jointly labeled scRNA-seq dataset ( A), into a new UMAP, split across age and condition ( B). We found that interstitial macrophages shifted from a resting state in unaffected mice to an activated M1 interstitial macrophage state, distinguished by increased expression of Rsad2 and Inhba ( A). Alveolar macrophages were largely absent at 48 h post-infection in both neonates and juveniles, whereas M1-activated alveolar and interstitial macrophages showed an increase at 48 h post E. coli ( B). At 96 h post E. coli, the alveolar macrophages in both age groups were increased in number compared to the 48-h time point. To identify age-related differences in macrophage gene expression profiles across the course of infection, we performed differential gene expression tests between neonatal and juvenile alveolar and interstitial macrophages in unaffected lungs ( C and 3D) and between their M1-activated counterparts at 48 h post-infection ( E and 3F). In unaffected mice, we found that the expression of Gsn, the gene encoding gelsolin, was significantly increased in neonatal alveolar macrophages relative to those in juveniles ( C). Exogenous gelsolin was previously shown to attenuate inflammation and alveolar hypoplasia in a neonatal model of hyperoxia. 
In unaffected controls, juvenile alveolar macrophages had higher expression of Rora compared to neonates. Rora induces upregulation of IkappaB alpha, a major inhibitor of the NF-kB signaling pathway. Juvenile interstitial macrophages from the unaffected lung also had higher expression of Ccnd3, which competitively inhibits M1-M2 of the cell cycle to impair virus production of influenza-infected cells. These findings suggest that juvenile myeloid cells are more poised to control pathogen growth and regulate inflammation compared to neonates.

## Neonatal M1-activated myeloid cells expressed robust pro-inflammatory responses when challenged with E. coli
Compared to juveniles, neonatal M1 alveolar macrophages at 48 h post-infection had higher expression of Mmp12 ( E); a gene that encodes a matrix metalloproteinase involved in the alveolar macrophage injury response. Higher expression of Slc7a2 ( E and 3F) was also found in neonatal M1-activated alveolar and interstitial macrophages. Slc7a2 is a gene that encodes an L-arginine transporter solute carrier and increases inflammatory macrophage activation by modulating arginase activity. , Expression of Saa3, a marker of inflammation activation in mice, was also higher in neonatal M1 interstitial macrophages compared to juveniles ( F). Together, these results indicate that neonatal M1 macrophages mount a strong pro-inflammatory response against E. coli but, unlike juveniles, are less poised to express regulatory responses that constrain inflammation.

## Dynamic neutrophil responses to E. coli
We were able to capture a robust cohort of neutrophils in our scRNA-seq experiments from both neonates and juveniles. Neutrophils were distinguished from other myeloid cells by their relatively low gene detection rate ( A) and their expression of S100a8 and Stfa2l1 ( A). As expected, activated neutrophils appear in significant numbers only after infection ( C) and are distinguished from resting neutrophils by their expression of Inhba and Rsad2 ( A). Neutrophils were selected from the jointly annotated scRNA-seq dataset ( A), and re-projected. RNA velocity analysis was then performed on spliced and unspliced mRNA counts ( B) to model their activation as a smooth process across a latent time ( C). 
Qualitatively, the RNA velocity vector field indicates that resting neutrophils proceed toward either an activated state or toward maintenance of their resting potential ( B). A full dynamical model of mRNA transcription was employed to uncover a latent time underlying this activation process ( C). Neutrophils along the process from resting state to activated state were ordered, and transcriptome-wide gene likelihood testing was performed to identify the top 20 genes that displayed the most dynamic changes in RNA velocity ( D). In the absence of prior knowledge, these genes can be interpreted as likely drivers of the neutrophil activation process, and indeed, many of the genes identified a priori in this analysis are known to be important in this context. For example, Il1a and Il1b are both known to be upregulated in neutrophils in response to LPS stimulation and their increased rates of mRNA transcription track with the neutrophil activation process, with Il1b peaking in expression at approximately the midpoint of the latent time and Il1a peaking near the endpoint ( D). Some genes, such as Il1b and Casp4, show positive RNA velocity early in the activation process and negative velocities toward the end, indicating that these genes are likely no longer being actively transcribed by activated neutrophils ( F and 4G). Conversely, other genes such as Il1a and Cd247 (the gene encoding PD-L1) show only positive RNA velocities and do so only in the activated neutrophil state ( E and 4H).
While neonatal and juvenile neutrophils showed striking similarities in the top dynamically varying genes as modeled by RNA velocity ( C–S4F), some genes were differentially expressed between the two age groups in activated neutrophils at 48 h post-infection. Alcam1 (CD166), a ligand responsible for inhibiting endothelial tube formation and activating a variety of T cell responses via its interaction with CD6, and Tgfbr1, which encodes the receptor for transforming growth factor β 1 (TGFB1), a ligand that stimulates neutrophil chemotaxis, were both upregulated in the activated neutrophils of juvenile mice ( I). Performing over-representation analysis (ORA) on these DEGs against the Gene Ontology (GO), Biological Process (BP), we found that neonatal activated neutrophils upregulated gene pathways associated with innate immune response, defense response to other organisms, and response to bacteria ( J), indicative of a strong inflammatory immune response. In contrast, juvenile activated neutrophils upregulated genes associated with positive regulation of macroautophagy, regulation of response to cytokine stimulus, and tissue remodeling ( K). These findings suggest that, in contrast to the neonate, the juvenile activated neutrophils respond to post-infection through a balance between defense and homeostasis and invoke a regulatory autophagy response to infection.

## E. coli disrupts the proliferation of neonatal AT2 cells
AT2 cell proliferation plays a crucial role in alveologenesis while also maintaining alveolar homeostasis, serving as facultative progenitors for AT1 cells, and expressing immune response genes when challenged by lung pathogens. To further interrogate the neonatal response of AT2 cells to E. coli, we characterized gene expression in AT2 cells at 48 and 96 h post-infection. Distal alveolar epithelial cells (AT1 and AT2 cells) previously identified in the jointly labeled scRNA-seq dataset were isolated and reprojected ( A). In unaffected juvenile but not neonatal AT2 cells, Socs2, a gene that encodes a cytokine signaling suppressor, was highly expressed ( B and 5C), indicating a readiness to regulate inflammation. Alternatively, in unaffected neonatal but not juvenile AT2 cells, Elf5, a gene critical for specification and differentiation of epithelial cells during alveologenesis, was upregulated ( C). At 48 h post-infection, neonatal AT2 cells had higher expression of the Notch ligand Dlk1 (delta-like 1 homolog) compared to juveniles ( D). DLK1 is essential for AT2 to AT1 transition during alveologenesis and lung repair and when deleted leads to accumulation of transitional AT1-AT2 cells. 
Ros1, a gene involved in epithelial cell differentiation, was also upregulated in neonatal AT2 cells at 48 h post-infection. In juveniles, genes associated with protein targeting to the vacuole involved in autophagy, regulation of type 2 interferon-mediated signaling pathway, and MHC class I protein complex assembly were upregulated at 48 h post-infection relative to neonates ( E). These findings underscore the readiness of juvenile AT2 cells to respond to exogenous insults, whereas neonatal AT2 cells are more transcriptionally driven toward alveolar growth and epithelial cell differentiation pathways. 
To more comprehensively profile the transcriptomes of AT2 cells at peak infection, we sorted primary AT2 cells from mice at 48 h post E. coli or PBS and performed bulk RNA-seq. Principal-component analysis of AT2 cells showed strong separation by age and treatment between neonates and juveniles at 48 h post E. coli or PBS challenge ( F). Similar to scRNAseq, neonatal AT2 cells post-infection expressed higher levels of Dlk1 when compared to juveniles ( G). Mki67, a marker of cell proliferation, was also higher in the neonatal AT2 cells. In response to E. coli, both neonatal and juvenile AT2 cells expressed higher levels of Saa3 compared to age-matched controls ( A and S5B), indicating that E. coli induces an inflammatory response in both age groups.
To characterize the proliferative dynamics of AT2 cells in response to E. coli, 3 h EdU pulse-chase labeling was performed and EdU+ AT2 cells (LAMP3+) were quantified in neonatal and juvenile lungs at 48 h post-infection. The unaffected neonates had a higher % EdU+LAMP3+ cells compared to unaffected juveniles ( H and 5I). Post E. coli, neonates had a modest drop in the % of EdU+LAMP3+ cells compared to age-matched controls, while juveniles underwent a modest but significant increase in % EdU+LAMP3+ cells post E. coli, compared to age-matched controls. These findings indicate that the highly proliferative neonatal AT2s respond to lung injury by a modest but significant decrease in cell growth, whereas the more quiescent juvenile AT2s respond to lung injury by a modest but significant increase in cell growth.

## E. coli decreases the number of SCMFs in neonatal lungs
During alveologenesis, SCMFs migrate to form secondary crests along the distal alveolar epithelium of neonatal lungs. , Since E. coli suppresses AT2 cell proliferation in the neonate, we sought to determine if the SCMF population size and transcriptional dynamics were also affected by E. coli in the neonate. SCMFs and Acta2+ mesenchymal cell types (ductal myofibroblasts and airway smooth muscle) previously identified in the jointly labeled scRNA-seq dataset ( B) were isolated and reprojected ( A). Proliferating SCMFs were subsequently identified and annotated based on increased expression of Mki67. , At 48 h post-infection, we found a decrease in SCMFs and proliferating SCMFs by total number per sample and by their proportion relative to all Acta2+ mesenchymal cells per sample. Some recovery of SCMF number was found at 96 h post-infection ( B). 
We next examined ligand-receptor interactions between AT2 cells and lung mesenchymal cells. Using squidpy ligand-receptor analysis, our scRNA-seq data were pseudobulked by splitting across each cell type. Putative ligand-receptor interactions were then identified between cell types and within each age group and condition ( ). In the unaffected neonatal lung, we identified an interaction between Fgf1 expressed in AT2 cells and Fgfr4 expressed in SCMF/proliferating SCMFs; however, this interaction was absent at 48 h post E. coli infection ( C and 6D). Fgfr4 encodes a receptor tyrosine-protein kinase, which is responsive to a variety of fetal growth factors (FGFs), including FGF1, which affects cell proliferation, differentiation, and migration, , indicating that its loss in SCMFs during the peak of E. coli infection may disrupt postnatal lung growth. Expression of Fgfr4 in SCMFs recovered partially by 96 h post-infection. Taken together, these studies show that E. coli infection in the neonatal lung impacts SCMF number and gene expression relevant to SCMF function, which may aberrantly impact distal lung morphogenesis.

## E. coli induces inflammation in PDGFRα+ lung fibroblasts
To characterize mesenchymal responses in our E. coli pneumonia model, we selected the Col1a1+ mesenchyme in our scRNA-seq data, excluding Pdgfrb+ pericytes, vascular smooth muscle, and Upk3b+ mesothelium. We then plotted expression of Saa3, a known marker of inflammatory fibroblast activity in mouse lungs, , in neonates and juveniles in unaffected controls and at 48 and 96 h post E. coli ( A). At 48 h post E. coli, we observed upregulation of Saa3 in adventitial (Mfap5-PDGFRα+) and alveolar (Wnt2- PDGFRα+) fibroblasts ( A and 7B). In juvenile adventitial and alveolar fibroblasts, a modest increase in Saa3 and Cxcl12 (a leukocyte chemoattractant) was still observed at 96 h E. coli ( B). 
Using thick lung tissue slices from neonatal and juvenile mice, we found increased expression of SAA3 protein throughout the lung of neonatal and juvenile mice at 48 h post E. coli compared to PBS ( C). We also performed bulk RNAseq on lung fibroblasts isolated from neonatal and juvenile mice ( D). Neonatal fibroblasts from E. coli-challenged lungs showed higher Saa3 expression compared to juvenile E. coli fibroblasts, in addition to increased expression of other acute-phase immune reactants such as Ifitm1, which has been shown to be increased in response to LPS and mycobacterium tuberculosis infection ( E). However, both neonatal and juvenile fibroblasts show increased Saa3 expression at 48 h post E. coli, compared to age-matched controls ( A and S6B). These studies demonstrate that both neonatal and juvenile mesenchyme exhibit lung inflammation at 48 h post E. coli; however, cell-specific differences in inflammation were found between the two age groups.

## Activated macrophages induce Saa3 and Il6 expression in PDGFRα+ lung fibroblasts
To determine if proximity to activated lung macrophages can induce inflammation in PDGFRα+ lung fibroblasts, we isolated PDGFRα+ fibroblasts and CD68+ monocytes/macrophages from the lungs of naive mice. Lung mono/macs were exposed to either PBS or LPS for 24 h ( A). After macrophage stimulation, fibroblasts and macrophages were co-cultured together for 72 h. The PDGFRα+ fibroblasts co-cultured with LPS-stimulated macrophages demonstrated increased expression of SAA3 protein relative to PBS-stimulated macrophage controls by both fluorescence intensity of SAA3 in PDGFRα+ GFP+ fibroblasts and by the number of SAA3+ PDGFRα+ GFP+ fibroblasts ( B and 8C). From multiple co-culture wells, cells were sorted, total RNA was extracted, and RT-qPCR was performed for the inflammatory markers Saa3 and Il6. Compared to PBS-treated controls, both fibroblasts and macrophages extracted from co-cultures with LPS-stimulated macrophages displayed significantly increased expression of Saa3 and Il6 ( D). Taken together, these findings indicate that activated macrophages can induce inflammation in unstimulated lung PDGFRα+ fibroblasts. These in vitro results support our in vivo studies in which we found that neonatal and juvenile alveolar and adventitial PDGFRα+ lung fibroblasts display inflammatory activity post E. coli infection. 

## Discussion
Gram-negative pathogens are a leading cause of severe pneumonia in young children. To uncover immune response differences that underlie the vulnerability of the very young to pneumonia, we employed a murine model of E. coli pneumonia. E. coli elicited immune cell transcriptional responses that differed between neonates (early alveologenesis) and juveniles (late alveologenesis). Although both neonatal and juvenile M1 macrophages expressed a robust inflammatory response to E. coli, only juvenile macrophages expressed genes that regulate inflammation during homeostasis. The readiness of the juvenile mac to respond to inflammation was supported by lung injury scores, in which juveniles had faster recovery at 72 h post E. coli. Similarly, both neonatal and juvenile lung neutrophils expressed robust inflammatory signatures to E. coli; however, juvenile neutrophils were more likely to upregulate gene pathways involved in tissue remodeling, autophagy, and regulatory responses to cytokines post E. coli. Lung-resident cells also showed age-dependent response differences to E. coli. Neonatal AT2 cells in control mice were approximately four times as proliferative as AT2 cells in juveniles, indicative of a higher proliferative state. However, E. coli decreased AT2 cell proliferation in neonates, while juveniles responded with a modest increase. The increase in AT2 cell proliferation in juvenile mice was associated with upregulation of autophagy pathways and pathways that regulate type 2 interferon genes. These studies show that E. coli pneumonia causes differential age-dependent immune and resident cell responses in young mice with neonates less poised to regulate lung inflammation and repair compared to juveniles, contributing to the age-dependent vulnerability of neonates to Gram-negative pneumonia.
During homeostasis, neonatal AT2 cells rapidly proliferate to support postnatal alveolar growth necessary for survival. However, proliferating cells are especially vulnerable to damage, negatively impacting cell viability and function post injury. In neonates, we found a decline in cell proliferation in neonatal AT2 cells at 48 h post E. coli, whereas juvenile AT2 cells had a modest increase while expressing transcriptional signatures of autophagy and repair. Our findings suggest that developmental differences in injury responses exist between neonates and juveniles, with the neonate primarily driven by proliferative responses and the juvenile more toward injury repair. Age-related differences in gene expression were also found during homeostasis. Juvenile AT2 cells expressed higher levels of suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (Socs2), compared to neonates. SOCS2 protein regulates inflammation by inhibiting NF-kB pathways, , potentially mitigating inflammation in juvenile AT2 cells during E. coli challenge. Findings from our study indicate that juvenile AT2 cells are primed toward injury repair responses, whereas neonatal AT2s are transcriptionally programmed toward cell proliferation. This may in part explain the increased susceptibility of the neonatal lung to poorer health outcomes when challenged with Gram-negative pathogens such as E. coli. This response may also be generalizable to other respiratory pathogens or insults that occur in the neonatal lung.
Our study also revealed that E. coli induces inflammation in mesenchymal compartments of both neonate and juvenile lungs. We found increased expression of Saa3, a pro-inflammatory gene in adventitial and alveolar PDGFRα+ fibroblasts post E. coli, with the highest expression in neonates at 48 h. Using in vitro co-culture experiments, we demonstrated that activated macs in the absence of a triggering agent were sufficient to induce inflammation of PDGFRα+ lung fibroblasts. Furthermore, we found that SCMFs, unique to early alveologenesis (neonate), were decreased in number at 48 h post E. coli and that ligand-receptor expression of Fgf1 (AT2 cells) and its receptor Fgfr4 on SCMFs was disrupted at 48 h post E. coli. AT2 cell expression of Fgf1 has been shown to stimulate DNA synthesis, whereas SCMFs have been shown to support alveolar epithelial progenitor cells during early alveologenesis through the secretion of trophic molecules. Disrupting AT2 cell and SCMF interactions necessary for early postnatal alveologenesis may account in part for the long-term effects of early lung injury on alveolar and airway structure in later life. Taken together, these findings help to underscore the origins of adverse health and long-term outcomes caused by early-life lung injury.
Both neonatal and juvenile mice had a near absence of alveolar macrophages at 48 h post E. coli with partial repopulation at 96 h post-infection. Loss of macrophage post injury has been previously described and has been referred to as a “macrophage disappearance reaction.” Although critical in the early stages of bacterial clearance, alveolar macrophages are susceptible to apoptosis during an infection which likely accounts for their disappearance in our model. , , With the depletion of alveolar macrophages at 48 h post E. coli, we found an increase in the number of other innate immune cells, which included lung interstitial macrophages and neutrophils. Using RNA velocity analysis, we characterized the temporal dynamics of neutrophil activation in response to E. coli infection. We observed that neonatal neutrophils exhibited a pronounced inflammatory response, evidenced by their upregulation of genes associated with positive regulation of defense response and innate immune response. In contrast, juvenile neutrophils favored an autophagy-dominant response, as indicated by upregulation of genes associated with positive regulation of macroautophagy, regulation of response to cytokine stimulus, and tissue remodeling. These findings suggest that age-dependent differences in neutrophil activation may contribute to the observed disparities in severity and duration of E. coli pneumonia in neonates versus juveniles in our model.
In summary, we have shown that E. coli pneumonia evokes age-dependent differential immune and resident cell responses in young mice. The acute inflammatory immune response in neonatal mice associates with a decrease in AT2 cell proliferation and transiently disrupts AT2-SCMF cell interactions needed to promote alveologenesis during a period of rapid lung growth in early life. In contrast juvenile immune and lung-resident cells are transcriptionally poised to respond to lung injury, dampening the acute inflammatory effects of E. coli on the lung. This study highlights how early-life immune ontogeny impacts disease susceptibility, opening avenues for future hypothesis-driven research for identifying therapeutic targets to enhance resistance to respiratory infections in the most vulnerable populations.

## Limitations of the study
In this study, we used a sublethal model of E. coli pneumonia in young mice. This approach allowed us to examine 48 and 96 h time points post lung injury and the effects of early life E. coli pneumonia on lung structure in adult mice. However, in using a sublethal approach, we observed a degree of heterogeneity among the individual mice. Examples of this include variability in histological injury scoring ( D), mean chord-length measurements ( K), and whole-lung quantitative reverse-transcription PCR measurements of inflammatory marker gene expression ( F–1J) in the mice treated with E. coli. Although the use of greater numbers of animals for each experiment may have reduced this variability, our studies were able to demonstrate significant differences in injury responses between neonates and juveniles at both 48 and 96 h time points post injury and between control and treatment groups. Another limitation of our study was the pooling of multiple lungs for single-cell RNA-sequencing for each of the experimental conditions, leading to a lack of identifiable experimental replicates in these scRNA-seq data. Although not available to us at the time of our experiments, the use of newer sample multiplexing strategies, such as on-chip multiplexing or lipid/antibody-oligo cell tagging, , may have enabled us to better characterize injury heterogeneity among individual mice.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Sharon A. McGrath-Morrow (mcgrathmos@chop.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability
Raw and processed bulk RNA-seq and scRNA-seq gene expression data are available via the NIH Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession IDs GEO: GSE304531 and GEO: GSE295484, respectively. This paper does not report original code. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We thank the Pathology Core Laboratory, the Flow Cytometry Core Laboratory, and the Center for Advanced Genomics at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute for providing services. This work was supported by the 10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health (Bethesda, MD, USA)—S.A.M.: R01 HL114800; J.A.Z.: R35GM146835.

## Author contributions
S.N.M., conceptualization, formal analysis, investigation, software, data curation, visualization, and writing – original draft, review, and editing; J.V.P., investigation, validation, formal analysis, and visualization; D.A.V., investigation, validation, formal analysis, and visualization; A.J.T., investigation and validation; T.L.V., investigation and validation; B.D.S., investigation and writing – review & editing; J.A.Z., investigation, validation, resources, writing – review & editing, project administration, and funding acquisition; S.A.M.-M., conceptualization, supervision, resources, writing – review & editing, project administration, and funding acquisition; all authors approved the final manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## Animal procedures
All animal procedures complied with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals recommendations. The animal protocol (IAC 23–001369) was approved by the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Wild-type C57BL/6, timed pregnant (E13.5) females were purchased from Charles River Laboratories, US Facilities. Litters were then used for subsequent experiments and housed with the dam, under standard BSL-2 housing conditions, with food and water available ad libitum. Mice of both sexes and littermates were used in all experiments.

## Method details

## Mouse weighing and harvest
Neonate-aged (PND 5–6) and juvenile-aged (PND 12–13) pups were intratracheally aspirated with E. coli (Seattle 1946, serotype O6, ATCC 25922) or PBS as previously described. Neonates were aspirated with 2.4–2.6e6 CFU of E. coli suspended in 10 μl of PBS and juveniles with 2.4–2.6e6 CFU of E. coli suspended in 15 μl of PBS. Mice were weighed and sacrificed daily, up to 96 h post-aspiration. Select mice were aged between 6 and 8 weeks of age. Lungs were harvested for RNA and histology. Lungs were inflated with 2% PFA and allowed to fix for 24 h at 4°C.

## Lung tissue histology and injury scoring
Fixed lung tissue underwent processing, paraffin embedding, and sectioning into 5 μm cuts prior to hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Images were acquired using a DMi8 Leica epifluorescence microscope. Histopathological scoring was adapted from work previously described and performed in a blinded fashion by two investigators. Briefly, sections were scored on a scale from 0 to 3 (0 representing no inflammation and 3 representing severe inflation) for the following parameters: bronchiolitis, alveolitis, perivasculitis, vasculitis, and consolidation. The sum of these parameters represents the cumulative inflammation score. The percentage of lesioned areas within each tissue section was also evaluated. The values represent scoring across the entirety of the H&E section.

## Mean chord length (MCL) measurement
MCL was measured in an automated fashion using a method similar to that previously described. In brief, a binary image of horizontal lines that were vertically spaced 1 per 25 μm was generated to match the dimensions of a thresholded 20× image of H&E stained distal lung tissue. Lines were split into chords based on their intersection with the thresholded H&E image (where they cross alveolar walls), and all chord lengths were measured, excluding those chords that touched image edges. The mean chord length of each image was calculated, and mean chord length measurements were averaged across all H&E tissue sections derived from a single animal.

## Immunofluorescence imaging
Sectioning and staining of 100 μm thick lung tissue slices for imaging were carried out as described previously. Briefly, lungs were inflated and stained overnight in 2% or 4% PFA before washing three times with ice-cold PBS for 30min each. Lungs were cut into smaller transverse sections and embedded in 4% low melting agarose (#IB70050, IBI Scientific). Embedded tissue was sectioned at 150–200 μm thickness using a Leica Vibratome (VT1000S). Sections were permeabilized in PBS+1% Triton X-100 for 1h at room temperature. Tissue sections were stained with primary antibodies (SAA3) in PBS +0.3% Triton X-100 + 1% BSA (#B2518, Sigma-Aldrich)] for 48h on a rocker at 4°C. Subsequently, tissue was washed in PBS+1% Triton X-100 three times at room temperature for 30min each. The tissue and secondary antibodies were incubated for 24h at 4°C on a rocker in PBS +0.3% Triton X-100 + 1% BSA. The sections were further cleared with Scale A2 (4M urea, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol) and Scale B4 (8M urea, 0.1% Triton X-100) for seven days each at 4°C each before imaging by confocal microscopy as described previously. , 

## Lung tissue cell dissociation for scRNA-seq
Mice aspirated with E. coli (treatment group) or PBS (control) or were sacrificed at specified time points for the data (48 and 96 h post-aspiration). A third group of unaspirated mice were used as a second control group. For each time point and condition, lungs were harvested and homogenized from n = 2–4 mice. Homogenate from each lung was enzymatically digested in 5U/mL Dispase (Corning 354235), 1.2 mg/mL Collagenase Type I (Worthington LS004194), and 0.001 mg/mL DNase 1 (StemCell Tech. 07900) solution for 15–30 min at 37°C with constant agitation. Digested lungs were batched and filtered through a 100 μM filter into FBS. The mixture was spun down at 300g for 5 min and the pellet was resuspended in ACK lysis buffer for removal of red blood cells. The mixture was spun down and resuspended in 10% FBS in DPBS and filtered through a 40-μM filter and then resuspended again and filtered through a 30 μM filter. Cell concentration was determined using a hemocytometer and the sample was diluted to a final concentration of 1200 cells/uL for 10× Genomics 3′-GEX processing and library preparation. Libraries were sequenced using an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 100 cycle flowcell to a target read depth of 25,000 reads/cell. The single-cell suspension was loaded onto the 10× Chromium Controller and libraries were prepared according to the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ v3.1 Dual Index Library protocol.

## Bulk RNA-sequencing of AT2 cells and PDGFRa+ lung fibroblasts
AT2 and lung fibroblast cells were isolated from neonatal and juvenile lungs at 48 h post E. coli or PBS (n = 4 for each condition, each sample contained 2–3 pooled lungs). Lungs were dissociated using 1.2 mg/mL Collagenase Type 1 (Worthington Biochemical, LS004197), 5U/mL Dispase (Corning, 354235), 0.01 mg/mL DNAse I (Stem Cell Technologies, 07900), 1× PBS). ACK lysis was added to lung suspension for 2 min. All lungs were prepared for fibroblast isolation by sorting for PDGFR-alpha-APC antibody. AT2 cells were isolated by FACS sorting using CD45-APC/Cy7, CD104-PE, and EpCAM (CD326-FITC).

## Bulk RNA-sequencing analysis
Reads in FASTQ format were aligned to the NCBI RefSeq mouse reference genome (mm10/GRCm38) and quantified at the gene level using the nf-core/rnaseq v3.8.1 Nextflow pipeline. Differential gene expression analysis was performed using PyDESeq2. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified between groups using the default results test and were called with a false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of FDR <0.01 and a minimum log2-fold change (LFC) of magnitude 1. Variance stabilized counts used for plotting and tertiary analysis were generated using the default vst transformation. Tertiary processing of bulk-seq data was performed using python and scanpy.

## RT-qPCR of whole lung tissue
All tissue samples were lysed on Qiagen TissueLyser II (30 Hz for 2 min) with 3.2 mm dia stainless steel beads and TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, 15596026). The lysate was transferred and stored in −20 °C until use for RNA extraction. RNA was extracted as described in the user guide for TRIzol Reagent, purified using silica columns (Qiagen, 74136), and stored at −80 °C. SuperScript IV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, 18091050) was used to synthesize cDNA with 2.5 μg RNA input per reaction. qPCR was performed on all samples with a cDNA input equivalent to 60 ng of RNA per reaction well. Three technical replicates were allocated for each biological replicate, and the assay was performed using SYBR Green (Applied Biosystems, A25742) and Gapdh for housekeeping gene. All PCR primers were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc.: Tnfa (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.12575861), Ifng (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.41769240), Il6 (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.13354106), Ccl2 (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.42151692), Cxcl10 (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.43575827), Ccl20 (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.12466372). Relative quantification (2−ΔΔCT) was performed for each gene to derive the fold-change expression over control (PBS).

## Single-cell RNA-sequencing analysis
Reads in FASTQ format were aligned to the NCBI RefSeq GRCm39 genome, and reads with unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) were quantified at the gene level using STAR-solo, with soloUMIdedup=”1 MM_CR”, soloUMIfiltering=”MultiGeneUMI_CR”, and soloCellFilter=”EmptyDrops_CR”. Ambient RNA was removed from the generated counts matrices using the scvi-tools implementation of scAR. , Ambient-corrected counts matrices were subsequently processed using scanpy and anndata. Cells were filtered to include only those cells with more than 493 unique genes detected/cell (the 5th percentile), fewer than 5910 unique genes detected/cell (the 95th percentile), and fewer than 15% of UMIs attributed to mitochondrial genes. Genes were filtered from the combined dataset if detected in fewer than 21 cells (0.1% of total number of unfiltered cells). Putative cell doublets were identified and removed from each batch independently using the scvi-tools implementation of the SOLO doublet identification model. 
Gene expression was calculated from scAR-corrected UMI-counts by first normalizing to CPM using the sc.pp.normalize_total function with target_sum=1e6 and then calculating ln(CPM +1) using the sc.pp.log1p function. The top 2000 highly variable genes in the dataset were identified using the sc.pp.highly_variable_genes function, with flavor=”seurat_v3″ and n_top_genes=2000. An initial principal component analysis was performed using the sc.tl.pca function with svd_solver=”arpack”. This PCA was subsequently batch-corrected using the pytorch implementation of the harmony batch correction algorithm. A cell-cell neighborhood was calculated using the sc.pp.neighbors function, with n_neighbors=int(0.25 ∗ sqrt(adata.n_obs)), and this cell-cell neighborhood was used to generate a 2-dimensional UMAP using the sc.tl.umap function with init_pos=”spectral”. Finally, cell clustering was performed using the leiden algorithm via the sc.tl.leiden function with resolution=1. 
Putative cell compartment (and subsequently cell type) labels were assigned to cells using the scvi-tools implementation of the SCANVI model. Briefly, a small set of cells were used as ‘seeds’ for each of the expected cell type categories, identified by their maximal expression of established marker genes for each cell type. The gene expression profiles of these ‘seed’ cells were then used to build the SCANVI model and predict putative cell type labels of unlabeled cells in the dataset. After this labeling step, cell type labels were collapsed on a per-cell-cluster (leiden cluster) basis to refine the final cell type labels using the additional information provided by cell-cell neighborhood network clustering.
Testing for differential gene expression was performed using the scanpy st.tl.rank_genes_groups function with test=’wilcoxon’. Over-representation analysis (ORA) was performed on genes with resulting FDR <0.05 using gProfiler, with runtime options ordered query, only annotated genes, g:SCS threshold < 0.05, and max term size = 5000.
RNA-velocity analysis: Spliced and unspliced counts were identified from raw sequencing reads in FASTQ format using STAR-solo with --soloFeatures=Gene GeneFull SJ Velocyto. Spliced/unspliced counts matrices were then processed using scvelo. , RNA-velocity moments and velocities were calculated using the scv.tl.velocity function with mode=’stochastic’. Velocity graphs, UMAP embedding streams, gene dynamics, and latent time were calculated/inferred using the scv.tl.velocity_graph, scv.pl.velocity_embedding_stream, scv.tl.recover_dynamics, and scv.tl.latent_time functions, respectively, with default parameters. Top dynamically regulated genes were identified using the calculated adata.var[‘fit_likelihood’] column, selecting those genes with the greatest fit likelihoods.

## In vitro fibroblast-macrophage co-culture system
PDGFRα-GFP+ fibroblasts that were previously harvested and frozen from 12days old mice (The Jackson Laboratory: PdgfraH2B:EGFP, Stock no. 007669) were plated and cultured. Macrophages were isolated from whole lung harvested from 5 to 6 mice, aged 8–10 weeks. Lungs were minced and transferred into a Dissociation Solution (1.2 mg/mL Collagenase Type 1 (Worthington Biochemical, LS004197), 5U/mL Dispase (Corning, 354235), 0.01 mg/mL DNAse I (Stem Cell Technologies, 07900), 1× PBS). The tissue digestion was carried out at 37 °C for about 30 min after which the solution was filtered multiple times to exclude out undigested fragments. After a single-cell suspension was obtained, cell solutions were stained for CD45 (at 1:100 dilution, BioLegend, 103105) and CD64 (at 1:200 dilution, BioLegend, 161007). Draq7 (1:1000, BioLegend, 424001) or 7-AAD (1:200, Invitrogen, 00-6993-50) was used as the live-dead stain. Cells were sorted for DRAQ7/7-AAD- CD45+ CD64+ population on a BD FACSJazz instrument until >1 M cells were collected. Soon after, the largely monocyte-macrophage cell solution was resuspended in RPMI 1640 media containing 10% serum and 50 ng/mL murine M-CSF (PeproTech, 315-02). Cells were plated and cultured for a period of 3–5 days at which point, the culture media was replaced with either lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-treated (50 ng/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, L2630) or PBS-treated culture media (control) in the designated wells, and continued culture for 24h.
The LPS-stimulated and PBS control macrophages were harvested from the culture plates in two consecutive steps: (1) incubation in ice-cold 10 mM EDTA 1× PBS buffer for 15 min, stabilizing with equal vol. of macrophage culture media, and collection of dissociated cells, (2) the remaining attached cells were incubated with TrypLE Express reagent (Gibco, 12605010) for 5–10 min with vigorous pipetting to aid complete detachment from the surface. Following the collection of the detached cells, cells were spun, resuspended into macrophage culture media, and plated 1:1 with the PDGFRα GFP+ fibroblasts into wells on a 12-well chambered slide (ibidi GmbH, 81201), with a total of 20,000 cells per well. Cells were co-cultured in macrophage culture media for 2 days before preparing them for immunofluorescent staining or RT-qPCR.
For post co-culture staining, cells were fixed in ice-cold 2% paraformaldehyde for 1 h on ice, permeabilized, blocked and stained with SAA3 primary antibody (abcam, ab231680) at 1:500 dilution in blocking solution (1% BSA, 1% Triton X-100 in 1× PBS), followed by a wash and incubation in secondary antibody at 1:1000 dilution. The slides were washed, DAPI-stained (1 μg/mL), mounted with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, H-1400), and imaged on a Leica DMi8 microscope at 40× magnification using Leica K5 sCMOS camera. Image analysis was performed using ImageJ and the integrated density of the pixel values within bounds defined by DAPI-stained nuclei was measured as a proxy to quantify and compare SAA3 protein expression between the LPS-treated and control co-cultures. The Integrated Density values were min-max normalized across the sample pairs before plotting the results. The SAA3+ cell counts were obtained manually.
For post co-culture RT-qPCR, cells were harvested using EGTA and TrypLE Express as described above and resuspended into 100 μL of 1× Ca2+/Mg2+-free PBS, 2% FBS, 1 mM EDTA. Cell mixture was then selected for CD45+ cells (macrophages) and sorted by magnetic beads (EasySep Mouse CD45 Positive Selection Kit, Cat. No. 18945). The supernatant containing the fibroblasts was spun down and dissolved in 0.5 mL of TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, 15596026). The macrophage-beads conjugate was lysed directly by dissolution into 0.5 mL of TRIzol Reagent. These samples were individually purified and converted to cDNA using Maxima H Minus Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Scientific, EP0752). qPCR was performed on all samples with a cDNA input equivalent to 10 ng of RNA per reaction well. Three technical replicates were allocated for each biological replicate, and the assay was performed using SYBR Green (Applied Biosystems, A25742) and Gapdh for housekeeping gene. The PCR primers for Saa3 (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.10949783), Il6 (PrimeTime Mm.PT.58.13354106) and GAPDH (PrimeTime Mm.PT.39a.1) were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies, Inc. Relative quantification (2−ΔΔCT) was performed for each gene to derive the fold-change expression over control (PBS).

## 5-Ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine (EdU) labeling
EdU (Thermo Fisher, cat. #E10187) was dissolved at 5 mg/mL in PBS. Neonatal and juvenile mice were injected intraperitoneally (ip) at a dose of 50 mg/kg. Mice were harvested 4 h post EdU injection for RNA and histology. Lungs were inflated with 2% paraformaldehyde and washed in PBS and stored in 70% Ethanol until embedding in paraffin. Sections, 5–7 μm thick, were cut and mounted on histology glass slides, let dry overnight at 37 °C before storage. The slides were deparaffinized in a series of ethanol solutions, and antigen retrieval was performed in Reveal Decloaker, 1×, solution (RV1000M) using the pressure cooker method (120°C, 5 min at 15 psi). Following this, the slides were rinsed in deionized water for 5 min, and washed in Permeabilization Buffer (1× PBS, 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma ×100)) for 5 min on a shaker. Excess liquid was removed from the slides and sections demarcated with hydrophobic ink (Vector Laboratories, H-4000). Sections were blocked with 3% BSA solution for 10 min and placed in a humidified chamber. EdU-labeling was performed with the Click-iT Plus EdU Alexa Fluor 488 kit (Invitrogen, C10637). Labeling solution was prepared at the specified concentrations. Each tissue section was covered with a spacer-coverslip (Electron Microscopy Sciences, LifterSlip, 72184-22) and 50 μL of the solution was pipetted in to uniformly cover the entire section. After 20 min of incubation at RT, slides were washed with 3% BSA solution twice for 5 min each. Slides were further blocked for 1 h at RT in Blocking Solution (5% donkey serum in PBS), following which a 1:500 solution of Guinea pig anti-mouse LAMP3 antibody (Synaptic Systems GmbH, 391005) was applied on each section for overnight incubation at 4°C. After washing the sections with Permeabilization Buffer, incubation with secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch, 706-605-148) at 1:400 dilution was performed for 3h at RT, followed by counterstaining with DAPI and mounting with Prolong Gold (Invitrogen, P36930). Images were acquired at 20× magnification on Leica DMi8 epifluorescence microscope and analyzed using ImageJ. EdU and LAMP3 positivity were determined by simple object-based co-localization analysis (Threshold, ImageCalculator, and Analyze Particles functions).

## Quantification and statistical analysis

## Statistics and reproducibility
All statistical analyses not previously described were performed in python using the scipy library with testing parameters indicated in figure legends. Differences between groups were considered significant if resulting p-value was <0.05. All animal studies are from multiple litters and quantification data presented are averaged values from individual mice where indicated. All in vitro experiments were performed at least three times with successful replication. Specific n values are listed in the figure legends.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6

## Table S1. Differential gene expression (DEG) testing results comparing the three control conditions (48 h air vs. 48 h PBS vs. 96 h PBS), within each cell type and age group

## Table S2. Mean pseudobulked gene expression values (ln(1+CPM)) of highly variable genes across age, treatment, time, and cell type

## Table S3. Significant putative ligand-receptor interaction strengths between AT1 cells, AT2 cells, aCaps, Wnt2-PDGFRa fibroblasts, and SCMFs across ages and conditions

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.114219.