pmcACS OmegaACS Omega3686acsomegaaoACS Omega2470-1343American Chemical SocietyPMC11840620PMC11840620.111840620118406203998982510.1021/acsomega.4c081401ReviewRole of Cell Adhesion
in Cancer Metastasis Formation:
A Review
BurčíkDenisMackoJánhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4187-3583PodrojkováNatáliaDemeterováJanaStanoMichalhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-6624-9907OriňakAndrej University of P. J. Safarik
in Kosice, Faculty of Sciences,
Institute of Chemistry, Department of Physical Chemistry, Moyzesova 11, 041 01 Kosice, Slovakia*Email: andrej.orinak@upjs.sk.090220251802202510648259851935213090920242201202510012025090220252102202524022025© 2025 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society2025The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
Intercellular adhesion
is accompanied by several physical
quantities
and actions. In this review, we tried to collect information about
the influence of surface energy and its impact on cell–cell
adhesion. It still undergoes development for cancer treatment. Data
on receptor–ligand interactions that occur on circulating tumor
cells (CTCs) are described, and adhesion receptors as therapeutic
targets are collected. Additionally, the impact of surface roughness
on the interactions between CTC cells and the surface was monitored.
The effects of different cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) on cell adhesion,
growth, and proliferation were investigated. This review offers general
principles of cell adhesion, through the blockade of adhesion with
blocking drugs and inhibitors like computational models that describe
the process of adhesion. Some theoretical models based on the minimum
of the total free energy of interaction between CAMs and selected
organic molecules have been presented. The final aim was to find information
on how modulation of the surface of CTCs (by medicals or physically)
inhibits cancer metastases formation.

AgentÃºra na Podporu VÃ½skumu a VÃ½voja10.13039/501100005357APVV-20-0278pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9ao4c08140document-id-new-14ao4c08140ccc-price1

## Introduction
Many types of cancer are
the most common causes of death. The most
dangerous part of cancer is metastasis, which can spread throughout
the body. Metastasis is the formation of a secondary tumor that arises
in distant organs or tissues from a primary tumor. For example, if
cancer cells migrate through lymphatic vessels, they can seed and
create lymphatic metastasis. Initially, they affect regional lymph
nodes, and later, they invade distant nodes. Most of the cancer types
metastasize via blood vessels, so secondary tumors appear in the lungs,
liver, brain, or bone marrow. , 

## Cells Adhesion and Cancer
Metastases
This review analyzes
various adhesion molecules and presents evidence of their mechanistic
function in the process of cancer metastasis. The ability of cancer
cells to colonize specific organs has been linked to the main adhesion
of these cells to endothelial cells following from the target organ.
This indicates that adhesion between cancer cells and endothelial
cells plays a critical role in metastasis and that adhesion molecules
are rendered on the endothelium in an organ-specific manner. Furthermore,
it appears that, given organ-specific adhesion molecules, a majority
of inducible endothelial adhesion molecules also play a role, which
is relevant to metastasis. The role of adhesion molecules thus opens
possibilities for therapeutic approaches to metastasis by disrupting
adhesive interactions, complementing other treatments for primary
tumors. We can simply say that these groups of molecules are part
of a wide range of adhesive networks. 
The whole process of metastasis formation is described in the following
figure ( ).
 

## Role of Receptors in Metastasis
Formation
The role
of receptors in metastasis formation is thoroughly described in ref ( ). Adhesion receptors, which
can serve as therapeutic targets for circulating cancer cells, play
a crucial role in this process. CAMs as
membrane receptors which facilitate cell–cell and cell–matrix
interactions introduce intracellular signals essential for adhesion,
migration, invasion, angiogenesis, and organ-specific metastasis.

## Blocking the Adhesion Receptors and Target-Receptor Cancer Treatment
Future research could focus on blocking the adhesion of receptors
to the surface of CTCs. The receptors are generally CAMs (selectins,
integrins, immunoglobulins, VCAM, ICAM, etc.), and ligands can be
principally expressed on the cell surface. Several groups of CAMs
are known, but the most studied groups are cadherins and integrins.
Adhesion between cells is in most common cases mediated by cadherins.
We also know that the interaction between the extracellular matrix
and cells is mediated by integrins. These two types of CAMs and, of
course, all other groups are involved in many interactions that occur
on different levels. The development of tumors and metastases is a
complex process that consists of multiple steps. CAMs play an important
role in this process. Some cancer cells are influenced by structural
changes and alterations in the adhesion properties, which are important
for the progression of cancer. Then they invade organs and tissues
where metastasis can occur.

## Tissue Engineering on Surfaces
Several
scientific disciplines,
such as cell biology, tissue engineering, and other parts of medicine,
have achieved breakthroughs in the study of regeneration during transplantation
and tissue repair, which is used in various artificial systems. It
is very important to fully understand cell behavior (adhesion, differentiation,
growth, and migration in vitro) on artificial surfaces. , Cancer invasion through the extracellular matrix and surrounding
tissue is a key step in oncologic disease progression. Therefore,
identifying the correlation between collective cell migration and
cell rearrangement is one of the main and most challenging tasks in
biomedical sciences. However, different
surface modification methods have achieved a long-term circulation
of nanomedicine in vivo. This article
demonstrates therapeutic intervention involving platelet adhesion
to CTCs, blockage of platelet signaling to CTCs, and delivery of novel
selectin-based drugs to CTCs. Surface engineering is among the fastest
developing disciplines. Many properties of biointerfaces (for example,
surface charge and roughness) are explored for regulating the strength
of cell adhesion. Chemical functional groups were utilized as an alternative
to the attachment and differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells.
In addition, it is possible to greatly enhance specific cell adhesion
with the help of nanostructured biointerfaces, such as TiO2 nanosisals, Au nanofractals, and Si nanowires. Additionally, many
of these examples are focused mostly on the effect of a single factor
on cell adhesion. The synergistic effect of several factors is neglected.
However, this approach is very important for comparing every option
if we want to satisfy practical requirements of these complicated
environments. 

## CTC Trapping Hypotheses
Additionally, a different hypothesis
for CTC trapping has been mentioned. The connection with these hypotheses
mentioned in reference ( ). This describes an energy motion by 2 phases of the cell to compute
cell velocities and energy content during cell movement. However,
the roles of growth factors in cancer progression have been well described. The main impact on this process has the structure
and function of adhesion molecules. 

## Models and Computational Simulations
The next models
demonstrate the effect of surface tension on driving cancer cell migration, the use of surface tension to sort droplets, and the application of different surface charges
on the modulation of cell migration. The
most common method involves the formation of tumor antigens, but it
is well-known that CTCs have particular biomechanical properties.
Many strategies have been developed to change the characteristics
of CTCs, and several other techniques have been established to isolate
them from blood. The most common density gradient centrifugation or
micropore filtration method is used, where the most important parameter
is the size. However, the best results in terms of CTC capture efficiency
have been achieved with microfluidic technologies. Hydrodynamic chromatography,
microfluidic filtration, and dielectrophoresis are used for CTC enrichment. Another model represents the fact that any receptor
and any binding site of a multispecific ligand are a rigid body. The
simulation forms different types or numbers of ligands spatially.
When different ligands are presented to cells changing densities of
surface receptors, it was predominated that ligands with reduced affinities
exhibit higher specificity in distinguishing cells based on the relative
receptor concentrations. Additionally, modifications in intramolecular
flexibility were shown to optimize receptor–ligand binding.
This study provides new insights into the fundamental principles governing
ligand–receptor interactions. 

## Surface Energy Calculations on CTC
Many researchers
have investigated the connection between the surface energy and the
behavior of cells on polymer surfaces. According to the results of
several studies, a cell’s growth is better on surfaces with
higher energy, and it is not important if the function of the polymer
surface is determined by proteins. Polymer surfaces might contain
polar or nonpolar groups. Polar groups react with cell surface chemical
groups and create bonds, but nonpolar groups create van der Waals
interactions with short-range impacts. A review of the references
shows contrasting results about cell–surface interactions,
which are affected by surface energy and roughness. However, additional
information is needed to fully understand this phenomenon. 
Methods for measuring contact angles to
determine surface energy on cells have been compiled. Among these, a novel approach utilizing the “squeezing”
of agarose beads to describe surface energy and receptor–ligand
interactions appears to offer a unique means of identifying optimal
interaction intensity. 

2

## Receptor Adhesion in Cancer Metastasis Formation
Cell adhesion
is a universal phenomenon that is very important
for almost every domain in life. This approach is based on the cellular
level, so it involves tissues, single cells, or whole organisms. In
addition to cell–cell adhesion, we also know the adhesion of
a cell to its surroundings, which is in most cases an extracellular
matrix. This interaction involves specific bonds between extracellular
ligands and proteins in cell membranes, which are the most important.
The cell surface is modulated by changing the microenvironment and
shedding extracellular matrix receptors, which we are looking for. Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) are specific
molecules that recognize various ligands at cell junctions, and they
are located on the surface of cytoplasmic membranes. Their function
is to help cells adhere to a matrix that presents their surroundings
or to other nearby cells. Based on a few published sources, − we can find these proteins to be cell adhesion proteins. Cell adhesion
is an interaction between cells or their surroundings that depends
on proteins located in the cytoplasmic membranes. Cells can be in
contact thanks to adhesion either directly by cell–cell adhesion
or indirectly by connection through the extracellular matrix, which
represents an intermediate step in the mechanism of adhesion. Understanding
cellular adhesion is crucial in life sciences, as most cell types
have to adhere to neighbor surfaces to survive and participate in
unique processes such as tissue development and reorganization, cell
motility, immunity, and vital functions. The extracellular matrix is a gel-like material that contains many
ligands that can be involved in adhesion. Cell–cell adhesion
is a mechanism that represents interactions between cells. This phenomenon
is based on molecular reactions at the surfaces of adjacent cells.
It is one of the most important cell functions because it maintains
the integrity of tissues formed from multiple cells. All multicellular
organisms exist thanks to this mechanism. This type of adhesion is
controlled by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs).

## Cadherin Receptors in Cancer
Cadherins are transmembrane
glycoproteins dependent on the calcium presence for function, mediating
homophilic cell-to-cell adhesion. With over 20 types within this group,
key members include E-, N-, P-, VE-, and R-cadherins, each playing
significant roles in cancer metastasis. E-cadherin maintains epithelial
integrity and polarity by forming adherent junctions; its reduced
expression in cancer cells decreases epithelial adhesion. An example
involves epithelial cells and fibroblasts forming adhesive structures
at points of contact, where epithelial cells express E-cadherin and
fibroblasts express N-cadherin. These
cadherins are believed to form heterophilic adherence junctions. This
mechanism is preserved during cancer invasion, where cell adhesion
occurs within epithelial carcinoma cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAFs). CAFs promote collective cancer cell invasion by exerting intercellular
physical forces, which are translocated
through adherence junctions formed by one cadherin (E typically) on
the cancer cell membrane and a second cadherin (N) on the CAF membrane.
Cadherin-11, originally identified in osteoclasts, is specifically
expressed in fibroblasts and cancer cells undergoing the epithelial–mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Research indicates that cadherin-11 intermediates
have adherence junctions between cancer cells and fibroblasts, which
are crucial for fibroblast-driven breast cancer invasion. Additionally, cadherin-11 expression in triple-negative
breast cancer cells correlates with weak clinical outcomes.
Cadherin-23, an atypical molecule of cadherins primarily found
in the inner ear as a critical component of stereocilia tip links,
mediates heterotypic adhesion between cocultured breast cancer cells
and fibroblasts. In breast cancer tissues,
cadherin-23 is upregulated, particularly in the stromal regions at
the invasive front of tumors, suggesting its role in facilitating
adhesion between invading tumor cells and stromal fibroblasts.
R-Cadherin supports epithelial phenotype maintenance, with its
overexpression linked to more malignant cancer forms. 
The expression and activation of cadherins and integrins
directly
influence the progression of human malignancies. Due to their extensive
roles in malignant transformations, cadherin molecules are chosen
targets for cancer therapy. Studies of
CD34+ cell cultures from patients with myelodysplastic syndrome revealed
frequent hypermethylation of the E-cadherin promoter, leading to reduced
protein expression. A comparative analysis
of patient tissue samples showed that the E-cadherin promoter was
unmethylated, while over three quarters of leukemia samples exhibited
abnormal hypermethylation in this region, supporting the role of the
E-cadherin as a usual target for hypermethylation in hematologic cancer
malignancies. 
Abnormal functions
of N-cadherin in hematopoietic stem cells have
been shown to promote and maintain stem cells during serial bone marrow
transplantations. Conversely, blocking of N-cadherin significantly
reduces the chances of successful engraftment. The results of the
experiments show that N-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion is critical
for regulating hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell activity in
the bone marrow, highlighting it as a promising therapeutic target
for leukemia treatment. 

## Selectin Receptors
in Cancer
E-Selectin, a glycosylated
transmembrane receptor, is associated with an increased risk of metastasis
when overexpressed. The role of selectin ligands in mediating the
hematogenous metastasis of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) has been
described elsewhere. , This section focuses on therapeutic
uses targeting selectin binding as a strategy to prevent cancer metastasis.
Two key factors contribute to the efficient capture of CTCs. First,
the rapid binding and spinning of leukocytes or CTCs under shear flow
is facilitated by the quick bound kinetics of selectins and their
ligands. , This capability allows cells to be enhanced
under flow conditions, improving the rate of sample analysis. Next,
the microtube form enables the capture of CTCs toward the prepared
wall, where they interact with selectins. This effect, characterized
by the flow-dependent interaction of leukocytes with red blood cells,
also applies to CTCs. − 

## Integrin Receptors in Cancer
Integrins
interact with
ECM components such as fibronectin, fibrinogen, collagen, and laminin,
playing key roles in processes such as cell adhesion and metastasis
formation. The extracellular matrix (ECM) is a 3D structure made out
of various organic compounds, delivering diverse biochemical and mechanical
signals. , Cells adhere to specific surfaces via integrins,
and those unable to establish adhesion often undergo cell death. The
ECM is composed of proteins that are identified by integrins and cellular
receptors. Many of these ligands play critical roles in regulating
cell behavior and physiological processes, including migration, adhesion,
secretion, gene expression, growth, and apoptosis. , Through these mechanisms, circulating tumor cells (CTCs) can infiltrate
blood or lymphatic vessels, using them as channels to spread to distant
parts of the body, forming secondary tumors or metastases. Modulating
integrin activity can alter metabolic and signaling pathways, affecting
the expression of other CAMs and contributing to angiogenesis regulation. Phospholipids, consisting of hydrophilic phosphate
heads and hydrophobic lipid tails, form a bilayer within the cell
membrane. The heads are aligned on the outer part, while the space
between the layers is filled with the lipid tails. This arrangement
places the extracellular matrix above and the cytoplasm below the
membrane. Integrins possess similar segments extending into the ECM
to bind to fibronectin, while inner segments interact with adaptor
proteins. 
Integrin activation and
binding to the extracellular matrix (ECM) initiate the exciting of
the adhesome, a set assembly of cytoskeletal and other proteins that
interact variously with integrin cytoplasmic tails. − This complex
unit regulates critical phases of cell life cycles. Dysregulated integrin-controlled
adhesion and signaling are crucial contributors to the pathogenesis
of numerous human diseases, such as complications with blood coagulation,
heart problems, and cancer. Circulating
tumor cells (CTCs) exhibit anchorage-independent growth and anoikis
resistance through pathways involving altered integrin signaling. For metastasis to occur, CTCs have to adhere
within a vasculature of organs and extravasate into perivascular
tissue. Integrins serve as primary ECM receptors, linking the external
matrix scaffold to the internal actin cytoskeleton, a connection mediated
predominantly by their cytosolic adaptor proteins, including talin
and kindlin, which play critical roles. , The specific
roles of integrins in cancer are discussed in detail. − 
Integrins are carefully thought about as promising anticancer
prime
drug targets. Their antagonists have been shown to work by impeding
integrin pushing that involves invasion and migration of cells in
tumors, which are important in promoting cancer metastasis. A mixture of integrins were considered to inhibit
ligand binding and tumor growth in xenograft models. These valued
results support further larger clinical studies. , Integrin β2 functions by inhibiting cell adhesion and receiving
white blood cells. Earlier research results
suffered due to the low therapeutic effect and the low selectivity
coupled with particular hepatotoxicity. There are a broad group of
recent studies on integrin inhibition as a target for cancer therapy
strategy. The conjugates presenting a
selective binder for the extracellular portion of integrin αVβ3
covalently bound to sunitinib were tested for their antitumor potential.
This strategy resulted in one active compound inhibiting a different
range of growth cells in the micromolar range and reduces cell migration
and invasive abilities. 
The complex
expression of the adhesion process of CAMs is given
in .
 Many world-renowned chemists,
physicists, biologists
and material
scientists wrote down their knowledge about adhesion in a book. They clarify cell adhesion mechanisms and how
to influence them. This book is one of many pieces of evidence that
adhesion is not simple to understand and demands interdisciplinary
approaches. It contains important information about cell adhesion
and provides a good start for every researcher. Comprehensive theories
on cell–substratum and cell–cell adhesion mechanisms
are reviewed in ref ( ), highlighting recent insights that identify cell adhesion molecules
as promising therapeutic targets, particularly in cancer and other
diseases, with significant implications for public health. Morphogenesis
and the maintenance of the epithelial cell state are discussed in
detail in ref ( ),
while advancements in surface modification techniques to regulate
cell adhesion and behavior are extensively documented. Notably, NECTIN4, a cell adhesion molecule highly
expressed in malignant tumors, has been selected as a potential healing
target for its critical role in tumor progression. Additional innovations include adhesion-independent activation
of FAK and YAP, which are vital for cancer cell viability and growth. Progress in surface modification for controlling
cell adhesion and behavior is further elaborated in refs ( and ). For a comprehensive overview
of adhesion science, ref ( ) provides an in-depth review. Cell adhesion is also associated
with a range of pathological diseases, e.g., arthritis, cancer, osteoporosis, and atherosclerosis. The
adhesion of cancer cells is usually lower than that of normal cells
(resulting in the destruction of tissue structure). , This morphological feature is a picture of malignant tumors. Research
on cell adhesion in vitro has been widely involved
in cell biology, biomedicine, and tissue engineering, , covering biomaterials with a range of research results of implantable
sensors, artificial bone and tooth replacement, skin regeneration,
organ transplantation, and so on. Recently, the researchers have devoted
attention to the study of ECM to regulate the gene expression of cells in vitro and to the surfaces that control cell adhesion
very often. Readers can refer to ref ( ) and additional sources
for general and introductory materials on the structure and function
of cell adhesion molecules in healthy tissues, the task of growth
factors in cell migration, and the reduction of adhesion in the case
of malignant transformation. These sources also cover topics such
as cell adhesion in collective migration-driven invasiveness, the
task of growing factors as signaling adhesion molecules, and the function
of CAM within the tumor microenvironment.

3

## Surface
Energy on the Cell Surface
Surface energy is recognized to
measure the bond energy from the
open bonds of the surface basis. , This property
affects cellular activity, as the adsorption of serum protein and
cell adhesion generally depends on the surface energy of polymers
or another wafer when in contact with biological fluids. Early research
has established a link in cell adhesion and the surface free energy
of the matrix: surfaces with high free energy enhance cell adhesion
and spreading; however, those with low free energy can restrict cellular
behavior. , Surface energy is formally used for the
description of many surface interactions, as shown in .
 Every tissue is composed of cells. For analogy
we can imagine that
this process is like that of molecules in fluids. The surface tensions
are also similar between these two examples. Differential energy exists
between cells on the surface of the tissue and inside the tissue. Surface tension is based not only on the adhesion
energy between cells but also on the interaction area. To measure the surface energy with a goniometer,
we used the OWRK method with the Cassie–Baxter relation. This
model is often used in modeling adhesion processes. 1In this equation, ESP and ESD are the solid
surface energies due to the polar component
and disperse component, respectively. With ELP and ELD, it is similar,
but they are liquid surface energies. θ is the contact angle.
Atomic force microscopy provides topographical data that help us calculate
the height–height correlation (H(r)). From the equation below, we can obtain roughness parameters, which
include the square surface roughness (σ), lateral correlation
length (ξ), and Hurst exponent (α), also known as the
roughness exponent. 2The energy of cells is often
measured by their physical properties. One of them is cell adhesion
which is defined by the free energy of adhesion. In the next equation,
ΔFadh is the energy; γcs is the cell–substrate tension; γcl is the cell–fluid interfacial tension; and γsl is the substrate–fluid interfacial tension. 3The surface
free energy can
also be calculated with Jouany’s equation, where γ is
the surface tension for different interfaces. H indicates hydrocarbon;
W indicates water; and S indicates a solid. γSd and γWd are dispersion components. 4ISWp presents
the
nondispersive interaction between water and solid and is expressed
with the following equation: 5γsp and γwp are polar components. 
Another physical parameter related to
cell adhesion is the work
of adhesion (WSW) expressed by Fowkes
as the interaction between water and the solid. In this case we also
know dispersive and nondispersive interactions: 6 7The surface of two
aggregates
(A) is expressed with the equation below, where R is the aggregate radius and θ(t) is the fusion angle. 8Surface
energy values were
used in another study, in which an experiment was carried out with
the cancer cell line HT29 and human fibroblasts. A study resulted
in moderate surface energy (ES ≈
70 mJ m2) and an intermediate roughness ratio (r ≈ 2) that establish the most suitable conditions
for effective cell adhesion, growth, and proliferation. If we assume that the droplet interface bilayer
(DIB) stays in axial symmetry, as shown in , the bilayer’s radius rb can be modeled as a section of a spherical cap with
height hb, and the droplets can be modeled
as intersecting spheres with radii r1 and r2 which are reduced to heights h1 and h2, respectively. The
lost volume forms a spherical cap whose base has radius a.( ) If we set the bilayer concavity toward
droplet 2, as shown in , we can express the balance of surface tension with these
equations: 9 10According to , γb is the
surface tension of the bilayer, and γ1 and γ2 are the surface tensions of the droplets. θ1, θ2, and θb are contact angles
between radius a and individual tensions. The radius a is the radius of the spherical cap base that was created
between these two droplets.
 The volume of droplets can be calculated with the
following equations
(all the parameters were described before and are shown in ): 11 12Many physical parameters
are very important for cell biology. One of them is the surface energy
of biomembranes. It affects several functions in cells, such as ion
binding, integral protein activity, and membrane fusion. According
to Barlow et al., it is still very difficult
to measure the surface energies of lipid DIB membranes. We know of
only one accepted measurement method, which is made with bright field
microscopy via direct visualization of the surface morphology, and
we need to know the monolayer surface tension. Then, we can deduce
the bilayer tension. This technique is expressed with the equation
below: 13The Worthington
number (Wo)
is a dimensionless number that measures the ratio of gravitational
forces to surface forces. This number is an analogue of the well-known
bond number in bubble systems, and it is often used to estimate the
accuracy of a technique, where a measurement is considered accurate
when Wo is approximately 1 and inaccurate when Wo is less than 1.
Other parameters in the equation are Δρ (density difference
between two liquids), g (gravity acceleration), Vd (droplet volume), Dn (needle diameter), and γ (surface tension). The surface tension, bending elasticity of the lipid bilayers,
and deformation of vesicles can be defined by the modified Helfrich
equation. The increase in the surface area (ΔS) and the surface tension (σ) of vesicles formed from the cytoplasmic
membrane were combined according to the Cahn–Hillard equation.
After a few changes, we obtain the following equation: 14where S0 is the surface area of the original vesicle; kB is the Boltzmann constant; T is the
absolute temperature; κ is the bending rigidity; σ0 is the surface tension of the undeformed CM vesicle; and Ka is the area expansion modulus of the membrane.
The Johnson–Kendall–Roberts model was applied to relate
the surface energy of the interaction to the elasticity of the bread
and the area of contact, in receptor–ligand adhesion interaction.
Understanding these interactions is a top research priority in
bionanotechnology, aimed at designing artificial systems that mimic
natural processes. The combination and spatial arrangement of ligand–receptor
pairs on surfaces form the basis of new structural supports. Recent
reviews on signaling pathways address
three essential questions in cancer drug discovery based on molecular
markers and pathway modifications and suggest how combination therapies
may outperform monotherapy for cancer treatment. Direct signaling
pathways, moderated by receptors and ligands on cell surfaces, are
used in biomimetic approaches for cell adherence to natural or artificial
matrices. For this aim various extracellular matrix and plasma membrane
ligands, receptors, and macromolecules are integrated into systems. Indirect signaling, mediated by extracellular
molecules or vesicle flux, is applied in tissue engineering by introducing
signaling molecules—as growth factors (EGF, VEGF, and FGF),
bone morphogenetic proteins, cytokines, and chemokines—into
the extracellular matrix. As these molecules have short half-lives
in biological fluids and degrade rapidly in vivo, various affections
and delivery systems have been developed to prolong their activity.
These molecules can be integrated into biomimetic scaffolds for controlled
temporal and spatial release, tissue formation, cell differentiation,
adhesion, or mobility. Passive release of signaling molecules can
also be achieved by encapsulating them within the matrix. Integrins
are important targets in cancer therapy due to their critical function
in tumor progression. Integrin inhibitors generally fall into four
categories: antibodies, peptides, small molecule peptidomimetics,
and targeted nanoparticles, all of which can make use of both direct
and indirect antitumor effects by inhibiting tumor growth and angiogenesis. , Volociximab (M200, Eos 200–4), a chimeric IgG4 monoclonal
antibody targeting integrin α5β1, has demonstrated preliminary
antitumor activity in renal cell carcinoma patients in phase II trials. A CNTO 95, a fully humanized antiαv integrin
monoclonal antibody, has shown antitumor activity as a monotherapy
in preclinical studies and enhances the efficacy of fractionated radiation
therapy in various human xenograft tumor types. , Cilengitide (EMD 121974, NSC 707544), an antiangiogenic agent blocking
integrins αvβ3 and αvβ5, was well-tolerated
in phase I and II trials for multiple tumors, including breast cancer. ATN-161, a non-RGD-based peptide inhibitor of
integrin α5β1, effectively inhibited breast cancer growth
and metastasis in vivo. In phase II trials,
ATN-161 displayed a U-shaped dose–response curve, indicating
potential future applications in combination with chemotherapy for
cancer treatment. Although peptidomimetics
targeting integrins have mainly been clinically validated as antithrombotic
agents, their potential in oncology is promising. Elevated expression levels of specific integrins and enhanced
integrin signaling are associated with cancer progression. Dysfunctional
integrin signaling is thought to facilitate tumor cell detachment
from the surrounding cells, promoting survival and proliferation in
foreign microenvironments. Novel research results have shown that
integrin heterodimers are endocytosed from the plasma membrane into
the cytoplasm, with some receptors later being recycled back to the
cell surface. Intensive studies within the integrin field have highlighted
important signal transduction pathways involved in integrin-mediated
cellular behavior in both normal and cancerous cells, underscoring
the role of integrins in regulating cellular functions.

4

## Specific Receptors on CTC Surfaces That Adhere
to Endothelial Ligands
Specific adhesion receptors as therapeutic
targets for circulating
tumor cells play an important role in cancer treatment methods nowadays. shows processes
running at the surface during the interaction of receptor–ligand
at the CTC cell.
 Physical trapping of CTCs in microdevices represents
recent advances
in the variety of adhesion molecules on CTCs. By specific adhesion,
molecules enable direct interaction with the endothelium in tissues.
Progress has been made in understanding how these receptors confer
enhanced invasion and survival.
The newest information about
whole raw sequences of receptors and
their blockage is described in ref ( ). Research on specific receptors that interact
with the CTC surface has been conducted by many laboratories. A conjugated
system containing folate, an oligoproline linker, a PEG spacer, and
molecules of biotin and streptavidin on magnetic beads, can capture
CTCs and block the formation of metastases ( ).
 The folate receptor has appeard as a promising
molecular target
due to its high upregulation on the surface of various solid tumor
cells. This receptor offers a rational
therapeutic target for personalized cancer treatments. Among recent advancements, one of the most promising
approaches is gene encapsulation in nonviral carriers, with surface
modifications using ligands that exhibit high selectivity and affinity
for specific receptors on target cells. A notable study evaluated
terpolymer-based nanocapsules for targeted DNA delivery to cancer
cells. These nanocapsules were surface-modified with folic acid to
selectively target folate receptors overexpressed in various cancer
cells. The nanocapsules displayed strong DNA encapsulation and release
capabilities. Additionally, the targeted ligands on the nanocapsules’
surface enhanced cellular uptake, creating potential for more effective
therapies. In another article, the very common methods for capturing CTCs were
based on biological or chemical characteristics. Polyphenols have
exceptional anti-inflammatory effects. Polyphenol tannic acid-functionalized
films have been developed for capturing CTCs. This approach is a simple
but effective strategy for label-free capture. The preparation of
the film was quite fast (a few minutes). This process consists of
three steps: metal–polyphenol coordinated interaction, integration
of the effects of repelling sample blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) adhesion,
and enhancement of cancer cell adhesion. A key factor in enhancing
cancer cell adhesion to the film is the presence of galloyl groups
on tannic acid (TA). This type of film prefers cancer cells over PBMCs.
It can capture many different types of cancer cells, and it does not
need any help from captured antibodies. This film is quite harmless
for capturing cells. Compared with those of similar biological assays,
the viability of these cells is greater, and the results are approximately
90%. This label-free strategy provides new ideas for how to capture
CTCs more effectively. We can develop new methods and design more
sophisticated devices for the detection and analysis of CTCs. For
CTC identification, several strategies with various detection abilities
exist. The most commonly used methods are fluorescence spectrophotometry,
fluorescence microscopy, electrical impedance, flow cytometry, or
surface-enhanced Raman scattering. Every
CTC has specific biomarkers, such as prostate-specific membrane antigen,
estrogen and folate receptors, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2
(HER2), or survivin. These markers have different degrees of significance
according to the type of cancer. However,
clusters of CTCs are much more dangerous than single CTCs because
they are approximately 50 times more likely to create metastatic deposits.
While the number of CTC clusters is not as high as the number of single
CTCs, clusters are responsible for the same number of metastases in
the lung, as was proven in a mouse model of breast cancer. According
to this model, CTC clusters make up only 2–5% of all CTCs detected
in circulation. Despite their low amount, they drastically increase
metastatic potential (23–50 times in comparison with single
CTCs). Therefore, they are responsible for approximately half of the
lesions in this model of breast cancer. Circulating tumor cells are extremely rare in the bloodstream. There
is only one CTC per 109 blood cells; therefore, it is important
to have sensitive platforms to detect these cells. For example, the epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)
has long been tested as a surface marker for the detection and capture
of CTCs. Newer studies have demonstrated that EpCAM is expressed at
low levels on the cell surface of some cancer types. Therefore, the
EpCAM antibody is not adequate for use as a sole marker for the identification
and capture of all CTC subpopulations. Although a nonfunctionalized sample of a nanorough glass substrate
could take rich cancer cells from lysed whole blood with a capture
efficiency of more than 90%, more testing on clinical samples is necessary
before results can be reached. The separation
of CTCs and cancer cells is not as simple as it looks because they
are different in several ways. To isolate CTCs from the bloodstream,
we need to know which cell subsets have been changed. In most cases,
we can distinguish them with the help of biomarker expression. However,
isolation techniques are limited by more issues, two of which present
major challenges. The first limitation is the CTC heterogeneity. Every
type of cancer is somehow different, but that is not all. The same
type of cancer could have different biomarkers, according to the patient.
It can be a biomarker of the cytoplasmic membrane, but several other
biomarkers could also be involved. These factors affect the characteristics
and morphologies of CTCs. Thus far, we cannot choose one biomarker
that can be used for the isolation of cancer cells. The next pressing issue is releasing captured CTCs from
the substrate, especially releasing them from a nanostructure. Many
techniques can significantly damage cell structures; for example,
mechanical lift-off methods can damage ECM proteins. Biomarkers could be a good step forward in understanding
cancer cells, but this is a dead end. Focusing on the next variants
is extremely necessary. CTC separation also relies on the physical
properties of the cells, such as size, density, phenotype, and electrical
polarization. Many methods are specialized to distinguish cancer cells
from immune cells through these parameters. Tumor progression can be classified according to the type of cancer
or several inner or outer factors. However, all cancers have the same
similarity. They require abnormal mechanical and adhesion properties,
but we are still not sure how they manifest in organisms. We assumed
that they would mimic a tissue because this behavior was observed
in 3D multicellular spheroids, which represent the simplest models
of cancer ( ).
 Various types of cancer cells can be captured in
vivo, but CTCs
in the blood are very rare. Several antibodies are used in various
techniques for cell isolation. One type of antibody or drug is not
effective enough to capture them. Many scientists have decided to
determine the nanoarchitecture for this purpose using two or more
components to increase the efficiency of the process. One of these
studies described dendrimers functionally coated with dual antibodies
(aEpCAM and aSlex). Dendrimers from poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) were
spatiotemporally coated with these antibodies. Modified dendrimers
have been tested in experiments with HT29 cells and HUVECs and for
observing heteroadhesion. The combination of nanomaterials with dual-targeting
antibodies prevents the formation of metastases via blood circulation. Similar studies and experiments led to the discovery
of many peptides that bind specifically to tumor cells. Tumor cells
have their own biomarkers, as mentioned before, and these peptides
have a strong affinity for their receptors. Alternatively, these receptors
may be overexpressed compared to their expression in normal cells. Cell-to-cell and specially cell-to-ECM interactions
are mediated by the interplay of CD44 receptors and hyaluronan. Recent results correlate CD44 expression with
cancer metastasis, , finding a potential of using
the CD44–hyaluronan interaction to capture circulating cancer
cells.
Targeted therapeutic drugs have become prominent in cancer
treatment.
To support the advancement of anticancer drugs, the authors made an
in-depth review of small molecule therapies classified by target type.
A review includes approved drugs and significant candidates currently
in clinical tests for each target, addresses ongoing challenges, and
offers future directions for anticancer drug research and development. A promising immunotherapy research in cancer
is the targeted elimination of malignant cancer cells through the
adoptive transfer of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells. In
this technique, the immune cells are genetically modified to carry
the above-mentioned receptors with specific antigen-binding abilities,
activating cytotoxic T lymphocytes to enhance immune response and
target cancer cells. This review explores
the foundational structure and function of CAR-T cells, identifying
antigenic targets for treating various cancers and discussing potential
drawbacks of this therapeutic approach. Furthermore, multifunctional,
receptor-targeting, antibody-based molecules have been developed,
enabling the proposal of multiple surface receptors on tumor, endothelial,
or immune cells within the tumor microenvironment. These advancements
outline the rationale and strategies for multifunctional receptor-targeting
antibodies, detailing their mechanisms, potential benefits, and challenges
in cancer treatment, which offer promising improvements for targeted
therapies. Dependence receptors, which
support cell survival and positive signaling such as proliferation,
migration, and differentiation, when activated, also initiate apoptosis
if unbound to their ligand. Abnormal regulation of these receptors
is a critical factor in tumorigenesis, allowing cancer cells to bypass
apoptosis while simultaneously supporting proliferation, angiogenesis,
invasiveness, and chemoresistance. The role of dependence receptors
in various cancer hallmarks has generated significant interest in
targeting them for cancer therapy. While further studies are needed
to thoroughly understand the signaling pathways associated with these
receptors and optimize their targeting, dependence receptors present
a highly promising focus for future cancer treatments. 

5

## Adhesion Blocking Compounds
Tumors
and metastases can be cured with many different medicaments
or medical processes. Treatment of cancer is a very difficult task.
We know of many types of cancer, and we use several methods to cure
patients. Many drugs can cure different stages of cancer progression,
but they also present a danger to the immune system of these patients.
It is very important to save people with these treatments. However,
there is also a second option to prevent the formation of metastases,
which are the most dangerous forms of cancer. Cell adhesion is one
of the most important features associated with this prevention. Some
drugs can increase adhesion forces or disrupt them. Circulating tumor
cells are released into the blood or lymphatic vessels and subsequently
travel through these vessels. CTCs start rolling inside the vessel
and then adhere to endothelial cells. In the next stage, the adhesive
junction between two endothelial cells breaks, and the cells penetrate
through the free space. Therefore, the simplest way to stop cancer
progression is to strengthen the adhesion between endothelial cells.
However, many scientists have different theories. Antiadhesive drugs
for blocking receptors on the cytoplasmic membrane of CTCs have been
tested. Every CTC has many receptors and ligands on its surface. Several
of these proteins participate in cell–cell adhesion. These
receptors and ligands are mostly called cell adhesion molecules (CAMs).
We know four groups of CAMs, namely, immunoglobulins, integrins, cadherins,
and selectins, but there are a few other molecules connected with
adhesion that are not part of any of these mentioned groups: ICAM
and VCAM. Antiadhesive drugs contain ligands that interact with CAMs.
When receptors on CTCs are blocked, they cannot adhere to epithelial
cells or communicate with other healthy cells in the vessels. After
some time, they will perish, and cancer will not spread to different
organs or tissues. In this part of this review, we introduce several
antiadhesive drugs. Pure chemicals were tested on cell cultures or
in mice. Many of these chemicals are used in several drugs in their
pure forms or as derivatives that have stronger effects. We know about
several types of cancer, and every cancer has its own cancer cells.
These cells are, in most cases, different. Some of these cells have
different receptors, and the other has different metabolic pathways.
This is a short summary of a few variants. Many of these products
are natural products, and people have known about their effects for
centuries; however, until recently, they could not imagine which of
them had anticancer or antiadhesive effects on the human body. Almost
all drugs have multiple effects on the human body. They can help not
only with the treatment of cancer but also with cardiovascular diseases,
diabetes, or inflammation. One of these chemicals is ursolic acid
(ursane-type pentacyclic triterpenic acid). It can be found in many
medicinal plants, berries, leaves, or wax-like surfaces of several
fruits. , , Actein affects
the protein expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR),
AKT, and NF-kB signaling proteins. The authors mentioned that in vivo
results showed that actein (60 mM) significantly decreased the number
of zebrafish embryos with migrated cells by 74%. Actein exhibited
antiproliferative, antiadhesion, and antimigration effects. The main
effect of actein is represented by a reduction in the expression of
the integrin subunits α2 and b1, which are important adhesion
receptors. Moreover, actein degrades CXCR4 expression. However, other authors have documented the antiadhesion
effect of cimetidine against colorectal tumors. Blocking the adhesion of platelets and leukocytes with
heparin seems to be very important for metastasis inhibition. This
is the main pathway for preventing the formation of metastases and
saving patients’ lives. The antiadhesion
effects of sesquiterpenoids on ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and E-selectin against
tumors have been documented. This is another mechanism of action through
which the expression of cell adhesion molecules is stimulated by TNF-α. The novel compound exopolysaccharide was mentioned
by the authors as an inhibitor of liver
cancer cell growth and adhesion. The underlying mechanism was determined
from previous experiments. The overall side effects were documented.
EPS364 changes the signaling pathway FGF19-FGFR4, which changes the
expression of genes in the nucleus, resulting in the downregulation
of ICAM-1, cadherin 2, and ALCAM. A PP2 inhibitor can block FAK that
participates in the process of adhesion. This inhibitor maintains
the functionality of the cell adhesion system by mediating the E-cadherin.
The E-cadherin/catenin system is downregulated in tumors originating
from epithelial cells. It can be restored with inhibitors of FAK. (E)-7-Phenyl-2-hepten-4,6-diyn-1-ol
(1) and (Z)-7-Phenyl-2-hepten-4,6-diyn-1-ol (2) are
the isomeric nature polyacetylenes extracted from the Chinese medicinal
plant Bidens pilosa L. These results discovered the important antimetastasis
potential of these double polyacetylenes on human gastric cancer HGC-27
cells and the peculiar key molecular mechanisms. Together, polyacetylenes
1 and 2 affected the relocation, intrusion, and grip of HGC-27 cells
at their nontoxic concentrations. Polyacetylene 1 controlled the expression
of vimentin, Snail, b-catenin, GSK3β, MST1, YAP, and YAP/TAZ
and phosphorylation and expression of E-cadherin and p-LATS1. The
activation of the Wnt/β-catenin indicating pathway can promote
tumor cell addition by creating the cadherin–catenin complex,
improving epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), producing
clone initiation and attack, and hence promoting tumor metastasis.
The basal molecule of the Wnt signaling pathway, β-catenin,
is introduced in cell adhesion through interactions with transcription
factors. In vitro investigations have
indicated that lycopene can effect the cell adhesion and migration
resouces of cancer cells. So called disintegrins
are small (4–16 kDa) viperid snake poisonous proteins that
bind to canonical integrins (frequently RGD). These nonenzymatic
proteins restrain integrin-mediated cell–cell and cell–extracellular
frameworks, making them potential therapeutic candidates for cancer
and various other human disorders. Tzabcanin restrains the attachment
of melanoma (A-375) and lung (A-549) cancer cell lines to vitronectin
and has an exceptional potential for preventing the death of A-375
cells. Moreover, αvβ3 may bind to tzabcanin. 

6

## Micro/Nanopatterning of the
Surface for Regulating
Cell Adhesion
A microchip procedure was created to separate
CTCs in mouse pancreatic
cancer by immobilizing the EpCAM counteracting agent on a plastic
surface and streaming blood through it that ties to CTCs. Execution
of this innovation in people to disconnect CTCs in cancer patients
appears to guarantee an understanding of CTC science in connection
with improvements in biomarkers and therapies. Very recently, similar
microfluidic methods have been developed to isolate CTCs from patients
with breast cancer. Cell membranes are
microsurfaces that can be modified. After this interaction, we can
change several parameters, such as the surface energy, which is related
with adhesion. Multiple methods are known and are used to change surfaces.
According to Shuxiang Cai et al., there
were actually seven techniques for surface modification: SAMs, polymer
brushing, layer-by-layer assembly, photolithography, electrospinning,
spin coating, and 3D bioprinting. SAMs are chosen molecular structures
formed by the absorption of an active substance on a solid or liquid
surface in a dilute solution. A polymer brush is a macromolecular
structure formed by different polymers that are tightly connected
to the surface by one of their ends. Layer-by-layer assembly introduces
an alternate deposition of interacting species on the surface to create
a polyelectrolyte multilayer. Photolithography is used to create patterns
on surfaces with different energy sources, such as ultraviolet light,
lasers, or electron beams. Electrospinning presents a technique involving
static electricity under high voltage, which attracts the polymer
solution to the surface. Spin coating is a complex process consisting
of four stages: deposition, spin up, spin off, and evaporation. The
next technique is 3D bioprinting. With the help of computer imaging
technology, 2D patterned polymers with modified surfaces have been
created. The 3D polymer layer was assembled from the bottom up and
printed with liquid biological materials. Researchers need to decide
which one they will choose for their experiments to achieve the best
results. shows the quantified surface properties
through contact angle measurements during fibroblast adhesion. illustrates cell
adhesion controlled on nanosilica substrates by Cassie–Baxter
and Wenzel models.
 Microfluidics technology is enormously used in
the development
of blood glucose strips, lab-on-a-disc/lab-on-a-chip applications,
and other symptomatic consumables and gadgets. The applications of
microfluidics devices vary and involve pathogen detection, chronic
disease monitoring, cancer screening, genetic biomarker detection,
and food and environmental monitoring. Because of the similarity between an in vivo ECM and a nanotopographic
substrate, novel functional nanostructures that mimic the natural
nanostructure of the ECM can be produced to improve the affinity between
cells and substrates. To distinguish
some CTCs in many other cells, in vivo diagnostic tools or ultrasensitive
methods are needed. For an in vivo diagnostic tool, a sensor must
be embedded across blood vessels to analyze flowing cells. Moreover, nanostructured substrates can include
most captured cells viable for subsequent molecular analysis and/or
cell culture. A spiral microfluidic device
is an emerging tool for separating CTCs from peripheral blood. Developed microfluidic devices are capable of
providing a platform for continuous hydrodynamic-driven, size-based
filtration of cells and molecular separation, including, but not limited
to, protein and DNA separation and detection. Microfluidic platform-based techniques have already been
developed to recognize and quantify CTCs through various means, such
as mechanophysical interactions, cell-affinity microchromatography,
dielectrophoresis, and magnetophoresis. Jain et al. demonstrated in microfluidic
experiments that leukocytes have obvious margination within a range
of hematocrits of 20–30%, and a lower or higher hematocrit
may cause less margination. The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
is one of the foremost common receptors overextended on the membranes
of tumor cells and has become an appealing biomarker for cancer determination.
To eliminate these technical hurdles, a set of platforms, such as
immunofluorescence labeling using antibodies against biomarkers on
the CTC surface, microfluidic devices monovalently modified with targeting
ligands, or nanostructured substrates coated with anti-EpCAM (aEpCAM)
or aptamers, has been developed. A Slex may hinder the heteroadhesion
between cancer cells and endothelial cells through Slex/E-selectin
interactions; aEpCAM may specifically diminish the gripability of
cancer cells. The effects of aEpCAM- or/and Slex-coated dendrimers
on the adhesion of cancer cells to endothelial cells were investigated
in ref ( ). The following
set of equations represents a geometrical platform to construct a
microfluidic device detection chamber. 15 16 17 18where R is
the binding site distance; r is the distance from
the dye molecule to the nanoparticle; d is the nanoparticle
diameter; Φ is the energy transfer efficiency; r0 is the constant value for a specific dye system; and r is the distance from the dye molecule to the gold nanoparticle.
Surface adjustment trials used the donation of unused properties
and capacities, such as hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, surface charge
properties, biocompatibility, harshness, grip strength, or optical
and attractive properties, to the surface of materials while maintaining
unique bulk properties. As a common method of surface modification
in nanomedicine, it has has been widely studied in recent years, and
advanced and practical surface modification strategies have emerged
as a whole, thus expanding the scope of nanomedicine application. – show the geometrical interpretation
of the roughness at the surface and application the in microfluidic
range. Studies have shown the possibility of separating circulating
CTCs from normal blood cells using a microfluidic device with a channel
diameter of 5 μm. When blood flows through a filtering channel,
more deformable normal blood cells can generally flow or squeeze through,
but stiffer CTCs will be blocked. This resistance is caused by the
surface tension of the CTC cells. The level of resistance can be
expressed by the total inlet pressure required to overcome the cell
membrane surface tension. 19The viscosity pressure drop
can be expressed by the Hagen–Poiseuille law: 20The minor pressure drop can
be expressed as follows: 21The pressure drop caused
by the dimensions of the filtering channel can be expressed as follows: 22Considering the Young–Laplace
analysis, the pressure drops caused by surface tension can be expressed
as follows: 23where Pt is the inlet pressure; Pvis is
the pressure drop due to viscosity; Psur is the pressure drop due to surface tension; Pmajor is the viscous pressure drop; Rhyd is the hydraulic resistance; QV is the volume flow rate; Pminor is the
minor pressure drop; V is the flow velocity; KC is the constriction coefficient; KE is the expansion coefficient; ρ is the density,
σ is the surface tension coefficient; Rchannel is the radius of the channel; Rcell is the radius of the cell body; Cpw is the cross-sectional wet perimeter; θ is the contact
angle; and Ap is the section area.
In the following study, the authors utilized the ISET transistor
for the discovery of CTCs in cancer patients and as a screening tool
in patients with a higher hazard of threat, e.g., family history,
smoking status, and age (>50 years). Here, we demonstrated that
screening
for CTCs permits early identification of the location of cancer. We
further summarized the follow-up results of CTC repeat tests in patients
whose CTCs were detected who were receiving immune-stimulating nutritional
therapy. A strategy to kill cancer cells
within the bloodstream was illustrated by functionalizing circulating
leukocytes with cancer-specific TNF-related apoptosis actuating ligand
(Trail) and the E-selectin grip receptor. In this preparatory work,
we propose a straightforward strategy in which a corporeal tube is
utilized to evacuate and collect CTCs from the circulatory system;
this strategy has potential applications in the following areas ( ):(a)diminishing metastasis
by expelling
CTCs from circulation and
(b)demonstrating applications such as
CTC count and hereditary investigation.
The
described device consists of a modified commercially available
plastic tube functionalized with EpCAM antibodies on the inner surface. The authors mentioned the potential for utilization
in a clinical setting by segregating CTCs in 14 blood tests from 12
patients with metastatic breast, prostate, lung, or ovarian cancer.
This device may be a direct framework consisting of a polyurethane
microtube functionalized with a bimolecular surface of selectin and
counteracting agent atoms that permits for the reproducible maintenance
of CTCs within the device without dispensing cellular harm. The authors
further report on the application of a halloysite nanotube coating,
which leads to enhanced device performance. Capture efficiency or effectiveness determines the device’s
ability to capture tumor cells (TCs) in spiked blood samples. This
measurement was defined as the number of tumor cells obtained divided
by the total number of tumor cells included in the blood sample. 24Embosment is similar to capture
efficiency but instead refers to the greater percentage in the tumor
cells within a volume compared to a background of other cells (primarily
white blood cells) before and after the sample passes through the
device being evaluated. 25Purity refers to the possibility
of the device to specifically capture tumor cells or CTCs with a background
of contaminating cells (white blood cells, etc.). Purity was declared
as the number of CTCs captured divided by the total number of nucleated
cells captured, and one metric can be measured from clinical samples. 26Throughput
declares how quickly
the device can process a sample, and it is commonly written as either
volume or cells per unit of time (Jin et al., 2014). In another work, a microfluidic chip captures CTC by using
an RIE-generated nanorough glass surface as the substrate for efficient
capture of CTCs, regardless of cell size or surface protein expression. They mentioned that RIE-generated nanorough
surfaces efficiently capture various types of cancer cells (MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231, HeLa, PC3, SUM-149, etc.) without the need for capture
antibodies. We succeeded in demonstrating that this approach is possible.
The authors’ cancer cell retention strategy with a nanorough
glass surface uniquely applies the differential adhesion preference
of cancer cells to nanorough surfaces compared to that of normal blood
cells; thus, this strategy was not reliant on the physical size or
surface protein formation of cancer cells, a significant advantage
compared to other existing CTC capture techniques. CTCs however in are a rare state and have the potential
to pose as biomarkers to noninvasively diagnose and prognose disease.
CTCs have fueled the emergence of diverse and novel technologies to
capture them efficiently and rapidly. It was confirmed that the tubes could be reused with only a slight
reduction in capture capacity by removing the captured cells by trypsinization
(data not included). Finally, the method does not need complex microfluidics
or microfabrication and can be easily adapted to current medical practice
using existing medical tubing. Threfore, additional markers need
to be added in the future. The device can be used for both diagnostic
and therapeutic purposes. An interesting application of this method
lies in the collection of live cancer cells for patient-derived tumor
xenograft (PDTX) models used in cancer drug discovery. Additional
filters or agents that induce apoptosis can also be mounted to increase
capture/kill rates. Notably, this principle can also be applied to
other conditions, such as bacterial or viral bloodborne infections. 
 Microstructured surfaces are demonstrated by unique
properties,
waterproofing and low adhesion, making them highly valuable in this
field. These surfaces significantly influence cell behavior by replicating
the natural microenvironments of biological tissues. Micropatterned
surfaces made from polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) were used to study
their effects on primary breast cancer cell lines compared with outcomes
on conventional flat surfaces. By varying the surface topography,
researchers guided cell addition, growth, and morphology. They confirmed
that surface-free energy is not a secondary factor but a pivotal element
in cell dynamics with a strong correlation to the spreading behavior
of breast cancer cells. On micropillar surfaces representing high
surface-free energy, an increase in cancer cells was noted, while
surfaces with lower surface-free energy reduced cell viability. Structural
parameters, taking into account the gaps and diameters of the pillars,
were found to be critical in cellular dispersion and adhesion, highlighting
the importance of microstructural topography in biomedical applications.
These insights lay the foundation for designing advanced microstructured
surfaces tailored to specific cellular responses, enabling new possibilities
in targeted cancer therapies and tissue engineering. , Overall, a table with a list of common surface preparation methods
is given in .
 
7

## Modeling of Adhesion on the Surface of CTC
Cell-based models,
known as discrete, agent-based, or individual-based
models, simulate individual cell interactions within virtual tissue
environments, which replicate the dynamics observed and controlled
in cancer systems. Modeling individual cells enables the direct translation
of biological observations into simulation rules. Cell adhesion, a phenomenon that characterizes cell–environment
interactions, significantly influences the cellular behavior. Cell
adhesion is supported by focal adhesions (FAs), which are multilayered
protein complexes. The disorder in cytoskeletal filaments enables
information to be transferred efficiently along these rigid transport
channels between cell regions, minimizing energy dissipation typical
in softer materials. Specific elements of adhesion mechanisms—such
as tensile stiffness inhomogeneity in cell structure and a tension-supported
cell system—are effectively addressed by modeling strategies
using the finite element method (FEM), which is a reliable tool for
simulating cell adhesion. , FEM modeling replicates
experimental results and predicts cell behaviors, offering essential
insights that advance computational models and enhance our understanding
of metastasis, a complex cancer progression stage. These models propose
new tools for predicting cancer spread, while different steps of metastasis
highlight fresh perspectives, identify research gaps, and suggest
future directions for study. The review authors classify computational
models and simulations by the metastasis stage they target, with cellular
adhesion modeling outlined in the proposed work. Detailed modeling equations are provided in Table 1 and
Table 2 in the same reference. The elements
interact with their neighbors through three forces, i.e., a conservative
(repulsive) force FijC, a dissipative (friction) force FijD, and a
random force FijR. The resultant force Fi exerted on each individual particle is expressed as 27This force can be used as
a model equation. Many researchers have attempted to solve problems
associated with the cell adhesion process via molecular modeling.
The authors of these studies describe
cell adhesion forces via mathematical modeling. The authors used equations
for the time-dependent position of the single binding side of the
substrate. Another study described the cell–substrate adhesion
strength via biophysical measurements of cell detachment from the
substrate. A theoretical framework was presented for calculating the
fraction of detached cells. The computation
of cell motility was described in the next article. Here, the authors explained that lymphocytes perform different
movement patterns such as the sustained Brownian random walk and the
Lewy Walk ( ). The model predicts a random walk with short-term persistence but
long-term quasi diffusive properties that lead to pivot motility.
The spatial distribution of adhesion is an important factor in cell
motility when the adhesion area is small.
 Cells migrate to their destination and aggregate
through cell–cell
adhesion to form an adhesive tissue. The model is formed in three
forms. Probabilistic, individual, or deterministic. The models of
cell–cell adhesion reviewed in the past have predominantly
been discrete, and there are relatively few continuum, population-based
models. Modeling of cell adhesion is
important, mainly in studies of cancer invasion and metastasis. Modeling
the multispecific targeting reagents can improve the efficiency and
selectivity of drug-based therapies. Therefore, a deeper understanding
of the basic principles underlying the interaction between multiple
specific ligands and their receptors is crucial for the further development
of new therapeutic strategies. Computational approaches have made
it possible to systematically study a wide range of variables, and
many methods have recently been created to study interactions between
ligands and cell surface receptors. The chemical kinetics of receptor–ligand
binding was first described by simple mathematical models and has
been improved by considering the spatial confinement of membrane receptors.
The authors investigated the effect of reducing the dimensionality
of a receptor qualified to a two-dimensional bilayer by adjusting
the reaction rate between the receptor and ligand on binding. Information
about spatial heterogeneity and molecular details was not obtained.
In contrast, atom-based molecular dynamic simulations were applied to provide full structural descriptions
of both ligands and receptors. Other hybrid models have been involved
in bridging the gap between mathematical modeling and atomic simulations.
For instance, Miguez and colleagues
applied Langevin dynamics for ligand–receptor interactions,
in which ligands and receptors were represented as simplified spherical
particles. Another computational model was introduced to study the
general mechanisms of interaction between membrane receptors and their
ligands. This paper summarizes current advances in this field and
discusses the role of cell junctions, cell adhesion, epithelial–mesenchymal
transition, and vascular and lymphangiogenesis. The important role
of cell adhesion molecules in the cancer metastatic cascade can be
divided into three main processes: invasion, intravasation, and extravasation.
Loss of cell–cell adhesion ability enables malignant tumor
cells to decouple from the primary tumor mass, and altered cell–matrix
interactions allow cells to invade the surrounding stroma. A comparison
of rolling and firm adhesion states of CTC cell models’ distinct
adhesion states in fluid flow under Re = 0.1 is given in ref ( ). Periphery conformation
and adhesion are two very necessary and related steps in tumor metastasis.
For example, Firrell et al. and Abbitt
et al. suggested that the bordering
and adhesion of a leukocyte mainly occur at low flow rates based on
in vivo and in vitro experiments. Fedosov et al. also reported a same dependence of leukocyte margination
on the flow rate and hematocrit via numerical simulations. To date,
only a few quantitative studies on tumor cell margins and adhesion
have been performed. In any case, a
few tests have shown that delicate CTCs are more likely to extravasate
from the circulation. Recent simulation has also favored the latter
conclusion. The stochastic adhesion
model applied by Hammer and Apte is
frequently used to theoretically and quantitatively study the adhesion
of various cells, including CTCs. The model proposed cell adhesion
as a dynamic association and dissociation between cell receptors and
vascular wall ligands. Clearly, if receptors and ligands are in frequent
contact, cells are likely to adhere to the vessel wall. Additionally,
several studies have shown that cell adhesion significantly depends
on the microvessel geometry. For example, Liu et al. performed experiments
and concluded that breast cancer cells preferentially extravasate
from vascular bifurcations. More recently, Hynes and Pepona et al. studied metastatic behavior of a complex vasculature
via both experiments and simulations. However, few studies have been
performed on tumor metastasis through a complex microvascular network
at the cellular level, where cell deformation, aggregation, and adhesion
need to be considered at the same time. Experimental results in this
range are limited by the reliability of the measurements and the complexity
of blood flow. Numerical modeling also poses great challenges due
to the polydispersity of blood components and the network-like structure
of microvessels. This excellent review
describes multicellular assembly with synthetic cell adhesion molecules. The authors demonstrated that combining orthogonal
extracellular interactions with intracellular domains from native
adhesion molecule types of cadherins and integrins can result in a
wide variety of synthetic cell adhesion molecules. Cell–cell
interactions with adhesion facts lead to native interactions produced
by the resulting molecules. This makes it possible for native tissues
to undergo systematic remodeling, as well as the rationally programmed
assembly of multicellular architectures. All types of adhesion interactions
are skillfully described in ref ( ). In another review on surface modeling, the
control of cell shape, tissue patterns, and morphogenesis were modeled.
The adhesion phenomenon can be interpreted by the regulation of the
cell surface tension. The associations between fluids and tissues,
compartment and cell type, and cell shape and cell surface tension
have been described in detail. Not less
important information is collected in review articles in which the targeting of metastatic cancer
cells is thoroughly documented. In general, tumors undergo ECM remodeling
to form a microenvironment that promotes tumorigenesis and metastasis.
The authors focused on how tumor and tumor-associated stromal cells
deposit, biochemical and biophysical modifications, and degradation
of tumor-associated ECM. A better understanding of the underlying
mechanisms of tumorigenic ECM remodeling is crucial for developing
therapeutic treatments for patients. A review of cell–cell interfaces and their shared components
was published. A detailed model of cell–surface
integrins is described in ref ( ) ( ). The results from the simulation by a single-state method applying
the following clustering of ligands does not enhance total receptor
binding. However, when the energy of receptor bindings increases and
neighboring ligand receptors are present, strong ligand spatial distribution
effects increase. These results describe how the spatial distribution
of ligands might control cell responses to external ligands, which
can be achieved by synthetic biomimetic materials or an extracellular
matrix. The results also suggest a feedback mechanism for initiation
of local contact formation.
 The bonding of the cells in the
first stage is
mediated by the
formation of weak adhesion, which depends on CD44 and integrin αvβ3.
Stabilization of this process requires integrin α5β1-dependent
adhesions, which have a greater strength of adhesion. Therefore, CTCs
can discontinue in vascular regions with lower shear forces. In addition,
blood flooding preferentially leads to luminal deposition of fibronectin
on endothelial cells (integrin α5β1 ligand). According
to these findings, only receptors that participate in stable adhesion
are required for metastasis and subsequent extravasation. The molecular
members sequentially exploited by CTCs to arrest and extravasate in
vascular regions with permissive flow regimes were identified. The ability of elastic deformation analysis
to measure receptor binding affinity led to the conclusion that the
relative binding affinity of adhesion complexes is crucial for the
regulation of cell adhesion. Initially,
experiments were conducted. , 
A biomechanistic
simulation plays its own role in modeling cancer.
Tissue engineering enables the creation of models that more accurately
replicate the 3D architecture found in tumors. Furthermore, the mechanical
microenvironment has been shown to significantly influence the cancer
progress and drug resistance. Recent advancements in tissue-engineered
tumor models highlight the impact of biomechanical forces, and future
improvements are suggested to enhance the physiological relevance
of these models. The tumor microenvironment
encompasses a complex interaction among cells, the extracellular matrix
(ECM), and vasculature. The ECMs, composed from collagen, fibronectins,
CAMs, and matrix metalloproteinases, serve as a mediator of mechanical
properties and are a key component in the mechanical signaling pathway. The vasculature applies shear forces on tumor
cells, enabling them to take on immune surveillance, promoting their
circulation in the bloodstream, guiding the trajectory of circulating
tumor cells (CTCs), and playing a primary role in regulating adhesion
to the vessel wall. Increasing relations from physical sciences in
oncology supposed that the interaction between the biophysical properties
of the tumor microenvironment and genetic regulation greatly influences
tumor progression. Tumor cells, along
with attached stromal cells, not only modify their own cytoskeleton
and physical characteristics but also remodel the microenvironment,
introducing abnormal physical properties. A systematic understanding
of how biophysical signals affect tumor pathophysiology remains incomplete.
This highlights new directions for future cancer research and outlines
a novel mechanomedicine framework to address the limitations of conventional
cancer diagnostics treatments and therapies. 

8

## Conclusions
The aim of this review
was to collect novel information about the
role of modifying cell surface energy and the effects of physical
adhesion to prevent the formation of metastases. Information on the
challenges and opportunities for developing treatments for cancer
metastasis was tracked. General adhesion science relies on the modulation
of the cell surface energy and its effect on adhesion. Adhesion receptor
function was documented, including a brief description of signaling
pathways. Cadherin and integrin expression and activation directly
affect human malignancies. A number of early studies have reported
the relationship between cell adhesion and the matrix surface free
energy. A description of the surface energy calculation is given,
and receptor-targeted cancer therapy and the use of antiadhesion molecules
are mentioned. Surface modification and surface engineering regulate
the roles on cell adhesion. Surface-free energy not only represents
a background factor but also plays a decisive role in cell dynamics,
strongly correlating with the spreading behavior of breast cancer
cells. Different computational models were documented on cell adhesion
and different stages of malignancy.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by financial grant
APVV-20-0278 from the Agency for support of research and development
and NATO SPS program ID number G6106.

## Abbreviations
aEpCAMAntibody
of epithelial cell adhesion
molecule
ALCAMActivated
leukocyte cell adhesion
molecule
aSLeXSialyl
Lewis X antibody
CAMCell adhesion molecule
CMCell membrane
CTCCirculating tumor cell
DIBDroplet interface bilayer
ECMExtracellular matrix
EMTEpithelial–mesenchymal
transition
EpCAMEpithelial cell adhesion molecule
EPS364Exopolysaccharide 364
ERMEzrin, Radixin, Moesin
FAKFocal adhesion kinase
FGF19-FGFR4Fibroblast
growth factor
19–fibroblast growth factor receptor 4
EGFREpidermal growth factor receptor
GSK3βGlycogen
synthase kinase-3
beta
HER2Human
epidermal growth factor receptor-2
HUVECHuman umbilical vein endothelial
cell
ICAMIntercellular
adhesion molecule
MST1Macrophage-stimulating 1
Myo1Myosin-1
NF-kBNuclear factor kappa-light-chain
enhancer of activated B cells
OWRK methodOwens, Wendt, Rabel, and
Kaelble method
p-LATS1Phospho-large tumor suppressor
kinase 1
PAMAMPoly(amidoamine)
PBMCPeripheral blood
mononuclear cell
PEGPoly(ethylene glycol)
RBCRed blood cell
RGDArginylglycylaspartic acid
RIEReactive ion etching
SAMSelf-assembled monolayer
SEMScanning electron microscope
TATannic acid
TCTumor cell
TAZTranscriptional coactivator
with
PDZ-binding motif
TNF-αTumor necrosis factor α
VCAMVascular cell adhesion molecule
WntWingless-related integration
site
YAPYes-associated
protein