pmcJ Orthop TranslatJ Orthop Translat3351jotJournal of Orthopaedic Translation2214-031X2214-0328Chinese Speaking Orthopaedic SocietyPMC12799505PMC12799505.112799505127995054154210210.1016/j.jot.2025.08.005S2214-031X(25)00135-41Review ArticleCan alternatives to animal testing yield useful information regarding biological mechanisms and drug discovery?
GaoQiChowSimon Kwoon-HoShinoharaIsseiMurayamaMasatoshiSusukiYosukeMoritaMayuMaChaoGoodmanStuart B.goodbone@stanford.edu Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 94304, USA⁎Corresponding author. goodbone@stanford.edu112025119202555496134132145252202528720251182025110920251501202616012026© 2025 The Authors2025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Establish alternative strategies to standard animal experiments decrease animal utilization and simultaneously enhance the reliability of biological and disease models. This review highlights advancements in three areas: in vitro culture platforms, disease modeling, and in silico simulations. We first discuss the innovative in vitro approaches, including 2D coculture systems, 3D spheroids, organoids, and organ-on-chip models, which facilitate the creation of physiologically relevant environments. Then, we focus on cell selection and characterization in disease modeling, with a particular focus on bone fracture healing and inflammation. We further review the potential of in silico simulations, including molecular docking, machine learning (ML) approaches, and pharmacokinetics-pharmacodynamics (PK/PD) modeling, to predict drug efficacy, interactions, and biological outcomes. These alternative strategies provide the potential for obtaining accurate and consistent results, thereby enhancing biomedical research and decreasing dependence on animal models. The Translational Potential of this Article: This review examines in vitro organoids, microphysiological systems, and computational models as alternatives to animal testing. These methods enhance our understanding of biological mechanisms. They also reduce the requirement for animal models. Ultimately, they help accelerate drug discovery that can directly benefit patients.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Keywords
Microphysiological systemsDisease modelingIn silico modelspmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Traditionally, animals have been used in preclinical studies for disease modeling and drug discovery. When performing biological experiments using animals, one must bear in mind the “3 Rs” of responsible animal use: Replacing, Reducing and Refining [ , ]. Replacing implies avoiding or substituting established animal models with non-animal systems such as cell-based systems, less advanced animal species, computer simulation and modeling, and other approaches and technologies. Reducing denotes using the minimal number of animals to accomplish the goal of the experiment. Statistical consultation is invaluable in achieving this objective. Reducing encompasses well designed and analyzed experiments in which the findings are robust, reproducible, and further the scientific knowledge in the specific area. Refining implies that if animal experiments are performed, the researcher must ensure the least amount of pain and distress to the animal, in an optimized, supportive environmental setting.
Recently, government agencies and institutions worldwide have adopted the 3Rs and have acted to substantially limit animal research and testing in the future [ , , ]. To this end, the FDA published the following statement in 11/14/2023 [ ]:
“Animal studies can be critical to evaluating the potential for toxicity, safety and, at times, effectiveness, of FDA-regulated products. However, premarket animal-based assessments are time and resource intensive and may not always fully predict or detect potential concerns of FDA-regulated products for proposed uses in humans and animals. Alternative methods have the potential to provide both more timely and more predictive information to help accelerate product development, prevent products with increased toxicological risk from reaching the market, assess efficacy, provide insight into disease processes, and enhance emergency preparedness for the benefit of U.S. patients, consumers, and animals. Alternative methods have this potential while reducing the need for animal testing”.
The above position statement has stimulated a critical appraisal of the use of animals in translational research, and premarket assessments of new drugs. Indeed, a 3D microfluidic chip based on bone marrow aspirate concentrate (BMAC) is suggested to predict pain relief in knee osteoarthritis patients in a phase 3 multicenter trial (NCT03818737) [ ]. BMAC clinical samples cultured in the on-chip 3D system exhibited elevated levels of immunomodulatory and higher correlative power with patient pain scores compared to 2D culture. While this is a landmark proof-of-concept supporting future regulatory acceptance, it has not yet received a specific 10.13039/100000038FDA designation. As alternatives to animal testing, strategies to obtain data relevant to human diseases may include simpler models that do not involve whole animals (such as cell cultures, organoids, and microphysiological systems), computer simulations of physiological processes, and other approaches.
In 1938, the U.S. Congress passed the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act which gave the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the power to oversee and help ensure the safety and efficacy of food, drugs, medical devices and cosmetics. Animal testing was an integral part of the protocols to accomplish these goals for new drugs. For the reasons outlined above, the use of animals in preclinical and drug studies was recently reassessed by Congress resulting in The FDA Modernization Act 2.0, which was signed into law in December 2022 by President Biden. This new law overrides the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act of 1938, and now allows robust and evidence-based preclinical studies that do not necessarily include animal testing [ , ]. This act has spawned a new age in which in vitro, in silico and related models have provided valuable data to investigate new drugs, and biological mechanisms of disease.

2

## In vitro culture platforms
2.1

## Culture of adhesion cells and suspended cells
Adhesion cells are characterized by their dependence on a substrate to grow and proliferate. This category includes various cell types, such as mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), fibroblasts, chondrocytes, skeletal myocytes, and neurons. The culture surface serves as a support structure that facilitates cell spread and expand. This process involves complex interactions between the cell membrane and extracellular matrix (ECM) components on the surface (see ). 
Surface coatings and patterning have widely been developed to improve and modulate cell adhesion, differentiation, and function. The surface coatings are designed to replicate the ECM environment that cells naturally experience. Collagen is one of the common coating materials that enhance MSC adhesion, survival rate, and proliferation [ ]. Coating of type II collagen to chitosan scaffolds markedly enhances the adhesion of MSCs and promotes the process of chondrogenesis [ ]. The interactions of collagen with integrins, discoidin domain receptors, and annexin V receptors promote cell adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation. Therefore, it is suggested that the direct injection of collagen into joint space may improve the localization and chondrogenic differentiation of MSCs [ ]. The coating of fibronectin supports the adherence and growth of MSCs on a polyurethane meniscal scaffold, as it binds to integrins on the cell membrane [ ]. In addition, fibronectin bound to a fibrous substrate has chondrogenic induction properties [ ]. The ECM natural products generated by cells serve as another key material for coatings. They consist of a mixture of biomolecules, including collagen, fibronectin, and growth factors. The ECM derived from MSC promotes the chondrogenic phenotype and facilitates cartilage formation [ ]. Besides improving cell differentiation and proliferation, for induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), the use of surface coatings is crucial to achieve optimal conditions for attachment, growth, and differentiation in a culture environment. Commonly used coating materials include: vitronectin, laminin, and Matrigel [ ].
As cells attach to the surface, their functions are significantly influenced by the topography and geometry of the substrate. Developments in microfabrication produced micro-patterned surfaces that direct cell alignment, morphology, and functionality. Modification of surface topography and substrate stiffness have a significant impact on the differentiation of cells into osteogenic and chondrogenic lineages [ , ]. Topography-mediated mechanosensing modulates cell elongation, focal adhesions, and the activity of transcriptional regulator YAP which influences MSC osteogenesis. Surface coatings and patterning play a crucial role in promoting cell adhesion and differentiation by mimicking the ECM, with modifications influencing cell behavior and tissue development.
Suspended cells are characterized by their lack of requirement for surface attachment, allowing them to remain in suspension in the culture medium. In the musculoskeletal system, several types of suspended cells are involved in the maintenance of tissue homeostasis, as well as for the repair and regeneration processes. For example, proinflammatory T cells secrete cytokines that synergize with BMP-2 to promote osteoblast differentiation [ ]. Upon activation, naive immune cells secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IL-1, and IL-6, to initiate and regulate immune responses. Conversely, immune cells polarize to an anti-inflammatory phenotype and produce anti-inflammatory cytokines including IL-10 and TGF-β, which help regulate inflammation, promote healing, and restore tissue integrity. In addition to T cells, monocytes circulate in the bloodstream and are differentiated into macrophages that modulate inflammation and tissue homeostasis. Hematopoietic cells also provide signals that facilitate the proliferation of MSCs. The c-Mpl signal is crucial for maintaining hematopoietic stem cells and significantly impacts the proliferation and differentiation of MSCs [ ]. By utilizing suspended cells, researchers can explore cell signaling, differentiation, and regenerative processes in a controlled environment.
In vitro culture is the most common approach, which is simple to operate without special equipment. In adhesion culture, cells attach to a flat substrate, which is advantageous for microscopy, live-cell imaging, and allows for cell expansion to support downstream experiments. It also facilitates studies of cell migration, proliferation, and differentiation. However, 2D culture cannot mimic the in vivo 3D microenvironment, limiting investigations of cell heterogeneity and gradient formation. Furthermore, long-term 2D culture can induce phenotypic changes in cells ( ).

2.2

## 2D Co-culture systems for musculoskeletal research
Cell co-culturing is two or more different types of cells that grow together in a single culture system. Depending on the experimental design, cells can interact in different ways, including well-mixed contact, layered contact, and layered non-contact.
In well-mixed contact conditions, cells are randomly mixed and in direct contact with each other. For instance, co-culture of chondrocytes and MSCs significantly enhances the expression levels of ECM components (including type II collagen and aggrecan) associated with cartilage [ ]. The ratio of different cell types can significantly affect the outcomes of the experiment. In the process of coculturing MSCs, macrophages, and T cells, an increase in the number of T cells resulted in an increased M2 polarization [ ].
In layered contact conditions, cells are cultured in layers that are in direct physical contact with each other. The direct placement of hematopoietic progenitor cells onto a confluent layer of MSCs significantly promotes the proliferation and maintenance of these progenitor cells [ ]. Certain cell cultures require attachment and growth on a seed cell layer. For example, iPSCs are often generated and expanded in the presence of a feeder cell layer [ ]. The feeder cell layer supports iPSCs by secreting growth factors, providing ECM components, and maintaining their pluripotent state.
In layered non-contact conditions, cells are cultured in distinct layers but do not have direct contact with each other. A membranes or porous inserts (known as transwell systems) creates a physical barrier between various cell types. One cell type is placed on the lower side of the membrane, whereas a different type can be introduced to the upper side. The membrane pore size is small to prevent the migration or penetration of cells while enabling the exchange of soluble factors. This system enables studying paracrine signaling, cell migration, and other interactions. For example, human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMECs) can be seeded into the upper chambers of cell-culture inserts, while MSCs are cultured on the lower side. The paracrine secretion of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) by MSCs enhance endothelial permeability significantly [ ]. The spatial arrangement of different cell types in coculture systems has the potential to induce unique cellular behaviors and increase the production of factors crucial for tissue repair and regeneration. Culture of human synovial MSCs at the lower layer and chondrocytes on the upper layer promotes chondrogenic differentiation while promoting the secretion of TGFβ [ ].
2D cell coculture enables the study of cell-to-cell crosstalk, such as paracrine signaling, and the use of one cell type as a support cell to promote the growth of another cell type. It also retains the conveniences of 2D culture, including high-resolution imaging and live-cell microscopy. However, this system is difficult to incorporate mechanical cues and fails to recapitulate in vivo gradients of oxygen, nutrients, and growth factors.

2.3

## 3D spheroids and organoids
3D culture is more physiologically relevant compared with traditional 2D cell cultures. The self-assembly of cells leads to the formation of 3D spheroids. Organoids are complex 3D structures resembling small organs. They generally comprise multiple cell types and require scaffolds or specific matrices to facilitate their growth and organization [ , , ]. Both spheroids and organoids are valuable tools in investigating diseases associated with bone, cartilage, and muscle. While various generation methods have been extensively reviewed, this discussion will focus on experimental techniques for detecting biological processes.
Cell numbers are essential factors in the generation of spheroids directly influence their dimensions. An increased cell number frequently corresponds with an increased spheroid size, which ranges from tens of micrometers to several hundred micrometers in diameter. For example, when MSCs are cultured in a non-adherent environment, they can form spheroids within one day. The diameter of spheroids generated from 2600 cells is approximately 300 μm, while those from 1000 cells have a diameter of around 200 μm [ ]. However, different methods may generate spheroids that vary in size, even with the same number of cells. 100,000 cells seeded using the hanging drop method had a diameter of around 900 μm, while magnetically levitated spheroids had a diameter of only 500 μm [ ]. A hypoxic core may form in spheroids when they exceed a particular size threshold. Oxygen-dependent biomarker is transfected to cells via lentivirus. Hypoxia is identified when spheroids produced by the hanging drop technique reach a diameter of 920 μm. In micro-structured plates, spheroids with a diameter of 180 μm resulted in the formation of a radial oxygen gradient [ ]. Cells possess regulatory mechanisms that help to alleviate the impacts of hypoxia. As the number of cells and the overall size of the spheroids increase, there is a marked decrease in cellular metabolism. This reduction in metabolism may result from adaptive changes in matrix deposition and packing density, thereby enabling them to prevent the onset of a hypoxic core [ ]. Dynamic culture systems (rotating bioreactors) maintain spheroids and organoids in gentle suspension, which enhances mixture of the culture medium around the 3D constructs and improves oxygen and nutrient transportation. As a result, dynamic systems prevent the development of hypoxic or necrotic cores that commonly arise in static cultures.
To evaluate cell viability, a dual-staining strategy is widely used, where calcein-AM is employed to indicate live cells and ethidium homodimer-1 is employed to indicate dead cells. In addition to cell viability, cell proliferation is also crucial for assessing cell status, as it may slow down due to limited nutrient and oxygen availability. The cell proliferation rate within the 3D culture can be measured using assays such as EdU incorporation or Ki-67 staining [ ]. Analyzing single cell properties in the 3D spheroid or organoid models is essential for understanding their functional characteristics. Spheroids and organoids are dissociated to obtain single cells, facilitating further examination such as flow cytometry and other analyses. For example, spheroids are digested using Accutase Cell Detachment Solution [ ], and the surface markers and gene expression of the single cells can be verified using common protocols. 2.5 % Trypsin and TrypLE Express solution may also work [ , ].
Methods used for analyzing spheroids and organoids are the similar to those used in standard 2D cell cultures or animal experiments. qRT-PCR or RNA sequencing are widely applied to quantify the expression of organ-specific genes. Bone, cartilage, and adipose organoids derived from MSCs/iPSCs are generated using hydroxyapatite nanorods, an osteoinductive bioceramic. These organoids are subsequently validated by gene expression profiling and histological analysis. The successful expression of tissue-specific markers demonstrates that organoids derived from MSCs or iPSCs can be used to mimic articular tissue [ ]. The Col II/Col I ratio is a key quantitative factor for validating 3D cartilage models that recapitulate cartilage characteristics. In a chondral organoid cultured for 7 days, qPCR analysis of Col II and Col I mRNA levels produced a Col II/Col I ratio comparable to that of primary human articular cartilage tissue, demonstrating that these organoids exhibit a bona fide cartilage-like phenotype and tissue properties [ ]. Cells in a 3D state can also be observed using microscopy, with common techniques including confocal microscopy and live-cell imaging. A 3D spheroid model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovial tissue incorporates fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages. The spheroid expansion and cell migration are quantified using confocal microscopy and digital image analysis [ ]. Cartilage organoids derived from MSCs exhibit significant osteoarthritic characteristics, including chondrocyte hypertrophy, mineralization of the cartilage matrix, increased catabolic activity, and mechanical stiffening. Mass spectrometry is further applied to analyze proteomics of the spheroids subsequent to their exposure to IL-1Ra. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Luminex methodologies enable the identification of specific proteins or cytokines that secreted to the environment. The levels of secreted IL8, PGE2, IL6, and TNF-α are quantified by ELISA and Luminex assay [ ]. Stiffness can be identified in 3D models, which is an essential factor in osteogenic differentiation by providing mechanical support. Atomic force microscope indentation is commonly used to measure scaffold stiffness, providing an accurate representation of the physical environment that affects cell behavior and tissue development [ ]. Furthermore, 3D culture can incorporate some methods used in animal experiments, allowing for tissue sectioning and images. IL-1β, TNF-α, and IL-6 are used to treat organoids derived from osteoarthritis (OA) articular cartilage or osteophytes. IL-6 is found to suppress osteophyte growth, indicating its role in regulating osteophyte formation in pathological joints. The organoids were fixed, embedded in paraffin, stained with hematoxylin and eosin, and Safranin O, and assessed through histological grading [ ]. Using these techniques and methodologies, we can investigate cellular behavior and interactions in a 3D microenvironment. For disease modeling, 3D organoids can be evaluated using the same quantitative standards applied in vivo. For example, histological scoring systems (such as the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) system for cartilage degeneration or the Pritzker scale for osteoarthritis) can be applied to organoid sections stained with Safranin O/Fast Green or hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). For example, after applying hyper-physiological cyclic loading to iPSC-derived cartilage organoids, histological sections are scored using the OARSI system to quantify depth and surface area of degeneration, mimicking load-induced cartilage damage in vitro [ ]. In addition, inflamed versus perfused synovial and chondral organoids are compared based on OARSI scoring of Safranin O-stained sections [ ].
3D spheroids and organoids allow cells to grow in 3D, establishing faithful cell–cell and cell–matrix interactions and reproducing internal gradients of nutrients, oxygen, and metabolites. However, the variability in methodologies among different research groups and cell batches is high, making standardization difficult. Their 3D structure is not compatible to conventional microscopy and requires light‐sheet imaging, tissue sectioning, or clearing. Recovering cells for downstream analysis also demands additional digestion steps. Finally, organoid differentiation and maturation take weeks, which limits their use in rapid screening workflows.

2.4

## Organs-on-Chips
Organ-on-Chip (OOC) is a microfluidic device that mimics human organ functions in a dynamic process. It typically contains a variety of cell types within a 3D environment and incorporates microfluidics to simulate blood circulation, mechanical forces, and tissue–tissue interactions. Establishing an OOC model begins with designing and fabricating a microfluidic chip that mimics the architecture. Flow and mechanical forces, such as shear stress or stretching, are applied to simulate physiological conditions such as blood flow or organ movement. Cells are subsequently introduced into the chip.
Cells used in OOC can be mature tissue cells or by loading stem cells for differentiation within the system. For the first approach, mature cells such as chondrocytes or fibroblasts are directly collected and loaded onto the OOC. For the second approach, stem cells such as MSCs are encapsulated in photocrosslinkable methacrylated gelatin. The MSC-laden gelatin constructs are then integrated into a 3D-printed bioreactor. Separate flows of osteogenic and chondrogenic media were introduced to sustain the respective tissue phenotypes for 28 days [ ].
Once the model is set up, validation involves confirming that the cells behave as they would in vivo. This is accomplished by assessing cell viability, morphology, gene expression, and functional assays. For instance, in synovial and chondral organoids, confocal imaging reveals typical round chondrocyte morphology in the fibrin constructs, with 83.46 ± 16.5 % cell viability on day 21. The chondral organoids obtained from healthy donors demonstrate indicators of cartilage health, such as the ratios of Col II to Col I and AGC to Col I, which are comparable to those observed in native human cartilage [ ]. Osteochondral tissues from knee replacement surgeries of OA patients are cultured in an OOC system, with cytotoxicity measured by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels. Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), Coll2-1, and PIINP are monitored in the medium over 70 days to validate system replicates the joint microenvironment [ ].
Multi-organ systems are advanced models that integrate multiple human organ systems into one chip to simulate multi-organ interactions. A successful example is a tissue-chip system that integrates human heart, liver, bone, and skin tissues, connected through vascular flow to simulate organ interactions. Bone tissue is generated using MSCs and decellularized scaffolds, with monocytes replicate the osteolytic cycles. Crosstalk between tissues is verified, as heart-derived exosomes have been identified in all tissue types, and exosome uptake by endothelial cells is confirmed. Each tissue maintains its phenotype for four weeks and recapitulates doxorubicin pharmacokinetics, identifying cardiotoxicity biomarkers [ ]. Multi-organ systems are limited, and studying the unique functions of each organ requires collaboration across multiple disciplines. Each organ has different requirements for its environment. For example, the integration of mechanical stimulation within a 3D joint model effectively simulating the in vivo conditions. Bone requires vasculature and neural cells to more accurately mimic the body's condition, while cartilage is characterized by the absence of vascular structures. Combining these two structures in a model requires further research to understand how to appropriately integrate these distinct tissues. Although further research is needed, multi-organ systems represent a promising direction for future development.
Organ-on-chip platforms recreate key aspects of the tissue microenvironment, including 3D architecture, fluid flow, and mechanical forces, and promote the interconnection of multiple tissue compartments to model organ-to-organ crosstalk. For instance, a high-throughput biomimetic bone-on-a-chip platform designed to assess the efficacy of anti-osteoporotic agents demonstrated substantial utility in preclinical applications [ ]. Furthermore, the emergence of integrated systems such as the innervated synovium-cartilage chip highlights the application in modeling complex joint diseases and pain mechanisms in vitro [ ]. By loading patient-specific cells, these devices support personalized-medicine applications and offer a more patient-relevant alternative for efficacy testing, potentially reducing reliance on animal models. However, they require specialized microfabrication facilities, expertise in microfluidics and custom engineering designing, which increase per-unit costs than static 2D or 3D cultures.
Adhesion cells and suspended cells are commonly used for basic culture studies and are often cocultured in 2D systems. However, to faithfully mimic in vivo conditions, increasing research is focused on 3D spheroids and organoids, which offer more physiologically relevant environments for cell differentiation and tissue modeling, as shown in . The emerging field of organ-on-chip technology integrates multiple cell types within microfluidic platforms, simulating the dynamic interactions and functions of human organs. These platforms enhance our ability to investigate cell behaviors, disease mechanisms, and drug responses in vitro. Table 2 summarizes the key differences among spheroids, organoids, organ-on-chip systems, and multi-organ platforms.Traditional 2D monoculture requires minimal equipment (incubators, standard microscopes), inexpensive consumables (media, plasticware), and low personnel time. The simplified format promotes early phase drug screening and basic mechanistic studies. In contrast, 2D coculture introduces cell-to-cell crosstalk, such as paracrine signaling and support-cell functions, and can partially replace animal experiments. 3D spheroids and organoids demand specialized culture conditions (low-adhesion plates, advanced imaging), and extended culture periods, increasing labor and consumable costs; however, the 3D architecture closely mimics in vivo tissues, significantly reducing reliance on animal models. The 3D culture system promotes research areas such as tumor biology, organogenesis, and toxicity testing. In addition, it improves predictive accuracy to minimize failures in downstream animal studies. Organ-on-chip platforms take the highest economic costs due to microfabrication or commercial chip acquisition. Integrated sensors and dedicated fluidic hardware make them difficult for large‐scale screening but are ideally suited for toxicity assessments and multi-organ interaction studies. Organ‐on‐chip can substitute for multiple complex animal models and are especially valuable for critical toxicity predictions and personalized medicine approaches. Accordingly, one can adopt a staged strategy to optimize the research, that is early high‐throughput assays with 2D monoculture or coculture, mid-stage mechanistic experiments using 3D spheroids/organoids, and critical preclinical evaluations on organ‐on‐chip systems. Animal models require an initial disease-induction phase, such as surgical, genetic, or chemical treatments which often take weeks to establish before mechanism studies or drug efficacy testing is done. In contrast, in vitro systems bypass this induction step, and organ-on-chip platforms can recreate key pathophysiological cues on demand, enabling mechanistic and pharmacological assays to start within days. By integrating relevant cell types under controlled flow and mechanical stimuli, organ-on-chip models dramatically shorten the time from model setup to data collection compared with traditional animal models ( ). 

3

## Disease modeling and therapeutic strategies exploring
3.1

## Cell sources
Commercial cell lines are widely used due to their consistency, accessibility, and ease of manipulating. Within the musculoskeletal system, various cell lines are employed for disease modeling and drug screening. For example, hFOB 1.19 human fetal osteoblasts demonstrate osteoblast-like characteristics, including producing mineralized matrices. Additionally, they express essential osteogenic markers such as alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin. This cell line is frequently employed in studies related to bone diseases and assessment of drug efficacy. The impact of semi-purified fractions derived from Quercus infectoria on bone metabolism is tested using the hFOB 1.19 human fetal osteoblast cell model [ ]. This cell line can also be used to investigate drug pathways, providing a stable and controlled environment to analyze the effects of compounds on cellular processes. The activation of JNK, ERK1/2, and mTOR kinases by betulin facilitates the differentiation of human osteoblasts in vitro, with its osteoinductive properties confirmed through studies utilizing the hFOB 1.19 cell line [ ]. ATDC5 human chondrogenic cell line is commonly used for cartilage research. The mechanism of differentiation induced by ascorbic acid is investigated utilizing ATDC5 chondrogenic cells [ ]. The activity of ascorbic acid is dependent on collagen synthesis and ERK activation and the extracellular matrix produced by ATDC5 cells exposed to ascorbic acid is sufficient to promote differentiation in an ERK-dependent manner. Furthermore, TGF-β suppresses the expression of Ift88, an intraflagellar transport protein essential for cilium function and the maintenance of chondrocytes and cartilage, is confirmed in ATDC5 cells [ ]. Immune cell lines include THP-1 cells (human acute monocytic leukemia cell line) [ ]. THP-1 cells can be differentiated into macrophage-like cells. THP-1-derived macrophages promote MSC osteogenesis by engaging the IL-23/IL-23R/β-catenin pathway [ ]. Although cell lines have many advantages, such as ease of culture, reproducibility, and consistency, they may not fully replicate the complexity and heterogeneity of primary tissues or in vivo environments. An example is that THP-1 and human peripheral blood mononuclear cell-derived macrophages differ in their capacity to polarize in vitro [ ].
Primary cells are obtained directly from tissues, preserving the inherent properties of the original tissue. MSCs can be isolated from both healthy donors and patients for in vitro experiments. These cells preserve and resemble their original features, such as differentiation potential, cell surface markers, and functional properties [ ]. Primary chondrocytes can be isolated from surgical waste after total knee arthroplasty (TKA) [ ]. In addition to tissues, primary cells can also be collected from blood. For example, primary human macrophages are isolated from PBMCs. These immune cells are key for research into immune responses, inflammation, and diseases during bone regeneration. Although primary cells more faithfully reflect clinical features, their cell heterogeneity complicates data interpretation and reproducibility. Primary cells consist of a diverse population of cells that exhibit distinct characteristics and responses, thereby affecting research consistency. For example, tissue-specific endothelial cells exhibit significant heterogeneity in their functions, particularly in the context of organ maintenance and regeneration [ ]. Careful consideration of this variability is necessary when using primary cells in research, and strategies such as cell sorting or expanded populations may be employed to reduce this heterogeneity.
Transfecting cells with specific genes is a powerful method for disease modeling and investigating gene function. By incorporating genes associated with specific diseases or traits, researchers are able to investigate how these genes influence cell function, differentiation, and treatment efficiency. Lentiviral vectors transport genetic material into the target cells, which subsequently integrate it into the DNA of the host. These vectors can be engineered to insert specific genes, thereby enabling long-term gene expression. MSCs that are transduced with HIF-1α using a lentiviral vector demonstrate improved osteogenic potential [ ]. In addition, the utilization of a lentiviral vector that promotes the co-expression of PDGF-BB and IL-4 represents a potentially effective method for improving bone regeneration of MSCs [ ]. While lentiviral vectors are utilized to either enhance gene expression or inhibit gene activity, CRISPR/Cas9 offers higher precision for targeted gene editing. It allows for specific modification at the desired genomic location, either by introducing precise mutations or inserting/exchanging specific sequences. The system is guided by a short RNA sequence (guide RNA, gRNA), which directs the Cas9 enzyme to a precise location in the genome. PTEN knockout MSCs are established utilizing CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing methods [ ]. The PTEN (Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog) knockout strain demonstrated enhanced proliferation abilities while exhibiting a reduced capacity for multi-directional differentiation. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knock-in of a GFP-human dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) promoter in MSCs enables real-time monitoring of osteoblast differentiation [ ].
iPSCs are stem cells generated by reprogramming somatic cells from a patient, reflecting the specific characteristics associated with that patient's condition. Characterized by their pluripotent state, iPSCs are a powerful tool in disease modeling, regenerative medicine, and drug discovery. The typical method for generating iPSCs involves the transfection of specific reprogramming factors, including Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc (known as the Yamanaka factors) [ ]. iPSCs have the potential to differentiate into various cell types derived from the three germ layers, mesoderm, ectoderm, and endoderm. This includes MSCs, endothelial cells, neurons, and other specialized cells. Chondrocytes derived from human iPSCs replicate the functionality of juvenile chondrocytes, enhanced proliferation as well as increased resistance to IL-1β [ ]. The generation of iPSC-derived Prg4-positive cells exhibiting traits similar to those of superficial zone chondrocytes and fibroblast-like synovial cells [ ]. These cell-based alternatives provide crucial information while reducing the need for animal testing, but they must be used alongside other models for comprehensive validation and accurate translation to human health.

3.2

## Characterizing cell types and functions
Identifying cell types and functions in disease processes enables the development of in vitro systems that accurately represent human disease biology. Antibody-based techniques are the most widely used methods for protein detection. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and Immunofluorescence employ antibodies that specifically target markers associated with specific cell types, enabling the identification and visualization of distinct cell types in tissue. For example, IHC has been used to localize MSCs in ossified human spinal ligaments [ ]. Flow cytometry follows a similar principle, the antibodies are conjugated with fluorescent markers to detect the target markers. For example, distinct populations of macrophages (CD14+/HLA-DR+/CD68+) and potential osteoclast progenitors (CD45+/HLA-DR−/CD115+) are identified within the subchondral bone marrow compartment of osteoarthritis patients [ ]. Flow cytometry can also be used to study cell functions and responses under stimulation. Phagocytes of polyethylene particles are identified in CD14+CD16− macrophages, with occasional CD14+CD16+ macrophages [ ]. Another advantage of flow cytometry is its capability to sort cells based on specific markers. Specific surface markers, such as CD9, CD90, and CD166, can be employed to MSCs from the synovial membrane [ ]. However, the overlap of fluorescent signals presents a challenge in flow cytometry, which limits the effective detection of multiple markers in a single experiment. The conjugation of antibodies with metals, as in mass cytometry (CyTOF), enables the examination of multiple cell types in a single experiment. Classical monocytes, intermediate monocytes, and macrophages produced high levels of proinflammatory mediators osteopontin and CCL2 without in vitro stimulation [ ]. Simultaneous detection of multiple markers enables the identification of rare cell populations. An inflammation-amplifying (Inf-A) population, marked by interleukin-1 receptor 1 and tumor necrosis factor receptor II, and an inflammation-dampening (Inf-D) population, marked by CD24, are identified in OA cartilage samples. The suppression of the Inf-A population led to a reduction in inflammation, while the Inf-D population demonstrated resistance to inflammatory processes [ ]. The application of CyTOF with 30 metal isotope-labeled antibodies outlined the drug effects on human OA chondrocytes and their associated pathways. Inhibition of the NF-κB pathway resulted in a reduction of p-NF-κB, HIF2A, and inducible NOS expression across various chondrocyte clusters, leading to a significant decrease in four populations of senescent cells expressing p16ink4a, which included NOTCH1+STRO1+ chondroprogenitor cells [ ].
In addition to using antibodies for protein detection, gene expressions are utilized to investigate cell types and functions. Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) provides a detailed view of gene expression at the single-cell level, which facilitates the identification of different cell types, understanding of single cell characteristics, and facilitates the examination of cellular subpopulations within a tissue. For example, scRNA-seq identified a unique Cd36+ cluster, which is recognized as osteoclast precursors with a reduced differentiation potential. Additionally, AP-1 is identified as a key transcription factor driving these underlying mechanisms [ ]. scRNA-seq uncovers dynamic processes such as cell differentiation and disease progression, which may be masked in bulk RNA-seq. scRNA-seq analysis of MSC-derived osteoblastic lineage cells revealed that Fat4+ cells might initiate a unique osteogenic differentiation pathway in the alveolar bone. Knockdown of Fat4 significantly impaired the osteogenic differentiation of alveolar bone MSCs [ ]. scRNA-seq also provides insights into the role of cells in regulating the fracture healing process, thereby enhancing our understanding of how various cell populations contribute to differentiation. B cells regulate fracture healing by inhibiting excessive bone regeneration through osteoblast inhibitors. Their numbers are lowest during callus formation, promoting osteoblast and osteoclast differentiation, while their numbers are higher during callus healing, where they inhibit these processes [ ]. The analysis of gene profiles reveals critical pathways associated with nonunion, presenting a clinical rationale for the targeted intervention of specific osteoimmunology factors in the treatment of nonunion fractures. Nonunion samples exhibit elevated levels of monocytes and CD14+ dendritic cells (DCs), whereas the proportions of T cells, myelocytes, and promyelocytes are diminished in comparison to union samples [ ].
Spatial transcriptomics integrates gene expression profiling with spatial information from tissue samples, providing a comprehensive expression patterns of specific genes within the tissue. The cellular and spatial organization of bone marrow niches is investigated through the application of spatial transcriptomics. Different subsets of Cxcl12-abundant-reticular (CAR), including adipo-CAR and osteo-CAR, localize differently to sinusoidal and arteriolar surfaces. These cells act as professional cytokine-secreting cells, forming peri-vascular micro-niches [ ]. 3D spatial transcriptomics reveals distinct cell type localizations in human RA synovium. In seropositive patients, there is a notable overexpression of CXCL13 in tertiary lymphoid organs (TLOs). In seronegative tissues, CD55+ and THY+ fibroblasts, including HLA-DRAHigh populations, and macrophages are significantly overexpressed in TLOs, suggesting a distinct immunological mechanism driving inflammation compared to seropositive tissues [ ]. Spatial transcriptomics also reveal that sensory nerves maintain cranial suture patency by modulating BMP/TGF-β signaling. The proliferation and differentiation of mesenchymal progenitor cells (MPC) in the suture mesenchyme are regulated by sensory nerve-derived signals, such as FSTL1, which in turn coordinate the patterning of cranial bones [ ].
Multi-omics approaches integrate data from multiple molecular levels, such as genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, to provide a comprehensive understanding of cellular functions and the underlying disease mechanisms. For instance, by integrating RNA-seq with proteomics and metabolomics, researchers can simultaneously analyze gene expression, protein production, and metabolic activity. Lipid metabolic signature in OA is identified by integrating multi-omics data, highlighting HomC1, a pathogenic cell subtype, and PLA2G2A, a key lipid metabolism gene, as targets for precision therapy [ ]. A multi-omics atlas of human embryonic joint and cranium development between 5 and 11 weeks after conception is established using paired transcriptional and epigenetic profiling of approximately 336,000 nucleus droplets and spatial transcriptomics. The integrated analysis of transcriptional and epigenetic data reveals regionally distinct trajectories of osteoprogenitors in both the limb and cranial areas, while also identifying the regulatory networks that control intramembranous and endochondral ossification. Furthermore, trajectory analysis suggests that human chondrocytes may originate from non-canonical cellular sources, particularly Schwann cells [ ].

3.3

## Bone fracture/defect modeling and healing
In vivo, bone fracture and defect healing are most commonly modeled by creating critical‐size defects in long bones or calvaria of animals. By contrast, in vitro platforms aim to accelerate specific phases of repair. compares the preclinical data for in vivo and in vitro bone fracture and defect healing models. 
Bone grafts harvested from the proximal tibia and the iliac crest [ , ] or scaffolds are commonly utilized at the fracture site to facilitate bone regeneration. In vitro studies are vital for assessing artificial scaffolds and bone grafts, while also enhancing our understanding of the mechanisms of how they promote bone formation. The mechanical properties of the scaffold are crucial for bone formation. Biomechanical loading test is conducted on reconstructed mandibles with fibular, iliac crest, and scapula graft. The fibular graft provided greater stability than iliac crest and scapular grafts, with all bone specimens resisting mechanical stress within the recognized biting force range after mandibular reconstruction [ ]. Based on the biomechanical competence of different bone screws, the artificial bone substitute material showed higher retention forces than real bone samples, and cancellous screws are suggested for flat bones such as the scapula and iliac crest [ ]. Scaffold-based systems recreate a bone-like environment facilitates cell growth and differentiation. The essential characteristics include the biocompatibility, solubility, and compressive properties of scaffold materials. For example, biocompatibility and biodegradation of PCL/β-TCP bone tissue scaffolds fabricated using a structural porogen method are assessed. Cell viability and proliferation are measured every two days using the Alamar Blue™ assay. Degradation tests are also conducted for 2, 4, and 6 weeks. Compression tests of PCL and PCL/β-TCP cylinders (90/10 and 80/20 ratios) after degradation are performed using a Tinius Olsen H25KT machine until failure at a rate of 1 mm/min [ ]. Cells respond differently to various bone graft materials. An assessment of the biological characteristics of six commercially available bone-graft substitutes is conducted by analyzing their impact on MSC seeding efficiency, metabolic activity, gene expression, and growth behavior in vitro. MSC seeded onto Tutoplast® exhibited the highest metabolic activity and CBFA-1 gene expression, while among all other synthetic scaffolds, β-tricalcium phosphate demonstrated the best growth behavior for MSCs [ ]. The findings highlight significant variations in MSC integration across different substitutes.
Computer-assisted 3D scaffold printing facilitates the creation of custom-designed scaffolds that replicate the natural architecture of bones, cartilage, and other tissues in the musculoskeletal system. 3D-printed custom-designed scaffolds also need validation. A 3D-printed osteoconductive composite scaffold functionalized with quaternized chitosan is evaluated for anti-infective efficacy, cytocompatibility, and biocompatibility. In vitro degradation in simulated body fluid for up to 4 weeks showed favorable conditions. HA-incorporated scaffolds enhanced cell attachment, proliferation, spreading, and osteogenic differentiation, with CCK-8 assays confirming attachment at 6 and 12 h. After validation, in vivo experiments are conducted to assess the functionality. An in vivo rat study validated med that these scaffolds promoted neovascularization, tissue integration, and exhibited good biocompatibility [ ].
Implementing these strategies allows for a detailed analysis of the cellular characteristics and functions present within the disease. This information can subsequently be utilized for in vitro experiments that replicate disease conditions, enabling researchers to investigate disease progression and assess the efficacy of potential drugs.

3.4

## Inflammation
To investigate inflammation and immune mechanisms in musculoskeletal diseases, certain techniques are used to induce disease states that mimic conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), osteoarthritis (OA), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and muscle injuries.
RA is an autoimmune disease characterized by the immune system incorrectly identifies joint tissues as foreign, which prompts the generation of autoantibodies. These antibodies subsequently facilitate the recruitment of inflammatory cells, including T-cells, B-cells, and macrophages. To simulate RA in animal models, it is common to inject collagen or adjuvants (such as citrullinated peptides) [ ]. Upon the introduction of stimulants, the immune system responds by activating immune cells, releasing cytokine, inducing synovial hyperplasia, and subsequent destructing cartilage. In in vitro models, cells are often directly stimulated with cytokines to simulate the inflammatory environment seen in RA. TNF-α is used to induce inflammation in a 3D synovium-on-chip system to study the architecture and inflammatory processes of synovial tissue in RA. Patient-derived cells are employed to create more clinically relevant RA models. The system's performance is evaluated by assessing cytokine-induced structural changes over 7 days, with disease progression and 3D light scatter signals verified through ELISA and immunohistochemistry. A diseased phenotype can already be distinguished as early as day 2–3 post seeding, which is normally distinguished around 14–21 days post-seeding for conventional microtiter-based 3D synovial models with proliferation assays and cytokine assays such as ELISA [ ]. The in vitro synovium-on-chip system serves as a rapid screening tool, enabling more efficient and controlled analysis of potential treatments.
In OA, inflammation is a critical contributor to cartilage degradation and joint dysfunction. Increased inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 increasing the activity of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) which facilitate cartilage degradation. Synovial organoid cultures using primary fibroblast-like synoviocytes provide reliable insights into how systemic inflammatory stress affects synovial tissue architecture. Exposure of the organoids to inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-1β triggered an arthritis phenotype, which was evidenced by upregulated inflammatory mediators such as ADAMTS5, IL-6, MMPs, and ColX [ ]. In addition, polyethylene particles generated from the wear of joint replacement implants provoke inflammatory responses, leading to cartilage degradation and contributing to the development or progression of OA. Animal models can simulate inflammation caused by wear particles. For example, an osmotic pump containing polyethylene wear particles subcutaneously in mice delivers polyethylene particles into the femoral intramedullary space of aged mice for 6 weeks [ ]. The effect of polyethylene wear particles is also investigated using a bone-on-chip model, which simplifies the experimental process, reduces the need for animal testing, and provides promising results. The characterization of bone formation involves the application of micro-CT, along with assessments of gene and protein expression. Co-cultures of MSCs with M2 macrophages in the presence of polyethylene wear particles show increased expression of osteogenic markers, suggesting a promotion of bone formation [ ].
We discussed various cell sources used for modeling diseases. The choice of appropriate cell sources can be made based on experimental objectives. We further discussed how in vitro models can enhance animal experiments. These models mitigate the ethical concerns and limitations associated with animal research, while continuing to provide significant insights into drug development and disease progression.

3.5

## In silico simulations
The use of computational models and simulations enables researchers to predict biological outcomes, understand drug interactions, and elucidate disease mechanisms, as shown in . In silico approaches can replace many in vitro or small-animal experiments, thereby reducing the number of animals required. These methods depend on high-performance computing resources. Compared with traditional experimental screening, they also save on costly reagents. Moreover, by filtering low-success candidates early, in silico workflows decrease downstream investments in compound synthesis, in vitro, and in vivo validation. 

3.6

## Molecular docking and dynamics
Molecular docking identifies small molecules, allowing the prediction of drug efficacy by evaluating their binding affinity and specificity to disease-related targets. Cartilage degradation is a hallmark of osteoarthritis. Designing inhibitors for MMPs that break down the extracellular matrix in cartilage can help slow disease progression. Curcumin and its metabolites are analyzed for binding with MMP-1, MMP-8, and MMP-13. Among the tested compounds, curcumin monoglucuronide (CMG) showed the best binding affinity with MMP-13, a key enzyme in OA [ ], with a binding free energy (ΔGbind) of −60.55 kcal/mol, lower than previously reported values [ ]. IC50 (half maximal inhibitory concentration) values of curcumin monoglucuronide are generally greater than 200 μM [ ]. Fufang Shatai Heji (STHJ) is a mixture of collected Chinese herbal medicines. Through molecular docking studies, acteoside (whose IC50 is reported to be in the range of tens to hundreds of micromolar [ ]) in STHJ could directly bind to the Glu111 and Phe110 residues in MMP-9, and glycyrrhizic acid in STHJ bind to the Glu382, Asn433 residues in MMP-13. After that, animal experience confirms the protection by inhibiting MMP-9 expression and reducing synovial hyperplasia and cartilage destruction [ ]. Molecular docking is also used for studying the active compounds of Chinese Miao Medicine Sidaxue for RA treatment, including β-amyrin, cajanin, and eleutheroside A. Molecular docking analysis showed high affinity for TNF-α, VEGFA, IL-2, AKT, and PI3K. The application of Chinese Miao Medicine Sidaxue (IC50 generally falling within the range of 40–90 mg/L [ ]) reduces the effects of RA in rats through the modulation of the VEGF/PI3K/AKT, TNF-α, and IL/NF-κB signaling pathways [ ]. In cases where a specific signaling pathway is identified, targeted pathway docking and screening can facilitate the identification of critical molecular targets and the evaluation of potential interactions with drugs. IL-17 signaling pathway is identified as the most significant pathway in osteoarthritis. TNF-α and IL-1β are pinpointed as critical molecular targets within this pathway [ ].Molecular docking simulations supported these findings, showing strong binding between hexacyclinic acid and TNF-α (−8.62 kcal/mol) and IL-1β (−8.76 kcal/mol). These results suggest that hexacyclinic acid may help manage OA by modulating the IL-17 pathway, particularly through its interaction with TNF-α and IL-1β [ ]. Molecular docking can be used to repurpose current drugs. Ginsenoside compound K (CK), traditionally used in oriental medicine, have not been reported for their anti-osteoarthritic effects. CK's binding energy with IKK suggests potential anti-osteoarthritic functions. The protective effects of ginsenoside compound K (CK) are evaluated in silico and in vitro using H2O2-stimulated MC3T3-E1 cells. A significant increasing of osteoblast differentiation is detected in CK-treated cells, including alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, type I collagen content, and mineralization. In contrast, the levels of inflammatory markers, including IKK and IL-1β, exhibited a dose-dependent decrease. These results suggest CK is a promising protective and therapeutic agent for osteoarthritis [ ].
Docking helps in designing compounds that influence protein–protein interactions (PPIs). A cytokine PPI network is built using data from HPRD, BioGRID, MINT, IntAct, and STRING, integrated with RA-related gene expression data from GEO. 24 key proteins are identified, including 2 existing drug targets and 12 proteins directly linked to current RA drug targets [ ]. On the other hand, the construction and analysis of a PPI network related to ankylosing spondylitis (AS) revealed that AS-related variations are governed by an integrated network, with CD4 serving as a central node among the 93 identified nodes [ ]. The anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory characteristics of flavonoids suggest their potential as therapeutic agents for RA. Through LCMS and network pharmacology, five flavonoid structures with shared targets are identified. The top 10 targets, including AKT1, EGFR, and NOS2, are highlighted via a PPI network. Key RA-related pathways, such as AGE-RAGE, PI3K-AKT, and Rap1 signaling, are also emphasized, guiding further experimental validation and clinical development of flavonoid-based treatments [ ].

3.7

## Machine learning and AI in drug discovery
Machine learning (ML) has shown great potential in the diagnosis, treatment, and research of musculoskeletal diseases. In supervised learning, the algorithm is trained using labeled data to learn the relationship between inputs and outputs, enabling the model to predict outputs for new inputs.
Support Vector Machine (SVM) aims to maximize the margin between the closest data of each class and the hyperplane. Using an SVM and a regulation network model, the relationships between clinical and molecular data are investigated in a cohort of women with Kellgren–Lawrence grade 2–3 knee OA. The SVM is used to classify patients based on clinical descriptors, including pain catastrophism, depression, functionality, joint pain, rigidity, sensitization, and synovitis [ ]. Patients were classified using clinical descriptors (pain catastrophism, depression, functionality, joint pain, rigidity, sensitization, and synovitis), and Youden's test was applied to each descriptor to determine the optimal binarization thresholds. The SVM classifier achieved a mean accuracy of 0.97, with clinical pain catastrophism yielding an AUC (area under the curve) of 0.90, and transcription-factor based inputs averaging an AUC of 0.608. In addition, SVM can be used to grade metacarpophalangeal RA on ultrasound images with the highest accuracy of up to 92.50 %, and the AUC value of 0.9560. Gaussian scale space-based object segmentation method is used to extract geometric parameters related to metacarpophalangeal RA bone and synovial thickening. These parameters, combined with GLCM texture features, are used with SVMs to classify four grading categories of metacarpophalangeal RA ultrasound images [ ]. Overfitting remains a critical challenge in developing robust machine learning models for medical image analysis, particularly when working with limited datasets. Expanding the dataset with additional subjects, such as diverse demographics (different gender, different OA grades, and ethnicities), would significantly reduce overfitting. To partially compensate for the limited sample size, data augmentation techniques such as Gaussian noise injection, random translation, and flipping were applied. Random Forest is based on an ensemble learning method that combines multiple decision trees to make predictions and classification. Naive Bayes is based on Bayes' Theorem, which calculates the probability of an event occurring given prior knowledge of related conditions. It assumes that all features are independent of each other and contribute equally to the outcome. Naive Bayes and Random Forest classifiers are developed as part of a Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) approach to detect OA using knee X-ray imaging. Pixel intensities are used as features to train the classifiers, providing a decision support tool for the early detection of knee OA and enabling accurate, efficient diagnosis [ ]. This proposed system achieves a high predictive classification rate for OA detection, with an accuracy of 82.98 %. SVM, Random Forests, and Naive Bayes classifiers enable automated, objective, and reproducible assessments in medical image analysis. Once trained, models can process large volumes of imaging data as scale. Incorporating additional performance metrics such as precision, recall, and F1-score will allow for a more comprehensive evaluation, especially in imbalanced clinical datasets. Furthermore, implementing k-fold cross-validation can improve model generalizability and help mitigate overfitting, thereby enhancing the clinical reliability of these machine learning approaches.
CNNs (Convolutional Neural Networks) are the most used in supervised learning tasks, particularly for image classification, object detection, and segmentation. CNN consists of multiple layers, including convolutional layers that apply filters to extract features, pooling layers to reduce dimensionality, and fully connected layers for classification. Automates skeletal bone age assessment using deep learning reduces human error and time by eliminating the necessity for manual interpretation by radiologists. It leverages CNN to handle nonrigid deformations in X-ray images of the left hand, typically assessed using the Greulich and Pyle (G&P) or Tanner-Whitehouse (TW) methods. The accuracy of this CNN-based approach was validated using the Digital Hand Atlas Database, which contains 1391 X-ray scans of children up to 18 years old, with bone age provided by two radiologists for comparative analysis [ ]. CNN is also widely used for disease diagnosis, particularly in the detection of OA through X-ray imaging. A deep learning model was developed to predict the likelihood of a patient undergoing total knee replacement (TKR) within 9 years, as well as the Kellgren–Lawrence grade based on knee radiographs. The study included a case–control matched subcohort of participants aged 45–79 years, matched by age, sex, ethnicity, and body mass index. The model used a transfer learning approach with the ResNet34 architecture and is validated using sevenfold nested cross-validation [ ]. This model emphasizes the potential for automated OA diagnosis and severity grading, while also emphasizing its practical use in clinical settings.
Transformer networks are primarily used for supervised learning tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP), including text classification, translation, and question answering. The integration of visual and textual data in medical diagnostics has the potential to improve clinical decision-making accuracy. BoneCLIP-XGBoost, a novel model combining Vision Transformer and ClinicalBERT, unifies X-ray images and textual descriptions into a shared feature space, enhancing multimodal data alignment. This model bridges the gap between raw medical texts and actionable insights, ultimately improving healthcare decision-making [ ]. It is possible to integrate the data pertaining to texture with that of structure. A multi-scale weighted fusion contextual transformer network (FCoTNet) is developed for osteoporosis prediction using lumbar spine X-ray images. The model demonstrated effective performance in diagnosing and classifying osteoporosis by analyzing the texture features of X-ray images of lumbar vertebrae (L1 to L4) [ ]. Furthermore, NLP can be used to generate annotations. NLP using the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model is employed to extract structured information from radiological reports, generating annotations for a large dataset of lumbar spine radiographs (N = 10,287). These annotations are used to train deep learning models for detecting radiological findings from the images. Despite challenges with noisy reports and NLP predictions, this approach effectively reduces the requirement of manual annotation, facilitating large-scale data generation and advancing the application of artificial intelligence in musculoskeletal radiology [ ].
Unsupervised learning is characterized by training models on unlabeled data. Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) is primarily used for unsupervised learning tasks, as it generates new data that closely resembles the given dataset. GAN is successfully utilized for taphonomic image augmentation and to establish a model protocol for deep learning analysis of bone surface modifications. Utilizing the image data augmentation allows for the maintenance of accuracy, despite a considerable reduction in image resolution [ ]. Using a Style GAN adaptive discriminator augmentation, high-resolution knee X-ray images are successfully synthesized, accurately representing different stages of arthritis progression. The Visual Turing test is performed by two computer vision experts, two orthopedic surgeons, and a musculoskeletal radiologist to validate the generated knee anteroposterior radiography images. The generated images accurately reproduced key features including osteophytes, joint space narrowing, and sclerosis [ ]. Generation of synthetic anteroposterior pelvis radiographs using GANs facilitate deep learning-based image analysis. The final is trained on a dataset of 37,640 real radiographs from 16,782 patients. Both synthetic and real images showed comparable performance levels [ ].
Machine learning algorithms are being used to analyze large datasets, predict disease outcomes, and improve treatment strategies, leading to significant advances in diagnosis, drug discovery, and personalized medicine for musculoskeletal disorders.

3.8

## Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics modeling
Pharmacokinetics (PK) models help to provide a comprehensive understanding of drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion (ADME). Pharmacodynamics (PD) models focus on the effects of the drug on the body. PK and PD modeling play a critical role for gaining insights into the interactions between drugs and the musculoskeletal system, as well as in designing therapeutic strategies for musculoskeletal diseases.
Pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling helps determine personalized dosing based on plasma concentration. As a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) and a selective COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib is commonly prescribed for OA, RA, ankylosing spondylitis, acute pain, and primary dysmenorrhea. Following oral administration, the predominant metabolic pathway involves CYP2C9. Genetic variations in CYP2C9 markedly affect the pharmacokinetics of celecoxib and its potential for causing adverse drug reactions. A physiologically based PBPK model is proposed that incorporates CYP2C9 genetic variations, enabling personalized dosing of celecoxib based on an individual's genetic profile [ ]. Similarly, a PBPK model for Meloxicam, influenced by CYP2C9 genotypes, accurately predicted its pharmacokinetics, with fold errors within the two-fold error criteria in all validation datasets [ ]. Methotrexate's intra-articular distribution can be modeled using PK techniques to enable optimized dosing and personalized treatment strategies. A PBPK model is developed to simulate methotrexate transfer from the intra-articular (IA) space to plasma. The model includes compartments for synovial fluid, synovium, and cartilage, with drug diffusion back into synovial fluid once part enters systemic circulation. Methotrexate, chosen as a case study due to available IV, oral, and IA data for RA, is validated through PO administration simulations. The model accurately predicted IA PK profiles, though further studies are needed to evaluate its scalability across species and doses [ ].

3.9

## Challenges and future perspectives
Although alternative approaches to animal testing, including in vitro disease modeling and in silico simulations, present significant advancements in drug discovery, they continue to encounter challenges concerning accuracy, scalability, and regulatory approval.
Most in vitro disease models rely on single-lineage cultures that fail to capture multicellular crosstalk and immune interactions. Incorporating co-cultures of multiple cell types such as MSCs, endothelial cells, and patient-derived immune cells within biomimetic scaffolds or multi-organ-on-chip systems will faithfully recapitulate in vivo pathophysiology. Challenges in integrating data from diverse alternative testing platforms are the variability arising from differences in cell sources, scaffold materials, and experimental conditions, which can lead to inconsistent results. Although isolation or sorting specific cell types may help eliminate subpopulations, variations in culture protocols, and scaffold materials can affect cellular behavior and tissue function, thereby complicating comparisons between different platforms. Another limitation is the lack of systemic factors, such as immune responses, neuronal activity, and hormonal signaling, which are crucial to understanding both acute and chronic disease processes. Long-term immune cell delivery and maintenance in culture are difficult to achieve, especially in chronic inflammatory conditions. For example, in OA or RA, immune-mediated tissue cartilage needs to be monitored and modeled over an extended period of to reflect disease progression accurately. Furthermore, the chronic stimulation of neurons and the study of neuroinflammation in models are particularly challenging. OA pain involves long-term, complex neurological and inflammatory interactions. While co-culturing neurons with immune cells or other tissue types is possible, detecting neuronal signaling 3D is often difficult.
In the U.S., the FDA Modernization Act allows for the evaluation of experimental drugs using advanced non-animal methodologies. However, the lack of standardized protocols remains a major hurdle. For example, there is a significant need for reliable guidelines for choosing different scaffolds. In fields such as bone repair scaffolds, both natural and synthetic, are used in clinical studies. For instance, eight clinical studies have focused on natural scaffolds, including collagen, gelatin, and cellular scaffolds for bone healing, while twelve studies have explored synthetic scaffolds such as hydroxyapatite (HAp), tricalcium phosphate (TCP), and complex scaffold materials for repairing bone defects [ ]. While promising, these studies highlight the requirement for more consistent protocols and comprehensive evidence to ensure the efficacy and safety of these approaches. Several guiding documents have been proposed to promote translational application between industry and regulatory agencies. For example, ISO 20691:2022 provides general requirements for data formatting and description in the life sciences, supporting standardized data reporting in microphysiological systems. ISO 20391–1:2018 also provides general guidance on cell counting methods. Additionally, ISO 23494–1:2022 outlines provenance information for biological materials, promoting consistency in biomaterials, which is a key consideration in organ-on-chip fabrication. These standards serve as references for aligning scientific innovation with standard requirements.
Variations in data formats, along with the biological relevance of each system make it difficult to obtain reliable and standardized outcomes. However, advancements in tools such as AlphaFold for protein structure prediction, RNA sequencing libraries for gene expression analysis, and machine learning algorithms for data harmonization have provided a foundation for addressing some of these issues, enabling more consistent and reproducible results. These approaches can help minimize batch-to-batch variability and integrate data from multiple sources, providing the potential to standardize and compare results across platforms more effectively. Multi‐omics and Machine-learning integration systematically pairing transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic profiling of organoids help identify novel biomarkers and forecast drug responses with high accuracy. These methods not only refine the biological fidelity of in vitro and computational models but also prioritize candidate therapeutics for preclinical validation, ultimately reducing time and cost in the drug‐development pipeline. Finally, in vitro and in silico models may not fully replicate the intricate interactions within a whole organism. While multi-organ-on-chip systems provide more detailed insight into individual organ function and interactions compared to single-organ models, they can't simulate the bi-directional and dynamic communication that takes place between organs in a living organism. Current organ-on-chip models that are governed by fluid flow predominantly exhibit unidirectional communication, which significantly restricts their capacity to mimic the bidirectional communication in biological systems. Potential technical solutions include integrating porous membranes to promote soluble factors exchange between compartments. An intermittent flow control module may also be incorporated to simulate physiologically oscillatory pulsatile.

4

## Conclusion: the future of drug discovery without animal testing
In this paper, we explored the transformative potential of alternative approaches to animal testing, focusing on in vitro culture platforms, disease modeling, and in silico simulations. These techniques provide significant potential for advancing drug discovery in a more ethical, efficient, and precise manner by replicating human physiological conditions and enhancing the accuracy of predictions regarding drug responses. While each approach presents unique strengths, challenges such as model validation, scalability, and regulatory acceptance remain. As research advances and more resources are invested, we could reduce our reliance on animal models, creating a more ethical and scientifically reliable future for biomedical studies.

## Informed consent statement
Not applicable.

## Funding
This work was supported by 10.13039/100000002NIH grants UG3TR002136, R01 AR063713, R01 AR073145, the Ellenburg Chair in Surgery at 10.13039/100005492Stanford University.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
During the preparation of this work the author(s) used ChatGPT in order to improve the English grammar and avoid spelling mistakes. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the publication.

 

## Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to other members in the participating laboratories for their contributions and suggestions.