822acssdACS NanoACS NanoPMC1144789411447894114478943923825810.1021/acsnano.4c06921Hydrogel Microneedle
Patches Loaded with Stem Cell
Mitochondria-Enriched Microvesicles Boost the Chronic Wound Healing
YaoWen-De ZhouJun-Nian TangChao ZhangJu-Lei ChenZhao-Yang LiYan GongXiao-Jing QuMing-Yi ZengQuan JiaYa-Li WangHai-Yang FanTao RenJing GuoLing-Li XiJia-Fei PeiXue-Tao HanYan YueWen †School
of Medicine, Nankai University, 94 Weijin Road, Tianjin 300071, China‡Department
of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, The First Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, 28 Fuxing Street, Beijing 100853, China§Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China*Email: zhoujunnian@bmi.ac.cn.
*Email: 13720086335@163.com.
*Email: yuewen@bmi.ac.cn.
69202418392673326733–267504102024© 2024 The Authors. Published by American Chemical SocietyPermits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
 Rescuing or compensating mitochondrial function represents
a promising
therapeutic avenue for radiation-induced chronic wounds. Adult stem
cell efficacies are primarily dependent on the paracrine secretion
of mitochondria-containing extracellular vesicles (EVs). However,
effective therapeutic strategies addressing the quantity of mitochondria
and mitochondria-delivery system are lacking. Thus, in this study,
we aimed to design an effective hydrogel microneedle patch (MNP) loaded
with stem cell-derived mitochondria-rich EVs to gradually release
and deliver mitochondria into the wound tissues and boost wound healing.
We, first, used metformin to enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and
thereby increasing the secretion of mitochondria-containing EVs (termed
“Met-EVs”) in adipose-derived stem cells. To verify
the therapeutic effects of Met-EVs, we established an in vitro and an in vivo model of X-ray-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction. The Met-EVs ameliorated the mitochondrial dysfunction
by rescuing mitochondrial membrane potential, increasing adenosine
5′-triphosphate levels, and decreasing reactive oxygen species
production by transferring active mitochondria. To sustain the release
of EVs into damaged tissues, we constructed a Met-EVs@Decellularized
Adipose Matrix (DAM)/Hyaluronic Acid Methacrylic Acid (HAMA)-MNP.
Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP can load and gradually release Met-EVs and their
contained mitochondria into wound tissues to alleviate mitochondrial
dysfunction. Moreover, we found Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP can markedly
promote macrophage polarization toward the M2 subtype with anti-inflammatory
and regenerative functions, which can, in turn, enhance the healing
process in mice with skin wounds combined radiation injuries. Collectively,
we successfully fabricated a delivery system for EVs, Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP,
to effectively deliver stem cell-derived mitochondria-rich EVs. The
effectiveness of this system has been demonstrated, holding great
potential for chronic wound treatments in clinic.
Keywords: stem cell, metformin, mitochondria-enriched
extracellular vesicle, hydrogel microneedle patch, radiation-induced injury

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 May 24; Accepted 2024 Aug 26; Revised 2024 Aug 23; Collection date 2024 Oct 1.

Radiotherapy for the patients with malignant tumors and nuclear
and radiological accidents can lead to the development of irradiation-associated
skin injuries. These wounds tend to resist treatment and may be cancerous,
causing immense suffering in patients. − However, the pathological
mechanisms that cause radiation-induced injuries are yet to be resolved,
and no fully efficacious treatment options exist. Although the cell nucleus has long been considered the
main target of radiation damage, increasing evidence supports the
notion that mitochondrion is another principal subcellular organelle
that is targeted in radiation-induced damage. , , Radiation injuries are closely associated
with oxidative stress, which occurs when organisms are exposed to
radiation-induced damage to mitochondrial macromolecules and the electron
transport chain. This exposure results
in the generation of primary and secondary reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and in mitochondrial dysfunction, − leading to a prolonged
inflammatory phase in the wound, delayed wound healing, and, ultimately
the development of chronic wounds. 
Mitochondria transplantation has been hypothesized to improve mitochondrial
dysfunction in damaged cells. To achieve better therapeutic effects,
transplanted mitochondria must be viable and be capable of respiratory
functions. However, one must note that isolated mitochondria remain
active for only a short time in vitro, , limiting the potential applications of freshly isolated mitochondria
transplantation. , Extracellular vesicles (EVs)
that contain mitochondrial components, especially from stem cells,
are capable of transferring healthy mitochondria to damaged tissues,
which results in the amelioration of metabolic disorders in injured
tissues. − Mitochondria transported by EVs are preferable over isolated/naked
mitochondria because of lipid bilayer protection, which enables convenient
storage. Moreover, Ikeda et al. demonstrated that mitochondria within EV are more resistant to Ca2+ overload and oxidative stress compared to isolated/naked
mitochondria. Therefore, the use of mitochondria-containing
EVs is a more suitable option for treating skin wounds combined with
radiation injuries.
Boosting the number of functional mitochondria
in stem cell-secreted
EVs can potentially increase the therapeutic effects on wound healing.
Metformin, a drug commonly used clinically for treating diabetes,
acts as a mitochondrial biogenic agent, promoting the formation of
new mitochondria. − However, whether mitochondria content in secreted
EVs could be elevated by metformin remains unknown. Thus, we aimed
to evaluate if treatment of adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs) with
metformin can enhance mitochondrial biogenesis and, consequently,
the secretion of mitochondria-containing EVs.
Microneedle patch
(MNP)-based delivery is a painless, and self-administered
technique better than the hypodermic needle. Among four producing
approaches of MNPs, hydrogel MNP are preferred for enhanced tissue
uptake of EVs and EVs release, because EVs can be encapsulated, stored,
and protected in the hydrogel and delivered into the target cells
after inserting the skin, followed by the biodegradation process. 
Considering that the repair of damaged
tissues by EVs requires
sustained-release delivery in situ to achieve good
therapeutic effects, this study aimed to establish an MNP-based delivery
system effectively delivering stem cell-derived mitochondria-rich
EVs and treat chronic wound healing. In the study, metformin-treated
ADSC-derived EVs (Met-EVs) were mixed well together in prehydrogels
composed of a decellularized adipose matrix (DAM) and hyaluronic acid
methacrylic acid (HAMA), which were then prepared as a MNP to poke
the biofilm layer of a wound and gradually release and deliver mitochondria
into wound tissues. This process results in improvements of mitochondrial
dysfunction, allowing for the effective healing of skin wounds complicated
by radiation injuries.

## Results and Discussion

## Fabrication and Characterization of Met-EVs
Emerging
evidence suggests that the therapeutic effects of MSCs may be mostly
because of paracrine EV secretion rather than cell engraftment and
differentiation, with the former increasingly becoming an attractive
and safer therapeutic source. , MSC-derived EVs >300
nm in size can reportedly transport functional mitochondria or efficient
mitochondrial components to injured cells to reprogram their metabolism
and improve cellular respiratory functions, − , which distinguishes
from somatic pluripotency reprogramming. Notably, O’Brien et al.( ) reported that MSCs beyond passage 4 produce fewer mitochondria-containing
EVs than do early passage MSCs, which is consistent with our quality
standards for clinical-grade MSCs used from passage 3 to 5. , In the present study, based on the cell growth rate and output of
mitochondria-containing EVs, we selected passage 3 ADSCs for further
investigation.
We first isolated ADSCs and demonstrated that
cultured ADSCs were highly positive for mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)
surface markers, including CD29, CD73, CD90, CD105, and CD166, but
negative for hematopoietic cell (CD34 and CD45), immune cell (CD14
and CD38), and endothelial cell (CD31) surface markers (see Figure S1A in Supporting Information). ADSCs
have trilineage differentiation potential into adipocytes, osteocytes,
and chondrocytes, as confirmed by typical staining of Oil Red O, Alizarin
Red, and Alcian Blue, respectively, which showed lipid droplets in
lipogenically differentiated cell cytoplasms, calcium deposition in
the osteogenically differentiated cell cytoplasms, and acidic mucopolysaccharide
deposition in the chondrocyte globules of differentiated cells, respectively
(Figure S1B). These results suggest that
our isolated ADSCs were well-cultured MSCs.
To screen for a
suitable drug to increase mitochondrial biogenesis
within ADSCs, available reports led us to select two drugs that are
commonly used clinically: metformin and pioglitazone. Pharmacological
metformin concentrations enhance mitochondrial fission, thereby improving
mitochondrial respiration and restoring the mitochondrial life cycle. Pioglitazone increases the copy number of mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) in cells. , To investigate whether metformin
and pioglitazone affect mitochondrial biogenesis in ADSCs, we first
examined the drug dose–effect relationship of metformin and
pioglitazone on ADSCs using a CCK-8 assay. The results indicated that
the half maximal inhibitory concentration of metformin and pioglitazone
on ADSCs were 3143 and 546.7 μM, respectively (Figure S2). MitoTracker Deep Red FM (MTDR) is a fluorescent
probe that labels mitochondria in living cells. It selectively accumulates
in active mitochondria, and this accumulation is mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP)-dependent; MTDR effectively accumulates and emits
fluorescent signals when mitochondria are active and have normal membrane
potential. Next, we selected a series
of metformin concentrations (0, 25, 50, 75, and 100 μM) and
pioglitazone (0, 5, 10, 25, and 50 μM) to treat ADSCs, followed
by labeling the mitochondria of ADSCs with MTDR. The mean fluorescence
intensity of MTDR expression in ADSCs was analyzed using flow cytometry.
The results showed that with the increase of metformin concentration,
the expression of MTDR in ADSCs tended to be upgraded, and MTDR reached
the peak when the metformin concentration was 75 μM (Figure S3). Furthermore, ADSC morphology was
not altered by metformin treatment ( A).
 Next, we compared Met-EVs with EVs from normal
ADSCs (Ctrl-EVs).
EVs were isolated by differential centrifugation of the supernatants
from passage 3 ADSCs ( B). NTA and TEM showed that the EVs in both groups were between
100–1000 nm in size ( C), with a typical “cup-shaped” morphological
appearance ( D). We then confirmed the expression of the EV markers CD9 and TSG101
using a capillary-based immunoassay at protein level ( E).
Next, to clarify
whether metformin increases the content of active
mitochondria in EVs secreted by ADSCs, the expression level of the
mitochondrial membrane protein Tom20 in the EVs of the two groups
was examined using a capillary-based immunoassay. The results revealed
that Tom20 expression levels in Met-EVs were 9.86-fold higher than
those in Ctrl-EVs ( F,G). We further analyzed the percentage of active mitochondria-containing
Met-EVs using flow cytometry. ADSCs were prestained with MTDR, followed
by incubation with an anti-CD44 antibody. The results revealed an
increased proportion of CD44+MTDR+ EVs in Met-EVs
compared with that in Ctrl-EVs (see Methods— , Figures S4, and H). These results suggest that
ADSC-EVs prepared by differential centrifugation contain active mitochondria
and that metformin treatment enhances the percentage of mitochondria-containing
EVs.

## Increased Mitochondria-Associated Protein Content within Met-EVs
To comprehensively analyze the biological effects of metformin
on ADSC-derived EVs, we performed a 4D-label free proteomic analysis
of Met- and Ctrl-EVs. We identified 3297 proteins in the EVs of the
two groups, among which an expression difference greater than 2-fold
(both up- and downregulation) was displayed, and those with a p-value (t-test/significance A) < 0.05
were considered significantly differentially expressed proteins. A
total of 219 differentially expressed proteins were identified, comprising
146 upregulated and 73 downregulated proteins (Figure S5). Subcellular localization analysis showed that
13.7% of these proteins were derived from mitochondria ( A).
 We then performed KEGG pathway enrichment of the
upregulated proteins.
The results showed that the upregulated proteins had the highest degree
of enrichment in the tricarboxylic acid cycle pathway ( B). Furthermore, functional
annotation of the upregulated proteins was performed using GO enrichment
analysis considering biological processes ( C), cellular components ( D), and molecular functions
( E). The results
showed that two of the top six enriched pathways in biological processes
were involved in the succinate metabolic process and tricarboxylic
acid cycle pathway, which is associated with mitochondrial metabolism
( C). One of
the top 16 most enriched pathways in cellular components, mitochondrial
respiratory chain complex II, is involved in mitochondrial metabolism
( D). Five of
the 16 most enriched molecular functions, pyruvate dehydrogenase (acetyl-transferring),
succinate dehydrogenase (ubiquinone), pyruvate dehydrogenase (NAD+), succinate-CoA ligase (GDP-forming), and succinate-CoA ligase
(ADP-forming), are associated with mitochondria ( E).
Taken together, these
results suggest that EV-transported proteins
associated with mitochondrial metabolism are upregulated after the
metformin treatment of ADSCs.

## Met-EVs Ameliorate X-ray-Induced Mitochondrial Dysfunction in
Macrophages by Transferring Mitochondria
As the initial step
in evaluating the biological effects of Met-EVs, we first incubated
1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
perchlorate dye (Dil, red)-labeled Met-EVs with THP-1 macrophages
for 24 h. Using CLSM, Met-EVs were observed to be endocytosed by macrophages
(See Methods— and Figure S6). We then performed a colocalization
experiment between mitochondria-containing Met-EVs (prelabeled with
MTDR, red) and endogenous mitochondria (prelabeled with MitoTracker
Green FM, MTG, green) in macrophages. The CLSM results showed that
mitochondria (red) in Met-EVs were transferred to recipient macrophages
24 h after incubation, and some were fused with the host mitochondrial
network (green) ( A).
 Mitochondrial dysfunction and mtDNA mutations following
radiation
exposure play key roles in chronic oxidative stress. To further verify
the therapeutic effect of Met-EVs on radiation combined injury wound
healing and the role of mitochondrial transfer during this process,
we established X-ray-induced mitochondrial dysfunction models in vitro. Macrophages were irradiated with X-rays at doses
of 2 and 4 Gy, based on a previous report. After measuring intracellular adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP)
and ROS levels at 3 and 24 h postirradiation, we found that macrophages
were more sensitive to low-dose (2 Gy) irradiation. Eventually, we
irradiated the macrophages with X-rays at a dose of 2 Gy to induce
mitochondrial dysfunction (Figure S7).
Macrophages were treated with a series of concentrations of Met-EVs
immediately after X-ray irradiation, and mitochondrial function was
assessed by determining ATP levels (Figure S8) and ROS generation in macrophages at 3 and 24 h (see Methods— ). Consistent
with previous reports, , THP-1 macrophages exposed to
X-rays showed increased ROS levels, decreased ATP levels, and intracellular
mitochondrial dysfunction. Treatment with Met-EVs increased ATP levels
and decreased ROS production in a dose-dependent manner, with 1.0
× 108 and 3.0 × 108 particles/mL Met-EVs
showing significant effects 3 and 24 h after treatment, respectively
( B–D).
To further demonstrate that Met-EVs ameliorate macrophage mitochondrial
dysfunction by transferring active mitochondria, we compared the effects
of Met- and Ctrl-EVs on X-ray-induced macrophage mitochondrial dysfunction
at a concentration of 108 particles/mL ( B). As shown in E–H, compared with unirradiated
macrophages (Control group), mitochondrial dysfunction was observed
in irradiated macrophages (IR + PBS) 3 and 24 h postirradiation, corroborated
by decreased ATP production ( E), increased ROS content ( F), and decreased MMP (ΔΨm) (see
Methods— and G,H).
As expected, Met-EVs were superior in ameliorating mitochondrial dysfunction
than Ctrl-EVs in macrophages.
Other cells, including keratinocytes,
fibroblasts, and vascular
endothelial cells, may also take up mitochondria-containing Met-EVs,
resulting in better metabolic function and enhanced wound healing.
For example, mitochondrial translocation has been demonstrated to
increase MSC migratory capacity and human
umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) angiogenesis. Indeed, we confirmed a better improvement in the MMP of
Met-EVs than that of Ctrl-EVs in human epidermal keratinocytes (HaCAT),
human foreskin fibroblasts (HFF), and HUVECs, as shown in Figure S9.
These results suggest that Met-EVs
can alleviate mitochondrial
dysfunction in cells by transferring active mitochondria and that
this regulatory effect is better than that of Ctrl-EVs.

## Preparation and Characterization of MNP Loaded with Met-EVs
In the previous study, we showed direct intravenous injection of
platelet-derived EVs into irradiated mice increased the number of
megakaryocytes and platelet differentiation from hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells in the bone marrow. In the present
study, to enable efficient and slow release of Met-EVs into wound
tissues, we used human DAM (Figure S10),
as we previously reported, , combined with HAMA
to construct an MNP via ultraviolet light (UV) curing.
To optimize the appropriate scaffold structures for EV loading, we
mixed a series of DAM concentrations (w/w: 0.6, 0.8, and 1.2%) with
HAMA (w/w: 6 and 10%) hydrogels. After comparing the average pore
sizes and compressive moduli of each group of hydrogels ( A, B), we selected
an equal volume ratio of 10% HAMA and 0.8% DAM hydrogels (with a pore
size of 168.96 μm and Young’s modulus of 1.75 MPa) to
prepare the MNP ( C) after loading with Met-EVs at a final concentration of 3 ×
108 particles/mL (see Methods— ).
 Biocompatibility is a crucial parameter for assessing
the quality
of biomaterials. To determine the cell viability and the growth of
cells cultured in medium containing liquid DAM/HAMA hydrogel extracts,
we performed live/dead cell staining and CCK-8 assays, as depicted
in D, E. The
DAM/HAMA hydrogels exhibited good biocompatibility properties in vitro. To further assess the biocompatibility of the
MNP in vivo, we subcutaneously implanted the HAMA,
DAM/HAMA, and Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA hydrogels in C57 mice. The periplasmic
tissues surrounding the implanted scaffolds were excised 1 week later
and subsequently stained for three typical inflammation markers: CD3
(T cells), CD68 (macrophages), and myeloperoxidase (MPO, neutrophils).
As shown in Figure S11, none of the three
hydrogel groups induced a significant inflammatory response. Finally,
we confirmed the presence of Met-EVs in the DAM/HAMA-MNP. Met-EVs
were labeled with Dil dye (red) before incorporation into the hydrogels.
Three-dimensional (3D) imaging by confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM) revealed that the EVs were thoroughly and evenly spread throughout
the MNP ( F,
top left and top right). Moreover, SEM revealed that intact Met-EVs
were carried by the lyophilized scaffold material ( F, bottom left and bottom right).
These results indicate the successful loading of EVs into the hydrogels.
The degradation and sustained-release properties of the hydrogels
were measured in vitro (see Methods— and ), and the curves are shown in G, H and Figure S12. The
scaffold material degraded slowly, and the EVs were released gradually,
with approximately 80% of the EVs being released cumulatively in the
first 4 days. These results suggest that Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP has
good biocompatibility and can provide sustained and efficient delivery
of EVs to wounded tissues.
We selected DAM/HAMA-MNPs as carriers
for the efficient and sustained
release of Met-EVs into irradiated wound tissues owing to their several
indispensable advantages. (1) MNPs are preferred for enhanced tissue
uptake of EVs and EV release, as well as excellent stem cell scaffold. Hydrogel microneedles exhibit better biocompatibility
than traditional microneedles. Among these candidates, hyaluronic
acid (HA) is a widespread extracellular matrix (ECM) constituent present
in almost all human body tissues and plays a vital role in wound healing
and tissue regeneration. HA modified
by methacrylic anhydride together with UV photocrosslinking was employed
to produce hydrogels reminiscent of the primary constituents of natural
ECM, − although HA lacks the naturally occurring peptide
portion responsible for adhesion that many ECM proteins possess. Natural
DAM hydrogels enhance cell adhesion and facilitate tissue repair owing
to the retention of an effective collagen scaffold structure and biofactors,
as previously reported. , Therefore, we combined
these (DAM/HAMA-MNP) to construct a better physiological environment
to maintain the biological activity of mitochondria-containing EVs.
(2) Hydrogel MNPs are more effective vehicles for releasing and transporting
EVs. When the Young’s modulus of the hydrogel exceeds 1 MPa,
the MNP can effectively penetrate wound tissues, while swelling of the hydrogel during water absorption
results in larger pore sizes. Our DAM/HAMA
hydrogel parameters (pore size of 168.96 μm and Young’s
modulus of 1.75 MPa) facilitate the release and delivery of EVs into
tissue cells, , as confirmed by our results.
(3) Our DAM/HAMA-MNP has superior degradability and absorptive capacity
after the painless transdermal delivery of mitochondria, via a minimal invasive method with an ideal comfort level, which can result in extraordinary therapeutic
effects owing to the dramatically increased contact area between the
MNP and the wound. 

## Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP Accelerate Wound Healing in Mouse Skin
Irradiation Combined Wounds
To confirm the therapeutic efficacy
of Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs in vivo, a dorsal skin radiation-combined
wound model was established in C57 mice (see Methods— ). As shown in A, the model mice were treated with DAM/HAMA-MNP
containing Met-EVs at a final concentration of 3 × 108 particles/mL (IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP), and the total healing
rate was compared with that of the other groups: DAM/HAMA-MNP-treated
irradiation-combined (IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP), PBS-treated irradiation-combined
(IR + PBS), and PBS-treated unirradiated wounds (Without IR). The
results revealed that radiation exposure delayed wound healing in
mouse skin. However, it is noteworthy that this delayed healing outcome
was significantly ameliorated in the Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP treatment
group. Wounds treated with Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs healed by postoperative
days (POD) 12, which was close to the wound healing time of the Without
IR group (POD9). The healing time was significantly faster than that
in the IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP (POD14) and IR + PBS groups (wounds that
remained unhealed by POD14) ( B,C).
 Next, we measured the proportion of the remaining
wound area in
each group of mice on POD6 and 9. As shown in D, on POD6, the remaining wound area in the
IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP group (19.75%) was significantly smaller
than that in the IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP (37.18%, p <
0.0001) and IR + PBS groups (40.07%, p < 0.0001),
while no significant difference compared to the Without IR group was
observed (p > 0.05). On POD9, the IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP
group exhibited a significantly smaller percentage of remaining wound
area (7.53%) than those of the IR + DAM/HAMA (13.77%, p < 0.001) and IR + PBS groups (25.84%, p <
0.0001), although it was significantly higher than that of the Without
IR group (2.57%, p < 0.05).
Next, histopathological
analysis of the wounds and surrounding
tissues on POD14 was performed using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
and Masson’s trichrome staining. H&E staining demonstrated
that the Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP group had a significantly thicker epithelium
(mean = 92.14 μm) compared with that of the IR + DAM/HAMA (mean
= 56.44 μm, p < 0.05) and IR + PBS groups
(mean = 19.15 μm, p < 0.0001). Notably,
the IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP group was restored to a level comparable
to that of the unirradiated skin group (85.45 μm, p < 0.0001) ( A, B). This suggests that IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP treatment promoted
skin wound healing following radiation injury in mice. The assessment
of wound tissue collagen deposition in each group by analyzing the
type I collagen volume fraction using Masson’s trichrome staining
was consistent with the H&E results. The IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP
group showed significantly higher collagen deposition (48.15%) than
that in the IR + DAM/HAMA (30.23%, p < 0.0001)
and IR + PBS (14.78%, p < 0.0001) groups. No significant
difference was observed when compared with the Without IR group (53.02%, p > 0.05) ( C,D).
 Immunofluorescence staining of CD31 (red) and α-SMA
(green)
was also performed and analyzed in wound tissues on POD14 ( E, F). The results
indicated significant upregulation of CD31 and α-SMA expression
in the IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP group compared with that in the IR
+ DAM/HAMA-MNP (p < 0.0001) and IR + PBS groups
(p < 0.0001). No significant difference was observed
between the IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP and Without IR groups (p > 0.05).
These results suggest that radiation
leads to delayed healing of
skin wounds and that treatment with Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs reduces
this negative effect and facilitates wound healing.

## Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP Improves X-ray-Induced Metabolic Disorders
in Wound Tissues
To illustrate the capacity of Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs
to transport active mitochondria to wounded tissues, we incorporated
MTDR-labeled Met-EVs (red) into DAM/HAMA-MNPs to treat the dorsal
skin wounds of C57 mice. Active mitochondria delivered by Met-EVs
were observed in the wound tissues 3 days post-treatment, as determined
by immunofluorescence staining ( A). The results showed that labeled mitochondria were
transferred to macrophages (CD68, green), vascular endothelial cells
(CD31, green), epithelial cells (Pan-keratin, green), and myofibroblasts
(α-SMA, green) in the wound tissue, consistent with our in vitro results (Figure S9).
 Moreover, to determine whether Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs
could ameliorate
metabolic disorders in wound tissues, we examined the ATP and ROS
content within the wound tissues ( B, C). The results indicated that the ATP
concentration in the wound tissues of the IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP
group was significantly higher than that of the IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP
and IR + PBS groups on both POD3 and 7 but did not significantly differ
from that in the Without IR group ( B). Accordingly, the ROS content in the wound
tissues treated with Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP was lower than that in the
IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP and IR + PBS groups but did not significantly differ
from that in the Without IR group ( C).
To investigate whether Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP
treatment regulates
macrophage polarization, we stained excised tissues with the macrophage
surface marker CD68 (red) and the M2 subtype macrophage surface marker
CD206 (green) on POD3 and 7. The percentage of M2 macrophages in the
wound area was significantly higher in the IR + Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP
group than that in the IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP and IR + PBS groups, while
no significant difference from that of Without IR was observed ( D, E). These results
indicated that Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs promoted macrophage differentiation
from the M1 to M2 subtype within wound tissues. Consistently, qPCR
results showed that the expression levels of pro-inflammatory factors
including interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-α) in the Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP group were significantly
lower than those in the IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP and IR + PBS groups; in
contrast, the expression levels of anti-inflammatory factors including
Arg1 and IL-10 were significantly higher than those in the IR + DAM/HAMA-MNP
and IR + PBS groups on POD7 ( F).
In vivo, radiation exposure
leads to the inflammatory
cell infiltrations, which become important sources of ROS and nitric
oxide. An imbalance in macrophage metabolism
leads to impaired tissue repair and wound healing. , Our animal experiments showed that Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs effectively
transported ADSC-derived mitochondria into wound tissues. Treatment
with Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs resulted in enhanced ATP production, reduced
ROS levels, and promoted the polarization of macrophage from the pro-inflammatory
M1-subtype toward the M2-subtype with anti-inflammatory and wound-healing
functions in skin wound tissues.
We acknowledge the limitations
of this study. First, EVs were prepared
by differential centrifugation at 2000 × g to
remove apoptotic bodies and cellular debris, followed by centrifugation
at 20,000 × g to obtain larger EVs; therefore,
we could not completely exclude EVs with a size < 300 nm. Second,
we only examined the active mitochondrial components of the vesicles
that may alleviate mitochondrial dysfunction. However, the presence
of other RNAs or mtDNA fragments present in the vesicles that may
also alleviate cellular metabolic dysfunction cannot be ignored. The
use of mitochondria-containing EVs has certain drawbacks, such as
low strength and restricted drug doses. Nonetheless, we observed that
the mitochondria-containing EVs, loaded and delivered by hydrogel-forming
MNPs, has good therapeutic effects on chronic wound healing. We believe
that, with advancements in the hydrogel MNP preparation techniques
and deep understanding of how to regulate mitochondria package and
transfer with EVs, better therapeutic effects can be achieved in future
applications.

## Conclusions
Together, we successfully constructed a
DAM/HAMA-MNP loaded with
mitochondria-containing EVs that effectively treated skin wounds combined
with radiation injuries by promoting mitochondrial transfer. These
Met-EVs contained active mitochondria capable of ameliorating mitochondrial
dysfunction and facilitating macrophage polarization toward the M2
phenotype. The efficacy of Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs in repairing chronic
wounds was proven in vivo and holds great potential
for future clinical wound care ( ).
 

## Methods

## Patients and Ethics Approval
ADSCs were obtained from
discarded adipose tissue after abdominal and thigh liposuction in
the Plastic Surgery Department of the First Medical Center of the
General Hospital of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA).
All patients provided the informed consent. The inclusion criteria
were the absence of systemic diseases, and current or recent drug
treatment. Exclusion criteria were patients over the age of 45 or
those who refused to provide a specimen. The Ethics Committee of the
Chinese PLA General Hospital approved the study protocol (S2023-207-01).

## ADSC Isolation, Culture, and Characterization
ADSCs
were prepared and cultured as we previously described. Human adipose tissue was digested with type
I collagenase, and ADSCs from passage three were used for EV isolation.
ADSCs were cultured in human ADSC medium (Cyagen, Santa Clara, CA,
USA). To determine ADSC surface marker expression, ADSCs were incubated
with fluorescence-labeled antibodies, including CD29-APC, CD73-APC,
CD105-PE, CD166-PE, CD14-APC, CD34-APC, and CD45-APC (BD Biosciences,
Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) and CD31-APC, CD38-APC, and CD90-PE-cy7 (eBioscience,
Santa Clara, CA, USA), and analyzed by flow cytometry (Luminex Guava
easyCyte; Luminex Corporation, Austin, TX, USA). The trilineage differentiation
of ADSCs was performed using the appropriate induction media (human
adipose-derived MSC adipogenic differentiation medium, human adipose-derived
MSC osteogenic differentiation medium, and human adipose-derived MSC
chondrogenic differentiation medium; Cyagen), analyzed by Alizarin
Red, Oil Red O, and Alcian Blue staining, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

## Isolation and Characterization of EVs
For Met-EV isolation,
ADSC medium containing 75 μM metformin was replaced and induced
for 48 h after cultivating ADSCs at passage 3 to approximately 60%
confluence. After two washes with PBS, ADSC medium containing 10%
exosome-free fetal bovine serum (FBS, Cagen) was added. After 48 h
of incubation, the medium was collected, and the supernatant was collected
by centrifugation at 300 × g for 5 min to remove
dead cells. Subsequently, the supernatant was centrifuged at 2000
× g for 10 min to remove apoptotic bodies and
cellular debris, followed by two rounds of centrifugation at 20,000
× g for 60 min, after which the pellet was resuspended
in PBS. Ctrl-EVs were cultured in ADSC medium without metformin. All
EVs extraction steps were performed at 4 °C to ensure EVs activity.
The size distribution and concentration of EVs were analyzed by
NTA using a ZetaView Particle Tracker (Particle Metrix, Inning am
Ammersee, Germany). EV morphology was observed using TEM (HT7800;
Hitachi High-Tech Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). EV marker levels (CD9
and TSG101) and the mitochondrial outer membrane protein Tom20 were
analyzed using a capillary immunoassay (Protein Simple; Biotechne,
Minneapolis, MN, USA).

## Flow Cytometric Analysis of EVs
Mitochondria were labeled
before changing to the exosome-free FBS-containing medium, and residual
FBS was removed by washing with PBS before staining. Mitochondria
in isolated EVs were derived from ADSCs prestained with 200 nM MTDR
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in 10 mL of standard
serum-free medium and incubated for 45 min at 37 °C in the dark.
After five washes with PBS, the exosome-depleted medium was changed.
The supernatant was harvested for EV extraction after 48 h. Thereafter,
the EVs were resuspended in 100 μL PBS, stained with propidium
iodide (necrosis), Annexin V-BV421 (apoptosis), and antihuman CD44-PE-Cy7
for 40 min at 4 °C in the dark, washed with 1 mL PBS, and centrifuged
at 20,000 × g for 60 min at 4 °C. Next,
the pellet was collected and resuspended in 300 μL PBS. Standard-sized
200-, 500-, and 1000 nm beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used
as a reference for comparison with EVs in the forward vs side scatter
(FSC vs SSC) plots. The gating strategy was as follows: using standard
beads as a reference, EVs were gated by FSC and SSC to select EVs
of 200–1000 nm size, after which events negative for propidium
iodide staining (necrosis) were gated; Annexin V staining (apoptosis)
was excluded. Based on previous report, the final gate was used to determine the proportion of EVs expressing
CD44 and containing mitochondria (MTDR).

## KEGG and GO Enrichment Analyses of Differential Proteins between
Met- and Ctrl-EVs
Two sets of EV protein samples were separated
by chromatography and analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS) using an
Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. MS data were analyzed using
MaxQuant software version 1.6.17.0. The protein sequence database
was: uniprot_homo_20221024_20402_9606_swiss_prot. The GO and KEGG
databases used in this project are versioned as go.obo (2019.07.01)
and KO–INFO-END.txt (2022.11.05), respectively. Enrichment
analysis algorithms for GO and KEGG annotations are consistent. Fisher’s
exact test was used to compare the distribution of each GO term or
KEGG pathway in the target and total protein set. The significance
level of GO term or KEGG pathway enriched was subsequently assessed.
The WoLF PSORT was used to predict the
subcellular localization of proteins. The MS proteomics data have
been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (https://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the iProX partner repository , with the data set identifier PXD048824.

## Preparation of Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP
To prepare the
DAM hydrogel, human adipose tissues discarded from healthy patients
after liposuction were decellularized. The Ethics Committee of the
Chinese PLA General Hospital approved the study protocol (2019-X15–02).
Briefly, adipose tissues were first subjected to three freeze–thaw
cycles, digested with trypsin (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) and nuclease
(HaiGene, Harbin, China), extracted with isopropyl alcohol, and finally
lyophilized to produce DAM. The DAM was ground into a powder in liquid
nitrogen. Subsequently, the DAM digest was prepared by treatment with
a pepsin solution (1 mg/mL; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) containing
0.01 mol/L HCl for 48–72 h. The pH was adjusted to approximately
7.4 for DAM hydrogels by adding 10× α-MEM (Gibco) and an
appropriate amount of 1 mol/L NaOH at 4 °C. The hydrogel concentrations
were 0.6, 0.8, and 1.2% (w/w). The prepared DAM was characterized
by H&E, Masson’s trichrome, Oil Red O, and immunofluorescence
staining and SEM (Hitachi Regulus 8100; Hitachi High-Tech Corporation).
HAMA (150 kDa) was purchased from Engineering for Life Sciences
(EFL, Suzhou, China) and mixed with 0.25% (w/w) lithium acylphosphate
photoinitiator to prepare 3, 5, 6, and 10% (w/w) HAMA pregels. The
DAM hydrogel was then mixed with the HAMA pregel in equal volumes,
and the cross-link was exposed to 405 nm visible light for 30 s to
cure a cylindrical gel 13 mm in diameter and 6 mm in height. The compressive
moduli of the gels with different concentration ratios were measured
using an HZ-1004 Material Testing System (Dongguan Lixian Instrument
Scientific Co., Ltd., Dongguan, China). Simultaneously, the gels were
freeze-dried, and the pore sizes of the gels with different ratios
were observed and compared using SEM after brittle fracture.
To prepare Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs, after injecting 0.8% DAM and
10% HAMA pregel into the microneedle mold (EFL-MMN-500, circle, diameter
17.5 mm), the mixture was centrifuged at 1500 × g for 3 min to remove bubbles and subjected to cross-linking under
visible light at 405 nm for 30 s to cure the DAM/HAMA-MNPs. Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs
were prepared by adding PBS-resuspended Met-EVs to DAM/HAMA before
addition to a microneedle mold. The pregel was mixed, and the final
concentration of Met-EVs was 3 × 108 particles/mL.

## DAM/HAMA Hydrogel Biocompatibility Assay
HUVECs, HaCATs,
and HFFs were used to evaluate DAM/HAMA hydrogel biocompatibility in vitro. DAM/HAMA hydrogels
were immersed in complete medium containing Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM, high-glucose) with 10% FBS for different
periods (0, 24, 48, and 72 h). The extracted fluid was then collected
for biocompatibility testing. The LIVE/DEAD assay (Beyotime Biotechnology,
Shanghai, China) was used to assess cell activity, while cell viability
was estimated using a CCK-8 assay (Dojindo Laboratories, Japan). Approximately
8 × 103 HaCATs, 4 × 103 HUVECs, and
3.2 × 103 HFFs were seeded in 96-well plates with
100 μL extract liquid per well for 24 h, with six parallel controls
for each group. Next, 100 μL of working reagent was added to
each well and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h before detection.
For the in vivo biocompatibility assay, female
C57BL/6J (6–8 weeks old; Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology,
Beijing, China) were used. A 1 cm skin incision was made in the middle
of the backs of the mice, and the cavities were peeled off at the
subcutaneous level. Thereafter, HAMA, DAM/HAMA, and Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA
hydrogels (n = 6) were implanted subcutaneously into
the backs under sterile conditions. Mice were sacrificed 1 week after
surgery, and the samples were processed for histological analysis.

## Endocytosis of the EVs
THP-1 cells (Procell CL-0233;
Procell Life Science & Technology Co., Ltd., Wuhan, China) were
cultured in RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin
and 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol and incubated in a 37 °C
5% CO2 incubator. Cells were grown at a density of 2 ×
105 cells/mL. To induce THP-1 cell differentiation into
macrophages, THP-1 cells were incubated with 100 nM phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) for 48 h before the experiment.
To well-label
EVs and trace their movement under a CLSM (ZEISS LSM 980; ZEISS, Oberkochen,
Germany), Dil (red; Beyotime Biotechnology) was used. First, an equal
volume of the working solution containing 10 μM Dil was added
to the EV suspension, and then the mixture was incubated at 37 °C
for 15 min in the dark. Afterward, we diluted the mixture by adding
5× PBS, after which the Dil-labeled EVs were centrifuged at 20,000
× g for 60 min and resuspended in PBS. Subsequently,
the labeled EVs were incubated with PMA-induced THP-1 macrophages
for 24 h. Next, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and
stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and a microfilament green fluorescent probe (Beyotime
Biotechnology) for 20 min. The cells were observed using CLSM to monitor
the endocytosis of EVs by macrophages.

## Degradation Properties of DAM/HAMA Gels
The pregel
(0.8% DAM +10% HAMA) (200 μL) was exposed to light, dried in
an oven at 75 °C for 4 h, and weighed (W0).
Subsequently, the gel was immersed in PBS buffer containing 100 U/mL
of hyaluronidase (EFL) and 0.1% type I collagenase (Sigma-Aldrich)
and placed in a shaker (150 rpm, 37 °C) for digestion for 24
h. Next, after the PBS solution discarded, the gels were dried in
an oven at 75 °C for 4 h, after which they were weighed (W1); the weight of the gel residue (Wx)
was continuously monitored during the experiment. The dry weight ratio
(ΔW %) was defined as ΔW% = Wx/W0 × 100%.

## Assay of EV Release from Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA Gels
Dil-labeled
EVs were mixed with the DAM/HAMA pregel and cured using light. Thereafter,
CLSM was used to image the samples, which were subsequently reconstructed
into 3D images to observe the loading of EVs onto the DAM/HAMA hydrogel.
After measuring the concentration of Met-EVs using the BCA method,
they were mixed with the DAM/HAMA pregel to achieve a final concentration
of EVs of 500 μg/mL. Subsequently, 100 μL of the pregel,
photopolymerized into a cylindrical shape, was aspirated into each
sample well of a 24-well plate. Each well was immersed in 800 μL
of PBS at 37 °C. The DAM/HAMA gel without EVs served as the control
group. The 400 μL of PBS solution in each well was replaced
daily, with the replaced solution used for BCA protein concentration
detection for a period of 7 days. Cumulative EV release (Q) was calculated
as follows
 where V is the liquid volume
per PBS change (400 μL), V0 indicates
each well plate containing a total of liquid (800 μL), Cit is the protein concentration
of the ith experimental group, Cictrl is the concentration of the ith protein measured in the control group, Cnt is the concentration of the nth protein measured in the experimental group, Cnctrl is the concentration
of the nth protein measured in the control group,
and M is the total EV protein loaded at 50 μg.

## ATP Content Assay
For cell sample collection, cells
were washed twice with 1 mL of PBS and lysed by 200 μL of lysis
solution into each well of a 6-well plate. After lysis, the cells
were centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 5 min at
4 °C, after which the supernatant was collected for testing.
For skin tissue collection, fresh tissue samples were rinsed with
PBS and weighed. Thereafter, 200 μL of lysate for every 20 mg
of tissue was added and homogenized well using a tissue grinder (Servicebio,
Wuhan, China) at −20 °C. After the tissue was lysed, it
was centrifuged at 12,000 × g for 5 min at 4
°C, and the resulting supernatant was obtained for further analysis.
Next, 100 μL of an ATP assay working solution (Beyotime Biotechnology)
was added to a 96-well plate, and a control group was established
by adding the working solution only. After 3–5 min at 25 °C,
20 μL of the sample was quickly mixed using a pipet gun and
added to the assay wells. Subsequently, relative light unit values
were determined at intervals of at least 2 s using a multifunctional
enzyme reader (Spectramax M2e; Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA).
The ATP content in each group was calculated using a standard curve.
For the tissue ATP assay, a separate supernatant of the homogenate
was used, and the protein content was assessed using the BCA method.
The ATP concentration was then converted into nmol/mg protein units
for comparative purposes. All the procedures were conducted on ice.

## ROS Content Assay
To determine intracellular ROS content,
the cells were rinsed twice with PBS, digested with trypsin, and centrifuged
at 150 × g for 4 min. The cells in the assay
group were resuspended in 100 μL of CellRox working solution
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) containing 5 μM of CellRox, while
the cells in the blank group were resuspended in 100 μL of PBS.
Both groups were incubated in the darkness for 30 min at 37 °C,
followed by dilution with 1 mL PBS and cell centrifugation. The cells
were then resuspended in 300 μL PBS, and the mean green fluorescence
intensity was analyzed using flow cytometry.
For skin tissue
ROS determination, all procedures were performed on ice. Briefly,
fresh tissue samples were weighed, after which 1 mL of homogenization
buffer per 50 mg of tissue was added, and the mixture was ground well
using a tissue grinder at −20 °C. Next, the homogenate
was centrifuged at 1000 × g for 3 min at 4 °C,
then, 200 μL of the homogenized supernatant and 2 μL of
dihydroethidium probe (Tissue ROS Test Kit; BIO-LAB, Beijing, China)
were added to a 96-well plate and mixed well by blowing up the supernatant
with a pipet. The plate was then incubated at 37 °C in the darkness
for 30 min. Next, the fluorescence intensity of the sample was determined
using a multifunctional enzyme reader (Spectramax M2e, Molecular Devices).
In addition, another homogenate was used to quantify the protein levels.
The resulting relative fluorescence unit/mg protein value (RFU/mg)
indicated the levels of tissue ROS.

## Cellular MMP Assay: JC-1 Assay
After washed with PBS,
1 mL of medium was added to the cells. Subsequently, 1 mL of JC-1
staining working solution (Beyotime Biotechnology) was added and mixed
thoroughly. After a 20-min incubation at 37 °C in the cell incubator,
the supernatant was removed, and the cells were washed twice with
JC-1 staining buffer. Finally, 2 mL of cell culture solution was added,
and observation and imaging were conducted using CLSM.

## Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNP-Treated Mice with Irradiated Combined Skin
Wounds
Female mice heal skin wounds faster than males, and
the mixed allocation of males and females may affect the healing time
of wounds in each group; while male mice
are more aggressive and are prone to bite wounds when kept in the
same cage. Therefore, female mice were
selected for in vivo experiments in this study. Forty-eight
female C57BL/6J mice aged 6–8 weeks were divided into four
groups. Thirty-six of them were randomly assigned to study irradiated
wound healing and were divided equally into three treatment groups:
DAM/HAMA-MNPs, Met-EVs@DAM/HAMA-MNPs, and PBS-treated controls. The
skin was shaved and depilated before X-ray irradiation. Lead shielding
was used to safeguard all tissues, excluding the dorsal skin. An overall
exposure of 10 Gy was administered to the dorsal skin using an X-ray
machine (RS2000; Rad Source Technologies, Buford, GA, USA). Full skin
wounds were symmetrically created on the backs of mice irradiated
with X-rays using a 10 mm skin perforator 3 days after irradiation,
which was considered day 0 of the treatment. An additional 12 mice
were used for regular nonirradiated skin wound treatment. The wounds
were changed every 3 days until they healed. The wounds were subjected
to various therapeutic treatments at POD0, 3, and 6. Tissue metabolism
studies were conducted on wound tissues collected on POD3 and 7. Pathological
section analysis was performed on wound tissues collected on POD14.
Exclusion criteria were the death of mice throughout the experiment,
or aggravation or splitting of wounds caused by mouse bites at the
wound sites. All animal protocols were approved by the Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee and complied with the guidelines of
the Beijing Medical Experimental Animal Care Commission (IACUC-DWZX-2023–525).

## Real-Time Quantitative PCR Analysis
Total RNA was extracted
using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Subsequently,
cDNA synthesis and qPCR were conducted using ReverTra Ace qPCR RT
Master Mix (TOYOBO, Shanghai, China) and SYBR Green Real-time PCR
Master Mix (TOYOBO), respectively. PCR primer sequences are listed
in Table S3. Gene expression was quantified
using the delta–delta Ct method. All gene expressions were normalized to mouse GAPDH.

## Statistical Analysis
All data are presented as mean
± standard deviation. Statistical analyses were performed using
GraphPad Prism 9.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Two-group
comparisons were conducted using a paired t-test,
and multiple-group comparisons were performed using one-way ANOVA
(Tukey’s posthoc test). Statistical significance was considered
at p < 0.05: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, and ****p < 0.0001.

## Acknowledgments
This
work was financially supported by the Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine.

## Glossary

## Abbreviations
ADSCsadipose-derived
stem cells
MSCsmesenchymal stem cells
FBSfetal bovine serum
EVextracellular vesicle
Met-EVsmetformin-treated
ADSC-derived EVs
Ctrl-EVscontrol EVs
DAMdecellularized adipose matrix
HAMAhyaluronic acid methacrylic acid
MNPmicroneedle patch
IRirradiation
ROSreactive oxygen species
mtROSmitochondrial
ROS
mtDNAmitochondrial
DNA
MTDRMitoTracker
deep red FM
Dil1,1′-dioctadecyl-3,3,3′,3′-tetramethylindocarbocyanine
perchlorate
DAPI4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
TEMtransmission electron microscopy
MSmass spectrometry
SEMscanning electron microscopy
HaCAThuman epidermal
keratinocyte
HFFhuman foreskin fibroblast
HUVECshuman umbilical vein endothelial cells
PBSphosphate-buffered saline
CLSMconfocal laser scanning
microscopy
ATPadenosine
5′-triphosphate
NTAnanoparticle tracking analysis
PODpostoperative day
Gygray
H&Ehematoxylin–eosin
IC50half maximal inhibitory concentration
ECMextracellular matrix
MMPΔΨm,
mitochondrial membrane potential
DMEMDulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium

## Data Availability Statement
The data that
support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.4c06921.
Figure S1 Identification of ADSCs; Figure S2 Dose–response
curve of ADSCs treated with metformin or pioglitazone; Figure S3 Relative
MTDR expression in ADSCs treated with a series of metformin and pioglitazone
concentrations; Figure S4 Gating for flow cytometry (FCM) analysis
of active mitochondrial in ADSC-derived EVs; Figure S5 Proteomic analysis
of differential proteins between Met- and Ctrl-EVs; Figure S6 Macrophage
endocytosis of EVs; Figure S7 Comparison of changes in ATP and ROS
after X-ray irradiation of macrophages at 2 or 4 Gy; Figure S8 Standard
curve for ATP assay; Figure S9 Met-EVs ameliorate X-ray-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction in HaCAT, HFF, and HUVECs; Figure S10 Preparation and
characterization of DAM hydrogel; Figure S11 Immunofluorescence staining
of infiltrating inflammatory cells in tissue surrounding subcutaneous
implants; Figure S12 Standard curve for BCA protein assay. Table S1
Kits and reagents used in the study; Table S2 Antibodies used in the
study; Table S3 Primers used for PCR and RT-qPCR in the study (PDF)

## Author Contributions
∥ These
authors contributed equally to this work. J.N.Z., W.Y., Y.H.
and W.D.Y. conceived and designed the experiments. W.D.Y., J.N.Z.,
C.T., and J.L.Z. performed the experiments. W.D.Y., J.N.Z., C.T.,
J.L.Z., Z.Y.C., Y.L., X.J.G., M.Y. Q., Q.Z., Y.L.J., H.Y.W., T.F.,
J.R., L.L.G., J.F.X., X.T.P., Y.H., and W.Y. analyzed and discussed
results. W.D.Y., J.N.Z., and W.Y. wrote the manuscript. All of the
authors read and approved the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Supplementary Material
nn4c06921_si_001.pdf

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
nn4c06921_si_001.pdf

## Data Availability Statement
The data that
support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding
author upon reasonable request.