pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC11194014PMC11194014.3191119401411194014NIHMS20004403873358310.1016/j.celrep.2024.114202NIHMS2000440NIHPA2000440319ArticleThe Janus kinase 1 is critical for pancreatic cancer initiation and progression
ShresthaHridaya RädlerPatrick D. DennaouiRayane WickerMadison N. RajbhandariNirakar SunYunguang PeckAmy R. VistisenKerry TriplettAleata A. BeydounRafic SterneckEsta SaurDieter RuiHallgeir WagnerKay-Uwe 1Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine and Tumor Biology Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit, MI 48201, USA2Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA3Department of Pathology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA4Department of Pharmacology, Physiology & Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA5Department of Oncology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA6Laboratory of Cell and Developmental Signaling, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA7Division of Translational Cancer Research, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany8Translational Cancer Research and Institute of Experimental Cancer Therapy, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany9Present address: University of North Carolina, 125 Mason Farm Rd., Chapel Hill, NC 27514, USA10Present address: Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Oncology, Moores Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA11Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.-U.W. formulated the overarching research goals and aims, supervised the research, and wrote the manuscript. H.S. performed most of the in vivo and cell culture experiments, immunoblots, and immunofluorescent staining techniques. P.D.R. conducted computational analyses of RNA sequencing and nCounter datasets and performed immunofluorescence staining experiments. R.D. assisted with the analyses of human PDAC cell lines, collection of tissue specimens, immunostaining, and retroviral vector production. M.N.W. maintained cell lines, collected tissues, and conducted xenografting experiments. N.R. assisted in the generation and initial analysis of the genetically engineered PDAC mouse models and derived cancer cell lines. R.B. provided expertise in histopathology. K.V. and A.A.T. helped draft institutional animal study protocols, maintained the animal colony, executed the processing of tissues, and developed PCR genotyping protocols. E.S. provided expertise and reagents to study CEBPD gene function. D.S. developed the genetic mouse strains for the pancreas-specific gene deletion and assisted in the application of these strains for this project. H.R. provided normal and malignant human pancreatic tissues and worked with Y.S. and A.R.P. to conduct the associated immunostaining experiments and quantitative imaging analyses.
*Correspondence: kuwagner@wayne.edu2852024105202443546527911420211420217062024230620242306202405052025https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
Interleukin-6 (IL-6)-class inflammatory cytokines signal through the Janus tyrosine kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway and promote the development of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC); however, the functions of specific intracellular signaling mediators in this process are less well defined. Using a ligand-controlled and pancreas-specific knockout in adult mice, we demonstrate in this study that JAK1 deficiency prevents the formation of KRASG12D-induced pancreatic tumors, and we establish that JAK1 is essential for the constitutive activation of STAT3, whose activation is a prominent characteristic of PDAC. We identify CCAAT/enhancer binding protein δ (C/EBPδ) as a biologically relevant downstream target of JAK1 signaling, which is upregulated in human PDAC. Reinstating the expression of C/EBPδ was sufficient to restore the growth of JAK1-deficient cancer cells as tumorspheres and in xenografted mice. Collectively, the findings of this study suggest that JAK1 executes important functions of inflammatory cytokines through C/EBPδ and may serve as a molecular target for PDAC prevention and treatment.

## In brief
Shrestha et al. demonstrate that JAK1 is a key signaling mediator of cytokines that promote mutant KRAS-induced pancreatic cancer initiation and progression. They provide experimental evidence that deficiency in JAK1 prevents tumor formation, and they identified C/EBPδ as a critical downstream effector of the pro-tumorigenic functions of JAK1/STAT signaling.

## Graphical abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Most pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs) are driven by gain-of-function mutations in KRAS along with genetic and epigenetic alterations in tumor susceptibility loci such as TP53 and CDKN2A. , Besides the well-established importance of these main oncogenic drivers, epidemiological and experimental evidence shows that environmental factors that cause inflammation play key roles in the etiology of pancreatic cancer (for references see review by Dennaoui et al. ). Inflammatory cytokines produced by the cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment are important mediators for cancer initiation and metastatic progression. – 
Interleukin-6 (IL-6)-class cytokines (e.g., IL-6, LIF, OSM) are key regulators of inflammation and rational targets for therapy. In support of this notion, work by Shi et al. demonstrated that the inhibition of the leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) or deficiency of its receptor significantly blocked the initiation of mutant KRAS-induced PDAC. It was also recently proposed that other interleukins (i.e., IL-4 and IL-13) promote the proliferation of cancer cells through metabolic reprogramming. A commonality of these growth factors is that they engage with specific receptor complexes that rely on Janus tyrosine kinases (JAKs) and associated signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins for tumor cell-intrinsic signal transduction. Specifically, IL-6-class cytokine receptors share the glycoprotein 130 (gp130) subunit that activates STAT3 in cancer cells. The tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear location of STAT3 is a hallmark of many malignancies and coincides with the formation of pancreatic precursor lesions. – The conditional deletion of the Stat3 gene in the exocrine pancreas was sufficient to prevent the development of primary and metastatic tumors. , However, the paradigm of STAT3 as an oncogene has recently been challenged by D’Amico et al., who proposed that this transcription factor might be critical for the epithelial identity of pancreatic cancer cells, thereby facilitating tumor-suppressive functions.
The inhibition of STAT3 in adenocarcinomas is the subject of intense investigations, and pharmacological agents that directly target this transcription factor or its upstream kinases are currently being tested in preclinical trials. – Thus far, the treatment of adenocarcinomas with JAK inhibitors has not been successful, and it has remained uncertain whether the activation of STAT3 in pancreatic cancer is regulated by Janus kinases. Our team generated conditional knockout mouse models that lack JAK2 and JAK1 , to assess the biological significance of individual Janus kinases as well as to identify and validate critical downstream targets. Using these models, we recently showed that JAK1 primarily controls the activation of STAT3 in normal and neoplastic mammary epithelial cells. , The lines of investigation presented in this work are to establish the degree of functional conservation of JAK/STAT signaling cascades in pancreatic tumor cells and to determine whether JAK1 is a rational target in PDAC to block active STAT proteins. The deletion of JAK1 in mice expressing mutant KRAS and in pancreatic cancer cell lines demonstrated that this tyrosine kinase promotes the onset and progression of pancreatic cancer through the activation of multiple STAT proteins (STAT3, 1, and 6) and their transcriptional targets. Moreover, we identified and validated CCAAT/enhancer binding protein δ (C/EBPδ) as a critical downstream effector, which executes important functions of inflammatory cytokine signaling through JAK1. Targeting the JAK1-C/EBPδ signaling cascade might be a suitable strategy for PDAC prevention and treatment.

## RESULTS

## Expression of JAK1 and constitutive activation of STAT3 and STAT1 in PDAC
We performed a comprehensive analysis of the expression of JAK1 and JAK2 and the activation of five downstream STAT proteins (STAT1, 3, 5a/b, and STAT6) in nine commonly used human pancreatic cancer cell lines and untransformed pancreatic cells (HPNE) ( and ). The immunoblot analysis showed that both JAKs are expressed at various levels in pancreatic cancer cell lines and untransformed HPNE cells. Relative to the expression in HPNE cells, the levels of JAK1 were elevated in three of the cancer cell lines and lower in Hs766T cells. Despite variations among three experimental repeats, the expression of JAK2 was noticeably lower in six cancer cell lines ( ). Under normal growth conditions, five out of nine cancer cell lines exhibited significantly higher steady-state levels of tyrosine phosphorylated STAT3, and only two cancer cell lines (Capan-2 and Hs766T) showed a prominently elevated activation of STAT1. Interestingly, five cancer cell lines exhibited a significant reduction in STAT1 activation compared to untransformed cells ( ) and none of the pancreatic cell lines expressed tyrosine phosphorylated STAT5 and STAT6 in steady state without the administration of exogenous ligands such as growth hormone (hGH) or IL-4 ( ).
To assess the activation of STAT3 in patient-derived specimens, we conducted a quantitative immunofluorescent analysis of tyrosine phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3) on 28 PDAC cases and 17 normal pancreata ( ). Given the expression of active STAT3 in the tumor-associated stroma, the tissues were co-stained for pan-cytokeratin to discriminate the nuclear localization of pSTAT3 in cancer cells. While pSTAT3 was detected in a few areas of normal pancreata, the number of cases expressing active STAT3 was significantly higher in pancreatic cancer cells ( ). Moreover, tumor-derived inflammatory cytokines can impose a field effect that leads to a significantly elevated activation of STAT3 in untransformed exocrine cells as determined by the analysis of pSTAT3 expression on a second set of tissue specimens consisting of 29 cancer cases along with 20 normal pancreatic tissues adjacent to the tumor (NAT) and five normal control pancreata ( ). The collective observations on primary tumor specimens and human cancer cell lines show that the constitutive activation of the JAK/STAT3 pathway is a common feature in pancreatic cancer. Notably, high activation of STAT3 did not closely match the expression of JAK2 (e.g., Capan-2, Panc-1 cells). JAK1 is abundantly expressed in most pancreatic cancer cell lines, suggesting that JAK1 might be the pivotal tyrosine kinase for the activation of STAT3.

## JAK1 deficiency prevents the formation of mutant KRAS-induced high-grade preneoplasia and pancreatic tumors
To determine the significance of JAK1 signaling in pancreatic cancer, we initially used a conventional approach to conditionally delete both copies of the Jak1 gene in the pancreata of mice that express the KRASG12D oncogene in a Cre-dependent manner and under a tetracycline-controlled transactivator (Pdx1-Cre CAG-LSL-tTA TetO-KrasG12D
Jak1fl/fl). In this model, we did not find any KRASG12D-induced precursor lesions in 3- and 6-month-old animals ( ). This finding might suggest that JAK1 is required for the development of pancreatic preneoplasia, but the outcome of this experiment was inconclusive. The absence of premalignant lesions was possibly the consequence of a negative selection of Pdx1-Cre-expressing exocrine cells that lack JAK1 and expression of mutant KRAS. Using a Cre/lox reporter transgene (CAG-LSL-GFP) to track individual cells with a JAK1 deletion, we found that, in comparison to littermate controls expressing JAK1, pancreata of Pdx1-Cre Jak1fl/fl CAG-LSL-GFP mice exhibited a significant reduction in GFP fluorescence, which is indicative of a selection against JAK1 knockout cells during early development ( ). To circumvent a negative selection of knockout cells, we established a more advanced genetic model where JAK1 is conditionally deleted in the pancreata of adolescent or adult mice. The model relies on the tamoxifen (Tam)-inducible Cre recombinase (CreERT2), whose expression is activated in the pancreas with a Pdx1 promoter-driven transgene expressing the Flp recombinase ( ). Simultaneously, Flp activates the expression of mutant KRAS from its engineered endogenous locus (FSF-KrasG12D) to initiate the formation of pancreatic neoplasms. The deletion of JAK1 was accomplished by treating animals with Tam, which also activated the expression of the CAG-LSL-GFP reporter transgene that was used to monitor the functionality of the CreERT2 on the single-cell level. Strong activation of GFP and the ligand-controlled deletion of JAK1 were observed in the pancreata of adult Tam-treated experimental animals that carried the Pdx1-Flp, Rosa26CAG-FSF-CreERT, and CAG-LSL-GFP transgenes in the presence of Jak1 conditional knockout alleles ( and ). The permanent expression of GFP, even months after Tam administration, is evidence that JAK1 is not needed for the survival of exocrine cells in the fully developed pancreas. On the histological level, the Tam-treated knockout glands were indistinguishable from untreated experimental mice ( ). Despite strong and widespread GFP fluorescence throughout the pancreas, we observed small areas that did not express the reporter, indicative of a minimal mosaic expression of one or more transgenes ( , asterisk).
While JAK/STAT signaling is largely inactive during normal tissue homeostasis, the expression of oncogenic KRASG12D in a Flp recombinase-inducible manner (Pdx1-Flp FSF-KrasG12D) led to an activation of STAT3 and STAT1 ( ). The Tam-mediated deletion of JAK1 resulted in a concurrent decline in tyrosine phosphorylated STAT3 and STAT1, suggesting that the persistent oncogenic activation of these STATs is mediated by JAK1. The expression of mutant KRAS in control mice caused a widespread development of precursor lesions, most of which were high-grade pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). In contrast, Tam-treated experimental mice presented low-grade PanINs that were composed of columnar to cuboidal cells with varying amounts of mucins and very mild degrees of cytological and architectural atypia ( ). The tall columnar and cuboidal epithelial cells in the low-grade lesions did not express any nuclear STAT3 ( , middle). The observed differences in the precursor subtype might be primarily due to the lack of JAK1 since Tam-treated mice with only one conditional Jak1 knockout allele exhibited GFP-positive high-grade PanINs with few areas of low-grade preneoplastic lesions ( , right). Low-magnification images illustrate the widespread differences in the histopathology between the JAK1 conditional knockouts and wild-type controls ( ). More importantly, the high-grade PanINs in the pancreata of JAK1-expressing mice had significantly more Ki67-positive proliferating cells compared to the low-grade precursor lesions in the JAK1 knockouts ( ).
Among five experimental mice treated early with Tam (i.e., before or shortly after weaning), only one mouse developed a palpable pancreatic tumor after more than 12 months. This tumor and the adjacent acinar cells exhibited a variable expression of GFP, and nuclear STAT3 was present in GFP-negative cells ( , left). The GFP-negative tumor cells likely originated from cells that did not undergo CreERT2-mediated recombination, such as those shown in . We also investigated the potential effects of deleting JAK1 in the pancreata of experimental mice with established precursor lesions. Among 11 mice treated with Tam around 6 months of age, only one animal presented with a primary tumor. Compared to the adjacent normal pancreatic tissue, the GFP expression in this tumor was lower ( , right), and cancer cells were not completely devoid of nuclear STAT3, suggesting that the retention of active STAT3 might provide a selective advantage of transforming cells in vivo.

## Selective advantage of cancer cells expressing active STAT3 during PDAC progression
Compared to JAK1-deficient experimental mice, significantly more control animals expressing mutant KRAS in the presence of wild-type JAK1 developed pancreatic tumors. Specifically, five out of 17 control mice not treated with Tam ( ; Trp53wt no Tam) presented with tumors within 1 year, and eight mice succumbed to PDAC by 16 months of age. Two of these animals had liver and lung metastases at the time of necropsy. The inclusion of one copy of a mutant Trp53R172H allele significantly accelerated the tumor onset, and all animals expressing oncogenic KRAS in the presence of mutant p53 and wild-type JAK1 ( ; Trp53R172H no Tam) developed pancreatic cancer after an average latency of 124 days. In comparison to these control groups, we observed a trending extended survival of JAK1-deficient mice expressing KRASG12D and mutant p53R172H ( ; Trp53R172H + Tam). With a median survival of 151 days, JAK1 conditional knockout mice lived 27 days longer than the controls when Tam was administered early (i.e., after weaning) to delete JAK1 (p = 0.039, Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test; log-rank p > 0.05). At the histological level, primary pancreatic tumors of untreated control mice were typical adenocarcinoma with variable degrees of desmoplasia ( , left). The tumors of Tam-treated mice were similar but exhibited selected areas with distinctive characteristics, such as the presence of columnar cancer cells ( , middle). Unlike low-grade preneoplasia in the proximity of the PDACs of Tam-treated mice ( , right), the nuclei within the columnar cancer cells were not basally located.
At the time of necropsy, 16 of the 56 untreated controls had macroscopically visible, GFP-negative disseminated tumors in their lungs and livers ( ). Metastatic lesions were found in 10 of the 14 Tam-treated mice; however, three of these tumors were GFP negative and likely descendants of primary cancer cells that lacked expression of Cre recombinase. Notably, more than 50% of the Tam-treated mice were around 4 weeks older than the untreated controls at the time of necropsy, and the observed GFP-positive metastatic lesions in the livers and lungs of seven Tam-treated mice were small and only identifiable under a fluorescent stereoscope ( , left). Two Tam-treated mice also had GFP-positive tumors in their adrenal glands. The immunofluorescent staining results revealed that GFP-positive metastatic cancer cells retained a variable expression of nuclear STAT3 ranging from levels below that of tumor-associated stromal cells to very high levels in cancer cells despite the Cre-mediated activation of the GFP reporter ( , right). Tumors with high pSTAT3 expression were likely clonal derivatives where the inducible CreERT2 led to the activation of GFP but not a complete deletion of both Jak1 alleles. The absence or incomplete recombination of the Jak1 conditional knockout alleles was validated by PCR on isolated cancer cells from the two larger GFP-positive adrenal gland tumors ( ). These findings along with the observation that 30% of all metastases were GFP negative suggested that transforming cells that retained active STAT3 had a selective advantage during cancer initiation and progression.

## JAK1 is essential for the activation of STAT3, STAT1, and STAT6 in mouse and human pancreatic cancer cells
To address whether JAK1 is required for the persistent activation of STAT proteins as well as the growth and survival of pancreatic cancer cells, we generated six pancreatic tumor cell lines from mice expressing the Flp-activated KrasG12D along with mutant p53R172H in the background of two Jak1 conditional knockout alleles ( ). Two mice also carried the inactive CAG-LSL-GFP reporter. The presence of the activated KrasG12D allele in the tumor cell lines was determined by PCR ( ). Following a retroviral-based expression of Cre recombinase, the deficiency in JAK1 was validated in all six cell lines by immunoblot analysis ( and ). In comparison to the JAK1-expressing parental control cells, the Cre-mediated deletion of this kinase significantly reduced the constitutive activation of STAT3 in steady state ( ). Deficiency in JAK1 blocked the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3 and STAT1 and the formation of STAT3/1 heterodimers in oncostatin M (OSM)-treated cells ( ‒ ). The deletion of JAK1 also abolished the activation of STAT1 in response to interferon-gamma (INFγ) stimulation ( ). Like the human PDAC cell lines ( ), none of the mouse tumor cells expressed active STAT6 in steady state, and deficiency in JAK1 effectively prevented the phosphorylation of STAT6 in response to IL-4 stimulation ( ). We also generated two pancreatic tumor cell lines from Pdx1-Flp FSF-KrasG12D
p53R172H mice that carry two Jak2 conditional knockout alleles, and the conditional deletion of JAK2 in these tumor cells did not affect the constitutive activation of STAT3 ( ). To validate the essential role of JAK1 for the activation of STAT3 in human PDAC cell lines, we used CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing to generate MIA PaCa-2 and AsPC-1 cells that lack JAK1 ( ). We also established MIA PaCa-2 and AsPC-1 cell lines with a doxycycline (Dox)-inducible knockdown of JAK2. A direct comparison of the parental human cancer cell lines and their JAK1 knockout or JAK2-deficient derivatives demonstrated that, identical to all mouse cell lines, JAK1 is the pivotal Janus kinase that mediates the oncogenic activation of STAT3 ( ).
While conducting the cytokine response studies, we observed that JAK1-expressing cells retained low levels of active STAT3 following serum starvation and specific growth factor deprivation ( , , and ), suggesting that, in part, the persistent activation of STAT3 in pancreatic cancer cells is a result of autocrine signaling. Deficiency in JAK1 and the consequential block of the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT3, STAT1, and STAT6 did not lead to a compensatory activation of STAT5 in steady state and after stimulation with IL-4, IL-13, or OSM ( ). Interestingly, STAT6 was only activated by IL-4 in PDAC cells but not through stimulation with IL-13 or OSM. While the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT5 can be induced by human growth hormone (hGH) ( , bottom), we found that, unlike in MCF7 human breast cancer cells, STAT5 was not activated in response to hGH stimulation in MIA PaCa-2 cells despite expression of JAK2 ( ). We also did not observe a compensatory activation of STAT5 when JAK1-deficient mouse and human pancreatic cancer cells and their parental JAK1-expressing controls were transplanted into immunocompromised animals ( and ).

## JAK1 deficiency decreases the proliferation and growth of pancreatic cancer cells in vivo
Although JAK1, active STAT3, STAT1, and STAT6 may not be strictly required for cancer cell survival, deficiency in JAK1 had notable effects on the growth characteristics of cancer cells in culture and in vivo. Initially, we observed only a marginal decrease in cellular proliferation when mouse JAK1-deficient cancer cells were grown as monolayers ( ). Interestingly, a pool of JAK1 knockout human AsPC-1 cells could be propagated despite a notable reduction in cell proliferation ( ), but, unlike MIA PaCa-2 cells, individual AsPC-1 JAK1-deficient clones could not be established ( and ). Only clones with an incomplete knockout of JAK1 were able to multiply. When grown in non-adherent culture conditions, mouse and human pancreatic cancer cells with and without JAK1 were able to form similar numbers of tumorspheres ( ). However, the average size of the tumorspheres was smaller in mouse and human JAK1-deficient cancer cell lines ( ), which was likely a consequence of the lower proliferative capacity of these cells. In contrast to the reduction in cell proliferation, a knockout of JAK1 did not have any statistically significant impact on cell migration ( ).
Next, we transplanted mouse and human JAK1 knockout pancreatic cancer cells and their isogenic JAK1 wild-type controls subcutaneously into Athymic nude mice to study the growth characteristics of JAK1-deficient pancreatic tumor cells in vivo ( ). In both models, the knockout of JAK1 slowed the growth of tumors (mouse, and ; human, , ). On the histological level, all tumors were solid adenocarcinomas as shown in . Immunofluorescent staining against the human-specific Ku80 was used to validate the correct xenografting of the parental MIA PaCa-2 cells and their JAK1 knockout derivatives ( ). In contrast to the high abundance of nuclear STAT3 in the larger control tumors, the knockout of JAK1 was highly effective in sustaining the block of STAT3 activation in vivo (mouse, ; human, ). Explanted cancer cells from the smaller secondary tumors showed that they were composed of JAK1-deficient tumor cells that lack active STAT3 (mouse, ; human, ). For this study, we purposely used the original pool of MIA PaCa-2 cells with the CRISPR-Cas9-targeted knockout of JAK1 that contained very few cells expressing JAK1 ( ). However, within the limited experimental timeline, we did not observe a selective amplification of residual JAK1 wild-type cells with active STAT3. The collective results suggest that, while JAK1 and active STAT3 may not be obligatory for pancreatic cancer cell survival, the inhibition of this cancer cell-intrinsic JAK/STAT signaling pathway reduces the proliferation and growth of pancreatic tumor cells in vivo.

## JAK1 signaling controls the expression of STAT transcriptional targets but does not affect phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase signaling or epithelial and mesenchymal characteristics
In mammary epithelial cells, JAK/STAT pathways are determinants for cell proliferation, survival, and cell death, in part, by modulating the expression of specific Phosphatidylinositol 3 Kinase (PI3K) subunits and AKT that are important downstream targets of receptor tyrosine kinases and RAS GTPase signaling. To assess whether the reduced proliferation of JAK1-deficient pancreatic cancer cells is a consequence of similar signaling networks, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and PI3K signaling in four mouse and three human JAK1-deficient pancreatic cancer cell lines and their parental controls expressing JAK1 ( ). The collective results show that the lack of JAK1 and active STAT3 did not significantly affect the expression and activation of ERK1/2 or AKT in pancreatic cancer cells ( and ). The p50/p55 regulatory subunits of PI3K are transcriptional targets of STAT3 in the mammary gland epithelium, but it was surprising that both subunits were not expressed in any of the mouse and human pancreatic cancer cell lines ( and ). In conclusion, pancreatic cancer cells do not seem to have the same molecular networks that facilitate a crosstalk between the JAK/STAT and PI3K/AKT signaling cascades as in mammary epithelial cells.
Next, we examined a potential JAK1/STAT3 dependency of molecular determinants that control cellular plasticity and epithelial identity. The collective results of the immunoblot analyses performed on seven isogenic pairs of PDAC cell lines with and without JAK1 (four mouse and three human) showed that, despite phenotypic variations between parental cell lines, there were no consistent changes in the expression of epithelial and mesenchymal markers (CK19, cadherins, vimentin, and EpCAM) or transcription factors that are known regulators of cellular plasticity such as SNAIL, SLUG, ZEB1, and TWIST ( and ). The results suggested that active JAK1/STAT3 signaling is not a determinant for the cellular identity of pancreatic cancer cells as previously reported and the observed differences in cancer cell growth properties between JAK1-deficient tumor cells and controls were not a consequence of potential changes in cellular plasticity.
The finding that JAK1/STAT3 signaling does not have a significant impact on cellular plasticity in PDAC is validated by the results of the transcriptomic analysis of six isogenic pairs of mouse pancreatic cancer cell lines with and without JAK1. The multidimensional scaling (MDS) plot shown in illustrates that the gene expression profiles were significantly more divergent between the parental cell lines expressing JAK1 than the differences in gene expression that resulted from the deletion of JAK1. The paired analysis of parental and JAK1-deficient cancer cells identified 245 genes that were downregulated and 65 genes that were upregulated in the JAK1 knockouts (false discovery rate [FDR] <0.05; ). Among those, 164 genes were deregulated 2-fold or greater (124 down, 24 up) in cancer cells lacking JAK1. The list of the top 25 deregulated genes ( ) included Osmr and Il13ra1, which engage JAK1 for STAT activation ( ‒ , and ). In agreement with these findings, the gene set enrichment analysis revealed concordant differences in specific gene sets that are functionally related to the interaction of cytokines and their receptors, JAK/STAT signaling, and cell adhesion ( ). Several of the downregulated genes in the JAK1 knockout cells were STAT3 targets, including Stat3 itself, Socs3, Map3k8, and Tgfbi, as well as genes encoding selected matrix metalloproteases (MMPs). The deregulated expression of these genes was validated in each cell line using the NanoString nCounter analysis ( ).

## C/EBPδ is upregulated in pancreatic cancer and executes the pro-tumorigenic functions of JAK1 signaling
One of the top JAK1 candidate target genes that were consistently downregulated in JAK1 knockout pancreatic cancer cells was Cebpd, which encodes the C/EBPδ ( ). Contrary to its recently proposed tumor-suppressive role in PDAC, the immunostaining results on human tissue specimens showed that C/EBPδ is considerably upregulated in pancreatic cancers ( ). While C/EBPδ was not detected in the normal pancreas and low-grade PanINs, high-grade preneoplastic lesions showed a pronounced nuclear expression of C/EBPδ ( ). Moreover, a significantly elevated expression of this protein was detected in six of nine commonly used human PDAC cell lines ( and ), including MIA PaCa-2 cells with high levels of active STAT3. The JAK1-dependent expression of C/EBPδ on the level of the protein was validated by immunoblot in mouse and human MIA PaCa-2 cells ( , , and , left). Identical to human tissue specimens, C/EBPδ was not expressed in normal pancreata of mice, while cancer cells and tumor-associated stromal cells exhibited nuclear C/EBPδ at various levels ( ). The expression of C/EBPδ was significantly lower in JAK1 conditional knockout mice that were treated with Tam after the onset of preneoplasia to delete one or two copies of the Jak1 gene ( ). Most notably, C/EBPδ was completely absent in low-grade PanINs in the JAK1 knockout ( , right) that lack expression of active STAT3 as shown earlier ( , middle). The extended analysis of the expression of other C/EBPs revealed that C/EBPα, C/EBPβ, and C/EBPγ were not present in mouse pancreatic cancer cells ( , right), and only the liver-enriched activating and inhibitory protein (LAP, LIP) isoforms of C/EBPβ were detected in human MIA PaCa-2 cells ( ). The level of the LAP protein was slightly lower in JAK1-deficient cells compared to their parental controls, but the reduced expression of C/EBPβ was less significant than that of C/EBPδ in the JAK1 knockout.
C/EBPδ is encoded by a single exon, which we targeted with high efficiency in MIA PaCa-2 cells using CRISPR-Cas9-mediated gene editing ( ). The initial results of the knockout experiment confirmed the specificity of the C/EBPδ antibody, and we observed that the high activation of STAT3 remained unchanged, suggesting that C/EBPδ is not an essential mediator of the autocrine loop of inflammatory cytokines that signal through JAK1. Similar to the JAK1 knockout, deficiency in C/EBPδ did not significantly affect the proliferation of cancer cells when they were maintained as monolayers ( ). However, we observed a significant reduction in the number and average size of tumorspheres when CEBPD knockout cells were grown on non-adherent culture dishes ( ), suggesting that C/EBPδ may have a role in promoting self-renewal in addition to cellular proliferation. Similar to tumorspheres in culture, C/EBPδ-deficient cells grew significantly slower in xenografted mice compared to the CEBPD wild-type parental controls ( ).
Next, we generated JAK1 knockout MIA PaCa-2 cells that express exogenous, FLAG-tagged CEBPD to investigate whether the re-expression of C/EBPδ restores the growth of JAK1-deficient tumorspheres. Reinstating the expression of C/EBPδ did not rescue the activation of STAT3 in the absence of JAK1 ( ) and had no significant effect on the proliferation of cancer cells in monolayer cultures ( ). However, expression of exogenous C/EBPδ increased the number and average size of JAK1-deficient tumorspheres ( ). The bright fluorescence of the dTomato reporter, which is co-expressed with CEBPD from the bicistronic lentiviral vector, suggested that the larger tumorspheres were a consequence of the re-expression of C/EBPδ ( , right panel). A knockout of C/EBPδ or its re-expression in JAK1-deficient MIA PaCa-2 cells had no effect on the levels of C/EBPβ ( , left). More importantly, reinstating the expression of C/EBPδ was sufficient to restore the growth of JAK1-deficient cancer cells in xenografted mice ( ). The key findings from human MIA PaCa-2 cancer cells were confirmed in mouse pancreatic tumor cells ( ). A genetic rescue of the expression of C/EBPδ in cancer cells with a conditional knockout of JAK1 did not have a major impact on cellular proliferation in monolayer cultures ( ) but significantly accelerated the formation and expansion of tumorspheres as well as tumor growth in xenografted animals ( ‒ ). The notion that JAK1 signaling through C/EBPδ is critical for tumor cell proliferation in vivo is supported by the analysis of Cyclin D1 expression in transplanted mouse and human pancreatic cancer cells that are deficient in JAK1 and their parental JAK1-expressing controls ( ). The deletion of JAK1 or C/EBPδ in MIA PaCa-2 cells resulted in a significantly lower nuclear expression of Cylin D1. The reduced level of this pivotal regulator of cell proliferation was rescued by reinstating the expression of C/EBPδ in JAK1 knockout cells. The collective results of this line of investigation suggest that important pro-tumorigenic functions of JAK1 signaling are executed by C/EBPδ.

## DISCUSSION
Defining the roles of specific IL-6 class inflammatory cytokines in normal tissue homeostasis and cancer is somewhat complicated because of their functional redundancy, ligand-receptor promiscuity, and the formation of receptor heterodimers within signaling complexes. Then again, the diverse ligand-receptor complexes engage only a few JAKs and STATs for signal transduction, which provides opportunities for targeted intervention, particularly those aimed at blocking the persistent activation of STAT3 in chronic inflammation and cancer. While recent studies highlighted the paracrine contribution of cytokines from the tumor microenvironment, , , the oncogenic activation of JAK/STAT signaling in PDAC is likely a primary consequence of autocrine signaling, which is most evident by the constitutive activation of STAT3 in established human and mouse cancer cell lines. This autocrine loop can be effectively blocked through the targeted ablation of JAK1. It should be noted that the downregulation or conditional knockout of JAK2 did not attenuate the activation of STAT3, suggesting that the reported consequences of using various kinase inhibitors in previous studies to target STAT3 activation were incorrectly assigned to JAK2. In addition to STAT3, JAK1 is essential for the activation of STAT1 and STAT6 in pancreatic cancer cells, which is analogous to observations in the normal mammary gland epithelium as well as human and mouse mammary cancer cells. – These consistent findings among different epithelial tissues and diverse cancer models imply that neither JAK2/3 and TYK2 nor receptor tyrosine kinases (e.g., epidermal growth factor receptor [EGFR]) can substitute for the loss of JAK1 to effectively activate these STAT proteins.
A consequence of the ablation of JAK1 before the onset of PDAC was the predominant presence of low-grade PanINs compared to high-grade preneoplastic lesions in the JAK1 wild-type controls. This suggests that blocking JAK1 signaling arrests the progression of PanIN lesions at an early stage where active STAT3 is typically low or absent. The rare occurrence of palpable tumors in JAK1 conditional knockout mice expressing oncogenic KRAS and the observed delay in cancer progression in animals that also carry mutant p53 support the previously proposed pro-tumorigenic role of STAT3 in pancreatic carcinogenesis. , , Our genetic studies show that JAK1 and active STAT3 are not necessary for the survival of pancreatic cancer cells, in particular, when cultured ex vivo. However, there was a noticeable growth advantage of cancer cells in vivo that escaped from the conditional deletion of JAK1 and that retained expression of active STAT3.
On the mechanistic level, loss of JAK1 resulted in the reduced expression of STAT3 target genes, including MMPs, which are associated with pancreatic and gastrointestinal cancer progression. , , Moreover, deficiency in JAK1 blocked the autocrine signaling loop of inflammatory cytokines by downregulating the receptors for OSM and IL-13 that activate STAT3 and STAT6 in PDAC. Despite differences in the RNA expression of selected genes related to cell adhesion (e.g., Vcam, Alcam, Claudins, and Syndecans that are part of this Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes [KEGG] gene cluster), the examination of nine markers of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in seven isogenic pancreatic cancer cell lines with and without JAK1 did not provide evidence that JAK1/STAT3 signaling plays a significant role in the modulation of cellular plasticity as previously proposed. It was also surprising to find that, in contrast to mammary epithelial cells, , STAT3 is not a driver for the transcriptional activation of the PI3K regulatory subunits p50 and p55 or AKT activation, which might explain the limited impact of the JAK1 knockout on pancreatic cancer cell survival.
The identification and validation of Cebpd as one of the most consistently downregulated genes in the JAK1 knockout supports earlier studies that C/EBPδ is a target of STAT3. , The knockout of C/EBPδ in cancer cells mirrored the phenotypic consequences of JAK1 deficiency related to the growth of tumorspheres and reinstating the expression of C/EBPδ was sufficient to restore the tumorsphere-forming properties of human and mouse JAK1-deficient cancer cells and their growth in xenografted mice. However, it should be noted that a high overexpression of Cebpd can cause growth inhibition, which might give the impression that this transcription factor is a tumor suppressor. The collective results of this study highlight the oncogenic roles of active STAT3 and C/EBPδ in human and mouse pancreatic cancers. These findings are consistent with earlier reports that implicated C/EBPδ in tumor cell stemness in breast cancer and glioblastoma. , In summary, JAK1 executes biologically relevant functions of inflammatory cytokines through C/EBPδ in pancreatic cancer cells and may serve as a rational target for PDAC prevention. Although the ablation of JAK1 and STAT3 activation may not lead to pancreatic cancer cell death, the results from the transplantation experiments suggest that targeting JAK1 may slow or prevent the progression of locally invasive disease in patients with resectable pancreatic tumors who are at risk of recurrence.

## Limitations of the study
The genetic models in this study provided insight into cell-intrinsic functions of JAK1 signaling and the activation of downstream targets such as C/EBPδ in preneoplastic and fully transformed pancreatic cancer cells. The biological consequences of blocking JAK1 signaling in other cell types within the tumor microenvironment in addition to cancer cells were not investigated but could be therapeutically relevant. Also, the complete absence of the JAK1 protein in cancer cells may not discriminate the potential roles of this kinase as a scaffold independent of its catalytic activity as previously reported for JAK2. 

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the , Dr. Kay-Uwe Wagner (kuwagner@wayne.org).

## Materials availability
JAK1 and JAK2 conditional knockout mice will be distributed by the Mutant Mouse Resource & Research Centers (MMRRC ID: 71383 and ID: 71382). Mouse tumor-derived cell lines and plasmids created as part of this study are available upon request. A completed Material Transfer Agreement may be required.

## Data and code availability
The RNA sequencing data were deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number GSE227149.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Genetically modified mouse strains
Our team generated genetically engineered mice with conditional knockout alleles for JAK1 (Jak1fl, Jak1tm1Kuw) and JAK2 (Jak2fl, Jak2tm1Kuw) as well as the CAG-LSL-tTA transgenic line [Tg(CAG-bGeo,-tTA,-EGFP)2A11Kuw] that constitutively expresses the tetracycline-controlled transactivator in a Cre recombinase-dependent manner. The CAG-LSL-GFP reporter strain was kindly provided by Dr. Miyazaki (Osaka University). The TetO-KrasG12D [Tg(tetO-Kras2)12Hev/J] and FSF-KrasG12D [B6(Cg)-Krastm5Tyj/J] mouse strains were purchased from The Jackson Laboratory. Pdx1-Cre transgenics and Trp53LSL-R172H knockin mice [B6.129S4-Trp53tm2Tyj/Nci] were provided by the NCI Mouse Repository. The conversion of the Trp53LSL-R172H targeted locus into the Trp53R172H allele was accomplished in the female germline of MMTV-Cre [Tg(MMTV-cre)1Mam] transgenics. A detailed description of the Pdx1-Flp transgenic line and the Rosa26CAG-FSF-CreERT2 knockin strain expressing a tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase in an Flp-dependent manner [MGI:5616874; Gt(ROSA)26Sortm3(CAG-Cre/ERT2)Dsa] was published by Schönhuber et al. The transgenes and targeted alleles were maintained on a C57Bl/6 genetic background. PCR primers to genotype transgenes and genetically engineered alleles are provided in . To induce a CreERT2-mediated deletion of the JAK1 conditional knockout alleles and activation of the CAG-LSL-GFP reporter, mice were treated with tamoxifen (Tam) once daily for five consecutive days. All animals were maintained on a 12/12-h light/dark cycle under pathogen-free conditions in micro-isolator cages. The care and use of animals followed the ARRIVE guidelines, and this work was conducted in accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The animal study protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at the University of Nebraska Medical Center and Wayne State University.

## Transplant models
To establish xenograft models, suspensions of 1×105 pancreatic cancer cells in chilled Matrigel (Corning #354263) were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of 12-week-old male and female NCrnu/nu recipients (Charles River). Tumors were measured using an electronic caliper, and tumor volumes (mm3) were calculated using the following equation: length (mm) x width2 (mm2)/2. The experimental endpoints to assess cancer growth in transplanted recipients and in genetically engineered mice were determined by the size of the tumor. The maximum allowed tumor size was approximately 1.5 cm in diameter as mandated by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees.

## Human tissues, multiplexed immunohistochemistry, and quantitative image analysis
Two tissue microarray panels comprising deidentified FFPE normal pancreas tissue and therapy-naïve primary pancreatic cancer from two non-overlapping patient cohorts were provided by the Medical College of Wisconsin Biorepository & Tissue Analytics core as approved by institutional IRB. Histological sections (4 μm) were deparaffinized and went through antigen retrieval using pH 6.0 retrieval buffer (Dako) followed by multiplex immunostaining on a Dako/Agilent Omnis autostainer. Sections were incubated for 30 min with a mixture of rabbit monoclonal anti-pY-Stat3 (Cell Signaling, cat.# 9145; 1:200 dilution) and mouse anti-pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3, Dako/Agilent, cat.# M3515, 1:100 dilution), washed and incubated with HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit polymer (EnVision+; Dako/Agilent, cat.# K400311–2, 1:200 dilution), followed by visualization of pY-Stat3 using Cy5-tyramide as substrate. Pan-cytokeratin was visualized using Alexa 555-labeled goat anti-rabbit antibody (Invitrogen, cat.# A-21429; 1:200 dilution). In parallel, separate slides were stained for C/EBPδ (CEBPD) using a pH 9.0 antigen retrieval buffer (Dako) prior to incubation with the rabbit anti-CEBPD antibody (Abcam, cat.# ab245214, 1:1000 dilution) and mouse monoclonal anti-pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3, Dako/Agilent, cat.# M3515, 1:400 dilution), followed by HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody. C/EBPδ was visualized using Cy5-tyramide as substrate and cytokeratin was visualized using Alexa 555-labeled goat anti-mouse antibody (Invitrogen, cat.# A-21422, 1:200 dilution). Finally, sections were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Vector) to visualize cell nuclei. Stained slides were digitized at 20x magnification on a slide scanner (3DHistech Panoramic Flash II) capturing fluorescent images in three channels (DAPI, Alexa 555, and Cy5). Digitized images were analyzed by Tissue Studio (Definiens), and the mean nuclear expression signal for pY-Stat3 immunoreactivity was computed for cytokeratin-positive cells in each tissue core.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Genotyping
For PCR-based genotyping of mice, genomic DNA was extracted from digested tail biopsies of mice (10 mg/mL proteinase K in 1% SDS, 50 nM Tris/HCl pH8, 100 nM NaCl, and 50 mM EDTA) using an AutoGenprep2000. The PCR primer sets listed in were used to genotype the genetically engineered alleles and transgenes.
To determine the Cre-mediated recombination of the Jak1 conditional knockout allele in metastases using PCR, pancreatic cancer cells were identified and isolated from H&E-stained histologic sections of GFP-positive tumors in the adrenal glands. Slides were briefly immersed in liquid nitrogen to remove the coverslip and washed in Histo-Clear to remove the mounting media. Metastases were carefully extracted under a stereoscope using a fine needle. The DNA was isolated as described above and the PCRs for the unrecombined floxed and knockout alleles of Jak1 as well as the wild-type Jak2 allele (DNA control) were carried out using the primers shown in .

## Histological analysis and immunostaining on mouse specimens
Mouse pancreata and tissue samples from livers, lungs, kidneys, and adrenal glands were placed on glass slides and examined with a Discovery.V8 fluorescent stereoscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.) for GFP expression. Tissues were fixed overnight in 10% buffered formalin (Fisher Scientific Company) at room temperature and stored in 70% ethanol prior to paraffin embedding, sectioning, and staining with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) for histological examination. Brightfield images were taken on a whole-slide scanner (Leica Microsystems, Inc). For immunostaining, histologic sections of 5 μm were deparaffinized three times in 100% Histo-Clear, rehydrated in decreasing concentrations of ethanol (100%, 95%, 90%, 70%, 50%, and 30% for 3 min each), and washed for 5 min in 1x PBS. Tissue sections were pressure cooked in ImmunoRetriever with Citrate (Bio SB #BSB0022) using a Bio SB TintoRetriever pressure cooker, which was set to 116°C–121°C for 1 min for antigen retrieval. Once the slides had returned to room temperature, they were rinsed for 5 min in 1x PBS and blocked with 3% BSA for 1h. Subsequently, primary antibodies were added (varying dilutions and staining conditions are listed in ) and incubated overnight at 4°C in a moist chamber. The following day, the slides were washed three times with 1x PBS for 5 min each, a fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody was added, and slides were incubated in the dark for 1h at room temperature in a moist chamber. After washing the slides twice with 1x PBS and once with distilled water, Vectashield DAPI mounting media (Vector, H-1200) and coverslips were applied. Stained slides were examined with an Axio Imager microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.) equipped with an SPOT FLEX camera (Diagnostic Instruments, Inc.). For quantification, Cyclin D1-positive nuclei were counted in three representative images (400x magnification) of non-overlapping tumor regions. The relative number of Cyclin D1-positive cells in each of these images was determined with the semi-automated Weka Trainable Segmentation Plugin within Fiji software (v2.0.0; https://fiji.sc/) by counting the Cyclin D1-positive nuclei and the total number of DAPI-stained nuclei. The accuracy of the software was confirmed by manual counting of selected images. Manual counting was performed to quantify Ki67-positive nuclei and the total number of DAPI-stained nuclei within GFP-positive low-grade and high-grade PanINs. Ki67-positive nuclei cells were counted in three representative images (400x magnification) of non-overlapping pancreatic tissue regions. A paired Student’s t-test using GraphPad Prism (v6.07; GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) was performed to assess statistically significant differences in cellular proliferation. The resulting data were visualized as box and whisker plots with an indication of the minimum and maximum value, as well as the first quartile, median, and third quartile.

## Cell culture, CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing, and shRNA-mediated knockdown
Pancreatic cancer cells were derived from primary tumors of mice that express oncogenic KRAS and mutant p53 (Pdx1-Flp FSF-KrasG12D
Trp53R172H) in the presence of two Jak1 conditional knockout alleles (Jak1fl/fl). Primary tumor cells were maintained in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS, L-glutamine, and nonessential amino acids as well as 10 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin and 50 μg/mL gentamicin. To generate isogenic cell lines that are deficient in JAK1, the parental lines were infected with pBabe-Cre-puro retroviral particles and selected with increasing concentrations of puromycin (2, 4, and 7 μg/mL). Immortalized, untransformed human pancreatic cells (HPNE) that were maintained at early and late passage numbers were a kind gift from Michel Ouellette (UNMC), and the hTERT/E6/E7-immortalized HPNE cells and pancreatic cancer cell line panel were obtained as part of the collaborative work with investigators of the UNMC Specialized Program of Research Excellence (SPORE) in Pancreatic Cancer. Polyclonal MIA PaCa-2 and AsPC-1 cancer cell lines with a CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of JAK1 were generated as a service by Synthego, Corp. MIA PaCa-2 cells were maintained in DMEM medium (ATCC #30–2002) supplemented with 10% FBS and 10 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin. AsPC-1 cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 10 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin. The deletion of the CEBPD gene in MIA PaCa-2 cells was performed in our laboratory using the Synthego Gene Knockout Kit v2 and Lonza nucleofection protocol (buffer SF). MCF7 cells were obtained from ATCC and maintained in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% FBS, L-glutamine, and 10 μg/mL penicillin/streptomycin.
To conditionally knock down the expression of JAK2 and JAK1 in human pancreatic cancer cell lines (MIA PaCa-1, AsPC-1, and PANC-1), oligonucleotides of previously validated shRNA sequences ( ) were cloned into the lentiviral Tet-pLKO-puro vector (Addgene #21915), which permits a doxycycline (Dox)-controlled knockdown of target genes. Lentiviral particles were produced in 293T cells using a standard protocol. Following infection and puromycin selection, pancreatic cancer cells were treated with 2 mg/mL doxycycline for 24 to 72 h to downregulate JAK2 or JAK1. To express exogenous CEBPD in JAK1 knockout MIA PaCa-2 cells and in mouse pancreatic cancer cells with a Cre-mediated knockout of JAK1, we established lentiviral pHIV-Cebpd-dTomato and pHIV-Cebpd-ZsGreen vectors by inserting an XbaI/EcoRI fragment of the mouse Cebpd coding sequence with a 5′ FLAG epitope tag into the corresponding restriction enzyme sites of the pHIV lentiviral vectors (Addgene #21374, #18121). The correct sequences of the shRNAs and CEBPD expression vectors were validated by Sanger sequencing prior to the production of lentiviral particles. The sequences of the gRNAs and shRNAs that were applied in the gene knockout and knockdown experiments can be found in .

## Cell proliferation, tumorsphere, and cell migration assays
The proliferation rates of pancreatic cell lines were determined by plating 1 × 104 cells into 12 wells of 24-well cell culture plates (CytoOne #CC7682–7524). After 24h, 48h, 72h, and 96h cells were collected from three wells per timepoint and the total number of cells for each well was determined using a CellDrop automated cell counter (DeNovix Inc.). In the case of AsPC1 cells, 2 × 104 cells were plated into each well of a 24-well cell culture plate (Corning #3524). After 24h, 48h, 72h, 96h, 120h, 144h, 168h, and 192h cells were collected from three wells per timepoint and the total number of cells for each well was determined.
For the tumorsphere assays, 1 × 104 cells were plated into 3 wells of 6-well ultra-low attachment plates (Corning #3471) containing regular cell culture media, and tumorspheres were imaged after 7 days using a ZOE Fluorescent Cell Imager (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc.). Spheres were counted in at least 8 areas of each plate for quantification. Using the “Colony Blob Count Tool” and appropriate size and shape parameters, ImageJ counted and measured the area of the spheres.
For the trans-well migration assays, 0.5 mL of serum-rich media (20% fetal bovine serum, FBS) was added as chemoattractant into a new 24-well plate, and an 8-μm insert was placed in each well (Falcon, 353097). Single cells from the maintenance culture were resuspended in serum-free media and counted using the CellDrop automated cell counter. 1 × 104 cells in 0.3 mL serum-free media were added on top of the 8-μm insert and incubated for 24 h. The following day, the inserts were collected, washed in 1x PBS or distilled water, and consecutively dipped 15 times in HEMA3 fixative. The cytoplasmic and nuclear staining of cells (Wright-Giemsa stain) was carried out using the HEMA 3 STAT Pack (Fisher Scientific, 123–869) according to the manufacture’s protocol and washed in distilled water. The membrane inserts were cut out with a razor blade, air dried, and placed in Permount on microscope slides that were then mounted with a coverslip. The number of migrating cells was determined by counting cells under 200x magnification in three areas of 1 mm2. Data were presented as means of three replicate experiments.

## Cytokine stimulation
Cells were maintained in serum-free medium for 16 h and then treated with human growth hormone (500 ng/mL; Invitrogen, Cat.# RP-10928) for 20 min, recombinant mouse IL-4 (50 ng/mL; BD Pharmingen, Cat.# 550067), recombinant mouse IL-13 (50 ng/mL; Peprotech, Cat.# 210–13), recombinant mouse interferon-gamma (10 ng/mL; Millipore, Cat.# IF005) for 15 min or OSM (25 ng/mL; R&D Systems, Cat.# 495-MO) for 15 min, 1 h, 4 h, and 16 h at 37°C prior to cell lysate preparation for immunoblotting.

## Immunoblot analyses and immunoprecipitation
Cell pellets or homogenized tissues were sonicated for 3 s in complete lysis buffer containing 1% Nonidet P-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), 0.4 units/mL aprotinin, 1 mM NaF, leupeptin, and 0.1 mM sodium orthovanadate and kept on ice for 30 min. Whole-cell extracts were resolved by SDS-PAGE and blotted onto polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (Invitrogen). The membranes were blocked for 1 h at room temperature in 5% dry milk in 1x TBST (Tris-buffered saline with 0.05% Tween 20) buffer or 5% Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) in 1x TBST for phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies. Subsequently, membranes were incubated with primary antibodies in the blocking buffer at 4°C overnight. A list of primary and secondary antibodies for immunoblotting as well as recommended dilutions are provided in . On the next day, membranes were washed three times for 5 min in 1x TBST and incubated for 1h at room temperature with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies [Digital anti-Mouse-HRP (R1005) or Digital anti-Rabbit-HRP (R1006) from KwikQuant or goat anti-Chicken IgY-HRP (sc-2428) or goat anti-Rat IgG-HRP (sc-2006) from Santa Cruz Biotechnology] in blocking buffer. Membranes were washed three times for 10 min with 1x TBST and then two times for 10 min in 1x TBS (Tris-buffered saline without Tween 20) and finally for 5 min in ultrapure water (Invitrogen 10977–023). Protein bands were detected using the ECL chemiluminescence kit for Western blot analysis [KwikQuant Ultra Digital-ECLTM Substrate Solution (Cat.#R1002)] according to the instructions by the manufacturer (Kindle Biosciences, LCC). Chemiluminescence and brightfield images of the blots with size markers were taken using a D1001 KwikQuant Imager (Kindle Biosciences, LLC). The protein band intensity of the immunoblots was quantified using KwikQuant Image Analyzer 5.9 for Mac OS (Kindle Biosciences, LLC). Membranes were stripped using a mild glycine stripping buffer (Abcam protocol) for consecutive detection of various proteins.
For the co-immunoprecipitation experiment, cells were lysed in complete lysis buffer as described above without the sonication step and incubated with primary antibody and pulled down with DynabeadsTM Protein G according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Invitrogen Cat.# 10007D). The immunoprecipitated proteins were analyzed by western blot as described above.

## Transcriptomic analyses
Total RNA was isolated from pancreatic cancer cell lines using the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN). RNA quantity and quality were assessed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer and gel electrophoresis. The mRNA expression library construction and next-generation sequencing (RNA-Seq) were performed at the UNMC Genomics Core Facility and Novogene. The quality of sequenced reads was evaluated using FastQC (v0.11.9; http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc). For the differential expression analysis between parental and JAK1 knockout samples, the 150 base paired-end reads were aligned to the GRCm38/mm10 mouse reference genome (UCSC) via Rsubread (v2.0.0). Transcript abundance was determined using the featureCounts function of the Rsburead package, and low abundance gene transcripts (cpm <5 in more than half of the samples) were omitted in further downstream analyses. Subsequently, transcript counts were normalized using the R package edgeR (v.3.28.0). Furthermore, the edgeR package was used for the paired sample differential expression analysis between wild-type parental cells and isogenic JAK1 knockout cells. Genes that passed the threshold of a False Discovery Rate (FDR) below 0.05 were considered significantly deregulated. To visualize the differential expression of select deregulated genes, the genes were log2 transformed and scaled to highlight differences in isogenic cell line pairs and were subsequently plotted as a heatmap using the R-function heatmap.2 (package: gplots v3.0.3), http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gplots/index.html. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed using the Broad Institute’s GSEA software (GSEA v4.0 for Linux), http://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/downloads.jsp. 
The nCounter gene expression analysis was carried out by the Genomics Core of the Research Technology Support Facility at Michigan State University using the NanoString nCounter MAX Analysis System. The resulting data were normalized and visualized using Nanostring’s nSolver software (v4.0 for Mac), https://www.nanostring.com/products/analysis-software/nsolver. A list of nCounter design details (genes, sequences) is shown in .

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Graphic illustrations and statistics were performed with GraphPad Prism (v6.07; GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). All reported measurements were taken from distinct samples. Unless otherwise indicated in the figure legends, experimental data are shown as mean values ± SEM or mean ± SD. For statistical analysis, the data were assessed for normality followed by an unpaired Student’s t-test, Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, one-way ANOVA, and Tukey’s multiple comparison test. The tumor-free survival distributions between animals were assessed using the log-rank test or the Gehan-Breslow-Wilcoxon test. p values < 0.05 (*), <0.01 (**), <0.001 (***), or <0.0001 (****) were considered statistically significant.

## Supplementary Material
1

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Melissa Anders-DiPonio, Bridget Reno, as well as members of the Animal Model and Therapeutics Evaluation Core and Biobanking and Correlative Sciences Core Facilities at the Karmanos Cancer Institute (KCI) for the preparation of histologic sections. The KCI core facilities are supported by the US Public Health Service grant CA022453. Amalraj Thangasamy assisted with the acquisition of whole-slide images. Immunohistochemistry services were provided by Linna Ge of the Biorepository & Tissue Analytics Core of the Medical College of Wisconsin Cancer Center. RNA sequencing was performed at the UNMC Genomics Core Facility, which is supported by the Public Health Service grant CA036727. The NanoString nCounter data acquisition was carried out at the Genomics Core of the Research Technology Support Facility at Michigan State University. Financial support was provided by Public Health Service Grants CA202917 (K.-U.W.) and CA267549 (H.R.). E.S. is supported by the Intramural Research Program of the National Cancer Institute, in part through contract number HHSN261200800001E. R.D. and M.N.W. were supported by the Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award T32 (CA009531), and P.D.R. received a graduate fellowship through the Cancer Research Training Program at UNMC (CA009476). N.R. was supported through a research assistantship from the UNMC Graduate Studies Office. The funders had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, the decision to publish, or the preparation of the manuscript. The illustration for the graphical abstract was generated using BioRender.com.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2024.114202.
 

## Highlights
JAK1 deficiency prevents the formation of high-grade preneoplasia and pancreatic tumors
Pancreatic cancer cells expressing active STAT3 have a higher propensity to metastasize
JAK1 is a key signaling node for STAT3, STAT1, and STAT6 activation in cancer cells
C/EBPδ executes pro-tumorigenic functions of JAK1/STAT signaling