3532isciiScienceiScienceElsevierPMC1268868012688680126886804137766410.1016/j.isci.2025.113977CD2 costimulation strength: A key regulator of T cell function and anti-tumor immunity that is epigenetically regulated
DemetriouPhilippos IakovouMaria GregoriouGregoria VrachnosDimitris ChiJianxiang TamamounaVasilia StavrouGeorgia ConstantinouStavros PapanastasiouVakis AntoniadesAthos CosteasPaul 1The Center for the Study of Haematological and Other Malignancies, Nicosia, Cyprus2Stremble Ventures LTD, Limassol, Cyprus3Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK4Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge5Cancer Research UK Lung Cancer Centre of Excellence, University College London Cancer Institute, London, UK6Aretaeio Hospital, 55-57 Andrea Avraamides, Strovolos, Nicosia 2024, Cyprus7Cyprus Cancer Research Institute, Aglantzia, Nicosia, Cyprus∗Corresponding author demephil@gmail.com
8Lead contact
10112025281211397711397710122025© 2025 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Summary
CD2 is a key costimulatory receptor on human T cells, but its surface abundance regulation and its functional significance remain incompletely defined. We found that CD2 expression is markedly reduced in CD4+ and CD8+ tumor-infiltrating T cells from human brain tumors. To identify factors sustaining CD2 expression, we performed a genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screen in Jurkat T cells and discovered BAP1 and SUZ12 as regulators. Loss of BAP1 caused downregulation of CD2, TRAC, and other costimulatory receptors, with CD2 and TRAC expression remaining impaired even after activation. Transcriptomic analysis linked BAP1 deficiency to the disruption of programs controlling T cell identity and differentiation, while histone deacetylase inhibition partially restored CD2. In primary human T cells, reduced CD2 costimulation impaired the magnitude of proliferation and IFN-γ production. These findings identify BAP1 as a central regulator of receptor expression and highlight CD2 as a tunable modulator of human T cell responses.
Subject areas: microenvironment, immunology

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Brain tumor T cells display reduced CD2, limiting costimulatory capacity
•A genome-wide KO CRISPR-Cas9 screen uncovers BAP1 and SUZ12 as epigenetic regulators of CD2
•BAP1 loss broadly represses T cell surface receptors, partly reversible by HDAC inhibition
•CD2 costimulation strength dictates the magnitude of proliferation and IFN-γ production

Microenvironment; Immunology.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Apr 25; Revised 2025 Jul 11; Accepted 2025 Nov 5; Collection date 2025 Dec 19.

## Introduction
T cell activation is governed by a finely balanced interplay between antigen recognition through the T cell receptor (TCR) and signals from costimulatory or coinhibitory receptors, with profound implications for immunity, tolerance, and cancer immunotherapy. , , While much attention has focused on the CD28 family and inhibitory checkpoints such as PD-1, other costimulatory receptors remain underexplored.
CD2 has been historically recognized for its role in synapse formation and is regarded as an adhesion and costimulatory receptor that increases the sensitivity of T cells to antigen, especially those with low affinity or expression levels. , , , CD2 costimulation has been shown to enhance proximal TCR signaling in a dose-dependent manner, regulated by either receptor expression itself or the availability of its ligand, CD58, on interacting cells. Recent studies using partially humanized mouse models have also demonstrated that the absence of CD58 expression in tumor cells compromises in vivo T cell activation and infiltration into tumors, occurring concurrently with increased PD-L1 expression, the ligand for the inhibitory receptor PD-1. , 
Given the renewed attention CD2 has received for its roles in modulating TCR signaling and supporting antitumor T cell responses, , , we tested the hypothesis that tumor-infiltrating T cells in brain tumors exhibit reduced CD2 expression, potentially representing an additional mechanism contributing to ineffective antitumor immunity in vivo.
Furthermore, despite its functional importance, the molecular mechanisms controlling CD2 abundance remain incompletely characterized. To investigate the upstream regulation of CD2, we utilized the human Jurkat T cell line as a tractable model system to perform an unbiased genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 knockout screen. This approach identified BAP1, a chromatin-associated deubiquitinase with established roles in transcriptional regulation, as a previously unrecognized modulator of CD2 expression, including under T cell activating conditions. We characterized the role of BAP1 in maintaining CD2 and other surface receptor expression and explored the chromatin-based mechanisms underpinning this regulation. Finally, to assess the functional impact of varying CD2 levels in primary human T cells without perturbing broader gene networks, we used healthy donor T cells to simulate titrated CD2 engagement. These experiments demonstrated that CD2 costimulation operates in a tunable manner, revealing an unappreciated capacity to calibrate not only the recruitment of T cells into activation but also the magnitude of effector responses within the responding population.
Together, our findings identify BAP1 as a key upstream regulator of CD2 and a broader regulator of gene networks, revealing a novel chromatin-based mechanism by which quantitative variation in CD2 abundance can calibrate T cell responsiveness, with potential implications for immune regulation in health and disease.

## Results

## A CD2low phenotype is exhibited by brain tumor-infiltrating CD8+ and CD4+ T cells
We analyzed matched peripheral blood (PB) and tumor-infiltrating T cells (TI-T cells) from patients with glioblastoma (GBM) and meningioma (MNG) using flow cytometry ( ).
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from tumor and blood samples were phenotypically classified into naive and memory subsets using CD62L and CD45RA expression as described previously ( A), and CD2 levels were assessed in each subset. CD2 expression is presented as a relative CD2 MFI fold change compared to matched PB naive CD4+ T cells ( and B), which consistently express the lowest levels of CD2 as previously shown by us and others. , As expected, PB memory T cells exhibited higher CD2 levels than their naive counterparts. In contrast, although nearly all TI-T cell subsets remained CD2+, we consistently detected reduced CD2 expression in both CD8+ and CD4+ memory-phenotype T cell subsets from GBM and MNG tumors relative to their matched PB memory T cells ( A–1D). In many cases, these reduced CD2 levels approached those seen in PB naive T cells, which were themselves largely absent from tumors ( A).
 This reduction was consistent across patients and suggests a convergent phenotype driven by the tumor microenvironment. Importantly, unlike our previous findings in other solid tumors (colorectal, endometrial, and ovarian) - where a CD2low phenotype was described and was largely restricted to CD8+ TI-T cells - we now observe that CD4+ TI-T cells also exhibit markedly reduced CD2 expression in nearly all patients with brain tumor. This suggests that the brain tumor microenvironment may impose broader suppressive effects on CD2 expression across T cell subsets. This is particularly relevant, as effective anti-tumor immunity in brain tumors requires coordinated activation of both CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets , , 
Together, these findings raise the possibility that reduced CD2 expression may represent a mechanism of functional impairment in both CD4+ and CD8+ TI-T cell subsets in the brain tumor microenvironment. Based on our earlier demonstration that even moderate reductions in CD2 levels can significantly attenuate proximal TCR signaling in a dose-dependent manner ; we propose this effect could be especially compromising in settings of low-avidity antigen recognition as commonly observed in cancer. , 

## Genome-scale CRISPR-Cas9 screen identifies regulators of CD2
In light of the differential CD2 expression levels detected in the various T cell subsets and settings, we sought to identify regulators of CD2 expression. We performed a positive selection genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 loss-of-function (LOF) screen in Jurkat T cells ( A) using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). Jurkat T cells with low surface CD2 expression (CD2lo) were FACS-isolated and compared to unsorted total Jurkat T cells to identify genes whose loss reduces CD2 levels. As expected, CD2 itself was the most frequently enriched gene, validating the screen design ( B and 2C; ). Among the top-ranked hits consistently enriched across different time points in the CD2lo T cell population compared to the control group, we identified two novel epigenetic regulators of CD2 expression: the nuclear deubiquitinating enzyme BRCA1-associated protein-1, BAP1, known for its chromatin-modifying functions, and SUZ12, a core component of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). These results suggest a previously unrecognized role for epigenetic mechanisms in the regulation of CD2 expression in T cells, a mechanism not previously described for this costimulatory receptor.
 We validated both hits using independent sgRNAs ( ). BAP1 knockout (BAP1 KO) led to a robust and consistent reduction in CD2 expression at both mRNA and protein levels, whereas SUZ12 KO produced a more modest decrease ( D–2H). Importantly, the smaller magnitude of the SUZ12 effect does not diminish its potential significance, especially given that fine-tuned expression levels of CD2 can substantially alter TCR signaling outcomes. Given the stronger phenotypic impact of BAP1 loss and the limited prior knowledge about its role in human T cells, we selected BAP1 for further investigation in subsequent analyses. 

## CD2 expression is co-regulated with the expression of markers associated with T cell development, stemness, exhaustion, and metabolism
To investigate whether BAP1 KO affects only CD2 expression, we conducted a bulk transcriptomic analysis comparing BAP1 KO Jurkat T cells to wild-type (WT) Jurkat T cells. BAP1 KO led to the identification of 2107 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) relative to the WT ( A, log2FC > 0 and adjusted p-value <0.05), with 1026 genes being upregulated and 1081 downregulated ( A). This altered transcriptional profile following BAP1 KO was characterized by the downregulation of key T cell surface receptors, beyond that of CD2, notably CD28 and CD226, with TRAC being among the top 10 DEGs, and the upregulation of others such as CD3G, CD3E, TNFRSF4/OX40, PTCRA, and CD81 ( B). Changes in total TRAC protein levels were validated using western blotting ( A), and the loss of TCR complex at the cell surface and other surface receptors was confirmed using flow cytometry ( B). Downregulated genes included molecules involved in adhesion and cell trafficking (SELL, ITGA1, ITGA4, ITGAL, ICAM2, ALCAM) ( B). These changes indicate BAP1 regulation is not specific to CD2 but rather BAP1 supports a coordinated expression of a surface receptor network essential for effective immune synapse formation and T cell responsiveness.
 BAP1 KO resulted in expression changes in genes regulating T cell differentiation, such as RORA, GATA3, PTPA, and solute transporters regulating metabolism, such as GLUT1 and GLUT3 ( C). In addition, BAP1 KO resulted in the differential expression of genes previously associated with T cell stemness, differentiation to memory, progenitor exhausted or exhausted T cells; we categorized these gene expression changes into two groups i.e., A and B, based on what would be the effect of this change on T cell status if they were to take place in a relevant setting such as a chronic stimulation setting following an infection where such T cell subsets have been observed and play a determining role in pathology. Gene expression changes in group A genes (TOX, TOX2, TCF7, ID2, SNX9, etc.) ( C) would favor T cell stemness based on separate studies investigating each individual gene independently. In contrast, gene expression changes in Group B genes (ACSS2, ID3, MYB, PRKCQ, PRKCH, LMO4, etc.) have been associated with reduced T cell stemness and would favor a T cell exhaustion state. TOX2 has been attributed contrasting roles with potentially context-dependent differences, i.e., its expression imposes T cell exhaustion or promotes central memory differentiation and prevents exhaustion in a context dependent manner. Interestingly, there was an increase in CD57+ T cells upon BAP1 KO and a 1.4– to1.7-fold increase in CD57 average expression among CD57+ T cells compared to WT ones ( B). This is suggestive of increased terminal differentiation phenotype upon BAP1 loss, as CD57 expression has been associated with terminally differentiated CD8+ T cells and T cell senescence but also with the responding T cells to anti-PD-1 checkpoint therapy in non-small cell lung cancer. , Given that the above results were obtained in the leukemic Jurkat T cell line, we interpret them as indicative of a broader transcriptional reprogramming effect of BAP1 loss, rather than definitive markers of specific T cell differentiation state. Validation of BAP1 loss mediated changes in primary T cells and in a relevant setting, as described above is required to draw final and firm conclusions.
Gene ontology analysis ( D, 3E, and C; B and S4C) confirmed the role of BAP1 in regulating genes involved in T cell receptor signaling regulation, T cell synapse, adhesion processes, T cell differentiation, immune system development, and metabolism, such as glucose metabolism and insulin response. It further revealed the involvement of BAP1 in regulating genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation, regulation of telomeres, and post-translational protein modification pathways. KEGG analysis revealed the enrichment of pathways associated with cell cycle, Notch, TGF-beta, and FoxO signaling pathways, nucleotide and fatty acid metabolism, and finally oxidative phosphorylation and cellular senescence ( E; D).
Similar to the transcriptomic data findings, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) indicated a downregulation of processes related to immune responses, T cell activation, and differentiation. In contrast, there was an upregulation of processes associated with ribosome biogenesis, non-coding RNA processing, and metabolic processes ( F; E). GSEA also indicated similarities between BAP1 KO-induced gene changes and those observed in human intrathymic T progenitor cells compared to CD4 thymocytes, suggesting a role of BAP1 in thymocyte development. Additionally, parallels were drawn with gene expression differences in HIV-specific CD8 T cells of HIV controllers compared to progressors ( G; F).
Generating a progenitor exhausted T cells, Tpex gene signature by comparing the DEGs of Tpex (CD101-Tim3- T cells), to exhausted T cells, Tex (CD101+Tim3+ T cells) from a previous mouse study, and in the context of mouse-human orthologs, we run a GSEA on this Tpex signature using our DEGs of BAP1KO T cells ( H). This revealed that BAP1KO Jurkat T cells downregulate a number of genes also downregulated in Tpex. At the same time, BAP1KO Jurkat T cells also downregulated genes that were found upregulated in Tpex. These findings, although contrasting between them, agree with our manual interpretation of our transcriptomic findings ( C) that show that upon BAP1 KO in Jurkat T cells, there are changes that could both favor and disfavor an enhanced T cell stemness state; this requires validations of these changes in primary T cells in an exhaustion in vivo or in vitro setting.
In summary, under our experimental conditions in Jurkat T cells, BAP1 did not selectively regulate CD2 alone, but instead emerged as a broader regulator of a gene network encompassing surface receptor expression, transcription factor networks, and metabolic programs linked to T cell identity and function. These data provide valuable insight into the regulatory architecture influenced by BAP1 in T cells, highlighting its potential role in coordinating gene networks involved in receptor expression, differentiation, and metabolism. While these observations were made in a leukemic T cell model, they establish a mechanistic foundation that now invites exploration in primary human T cells to determine their physiological relevance. Supporting this direction, recent work by others has begun to investigate BAP1’s role in primary mouse T cells 

## BAP1 expression levels associate with changes in surface receptor expression in T cells
Upon profiling T cells 7 days after sgRNA BAP1 transduction for knockout in Jurkat T cells, we observed a significant increase in the percentage of the CD3−CD2+ (Single Positive, SP) T cell subset compared to the control. Notably, it was not until 12 days post-transduction that a significant increase in the CD3−CD2− (double-negative, DN) T cell subset, indicating loss of CD2, was detected; this population continued to rise over time, peaking around days 20–30 post-transduction ( A and A). The resulting CD3/CD2 expression profile remained stable with continued culture.
 As expected, BAP1 protein levels were highest in wild-type (WT) cells, but among the aforementioned phenotypically distinct populations, BAP1 levels declined from SP to DN ( B), with double-positive (DP) cells showing levels similar to WT. In parallel, the expression of co-stimulatory and adhesion receptors, previously shown to be downregulated in bulk RNA-seq and protein analysis, was also progressively reduced across DP, SP, and DN subsets ( C and B). These patterns were consistent across two independent sgRNAs targeting BAP1 ( C and B). The DN subset exhibited the lowest frequency of CD2+, CD28+, CD11a+, and CD49a+ T cells, with incremental increases in SP and DP subsets. Notably, although DP cells retained near-WT BAP1 levels ( B), they still showed a modest but significant reduction in surface marker expression. Interestingly, the ligand of CD2, CD58, which is also expressed by T cells, however, remained unaffected across all subsets.
To further investigate the basis of this graded BAP1 expression, we analyzed the targeted BAP1 exon 8 region in sorted DN, SP, and DP populations. Sequencing revealed a distribution of wild-type and mutant DNA alleles, including in-frame and frameshift/missense mutations ( D). The composition of these alleles within each subset suggests a model where the DN population is enriched for homozygous loss-of-function mutations (∼1% WT, ∼99% mutant DNA sequences), while SP cells predominantly harbor heterozygous mutations (∼24% WT and ∼76% mutant DNA sequences), consistent with their intermediate BAP1 expression levels, while DP cells retain a higher proportion of WT alleles (∼63% WT and ∼37% mutant sequences), consistent with their similar BAP1 protein levels to WT Jurkat T cells.
To assess whether these mutations impact BAP1’s structural integrity, we selected the top three mutant protein variants identified across DN, SP, and DP subsets (labeled A–C; ) and performed protein structure modeling ( E and C). This analysis revealed pronounced structural alterations in mutant A (white to red color change depicting an increase in structural differences to WT and no alterations compared to WT), while mutants B and C exhibited subtler disruptions, suggesting that structural destabilization may contribute to the observed reductions in BAP1 protein levels.
Together, these findings suggest that progressive loss of BAP1, driven here by distinct mutational profiles, correlates with stepwise alterations in the expression of surface receptors involved in T cell adhesion and activation. These observations lay the groundwork for examining whether similar regulatory effects of BAP1 occur in primary T cells under physiological or pathological conditions.

## BAP1 is required for full upregulation and sustained expression of CD2, T cell receptor, and PD-1, but not CD28 or CD226, following T cell activation
To determine whether BAP1-dependent regulation of surface receptors persists under activating conditions, we stimulated WT and DN BAP1 KO Jurkat T cells (referred to as WT T cells and DN BAP1KO T cells) with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) and/or ionomycin (ION), which bypasses TCR engagement; low and high concentrations of these activators were used alone or in specific combinations. These activators were used because DN BAP1 KO T cells lost the surface expression of the TCR/CD3 complex; hence, it would not be possible to activate them by engaging this complex. Surface expression of key surface receptors was measured at defined timepoints, i.e., two days after stimulation and again at 11–12 days post-stimulation. Noteworthy, CD2 expression is significantly upregulated following T cell activation in Jurkat T cells and in primary T cells. Activation was assessed via the expression of activation marker CD69, revealing that both T cell clones could be activated (>80%); with compromised activation in DN BAP1KO T cells only under ION-alone stimulation ( A and S4B).
As anticipated, WT Jurkat T cells exhibited a 1.8-fold increase in average CD2 expression upon stimulation compared to resting conditions, with similar increases observed for combinations of PMA with ION (1.2– to1.8-fold) and high concentrations of ionomycin alone (1.5-fold); nearly all WT T cells were CD2+ across all conditions ( A, C, and S4D). In stimulated DN BAP1KO T cells, CD2 upregulation was detected, too, resulting in approximately 21% CD2+ DN T cells compared to 5% CD2+ in resting conditions ( A). Despite this increase, CD2 levels in DN BAP1KO T cells remained significantly lower (about 8-fold less) than those found in resting WT T cells. Subsequent culture of T cell clones under resting conditions led to a reduction in the percentage of CD2+ DN BAP1KO T cells, except for those stimulated with high PMA concentrations, which maintained around 20% CD2+ DN T cells ( B and D). This trend in CD2 expression contrasted sharply with the expression of CD28 and CD226 upon stimulation, followed by resting. CD28 and CD226 were upregulated in WT T cells, and they also showed significant upregulation in DN BAP1 KO T cells with PMA stimulation, reaching levels comparable to those in resting or activated WT T cells, respectively. Phenotypic analysis following subsequent culture in resting conditions showed that over 50% of DN BAP1 KO T cells retained the upregulated CD28 or CD226 expression at levels similar to those observed in WT T cells ( B). WT T cells strongly upregulated the co-inhibitory PD-1 receptor, upon high PMA-high ION stimulation (78% PD-1+ T cells), but DN BAP1KO T cells showed significantly lower percentage of PD-1+ T cells (42% PD-1+ T cells), despite similar levels of activation based on CD69 activation marker expression two days post-activation ( B and S4C). Within PD-1+ T cells, the average PD-1 expression was lower in PD-1+ DN BAP1KO T cells (gMFI: 28851) compared to PD-1+ WT T cells (gMFI:70206). This suggests that, similarly to CD2 expression, BAP1 is required for efficient and high expression of PD-1 upon T cell activation. Finally, high ION with or without PMA stimulation resulted in increased TCR expression in both WT and DN BAP1KO T cells relative to resting conditions ( S and D). Despite this upregulation, DN BAP1KO T cells had a lower percentage of TCR+ T cells compared to WT T cells; in fact, average TCR expression was half-fold lower in TCR+ DN BAP1KO T cells compared to WT TCR+ T cells. Subsequent culture in resting conditions resulted in a decrease of TCR+ T cells in both T cell clones; this contraction, though, was more pronounced in the DN BAP1KO T cell population compared to WT T cells ( D).
 In summary, these results suggest that some receptor expression programs can be restored or maintained through activation-induced pathways in the absence of BAP1, while others, such as CD2, PD-1, and TCR, remain dependent on BAP1 activity, even in the context of strong, TCR-independent activation. These findings underscore a potential role for BAP1 in stabilizing T cell receptor architecture and costimulatory readiness.

## Pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylases partially rescues BAP1 loss-mediated CD2 repression
We hypothesized that loss of BAP1 results in CD2 repression through chromatin condensation, which is one known way of transcriptional regulation , as per previous studies investigating the mechanism of BAP1 transcriptional regulation. , , , , , One such epigenetic mechanism driving this chromatin condensation is the accumulation of tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 protein (H3K27me3) carried out by the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2). , We treated DN BAP1KO Jurkat T cells with several PRC2 complex inhibitors (PRC2 catalytic subunit enhancer of zeste homolog 2, EZH2, inhibitors) to investigate if this rescues the loss of CD2, but there was no upregulation of CD2 ( A, top). EZH2 inhibitor treatment of WT Jurkat T cells resulted in a dose-dependent reduction of CD2 expression ( A), consistent with our genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 KO screen, where we identified SUZ12 as a potential regulator of CD2 expression; SUZ12 is one of the members of the PRC2 complex together with EZH2. Repression of CD2 expression was confirmed in independent gene KOs of EZH2 ( B). BAP1 KO has been shown to not only increase global H3K27me3 but also reduce H3K27acetylation (K3K27ac) around gene promoters. To investigate whether counteracting loss of H3K27ac upon BAP1KO upregulates CD2 expression, we treated DN BAP1KO T cells with the histone deacetylase inhibitor, LMK235. This resulted in a partial rescue of CD2 loss upon BAP1 loss. There was a dose-dependent upregulation of CD2 expression with increasing levels of the HDAC inhibitor ( B); this upregulation, though, was not strong enough to reach the high levels seen in WT T cells. These findings suggest there is an interplay between BAP1 and HDAC activity in regulating CD2 expression. However, boosting H3K27ac is apparently not enough on its own to enable high levels of CD2 expression in the absence of BAP1.
 

## Magnitude of T cell proliferation and IFN-γ production correlate with CD2 costimulation strength
While these findings underscore the role of chromatic accessibility in maintaining CD2 expression in Jurkat T cells, they do not directly address whether variation in CD2 surface levels has functional consequences in primary T cells. Given the consistent reduction of CD2 observed in TI-T cells, we next asked whether differences in CD2 engagement are sufficient to alter T cell function. To model this in a controlled manner without perturbing broader gene networks (e.g., via BAP1 KO), we activated CFSE-labelled peripheral blood (PB) naive and memory CD4+ or CD8+ T cells, from healthy controls, in vitro using anti-CD3e antibody-coated beads, supplemented with titrated amounts of anti-CD2 antibody, which served as a surrogate ligand. This setup allowed us to evaluate T cell proliferation in the context of varying CD2 costimulatory strength, independently of CD28. Following two days of activation, cultures were supplemented with exogenous IL-2. Importantly, anti-CD28 was not used in these assays, allowing a focused assessment of CD2 costimulation.
As expected from previous literature, , , increased CD2 costimulation resulted in a higher percentage of human T cells expressing activation markers such as CD25 and undergoing proliferation ( A and S6B). However, we extended these observations by quantifying the magnitude of response within the activated population. Specifically, among the activated (dividing) cells, increasing CD2 costimulation strength led to significantly greater average numbers of cell divisions and higher fold expansion, as measured by the proliferation index (PI) and replication index (RI), respectively ( A, 7B, C, and S6D). This dose-dependent effect was consistently observed across both naive and memory subsets of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. These data indicate that CD2 costimulation not only increases the proportion of T cells that are activated but also quantitatively enhances the proliferation capacity of each activated cell - a distinction not previously emphasized in earlier studies. Furthermore, CD25 (IL-2 receptor α chain) expression levels measured two days post-activation positively correlated with both PI and RI ( C, 7D, and E), suggesting that CD2 costimulation may enhance IL-2 responsiveness by upregulating CD25, thereby reinforcing expansion in activated T cells. While CD25 is a well-established activation marker, the correlation between its expression and the proliferation indices in the context of CD2 titration adds a layer of mechanistic insight not addressed in prior work.
 We next examined the effect of CD2 costimulation on cytokine production in an in vitro Th1 differentiation model using naive CD4+ T cells. In line with previous reports, CD2 costimulation enhanced the percentage of human IFN-γ-producing T cells. , , , However, our analysis also revealed a gradation in IFN-γ levels among IFN-γ+ cells, with stronger CD2 costimulation increasing the frequency of high-producer subsets and decreasing the proportion of low producers ( E and F). In contrast, IL-2 production by T cells themselves remained unaffected by CD2 strength. To our knowledge, these dose-sensitive differences in cytokine expression within the IFN-γ+ T cell compartment have not been previously reported, as earlier studies primarily quantified total IFN-γ in supernatants or the percentage of cytokine-expressing cells without resolving expression intensity within cytokine-expressing cells.
Together, these findings reveal that CD2 costimulation strength not only determines the fraction of responding T cells but also modulates the intensity of their functional output, in terms of proliferation, CD25 expression, and IFN-γ production. This quantitative dimension of costimulatory control extends the current understanding of CD2 biology and may have important implications for designing T cell boosting therapies or T cell preparation protocols in the context of immunotherapies for cancer.

## Discussion
T cell costimulation is a tightly regulated process that shapes immune activation, persistence, and antitumor function. Although CD2 has long been recognized as a costimulatory receptor in T cells with roles in adhesion and synapse formation, attracting renewed interest in the fields of cancer immunology and immunotherapy , , , , , , over the past five years, relatively little is known about how its expression is regulated. Here, we identify CD2 as a dynamically regulated surface molecule whose expression varies across tissue compartments and disease states, and we uncover an epigenetic mechanism of control involving the chromatin modifier BAP1.
Our study extends our earlier observations that tumor-infiltrating CD8+ T cells exhibit reduced CD2 expression, now demonstrating that this phenotype is present in both CD8+ and CD4+ TI-T cells in human brain tumors. This was not exhibited by CD4+ TI-T cells in our previously studied cancer types (colorectal, ovarian, and endometrial) and cohorts. This is important to consider since it has been shown that the activation of both subsets is required for functional anti-tumor T cell immunity in brain tumors. , , While CD2 expression generally remains detectable, the observed reductions in surface abundance are functionally relevant: prior work has shown that quantitative differences in CD2 engagement within the immunological synapse modulate proximal TCR signaling strength. Thus, we propose that even modest decreases in CD2 in TI-T cells could attenuate downstream activation or functional responses and serve as an immune evasion mechanism imposed by the tumor microenvironment, akin to the loss of CD58 observed in hematological malignancies. , In fact, in a recently published partially humanized melanoma model study, it has been shown that the absence of CD58 expression in tumor cells compromises T cell tumor infiltration, activation, and cytotoxicity, similar to an earlier in vitro cytotoxicity screen, further highlighting the potential impact reduced CD2 costimulation could have on human anti-tumor T cell immunity.
Through an unbiased genome-wide CRISPR screen, we identified BAP1 and SUZ12, two epigenetic regulators, as genes whose loss reduces CD2 expression. BAP1 KO led to a robust decrease in CD2 at both the transcript and protein level, and downstream analyses revealed that BAP1 influences the expression of multiple surface receptors and transcription factors involved in T cell identity. Although SUZ12 loss produced a more modest phenotype relative to BAP1 loss, it reinforces the role of chromatin-based mechanisms in costimulatory regulation.
Transcriptomic profiling of BAP1-deficient Jurkat T cells revealed widespread changes in gene expression, including the downregulation of CD28, CD226, and TRAC, and altered levels of transcription factors such as TCF7, TOX, BACH2, and ID2. These shifts point to a broad regulatory role for BAP1 in shaping T cell molecular architecture. This is consistent with findings in other cell types, particularly in cancer cells, where BAP1 constrains histone ubiquitination to regulate gene expression by maintaining a more permissive chromatin state. , Importantly, the effect of BAP1 on surface receptor expression was dose-dependent, with partial knockdown producing graded decreases in surface receptors. This finding positions BAP1 as a rheostat of T cell gene expression, capable of fine-tuning molecular programs rather than acting as a binary switch.
While some of the genes downregulated in BAP1-deficient Jurkat cells have been associated with stem-like or exhausted T cell phenotypes, we caution against inferring specific differentiation states from this model system. Nonetheless, the transcriptional footprint, encompassing factors such as TCF7, TOX, BACH2, and ID2, suggests that BAP1 may influence gene programs relevant to T cell persistence and adaptability. This possibility is supported by recent work on ASXL1, a core component of the Polycomb repressive deubiquitinase complex, PR-DUB, with BAP1. , In a mouse chronic infection model, ASXL1 knockout in P14 T cells led to a higher frequency of terminally exhausted T cells, but transcriptomic profiling revealed lower TOX expression and enrichment of Tpex-associated genes such as Tcf7 and Myb These findings raise the possibility that BAP1, through its partnership with ASXL1, may participate in regulatory networks influencing T cell fate decisions under chronic antigen exposure. However, direct extrapolation requires caution: comparative mouse studies of BAP1 and ASXL1 knockout tumor cells have revealed both overlapping and distinct gene expression changes, likely reflecting context-specific regulation. Our own findings - that BAP1 regulates TRAC, PTCRA, and gene signatures linked to thymic progenitors - are consistent with prior observations in BAP1-deficient murine T cells reporting a role of BAP1 in mouse T cell development. 
Mechanistically, we show that BAP1-deficient Jurkat T cells exhibit selective and persistent loss of CD2 and TCR-α even following strong activation with PMA/ionomycin, whereas CD28 and CD226 are restored. Pharmacological inhibition of histone deacetylases partially rescued CD2 levels, suggesting that BAP1 promotes a permissive chromatin state that facilitates the expression of specific immune receptors. A similar rescue effect has been reported in a different biological system; HDAC inhibition partially restored developmental defects caused by BAP1 loss during gastrulation in Xenopus laevis embryos. We propose that increasing histone acetylation allows for a more open chromatin conformation, , which counteracts a closed chromatin state at the CD2 locus induced by BAP1 deficiency.
Finally, we show that CD2 costimulation in primary human T cells not only increases the proportion of activated IFN-γ-producing T cells, as previously described , , , but also quantitatively tunes the magnitude of responses within those activated populations. By titrating anti-CD2 antibody stimulation, we demonstrate that once a T cell becomes activated, the level of CD2 engagement directly determines the extent of CD25 upregulation, the degree of proliferation, and the amount of IFN-γ produced. This reveals that CD2 functions not as a binary costimulatory signal, but as a quantitative amplifier of T cell activation and effector output. These findings provide functional support for the concept that quantitative variation in CD2 signaling strength, whether driven by chromatin-level regulation, as in the case of BAP1 deficiency, by the availability of CD2 ligand, CD58, or receptor availability as observed in tumor-infiltrating T cells, can meaningfully influence T cell responsiveness. This graded response aligns with observations made for the inhibitory receptor PD-1, which has been shown to modulate T cell responses such as proliferation, cytokine production, and cytotoxicity in a continuum-dependent rather than threshold-based manner. 
Together, our findings reveal BAP1 as a novel regulator of CD2 and a broader network of surface and transcriptional genes in T cells. By uncovering an epigenetic layer of costimulatory control, this work opens new avenues for understanding how T cell activation and functional potential is modulated at the level of gene expression. In parallel, our functional assays demonstrate that CD2 costimulation strength quantitatively tunes proliferation and IFN-γ production in human T cells, reinforcing the concept that modest variation in CD2 engagement can shape immune responses. Ongoing studies in primary human T cells will clarify the physiological relevance of these mechanisms, complement emerging research on the role of the PR-DUB complex - in which BAP1 and ASXL1 are core components - in T cell biology, and determine whether targeting BAP1-linked chromatin pathways could offer a strategy for fine-tuning T cell activation and enhancing immune function in disease contexts such as cancer or chronic infection.

## Limitations of the study
A key limitation of this study is that many descriptive and mechanistic findings were derived from the Jurkat T cell line. Validation of these results in primary human T cells is needed to strengthen the conclusions and establish their relevance in a physiological context. Accordingly, the Jurkat data should be viewed as exploratory and hypothesis-generating. We note, however, that recent work by Kang T. G. et al. (ref. 42) supports a broader role for BAP1 in regulating gene expression and T cell responses in cancer, complementing our observations. Another limitation is the absence of a mechanistic investigation into the CD2low phenotype observed in brain tumor-infiltrating T cells. Future studies applying bulk or single-cell RNA sequencing to compare BAP1 and CD2 levels across high and low CD2 T cells from tumors and peripheral blood will be important to address this question. Finally, the small cohort size limited our ability to assess the potential influence of sex, gender, or both on the study results related to the CD2 phenotype. In addition, information on sex and gender was not available for the healthy control T cell assays, further preventing us from evaluating their possible impact on the outcomes.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Philippos Demetriou (demephil@gmail.com).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•The data reported in this article will be shared by the upon request.
•This article does not report original code.
•The RNA-seq data are deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE308492).
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this article is available from the upon request.

## Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Dimitris Aspris for his assistance in transfering the knowledge on CRISPR-Cas9 genome wide screens in cell lines to CSHM, Skevi Charalampous and all the nursing staff of Aretaieio Hospital, Nicosia for helping out with the patient consents and sample acquisition, respectively. The graphical abstract and A were created in Biorender (https://BioRender.com) and we thank Dr. Charys Papagregoriou for her feedback and work on the graphical abstract. This study was supported by the internal funding of the CSHM.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization: P.D. and P.C.; data curation: P.D. and M.I.; methodology: P.D., M.I., P.C., D.V., G.G., V.T., J.C., V.P., S.C., and G.S.; investigation: P.D., M.I., P.C., and D.V.; funding acquisition: P.C. and A.A.; supervision: P.D. and P.C.; writing - original draft: P.D. and M.I.

## Declaration of interests
Authors declare that they have no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details

## All experiments described above and in the sections following conform to the relevant regulatory standards

## Cancer patient cohort
Sixteen fresh tumor samples from two sites of the tumor and matched peripheral blood in EDTA-blood collection tubes from sixteen consented GBM and MNG patients were obtained from patients who underwent surgical removal of tumors at the Aretaieio Private Hospital (Nicosia, Cyprus). They were processed into single cell suspensions. Information about the age, gender and sex of the patients is provided in A-S1B. The above were performed under the license granted by the Cyprus National Bioethics Committee License with ID ΕΕΒΚ/ΕΠ/2020/45. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients.

## Single cell suspension of brain tumor samples
Preparation of single cell suspensions from fresh brain tumor tissue (BT) was carried out as described previously in. Briefly, the sample was cut into small fragments (approximately 1–2 mm3) and resuspended in Hanks' Balanced Salt solution (HBSS(+Ca+Mg); Sigma-Aldrich, cat. No. 55037C) at 100 mg tissue per mL. Then neutral protease (NP, AMSBio. S3030112) at 0.11 DMC U/ml and a Bovine pancreatic deoxyribonuclease I at 400U/ml (DNase I; Sigma-Aldrich, 11284932001) were added to the suspension and incubated for an average time of 2 h at 37oC. The preparation was then filtered through a 70 μm strainer to remove clumps. The single cell suspension was then washed once and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Fisher Scientific, 10010056) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, ThermoFisher, A5256801). The standard trypan blue dye-exclusion method was used to evaluate cell viability.

## Isolation of PBMCs and T cells from human samples
Human PBMCs and T cells were isolated from leukapheresis products of healthy controls (Cyprus National Bioethics Committee License 2020/44 – no gender, sex information available as these samples are provided in this study as these samples are provided to us with no personal information at all) or fresh peripheral blood of cancer patients (Cyprus National Bioethics Committee License 2020/45) using Ficoll-Paque density gradient as per supplier’s instructions followed by an erythrocyte lysis step using ACK lysis buffer (ThermoFisher A1049201) as per manufacturer’s protocol; T cell subsets were isolated using negative selection EasySep enrichment kits from STEM CELL Technologies. T cells were maintained, when required, in resting conditions, in the absence of any IL-2, at 37°C, 5% CO2, in RPMI medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS, 5% Penicillin-Streptomycin, (Penstrep, Gibco), 1x MEM Non-Essential Amino Acids Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 10 mM HEPES (Life Technologies), 1 mM Sodium Pyruvate (Thermo Fisher Scientific). T cells were maintained at maximum 2x106 cells/ml for a maximum of 5 days during resting conditions.

## Cell lines
Human Jurkat T cell line with was a kind gift of Anastasia Pakidi from the Cetner for Cancer Immunology, University of Southampton. This cell line was initially derived from a male acute-T cell leykemia patient. We used this cell line as a model of human primary T cells to perform a genome-wide CRISPR-CAS9 genetic screen and single gene knock outs for mechanistic assays. Jurkat T cell line was maintained at 37°C, 5% CO2, in RPMI medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS, 5% Penicillin-Streptomycin, (Penstrep, Gibco). The human embryoonic kindey epithelial cell line, HEK293T, was used for lentivirus production and was maintained at 37°C, 5% CO2, in DMEM medium (Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific) with 10% FBS, 5% Penicillin-Streptomycin, (Penstrep, Gibco). These cell lines were not authenticated.

## Method details

## Prepartion of T cell activation beads
Human T cell activation beads from Miltenyi Biotec (130-091-441) were used for providing titrated levels of CD2 costimulation in the context of constant signal 1 anti-CD3 antibody stimulation. The beads were prepared as per company’s instruction i.e., at the recomended bead to antibody ratio (for titrated CD2 costimulation below). Anti-CD3 antibody was used at the single concentration recommended by the company either alone or with different levels of anti-CD2 antibody as follows. Anti-CD2 antibody was used at the concentration recommended by the company - this was used as the max CD2 signal to be provided - and then serially diluted 2-fold to allow for the generation of five additional antibody-coated bead populations with the same amount of anti-CD3 antibody and decreasing levels of anti-CD2 antibody. All antibody concentrations were prepared prior to incubation with beads on a shaker at 4°C.

## Primary T cell activation and proliferation assays
Proliferation of human T cells was monitored by following dilution of CFSE-labelled T cells (CFSE kit, Invitrogen). Briefly, T cells single cell suspensions at 3x106 cells/ml in PBS were stained with 1 μM CFSE in PBS solution by a 10 min incubation in a culture incubator at 37oC, 5% CO2. Staining was quenched by adding FBS at a final 10% FBS concentration before pelleting the cells to remove supernatant. Cells were washed and resuspended in culture medium for downstream assays.Typically, T cells were prepared for T cell activation in U-bottom plates at 1x106/mL and activated with anti-CD3 alone or anti-CD3,anti-CD2 antibody coated activation beads (Miltenyi,130-091-441) for 2 days before removal of the activation stimulations and supplementing the culture with 30U/ml IL-2. The culture was split every other day starting from the day of stimuli removal. At the endpoint, T cells were stained with fixable viability ef780 dye (ThermoFisher) followed by a mixture of fluorophore-conjugated antibodies when needed. Stained samples were acquired on a 3-laser Aurora spectral flow cytometer (Cytek).

## Profiling human samples using flow cytometry
Human primary T cells, PBMCs, Jurkat T cells and cancer patient tumor single cell preparations were stained at around 0.05x106, 0.01x106, 0.1x106 and 1x106 per staining condition respectively in U-bottom plates. For PBMCs and cancer tumor samples an Fc-receptor blocking step was carried out by resuspending cells in 50 μL PBS with 0.5% BSA and 5 μL Human TruStain FcX (BioLegend) per sample, followed by incubation at room temperature for 10 min. Cells were stained with an antibody mix prepared in ice-cold PBS/0.5% BSA and incubated on ice in the dark for 20 min. Antibodies were used in the range of 0.5–2.5 μg/mL, based on the determined staining index of each antibody. Following antibody staining, the cells were washed twice in PBS/0.5%BSA and acquired on a 3-laser Aurora flow cytometer. Data analysis was performed using FlowJo software (v10.8.1).

## In vitro differentiation of naive CD4+ T cells to Th1
Human naive CD4+ T cells were isolated as described above. They were activated for 2 days using anti-CD3−CD2 antibody coated beads from Milteyni Biotec as described above in the activation assay. The culture medium was supplemented with a cytokine-containing cocktail supplemented also with cytokine blocking antibodies from STEMCELL Technologies (ImmunoCult Human Th1 Differentiation Supplement, 10973) recommended for differentiation to Th1; it was used at 1:500 dilution. Following removal of activation beads, cells were split 1 in 2 every other day. Th1 status was profiled 7 days post-initiation of experiment using intracellular cytokine staining for IL-2 and IFN-γ. Intracellular cytokine staining was performed using the Foxp3 staining kit from eBioscience as per company’s instruction for a U-bottom two-step protocol.

## Genome wide CRISPR-Cas9 KO screen in Jurkat T cells
For generation of constitutively Cas9-expressing cell lines, vector pKLV2-EF1a-Cas9Bsd-W was packaged into lentivirus by co-transfection of HEK293T cells alongside lentiviral envelope and packaging plasmids pMD2.G and psPAX2 using Lipofectamine LTX with PLUS reagent (Invitrogen) as previously performed in. The Jurkat cell line was transduced with lentivirus carrying Cas9 in the presence of polybrene (8 μg/mL). The following day, lentiviral containing medium was replaced with complete medium. Blasticidin selection was started on day 4 post transduction at 4 μg/mL. Cas9 activity was assessed using a lentiviral reporter system consisting of the constructs pKLV2-U6gRNA(gGFP)-PGKBFP2AGFP-W and pKLV2-U6gRNA(gEmpty)-PGKBFP2AGFP-W. Cells were transduced with a predetermined viral amount of the genome wide gRNA-BFP library that allows for an average of 30% transduction, measured by BFP expression by cytometry and ensures incorporation of a sgRNA per cell with about 9% error rate. Transduction was performed at 1×106 cells per well in 6-well plates for a total of 100x106 to allow for 350x coverage of the library. Puromycin selection was used, starting at day 4 of the culture, to select for cells that had successful lentiviral plasmid integration. Cell transduction efficiency was determined before and after puromycin selection by quantifying the percentage of BFP expressing cells using flow cytometry. FACSorting was performed at 5 different timepoints during cell culture of these cells, sorting for 5% of CD2low/neg cells from the live T cell population. FACSorted T cells were stored in RNAlater in −20oC till DNA extraction, DNA library preparation and next-generation sequencing. The bioinformatic analysis was performed as described previously in , using the MaGeCK package.

## Designing sgRNAs for gene knock out in T cells
Single guideRNAs(sgRNAs) were designed using the CHOPCHOP and Synthego web tool or using the gRNA list from the Human genome-wide lentiviral CRISPR gRNA library version 1(Addgene 67989) ( ). Priority was given to plasmids found enriched in the MaGeCK analysis results of our screen. For online tools, selection criteria also included GC content (>45%), efficiency score (>0.5), and minimal self-complementarity/mismatch scores.

## Western blotting
Whole cell lysates were prepared by incubation of the cell pellet for 30 min in 1X RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich, R0278) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, 11836153001) on ice. Supernatant was harvested and stored in −20°C until required for downstream analysis. Total protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay. 50–100 μg of total protein was loaded per well in a 8 or 10% SDS-PAGE gel depending on the molecular weight of the proteins of interest. Whole cell lysates were prepared using 1X Laemmli loading buffer (Bio-Rad, 1610747) and denatured for 5 min at 95°C. Proteins were transferred to Porablot nitrocellulose membranes (Macherey-Nagel, 741280) using a wet transfer system. Membranes were blocked in 5% nonfat milk or BSA prepared in in TBS-T (Tris-buffered saline supplemented with 0.05% Tween 20) for 1 h at room temperature and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies prepared in TBS-T supplemented with 5%BSA or milk as per manufacturer’s recommendations. After washing with TBS-T, membranes were incubated with a IRD680RD or IRD800CW-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at room temperature. Following extensive washing, protein bands were imaged on the Vilber imaging system. Protein band total intensities were quantified using FIJI software, normalized to housekeeping proteins (β-actin or GAPDH) and presented as relative protein expression.

## RNA extraction, sequencing, RT-qPCR, DEG analysis
Total RNA was extracted using the MagCore triXact RNA Kit (Cat.no. 631) as per manufacturer’s recommendations and assessed for quality and quantity using a NanoDrop 2000/2000c Spectrophotometer. The RNA aliquots were stored at −80°C.
For real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), total RNA from each sample was used to synthesize cDNA using PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit(Takara, cat. No RR037A) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The reagents, RNA, oligo (dT), and dNTPs were mixed first, then incubated at 37°C for 15 min, 85°C for 5 min and then chilled on ice. The samples were stored at −20°C until required for downstream assays. RT-qPCR was performed using the TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 4304437) for precise quantification of gene expression. TaqMan primer-FAM probe pairs were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific and are included in the reagents section above. The internal control gene used was ABL1 (Hs01104728_m1), and target genes used can be found in the reagents paragraph. All of the reactions were run in triplicates on a CFX 96 (BioRad) thermal cycler. The Cq values were estimated by analysing the data as a single pool, using the automatic threshold and baseline cycle option of the CFX Manager Software v3.1. Amplifications were conducted in triplicates on a real-time PCR system under the following thermal cycling conditions: an initial step at 50°C for 2 min, 95°C for 10 min, followed by 50 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 1 min. Fluorescence was monitored throughout amplification. Relative gene expression levels were calculated using the 2ˆ−ΔΔCT method, normalized to ABL1.
cDNA libraries for bulk RNAsequening analysis were prepared from the extracted total RNA using the QuantSeq 3′mRNA-Seq V2 Library Prep Kit-FWD (Lexogen; 192.96) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Three biological replicates of each sample were analyzed. The pooled libraries were sequenced on an Illumina the NextSeq2000 system. Different expression gene analysis was performed by the Lexogen pipeline using DESeq2 algorithm as described on the company’s website.

## Bioinformatic analysis: GO, KEGG and GSEA
Bioinformatics analysis of differential expression findings was performed by utilizing the R package clusterProfiler for functional enrichment analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analyses were conducted to identify over-represented biological themes. Additionally, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed using gene sets from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) collections C5 (ontology gene sets) and C7 (immunologic gene sets). All analyses were conducted using default parameters within the respective functions. Differential expression analysis was performed using the DESeq2 R package, which models raw read counts with a negative binomial distribution. To account for variations in library depth, counts were normalized using the median of ratios method. The package’s empirical Bayes shrinkage approach was then used to stabilize gene-wise dispersion estimates, borrowing information across all genes. Differential expression was assessed using the Wald test, and the resulting p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons via the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. Genes with an adjusted p-value (padj) less than 0.05 were considered significantly expressed. Functional enrichment analysis was performed using the R package clusterProfiler. For Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, the enrichGO function was utilized to identify over-represented terms in the Biological Process (BP), Molecular Function (MF), and Cellular Component (CC) ontologies separately. Similarly, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment was conducted using the enrichKEGG function. For both analyses, an Over-Representation Analysis (ORA), based on a hypergeometric test, was performed. The results were filtered using a pvalueCutoff of 0.05 and a qvalueCutoff of 0.2, with the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure applied for multiple testing correction. GSEA was conducted using clusterProfiler to identify enriched pathways without a preliminary gene selection cutoff. A pre-ranked gene list was generated by calculating a metric for each gene, defined as the product of the sign of its log2 fold change and the negative log10 of its p-value. This ranked list was then analyzed against the C7 immunologic signature gene sets from the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB). The GSEA was executed using the classic, unweighted enrichment statistic (eps = 0), with a random seed set for reproducibility. The final results were filtered to include gene sets with a p-value less than 0.05.
For the generation of a Tpex signature, we utilised bulk RNAseq data from and comparison of CD101-TIM-3- T cells and CD101+TIM-3+ using the DESeq2 software package; differentially expressed genes with a padj<0.05 and log2fold change>0 were used as a Tpex gene signature against which a GSEA was performed with the DEG of BAP1 KO Jurkat T cells.

## FACSorting BAP1 KO Jukrat T cell subsets
To investigate the three distinct subsets observed following CRISPR-Cas9-mediated BAP1 knockout in Jurkat T cells, the cells were separated by FACS based on their CD3e and CD2 expression profiles. The CD3+CD2+ population was designated as double-positive (DP), the CD3+CD2−population as single positive (SP), and the CD3−CD2−population as double-negative (DN).

## Mutation classification of BAP1 in Jurkat subsets
Raw sequencing reads were extracted from FASTQ files corresponding to three FACSorted Jurkat T cell subsets as described above (DP, SP, DN). Initially, all sequences were aggregated to determine the frequency of each unique read. A minimum read count threshold of 30 was applied, and any unique sequence with fewer than 30 reads was discarded to filter for potential sequencing artifacts. This initial filtering resulted in total read counts of 117,631 (DP), 113,439 (SP), and 93,760 (DN) for each corresponding subset. From this dataset, reads identical to the wild-type (WT) BAP1 exon 8 reference sequence, derived from the Homo sapiens GRCh38 genome assembly, were identified and removed. This process eliminated 71% (84,106) of reads from replicate DP, 31% (35,665) from SP, and 1% (1,203) from DN. This resulted in final pools of 33,525 (DP), 77,774 (SP), and 92,557 (DN) mutant sequences for analysis. This remaining pool of mutant sequences underwent further processing; each sequence was reverse-complemented, and residual 3′ primer sequences were computationally trimmed. These processed DNA sequences were then translated into their corresponding amino acid sequences in all three possible reading frames.
To select the correct reading frame and classify each mutant, a custom script was implemented in R using the dplyr and purrr packages. The script scored each of the three potential reading frame translations against the wild-type (WT) BAP1 exon 8 reference peptide (GPWGEDEEWTDKARRVIMERIGLATAG) using a custom semi-global alignment algorithm. This algorithm assigned a numerical score based on the following scheme: +2 for a matching amino acid, −1 for an insertion or deletion (gap penalty), and −2 for a mismatch. To ensure comparability, the final raw alignment score for each frame was normalized by the length of the WT peptide.
This scoring system provided a quantitative basis for classification. In-frame mutations were unambiguously identified by a high positive normalized score in a single reading frame, reflecting high sequence conservation. In contrast, out-of-frame mutations that cause frameshifts consistently produced low or negative scores in all three frames due to the accumulation of mismatch and gap penalties. For each mutant, the translated sequence from the reading frame with the highest normalized alignment score was selected as the definitive protein sequence for all subsequent analyses.

## Structural Prediction of BAP1 variants
The top three highest-scoring mutant protein variants amogst the three subsets were selected for structural modeling. The three-dimensional structures of the full-length BAP1 protein incorporating these mutations were predicted using AlphaFold2. In each case, the amino acid sequence of the native exon 8 was computationally replaced with the sequence of the respective mutant variant. Finally, structural analysis was performed using PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 2.5, Schrödinger, LLC). The predicted structures of the BAP1 mutants were structurally aligned to the wild-type BAP1 protein. To assess changes in protein dynamics and stability, the predicted B-factor values (plotted as spectrum b in PyMOL) of the mutant structures were qualitatively compared to those of the wild-type protein, with a focus on the region surrounding the mutation in exon 8.

## PMA and ionomycin treatment of Jurkat subsets
Wild Type (WT) or FACSorted CD3−CD2− (double-negative, DN) Jurkat T cell subsets were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 IU/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 with or without treatment with low levels of Phorbol 12-myristate 12-acetate, PMA (0.6 ng/ml), high levels of PMA (20 ng/ml) low levels of Ionomycin (ION, 0.1 μg/ml), high levels of ION, 1 μg/ml or high levels of PMA combined with low or high concentration of ION. Following two days of T cell treatment, culture medium was replaced and cells were split every other day in fresh supplemented media in resting, no stimulation conditions for an additional 9–10 days. T cell viability and expression of surface receptors were evaluated 2 days post-stimulation and after 9–10 in resting culture conditions using flow cytometry analysis.

## PRC2 and HDAC inhibitor treatment of Jurkat subsets
Wild Type (WT) or FACSorted CD3−CD2− (double-negative, DN) Jurkat T cell subsets were cultured in supplemented RPMI 1640 medium with or without PRC2 complex inhibitors (MedChemExpress, A-395, HY-101512; GSK126, HY-13470; Tazemetostat, Cat. No.: HY-13803). Inhibitor treatment, at titrated concentrations, was started on day 0 and supplemented on day 3 post-initiation of experiment. T cell viability and CD2 expression were evaluated at days 3 and 7 post-initiation of experiment.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism v10 for C, in MaGeCK package for B and 2C and for and the statistical tests are included in the “ ” section of section.

Published: November 10, 2025

## Footnotes
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2025.113977.

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1 and S3

## Table S2_MaGeCK analysis of screen related to Figure 2
(A) TIME POINT1, (B) TIME POINT 2, (C) TIME POINT 3, (D) TIME POINT 4, (E) TIME POINT 5.

## Table S4_Bioinformatics of bRNAseq related to Figure 3
(A) BAP1KOvsWT, (B) GO Biological Process, (C) GO Cellular Component, (D) GO KEGG, (E) GSEA C5, (F) GSEA C7.

## Table S5_BAP1 DNA-protein sequence analysis related to Figure 4
(A) BAP1 SEQUENCES.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Document S1. Figures S1–S6 and Tables S1 and S3

## Table S2_MaGeCK analysis of screen related to Figure 2
(A) TIME POINT1, (B) TIME POINT 2, (C) TIME POINT 3, (D) TIME POINT 4, (E) TIME POINT 5.

## Table S4_Bioinformatics of bRNAseq related to Figure 3
(A) BAP1KOvsWT, (B) GO Biological Process, (C) GO Cellular Component, (D) GO KEGG, (E) GSEA C5, (F) GSEA C7.

## Table S5_BAP1 DNA-protein sequence analysis related to Figure 4
(A) BAP1 SEQUENCES.

## Data Availability Statement

•The data reported in this article will be shared by the upon request.
•This article does not report original code.
•The RNA-seq data are deposited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE308492).
•Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this article is available from the upon request.