3079cmghCellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and HepatologyCell Mol Gastroenterol HepatolElsevierPMC6008251600825160082512992867310.1016/j.jcmgh.2018.02.007Monoclonal Antibodies Reveal Dynamic Plasticity Between Lgr5- and Bmi1-Expressing Intestinal Cell Populations
SmithNicholas R SwainJohn R DaviesPaige S GallagherAlexandra C ParappillyMichael S BeachCatherine Z StreeterPhilip R WilliamsonIan A MagnessScott T WongMelissa H 1Department of Cell, Developmental and Cancer Biology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon2Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon4Oregon Health & Science University Stem Cell Center, Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Department of Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina∗Correspondence Address correspondence to: Melissa H. Wong, PhD, Department of Cell, Developmental, and Cancer Biology, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Mail Code L215, Portland, Oregon 97239. fax: (503) 494-4253. wongme@ohsu.edu
1032018617979–962062018© 2018 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract

## Background & Aims
Continual renewal of the intestinal epithelium is dependent on active- and slow-cycling stem cells that are confined to the crypt base. Tight regulation of these stem cell populations maintains homeostasis by balancing proliferation and differentiation to support critical intestinal functions. The hierarchical relation of discrete stem cell populations in homeostasis or during regenerative epithelial repair remains controversial. Although recent studies have supported a model for the active-cycling leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein–coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5)+ intestinal stem cell (ISC) functioning upstream of the slow-cycling B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog (Bmi1)-expressing cell, other studies have reported the opposite relation. Tools that facilitate simultaneous analyses of these populations are required to evaluate their coordinated function.

## Methods
We used novel monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) raised against murine intestinal epithelial cells in conjunction with ISC–green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter mice to analyze relations between ISC populations by microscopy. Ex vivo 3-dimensional cultures, flow cytometry, and quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction analyses were performed.

## Results
Two novel mAbs recognized distinct subpopulations of the intestinal epithelium and when used in combination permitted isolation of discrete Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP-enriched populations with stem activity. Growth from singly isolated Lgr5GFP ISCs gave rise to small spheroids. Spheroids did not express Lgr5GFP and instead up-regulated Bmi1GFP expression. Conversely, Bmi1-derived spheroids initiated Lgr5GFP expression as crypt domains were established.

## Conclusions
These data showed the functional utility of murine mAbs in the isolation and investigation of Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP ISC-enriched populations. Ex vivo analyses showed hierarchical plasticity between different ISC-expressing states; specifically Lgr5GFP ISCs gave rise to Bmi1GFP cells, and vice versa. These data highlight the impact of temporal and physiological context on unappreciated interactions between Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP cells during crypt formation.

Keywords: Intestinal Stem Cells, Hierarchy, Lgr5, Bmi1, Plasticity

Abbreviations used in this paper: APC, allophycocyanin; Bmi1, B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog; cDNA, complementary DNA; Egf, epidermal growth factor; FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting; 4-OHT, 4-hydroxytamoxifen; GFP, green fluorescent protein; HBSS, Hank’s balanced salt solution; ISC, intestinal stem cell; Lyz, lysozyme; Lgr5, leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein–coupled receptor 5; mAb, monoclonal antibody; mRNA, messenger RNA; OHSU, Oregon Health and Science University; PBS, phosphate-buffered saline; PE, Phycoerythrin; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction; Rspo1, R-spondin1; TdT, tdTomato; 3D, 3-dimensional; Wnt, wingless-type MMTV (mouse mammary tumor virus) integration site

## Graphical abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2017 Sep 1; Accepted 2018 Feb 26; Collection date 2018.

## Summary
Multiple stem cell populations coordinately support continued epithelial renewal and regeneration in the intestine. The hierarchical function of discrete stem and progenitor cell populations remains controversial. By using novel antibody tools to assess active- and slow-cycling cell populations, we show a unique stem cell property of a slow-cycling epithelial cell and that it has bidirectional plasticity with the Lgr5-expressing stem cell.
The intestinal epithelium undergoes continuous renewal to preserve its critical function as a primary barrier, immune organ, and digestive system. Distinct populations of intestinal stem cells (ISCs) are localized within their niche at the crypt base and receive instructive cues from adjacent epithelial or underlying stromal cells. , These stem cells are defined by discrete marker expression. , , , , Most ISCs or progenitors are categorized into 3 proliferative phenotypes: active-cycling, exemplified by the leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein–coupled receptor 5 (Lgr5)-expressing population , , ; slow-cycling at the +4 position in the crypt (ie, B lymphoma Mo-MLV insertion region 1 homolog [Bmi1]-expressing or quiescent), exemplified by the mouse telomerase reverse transcriptase (mTert) population. , It remains unclear and controversial how ISC or progenitor populations interact within the epithelium in different contexts (eg, development, homeostasis, or regeneration).
Intestinal epithelial stem cell hierarchy is thought to be analogous to the linear organization of hematopoietic stem cells, as characterized by a quiescent cell situated upstream of slow-cycling and active-cycling cells. , However, recent discoveries have shown a number of unappreciated complexities that suggest ISC relations deviate from sequential hierarchy. First, lineage tracing and epigenetic analyses showed that active-cycling Lgr5+ ISCs give rise to Bmi1+ ISCs. , , This calls into question the functionality of slow-cycling Bmi1+ cells upstream of active-cycling ISCs. Second, the heterogeneous nature of various stem cell markers decreases the purity of identified pools of ISCs. Finally, ISCs show a level of plasticity in which lineage progenitors can assume stem cell function, most notably after an injury stimulus. , , Recent findings challenge the existing status of Bmi1+ cells, suggesting they are lineage-committed progenitors capable of responding to injury-repair cues by dedifferentiating to an Lgr5+ stem cell state. , Despite this shift in dogma, the heterogeneous nature of the Bmi1-expressing population , still points to undefined subpopulations that may harbor differential contributions to tissue homeostasis and renewal. Exploration of these overlooked subpopulations is critical for full appreciation of the temporal dynamics of the stem cell niche.
A tractable system that can overcome the current shortages of multicolored transgenic reporter mice and antibodies against discrete stem cell populations is required to investigate ISC relations. The established ex vivo 3-dimensional (3D) intestinal culture system is a foundational assay for assessing the contribution of various cell populations in a regenerative context. This system was first used to show stem properties of Lgr5(GFP) cells. Within the mature enteroid structures, crypt-like buds harbor multiple Lgr5GFP ISCs that propagate differentiated epithelial lineages. However, isolated Bmi1GFP cells in the context of the same ex vivo system generate an entity distinct from the enteroid—a spheroid structure. , These differences in growth phenotypes motivate further investigation. The rapid and visually informative nature of cell culture makes ex vivo assays ideal for exploration of potential relations between these different cell populations and their distinct contributions to epithelial growth. In this study, we explore the relations between the active-cycling Lgr5GFP ISC and Bmi1GFP in crypt-like buds. The power of 3D ex vivo enteroid culture as a functional assay in combination with murine reporter mouse models and novel monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) showed a unique stem cell property of Bmi1GFP cells and their bidirectional relation with the Lgr5GFP ISCs.

## Materials and Methods

## Mouse Strains and Statistics
Animal experiments were performed in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Animal Care and Use Committee at Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU). Mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free environment under strictly controlled light cycle conditions, fed a standard rodent lab chow (5001; PMI Nutrition International, Richmond, IN), and provided water ad libitum. The following mouse strains were obtained from The Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME): C576BL/6J (JAX #000664), B6.129P2-Lgr5tm1(cre/ERT2)Cle/J (Lgr5-GFP; JAX #008875), and Bka.Cg-PtprcbBmi1tm1IlwThy1a/J (Bmi1-GFP; JAX #017351), B6.129-Bmi1tm1(cre/ERT2)Mrc/J (Bmi1-CreERT; JAX#010531), B6.Cg-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm9/(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J (ROSA-TdTomato [TdT]; JAX#007909). F344 rats were acquired from Charles Rivers Laboratories (Wilmington, MA). Cells isolated from Lgr5-GFP and Bmi1-GFP mice are referred to as Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP, respectively. All experimental animals were 8–12 weeks of age, and represented both sexes. All experiments were conducted with multiple biologic and technical replicates. When possible, littermate controls were used. Each experiment was performed with n = 4–24 total mice with a minimum of 2 independent technical experiments. Data are presented as means ± SEM and statistical significance was determined using a 2-tailed unpaired Student t test with the Welch correction. A P value of less than .05 was deemed statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism software (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA).

## mAb Generation and Characterization
Novel mAbs directed against mouse intestinal epithelial cells were generated in F344 rats at OHSU mAb Core Facility as previously described. Briefly, a modified subtractive immunization protocol was used. Rats were pre-immunized with isolations of differentiated mouse intestinal epithelial cells, the undesired antigen. Cyclophosphamide then was injected intraperitoneally to eliminate B lymphocytes reacting against these antigens. Subsequent immunization with crypt-based cells (ie, whole crypts, single cells isolated from crypt preparations, or single fluorescence-activated cell sorting [FACS]-isolated cell populations) was performed. On day 42 after initial immunization, rats were killed, their spleens were isolated, and splenocytes were fused with SP2/0 Ag14 myeloma cells to generate hybridomas. Hybridomas were cultured and expanded under standard conditions. Supernatants from hybridomas were screened by immunofluorescence on mouse intestinal tissue or by flow cytometry using isolated intestinal stem cells from transgenic GFP reporter mice or using isolated intestinal epithelial cells stained with crypt-based antibodies (ie, CD24, CD44, CD166) ( ). , , Approximately 2500 isolated clones were collected for screening. Clones with expression patterns of interest (ie, to discrete intestinal cell populations, including intestinal stem cells) were cryopreserved and passaged to yield increased supernatant production. Verification of discrete expression patterns were confirmed using quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and enteroid culture of FACS-isolated cell populations.
 

## Tissue Preparation and Immunofluorescent Analyses
Mouse intestines were isolated and prepared for downstream immunofluorescent analyses as previously described. For mAb staining, freshly isolated murine intestines were embedded in, optimum cutting temperature compound. Sections (5 μm) were prepared on a cryostat (Leica, Buffalo Grove, IL) and subsequently fixed for 10 minutes in acetone at -20°C. Slides were incubated in hybridoma supernatants for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by incubation with fluorescently conjugated anti-rat secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) ( ) for 1 hour at room temperature before nuclear counterstaining and mounting in n-propyl gallate antifade solution. For co-localization of mAb F5C12 with Lgr5GFP, intestinal tissue from Lgr5-GFP reporter mice were briefly fixed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) + 2% paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes at room temperature before embedding in optimum cutting temperature compound. For stains with mAbs E5D10 and F5C12 in combination, we used isotype-specific anti-rat IgM and IgG secondary antibodies, respectively. Enteroid staining was performed similar to published protocols. Briefly, cultures were fixed in Matrigel (Corning, Corning, NY) droplets with PBS + 2% PFA for 30 minutes at room temperature. After washing, cultures were permeabilized and blocked in PBS + 1% bovine serum albumin and 0.1% TX-100, followed by incubation with antibodies ( ). Fluorescent images were captured on a Leica DMR or Zeiss Observer Z1 microscope with ApoTome. Image analysis and processing was performed using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) and figure panels were assembled in Canvas (ACD Systems, Plantation, FL).

## Isolation of Mouse Intestinal Epithelial Cells and Flow Cytometry/FACS Analyses
Crypt-enriched intestinal epithelium was isolated for downstream analyses as previously described. Briefly, intestines were freshly isolated, flushed with ice-cold PBS, linearized, and incubated in Hank’s balanced salt solution (HBSS) + 10 mmol/L HEPES pH 7.4, 5 mmol/L EDTA, and 1.5 mmol/L dithiothreitol for 20 minutes on ice. Tissues subsequently were incubated in HBSS + 10 mmol/L HEPES pH 7.4 and 5 mmol/L EDTA for 8 minutes at 37°C followed by shaking to remove epithelial cells. The resultant cell fraction was crypt-enriched by sequential filtration through 100-μm and 70-μm cell strainer caps (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Crypt-enriched fractions were verified by microscopic analysis, and then digested to single cells by incubation with HBSS + 0.3 U/mL Dispase (Gibco, Gaithersburg, MD), 0.05 mg/mL DNAse I (Roche, Indianapolis, IN), and 5 mol/L anoikis inhibitor Y-27632 (Stemgent, Lexington, MA). Digested cells were filtered through a 40-μm cell strainer cap (BD Biosciences) and stained with mAbs, anti-rat fluorescently conjugated antibodies, and antibodies against CD31 and CD45 ( ) to exclude contaminating endothelium and leukocytes, respectively. Cells were analyzed on a BD LSR analyzer (BD Biosciences) or isolated on a BD Influx cell sorter (BD Biosciences) running BD Diva software (BD Biosciences) at the OHSU Flow Cytometry Core Facility. Flow cytometry plots and analyses were performed using FlowJo Software (Treestar, Ashland, OR).

## Enteroid Culture
Cultures of FACS-isolated single-cell populations were performed as described. , All ex vivo cultures, except for those analyzed in single-cell growth assays were grown as follows. Cells were seeded in growth factor reduced Matrigel (Corning) containing 50 ng/mL epidermal growth factor (Egf; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), 100 μg/mL Noggin (Peprotech, Rocky Hill, NJ), 1 μg/mL R-Spondin1 (R&D Systems), and 1 μmol/L Jagged-1 peptide (Anaspec, Fremont, CA) at 100 cells/μL. Matrigel droplets were solidified at 37°C for 15 minutes and overlaid with prewarmed enteroid culture media (advanced Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium/F12 + 10 mmol/L HEPES pH 7.4, N2 and B27 supplements [Gibco], and 10 μmol/L Y-27632 [Stemgent]). Growth factors were replenished every 2 days and media exchanged every 4 days. For growth-dependent assays shown in F, recombinant growth factors were systematically depleted from culture media for enteroids and spheroids, followed by assessment of growth and survival for 7–10 days. Spheroids were found to be resistant to R-Spondin1 (Rspo1) depletion and could survive serial passaging without Rspo1 supplementation. Enteroids died and could not be passaged if Rspo1 was omitted from the culture media. For enteroid lineage tracing experiments, Cre recombinase was activated by addition of 100 nmol/L 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) into the enteroid culture media for 18 hours, after which the 4-OHT–containing media was removed. Images were captured on a Leica DMIRB inverted microscope equipped with a Spot Camera. Enteroid growth efficiencies were determined by the total number of epithelial structures present at day 12 of culture divided by the total number of cells plated within each Matrigel droplet.
 The single-cell growth analyses were performed as described. Briefly, singly sorted cells using the mAb F5C12 was performed from intestinal epithelium from Lgr5-GFP reporter mice. Cells were plated in microraft arrays (Cell Microsystems, Chapel Hill, NC) in enteroid culture medium as described earlier, but with the addition of 1 μmol/L CHIR-99021 (Stemgent) and 100 μmol/L Valproic acid (Selleck Chemicals, Houston, TX). Single cells were seeded into microwells by centrifugation, and growth was monitored. Images were captured on an automated Olympus ×81 inverted microscope equipped with a Hamamatsu charge-coupled device camera. Single-cell growth analyses were performed as described by identifying microrafts containing single cells and assessing enteroid contents of those specific microrafts 7 days later. 

## qRT-PCR Analysis
RNA was isolated and purified from FACS-isolated cell populations using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD) with on-column DNAse digestion. RNA quality was assessed on a Bioanalyzer and complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries were prepared using the High Capacity cDNA Synthesis kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Resultant cDNA was validated and confirmed to be free of genomic DNA contamination by PCR. Gene expression analysis was performed using commercial TaqMan probes ( ) and 2× TaqFast reagents on a Viia7 qPCR thermocycler (Applied Biosystems). Each cDNA was analyzed in triplicate and fold change was determined by the ΔΔCT method relative to the reference gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Average fold changes are reported as mean ± SEM for a representative analysis. qRT-PCR of FACS-isolated cell populations were compared with the reference unsorted total live epithelium (PIneg/CD31neg/CD45neg), or crypt/villus-enriched cell populations using mAb B6A6. 
 

## Results

## Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP Cells Display Distinct Growth Properties in Ex Vivo 3D Cell Culture
Previous studies have shown Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP cell populations have distinct in vivo expression patterns , and functional stem capacities under different contexts including in response to injury, , or under defined ex vivo culture conditions. , Recent studies have indicated that Bmi1GFP cells are secretory progenitor cells, and may elicit their stem cell properties by adopting an Lgr5+ state to drive tissue regeneration after injury. However, studies in ex vivo cultures are not fully congruent with this observation because Bmi1-derived spheroids are composed almost entirely of Bmi1GFP cells (see later), and are highly proliferative. To examine the relations between Bmi1GFP and Lgr5GFP cells, we conducted systematic analyses of the 2 populations using ex vivo 3D cultures, novel mAbs generated in our laboratory that enrich for Bmi1GFP and Lgr5GFP cells, and ISC-GFP reporter mice. Importantly, we reasoned that analyses using ex vivo 3D culture provide a simple system that permits temporal tracking of crypt-like bud formation, a process that may be analogous to regeneration of the intestinal epithelium in response to injury.
As previously reported, singly FACS-isolated Lgr5GFP-hi ISCs from transgenic reporter mice cultured under standard Sato conditions (in the presence of recombinant growth factors Egf, Noggin, and Rspo1, see the Materials and Methods section) predominantly generate enteroids, which are heterogeneous epithelial structures containing each of the major differentiated lineages. These structures feature proliferative crypt-like bud domains that maintain a population of Lgr5GFP ISCs ( A, arrowheads). Under identical culture conditions, FACS-isolated Bmi1GFP cells predominantly generate large hollow spheroids, made up of a thin layer of cells that nearly all express Bmi1GFP ( B). Quantification of enterospheres (also referred to as spheroids or spheres) and enteroids from isolated Lgr5GFP or Bmi1GFP cells showed that, after 12 days in culture, Lgr5GFP cells predominately generate enteroids and Bmi1GFP cells predominately form spheres, even though small numbers of the opposite phenotype were present ( C).
In addition to discrete ex vivo–derived structural phenotypes, Lgr5GFP-derived enteroids harbor gene expression distinct to Bmi1GFP-derived spheroids ( D). Spheroids showed increased expression of Bmi1, the Bmi1 target gene p19Arf, and cell-cycle genes (eg, cyclin D1). Spheres also showed reduced messenger RNA (mRNA) expression of active-cycling ISC markers including Lgr5, Ascl2, and Smoc2, and low expression of differentiated gene products, including the enteroendocrine gene markers ChgA, ChgB, and Ngn3 ( D). As further confirmation of reduced differentiated lineage marker expression in spheroids, analyses of enteroids and spheroids for the enteroendocrine marker ChgA and Paneth cell marker lysozyme (Lyz) showed the absence of protein staining in spheroids ( E). In addition to discrete gene and protein expression profiles, proliferative Bmi1GFP-derived spheroids were sustained by distinct growth factor requirements. Lgr5GFP-derived enteroids are wingless-type MMTV (mouse mammary tumor virus) integration site (Wnt)-dependent , and require supplementation with the Wnt agonist Rspo1 , , for ex vivo survival and growth ( F). In the absence of Rspo1, enteroids died within 7 days. However, Bmi1GFP-derived spheroids grew in Rspo1-depleted medium and could be propagated through multiple serial passages long term without the Wnt agonist ( G, at least up to passage 30). These data indicate that spheroid-forming cells exist within the Bmi1GFP cell population, and that Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP cells harbor differential growth potential in ex vivo 3D cell culture, ultimately giving rise to phenotypically and molecularly distinct epithelial structures.

## Novel mAb Clone F5C12 Facilitates FACS Enrichment of Lgr5GFP ISCs
To fully appreciate relationships between ISC populations, tools to concurrently analyze these discrete populations in tissue or in ex vivo cultures are required. Antibodies that support identification and isolation of Bmi1+ and Lgr5+ ISCs are lacking, therefore we generated antibodies against murine intestinal epithelial cells and screened more than 6000 clones for antibodies with potential overlap with ISC populations within the crypt. One novel mAb clone, F5C12, identified in our screen showed specific expression within the ISC zone. This mAb robustly stained the apical surface of epithelial cells in the lower region of the crypt ( A), along the entire proximal-distal axis of the small intestine from duodenum, jejunum, ileum, and within the colon ( A and B). Co-staining of Lgr5GFP and F5C12 in reporter mouse intestines showed intriguing overlapping expression ( B); importantly, the F5C12 mAb was expressed in cells from all crypts, unlike the mosaic expression of the Lgr5-GFP reporter, indicating uniform expression of the F5C12 epitope. Despite this, the Lgr5-GFP reporter and the F5C12 staining pattern had subtle differences that immunofluorescent analyses were not able to resolve on a cellular level. Therefore, we FACS-isolated F5C12+ crypt epithelial cells and performed qRT-PCR for crypt-based and differentiated cell lineage gene expression. The F5C12 mAb reproducibly fractionated 20.7% ± 1.2% of crypt-enriched single epithelial cells ( C). Consistent with the crypt-base expression pattern, the F5C12+ cell population showed gene expression enrichment of the crypt markers CD44, Sox9, Ki67, and cyclinD1, and was de-enriched for differentiated lineage markers Fabpl, Muc2, and ChgA relative to a crypt-enriched cell population ( F). Consistent with overlapping protein expression with Lgr5GFP, F5C12+ cells were enriched for Lgr5 gene expression, but not for Bmi1 or the Paneth cell marker Lyz1 ( G). Bmi1 mRNA is reported to be diffusely expressed in all crypt-based cells, , , however, it is expressed at lower levels in Lgr5GFP cells relative to all cells within the crypt ( G) and therefore provides an additional approach to assay for discrete crypt-based cell populations. To evaluate the extent to which the F5C12 mAb was co-expressed on Lgr5GFP ISCs, we analyzed Lgr5-GFP reporter mouse intestines by flow cytometry ( D). Consistent with the observed in vivo staining pattern, the majority of all Lgr5GFP cells expressed F5C12 epitopes (66.5% ± 1.5%) ( D, left). However, this population increased when analyzing only the Lgr5GFP-hi stem cell population (85.7% ± 2.0%) ( D, right), consistent with enrichment of Lgr5+ ISCs within the F5C12+ population. When we performed a similar experiment using Bmi1-GFP reporter mice, we found that Bmi1GFP cells were rarely marked by F5C12 staining (4.5% ± 0.4%) ( E). These data support that F5C12 is expressed on Lgr5+ ISCs, and not robustly expressed on the Bmi1GFP population or the supportive Paneth cell.
 Lack of functional antibodies to Lgr5 has impeded analyses of the population with respect to other ISC populations. Moreover, available Lgr5-GFP transgenic reporter mice harbor mosaic expression of GFP in approximately 50% of crypts. To determine if Lgr5GFP-neg/F5C12+ cells identified in our studies ( B, right crypt) also could give rise to intestinal enteroids, we performed single-cell growth analyses on 4 discrete subpopulations: Lgr5GFP/F5C12neg, Lgr5GFP/F5C12+, Lgr5GFP-neg/F5C12+, and bulk F5C12+ ( H–J). For this high-throughput, single-cell growth assay, CHIR-99021 and valproic acid were added to the growth medium to optimize analyses. Consistent with the mAb F5C12 encompassing the majority of Lgr5+ ISCs, the bulk F5C12+ population showed strong enteroid-forming potential ( J). However, the Lgr5GFP/F5C12+ population showed the highest growth efficiency, which was similar to the reported efficiency of Lgr5GFP-hi cells in this system. This indicates that the F5C12 antibody neither promotes nor inhibits enteroid growth potential. Furthermore, as expected from the in vivo expression pattern in Lgr5-GFP reporter tissues ( B), a population of Lgr5GFP-neg/F5C12+ cells were isolated and shown to harbor functional stem cell behavior as evidenced by their ability to form enteroids. This shows that F5C12+ cells likely encompass Lgr5 cells that are GFP negative. Interestingly, the more rare population of Lgr5GFP/F5C12neg cells also initiated enteroids ( I and J). Collectively, these data indicate that mAb F5C12 marks and enriches for active-cycling Lgr5+ ISCs.

## Novel mAb Clone E5D10 Shows Low Expression Levels in the Stem Cell Zone
A second mAb clone of interest, E5D10, showed panepithelial staining within the small intestine and down the length of the intestinal tract ( C), but stained most robustly on the surface of differentiated epithelial cells on villi and the upper crypt within the small intestine and on the colonic crypt cuff epithelium ( C and A). FACS analysis of crypt-enriched mouse intestinal epithelial cells fractionated populations into a minor E5D10lo subset and a robust expression population of 67.6% ± 1.4% E5D10hi ( B). qRT-PCR gene expression analysis of FACS-isolated cells showed enrichment of crypt marker gene expression in the E5D10lo population (CD44, CD24, Ki67, Olfm4), as well as de-enrichment of the differentiated absorptive cell marker Fabpl ( C). These data are consistent with the in vivo staining pattern for the E5D10 mAb, and supports that the E5D10lo population demarcates the stem cell zone within the crypt base. To determine if the E5D10lo cell population encompasses ISC populations, we used flow cytometry to analyze GFP-expressing cells from either Lgr5-GFP or Bmi1-GFP transgenic reporter mouse intestines. Gating first on the GFP-expressing population, then analyzing E5D10 staining levels, showed both Lgr5GFP-hi (98.5% ± 0.3%) ( D, right) and Bmi1GFP (97.2% ± 0.3%) ( E) cells resided predominantly within the E5D10lo population. Consistently, qRT-PCR analysis of FACS-isolated E5D10lo cells were enriched for the stem cell genes including Lgr5 and Bmi1, as well as the Paneth cell marker Lyz1 relative to the parent unsorted live epithelial cell fraction ( F). Collectively, these data support that the E5D10lo cell population contains both Lgr5+ and Bmi1+ cells.
 

## Combination of mAbs E5D10 and F5C12 Facilitates Isolation of Lgr5GFP or Bmi1GFP ISC Populations
Notably, the E5D10lo cell population contains both Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP cells ( ), whereas the F5C12 mAb enriches for the Lgr5+ ISCs, but excludes Bmi1GFP and Paneth cells ( ). Therefore, we reasoned that combining E5D10 and F5C12 mAbs would facilitate the simultaneous isolation and downstream analyses of Lgr5+ or Bmi1+ cells. Immunofluorescent analyses of mouse intestinal tissue showed reciprocal expression of E5D10 (villus) and F5C12 (crypt) ( A and B). Notably, F5C12 is confined to the crypt base, where E5D10 expression is the lowest ( B). Furthermore, FACS analysis of crypt-enriched intestinal epithelial cells subdivided the E5D10lo crypt-based cells into 2 main populations: E5D10lo/F5C12+ and E5D10lo/F5C12neg ( C and A–D). qRT-PCR analysis of FACS-isolated populations indicated that the E5D10lo/F5C12+ population was enriched for active-cycling ISC markers including Lgr5, Ascl2, and Olfm4, whereas the E5D10lo/F5C12neg population was enriched for the Bmi1, but not for HopX or mTert ( D). Of note, the latter population also was enriched for Paneth cells. Flow analyses, using ISC-GFP reporter mice, allowed for tracking of the 2 populations relative to the Lgr5GFP or Bmi1GFP populations. As expected, the majority of Lgr5GFP ISCs were localized to the E5D10lo/F5C12+ gate, whereas Bmi1GFP cells were localized primarily within the E5D10lo/F5C12neg gate ( E and F).
 As noted, Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP cells show differential ex vivo 3D growth phenotypes—enteroids and spheroids—respectively ( A and B). , , To validate growth phenotypes from mAb-mediated isolated populations for discrete stem cell phenotypes, we FACS-isolated E5D10lo/F5C12+ and E5D10lo/F5C12neg cells and cultured them in the presence of Egf, Noggin, and Rspo1. As expected, the Lgr5-enriched E5D10lo/F5C12+ population yielded nearly exclusively enteroids with crypt-like bud domains (99.1% ± 1%). The Bmi1GFP-enriched E5D10lo/F5C12neg population primarily yielded spheroid structures (66% ± 4.9%), but consistent with previous data showing a population of Lgr5GFP ISCs lacking F5C12 expression ( D and H), also yielded a subset of enteroids ( E-G). The culture growth efficiencies for the spheroid and enteroid-enriched cell populations were similar to our previously reported growth efficiencies for Bmi1GFP and Lgr5GFP populations in this system ( G) (0.21% ± 0.05% and 0.5% ± 0.13%, respectively). Taken together, these data show that using 2 novel mAb clones facilitate simultaneous isolation of active-cycling Lgr5GFP (E5D10lo/F5C12+) and slow-cycling Bmi1GFP (E5D10lo/F5C12neg)-enriched ISC populations.

## Bmi1GFP Cells Within Spheroids Exist in a Stem State
Recent studies of the Bmi1GFP cell population indicate that these cells are predominantly enteroendocrine cell progenitors and not bona fide intestinal stem cells. , However, ex vivo growth properties of Bmi1GFP cells show the existence of a clonogenic population that has spheroid-forming capacity ( B). These spheroids harbor the recognized stem cell property of self-renewal in culture ( F). To examine the relations between Bmi1 and Lgr5 within spheroids, we used our novel mAbs to isolate spheroid-forming Bmi1GFP-enriched cell populations from either Bmi1-GFP or Lgr5-GFP reporter mice ( A). Consistent with spheroids generated from FACS-isolated Bmi1 cells, spheroids grown from the mAb cell population E5D10lo/F5C12neg isolated from Bmi1-GFP reporter mouse intestines expressed GFP in nearly all cells throughout the structure, from single cell to day 12 ( C, left). However, in rare cases in which spheroids begin to form crypt-like bud domains, the Bmi1GFP expression appeared to be diffuse or diminished ( C, right and magnification of budded area). When we isolated the same E5D10lo/F5C12neg cell population from Lgr5-GFP reporter mouse intestines, we never observed spheroids expressing Lgr5GFP within the structure throughout the analytical window (ie, days 1–14 after seeding) ( B, left). These observations were consistent with our finding that spheroids express low levels of Lgr5 mRNA ( D). However, in the rare instance in which spheroids formed crypt-like buds—typically around day 14—Lgr5-GFP was expressed in the newly formed bud domains ( B, right). These data indicate that the Bmi1GFP cells within the spheroid structure are able to transition into a state with down-regulated Bmi1GFP and up-regulated Lgr5GFP expression within newly formed crypt-like buds, supporting stem cell properties of Bmi1GFP expressing cells in spheroids. Furthermore, to show the lineage tracing capacity of the Bmi1-expressing cells in this context, E5D10lo/F5C12neg cells were isolated from Bmi1-CreERT/R-TdT (Bmi1-Cre/RTdT) mouse intestines and analyzed. After a short 1-day exposure to 4-OHT on day 2 after seeding, Bmi1-Cre/R-TdT spheroid cells robustly activated Cre and traced nearly all cells within the structure when analyzed 4 days later ( D). These data further highlight that induced mAb-mediated isolated Bmi1 cells have stem properties under ex vivo culture conditions.
 

## Plasticity Between Stem States Shown Using Novel mAbs
Previous studies have suggested that Lgr5GFP ISCs can assume different states, including those of other stem cell entities (eg, HopX+), and that Lgr5GFP ISCs may have robust expression of proposed slow-cycling or +4 cell markers. These findings may indicate that there is significant overlap in expression and/or function of different ISC populations. New tools, such as our novel mAbs, now permit simultaneous analyses of Lgr5+ and Bmi1+ ISCs. This, in conjunction with ex vivo 3D culture, facilitates the investigation of ISC relations in the context of a dynamic process, such as crypt formation. To investigate the role of Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP ISCs during crypt initiation and budding in 3D enteroid structures, we analyzed their contributions to this dynamic process using mAb-mediated isolated Lgr5-enriched cells (E5D10lo/F5C12+) from either Lgr5-GFP or Bmi1-GFP reporter mouse intestines ( A). Singly isolated E5D10lo/F5C12+ cells from Lgr5-GFP mouse intestines progressed from a single cell to a small spheroid, however, Lgr5GFP expression was down-regulated and not detectible in these small spheroids between days 1 and 4 after seeding (not shown). Next, just before formation of a crypt bud, during a crypt-like initiation event, Lgr5GFP was re-expressed in a small number of cells adjacent to a granular cell—likely a newly formed Paneth cell—(day 6) ( B, left), and continued to form a crypt-like bud. In the mature enteroid structures, Lgr5GFP expression was restricted to the base of the established crypt-like buds (day 12) ( B, right). When E5D10lo/F5C12+ (Lgr5GFP ISC-enriched) cells were FACS-isolated from Bmi1-GFP mouse intestines, GFP-negative single cells ( F) generated small spheroids that were Bmi1GFP positive (day 6) ( C, left). Similar to structures grown from Lgr5GFP cells, these small Bmi1GFP-expressing spheroids went on to form budded enteroids, but in this case the crypt domains lacked appreciable Bmi1-GFP expression (day 12) ( C, right). These data indicate that to form mature enteroid structures, single Lgr5GFP ISCs transit from an Lgr5-expressing state into a Bmi1-expressing state to form a small spheroid structure (between days 2 and 5). Although an alternative interpretation is that the Lgr5GFP ISC directly gives rise to a Bmi1GFP ISC that is capable of forming a spheroid, we point out that this state is devoid of Lgr5GFP expression. Notably, these spheroids go on to bud and re-express Lgr5 to generate crypt domains. Consistent with this observation, small spheroids (day 4) generated from the E5D10lo/F5C12+, Lgr5-enriched mAb cell population had increased expression of Bmi1 and low expression of Lgr5 mRNAs ( D).
 Because lineage tracing frequently is viewed as a hallmark of stem properties, the ability of the E5D10lo/F5C12+ cell population to give rise to downstream cells is shown in mature enteroids: Cre induction at day 11 and analyses at day 12 ( E). Both expression of endogenous GFP from the reporter expression and TdT from lineage traced cells were apparent. These studies showed robust induction of lineage tracing in crypt buds (ie, expression of TdT). However, to further investigate the loss of Lgr5GFP expression in the early spheroid state, we induced Cre expression at day 2. In these experiments, Lgr5-enriched E5D10lo/F5C12+ cells were FACS-isolated from either Lgr5-GFP-CreERT- or Bmi-CreERT/R-TdT mice, induced for lineage tracing at day 2 by administration of 4-OHT, and analyzed 10 days later ( F and G). As seen in F, Lgr5-Cre/R-TdT enteroids induced with 4-OHT on day 2, single mAb Lgr5-enriched cells (endogenous GFP from the reporter expression) could be detected in crypt buds by day 7, with greater numbers appreciated in mature enteroid crypt buds at day 12 ( F, white arrowheads). Importantly, these Lgr5 cells were predominantly devoid of TdT expression (designation of lineage-traced progeny), indicating that the single Lgr5+ cells down-regulated Lgr5 expression by day 2 in culture ( H). However, when the same analysis was conducted from E5D10lo/F5C12+ cells isolated from Bmi1-Cre/R-TdT mice, lineage tracing was apparent as early as day 3, one day after Cre induction, and increasing levels of lineage-marked cells were detected as enteroids matured from day 7 to day 13 ( G and H). These data indicate that Lgr5 expression (defined by GFP reporter and Cre-mediated lineage tracing) is dynamically modulated during enteroid generation and crypt-like bud formation under 3D ex vivo culture. Collectively, these observations highlight the novel finding that Lgr5+ and Bmi1+ ISCs are capable of dynamically converting during the discrete stages that lead to mature enteroid formation—specifically from single cell to sphere state, and from sphere state to crypt-bud formation. Notably, this dynamic relationship, shown by temporal analyses of ex vivo intestinal structures, may reflect a fundamental program of dynamic transition between stem cell states that may be essential for in vivo programs of epithelial regeneration, development, or tissue homeostasis.

## Discussion
Within the past decade, significant advances in the ISC field are largely owing to the identification of various markers for active-cycling, slow-cycling, and quiescent stem populations, as well as the development of ex vivo systems for analyses of their ISC attributes. , , , However, relations between discrete stem populations and clarity of their functional hierarchies continue to be controversial. , , The lack of available antibody tools for simultaneous analyses of these populations in reporter mouse-independent systems proves to be a major limitation in moving the field forward. We describe and validate 2 novel mAbs that facilitate concurrent isolation of Lgr5+ and Bmi1+ ISC-enriched populations. Using these new tools, we show their functional utility to investigate the dynamic relationship between Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP ISCs in ex vivo 3D cell culture.
Optimization of ex vivo growth conditions for Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP ISCs led to the determination that Bmi1GFP cells give rise to unique 3D intestinal structures: enterospheres or spheroids ( B). We extended upon the first descriptions of this structure , by showing phenotypically and molecularly distinct properties of the sphere state relative to the enteroid state. Bmi1-derived spheroids do not depend on the Wnt agonist, Rspo1, for growth and survival ( F and G), and therefore exist in a different proliferative state than enteroids. This observation supports that Bmi1GFP cells proliferate in a Wnt-independent fashion. This is not surprising, given that Bmi1-derived spheroids do not express high levels of Lgr5, a receptor for Rspo1 ( D). Within spheroids Bmi1GFP cells undergo symmetric cell division because nearly all cells retain Bmi1GFP identity and retain a stem-like state. This is evidenced by the lack of differentiated cell lineage markers in spheres ( D and E) and perpetual self-renewal ( G). In contrast, Lgr5GFP-derived enteroids contain ISCs restricted to the crypt domains, likely undergo asymmetric cell division during crypt bud formation, and give rise to downstream differentiated cells.
Bmi1GFP -derived spheroids are characterized by Rspo1 independence, low or negative Lgr5GFP expression, and structural morphology. Interestingly, these spheroids are highly reminiscent of cultures generated from early developmental time points reported to be Lgr5-independent. , Future investigations can explore whether or not adult-derived Bmi1GFP spheroids reside in a state similar to the developing intestine. Nonetheless, Bmi1GFP -derived spheroids retained the potential to form buds and re-express Lgr5GFP in the presence of Rspo1 ( B), but as a whole population, maintained and propagated the spheroid state ( G). We never observed budding and re-expression of Lgr5GFP from spheroids cultured in the absence of Rspo1 (data not shown). In the context of factors that are required for crypt budding, it is likely that re-expression of the Wnt-target gene Lgr5 and transition into a Wnt-dependent state is required. However, not all spheroids are capable of transitioning to a budded enteroid structure, which suggests that localized factors may be critical in driving crypt initiation. This observation requires future focused studies to show the necessary growth factors, and cellular and noncellular requirements. Notably, the temporal course for budding from a Bmi1GFP cell is discrete from that of an Lgr5GFP cell (ie, day 12 vs 6), and we postulate that these 2 events leading to a similar budded enteroid may be driven by different processes.
The notion that Lgr5+ and Bmi1+ cells harbor distinct stem cell functions to support intestinal homeostasis and epithelial regeneration after injury recently has been challenged. New studies support the idea that the Bmi1+ cell population consists of predominantly differentiated enteroendocrine cells capable of de-differentiation into an active-cycling state to support tissue renewal. , Mathematic modeling based on epigenetic profiles of discrete isolated ISC populations puts forth a model in which the active-cycling ISC (ie, Lgr5GFP) sits hierarchically upstream of the Bmi1GFP cell. Upon tissue injury the Bmi1-expressing lineage progenitor can re-establish an Lgr5-like expression identity. Thus, the capacity of a Bmi1+ cell to function as a proliferative ISC after injury may be contingent on the ability to de-differentiate. Bmi1+ cells isolated from the intestinal epithelium indeed represent a heterogeneous pool of cells, with approximately 10% devoid of differentiated enteroendocrine cell markers. , Notably, the proliferating Bmi1GFP cells within spheroids are largely devoid of an enteroendocrine lineage signature ( D and E). Therefore, it is possible that an alternative view may co-exist in which Bmi1GFP cells represent a heterogeneous population that simultaneously includes secretory progenitors, differentiated enteroendocrine cells, and cells with nascent stem cell properties. In this scenario, it is likely that these cells could represent a continuum of differentiation, each with their own ability to contribute to the stem function required to maintain the intestinal epithelium. Although identifying the subpopulation that harbors stem cell properties challenges current beliefs in the field, past discoveries of redundant processes that are critically important for survival remind us that our theories of stem properties and ISC relations need not be mutually exclusive. 
Our data support the notion that Bmi1+ cells can exist in a self-propagating spheroid that expresses Bmi1GFP ( B and C). In addition, examination of crypt-like domain formation in ex vivo cultures showed that Bmi1GFP cells from spheroids can down-regulate Bmi1-GFP expression at the point of crypt domain establishment ( C, right panel). Concurrently, Bmi1GFP-derived spheroids up-regulate Lgr5GFP expression to generate crypt domains ( B, right panel). Areas for future investigation include the study of how crypt budding occurs from a seemingly homogeneous cell population and whether this occurs in a stochastically or directed manner.
Lgr5GFP ISCs have well-defined growth properties under 3D enteroid culture. The enteroid culture system originally was used to validate the stem capacity of single Lgr5GFP ISCs. During enteroid formation, single Lgr5GFP ISCs form a small spheroid ( B and C), which was thought to indicate that Lgr5GFP ISCs self-renew before forming crypt buds and giving rise to differentiated progeny. Interestingly, more recent studies have indicated that this is unlikely , because the Lgr5-GFP reporter expression is not appreciable during this sphere-phase of enteroid growth ( B and F). The transient sphere-state is similar, although on a smaller scale, to the Bmi1GFP-derived spheroid, in which we observe uniform expression of the Bmi1-GFP reporter (compare C with C). The development of our novel mAbs allowed us to isolate Lgr5GFP ISCs from the Bmi1-GFP reporter mouse and we detected expression of the Bmi1-GFP reporter ( C) during the small spheroid growth phase of the enteroid. These findings were corroborated further by lineage tracing experiments showing that Lgr5-enriched enteroids are lineage traced at early time points in the sphere-state predominantly from Bmi1-expressing cells vs Lgr5GFP-expressing cells ( F–H). These exciting observations suggest that single Lgr5GFP ISCs transition into a Bmi1GFP-expressing sphere-state to self-propagate before initiating the crypt-like buds that define mature enteroid phenotypes ( ). Transit through a spheroid state may indicate that Bmi1+ ISCs harbor unique properties required to direct development and tissue regeneration, however, an analogous in vivo population has yet to be defined. Future studies are needed to understand the signaling pathways and factors that collectively drive the transitions between growth phenotypes, budding, and ISC-expression states.
 Our findings shed new light on the dynamic inter-relations between the Lgr5GFP and Bmi1GFP ISC populations. The capacities of each stem cell type to bidirectionally transition between reciprocal expression states highlight the dynamic complexity of ISC relationships and the importance of the context in which stem cells are studied (eg, temporal and physiologic). In addition, the ex vivo 3D culture model used in this study has a high degree of similarity to the stimulated states of injury-induced repair, cancer, or development. This likeness suggests that these systems may provide insight into how discrete ISC populations function in vivo to safeguard the critical functions of the intestine.

## Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for cell-sorting assistance from the OHSU Flow Cytometry Core Facility (P. Canaday, M. Gilchrist, and D. LaTocha), for mAb production assistance from the OHSU Monoclonal Antibody Core Facility (M. Grompe and Y. P. Zhong), and to Z. C. Wong for editing.

## Footnotes
Author contributions Nicholas R. Smith was responsible for the conception and design, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing/editing, and final approval of the manuscript; John R. Swain was responsible for the conception and design, collection and/or assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing/editing, and final approval of manuscript; Paige S. Davies was responsible for the collection and/or assembly of data and final approval of the manuscript; Alexandra C. Gallagher was responsible for the collection of data and final approval of the manuscript; Michael S. Parappilly was responsible for the collection and/or assembly of data and final approval of the manuscript; Catherine Z. Beach was responsible for the collection and/or assembly of data and final approval of the manuscript; Philip R. Streeter was responsible for the interpretation of data and final approval of the manuscript; Ian A. Williamson was responsible for the collection of data and final approval of the manuscript; Scott T. Magness was responsible for the collection of data and final approval of the manuscript; and Melissa H. Wong was responsible for the conception and design, financial support, data analysis and interpretation, manuscript writing, and final approval of manuscript.
Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no conflicts.
Funding Supported by U01DK085525 (M.H.W.); CA106195-09, the Medical Research Foundation of Oregon ECI Award, and Oregon Health & Science University Knight Cancer Institute Research Development Award (N.R.S.); and R01 DK091427, and P30 DK34987, (S.T.M.), and P30 CA069533 from the OHSU Knight Cancer Institute.

## References