ImmunityImmunity3815pheelsevier9432918Immunity1074-76131097-4180pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleElsevier - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC7831653PMC7831653.1783165378316533338297310.1016/j.immuni.2020.12.011S1074-7613(20)30539-21ArticleNeurological Manifestations of COVID-19 Feature T Cell Exhaustion and Dedifferentiated Monocytes in Cerebrospinal Fluid
HemingMichael LiXiaolin RäuberSaskia MausbergAnne K. BörschAnna-Lena HartlehnertMaike SinghalArpita LuI-Na FleischerMichael SzepanowskiFabian WitzkeOliver BrennerThorsten DittmerUlf YosefNir KleinschnitzChristoph WiendlHeinz StettnerMark Meyer zu HörsteGerd 1Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany2Department of Neurology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany3Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Center for Computational Biology, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA4Department of Infectious Diseases, West German Centre of Infectious Diseases, University Duisburg-Essen, Germany5Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany6Institute for Virology, University Hospital Essen, Germany7Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA8Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA∗Corresponding author∗∗Corresponding author9These authors contributed equally
10These authors contributed equally
11Lead Contact
121202123122020541373761164175.e628102020812202015122020231220202601202102042026© 2020 Elsevier Inc.2020Elsevier Inc.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.Patients suffering from Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) can develop neurological sequelae, such as headache and neuroinflammatory or cerebrovascular disease. These conditions—termed here as Neuro-COVID—are more frequent in patients with severe COVID-19. To understand the etiology of these neurological sequelae, we utilized single-cell sequencing and examined the immune cell profiles from the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of Neuro-COVID patients compared with patients with non-inflammatory and autoimmune neurological diseases or with viral encephalitis. The CSF of Neuro-COVID patients exhibited an expansion of dedifferentiated monocytes and of exhausted CD4+ T cells. Neuro-COVID CSF leukocytes featured an enriched interferon signature; however, this was less pronounced than in viral encephalitis. Repertoire analysis revealed broad clonal T cell expansion and curtailed interferon response in severe compared with mild Neuro-COVID patients. Collectively, our findings document the CSF immune compartment in Neuro-COVID patients and suggest compromised antiviral responses in this setting.

## Graphical Abstract
 

## Highlights
•Single-cell atlas of cerebrospinal fluid in Neuro-COVID and controls
•Expansion of dedifferentiated monocytes and exhausted CD4+ T cells in Neuro-COVID
•Less pronounced interferon signature in Neuro-COVID than in viral encephalitis
•Curtailed interferon-response in severe Neuro-COVID

Neurological manifestations associated with COVID-19 (Neuro-COVID) are recognized but under-studied. Using single-cell transcriptomics, Heming et al. identify expansion of dedifferentiated monocytes and exhausted CD4+ T cells in the cerebral spinal fluid of Neuro-COVID patients. This work provides a basis for improved understanding of the neurological sequelae associated with COVID-19.

## Keywords
transcriptomicssingle-cell RNA sequencingcerebrospinal fluidCOVID-19SARS-CoV-2neurological manifestationNeuro-COVIDT cell exhaustioninterferon-stimulated genespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesPublished: December 22, 2020

## Introduction
Patients suffering from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the global pandemic caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), can develop acute or long-term neurological sequelae, henceforth collectively termed “Neuro-COVID” ( ). Diverse neurological signs and symptoms have been associated with COVID-19, ranging from mild symptoms (e.g., anosmia, ageusia, headache, dizziness) to severe complications, such as seizures, encephalitis, ischemic stroke, and intracerebral hemorrhage ( ; ; ). Consensus criteria for the diagnosis and classification of the severity of Neuro-COVID have been proposed ( ; ). The prevalence of Neuro-COVID varies considerably between individual studies ranging from 4.1% ( ) to 57.4% ( ) and even 84% in COVID-19 with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) ( ). The heterogeneity might be due to variable definitions of Neuro-COVID ( ) or selection bias, as most evidence stems from retrospective studies of hospitalized patients ( ; ; ; ). Most of the specific neurological signs and symptoms, with the exception of anosmia and ageusia, are more prevalent in severe COVID-19 infection and severely affected patients will be hospitalized more frequently. During infection with the new SARS-CoV-2, the prevalence of neurological manifestations ranges orders of magnitude higher than previous reports of infections with the related SARS-CoV (0.09%) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) (0.36%) ( ). Neurological sequelae associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection thus constitute an unexpectedly frequent health burden and the underlying mechanisms remain poorly defined.
Three potential mechanisms of Neuro-COVID have been proposed: (1) non-specific complications of systemic disease for example because of oxygen deprivation, sepsis, or hyperpyrexia; (2) direct viral damage to cells of the nervous system because of neurotropism of SARS-CoV-2; and (3) indirect damage to the nervous system because of an infection-triggered excessive and detrimental immune activation ( ). These suspected mechanisms are not mutually exclusive and might coexist in individual patients. In support of direct neuro-tropism, previous studies have shown that SARS-CoV-2 can enter the nervous system by crossing the neural-mucosal interface in olfactory mucosa by binding to ACE2 ( ; ). The virus subsequently spreads along neuroanatomical structures and penetrates respiratory and cardiovascular control centers in the medulla oblongata ( ). SARS-CoV-2 was accordingly detected in the brains of 53% of brain autopsy specimens with enrichment in cranial nerves originating from the lower brainstem ( ). In support of detrimental immunity, the same study provided neuropathological evidence of microglia activation and in 79% of the analyzed patients infiltration of CD8+ T cells in the brain and meninges ( ). However, autopsy and brain biopsy materials are rarely available from patients and will naturally be restricted to very severely affected patients. Analyzing a more readily available biomaterial in Neuro-COVID is thus preferable.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) forms a unique immune compartment that surrounds the central nervous system (CNS) and can be sampled from patients to facilitate the diagnosis and understanding of neurological diseases ( ). The noncellular fraction of CSF represents mainly an ultrafiltrate of serum, while the composition of leukocytes in the CSF is tightly controlled and differs substantially from blood ( ). For example, while CD4+ T cells are the most abundant cell type in CSF, myeloid and B cells are reduced compared with blood ( ; ). Applying modern technologies, such as single-cell transcriptomics to the CSF, multiplies the potential of the CSF to decipher the pathogenesis of neurological diseases ( ) as previously exemplified in multiple sclerosis and Alzheimer’s disease ( ; ; ).
Previous studies have analyzed CSF in Neuro-COVID using established techniques, such as cell counting and protein characterization. Most studies identified a normal cell count, except when the presentation was encephalitis, and normal or mildly elevated protein ( ), yet a detailed leukocyte characterization in CSF is lacking. Notably, SARS-CoV-2 RNA was undetectable in the CSF in nearly all studies, and its detection was equally rare in pulmonary COVID-19 (2 out of 578 patients, see ) and in Neuro-COVID (0 out of 30 patients, see ; 0 out of 31, see ; 1 out of 37, see ). This suggests indirect mechanisms primarily causing neurological sequelae of COVID-19 patients. However, these studies provide a low dimensional characterization of CSF in Neuro-COVID and lack unbiased techniques.
In contrast, high-resolution data are available from the blood and bronchoalveolar fluid (BALF) in pulmonary COVID-19. Recent single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) studies have revealed complex immune dysregulation in the blood with a severity-specific pattern of myeloid cells and clonally expanded CD8+ T cells in pulmonary COVID-19 ( ; ). Whether similar or distinct changes occur in the CSF in Neuro-COVID, remains unknown.
Here, we therefore constructed an unbiased single-cell transcriptional atlas of CSF leukocytes in patients with Neuro-COVID and infectious, autoimmune, and non-inflammatory controls. We identified an increase of dedifferentiated monocytes and exhausted T cells in the CSF, which was specific to Neuro-COVID. An interferon (IFN) response in Neuro-COVID was present but attenuated compared with viral encephalitis. Severe Neuro-COVID exhibited a broad clonal T cell expansion and a decreased IFN response. Thus, leukocytes exhibit disease-specific signs of local immune overactivation, despite the absence of SARS-CoV-2 in the CSF. We thereby provide further evidence for immune-mediated mechanisms in Neuro-COVID.

## Results

## Single-Cell Atlas of Cerebrospinal Fluid Leukocytes in Neuro-COVID Compared with Controls Including Viral Encephalitis
We successfully collected CSF leukocytes from eight Neuro-COVID patients for scRNA-seq analysis ( ) ( 
A; ). Two of these patients had severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), necessitating mechanical ventilation, while six had mild-to-moderate pulmonary COVID-19 manifestation ( ). Three patients (two of them with ARDS) had severe neurological signs/symptoms, including seizures, flaccid paresis, or stroke. Five patients showed mild neurological manifestations, including headache, dizziness, anosmia/ageusia, and cognitive impairment. In line with previous reports ( ; ; ; ), we did not detect SARS-CoV-2 in the CSF of any patient using PCR. Additionally, we did not identify any cells expressing SARS-CoV-2 RNA with single-cell transcriptomics (see below and ). We then collected previously published scRNA-seq data from controls with idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) (n = 4), a non-inflammatory condition characterized by excess CSF, and with the brain autoimmune disease multiple sclerosis (MS) in relapse (n = 4) ( ). To improve statistical power, we recruited additional patients with IIH (n = 5), active MS (n = 5), and viral encephalitis (VE) (n = 5) and performed scRNA-seq of CSF cells ( A; ). 
Basic CSF analysis (e.g., cell numbers, protein) yielded an increase of CSF leukocyte counts and protein concentration in VE compared with all other patients ( A). Blood-CSF-barrier disruption (BCBD) was more prevalent in Neuro-COVID and VE patients than in MS and IIH. CSF of MS patients exhibited intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis, as expected ( ) ( A). Even though basic CSF parameters thus showed disease-consistent changes, they failed to sufficiently explain neurological involvement in COVID-19 infection.
We therefore merged all available scRNA-seq data of Neuro-COVID and control patients (IIH, MS, VE), which then encompassed 80,919 total single-cell transcriptomes with 2,610 ± 504 SEM average cells per sample and 1,027 ± 85 SEM median genes detected per cell ( ). This dataset considerably exceeds existing scRNA-seq studies from the CSF ( ; ). We performed unbiased cell clustering ( B) and annotated the resulting 16 clusters based on the expression of marker genes ( C; ).
Three T cell clusters (CD3E, TRAC, TRBC2) were classified into CD4+ T cells (CD4: IL7R), regulatory T cells (Treg: FOXP3, CTLA4, IL2RA) and CD8+ T cells clusters (CD8: CD8A) ( C). NK cells (NK: NKG7, GNLY) clustered together with γδ T cells (TRDC) ( C). B lineage clusters separated into plasma cells (plasma: SDC1/CD138, CD38) and naive B cells (naiveBc: CD19, MS4A1/CD20, CD24) ( C). One cluster with inconclusive lineage assignment showed expression of canonical proliferation-associated cell cycle genes (cycling: CDC45, TPX2, TOP2A) ( C). We identified four dendritic cell (DC) clusters that represented myeloid DC type I (mDC1: CLEC9A, XCR1, BATF3), type II (mDC2: CLEC10A, CD1C, FCER1A), plasmacytoid DC (pDC: CLEC4C, IRF8, TCF4/E2-2), and mature DC (matDC: IDO1, FSC1, LAMP3) ( C). Further myeloid-lineage clusters included granulocytes (granulo1/2: S100A8, S100A9) and three monocyte-like clusters (mono1–3) ( C). The mono1 cluster preferentially expressed CNS-border-associated macrophage genes (mono1: MRC1, LYVE1), and the mono3 cluster expressed known microglia-associated genes (mono3: SPP1, OLFML3, P2RY12, TMEM119) ( C), which were previously observed in CSF-derived leukocytes ( ). Non-manual cluster annotation supported our cluster labeling ( B). We thus replicated the known composition and phenotype of hematopoietic lineages in the CSF ( ; ; ; ).

## Neuro-COVID Cerebrospinal Fluid Features an Expansion of Dedifferentiated Monocytes
Next, we systematically compared the CSF cluster composition between disease conditions ( D–1H). To validate our approach, we first compared MS with IIH. In accordance with previous studies in the CSF ( ; ), MS patients featured a significant increase of naiveBc, plasma, and Treg clusters ( C). Next, we compared Neuro-COVID with controls. We found a significant expansion of the mono2 cluster in Neuro-COVID compared with IIH ( F). In contrast, in patients with VE, Treg, cycling, NK, and granulo2 clusters expanded, but the mono2 cluster did not change considerably ( G). When directly compared with VE, Neuro-COVID accordingly featured a specific increase of the mono2 cluster while Treg, granulo2, and plasma clusters were more abundant in VE ( H). Neuro-COVID thus induced a specific pattern of leukocyte changes in the CSF - preferentially affecting a subset of monocytes.
We aimed to better characterize the mono2 cluster. In contrast to the mono1 and mono3 clusters, mono2 exhibited reduction of pan-monocytic markers (CD14, LYZ, CD68) and markers of microglia and border-associated macrophages (e.g., CX3CR1, LYVE1, APOE, TREM2) ( 
A; ). Mono2 also showed an overall lower expression of a previously identified microglia gene set ( ) than the mono1 and mono3 clusters ( D; ). We compared our monocytic clusters in CSF with previously published COVID-19-associated monocytes in blood ( ) but did not identify overlap with a specific subset ( B). Compared with all other clusters, mono2 featured enhanced antigen-presenting characteristics in pathway enrichment analysis ( C; ). In addition, mono2 partially resembled developmental macrophages in comparison with data from the Mouse Cell Atlas ( ) ( D), potentially indicating dedifferentiation. Pseudotime analysis revealed trajectories within monocytic clusters likely originating from the mono2 cluster ( E). Neuro-COVID thus features monocytes in the CSF with a partially developmental and antigen-presenting phenotype. 

## Neuro-COVID Results in a Less Pronounced IFN-Signature than in Viral Encephalitis
Next, we sought to identify Neuro-COVID-specific transcriptional changes. In scRNA-seq, differential expression (DE) analysis tends to perform poorly in clusters with low cell numbers ( ). We therefore merged clusters into three gross “meta-clusters” of T/NK (TcMeta), DC (DCMeta), and monocytes/granulocyte (monoMeta) cell types ( A). The B lineage and the cycling clusters were removed because of low total cell numbers. The monoMeta cluster increased expression of some IFN-driven transcripts (IFITM3, IFI27, IFNGR2, IL18), including CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (CEBPA, CEBPB) in Neuro-COVID compared with IIH controls ( ). The TcMeta cluster also increased expression of IFN-regulated transcripts (PRF1, XCL1, ETS1) when Neuro-COVID samples were compared with IIH controls ( ). In a direct DE analysis against VE, however, we found that multiple canonical IFN-signaling transcripts (e.g., STAT1, IRF7, MX1, ISG15) were expressed considerably higher in VE than in Neuro-COVID across all meta-clusters ( E–2G; ). In Neuro-COVID, CSF leukocytes might thus not elicit a comparably strong antiviral response as in direct VE. The DCMeta and monoMeta clusters instead showed higher expression of homeostatic microglia/border-associated macrophage transcripts (e.g., LYVE1, APOE, CD1C) in Neuro-COVID than in VE ( E and 2F). In the same comparison, the TcMeta cluster expressed some trafficking (CCL4) and immunosuppressive transcripts (LGALS1) ( G). We thus identified a Neuro-COVID-specific transcriptional response in CSF leukocytes clearly distinct from conditions with direct viral damage to the CNS.

## Exhausted CD4+ T cells Are Increased in the Cerebrospinal Fluid in Neuro-COVID
T cell subsets are transcriptionally similar and tend to require targeted analytical approaches ( ). We therefore subclustered all T cells ( 
A). This returned the following subclusters: two CD8+ T cell clusters (CD8_1, CD8_2: CD8A, CCL5), regulatory CD4+ T cells (Treg: CTLA4, FOXP3, IL2RA), naive CD4+ T cells (naive_CD4: CCR7, SELL), proliferating CD4+ T cells (proli_CD4: CCR7, ribosomal genes), and memory-like CD4+ T cells (memory_CD4: IL7R, CD69) ( B; ). In addition, we identified one CD4+ T cell cluster with strong induction of IFN-stimulated genes (antiviral_CD4: e.g., IFITM3, IFI44L, MX1; C; ). A further cluster, which we named exhausted CD4+ T cells (exh_CD4), expressed a partial cytotoxicity signature (e.g., GZMA, GZMK, CCL5, XCL1; D) ( ) and canonical T cell exhaustion transcripts (exh_CD4: PDCD1, ICOS, CTLA4, HAVCR2/TIM3, CD226; E). Additional previously published exhaustion signatures ( ; ; ) were also expressed by the exh_CD4 cluster ( F), including previously identified co-inhibitory genes modules ( ) transcriptionally controlled by c-MAF (IL10, IL12RB1, PLEKHF1, ALCAM) and Blimp1/PRDM1 (PLEKHO2, MAP3K5, RUNX2) ( B). 
Human CD4+ T cells are poorly classified by clustering ( ). We therefore applied cell set enrichment analysis (CSEA) to identify cluster-independent compositional changes ( ). T cells resembling IL-10−CD8+ and IL-10+CD8+ cells in murine coronavirus encephalitis ( ), and resembling PD-1 expressing T cells, associated with T cell dysfunction (GSE26495), were enriched in Neuro-COVID compared to VE ( ).
When abundances between disease conditions were compared, Neuro-COVID patients featured a significant expansion of the exh_CD4 and reduction of the proli_CD4 cluster compared to IIH ( G and 3H). This indicates that T cell-driven antiviral immunity in the CSF might be inefficient or “exhausted” in Neuro-COVID, although this could be confounded by the time of sampling ( ). When Neuro-COVID and VE were directly compared, the antiviral_CD4 and, to a lesser extent, Treg clusters characterized VE ( I). The relative lack of antiviral IFN-producing CD4+ T cells might suggest an ineffective immune response in the CSF of Neuro-COVID patients but could also reflect differences in study recruitment kinetics. Because VE features a strong antiviral immune response in the CSF, the antiviral response in Neuro-COVID might also be simply weaker, without necessarily being ineffective.

## Severely Affected Neuro-COVID Patients Show Curtailed IFN Responses
Previous studies reported severity-dependent changes in the blood during pulmonary COVID-19 infection ( ; ; ; ). We tested for similar changes in Neuro-COVID by categorizing the Neuro-COVID patients based on their neurological signs and symptoms into mild/moderate (n = 5; mean age 69 years) and severe (n = 3; mean age 64 years) cases ( ). We then performed principal component analysis (PCA) of the Neuro-COVID cluster abundances, thus plotting their relative scRNA-seq cluster abundance into a two-dimensional space. In contrast to the general clusters ( C), the T cell subclusters clearly distinguished between mild and severe Neuro-COVID ( 
A). Abundance of the proli_CD4 cluster characterized severely affected Neuro-COVID, while memory_CD4 was a hallmark of mildly affected Neuro-COVID ( B). In a direct mild versus severe comparison, no cluster proportions passed our significance threshold ( D–S2G). Severe Neuro-COVID showed a non-significant trend toward increased naiveBc and proli_CD4 ( E and S2G). Most likely, our study was not sufficiently powered to achieve significance in this direct subgroup comparison. In accordance with an underpowered study size, the increase of BCBD in severe Neuro-COVID reported previously ( ) also did not reach significance in our severe versus mild comparison ( H). 
We next investigated severity-dependent transcriptional differences in the meta clusters. Expression of several IFN-associated transcripts (MX1, IFNGR1, IRF1) was reduced in the TcMeta and monoMeta clusters in severe compared to mild Neuro-COVID ( ). Concurrently, the expression of several class I (HLA-B, HLA-C) and class II (HLA-DRB1, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DQA1) genes was reduced in TcMeta and monoMeta in severe disease ( ). In addition, expression of trafficking molecules (CXCR4, ITGB1, ITGA4) was decreased in TcMeta in severe versus mild Neuro-COVID ( ). Transcriptionally, we thus found signs of potentially impaired antiviral responses in the CSF of severely affected Neuro-COVID patients.

## Severe Neuro-COVID Patients Exhibit a Broad Clonal T Cell Expansion
Finally, we reconstructed single-cell T cell receptor (TCR) sequence information from Neuro-COVID samples (see ; ). We successfully identified any α- or β-chain clonotype in 25% of all T cells. In mild Neuro-COVID, expanded clonotypes (defined as ≥2 identified clones) aggregated in the CD8_1 cluster, while severe Neuro-COVID showed expanded clones across multiple T cell clusters ( C and 4D). In accordance, bronchoalveolar CD8+ T cells had shown more pronounced transcriptional heterogeneity in severe infection than in moderate pulmonary COVID-19 ( ). We then compared the complementarity-defining region (CDR) 3 amino acid (aa) sequences with published CDR3 aa information from seven COVID-19 studies in a public repository (>180 million clonotypes) ( ). We found larger overlap in the expanded (69%) than in the non-expanded (54%) clonotypes with CDR3 aa sequences of COVID-19 patients from the repository. In contrast, healthy controls from COVID-19 studies of the same repository showed only 23% overlap with COVID-19 patients based on their CDR3 aa sequences ( E). This provides evidence that virus-associated adaptive immunity might be shared between CSF and periphery and across individuals in COVID-19 infection.

## Neuro-COVID-Associated Changes Are Partially Maintained when Controlling for Confounders
We systematically compared our observations in CSF with published scRNA-seq studies from leukocytes in the blood and BALF to facilitate putting our findings into context ( ).
Next, we aimed to control for potential biases in our study. After tentative removal of one Neuro-COVID patient with comorbid MS, core results, including the expansion of the mono2 and exh_CD4 clusters in Neuro-COVID, remained unchanged ( A–S3H)—arguing against a relevant distortion of our observations caused by this patient.
Cohorts in our study are imbalanced with regard to age and sex, because MS and IIH primarily manifest in young females ( ; ), while severe COVID-19 infection and Neuro-COVID predominate in aged males ( ; ). To account for this, we performed regression analysis using age, sex, and diagnosis as predictors of cluster proportions. In the Neuro-COVID versus IIH comparison, the increase of the mono2 cluster did not reach significance (p = 0.12) ( ). In the same comparison, the increase of the exh_CD4 cluster remained significant (p = 0.029) when controlling for age and sex as covariates ( ). Neuro-COVID-associated changes in the CSF are thus partially maintained if controlled for confounders.

## Discussion
In this single-cell transcriptomics study, we identified specific immune alterations in the CSF of Neuro-COVID patients featuring an increase of dedifferentiated monocytes and exhausted T cells. We observed an IFN response in Neuro-COVID that was attenuated compared with viral encephalitis. Severe Neuro-COVID exhibited a broad clonal T cell expansion and curtailed IFN response compared with mild Neuro-COVD. Thus, our study potentially indicates a compromised antiviral response and points toward immune-mediated mechanisms contributing to Neuro-COVID. Our observations could in fact represent only the “tip-of-the-iceberg” of Neuro-COVID associated alterations because this study had limited statistical power.
In line with our findings in the CSF, several studies reported an increase of specific monocyte lineage cells in the blood of pulmonary COVID-19 patients which were classified as proinflammatory macrophages ( ; ), HLA-DRlo classical monocytes ( ), or CD14+ classical monocytes ( ; ). Similarly, T cell exhaustion has been described in the blood of COVID-19 patients, especially in severe cases ( ; , ). Another hallmark of COVID-19 in blood was an IFN-dominated transcriptional response ( ; ; ), which was reduced in severe COVID-19 ( ; ) and compared with influenza virus ( ). In line with those results, we observed attenuated IFN response in the CSF of severe Neuro-COVID and compared with viral encephalitis. Inversely, many studies reported an expansion of plasma cells and plasmablasts ( ; ; ) that we did not observe in the CSF. Immune alterations may thus be partially shared between compartments and partially compartment specific. Considering the tightly controlled leukocyte composition in CSF differing from blood ( ), synonymous alterations between compartments are notable. We speculate that Neuro-COVID does not simply represent a “side-effect” of pulmonary COVID-19 but displays CSF-specific mechanisms in support of immune-mediated mechanisms in Neuro-COVID.
Exhausted or dysfunctional T cells arise because of repetitive over-stimulation during chronic infection and in the tumor micro-milieu. They are characterized by loss of effector functions, high expression of co-inhibitory receptors, and a specific transcriptional program ( ; ; ; ). Checkpoint inhibitor treatment can “reinvigorate” exhausted T cells. This treatment has revolutionized the therapy of multiple malignancies ( ) but has also been investigated in chronic viral infections ( ), including infections with HIV ( ), influenza A virus ( ), and notably also in a mouse model of coronavirus ( ). Whether this could represent a therapeutic avenue in some instances of Neuro-COVID remains to be investigated, especially by confirming exhaustion in functional assays and understanding immune mechanisms in early versus late stages of Neuro-COVID.
Our study also articulates hypotheses to be investigated in future clinical studies. Because detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the CSF is extremely rare ( ; ; ) and the diagnosis of Neuro-COVID often relies on subjective symptoms, one could envision flow cytometric detection of a specific immune profile, e.g., dedifferentiated monocytes and exhausted T cells, in the CSF to substantiate and standardize the definition of Neuro-COVID. Using CSF analysis for the diagnosis of Neuro-COVID would first require testing CSF from patients with COVID-19 infectious without neurological involvement in the future to define the specificity of our observations. Our findings could also gain predictive potential. It could be tested whether CSF analysis at the onset of Neuro-COVID can predict outcome or the severity of incipient Neuro-COVID. Studies with longitudinal clinical follow-up will be required to address this question. Additionally, the effects of immune responses may be stage-specific in Neuro-COVID as observed in the multi-stage kinetics in pulmonary COVID-19 ( ; ).
A previous unpublished study used scRNA-seq to investigate CSF leukocytes in Neuro-COVID, yet with a different design ( ). The authors analyzed CSF compared with blood but did not provide autoimmune or encephalitis controls. Non-inflammatory controls in that study were mostly (8 out of 11 patients, 72%) derived from another preceding study, which could cause systematic bias ( ). In accordance with our results, the authors observed a compartmentalized immune response within the CSF, featuring activation of T cells, interleukin (IL)-12-associated immune cell activation and induction of IFN-stimulated genes ( ). The authors reported an expansion of B cells in the CSF in Neuro-COVID, which did not reach significance in our IIH (0.27%) versus Neuro-COVID (0.56%) comparison (p = 0.59). Patients in the Song et al. study were sampled on average 12.5 days after hospital admission versus 17.25 days in our study. Observations may thus also reflect different stages of COVID-19 infection. Moreover, the authors identified anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in the CSF with widespread cross-reactivity against anti-neural and anti-glia epitopes, while SARS-CoV-2 RNA was consistently undetectable in the CSF ( ). Autoantibodies of unknown relevance had been detected in the CSF in Neuro-COVID in another study ( ).
In summary, our study delineated local immune mechanisms and, in synergy with other studies, lends support to immune-mediated mechanisms contributing to neurological sequelae of COVID-19 patients. Our findings set the basis for better understanding and potentially diagnosing Neuro-COVID in the future.

## Limitations of the Study
There are limitations to our study. CSF cell numbers were considerably lower in Neuro-COVID than in other conditions, and we did not include COVID-19 patients without neurological manifestations as controls because of ethical concerns in performing an invasive lumbar puncture for only scientific reasons in these patients. Moreover, our study lacks patient-matched blood data so that we cannot draw conclusions about CSF-specificity of immune alterations solely based on our data. The time between sample collection and clinical presentation varied among patients and among groups. Our findings may thus be biased, especially because of the known stage-dependent immune alterations of COVID-19 ( ; ). Finally, neurological signs and symptoms in Neuro-COVID might not only depend on the observed CSF changes, but also on systemic factors, such as oxygen or serum cytokine levels.

## STAR★Methods

## Key Resources Table

 

## Resource Availability

## Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Gerd Meyer zu Hörste (gerd.meyerzuhoerste@ukmuenster.de).

## Materials Availability
All unique reagents generated in this study are available from the Lead Contact without restriction.

## Data and Code Availability
Raw sequencing data are available in the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository (GSE163005). An interactive version of the entire dataset using cerebroApp ( ) is available at: http://covid.mheming.de. We followed the official tutorial of the packages listed, no custom code was generated. Additional Supplemental Items are available from Mendeley Data at https://doi.org/10.17632/5mt97xcyyw.2.

## Experimental Model and Subject Details

## Neuro-COVID Subjects
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was collected from eight patients classified as Neuro-COVID admitted to the University Hospital Essen, Germany between May and June 2020. All patients were tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of nasopharyngeal swabs and developed neurological signs/symptoms between 10 days prior to and 20 days after the diagnostic PCR was performed ( ). PCR for SARS-CoV-2 in CSF was performed in all patients and was negative in all patients. Seven patients were male and the age ranged from 53 to 82 years ( ). Based on pulmonary and systemic signs/symptoms, disease severity was classified into 3 categories as described ( ).1Mild disease: asymptomatic infection or mild respiratory signs/symptoms (e.g., fever, sore throat, pharyngeal congestion) without any radiographic abnormalities and no septic presentation
2Moderate disease: clinical signs of mild pneumonia (e.g., fever, dry or productive cough, abnormal breath sounds on auscultation) without signs of hypoxemia (e.g., shortness of breath)
3Severe disease: mild or moderate disease and signs of disease progression (e.g., respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, septic shock or organ dysfunction requiring intensive care unit-monitoring)

The severity of neurological signs/symptoms in COVID-19 infected patients was classified as follows: Neuro-COVID severity 1 was defined by mild signs/symptoms (e.g., headache, dizziness, anosmia, ageusia), severity 2 by moderate signs/symptoms (e.g., fatigue, mono/para/quadriparesis), and severity 3 by severe neurological manifestations (e.g., seizures, stroke, cognitive impairment or muscle weakness) ( ). To account for the relatively small sample size, we merged Neuro-COVID patients in stage 1 and 2 and refer to these patients as ‘mild’ Neuro-COVID throughout the manuscript. Patients in stage 3 are termed ‘severe’ Neuro-COVID. None of these patients had received any immunomodulatory treatment previously ( ).

## Control Subjects
In total, we included data from 20 control patients in our study ( ). All control patients were treated in inpatient or outpatient clinics of the Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology at the University Clinic Münster, Germany between 2017 and 2020. Out of these 20 control patient data, 8 had been published previously ( ). Previously published scRNA-seq data from controls with idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) (n = 4) and relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) (n = 4) in active relapse were used ( ). Additionally, we recruited five new treatment-naive patients with relapsing remitting (RR)MS in active relapse leading to the first diagnosis and IIH, respectively, and 5 patients with VE ( ). The detailed inclusion and exclusion criteria have been described previously ( ). Briefly, all MS patients were included at first relapse leading to the diagnosis of disease, met the revised McDonald criteria ( ) and were treatment-naive. An extensive diagnostic workup was performed in order to exclude differential diagnoses ( ). Patients with a questionable diagnosis, secondary progressive (SP)MS and any immunomodulatory therapy were excluded ( ). The Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) was used to assess disease severity ( ).
Patients with IIH were diagnosed based on the diagnostic criteria of IIH ( ). These included signs/symptoms of an increased intracranial pressure, elevated opening pressure (above 200 mmH2O) on lumbar puncture, normal routine CSF studies and no structural cause of intracranial hypertension. Patients with VE were included, if they showed clinical signs of encephalitis (e.g., headache, seizure, psychiatric symptoms, altered mental status and focal neurologic abnormalities) and alterations of the CSF that were compatible with the diagnosis ( ). Specific viruses (Herpes simplex virus-1/2 (HSV-1/HSV-2), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV), Varicella zoster virus (VZV), Human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6) and Enterovirus were tested by PCR in all VE patients. HSV-1 and VZV could be detected in the CSF of one patient, respectively. Screening for serum antibodies to the Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) virus was performed by ELISA and was positive in one patient. CSF and serum were tested by Treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay to exclude Treponema pallidum infection. ELISA and immunoblotting were performed to detect Borrelia burgdorferi. Screening for the following antibodies was performed using immunofluorescence assays (IFA) and immunoblotting to exclude autoimmune encephalitis: Anti-Hu, Ri, ANNA-3, Yo, TR/DNER, Ma/Ta, GAD65, Amphiphysin, NMDA receptor, GABA-b receptor, GABA-a receptor, LGI1, CASPR2, ZIC4, DPPX, glycine receptor, mGluR1, mGluR5, RhoGTPase activating protein, Recoverin, GluDR2, Flotilin, Homer3, Neurochondrin, AMPA receptor.

## Exclusion Criteria
Exclusion criteria for all control patients were: pregnancy and breastfeeding, patients under 18 years, severe concomitant infectious or autoimmune disease and a red blood cell count over 200/μl in CSF.

## Methods Details

## Ethics Statements
All patients gave written informed consent to sample collection and data analysis. The study was approved by the local ethics committee in Essen (Ethics Committee of the University Duesburg-Essen; reference number 20-284-BO) and in Münster, Germany (Ethics Committee of the Board of Physicians of the Region Westfalen-Lippe and of the Westfälische Wilhelms-University Münster; reference number 2015-522-f-S).

## Diagnostic Procedures and CSF Analysis
Lumbar puncture was performed between day 0 and day 40 (Neuro-COVID patients), on day 0 or 1 (MS patients), between day 0 and 7 (IIH patients) and between day 0 and 7 (patients with VE) after admission to the hospital. CSF was processed within an h to ensure optimal sample quality. CSF cells were counted manually in a Fuchs-Rosenthal chamber, total protein and intrathecal immunoglobulin concentrations were assessed by nephelometry. Concentration of protein and immunoglobulins in serum and CSF were compared and a Reiber scheme was created to evaluate the integrity of the blood-CSF-barrier (BCBD), quantified by the ratio between CSF albumin and serum albumin. Oligoclonal bands (OCB) were detected by isoelectric focusing and silver nitrate staining. Electroencephalography, using a standard 10-20-EEG system, was recorded in seven Neuro-COVID cases and abnormalities (generalized or focal slowing and epileptiform activity) were classified by a board certified neurologist ( ). Imaging studies (either CT or MRI head) were performed in 24 out of 27 included patients to identify structural abnormalities ( ).

## Single-Cell RNA Sequencing
CSF was processed for scRNA-seq as described previously ( ). Briefly, CSF samples were collected into round bottom polypropylene tubes and then centrifuged for 10 min at 300 x g. The CSF supernatant was removed, and CSF cells were resuspended in 5 mL of X-Vivo15 media (Lonza) and stored at 4°C. The samples were then transported to the laboratory of the Department of Neurology with Institute of Translational Neurology at the University Clinic Münster, Germany for scRNA-seq. Transport time of samples collected in Münster was 10-30 min. Transport time of samples collected in Essen was < 60 min. Cell suspensions were then centrifuged again for 5 min at 400 x g and then resuspended in 40 μL of X-Vivo15 media (Lonza). Out of this volume, 6 μL were used for cell counting and the remaining volume was entirely used for scRNA-seq.
Single-cell suspensions were then loaded onto the Chromium Single Cell Controller using the Chromium Single Cell 3′ or 5′ Library & Gel Bead Kit (both from 10X Genomics) with different versions of chemistry (details see ). Sample processing and library preparation was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions using AMPure beads (Beckman Coulter). Single-cell immune receptor repertoires were reconstructed from Neuro-COVID samples ( ). Sequencing was carried out commercially on an Illumina Nextseq500 with either 26-8-0-57 or 26-8-0-132 read setup, or an Illumina Novaseq 6000 with 150-8-8-150 read setup (for details see ). Processing of sequencing data was performed with the cellranger pipeline v3.1.0 (10X Genomics) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, subsequent read alignments and transcript counting was done individually for each sample using the cellranger count pipeline with standard parameters. To detect SARS-CoV-2 positive CFS cells, the cellranger count pipeline was additionally performed with a customized reference genome constructed by cellranger mkref that included the SARS-CoV-2 genome (NCBI Reference Sequence: NC_045512.2) added to the pre-built human GRCh38 reference. The cellranger aggr pipeline was employed to aggregate samples with mapping normalization to leave each sample with similar sequencing depth per cell. The total and per sample cell numbers are listed in .

## Single-Cell TCR-Sequencing
Four Neuro-COVID samples ( ) were processed with the Chromium Single Cell 5′ Library & Gel Bead Kit and barcoded, full-length VDJ segments from T cells were enriched from first-strand cDNA via PCR amplification with the Chromium Single Cell VDJ Enrichment Kit, Human T Cell (from 10X Genomics) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Further library preparation was performed using the Chromium Single Cell 5′ Library Construction Kit (10X Genomics). Sequencing was carried out on an Illumina Nextseq550 with 26-8-0-132 read setup (for details see ). Raw data was processed by the cellranger pipeline v3.1 (10X Genomics) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Three Neuro-COVID samples ( ) were processed with the Chromium Single Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit (10x Genomics) and we developed a novel method to sequence antigen receptor information from 3′ scRNA-seq libraries. The method allows shortening the constant region of antigen receptors during enrichment, while maintaining their cell barcode and unique molecular identifier (UMI) information attached to the 3′ of the cDNA molecules. In summary, the method involves self-circulating the cDNA library, enriching the VDJ region and re-linearizing. Each step maintains the VDJ region together with the cell barcode and UMI in the same molecule. Primer Poly A is used as a 5′ race primer and two T cell receptor (TCR) reverse primer pools were synthesized from Eurofins according to sequences of reverse primers of 10x Genomics Chromium Single Cell V(D)J Enrichment Kit, Human T Cell, PN-1000005 (Sequences and concentration see Table S2). All primers were synthesized by Eurofins Genomics; the primers are listed in Table S2. For circularization, cDNA generated from 10x Genomics Chromium Single Cell V(D)J Enrichment Kit, Human T Cell, PN-1000005v3 were end-phosphated with the T4 Polynucleotide Kinase (New England Biolabs), and purified by 0.6x Ampure XP beads (Beckman Coulter). Then 1,000 units of T4 DNA Ligase (New England Biolabs) were added to self-circularize the phosphated cDNA at 16°C for 16 h. Subsequently, 0.7x Ampure XP beads were used to purify. Remaining linear DNA was digested by 0.9 units/μl RecJf and 0.1 units/μl Lambda Exonuclease (both from New England Biolabs). Circularized cDNA libraries were purified by 0.7x Ampure XP beads. A 5′ race nested PCR enrichment was performed to enrich the TCR variable region. A size selection was done by 0.5x - 0.8 x Ampure XP beads. Then, the nested PCR products were phosphated, circulated and linear digested again as above. A PCR with primers read1 and TSO was used to re-linearize the circulated library. PCR products were purified by 0.5x - 0.8 x Ampure XP beads (Beckman Coulter) and libraries were prepared from them using the Chromium Single Cell 3′ Library Kit v3 (10x Genomics). Sequencing was carried out on an Illumina Nextseq550 with 26-8-0-132 read setup (for details see ). In order to analyze them with cellranger pipelines from 10x Genomics, we converted read 2 into reverse-complement and replaced the cell barcode white list of the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5′ Library & Gel Bead Kit v1.1 with the one of Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3′ Library & Gel Bead Kit v3 in the folder /cellranger-3.1.0/cellranger-cs/3.1.0/lib/python/cellranger/barcodes/ of the cellranger pipeline. Processing of modified sequencing data was performed with the modified cellranger VDJ pipeline v3.1.0 (10X Genomics) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## Data Analysis of Single-Cell RNA Sequencing
Downstream analysis of scRNA-seq datasets was performed using Seurat v3.2 ( ) and R v4.0 as described previously ( ). Each sample was filtered individually to remove cell doublets and low-quality cells with few genes (< 200) high genes (> 1200-6000) or high mitochondrial percentages (5%–20%). To account for technical noise, data were normalized using logarithmic transformation normalization, highly variable genes were identified, and data were scaled taking into account mitochondrial percentages. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using highly variable genes. Based on the elbow plot, we used the first 40 principal components for further analysis. To cluster the cells, we used the ‘FindNeighbors’ (based on KNN graphs) and the ‘FindCluster’ (based on Louvain method; resolution 0.3) functions in Seurat. Batch effects were taken into account using Harmony ( ), which project cells into a shared embedding. To visualize cells in a two-dimensional dataset we performed UMAP. We annotated clusters based on known marker genes or automated with the clustifyr ( ) package based on Monaco et al. ( ). One cluster with 921 cells that showed high percentage of mitochondrial transcripts (4.9%; mean mitochondrial percentage of all clusters 2.5%) and low UMI counts (864; mean UMI count of all clusters 5403) was removed because it most likely represents dying cells. We subsetted the T cell clusters and re-clustered these subclusters with a higher resolution (0.5). DotPlots and FeaturePlots were created using the internal visualization functions of Seurat. Volcano plots of cell cluster abundance were created using ggplot2 v3.3 using unpaired two-sided t test in R. Heatmaps were created with pheatmap v1.0 and data were clustered using complete linkage with Euclidean distance measure. Significant cluster abundance changes were adjusted for age and sex employing a linear regression analysis in R and including age and size as predictors. Comparisons of our scRNA-seq data with the Mouse Cell Atlas (MCA) ( ) and Schrepping et al. ( ) were carried out using clustifyr and were based on the official cluster annotations. PCA of cluster abundances was performed and visualized with the R package factoextra.
Differentially expressed (DE) genes were determined with the FindMarker function in Seurat with the Wilcoxon rank sum test with a threshold of adjusted p value (based on Bonferroni correction) of 0.05 and a minimum of 10 cells per cluster. Volcano plots of DE genes were created with the R package EnhancedVolcano. To perform gene set enrichment analysis, we used the Enrichr tool ( ). and the GO Molecular Function 2018 reference dataset.
We performed pseudotime of the mono1, mono2 and mono3 clusters using Slingshot ( ). Slingshot was performed with the UMAP embeddings and cluster annotations of the Seurat analysis (see above).

## Single-Cell Immune Repertoire Analysis
Single-cell T cell receptor sequencing (scTCR) data were analyzed using the R package scRepertoire v1.2 ( ) following the official vignette. Clonotypes were removed if any cell barcode had more than 2 immune receptor chains. scTCR data were merged with scRNA-seq data of the T cell clusters only based on the cell barcodes. TCR clones that matched barcodes of cells that were not located in T cell clusters (based on our previous annotations using Seurat) were removed. TCR were categorized into expanded (defined as ≥2 identified clones) and non-expanded clones (clone frequency 1). Published immune repertoire data of COVID-19 were retrieved from iReceptor ( ) using the AIRR Data Commons API. Repertoires with diagnosis ID DOID:0080600 (COVID-19) were queried from http://covid19-1.ireceptor.org/airr/v1/ and http://covid19-2.ireceptor.org/airr/v1/ comprising 7 studies at the time of access: Nielsen et al. ( ), Minervina et al. ( ), Galson et al. ( ), Liao et al. ( ), Schultheiß et al. ( ), Shomuradova et al. ( ) and Alsoussi et al. ( ). In a next step, CDR3 amino acid (aa) sequences were retrieved from these patients resulting in 181,969,096 sequences. We determined the overlap of CDR3 aa sequences from our Neuro-COVID clones with these sequences. As a negative control we retrieved repertoires by filtering for “Control (Healthy)” study group description from http://covid19-1.ireceptor.org/airr/v1/ and http://covid19-2.ireceptor.org/airr/v1/. We then downloaded all CDR3 aa sequences from these patients resulting in 2,156,752 sequences. Finally, we calculated the overlap of CDR3 aa sequences from these healthy controls with those of COVID-19 patients.

## Cell Set Enrichment Analysis (CSEA)
CSEA was performed as previously described ( ). Briefly, we used the gene-cell expression matrix, labels for the input cells, and the gene set of interest as input for CSEA. Using the genes in the specified signature, CSEA computed the score for each cell by dividing the log gene expression values by the mean expression across all cells, taking the sum across all genes, and normalizing the resulting values between 0 and 1. Then, the cells were rank-ordered based on the computed score, and the Enrichment Score (ES) was computed using the ranked cell scores as previously described ( ). To determine the p value of the CSEA ES, we selected a new set of genes and re-compute the cell scores 100 times and then computed the probability that the maximum ES computed with the original gene signature was greater than the ES computed with the permuted gene sets. The random gene set was selected by finding the same number of genes as in the original gene set and finding the top 100 genes that had the closest mean expression to each gene in the original signature set and then randomly sampling one of those 100 genes. We also computed the p values for the enrichment in IIH as the negative enrichment p values in order to select for gene signatures that were only enriched in Neuro-COVID cells not IIH cells. We corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to generate the corrected p values for both positive and negative enrichment. We filtered the result based on the following criteria: the corrected p value of the true signature set is smaller than 0.05 and the corrected p value of the control signature set is > 0.05.

## Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using R v4.0. Boxplots were created with the ggpubr package. When comparing one categorical variable with two groups (severe versus mild Neuro-COVID) with one continuous parameter (e.g., cells, protein, IL-6, IL-8) we used Wilcoxon’s rank-sum test (two-sided). When comparing one categorical parameter with multiple groups (Neuro-COVID, MS, IIH, VE) with a continuous parameter, we performed Kruskal-Wallis with Dunn test as a post hoc test (rstatix package in R). To compare a categorical parameter with two groups (severe versus mild Neuro-COVID) with another categorical parameter with two groups (OCB, BBBD) we used Fisher’s exact test (two-sided). In the case of one categorical parameter with multiple groups (Neuro-COVID, MS, IIH, VE) with another categorial, we used the Freeman-Halton extension of Fisher’s exact test. For pairwise comparisons we performed Fisher’s exact test (two-sided) with multiple testing adjustments using Benjamini-Hochberg’s method (rstatix package). The significance level alpha was set at 0.05.

## Systematic Meta-Analysis
For the meta-analysis-like literature review, we systematically searched the databases PubMed, MedRxiv, and BioRxiv until December 2020 using the MeSH terms “Coronavirus,” “Coronavirus Infections/virology,” “Coronavirus Infections/immunology,” “Coronavirus Infections/pathology,” “RNA-Seq/methods,” “Sequence Analysis,” “RNA/ methods,” “Single-Cell Analysis,” and “Sequencing.” We included original research articles assessing the impact of COVID-19 on immune cell populations by analyzing samples obtained from SARS-CoV-2 positive patients with genome-wide single-cell transcriptomics techniques, such as 10x Genomics or drop-seq.

## Additional Resources
In addition to the deposition of the raw sequencing data on GEO, we provide an interactive platform of the entire dataset using cerebroApp ( ) at http://covid.mheming.de/. The platform includes analysis information, shows key analytic results, such as UMAP visualization, marker genes and cluster abundances and allows interactive exploration of the results based on custom genes and gene sets.

 

## Supplemental Information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S3

## Table S1. Characteristics of Patients, Technical Information on Single-Cell RNA Sequencing, Related to STAR Methods
Sheet 1 named patient info: Patient characteristics. Ab - antibody; AF - atrial fibrillation; BCBD - blood-CSF-barrier dysfunction; BPH: benign prostatic hyperplasia; CAD: coronary artery disease; C - COVID-19; CIM/CIP - critical illness myopathy/polyneuropathy; cn - cranial nerve; COPD - Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CRC - colorectal cancer; CRP - C-reactive protein; CTS - Carpal tunnel syndrome; EDSS - Expanded Disability Status Scale; GERD - gastresophageal reflux disease; Ig - immunoglobulin; IIH - intracranial hypertension; IL - interleukin; LP - lumbar puncture; MS - multiple sclerosis; NSCLC - non-small cell lung cancer; OCB - oligoclonal band; OSA - obstructive sleep apnea; PAD - peripheral arterial disease; PCT - procalcitonin; PNP - polyneuropathy; S/p - status post; RBC - red blood cell; TBI - traumatic brain injury; TIA - transient ischemic attack; VE - viral encephalitis; vvECMO - veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; WBC - white blood cell count; VZV - Varicella zoster virus; HSV - Herpes simplex virus; Sheet 2 named scRNA-seq: Technical information on single-cell RNA sequencing. Please note that the columns ‘cells’ and ‘median genes per cell’ refer to the raw cellranger output, while the columns ‘final cells’ and ‘final median genes per cell’ refer to the final Seurat object after filtering low-quality cells and removing the low quality-cluster (see Methods). Sheet 3 named scTCR-seq: Technical information on single-cell T cell receptor sequencing. TCR - T cell receptor sequencing

## Table S2. Marker Genes of Clusters, Differentially Expressed (DE) Genes of mono2 versus mono1 and mono3, TCR Sequencing Primers, Microglia Marker, and Enrichment Analysis of DE Genes of mono2, Related to STAR Methods and Figures 1, 2, and S1
Sheet 1 named Marker genes: Top marker genes of all clusters. Average logFC threshold was set to 0.25 and minimal percentage of expressing genes in either of the two populations to 0.25. All genes with an adjusted p value above 0.05 were removed. Only genes with a positive average log fold change were retained. avg_logFC - natural log fold change of the average expression between the corresponding cluster and all remaining clusters; pct.1 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in the corresponding cluster pct.2 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in all remaining clusters; p_val_adj - adjusted p value (based on Bonferroni method). Sheet 2 named DE mono2 versus mono1 and mono3: Differentially expressed genes of mono2 versus mono1 and mono3. Average logFC threshold was set to 0.1 and minimal percentage of expressing genes in either of the two populations to 0.1. All genes with an adjusted p value above 0.05 were removed. A positive average logFC value shows a higher expression in the mono2 cluster. All mitochondrial and ribosomal genes were removed. avg_logFC - natural log fold change of the average expression between mono2 and mono1/3; pct.1 - percentage of cells with the gene detected mono2; pct.2 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in mono1 and mono3 clusters; p_val_adj - adjusted p value (based on Bonferroni method). Sheet 3 named TCR Primer: Technical information of TCR sequencing. TCR - T cell receptor; R - a purine base (arginine (A) or guanine (G); Y - a pyrimidine base (cytosine (C) or thymidine (T); B - a base of either C, G or T; 4 step PCR was used in TCR Repertoire enrichment. 2 annealing steps (63°C and 57°C) were used due to the annealing temperatures’ difference between PolyA primer and TCR rev primer. Temperature was defined with degree Celsius (°C) and duration time in hh:mm:ss. Sheet 4 named Microglia marker: Microglia markers from Sankowski et al. (Sankowski et al., 2019) used for the gene score feature plot (Figure S1D). Sheet 5 named Enrichment analysis of DE genes: Enrichment analysis of significant DE genes of mono2 cluster using EnrichR tool in GO Molecular Function 2018 dataset. Mitochondrial and ribosomal DE genes were removed in advance.

## Table S3. DE Genes of Neuro-COVID versus IIH and Neuro-COVID versus VE, Related to Figure 2
Sheets 1-6: DE genes in Neuro-COVID versus IIH (sheet 1-3) and Neuro-COVID versus VE (sheet 4-6) clusters in TcMeta (sheet 1 & 4), DCMeta (sheet 2 & 5) and monoMeta (sheet 3 & 6) were identified with the FindMarkers function in Seurat. Average logFC threshold was set to 0.1 and minimal percentage of expressing genes in either of the two populations to 0.1. All genes with an adjusted p value above 0.05 were removed. A positive average logFC value shows a higher expression in Neuro-COVID, a negative average logFC value shows a higher expression in IIH / VE. All mitochondrial and ribosomal genes were removed. avg_logFC - natural log fold change of the average expression between the corresponding cluster in Neuro-COVID and the corresponding cluster in IIH / VE; pct.1 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in the corresponding cluster in Neuro-COVID; pct.2 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in the corresponding cluster in IIH / VE; p_val_adj - adjusted p value (based on Bonferroni method).

## Table S4. Marker Genes of T Cell Subclusters, T Cell Exhaustion and ISG and Signatures, CSEA of CD4+ T Cell Clusters, DE Genes of Severe versus Mild Neuro-COVID, Related to Figures 3 and S2
Sheet 1 named Marker genes T subclusters: Marker genes of the T cell subclusters. Average logFC threshold was set to 0.1 and minimal percentage of expressing genes in either of the two populations to 0.1. All genes with an adjusted p value above 0.05 were removed. Only genes with a positive average log fold change were retained. avg_logFC - natural log fold change of the average expression between the corresponding cluster and all remaining clusters; pct.1 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in the corresponding cluster; pct.2 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in all remaining clusters; p_val_adj - adjusted p value (based on Bonferroni method). Sheet 2 named Marker genes exhaustion and ISG: T cell exhaustion and interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) signatures. Interferon-stimulated genes (ISG) from Wilk et al. (Wilk et al., 2020) that were used for the ISG signature heatmap in Figure 3C and markers of T cell exhaustion from Singer et al. (Singer et al., 2016) (Dysfunction and Activation module), Chihara et al. (Chihara et al., 2018) and Tirosh et al. (Tirosh et al., 2016) that were used for the T cell exhaustion signature in Figure 3E and Figure S2. Sheet 3-4: CSEA Neuro-COVID versus IIH (sheet 3) and Neuro-COVID versus VE (sheet 4) in CD4+ T cells. Summary of the CSEA enrichment score, the total number of cells in the leading edge, which drive the enrichment of the specific signature, the enrichment in the leading edge that demonstrates how enriched the leading edge is for Neuro-COVID cells compared to the total cell population, the corrected p value, which is the p value for positive enrichment (Neuro-COVID versus IIH/VE) and the negative p value, which is the corrected p value for negative enrichment (IIH/VE versus Neuro-COVID). Sheet 5-7: DE genes in severe versus mild Neuro-COVID in TcMeta (sheet 5), DCMeta (sheet 6) and monoMeta (sheet 7) clusters. Average logFC threshold was set to 0.1 and minimal percentage of expressing genes in either of the two populations to 0.1. All genes with an adjusted p value above 0.05 were removed. A positive average logFC value shows a higher expression in severe Neuro-COVID, a negative average logFC value shows a higher expression in mild Neuro-COVID. All mitochondrial and ribosomal genes were removed. avg_logFC - natural log fold change of the average expression between the corresponding cluster in severe Neuro-COVID and the corresponding cluster in mild Neuro-COVID; pct.1 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in the corresponding cluster in severe Neuro-COVID; pct.2 - percentage of cells with the gene detected in mild Neuro-COVID; p_val_adj - adjusted p value (based on Bonferroni method).

## Table S5. Meta-Analysis and Regression Analysis, Related to STAR Methods
Sheet 1 named Meta analysis: Summary of 20 single-cell RNA-sequencing studies of COVID-19. Changes of cluster abundance are listed for pulmonary COVID-19 versus healthy control, severe versus mild COVID-19 and COVID-19 versus inflammatory controls (e.g., influenza). BALF - bronchoalveolar fluid, CCL - CC-chemokine ligand, CCL4L2 - C-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 4 Like 2, CLEC9A - C-Type Lectin Domain Containing 9A, cMono - classical monocytes, CTL -cytotoxic T lymphocyte, CTLA 4 - cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated Protein 4, CTSB - Cathepsin B, CTSL - Cathepsin L, CXCL - C-X-C motif chemokine, DC - dendritic cell, EM - effector memory, FCN - Ficolin, FU - follow-up, GZM - granzyme, hi - high, HIF1A - Hypoxia Inducible Factor 1 Subunit Alpha, HLA - human leukocyte antigen, lo - low, HMOX1 - Heme Oxygenase 1, ICOS - inducible T cell costimulator, IFI27 - Interferon Alpha Inducible Protein 27, IFITM3 - Interferon Induced Transmembrane Protein 3, IFN - interferon, IL - interleukin, IL1RN - Interleukin 1 Receptor Antagonist, iMono - intermediate monocytes, ISG - Interferon-stimulated gene, ITGAE - Integrin Subunit Alpha E, KLRB - Killer Cell Lectin Like Receptor, MAIT - Mucosal associated invariant T cells, LTB - lymphotoxin β, Mac - macrophages, MAPK - mitogen-activated protein kinase, mDC - myeloid dendritic cell, MK - megakaryocytes, Mono - monocyte, n/a - not available, ncMono - non-classical monocytes, NK - natural killer cell, NRG - neuregulin, OAS1 - Oligoadenylate Synthetase 1, pDC - plasmacytoid dendritic cell, PRF - perforin, S1PR1 - Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Receptor 1, Tcm - T central memory cell, TFH - T follicular helper cell, TH - T helper, TEM / Tem - T effector memory cell, TM - T memory cell, TNF - tumor necrosis factor, Treg - regulatory T cell, TTE - terminal effector, XCL - X-C Motif Chemokine Ligand, ZNF683 - Zinc Finger Protein 683. Sheet 2 named Linear regression. Linear regression analysis. Regression was performed for all significant cluster abundances changes with age, sex and diagnosis as predictors.

## Document S2. Article plus Supplemental Information

## Acknowledgments
We are deeply indebted to the patients for their participation. We thank Carolin Lewe and Marc Hennies for excellent technical assistance and Dr. Chenling Xu for help with data analysis. G.M.z.H. was supported by grants from the 10.13039/501100001659Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG; grant number ME4050/4-1) and DFG grant ME4050/8-1, under the frame of E-Rare-3, the ERA-Net for Research on Rare Diseases; and from the Ministerium für Innovation, Wissenschaft und Forschung (MIWF) des Landes Nordrhein-Westfalen. This study was supported by the DFG through Sonderforschungsbereich Collaborative Research Center Transregio (CRC-TR) 128, projects A09 (to H.W.) and B03 (to G.M.z.H.). The study was also supported by the Foundation University Hospital Essen (M.S.). H.W. received project-related research support from 10.13039/100005614Biogen. O.W. was supported by an unrestricted grant of the 10.13039/501100014837Rudolf-Ackermann-Stiftung (Stiftung für Klinische Infektiologie). The graphical abstract contains images from Servier Medical Art (https://smart.servier.com, licensed under a Create Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License).

## Author Contributions
G.M.z.H. and M.S. conceived and supervised the study. A.K.M., M.F., F.S., O.W., T.B., U.D., and M.S. recruited COVID-19 patients. S.R., A.-L.B., and M. Hartlehnert performed data acquisition. X.L. and I.-N.L. carried out sequencing experiments. M. Heming., A.S., N.Y., and X.L. performed data analysis. C.K. and H.W. co-supervised the study. G.M.z.H. and M. Heming. wrote the manuscript. All authors critically revised the manuscript.

## Declaration of Interests
A patent application covering the method for reconstructing TCR information from 3′ libraries has been requested under the filing number LU101949 by X.L. and G.M.z.H. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2020.12.011.