319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC764332576433257643325NIHMS16396263308606910.1016/j.celrep.2020.108296SCLC-CellMiner: A Resource for Small Cell Lung Cancer Cell Line Genomics and Pharmacology Based on Genomic Signatures
TlemsaniCamille PongorLorinc ElloumiFathi GirardLuc HuffmanKenneth E RoperNitin VarmaSudhir LunaAugustin RajapakseVinodh N SebastianRobin KohnKurt W KrushkalJulia AladjemMirit I TeicherBeverly A MeltzerPaul S ReinholdWilliam C MinnaJohn D ThomasAnish PommierYves 1Developmental Therapeutics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA2Biometric Research Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis, National Cancer Institute, NIH, 9609 Medical Center Drive, Rockville, MD 20850, USA3Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA4Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA5cBio Center, Division of Biostatistics, Department of Data Sciences, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA6Present address: INSERM U1016, Cochin Institute, Paris Descartes University, 75014 Paris, France7These authors contributed equally8Lead ContactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Y.P., C.T., L.P., and A.T. performed the conceptualization of the study and its methodology. Y.P., C.T., L.P., F.E., S.V., A.L., V.N.R., P.S.M., and W.C.R. performed the experiments and the analysis. Y.P., L.G., B.A.T., P.S.M., W.C.R., and J.D.M. provided all resources. Y.P., C.T., L.P., A.T., F.L., N.R., M.I.A., and W.C.R. wrote the original draft. Y.P., C.T., L.P., F.E., L.G., K.E.H., N.R., S.V., A.L., V.N.R., R.S., K.W.K., J.K., M.I.A., B.A.T., P.S.M., W.C.R., J.D.M., and A.T. reviewed and edited the original draft.
*Correspondence: pommier@nih.gov
201020203331082961082965112020This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
CellMiner-SCLC (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/SclcCellMinerCDB/) integrates drug sensitivity and genomic data, including high-resolution methylome and transcriptome from 118 patient-derived small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines, providing a resource for research into this “recalcitrant cancer.” We demonstrate the reproducibility and stability of data from multiple sources and validate the SCLC consensus nomenclature on the basis of expression of master transcription factors NEUROD1, ASCL1, POU2F3, and YAP1. Our analyses reveal transcription networks linking SCLC subtypes with MYC and its paralogs and the NOTCH and HIPPO pathways. SCLC subsets express specific surface markers, providing potential opportunities for antibody-based targeted therapies. YAP1-driven SCLCs are notable for differential expression of the NOTCH pathway, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and antigen-presenting machinery (APM) genes and sensitivity to mTOR and AKT inhibitors. These analyses provide insights into SCLC biology and a framework for future investigations into subtype-specific SCLC vulnerabilities.

## In Brief
Tlemsani et al. provide a unique resource, SCLC-CellMiner, integrating drug sensitivity and multi-omics data from 118 small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell lines. They demonstrate that SCLCs have differential transcriptional networks driven by lineage-specific transcription factors (NEUROD1, ASCL1, POU2F3, and YAP1). Furthermore, YAP1-driven SCLCs have distinct drug sensitivity profiles.

## Graphical Abstract
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionno

## INTRODUCTION
Although small cell lung cancer (SCLC) represents only 15% of all lung cancers, it accounts for more than 30,000 cases/year in the United States, with most patients presenting with widely metastatic disease. Unlike the increasingly personalized treatment approaches for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), SCLC is currently treated as a homogeneous disease ( ; ). The typical short life expectancy and the therapeutic options, which have not changed for decades (platinum-etoposide combination as first-line therapy and topotecan at relapse), caused the National Cancer Institute (NCI) to categorize SCLC as a “recalcitrant” cancer.
SCLC tumors are usually characterized by their neuroendocrine (NE) differentiation, which is immuno-histochemically visualized with markers including synaptophysin (SYP) and chromogranin A (CHGA) ( ; ). Yet a small subset of SCLCs express low levels of these NE markers (“non-NE”) ( ; ). Hence, SCLCs have been historically defined as “classic” (NE) or “variant” (non-NE) ( ). Gazdar and colleagues proposed a classification (“NE score”) on the basis of the expression of 50 genes (25 with increased and 25 with decreased expression) for NE SCLC, including the transcription factors ASCL1 (achaete-scute homolog 1) and NEUROD1 (neurogenic differentiation factor 1), which are highly expressed in NE SCLC ( ). A consensus nomenclature for molecular subtypes has been recently proposed on the basis of differential expression of two additional transcription factors, YAP1 (Yes-associated protein 1) and POU2F3 (POU class 2 homeodomain box 3) for the non-NE SCLC subtypes ( ). POU2F3 encodes a POU domain transcription factor normally expressed in chemosensory cells of the intestinal and lung epithelium ( ). YAP1, a key mediator of the Hippo signaling pathway, is reciprocally expressed relative to the NE marker INSM1 ( ). Hence, SCLCs can be classified into four groups on the basis of the expression of NEUROD1, ASCL1, POU2F3, and YAP1 ( ). For brevity, we refer to this classification as “NAPY” (N for NEUROD1, A for ASCL1, P for POU2F3, and Y for YAP1).
Genomic initiatives spearheaded by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium have accelerated the pace of discovery for many cancers. Yet TCGA was not extended to SCLC, because of a lack of readily accessible and adequate tumor tissue, as most patients are diagnosed by fine-needle aspiration. Nevertheless, SCLC research has benefited from the systematic collection of a large number of tumor cell lines, most of them developed at the NCI in the NCI-VA and NCI-Navy Medical Oncology Branches ( ). This collection has been distributed widely and included in the cancer drug genomic databases of the NCI, Broad Institute/MIT, and Sanger/Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) ( ; ; ; ). However, the data were until now accessible only from individual platforms, making it challenging to translate genomic knowledge of SCLC tumor biology and therapeutic possibilities. Additionally, a number of SCLC cell lines generated by the Minna-Gazdar group at UT Southwestern (UTSW) Medical Center ( ) had not been integrated in the NCI (NCI-SCLC), Broad Institute (Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia [CCLE]/Cancer Therapeutics Response Portal [CTRP]), and Sanger/MGH (Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer [GDSC]) databases.
To extend our understanding of the genomics of SCLC, we performed genome-wide promoter methylation on the NCI set of 66 SCLC cell lines and whole-genome RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) for 72 cell lines of the UTSW set. We integrated those data in a global drug and genomic database (SCLC-Global) encompassing 118 SCLC lines from 115 individual patients. The integrated data, SCLC-CellMiner-CrossDataBase (SCLC-Cell-Miner), are available from a web-based tool (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/SclcCellMinerCDB/) derived from our CellMiner cross-database (CDB) web application ( ).

## RESULTS

## SCLC-CellMiner Resource
SCLC-CellMiner integrates genomic and drug activity data for 118 molecularly characterized SCLC cell lines, all of which have DNA fingerprints establishing their provenance ( and ): 68 from the NCI collection ( ), 74 from the GDSC ( ), 53 from the CCLE, 39 from the CTRP ( ), and 73 from UTSW ( ). Seventeen cell lines (14%) are in all five data sources, 20 (17%) are in four data sources, 23 (20%) in three data sources, 15 (13%) in two data sources, and 43 (36%) in only one data source ( ; ).
 Our integrated resource includes new analyses for high-resolution methylome ( ) and copy number for 66 NCI cell lines and RNA-seq for 72 UTSW cell lines ( ). SCLC-CellMiner also makes accessible whole-exome mutation data for 12,537 genes across 72 cell lines of the UTSW SCLC database in addition to the previously released exome sequencing data for 52 cell lines from CCLE and 62 cell lines from GSDC.
Tested clinical drugs and investigational compounds in each dataset and across data sources are summarized in . The NCI dataset provides the largest number (n = 526), followed by the CTRP (n = 481), GDSC (n = 297), and CCLE (n = 224).
SCLC-CellMiner allows multiple analyses ( ): confirming cell line reproducibility and identity across datasets, drug activity reproducibility, determinants of gene expression (on the basis of DNA copy number, promoter methylation, and microRNA expression), exploration and validation of genomic networks, classification of the cell lines on the basis of metadata such as the NAPY, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and antigen-presenting machinery (APM) scores, and validation and discovery of drug response determinants.
 

## Data Validation, CDB Analyses, and CellMiner Univariate Analyses
Cross-comparison for matched cell lines was used to validate the new NCI-SCLC methylome (850K Illumina array) ( ) by comparison with the published SCLC data of GDSC (450K array) ( ). The comparison yields high overall correlation for promoter methylation ( ), with a median of 0.90 for 9,015 common genes with a wide expression range for the 43 common cell lines ( and ). Cross-correlation of the new RNA-seq data from UTSW with other gene expression data (microarray and RNA-seq) is also highly significant ( and ). This demonstrates the high reproducibility and stability of the key molecular characteristics in SCLC lines grown in tissue culture for widely divergent passages at different institutions and analyzed independently with different technical platforms (RNA-seq versus microarray, 850K versus 450K methylome arrays).
 Reproducibility across datasets can be tested with CellMinerCDB by plotting the same gene (expression, copy number, or promoter methylation), drug, or microRNA on the x and the y axes. For instance, Schlafen 11 (SLFN11), whose expression is highly predictive of response to a broad range of frontline treatments of SCLC (etoposide, topotecan, cis- and carboplatin) as well as drugs under investigation such as the poly(ADP-ribose polymerase) inhibitors ( ; ; ; ) measured by RNA-seq in the UTSW database, shows a 0.92 Pearson correlation with its measured values by Affymetrix microarray in the NCI database ( ). SLFN11 promoter DNA methylation in the NCI database also shows a Pearson correlation of 0.9 with its value in the GDSC ( ).
CDB analyses are shown in for MYC, which is commonly amplified and drives proliferation of SCLC ( ), for BCL2, which encodes a canonical antiapoptotic protein targeted by navitoclax (ABT-263) ( ), and for two SCLC drugs, etoposide and topotecan. MYC amplification (in NCI) is correlated with its overexpression (by RNA-seq in CCLE) ( ). Navitoclax activity is correlated with BCL2 expression ( ). Response to etoposide is correlated in the NCI and CTRP despite different assays; cells responding to etoposide overlap for topotecan ( and ).
Integrating the CellMinerCDB database of more than 1,000 cell lines of all lineages, which includes 74 and 53 SCLC cell lines in GDSC and CCLE ( and ) ( ), allows comparisons among tissue of origin. For instance, MYC expression is correlated with the replication processivity factor PCNA (proliferating cell nuclear antigen) in SCLC versus other tissues, including NSCLC, consistent with the replicative genotype of SCLC and high PCNA expression compared with NSCLC ( ).

## The SCLC Methylome
Two prior studies described the promoter methylation profiles of SCLC with limited data for cell lines; 18 were examined by and 7 by together with primary tumors and patient-derived xenograft (PDX) samples. Here we analyzed the methylome of the 66 cell lines of the NCI and processed the methylome of the whole 985 GDSC cancer cell line dataset, including its 61 SCLC cell lines. Individual probe analysis for the Illumina 850K platform in the NCI SCLC cell lines is reported in a parallel publication ( ), while SCLC-CellMiner provides promoter methylation score ( ). The promoter methylation data are highly reproducible between the NCI and GDSC datasets for the 43 common cell lines despite the different Illumina platforms (850K versus 450K) ( and ). Thus, SCLC-CellMiner provides promoter methylation for a total of 84 individual SCLC cell lines (43 common + 23 specific to NCI-SCLC + 18 specific to GDSC).

## Low Global Methylation and Promoter Methylome of SCLC Cell Lines
Global methylation levels show marked differences between the SCLC and the other cancer cell lines from different histologies across the GDSC, with SCLC showing the lowest median level of global methylation among 21 cancer subtypes ( ).
 To assess the distinctiveness of the methylome of the SCLC cell lines, we compared 61 cell lines from GDSC and 66 cell lines from NCI with the 75 NSCLC cell lines of the GDSC and the 60 cell lines of the NCI-60, which include nine NSCLC cell lines. We selected 1,813 genes with the highest methylation range (SD > 0.25). Hierarchical clustering ( ) shows that SCLC cell lines come together (cluster b), except for nine cell lines (one in cluster a, eight in cluster c), which are all SCLCs not expressing NE features (“non-NE” SCLCs). Of the five NSCLC cell lines in the SCLC cluster (b), three are large cell lung cancers and one is a carcinoid ( ). This demonstrates a promoter methylation signature for SCLC cell lines associated with NE phenotype.
Genes clustered as (1) hypomethylated in SCLC (clusters 1–3), including ASCL1, NEUROD1, INSM1, and CHGA ( ); (2) hypermethylated in SCLC (cluster 5); and (3) variably methylated independently of tissue of origin (cluster 4) ( ). Pathway analysis of the 1,082 hypomethylated genes (clusters 1–3) shows enrichment of neurological as well as extracellular matrix (ECM) pathways ( ; ), consistent with the NE and aggregation features of classic SCLC cell lines. Many genes involved in EMT ( ) also tend to be hypomethylated in SCLC cell lines, including ZEB1, CLDN7, and ESRP2.

## Histone and Epithelial Genes Are Driven by Methylation in SCLC Cell Lines
To determine the influence of promoter methylation on gene expression, we selected gene categories on the basis of our previously established Development Therapeutics Branch (DTB) gene sets ( ) ( ). Epithelial and histone genes stood out ( , with median correlation of −0.53 and −0.50, respectively). Canonical histones showed the highest negative correlation between expression and methylation ( ), suggesting that epigenetic regulation of canonical histones is a feature of SCLC carcinogenesis.
We also performed gene set enrichment analyses (GSEAs) looking at Gene Ontology (GO) and functional gene set collections (MSigDB Hallmark gene set, C2 curated pathway gene set, and C5 GO gene set, as well as our DTB functional gene sets; ). They confirmed the high significance of the histones and epithelial genes as well as additional GO categories, including protein modifications, microtubule cytoskeleton, mitotic cell cycle, and cellular responses to DNA damage ( ).

## SCLC DNA Copy Number versus Methylome as Drivers of Gene Expression
To evaluate the relative importance of promoter methylation and gene copy number, we derived copy number data from the Illumina 850K methylome array and correlated the expression of each gene with DNA copy number and methylation in the NCI-SCLC dataset ( ) ( ). Correlations for individual genes can be readily displayed with SCLC-CellMiner (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/SclcCellMinerCDB/), and snapshots of genes involved in SCLC carcinogenesis and driven by methylation (NEUROD1, ASCL1, POU2F3, YAP1, and SLFN11) are presented in .
Unlike the histone and epithelial genes, the expression of SCLC growth-driving genes, such as the oncogenes (MYC, MYCL, MYCN, and AKT1), tumor suppressor genes (CDKN2A, BAP1, and VHL), and chromatin remodeler genes (EP300 and CREBBP), are driven primarily by copy number alterations ( ; ). CellMinerCDB snapshots showing increased (MYC, MYCL, and MYCN) or decreased (BAP1 and VHL) copy number variation are provided in .

## SCLC-Global Integrates Transcriptomes and Molecular and Phenotypic Data for 116 Cell Lines
To integrate expression data from microarray and/or RNA-seq across the five data sources ( ), we created the “SCLC-Global” expression set by regrouping all datasets by Z score normalization, which enables CDB analyses of gene expression (and also other genomic, epigenomic, and phenotypic drug response information). Principal-component and correlation analyses (Circos- and CAT-plots) validated the approach ( – and ). The “SCLC-Global” data are available in the pull-down tabs “x-Axis Cell Line Set” and “y-Axis Cell Line Set” (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/SclcCellMinerCDB/). The “SCLC-Global” mRNA dataset shows very high correlation with each dataset (NCI-SCLC, GDSC, CCLE, and UTSW) ( ). For example, ASCL1 expression in SCLC-Global versus SCLC NCI/DTP is highly correlated (r = 0.99, p = 1.9e-55). SCLC-Global offers many other features, including cross-correlation with other databases for DNA methylation, DNA copy number, DNA mutation, microRNA expression, and drug activity.
SCLC-Global can also be used to retrieve all the genes correlated with the expression of any given gene. For instance, for MYCN, the top correlate (p = 0.967) is MYCNOS ( – ), the MYCN Opposite Strand antisense RNA. The data for individual cell lines can also be visualized by plotting MYCNOS against MYCN in the SCLC-Global database ( ). Plotting MYCN versus MYCNOS in the CCLE database using CellMinerCDB extends the finding that MYCN is co-expressed with its antisense RNA in both SCLC and brain tumor cell lines ( ).

## NE, NAPY, MYC, and EMT Molecular Signatures
Ranking of the 116 cell lines of SCLC-Global on the basis of their NE scores ( ) shows the expected high correlation with SYP, CHGA, NCAM1, and INSM1 expression ( ). To explore the selectivity of those genes for SCLC, we examined the GDSC and CCLE human tumor cell line collections with CellMinerCDB ( ). CHGA, INSM1, and SYP are selective for SCLC and brain tumors, consistent with the neuronal differentiation of SCLC ( and ). The SCLC cell lines with high NE scores, which can be readily labeled in SCLC-CellMinerCDB under the “Select Tissues to Color” tab, have significantly higher levels of expression of CHGA and SYP than cell lines with low NE score ( ).
 Next we tested the lineage transcription factor molecular classification on the basis of the expression of NEUROD1 and ASCL1 for NE and YAP1 and POU2F3 for non-NE SCLC ( ) and found clear separation ( ; ). Comparison with other tissues showed selective expression of NEUROD1 and ASCL1 in SCLC and brain tumors ( ), while POU2F3 was expressed only in a subset of SCLC cell lines ( ). In contrast, YAP1 is not exclusive to SCLC and is expressed in a wide range of cancer types (except blood and lymphoid tumors) ( ), consistent with its broad role in carcinogenesis ( ). We also noted a significant fraction of NE-SCLC cells with dual expression of ASCL1 and NEUROD1 ( and ).
The three MYC genes (MYC, MYCL, and MYCN) play key roles in SCLC carcinogenesis ( ; ; , ). With SCLC-Global, ~80% of the SCLC cell lines highly express one of the MYC genes, and MYC and MYCL are most prevalent ( ). Expression of the MYC genes is mutually exclusive ( ; ), with the non-NE cell lines (Y and P) expressing MYC and the NE cell lines expressing MYCL and MYCN ( and ).
The EMT status ( ) derived from the expression of 37 genes ( ) showed that the SCLC-P cell lines are consistently epithelial, while the SCLC-Y cell lines have a mesenchymal signature ( ), except for NCI-H1607, expressing both YAP1 and POU2F3 ( , left). The SCLC-NE cells form two subgroups, one mesenchymal and the other intermediate ( ).

## SCLC Transcriptional Networks for the ASCL1, YAP/TAZ, and NOTCH Pathways
As a pioneer transcription factor, ASCL1 binds E-box motifs (as does NEUROD1) to promote chromatin opening and activation of neuronal genes. summarizes the ASCL1-NOTCH network on the basis of our molecular interaction map (MIM) conventions (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/mim/index.jsp) ( ). Notably both NKX2.1 and PROX1 transcription factors are highly significantly co-expressed with ASCL1, suggesting that they function together ( ). This co-expression is not due to the location of those genes on the same chromosomes ( ), indicating upstream regulatory transcriptional control with the likely implication of super-enhancers. As expected, the transcriptional targets of ASCL1 were co-expressed with ASCL1 ( and ). One of those, BCL2, is positively correlated not only with ASCL1 but also with POU2F3, whereas BCL2 expression is negatively correlated with NEUROD1 expression ( and ). Expression of the cancer-driving genes RET, SOX1, SOX2, FOXA1, and FOXA2 is also highly correlated with ASCL1 ( ). Expression of DLL3, a known inhibitor of the NOTCH pathway and direct target of ASCL1, was found to be significantly correlated with ASCL1 (r = 0.61, p = 4.05e-13; ).
 Analysis of the NOTCH pathway whose inactivation is crucial in NE-SCLC ( ; ; ) showed that NOTCH1, NOTCH2, and NOTCH3 are jointly downregulated in the SCLC-A cell lines ( and ). Functional downregulation of the NOTCH pathway is consistent with the negative correlation (r = −0.545, p = 2.45e-10) between ASCL1 and REST, the transcriptional target of NOTCH ( ). The NEUROD1 subset of NE-SCLC (SCLC-N) did not show significant correlation between NEUROD1 and DLL3 expression (r = −0.18, p = NS) ( and ), questioning whether DLL3 downregulates the NOTCH pathway in SCLC-N cell lines.
Of the 116 SCLC cell lines in SCLC-CellMiner, 9 belong to the YAP subset ( ). Because expression of YAP1 is a feature in a wide variety of solid tumors ( ), we explored the YAP transcriptional network ( ). The first notable finding is that YAP1 expression is highly correlated with the expression of its heterodimeric partner TAZ (encoded by the WWTR1/TAZ gene) both in the SCLC-Global dataset ( and ) and across the 986 cell lines of the GDSC ( ), suggesting a master transcriptional regulator upstream of both genes, or YAP1 acting as super-enhancer ( ).
YAP/TAZ functions as a direct activator of the TEAD transcription factors (encoded by TEAD2/TEAD3/TEAD4), whose expressions are highly significantly coregulated with YAP1 ( ). As expected, known transcriptional targets of the TEADs are also significantly correlated with YAP1 expression ( ). Others can readily be revealed with the “Compare Patterns” feature of SCLC-CellMiner using TEAD or YAP1 as “seeds.” Among those are the cancer- and growth-related SMAD3 and SMAD5 genes, CCN1/CYR61 (encoding a growth factor interacting with integrins and heparan sulfate), and VGLL4 ( and ).
Next, we explored the Hippo pathway, which acts as a negative regulator of YAP/TAZ and is commonly inactivated in solid tumors ( ; ; ). Expression of LATS2 and LATS1, which encode the core kinase of the Hippo pathway and negatively regulate YAP by sequestering phosphorylated YAP in the cytoplasm, are significantly positively correlated with YAP1 expression ( and ). Similarly, the transcripts of MOB1A and MOB1B, the cofactors of LATS1/2, are positively correlated with YAP1 ( and ). Moreover, the transcripts of the negative regulators of YAP, AMOT and AMOTL2, which are released by depolymerized F-actin and sequester YAP from its nuclear translocation, are also significantly positively coregulated with YAP1 ( and ) ( ; ). Together, these results demonstrate that the SCLC-Y cell lines co-express both YAP/TAZ and its negative regulator genes driving the Hippo pathway, suggesting an equilibrium (“metastable”) state in which the Hippo pathway remains active to potentially negatively regulate YAP/TAZ in SCLC-Y cells.
Consistent with the NOTCH pathway as transcriptional target of YAP/TAZ and the TEADs ( ), YAP1 expression is highly correlated with NOTCH1, NOTCH2, NOTCH3, and REST ( – ). In contrast, expression of the NOTCH ligand DLL3, which acts as negative regulator of the NOTCH receptors ( ), is negatively correlated with YAP1 ( ). These results support the conclusion that the NOTCH pathway is “on” in the SCLC-Y cells. In contrast, in the SCLC-A cells, the opposite is observed ( and ). The SCLC-P cells also show a positive correlation between the NOTCH receptor and REST effector transcripts and POU2F3 expression ( , , and ). These analyses demonstrate a difference between NE and non-NE SCLC with respect to NOTCH, with the pathway “off” in the NE subset (N and A) and “on” in the non-NE subset (P and Y).
Global analyses of the NOTCH pathway across 1,036 cell lines from the 22 different tissue types of CCLE ( , , and ) show that NOTCH2 and NOTCH3 are co-expressed in many tumor types and that the NE-SCLC cell lines are characterized by low NOTCH expression ( and ). In contrast, the SCLC-Y- and -P cells are among the highest NOTCH-expressing cells.

## The SCLC-Y Transcriptome Clusters with NSCLC Cell Lines
Next, we examined the relationship between the SCLC-Y and the NSCLC cell lines ( ). tSNE (t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding) is a method to highlight strong patterns by reducing the dimensionality of a dataset while preserving as much “variability” as possible. tSNE analysis using gene expression data between NSCLC (n = 100) and SCLC (n = 60) cell lines from the GDSC grouped the SCLC-Y with the NSCLC cell lines. Among the few NSCLC cancer cell lines clustering with the NE-SCLC were carcinoids and large cell lung cancers ( ; ). Our analysis supports that SCLC-Y cell lines are distinct among the SCLC subtypes with transcriptome similarity to NSCLC.
Another characteristic of the SCLC-Y cell lines is their low number of RB1 mutations (only one cell line among nine shows RB1 mutation; ). However, several of the SCLC-Y lines (NCI-H196, NCI-H841, NCI-H1339, and NCI-H1607) do not express RB1 protein ( ). The SCLC-Y cell lines also show reduced replication transcriptional network with lowest PCNA, MCM2, and RNASEH2A expression ( ). Additionally, the SCLC-Y cells express the mesenchymal marker VIM, the cytoskeleton component and regulators CNN2 (actomyosin and F-actin component), and the AMOT genes, which regulate cell migration and actin stress fiber assembly ( ) ( ).

## Global Drug Activity Profiling Suggests Transcription Elongation Pathways as General Drug Response Determinants and Hypersensitivity of the SCLC-P Cell Lines
To explore connections between the NAPY classification and drug responses, we analyzed the drug responses of the 66 SCLC-NCI cell lines using 134 compounds with the broadest activity range ( ). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering generated two groups of cell lines: those globally drug resistant and those globally drug sensitive, with a bimodal distribution ( ). Although the NE cell lines (SCLC-N and SCLC-A) and SCLC-Y were distributed in both clusters, the SCLC-P cell lines clustered among the most drug sensitive.
 Differential gene expression followed by enrichment pathway analyses ( and ) showed the ribosomal and EIF2 signaling pathway selectively activated in the sensitive cell lines. EIF2 (eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2A) catalyzes the first regulated step of protein synthesis initiation, promoting the binding of the initiator tRNA to 40S ribosomal subunits. EIF2 factors are also downstream effectors of the PI3K-AKT-mTOR and RAS-RAF-MAPK pathways. These results suggest that global drug response in SCLC is associated with active protein synthesis.

## Drug Activity Profiling in Relationship with the NAPY Classification
Both the SCLC-A and N subgroups showed a broad range of response to etoposide, topotecan, and cisplatin, as well as to the PARP inhibitor talazoparib ( and ). The most significant genomic predictor of response for this NE subgroup is SLFN11 expression ( ), consistent with analyses in other tissue types ( ; ; ). The potential value of SLFN11 expression as a predictive biomarker is borne out by its highly dynamic and bimodal expression pattern ( ). Approximately 40% of the 116 SCLC cell lines of SCLC-Global do not express SLFN11 ( ) and are predicted to be DNA damaging agent resistant.
Methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) is a predictive biomarker of drug response is for temozolomide (TMZ). Cancer cells (typically glioblastomas) with MGMT inactivation are selectively sensitive to TMZ. Analyses of SCLC-Global reveals lack of MGMT expression in 33% (N = 38) of the cell lines ( ). Notably, the non-NE SCLC cell lines all express MGMT, indicating that the SCLC-P- and -Y cancer cells are predicted to be poor candidates for TMZ-based therapies ( ).
The SCLC-Y cell lines show the greatest resistance to the standard-of-care drugs (etoposide, cisplatin, and topotecan) ( ). This result is not limited to SCLC, as a highly significant drug resistance phenotype is observed between YAP1 expression and response to etoposide and camptothecin across the whole database of the CCLE-CTRP ( ).
To determine whether the NAPY classification predicts sensitivity to drugs not commonly used as standard of care for SCLC, we analyzed 526 compounds of the NCI database ( ) ( ). Eighteen drugs were highly subtype specific (p < 0.01, Kruskal-Willis test). Although the BCL2 inhibitor ABT-737 was selective of the SCLC-A cells, seven PI3K-AKT-mTOR inhibitors showed high activity in the non-NE cell lines (SCLC-Y and SCLC-P) ( and ). The SCLC-P and -Y cell lines are also more sensitive to multi-kinase inhibitors, including dasatinib and ponatinib.

## Immune Pathways Are Selectively Expressed in the YAP1 Subgroup of SCLC
Although immune checkpoints inhibitors have been approved for SCLC, the benefit in an unselected patient population is modest with approximately 2-month improvement in median overall survival when immunotherapy is added to first-line platinum and etoposide.
To explore the immune pathways in the 116 cell lines of SCLC-Global and the potential value of the NAPY classification for selecting SCLC patients likely to respond to immune checkpoint inhibitors, we explored the transcriptome of a subset of established native immune response and antigen-presenting genes. and shows that the SCLC-Y cell lines are the only subset expressing innate immune response genes. Expression of the innate immune effector genes CGAS and STING, HLA-E and interferon-inducible genes (IFIT3, IFITM1, IFI44L, IFIT, IFITM8P, and IFITM3) are positively correlated with YAP1 expression. In contrast, the NE subtype shows negative correlation between NEUROD1 and ASCL1 expression for those same immune genes ( ).
On the basis of the study of reporting a novel APM transcription signature score yielding a high prediction index for tumor response to immune checkpoint inhibitors, we tested the APM score in the SCLC cell lines ( ). The APM score showed a high correlation with PD-L1 expression, which is notable as PD-L1 is not included among the 13 genes constituting the APM score. Interestingly, the SCLC-Y subtype showed the highest APM score ( ).

## Cell Surface Biomarkers for Targeted Therapy in Relation with the NAPY Classification
Antibody-targeted therapies including antibody-drug conjugates (ADC) represent a promising approach for specific homing, increased uptake, and drug retention at tumor sites while reducing drug exposure to normal tissues and the associated dose-limiting side effects ( ).
A primary criterion for efficient drug delivery is to choose an exclusively or overexpressed target for the cancer cells. and show the expression of two receptors of clinical ADCs in the SCLC cell lines: DLL3 (used for SCLCs as rovalpituzumab tesirine [Rova-T]; ; ) and the carcinoembryonic antigen CEACAMC5 (used in other clinical indications as labetuzumab govitecan; ). DLL3 expression is highly correlated with ASCL1 expression (p = 0.62), suggesting that targeting DLL3 could be selective toward SCLC-A tumors. CEACAM5 is highly expressed in only a subset of SCLC-A cell lines that may be potentially sensitive to labetuzumab govitecan (IMMU-130). Both DLL3 and CEACAM5 show highest expression in SCLC among all GDSC tissue types ( ). Expression of TACSTD2 (TROP2), which is used as target for sacituzumab govitecan (IMMU-132) in patients with triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC), exhibits a low expression level in all SCLC cell lines, suggesting that TACSTD2 as a targeted receptor may not be efficient in SCLC ( ).
Among potential new targets for the development of ADCs, the specific NE markers NCAM1, CD24, CADM1, and ALCAM are highly expressed in non-YAP1 SCLC ( ), suggesting the potential of developing ADCs targeting such surface receptors for NE-SCLC and SCLC-P patients. In contrast, the non-NE surface markers CD151 and EPH2 are highly expressed in the YAP1 cell lines ( ), suggesting their potential for SCLC-Y cancers.

## DISCUSSION
SCLC-CellMiner (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/SclcCellMinerCDB/) provides a unique and first-of-its-kind resource of patient-derived SCLC cell lines characterized comprehensively using multi-omics and drug sensitivity. It also includes new high-resolution methylome, detailed in a complementary publication ( ). SCLC-CellMiner enables interrogation of different databases. The data are highly reproducible across databases, which allowed us to build an integrated platform (“SCLC-Global”) to examine genomic characteristics and drug sensitivities across 116 SCLC cell lines.
Patient-derived cancer cell lines remain the most widely used models and the primary basis to study the biology of cancers. They enable high-throughput testing of new drugs and determinant-of-response hypotheses. The database of 116 SCLC cell lines reported here models the genetic and molecular diversity of SCLC, as exemplified by their stratification across the four recently proposed subgroups (NAPY classification) ( ).
Several studies of human cancer cell lines have revealed a drift at the transcriptomic level for individual cell lines over multiple passages, or passages in different laboratories. This raised the concern that cancer cell lines bear more resemblance to each other, regardless of the tissue of origin, than to the clinical samples that they model. However, several other studies have come to the opposite conclusion, demonstrating the need for human cancer cell line panels ( ; ; ; ; ; ). For lung cancer cell lines, it has been shown that the genomic drift during culture life is not a dominant feature ( ). The recent analyses across SCLC cell lines, PDX models, and human tissues reported by and our present analyses provide strong evidence that the molecular features of SCLC are stable.
SCLC is highly proliferative and under replication stress ( ). SCLC-CellMiner confirms that genes involved in DNA replication such as PCNA and MKI67 are highly expressed in SCLC ( ). We also found evidence of chromatin adaptation in SCLC. Not only are many core histone gene promoters hypermethylated ( ) but also H2AFY, a non-canonical histone encoding macroH2A.1, is highly expressed in SCLC cell lines. Two H2AFY splice variants have been identified and SCLC cell lines predominantly express the macroH2A1.2 variant, known to promote homologous recombination and proliferation ( ). In the context of chromatin and histone genes, ACTL6B, which encodes a subunit of the BAF (BRG1/brm-associated factor) complex, is highly expressed in the SCLC cell lines ( ). The BAF complex is functionally related to SWI/SNF complexes that facilitate transcriptional activation of specific genes by antagonizing chromatin-mediated transcriptional repression. ACTL6B expression is specific to SCLC and brain tumor cell lines and highly correlated with the expression of other chromatin genes, including HMGN2, KDM4B, and SMARCA4 ( ). Only the NE cells express ACTL6B, while the non-NE cells express lowest KDM4B and SMARCA4. These results suggest that this specific BAF complex subunit may be critical in determining the cell fate of NE cells.
Supporting the importance of epigenetics in SCLC carcinogenesis, SCLC cell lines exhibit distinct promoter methylation profile. First, they are globally hypomethylated, suggesting their plasticity. Second, they exhibit a distinct epigenetic profile compared with NSCLC ( ). Most genes with low methylation are involved in neuronal pathways, suggesting that NE differentiation is driven by promoter methylation. In contrast, reported that SCLCs tend to have high methylation levels. The apparent discrepancy could be due to the inclusion of PDX and tumor samples in their study. Also, they did not measure promoter methylation but the proportion of highly variable CpGs, leading them to conclude that high methylation instability is consistent with the plasticity of SCLC ( ).
SCLC-CellMiner validates the NAPY classification ( ) and provides insights into the coordinated network regulated by each lineage transcription factor. Potential upstream regulators (super-enhancers, microRNAs, or non-coding RNAs) may explain the co-expression of ASCL1 with NKX2-1 and PROX1 and YAP1 with TAZ and warrants further investigations, which can be facilitated by SCLC-CellMiner. Consistent with the results of , the NAPY classification shows that the cell lines driven by ASCL1 and NEUROD1 often overlap and share common features ( and ). Yet they differ in their relationship with respect to the NOTCH pathway, with the SCLC-A cells showing strong negative correlation with NOTCH genes expression, consistent with NOTCH acting as negative regulator of ASCL1 ( ) ( ).
Transcriptome and drug response analyses highlight the distinguishing features of the SCLC-Y. In contrast to ASCL1, NEUROD1, and POU2F3, YAP1 is expressed widely across different tissue types ( ) ( ), and transcriptome analyses cluster the SCLC-Y cell lines with NSCLC ( ). SCLC-Y cells also express the NOTCH pathway, in contrast to SCLC-A. This feature could be related to the direct transcriptional activation of the NOTCH pathway by YAP/TAZ ( ) ( ). In addition, SCLC-Y cells do not express MYCL or MYCN but rather MYC ( ) ( ; ). They tend to be RB1 wild-type ( ) and have lower expression of replication and proliferation genes than the other SCLC subtypes ( and ). SCLC-Y cells were also often derived from non-smoking patients ( ; ). In total, our data suggest that SCLC-Y cell lines are probably derived from a different cell type compared with the NE and SCLC-P subgroups. Our findings of differential drug sensitivities on the basis of transcriptional subtypes support this notion ( and ) and are consistent with recent studies showing that non-NE and MYC-driven SCLC cell lines are sensitive to PI3K-AKT-mTOR, AURKA, and HSP90 inhibitors ( ; ).
Overall, our data suggest that targeted therapies in patient subgroups selected on the basis of NAPY stratification may be beneficial. Additional therapeutic insights can be derived from our study. First, although SCLC is among the cancer types with the lowest expression of immune-related genes, the SCLC-Y cells notably demonstrate high presenting and native immune predisposition ( , , and ). If verified in clinical cohorts of immunotherapy-treated patients, this finding might enable patient selection. Second, we highlight potential surface markers that could be targeted on the basis of the NAPY subgroups. For example, SCLC-Y cells express neither the therapeutically relevant surface epitopes DLL3 or CEACAM5 ( ; ; ), which tend to be specific for the SCLC-A (and N). However, SCLC-Y express CD151 and EPHA2 ( ) and might respond to the YAP1 and NOTCH inhibitors in clinical development ( ; ).
Our analyses demonstrate the value of cancer cell line databases and imply that updating drug testing with new clinical drug candidates shall provide valuable information to guide clinical trials. Our results also suggest the potential value of using the NAPY classification to select patients for targeted therapies. It is likely that genomic signatures based on transcriptome and promoter DNA methylation will have to be developed to build reliable tools to assign samples to each of the NAPY subgroups and determine their prognostic and therapeutic value.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead Contact
Further information and requests for reagents may be directed to and will be fulfilled by Lead Contact Yves Pommier (pommier@nih.gov).

## Materials Availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and Code Availability
The scripts and data used for the analysis can be obtained at https://zenodo.org/record/3959142.
All newly generated methylation datasets are available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under the accession number GEO: GSE145156.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
SCLC-CellMiner is a dedicated CellminerCDB version for SCLC cell lines ( , , , ) https://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminercdb/).
The cell line sets included in SCLC-CellMiner Cross-Data-Base (CDB) currently are from the National Cancer Institute SCLC cell lines from the Developmental Therapeutics Program Small Cell Lung Cancer Project (SCLC NCI-DTP), Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE), Genomics and Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC), Cancer Therapeutics Response Portal (CTRP), the University of Texas SouthWestern (UTSW) and a new resource SCLC-Global. The data source details are described in “Help” section of the SCLC-Cell-Miner website.
Most of the data including drug activity and genomics experiments were processed at the institute of origin and were downloaded from their website or provided from their principal investigator. The genomic data from CTRP and CCLE are common for the overlapping cell lines. However, methylation, mutation and copy number data were processed at Development Therapeutics Branch (DTB), CCR, NCI to generate a gene level summary as described previously ( ; ; ; ; ). The new Global expression (SCLC-Global) was developed at DTB by merging the gene expression of all the data sources.

## METHOD DETAILS

## DNA methylation data
Gene-level methylation using the 850K Illumina Infinium MethylationEPIC BeadChip array was summarized based on ( ). In short, methylation data were normalized using the minfi package using default parameters, where probe-level beta-values and detection p values were calculated for each probe. This provided 866,091 methylation probe measurements. Methylation probe beta-values for individual cell lines with detection p values > = 10–3 were set to missing. Also probes with median p value > = 10–6 were set to missing for all cells and removed from the analysis. Probe locations on the human genome (hg19 version) defined by Illumina was used for the analysis, annotating proximal gene transcripts and CpG islands. Probes were designated as category “1” or “2,” with category “1” considered to be most informative. Category “1” probes overlapped CpG islands and they overlapped either the TSS region within a 1.5kb distance, the first exon or 5′-UTR region. Additionally, probes on the upstream shore of a CpG island with a maximal distance of 200bp from the TSS were also included as category “1” probes. Category “2” probes were positioned either in the upstream- or downstream shore of a CpG island and overlapping the first exon, or on the downstream shore of CpG islands overlapping a 200bp region from the TSS, or in 5′-UTR. In case of genes with multiple transcript start sites, the transcript methylation with the most negative correlation to the gene level expression was used. The analysis resulted in gene-level methylation values for 23,202 genes.

## Copy number
Genome wide copy number for the cell lines was estimated from the methylation array data using the Chip Analysis Methylation Pipeline (ChAMP) ( ) package. ChAMP returns lists of genomic segments with putative copy number estimates. However, the estimate is not valid for regions with high methylation detection p values. For this reason, regions spanning more than 1kb with at least 5 probes with high detection p values (p > 0.05) were filtered out. The copy number estimates were set to missing for those areas. Gene level copy number (for n = 25,568 genes) was calculated for each gene individually, by calculating the average estimate between the transcription start sites and transcription end sites.

## RNaseq data
The RNA-seq gene expression data from UTSW SCLC were obtained from analyses based on . The raw data have been previously submitted to dbGaP (accession phs001823.v1.p1). The paired-end RNA-seq reads from the 70 UTSW SCLC cell lines were aligned to the human reference genome GRCh38 using STAR aligner (version 2.7), FPKM expression values were generated with cufflinks (version 2.2.1) ( ) and log-transformation.

## Global expression data
We generate a new Global SCLC dataset (SCLC-Global) using all combined cell line resources: NCI SCLC, CCLE, CTRP, GDSC and UTSW. The data sources have a mixture of microarray and RNA-seq gene expression. For each experiment, genes were scaled across all cell lines to create a z-score normalized dataset. The SCLC-Global expression was calculated by averaging the z-scored gene expressions from all sources. To test for removal of batch effects by gene scaling (z-score normalization), we clustered the cell lines based on gene expression using the raw data ( ) and the normalized data ( ) in R using the hclust() for clustering, and the ape package (version 5.3) to create the clustering dendrograms.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES

## Pathway level correlation of expression and DNA methylation
The correlation between methylation and gene expression for multiple functional categories was calculated based on genes in using R programming language. For each category, the median correlation of the related genes was calculated to identify potential categories of interest.

## Predictive power of DNA copy number and methylation on transcript expression
Testing the predictive power of DNA copy number and methylation on transcript expression was performed with linear regression analysis (as seen in . For each of the 15,798 genes with all three forms of data available (transcript, methylation, and copy number levels) a linear regression model was fit, with both copy number and methylation as independent variables and transcript expression as the dependent variable. The model provided coefficients for the copy number and methylation that gave the lowest squared error between fitted values and true expression. We separated individual contributions of these two factors for gene expression prediction using the method of relative importance ( ), using the lmg method ( ) from the R package relaimpo to compute individual R2 values. Total (or combined) R2 is the summation of these two. Square roots of the R2 values were multiplied by the sign of the coefficients of the factors in the combined model to get the value of R.

## Methylome cluster analysis
The methylation cluster analysis was performed using the methylation data from the NCI-SCLC cell lines, GDSC lung cancer (SCLC and NSCLC) cell lines and the NCI-60 cell lines. Genes with high standard deviation (> 0.25) in the GDSC lung cancer cell lines were selected for the analysis. The number of reported clusters was selected based on the cutreeDynamic() function of the dynamicTree-Cut R package (v1.63–1), which split genes into 5 main clusters and cells into 3 main clusters (as reported in the figure). The methylation heatmap was created with the ComplexHeatmap ( ) R package (version 1.20.0).

## SCLC subtypes and heatmaps
The SCLC cell lines were classified into the NAPY subtypes using the expression of NEUROD1, ASCL1, POU2F3 and YAP1 with the SCLC-Global expression dataset. Clustering was performed using distance matrix based on Euclidean distance and “ward.D” clustering using the hclust() function in R programming language.

## SCLC neuroendocrine score
Cell line neuroendocrine score was calculated based the method reported in that uses a gene set of 25 neuroendocrine and 25 non-neuroendocrine genes for classification. For each cell line, the expression values of genes were correlated with the expression averages of neuroendocrine [NE] cells and non-neuroendocrine [non-NE] cells from . The NE score was calculated with the following formula:

NEscore=correl([Xi],[NE])−correl([Xi],[nonNE])2
where Xi denotes the gene expression values of cell line i, [NE] is the mean expression of genes in neuroendocrine cells from and [nonNE] is the mean expression of genes in non-neuroendocrine cells from . The R script that calculates the NE score from the SCLC-Global expression data is available in the .

## t-SNE clustering of GDSC lung cell lines using gene expression
SCLC and NSCLC cell line grouping was performed with the gene expression data from the GDSC microarray dataset using the t-SNE algorithm in R (v3.5.1). The random seed was set to 1, the Euclidean distance of genes was calculated with the dist() function with default settings. The t-SNE grouping was calculated using the Rtsne() function from the Rtsne ( ) package (v0.15) using the calculated distance matrix, with perplexity set to 10, and 5k maximum iterations.

## Clustering drug data of NCI-SCLC cell lines
SCLC cell line expression heatmaps for the SCLC markers, NAPY genes and MYC genes were done using the ComplexHeatmap ( ) R package (version 1.20.0).
The NCI SCLC drug activity heatmap was generated using R. First, drugs with coefficient of variation less or equal to 0.09 were filtered out. Then the remaining data for the selected 134 drugs (from originally 527) across the 66 SCLC lines were clustered using the hierarchical method based on Euclidean distance and complete linkage.

## Gene set enrichment analysis and GSEA analysis
A preranked gene set enrichment analysis was run in R using the clusterProfiler ( ) and ReactomePA ( ) packages. Pathways with an adjusted p value below 0.05 were considered as significantly enriched. Single sample gene set enrichment score (APM score) was computed using the R package GSVA (version 1.28.0).
A pre-ranked gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA version 4.0.3) was performed for the correlation between the gene expression and methylation across all the NCI SCLC cell lines. The score was 1/p value if correlation was positive and −1/p value otherwise. The gene sets included our DTB 21 gene sets with the Hallmark, C2 (pathways) and C5 (GO) GSEA signatures. The analysis was done using the classic enrichment statistic with a minimum gene set size of 15 and a maximum of 1000.

## Statistical methods
Correlations, heatmaps, and histograms were generated mostly using The R Project for Statistical Computing. Some plots and analysis (such as the Kruskal Willis test) were generated using Partek Genomics suite v7.17.1222 (https://www.partek.com/partek-genomics-suite/) or using SCLC-CellMiner and CellMinerCDB (https://discover.nci.nih.gov/cellminercdb).
Wilcoxon rank-sum tests were used to test the difference between continuous variables such as drug sensitivity and gene expression according NAPY classification. We considered changes significant if p values were below 0.05. In the figures, p values below 0.00005 were summarized with four asterisks, p values below 0.0005 were summarized with three asterisks, p values below 0.005 were summarized with two asterisks and p values below 0.05 were summarized with one asterisk. The scripts and data used for the analysis can be obtained at https://zenodo.org/record/3959142.

## Supplementary Material
123456789
 

## Highlights
SCLC-CellMiner is an extensive cell line genomic and pharmacology resource
SCLC cell lines show a methylome consistent with their plasticity and lineage
Transcriptome analyses reveal lineage transcriptional networks and drug predictions
SCLC-Y cells differ from other subgroups by transcriptome and potential therapeutics

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
C.T., L.P., F.E., N.R., S.V., V.N.R., R.S., M.I.A., W.C.R., A.T., and Y.P. are supported by the Center for Cancer Research, CCR-NCI-NIH (Z01-BC-006150). P.M. is supported by the Center for Cancer Research, CCR-NCI-NIH (ZIA BC 011091). J.K. and B.A.T. are supported by the Developmental Therapeutics Program, Division of Cancer Treatment and Diagnosis (DCTD)-NCI-NIH (HHSN261200800001E). L.G., K.E.H., and J.D.M. are supported by P50 CA070907, U24 CA213274, U01 CA2113338, and Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (CPRIT) RP110708. We acknowledge the role of the late Adi Gazdar in generating many of the SCLC lines.

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108296.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
123456789

## Data Availability Statement
The scripts and data used for the analysis can be obtained at https://zenodo.org/record/3959142.
All newly generated methylation datasets are available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) under the accession number GEO: GSE145156.