PLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC8139512PMC8139512.1813951281395123401959310.1371/journal.pone.0251961PONE-D-20-315401Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsGenitourinary Tract TumorsProstate CancerMedicine and Health SciencesUrologyProstate DiseasesProstate CancerBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyExocrine GlandsProstate GlandMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyExocrine GlandsProstate GlandBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyMolecular MotorsMotor ProteinsActin MotorsMyosinsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsMotor ProteinsActin MotorsMyosinsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsContractile ProteinsMyosinsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryProteinsCytoskeletal ProteinsMyosinsMedicine and Health SciencesDiagnostic MedicineCancer Detection and DiagnosisMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancer Detection and DiagnosisBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsPhenotypesMedicine and Health SciencesSurgical and Invasive Medical ProceduresMedicine and Health SciencesSurgical and Invasive Medical ProceduresBiopsyBiology and Life SciencesGeneticsGene ExpressionMyosin 1C isoform A is a novel candidate diagnostic marker for prostate cancer
Myosin 1C isoform A in prostate cancerhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-3294-7146SaidovaAleena A.ConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing PotashnikovaDaria M.InvestigationMethodologyValidationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing TvorogovaAnna V.InvestigationMethodologyVisualization PaklinaOxana V.MethodologyValidation VelievEvgeniy I.Data curationMethodology KnyshinskyGrigoriy V.InvestigationMethodology SetdikovaGaliya R.Formal analysisMethodologyVisualization RotinDaniil L.Formal analysisValidation MalyIvan V.ConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologySupervisionVisualizationWriting – review & editing HofmannWilma A.ConceptualizationInvestigationMethodologySupervisionValidationVisualization VorobjevIvan A.ConceptualizationFormal analysisSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing 1
School of Biology, Cell Biology and Histology Department, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia2
A.N. Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, M.V. Lomonosov Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia3
Pathoanatomy Department, S.P. Botkin Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russia4
Urology Department, S.P. Botkin Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russia5
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United States of America6
Department of Biology, School of Sciences and Humanities, Nazarbayev University, Nur-Sultan, KazakhstanSaleemMohammadEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Early diagnosis of prostate cancer (PCa) is critically important due to its high incidence and related mortality [ ]. A final diagnosis of prostate cancer in routine practice is based on the histological evaluation of transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) biopsies or surgical material. Diagnostic accuracy of this method remains low, as 30% of prostate cancers are missed, and many men without cancer undergo unnecessary invasive procedures [ ]. Both MP-MRI [ ] and increasing the number of core biopsies from 12 to 24 [ ] were proposed to improve the sensitivity of the diagnostic procedures. However, the former approach is not always available in routine clinical practice, and the latter is associated with risk- and can cause life-threatening sepsis [ ]. Heterogeneity of clinical symptoms highlights the need for a new generation of specific and sensitive PCa markers, which would decrease the invasiveness of diagnostic interventions and facilitate early diagnosis [ ]. Among novel promising markers [ ] isoform A of myosin 1C [ ] has been described as a specific marker of prostate cell lines and mouse prostate cancer tissues [ ]. Recent findings highlight the role of this protein in mechanoregulation of epithelial cell-cell adhesion [ ] and stimulation of exosome secretion in prostate cancer cells [ ]. In this study, we evaluated myosin 1C isoform A mRNA and protein expression levels in clinical samples of prostate cancer and benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH).

## Materials and methods

## Clinical samples
Forty-one patient with prostate cancer and eleven patients with BPH who were diagnosed in the Urology department of S. P. Botkin City Clinical Hospital were enrolled in this study from February 2019 to August 2020. Patient age was from 42 to 74 years (mean 57.9±8.5 years). Levels of prostate specific antigen (PSA) for PCa samples ranged between 0.80–44 ng/ml (mean 12.9 ±10.8 ng/ml); levels of PSA for BPH samples ranged from 1.8 to 10 ng/ml (mean 4.3±2.8 ng/ml). Gleason score was 6 for 12 patients, 7 for 22 patients, five patients had a Gleason score of 8, and two had a Gleason score of 9. Clinical data for all patients are summarized in .
Samples for RTqPCR and flow cytometry were processed immediately after surgery. Cryostat sections were prepared from different parts of the post-surgical material; each section was evaluated by an experienced pathologist. All human material was obtained with written informed consent. All procedures were performed following the ethical standards of the responsible local committee (study approved at the MSU Biology Department Bioethical Committee protocol #127-d) and the Helsinki Declaration of 1975 as revised in 2008. Patients with previous prostate surgery or chemotherapy were excluded from the study. Staging of clinical samples was performed according to American Joint Committee on Cancer (8th edition) [ ]. Examples of histological patterns for samples with different Gleason scores are provided in .
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples of normal and cancerous human prostate were purchased from US Biomax, Inc. (Derwood, Maryland). These samples were collected under HIPPA-approved protocols with the donors’ informed consent. Eosin- and hematoxylin-stained FFPE sections were imaged on a Leica DMRE microscope (Leica, Wetzlar) equipped with an RT Slider CCD camera (SPOT Imaging, Sterling Heights MI).

## Cell lines
Non-malignant prostate epithelial cell line (RWPE-1) (CRL116-09) and prostate cancer cell lines LNCaP (CRL-1740), DU145 (CRL-3356), 22Rv1 (CRL-2505), PC-3 (CRL-1435) were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). RWPE-1 cells were cultured in serum-free keratinocyte medium with L-glutamine (Gibco-Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wlatham, MA, USA), supplemented with 1% gentamycin (Paneco, Russia), 0.05 mg/ml bovine pituitary extract (BPE) and 5 ng/ml human recombinant epidermal growth factor (EGF) (both from Gibco-Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Cancer cell lines were cultured in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 10% FBS, with 1% gentamycin and L-glutamine (Paneco, Moscow, Russia). Cells were grown in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37°C. Cells were routinely tested for mycoplasma, and only cells that were mycoplasma-free were used in the experiments.

## RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis
RNA was extracted from thawed suspensions of clinical samples and cell cultures using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA concentration was measured using a NanoPhotometer (Implen, Munich, Germany), and its purity was assessed according to the А260/А280 and А260/А230 ratios. cDNA was transcribed using the ImProm-II AMV-Reverse Transcription Kit (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was extracted from the FFPE samples (same tissue cores as used for histology) using the Absolutely RNA kit (Agilent, La Jolla, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and reverse-transcribed with Superscript III (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

## Primers and real-time PCR
Real-time qPCR experiments were performed using CFX96 Touch cycler (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). All samples were processed in triplicate. One sample of cDNA put into each PCR run served as an inter-run calibrator for combining data into one experiment. Primer details were reported previously [ , ]. Primer sequences are provided in . Primers for isoform A specifically recognize human myosin 1C isoform A (NCBI reference sequence NM_001080779.1). Primers were purchased from Synthol (Moscow, Russia). Primer specificity was confirmed by melting curve analysis and detection of products with predicted length by electrophoresis on a 1.5% agarose gel. The reaction protocol included denaturation (95°С, 10 min), followed by 40 amplification cycles (95°С, 15 sec; 60°С, 30 sec; 72°С, 60 sec). The Ct values were determined for real-time PCR curves by setting the threshold at 5 SD for each run. qPCR data were normalized according to Vandesompele et al. [ ].

## Western blotting
Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer for 30 minutes on ice. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). 50 μg of protein lysates were resolved in 12% SDS-PAAG gel and transferred to 0.2 μm nitrocellulose membrane (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA), blocked with 5% nonfat dry milk, 1X TBS, 0.1% Tween-20 for 40 minutes at RT. Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies against myosin 1C isoform A (custom antibody [ ]) and alpha-tubulin (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA; clone DM1A 2128, clone 9f3, lot7) at +4° overnight in 1% BSA in 1X TBS, 0.1% Tween-20. Mouse monoclonal antibody against N-terminal peptide of myosin 1C isoform A was described in Ihnatovych et al [ , , ]. After washing, membranes were incubated with mouse or rabbit secondary antibodies linked with horseradish peroxidase (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) for 1 hour at RT. Proteins were visualized using Image Quant LAS 4000 system (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA).

## Flow cytometry
37 clinical samples (29 tumors and 8 benign hyperplasias) and 5 prostate cell lines were analyzed in suspension by multicolor flow cytometry using a FACSAria SORP instrument (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA).
Single-cell suspensions of solid prostate tissues were prepared using a MediMachine (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and stained for surface antigens with monoclonal antibodies, as presented in . Unspecific binding was blocked by normal mouse serum (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), cells were incubated with antibodies at RT for 20 minutes, washed once in PBS and analyzed. FACSDiva software (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) was employed for data acquisition and analysis. The spectral compensation matrix was calculated automatically using single-stained controls. FACS profiles were obtained for each sample on the day of retrieval, typically in 4 hours after the extraction.

## Data analysis
Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prizm 6 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) and R (R Core Team, 2019) with basic package “stats” ver. 3.6.0 (R Core Team, 2019), additional package “PMCMR” ver. 4.3 and graphic package “ggplot2” ver. 3.3.1. To analyze the results, Kruskal—Wallis analysis of variance was performed to evaluate the differences in the level of myosin 1C isoform A or CD-positive cell percentages at different cancer stages. For pairwise comparisons, we performed the Conover-Iman test from the “PMCMR” package with a 0.95 confidence level. To measure the relationship between the isoform A level and CD-positive percentage, we calculated Spearman correlation coefficients for each cancer stage. Images were finalized in AdobePhotoshop Software (Adobe Inc., San Jose, CA, USA)

## Results

## Myosin 1С isoform A is overexpressed in clinical prostate cancer samples
We first addressed the difference in myosin 1C isoform A expression between benign prostate hyperplasia and prostate cancer clinical samples. To describe the expression of isoform A in prostate cancers, we divided our dataset into 3 groups according to the clinical stage. The first group included 11 samples with benign prostate hyperplasia, which we formally denote as clinical stage 0 in our comparisons. The second group included 28 samples with clinical stage 2, and the third group consisted of 13 samples with clinical stage 3. In the combined dataset, the median of relative normalized isoform A mRNA expression in prostate cancer samples was 2.078 (range 0.102–14.89) compared to 0.062 in benign prostate hyperplasia samples (range 0.0003–0.386) ( , ). Thus, mRNA expression of myosin 1C isoform A in prostate cancer cells is 2 orders of magnitude higher than for benign prostate hyperplasia, and the differences are statistically significant (p<0.0001, Kruskal-Wallis test). The difference in isoform A expression was statistically significant between benign hyperplasia (stage 0) and all clinical stages ( , Kruskal-Wallis test, p<0.0001). Notably, based on isoform A expression we could also distinguish stage 2 and stage 3 (p = 0.004, Mann-Whitney test). mRNA expression of isoform A in prostate cancer cell lines was similar to human prostate cancer tissues (median 2.167, range 0.359–4.174), and the isoform A mRNA expression in the RWPE-1 cell line, which is assumed to be a normal prostate tissue analog, is similar to that in BPH. Finally, we confirmed the differences in isoform A mRNA expression between prostate cancer and benign hyperplasia at the protein level ( ).
 To test whether the uncovered pattern of expression could also be discerned in archival prostate cancer tissue samples, we performed the analysis on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) prostate samples. The sample set consisted of 2 clinical cases of stage 2 (T2N0M0) prostate carcinoma, 3 cases of disease stage 3 (T3N0M0), and normal prostate tissue from 2 different individuals without cancer. Histology of the samples was verified by routine microscopy ( ). qPCR of RNA extracted from the same FFPE tissue cores as used for microscopy showed a qualitative tendency toward an increased expression of isoform A at disease stage II and a statistically significant (p<0.05 by the confidence interval method) increase by a factor of 135 at disease stage III relative to the normal prostate ( ). These data demonstrate that the overall pattern of myosin IC isoform A expression associated with the development of prostate cancer, which has been uncovered here on fresh clinical samples, can be followed also on archival FFPE pathology material.

## Basic phenotype of prostate cancers
The surface phenotype of prostate cancer samples was accessed using the basic 5-color antigen panel reported previously for the description of the prostate cancer and non-cancer cell lines [ ] that included CD44 (marker of basal cells), CD57 (marker of luminal cells), CD24 (marker of differentiating cells), CD90 and CD133 (stromal markers). All cell lines tested and biopsy samples did not express CD133, CD57 and CD90 surface markers.
A non-malignant cell line RWPE-1 as well as prostate cancers PC-3 and DU145 demonstrated the CD44+/CD24- and CD44+/CD24+ phenotypes of progenitor cells, while prostate cancers 22Rv1 and LNCaP demonstrated CD44-/CD24- and CD44-/CD24+ phenotypes.
CD44 and CD24 were heterogeneously expressed on cells ex vivo, reflecting different maturation stages of the prostate epithelium. The majority of prostate cells in BPH non-cancer specimens were CD44-/CD24+ and CD44-/CD24-. The progenitor CD44+/CD24- and CD44+/CD24+ cells–resembling a non-malignant RWPE-1 cell line were detectable as a minor fraction in BPH ( ).
 Compared to non-cancer BPH tissue, prostate cancer samples demonstrated a statistically significant decrease in CD24+ cell numbers (p = 0.029, Kruskal-Wallis test). Also, there was a trend towards reduction of CD44+, although the results were not significant ( ; ). The majority of prostate cells in cancer specimens had CD44-/CD24- phenotype with reduced CD44-/CD24+ cell fraction compared to BPH. Such phenotype corresponds to that of LNCaP and 22Rv1 cancer cell lines. None of the assessed markers were differentially expressed between stage 2 and stage 3 of prostate cancer (Conover-Iman post-hoc test with Holm correction) ( ; ). Thus the ex vivo prostate cancer cells, albeit heterogeneous, predominantly corresponded to LNCaP and 22Rv1 phenotype.

## Cells with low and high isoform A expression display different surface phenotypes
To determine whether high and low myosin IC isoform A expression correlated with distinct cell surface phenotypes, we extended our panel adding seven surface molecules (CD10, CD13, CD29, CD38, CD54, CD146, and CD166) that have been associated with the tumorigenic potential of prostate cancer cells [ – ]. Five malignant and non-malignant prostate cell lines were primarily used to test the new panel. The representative dot plots are shown in . Since cell lines exhibit more homogeneous phenotypes than patient samples, the data was analyzed as median fluorescence intensity (MFI) ratios–MFI of the stained sample divided by the MFI of the negative control (numerical data are presented in ). Correlation analysis revealed that isoform A mRNA expression level negatively correlated with the presence of CD10 (Spearman R coefficient = -0.77) and CD13 (R = -0.77), and positively correlated with the presence of CD38 (R = 0.8), CD29 (R = 0.8) and CD54 (R = 0.8) Thus the expanded phenotypes are CD10+/CD13+/CD146-/CD166low/CD29low/CD54low/CD38low for LNCaP cells with the lowest MyoICA expression level among cell lines (normalized mRNA expression level 0.359) and CD10-/CD13-/CD146low/CD166low/CD29+/CD54+/CD38+ for PC-3 cells with the highest MyoICA expression level (normalized mRNA expression level 4.174).The expanded flow cytometry panel allowed the discrimination between the model cell cultures– 5 cultures into 4 groups (PC-3 and DU-145 remained similar). Thus high expression level of MyoICA correlated to the decreased surface levels of CD10 and CD13 and increased surface levels of CD29, CD54, and CD38 on model cell lines.
 Quadrant gates are set based on unstained controls. Rows of plots correspond to the cell lines indicated on the left. PC-3 cancer cell line demonstrates high antigen expression levels; the reference immunophenotype is CD29+high/CD54+high/CD146+/CD166+low/CD38+high/CD10-/CD13-. 22Rv1 cancer cell line demonstrates moderate antigen expression levels; the reference immunophenotype is CD29+low/CD54+low/CD146+low/CD166+low/CD38+low/CD10-/CD13-. RWPE-1 non-malignant prostate cell line demonstrates moderate antigen expression levels; the reference immunophenotype is CD29+low/CD54+low/CD146+/CD166+low/CD38+low/CD10-/CD13+low.
Applying the extended staining panel to the clinical samples (15 specimens) demonstrated an overall weaker staining and very high population heterogeneity for all antigens assessed in vitro. Ex vivo prostate samples contained very few CD10+, CD13+ or CD166+ cells (maximum fraction of positive cells < 10% and median < 1.5%) corresponding to CD10-/CD13-/CD166- phenotype. The maximum fraction of CD146+ cells was 10.2% with median fraction– 4.6%, corresponding to CD146low phenotype. The fractions of CD29+ (maximum– 36.2%, median– 2.3%), CD54+ (maximum– 20.4% median– 4.9%), CD38+ (maximum– 43.5%, median– 25.8%) cells differ between samples and correspond to CD29+low/CD54+low/CD38+ phenotype ( ). CD38 was the most abundantly expressed marker and similarly to CD24 demonstrated a statistically significant decrease in prostate cancer samples compared to non-cancer tissue (p<0.01, Kruskal-Wallis test). Thus, despite the intra-specimen heterogeneity, the surface phenotype of the majority of clinical samples was similar to the prostate cancer cell lines with high isoform A expression.
Despite the overall heterogeneity, certain correlations between isoform A expression and surface phenotype were observed within sets of clinical samples pertaining to individual stages ( ). The significance of these correlations was validated by the least-squares linear and log-linear regression analysis ( ). The presence of intra-stage correlations may suggest that prostate cancer cells abruptly change their surface phenotype during cancer progression, and surface markers could thus have prognostic values.
 

## Discussion
The need for sensitive and specific prostate cancer markers arises from the highly heterogeneous symptoms of this disease, varying from indolent to highly aggressive forms that require immediate chemotherapy and surgery. Evaluation of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and characterization of histological material after TRUS biopsy or surgery have been set as a gold standard for PCa diagnosis, though the diagnostic value of these methods is hotly debated in the literature due to high incidence of false-positive and false-negative results [ , , , ]. Several novel promising mRNA markers that reduce the number of invasive diagnostic procedures and decrease the number of false results for PCa have been proposed over the years [ ]. Among them, isoform A of myosin 1C has been described to be expressed specifically in progressive, metastatic prostate cancer cell lines and prostate tissue of the TRAMP mouse model with spontaneous development of orthotopic prostate cancer [ ].
Myosin 1C is an unconventional single-headed non-muscle motor protein [ ]. In normal epithelial MDCK cell line, it promotes the force transmission to a lateral membrane, and knockdown of myosin 1C reduces the force of cell-cell adhesion [ ]. In the PC-3 prostate cancer cell line, its knockdown causes suppression of exosome secretion and an overall decrease of the cells’ migratory capacity. Isoform A, specifically, is found in exosomes that contain matrix metalloproteinases MMP1 and MMP9 and is functionally involved in migration across extracellular matrix barriers [ ]. Here we report that isoform A is overexpressed in clinical prostate cancer samples compared to benign hyperplasia samples both on the mRNA and protein level.
The overexpression of isoform A mRNA in cancer samples is two orders of magnitude higher than in benign hyperplasia. Thus we suggest that the use of isoform A in clinical practice will improve the sensitivity of fine needle biopsy. This is also backed by our previous data showing that isoform A allows to distinguish cancer cells in the proportion 1 to 1000 [ ].
Analysis of prostate tissue biopsy is still the most reliable information for PCa diagnosis, and a multivariate model that combines several indicators increases the discrimination power but does not add considerably to the information obtained from Gleason scoring [ ]. Thus, we suggest that a new candidate marker will increase the sensitivity of needle biopsy analysis and make it possible to decrease the number of core biopsies.
Validation of biomarkers suitable for non-invasive diagnostics using patients’ serum and urine is an important direction in the current research on PCa [ – ]. In the light of the present findings that establish utility of myosin IC isoform A in analyzing biopsy samples and our recent results [ ] that demonstrated presence of myosin IC isoform A in exosomes secreted by PCa cells, assessing diagnostic applications of this isoform’s detection in serum or urine is a logical next step in validation of this biomarker for clinical use. Expression of myosin IC isoform A, according to the data presented here, is a robust and differentiating feature of clinical samples from the different stages of the disease, and thus compares favorably with markers that are detected in small subgroups of patients (e.g., the recently characterized isoform of NCOR1, [ ]). Assembly of biomarker panels with high collective diagnostic capacity is another direction of current work in the field [ ]. The ability to differentiate stages of PCa progression that is demonstrated here raises the likelihood of eventually including myosin IC isoform A in a panel of biomarkers that will be capable of accurately and predictively diagnosing PCa and the likely course of the disease.
A body of work has been focused on immunophenotyping prostate cancers using immunohistochemistry as well as flow cytometry [ , ]. Despite this, no surface markers have been included in conventional panels for PCa diagnosis and staging so far. The antigens analyzed here were previously reported to be associated with distinct types of prostate cells and/or distinct stages of prostate cancer progression. CD57 is typically related to luminal epithelial cells and primary non-metastatic carcinoma [ , ], while CD44 is a basal cell and metastatic carcinoma marker [ , ]. The data indicate significance of the CD24 vs. CD44 expression pattern on various cancer cells and attribute early progenitor/stem cell properties to the CD44+/CD24- population [ ]. This pattern is particularly pronounced in breast cancer models [ – ], but some evidence has been obtained for prostate cancer models as well [ , ]. CD133 is a putative cancer stem cell marker for many cancers [ ] that is transiently expressed on prostate cells and limited to the basal layer, e.g., the early progenitor cell subtype [ , ]. CD90 is a marker of prostate basal epithelial cells and stromal fibroblasts that is associated with pro-tumorigenic microenvironment [ , ]. The panel of basic antigens allowed us to discriminate the cancer and non-cancer phenotypes by CD24 expression and to show that in general, the cancer samples often demonstrate a “low-expressing” phenotype based on significantly diminished expression of CD24 ( ; ). Although the difference between cancer and non-cancer cells was clear, there was no correlation between isoform A expression and the percentages of positive cells for any of the CD molecules from the basic panel.
Next, we sought to find whether we could attribute a specific phenotype to cells with low and high isoform A expression, using an expanded antigen panel. The expanded antigen panel included additional surface adhesion and signaling molecules: CD29 [ ], CD54 [ ], CD146 [ ], CD166 [ ], CD38 [ , ], CD10 [ , ] and CD13 [ , ], which have distinctive expression patterns and presumed tumorigenic potential in prostate malignancies. Our data on antigen expression obtained on cell lines are in accordance with Liu et al. [ ]. Furthermore, we revealed that cell lines with high expression of myosin 1C isoform A have higher percentages of cells positive for specific adhesion molecules like CD29 (integrin β1), CD54 (ICAM1), CD146 (MCAM1) and CD166 (ALCAM). This suggests that cell lines with high isoform A expression may be more adhesive to the substrate, which could provide an additional mechanistic explanation for the isoform A-expressing cells’ high metastatic potential.
Testing the antigen panels on clinical samples revealed a decreased antigen expression and high population heterogeneity compared to in vitro cell lines. All samples under study had low CD10, CD13 and CD166 percentages. CD38 demonstrated a significant (p<0.05) decrease in stage 2 and 3 prostate cancers compared with BPH ( ). The most obvious discrepancy in the phenotype of prostate cell lines and clinical samples was the expression of CD38 that positively correlated with isoform A expression in cell lines and negatively correlated with isoform A in clinical samples. While the mechanism of such shifts is unknown, the correlation pattern seen in the clinical samples may find an explanation in the light of the recent clinical data [ ] where CD38 was significantly elevated in benign prostate tissue but displayed a progressively reduced expression between the localized, metastatic, and neuroendocrine cancer subtypes, suggesting a tumor-suppressing role. The CD38 influence on NADH metabolism and related tumor signaling [ ] may explain such a role, and its anti-correlation with the expression of myosin 1C isoform A is consistent with this myosin’s proposed function [ , ] as a prostate cancer progression-associated molecule.
Importantly, both in prostate cell lines and the clinical dataset, we revealed a strong positive correlation between the percentage of CD54 (ICAM1)-positive cells and myosin IC isoform A expression. Among the clinical samples, this correlation was seen in benign hyperplasia, while a very strong positive correlation between the percentage of CD29 (integrin beta1)-positive cells and isoform A expression was observed in the most aggressive cases (stage 3).
Thus, the ex vivo prostate specimens contain heterogeneous cell subpopulations that correspond to different cell line phenotypes. The moderate expression levels of most surface markers and the lack of surface CD10 seen in most cancers best correspond to the phenotype of 22Rv1 model cell line. However, small subpopulations with the similar phenotype could be observed in BPH specimens. Only CD38 level (that correlated with MyoICA expression in vitro) demonstrated statistically significant differences between cancer and non-cancer specimens.
These findings may provide new criteria for differential diagnostics of prostate cancers and help to introduce FACS-based surface immunophenotyping into broad clinical practice. Moreover, they demonstrate a connection between the cell migratory potential at different clinical stages, cell adhesion patterns, and myosin expression levels, and thus have both biological relevance and prognostic value.
Taken together, our data indicate the potential utility of assessing the expression of myosin IC isoform A in diagnostics of prostate cancer, which allows distinguishing cancer from non-cancer samples even without additional sorting of stromal cells. Introduction of this marker into other gene classifier panels [ ], with an additional analysis of surface antigens, will facilitate early diagnosis of prostate cancer and decrease the number of invasive diagnostic procedures.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Histological patterns of the specimens with different Gleason scores.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Samples stained with eosin and hematoxylin.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Isoform A expression in FFPE samples, quantified by qPCR.
Normalized to total myosin IC. Error bars: standard error of the mean.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Surface antigen expression on prostate cancer cells ex-vivo.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Clinical data for 41 prostate cancer specimens and 11 specimens with benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH).
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## Primer sequences for RTqPCR mRNA evaluation.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Table

## List of monoclonal antibodies used for the surface staining of prostate cancer and benign hyperplasia specimens.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Table

## Surface antigen expression on prostate cells from ex vivo clinical specimens and in vitro model cell lines of malignant and non-malignant origin.
(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Raw image(JPG)
Click here for additional data file.

 10.1371/journal.pone.0251961.r001Decision Letter 0
SaleemMohammadAcademic Editor© 2021 Mohammad Saleem2021Mohammad Saleemhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
3 Mar 2021

PONE-D-20-31540
Myosin 1C isoform A is a novel candidate diagnostic marker for prostate cancer
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Aleena Saidova,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Reviewer #1:
Prostate Cancer is one of the leading cancers in the world and to find the new biomarkers is a very challenging task. In this paper, authors tried to find a unique and reliable biomarker for a sensitive diagnosis that will be upregulated exclusively in prostate cancer cells. In this study, Authors evaluated the expression of myosin 1C isoform A in 5 prostate cell lines, 29 prostate 30 cancer cases, and 8 benign hyperplasia tissues. Furthermore, authors studied the expression of 12 surface molecules on prostate cancer cells and performed correlation analysis with myosin 1C isoform A. After going through the paper, I noticed few things which are addressed below:
Comments1: It is not very clear in the paper, how the expression of myosin 1C isoform A was evaluated as myosin 1C isoform A has several isoforms. Do authors use any specific antibody? Please include the sequence of primers used in the study.
Comment 2: P value were not included in figure 1A
Comment 3: Since authors believe that myosin 1C isoform A could be used as a Biomarker. Does author’s tried to find the expression of myosin 1C isoform A in patent serum or urine.
Reviewer #2: 
The paper explains some interesting observations. The authors previously published a related article (PMID: 30498638). This paper reported the Myosin 1C isoform A is a novel candidate diagnostic marker for prostate cancer, I found it interesting, but authors need to explain/include some of the concerns before publications.
Concerns:
1. Add vendors' names, city, and country of origin for each instrument and software.
2. Authors need to increase the clinical sample number for a conclusive result.
3. I am wondering why the authors analyzed only cancer stage II and III samples. They should include stage I and Stage IV.
4. Authors must explain how their Myosin 1C isoform A is a better diagnostic marker than previously published biomarkers (PMID: 23308129; PMID: 33256740; PMID: 33113419; PMID: 33058520)
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 17 2021 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
M. Saleem
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Thank you for including your ethics statement:  
'All human material was obtained with informed consent. All procedures were performed following the ethical standards of the responsible local committee (at the Biological Department of Moscow State University) and the Helsinki Declaration of 1975 as revised in 2008.'   
(a) Please amend your current ethics statement to confirm that your named institutional review board or ethics committee specifically approved this study.
(b) Once you have amended this/these statement(s) in the Methods section of the manuscript, please add the same text to the “Ethics Statement” field of the submission form (via “Edit Submission”).
For additional information about PLOS ONE ethical requirements for human subjects research, please refer to http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-human-subjects-research.
3. Please provide additional details regarding participant consent.
In the ethics statement in the Methods and online submission information, please ensure that you have specified what type you obtained (for instance, written or verbal, and if verbal, how it was documented and witnessed).
If your study included minors, state whether you obtained consent from parents or guardians.
If the need for consent was waived by the ethics committee, please include this information.
4. Please provide additional information about each of the cell lines used in this work, including any quality control testing procedures (authentication, characterisation, and mycoplasma testing). For more information, please see " ext-link-type="uri" xlink:type="simple">http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-cell-lines."
5. In the Methods section, please provide the product number and any lot numbers of the primary antibodies purchased from chemical companies  for your study.
6. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels.
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
7. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information
10.1371/journal.pone.0251961.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
17 Apr 2021

Dear Dr. Muhammad Saleem,
Thank you for conducting an expert peer review of our manuscript and for your favorable decision concerning our first version. We are submitting a thoroughly revised version for your consideration. We are grateful to both reviewers for their recommendations. We have carefully reviewed the comments and revised the manuscript accordingly. Our complete response and list of the changes follow. Changes to the manuscript are shown in red.
We hope that the revised version is now suitable for publication and look forward to hearing from you soon.
Kind regards, 
Aleena Saidova, PhD
Senior Research fellow
School of Biology, Moscow State University
Reviewer 1 Comment 1
It is not very clear in the paper, how the expression of myosin 1C isoform A was evaluated as myosin 1C isoform A has several isoforms. Do authors use any specific antibody? Please include the sequence of primers used in the study.
The gene for Myosin IC encodes three isoforms, termed isoform A, B, and C. Isoforms A contains a unique N-terminal peptide sequence of 35 amino acids that is encoded by an isoform specific exon. This unique exon sequence as well as the unique amino acid sequence allowed us to detect specifically myosin IC isoform A. 
The details of the myosin IC isoform A-specific primer that target the isoform A specific exon are included in Table S2. 
On protein level, myosin IC isoform A was identified using a monoclonal, isoform A-specific antibody that was raised specifically against the N-terminal isoform A-specific peptide. The antibody is described in Ihnatovych et al., 2012. The antibody has also been licensed to EMD Millipore as an isoform A specific antibody under the name: Anti-MYO1C Antibody, clone B7H8. A better description of this antibody has been added to the “method” section
Reviewer 1 Comment 2
P value were not included in figure 1A
 We have revised figure 1A and included p-value.
Reviewer 1 Comment 3
Since authors believe that myosin 1C isoform A could be used as a Biomarker. Does author’s tried to find the expression of myosin 1C isoform A in patent serum or urine.
The possibility that the reviewer raises is an important one for further development of this biomarker. While detection of myosin IC isoform A in serum or urine is outside the scope of this paper, which for the first time clearly establishes clinical relevance of this marker and focuses on its use in analyzing biopsy material, we are planning to assess its use in non-invasive diagnostics in the near future and have included the following text in the Discussion:
“Validation of biomarkers suitable for non-invasive diagnostics using patients’ serum and urine is an important direction in the current research on PCa (see, e.g., https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23308129/, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30129068, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33256740/). In the light of the present findings that establish utility of myosin IC isoform A in analyzing biopsy samples and our recent results (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28814772/) that demonstrated presence of myosin IC isoform A in exosomes secreted by PCa cells, assessing diagnostic applications of this isoform’s detection in serum or urine is a logical next step in validation of this biomarker for clinical use.”
Reviewer 2 Comment 1
Add vendors' names, city, and country of origin for each instrument and software.
We have revised the Materials and Methods and added vendor details for instruments and software
Reviewer 2 Comment 2
Authors need to increase the clinical sample number for a conclusive result.
We have increased the clinical dataset on 15 samples, that allowed us to discriminate II and III clinical stages based on isoform A expression.
Reviewer 2 Comment 3
I am wondering why the authors analyzed only cancer stage II and III samples. They should include stage I and Stage IV.
Stage I is almost impossible to include since biopsies are very rarely done at this stage. Similarly, about stage IV – usually the patients are coming to the hospital at earlier stage (II or III) and biopsy cannot be postponed to follow cancer progression due to ethical reasons. Moreover, the common protocol at stage IV is chemotherapy to reduce the cancer mass that would be then classified as stage III.
Reviewer 2 Comment 4
Authors must explain how their Myosin 1C isoform A is a better diagnostic marker than previously published biomarkers (PMID: 23308129; PMID: 33256740; PMID: 33113419; PMID: 33058520)
We have added the following passage to the Discussion, which references the literature indicated by the reviewer:
“Validation of biomarkers suitable for non-invasive diagnostics using patients’ serum and urine is an important direction in the current research on PCa (see, e.g., https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23308129/, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30129068, https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33256740/). In the light of the present findings that establish utility of myosin IC isoform A in analyzing biopsy samples and our recent results (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28814772/) that demonstrated presence of myosin IC isoform A in exosomes secreted by PCa cells, assessing diagnostic applications of this isoform’s detection in serum or urine is a logical next step in validation of this biomarker for clinical use. Expression of myosin IC isoform A, according to the data presented here, is a robust and differentiating feature of clinical samples from the different stages of the disease, and thus compares favorably with markers that are detected in small subgroups of patients (e.g., the recently characterized isoform of NCOR1, see PMID: 33058520). Assembly of biomarker panels with high collective diagnostic capacity is another direction of current work in the field (see, e.g., https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33256740/). The ability to differentiate stages of PCa progression that is demonstrated here raises the likelihood of eventually including myosin IC isoform A in a panel of biomarkers that will be capable of accurately and predictively diagnosing PCa and the likely course of the disease.”
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Response to Reviewers.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0251961.r003Decision Letter 1
SaleemMohammadAcademic Editor© 2021 Mohammad Saleem2021Mohammad Saleemhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
7 May 2021

Myosin 1C isoform A is a novel candidate diagnostic marker for prostate cancer
PONE-D-20-31540R1
Dear Dr. Aleena Saidova,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Mohammad Saleem
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: The revised manuscript is improved far than the previous version. I accept this modified version of the paper.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: Yes: Hifzur R Siddique
10.1371/journal.pone.0251961.r004Acceptance letter
SaleemMohammadAcademic Editor© 2021 Mohammad Saleem2021Mohammad Saleemhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
12 May 2021

PONE-D-20-31540R1 
Myosin 1C isoform A is a novel candidate diagnostic marker for prostate cancer 
Dear Dr. Saidova:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Mohammad Saleem 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE