pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpa101573691Cell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC8653526PMC8653526.186535268653526NIHMS17497643468632010.1016/j.celrep.2021.109843NIHMS1749764NIHPA17497641ArticleCorticospinal neuron subpopulation-specific developmental genes prospectively indicate mature segmentally specific axon projection targeting
SahniVibhu ShniderSara J. JabaudonDenis SongJanet H.T. ItohYasuhiro GreigLuciano C. MacklisJeffrey D. 1Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Center for Brain Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA2These authors contributed equally3Present address: Burke Neurological Institute, White Plains, NY 10605, USA4Present address: Feil Family Brain and Mind Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY 10065, USA5Present address: Teva Pharmaceuticals, Netanya, Israel, 42504836Present address: Department of Basic Neurosciences, University of Geneva, Geneva CH-1211, Switzerland7Present address: Clinic of Neurology, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva CH-1211, Switzerland8Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Research designed by V.S., S.J.S., D.J., and J.D.M.; research performed by V.S., S.J.S., D.J., J.H.T.S., Y.I., and L.C.G.; data analyzed by V.S., S.J.S., J.H.T.S., Y.I., and J.D.M.; and manuscript written by V.S. and J.D.M.
*Correspondence: jeffrey_macklis@harvard.edu1910202137339523710984310984301122021081220210812202111062024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
For precise motor control, distinct subpopulations of corticospinal neurons (CSN) must extend axons to distinct spinal segments, from proximal targets in the brainstem and cervical cord to distal targets in thoracic and lumbar spinal segments. We find that developing CSN subpopulations exhibit striking axon targeting specificity in spinal white matter, which establishes the foundation for durable specificity of adult corticospinal circuitry. Employing developmental retrograde and anterograde labeling, and their distinct neocortical locations, we purified developing CSN subpopulations using fluorescence-activated cell sorting to identify genes differentially expressed between bulbar-cervical and thoracolumbar-projecting CSN subpopulations at critical developmental times. These segmentally distinct CSN subpopulations are molecularly distinct from the earliest stages of axon extension, enabling prospective identification even before eventual axon targeting decisions are evident in the spinal cord. This molecular delineation extends beyond simple spatial separation of these subpopulations in the cortex. Together, these results identify candidate molecular controls over segmentally specific corticospinal axon projection targeting.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Sahni et al. show that corticospinal neuron (CSN) axons exhibit targeting specificity in spinal white matter in development, well before encountering spinal neurons or making connections with spinal circuits. CSNs projecting to distinct spinal segments can now be prospectively identified molecularly and investigated even before their axons reach the cord.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
The corticospinal system is essential for skilled movements ( ); fine motor control relies on corticospinal neurons (CSN) projecting axons to appropriate and specific segmental targets. CSN in multiple cortical areas, beyond the primary motor cortex (M1), form corticospinal circuitry with distinct functional outputs, including spinal motor neuron excitation and inhibition by direct and indirect pathways, descending control of ascending inputs, and autonomic control ( ; ; ; ). Such diverse functional output, especially for precise motor control, requires distinct CSN subpopulations to project to segmentally specific targets in the pons, medulla, and cervical, thoracic, and lumbar cord for head, forelimb, trunk, and hindlimb motor control.
Cortical organization of segmentally distinct CSN subpopulations, their spinal projections, and their role in motor control has been intensely researched. Penfield’s homunculus in the primary motor cortex (M1) in humans ( ; ) and Woolsey’s primate simiusculus ( ) demonstrate that cortical regions are organized to control movement of distinct body parts. Many anatomical ( ; ; ; ; ; ) and physiological ( ; ; ) studies have also revealed somatotopic mapping in rodents, extending beyond M1.
In mice, intracortical microstimulation identified cortical regions controlling forelimb movement, including the rostral and caudal forelimb areas (RFA and CFA, respectively). The RFA is surrounded by representations of the whiskers, jaw, and other proximal structures ( ). CSN axons from RFA versus CFA have distinct spinal projections and control distinct elements of forelimb reaching ( ). There appears to be only one ‘‘hindlimb’’ area, with lumbar projections ( ; ). Understanding how CSN axons target specific spinal segments is a major goal toward identifying the developmental basis for the organization of segmentally specific function, including motor, sensory, and autonomic control. Further, in distinct variants of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), distinct subsets of CSN are preferentially vulnerable such as bulbar-projecting CSN in bulbar ALS and lumbar-projecting CSN in hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP).
Previous work investigating transcriptional regulators controlling differentiation of projection neuron subtypes, such as CSN versus corticothalamic projection neurons (CThPN) versus callosal projection neurons (CPN) (reviewed in ; ; ; ; ; ), has identified that CSN development is regulated first by controls over broad corticofugal neuron differentiation, then by controls over all sub-cerebral projection neurons (SCPN), and then by CSN-specific controls ( ; ; , ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; , ). CSN-specific controls identified to date do not distinguish between hodologically distinct CSN subpopulations, and the molecular basis for the segmentally specific CSN diversity described above remains entirely unknown.
To provide a foundational framework for this eventually specific circuit establishment, we aimed in experiments presented here and in the accompanying functional investigation ( ) to identify in mice distinct, developmentally specified, segmentally specific subpopulations and investigated molecular control over CSN segmental target specificity. Using retrograde and anterograde physical and viral labeling, we find that CSN axons exhibit remarkable specificity of targeting in spinal white matter well before encountering any spinal neurons in the gray matter. CSN in the lateral sensorimotor cortex extend axons exclusively to targets in the brainstem and cervical cord (bulbar-cervical) and do not extend even transient axons past these targets. In contrast, CSN in the medial sensorimotor cortex are diverse, with a thoracolumbar-projecting subpopulation interspersed with a bulbar-cervical-projecting subpopulation. Further, these developmental axon-extension decisions in spinal white matter establish the durable foundation for later stages of segmentally distinct axon collateralization in spinal gray matter. Anatomical and molecular analyses define three segmentally distinct CSN subpopulations through development into maturity. This indicates that segmentally distinct CSN subpopulations are molecularly substantially predetermined for their segmentally specific axon targeting. In the accompanying study ( ), we functionally investigate a subset of these controls in regulating segmentally specific CSN axon targeting. These results provide reagents with potential for molecular- and circuit-level investigation of CSN organization and functional output.

## RESULTS

## Differential spinal segmental axon targeting in white matter by distinct CSN subpopulations during development
In contrast to prior methods like spinal gray matter injections ( ) and rabies tracing ( ), which can only label CSN already collateralized into the spinal gray matter, we investigated whether CSN axon targeting specificity exists from the earliest stages of axon extension to the cord before branching or innervation. We retrogradely labeled CSN from spinal white matter as axons traverse the dorsal funiculus (DF) as defined levels.
We investigated neocortical locations of CSN that project axons to only bulbar-cervical segments (CSNBC) versus CSN that project axons past T2 to thoracic and lumbar segments (CSNTL) during development. These subpopulations were selected because (1) transition from the cervical to thoracic cord reflects a functional distinction of motor control, with cervical segments executing more skilled forelimb movements; (2) studies suggest that cervical-projecting CSN represent a distinct subpopulation with seemingly more specific axon targeting ( ); (3) molecular programs downstream of Hox genes delimit cervical from thoracic circuits ( ; ), which suggests that developing CSN axons encounter distinct signals as they navigate between these segments; and (4) the transition is reliably and reproducibly identifiable.
We first differentially labeled CSNBC and CSNTL by retrograde labeling from the spinal cord of postnatal mice at thoracic T2 (to specifically label CSNTL) at P4, followed by retrograde with a distinct label at cervical C1 (to label all CSN, both CSNBC and CSNTL) at P6 ( and ). Mice were perfused at P8. We included CSNBC and CSNTL regardless of the nominal functional area in which they are located, as CSN reside in multiple cortical locations, including outside M1 ( ; ; ).
Whole-mount analysis shows that CSNTL occupy a more restricted area of the sensorimotor cortex compared to CSNBC ( ). (Approximately 25% of CSN projecting to thoracolumbar levels at P4 are later pruned by P28 [below]; we refer to CSN projecting to thoracolumbar segments at P4 as CSNTL.) We quantified the number of CSNBC versus CSNTL in the medial versus lateral cortex at four distinct rostrocaudal levels ( – and ). Similar distributions were observed when retrograde injections were performed in separate mice (data not shown). Retrograde analyses confirm that, at P4, all CSNTL are located medially ( , , , and ) and excluded from the lateral cortex ( , , , and ). While a minority of CSNTL are located in the rostral medial cortex ( , , and ), most reside in the caudomedial cortex in an area including the eventual representations of the hindlimb and part of the trunk ( ) ( , , , , , , , , and ). In contrast, CSNBC occupy a broader cortical area extending medially and laterally ( – and ). While most CSN in the caudomedial cortex are CSNTL, they are intermingled with CSNBC, and almost all CSN in the lateral cortex are CSNBC ( ). Therefore, CSN subpopulations exhibit axon targeting specificity between cervical and thoracolumbar segments early in development.

## Early axon targeting specificity by CSN in the lateral cortex is durably maintained
To confirm these retrograde labeling results, we performed anterograde labeling from distinct cortical areas with adeno-associated virus (AAV) particles engineered to express either EGFP (AAV-EGFP) or tdTomato (AAV-tdTomato). AAV-EGFP was injected into the rostrolateral cortex and AAV-tdTomato was injected into the caudomedial cortex at P0 ( – ). We analyzed labeled axons from these distinct CSN subpopulations at specific spinal levels at P4 while corticospinal tract (CST) axons are still extending toward distal targets ( ) and at P7 when they have reached the lumbar cord ( – ). As expected, CSN axons from both cortical locations are present in DF at C1 ( and ); essentially all EGFP-labeled CSN axons from the rostrolateral cortex terminate within the cervical cord, with only a few axons present at T1-T2 ( ) and none extending to L1-L2 ( ). In contrast, tdTomato-labeled CSN axons from the caudomedial cortex extend to thoracic and lumbar levels ( and ). We also investigated this differential axon targeting at P28 with equivalent results ( – , , and ). Interestingly, while axons from both the lateral and medial cortex collateralize extensively in the cervical gray matter, EGFP+ axon collaterals from CSNBC in the rostrolateral cortex occupy a more ventral location compared to tdTomato+ collaterals from the caudomedial cortex ( – ). Together, these anterograde and retrograde data define a somatotopic distribution of CSNBC versus CSNTL in the developing cortex, which persists with maturity. CSNBC in the lateral sensorimotor cortex appear relatively homogeneous, with projections exclusively to targets in the brainstem and cervical cord (bulbar-cervical), referred to here as ‘‘CSNBC-lat.’’ In contrast, CSN in the medial sensorimotor cortex (CSNmedial) project to both bulbar-cervical and thoracolumbar targets.

## CSNBC-lat do not significantly extend even transient projections past thoracic T2
We next investigated two alternative possibilities underlying this differential targeting: (1) that it arises from different rates of axon extension by these CSN subpopulations (e.g., CSNBC-lat axons might ‘‘lag behind’’ CSNmedial axons during early development, resulting in differential targeting later [at P4, P7, or P28]); or (2) CSNBC-lat axons might theoretically initially extend into the thoracic cord, with subsequent pruning between P1 and P4. We therefore investigated the time course of axon extension past T2 by CSNBC-lat and CSNmedial by retrograde labeling from C8 at P1, T2-T3 at P2, and T3-T4 at P4 ( , , and ). We find that both CSNBC-lat and CSNmedial are labeled from C8 at P1, but neither population is labeled from T2, consistent with previous results ( ). Labeling from T2 at P2 very specifically labels a small subset of CSN in the medial cortex ( – ), with a larger subset labeled from T3 to T4 at P4 ( – ); no CSN in the lateral cortex are labeled at any time investigated ( – and – ).
These experiments reveal that although axons from both subpopulations arrive at C8 by P1, they then exhibit strikingly different behaviors. CSNmedial (of which CSNTL are a subset) extend axons past T2, while CSNBC-lat do not. Further, once CSNBC-lat axons execute this decision, they maintain this specificity from P1 into maturity at P28 ( – ).

## Developmental axon extension specificity in the medial sensorimotor cortex is durably maintained
Since there is known promiscuity of CSN axon projections during development ( ), it could be possible that some of the early CSNmedial axonal projections past T2 are promiscuous and subsequently pruned between P4 and P28. In this scenario, CSNBC and CSNTL in the medial cortex could be molecularly equivalent at P4, and therefore not yet specified with regard to their later segmental axon targeting ( , schematic on the right with both populations shown in red). Alternatively, this early axon targeting specificity could reflect early developmental specification of CSN segmental projection. In this scenario, CSN projecting past T2 at P4 are already committed, and thus likely molecularly specified, toward thoracolumbar axon targeting at maturity. The medial sensorimotor cortex would therefore contain CSNTL interspersed with medial CSNBC, with the two populations already expressing distinct genes that determine their segmental target specificity ( , schematic on the left in which CSNBC are shown in purple and CSNTL are shown in red).
To directly address this question, we used an intersectional viral strategy to permanently label segmentally distinct CSN subpopulations during development to then investigate their axon projections into maturity. We injected AAV-FLEX-tdTomato into the medial sensorimotor cortex, combined with AAV-Cre into either C1 or T2 DF at P4 ( and ). AAV-Cre injection at C1 labels all CSNmedial, regardless of their segmental targets at P4 (both CSNBC and CSNTL). In contrast, AAV-Cre injected at T2 only labels CSN projecting to thoracolumbar segments (CSNTL). This approach specifically and permanently labels segmentally distinct CSN subpopulations at P4, enabling investigation of their cortical location, and eventual segmental axon targeting at P28.
All tdTomato+ CSNmedial at P28 labeled by either C1 or T2 AAV-Cre at P4 were in layer V, validating labeling specificity ( – ). tdTomato+ CSN labeled by C1 AAV-Cre reside throughout the rostrocaudal medial cortex ( – ), while most CSN labeled by T2 AAV-Cre reside more caudally in the medial cortex ( – ). These P28 results are consistent with retrograde labeling at P4.
Next, we investigated whether differential axon extension by CSNmedial at P4 is durably maintained by analyzing axon projections at P28 from CSN labeled at P4 with AAV-Cre injected at C1 (CSNmedial; both CSNBC and CSNTL) versus T2 (only CSNTL). We first quantified the number of C1-labeled tdTomato+ CSN axons present at cervical, thoracic, and lumbar levels. Of total labeled CSN axons in DF at C1, only roughly half (48% ± 13%) extend to the thoracic DF and only roughly a quarter (22% ± 7%) extend to the lumbar DF ( – and ), indicating that only approximately half of CSNmedial extend axons to the thoracolumbar cord at P28. In one outlier, all labeled CSN were CSNBC (see for details; ‘‘outlier’’ in ).
We next analyzed axon extension at P28 by CSNmedial labeled with AAV-Cre from T2 at P4 (CSNTL). In striking contrast to CSN labeled from C1, nearly 75% (74% ± 3%) of CSN labeled from T2 extend axons to the thoracic DF and more than half (54% ± 5%) extend to lumbar DF ( – and ). These results indicate that CSNTL within the medial cortex are substantially predetermined by P4 toward thoracolumbar axon projection and that this early specificity is largely and durably maintained from P4 to P28.
Together, P4 developmental retrograde analyses combined with intersectional viral labeling enable further delineation of spatially interdigitated CSN subpopulations in the medial cortex based on differential axon targeting in DF at thoracic T2: (1) CSN that extend axons to cervical cord and not beyond T2 (referred to here as CSNBC-med); and (2) CSN that extend axons past T2 to thoracolumbar segments (CSNTL) at P4, approximately 25% of which are later pruned. Further, these data indicate that axon targeting specificity by CSNBC-med versus CSNTL at P4 is largely maintained into maturity and therefore represents a first step in establishing eventual segmentally specific axon targeting.

## CSN axon targeting specificity establishes an early foundation for later segmentally distinct axon collateralization
We next investigated the extent to which specificity of axon extension in DF between CSNBC-med versus CSNTL dictates specificity of axon collateralization in the cervical versus thoracolumbar cord. We investigated at P28 the distribution of tdTomato+ axon collaterals across the entire cord by CSNmedial intersectionally labeled by AAV-Cre at P4 as described above ( ; – ). We quantified, for each mouse, the percentage of total tdTomato+ CSN axon collateral area in the cervical versus thoracic versus lumbar cord.
We find that the specificity of axon extension between CSNBC-med versus CSNTL correlates with the specificity of axon collateralization in the cervical versus thoracolumbar cord. Nearly 70% (70% ± 11%) of the total CSNmedial axon collateral area is in cervical cord ( and ), with only approximately 30% (30% ± 11%) in the thoracolumbar cord ( , , and ; ). In striking contrast, ~70% (72% ± 7%) of the CSNTL axon collateral area is present in the thoracolumbar cord ( , , and ; ), with only 30% (28% ± 7%) in the cervical cord ( and ; ). This links axon targeting specificity in spinal white matter with the specificity of axon collateralization in spinal gray matter. This finding is consistent with prior electrophysiology results in cats showing that CSN innervating caudal to thoracic T3 also collateralize at cervical levels ( ), but it also reveals that this is a relative minority.
While CSNmedial axons are ~2.3 times more likely to branch in the cervical versus thoracolumbar cord, CSNTL are four times more likely to collateralize in the lumbar cord than the overall CSNmedial population (axon collateral area in lumbar cord: CSNTL = 32% ± 5% and CSNmedial = 9% ± 4%). At P4, a CSNmedial axon extending past T2 is four times more likely to collateralize in the lumbar cord at P28.
We also investigated approximate segmental distribution of tdTomato+ CSN axon collaterals and find that the peak of CSNmedial axon collateral density occurs in spinal gray matter bins spanning C3–C7, approximately overlying the cervical enlargement ( ). In contrast, the peak of CSNTL axon collateral density occurs in spinal gray matter bins spanning L2–L5 approximately overlying the lumbar enlargement ( ). Together, these results indicate that CSNTL axons preferentially extend collaterals into thoracolumbar segments, and that early axon extension specificity at P4 at T2 establishes a durable foundation for later stages of segmentally specific axon collateralization.
Together, our retrograde and viral labeling experiments indicate that axon targeting specificity in the white matter identifies segmentally distinct subpopulations during development (CSNBC-lat, CSNBC-med, and CSNTL). CSNBC-lat reside outside the ‘‘classic’’ motor cortex in the lateral cortex and project only to bulbar-cervical segments. In contrast, in the medial sensorimotor cortex, some CSN project only to bulbar-cervical segments and not beyond (CSNBC-med), and others (CSNTL) extend axons past T2 to thoracolumbar segments. These subpopulations remain distinct into maturity, and they continue to exhibit distinct axon projection and gray matter collateralization. Further, early axon extension specificity between CSNBC-med and CSNTL appears to reflect molecularly specified diversity, with distinct interspersed subsets of medially located CSN molecularly controlled either to extend axons past T2 or to limit axon extension rostral to T2.

## Fluorescence-activated cell sorting purification and transcriptional analysis of developing CSNBC-lat versus CSNmedial reveals binary, subpopulation-specific molecular differences
We hypothesized that CSN subpopulations extending axons rostral versus caudal to T2 might express distinct regulators over differential axon targeting. We aimed to identify distinct molecular controls for each subpopulation (CSNBC-lat, CSNBC-med, and CSNTL). We took advantage of the spatial separation between CSNmedial and CSNBC-lat to selectively purify each subpopulation by retrogradely labeling CSN from C1 and micro-dissecting the rostrolateral versus caudomedial sensorimotor cortex followed by FACS purification (details and justification in the 
 ). This allowed us to prospectively isolate CSNTL, as part of the broader CSNmedial subpopulation, even before their differential axon targeting occurred (P1) and at later stages of differential targeting (P4, P7) for differential gene expression analysis ( – ).
We confirmed the reproducibility and consistency of data ( ) and used multiple statistical tools ( 
 ) to identify differentially expressed genes specifically and mutually exclusively expressed by CSNBC-lat or CSNmedial either at all three times or at specific developmental stages ( ; ).

## In situ hybridization analyses confirm binary transcriptional differences between developing CSNBC-lat versus CSNmedial and highlight further diversity within CSNmedial
We confirmed subtype-specific expression of CSNBC-lat and CSNmedial candidate genes by in situ hybridization. We first examined the expression of candidate genes previously identified as predominantly CSN specific (versus CPN; ; ). As expected, these genes are expressed in layer V, and consistent with our hypothesis, CSNBC-lat-specific genes Klhl14 ( – ), Ermin ( – ), Cartpt ( – ), and Afap1l2 ( – ) are expressed only in lateral layer V and excluded from medial layer V. Conversely, CSNmedial-specific genes Crim1 ( – ), Cry-mu ( – ), St6galnac5 ( – ), and Chst8 ( – ) are specifically expressed only in medial, but not lateral, layer V. These results identify that subsets of CSN-specific genes exhibit additional CSNBC-lat versus CSNmedial expression.
Because differentiation of CSNBC-lat versus CSNmedial might also be regulated by area-specific genes expressed across multiple projection neuron subtypes ( ), we investigated genes that are not predominantly CSN specific. For example, CSNBC-lat-specific Pappa2 ( – ) and Alcam ( – ) are also expressed by CThPN ( ; ), while Frzb ( – ) is also expressed by CPN. All of these genes are expressed in lateral, but not medial, layer V. Reciprocally, Igsf4a ( – ), Zbtb16 ( – ), and Wnt4 ( – ) are selectively expressed by CSNmedial versus CSNBC-lat but are also expressed by other projection neuron subtypes in the medial cortex. Some genes were further restricted to subpopulations of CSNmedial located at different rostrocaudal levels and might potentially represent additional segmental (thoracic versus lumbar) diversity, given that retrograde tracing from T13/L1 only labels a subset of CSNTL (lumbar-projecting ‘‘CSNL’’) in the caudomedial sensorimotor cortex ( – ). For instance, St6galnac5 is expressed throughout the medial cortex ( – ); Chst8 has graded expression from low rostral to high caudal ( – ), while Igsf4a and Wnt4 are mostly restricted to the caudomedial sensorimotor cortex ( – ). Overall, these data indicate that spatially distinct CSN subpopulations express complements of genes giving rise to considerable early molecular diversity, some of which might control their distinct segmental axon targeting and connectivity.

## Klhl14 and Crim1 expression molecularly distinguish and parcellate CSNBC-lat versus CSNTL during early development
We selected Crim1 in CSNmedial and Klhl14 in CSNBC-lat for more detailed analysis using a priori criteria (see and and ). In situ hybridization confirms that Crim1 and Klhl14 exhibit complementary expression in layer V ( – ); Klhl14 is expressed in the lateral cortex, where CSNBC-lat reside, while Crim1 is expressed in the medial cortex. Importantly, expression of both genes is absent in the Fezf2 null cortex, which completely lacks CSN ( , ; ; ), confirming their CSN specificity ( – ). We combined in situ hybridization with retrograde labeling, and we confirmed that the domain of Klhl14+ CSN in the lateral cortex does not overlap with the region occupied by CSNTL in the medial cortex ( – ). Using real-time PCR following laser-capture microdissection, we confirmed that Crim1 is enriched in CSNTL, while Klhl14 is enriched in CSNBC-lat ( – ).
We next investigated temporal expression of both Klhl14 and Crim1 ( ). Neither gene is detected in the cortical progenitors that give rise to CSN at E13.5 (data not shown). Consistent with transcriptomic analysis, Klhl14 expression peaks early, with the highest expression at E18.5 and P1 ( and ). Klhl14 levels decline in the first postnatal week, once CSNBC-lat axons begin to collateralize in cervical gray matter ( and ), with few Klhl14+ cells with low-level expression by P10 ( ). At P14, there is no detectable expression in the cortex (data not shown). Crim1 expression begins by E18.5 and peaks at P4 ( – ). Crim1 expression declines from P7 to P14 ( and ), with low-level Crim1 expression by P28 ( ). Crim1 expression remains restricted to medial layer V, i.e., where CSNTL reside ( and ), at all times. Thus, Klhl14 and Crim1 are expressed in nonoverlapping cortical domains through development.
We quantified colocalization of retrogradely labeled CSNTL with Crim1 using single molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smFISH, via RNAscope) or Cry-mu, another CSNmedial-specific gene ( ). Nearly all retrogradely labeled CSNTL (95% ± 2%) express Crim1 ( and ). In contrast, Cry-mu does not exhibit the same extent of colocalization with CSNTL; only 63% ± 5% of CSNTL express Cry-mu ( and ), suggesting that, unlike Crim1, it is also expressed by CSNBC-med.
We combined CTIP2 immunocytochemistry, CSNTL retrograde labeling, and Crim1 expression analysis ( – ) to quantify the percentage of high CTIP2+ CSNmedial that are either Crim1 positive or Crim1 negative. We identified that 66% ± 1% of CSNmedial are Crim1 positive; they reside interdigitated with a high CTIP2+, Crim1-negative (34% ± 1%) subpopulation ( and ). Strikingly, CSNBC-med comprise a very similar percentage of CSNmedial (36% ± 7%), while CSNTL comprise the remaining 64% ± 7% of CSNmedial ( ; retrograde label data from are shown again in this integrated panel). These results indicate that Crim1 delineates more than spatial separation between CSNBC-lat versus CSNmedial; Crim1 is expressed by an exceptionally high percentage of developing CSNTL and is mostly not expressed by developing CSNBC-med.

## Crim1 expression prospectively delineates a subpopulation highly enriched in CSNTL: Crim1+ CSN largely extend axons past thoracic T2 at maturity
We next investigated whether Crim1 expression at P4 might identify CSNTL prospectively—i.e., whether Crim1-expressing CSN during early development (1) maintain axon projections to thoracolumbar segments and (2) if so, whether they also collateralize more extensively in thoracolumbar gray matter.
We first bred Crim1CreERT2 (Crim1GCE) mice ( ; see ) with Thy1-STOP-YFP reporter mice ( ; ) (schematized in ). Recombination was induced in Crim1+ neurons at P0, when CST axons first reach the cord, and P3.5, when CSNTL axons are extending to thoracolumbar segments. We confirmed Cre expression by YFP+ CSN at P5 (CTIP2+, SATB2-; – , presumptive CSNTL) and that the molecular identity and axon trajectories of CSN labeled with tamoxifen at P0 and P3.5 do not differ.
We then investigated their axon projections at later stages. Crim1+ CSN axons in the internal capsule traverse medially ( and ), where anatomically identified CSNmedial axons traverse ( – ), extending to all spinal levels ( – ). We compared segmental targets of Crim1+ CSN axons, labeled by tamoxifen at P3.5, with published results examining all CSN projections to the spinal cord in CST-YFP mice ( ). The results showed that 44% ± 1% of total CSN axons at C1-C2 reach T1-T2, and less than a quarter (24% ± 0.5%) extend to L1 (calculated from ; ). In striking contrast, following tamoxifen administration at P3.5, 80% ± 4.0% of Crim1+ CSN axons in DF at C1-C2 reach T1-T2, and 71% ± 3.0% reach L1-L2 ( ). Interestingly, these percentages are similar after tamoxifen administration at P0 (76% ± 5.0% of axons at C1-C2 reach T1-T2, and 64% ± 9.0% reach lumbar L1-L2 ( ). This is striking since CSN axons have not reached the caudal cervical cord at P0, but Crim1+ CSN appear to be already partially specified to extend thoracolumbar projections. Together, these data identify that compared with the total CSN population, Crim1+ CSN largely extend axons past cervical to thoracolumbar segments.

## Crim1 expression prospectively delineates a subpopulation highly enriched in CSNTL: Crim1+ CSN axons preferentially collateralize in thoracolumbar gray matter
Because Crim1 is also expressed by spinal neurons ( ), we were not able to investigate axon branching by Crim1+ CSN using Crim1GCE; Thy1-STOP-YFP mice as described above, since their spinal gray matter is also invaded by YFP+ collaterals from Crim1+ spinal neurons ( – ). To circumvent this limitation, we employed a mouse line, Emx1-IRES-FlpO ( ), which drives FlpO recombinase expression in neocortical projection neurons, with no spinal expression ( ). We used intersectional reporter Ai65 (RCFL-tdT) mice, in which tdTomato expression occurs only upon both Cre and Flp expression ( ). We generated Crim1GCE; Emx1-IRES-FlpO; Ai65(RCFL-tdT) (referred to here as ‘‘CERai65’’) intersectional genetic reporter mice and administered tamoxifen at P3.5 (schematized in ). We confirmed that CERai65 mice eliminate all noncortical reporter expression (observed in Crim1GCE; Thy1-STOP-YFP mice). As expected, we detect YFP+ neurons in the striatum and medial septum of Crim1GCE; Thy1-STOP-YFP mice ( – ), and this labeling is eliminated in CERai65 mice. Similarly, spinal neuronal labeling in Crim1GCE; Thy1-STOP-YFP mice ( – ) is also eliminated in CERai65 mice ( – ). tdTomato expression in the medial cortex, where Crim1+ CSN reside ( – ), is maintained in CERai65 mice and tdTomato+ axons extend to all spinal levels ( – ).
We therefore utilized CERai65 mice to investigate whether segmental axonal branching by Crim1+ CSN is similar to CSNTL. We compared the Crim1+ CSN axon collateral area with CSNTL (labeled by T2 AAV-Cre at P4) and the overall CSNmedial subpopulation (labeled by C1 AAV-Cre at P4). We find that 76% ± 1% of the total Crim1+ CSN axon collateral area is distributed over thoracolumbar segments, with 24% ± 1% branched into the cervical cord ( ). Therefore, Crim1+ CSN axon collateral distribution is nearly identical to CSNTL ( and ) and distinct from overall CSNmedial ( ).
We next investigated whether segmental collateral distribution of Crim1+ CSN axons matches the distribution of CSNTL ( ). As with CSNTL, the highest peaks of the Crim1+ axon collateral area occur in the L2–L5 bins of the lumbar enlargement ( – ). We statistically compared the overall cumulative segmental axon collateral distribution between Crim1+ CSN and CSNTL as well as CSNmedial using the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test ( ). We find that the overall cumulative segmental axonal collateral distribution of Crim1+CSN is not significantly different from that of CSNTL ( ) but differs significantly from that of CSNmedial (p < 0.005; ). Moreover, Pearson pairwise correlation analyses of segmental axon collateral distribution reveal a significant correlation between Crim1+ CSN and CSNTL (Pearson correlation; r = 0.578, p < 0.003; ), but no correlation between Crim1+ CSN and CSNmedial ( ) or between CSNTL and CSNmedial ( ). These results indicate that Crim1+ CSN axons exhibit significantly different segmental collateral distribution when compared to all other CSNmedial axons. Together, the combined results of matched segmental specificity of axon targeting, matched axon collateralization within lumbar enlargement, identical cumulative segmental axon collateral distribution, and correlation of segmental collateralization strongly indicate that Crim1 expression during development is a reliable indicator for CSNTL or a subpopulation highly enriched in CSNTL.
These results validate the hypothesis that molecular delineation of defined CSN subpopulations during development can prospectively identify their segmentally distinct spinal axon connectivity into maturity. Together, these analyses enable delineation during development of CSN subpopulations with persistent distinct segmental axon targeting, well before final axon connectivity is established: (1) Klhl14 expression delineates Klhl14-positive CSNBC-lat from Klhl14-negative CSNBC-med, (2) all CSNTL are Klhl14 negative, and (3) ~95% of CSNTL express Crim1 (schematized in ).

## DISCUSSION
Segmentally specific CSN connectivity is critical for precise execution of skilled movement. Further, individual human neurodegenerative diseases predominantly affect segmentally specific CSN (e.g., bulbar ALS or HSPs). In this report, we identify (1) that segmentally specific corticospinal connectivity is initially established by axon targeting specificity and (2) that distinct CSN subpopulations are molecularly specified during development to target distinct spinal segments at maturity. We identify molecular controls that distinguish distinct CSN subpopulations during development and prospectively identify them before differential axon targeting in the cord. Thus, despite CSN sharing a broad developmental program, additional controls expressed by distinct CSN subpopulations likely control their distinct connectivity, physiology, and function.

## Topographic organization of CSN subpopulations in the sensorimotor cortex from development into maturity
Functional maps have identified CSN connectivity from distinct cortical regions, several outside M1 ( ; ; ; ; ), consistent with our findings that a substantial CSNBC subset resides outside M1. Recent work has additionally highlighted that, even in rodents, CSN residing outside M1 have distinct axon projections in the spinal gray matter, have distinct synaptic connectivity, and control distinct functional outputs in comparison with M1 projections ( ; ; ). Our results are broadly consistent with the overall topography of established functional maps in adult rodents: CSNBC are enriched in areas that will eventually be the adult forelimb cortex, and the majority of CSNTL reside in what will eventually become the hindlimb cortex ( ). Collectively, our data, combined with prior analyses in adults, indicate that the overall topography of segmentally specific CSN projections is established relatively early in development.
Our data also indicate that molecular and connectivity analyses are complementary to microstimulation experiments in more fully identifying CSN connectivity and diversity. Many cervical-projecting CSNBC-lat reside in the rostrolateral sensorimotor cortex, extending into the ‘‘jaw representation’’ ( ). From our anterograde analyses, we identify that these CSN send projections throughout the rostrocaudal extent of the cervical cord ( ). It is likely that interspersed CSN populations with jaw versus forelimb connectivity reside in the same cortical domain that would have been identified by microstimulation as the ‘‘jaw area.’’ There are likely other subsets of interspersed projections with connectivity distinct from previously functionally identified cortical domains. This indicates that while microstimulation can identify the presence of CSN connectivity, the absence of movement by microstimulation does not mean an absence of projection from a cortical area to a specific spinal level.
CSNBC-lat cervical collaterals extend more ventrally than cervical collaterals from CSNmedial, which is reminiscent of CSN collaterals from the rostral versus caudal forelimb cortex in cats ( ). CSNBC-lat projections might play distinct function(s) compared to CSNmedial projections; for example, digit movement in rats is almost entirely evoked by stimulating RFA and not CFA ( ). Future investigations of now molecularly distinct CSN subpopulations can elucidate their contributions to distinct aspects of motor control and nonmotor functions.

## CSNBC and CSNTL exhibit striking axon targeting specificity during development
Previous studies using diffusible dyes suggested some promiscuity of axon extension by which some CSN axons from the forelimb motor cortex extended to the lumbar cord ( ). Our approach of using intersectional viral labeling during development directly addresses this question of promiscuity versus specificity of axon extension during development. We find that there is some promiscuity of axon targeting, with ~25% of CSNmedial projecting to T2 at P4, pruning this projection by P28. However, ~75% of these P4 projections are still present at P28, indicating that axon extension specificity from precircuit development is largely maintained. This early axon segmental targeting specificity of CSNTL also appears to establish the specificity of axon collateralization in the spinal gray matter at thoracolumbar versus cervical segments, with 70% versus 30% of total CSNTL spinal collateral area within these segmental regions, respectively.
We find that CSNBC-lat versus CSNTL differential targeting is not due to either differences in axon extension rates, or promiscuous growth with later pruning, but likely reflects tight molecular control over axon extension by molecularly distinct subpopulations (investigated in ). This might reflect additional levels of control over connectivity between CSN subpopulations, since ‘‘promiscuous’’ CSN reside in M1, and we identify them as distinct from CSNBC-lat, anatomically and molecularly. We speculate that CSNBC-lat targeting specificity reflects tighter control for specialized function.

## Identification of CSNBC-med as a distinct subpopulation in the medial sensorimotor cortex
Consistent with previous investigations ( ), we find CSN subpopulations that innervate both cervical and lumbar segments. These previous investigations injected tracers into spinal gray matter at cervical C7 or lumbar L4, thereby focusing on CSN that had already collateralized into those gray matter segments. Our results indicate that these dual, cervical- and lumbar-projecting CSNare a subset of CSNTL. However, we injected retrograde tracers and AAV vectors directly into DF (i.e., white matter), which identified all axons projecting to and beyond that spinal level; tracer injection at T2 labels all CSN projecting past the cervical cord to thoracolumbar segments, not just projections at T2. This key difference enabled us to screen entire subpopulations, rather than sampling CSN innervation at just two levels. Therefore, while prior studies ( ) established that some CSNarborize at both C7 and L4, they could not identify the presence of CSNBC-med, which we now identify as an anatomically and molecularly distinct CSN subpopulation in the medial cortex.

## Segmentally distinct CSN subpopulations are molecularly distinct, including differential expression of genes known to direct CST pathfinding
We find that some genes differentially expressed by CSNBC-lat versus CSNmedial can function in modulating downstream signaling known to regulate CSN axon growth, such as insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-I) ( ) and Wnt-Ryk ( ). CSNBC-lat express genes known to negatively regulate these mechanisms. For example, CSNBC-lat express pappalysin 2 (Pappa2), which cleaves IGFBP-5 ( ). IGFBP5 normally augments IGF signaling in the brain ( ; ); thus, its cleavage is expected to negatively regulate IGF signaling. CSNBC-lat also express Frizzled related protein (Frzb), a known Wnt inhibitor in the CNS ( ; ) ( ). Conversely, CSNmedial-specific genes include positive regulators of pathways that promote CSN axon growth: (1) Wnt ligands Wnt4 and Wnt5a ( ; and ) and (2) genes positively regulating the thyroid hormone (TH) pathway, which is required for CST extension to the lumbar cord ( ), including Mu-crystallin (Cry-mu) ( ) and Slc16a2 ( ; ) ( ; ).
Finally, more subtly graded expression differences over space and time are likely to be important in the fine control of targeting and final connectivity. Molecular differences at later developmental times likely control collateral branching, synaptic connectivity, and pruning. CSN collateralization occurs at distinct times between cervical and lumbar segments ( ; ), which is possibly regulated by such distinct molecular controls. Further, in addition to genes exhibiting sharp boundaries, we also identified CSN-specific genes exhibiting gradients of expression. While these are more highly expressed by one CSN subpopulation versus another, this suggests that gene dosage might affect differential connectivity.

## Crim1 expression prospectively identifies a segmentally distinct CSN subpopulation
We previously identified Crim1 as CSN specific ( ; ) and Crim1+ cortical neurons extend subcortical axons ( ). Here, we find that Crim1 expression by CSN during development predicts largely thoracolumbar projection at maturity. Crim1 expression is regulated by area-specific controls, such as Ctip1 ( ). However, Crim1 specificity goes beyond CSN spatial locations, with interspersed Crim1-positive and Crim1-negative subpopulations in the medial cortex, indicating that Crim1 expression is not only controlled by areal patterning mechanisms. Acquisition of cortical projection neuron subtype identity involves specification of SCPN versus CThPN and CPN. Delineation of CSN subpopulations via Crim1 expression likely reflects more specific refinement of subtype identity acquisition. Fezf2, a critical determinant of SCPN, and other known molecular controls required for establishing SCPN identity (e.g., Ctip2) are not differentially expressed between CSNBC-lat and CSNmedial. Therefore, transcriptional control over Crim1 expression is likely mediated by additional interconnected mechanisms, yet to be identified.

## Subpopulation-specific molecular controls have relevance for motor neuron disease
CSN degeneration in motor neuron diseases, such as ALS ( ), HSP ( ), and primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) ( ; ), causes spasticity, dyscoordination, and paralysis. ALS and related CSN diseases exhibit well-known heterogeneity; for example, brainstem-projecting CSN preferentially degenerate in bulbar ALS, and primarily lumbar-projecting CSN degenerate in HSP. Early developmental controls, when dysregulated and/or when they have unique function in a specialized subtype, might predispose CSN subpopulations for preferential vulnerability to later degeneration in maturity. This might be due to increased complexity, an inherent increase in vulnerability with specific circuitry maturation, imperfect circuitry formation, and/or other causes.
It is now clear that multiple mechanisms cause ALS ( ) and that subtle interactions of genetics with other factors might lead to subtype-specific vulnerability. There is emerging evidence that molecular controls over CSN development are important candidate genes linked to CSN disease. Resequencing of CSN developmental genes ( ) has identified novel candidate ALS-disease genes, including Crim1 and Cry-mu investigated here ( ).

## Implications for organization, plasticity, and evolution of cortical function in motor control
The results presented here might also shed light on CST plasticity after spinal cord injury (SCI), in which changes in segmental innervation have been reported. Such plasticity has been extensively studied in both animal models ( ; ) and humans ( ). For example, after thoracic SCI, CSN in the hindlimb cortex increase collateralization into the cervical cord ( ). This has been presumed to reflect increased sprouting by lumbar-projecting CSN (likely CSNTL) axons into the cervical cord. Our data that CSNBC-med and CSNTL are spatially interdigitated suggest that, rather than solely cervical collateralization by CSNTL axons in such cases, there might be increased collateralization by axons from CSNBC-med. Future experiments using Crim1-labeled CSNTL axons (e.g., using CERai65 mice) might distinguish between these possibilities.
M1 in primates can be divided into an ‘‘older’’ and ‘‘newer’’ M1 based on the absence or presence of CM cells (cortico-motoneuronal cells, i.e., CSN with monosynaptic connections on spinal motor neurons) that are critical for fine dexterous movement ( ; ). Skilled movements are now known to be phylogenetically older than primates, present in rodents, especially in the forelimb ( ). This correlates with an increase in cortical representation of the forelimb versus hindlimb, even in mice ( ). We find that CSNBC-lat largely reside in the evolutionarily newer cortex ( ) and that CSNBC-lat-specific Klhl14 is a relatively recent evolutionary addition; Klhl14 orthologs are present in vertebrates, but not invertebrates (no orthologs in Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, or Ciona intestinalis; data from https://ensembl.org). Conversely, a significant number of CSNmedial-specific genes, including Crim1, are also expressed in the cingulate cortex, a phylogenetically older region.
Klhl14 expression is conserved in the developing human neocortex ( ). At 21 weeks postconception (pc), Klhl14 is expressed in the cortical plate and excluded from germinal zones. Further, Klhl14 is highly expressed at 21 weeks pc, and its levels sharply decline after 24 weeks pc ( ), coincident with CSN axons reaching cervical C8 ( ). Hence, similar to mice, Klhl14 is expressed by human postmitotic neurons in development; its levels decline once CSN axons reach the caudal cervical cord.
Our identification of molecular controls that distinguish segmentally specific CSN subpopulations offers insight (1) into the precision of circuit development for motor control and (2) into potential abnormalities of their development that might underlie later disease vulnerability. These results suggest that early regulators play critical roles in establishing specificity of corticospinal connectivity. In the accompanying study ( ), we functionally investigate a subset of these genes identifying their role(s) in controlling segmentally specific CSN axon targeting. Future investigations will likely identify additional nested subpopulations with more molecular diversity, highlighting potentially even greater early differentiation and specialization of CSN during early development that underlie the establishment of this complex motor control circuitry.

## STAR★METHODS

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Dr. Jeffrey D. Macklis (jeffrey_macklis@harvard.edu).

## Materials availability
We plan to deposit Emx1-IRES-FlpO mice to the Jackson Laboratory or MMRC. All unique/stable reagents generated in this study are available with a materials transfer agreement from the lead contact for academic, non-commercial use; negotiation and completion of a materials transfer agreement with Harvard University is required if there is potential for commercial application.

## Data and code availability
The microarray data profiling lateral versus medial CSN subpopulations at P1, P4, and P7 have been deposited at GEO and are publicly available. Accession number is listed in the . Gene intensities using Rosetta Resolver for all genes have been deposited on Mendeley and are publicly available. The DOI is listed in the . Microscopy data reported in this paper will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
No original code was generated as part of this study.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Mice used in this study
Wild-type mice on a pure C57BL/6 and CD1 background were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA). The day of vaginal plug detection was designated as E0.5. The day of birth was designated as P0. All mouse studies were approved by the Harvard University IACUC, and were performed in accordance with institutional and federal guidelines. Thy1-STOP-YFP mice were generously provided by Dr. Joshua Sanes at Harvard University. Fezf2 –/– mice were generated previously ( ) and have been previously described ( ).
Crim1GCE mice ( ) were obtained from Jackson Laboratories; they contain an EGFP coding sequence followed by a tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase coding sequence placed 3′ to the ATG of the first codon. The original depositing investigator observed no EGFP expression, and we confirm no EGFP expression at any age. Cre was induced using tamoxifen (Sigma) dissolved in corn oil (Sigma). A 3.5 mg/ml stock solution was prepared, and each pup received 350 μg (100 μL of stock / pup). For investigating and quantification of axon segmental targeting by Crim1+ CSN axons, we used Crim1GCE; Thy1-STOP-EYFP double heterozygous mice. These mice were pulsed with tamoxifen either at P0 ( ) or at P3.5 ( , – , – , , and ).
Emx1-IRES-FlpO mice were generated and validated ( ) following the same strategy employed by Jones and colleagues( ) to introduce an IRES-FlpO cassette into the 3′ untranslated region of the Emx1 gene.
Ai65 (RCFL-tdT) mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories (stock number 21875), and genotyped using their recommended protocol.
For establishing CERai65 triple transgenic mice, we bred generated Crim1GCE/+, Emx1-IRES-FlpO/+, and ai65 (RCFL-tdT)/+ mice to obtain Crim1GCE/+; Emx1-IRES-FlpO homozygous; ai65 (RCFL-tdT) homozygous mice. These mice were then pulsed with tamoxifen (as described above) and used for downstream analyses of axon projection targeting and collateralization.
The genders of early postnatal mice were not determined. Mice were used at the following ages:
Crim1GCE mice: were used at P5; both males and females were used at P15, and at P24.
Thy1-STOP-EYFP mice: were used at P5; both males and females were used at P15.
Emx1-IRES-FlpO mice: both males and females were used at P24.
Ai65 (RCFL-tdT) mice: both males and females were used at P24.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Anterograde and retrograde labeling
CSN were retrogradely labeled bilaterally from specific spinal levels by injecting the retrograde label Cholera Toxin B subunit (CTB; Thermo Scientific) into each side of the midline using ultrasound backscatter microscopy (Vevo 770; VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada) via a pulled glass micropipette with a nanojector (Nanoject II, Drummond Scientific, Broomall, PA). For cervical and thoracic cord labeling (P1, P2, and P4), we counted the vertebral segments from C1 to C8. An identical approach was used to inject AAV-Cre at P4 into cervical C1 versus thoracic T2 for intersectional viral labeling experiments. The landmark for labeling CSN whose axons reach thoracic T12/13 -lumbar L1 was determined by examining the relative position of the vertebral column as it approaches the dorsal surface of the body (moving from caudal thoracic levels rostrally, where the column is located more deeply and closer to the viscera, to lumbar levels caudally, where the column is situated closer to the dorsal surface). The central landmarks for all intraspinal injections are the midline, vertebral bodies, dorsal aspect of the spinal cord, and echo density in the dorsal funiculus. For these neonatal injections, pups were anesthetized under ice for 4 minutes. The pups were placed on a heating pad for recovery.
For AAV-mediated anterograde labeling, AAV2/1 particles expressing fluorescent protein were injected at P0 into specific cortical sub-regions under guidance by ultrasound backscatter microscopy, using techniques similar to those described above. The central landmarks for the intracranial injections that provide both accuracy and precision are the midline, dorsal and lateral aspects of the lateral ventricle, anterior aspect of the hippocampus, posterolateral aspect of the striatum, corpus callosum, and its genu. All virus work was approved by the Harvard Committee on Microbiological Safety, and conducted according to institutional guidelines.

## Retrograde labeling and FACS purification
Green fluorescent microspheres (LumaFluor, Naples, FL) were injected under guidance by high-resolution ultrasound backscatter microscopy into the cerebral peduncle at the midbrain-hindbrain boundary at P0, or into the CST at cervical segments C1/C2 at P3 and P5.5. Twenty-four hours (P0 and P3 injection) or 36 hr (P5.5 injection) later, neocortical tissue was microdissected for dissociation. The meninges were removed from fluorescently-labeled cortices. A custom-designed multi-blade microtome was used to precisely and distinctly microdissect the rostrolateral and caudomedial regions of motor cortex, using a fluorescence dissecting microscope to precisely visualize the labeled cortical regions during dissection (shown stepwise in ). Retrogradely labeled neurons from each sub-region were purified by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) using established methods ( ; ; ).

## Experimental approach for purifying CSN subpopulations for transcriptional analysis
We aimed to identify candidate molecular controls distinct for each subpopulation– CSNBC-lat, CSNBC-med, and CSNTL– that controlled their differential axon targeting. One possible approach might have been to differentially label CSNBC-med and CSNTL by using distinct retrograde labels from cervical versus thoracic cord (as in ) once this axon targeting had been established, then transcriptionally analyze these differentially labeled subpopulations. However, this approach would not detect earlier molecular differences and controls over CSN axon targeting that might be downregulated by the time distinct axonal targeting is actually achieved. We reasoned from much prior knowledge in the field of cortical projection neuron development, identifying a number of early-expressed transcriptional controls that are absent or substantially downregulated by P0-P4, that it would be likely that relevant controls over spinal segmental targeting might be similarly substantially downregulated once their early axon targeting functions had been served (and the earliest possible stage to label from thoracolumbar segments would have been P4).
We used an alternative approach to discover earlier molecular controls. Since CSNBC-lat are relatively homogeneous, with only bulbar-cervical projections, we compared CSNBC-lat gene expression with the more heterogeneous CSNmedial subpopulation (which includes CSNTL). We performed transcriptional analysis at developmentally informative stages to identify candidate gene expression that might be specifically required for CSNTL axon projection past cervical cord. For example, at P4, CSNTL are the only CSN in medial cortex that project axons past the cervical cord toward thoracolumbar segments, so potential early molecular controls over axon extension to distal spinal segments would be predicted to be expressed only by the CSNTL subset of CSNmedial (and not at all by CSNBC-lat).
We isolated CSNmedial and CSNBC-lat at developmentally critical stages of P1, P4, and P7. At P1, CSNmedial and CSNBC-lat axons have simultaneously reached only the cervical cord–CSNBC-lat axons have halted their white matter extension, while CSNmedial axons will continue white matter extension. At P4, CSNBC-lat axons are innervating the cervical cord, while a subset of CSNmedial (CSNTL) are extending axons through thoracic cord. At P7, CSNTL are innervating thoracic and lumbar target segments.
We purified CSNBC-lat and CSNmedial from rostrolateral versus caudomedial cortex respectively, via fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) following retrograde labeling with green fluorescent microspheres under high-resolution ultrasound backscatter microscopic guidance. We performed retrograde labeling from cervical C1 at P0, P3, or P5.5 for purification of CSN subpopulations at P1, P4, and P7, respectively
We microdissected the non-overlapping rostrolateral versus caudomedial regions of developing sensorimotor cortex ( – ) using a custom-made four-blade instrument to microdissect 700 μm tissue blocks. We then dissociated isolated neuron suspensions ( ) using our previously validated approaches ( ; ; ; ) and performed differential gene expression analysis.

## Affymetrix microarrays
RNA samples for microarrays were collected from independent FACS purifications from each age to rigorously validate reproducibility and significance (n = 2 for P4 and P7; n = 3 for P1). Samples were hybridized to Mouse Genome Affymetrix 430.2 arrays (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) arrays per Affymetrix GeneChip Expression Analysis protocol, stained using an Affymetrix GeneChip Fluidics Station 450, and scanned with a GeneChip Scanner 3000. All microarray data have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database at NCBI (Accession GSE77311).
Data files from microarrays were uploaded via Rosetta Resolver software (version 5.0; Rosetta Biosoftware, Seattle, WA) for normalization and intensity ratio calculations, or with Bioconductor (www.bioconductor.org) for normalization with three independent methods: (1) Microarray Suite 5.0 (MAS5), in which arrays are scaled to have the same mean value; (2) Robust Multi-Array Analysis (RMA), which normalizes the data at the probe level, and across all microarrays; (3) GC-RMA, a modification of RMA, which accounts for GC content of the individual probes. Statistical analysis was performed by pairwise comparisons at each age with Rosetta Resolver, or with Statistical Analysis of Microarrays (SAM; performed on RMA, GC-RMA and MAS5 normalized data). The temporal expression profile plots are intensities obtained from the Rosetta Resolver software ( and ). Error bars represent standard error of mean (SEM).
We applied a cut-off of a ≥ 2-fold difference in expression with a p value ≤ 0.005 based on Rosetta Resolver parameters, to select genes significantly differentially expressed between the two CSN subpopulations. In addition, we performed cross-correlation with other statistical approaches such as Statistical Analysis of Microarrays (SAM) (applied to data normalized with RMA, GCRMA or MAS5). Although different statistical methods can include some differences in highly significant genes, genes that are repeatedly top ranking are highly likely to be true positives.

## Validating reproducibility of Microarray data
We confirmed the reproducibility and consistency of data by comparing gene expression between independent biological replicates (3 replicates for P1, and 2 replicates each for P4, and P7). Correlation coefficients for biological replicates range from 0.96 to 0.99, indicating high reliability of the data. Anterograde and retrograde analyses (presented in and ) identify that CSNBC-lat represents a relatively more homogeneous subpopulation as compared to CSNmedial. Consistent with this, we find that CSNBC-lat biological replicates are more highly correlated than CSNmedial biological replicates ( ) likely reflecting the heterogeneity in CSNmedial (which includes both CSNBC-med + CSNTL).

## Statistical criteria used for selecting candidate genes from microarray data for further analysis
Genes differentially expressed in lateral sensorimotor cortex are expressed specifically by CSNBC-lat. However, since CSNBC-med and CSNTL are interdigitated in medial sensorimotor cortex, genes differentially expressed by CSNmedial might be expressed either by CSNBC-med or CSNTL or both subpopulations. Our combined anterograde and retrograde analyses identified P4 as the peak time of CSNTL axon extension toward distal spinal segments. Therefore, to molecularly delineate CSNTL, as a distinct subset within CSNmedial, we specifically investigated genes that exhibited peak differential expression by CSNmedial at P4. Our hypothesis was that such genes might control axon extension to distal spinal segments and would therefore be expressed only by CSNTL and not CSNBC-med, and not at all by CSNBC-lat. This would therefore enable molecular delineation of CSNTL as a molecularly distinct subpopulation within CSNmedial. In addition, CSNBC-lat axons target the cervical cord at P1 ( – ). We therefore investigated genes that are differentially expressed by CSNBC-lat at P1 to identify potential molecular controls that potentially limit CSNBC-lat axon extension to the cervical cord. We next detail the criteria utilized for identifying such candidate genes for further analyses.
We prioritized candidate genes for additional expression analysis and functional investigation based on three central criteria: (1) we examined genes found to be most statistically significantly differentially expressed by either subpopulation; (2) we examined temporal expression, and prioritized genes exhibiting peak differential expression at P1 in CSNBC-lat (when they target cervical cord) and P4 in CSNmedial (when CSNTL target thoracic and lumbar cord); and (3) we cross-referenced these potential top candidates with published datasets of genes with CSN-specific expression (using our previously published analyses comparing CSN with CPN, CThPN, and corticotectal projection neurons ( ; ; ), and the DeCoN database ( )). We prioritized genes that exhibit CSN-specific expression (in comparison with CPN and CThPN). Of the top ranked CSNmedial genes that are differentially expressed at P4, Crim1 (cysteine rich transmembrane BMP regulator 1) is the highest ranked gene that exhibits CSN specificity (genes highlighted in red font in ). While other genes are ranked higher than Crim1 based solely on level of differential expression and significance (e.g., Gpr88, Hmgb1), these genes either exhibit no enrichment by CSN (e.g., Hmgb1) or exhibit significantly higher expression levels in other projection neuron populations (e.g., Cav1, Gpr88 are highly expressed by CPN). Further, Crim1 differential expression is highly statistically significant only at P4, and not at the other two times examined - P1 or P7 ( , ), indicating that Crim1 exhibits peak differential expression just when CSNTL axons target thoracolumbar cord. Kelch-like 14 (Klhl14) is the highest ranked differentially expressed gene for CSNBC-lat ( ). Using these a priori criteria, the highest ranked CSN-specific genes are Crim1 in CSNmedial and Klhl14 in CSNBC-lat, each showing peak differential expression at the appropriate times for each CSN subpopulation (Crim1 by two separate probes, overall SAM RMA ranks 5, 45; Klhl14 by two separate probes, overall SAM RMA ranks 1, 3; see and ).
Interestingly, microarray analysis finds ~1.7-fold enrichment of Crim1 in CSNmedial at P1 (compared to ~5-fold enrichment at P4). This suggests that, even though CSNTL exhibit relatively selective Crim1 expression at P0, differential analysis comparing overall CSNmedial at P1 was unable to stringently detect this selective expression. This is likely because this modest enrichment is diluted by heterogeneity of CSNmedial.

## Generation of AAV particles
AAV2/1 particles were generated at the Massachusetts General Hospital Virus Core using established protocols ( ). EGFP (for AAV-EGFP), and tdTomato (for AAV-tdTomato) coding sequences were cloned into a shuttle plasmid that contains the following elements flanked by AAV2 ITRs: a CMV/b-actin promoter to drive the expression of the gene of interest, followed by the woodchuck hepatitis virus post-transcriptional regulatory element (WPRE), a bovine GH pA signal, and an SV40 pA signal.
AAV8 hsyn-GFP-Cre was obtained from the vector core at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC Vector Core). This virus is retrogradely trafficked at a lower efficiency, which enabled accurate and reproducible visualization of individually labeled CSN axons in the cord. AAV2/1 CAG-FLEX-tdTomato (originally generated by the Allen Institute) was obtained from the vector core at the University of Pennsylvania.

## Immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization
Brains were fixed and stained using standard methods ( ; ; ). Primary antibodies and dilutions used: rat anti-CTIP2, 1:500 (Abcam); chicken anti-GFP, 1:500 (Invitrogen); rabbit anti-GFP, 1:500 (Invitrogen); rabbit anti-RFP 1:500 (Rockland Immunochemicals), mouse anti-SATB2, 1:500 (Abcam). In situ hybridization was performed as previously described( ; ; ). cDNA clones for riboprobes are listed in . Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for Cry-mu using DIG-labeled probes was performed as previously described( ).

## Single molecule Crim1 in situ hybridization
Single molecule in situ hybridization was performed using the RNAscope 2.5 HD RED kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Advanced Cell Diagnostics). In brief, 16 μm thick brain cryosections were mounted onto glass slides in phosphate buffer (pH 7.2), airdried, and baked at 60°C for 30 min, followed by pretreatment with hydrogen peroxide for 10 min, target retrieval, and ethanol dehydration. After the pretreatment with Protease Plus (1:10 diluted in PBS) at 40°C for 30 min, brain sections were incubated with Crim1 probe (550751, Entrez Gene: NM_015800.3) at 40°C for 2 h, and the standard RNAscope protocol was followed. Incubation time of amplification step 5 and color reaction were optimized at 12 min and 5 min, respectively.

## Laser-capture microdissection and quantitative PCR
35 μm sections of labeled brains were stained for EGFP, and mounted on membrane PEN slides (Carl Zeiss). Labeled neurons were visualized, and captured into adhesive cap tubes (Carl Zeiss) using a PALM laser microdissection system (Carl Zeiss) using a uv laser to cut and flip tissue samples directly into inverted adhesive caps placed above slides. RNA was extracted using an RNeasy FFPE kit (QIAGEN). Reverse transcription was performed using random hexamers and Thermoscript reverse transcriptase (Fisher Scientific). Real time PCR was performed using SYBR® Green PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher) on a Realplex4 cycler (Eppendorf). We confirmed the specificity and size of the amplicons by running the PCR product on agarose gels, and by melting curve analysis. For Klhl14-overexpression experiments, data were analyzed using an unpaired two-sided t test. The PCR primers are listed in .

## Imaging and quantification
For analysis of retrogradely labeled CSN from cervical versus thoracic levels, 50 μm coronal brain sections of retrogradely labeled brains were imaged on an Axioscan Z1. We set a priori anatomical criteria for distinguishing medial versus lateral locations of CSN in sensorimotor cortex. For counting CSN distributed in medial versus lateral locations in cortex, images of coronal brain sections at specific rostro-caudal levels (shown in ) were binned into 5 medio-lateral bins spanning the width of each cortical hemisphere, and medial versus lateral distinction was made by combining the 3 medial bins for medial CSN counts and the 2 lateral bins for lateral CSN counts. We confirmed reproducibility of this binning by also evaluating the separation of medial versus lateral cortical locations with respect to histological landmarks in each section. At the mid-rostral level, the lateral edge of the medial bin aligns with lateral aspect of the striatum. At the mid-caudal and caudal levels, the barrels in primary somatosensory cortex (S1) were completely included in the two lateral bins. At the caudal level, the hippocampus was completely included in medial cortex. CSNmedial include all CSN in agranular cortex, including both primary and secondary motor cortex. Therefore, primary motor cortex, including the transition zone between agranular motor cortex and granular sensory cortex, is completely included in medial cortex. This medial versus lateral division aligned with and informed the 700 μm tissue blocks that were made on retrogradely labeled brains following microdissection for FACS purification of spatially distinct CSN subpopulations. Both cortical hemispheres were analyzed for each mouse, and every labeled neuron was counted in each section using the Cell Counter function in ImageJ.
For analysis of collateral distribution, CSN axonal collaterals in intersectional viral labeling experiments were visualized by native tdTomato fluorescence from AAV-FLEX-tdTomato. Crim1+ CSN axonal collaterals in CERai65 mice were first amplified using anti-RFP antibody (Rockland Immunochemicals) before imaging and analysis. All serial horizontal 70 μm spinal cord sections were imaged on an Axioscan Z1 (Carl Zeiss Microscopy). Each section was imaged in its entirety, from rostral to caudal and in the Z axis. These Z stacks were collapsed using the ‘‘Extended Depth of Focus’’ function on ZEN blue 2.6 image processing software (Carl Zeiss Microscopy). Collapsed images of each section were then exported as a single TIF image and imported into Adobe Photoshop. Each individual section (from dorsal to ventral) was manually aligned with its nearest neighbor using its rostral and caudal ends and its midline as landmarks. For quantification of collateral area, we first identified the boundary between gray and white matter in the spinal cord using Hoechst counter stain. The white matter was then cropped out from all the sections that contained it including the labeled, tdTomato+ corticospinal tract. TdTomato+ pixels in the spinal gray matter (representing CSN axonal collaterals) were then identified by thresholding in NIH ImageJ. The total area of thresholded pixels was measured using the ‘‘Analyze Particles’’ function, and the percentage of total area present in the entire cervical, thoracic, and lumbar cord was calculated. For the binned segmental analysis, the thresholded images of each section were first divided into the appropriate number of bins (7 in cervical, 12 in thoracic, 5 in lumbar) in Adobe Photoshop using the ‘‘Divide Slice’’ tool, and each slice was imported and analyzed in NIH ImageJ as above. For 3D rendering, aligned horizontal sections of the spinal cord were imported as an image stack in NIH ImageJ, and the rendered using the 3D project function.
For all quantification of axon counts ( and ) quantification on axial sections, 60X confocal Z stacks of the entire CST in the dorsal funiculus were obtained on either a BioRad Radiance 2000 or Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope. Cervical, thoracic, and lumbar cord axial sections were imaged using identical parameters. Axons were counted manually in each section using the Cell Counter function in ImageJ.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The details of imaging quantification methodologies have been described in . All n values, as well as p values obtained are also listed in the figure legends. GraphPad Prism version 8 was used to perform statistical tests in this study.
Data distributions were assumed to be normal, but this was not formally tested. No statistical methods were used to pre-determine sample sizes. For axon counts comparing intersectional viral labeling with Crim1+ axons in Crim1GCE mice, we used a one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s posthoc test. For comparing the total collateral area and binned collateral area distribution between cervical AAV-Cre versus thoracic AAV-Cre injected mice, we used a two-sided t test. For, comparing segmentally binned axonal collateral distribution between Crim1CreERT2-labeled CSN axons and CSN axons labeled using intersectional viral labeling with either cervical versus thoracic AAV-Cre, we used a two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test as well as Pearson correlation in GraphPad Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA).
The reason for employing distinct statistical tests to investigate axon extension versus axon collateralization is because analysis metric of axon collateralization is quite different from the metric of white matter axon extension. For axon extension analyses, axon numbers are counted at specific sites along the thoracic cord. Because this is not a cumulative distribution, we employed the statistically appropriate ANOVA. For the axon collateralization analysis in the spinal gray matter, we measured the total axonal collateral area throughout the entire spinal gray matter, then analyzed the percentage of this total collateral area at each spinal segmental bin from cervical C2 to lumbar L6. Since this is a cumulative distribution (total percentage across all bins equals 100%), we used the two sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, in which the null hypothesis states that there is no difference between the cumulative distributions being compared.

## Supplementary Material
124567891011

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Erica Gornstein, Ryan Richardson, Gustav Cederquest, Lincoln Pasquina, Ted Yamamoto, Aaron Wheeler, Eva Gillis-Buck, Thomas Addison, and Bonnie Wall for technical assistance; members of the Macklis laboratory for input; and the Harvard Center for Biological Imaging for infrastructure support. This work was supported by the NIH (grants R01NS045523 and R01NS075672 and additional infrastructure grants NS049553, NS104055, and DP1NS1066 65), the ALS Association, the Packard Center for ALS Research at Johns Hopkins, the Travis Roy Foundation, and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (to J.D.M.). V.S. was partially supported by the NIH (NTRAIN/Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development [NICHD] grant K12HD093427) and the DEARS Foundation. S.J.S. was partially supported by the NIH (predoctoral Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award [NRSA] F31NS063516). Y.I. had partial support from the Uehara Memorial Foundation, the Kanae Foundation, the Murata Overseas Scholarship Foundation, and the DEARS Foundation. L.C.G. was partially supported by the Harvard Medical Scientist Training Program, the NIH (predoctoral NRSA F31 NS080343), and the DEARS Foundation. J.D.M. is an Allen Distinguished Investigator of the Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109843.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
 

## Highlights
Developing corticospinal axons specifically target spinal segments before connectivity
Corticospinal neurons (CSN) targeting distinct segments are molecularly distinct
CSNBC-med is an anatomically and molecularly distinct subpopulation
CSN subpopulations can be prospectively identified through development into maturity