ACS Cent SciACS Cent Sci2967acscentsci101660035ocACS Central Science2374-79432374-7951American Chemical SocietyPMC8161478PMC8161478.1816147881614783407989310.1021/acscentsci.0c014481OutlookThe Masking Game: Design of Activatable Antibodies
and Mimetics for Selective Therapeutics and Cell Control
LucchiRobertaBentanachsJordihttp://orcid.org/0000-0002-8140-6111Oller-SalviaBenjamí Grup d’Enginyeria
de Materials, Institut Químic de
Sarrià (IQS), Universitat Ramon Llull, 08017 Barcelona, Spain*Email: benjami.oller@iqs.url.edu.26042021260520217538274172473826102020260420210106202101112023© 2021 The Authors. Published
by American
Chemical Society2021The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
The high selectivity
and affinity of antibody binding have made
antibodies all-pervasive tools in therapy, diagnosis, and basic science.
A plethora of chemogenetic approaches has been devised to make antibodies
responsive to stimuli ranging from light to enzymatic activity, temperature,
pH, ions, and effector molecules. Within a single decade, the field
of activatable antibodies has yielded marketed therapeutics capable
of engaging antigens that could not be targeted with traditional antibodies,
as well as new tools to control intracellular protein location and
investigate biological processes. Many opportunities remain untapped,
waiting for more efficient and generally applicable masking strategies
to be developed at the interface between chemistry and biotechnology.

The combination of chemistry and genetic
modification has
yielded within the past decade a plethora of antibodies responsive
to environmental cues. Activatable antibodies enable engaging therapeutic
antigens that could not be targeted with traditional antibodies and
provide new tools to investigate biological systems.

European Commission10.13039/100010665MSCA- IF 844441Institut QuÃ Â­mic de SarriÃ Â NANAAgÃ Â¨ncia de GestiÃ Â³ d''Ajuts Universitaris i de Recerca10.13039/501100002809SGR 2017 1559Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities10.13039/100014440FPU19/03216pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9oc0c01448document-id-new-14oc0c01448ccc-price1

## Activatable Antibodies for Every Stimulus
Antibodies are extensively exploited in therapy, diagnosis, and
basic science due to their high affinity and selectivity. The field of antibody engineering appeared to
reach its maturity with the discovery of directed evolution to optimize
binding, with humanization to decrease immunogenicity, and, more recently,
with the possibility to target cytotoxic molecules to cancer cells
and to engineer bispecific molecules that engage immune cells. However, in the past decade, several technologies
that render antibodies activatable under particular stimuli have unravelled
new avenues for antibodies as therapeutics and as probes to investigate
biological systems.
A plethora of approaches, many of them combining
chemistry and
genetic modification, has been devised to make antibodies responsive
to endogenous or exogenous cues ranging from light to enzymatic activity,
temperature, pH, ions, effector molecules, and antigen combinations
( ). Remarkably,
many antibodies sensitive to pH and proteases are in clinical development,
and two of them have recently been approved for clinical use. Other
antibodies responsive to light, effector molecules, and the presence
of antigen combinations show great promise in the control of molecular
and cellular processes. Alternative approaches to modulate binding
of antibodies without modifying them, such as engineering of activatable
antigens and encapsulation , are beyond the scope of this review.
 Herein, we will provide a critical assessment of the chemogenetic
approaches that have been used to generate activatable antibodies,
discussing their applicability in therapy and basic research. Therapeutic
applications have mainly focused on full-length immunoglobulins G
(IgGs), which are the most widely used format in pharmacology due
to their long circulation times and the additional immune cytotoxicity
they may trigger against target cells, especially relevant in the
treatment of cancer. However, full-length
antibodies require sophisticated engineering and expression systems,
are complex to characterize, and have slow diffusion in tissues. Hence,
for therapeutic applications involving transport across biological
barriers and tissue penetration, and for basic research applications,
a wide variety of smaller antibody derivatives and mimetics has been
developed. Although many complex combinations
of antibody domains have been engineered, the three basic classes
of antibody derivatives are antigen-binding fragments (Fab), single-chain
variable fragments (scFvs), and single-domain antibodies (sdAbs, such
as nanobodies). Beyond structures directly derived from antibodies,
antibody mimetics include any protein that can be easily evolved to
bind different antigens, such as monobodies, affibodies, and designed
ankyrin repeat proteins (DARPins). Selection of the antibody or antibody
mimetic class may have a profound effect on the type of chemical and
genetic modifications required to enable stimulus sensitivity, as
discussed throughout the text.
In this Outlook, we analyse strategies
and applications for every
one of the main cues used for antibody activation. We start focusing
on the stimuli that have been utilized to engineer antibodies both
for the study of biological systems and pharmacology, i.e., light
and effector molecules, and then we transition to the endogenous cues
that have enabled the design of antibodies mostly intended for therapy,
i.e., pH, proteases, phosphatases, and antigen combination. Finally,
we provide a horizontal perspective comparing all strategies and highlighting
the trends in the field.

2

## Light Activation
Light enables high temporal and spatial resolution in the study
of molecules and living systems, and in photopharmacology. Hence,
several approaches have been devised to confer photosensitive binding
to antibodies ( ), which can be classified into (i) incorporation of sterically demanding
photocaging groups − and (ii) insertion of photosensitive domains for
antibody structure modulation. − Divalent peptide–DNA masks,
which have been engineered to be sensitive to several stimuli including
light, will be described in .
 2.1

## Photocaging Groups Hindering Binding
2.1.1

## Randomly Photocaged Nucleophilic Side Chains
Photolabile
protecting groups, i.e., photocaging groups, have been
used for selective light activation of biologically active compounds
since the late 1970s. Not surprisingly,
this was the first activation strategy to be applied to antibodies. , The field of activatable antibodies was pioneered by Self and Thompson,
who developed a method to protect random nucleophilic side chains
on the antibody surface with 1-(2-nitrophenyl) ethanol (NPE, A). Although good
nucleophiles such as lysine residues have low abundance on antibody
complementary determining regions (CDRs), photocaging these residues can affect multiple interactions in their
vicinity via steric hindrance. NPE coupling conditions require optimization
for every antibody, resulting in 20–50 nitrophenyl molecules
per antibody. , Deprotection of NPE is achieved
using UV-A light.
The applicability of this approach has been
demonstrated by generating a bispecific masked T-cell engager for
the treatment of aggressive ovarian carcinoma. − Anti-CD3 bispecifics are highly promising therapeutics but may cause
peripheral activation of T-cells, which results in T-cell depletion
and off-target effects such as cytokine storms. By photocaging the
anti-CD3 T-cell engaging domain, a significant decrease of primary
tumor growth and of liver metastases in a mouse model was achieved. 

2.1.2

## Genetically Encoded Photocaged
Amino Acid
Residues
Although random photocaging of lysine residues with
NPE is simple and generally applicable, the inactivation (from background
levels to 30% native binding) and activation (25–75% native
binding) efficiencies are highly variable. , , Moreover, in antibody–drug conjugates,
random functionalization of surface lysines has been shown to result
into lower therapeutic indexes compared to site-specific modification. Aiming to produce homogeneous antibody conjugates
activated by light, two research groups have recently reported the
genetic encoding of a photocaged tyrosine derivative ( B). , 
Tyrosine was selected because it is the amino acid residue most commonly
involved in antigen binding. O-Nitrobenzyl tyrosine (ONBY) was encoded into nanobody
genes via amber suppression using an evolved orthogonal tyrosyl tRNA
synthetase/tRNA pair. , , Binding was reduced 10 000-fold in the presence of ONBY and
was restored almost completely in all cases (76–95%) upon decaging
with UV-A light. Computational tools
may help rationalizing the selection of residues to be photocaged. 
The utility of encoding ONBY has been shown
with nanobodies targeting
therapeutically relevant receptors such as EGFR and HER2. These photocaged
ligands can be applied for targeting small molecules to cancer cells
as proven by Sachdeva and collaborators. Mootz and co-workers have shown that light-activated ONBY antibodies
can also be applied for the generation of molecular biology tools,
such as light-induced protein dimerizers that can be deprotected within
seconds on cells ( B). 
Although studies with
ONBY have focused on nanobodies, the same
technology should be applicable to any other antibody format or mimetic.
Full-length antibodies or Fabs, which have larger paratopes, may require
screening a larger number of positions or encoding more than one photocaged
residue. Red-shifted or two-photon caging groups, which enable deeper
tissue penetration, would facilitate translation of this technology
into animals. Recent advances in genetic code expansion may enable
the efficient incorporation of noncanonical amino acids bearing these
protecting groups and others into antibodies. , 

2.2

## Photoresponsive Protein Domains Modulating
Antibody Conformation
2.2.1

## Optogenetic Dimerization
of Split Antibody
Fragments
Photosensitive antibodies may have broad applicability
in cell biology because, despite the numerous tools developed in the
field of optogenetics, controlling untagged target proteins remains
elusive. Although genetic encoding of photocaged residues is an effective
solution to this problem, approaches that offer reversible activation
and do not require nonproteinogenic amino acids might facilitate a
more extended usage. Very recently, two strategies exploiting photoresponsive
protein domains have been engineered to meet these challenges, opening
new horizons for the precise perturbation of cellular processes to
investigate timing, location, and identity of active proteins.
Do Heo, Park, and co-workers have applied optical dimerization for
the first time to produce a photosensitive antibody ( D). Their approach consists of splitting a nanobody or an scFv into
two parts, each fused to complementary Magnet optical dimerization
proteins, which only bind upon blue light (488 nm) irradiation. Blue
light enables longer exposure times to monitor living cells compared
to the UV light required by current photocaging groups. The Magnet
system is based on engineered variants of the fungal photoreceptor
VVD that selectively heterodimerize through electrostatic interactions
upon light irradiation. Such dimerization
is mediated by the formation of a photoadduct between Cys108 and the
flavin adenine dinucleotide.
Although Magnet-mediated dimerization
is theoretically reversible,
the high affinity of the nanobody for its antigen (KD = 7.27 × 10–8 M) prevents dissociation.
The applicability of the anti-GFP “optobody” was first
shown by rendering the protein degradation method deGraFP light-inducible.
deGraFP is a system that ubiquitinates GFP-tagged proteins in cells,
targeting them for proteasomal degradation. This approach relies on
the fusion of an anti-GFP nanobody with an F-box protein, which defines
substrate specificity in E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes. By exchanging
the nanobody for an optobody in this system, degradation of any GFP-tagged
protein can be controlled with light. The authors further demonstrated
the broad scope of their method by developing optobodies that control
protein intracellular location, thereby manipulating cell processes
such as gelosin-induced cell migration and beta-2 adrenergic receptor
signaling.

2.2.2

## Conformational Switching
via a Photosensitive
Domain
Despite the number of methods to control antibody–antigen
binding that have recently emerged, few enable toggling between on
and off states. Harnessing the power of a natural protein switch,
Avalos and Toettcher groups have jointly created antibody mimetics
dubbed “optobinders” ( E). The basis
for their design is the insertion of a light-oxygen-voltage domain
from Avena sativa phototropin 1 (AsLOV2) into the
structure of nanobodies (OptoNBs) and
monobodies (OptoMBs). The AsLOV2 domain
exerts switching under blue light (447 nm) via a large conformational
change triggered by the covalent conjugation of photoexcited flavin
chromophore FMN to a conserved cysteine. This reaction causes the
disruption of the C-terminal Jα helix in AsLOV2, which results
in a looser conformation of the protein generally inducing inactivation.
Surprisingly, in OptoNBs, irradiation with light results in a binding
affinity increase or decrease depending on the loop in which AsLOV2
is inserted.
To prove the applicability of this approach in
controlling downstream cellular functions, an anti-mCherry OptoNB
was fused to the catalytic domain of the SOS protein, and membrane
localization of this domain was used to regulate Ras activity and
thereby control the Erk mitogen-protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. Erk
activity could be reversibly toggled on and off with both light- and
dark-inducible OptoNBs. Despite the successful application of OptoNBs
in cells, only up to a 5.5-fold change in binding affinity between
light and dark states was achieved. By contrast, OptoMBs reached a
330-fold affinity increase, which proved highly advantageous in light-controlled
affinity chromatography. Since the positions selected to insert LOV
domains are conserved across the respective antibody mimetic families,
this method may be transferable to other antigen specificities.

3

## Effector Molecule Activation
Light
needs an external source, and spatial and temporal control
often require complex setups. By contrast, control using soluble compounds
may be easier to implement in different experimental settings and
may be modulated with concentration. Moreover, activation triggered
by particular endogenous molecules could enable smart systems with
intrinsic selectivity. Although most systems have been tested with
molecules added exogenously, many of the engineered antibodies may
be adapted to interact with endogenous biomolecules or metabolites.
Effector molecules ( ), including oligonucleotides, peptides, and small molecules, − have been used both in the investigation of biological systems and
in therapeutics. These molecules can mediate activation via displacement
of a moiety masking the paratope or via recovery of the antibody binding
conformation.
 3.1

## Paratope
Masking Moieties
3.1.1

## Displacement of a Bivalent
Peptide–dsDNA
Lock
A family of effector molecules that is particularly
interesting because of its predictable binding properties and biological
significance is oligonucleotides. These molecules may enable the construction
of molecular logical circuits for the production of autonomous signal
processing systems in synthetic biology and molecular diagnostics.
By using a peptide–double-strand DNA (peptide–dsDNA)
lock, Merkx and co-workers have expanded the scope of activatable
antibodies toward this direction ( A). Antibody
inactivation relies on the bivalent binding of a dsDNA with a peptide
at the 5′ end of each strand. The peptide sequence acts as
a mimotope, i.e., an epitope-mimetic, and binds to the antibody with
such an affinity as to enable dissociation when monomeric and binding
when dimerized with the dsDNA. The 3′ end of one or both DNA
strands is elongated with an overhanging DNA sequence called the “toehold”;
in this way, a strand that binds this toehold and part of the dsDNA
sequence can dissociate the dsDNA linker. The installation of a toehold
on each DNA strand enables the generation of AND and OR gates, opening
the doors to programmed activation of antibody-based systems. This
approach is highly versatile and may be rendered sensitive to a second
stimulus such as proteases or light by adding different sensing modules
in the peptide–dsDNA linker ( C and B). However,
the efficacy of the lock is limited by the delicate affinity equilibrium
required between the monomeric and dimeric state to enable mimotope
release upon dsDNA dissociation or cleavage. Amenability to in vivo applications may be further limited by dsDNA stability.
While this approach is only applicable to full-length IgGs, other
effector molecule strategies are mostly limited to smaller antibody
derivatives.

3.1.2

## Chemogenetic Unmasking
Aiming to
provide a new tool that enables control over cellular functions with
both endogenous and exogenous molecules via allosteric regulation,
Johnsson and collaborators have recently engineered ligand-modulated
antibody fragments (LAMAs) ( B). Their approach consists
in inserting a circularly permutated bacterial dihydrofolate reductase
(cpDHFR) in the CDR3 of a nanobody. In the “on” state,
apo-cpDHFR is partly unfolded and enables binding to the antigen with
single-digit nanomolar affinity. In the “off” state,
triggered by the presence of its cofactor nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate (NADPH) and small-molecule inhibitors such as trimethoprim
(TMP), the cpDHFR becomes fully folded, sterically blocking antibody
binding. Remarkably, binding is reversible, and the affinity difference
with and without both small-molecule effectors is over 1000-fold.
Since NADPH is present in the cytosol and TMP is cell-permeable and
has low toxicity, this system is readily implemented in living cells.
The utility of this approach to study biological systems was shown
by controlling the intracellular location and thereby the function
of Mad2L1, a key component of the mitotic checkpoint complex. Transferability
of this strategy was demonstrated by creating LAMAs against other
targets, although their response was variable and required screening
alternative cpDHFR insertion sites.

3.2

## Conformational
Inactivation
3.2.1

## Peptide-Sensitive scFv
Linker
Rescue
of the antibody function can be achieved not only via unmasking as
shown in LAMAs or the peptide–dsDNA lock but also through allosteric
regulation of the conformation of the antibody itself. Thie, Dübel,
and co-workers devised a way to modulate scFv binding exploiting the
large conformational change of calmodulin upon interaction with calmodulin-binding
peptides ( C). The characteristic (Gly4Ser)3 linker present in scFvs was replaced by circularly permutated
calmodulins. Upon binding the peptide ligand, the alpha helical central
domain of calmodulin folds wrapping around the peptide, which introduces
significant strain in the scFv linker. The system was responsive to
a variety of peptides; curiously, some of them had opposite switching
behavior. This strategy could find applicability in high specificity
affinity chromatography requiring mild elution conditions. Despite
the potential of this approach, further improvement of the modulation
strength should be sought since the affinity decrease measured for
the most promising candidate is limited to 4.1-fold.

3.2.2

## Chemical Rescue of Antibody Structure
In addition to
peptides, small molecules have also been used to
allosterically control antibody conformation. This has been achieved
via split nanobodies fused to rapamycin dimerization domains ( D) in a similar manner as described for the light-inducible
Magnet fusions (see and D). Although rapamycin
dimerizers have been applied in vivo, antibodies intended for therapy may benefit
from activation strategies independent of large switching domains,
which may affect pharmacokinetics and induce immunogenicity. Along
these lines, Karanicolas and collaborators have envisioned a strategy
that relies on engineering antibodies with a cavity that precludes
them from adopting the active conformation. Activity can then be rescued
by fitting a small molecule in the cavity ( E). , A computationally guided
design for allosteric antibody activation, which alters 2–3
residues to form the cavity, enabled creating an antibody with a 10-fold
affinity increase in the presence of micromolar concentrations of
6-(benzyloxy)indazole. This approach
should be transferable to scaffolds that contain the three mutated
residues, which account for 78% of entries in the structure database
SAbDab.
Chemical rescue via cavity engineering might be applicable
to Fabs despite their larger interaction surface taking into account
that the knobs-in-holes strategy enables the generation of full-length
IgG bispecifics with a single cavity. Regarding translation of this approach into therapeutical applications,
two important improvements suggested by the authors are required:
(i) enhancing the molecule affinity for the cavity so that lower concentrations
of the effector molecule are needed and (ii) turning the effector
molecule into a prodrug that is only activated at the target site.

4

## pH Activation
Although light and effector molecule activation
provides promising
opportunities in pharmacology, pH-activatable antibodies are the ones
that have progressed the most as therapeutics to date. pH is an attractive
endogenous cue for strategies aiming to enhance antibody bioavailability
and therapeutic window. In the past decade, the difference in pH between
late endocytic vesicles and the extracellular space has been applied
to enable antibody “recycling”, to enhance antibody–drug conjugate (ADC) cytotoxicity, and to boost antibody transcytosis across the
blood–brain barrier. Two pH-sensitive
recycling antibodies are currently used in clinical practice, and
many others are under clinical and preclinical development. In addition,
the pH difference between healthy and solid tumors has been exploited
to increase the selectivity of antibody therapeutics. , pH-sensitive antibodies have also been used in immunoaffinity chromatography. 
In all cases, antibodies are rendered
pH sensitive by introducing
histidine residues in the CDRs and framework ( A, top). Capitalizing on a pKa near 6, the imidazole ring on histidine can be protonated
in intra- and extracellular microenvironments where the pH is significantly
lower than physiological values (7.2–7.4), especially in the
endosomes and in the tumor tissue. When histidine is protonated, it
is assumed to cause an electrostatic repulsion between the histidine-rich
paratope and the positively charged basic residues in the epitope.
Histidines have been engineered into pH-dependent antibodies via structure-based
design and via directed evolution techniques such as phage and yeast
display. − Full-length IgG has been the preferred format for
pH-sensitive antibodies given its advantageous pharmacokinetic properties
for therapeutic applications.
 4.1

## Activation in the Endosome
4.1.1

## Recycling
Antibodies
Although antibodies
have high affinity and selectivity, they can engage their targets
only once during the antibody’s circulation lifetime. Therefore,
antigens with high abundance and turnover rates cannot be efficiently
engaged using acceptable antibody administration frequency and doses.
In order to generate antibodies that could bind more than one target
in their lifetime, Igawa and collaborators proposed the concept of
“recycling antibodies” ( A, bottom). , These antibodies
are engineered with reduced affinity at endosomal pH (5.5–6.0)
so that they dissociate from their antigens only in the endosome.
Consequently, antigens may be sorted to lysosomal degradation, while
free antibodies bind the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) and are recycled
back to the surface. Since the FcRn-antibody affinity at near-neutral
pH is very low, antibodies are subsequently released into the extracellular
space. This phenomenon reduces antibody lysosomal degradation and
enables an antibody molecule to repeatedly neutralize target antigen
molecules, thereby displaying high efficacy even in substoichiometric
amounts relative to the antigen. Increasing the affinity of antibodies
for the FcRn at acidic or neutral pH, such as in “sweeping
antibodies”, may further increase their efficacy as recently
reviewed elsewhere. 
A seminal study
in 2010 revealed that about 75% of endocytosed acid-switched antibodies
against interleukin 6 receptor (IL-6R) were recycled. By contrast,
a non-pH-sensitive version of the same antibody was almost fully degraded
in the lysosome. The pH-switched antibody
had a 6.3-fold change in affinity between pH 7.4 and 6.0. This feature
enabled the release from membrane-bound IL-6R in the endosome, eventually
leading to a 20-fold increase in the antibody concentration in blood
plasma after 78 h. Moreover, the soluble form of IL-6R was reduced
40-fold with the acid-switched antibody compared to the non-pH-sensitive
antibody at day 4. This anti-IL-6R recycling antibody, under the name
of satralizumab, and ravulizumab, an acid-sensitive antibody against the complement
component C5, have recently been approved for their use in clinics.
The first is used to treat neuromyelitis optica and the latter for
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Other antibodies using this strategy are in clinical and
preclinical development, including antibodies targeting PCSK9 to treat
cardiovascular diseases; TFPI for hemophilia; TNF for inflammatory
diseases; and CEA, HER2, and CTLA-4 for cancer therapies. , − 
pH is a well-known feature that differentiates late endosomes
and
the extracellular environment. Moreover, evolving pH-sensitive antibodies
is well established. However, calcium sensitivity is a promising alternative
to pH-sensitivity in recycling antibodies ( A, top) because (i) the calcium concentration
difference between endosomes and blood plasma is roughly 650-fold,
while the proton concentration difference is on the order of 50-fold,
(ii) Ca2+ has greater capacity to destabilize binding because
of the much larger electrostatic potential compared to protonated
histidines, and (iii) divalent ions bring into proximity negatively
charged residues, which repel each other in the absence of the ion.
Allosteric antibodies, in which the CDR3 loop on the heavy chain is
structured by coordinating Ca2+, have been evolved via
phage display. Although antibodies with sensitivity to calcium have
shown substantial enhancement of IL-6R clearance in vivo, this approach has so far been applied
in very few instances compared to pH switching.

4.1.2

## ADCs with Increased Lysosomal Degradation
A recent
study by Ward, Ober, and co-workers has shown that pH
sensitivity can increase ADC lysosomal degradation instead of recycling
in cancer cells. This phenomenon increases toxin release in target
cells, thereby enhancing ADC efficacy ( B). The inability
of these ADCs to be recycled is rationalized by the presence of low
levels of FcRn in tumors such as breast, prostate, and lung cancers.
In the absence of FcRn, the soluble contents of late endosomes, including
ADCs dissociated from their membrane-bound antigens, are fully degraded.
In this study, pH-sensitive antibodies against HER2 derived from pertuzumab
were conjugated to the microtubule polymerization inhibitor monomethyl
auristatin E (MMAE). The higher efficacy of these ADCs with increased
lysosomal-trafficking activity (ALTAs) was confirmed in two mouse
models of HER2+ breast cancer, inhibiting growth of xenografts more
effectively than pertuzumab-MMAE and the FDA-approved trastuzumab-MMAE.

4.2

## Activation in the Tumor Microenvironment
ALTAs have enhanced efficiency against cancer cells by capitalizing
on the pH difference between the endosome and the extracellular space
and the low abundance of the FcRn. However, there is another pH difference
that can be exploited to enhance tumor selectivity: the one existing
between the tumor microenvironment (pH 6.0–6.8) and healthy
tissues (7.2–7.4). The lower pH in the tumor is due to several
factors such as poor vascular perfusion, regional hypoxia, and fermentative
glycolysis. By contrast to the affinity
decrease at lower pH required in ALTAs and recycling antibodies to
achieve endosomal release, tumor targeting requires an affinity increase.
Antibodies with low affinity at pH 7.2–7.4 and high affinity
at pH 6.0–6.8 will display minimal target engagement in healthy
tissue and maximal binding in the tumor.
Sulea, Zwaagstra, and
collaborators have engineered an acid-switched antibody that can selectively
engage its HER2 antigen in the tumor. Via a de novo structure-based approach, the authors
obtained antibodies with a 10-fold weaker binding at pH 7.3 compared
to pH 6.8, while preserving an affinity below 30 nM in the pH range
of 6.0–6.8. Variants formatted as full-length IgG1/k antibodies
inhibited the growth of tumor spheroids at a level comparable to the
gold standard anti-HER2 antibody, trastuzumab, at acidic pH and had
a significantly reduced effect at physiological pH. The substantial
improvement in efficacy of these therapies still needs to be confirmed in vivo.

5

## Protease Activation
Alongside the pH, the main internal cue exploited for antibody
activation is the activity of specific enzymes. In this field, research
groups and companies have mainly focused on the activity of proteases.
Altered protease expression and activity are a hallmark of cancer
and many other pathologies such as autoimmune, cardiovascular, and
neurodegenerative diseases. Conversely,
in healthy tissues protease activity is tightly regulated at different
levels. Most proteases are expressed as zymogens and require post-translational
modifications to be activated. Moreover, once activated, their functioning
can be further controlled by endogenous protease inhibitors. Such
efficient and redundant control mechanisms ensure that protease-dependent
prodrugs are mainly activated in diseased tissues, enhancing their
specificity and reducing side effects. Applicability to a wide variety of diseases, paired with the promising
results shown by small-molecule prodrugs, have drawn the interest
of several companies, which have contributed to the development and
advancement toward clinical application of this subclass of switchable
antibodies. Protease-activatable antibodies, mostly full-length IgGs,
have been engineered utilizing a number of strategies based on the
introduction of different types of masking moieties, including (i)
mimotopes and idiotypic masks; (ii) proteins binding the variable
domain and extending over the paratope or disrupting the binding conformation;
and (iii) nonbinding bulky moieties inserted near the paratope and
sterically hindering antigen binding ( ).
 5.1

## Mimotopes and Idiotypic Masks
The
most widely used approach consists of a mimotope or epitope-mimetic
peptide tethered via a protease-labile linker to the N-terminus of
the antibody or antibody derivative ( A). In this form, interaction with the antigen
is impaired, and, only in the presence of proteases, the linker is
cleaved and the masking peptide is released restoring antigen-binding
ability. This strategy was first presented by Williams and Rodeck
(2009) in the form of cross-masked scFvs ( B) and then
became the core technology of Probody Therapeutics (CytomX), which
has mainly focused on the development of masked full-length IgGs. , , The probody approach has been
applied to target a variety of receptors, including vascular cell-adhesion
molecule 1 (VCAM-1), EGFR, PD-L1, as well as receptors considered
undruggable because of their presence in many tissues, such as CD166
and CD71. , , , − Affinity changes provided by
the mimotope mask range from 40- to 300 000-fold, , and several of these products are currently in clinical trials. , 
One of the main advantages of the probody strategy is its
great versatility across antibody formats, including antibody–drug
conjugates, chimeric antigen receptors (CARs), and bispecifics. Probody
drug conjugates (PDCs) against CD166 and CD71 have shown tumor regression
and are well tolerated in patients with advanced solid tumors. More recently, the probody technology has been
applied to CARs, synthetic receptors expressed on the surface of T-cells
that allow activation of these cells upon tumor antigen engagement. Regarding bispecifics, a T-cell engager probody
targeting EGFR and CD3 has shown an increased maximum tolerated dose
in clinical trials. 
Probody epitope-mimetic
N-terminal extensions are not the only
mimotope-based strategies. In the field of multispecific antibodies
for T-cell activation, Harpoon Therapeutics has developed an activatable
form of its trispecific T-cell activating construct (proTriTAC). In
proTriTAC ( B), the CD3-targeting moiety is masked by an anti-albumin single-domain
antibody fragment modified to specifically interact with the anti-CD3
CDRs. The masked construct has a 250-fold
reduced affinity in addition to an enhanced half-life due to albumin
binding. Another alternative to using mimotopes is the use of anti-idiotypic
binders. Löfblom and collaborators proved that an inactivating
anti-idiotypic affibody can be fused to an anti-HER2 affibody, reducing
apparent affinity over 1000-fold. 
Although using epitope-mimetics or anti-idiotypic binders provides
outstanding inactivation efficiency, each mask can only be applied
for one antigen specificity. Furthermore, generation of the masking
domain requires a challenging and time-consuming affinity fine-tuning
involving bacterial or phage display selections.

5.2

## Masking Moieties Binding the Variable Domain
To improve
transferability to other antigen specificities, moieties
that bind more conserved regions in the variable domain (Fv) and extend
over the paratope or disrupt the binding conformation could be exploited
( C).
Conditional T-cell engagers named COBRAs (Maverick Therapeutics)
rely on the cleavage of an inactivating domain and subsequent dimerization
of the active domains of an scFv to allow binding to CD3. To the best of our knowledge, this is the only
protease-sensitive strategy that involves allosteric disruption of
the binding conformation rather than masking of the paratope. Despite
its complexity, this system is functional in vivo as proven by its capacity to target T-cell-dependent cytotoxicity
to HT-29 xenograft murine models, inducing complete tumor remission
at modest doses.
Easier transferability across some antigen
specificities can be
achieved with protein M from Mycoplasma genitalium. Chen and co-workers engineered a protease-cleavable version of
this protein that recognizes a conserved region in the Fv and extends
over the paratope, thus blocking binding in a full-length IgG. Interestingly, this is one of the few approaches
that does not require modification of the antibody, which may enable
easier transferability to other IgGs and antibody derivatives.

5.3

## Nonbinding Masking Moieties
A more
universal approach would require inactivation exclusively via steric
hindrance. Several strategies have been developed aiming toward this
ambitious goal by extending the N-termini of full-length antibodies
or derivatives with different moieties displaying varying degrees
of efficiency and transferability ( D).
A requirement for the steric mask
is low immunogenicity. Taking into account this criteria, several
protein moieties have been N-terminally fused to antibodies, including
endogenously derived inhibitory domains (i.e., LAP domain from pro-TGF-beta), peptides able to recruit albumin, and intrinsically disordered XTEN polypeptides. The first two approaches enable 2- and 10-fold
affinity decrease, respectively, and have not been reported in animals
studies. Conversely, XTENylated protease-activated T-cell engagers
(XPATs) show a significant increase in the maximal tolerated dose
in cynomolgus monkeys and minimal effect on antibody pharmacokinetics.
Aiming to provide a more stringent lock by elongating both N-termini
with interacting polypeptide chains, antibody fusions have been engineered
so that one masks the other decreasing antigen-binding affinity up
to 3000-fold. In one instance, a disulfide-stabilized Fv was fused
to the heavy chain of a full-length IgG, which acted as a masking
moiety. In another instance, the intrinsically
lower binding affinity in the “inner domain” of a dual
variable domain antibody was exploited. 
More recently, two strategies have been proposed that substantially
reduce the length of dimerizing N-terminal extensions while still
blocking antigen binding efficiently. While Cheng and co-workers used
the disulfide-stabilized hinge region of an IgG1 as a lock, Levengood and collaborators applied high-affinity
noncovalent interactions between leucin-zipper coiled-coil domains. The latter strategy enables a 750-fold reduced
affinity in an anti-CD19 antibody, which results in a lower engagement
of systemic antigen and prolonged half-life ( E). Remarkably, this antibody displays enhanced
efficacy in lymphoma xenograft models. This general protease-sensitive
approach could be easily transferred to virtually any Fab or full-length
antibody.

6

## Phosphatase Activation
Protease expression and activity in several pathologies is well
characterized. However, the expression of other enzymes is also altered
in diseased tissues, and interest in the role of phosphatases in diseases
has recently increased. Intra- and extracellular phosphatases are
involved in a wide variety of cellular processes, and their activity
can be altered in numerous diseases, including cancer, Alzheimer’s disease, and hypophosphatasia. Although
the expression and activity of phosphatases in many pathologies need
to be further characterized, dephosphorylation could be an interesting
stimulus to activate antibodies.
Davis and collaborators developed
an anti-lysozyme sdAb reversibly
inactivated through a phosphate group in the paratope. This phosphate group was located at a site that
mediates a hydrophobic interaction with the antigen, taking advantage
of a suggested evolved switching mechanism of phosphorylation. Post-translational
inactivation was achieved via a “tag-and-modify” approach.
First, the sulfhydryl group of a Cys residue in the CDR3 loop was
site-specifically eliminated to yield dehydroalanine. Next, the orthogonally
reactive tag was chemically phosphorylated into a phosphocysteine
( A). Several
alkaline phosphatases were able to remove the phosphate group and
restore binding from background to almost prephosphorylation levels.
Moreover, ex vivo, such a construct was able to selectively
stain lysozyme-positive cells transplanted into mice brains only after
expression of secreted embryonic alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) was induced
by a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-triggered TNF-α response ( B). Further investigation
is needed to evaluate the therapeutic potential of this novel strategy.
In particular, taking into account the broad substrate specificity
of many phosphatases, stability of the
inactivating group in circulation and diffusion in healthy tissues
should be evaluated. Interestingly, the post-translational installation
of dehydroalanine allows for site-selective modification of proteins
and antibodies with a wide array of groups that could be sensitive
to other stimuli.
 
7

## Activation via Antigen Combination
The advantage of rendering therapeutic antibodies activatable arises
from the scarcity of antigens exclusively expressed on diseased tissues.
All strategies introduced up to this point rely on a reversibly inactive
antibody that is only able to engage its antigen when activated at
the target site by an environmental cue. An alternative way to enhance
selectivity is to design antibodies that only bind target cells expressing
certain membrane antigen combinations. This concept was first materialized
in bispecific antibodies that only bind cells expressing two particular
antigens. Although such antibodies do
not have clearly defined active/binding and inactive/nonbinding states,
they are activated (able to engage target cells) only in the presence
of their two cognate antigens in close proximity. Bispecific antibodies
targeting oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases have been used to enhance
selectivity and counteract the onset of the most common resistance
mechanisms. Affinity of individual arms,
as well as overall avidity, needs to be fine-tuned to reduce binding
to single-positive nontarget tissues, which is a complex and delicate
process. , 
Baker and collaborators have recently
developed a system that overcomes
the challenge of fine-tuning bispecific antibody affinity and enables
recognition of more complex antigen combinations, bringing selectivity
to the next level. This system, named
LOCKR, includes three main components ( ): first, a “cage” protein
sequestering a functional peptide in an inactive conformation through
a “latch” domain; second, a “key” protein
that can bind the cage when in close proximity but not in high dilution.
Upon binding to the cage, the key displaces the functional peptide,
thus allowing it to recruit the third component, an “effector”
protein. Target specificity is conferred to the cage and key proteins
by fusing them to DARPINs or scFvs with native affinity. Adding to
this basic system either a second key protein or a decoy protein,
which can sequester the key, enables implementation of AND–OR
and AND–NOT Boolean logic, respectively. The authors show that
the LOCKR system can retarget CAR-T cells recognizing the functional
peptide in its active form to selectively kill Raji cells presenting
the right combination of antigens in vitro.
 The LOCKR system enables integration
of binding inputs based on
complex Boolean logic operations without relying on fine-tuned antibody
affinity or the cellular machinery. Moreover, it provides enhanced
specificity dependent on membrane-protein expression patterns. Nonetheless,
many challenges lie ahead for this complex system to be applied in
therapy, including potential immunogenicity of the cage and key components,
as well as selectivity and stability in physiologic media of the numerous
protein–protein interactions involved.

8

## Conclusions
and Outlook
A plethora of strategies have been applied to
generate activatable
antibodies responsive to a variety of environmental cues for diverse
applications ( ). Activation stimuli are closely related to applications, which
can be broadly classified into therapy and basic research.
 Antibody derivatives and mimetics
activatable with light and effector
molecules such as optobodies, optobinders, LAMAs, and genetically
encoded photocaged tyrosines provide powerful opto- and chemogenetic
tools to investigate biological processes. The reversibility displayed
by optobinders and LAMAs may be particularly interesting for cell
biology applications. In addition, many stimuli, including light and
effector ions and molecules, have been harnessed for the generation
of effective immunoaffinity purification systems and may also find
applicability in sensing devices. Temperature could also be applied
in molecular transducers; however, the only strategy reported to date
relies on an scFv with an elastin-based interdomain linker, which
has a high critical temperature (49 °C) and small affinity change
(<2-fold). , Although the activation strategies
reported to study biological systems have so far been tested in vitro, some of them might be amenable to experiments
in animals. For instance, large protein modulatory domains depending
on biologically orthogonal stimuli generally display a powerful and
selective affinity switching. Other methods would need substantial
refinement for in vivo applications, including the
peptide–DNA lock strategy and the protein M steric blocking.
Although these two strategies are highly appealing because they require
neither chemical nor genetic modification of the antibody, they display
limited masking capacity and stability.
Activatable antibodies
that have advanced the most in therapy,
i.e., “recycling antibodies” and “probodies”,
are based on endogenous stimuli and relatively simple and robust strategies.
Moreover, they are applied on full-length antibodies and preserve
or boost IgG outstanding pharmacokinetic properties. Although other
activation approaches based on Ca2+ concentration, light,
effector molecules, and membrane antigen combinations provide interesting
therapeutic options, they generally require more elaborate engineering,
have mostly been applied on small antibody derivatives, and may need
further refinement for an extended usage.
Apart from the special
case of antigen-combination-mediated activation,
reversible inactivation mechanisms described here can be broadly classified
in three categories: (i) structural disruption of small antibody derivatives
or mimetics, (ii) alteration of the charge on the CDR loops, and (iii)
steric blockage of antibody paratopes. Disruption of the structure
of antibody derivatives has been achieved with very slight changes,
such as the suppression of a few residues forming a chemically rescuable
cavity, to major structural modifications. Such major rearrangements
include the introduction of photoreceptor domains, splitting nanobodies
fused to photo- or chemodimerizing domains, producing scFvs with a
cleavable inactivating domain and reengineering the interdomain linker
of scFvs. The latter strategy is very versatile and has been used
to enable sensitivity to temperature, Ca2+, and calmodulin-binding
peptides. By contrast to small antibody derivatives, conformational
modulation of IgGs is difficult to achieve. Therefore, control of
these antibodies has mostly relied either on CDR charge alteration,
as in pH- and phosphatase-sensitive antibodies, or via insertion of
moieties sterically hindering antigen binding. Blockage of paratopes
has been materialized in very diverse formats, including mimotopes
and masking moieties solely relying on steric hindrance, anchored
in the CDRs or close to them. Mimotopes have mainly been used as N-terminal
fusions in probodies and in the peptide–dsDNA lock. Remarkably,
the latter strategy ( C, A, and B) utilizes a chemically synthesized linker and can thus be engineered
to be sensitive to virtually any stimulus, including the presence
of specific oligonucleotides, proteases, light, and pH. Masks that work only via steric hindrance range
from a single small light-sensitive o-nitrophenyl
group, to the extension of the N-termini with protease-labile coiled-coil
peptides or the insertion of chemosensitive domains such as cpDHFR
in LAMAs.
Some of the inactivation strategies, such as blockage
via nonbinding
N-terminal extensions or replacement of the flexible interdomain linker
in scFvs, are easily transferable to antibodies with different antigen
specificities. However, most approaches require a higher degree of
engineering and some knowledge of the structure. For instance, using
modulatory domains inserted in the CDRs and N-terminal extensions
with epitope-mimetics requires screening of many mutants or directed
evolution methods, respectively. Transferability across antigen specificities
has almost an inverse correlation with applicability to other antibody
derivatives and mimetics. In this regard, addition of mimotopes and
introduction of histidines, photocaged amino acids, or modulatory
domains in the CDRs could be applicable to any binder ranging from
full-length IgGs to affibodies. By contrast, IgG N-terminal extension
with coiled-coil peptides and the scFv linker engineering by modulatory
domains have a very limited applicability in other antibodies or mimetics.
The LOCKR system overcomes this limitation to some extent by uncoupling
activation from the ability of its individual components to engage
their cognate antigens. Therefore, LOCKR may utilize virtually any
type of antibody derivative or mimetic to engage the target antigen
combination.
Overall, within a single decade, research into
activatable antibodies
has yielded marketed therapeutics capable of targeting antigens that
could not be engaged with traditional antibodies, as well as new tools
to control untagged proteins and investigate cellular processes. Yet,
many opportunities in this expanding field remain untapped. New activation
mechanisms at the interface between chemistry and biology, together
with recently reported tools for directed evolution, , may render more efficient and generally applicable masking strategies.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
B.O.-S. acknowledges funding from the European
Union's Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie
grant agreement No 844441. R.L. is grateful to IQS for a Ph.D. fellowship
(2019−2020) and to the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation
and Universities for an FPU fellowship (FPU19/03216). We acknowledge
support from the Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris
i de Recerca (Generalitat de Catalunya) under the grant agreement
SGR 2017 1559. All the figures in this article have been created with
BioRender.