J Comp NeurolJ Comp Neurol379blackwellopen0406041CNEThe Journal of Comparative Neurology0021-99671096-9861pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleWiley Open Access CollectionPMC8248161PMC8248161.1824816182481613343875510.1002/cne.25107CNE251071ToolboxToolboxAxon guidance at the spinal cord midline—A live imaging perspective
Dumoulin et al.DumoulinAlexandrehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-2420-6877 ZuñigaNikole R.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4022-9649 StoeckliEsther T.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8485-0648 esther.stoeckli@mls.uzh.ch
1
Department of Molecular Life Sciences
University of Zurich
Zurich
Switzerland

2
Neuroscience Center Zurich
University of Zurich
Zurich
Switzerland
*Correspondence
Esther T. Stoeckli, Department of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland.
Email: esther.stoeckli@mls.uzh.ch221202101720215291038487110.1002/cne.v529.10251725381012202014920200812021010720210207202104102024© 2021 The Authors. The Journal of Comparative Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## Abstract
During neural circuit formation, axons navigate several choice points to reach their final target. At each one of these intermediate targets, growth cones need to switch responsiveness from attraction to repulsion in order to move on. Molecular mechanisms that allow for the precise timing of surface expression of a new set of receptors that support the switch in responsiveness are difficult to study in vivo. Mostly, mechanisms are inferred from the observation of snapshots of many different growth cones analyzed in different preparations of tissue harvested at distinct time points. However, to really understand the behavior of growth cones at choice points, a single growth cone should be followed arriving at and leaving the intermediate target. Existing ex vivo preparations, like cultures of an “open‐book” preparation of the spinal cord have been successfully used to study floor plate entry and exit, but artifacts prevent the analysis of growth cone behavior at the floor plate exit site. Here, we describe a novel spinal cord preparation that allows for live imaging of individual axons during navigation in their intact environment. When comparing growth cone behavior in our ex vivo system with snapshots from in vivo navigation, we do not see any differences. The possibility to observe the dynamics of single growth cones navigating their intermediate target allows for measuring growth speed, changes in morphology, or aberrant behavior, like stalling and wrong turning. Moreover, observation of the intermediate target—the floor plate—revealed its active participation and interaction with commissural axons during midline crossing.

We describe a novel method to culture the intact spinal cord of the chicken embryo for live imaging of axon guidance at the midline. The stability of this ex vivo method allowed us to characterize key aspects of midline crossing, such as axonal growth, timing of crossing, dynamic morphological changes of the growth cones, and growth cone‐floor plate cell interactions. 

axon guidancecommissural neuronsfloor platelive imagingmidlineneural circuit formationspinal cord cultureSwiss National Science Foundation 10.13039/501100001711 
2.3

## Dissection of open‐books
Open‐book preparations of spinal cords were dissected from HH24 embryos as previously described in a video protocol for HH25‐26 embryos (Wilson & Stoeckli, ). The first steps were identical to the protocol for intact spinal cord dissection given above (steps a,b in Figure ). Starting there, the tension along the rostro‐caudal axis was increased using the upper and lower needles and meninges were removed with a blade made of fire‐polished tungsten wire. Spinal cords were cut transversally at the wing and leg levels and carefully extracted from the embryo with forceps. At this point, the dorsal midline spontaneously opened. Open‐book preparations of spinal cords were then plated with the apical side down (Figure (g,h)) in the center of a 35‐mm Ibidi μ‐dish with glass bottom (Ibidi, #81158), precoated with 20 μg/ml poly‐l‐lysine (Sigma). A homemade, harp‐like holder made out of a Teflon ring and thin nylon strings was used to keep the spinal cord in place (Figure ). Note that the strings were barely touching the open‐books but stabilized the flat position of the spinal cord. Then, 100 μl of 0.5% low‐melting agarose (see above) were added on top of the spinal cord. Once the agarose solidified (around 5 min at room temperature), 200 μl of spinal cord medium were added to the agarose drop and the culture could be started.

2.4

## Live imaging
Live imaging recordings were carried out with an Olympus IX83 inverted microscope equipped with a spinning disk unit (CSU‐X1 10,000 rpm, Yokogawa). Cultured spinal cords were kept at 37°C with 5% CO2 and 95% air in a PeCon cell vivo chamber (PeCon). Temperature and CO2‐levels were controlled by the cell vivo temperature controller and the CO2 controller units (PeCon). Spinal cords were incubated for at least 30 min before imaging was started. We acquired 18–40 planes (1.5 μm spacing) of 2 × 2 binned z‐stack images every 15 min for 24 h with a ×20 air objective (UPLSAPO ×20/0.75, Olympus) and an Orca‐Flash 4.0 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software. We performed most of our recordings in the lumbar level of the spinal cord and always took three channels of interest: emission at 488 and 561 nm, as well as bright field. Recordings of axons after Fzd3 or luciferase knockdown were performed at the thoracic level (see cartoon in Figure 5(g)). For higher magnification recordings, a ×40 silicone oil objective was used (UPLSAPO S ×40/1.25, Olympus) with the same acquisition settings as above. Images taken every 5–15 min. The quantifications of growth cone behavior, such as splitting in the FP, formation of ventral–dorsal protrusions and protrusions before FP exit, were based on a time resolution of one stack taken every 15 min. The analysis of protrusions before FP exit could be done only on the first axons exiting the FP, because with time it was difficult to visualize the small protrusions correctly due to the increase in the density of axons at the FP exit site.

2.5

## Data processing and virtual tracing
Z‐stacks and maximum projections of Z‐stack movies were evaluated and processed using Fiji/ImageJ (Schindelin et al., ). The MtrackJ plugin (Meijering et al., ) was used to virtually trace single Math1‐positive dI1 commissural axons crossing the FP. This helped to keep track of which axons had already been quantified. The leading edge (and not filopodia) of growth cones was always selected for each time point. At the exit site, the central domain of the growth cone was selected with the tracing tool, as growth cones very often slightly changed their directionality and drastically change their shape before turning. For comparable analyses of axonal behavior and speed in the two halves of the FP, we only traced and quantified axons that entered, crossed and exited the FP during the 24‐hour imaging period. Axons already in the FP at the beginning of the imaging period were not considered. Overlays of labeled axons with EGFP‐F and bright‐field channels were used to assess the FP boundaries and midline localization. The virtual tracing tool was also used to extract the local growth speed for each single axon. Local speed is defined here as the average speed calculated for the last 15 min time period. Note that the montage of dI1 commissural axons shown in was generated from z‐stacks that were 2D deconvolved (nearest neighbor) using the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software and assembled with Fiji/ImageJ. All data acquired with higher magnification (×40 silicone oil objective) were 3D deconvolved using constrained iterative deconvolution of the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software (five iterations with adaptive PSF and background removal, Olympus). Maximum projections of live images containing Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive cells (channel) were corrected for photo bleaching in Fiji/ImageJ.

2.6

## Temporal‐color projections and kymographic analysis
Temporal‐color projections were generated using Fiji/ImageJ. Kymograph analysis of axons crossing or exiting the FP as previously described (Medioni et al., ) using a region of interest (ROI) selection, the re‐slice function and the z‐projection of the re‐sliced results in Fiji/ImageJ, which allowed following pixel movements within the horizontal axis. The ROI in the FP was selected as a 103 × 51 μm2 (Figure 7(c,d)) or 103 × 27 μm2 (Figure 7(e,f)) rectangle.

2.7

## Immunohistochemistry
Spinal cords dissected from HH22 embryos or intact spinal cords that were cultured for 1 day ex vivo were fixed 1 h at room temperature with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS, washed three times for 5 min each with PBS and cryopreserved for at least 24 h at 4°C in 25% sucrose in PBS. After mounting in O.C.T. compound (Tissue‐Tek) and freezing the spinal cords, 25‐μm thick cryosections were collected using a cryostat. The next day, sections were blocked and permeabilized 1 h at room temperature with 5% FCS in 0.1% Triton X‐100 in PBS (blocking buffer). Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer and added to sections overnight at 4°C (1:400 for goat‐anti‐GFP‐FITC, Cat# 600‐102‐215, RRID: AB_218187, Rockland; 1:2500 for rabbit‐anti‐RFP, Cat# ABIN129578, RRID: AB_10781500, antibodies‐online; 1:200 for rabbit‐anti‐cleaved caspase 3, Cat# 9661S, RRID: AB_2341188, Cell Signaling; 1:500 for goat‐anti‐NrCAM, G68, polyclonal antibody produced against the full length of chicken NrCAM purified from E14 chicken brain membranes (Fitzli et al., ); supernatants containing monoclonal mouse antibodies obtained from DSHB: anti‐Lhx2 (clone PCRP‐LHX2‐1C11, RRID: AB_2618817), anti‐islet‐1 (clone 40.2D6, RRID: AB_528315), anti‐Nkx2.2 (clone 74.5A5, RRID: AB_531794), anti‐Hnf3β (clone 4C7, RRID: AB_2278498); 3.1 μg/ml of mouse‐anti‐Shh (clone 5E1, RRID: AB_2188307); mouse‐anti‐laminin‐1 (clone 3H11, RRID: AB_528342); mouse‐anti‐BEN/SC‐1 (clone BEN, RRID: AB_2314001)). The next day, sections were washed three times for 15 min each at room temperature with 0.1% Triton‐X100 in PBS. Primary antibodies (except anti‐GFP‐FITC) were detected with a 2‐h incubation in adequate secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer (1:1000 for donkey‐anti‐mouse‐IgG‐Cy5, Cat#115‐175‐146, RRID: AB_2338713 or donkey‐anti‐rabbit‐IgG‐Cy3, Cat# 711‐165‐152, RRID: AB_2307443, both from Jackson ImmunoResearch). Finally, nuclei were counterstained for 10 min at room temperature with 2.5 μg/ml of Hoechst diluted in 0.1 Triton X‐100 in PBS (Cat# H3570, Invitrogen), washed three times for 10 min each with 0.1% Triton X‐100 in PBS and two times for 5 min each with PBS before mounting the slides in Mowiol/DABCO. Images were taken with an Olympus IX83 inverted microscope equipped with a spinning disk unit (CSU‐X1 10,000 rpm, Yokogawa), a ×20 air objective (UPLSAPO ×20/0.8, Olympus) or a ×40 silicon oil objective (UPLSAPO S ×40/1.25, Olympus), and an Orca‐Flash 4.0 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software, or with an Olympus BX61 upright microscope and a ×10 air objective (UPLFL PH ×10/0.30, Olympus) or ×40 water objective (UAPO W/340 ×40/1.15, Olympus) and an Orca‐R2 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software.

2.8

## Whole‐mount immunostaining
Intact spinal cords dissected from HH24‐25 embryos were fixed for 1 h at room temperature in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS and washed three times 10 min each with PBS. Spinal cords were permeabilized and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with 5% FCS in 0.1% Triton X‐100 in PBS (blocking buffer). Primary antibodies were diluted in blocking buffer and added to spinal cords for incubation overnight at 4°C (1:800 of goat‐anti‐GFP‐FITC, Rockland; 1:5000 of rabbit‐anti‐RFP, antibodies‐online; 1:200 of mouse‐anti‐laminin supernatant, clone 3H1, RRID: AB_528342, DSHB). The next day, sections were washed three times 30 min each at room temperature with 0.1% Triton‐X100 in PBS. The primary antibody against RFP was detected with a 2‐h incubation with donkey‐anti‐rabbit‐IgG‐Cy3 antibody (1:1000, Cat# 711‐165‐152, RRID: AB_2307443, Jackson ImmunoResearch) and the one against laminin with donkey‐anti‐mouse‐IgG‐Cy5 (1:1000, Cat#115‐175‐146, RRID: AB_2338713, Jackson ImmunoResearch) diluted in blocking buffer. Finally, nuclei were counterstained for 30 min at room temperature with 2.5 μg/ml of Hoechst diluted in 0.1% Triton X‐100 in PBS (Invitrogen). Samples were washed three times 30 min each with 0.1% Triton X‐100 in PBS and two times 15 min each in PBS. Stained spinal cords where mounted in 100 μl of 0.5% low‐melting agarose in PBS with the ventral midline pointing down on a 35‐mm Ibidi μ‐dish with glass bottom (Ibidi, #81158), similarly as described above. This allowed accessing the commissure of fixed in vivo samples and visualization of dI1 axons and their growth cone with an Olympus IX83 inverted microscope equipped with a spinning disk unit (CSU‐X1 10,000 rpm, Yokogawa). Pictures were taken with a ×4 air objective (UPLFLN PH ×4/0.13, Olympus), a ×20 air objective (UPLSAPO ×20/0.75, Olympus) or a ×40 silicon oil objective (UPLSAPO S ×40/1.25, Olympus) and an Orca‐Flash 4.0 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software. Note that the same mounting and microscopy procedure was applied to HH23‐25 intact spinal cords that were not stained and were used for the quantification of average growth cone areas in vivo (shown in Figure 9(c)).

2.9

## Shh intensity measurement in the FP
Transverse cryosections from the lumbar and the thoracic regions (see Figure 5(g)) were immunostained for Shh and counterstained with Hoechst to reveal the FP morphology (see Section ). The mean intensity was measured in the FP using a circle ROI with a diameter of 100 μm. For each embryo, this intensity was measured from two to three consecutive sections per level (lumbar and thoracic), averaged and normalized to the average intensity of the lumbar level. This was performed for four intact spinal cords and open‐book preparations that were fixed after 24 h in culture. For all embryos and levels, the acquisition settings were exactly the same. Images were taken with an Olympus BX61 upright microscope and a ×20 water objective (UAPO W/340 ×20/0.70, Olympus) and an Orca‐R2 camera (Hamamatsu) with the Olympus CellSens Dimension 2.2 software.

2.10

## Statistics and figures assembly
Statistical analyses were carried out with GraphPad Prism 7.02 software. All data were assessed for normality (normal distribution) using the D'Agostino and Pearson omnibus K2 normality test and visual assessment of the normal quantile–quantile plot before choosing an appropriate (parametric or nonparametric) statistical test. p‐Values of the simple linear regression shown in Figure 7(i,j) demonstrate whether the slope is significantly different to zero and the dashed lines represent the 95% confidence intervals. Figures were assembled using Corel Draw 2017.

3

## RESULTS
3.1

## Electroporation is an efficient tool to selectively label dI1 neurons
We used unilateral in ovo electroporation of the chicken spinal cord in Hamburger and Hamilton (HH) stage 17–18 embryos to specifically express farnesylated td‐Tomato (td‐Tomato‐F) in Math1‐positive dI1 neurons, as well as farnesylated EGFP (EGFP‐F) expression in their environment (Figure (a,b)). One day after electroporation, at HH22, embryos showed expression of td‐Tomato‐F restricted to dI1 neurons and EGFP‐F expression in the entire half of the spinal cord, as expected (Figure ) (Wilson & Stoeckli, ). At this stage, most of the Math1‐positive dI1 axons approached the FP, but did not yet cross the midline, whereas other more ventral populations of commissural neurons expressing EGFP‐F already projected many axons to the contralateral side of the spinal cord (white arrowheads and arrow, respectively, Figure ). For this reason, we chose HH22 as the optimal stage to start tracing dI1 axons at the midline using live imaging.

3.2

## Live imaging of dI1 axons at the midline of intact spinal cord
We extracted the intact spinal cord 1 day after electroporation (Figure ), cultured it with the ventral midline down and imaged it with an inverted spinning disk microscope and a ×20 objective (Figure (d–f)). Math1‐positive dI1 axons crossing the FP could be visualized for at least 24 h (white arrowheads, Figure ; , ). Within this time window, many dI1 axons crossed the midline, exited the FP, turned rostrally and formed the contralateral ventral funiculus (white arrows, Figure ). A Math1‐positive ipsilateral subpopulation of axons could also be seen in these recordings as previously reported in vivo (Phan et al., ) (white asterisk, Figure ). Cultures of intact spinal cords turned out to be a very stable system as the U‐shaped morphology of the commissure was preserved over time (Figure (b,c), ) and all major cell populations were still in place after 1 day ex vivo (Figure (a–d)). DRGs were still attached to the spinal cord via their central afferents forming the dorsal roots (black asterisks), the dorsal funiculi were intact (black arrows) and the ventral roots formed by axons of motor neurons were still pointing outward of the spinal cord as visualized by BEN (also termed ALCAM or SC‐1) staining (magenta asterisks, Figure ). The same staining also revealed that the overall triangular shape of the FP was preserved with enlarged basal structures in the commissure area (white arrow, Figure ). Furthermore, the secreted guidance cue Sonic hedgehog (Shh) was still restricted to the FP and showed the caudal (lumbar, high) to rostral (thoracic, low) gradient, like in vivo (Figure (a–c,g,h)) (Bourikas et al., ). Additionally, NrCAM, a cell adhesion molecule that guides dI1 axons into the FP, was still expressed there (Figure ) (Stoeckli & Landmesser, ). Most importantly, dI1 axons' navigation was identical to the in vivo situation during this time window (Figure ). We also compared our ex vivo method with a recently published protocol using open‐book preparations of HH24‐26 chicken spinal cords for the analysis of receptor dynamics to push axons out of the midline area (Pignata et al., ) (Figure (g–i)). In contrast to this protocol, our ex vivo method did not result in overshooting axons, an artifact that we have already seen after short times in cultures of open‐book preparations, with Math1‐positive dI1 commissural axons that crossed the midline but then failed to turn into the longitudinal axis and continued to grow straight into the contralateral side instead (white arrowheads, Figure (d,e); ). Because many of our studies focus on the turning behavior of postcrossing axons at the FP exit site, the high incidence of aberrant axon growth into the contralateral half of the spinal cord is not acceptable. We found that 91 ± 6% of dI1 axons overshot, whereas 8 ± 6% turned rostrally, and 1 ± 1% turned caudally at the contralateral side (mean ± SD, N(embryos) = 4, n(axons) = 392). In our system, none of them overshot, and 98 ± 2% turned rostrally and 2 ± 2% caudally at the contralateral side (mean ± SD, N(embryos) = 7, n(axons) = 305). Although open‐book cultures offer the possibility to follow midline crossing of single dI1 axons (Figure ), we could observe a number of important differences in tissue integrity compared to intact spinal cord cultures. The observed axon guidance artifacts are most likely explained by the deformation of the FP and commissure in this preparation (Figures (e,f) and ) and the fact that diffusible guidance cues are not well retained in the tissue, as exemplified by Shh that lost its caudal (lumbar) to rostral (thoracic) gradient after 24 h in culture (Figure (d–f,g,i)). In line with this, staining for laminin revealed that the meninges surrounding the spinal cord were intact in our culture system (black arrowheads, Figure ) but mostly absent from open‐book preparations (black arrowheads, Figure ), where only an isolated patch remained at the FP (black arrow, Figure ). Meninges secrete extracellular matrix proteins that are deposited in and organize the basal lamina surrounding the spinal cord (Siegenthaler & Pleasure, ). The integrity of the basal lamina and the secreted guidance molecules that are localized in it were shown to play a crucial role in guidance of commissural axons at the ventral midline of the spinal cord (Burstyn‐Cohen et al., ; Wright et al., ; Zisman et al., ). The laminin staining also revealed that the basal lamina was intact at the commissure of cultured intact spinal cord (white arrowheads, Figure ), whereas it was deformed (white arrow) and discontinued in cultured open‐books (white arrowheads, Figure ). We also assessed possible apoptosis in cultured intact spinal cords by staining for cleaved caspase. We found very little apoptosis in the ventral spinal cord (arrowheads, Figure (m,n)) and DRGs in our system (black asterisks, Figure ). In contrast, cultured open‐books showed massive apoptosis in the ventral spinal cord (arrowheads, Figure (o,p)) in the region of the motor columns that might be caused in part by the complete loss of ventral roots in this system (black arrowhead, Figure ). A combination or all of these marked differences observed in cultured open‐books are likely to be responsible for the strong artifactual behavior of dI1 axons at the contralateral FP border. In contrast, our ex vivo method of culturing intact spinal cords offers a highly stable intact system in which dI1 commissural axons are behaving as expected based on what is known from in vivo studies with the advantage that individual axons can be followed during midline crossing and subsequent turning along the contralateral FP border.
 
3.3

## Characterization of the timing of midline crossing by dI1 commissural axons
The time it takes commissural axons to cross the FP has been estimated but could not be measured exactly (Stoeckli, ; Zou, ). However, timing is an issue, because axons have to change their responsiveness to FP‐derived guidance cues, like the Slits, Shh, or Wnt proteins, by expressing appropriate receptors in a precisely regulated manner (Bourikas et al., ; Domanitskaya et al., ; Long et al., ; Lyuksyutova et al., ; Philipp et al., ; Wilson & Stoeckli, ). With our method, we could track single dI1 commissural axons in the FP at any time point and in different ROIs (black arrowheads,Figure ). We were therefore able to ask, how long dI1 axons needed for FP crossing and their subsequent rostral turn (Figure ). On average, dI1 commissural axons took 5.6 ± 1.4 h to cross the entire FP and 1.4 ± 1.0 h to turn and initiate the rostral growth at the FP exit site. Thus, in total, they needed 6.9 ± 1.8 h from entering the FP to the initiation of their rostral growth (mean ± SD, Figure and Table ). There was no significant difference between the average time of crossing the first versus the second half of the FP (Figure , Table ). This was supported by kymographic analysis of a ROI within the FP from 24‐h time‐lapse recordings showing similar growth patterns between the first and second half of the FP at the single axon level (Figure , black arrowheads in Figure , ). Although the kymographic analysis was useful to screen for overall growth pattern of single dI1 axons within the FP (Figure (e,f)), it was not sensitive enough to detect more subtle changes in growth speed. Hence, we used a virtual tracing tool to follow the movement of the leading edge of each growth cone at each time point (Figure ). With this tool, we could extract the local growth speed for each axon at a specific time point (defined as the average speed during the previous 15 min). It turned out that the large majority of them had a fluctuating growth pattern with random acceleration–deceleration pulses that could be observed in early as well as late crossing axons (Figure , , Figure ). Another interesting observation was made when we compared the times of crossing the FP and the initiation of rostral growth after turning. There was no significant difference in the time of FP crossing of later versus earlier crossing axons (p = .0503; Figure ). However, the time dI1 axons took to turn rostrally at the exit site was significantly reduced over time (Figure ). The latter observation suggests that commissural axons that already turned anteriorly at the contralateral FP exit site might help the following ones to turn more rapidly. Our method offers new opportunities for further investigations of possible collaborations between axons at choice points.
 
3.4

## Characterization of the dI1 growth cone morphology at choice points
Another aspect that we considered was growth cone morphology. The growth cone plays a central role in axon guidance, as it explores the environment for guidance cues and translates this information into the directionality of growth (De Ramon Francàs et al., ; Stoeckli, ). In agreement with published live imaging studies from the visual system, where growth cone morphology was recorded at the chiasm (Godement et al., ; Sretavan & Reichardt, ), we found changes in growth cone morphology during midline crossing in the spinal cord. We observed that dI1 growth cones in the FP appeared to have a thin and elongated shape in the direction of growth. At the FP exit site, they transiently enlarged (arrowheads, Figure , ). We measured the average growth cone area in each segment of interest and confirmed that growth cones at the exit site of the FP were indeed significantly larger than the ones within the FP or after the turn (Figure (a,b), Table ). There was no significant change in the average growth cone area between the first and second half of the FP (Figure , Table ). The changes of growth cone shape were in line with previous reports on chicken and rat commissural axons in vivo (Bovolenta & Dodd, ; Yaginuma et al., ) and our data on Math1‐positive axons in vivo (Figure , Table , Figure ). The possibility to follow individual axons over time allowed us to make novel observations of their behavior at the FP exit site. One hundred percent of the observed growth cones extended long filopodia in both rostral and caudal direction just before turning (N(embryos) = 7, n(axons) = 305, Figure , and ). We observed 16 ± 8% of the growth cones to transiently split just before turning rostrally, similar to dorsal root ganglia central afferents in the mouse dorsal root entry zone before bifurcating (Dumoulin et al., ) (mean ± SD, N(embryos) = 7, n(axons) = 305, ). All these features are present in vivo, as similar growth cone morphologies were found in fixed HH24‐25 spinal cords (Figure ). Thus, ex vivo live imaging of cultured intact spinal cords using low magnification time‐lapse microscopy offers the opportunity to detect morphological changes of growth cones at choice points and is ideal for the analysis of many aspects of midline crossing in a relative large cohort of axons. However, the limited resolution especially in 3D might preclude the detection of more subtle changes in morphology of growth cones while crossing the midline.
 
3.5

## Higher magnification analysis of commissural axons crossing the midline revealed dorso‐ventral activities of their growth cone
For this reason, we repeated time‐lapse recordings of cultured intact spinal cords using a higher magnification objective and advanced 3D deconvolution technology. This allowed following Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons over time while entering, crossing and exiting the FP ( ). We observed that dI1 growth cones crossing the FP were bulkier in the dorso‐ventral axis (white arrowheads, Figure , ) and were particularly dynamic in this axis showing rapid extension of filopodial protrusions (white arrows in Figure and ). This aspect of dI1 growth cone behavior in the FP was supported by visualization of tdTomato‐F‐expressing growth cones and the basal lamina marker laminin as a ventral commissure reference point of HH22‐24.5 whole‐mount spinal cords or cryosections (arrowheads, Figure (b–d), and ). In line with their dorso‐ventral activity, we could observe that 100% of the observed dI1 growth cones in the commissure sent at least once a dynamic long protrusion (up to ~13 μm) into the FP while crossing it (black arrow, Figure , black arrowheads, , N(embryos) = 4, n(axons) = 116). Protrusions entering the FP could also be detected for dI1 growth cones in vivo as revealed by immunostaining of HH22‐24.5 whole‐mount spinal cords or cryosections (white arrows, Figure (f,g)). Next, we also had a closer look at the FP exit site, where growth cones need to read longitudinal gradients to initiate the rostral turn after exiting the FP (Pignata et al., ; Stoeckli, ). Intriguingly, we detected that just before exiting the FP, dI1 growth cones very often sent a long protrusion into the FP (arrow, Figure , , 63% of 32 growth cones that could be followed at the exit site, N(embryos) = 4). Live imaging clearly revealed that the activity and orientation of growth cones switched by about 90° after exiting the FP, as they flattened in the dorso‐ventral axis and enlarged in the longitudinal axis ex vivo and in vivo (Figure (i,j), ). Another unexpected observation we made was that 80 ± 2% of dI1 growth cones transiently split while crossing the FP (mean ± SD, N(embryos) = 4, n(axons) = 116, asterisks in ). The splitting created two more or less equal branches (black arrows, Figure , ), but only one persisted and grew straight to the contralateral side, while the other one was retracted (black asterisks, Figure , ). Also this behavior was supported by snapshots from in vivo behavior of dI1 growth cones (arrows, Figure ). Taken together, ex vivo live imaging combined with high magnification analysis of growth cone dynamics allowed us to characterize the behavior dI1 growth cones at choice points in more detail.
 
3.6

## Live imaging unraveled the dynamics and morphologies of FP cells during midline crossing
The orientation of dI1 growth cones as well as their behavior during FP crossing suggested that they have to squeeze their way between the basal feet of FP cells which are attached to the basal lamina (Yaginuma et al., ; Yoshioka & Tanaka, ). Moreover, very little was known about the morphology of FP cells during axonal midline crossing and their potential active contribution in this process has never been addressed (Campbell & Peterson, ; Yaginuma et al., ; Yoshioka & Tanaka, ). Therefore, we examined the behavior and morphology of FP cells during midline crossing in our ex vivo system. We electroporated spinal cords at HH17‐18 after injection of a plasmid encoding EGFP‐F under the FP‐specific Hoxa1 enhancer for expression of the membrane‐bound fluorescent protein in FP cells (Li & Lufkin, ; Wilson & Stoeckli, ; Zisman et al., ) (Figure (a–d)). With this we were able to see Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive bulky FP basal feet in the commissure in vivo (white arrowheads, Figure ) as well as their thin morphology and orientation (white arrows) that seemed to be tightly aligned with dI1 growth cones crossing the midline (white arrowheads, Figure ). The morphology of medial FP basal feet with little extension in the rostro‐caudal axis but enlarged in the dorso‐ventral axis could be observed in real time using our ex vivo culture technique (Figure , ). Interestingly, we could observe dynamic protrusions sprouting from the basal feet in direction of axonal growth in the commissure (black arrows, Figure , ). Similar observations were made for basal feet of lateral FP cells (black arrow, Figure ). They produced dynamic protrusions toward the FP entry zone at high frequency (black arrows, Figure , ). Importantly, we could observe a similar morphology of medial FP basal feet at the single‐cell level in vivo (arrowheads, Figure , ). The dI1 commissural axons had the same orientation as the FP basal feet and seemed to grow in between these feet and interact with them in vivo ( and ). Moreover, we could observe similar protrusions coming either from lateral FP basal feet (white arrows) going toward precrossing dI1 axons arriving at the FP (white arrowheads, Figure ), or from medial FP basal feet extending parallel to axons in the commissure (white arrows, Figure and ). The tight interaction between dI1 axons and FP basal feet during midline crossing was unexpected ( ). The observation that protrusions from lateral FP basal feet (white arrowhead) were extending and contacting dI1 growth cones before they entered the FP (white arrows) suggested a much more active role of FP cells than anticipated (Figure , ). Last but not least, we could confirm that FP basal feet structures (yellow arrow) were present in between transiently splitting dI1 growth cones (white arrowheads and arrows) in the commissure (Figure , ). Taken together, these data showed for the first time the detailed morphology of single FP cells, their dynamics and tight interactions with axons during midline crossing, and they emphasized the probable active role of FP cells in initiating contacts with growth cones before and during midline crossing.
 
3.7

## Trajectory and behavior of dI1 axons can be visualized in real time at choice points
Our ex vivo culture method not only offers great opportunities to characterize behavior of growth cones and FP cells in a preserved system, but it also opens new possibilities for tracking axonal behavior after specific perturbations of either the neurons or their environment. As example, the Wnt receptor Fzd3 (Frizzled‐3) was specifically downregulated in Math1‐positive dI1 neurons (Alther et al., ; Wilson & Stoeckli, ) (Figure ). Fzd3 is required for the rostral turn of postcrossing commissural axons at the contralateral FP border in vivo (Alther et al., ; Lyuksyutova et al., ). We used our ex vivo culture system to visualize Math1::EGFP‐F‐positive dI1 axons expressing a microRNA for Fzd3 (miFzd3, Figure (b,c)). This allowed us to follow in real time how dI1 growth cones were turning caudally instead of rostrally at the contralateral FP border (black arrowheads, Figure ; and ). Interestingly, many axons were found to turn erroneously in caudal direction at the same position, suggesting that axons were influenced by close contact with other axons although a purely cell‐autonomous effect of a loss of Fzd3 cannot be ruled out with this experimental set up (black asterisk and black arrows in ). In addition, some axons were found stalling at the FP exit site without initiating any turn (black arrowhead, Figure , ). Nonetheless, the growth cones remained highly dynamic. The changes in morphology were accompanied with transient retraction and re‐extension but without a clear change in directionality. Importantly, expressing a control microRNA (mi2Luc) did not impact the guidance of dI1 axons at the contralateral FP border (Figure , ). Taken together, our method can be used to study the behavior of axons after perturbation of candidate genes specifically either in the neurons or in their target in real time, providing information about the dynamic behavior of growth cones and/or target cells that cannot be appreciated from snapshots taken from different preparations at selected time points.
 

4

## DISCUSSION
The possibility to follow one axon over time, rather than deducing behavior from snapshots of different axons, allowed us to extract detailed information on the timing of midline crossing and the tight interaction between FP cells and the growth cones in a higher vertebrate model (Figure ). Our ex vivo system offers significant improvement over existing open‐book culture systems, as it not only allows for observation of growth cones within the midline area but also during and after their turn into the longitudinal axis. In cultures of open‐book preparations, the deformation of the tissue, the lack of meninges that might restrict diffusion of secreted guidance cues, as seen for Shh, and the apoptosis in the ventral spinal cord could explain the guidance artifacts at the contralateral FP border (Figures , , ) (Pignata et al., ). Our ex vivo culture system is highly reproducible and generates a manageable amount of data compared to live imaging using light sheet‐based microscopy, for example (Liu et al., ).
 The comparison of growth cones at the FP (this study) and at the optic chiasm (Godement et al., ; Sretavan & Reichardt, ) reveals both common and different behaviors. As seen at the chiasm (Godement et al., ), growth cones exhibited a saltatory growth behavior during FP crossing. However, in contrast to the chiasm, where axons would stall for several hours, axons did not pause during FP crossing. Growth speed in the FP was slower (5–75 μm/h) compared to that of retinal ganglion cell axons at the chiasm (60–100 μm/h). As described for the chiasm, growth cone morphology changed according to the dynamic behavior of the growth cone. During elongation of the axon, after entering the FP and before reaching the contralateral side, growth cones had a streamlined morphology. At the FP exit site, growth cone morphology changed to a much more complex shape with extended filopodia exploring the environment before the actual turn. At the chiasm, crossing axons did not change their morphology significantly, whereas those that changed their trajectory to turn along the ipsilateral pathway displayed a dramatic shape change just before the turn. Therefore, this resembles the behavior at the FP exit site, where a new direction is adopted by turning into the longitudinal axis.
Our comparative analyses demonstrate that midline crossing of dI1 axons in our ex vivo system was very similar to what happens in vivo (Figures , , , ). Therefore, our ex vivo system can be used to monitor and assess axonal behavior at choice points. We could detect that dI1 growth cones took on average 5.6 h to cross the entire FP and that they did so in a pulsed manner (black arrowheads, Figure ). We could also measure that they needed on average 1.4 h to initiate their rostral growth, and that the first axons exiting the FP took longer than the followers (Figure ). In total they needed almost 7 h from entering the FP to making the decision to turn rostrally (blue arrowhead, Figure ). This is enough time for growth cones to change their responsiveness to specific guidance cues for crossing and exiting the FP as well as for turning rostrally due to changes in receptor expression regulated at the posttranslational, translational, and even transcriptional level (Nawabi et al., ; Philipp et al., ; Pignata et al., ; Preitner et al., ; Stoeckli, ; Wilson & Stoeckli, ).
The growth cone is the decision center where axon guidance instructions are transduced to the cytoskeleton (Vitriol & Zheng, ). With our newly developed ex vivo system, dynamic changes in dI1 commissural growth cone morphology and behavior at the midline can be observed in real time. Growth cones were thin and elongated in the FP with their major extension in the dorso‐ventral axis (black arrowheads, Figure (a,c)). At the FP exit site, they showed a 90° rotation to be enlarged and active in the longitudinal axis (green arrowhead and black arrow, Figure , black arrowhead, Figure ). The fact that dI1 growth cones sent a long filopodium into the FP, toward the FP cell soma area, while crossing it and just before exiting it, suggests that they might need to read signals from this area in order to move on and exit the FP (orange arrows in Figure (c,d)). The extension of long filopodia just before FP exit and rostral turning suggests that actin polymerization might be required to sense repulsive cues—for instance, SlitN and Shh, respectively—and transduce the signal into the growth cone, as suggested for Slit‐induced growth cone collapse in vitro (McConnell et al., ). Further investigations using our ex vivo culture system will be required to understand the role of cytoskeletal dynamics in axonal navigation of the intermediate target.
Our method also suggested a probable active contribution of FP cells to axon guidance that goes beyond providing axon guidance cues, as we found the cells of the intermediate target to be very dynamic and to extend protrusions in directions of the arriving axons, or to actively engage with axons in the FP. Thus, it seems that the intermediate target is much more than a passive by‐stander and provider of attractive and repulsive axon guidance and cell adhesion molecules. We characterized the FP cell morphologies in detail in the medial as well as the lateral FP. Basal feet appeared to be enlarged and oriented parallel to commissural growth cones (Figure ). This was in line with previous reports in the chicken and mouse embryos (Campbell & Peterson, ; Ducuing et al., ; Yaginuma et al., ; Yoshioka & Tanaka, ). The lateral FP basal feet sent protrusions (black arrows) toward dI1 growth cones approaching the FP and eventually interacted with them (black arrowhead, Figure ). This intriguing observation led us to speculate whether these protrusions might be cytonemes. Cytonemes are long protrusions known to spread and deliver morphogens, such as Wnts and Shh, to neighboring or more distant cells (González‐Méndez et al., ; Sanders et al., ; Stanganello & Scholpp, ). Given the fact that Shh is involved in guiding precrossing commissural axons toward the FP and that Shh and Wnts are both involved in guiding postcrossing axons toward the brain at the contralateral FP border, it is tempting to speculate that these protrusions might deliver such signals to the growth cones at choice points (Avilés et al., ). Moreover, we could appreciate how much the axons and their growth cones were intermingled within the medial FP basal feet which also formed long dynamic protrusions within the commissure (black arrowheads, Figure ). In sum, the combination of our live imaging approach with a FP‐specific marker will give the opportunity to further characterize the behavior of intermediate target cells with regard to axon guidance at choice points.
Ultimately, our method will be useful to get more insights into molecular mechanisms of axon guidance at a choice point, when combined with in ovo RNAi for specific gene knockdowns either in the neurons or in their environment, as exemplified with Fzd3 knockdown experiments (Figure ) (Andermatt et al., ; Baeriswyl et al., ; Pekarik et al., ). Similarly, pharmacological blockers will permit to screen for components required downstream of growth cone receptors to transduce guidance signals. Usually such experiments are conducted in vitro with cultured neurons growing axons in a very artificial environment. Thus, our method offers the advantages of an in vitro experiment in an intact complex “in vivo‐like” environment. The use of specific reporters will also allow for the assessment of dynamic changes of second messengers or the actin cytoskeleton in growth cones, for example (Nichols & Smith, ; Nicol et al., ). Moreover, the use of other sets of enhancers and promoters might offer the possibility to study the dynamics of midline crossing in other subtypes of commissural neurons in the spinal cord and in the brain (Hadas et al., ; Kohl et al., ).

## CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interests.

## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Alexandre Dumoulin: Designed experiments, performed experiments, evaluated data, and contributed to the writing of the manuscript. Nikole R. Zuñiga: Generated the Hoxa1 plasmid. Esther T. Stoeckli: Designed experiments, supervised the project, and contributed to the writing of the manuscript.

5

## PEER REVIEW
The peer review history for this article is available at https://publons.com/publon/10.1002/cne.25107.

## Supporting information

MOVIE 1
24‐hour time‐lapse recording of the ex vivo cultured intact spinal cord shown in Figure 3(a). Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons (magenta), β‐actin::EGFP‐F‐positive axons and cells (green) and brightfield maximum projections are shown in parallel. One z‐stack was taken every 15 minutes for each channel. White and magenta dashed lines indicate FP boundaries and the midline, respectively. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 2
8‐hour segment of a time‐lapse recording of an intact spinal cord cultured ex vivo. Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons are shown in black. Maximum projections of z‐stacks taken every 15 minutes are represented as well as 3D rotations at different time points (at FP entry, during FP crossing, at FP exit and after rostral turn). Black and orange dashed lines indicate FP boundaries and midline, respectively. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 3
4‐hour time‐lapse recording of the ex vivo cultured open‐book preparation of the spinal cord shown in Figure 3(d,e). Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons (magenta), β‐actin::EGFP‐F‐positive axons and cells (green) and brightfield maximum projections are shown in parallel. One z‐stack was taken every 15 minutes for each channel. White and magenta dashed lines indicate FP boundaries and the midline, respectively. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 4
24‐hour time‐lapse recording of an ex vivo cultured intact spinal cord used for kymographic analysis in Figure 7(d). Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons are shown in black. Maximum projections of z‐stacks taken every 15 minutes are represented. Black and orange dashed lines indicate FP boundaries and midline, respectively. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 5
7.75‐h time‐lapse recording of the segment shown in Figure 7(g). This movie shows the virtual tracing of the growth cone (black arrowhead) at each time point revealing the local growth speed. Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons are shown in black. Maximum projections of z‐stacks taken every 15 minutes are represented. Black and orange dashed lines indicate FP boundaries and midline, respectively. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 6
Example of growth cone enlargement at the floor‐plate exit site. Growth cone of a Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 commissural axon (black arrowheads) exiting the FP (black dashed line) and becoming spiky with many filopodia before turning rostrally (black arrow). Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 7
Example of growth cone enlargement at the floor‐plate exit site. Two growth cones of Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 commissural axons (black arrowheads) exiting the FP (dashed line) and becoming spiky with filopodia growing in rostral and caudal direction before turning rostrally (black arrows). Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 8
Example of growth cone enlargement and transient splitting at the floor‐plate exit site. Growth cone of a Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 commissural axon (black arrowheads) exiting the FP (dashed line), becoming spiky with a lot of filopodia and transiently splitting before turning rostrally (black arrow). Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 9
24‐hour time‐lapse recording with high magnification objective of cultured intact spinal cord. Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons are shown in black. Maximum projections of z‐stacks taken every 15 minutes are represented. Dashed lines represent FP boundaries. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 10
Time‐lapse recording within the floor plate uncovered dI1 growth cones orientation. Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 growth cone (white arrowhead) crossing the FP showed a dorso‐ventral orientation with filopodia activities in the dorso‐ventral axis (white arrows). Maximum projections of z‐stacks (rostro‐caudal and dorso‐ventral axis) taken every 15 minutes are represented as well as a 3D rotation. r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 11
dI1 growth cones showed the same dorso‐ventral orientation in the floor plate in vivo (whole‐mount staining of HH24.5 intact spinal cord). 3D representation of two Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 growth cones (shown in magenta, white arrowheads) showing little extension in the rostro‐caudal axis but enlarged size in the dorso‐ventral axis. The basal lamina was stained for laminin (shown in green, white arrows). r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 12
Early crossing dI1 growth cones showed the same dorso‐ventral orientation in the floor plate in vivo as observed ex vivo (immunostaining of HH22 spinal cord cross‐sections). 3D representation of a Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 growth cones (shown in magenta, white arrowheads) showing little extension in the rostro‐caudal axis but enlarged size in the dorso‐ventral axis. The basal lamina was stained for laminin (shown in green) and nuclei counter‐stained with Hoechst (shown in blue). r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 13
14‐hour time‐lapse recording of dI1 axons crossing the floor‐plate. Rostro‐caudal, dorso‐ventral and 3D representations of Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 axons crossing the FP. dI1 growth cones transiently split in the FP (black asterisks) and showed filopodial extensions towards the FP cell soma area (black arrowheads). r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 14
Detailed analysis of dI1 growth cone shape at the floor‐plate exit site in real time. Sequence from a time‐lapse recording showing two Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 commissural growth cones exiting the FP (black arrowheads). Both sent a protrusion towards the FP cell soma just before exiting (black arrows) and changed their orientation upon exiting the FP by 90° to adopt an enlarged size in the longitudinal axis. Dashed line represents the FP exit. r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 15
dI1 growth cone at the floor‐plate exit site of a HH24.5 spinal cord in vivo. Example of a Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive growth cone (shown in magenta, white arrowhead) with little extension along the dorso‐ventral axis but enlarged in the rostro‐caudal axis. r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 16
dI1 growth cone transiently split in the floor plate. Sequence from a time‐lapse recording showing a Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 commissural growth cone crossing the FP (black arrowhead) and transiently splitting (black arrowhead). Note that one branch retracted (black asterisk) while the other continued to grow straight towards the contralateral side (black arrowhead). Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 17
Time‐lapse recording sequence of a Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive medial floor plate cell. Live imaging of a medial FP cell showed that it had a thin basal foot in the rostro‐caudal axis. In the dorso‐ventral axis to foot was large. The FP cell extended highly dynamic protrusions from its foot in both directions of axonal growth (black arrows). r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 18
Time‐lapse recording sequence of Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive lateral floor‐plate cells. Live imaging of lateral FP cells revealed a very high activity of their basal feet with highly dynamic protrusions sprouting out in the direction of the arriving pre‐crossing axons (black arrows). r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 19
Whole‐mount staining of a medial floor‐plate cell uncovered its shape in vivo. Example of a single Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive medial FP cell at HH24.5 (shown in green) with two thin basal feet in the rostro‐caudal axis that were enlarged in the dorso‐ventral axis at the level of the commissure (white arrows). The orientation of basal feet was aligned to a Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 growth cone (white arrow, shown in magenta). r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 20
Whole‐mount staining of medial floor‐plate cells revealed alignment between their basal feet and dI1 growth cones in vivo. Example of Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive medial FP cells at HH24.5 (shown in green) with basal feet oriented in the dorso‐ventral axis (white arrows). Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 growth cones were aligned with the FP basal feet (white arrow, shown in magenta). r, rostral; c, caudal; d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 21
Z‐stack animation of the medial floor‐plate area reveal protrusions of basal feet and demonstrated close interaction between dI1 axons and floor‐plate basal feet in the commissure in vivo. Immunohistochemistry of HH22 spinal cord sections revealed that Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive medial FP basal feet (shown in green) also contained protrusions in the commissure in vivo (white arrows). FP basal feet seemed to enwrap Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive axons in the commissure (Shown in magenta, white arrowheads). Nuclei were counterstained with Hoechst (shown in blue). d, dorsal; v, ventral.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 22
Time‐lapse recording sequence of a dI1 commissural growth cone interacting with protrusions from floor‐plate basal feet before entering the floor plate. A Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 growth cone (shown in magenta) extended filopodia in the direction of the FP (white arrowheads) and eventually interacted with protrusions (white arrows) coming from the Hoxa1::EGFP‐F‐positive FP basal feet (shown in green) before entering the FP. Note that at “t = 240 min” a Z‐stack animation is shown to pinpoint the close vicinity between basal feet protrusions and the growth cone (white arrows and arrowheads, respectively). Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 23
Time‐lapse recording sequence of a dI1 commissural growth cone transiently splitting in the commissure in between floor‐plate basal feet. A Math1::tdTomato‐F‐positive dI1 growth cone (shown in magenta, white arrowhead) growing through the FP basal feet (shown in green) and undergoing transient splitting (white arrow). Note that at “t = 2 h” (splitting time point) a Z‐stack animation is shown to pinpoint that FP basal feet structures (white arrow) were present in between both branches of the split dI1 growth cone. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 24
48‐hour time‐lapse recording sequence showing aberrant caudal turning of dI1 commissural axons after silencing Fzd3. Math1::EGFP‐F; miFzd3‐positive dI1 axons exiting the FP are shown in black. The turning behavior at the contralateral FP border was randomized with a substantial number of mutant dI1 axons turning caudally instead of rostrally (black arrows). Often, collective behavior was seen, that is, after a first axon turning caudally many other growth cones seemed to follow the same path and fasciculated with axons that turned in the wrong direction (black asterisk). Dashed line represents the FP exit site. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 25
48‐hour time‐lapse recording showing growth cone stalling at the floor‐plate exit site after silencing Fzd3. Math1::EGFP‐F; miFzd3‐positive dI1 axons exiting the FP are shown in black. Black arrowhead shows a mutant dI1 axons stalling at the contralateral FP border. Some axons were also turning caudally (black arrows). Dashed line represents the FP exit site. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

MOVIE 26
48‐hour time‐lapse recording showing normal behavior of control‐treated dI1 axons at floor‐plate exit. Math1::EGFP‐F; mi2Luc‐positive dI1 axons exiting the FP are shown in black. All growth cones behaved normally at the contralateral FP border and turned rostrally (black arrowheads). Dashed line represents the FP exit site. Rostral is up.
Click here for additional data file.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Dr Beat Kunz for excellent technical assistance. This project was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

## DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.