2662carCartilageCartilageSAGE PublicationsPMC9434687943468794346873604015710.1177/19476035221113959Hydrogel-Embedded Poly(Lactic-co-Glycolic Acid)
Microspheres for the Delivery of hMSC-Derived Exosomes to Promote Bioactive
Annulus Fibrosus Repair
DiStefanoTyler J VasoKeti PanebiancoChristopher J DaniasGeorge ChionumaHenry N KunnathKuriakose KarouliasStylianos Z WangMinghui XuPeng DavéRajesh N SahooSusmita WeiserJennifer R IatridisJames C 1Leni and Peter W. May Department of
Orthopaedics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA2Department of Chemical Engineering, The
Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, New York, NY, USA3Department of Chemical Engineering, New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA4Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA5Mount Sinai Center for Transformative
Disease Modeling, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA6Icahn Institute for Data Science and
Genomic Technology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA7Cardiovascular Research Center, Icahn
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA8Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Leni
and Peter W. May Department of Orthopaedics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, USA✉James C. Iatridis, Orthopaedic Research
Laboratories, Leni and Peter W. May Department of Orthopaedics, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1188, New York, NY 10029,
USA. Email: james.iatridis@mssm.edu
30820221331947603522111395919476035221113959292022© The Author(s) 2022This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/) which
permits non-commercial use, reproduction and distribution of the work
without further permission provided the original work is attributed as
specified on the SAGE and Open Access pages (https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).

## Abstract

## Objective
Intervertebral disk degeneration is a prevalent postoperative complication
after discectomy, underscoring the need to develop preventative and
bioactive treatment strategies that decelerate degeneration and seal annulus
fibrosus (AF) defects. Human mesenchymal stem cell–derived exosomes
(MSC-Exos) hold promise for cell-free bioactive repair; however, their
ability to promote AF repair is poorly understood. The objective of this
study was to evaluate the ability of MSC-Exos to promote endogenous AF
repair processes and integrate MSC-Exos within a biomaterial delivery
system.

## Design
We characterize biophysical and biochemical properties of normoxic (Nx) and
hypoxic (Hx) preconditioned MSC-Exos from young, healthy donors and examine
their effects on AF cell proliferation, migration, and gene expression. We
then integrate a poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) microsphere
(PLGA µSphere) delivery platform within an interpenetrating network hydrogel
to facilitate sustained MSC-Exo delivery.

## Results
Hx MSC-Exos led to a more robust response in AF cell proliferation and
migration than Nx MSC-Exos and was selected for a downstream protection
experiment. Hx MSC-Exos maintained a healthy AF cell phenotype under a TNFα
challenge in vitro and attenuated catabolic responses. In
all functional assays, AF cell responses were more sensitive to Hx MSC-Exos
than Nx MSC-Exos. PLGA µSpheres released MSC-Exos over a clinically relevant
timescale without affecting hydrogel modulus or pH upon initial embedment
and µSphere degradation.

## Conclusions
This MSC-Exo treatment strategy may offer benefits of stem cell therapy
without the need for exogenous stem cell transplantation by stimulating cell
proliferation, promoting cell migration, and protecting cells from the
degenerative proinflammatory microenvironment.

Keywords: intervertebral disk, hydrogels, extracellular vesicles, exosomes, drug delivery

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2022 Jan 14; Revised 2022 Jun 27; Accepted 2022 Jun 28; Collection date 2022 Jul.

## Introduction
Lesions in the annulus fibrosus (AF) are a significant risk factor for intervertebral
disk (IVD) herniation, biomechanical dysfunction, and progressive degeneration, yet
current discectomy procedures do not repair AF defects after nerve root
decompression. - Since the IVD is the largest
avascular organ in the body, it has a poor intrinsic healing capacity and AF defects
tend to heal by the formation of a fibrous capsule at the outer AF. - These poor healing outcomes can
lead to painful postoperative complications following discectomy such as recurrent
herniation and progressive IVD degeneration (IVDD), thus motivating development of
strategies that improve repair of AF defects to slow IVDD and mitigate the risk of
adverse events after surgery. - 
Injectable bioadhesive hydrogels are an emerging treatment option to seal AF defects
and prevent recurrent herniation of nucleus pulposus (NP) tissue. Our group recently
developed a 2-part biomaterial repair strategy composed of a dual-modified
glycosaminoglycan that bonds an interpenetrating network (IPN) hydrogel to
extracellular matrix proteins to seals AF defects.
 
 The low modulus hydrogel had low herniation risk and may be amenable for
delivery of bioactive agents. Regenerative strategies that promote AF repair using
exogenous cell delivery is challenging because of low cell viability, injectate
leakage, aberrant differentiation, and osteophyte formation. - The development of cell-free
alternatives that can overcome these translational obstacles and prevent progressive
IVDD. - Furthermore, its delivery in
a biomaterial sealant also has potential to provide functional repair.
Mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes (MSC-Exos) are an emerging cell-free strategy
with demonstrated potential to promote endogenous tissue repair for a number of
tissuese. - Specifically, MSC-Exos
enhanced healing outcomes by attenuating inflammation, reducing catabolism,
decreasing levels of apoptosis, promoting proliferation, and stimulating
migration. , , , The use of MSC-Exos to treat IVDD is still in its infancy, with
few prior studies targeting IVDD. Studies that do use MSC-Exos for IVDD focus on NP
or organ-level responses to treatment with a dearth of information regarding AF
responses to treatment. - Given the distinct
differences between AF and NP phenotypes, as well as their functional roles in IVD
homeostasis and healing, there is a clear need to define AF cell treatment responses
to MSC-Exos in order to evaluate their regenerative potential for cell-free therapy
in a tissue-specific manner. - 
Two important considerations for the success of MSC-Exo therapy are the specific
bioactive cargo and the delivery system. Few studies have demonstrated regulatory
effects of the parent cell’s culture environment on the MSC-Exos molecular signature
which may be implicated in MSC-Exo treatment responses.
 
 Particularly, the oxygen tension (pO2) of MSC culture may
differentially regulate specific small RNA transcripts. - Therefore, normoxic (Nx;
18.6% O2) and hypoxic (Hx; 5% O2) MSC culture conditions were
used to determine the influence of pO2 on the composition of human
MSC-Exos. In regard to the delivery system, poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) (PLGA) is a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved biodegradable,
biocompatible synthetic copolymer that is widely used to fabricate microsphere
carriers (PLGA µSpheres) for controlled release applications.
 
 PLGA µSpheres loaded with MSC-Exos may be integrated into our IPN hydrogel to
form a bioactive AF sealant given that they achieve the following design goals: (1)
incorporation of PLGA µSpheres does not significantly stiffen hydrogel constructs
since the IVD herniation risk was shown to be inversely proportional to the hydrogel stiffness
 
; (2) degradation of PLGA µSpheres does not significantly decrease the
environmental pH to that which aligns with the degenerative microenvironment since
PLGA hydrolytically degrades into 2 acidic compounds and the acidic milieu can
promote progressive degeneration , - ; and (3) PLGA µSpheres
demonstrate proof-of-concept encapsulation and subsequent release of MSC-Exos on a
clinically relevant timescale in order to postoperatively enhance endogenous AF
repair responses.
The global objectives of this study are 2-fold: (1) to evaluate the therapeutic
potential of MSC-Exos to enhance endogenous AF repair and prevent hallmarks of IVDD
in vitro and (2) integrate a biodegradable MSC-Exo carrier for
local delivery to the AF (
 
). In Part 1, we compare the biophysical and biochemical composition between
Nx and Hx preconditioned MSC-Exos, then assess migratory and proliferative AF cell
responses to MSC-Exo treatment in order to select the MSC pO2
conditioning environment with the most robust responses. We next apply this MSC-Exo
group to TNFα-challenged AF cells to determine whether MSC-Exos can enable AF cells
to resist aberrant changes in cell phenotype under a proinflammatory cytokine
challenge. In Part 2, we integrate a degradable PLGA µSphere carrier within an
adhesive hydrogel system for the local delivery of MSC-Exos to AF repair sites. We
evaluate the effects of PLGA µSphere embedment on the short- and long-term
mechanical and material properties of the hydrogel, assess the effect of PLGA
degradation on culture acidity, and determine whether PLGA µSpheres can feasibly
encapsulate MSC-Exos and enable sustained release. Successful completion of Parts 1
and 2 will demonstrate proof-of-concept that IPN hydrogel-embedded PLGA µSpheres
loaded with MSC-Exos can be used to engineer a bioactive AF sealant for treating
IVDD.
 

## Materials and Methods

## hBM-MSC Culture for MSC-Exo Production
Human Bone Marrow-MSCs (hBM-MSCs) from 3 young, healthy biological donors
(MSC00115, MSC00175, and MSC00179) were purchased from RoosterBio Inc.,
Frederick, MD. MSC donor selection criteria included young adult age, high
positivity for CD166, CD105, CD90, and CD73 flow markers, and negative for CD14,
CD34, and CD45 flow markers. hBM-MSCs from donor MSC00115, MSC00175, and
MSC00179 were isolated from a 20-year-old female, a 25-year-old male, and a
21-year-old male, respectively. hBM-MSCs for all donors were demonstrated to
have trilineage (adipogenic, osteogenic, and chondrogenic) differentiation
potential from the supplier. Frozen hBM-MSCs (RoosterVial™-hBM-10M) were thawed
and spun down to remove excess dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in the freezing medium,
then cultured using tissue culture treated Corning® CellSTACK® CS2 culture
chambers (Corning Inc., Kennebunk, ME). hBM-MSCs were cultured in either
normoxic (18.6% O2, 5% CO2, 70.2% N2)
conditions or hypoxic conditions (5% O2, 5% CO2, 83.8%
N2) at 37 °C for expansion according to supplier’s
instructions.
At 90% confluency, hBM-MSC expansion culture medium was aspirated and fully
exchanged with RoosterCollect™-EV medium supplemented with of EV Boost™. After
24 hours, the MSC-conditioned medium was collected and stored at −80 °C until
downstream use for MSC-Exo isolation. Of note, hypoxic conditioned hBM-MSCs
remained in the hypoxic incubator, undisturbed for the full expansion phase (~72
h) as well as the MSC-Exo conditioning phase (~24 h), with the exception to
exchange media after confluency was reached (~5 min).
 

## MSC-Exo Isolation from MSC Conditioned Medium
MSC-Exos were isolated from conditioned media by ultracentrifugation and
separated from the soluble protein fraction using a sucrose gradient, as
previously described.
 
 The Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rochester,
NY) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions to quantify MSC-Exo
concentration in all freshly isolated samples and then immediately stored at −80
°C until downstream use.

## Transmission Electron Microscopy
Isolated MSC-Exos were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to
examine MSC-Exo morphology. MSC-Exos samples were first fixed in 2%
paraformaldehyde (PFA; Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) for 5 minutes
and subsequently loaded on copper grids (Electron Microscopy Sciences) to air
dry for 10 minutes. After drying, 1% uranyl acetate solution was applied to the
sample for at least 10 minutes for negative staining. Samples were then imaged
at 80 kV and 25,000x magnification on a HT7000 transmission electron microscope
(Hitachi America, Ltd., Santa Clara, CA).

## Dynamic Light Scattering
Isolated MSC-Exos were characterized by dynamic light scattering (DLS) to
determine nanoparticle size distribution. About 30 µL of reconstituted MSC-Exos
was added to 970 µL of 1X phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) in a spectrophotometry
cuvette (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ). The cuvette was placed in the
ZetaPALS Zeta Potential Analyzer and data were acquired over 3 cycles (1.5
min/cycle) and analyzed using ZetaPALS Particle Sizing Software (Brookhaven
Instruments Corporation, Holtsville, NY). Lognormal size distributions for each
sample were exported and the D50 values for hydrodynamic diameters
were recorded.

## MSC-Exo Protein Extraction and Western Blot
Following ultracentrifugation, MSC-Exos were lysed directly in 1x Pierce™ RIPA
Lysis and Extraction Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 4 °C. After
collection, protein expression in MSC-Exos was analyzed by western blot, as
previously described. , The 2 primary antibodies were used to examine protein
expression in MSC-Exo samples and hMSC lysate controls: Mouse monoclonal
antibody [4A10] to human TSG101 (ab83, 1:1000, Abcam Inc., Cambridge, MA) and
rabbit polyclonal antibody to human Calnexin (ab22595, 1:1000, Abcam Inc.).
 
 IRDye® goat-anti-mouse or IRDye®
goat-anti-rabbit were used as secondary antibodies
(1:10,000 in 5% [w/v] non-fat milk in TBS-T, Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratories, West Grove, PA). Polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes were
imaged using the Azure c600 Gel Imaging System (Azure Biosystems, Dublin,
CA).

## MSC-Exo RNA Isolation and Small RNA-Seq
Following ultracentrifugation, MSC-Exos were collected directly in 500 µL of
QIAzol Lysis Reagent (QIAGEN Sciences, Germantown, MD). After collection,
samples were transferred into sterile 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes and total
MSC-Exo RNA was isolated using a guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform
extraction method.
 
 MSC-Exo RNA concentration was quantified using a Qubit® RNA High
Sensitivity Assay Kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions with a Qubit® 4 Fluorometer (Invitrogen). Samples were stored at
−80 °C until downstream use for sequencing.
Sequencing was performed on an Illumina NextSeq 500 platform (Illumina, San
Diego, CA) with NextSeq 500/550 High Output Kit V2 (Illumina) as the sequencing
platform reagent. Norgen Biotek Small RNA Library Prep Kit was used for library
preparation (Norgen Biotek Inc., Thorold, ON, Canada). miRbase version 21,
gtRNAdb, RNAdb, Gencode version 21 (hg38) were used as reference/database
sequences for miRs, tRNAs, piRNA, and genome species, respectively. Read counts
of RNAs were first normalized using the trimmed mean of M-values normalization
(TMM) method to adjust for sequencing library size difference.
 
 To test whether any miRNAs were differentially expressed between Hx and
Nx MSC-Exo samples, paired differential expression analysis was performed by
employing a moderated t test implemented in the limma package.
 

## Primary AF Cell Isolation
Primary bovine AF cells from were isolated from 10 healthy and skeletally mature
biological donors from coccygeal levels cc1/2, cc2/3, cc3/4, and cc4/5 using a
collagenase digestion protocol as previously described.
 
 All primary AF cells were expanded to passage 2 (p2) in complete growth
medium and cryopreserved in 93% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gemini
Bio-Products, West Sacramento, CA) and 7% (v/v) DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St.
Louis, MO) as freezing medium. Complete growth medium was composed of high
glucose (4.5g/L) DMEM (Life Technologies Corporation, Grand Island, NY), 10%
fetal bovine serum (Gemini Bio-Products), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Life
Technologies Corporation), and 0.2% l-ascorbic acid (Fisher
Scientific).

## Cell Proliferation Assay
AF cell proliferation was measured using the CellTiter-Glo® 2.0 Assay (Promega
Corporation, Madison, WI) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bovine
AF cells (p2) from 3 biological donors were plated into Nunc™ MicroWell™ 96-Well
Optical Bottom Plates with Polymer Base (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a density
of 4,000 cells/cm2. At the time of plating, cells were treated with 0
to 50 µg/mL of Nx or Hx MSC-Exos in serum-free medium from donors MSC00115,
MSC00175, and MSC00179. All conditions were carried out in triplicate for all
biological donors. Plates were cultured at 37 °C, 5% CO2 until an
assay timepoint was reached (0, 24, 48, and 72 h), then the CellTiter-Glo® 2.0
Assay was carried out. Luminescence in Relative Luminescence Units (RLUs) was
recorded on a SpectraMax i3x Multi-Mode Microplate Reader (Molecular Devices,
San Jose, CA). All RLU values were normalized to the untreated control values at
each timepoint.

## Transwell Migration Assay
AF cell migration was evaluated using a Corning™ Transwell™ Multiple Well Plate
with Permeable Polyester Membrane Inserts (8 µm pore size) (Corning Inc.) and
adapted from a previously established protocol.
 
 Bovine AF cells (p2) were first seeded on the top of the filter membrane
and experimental medium was placed carefully into the bottom of the lower
chamber according to following conditions: (1) serum-free medium (negative
control), (2) serum-free medium supplemented with 100 ng/mL recombinant human
CCL5/RANTES as a comparison group (Cat. No. 278-RN-010/CF; R&D Systems Inc.,
Minneapolis, MN), and (3) serum-free medium supplemented with 50 µg/mL MSC-Exos.
The well plate was then incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 24 hours.
After fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C for 15 minutes to fix migrated
cells on the bottom side of the membrane, 0.2% (w/v) crystal violet
(Sigma-Aldrich) was used to stain cells for 5 minutes. Transwell membranes were
imaged on a Leica DM6 B (Leica Microsystems Inc., Buffalo Grove, IL). AF cell
migration was evaluated for 3 biological donors in triplicate per condition.
Migrated cells were counted using ImageJ software (National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD) and cell counts were normalized to the negative control
conditions.

## Fluorescent Labeling of MSC-Exos and Uptake Visualization
MSC-Exos were labeled using the PKH67 Green Fluorescent Cell Linker Kit for
General Cell Membrane Labeling (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. After preparation, samples were then centrifuged at 190,000 g for
2 hours at 4 °C. Following ultracentrifugation, the medium and interface layer
was aspirated out and the fluorescently labeled MSC-Exo pellet was resuspended
in sterile 1X PBS.
Bovine AF cells (p2) were plated in a Corning® Costar® 6-well Clear TC-Treated
Multiple Well Plate (Corning Inc.) at a seeding density of 4000
cells/cm2 in complete growth medium (2 mL/well). When 65%
confluence was reached, complete growth medium was fully exchanged with
serum-free medium for the following 2 conditions: (1) untreated serum-free
medium and (2) serum-free medium supplemented with the total resuspended volume
of fluorescently labeled MSC-Exos. Plates were incubated at 37 °C, 5%
CO2 for 6 hours. Following the 6-hour incubation period, AF cells
were fixed with ice cold 4% PFA (Electron Microscopy Sciences) for 15 minutes,
washed twice with 1X PBS (5 min/wash), and immediately imaged on a Leica DMi8
widefield microscope (Leica Microsystems Inc.).

## AF Cell Protection Experiment
AF cells (p2) from 10 biological bovine donors were plated in Corning® Costar®
12-well Clear TC-treated Multiple Well Plates at a density of 4,000
cells/cm2 in complete growth medium (1 mL/well). When 85%
confluence was reached, growth medium was aspirated and fully replaced with
serum-free medium. Cells were divided into the following 5 groups: (1)
serum-free medium (untreated control), (2) serum-free medium supplemented with
10 ng/mL recombinant human TNFα (Cat. No. 210-TA-020/CF; R&D Systems Inc.),
(3-5) serum-free medium pre-treated with 50 µg/mL Hx MSC-Exos from donors
MSC00115, MSC00175, or MSC00179 for 1 hour and subsequently supplemented with
10 ng/mL recombinant human TNFα. Cells were incubated at 37 °C, 5%
CO2 for 24 hours.

## RNA Isolation and Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
Following the protection experiment incubation period, AF cell RNA was isolated
by guanidinium thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction with TRIzol™ Reagent
(Life Technologies Corporation), as described (“MSC-Exo RNA Isolation &
Small RNA-Seq” section). cDNA was synthesized with 1 µg of total RNA from each
sample using a High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Gene expression
was determined using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
An ABI PRISM® 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied Biosystems) was used to
determine cycles to amplification for qRT-PCR reactions with Power SYBR™ Green
PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), according to manufacturer’s instructions.
Specific primer sequences for genes of interest can be found in . Fold changes in gene expression were determined using the
2-ΔΔCt quantification method.
 

## PLGA µSphere Fabrication
Blank and exosome-loaded PLGA µSpheres were fabricated with
poly(d,l-lactide-co-glycolide (PLGA;
75:25 lactide: glycolide; Mw = 66-107 kDa; Sigma-Aldrich) using a
modified double emulsion technique.
 
 For exosome-loaded µSpheres, 125 µL of isolated MSC-Exos in 1X PBS was
added to the primary emulsion and subsequently vortexed on high speed for 5
seconds. About 5 mL of 4% (w/v) poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA; Mw = 31-50
kDa; 98-99% hydrolyzed; Sigma-Aldrich) was then added to the solution to form
the second emulsion (w/o/w) and the second emulsion was vortexed for either 15
seconds (µSphere Condition 1), 30 seconds (µSphere Condition 2), 45 seconds
(µSphere Condition 3), or 60 seconds (µSphere Condition 4). Following
collection, PLGA µSpheres were frozen down at −80 °C overnight and subsequently
lyophilized for 7 days to obtain freeze-dried µSphere product.

## PLGA µSphere Particle Size Distribution Analysis
Particle size distribution (PSD) was measured for all µSphere conditions by laser
diffraction with dynamic image analysis using a RODOS-Helos system (Sympatec
Inc., Pennington, NJ) at an operating pressure of 0.5 bar. Following data
acquisition, the D10 (10th percentile), D50
(50th percentile), and D90 (90th
percentile) diameter values were recorded for each PLGA µSphere condition in
triplicate batches.

## IPN Hydrogel Fabrication
About 15% (v/v) poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA; Mw = 20 kDa;
Polysciences Inc., Warrington, PA) IPN hydrogels were fabricated as previously described.
 
 Hydrogels for the short-term and long-term studies (Parts 2-1 and 2-2)
incorporated blank PLGA µSpheres in the prepolymer solution at 2.5% (w/v) and 5%
(w/v). Hydrogels for the release kinetics experiment (Part 2-3) incorporated
MSC-Exo-laden PLGA µSpheres in the prepolymer solution at 2.5% (w/v) and 5%
(w/v).

## Scanning Electron Microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging was performed on a Hitachi S-4300
system (Hitachi America, Ltd.). All samples were prepared by lyophilization for
7 days and subsequently sputter coated with gold-palladium (Electron Microscopy
Sciences) for 2 cycles. SEM images were taken at 2 to 5 kV to ensure that
samples would not charge during image acquisition. Pore size and PLGA µSphere
counts were quantified from independent technical replicates (N
= 4-5/group) over the 84-day culture period. Hydrogel pore size measurements are
reported as the largest pore diameter(s) for each discernable pore within 3
independent regions of interest (ROIs) for a given technical replicate. PLGA
µSphere count is reported as the mean number of visible µSpheres across 3
regions of interest for a given technical replicate.

## Hydrogel Mechanical Testing
Hydrogel specimens underwent parallel plate shear testing (N =
10/group) after a 72-hour swelling period in 1X PBS using a TA Instruments
AR2000ex rheometer (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE) to evaluate short-term
mechanical effects of µSphere embedment on IPN hydrogels. To examine the
long-term effects of µSphere embedment on IPN hydrogel mechanical properties,
the same mechanical testing protocol was performed on days 7, 21, 42, 63, and
84. Specimens underwent a frequency sweep from 0.1 to 10 Hz at 1% strain, and
the complex modulus (|G*|) and tangent phase angle (tan δ) values were obtained
at 1 Hz, which is a physiologically relevant loading frequency.
 

## pH Measurements
pH of solution was measured at the start of the 84-day culture period and every 7
days for each hydrogel in culture (N = 7-10/group/timepoint)
using a FiveGo Portable F2 pH/mV Meter (Mettler-Toledo, Columbus, OH). Buffer
was fully exchanged with sterile 1X PBS every 7 days and the pH of fresh buffer
was measured before each exchange.

## Specimen Wet Weight and Swelling Ratio
Before placing specimens in new buffer for medium exchange, the wet weight of all
hydrogel formulations (N = 17-20/group/timepoint) was recorded
using a Sartorius CP124S Analytical Balance (Sartorius Corporation, Bohemia,
NY). After 84 days of culture, the hydrogel specimens were lyophilized for 7
days and the dry weight was recorded. Using both the wet and dry weight
measurements at the 84-day timepoint, the swelling ratio was calculated using
the following equation: Qw = Mwet/Mdry.

## Histological Assessment of PLGA µSpheres
Lyophilized PLGA µSpheres with and without encapsulated MSC-Exos were first
embedded in Epredia™ HistoGel™ Specimen Processing Gel (Epredia, Kalamazoo, MI)
and then fixed in aqueous buffered zinc formalin fixative (Anatech Ltd., Battle
Creek, MI) for 48 hours. After fixation, specimens were placed in a 4% osmium
tetroxide (OsO4) solution (Electron Microscopy Sciences) for 2 hours
to crosslink MSC-Exos lipids. Specimens were then infiltrated with a hydrophilic
resin, 2-hydroxypropyl methacrylate (Sigma-Aldrich), for 48 hours with 2 changes
of monomer solution. The monomer solution was then polymerized by the slow
addition of heat at 37 °C to form blocks for sectioning. About 5 µm histological
sections were then prepared, deplasticized, and imaged using a 63X oil immersion
objective on a Leica DM6B Upright Microscope (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar,
Germany).

## MSC-Exo Release Kinetics
MSC-Exo release kinetics for hydrogel-free µSpheres (i.e., PLGA µSpheres in 1X
PBS) and hydrogel-embedded µSpheres (i.e., PLGA µSpheres in IPN hydrogels) was
characterized by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) with a ZetaView®
instrument (Particle Metrix Inc., Mebane, NC). , Samples were cultured in
sterile 1X PBS, and culture medium was fully exchanged at collection timepoints
and on a weekly basis. Releasate samples were collected at 0-, 2-, 8-, and
12-hour timepoints (N = 4/group/timepoint) for the following
conditions: (1) 7.5 mg PLGA µSpheres in 1 mL sterile 1X PBS, (2) 15 mg PLGA
µSpheres in 1 mL sterile 1X PBS, (3) 2.5% (w/v) PLGA µSpheres embedded in IPN
hydrogels cultured with 3 mL sterile 1X PBS, and (4) 5% (w/v) PLGA µSpheres
embedded in IPN hydrogels cultured with 3 mL sterile 1X PBS. About 7.5 mg PLGA
µSpheres equates to the amount of µSpheres in one hydrogel-embedded technical
replicate at 2.5% (w/v) and 15 mg PLGA µSpheres equates to the amount of
µSpheres in one hydrogel-embedded technical replicate at 5% (w/v).

## Statistical Analyses
Quantitative data were reported as mean ± standard deviation. Student’s
t test assessed effects of pO2 on MSC-Exo
hydrodynamic diameter. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s post
hoc tests assessed effects of PLGA concentration on hydrogel
swelling ratio (Qw), and complex shear modulus (|G*|), and
Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA with Dunnett’s T3 assessed tangent phase angle
(tan δ) due to unequal variance. Two-way ANOVA assessed quantitative data
pertaining to AF cell proliferation response, AF cell migration, long-term|G*|
response, long-term tan δ response, hydrogel pore size measurements, µSphere
count measurements, and µSphere diameter, and MSC-Exo release kinetics
measurements. Dunnett’s post hoc detected differences across
groups in AF cell proliferation, long-term|G*| response, long-term tan δ
response, and MSC-Exo release kinetics. Tukey’s post hoc was
used to detect specific differences across groups in hydrogel pore size over
time. Šidák’s multiple comparison test detected differences across groups in AF
cell migration. Mixed-effects analyses with Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test
was used to assess significant differences across groups for quantitative data
pertaining to AF cell gene expression, pH, and hydrogel wet weight. ROUT method
(Q = 1%) was used to remove outliers for qPCR gene expression analyses. AF cell
proliferation response over time was plotted and fit via linear regression for a
given MSC donor at 50 µg/mL MSC-Exos and differences in regression coefficients
across MSC-Exo pO2 groups were tested via t test.
Pearson correlation evaluated the strength of association of AF cell
proliferation with miR-21-5p read counts in MSC-Exo samples, and of AF cell
migration with miR-652-3p and miR-214-5p read counts. Statistical analyses used
GraphPad Prism 9 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) with α = 0.05.

## Results

## Biophysical and Biochemical Characterization of MSC-Exos
MSC-Exos displayed a characteristic vesicular morphology distinct of exosomes
using TEM, where samples featured a cup-like shape with a distinguishable lipid
bilayer (
 
). All MSC-Exo groups exhibited undetectable protein expression for
Calnexin (90 kDa) and detectable protein expression for TSG101 (47 kDa),
consistent with established positive and negative markers for exosomes,
respectively (
 
). Nx and Hx MSC-Exos featured hydrodynamic diameters within the accepted
range for exosomes (30-150 nm), where Nx MSC-Exos had an average diameter of
113.3 nm ± 30.56 nm and Hx MSC-Exos had an average diameter of 88.6 nm ±
34.49 nm with no significant difference between pO2 groups
(P = 0.407) (
 
). Small RNA-Seq analyses indicated that there was no differential
expression observed between Nx and Hx MSC-Exo groups, although there was
considerable heterogeneity observed among biological MSC donors as visualized in
the heatmap for the top 60 variable miRs (
 
). Principal component analysis showed that MSC donor and pO2
conditions contributed to variability in MSC-Exo small RNAs. pO2
conditions contributed to the variability in MSC-Exo small RNAs for donor
MSC00179, where Nx and Hx groups did not cluster together due to differences
along dimension 2. However, pO2 conditions did not appear to drive
variability in MSC-Exo small RNAs for donors MSC00115 and MSC00175, as Nx and Hx
groups clustered together on the principal component analysis (PCA) plot.
Notably, variability between donors MSC00115 and MSC00175 was observed along
dimension 2 as well as variability in donor MSC00179 Hx along dimension 1 (
 
). Volcano plot shows miRs trending toward differential regulation
between Nx and Hx MSC-Exos, although no transcripts were significantly
upregulated or downregulated between pO2 MSC-Exo group after false
discovery rate correction. Top 5 miRs (by FC differences) trending toward
upregulation were miR-210-3p, miR-376a-5p, miR-10399-5p, miR-210-5p, and
miR-3163. Top 5 miRs trending toward downregulation were miR-1292-5p,
miR-23a-5p, miR-146b-5p, miR-296-5p, and miR-769-3p (
 
).
 

## AF Cell Proliferation
AF cells exhibited a dose- and time-dependent proliferative response to Nx and Hx
MSC-Exo treatment. A significant interaction between MSC-Exo concentration and
time was observed for both MSC-Exo treatment groups, suggesting a possible
non-linear dosing effect. Post hoc analyses were used to
identify the MSC-Exo concentration that elicited a proliferative effect in the
shortest amount of time for each MSC-Exo treatment group. Nx MSC-Exos induced
proliferation as quickly as 48 hours post-treatment using 6.25 µg/mL MSC-Exos
(P = 0.0001 and Hx MSC-Exos induced proliferation as
quickly as 72 hours post-treatment using 6.25 µg/mL MSC-Exos (P
< 0.0001) (
 
). Comparison between pO2 MSC-Exo groups indicate that Hx
MSC-Exos elicited a stronger proliferative response in AF cells over the 72hour
treatment period (at 50µg/mL) compared with Nx MSC-Exos (
 
). There was a strong positive (r = 0.763) and significant
(P = 0.0389) correlation between normalized luminescence
and MSC-Exo miR-21-5p reads per million (
 
).
 

## AF Cell Migration
After 24 hours of culture, crystal violet staining demonstrated observable AF
cell migration in response to an MSC-Exo chemotactic gradient at 50 µg/mL, with
notable visual differences compared with the negative control group and
CCL5-treated positive control comparison group (
 
). Quantification of migrated AF cells indicated a significant main
effect of MSC-Exo treatment on migrated cell count (ptreatment <
0.0001). However, there was no statistical effect of MSC-Exo pO2
group on AF cell migratory response (ppO2 = 0.3818). Post
hoc analyses indicated a significant increase in migratory response
compared with the negative control when a chemotactic gradient was established
with 50 µg/mL of Hx MSC-Exos (P = 0.0005), but not for Nx
MSC-Exos (P = 0.0629). No statistical difference was observed
in AF cell migration when a chemotactic gradient was established with CCL5 at
100 ng/mL (P = 0.8260) (
 
). There was a strong negative (r = −0.796) and significant
(P = 0.0292) correlation between normalized migrated cell
count and MSC-Exo miR-652-3p reads per million (
 
). There was also a strong negative (r = −0.743) and significant
(P = 0.0453) correlation between normalized migrated cell
count and MSC-Exo miR-214-5p reads per million (
 
).
 

## AF Cell Internalization of MSC-Exos
AF cells internalized MSC-Exos within 6 hours following treatment, as indicated
by the presence of fluorescently labeled MSC-Exos (PKH67 staining) within the
F-actin cytoskeleton (phalloidin staining). MSC-Exos resided within the cytosol
and localized to the perinuclear region of the cytoplasm (adjacent to DAPI
staining). Untreated AF cell controls showed no PKH67 staining indicating there
was no uptake of MSC-Exos within the cytoplasm (
 
).
 

## AF Cell Protection to Proinflammatory Cytokine Challenge
AF cells displayed an aberrant phenotype when challenged with 10 ng/mL TNFα for
24 hours, indicated by a significant decrease in COL1A1, COL2A1, ACAN,
SCX, and MKX (P < 0.05) and
significant increase in MMP1, IL6, and NLRP3
(P < 0.05) compared with untreated controls. Hx MSC-Exo
treatment at 50 µg/mL for 24 hours was able to prevent some aberrant gene
expression changes. In the MSC-Exo treatment group, AF cell gene expression was
not statistically different from untreated controls for COL1A1, ACAN,
SCX, MKX, and MMP1 (P > 0.05).
However, treatment could not prevent the significant downregulation of
COL2A1 and the upregulation of IL6 and
NLRP3 associated with TNFα challenge (
 
).

## Morphology and PSD of PLGA µSpheres
PLGA µSpheres were fabricated using a sonication-free double emulsion method that
successfully produced MSC-Exo carriers with spherical morphology for all
vortexing conditions, as demonstrated by SEM imaging. Visual assessment of SEM
images showed considerable polydispersity for all PLGA µSphere fabrication
groups. Laser diffraction analysis quantified the PSD for all PLGA µSphere
fabrication groups and statistically verified sample polydispersity with a
significant main effect across PSD percentiles (D10, 10th percentile
diameter; D50, 50th percentile diameter; and D90, 90th
percentile diameter) (P < 0.0001), but no significant effect
of vortexing condition (P = 1.159) or interaction
(P = 0.893) (
 
). SEM imaging showed that the sonication-free double emulsion method
yields a heterogeneous internal structure of PLGA µSpheres, where some PLGA
µSpheres were predominantly mononuclear whereas others were polynuclear with
notable differences in nuclear size (
 
).
 

## Short-Term Effects of PLGA µSphere Integration within IPN Hydrogels
PLGA µSpheres were incorporated successfully within the IPN hydrogels and did not
exhibit any degradation due to redox initiator exposure used for hydrogel
cross-linking. SEM imaging indicated that the PLGA µSphere carriers were
homogenously distributed within the hydrogel constructs, integrated within the
bioadhesive polymer network (white arrows), and the corresponding visual density
of PLGA µSpheres proportionally increased as the µSphere concentration increased
up to 5% (w/v) (
 
). Incorporated PLGA µSpheres within the IPN hydrogels did not result in
a significant increase in the complex shear modulus (|G*|(P
> 0.05)); however, PLGA µSphere incorporation did result in an increase in
the tangent phase angle (tan δ) at 2.5% (w/v) (P = 0.0007) and
5% (w/v) (P = 0.0189) µSphere concentrations (
 
).

## Long-Term Effects of PLGA µSphere Integration within IPN Hydrogels
Long-term culture of µSphere-free and µSphere-laden IPN hydrogels demonstrated a
significant decrease in complex shear modulus (|G*|(1 Hz)) for all formulations
as early as 7 days in culture compared with day 0 and monotonically decreased in
magnitude through day 84 (ptime < 0.0001). PLGA µSphere
concentration exhibited a significant effect on the complex shear modulus for
long-term culture (pconcentration = 0.0082) and significantly
interacted with time over the 84-day period (pinteraction = 0.0003).
Conversely, the tangent phase angle (tan δ) significantly increased for all
formulations as early as 7 days in culture compared with day 0 and monotonically
increased in magnitude through day 84 (ptime < 0.0001), although
values for tan δ remained very little indicating negligible dissipation. PLGA
µSphere concentration did not exhibit a significant effect on the tangent phase
angle for long-term culture (pconcentration = 0.0603), but
significantly interacted with time over the 84-day period
(pinteraction = 0.0169) (
 
). Over the 84-day culture period, the pH of solution for all
µSphere-free and µSphere-laden IPN hydrogel cultures remained within the pH
range of 7.0 to 7.4. The only significant decreases in pH occurred after the
first 7 days of culture, and the pH remained significantly elevated from the
original pH of solution at day 35 onward (
 
). IPN hydrogel wet weight steadily increased over time, where all
formulations exhibited significantly higher wet weight by the end of the 84-day
culture period compared with the initial wet weight (
 
). By day 84, the swelling ratio of all hydrogel formulations were not
significantly different from one another (
 
), motivating an analysis of the hydrogel microstructure over the 84-day
period.
 SEM imaging demonstrated that the hydrogel microstructure was predominantly
similar between the µSphere-free and µSphere-laden formulations, where the only
observable difference between groups was the incorporation of PLGA µSpheres
within the polymer network. Visual examination indicated that the hydrogel pore
size increased over time and supports findings from wet weight and swelling
ratio measurements (
 
). Quantitative analysis of SEM images indicated that there was a
significant effect of time on hydrogel pore size (ptime < 0.0001),
where the pore size was significantly larger at day 84 compared with day 7 for
all formulations (p0% < 0.0001; p2.5% < 0.0001;
p5% < 0.0001). Interestingly, there was a significant effect
of µSphere concentration (pconcentration < 0.0001), as well as a
significant interaction (pinteraction < 0.0001), on pore size
measurements (
 
). Examination of µSphere-laden constructs at higher magnification showed
a proportionally higher concentration of µSpheres in 5% (w/v) constructs
compared with 2.5% (w/v) constructs at earlier timepoints, but differences in
µSphere density between formulations was considerably less discernable over time (
 
). Quantification of µSphere count demonstrated a significant decrease
over time (ptime = 0.0014), with no significant effect of µSphere
concentration (pconcentration = 0.0603) or interaction
(pinteraction = 0.4323) (
 
).

## Encapsulation of MSC-Exos in PLGA µSpheres and Release Kinetics
Blank PLGA µSpheres exhibited a smooth surface topography and interior
composition through SEM imaging (
 
 and 
 
). Histological analysis indicated an absence of OsO4-stained particles
within the interior of the PLGA µSpheres, as well as the outer surface (
 
). MSC-Exo-laden µSpheres demonstrated particle speckling on the carrier
surface and the inner PLGA core (white arrows) which was distinctly different
from the smooth surface topography of the blank controls (
 
 and 
 
). Histological assessment of MSC-Exo-laden µSpheres also presented a
distinctly different composition than the blank µSphere controls, where the
MSC-Exo-laden µSpheres featured OsO4-stained particles at the outer radius of
the PLGA µSpheres, as well as the interior (black arrows) (
 
). Hydrogel-free MSC-Exo-laden µSpheres controlled the release of
MSC-Exos from PLGA µSpheres over a 12-hour period, with significant effects of
time and concentration as well as interaction (
 
). Hydrogel-embedded MSC-Exo-laden µSpheres demonstrated controlled
release of MSC-Exos over a 12-hour period, with a significant effect of time,
but no effect of concentration or interaction (
 
).
 

## Discussion
In this study, we investigate the potential of naive MSC-Exos as a new treatment
strategy for biologically active AF repair without the need for exogenous stem cell
transplantation, that are delivered in a biomaterial system capable of sustained
release in an AF sealant. In the present work, we evaluate the ability of MSC-Exos
to promote cellular responses that would enhance the AF’s innate endogenous repair
capacity. Specifically, we determined that MSC-Exos promote proliferation, stimulate
migration, and protect AF cells from aberrant phenotypes when exposed to a TNFα
challenge. An MSC-Exo delivery system using PLGA µSpheres was developed and
integrated within a bioadhesive hydrogel previously designed for AF repair.
 
 We found that PLGA µSpheres can feasibly encapsulate and release MSC-Exos as
well as integrate within the bioadhesive hydrogel network without affecting the
hydrogel’s mechanical properties or pH of the microenvironment as the µSpheres
degrade. Taken together, these results point toward a new approach to simultaneously
seal AF defects while delivering stem cell–derived vesicles that may enhance
endogenous AF repair and decelerate the degenerative cascade.
Cell proliferation in response to MSC-Exo treatment is a key cellular response of
interest, and our results indicate that MSC-Exos promote AF cell proliferation in a
dose-dependent manner for all MSC-Exo treatment groups, where the greatest
proliferative responses were observed at 72 hours following treatment. Therapeutic
application of MSC-Exos to promote mitotic activity may prevent disease progression
since cellular senescence is a pathological hallmark of IVDD.
 
 pO2 conditioning demonstrated differences in proliferative
responses between Nx and Hx MSC-Exos. When relating AF cell proliferation to small
RNA-Seq data, there was a significant and strong positive correlation between
luminescent output and miR-21-5p, suggesting that this miR is involved in regulating
cellular division. This finding corroborates with previous studies that empirically
validated miR-21-5p to post-transcriptionally regulate PTEN, a known repressor of
mitosis. , - Overall, these outcomes
demonstrate that naive MSC-Exos, particularly those containing high levels of
miR-21-5p, can promote proliferation in an effort to repopulate the disk space with
mitotically active cells and in turn mitigate the progression of IVDD.
Resident cell infiltration and stem cell homing are critical phenomena that support
endogenous AF tissue repair, and our findings indicate that MSC-Exos, regardless of
pO2 conditioning environment, promoted AF cell migration when a
chemotactic gradient was established with at least 50 µg/mL. - Notably, Hx MSC-Exos produced
the strongest migratory responses. When comparing AF cell migratory responses to the
small RNA-seq data, hypoxic downregulation of miR-652-3p and miR-214-5p across all
MSC-Exo donors may support our observation that Hx MSC-Exos induced a more robust
migratory response than Nx MSC-Exos. These findings are in agreement with the
significant and strong negative correlation between migrated cell count and
miR-652-3p as well as miR-214-5p, suggesting that these miR transcripts regulate
cell motility. Downregulation of miR-652 may be implicated in increased AF cell
migration by reduced targeting of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG) and
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathways.
 
 Moreover, downregulation of miR-214 may result in increased AF cell migration
by reduced targeting of PLAGL2.
 

Since Hx preconditioned MSC-Exos demonstrated the most robust cellular responses with
respect to AF cell proliferation and migration, we selected this MSC-Exo
pO2 group for downstream use to treat TNFα-challenged AF cells. This
in vitro system is useful to simulate the proinflammatory
microenvironment analogous to that of IVDD and determine whether MSC-Exos can
protect AF cells from an aberrant phenotype that emulates one found in IVDD pathologies.
 
 Following treatment, AF cells internalized MSC-Exos within 6 hours and were
localized in the perinuclear and cytosolic spaces, suggesting that these particles
can modulate AF cell expression through post-transcriptional repression and mRNA
destabilization once their small RNA cargo is released intracellularly. - Our study supports the
concept that naive MSC-Exos exert a protective effect against TNFα-induced damage as
indicated by their gene expression levels that were comparable to the untreated
control for many genes that are associated with a normal AF phenotype (i.e.,
COL1A1, ACAN, SCX, and MKX).
 
 Moreover, we found that MSC-Exos can modulate catabolic and inflammatory
responses in AF cells by attenuating MMP1 expression, which is
implicated in IVDD pathogenesis. , Outcomes in our study
corroborate with complementary findings in the only prior study that examines
MSC-Exo treatment on AF cells.
 
 Notably, AF cells were challenged with IL1β instead of TNFα in the previous
study, which is also associated with IVDD-related inflammation.
 
 However, IL1β elicits distinctly different responses in AF cell gene
expression than TNFα due to differences in respective intracellular signaling
cascades, motivating the present study to determine the protective effects of
MSC-Exos on AF cells when challenged with TNFα. - Nevertheless, the present
study and previous work substantiate the therapeutic potential of MSC-Exos for AF
repair in the context of proinflammatory conditions.
To achieve clinical utility of an MSC-Exo treatment strategy, an integrated drug
delivery system is required to enable sustained release of biological cargo and to
seal IVD defects to prevent leakage. PLGA µSpheres are widely used to deliver
biologics, and their use to deliver exosomes is just starting to emerge in
regenerative medicine. , A bioadhesive IPN hydrogel is also used to seal AF defects and
retain PLGA µSpheres within the repair site.
 
 Given the central role of mechanics in IVD physiology, AF-specific
applications must determine whether drug delivery systems impart biomechanical
changes in AF repair hydrogels. The present work therefore evaluated the short-term
and long-term effects of PLGA µSphere integration on mechanical and biomaterial
properties. In our previous study, we found that the herniation risk was inversely
proportional to the hydrogel modulus.
 
 Since IVD herniation risk is a clinical design priority for AF repair
hydrogels, a design requirement posed for the current study was to not affect the
modulus of the IPN hydrogel system when fabricating hydrogel composites with PLGA
µSpheres. - Although there were visual
differences in network structure, the complex shear modulus was not significantly
different between composite and µSphere-free hydrogels, suggesting that the
herniation risk is unchanged when repairing AF defects with PLGA µSphere-IPN
hydrogel composites.
Controlled release of MSC-Exos and associated tissue repair responses are contingent
on long-term degradation of the IPN hydrogel system and PLGA µSpheres, warranting
the characterization of time-dependent properties for this treatment strategy in
long-term culture. , The SEM findings demonstrate that the polymer network is
visually less dense with a significant increase in pore size over time, indicating
that hydrogel degradation occurs substantially within a 84-day period.
Degradation-related changes in polymer network architecture corroborate with
temporal changes in mechanical properties, where the complex shear modulus
monotonically decreases over time, while the tangent phase angle monotonically
increases over time. , Given that AF cells are under 20 µm in diameter, pore size
measurements suggest that this hydrogel system would easily permit cellular infiltration.
 
 To promote AF cell infiltration, PLGA µSpheres must simultaneously degrade so
as to release the MSC-Exo payload into the surrounding environment and establish a
chemotactic gradient. When quantifying the hydrogel-embedded PLGA µSpheres in
long-term culture, we found that µSpheres significantly degrade over an 84-day
period and may sustain continuous MSC-Exo release. The limited transport of the
avascular IVD has highlighted pH as an important factor in IVD repair strategies, so
it was necessary to examine culture pH during PLGA µSphere degradation. , , By
composition, PLGA is a copolymer of 2 acidic monomers that hydrolytically degrades
into these 2 byproducts over time. Our findings indicate that incorporating up to 5%
(w/v) PLGA µSpheres in IPN hydrogels enabled maintenance of a stable physiologically
healthy pH range over the 84-day period, suggesting PLGA degradation would not
deleteriously affect the IVD pH during repair.
 

Drug delivery systems enable controlled biologic release, prevent rapid clearance,
and allow for single dose administration, which leads to enhanced regenerative
outcomes compared with bioinert strategies without integrated delivery systems.
 
 Here, we utilize a sonication-free double emulsion fabrication protocol to
generate PLGA µSpheres with an MSC-Exo payload, while minimizing vortex perturbation
time during fabrication. Exosomes are more sensitive to µSphere fabrication
conditions than other biologics traditionally delivered with PLGA µSpheres, and our
histological findings support the use of this adapted sonication-free technique to
generate MSC-Exo-loaded PLGA µSpheres. SEM and histological findings indicate
successful MSC-Exo encapsulation within PLGA µSpheres and NTA quantification
exhibits sustained release of MSC-Exos from the carrier with and without the
hydrogel, demonstrating technical feasibility of this drug delivery system for
bioactive AF repair in IVDD conditions with and without large defects. Together,
these outcomes suggest this delivery system would achieve these 2 primary objectives
since µSpheres embed in the bioadhesive hydrogel during polymerization and would
consequentially remain within the AF repair site.
There are a few limitations associated with the present study and key avenues of
future directions that would advance this novel treatment strategy toward clinical
application. Although this study directly measures MSC-Exo release kinetics from
PLGA µSpheres via NTA, it is not known whether the MSC-Exo
concentration in the releasate elicits the most robust therapeutic responses in AF
cells, and our duration is limited to 12 hours. Two prior studies in craniofacial
tissue engineering utilized an analogous approach to deliver MSC-Exos from PLGA
µSpheres in dental pulp tissue and found that MSC-Exos maintain their bioactivity
throughout encapsulation and release processes. , While it is a limitation that
long-term kinetics and the degree of AF cell responses are not known, we anticipate
that the MSC-Exos will continue to be released and retain their bioactivity as the
particle concentration is a corollary for the RNA released into the culture
environment. Future work will optimize PLGA µSphere formulations with respect to
polymer molecular weight and lactic acid to glycolic acid ratios in order to
optimize MSC-Exo release kinetics and achieve MSC-Exo releasate concentrations that
maximize therapeutic responses. Another limitation is the in vitro
focus of this study, where this study focused on functional evaluation of AF cell
responses to MSC-Exo treatment and biomaterial delivery system development and
characterization. Preclinical models of IVDD in vivo are important
next steps to study this AF treatment strategy in the context of interconnected
systems with the IVD, including neurological pain behaviors and immune system
responses.

## Conclusions
This study is the first to develop a combination strategy composed of a bioadhesive
PLGA µSphere-IPN hydrogel composite system to deliver MSC-Exos for bioactive AF
repair. MSC-Exos offer distinct advantages over cell delivery strategies in IVD
regenerative medicine to confer the therapeutic benefits of stem cells, while
circumventing translational obstacles in IVD cell therapy. Here, we show that
MSC-Exos can (1) promote proliferative and chemotactic AF cell responses, (2)
modulate AF cell expression through post-transcriptional regulation and protect
against aberrant phenotypes associated with IVDD, and (3) be encapsulated within
PLGA µSpheres for controlled release in IVDD conditions with and without AF defects.
Our results provide strong evidence to suggest that MSC-Exos are a promising
therapeutic for IVDD and may enhance the AF’s poor intrinsic repair capacity by
directing pro-regenerative responses in resident AF cells without the need for
exogenous stem cell transplantation.

## Footnotes
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.J.D.; Study Design Discussion, T.J.D., S.S., J.R.W., and
J.C.I.; Primary Experimentation/Data Acquisition, T.J.D., K.V., G.D., H.N.C.,
K.K., and S.Z.K.; Data Post-processing, T.J.D., K.V., M.W., and P.X.; Writing –
Original Draft, T.J.D.; Writing – Review & Editing, T.J.D., K.V., C.J.P.,
G.D., H.N.C., K.K., S.Z.K., M.W., P.X., R.N.D., S.S., J.R.W., and J.C.I.,;
Supervision & Project Administration, T.J.D. and J.C.I.; Funding
Acquisition, T.J.D. and J.C.I.
Acknowledgments and Funding: This work was supported by NIH/NIAMS Grants R01 AR057397 & R01AR080096, and
NIH/NIGMS Grant T32 GM062754. Confocal microscopy was performed at the
Microscopy CoRE at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. We thank
trainees in Dr. Susmita Sahoo’s laboratory in the Cardiovascular Research Center
for technical training on MSC-Exo isolation protocols and access to facilities.
We gratefully acknowledge Andrew Paul Leonard and Dr. Ronald Gordon at the Mount
Sinai Pathology Core Facility for access and technical assistance with SEM and
TEM imaging. Also, we gratefully acknowledge Dr. Rachel Derita at the Penn Vet
Extracellular Vesicle Core for technical assistance running MSC-Exo releasate
samples on the ZetaView NTA instrument. Lastly, we thank Dr. Andrew C. Hecht for
his clinical expertise and input.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Ethical Approval: Ethical approval was not sought for the present study because post-mortem bovine
tissue and mesenchymal stem cells utilized in this study were purchased from
third party vendors.
ORCID iDs: Tyler J. DiStefano 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9406-3085
James C. Iatridis 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2186-0590

## References