pmcPLoS BiolPLoS Biol212plosbiol101183755plosPLOS Biology1544-91731545-7885PLOSPMC9671368PMC9671368.1967136896713683639510710.1371/journal.pbio.3001853PBIOLOGY-D-22-007881Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsNerve FibersAxonsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsNerve FibersAxonsBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyNervous SystemNeuroanatomySpinal CordMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyNervous SystemNeuroanatomySpinal CordBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceNeuroanatomySpinal CordBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceAxon GuidanceBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceDevelopmental NeuroscienceAxon GuidanceBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceAxon GuidanceChemoattractant Axon GuidanceBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceDevelopmental NeuroscienceAxon GuidanceChemoattractant Axon GuidanceBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsAfferent NeuronsRetinal Ganglion CellsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsAfferent NeuronsRetinal Ganglion CellsBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular TypesAnimal CellsNeuronsGanglion CellsRetinal Ganglion CellsBiology and Life SciencesNeuroscienceCellular NeuroscienceNeuronsGanglion CellsRetinal Ganglion CellsResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingImmunostainingBiology and Life SciencesMolecular BiologyMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesProbe HybridizationIn Situ HybridizationResearch and Analysis MethodsMolecular Biology TechniquesMolecular Probe TechniquesProbe HybridizationIn Situ HybridizationCbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regions
Cbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regionsHanPengConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing SheYuanchuData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing YangZhuoxuanInvestigationMethodologyValidation ZhuangMengruInvestigationMethodology WangQingjunInvestigation LuoXiaopengInvestigationMethodology YinChaoqunInvestigationMethodology ZhuJundaInvestigationMethodology JaffreySamie R.ConceptualizationData curationFunding acquisitionMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3380-258XJiSheng-JianConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
School of Life Sciences, Department of Neuroscience and Department of Biology, Brain Research Center, Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Systems Biology, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China2
Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medicine, Cornell University, New York, New York, United States of AmericaPolleuxFranckAcademic Editor files.

## Data Availability
The microarray data has been deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) with accession number GSE169448. All other relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
The precise control of axon pathfinding is critical for the correct neural wiring during nervous system development. The stimulation of axon growth and regulation of axon guidance have been shown to require adhesion molecules, diffusible signals, and morphogens such as Netrins [ – ], Slits [ – ], Ephrins [ ], Semaphorins [ , ], Draxin [ ], Shh [ ], Wnts [ ], and BMPs [ , ]. These axon guidance molecules bind to their receptors in the axon growth cones to activate various signaling pathways that eventually change the cytoskeleton [ ]. The lack of newly identified cues in the past decade has suggested that the major classes of growth and guidance cues have now been identified.
The commissures in the rodent spinal cord are one of the most prominent model systems to study axon growth and guidance. In a search for the differentially expressed genes in the dorsal spinal cord of mouse embryos, we identified a gene encoding the secreted protein cerebellin-1 (Cbln1). Cbln1 is released from cerebellar parallel fibers and has previously been characterized as a synaptic organizer by forming the synapse-spanning tripartite complex Nrxn-Cbln1-GluD2 (Nrxn, neurexin; GluD2, the ionotropic glutamate receptor family member delta-2) [ , ]. However, whether Cbln1 is expressed and plays roles in earlier nervous system development is unknown.
Here, we found that Cbln1 is expressed both in the dorsal commissural neurons (DCN) and in the floor plate (FP) of the embryonic mouse spinal cord. We generated DCN- and FP-specific Cbln1 conditional knockout (cKO) mice that demonstrated that the cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 from DCNs and FP regulate commissural axon (CA) growth and guidance, respectively. The dual roles of Cbln1 are mediated by its receptor, neurexin-2. Interestingly, the functions and mechanisms of Cbln1 in regulating axon growth and guidance were replicated in the developing cerebellar granule axon growth and the embryonic retinal ganglion cell axon guidance, respectively. Together, our findings reveal a general role for Cbln1 in regulating axon growth and guidance during early nervous system development prior to synapse formation.

## Results

## Cbln1 is expressed in both dorsal commissural neurons and floor plate in the developing mouse spinal cord
To identify the differentially expressed genes over developmental time in the mouse embryonic dorsal spinal cord, we genetically labeled embryonic dorsal spinal neurons with eGFP by crossing Wnt1-cre [ , ] with Rosa26mTmG [ ] mice ( ). Mouse embryonic E10.5, E11.5, and E12.5 spinal cords were dissected, and dorsal spinal neurons were collected ( ). Then, GFP+ dorsal spinal neurons were purified by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS), and the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) during the developmental stages were identified by the expression profiling analysis using microarray analysis ( and ). We carried out in situ hybridization to further explore the expression patterns of the candidate DEGs in the developing spinal cord. Among the candidates, Cbln1 was notable due to its expression pattern. Cbln1 has strong signals in FP and weak signals in DCNs at E10.5 ( ). At E11.5 and E12.5, the expression of Cbln1 increases in DCNs (notice DCNs migrate ventrally and medially at E12.5), maintains a high level in FP, and also appears in subpopulations of motor neurons ( ).
 To further explore the expression patterns of Cbln1 protein and confirm its expression sites, we carried out immunofluorescence (IF) using a Cbln1 antibody [ ]. Co-immunostaining of Cbln1 with Lhx2, a dI1 DCN marker [ ], confirmed the expression of Cbln1 in the dI1 DCNs of developing spinal cords from E10.5 to E12.5 ( ). Expression of Cbln1 was also detected in dI2-4 DCN subpopulations ( ). Expression of Cbln1 in FP was also confirmed by co-immunostaining with the FP marker Alcam ( ). To validate the specificity of Cbln1 expression in FP, we used a spinal FP-deficient model, Gli2 knockout (KO) mouse [ ]. As shown in , IF signal of Cbln1 in Alcam-marked FP was gone in Gli2 KO. These results revealed an interesting expression pattern for Cbln1 that is expressed both in the DCNs and in the intermediate target for DCNs, the FP.

## Cell-autonomous Cbln1 in the dorsal commissural neurons is both required and sufficient to stimulate commissural axon growth in vivo
Next, we wanted to explore the roles of Cbln1 expressed in DCNs and FP, separately. In order to specifically ablate Cbln1 from these tissues, we generated cKO of Cbln1 using tissue-specific Cre lines ( ). We used Wnt1-Cre line to specifically ablate Cbln1 from spinal DCNs, without affecting Cbln1 expression in other parts of spinal cord ( ). Cbln1 cKO in spinal DCNs does not disturb neurogenesis of these neurons, as indicated by normal numbers, distribution and patterning of dl1-4 neurons in the developing spinal cord ( ). We continued to check CA growth in DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO. We prepared open-books of developing spinal cords and used Robo3 immunostaining to label CAs. Robo3 selectively marks CAs as they navigate to and across the FP [ ]. As shown in , both lengths and numbers of CAs were decreased in Cbln1 cKO embryos compared with their littermate controls. These data suggest that Cbln1 in the DCNs is required for their own commissural axon growth.
 To further test whether Cbln1 is sufficient to stimulate CA growth in vivo, we used a model of chick neural tube. Chick Cbln1 (cCbln1) is expressed in the DCNs of developing chick neural tube, as is the case with mouse Cbln1, but is not detected in the FP of chick embryonic spinal cord ( ). We made a DCN-specific overexpression plasmid, pMath1-eGFP-IRES-MCS, by modifying a DCN-specific knockdown plasmid pMath1-eGFP-miRNA [ ]. Unilateral DCN-specific overexpression of cCbln1 by in ovo electroporation of pMath1-eGFP-IRES-cCbln1 enhanced chick CA growth compared with control plasmid without changing commissural neuron numbers ( ). These data suggest that Cbln1 is sufficient to stimulate CA growth.
In the DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO embryonic spinal cord, other cell-autonomous growth promoting molecules or non-cell-autonomous guidance attractants/repellents are not affected. So we continued to check whether the CA growth could eventually reach the FP. As shown in , almost all axons reached the floor plate at E12, and there was no difference between Cbln1 cKO and control for commissural axon length or number at this stage ( ). In an open book DiI assay performed at E12, the crossing or post-crossing behaviors of CAs in DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos were also similar to those of controls ( ).

## Cbln1 is secreted from commissural axon growth cones and stimulates commissural axon growth in an autocrine manner
Next, we continued to elucidate the mechanisms for the cell-autonomous functions of Cbln1. We hypothesized that Cbln1 was secreted from the DCNs and then acted to stimulate CA growth in an autocrine manner. To test this, we cultured DCN explants from E10.5 (a stage when most CAs have not projected to the midline yet and are called pre-crossing axons) mouse spinal cords and used Tag1 immunostaining to visualize pre-crossing commissural axons. Tag1 has been widely used as a marker for pre-crossing CAs [ , ]. Compared with control embryonic DCN explants, the CA growth of Wnt1-Cre-mediated Cbln1 cKO DCNs was significantly inhibited, indicated by decreased axon numbers and reduced axon lengths ( ), which is consistent with in vivo results for DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO ( ). These axon growth defects were efficiently rescued by adding a recombinant human Cbln1 protein (rhCbln1) to the cultures ( ). These data suggest that the cell-autonomous Cbln1 regulates CA growth in an autocrine manner.
 We next asked whether Cbln1-induced axonal growth works locally in CAs and growth cones. Immunofluorescence of DCN neuron culture using a Cbln1 antibody detected robust Cbln1 IF signals in CAs and growth cones ( ). To confirm the specificity of these axonal Cbln1 IF signals, we generated lentiviral shCbln1 that led to dramatic knockdown of Cbln1 in cultured neurons ( ). The Cbln1 IF signals in CAs and growth cones were largely lost after knockdown of Cbln1 ( ), indicating that Cbln1 is present in CAs and growth cones.
We continued to explore how Cbln1 is released from CAs. It is reported that Cbln1 co-localizes with the lysosomal enzymes cathepsin B and D in the adult mouse brain [ , ], indicating the lysosome may regulate Cbln1 secretion in CAs. To test this, we applied different lysosome inhibitors to the DCN cultures and checked their effects on Cbln1 secretion from CAs. Glycyl-L-phenylalanine 2-naphthylamide (GPN) can be specifically cleaved by cathepsin C, which leads to targeted disruption of the lysosomal membrane [ , ]. Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1) blocks lysosomal functions through working as a specific inhibitor of vacuolar H+-ATPase [ ]. Treatment of DCN cultures with GPN or BafA1, followed by an IF protocol to detect surface Cbln1 by leaving out the permeabilization steps, showed loss of Cbln1 IF signals on the CA surface ( , ), suggesting that Cbln1 is released from lysosomes in CAs and growth cones. Blocking Cbln1 secretion by GPN inhibited CA growth ( ), further supporting a model that Cbln1 is released from and works back on CA and growth cones to stimulate axon growth.

## Non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 from the floor plate regulates commissural axon guidance
The facts that the secreted Cbln1 works extrinsically and that it is expressed in the FP during CA growth to the midline suggest that Cbln1 from FP might regulate CA guidance. To test this idea, we first prepared COS7 cell lines stably expressing mouse Cbln1. High levels of Cbln1 were detected in the culture media, indicating the overexpressed Cbln1 was secreted from COS7 cells ( ). We then co-cultured the dorsal spinal cord explants from E11 mouse embryos with COS7 cell aggregates expressing Cbln1 tagged with FLAG and ZsGreen or ZsGreen alone in collagen gels ( ). The dorsal spinal cord explants growing with Cbln1-expressing COS7 cell aggregates had significantly longer axons than the control ( ). More importantly, the growth of commissural axons was attracted toward Cbln1-expressing COS7 cell aggregates, indicated by the higher axon number ratios (proximal/distal) compared with the control cell aggregates expressing ZsGreen alone ( ). These results suggest that the non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 functions as an attractive axon guidance molecule.
 To assess the in vivo functions of the non-cell-autonomous Cbln1, we generated FP-specific Cbln1 cKO mice. We utilized Foxa2-CreERT line that has been used to induce Cre recombinase expression specifically in floor plate cells in response to tamoxifen (TM) treatment [ , ]. Cbln1 expression was specifically ablated from the FP in these cKO embryos, without affecting its expression in other parts of spinal cord including the DCNs ( ). The neural patterning or neurogenesis was not disturbed by ablation of Cbln1 from the FP ( ). However, examination of commissural axon trajectories using Tag1 immunostaining in E11.5 spinal cords revealed significant axon guidance defects in the midline and ventral spinal cord. First, the thickness of the ventral commissure (VC) was significantly reduced in the FP-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos compared with their littermate controls ( ). Second, the intersection of the main CA bundle with the ventral commissural funiculus was shifted laterally in the FP-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos compared with their littermate controls ( ). The distances between the point of intersection and the midline were quantified, showing a significant increase in the FP-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos ( ). These phenotypes were also evident by NFM immunostaining ( ). These axon guidance defects suggest that Cbln1 from the FP indeed works as an axon guidance cue in the developing spinal cord.
To observe more clearly the CA guidance behaviors in the FP-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos, we performed DiI labeling of DCNs in the open-book spinal cords at E11.5. As shown in , there was a significant decrease of the number of normal crossing CAs in the Cbln1 cKO. Meanwhile, the numbers of commissural axons showing guidance defects such as ipsilateral turning, slower growing or winding crossing were significantly increased in Cbln1 cKO embryos compared with their littermate controls ( ).
All these data support the idea that the non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 derived from the FP works as an axon guidance cue for CAs in the developing spinal cord.

## Nrxn2 is expressed in the developing dorsal commissural neurons and axons, and mediates Cbln1-induced axon growth and guidance as its receptor
Previously, Cbln1 was shown to work as a synaptic organizer for the cerebellar excitatory PF-PC (PF, parallel fibers; PC, Purkinje cells) synapses by binding to its presynaptic receptor, neurexin (Nrxn) and its postsynaptic receptor, glutamate receptor delta 2 (GluD2) [ , ]. In addition, trans-synaptic signaling through Nrxn-Cbln-GluD1 has also been shown to mediate the inhibitory synapse formation in cortical neurons [ , ]. Here, we wondered whether Nrxn, GluD1, and/or GluD2 work as receptors for Cbln1 to mediate its regulation of CA growth and guidance in the developing spinal cord. To test this, we first checked if Nrxn, GluD1, and GluD2 are expressed in developing DCNs or not. GluD1 or GluD2 mRNA was not detected in E11.5 spinal cords ( ). There are 3 Nrxn genes in the mammalian genome, each of them encoding 2 major protein isoforms, α-neurexin and β-neurexin [ ]. Although Nrxn1, 2, and 3 mRNAs were all detected in E11.5 spinal cords, only Nrxn2 mRNA was found to be expressed in DCNs ( ). We further detected both Nrxn2α and Nrxn2β mRNAs in DCNs using the isoform-specific probes ( ). Immunostaining using an Nrxn2 antibody detected robust Nrxn2 IF signals in commissural axons and growth cones ( ), making it possible that Nrxn2 works as the receptor for Cbln1 in developing CAs.
 Indeed, CA lengths were significantly decreased after knocking down either pan-Nrxn2 or Nrxn2α, Nrxn2β separately ( , ). We continued to observe that axonal surface Cbln1 signals were decreased after Nrxn2 knockdown in culture DCN neurons ( ). These data suggest that Nrxn2 mediates cell-autonomous-Cbln1-induced CA growth. We continued to test whether Nrxn2 also mediates the non-cell-autonomous function of Cbln1 to attract CA turning. As shown in , Cbln1-expressing cell aggregates failed to attract commissural axons of DCN neurons that were knocked down of either pan-Nrxn2 or Nrxn2α, Nrxn2β separately. These data suggest that Nrxn2 (both Nrxn2α and Nrxn2β) works as the receptor for Cbln1 to mediate its cell-autonomous function in axon growth and non-cell-autonomous function in axon guidance of commissural neurons in the developing spinal cord.
In summary, these data and findings support the following working model for Cbln1 in the developing spinal cord ( ). In the pre-crossing CAs, Cbln1 is expressed cell-autonomously by the DCN and axons. Commissural axon growth cone-secreted Cbln1 binds to Nrxn2 receptors in commissural axons and growth cones to stimulate commissural axon growth in an autocrine manner ( ). In the DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos, CA growth is reduced compared with their littermate controls ( ). When commissural axons approach the midline, the FP-derived Cbln1 attracts CAs to the midline that is also mediate by Nrxn2 receptors ( ). In the FP-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos, commissural axon guidance in the midline crossing is impaired, resulting in a U-shaped and thinner ventral commissure compared with the V-shaped and thick ventral commissures in the littermate control embryos ( ).

## Cell-autonomous Cbln1 from cerebellar granular cells is required for parallel fiber growth
We wondered whether the function of Cbln1 to regulate axon development is a general mechanism which also works in other brain regions during development. The studies on Cbln1 so far have been focused on its functions as a synaptic organizer in cerebellum. Whether Cbln1 is expressed and exerts its functions at earlier stages of cerebellar development remains unexplored. We first checked expression of Cbln1 in earlier cerebellar development. As shown in , high and specific Cbln1 expression was detected in the P4-P8 cerebellar granule cells in the inner granule layer (IGL) by in situ hybridization. Immunofluorescence using a Cbln1 antibody showed that Cbln1 protein is enriched in the molecular layer (ML) of cerebellum ( ), suggesting that Cbln1 protein is expressed and secreted by cerebellar granule cell (GC) axons.
 Next, we tested the possible roles of Cbln1 in earlier cerebellar development. We generated Cbln1 cKO in cerebellum using the Wnt1-cre line [ , ], which resulted in the efficient knockout of Cbln1 from GCs ( ). Axon growth rates of Cbln1-deficient GCs in vitro were significantly decreased compared with control neurons ( ), suggesting that the cell-autonomous Cbln1 is required for GC axon growth. Similar to Cbln1 on commissural axons, extrinsic application of the recombinant hCbln1 (rhCbln1) protein to the GC axons could efficiently rescue this axon growth defect ( ). These results support a similar model as in the developing spinal cord that Cbln1 secreted from cerebellar GC axons works back to stimulate GC axon growth in the developing cerebellum. Detection of Nrxn1, 2, and 3 expression in GCs at IGL ( ) implied that neurexins would mediate the autocrine function of Cbln1 to stimulate GC axon growth in the developing cerebellum as in the spinal cord.
We continued to carefully examine the Cbln1 cKO cerebella. Immunostaining of the Purkinje cell (PC) marker Calbindin and the granule cell (GC) marker NeuN showed no difference between Cbln1 cKO and control cerebella at P8 ( ), suggesting that the neurogenesis of PC and GC in the cerebellum is not impaired. To investigate whether the in vitro regulation of GC axon growth by Cbln1 was recapitulated in vivo, we examined parallel fiber (PF) development in Cbln1 cKO mice by DiI labeling. Compared with control mice, the DiI-labeled parallel fiber lengths in Cbln1 cKO mouse pups at P6 were significantly decreased ( ), indicating that the parallel fiber growth was impaired in Cbln1 cKO cerebella.
All these data suggested that cell-autonomous Cbln1 from granule cells is required for parallel fiber growth in the developing cerebellum, just as cell-autonomous Cbln1 from commissural axons stimulates CA growth in the developing spinal cord.

## Non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 regulates axon guidance of retinal ganglion cells in the optic chiasm
The regulation of commissural axon guidance during midline crossing by the non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 from FP of the developing spinal cord inspired us to further test whether Cbln1 regulates axon guidance in other brain midline models. The optic chiasm (OC) is where retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons from each eye cross the midline. The ipsi- and contra-lateral axon organization of RGC axons in OC is critical for binocular vision [ ]. We wanted to check whether Cbln1 contributed to axon guidance signaling in OC. RGCs do not express Cbln1 ( ). However, both Cbln1 mRNA and Cbln1 protein were detected in the ventral diencephalon at the floor of the third ventricle that is adjacent to OC ( ), implying that Cbln1 has the right location to exert effects on OC. In vitro co-culture of retinal explants with COS7 cell aggregates expressing Cbln1 showed that Cbln1 is sufficient to attract RGC axon turning ( ).
 We next continued to explore whether Cbln1 physiologically regulates RGC axon guidance in OC at the ventral diencephalic midline. We generated Cbln1 cKO embryos using Nes-cre. As show in , Cbln1 expression in the ventral diencephalon was ablated. RGCs can be divided to ipsilateral and contralateral subgroups according to their projection laterality to the same or opposite side of the brain, respectively. The experiments checking expression of Cbln1 receptors in retina by in situ hybridization revealed that only Nrxn1 and Nrxn2 mRNA were detected in the developing retina ( ) while Nrxn3, GluD1, or GluD2 mRNA was not detected ( ). Nrxn2 was further found to be only expressed in the contralateral RGCs marked by Brn3a ( ), suggesting that Cbln1 would only work on the contralateral RGCs. Consistent with this, DiI tracing of RGC axons showed that contralateral axon attraction to OC was impaired in the Cbln1 cKO mouse embryos compared with control embryos ( ). We further checked the targeting of optic nerves to the brain by anterograde labeling with cholera toxin subunit B (CTB) and found that the ratio of ipsilateral area to contralateral area of the retinogeniculate projections was increased in Cbln1 cKO pups compared with control pups ( ). These data suggest that the non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 regulates contralateral RGC axon guidance in the optic chiasm.

## Discussion
Based on the in vitro and in vivo studies in mice, we have demonstrated that cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regions, respectively, suggesting a general role for Cbln1 in early nervous system development.

## New roles of Cbln1 in axon development prior to synapse formation
Studies on Cbln1 so far have focused on its role as the synaptic organizer in cerebellum [ , , , , , – ] and cortex [ ]. Whether Cbln1 works in earlier neuronal developmental processes prior to synapse formation or in other neural regions is not known. Here, we report that Cbln1 is expressed in developing spinal cord, cerebellum, and ventral diencephalon. We also found that Cbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regions. These findings suggest that Cbln1 has dynamic spatial–temporal expression patterns and functions in the nervous system. Thus, in order to distinguish the early (axon development) and late (synapse formation) roles of Cbln1, it would be critical to more precisely control the time point of knocking out Cbln1. For example, inducible Cbln1 cKO would be necessary to explore its roles in synapse formation, in order to avoid disrupting its role in axon growth and pathfinding.
It is surprising that Cbln1-Neurexin 2 that has been shown to work as synaptic organizers is also required by the DCNs and other neurons for promoting growth and guidance when there are already known attractants and growth factors doing the same job. However, quite a few studies have shown that these synaptic organizers are also involved in earlier neural development including axon development. In C. elegans, Nrxn promotes neurite outgrowth of DVB neurons [ ], and a neurexin-related protein, BAM-2, regulates axonal branches [ ]. In Drosophila, homolog of α-neurexin (DNrx) restricts axonal branching [ ], and neurexin and neuroligin-based adhesion molecules regulate axonal arborization growth independent of synaptic activity [ ]. These studies suggest that these synapse organizers are also required in early neural development to regulate axon development, working together with those already known attractants and growth factors.

## Cbln1 has dual roles as both non-cell-autonomous and cell-autonomous cues to regulate axon guidance and growth, respectively
During neural developmental stages before synapse formation, extracellular cues are required to direct axon growth and guidance [ ]. Most of these cues are non-cell-autonomous and secreted by sources such as the surrounding and target (intermediate or final) tissues. Here, we found that non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 expressed and secreted from FP in the developing spinal cord and from ventral diencephalon in the developing brain works in a paracrine manner to regulate CA and retinal ganglion axon guidance when they cross the midline.
In addition, we also found that cell-autonomous Cbln1 that is generated and secreted from commissural and cerebellar granule cell axons works in an autocrine manner to stimulate their own axon growth. Actually, other examples that axon-derived and remotely secreted cues regulate axon development have also been reported. The axonally secreted protein axonin-1 promotes neurite outgrowth of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) [ ]. Wnt3a is expressed in RGCs and has the autocrine RGC axon growth-promoting activity [ ]. The C terminus of the ER stress-induced transcription factor CREB3L2 was found to be secreted by DRG axons to promote DRG axon growth [ ]. A recent study suggests that axonally synthesized Wnt5a is secreted and promote cerebellar granule axon growth in an autocrine manner [ ].
Thus, Cbln1 shows up as an example of molecules with dual roles as both non-cell-autonomous and cell-autonomous cues to regulate axon guidance and growth, respectively.

## Cbln1-Nrxn signaling in axon development
We found that neurexins, especially Nrxn2, mediate Cbln1 functions in axon development. Neurexins are transmembrane proteins with a large extracellular region and a small intracellular C-terminal region [ ]. Nrxns are alternatively spliced at 6 sites (named as SS1 to SS6) [ ], whereas Cbln1 only bind to SS4+ neurexins [ ]. Extracellularly, α-Nrxns bind to Cbln1 via the LNS6 domain (laminin/neurexin/sex-hormone-binding globulin domain 6) that is also shared by β-Nrxns [ ]. Intracellularly, Nrxns interact with CASK, Mints, and protein 4.1 that nucleates actin cytoskeleton to regulate synapse formation [ – ]. It will be interesting to explore whether and how Cbln1-Nrxn signaling is mediated by intracellular CASK/Mint/p4.1-cytoskeleton pathway to regulate axon growth and guidance in the early neuronal development.

## The cerebellin family
There are 4 members in the cerebellin family, Cbln1-4. Cbln1 and Cbln2 bind to Nrxn1-3 and GluD1-2, while Cbln4 is a highly specific ligand for DCC [ ]. In addition, Cbln4-null mice did not show any defect in commissural axon guidance in the developing spinal cord [ ].
Cbln3 has only been studied in synapse structural and functional regulation and is secreted only when it is bound to Cbln1 [ ]. Cbln1 and Cbln3 proteins are both lost in Cbln1-null mice, while Cbln3-null mice have a robust increase in Cbln1 protein level [ ]. It would be interesting to check if Cbln3 is expressed in the developing dorsal spinal cord and brain, and if there is a similar Cbln1-Cbln3 interaction mechanism in the earlier embryonic stages.
It has been reported that Cbln1 and Cbln2 have redundancy in cerebellum but not in thalamic neurons in the adult mice [ ], supporting a tissue-specific redundancy in adulthood. Cbln2 is expressed in the developing chick dorsal spinal cord [ ]. Cbln1-Cbln2 double cKO may be useful to check their redundancy in the developing brain regions and axon developmental processes described in our current study.

## Materials and methods

## Ethics statement
All experiments using mice were carried out following animal protocols (SUSTC-JY2017004) approved by the Laboratory Animal Welfare and Ethics Committee of Southern University of Science and Technology.

## Animals
Generation of Cbln1 cKO mice was performed following procedures described previously [ ], with the whole coding sequence as the targeted region ( ). Cbln1+/fl mice and corresponding Cre mice lines were used to generate Cbln1 cKO and littermate control embryos. Genotyping primers are as following: the first Cbln1-loxP site, 5′-ACGCGGGGACATTTGTTCTGGAGT-3′ and 5′-ACGATGGGCTCTGTCTCATTCTGC-3′; the second Cbln1-loxP site, 5′-AGAAAGGCGACCGAGCATAC-3′ and 5′-AGTGTGCAGAGCTAAGCGAA-3′. Wnt1-cre [ ], Rosa26mTmG [ ], Gli2+/- [ ], Foxa2-creERT [ ], and Nes-cre [ ] mice used in this study were described in the indicated references, and their stock numbers in The Jackson Laboratory are 003829, 007676, 007922, 008464, and 003771, respectively. All mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free animal facility at the Laboratory Animal Center of Southern University of Science and Technology. For timed pregnancy, embryos were identified as E0.5 when a copulatory plug was observed at noon. To induce Cre activity for Foxa2-creERT-derived Cbln1 cKO in FP, 8-mg tamoxifen (Cayman Chemical) was given orally to E8.5 pregnant mice with an animal gauge feeding needle. Fertilized chick eggs were purchased from a local supplier and chick embryos developed in an incubator (BSS 420, Grumbach) were staged using the Hamburger and Hamilton staging system. For all experiments with mice or chick, a minimum of 3 (up to 20) embryos or pups was analyzed for each genotype or experimental condition.

## In ovo electroporation
The chick spinal DCN-specific knockdown vector pMath1-eGFP-miRNA was a gift from Esther T. Stoeckli [ ]. DCN-specific overexpression vector pMath1-eGFP-IRES-MCS was constructed by replacing the miRNA cassette with an IRES sequence plus multiple coning sites (MCS). The coding sequence of chick Cbln1 was cloned from St. 23/24 chick spinal cord cDNA with primers 5′-ATGCGGGGCCCG-3′ and 5′-TTAAAGCGGGAACACC-3′. In ovo electroporation was carried out using the ECM 830 Square Wave Electroporator (BTX) as previously described [ ]. Electroporation was performed at St.17 and embryos were collected and analyzed at St.23.

## Tissue and neuron culture
All tissue culture reagents were from Thermo unless otherwise specified. DCN explant and neuronal culture were carried out as describe previously [ ]. The working concentration for recombinant human Cbln1 (R&D Systems) was 500 ng/ml. GPN (Abcam) was dissolved in DMSO and used at the working concentration of 50 μm. Bafilomycin A1 (Coolaber) was dissolved in DMSO and used at the working concentration of 200 nM. P6-P8 mouse cerebella were cut into small pieces with scissors after the meninges were carefully removed. The tissue was then digested in 5 ml HBSS containing 0.1% Trypsin and 0.04% DNase I in a 37°C water bath for 15 min before termination addition of 5 ml BME with 10% FBS. Cell suspension was obtained by filtering with sterile cell strainers (40 μm). After centrifuged at 200×g for 5 min, the cell pellets were resuspended in BME supplemented with 5% FBS, 1× GlutaMAX-1, 0.5% glucose, and 1× penicillin/streptomycin. The neurons were then plated in PDL-coated cell culture plate and the medium was replaced by maintenance medium supplemented with 1× B27, 1× GlutaMAX-1, 0.5% glucose, and 1× penicillin/streptomycin after 4 h.

## Knockdown or overexpression using lentiviral system, RT-qPCR, and western blotting
The lentiviral knockdown constructs were made using pLKO.1-Puro or pLKO.1-GFP plasmids (Addgene) [ ]. The target sequences of shRNA are as following: shCbln1, 5′-GGCTGGAAGTACTCAACCTTC-3′; shNrxn2, 5′-CGTTCGTTTATTTCCCTCGAT-3′; shNrxn2α, 5′-GGACTTCTGCTGTTCAACTCA-3′; shNrxn2β, 5′-CTCCCCCATCACCCGGATTTG-3′; shCtrl for pLKO.1-Puro system: 5′-GCATCAAGGTGAACTTCAAGA-3′; shCtrl for pLKO.1-GFP system: 5′-GCATAAACCCGCCACTCATCT-3′. RT-qPCR was performed as previously reported [ ]. Primers used in qPCR are as following: mCbln1, 5′-CCGAGATGAGTAATCGCACCA-3′ and 5′-TCAACATGAGGCTCACCTGGATG-3′; mNrxn2, 5′-TACCCGGCAGGAAACTTTGA-3′ and 5′-CCCCCTATCTTGATGGCAGC-3′; mNrxn2α, 5′-CTCAAGTCTGGGGCTGTCTG-3′ and 5′-ATAGCGTGTCCAATCCCTGC-3′; mNrxn2β, 5′-GATGGATCCAGGCTTCACGG-3′ and 5′-GAAGGAAAACCAGAGCCCGA-3′; mGapdh: 5′-TTGTCAGCAATGCATCCTGCACCACC-3′ and 5′-CTGAGTGGCAGTGATGGCATGGAC-3′.
The coding sequence of mouse Cbln1 was cloned from E11.5 mouse spinal cord cDNA with primers 5′-CCGGAGGCGCGATGCT-3′ and 5′-ATTCCCGATACGTGCCAG-3′, and lenti viral expression construct was constructed using the pHBLV-CMV-MCS-3×Flag-EF1-Zsgreen1-T2A-Puro backbone (Hanbio). After infection with the lenti virus, the COS7 cell line stably expressing Cbln1 was acquired after multiple rounds of selection using puromycin. Expression of Cbln1-FLAG in cell pellets and supernatant was validated by western blotting (WB) following the standard protocols. The dilutions and sources of antibodies used in WB are as following: Cbln1 (1:100, Abclonal), FLAG (1:1,000, Beyotime), and β-actin (1:10,000, Abcam).

## Identification of the differentially expressed genes in the dorsal spinal cord of mouse embryos
Wnt1-cre and Rosa26mTmG mice were mated to generate Wnt1-Cre,Rosa26mTmG embryos. E10.5, E11.5, and E12.5 embryos were collected and dissected, and dorsal spinal cords were dissociated and GFP+ neurons were purified using FACS. RNAs were prepared from these purified neurons and the expression profiling was carried out using microarray analysis with GeneChip Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array (Affymetrix) following the manufacturer’s manual.

## In situ hybridization
In situ hybridization using DIG-labeled RNA probes was carried out on sections from mouse or chick tissue sections following a previously reported protocol [ ]. The primers used for PCR in cloning the templates for generating RNA probes are as following (all mouse clones except indicated): Cbln1, 5′-CCAAGACGTGACACGCGAGG-3′ and 5′-CAGTAAGTGGCAGGGTTCAG-3′; chick Cbln1, 5′-GAGAAGACGCCGCTCAGGTGT-3′ and 5′-CGGGTTGATTTGCGGTCCTTC-3′; Nrxn1, 5′-CAGGGAATGCGATCAGGAGG-3′ and 5′-AGACTTCTTCTCTGGCACGC-3′; Nrxn2, 5′-TCACAGCCCTGGGTTGATTT-3′ and 5′-AGCAGCGACACACACAAAAG-3′; Nrxn3, 5′-GTGAGATGGGGTGTACCACG-3′ and 5′-ACACACACACTGGTCAGAACC-3′; GluD1, 5′-CATTGGCCTCCTTCTTGCCT-3′ and 5′-GAGGTGCCATGAGAGGTGTC-3′; GluD2, 5′-GCCCCTACCGTGATGTCTTT-3′ and 5′-GTCAATGTCCAGAGGGGTCA-3′; Nrxn2α, 5′-GCAGGGATTGGACACGCTAT-3′ and 5′-GAACTGTGACTGCCTACCCC-3′. The template for Nrxn2β-specific RNA probe was synthesized (5′-TGAGGGGGGACCCCTAGCCGCCCGCGATGGATCCAGGCTTCA
CGGACCTTGGCCTTCCCGCTGCGCGTACCCCGGATTCCCCGGCGGGATCCAGTTGATTTGCTTGGCTCCGGACTGAGGCTCGGGCTCTGGTTTTCCTTCGCTTCACCCCTACCCCCCTCTCGGAGCTCGCAACCGGAGGGGGGCTTT-3′) and cloned to pUC57 (Sangon). RNA probes were transcribed in vitro using DIG RNA Labeling Kit (SP6/T7) (Roche). Anti-Digoxigenin-AP and NBT/BCIP Stock Solution were also from Roche. In situ hybridization images were collected with Axio Imager A2 (Zeiss) or TissueFAXS Cytometer (TissueGnostics).

## Axon guidance assay using co-culture of COS7 cell aggregates with DCN or retinal explants
Aggregates of COS7 cells stably expressing Cbln1 were prepared by resuspending cells in rat tail collagen gel and then placed into 24-well glass bottom plates (Nest). DCN explants were dissected from E11 mouse embryos, immersed in collagen gel, and placed 200 to 400 μm away from the COS7 aggregates. Explants and cell aggregates were co-cultured for 40 to 48 h in neurobasal medium supplemented with B27, GlutaMAX-1 and penicillin/streptomycin. Similarly, retinal explants were dissected from E14.5 mouse retinas and co-cultured with COS7 aggregates for around 30 h, with the culture medium as following: Neurobasal medium mixed with DMEM/F12 (1:1), supplemented with B27, N21 MAX Media Supplement, GlutaMAX-1 and penicillin/streptomycin.

## DiI tracing of axons
FAST DiI (Invitrogen, D7756) tracing of commissural axons in the spinal cord was performed as previously reported [ ]. FAST DiI (Invitrogen, D7756) labeling of cerebellar parallel fibers was performed as previously described [ ]. DiI (Invitrogen, D282) tracing of optic nerves was performed as previously reported [ ].

## CTB labelling of optic nerve
To label RGC axon terminals in P4 mouse brain, RGC axons were anterogradely labeled by CTB (Cholera Toxin Subunit B) conjugated with Alexa Fluor 555 (Invitrogen, C34776) through intravitreal injection 24 h before sacrifice. After PFA perfusion, the brains were fixed with 4% PFA in 0.1 M PB overnight, dehydrated with 15% sucrose and 30% sucrose in 0.1 M PB overnight at 4°C sequentially, embedded with O.C.T. for coronal section, and cryosectioned at 12 μm with Leica CM1950 Cryostat. The images were captured on Tissue Genostics with identical settings for each group in the same experiment with the TissueFAXS 7.0 software.

## Immunostaining and immunofluorescence
Immunostaining of tissue sections and IF of cultured DCN explants and neurons were done as previously described [ ]. The spinal cord open-books were prepared similarly as DiI tracing, and their immunostaining was performed with similar procedures as tissues sections except that all incubation and washing were done in 24-well plates and the open-books were mounted onto slides and covered with cover slips before confocal imaging. For IF of axon surface Cbln1 in cultured DCN neurons after GPN, Bafilomycin A1 or shNrxn2 treatment, the permeabilization step was omitted and there was no Triton x-100 in antibody incubation buffers. Immunostaining of tissue sections from the cerebellum and the optic chiasm were done as previously described [ , ]. The dilutions and sources of antibodies used in immunostaining and immunofluorescence are as following: Cbln1 (1:1,000, Abcam), Cbln1 (1:50, Frontier Institute), Lhx2 (1:500, Abcam), Alcam (1:200, R&D Systems), Lhx9 (1:50, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), Robo3 (1:500, R&D Systems), Tag1 (1:200, R&D Systems), NFM (1:1,000, Cell Signaling Technology), GFP (1:1,000, Abcam), Isl1/2 (1:500, DSHB), Nrxn2 (1:200, Abcam), Calbindin (1:200, Swant), NeuN (1:500, Cell Signaling Technology), Brn3a (1:200, Millipore), Lim1/2 (1:10, DSHB). Alexa Fluor-conjugated secondary antibodies (Thermo) were used at 1:1,000 (555) or 1:500 (488). Fluorescent images were acquired using laser-scanning confocal microscopes Nikon A1R with NIS software, Leica SP8 with LASX software, or Zeiss LSM 800 with Zen software. All images were collected with identical settings for each group in the same experiment. Quantification of immunofluorescence signals was performed using ImageJ.

## Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 7.0. Most of our data are represented as the box and whisker plots unless otherwise specified in the figure legends, and the settings are: 25 to 75 percentiles (boxes), minimum and maximum (whiskers), and medians (horizontal lines). Unpaired Student t test was performed for comparison between 2 groups and ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test was performed to the comparison of 3 or more groups. * Indicated statistically significant: *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p <0.0001.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Screening of the differentially expressed genes in the mouse embryonic dorsal spinal cord. (Related to ).
(A) The embryonic dorsal spinal neurons were genetically labeled with eGFP by crossing Wnt1-cre with Rosa26mTmG mice. Immunofluorescence of cross-sections of E11.5 spinal cord was shown. DCN, dorsal commissural neurons. CA, commissural axons. Scale bar, 100 μm. (B) The dissected E11.5 spinal cords were shown in both bright-field and fluorescent images. The regions in the red dotted boxes were shown with higher magnification in the lower images. The dotted white line indicates where to cut and separate dorsal and ventral spinal cord. (C) The scheme showing the procedures for identifying the differentially expressed genes in the mouse embryonic dorsal spinal cord. (D and E) Co-immunostaining of Cbln1 with Lim1/2 (D) or Brn3a and Isl1/2 (E) in spinal cord cross-sections at E11 showed expression of Cbln1 in the DCNs. Circled areas highlight the expression of Cbln1 in the dI2 neurons marked by Lim1/2, the dI3 neurons co-labeled by Brn3a and Isl1/2, and the Brn3a+ dI4 neurons just below dI3. Scale bars, 50 μm. (F) Co-immunostaining of Cbln1 with Alcam in spinal cord cross-sections of Gli2 KO and its littermate control embryos at E11.5. The circled areas indicate the expression and loss of Cbln1 in control and Gli2 KO embryos, respectively. Scale bar, 50 μm. DCN, dorsal commissural neurons; CA, commissural axon; FACS, Fluorescence-activated cell sorting; DEG, differentially expressed genes; dI2, dI3, dI4, dorsal interneuron 2, 3, 4.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## DCN-specific cKO of Cbln1 does not affect neurogenesis and patterning of spinal DCNs. (Related to ).
(A) Lhx2 and Lhx9 immunostaining in E11.5 spinal cord indicated that Cbln1 cKO in DCNs does not disturb neurogenesis or patterning of the dI1 neurons. Scale bar, 100 μm. (B and C) Quantification of Lhx2+ and Lhx9+ neurons in (A) showed that the dI1 neurogenesis is not affected in Cbln1 cKO. All data are represented as box and whisker plots: Cbln1fl/fl (n = 20 sections) vs. Wnt1-Cre+/-,Cbln1fl/fl (n = 16 sections); ns, not significant (p = 0.46 for Lhx2+ neurons in B, p = 0.99 for Lhx9+ neurons in C); by unpaired Student t test. (D and E) Lim1/2 and Brn3a/Isl1/2 immunostaining in E11.5 spinal cord indicated that Cbln1 cKO in DCNs does not affect neurogenesis or patterning of the dI2, dI3, or dI4 neurons. Scale bars, 50 μm. (F–H) Quantification of dl2, dl3, and dl4 neurons in (D and E) showed that their neurogenesis is not affected. All data are represented as box and whisker plots: Cbln1fl/fl (n = 36 sections for F, n = 33 sections for G and H) vs. Wnt1-Cre+/-,Cbln1fl/fl (n = 38 sections for F–H); ns, not significant (p = 0.37 for dl2 neurons in F, p = 0.31 for dl3 neurons in G, p = 0.79 for dl4 neurons in H); by unpaired Student t test. (I) Commissural axon growth could catch up at later stages in DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO in vivo. Commissural axons were marked by Robo3 immunostaining in spinal cord open-books at E12, showing that almost all Robo3-labeled commissural axons in Cbln1 cKO reached the floor plate. Scale bar, 500 μm. (J and K) Quantification of commissural axon lengths and numbers in (I). The spinal cords were divided to bins (500 μm) along the anterior-posterior (A➔P) direction. All data are mean ± SEM: Cbln1fl/fl (n = 8 embryos) vs. Wnt1-Cre+/-,Cbln1fl/fl (n = 10 embryos). All bins show no difference in axon length (J) or number (K) by multiple t tests. (L) DiI labeling of spinal cord open-books at E12 showed that crossing or post-crossing commissural axons are behaving normally in DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos compared with controls. Scale bar, 50 μm. The data underlying all the graphs shown in the figure are included in . Cbln1, cerebellin 1; DCNs, dorsal commissural neurons; cKO, conditional knockout; dI1, dI2, dI3, dI4, dorsal interneuron 1, 2, 3, 4; A➔P, anterior to posterior.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 Fig

## Knockdown of mCbln1 using lentiviral shRNA and inhibition of axonal Cbln1 secretion by BafA1 treatment. (Related to ).
(A) Validation of knockdown of Cbln1 using lentiviral shCbln1. Since Cbln1 is abundant in cerebellar granule cells, we prepared dissociated cerebellar granule cells from P8 mouse pups and cultured in vitro to test the knockdown efficiency of shCbln1. Cbln1 mRNA levels were measured by RT-qPCR after lentiviral shRNA infection. Data are mean ± SEM and represented as dot plots: **p = 0.0070; by unpaired Student t test. (B) Bafilomycin A1 (BafA1) blocked lysosomal exocytosis of Cbln1 from commissural axons. Cbln1 IF signals were reduced on the commissural axon surface of cultured DCN explants after 200 nM BafA1 treatment for 4 h. Scale bar, 50 μm. (C) Quantification of axon surface Cbln1 IF signals in (B). Data are represented as box and whisker plots: Vehicle (n = 182 axons) vs. BafA1 (n = 220 axons), ****p = 5.8 × 10−106, by unpaired Student t test. The data underlying all the graphs shown in the figure are included in . Cbln1, cerebellin 1; BafA1, Bafilomycin A1; shCtrl, control shRNA; shCbln1, shRNA against Cbln1; SEM, standard error of the mean; DCNs, dorsal commissural neurons; IF, immunofluorescence; A.U., arbitrary unit.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Floor plate-specific Cbln1 cKO does not disturb neural patterning or neurogenesis in the developing spinal cord. (Related to ).
(A) Overexpression and secretion of Cbln1 tagged by FLAG in COS7 cells were validated by WB. (B and C) Isl1/2 immunostaining showed normal patterning of spinal cord in the floor plate-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos (B). Isl1/2 marks different interneurons and motor neurons in spinal cord. The data for quantification of Isl1/2+ neuron numbers are represented as box and whisker plots (C): Cbln1fl/fl (n = 42 sections) vs. Foxa2-Cre+/-,Cbln1fl/fl (n = 49 sections); ns, not significant (p = 0.93); by unpaired Student t test. Scale bar, 100 μm (B). (D and E) The floor plate-specific cKO of Cbln1 does not disturb DCN neurogenesis, spinal cord patterning, or floor plate development. Lhx2 and Alcam immunostainings of E11.5 spinal cord were used to mark dI1 commissural neurons and floor plate, respectively (D). The data for quantification of Lhx2+ neuron numbers are represented as box and whisker plots (E): Cbln1fl/fl (n = 16 sections) vs. Foxa2-Cre+/-,Cbln1fl/fl (n = 35 sections); ns, not significant (p = 0.59); by unpaired Student t test. Scale bar, 100 μm (D). (F) The axon guidance defects of pre-crossing commissural axons were observed by NFM immunostaining in floor plate-specific Cbln1 cKO and control embryos at E11.5. Higher magnification views of the FP region in the white dotted boxes are also shown (bottom). The pair of red arrowheads denotes the thickness of the VC. The double-arrowed line measures the distance between the point of intersection (of the main pre-crossing commissural axon bundle with the ventral edge of spinal cord) and the midline (indicated by the dotted line). Scale bars, 50 μm. (G and H) Quantification of the VC thickness and the distance from the main bundle intersection point to the midline. All data are represented as box and whisker plots: Cbln1fl/fl (n = 49 sections) vs. Foxa2-Cre+/-,Cbln1fl/fl (n = 74 sections), ****p = 3.86 × 10−5 for G, ****p = 1.35 × 10−7 for H, by unpaired Student t test. The data underlying all the graphs shown in the figure are included in . Cbln1, cerebellin 1; DCNs, dorsal commissural neurons; Ctrl, control; OE, overexpression; cKO, conditional knockout; dI1, dorsal interneuron 1; NFM, neurofilament; FP, floor plate; VC, ventral commissure.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Working models for cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous Cbln1 in the developing spinal cord. (Related to ).
(A) GluD1 or GluD2 mRNA was not detected in E11.5 spinal cord cross-sections by in situ hybridization. Scale bar, 100 μm. (B–D) Validation of knockdown by shRNAs. Dissociated cerebellar granule cells from P8 mouse pups were cultured and lentiviral shRNAs were infected. Significant knockdown was achieved by shRNAs against Nrxn2, Nrxn2α, and Nrxn2β, respectively. RT-qPCR data are mean ± SEM and represented as dot plots: **p = 0.0084 for B; ***p = 0.00010 for C; ***p = 0.00020 for D; by unpaired Student t test. (E) Surface Cbln1 IF signals were reduced in the commissural axons and growth cones after lentiviral shNrxn2 infection. Dissociated DCN neurons from E11 mouse embryos were cultured and infected by lentiviral shNrxn2. Surface Cbln1 IF signals were imaged. Scale bar, 5μm. (F) Quantification of axon surface Cbln1 IF signals in (E). Data are represented as box and whisker plots: shCtrl (n = 27 axons) vs. shNrxn2 (n = 26 axons), ****p = 1.13 × 10−12, by unpaired Student t test. (G) Working model for the stimulation of commissural axon growth by the cell-autonomous Cbln1. In the pre-crossing commissural axons, Cbln1 is expressed cell-autonomously by the dorsal commissural neurons and axons. Commissural axon growth cone-secreted Cbln1 works back to itself in an autocrine manner and binds to Nrxn2 receptors to stimulate commissural axon growth. In the DCN-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos, commissural axon growth is reduced compared with their littermate controls. (H) Working model for the attraction of commissural axon growth toward midline by the non-cell-autonomous, floor plate-derived Cbln1. When commissural axons approach the midline, the floor plate-derived Cbln1 attracts commissural axons to the midline that is also mediate by Nrxn2 receptors. In the floor plate-specific Cbln1 cKO embryos, commissural axon guidance in the midline crossing is impaired, resulting in a U-shaped and thinner ventral commissure compared with the V-shaped and thick ventral commissures in the littermate control embryos. The data underlying all the graphs shown in the figure are included in . Cbln1, cerebellin 1; GluD1, GluD2, glutamate receptor delta 1, 2; Nrxn, neurexin; SEM, standard error of the mean; DCNs, dorsal commissural neurons; IF, immunofluorescence; shCtrl, control shRNA; shNrxn, shRNA against neurexin.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S6 Fig

## Expression of Cbln1 receptors in the developing cerebellum. (Related to ).
(A and B) In situ hybridization of Nrxn1, Nrxn2, Nrxn3, GluD1, and GluD2 in cerebella at P8 (A) and P15 (B). Nrxn1, Nrxn2, and Nrxn3 mRNAs were detected in the IGL. GluD2 mRNA was highly and specifically expressed in the PCs while GluD1 mRNA was not detected in the cerebellum at these stages. Scale bars, 500 μm. Cbln1, cerebellin 1; Nrxn, neurexin; GluD1, GluD2, glutamate receptor delta 1, 2; IGL, inner granule layer; PC, Purkinje cells.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S7 Fig

## In situ hybridization of Cbln1 receptors in the developing retina. (Related to ).
(A and B) In situ hybridization of Nrxn3 (A), and GluD1 and GluD2 (B) in E13 retina. Nrxn3, GluD1, or GluD2 mRNA was not detected in the developing retina. Scale bars, 100 μm. Cbln1, cerebellin 1; Nrxn3, neurexin 3; GluD1, GluD2, glutamate receptor delta 1, 2.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## Differentially expressed genes in the dorsal spinal cord of mouse embryos. (Related to ).
(XLS)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Raw Images

## Full western blot images for .
(PDF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Data

## Raw data and statistical data analysis for all the graphs.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Esther T. Stoeckli for the pMath1-eGFP-miRNA vector, members of Ji and Jaffrey laboratories for help, technical support, and comments on the manuscript. We thank the technical support from the Laboratory Animal Center and the Core Research Facilities of Southern University of Science and Technology.

## Abbreviations
Aanterior
A➔Panterior to posterior
A.U.arbitrary unit
BafA1Bafilomycin A1
CAcommissural axon
Cbln1cerebellin 1
cKOconditional knockout
CNScentral nervous system
CreCre recombinase
CTB555CTB-Alexa Fluor 555
Ctrlcontrol
Ddorsal
DCNdorsal commissural neuron
DEGdifferentially expressed genes
DIGdigoxigenin
dI1, dI2, dI3, dI4dorsal interneuron 1, 2, 3, 4
FACSfluorescence-activated cell sorting
FPfloor plate
GCgranule cell
GluD1, GluD2glutamate receptor delta 1, 2
GPNGlycyl-L-phenylalanine 2-naphthylamide
hhours
IFimmunofluorescence
IGLinner granule layer
LGNlateral geniculate nucleus
MLmolecular layer
NFMneurofilament
Nrxnneurexin
OCoptic chiasm
OEoverexpression
Pposterior
PCPurkinje cell
PFsparallel fibers
RGCretinal ganglion cell
rhCbln1recombinant human Cbln1 protein
SEMstandard error of the mean
shCtrlcontrol shRNA
shCbln1shRNA against Cbln1
shNrxnshRNA against neurexin
Ststage (Hamburger-Hamilton staging for chick development)
Vventral
VCventral commissure
 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001853.r001Decision Letter 0
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2022 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2022Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
21 Apr 2022

Dear Dr Ji, 
Thank you for submitting your manuscript entitled "Cbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regions" for consideration as a Research Article by PLOS Biology. Please accept my apologies for the delay in providing you with our decision.
Your manuscript has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editorial staff as well as by an academic editor with relevant expertise and I am writing to let you know that we would like to send your submission out for external peer review.
However, before we can send your manuscript to reviewers, we need you to complete your submission by providing the metadata that is required for full assessment. To this end, please login to Editorial Manager where you will find the paper in the 'Submissions Needing Revisions' folder on your homepage. Please click 'Revise Submission' from the Action Links and complete all additional questions in the submission questionnaire.
Once your full submission is complete, your paper will undergo a series of checks in preparation for peer review. Once your manuscript has passed the checks it will be sent out for review. To provide the metadata for your submission, please Login to Editorial Manager (https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology) within two working days, i.e. by Apr 25 2022 11:59PM.
If your manuscript has been previously reviewed at another journal, PLOS Biology is willing to work with those reviews in order to avoid re-starting the process. Submission of the previous reviews is entirely optional and our ability to use them effectively will depend on the willingness of the previous journal to confirm the content of the reports and share the reviewer identities. Please note that we reserve the right to invite additional reviewers if we consider that additional/independent reviewers are needed, although we aim to avoid this as far as possible. In our experience, working with previous reviews does save time. 
If you would like to send previous reviewer reports to us, please email me at ialvarez-garcia@plos.org to let me know, including the name of the previous journal and the manuscript ID the study was given, as well as attaching a point-by-point response to reviewers that details how you have or plan to address the reviewers' concerns. 
During the process of completing your manuscript submission, you will be invited to opt-in to posting your pre-review manuscript as a bioRxiv preprint. Visit http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/preprints for full details. If you consent to posting your current manuscript as a preprint, please upload a single Preprint PDF. 
Feel free to email us at plosbiology@plos.org if you have any queries relating to your submission.
Kind regards,
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

ialvarez-garcia@plos.org

10.1371/journal.pbio.3001853.r002Decision Letter 1
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2022 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2022Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
16 Jun 2022

Dear Dr Ji,
Thank you for your patience while your manuscript entitled "Cbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regions" was peer-reviewed at PLOS Biology and please accept my apologies for the delay in providing you with our decision. It has now been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors, an Academic Editor with relevant expertise, and by two independent reviewers. 
As you will see, the reviewers find your conclusions novel and interesting, although they also think that more work needs to be done to confirm the findings and would like you to add more details on the mechanisms underlying Cbln1 role in axon guidance. After consulting with the rest of the team and the Academic Editor, we agree with the interest of the findings and would like to invite you to submt a revision that addresses the outstanding issues.
We cannot make a decision about publication until we have seen the revised manuscript and your response to the reviewers' comments. Your revised manuscript is likely to be sent for further evaluation by all or a subset of the reviewers.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within 3 months. Please email us (plosbiology@plos.org) if you have any questions or concerns, or would like to request an extension. 
At this stage, your manuscript remains formally under active consideration at our journal; please notify us by email if you do not intend to submit a revision so that we may withdraw it.
**IMPORTANT - SUBMITTING YOUR REVISION**
Your revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. Please submit the following files along with your revised manuscript:
1. A 'Response to Reviewers' file - this should detail your responses to the editorial requests, present a point-by-point response to all of the reviewers' comments, and indicate the changes made to the manuscript. 
*NOTE: In your point-by-point response to the reviewers, please provide the full context of each review. Do not selectively quote paragraphs or sentences to reply to. The entire set of reviewer comments should be present in full and each specific point should be responded to individually, point by point.
You should also cite any additional relevant literature that has been published since the original submission and mention any additional citations in your response. 
2. In addition to a clean copy of the manuscript, please also upload a 'track-changes' version of your manuscript that specifies the edits made. This should be uploaded as a "Revised Article with Changes Highlighted" file type. 
3. Resubmission Checklist
When you are ready to resubmit your revised manuscript, please refer to this resubmission checklist: https://plos.io/Biology_Checklist
To submit a revised version of your manuscript, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' where you will find your submission record. 
Please make sure to read the following important policies and guidelines while preparing your revision and fulfil the editorial requests:
a) *PLOS Data Policy*
Please note that as a condition of publication PLOS' data policy (http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability) requires that you make available all data used to draw the conclusions arrived at in your manuscript. If you have not already done so, you must include any data used in your manuscript either in appropriate repositories, within the body of the manuscript, or as supporting information (N.B. this includes any numerical values that were used to generate graphs, histograms etc.). Please also indicate in each figure legend where the data can be found. For an example see here: http://www.plosbiology.org/article/info%3Adoi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pbio.1001908#s5
b) *Published Peer Review*
Please note while forming your response, if your article is accepted, you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

c) *Blot and Gel Data Policy*
Please provide the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare them now, if you have not already uploaded them. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements

d) *Blurb*
Please also provide a blurb which (if accepted) will be included in our weekly and monthly Electronic Table of Contents, sent out to readers of PLOS Biology, and may be used to promote your article in social media. The blurb should be about 30-40 words long and is subject to editorial changes. It should, without exaggeration, entice people to read your manuscript. It should not be redundant with the title and should not contain acronyms or abbreviations. For examples, view our author guidelines: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/revising-your-manuscript#loc-blurb
e) *Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/submission-guidelines#loc-materials-and-methods
Thank you again for your submission to our journal. We hope that our editorial process has been constructive thus far, and we welcome your feedback at any time. Please don't hesitate to contact us if you have any questions or comments.
Sincerely,
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

ialvarez-garcia@plos.org

------------------------------------------------------------------
Reviewers' comments
Rev. 1:
The authors of this study investigated a novel role for the protein Cerebellin-1 (Cbln1) in axon guidance during development. Using microarray analysis of dorsal spinal cord neurons, Cbln1 was identified as one of the differentially expressed gene candidates and verified by in situ hybridization that its mRNA is expressed both in dorsal spinal commissural neurons and the ventral floor plate. In order to study the cell autonomous (dorsal commissural neurons) and non-cell autonomous (floor plate) roles of Cbln1, a conditional flox Cbln1 mouse was generated and crossed with tissue-specific Cre lines. Using in vivo mouse genetics for loss-of-function, in utero electroporation in the chick for gain-of-function and in vitro tissue culture assays, it was shown that Cbln1 promoted commissural axon growth cell autonomously in commissural neurons and guidance by the floor plate in a non-cell autonomous manner. The investigators go on to show that Cbln1 most likely mediates these axon guidance events through it's receptor Neurexin-2. It is also interesting that Cbln1 signaling mediates axonal growth and guidance in other neuronal populations including cerebellar granule cells and retinal ganglionic cells, of which these results suggest that Cbln1 is used widely by the nervous system for axon growth and guidance besides its previously known role in synaptogenesis. This study adds new knowledge to the complex and diverse molecular mechanisms involved in axon guidance during early nervous system development. However, this study falls short of demonstrating the downstream signaling mechanism employed by Cbln1 in axon guidance. It is also not known whether the same or different signaling mechanisms are used by Cbln1 in synaptogenesis versus axon guidance, which would add substantial significance to this work.
Here are a few issues that the authors should address:
1. Higher magnifications images should also be presented of the open-book preparation for the WT and conditional mutant in Fig. 2B to better illustrate what the authors claimed that there are fewer number of commissural axons and shorter axons, especially when it is not clear in the quantification shown in Fig. 2D whether individual axons or bundled of axons are actually counted.
2. Fig. 3F and 3H show the in vitro commissural axon cultures treated with GPN to block Cbln1 exocytosis resulting in slower axon growth rate. First, the image panels in 3F does not appear to be different in terms of illustrating axon growth rate. Second, did the investigators look at whether the lack of Cbln1 signaling in the axons, especially in the in vivo conditional knockout mutants, only slow down the growth rate and that the mutant axons will eventually catch-up. This would make sense as there are other attractant and growth promoting molecules used by the dorsal spinal commissural neurons, like Netrin-DCC.
3. While this reviewer appreciates the brevity of the Discussion, in this case it might be a bit lacking. There is no discussion or speculation as to why Cbln1-Neurexin 2 is required by the dorsal commissural axons or other neurons and their axons for promoting growth and guidance when there are already known attractants and growth factors doing the same job. Is Cbln1-Neurexin 2 required for a specific subset of commissural axons as there are at least 4 different types, dI1-dI4, in the dorsal rodent spinal cord during development.
4. Finally, a minor correction is needed on Page 13 in the subsection "Cbln1-Nrxn signaling in axon development", first sentence: "esp." needs to be spelled out.
Rev. 2:
This manuscript by Han et al., identifies Cerebellin-1 as an attractive guidance cue for axons from several populations of neurons, including dorsal commissural neurons, retinal ganglion cells, and cerebellar granule neurons. Identification of a novel guidance cue is significant to the field. Previously, Cerebellin-1 had only been examined in synapse formation. Here, the authors use both mouse and chick models to demonstrate a role for Cerebellin-1 in axon guidance. They find evidence for both cell autonomous functions of the protein (promoting outgrowth in dorsal commissural neurons), as well as non-cell autonomous roles of Cerebellin-1 secretion from the floor plate and the ventral diencephalon to guide axons. Overall, the manuscript convincingly defines such a broad and conserved role. I have one suggested experiment, and several points for clarification.
1. My single experimental suggestion would be to more fully parse the cell autonomous and non-autonomous rolls of cerebellin-1 for DCNs. When Cerebellin-1 is specifically knocked out of DCNs, do they ever reach the floor plate, or do they not grow long enough to get there? Or what happens in an open book DiI assay?
Clarification Points:
1. At the beginning of the results, "differentially expressed genes" needs to be clarified by adding "over developmental time." As written now, it is quite vague.
2. Figure 1A: Motor neurons should also be highlighted in E12.5.
3. Figure 1B-D: Not really convinced by the LHx2 staining that Cbln1 is expressed in DCN (Figure 2A is more convincing). Adding zoomed insets may help?
4. Figure 3A-C: Old work from Tessier-Lavigne group showed no outgrowth of spinal explants, unless netrin was present. Was a modification to your system made? Commenting on this would be helpful.
F-H? worth using an additional inhibitor to nail this down a role for the lysosome or otherwise more clearly citing role for lysosome exocytosis in cerebellin-1 secretion from other papers for those not seeped in the field.?
5. Figure 6F: clarify in the text that this addition to wildtype, although would be interesting if rescued in knockout?
6. Figure 7C: Tag1 is marking axons of RGC---how were the regions defined, as it is unclear.
7. Figure 7D: Please include representative images.
8. Figure 7H: Why don't we see ipsilateral projection here? My understanding is that DiI labeling would also label the ipsilateral axons.
Other suggestions:
* Ibata et al shows that secreted Cbln1 binds Neurexin and diffuses along the axon. The authors show IF images of Cbln1 (Fig 3) and Neurexin (Fig 5) each localizing to commissural axons and the growth cone in cultured DCN neurons. May be useful to show if these proteins co-localize at the axon/growth cone in cultured neurons? Furthermore, does loss of Neurexin in cultured neurons decrease Cbln1 staining at the axon/growth cone?
* In the discussion, I would be interested in hearing the authors' thoughts on the other Cerebellin isoforms/any possible redundancy (or lack thereof) in axon guidance.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001853.r003Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
9 Aug 2022

AttachmentSubmitted filename: Responses to the reviewers comments_20220807.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001853.r004Decision Letter 2
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2022 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2022Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
2 Sep 2022

Dear Dr Ji,
Thank you for your patience while we considered your revised manuscript entitled "Cbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regions" for publication as a Research Article at PLOS Biology. This revised version of your manuscript has been evaluated by the PLOS Biology editors and the Academic Editor.
Based on the discussion, we are likely to accept this manuscript for publication, provided you satisfactorily address the data and other policy-related requests stated below.
As you address these items, please take this last chance to review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the cover letter that accompanies your revised manuscript.
We expect to receive your revised manuscript within two weeks. 
To submit your revision, please go to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/ and log in as an Author. Click the link labelled 'Submissions Needing Revision' to find your submission record. Your revised submission must include the following:
- a cover letter that should detail your responses to any editorial requests, if applicable, and whether changes have been made to the reference list
- a Response to Reviewers file that provides a detailed response to the reviewers' comments (if applicable)
- a track-changes file indicating any changes that you have made to the manuscript. 
NOTE: If Supporting Information files are included with your article, note that these are not copyedited and will be published as they are submitted. Please ensure that these files are legible and of high quality (at least 300 dpi) in an easily accessible file format. For this reason, please be aware that any references listed in an SI file will not be indexed. For more information, see our Supporting Information guidelines:
https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/supporting-information

*Published Peer Review History*
Please note that you may have the opportunity to make the peer review history publicly available. The record will include editor decision letters (with reviews) and your responses to reviewer comments. If eligible, we will contact you to opt in or out. Please see here for more details:

https://blogs.plos.org/plos/2019/05/plos-journals-now-open-for-published-peer-review/

*Press*
Should you, your institution's press office or the journal office choose to press release your paper, please ensure you have opted out of Early Article Posting on the submission form. We ask that you notify us as soon as possible if you or your institution is planning to press release the article.
*Protocols deposition*
To enhance the reproducibility of your results, we recommend that if applicable you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io, where a protocol can be assigned its own identifier (DOI) such that it can be cited independently in the future. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you have any questions.
Sincerely,
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor,
ialvarez-garcia@plos.org,
PLOS Biology
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ETHICS STATEMENT:
-- Please include the license number used.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
DATA POLICY: IMPORTANT - PLEASE READ
You may be aware of the PLOS Data Policy, which requires that all data be made available without restriction: http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/data-availability. For more information, please also see this editorial: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001797

Note that we do not require all raw data. Rather, we ask that all individual quantitative observations that underlie the data summarized in the figures and results of your paper be made available in one of the following forms:
1) Supplementary files (e.g., excel). Please ensure that all data files are uploaded as 'Supporting Information' and are invariably referred to (in the manuscript, figure legends, and the Description field when uploading your files) using the following format verbatim: S1 Data, S2 Data, etc. Multiple panels of a single or even several figures can be included as multiple sheets in one excel file that is saved using exactly the following convention: S1_Data.xlsx (using an underscore).
2) Deposition in a publicly available repository. Please also provide the accession code or a reviewer link so that we may view your data before publication. 
Regardless of the method selected, please ensure that you provide the individual numerical values that underlie the summary data displayed in the following figure panels as they are essential for readers to assess your analysis and to reproduce it:
Fig. 2D, E, H, I; Fig. 3B, C, E, G, H; Fig. Fig. 4B, C, F, G, I; Fig. 5D, F; fig. 6E, H; Fig. 7E, L; Fig. S2B, C, F-H, J, K; Fig. S3A, C; Fig. S4C, E, G, H and Fig. S5B-D, F
NOTE: the numerical data provided should include all replicates AND the way in which the plotted mean and errors were derived (it should not present only the mean/average values).
Please also ensure that figure legends in your manuscript include information on WHERE THE UNDERLYING DATA CAN BE FOUND, and ensure your supplemental data file/s has a legend.
Please ensure that your Data Statement in the submission system accurately describes where your data can be found.
**Please also make the data you have deposited in GEO with accession number GSE169448 publicly available at this stage.
------------------------------------------------------------------------
SPECIES INDICATED IN THE ABSTRACT? 
- Please note that per journal policy, the model system/species studied should be clearly stated in the abstract of your manuscript.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
BLOT AND GEL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
We require the original, uncropped and minimally adjusted images supporting all blot and gel results reported in an article's figures or Supporting Information files. We will require these files before a manuscript can be accepted so please prepare and upload them now. Please carefully read our guidelines for how to prepare and upload this data: https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001853.r005Decision Letter 3
Alvarez-GarciaInesSenior Editor© 2022 Ines Alvarez-Garcia2022Ines Alvarez-Garciahttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version3
27 Sep 2022

Dear Dr Ji,
Thank you for the submission of your revised Research Article entitled "Cbln1 regulates axon growth and guidance in multiple neural regions" for publication in PLOS Biology. On behalf of my colleagues and the Academic Editor, Franck Polleux, I am happy to say that we can in principle accept your manuscript for publication, provided you address any remaining formatting and reporting issues. These will be detailed in an email you should receive within 2-3 business days from our colleagues in the journal operations team; no action is required from you until then. Please note that we will not be able to formally accept your manuscript and schedule it for publication until you have completed any requested changes.
Please take a minute to log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pbiology/, click the "Update My Information" link at the top of the page, and update your user information to ensure an efficient production process.
PRESS
We frequently collaborate with press offices. If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper at this point, to enable them to help maximise its impact. If the press office is planning to promote your findings, we would be grateful if they could coordinate with biologypress@plos.org. If you have previously opted in to the early version process, we ask that you notify us immediately of any press plans so that we may opt out on your behalf.
We also ask that you take this opportunity to read our Embargo Policy regarding the discussion, promotion and media coverage of work that is yet to be published by PLOS. As your manuscript is not yet published, it is bound by the conditions of our Embargo Policy. Please be aware that this policy is in place both to ensure that any press coverage of your article is fully substantiated and to provide a direct link between such coverage and the published work. For full details of our Embargo Policy, please visit http://www.plos.org/about/media-inquiries/embargo-policy/.
Many congratulations and thanks again for choosing PLOS Biology for publication and supporting Open Access publishing. We look forward to publishing your study. 
Sincerely, 
Ines
--
Ines Alvarez-Garcia, PhD
Senior Editor
PLOS Biology

ialvarez-garcia@plos.org