pmcMater Today BioMater Today Bio3810mtbio101757228Materials Today Bio2590-0064ElsevierPMC9747511PMC9747511.1974751197475113652415110.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100514S2590-0064(22)00312-X1005141Full Length ArticlepH-driven continuous stem cell production with enhanced regenerative capacity from polyamide/chitosan surfaces
YenChia-Hsiangf04548042@ntu.edu.tw ChengNai-Chennccheng@ntu.edu.tw HsiehHao-Yinghaoying@ntu.edu.tw TsaiChing-Wen1909007@narlabs.org.tw LeeAn-Lid08548011@ntu.edu.tw LuChien-Yir09528026@ntu.edu.tw ChenYin-Tzuf07528032@ntu.edu.tw YoungTai-Horngthyoung@ntu.edu.tw aDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine and College of Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 1, Jen-Ai Rd., Taipei, 100, TaiwanbDepartment of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital and College of Medicine, No. 7, Chung-Shan S Rd., Taipei, 100, TaiwancDepartment of Dentistry, National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7, Chung-Shan S Rd., Taipei, 100, TaiwandTaiwan Instrument Research Institute, National Applied Research Laboratories, No. 20, R&D Rd. VI, Hsinchu Science Park, Hsinchu, 300, TaiwaneDepartment of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, MacKay Memorial Hospital, No. 92, Sec. 2, Chung-Shan N Rd., Taipei, 104, TaiwanfDepartment of Medicine, MacKay Medical College, No. 46, Sec. 3, Zhong-Zheng Rd., New Taipei City, 252, TaiwangDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, National Taiwan University Hospital, No. 7, Chung-Shan S Rd., Taipei, 100, Taiwan∗Corresponding author. Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine and College of Engineering, National Taiwan University, No. 1, Sec. 1, Jen-Ai Rd., Taipei, 100, Taiwan. thyoung@ntu.edu.tw1These authors contributed equally to the work.
2202307122022184229011005141882022161120222122022071220221412202201072023© 2022 The Authors2022https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) have raised significant interest for their potential therapeutic applications in regenerative medicine. However, ASCs usually suffer from decreased pluripotency and functional plasticity during in vitro expansion. Herein, this study sought to develop a continuous cell production system that can mass-produce ASCs with sustained regenerative capacity. The strategy was blending pH-responsive chitosan (CS) with polyamide-66 (PA) to generate combined surface properties with controllable cell growth/detachment ability to achieve a repeated cell production process. From the collected data, all the polymer blends were capable of completing a minimum of four consecutive production cycles, wherein the PA17CS blend (PA:CS 1:7) outperformed with respect to the working effectiveness (average cell detachment ratio 88%) and the cell viability. Compared to the trypsin-based method, ASCs harvested from PA17CS exhibited superior stemness characteristics along with SDF-1-mediated CXCR4 chemotactic response for stem cell homing. Moreover, injection of ASCs generated from PA17CS blend could more effectively induce neovascularization and protect skin ﬂaps during an ischemic injury in a rat model.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•Polyamide-66/Chitosan (PA/CS) serves as a continuous cell production platform.
•The periodic cell expansion/detachment is driven by the precise pH control.
•The harvested stem cells exhibit superior stemness characteristics (in vitro).
•The harvested stem cells showed prominent tissue regeneration ability (in vivo).
•This platform holds great biological potential depending on the input cell types.

## Keywords
pH-responsive surfacePolyamide-66/chitosanContinuous cell productionSDF-1/CXCR4 axisCell therapypmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND1

## Introduction
Adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs), a subset of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) from a reliable source of fat tissues, have raised significant interest for their potential therapeutic applications in regenerative medicine [ , ]. ASCs meet the criteria for ideal stem cells: they are abundant, have a minimally invasive harvest procedure, have multi-differentiation lineage pathways, can be safely and effectively transplanted to either autologous or allogeneic hosts, and can be mass-produced in accordance with good manufacturing practice (GMP) guidelines [ ]. Accumulating evidence reveals that the transplantation of ASCs into a wound bed accelerates ischemic tissue repair through differentiation and pro-angiogenic paracrine activity [ , ]. In addition, biomaterial-associated strategies have been shown to enhance the therapeutic capacity of ASCs in terms of differentiation, growth factor secretion, and stromal-derived factor-1 (SDF-1)-mediated C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4) chemotactic response [ , ]. Particularly, the SDF-1/CXCR4 axis plays a key role in intravenously homing of transplanted MSCs to the injury site, where the local SDF-1 levels are up-regulated. This stem cell mobilization also overcomes the low efficiency of cell retention in local implantation [ , , ]. Therefore, a system with the ability to mass-produce ASCs with CXCR4 overexpression could significantly facilitate tissue regeneration.
Over the past decade, large-scale continuous cell production systems have been emerging as an alternative to the conventional batch-type culture owing to the exponential advancement in the cell therapy industry [ , ]. Nevertheless, the critical challenge in stem cell therapy is maintaining primitive pluripotency during in vitro cell expansion, where the long-term passages of MSCs have shown declined functional plasticity [ , ]. Thus, to overcome this challenge, this study sought to develop a continuous cell production system (that includes the cell expansion/harvest phase) that ensures sustained regenerative capacity in the produced stem cells. The hypothesis of this study was that modifying the pH-responsive chitosan (CS) may contribute to a controllable culture surface for reversible cell growth/detachment and simultaneously modulate cellular protein expressions. CS is a naturally derived cationic polysaccharide that is composed of randomly distributed D-glucosamine (deacetylated units) and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (acetylated units) linked by β-(1,4) glycosidic bonds with a unique isoelectric point that appears at the restricted physiological pH (pH 7.4) [ , ]. In our previous works, we demonstrated that CS could control cell attachment/detachment in response to subtle pH variations to recover cultured cells without additional enzymatic treatments and extensive washing steps [ , , ]. Moreover, numerous studies have documented the enhanced pluripotency of MSCs by culturing them on CS or CS-based substrates [ , , ]. These established facts imply that CS is an advantageous candidate for the base material in a continuous cell production system.
Recently, the cell-biomaterial interaction has been recognized to play an essential role in mediating cell functions [ ]. The properties of a biomaterial can be improved by many techniques, such as chemical modification, protein coating, and polymer blends. Biomaterials have the potential to design binary polymer blends with desired clinical functions while preserving the advantages of each material to control cell behaviors. Polyamide-66 (PA) is a synthetic polymer that bears a resemblance to collagen in its backbone and has excellent stability and biocompatibility [ ]. As such, the addition of PA as a constituent material in a CS-based continuous cell production system would promote cell adherence and growth, thereby complementing the drawbacks of CS. Although CS has been blended with PA for the study of the biological effects in cell culture [ , ], the application of this blend utilizing their pH-responsiveness has not yet been demonstrated. The current study thus investigated blending CS with PA in an appropriate composition ratio to generate combined surface properties with pH-controllable cell growth/detachment ability to achieve repeated cell production.
According to our design principle, each cycle of cell production comprises two phases: cell expansion and cell harvesting, and the phase transition is governed by the medium pH adjustment. As for the role in polymer blends, CS component not only dictates cell harvesting by diminishing cell adhesion on its de-protonated surface but also regulates multiple intracellular pluripotency-related signaling pathways during the culture period, whereas the PA component is responsible for cell growth and proliferation without being affected by the environmental pH alterations. In this study, we demonstrated that a pH-driven continuous cell production system could be successfully constructed via the synergistic effects of each component in the designed polymer blend. In addition, ASCs harvested from this novel production system were compared with those from the trypsin-based passage method with respect to the in vitro characterization of cell stemness along with CXCR4 expressions and the in vivo tissue regeneration capacity in a rat ischemic skin flap model.

2

## Materials and methods
2.1

## Materials and sample names
Chitosan (CS; 83% degree of deacetylation, molecular weight Mw 132 kDalton with polydispersity index of 1.197) and polyamide-66 (PA; Mw 14 kDalton with polydispersity index of 1.213) was supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) as constituent polymers to form polymer blends. Formic acid purchased from Sigma-Aldrich was served as a carrier solvent for proper mixings. The degree of deacetylation of CS was determined by NMR spectroscopy ( ), and the polymer molecular weight with polydispersity index was resolved by gel permeation chromatography (GPC; -1&S2-2).
Sample polymers were named as follows: PA15CS stands for blend consists of PA to CS with content ratio 1:5 prepared using formic acid, PA16CS for blend consists of PA to CS with content ratio 1:6 prepared using formic acid, PA17CS for blend consists of PA to CS with content ratio 1:7 prepared using formic acid. If necessary, additional information is provided in the text or in the figure captions.

2.2

## Preparation and characterization of polymeric blends
PA was dissolved in formic acid to prepare 10% (w/v) PA solution. CS was dissolved in 3% (v/v) formic acid to prepare 0.5% (w/v) CS solution. To obtain various blend solutions designated as PA15CS, PA16CS, and PA17CS, different volume of 0.5% (w/v) CS solution was added to 30 ​μl of 10% (w/v) PA solution and 10 ​ml formic acid and stirred for 10 ​min on a magnetic stirrer before the coating process. All the film-forming solutions were uniformly spread onto the TCPS (Tissue culture polystyrene; Corning, NY, USA) by solvent-casting method and dried at 60 ​°C overnight. Next, the blended surfaces were neutralized with 0.5 ​N sodium hydroxide (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 ​min and then washed thoroughly with deionized water before sterilizing under ultraviolet light for 1 ​h.
The chemical structure analyses of the polymer blends were characterized by Attenuated total reflection/Fourier transform infrared (ATR/FTIR) imaging system (Nicolet Summit Pro, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). All spectra were obtained in the frequency range of 600–4000 ​cm−1 with a nominal resolution of 4 ​cm−1.

2.3

## Morphology study
The surface microstructure was observed under a scanning electron microscope (SEM; TM3000, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) after gold sputtering of specimens 0.5 0.5 ​cm in size was made with an ultra-thin conductive coating layer. For cell morphological examination, the adherent cells on the blended substrates after 48 ​h of incubation were stabilized by fixing with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 ​min at 4 ​°C. After thoroughly washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), the samples were dehydrated through a graded concentration of ethanol (30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100%; 20 ​min each) and freeze-dried. The specimens were then gold-sputtered in a vacuum environment and analyzed by SEM.

2.4

## Human ASC isolation and medium preparation
ASCs were isolated from the subcutaneous fat tissue of four non-smoking, non-diabetic female donors with an average age of 45 years old (32–57 years old) and an average body mass index of 24.6 (21.0–26.6) as described previously [ ]. The Research Ethics Committee of National Taiwan University Hospital approved the study protocol (NTUH-REC No. 201303038RINB) and written informed consent was obtained from all donors. ASCs from four donors were pooled to become a single population based on the similar surface marker expression and differentiation potential presented in each ASC clone. Small deposits of subcutaneous fat tissue were finely minced and washed using PBS, then digested using collagenase type I (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for 60 ​min. Fetal bovine serum (FBS; Biological Industries, Cromwell, CT, USA) was added to inhibit collagenase activity before the cell suspension was filtered and centrifuged. Pellets were suspended and plated on TCPS in medium consisting of Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium: Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F-12) (Hyclone, Logan, UT, USA) and supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco), and 1 ​ng/ml fibroblast growth factor-2 (R&D systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Cells were incubated in a humidified chamber with 5% CO2 at 37 ​°C, and the culture medium was replenished every 2–3 days. Cells employed in this work have been well characterized in our previous studies [ ]. Upon reaching 90% confluence, third-passage ASCs were trypsinized from the TCPS and seeded onto blended substrates at an initial density about 1.6 104 ​cells/cm2 for the subsequent experiments. The culture medium for experiments was DMEM-high glucose (DMEM-HG; Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco). The pH control was adjusted by the quantity of sodium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) adding into medium solution, 600 ​mg/L for pH 6.99 and 3600 ​mg/L for pH 7.65.

2.5

## Cell detachment assay and cell detachment ratio
The cell detachment assay was slightly modified from the preceding work [ ]. In brief, the pH-driven continuous cell production cycle is composed of the expansion phase and the harvest phase. Cells were cultured on the blended substrates at pH 6.99 for 48 ​h in the expansion phase and followed by medium replacement with pH raised to pH 7.65 for 2 ​h in the harvest phase. The performance of continuous cell production was observed for four repeated cycles under a phase-contrast microscope (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Cell numbers of the detached and the remaining adherent cells on the blended substrates were determined by CyQUANT assay kit (C35006; Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Cell detachment ratio was calculated as the previous reported method [ ].

2.6

## Cell viability
Cell viability study was determined by Alamar blue assay (DAL1100; Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's recommendation. Cells were plated onto different blended surfaces at pH 6.99 for the indicated time duration. Subsequent to the cultivation period, cells were replenished with fresh medium containing diluted Alamar blue reagent (10%) for additional 3 ​h in a humidified chamber with 5% at 37 ​°C. Afterwards, the fluorometric readouts (Ex/Em: 560 nm/590 ​nm) were measured using a microplate reader (SpectraMax M2e; Molecular Devices, San Jose, CA, USA).

2.7

## Flow cytometry analysis
To determine the expression of cell surface antigens, the samples were analyzed using a flow cytometer (FACSVerse; BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) and BD FACSuite software (BD Biosciences). In brief, about 1.0 106 ​cells were dissociated as single cell suspension, and incubated with the following antibodies: PE-conjugated Mouse Anti-Human CD31 (#303105; BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA), FITC-conjugated Mouse Anti-Human CD34 (#560942; BD Pharmingen), PE-conjugated Mouse Anti-Human CD44 (#397503; BioLegend), PE-conjugated Mouse Anti-Human CD73 (#344003; BioLegend), PE-conjugated Mouse Anti-Human CD90 (#561970; BD Pharmingen), and PE-conjugated Mouse Anti-Human CD166 (#343903; BioLegend). After PBS washing, the samples were acquired and analyzed by flow cytometry. Appropriate isotype controls were kept to eliminate non-specific staining. Positive cells were determined as proportion of the population with fluorescence intensity greater than 95% of the isotype controls.

2.8

## Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from cells using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The complementary DNA (cDNA) was applied as a template for the PCR assay and synthesized by SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sequences of gene-specific primers are listed in . Quantitative expression of mRNA was performed by Maxima SYBR Green Master Mix (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and followed by the detection using ABI 7900HT Fast Real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA). The relative quantity of gene expression was normalized to endogenous control Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and determined by the comparative CT method.

2.9

## Assessment of the differentiation potential
Prior to the induction procedure, ASCs derived from the TCPS and the blended surface were respectively re-seeded onto new TCPS plates and incubated with an appropriate medium containing selective lineage-specific induction factors. Adipogenic differentiation was induced in DMEM-HG supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, 500 ​μM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX; Sigma-Aldrich), 1 ​μM dexamethasone (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 ​μM insulin (Sigma-Aldrich), and 400 ​μM indomethacin (Sigma-Aldrich). On day 10, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 ​h and stained with Oil Red O solution (Sigma-Aldrich) to observe lipid droplets. Osteogenic differentiation was induced in DMEM-HG supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, 10 ​nM dexamethasone, 50 ​μM ascorbic acid-2-phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich), and 10 ​mM β-glycerophosphate (Sigma-Aldrich). On day 10, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 ​h and stained with 2%, pH 4.2 Alizarin Red S solution (Sigma-Aldrich) to observe the mineralization.

2.10

## Senescence and proliferation assay
For evaluation of the senescence marker, the fixed cells were incubated with the senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) chromogenic substrate X-gal in a buffer at pH 6.0 in the absence of CO2 at 37 ​°C. After the staining, the fixed cells were washed with PBS and viewed by a phase-contrast microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The percentage of cells with blue sedimentation in the cytoplasm was then calculated.
The cell proliferation ability was conducted by 5-Bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation. Cells were incubated with labeling medium containing 10 ​μM BrdU (ab142567; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) for 24 ​h at 37 ​°C, 5% CO2. After removal of the labeling solution and washed by PBS, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100. DNA was denatured by an incubation with 2 ​M HCl for 30 ​min at 37 ​°C. Non-specific staining was blocked with 0.1% bovine serum albumin (BSA; Hycell, Taipei, Taiwan) for 30 ​min at room temperature. The cells were then incubated in anti-BrdU primary antibody (Bu20a; #5292; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) with dilution of 1:1000 overnight at 4 ​°C. Thoroughly washed with PBS, cells were incubated with the Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, West Grove, PA, USA) and counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA) for 1 ​h at room temperature in the dark. The immunofluorescence was detected using a fluorescent microscope (Leica).

2.11

## Western blot analysis
The protein expression was determined by western blot analysis. In brief, the sample cells were lysed by radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA; Roche, Basel, Switzerland) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors, then resolved by 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), and blotted onto 0.45 ​μm polyvinylidene fluoride membranes (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA). The membranes were subsequently blocked in 5% BSA and probed with primary antibodies: anti-Nanog (#4903; Cell Signaling Technology), anti-Oct4 (#2750S; Cell Signaling Technology), anti-Sox2 (#14962S; Cell Signaling Technology), anti-CXCR4 (ab124824; Abcam), and anti-Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH, ab181603; Abcam) at 4 ​°C overnight. After extensive washing, the membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxide-conjugated secondary antibodies (HRP-conjugated 2nd antibodies): goat anti-rabbit IgG (ab6721; Abcam) and goat anti-mouse IgG (ab6789; Abcam) for 1 ​h at room temperature, then developed using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL; Merck Millipore). Immuno-reactive bands were detected by UVP BioSpectrum 810 imaging system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed by VisionWorks LS software (UVP, CA, USA). The protein expression levels were normalized to GAPDH as an internal loading control.

2.12

## Measurement of secreted growth factors
The concentration of angiogenesis-related growth factors VEGF and HGF in ASC-conditioned medium were analyzed using ELISA kits (R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Factor concentrations were determined in medium samples collected from independent cell culture plates. The collected medium samples were centrifuged and frozen prior to the further measurement. Data were expressed as the total release of factors at the time of harvest.

2.13

## In vitro tube-formation assay
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs; purchased from Bio-chiefdom International, New Taipei City, Taiwan) were plated on the polymerized Matrigel pre-coated μ-slide (#81506; ibidi, Gräfelfing, Germany) at a density of 7000 ​cells/well. HUVECs were treated with the pooled conditioned medium collected from the independent cell cultures of each group, respectively. Formation of the tube-like structures was visualized by a phase-contrast microscope after 8 ​h incubation at 37 ​°C, 5% CO2. The number of nodes and meshes per image were detected and analyzed using the Angiogenesis Analyzer Module of ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, USA).

2.14

## Immunofluorescent staining
For immunocytochemical (ICC) staining, the harvested ASCs from each cycle were replated onto TCPS for 24 ​h. Afterwards, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 ​min at 4 ​°C and blocked in 3% BSA for 30 ​min at room temperature. The primary antibody against CXCR4 (ab124824; Abcam) was incubated overnight at 4 ​°C. After PBS washing, cells were incubated with the Cy3-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) and counterstained with Phalloidin (ab176756; Abcam) and DAPI (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 1 ​h at room temperature in the dark. These immuno-stained cells were captured using a fluorescent microscope (Leica).

2.15

## SDF-1 mediated chemotaxis
The chemotactic migratory ability of polymer blend-derived ASCs from different production cycles was assessed by transwell chemotaxis assay (pore size: 8 ​μm; Corning). Briefly, about 1.0 104 ​cells in 150 ​μl medium were seeded into each transwell insert, and 600 ​μl medium with 50 ​ng/ml SDF-1 (SRP4391; Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the lower chamber to serve as the chemotactic agent. After 24 ​h incubation, the adhered cells on the lower chamber were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with DAPI (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 1 ​h at room temperature in the dark. Images were acquired using a fluorescent microscope (Leica) and semi-quantified by ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health).

2.16

## In vivo rat ischemic skin flap study
Male Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats (8 weeks old, 270–300 ​g body weight) were purchased from BioLASCO (Taipei, Taiwan) and were housed in an environmentally controlled room, at consistent temperature and humidity, on a 12:12 ​h light/dark cycle, with food and water ad libitum. The rats were randomly divided into three groups (PBS, TCPS, and PACS), depending on the experimental treatment. At least five rats were used for each group. All the conducted animal procedures were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of National Taiwan University (Ethic approval No. 20170495). On the day of surgery, rats were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of 2% (w/v) pentobarbital sodium (40 ​mg/kg). The modified McFarlane flap model in the rat dorsum (same position in each rat) was performed as previously reported [ , ]. Briefly, the three-sided full-thickness skin flap (2.5 ​cm 9 ​cm) was created on the dorsal skin of rats by raising the skin from the scapular tip to the iliac crest using sharp dissection with scissors, wherein the right and left sacral arteries were excised. After the flap was elevated, a piece of Tegaderm membrane (3 ​M, Maplewood, MN, USA) was adjusted to the flap size and placed beneath the flap as a barrier to prevent neovascularization from the wound bed. Finally, the flap was sutured in situ to the surrounding wound edge using 4–0 nylon. The skin flap area was divided into the distal (I), intermediate (II), and proximal (III) zones, each of equal size. On day 1 postoperatively, ASCs harvested from TCPS or PA/CS blend (2.4 106 ​cells) in 1.2 ​ml of PBS were administered intravenously through the lateral tail vein for targeted cell therapy. The negative control group received only PBS injection. Skin necrosis at distal flap gradually developed postoperatively and their macroscopic changes were recorded on postoperative days 0, 7, 14, and 21 using a digital camera. The survival area was evidenced by pink and soft skin, whereas the necrotic area was evidenced by scabbing, hardening, and dark nidus. The percentage of necrotic area in the entire skin flap was semi-quantified by ImageJ software (National Institutes of Health). On day 21 postoperatively, all animals were euthanized and the samples (0.5 ​cm 0.5 ​cm) of central tissue from zone II and III were collected, post-fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 ​h, and embedded in paraffin wax for transverse sectioning for the histological examination.

2.17

## Histological examination
For immunohistochemical (IHC) staining, the paraffin-embedded tissue samples were firstly sectioned to a thickness of 10 ​μm and mounted on glass slides. Then, these sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated through a graded ethanol series. After washing, the sections were blocked in 3% hydrogen peroxide and treated with sodium citrate buffer (10 ​mM sodium citrate, 0.05% tween 20, pH 6.0) for retrieval for 30 ​min at 95 ​°C. After blocking in 5% BSA for 1 ​h at room temperature, the sections were incubated with primary antibodies against CD31 (ab28364; Abcam) overnight at 4 ​°C. Next, the sections were incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. Also, hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain was performed to observe neovascularization and tissue morphology. The digital images of these stained sections were taken using an image-acquisition system (Olympus) and were analyzed using Motic DSAssistant software (Motic VM 3.0).

2.18

## Statistical analysis
All measurements were shown as the mean standard deviation (Mean S.D). Statistical significance was evaluated using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey's post-hoc test (p < .05 was considered significant).

3

## Results
3.1

## Material characterization
The molecular construction of the blended substrates was characterized by FTIR spectroscopy. In , the prominent peaks for PA at around 3299 and 2932 ​cm−1 were attributed to N–H and CH2 stretching, respectively. Other significant peaks observed at 1634 and 1531 ​cm−1 appeared due to the Amide I band/carbonyl stretching vibration and the Amide II band/CH2 asymmetric deformation in the PA unit, respectively. Meanwhile, those between 1070 and 1025 ​cm−1 of the CS spectra indicated the presence of saccharide structures. As for the polymer blends PA15CS, PA16CS, and PA17CS, they displayed collective characteristic peaks of their pristine polymers (PA and CS). The quantitative analyses revealed that the unique peak ratio of Saccharide (from CS) to Amide I (from PA) increased as the content of CS in the blends increased ( ). These FTIR results confirmed the successful preparation of PA/CS blends. In addition, no apparent frequency shifts were observed in the characteristic peaks of blended systems with respect to the individual pristine materials, indicating that there was no bond formation or strong chemical interaction within the blends. 

3.2

## Observation of surface microstructures and cell morphologies
The SEM graphs of the microstructures and the cell attachment behaviors on blended surfaces are displayed in A. Each substrate was denoted by a lowercase letter in an alphabetical order (a-e). The neat PA surface (a) exhibited a tightly-dispersed plaque-like landscape, whereas the neat CS surface (b) exhibited a plain appearance lacking complex topographic features. After the incorporation of CS, the domain size of plaques from the neat PA tended to shrink, and void spaces were generated on the blended surfaces (c-e), which formed a particulate structure. After 48 ​h of incubation, the primary human ASC on the neat PA surface (a) presented a well-flattened central mass with cytoplasmic webbing, whereas that on the neat CS surface (b) maintained a spherical morphology with spike-like protrusions of filopodia, indicating that it was still at the early stage of the cell adhesion process. However, cells on PA15CS, PA16CS, and PA17CS showed elongated, spindle-like morphologies with progressively extended filopodia (c-e). It was noted that the cells on those blended surfaces were spread and occupied a bunch of particulate regions, whereas the flattened cells on the neat PA surface only resided within a single plaque region. 
As the content of CS further increased, the micro-domain of the evenly-scattered particulates on those blended surfaces significantly decreased in size from 1.3 0.1 ​μm to 0.8 0.1 ​μm in diameter ( B). That is, following the addition of CS, an increase in the amount of the particulates per unit area was observed. Presumably, this surface heterogeneity of the prepared PA/CS blends may result in distinct production performance.

3.3

## Continuous cell production on the blended surfaces
For the achievement of continuous cell production, the prepared PA/CS blends were examined using the modified cell detachment assay developed in the previous study [ ], as illustrated in A. Each cycle of cell production comprised two phases: cell expansion at pH 6.99 for 48 ​h and cell harvest at pH 7.65 for 2 ​h. The phase-contrast images revealed that the majority of the adherent ASCs were detached from the substrates at the end of each harvest phase. As the pH control timeline went further, the cultured cells were capable of completing a minimum of four consecutive cycles of cell expansion/harvesting on the blended surfaces. Note that the remaining cells on PA18CS (PA:CS 1:8) failed to expand toward confluence after the first harvest phase (data not shown), we accordingly omitted this group from the investigation. Although the cell number (or the extent of confluence) at the end of the expansion phase revealed a gradual increase with respect to the cycle increment within the first four cycles, it declined markedly in the fifth cycle ( B). Thus, this study mainly concentrated on the first four cycles for property screening. 
Subsequently, for the determination of the optimal blending ratio for application, the overall performance of each blend was assessed from two aspects: the cell detachment ratio during the harvest phase and the cell viability during the expansion phase. On the whole, as the cycle number increased, the cell detachment ratio of all blends complied with the positive trend and reached approximately 90% in the fourth cycle ( C). However, the dependence of cell detachment ratio on each cycle varied in different blends. The measured detachment ratio in each cycle was all over 70% in PA16CS and PA17CS, whereas those in the first two cycles of PA15CS were below 50%. The average value was around 88% for four cycles in PA17CS, indicating its stability and abundancy in production (data not shown). Moreover, the dependence of the blending ratio on the cell detachment rate was analyzed from a single-cell perspective using the time-lapse technique ( ). During the harvest phase at pH 7.65, the adherent cells on the PA17CS immediately responded to the pH-driven cell detachment process in the early period (0–3 ​min). In contrast, those cells on the PA15CS and PA16CS did not show apparent movements within the first 15 ​min, but slowly detached in the later period of 30–45 ​min and 15–30 ​min, respectively. With regard to the cell health status, the fluorescence measurement of Alamar blue confirmed that PA17CS exhibited superior cell viability amongst all sample blends during the expansion period for 24, 48, and 72 ​h ( D). As a result, the PA17CS (PA:CS 1:7) blend was adopted as the experimental group in the following experiments, in which a series of quality inspections were carried out to assess the harvested cells after four production cycles from the pH-driven continuous cell production on PA17CS and the conventional cell passage method on TCPS.

3.4

## Phenotypic analyses of ASCs after four production cycles
The phenotypic expression of ASCs after four production cycles from PA17CS and those of their counterparts that were constantly cultured and sub-passaged on TCPS were analyzed. The growth media used for both cultures throughout the production cycles was DMEM-HG. For surface antigens, both groups were negative for the hematopoietic markers CD31 and CD34 and were positive for the MSC-related markers CD44, CD73, CD90, and CD166 ( A). This characterization was in line with the standard criteria proposed by the International Society for Cellular Therapy (ISCT) [ ]. According to previous reports [ , ], the differentiation potential of MSCs attenuated as the in vitro passage number increased. Despite this probable issue being taken into account in this study, the transcriptional activity of adipogenic and osteogenic marker genes (Ppar-γ and Runx2) was highly expressed in PA17CS-derived ASCs compared to their counterparts harvested from TCPS ( B; left panel). Moreover, the degrees of adipogenic and osteogenic differentiation were respectively evaluated by the staining of lipid droplets and calcium deposits following the application of appropriate induction media ( B; right panel). Consistent with the qRT-PCR results, the enhanced differentiation ability of PA17CS-derived ASCs was visualized by extensive pigments of both dyes. The formation of red oil droplets in the Oil Red O staining confirmed the adipogenic phenotype, whereas the Alizarin Red S staining detected the mineralization in the osteogenic phenotype. 
Two highlighted challenges for MSC-based therapy are the senescence issue and the replicative exhaustion after accruing numerous passages [ ]. These adverse effects forced stem cells to lose their regenerative capacity and increased cellular dysfunction, which resulted in reduced efficacy after clinical administration. Therefore, the evaluation of cellular senescence and proliferation in the PA17CS-derived cells was essential. First, SA-β-gal was assayed to label the senescent cells that underwent irreversible growth arrest in each culture ( C). Significantly less SA-β-gal-positive cells were found in the PA17CS group (2.4 1.7%) than in the TCPS group (15.7 2.9%), which indicates that the cells harvested from the blended surface were more resistant to the arising of senescence process. Second, the concern of replicative exhaustion was examined through the incorporation of the thymidine analog BrdU ( D). As BrdU incorporates into DNA during the S-phase of the cell cycle, cell proliferation could be detected by probing this substitute immunologically in the replicating cells [ ]. In the immunofluorescence, BrdU signals revealed robust proliferation in cells grown on PA17CS despite experiencing four production cycles; in contrast, weak signals were detectable in cells that constantly passaged on TCPS.

3.5

## Regenerative potential of ASCs after four production cycles
Regarding the pluripotency of stem cells and their propensity for self-renewal, the activity of transcription factors Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2, which can animate a multitude of pluripotent processes [ ], was identified in each culture condition after four production cycles. The ASCs raised on PA17CS exhibited higher levels of mRNA and protein expressions of Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2 compared to their counterparts cultured on TCPS ( A&B, respectively). In addition, angiogenesis is a critical element of many physiologic processes such as wound healing, and MSCs are known to have the potency to promote angiogenesis via paracrine secretion and contribute to the therapeutic effects in ischemic diseases [ , ]. Therefore, the activity of two key angiogenesis regulators, VEGF and HGF, was determined in terms of gene expression and secretion profile. It is evident from the qRT-PCR results ( C) that the mRNA levels of those angiogenesis regulators were significantly higher in the PA17CS group, with 2.8 0.4-fold and 11.0 0.4-fold increases relative to the TCPS group. For the comparison of growth factor secretion, the amount of the VEGF and HGF in ASC-conditioned media was measured using ELISA. The results ( D) showed remarkable angiogenic cytokine release in the medium collected from the continuous production platform compared to that from the TCPS culture, indicating that the harvested ASCs from PA17CS may significantly facilitate tissue repair through the induction of vascularization. 

3.6

## In vitro HUVEC tube-formation assay
For further testing of the angiogenic effect exerted by PA17CS-cultured ASCs, the HUVEC tube-formation assay was employed as an in vitro tool to initiate meshed pseudo-capillary networks in endothelial cells. Conditioned media collected from each group were applied to the HUVEC culture, and the vascular webbing structures were observed for 8 ​h ( A). The tube formation of HUVECs was quantified through counting of the total number of branching nodes and meshes per power field. Compared to the group that received conditioned medium from TCPS-cultured ASCs, the PA17CS-cultured group developed significantly more pseudo-capillary networks (202.0 20.8 vs. 428.0 19.1 for nodes; 19.5 2.4 vs. 54 5.6 for meshes, respectively; B). These observations implied that the continuous cell production platform was capable of producing ASCs with strengthened neovascularization ability. 

3.7

## SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling axis
The critical role of the SDF-1/CXCR4 signaling axis in tissue engineering, such as its guidance of stem cell homing, has been extensively discussed, [ , , ]. Given that the localized SDF-1 levels are upregulated at the injury site in response to the tissue hypoxia and damage, overexpression of CXCR4 in MSCs appears to be an effective strategy to accelerate mobilization toward the ischemic area [ , ]. In this section, the differential CXCR4 expression in ASCs harvested in each cycle on PA17CS was determined by gel electrophoresis, immunofluorescence, and chemotaxis assays. As the cycle number increased, the expression level of CXCR4 tended to elevate progressively and reached a significantly greater extent in the fourth cycle ( A&B). Combined with the previous findings ( B&C), it was noteworthy that the fourth cycle in PA17CS-culture not only delivered a high-yield production but also performed superior CXCR4 expressions of ASC, as compared to other separated cycles. C reveals the ASC chemotactic response in the presence of SDF-1 (50 ​ng/ml) using transwell migration assay. From the obtained results, an overall increased profile of cell migration was observed in this SDF-1 mediated chemotaxis, with a prominent amount of CXCR4-expressing ASCs observed in the fourth cycle. Accordingly, the cell production from the PA/CS blends was expected to promote effective stem cell-based targeted therapy in terms of quantity and quality. 

3.8

## In vivo rat ischemic skin-flap study
To assess the targeted therapeutic efficacy, the harvested ASCs at the fourth production cycle from TCPS or PA17CS were intravenously administered in rats with a created ischemic skin flap at dorsum. The schematic of the modified MacFarlane flap model is illustrated in A. The control group was intravenously injected with PBS solutions. The digital images of macroscopic observation ( B) showed clear boundaries between the necrotic and surviving areas in all groups on postoperative day 7 (POD7). The necrotic tissues were brown-black in color, hard in texture. Zone III in all flaps survived. However, while the necrotic area in the PA17CS group was limited to zone I, those in the control and TCPS groups spread to zone II. The percentage of necrotic areas in the PA17CS group was significantly smaller than those in the control group on POD7 (19.7 7.3 vs. 43.1 15.5%) and POD14 (22.0 5.9 vs. 45.7 14.1%). On POD21, the impaired region in the distal flap region of the PA17CS group exhibited an ameliorative healing feature, whereas those in the control and TCPS groups remained swollen and bruised in appearance. Meanwhile, the relative necrotic area in the PA17CS group was 15.8 8.1%, which was significantly lower than those in the control and TCPS groups (34.8 6.9 and 31.1 8.7%, respectively). In the histological sections, flap tissues in both the intermediate and proximal regions (zone II and zone III) of the PA17CS group exhibited a significantly higher number of microvessels than those in the control and TCPS groups ( C). Since CD31 is usually used to label the endothelial cells of vascular structures, the microvessel densities in all groups were also examined by identifying CD31-positive microvessels in IHC images. Flap tissues in both zone II and zone III in the PA17CS group exhibited significantly more CD31-positive microvessels relative to the other two groups, indicating more prominent neovascularization ( D). This increased neovascularization may stem from the administration of processed ASCs recruited to the ischemic flap tissues, thus restoring the blood supply previously severed during the surgery. Therefore, ASCs harvested from the PA/CS blends successfully improved the survival of ischemic skin flaps via intravenous administration, in which the mechanisms probably include the homing of stem cells to the injured sites and the formation of new blood vessels. 

4

## Discussion
To overcome the bottleneck in the conventional culture method of MSC-based therapy, this study developed an enzyme-free cell detachment platform by adopting pH-responsive PA/CS blended surfaces for continuous stem cell production. Under appropriate pH manipulation ranging from pH 6.99–7.65, the cultured cells can be partially lifted from the blended surface owing to the de-protonation of CS. As the medium pH elevates above pH 7.4 (the isoelectric point of CS), cell detachment is induced by the desorption of negatively-charged extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins from the de-protonated CS. Conversely, when the medium pH again reduces below pH 7.4, the protonated CS becomes attractive for ECM proteins through ionic interaction, which provides a favorable environment for cell adherence [ , ]. However, the susceptibility of cell growth on plain CS to complex environmental conditions has hampered the application of CS for large-scale cell expansion [ ]. This indicates that CS alone cannot effectively complete the entire continuous cell production process by reason of the insufficient stability of its cell expansion. Thus, PA is added to improve the overall cell expansion owing to its slow biodegradation rate and the stability of its backbone structure and active groups in aqueous fluids [ ]. Moreover, PA is insensitive to the environmental pH and therefore should not interfere with the pH-dependent cell detachment process driven by CS. The working process on the blended surface can be summarized as follows: the cultured cells are partially lifted and harvested by the de-protonated CS domain at pH 7.65, whereas the remaining cells regain a preferable environmental condition at pH 6.99 to re-expand toward confluence under the synergistic effects of the PA and protonated CS domains. These processes are repeatable on the same substrate due to the partial cell detachment. As a consequence, the pH-responsive PA/CS blended surface not only achieves complete continuous cell production but also reduces a large amount of cell culture consumables.
While partial detachment is a key factor in continuously producing cells, the basic requirements of an effective cell production system should include high yield and rapid cell expansion. In this study, varying extents of cell detachment were observed on the blended surfaces with different mixing ratios ( A&C). The cell detachment ability increased synchronously with the content ratio of CS in the blends. About 72–96% of the cultured ASCs were harvested in each cycle from PA17CS, and those remaining were subsequently re-attained cell confluence within 48 ​h in response to pH transitions. Therefore, the mixing ratio of PA17CS (PA:CS 1:7) was employed throughout the investigations, which was qualified as an effective cell production system with a performance comparable to the methods reported in the literature [ , ].
Surface topography describes the geometry profile of the structural features of an area and is often characterized by formations of grooves, pillars, pits, and wells. Many lines of evidence reveal that topographical features can physically modulate diverse cell behaviors such as cell adhesion, alignment, proliferation, migration, and differentiation [ , , , , , ]. From a biophysical perspective, it was speculated that the differential cell detachment ability observed on the blended surfaces resulted from their surface heterogeneity. Regarding the surface microstructures and domain distributions seen in the SEM graphs ( A) along with the dependence of blending ratio on the cell detachment rate visualized in the time-lapse analysis ( ), there were some critical points to highlight. First, as a domain unit can be defined as a group set containing single domains from each constituent polymer, the PA17CS blend encompassed much more domain units per unit area than the other groups. This configuration allowed the adherent cells to occupy more domain units and may have led to higher efficiencies of cell recognition of growth or detachment under specific environmental pH conditions. Second, the naturally-formed domain distributions on the PA/CS blended surfaces presented an identical isotropic profile. The PA domain was isotropically dispersed throughout the CS domain and generated a unique pebble paving-like surface architecture in which the cell confluence could be effectively attained through the radial propagation. Considering the ability of periodic control in cell growth/detachment, this functional domain distribution on the PA/CS blended surfaces is deemed to be a useful topography for stimuli-driven continuous cell production.
Stimuli-responsive biomaterial systems are a powerful tool for responding to exogenous stimulation (including temperature, pH, redox-state, light, mechanical stress, biological elements, and electric and magnetic fields) to deliver spatial and temporal cues to stem cells, and ultimately determine stem cell fate [ , ]. In particularly, poly (N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNiPAAM), which is known for its lower critical solution temperature (LCST) behavior at around 32 ​°C, is widely used to construct switchable cell culture surfaces [ , ]. In contrast, the narrow physiological pH has impeded the widespread practice of pH-responsive materials, and needless to say, the pH-driven continuous cell production systems have rarely been documented. Fortunately, as most polysaccharides are either neutral or negatively charged in an acidic environment, CS is blessed with a considerable amount of positively-charged groups (NH3+) [ ]. Benefiting from its cationic nature, the isoelectric point of CS happens to be near the physiological pH (pH 7.4), thereby rendering an optimal base material for pH-responsive cell culture systems. Currently, the applications stemming from the pH-responsiveness of CS are mainly concentrated on the on-demand drug delivery vectors [ ]. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to develop pH-driven continuous cell production through the use of CS-based polymeric blends.
It is widely accepted that CS or CS-based substrates can significantly enhance pluripotency in MSCs for 3–7 days of culture through three-dimensional (3D) multicellular spheroid formation, wherein the possible mechanisms are led by the calcium-dependent signaling cascade (N-cadherin/Wnt11) [ , , ]. In line with the literature, a similar signaling cascade (N-cadherin/Wnt11) for the enhanced cell pluripotency was clarified by the western blotting which revealed even stronger expressions in the proposed PA/CS blended surfaces compared to the CS group ( ). Unlike in the previous studies, the cultured ASCs on PA/CS blended surfaces did not form any spheroids during the cell expansion phase at pH 6.99 ( A). Strikingly, similar effects associated with cell pluripotency were found on the continuous culture platform. After four production cycles (8 days after the initial seeding, which was equivalent to four generations), the harvested ASCs from the PA17CS surface exhibited superior stemness characteristics, including multi-differentiation, senescence resistance, proliferation, self-renewal potential, pro-angiogenic paracrine activity, SDF-1-mediated CXCR4 chemotactic response, and tissue regeneration capacity, compared to their counterparts produced by the trypsin-based cell passage method on TCPS ( , , , , ). While PA's involvement in the regulation of cell stemness has not yet been demonstrated, these results suggested that the existence of PA in the blends may reprogram the original pathways on CS for cell fate decision. However, further investigations are required to obtain a better understanding of the exact dynamics in the reprogramming processes.
Ischemic diseases, which are generally caused by a shortage of oxygen and nutrients due to reduced blood flow, are a worldwide public health issue and contribute to increases in mortality and disability [ , ]. In recent years, the emerging concept of therapeutic angiogenesis has represented a hopeful strategy to improve perfusion and stimulate neovascularization in ischemic tissues [ ]. Thus, the strong angiogenic ability of the cultivated ASCs from our proposed culture platform is expected as a treatment modality against a variety of ischemic diseases. In addition, the spheroid-free property of the cultivated ASCs can further minimize the risk of vascular thrombosis when applied intravenously in clinical practice. This work adopted ASCs as the model cell owing to their therapeutic strength and low immunogenicity in cell therapy; meanwhile, the proposed cell production system holds the prospects of versatility and applicability, depending on the input cell types. Conclusively, the methodology of continuous cell production from the pH-responsive PA/CS blended surface provides expanded treatment options and broadens the usage of carbohydrate-based cell culture models.

5

## Conclusion
This study principally developed a novel method of pH-controllable cell growth/detachment on the proposed PA/CS blended surfaces for continuous production of ASCs with enhanced regenerative capacity. Through pH adjustment, the adherent cells could partially detach, and the remaining cells could grow until confluence for the next cycle. These processes are repeatable on the same surface without enzymatic or mechanical treatments. The unique pebble paving-like domain distribution on the PA/CS blended surfaces is deemed to be a useful topography for triggering effective cell response during the continuous production process. In terms of comprehensiveness, the PA/CS blended surfaces could be applied to a variety of biological demands depending on the input cell types. In summary, this pH-responsive platform not only boasts effectiveness in stem cell expansion but also provides more therapeutic opportunities for the regenerative medicine.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, C.H.Y, N.C.C, and T.H.Y; Methodology, C.H.Y, N.C.C, H.Y.H, A.L.L, C.Y.L, and T.H.Y; Data Acquisition, C.H.Y, N.C.C, H.Y.H, C.W.T, A.L.L, and Y.T.C; Data Analysis and Interpretation, C.H.Y, N.C.C, H.Y.H, C.W.T, C.Y.L, Y.T.C and T.H.Y; Visualization, C.H.Y and N.C.C; Writing-Original Draft Preparation, C.H.Y and T.H.Y; Writing-Review & Editing, C.H.Y, C.W.T, N.C.C, and T.H.Y; Funding Acquisition and Supervision, N.C.C and T.H.Y.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data availability
The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study

## Acknowledgment
We thank the staff of the Eighth Core Lab, Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, for their technical support. The assistance of Ms. Ya-Yun Yang and Ms. Ching-Yen Lin from the Instrument Center of National Taiwan University with SEM measurements is also appreciated. This research was financially supported by the 10.13039/501100004663Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Taiwan with contract No. MOST.110-2314-B-002-037-MY3/MOST.109-2314-B-002-266/MOST.109-2314-B-002-267.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2022.100514.