Environ Health Perspect253envhper0091-67651552-9924American Chemical SocietyPMC1638000PMC1638000.1163800016380001Journal Matter420001084136707[A153]010420001711200618112006pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
} : 
 
>PE R S P E C T I V E Journal of the National Institute of 
 
pffig-- E R IX p E C T I I V E S Environmental Health Sciences 
 
-U 
 
NIEHS DIRECTOR 
Kenneth Olden, PhD 
 
EDITORS-IN-CHIEF 
Gary E.R. Hook, PhD, DSc 
George W. Lucier, PhD 
 
EDITORIAL BOARD 
 
Lucile L. Adams-Campbell, PhD 
John F. Alderete, PhD 
 
T, e it jt T1, -1 
 
David L. Armstrong, PhD 
 
H,, tl ( ; 
 
J. Carl Barrett, PhD 
 
Douglas Bell, PhD 
 
Perry J Blackshear, MD, DPhil 
rjdt`1 1-st *;e l 11 l 
 
George F Bonney, PhD 
F: ' c-'0 ',i ' .r - er e , 
 
Patricia A. Buffler, PhD, MPH 
John Cairns, Jr, PhD 
 
Max Costa, PhD 
 
Jaes , D Crapo MD 
James D. Crapo, MD 
 
Douglas W. Dockery, PhD 
H~i , l .1 :, -.- P ub . H e t, 
William H. Farland, PhD 
 
Lynn R. Goldman, MD 
u,r t, r ret F, - sSl iF 
 
Bernard D. Goldstein, MD 
 
.; 5'te 
 
Frederick P. Guengerich, PhD 
 
1 rd, I C- X . 5 
 
Takafumi Hamaoka, MD, PhD 
 
T . , lA-:. Xt - -- 
 
Curtis C. Harris, MD 
 
Maureen C. Hatch, PhD 
 
Jorge Herkovits, MD, PhD 
 
Philip M. lannaccone, MD, PhD 
Lovell A. Jones, PhD 
 
Fred F. Kadlubar, PhD 
 
F,li F ! F. rt F f- r F l 
 
Michael A. Kamrin, PhD 
 
rstt,.te t.r E, , r;V !1 f't, ', 2 c 9~ 
 
1,1 f 9u! S . , U, 'er ' 
 
David Kessel, PhD 
 
Claude B. Klee, MD 
Paul Kleihues, MD 
 
Kenneth S. Korach, PhD 
He2 +5: t 
 
Thomas A. Kunkel, PhD 
 
Michael M. Lieberman, PhD 
Re-,, cr 'q _ get Mf 1k1 : , 
Mark 0. Lively, PhD 
 
Michael 1. Luster, PhD 
Ronald P. Mason, PhD 
Akio Matsukage, PhD 
 
Roger 0. McClellan, DVM 
 
:0 - , r. .r.... t Ate -' T-lr E 
 
John A. McLachlan, PhD 
Michel Mercier, PhD 
 
Roland Miller, PhD, DABT 
L: ,', . ', ,S p,1 l r 
Sankar Mitra, PhD 
 
1 Q - 1,, tA1 . -, 
 
Al Munson, PhD 
 
Daniel W. Nebert, MD 
 
U .er ' ?,: C :-~ rl dt .le;, j. :0t 1'1 
 
Kenneth Olden, PhD 
 
Gilbert S. Omenn, PhD 
 
Frederica P. Perera, DrPH 
Cecil B Pickett, PhD 
 
C. Arden Pope ill, PhD 
 
Christopher J. Portier, PhD 
 
Louise Prakash, PhD 
 
Sea s Cu te, '1l ..:1' ' e 
 
John B. Pritchard, PhD 
Carol Prives, PhD 
 
James W. Putney, Jr., PhD 
 
Prasanta K. Ray, PhD 
F - 1, -- - ',t,e 
 
Linda Rosenstock, MD, MPH 
 
Philip N. Sambrook, MD, LLB, 
FRACP 
 
Leona D. Samson, PhD 
Aziz Sancar, MD, PhD 
Dale P. Sandler, PhD 
 
Bernard A. Schwetz, DVM, PhD 
I,tOrn (e te , T t. ' 
R,ct;,-1rD 
 
Michael D Shelby, PhD 
 
N4a, ---ss 1 l1t! P - j . cm et 
 
He, Th 5e el (J-- 
 
1 Glenn Sipes, PhD 
 
t Jr J ,r. , 4, a- H,' , He e I ert 
 
Radim JLSram, MD, DSc 
 
Bernard S Strauss, PhD 
1j-- - li t ' c] ll. 
 
Takashi Sugimura, MD 
ria- ' ', d t; 11 (e' -e te 
 
William A. Suk, PhD 
 
Glenn W. Suter 11, PhD 
Oak R cigo IJ.ltlcllbrtr 
 
Jack A. Taylor, MD, PhD 
 
H,, 't 5e ' 
 
Robert E. Taylor, MD, PhD 
H .W..t. U . ', 
 
Raymond W. Tennant, PhD 
He, t 5. t + 
 
Masaaki Terada, MD 
 
N.t h ea ' Tlsy,, RPhD : I h 
 
Thea D. Tisty, PhD 
 
Lorenzo Tomatis, PhD 
11isllt-l.n 1)er L Infan: a 
 
James G. Townsel, PhD 
 
Mark J. Utell, MD 
 
U, 'r A R',' Rl 1, MA,e aleel C" t, 
Bennett Van Houten, PhD 
 
The> U,1.ru .' T... wld.s rlr 
 
Cheryl Walker, PhD 
 
M 1) D ,rdersc, Cd,, Ce,,elte, 
Susan S. Wallace, PhD 
T, e U,1 ,Ser t of Jrion 
 
Clarice R. Weinberg, PhD 
H,a. th ese 
 
1. Bernard Weinstein, MD 
 
Allen J. Wilcox, PhD 
 
tii.it osial lInst t.ltp otFM l. trl 
 
Walter C. Willett, MD, DrPH 
Hi,, srS ,1. o- PAbI,cie. 
Samuel Wilson, MD 
 
Roger W. Wiseman, PhD 
rj,it (wTa Mls .leo Ensr, ) )i. 
H",^ ltn %, e, ces 
 
Gerald N. Wogan, PhD 
 
t li .eI s 1r st Al. *n't T, 1 A, 
 
April 2000 
 
VOLUME 108 1 NO. 4 
 
PAGES A1 51-A194 & 279-382 
 
http://ehis.niehs.nih.gov/ | 
 
 
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 
.#1z,*< National Institutes of Health 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives is published monthly by the Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, and is a forum for the 
examination, discussion, and dissemination of news, scientific research, and ideas relating to issues and advances in environmental health. Environmental Health 
Perspectives consists of a monthly journal and six supplements. The supplements include monographs on current environmental topics and an annual review of 
environmental health. The Secretary of Health and 1Human Services has deemed Environmenta[Health Perspectives to be necessary in the transaction of the pub- 
lic business required by law of this department. 
 
Subscriptions: Environmental Health Perspectives and Environmental Health Perspectives Supplements are available through the Environmental Health 
Information Service (see page Al 56) or from the Government Printing Office (see page 340). To change an address or inquire about general subscription 
problems for Environmental Health Perspectives and Environmental Health Perspectives Supplments, send your mailing label(s) for each periodical with correct- 
ed information or a description of the problem to OCR Services, Inc., Attn: Order Processing, PO Box 12510, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2510 
USA; or fax your mailing label with corrections or descriptions of problems to (919) 541-0763 or call 1-800-315-3010. 
 
Disclaimer: Publication of articles in this journal does not mean that the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) condones, endorses, 
a pproves, or recommends the use of materials, methodology, or policies stated therein. Conclusions and opinions are those of the individual authors only and 
 
[o not reflect the policies or views of the NIEHS. 
 
Discrimination Prohibited: Under the provisions of applicable public laws enacted by Congress since 1964, no person in the United States shall, on the 
grounds of race, color, national origin, handicap, or age, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under 
any program or activity (or, on the basis of sex, with respect to any educational program or activity) receiving Federal financial assistance. In addition, Executive 
Order 11141 prohibits discrimination on the basis of age by contractors and subcontractors in the performance of Federal contracts, and Executive Order 
11246 states that no federally funded contractor may discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, or 
national origin. Therefore, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences must be operated in compliance with these laws and Executive Orders. 
 
EDITORIAL STAFF 
SCIENCE EDITORS 
 
Michael P. Dieter, PhD 
Thomas J. Goehi, PhD 
MEDICAL EDITOR 
 
Howard Hu, MD, MPH, ScD 
HARVARD MEDICAL SCHOOL 
NEWS EDITOR 
 
Kimberly G. Thigpen 
MANAGING EDITOR 
Rita B. Hanson 
 
SUPPLEMENTS EDITOR 
Dorothy L. Ritter 
 
TECHNICAL EDITOR 
Pamela S. Wigington 
 
ASSOCIATE NEWS EDITOR 
Susan M. Booker 
 
STAFF SPECIALIST 
Linda Hicks 
 
EDITORIAL ASSISTANTS 
Judith P. Crenshaw 
Erin E. Dooley 
 
Vivian Umberger 
 
EDITORIAL INTERN 
Lindsey A. Greene 
CONTRIBUTING 
 
CORRESPONDENTS 
Harvey Black 
Karen Breslin 
Lance Frazer 
Ernie Hood 
 
Julian Josephson 
Mike May 
 
Carol Potera 
 
ART AND PRODUCTION 
Joseph Warren Tart 
 
SENIOR ART DIRECTOR, OCR 
Mary Mahoney Edbrooke 
ART DIRECTOR, OCR 
 
Christopher G. Reuther 
 
PHOTO EDITOR/DESIGNER, OCR 
Christopher Bryant Pate 
GRAPHIc DESIGNER, OCR 
Sarah A. Bruce 
 
GRAPHic DESIGNER, OCR 
Todd A. Pontius 
 
GRAPHic DESIGNER, OCR 
WEB SITE 
 
Paul Cardullo 
 
WEB ADMINISTRATOR, OCR 
Hui Hu 
 
WEB PUBLISHER, OCR 
Heather R. Valli 
 
WEB PUBLISHER, OCR 
 
BUSINESS AND FINANCE 
Paul Galinak 
 
PROIECT DIRECTOR, OCR 
Cynthia Domencic 
 
BUSINESS MANAGER, OCR 
Belinda Cobbs 
 
SUBSCRIPTION COORDINATOR, OCR 
 
MARKETING AND ADVERTISING 
Nancy Surak 
 
MARKETING SPECIALIST, OCR 
Michael D. Scott 
 
MARKETINC/ADVERTISING DESIGNER, OCR 
Tia Bost 
 
MARKETING COORDINATOR, OCR 
 
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNICATIONS 
William M. Grigg 
 
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 
Steven K. Akiyama, PhD 
 
LABORATORY OF MOLECULAR CARCINOGENESIS 
Terri Damstra, PhD 
 
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION 
William Eastin, PhD 
 
Toxicology Operations Branch 
Thorsten A. Fjellstedt, PhD 
 
DIVISION OF EXTRAMURAL RESEARCH ANDTRAINING 
Thomas R. Hawkins 
 
OFFICE OF COMMUNICATIONS 
James Huff, PhD 
 
OFFICE OF THE SCIENTIFIC DIRECTOR 
C.W. Jameson, PhD 
 
REPORT ON CARCINOGENS 
Sandra V. Lange 
 
NTP LIAISON OFFICE 
 
In This Isu ep 
 
of#:>>r Hale and Hearty 
 
Inhaled toxicants can affect 
not only the nasal passages 
and lungs but also many 
iM other systems within the 
 
body. The NIEHS Respir- 
atory Toxicology Group, highlighted in this 
month's NIEHS News (p. A168), studies 
the diverse effects of inhaled toxicants such as 
mercury and occupational hazards including 
styrene and vanadium pentoxide. 
 
Reining in Air 
Pollution 
 
Air pollutants are notorious 
for slipping uninvited across 
international borders. The 
Focus (p. A170) examines 
several recent conferences, treaties, and pro- 
jects around the world that are aimed at lim- 
iting the amount of air pollution that leaves 
originating countries. 
 
g;l Making (and 
 
Breaking?) the Rules 
Under the gun to protect the 
health of the American pub- 
lic, regulatory agencies such 
as the U.S. EPA must some- 
times rely on less than rock-solid scientific evi- 
dence in setting standards. Some groups feel 
this is a violation of the Constitution and an 
abuse of power. The Spheres of Influence (p. 
A176) looks at the whys and wherefores of the 
agency's tighter new air pollution standards. 
 
Scrubbing Bubbles 
 
Bacteria have been used to 
process waste on the ground 
for years-now they're being 
used in the air, too. The 
Innovations (p. A178) 
describes new biofiltration technology that 
uses microbes to clean volatile organic com- 
pounds, hazardous air pollutants, and odor- 
ous emissions from polluted air. 
 
The Environmental Genome 
Project 
 
Sharp and Barrett (p. 279) comment on the 
ethical, legal, and social implications of the 
project being conducted by the National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
pointing out that individual genetic informa- 
tion complicates traditional issues in bioethics. 
Mortality and Air Particulates in 
Europe 
 
Peters et al. (p. 283) reassessed the associa- 
tion between mortality and elevated concen- 
trations of air particulates in Central Europe. 
Between 1982 and 1994 there was an 
increase in mortality of 3.4% in association 
with 100 pg/m3 total suspended partides in 
the Czech Republic. The mortality associated 
 
with air pollution was consistent with obser- 
vations in other western European cities and 
the United States. 
 
Cadmium and 
 
Hemochromatosis 
 
Iron absorption is greatly increased in indi- 
viduals with hereditary hemochromatosis, a 
genetic disease that results in pigmented skin 
and liver disease. Akesson et al. (p. 289) 
examined patients who were treated by 
bloodletting and found that they exhibited 
increased blood cadmium levels. The authors 
report that treatment rather than the disease 
gave rise to increased cadmium uptake, sug- 
gesting that cadmium absorption depends on 
both the genotype and the treatment by 
bloodletting. 
 
Neurotoxicity among Termiticide 
Applicators 
 
Steenland et al. (p. 293) analyzed neurologic 
function in 191 termiticide applicators who 
used chlorpyrifos and in 189 controls. A uri- 
nary metabolite of chlorpyrifos was approxi- 
mately 100 times higher in recently exposed 
applicators as compared to the general U.S. 
population. However, there were no differ- 
ences in clinical exams and only minor dif- 
ferences in neurobehavioral skills between 
applicators and controls; as in earlier studies, 
the exposed subjects did report more symp- 
toms and perform worse in some neurologic 
tests than unexposed subjects, which could 
be reason for concern. (Also see Science 
Selections, p. A182) 
 
Predictors of Allergen Levels 
 
The prevalence and adverse effects of child- 
hood asthma are highest in less affluent 
minority communities. Kitch et al. (p. 301) 
report that dust mite and cockroach aller- 
gens are prevalent in urban Boston, 
Massachusetts, neighborhoods, and espe- 
cially in households with low incomes. 
 
Lead in Calcium Supplements 
 
Over the last 20 years some calcium supple- 
ments have undergone a systematic reduction 
in contaminant lead, but because of the meth- 
ods used, measurements of lead in some of 
these supplements may be erroneously low by 
as much as 50% below currently employed 
detection limits. Using rigorous analytical 
techniques, Scelfo and Flegal (p. 309) report 
that some calcium supplements contain lead 
concentrations that still exceed new California 
criteria of 1.5 pg lead/g calcium. 
 
Balancing Risks of Drinking 
Water Disinfection 
 
Havelaar et al. (p. 315) use the applicabili- 
 
ty of disability adjusted life-years (DALYs) 
as a principle to quantitate risk of renal cell 
cancer by bromate that arises from water 
 
treatment by ozonation as compared to the 
risk of infection with Cryptosporidium 
parvum. Ozonation reduces infection 
approximately sevenfold, but bromate is 
produced at levels above current health 
guidelines. Nevertheless, health benefits of 
preventing gastroenteritis outweighs loss- 
es by premature death from renal cell can- 
cer by a factor of more than 10, resulting 
in a net benefit of about 1 DALY/million 
person-years. 
 
~ Serum Methyleugenol 
 
in Americans 
 
Barr et al. (p. 323) employed 
isotope dilution gas chro- 
matography-high resolution 
mass spectrometry to evaluate 
methyleugenol in adult serum samples. The 
chemical was present in 98% of 206 samples 
obtained from the Third National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey, with a 
mean concentration of 24 pg/g. (Also see 
Science Selections, p. A182) 
 
Hormone Mimics Disrupt 
Steroids in Turtles 
 
Willingham et al. (p. 329) used the red- 
eared slider turtle to examine the deleterious 
effects of hormone-mimicking chemicals on 
sexual determination. They show that expo- 
sure of the eggs to environmentally relevant 
concentrations of chlordane, aroclor 1242 
(PCB), and trans-nonachlor alter the levels of 
sex steroid hormones in otherwise normally 
appearing adult animals. 
 
Benzene and 
 
Smnoking-Induced 
Leukemia 
 
Korte et al. (p. 333) assessed 
the proportion of smoking- 
induced leukemia and acute 
myeloid leukemia attributable to the benzene 
in cigarette smoke. The authors report that 
benzene was responsible for approximately 
one-tenth to one-third of smoking-induced 
leukemia and for up to three-fifths of smok- 
ing-related acute myeloid leukemia, based on 
risk estimates of linear extrapolations from 
empirical data over a dose range of 10- to 
100-fold. (Also see Science Selections, p. A182) 
 
Asbestos Causes Mutagenesis in 
Transgenic Mice 
 
Rihn et al. (p. 341) used the lacI reporter 
gene in transgenic mice to determine the 
mutagenicity of asbestos administered by 
nose-only exposure at 5.75 mg/m3 crocido- 
lite dust for 6 hr/day for 5 days. There was a 
doubling of the mutation frequency in treat- 
ed mice 4 weeks after exposure, showing 
that mutagenesis was an early event in fiber 
intoxication that was evoked by cell transfor- 
mation due to asbestos exposure. 
 
Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 * Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
A 158 
 
In This Issue 
 
Air Pollution and Mortality in the 
Elderly 
 
Mar et al. (p. 347) investigated the relation- 
ship between air pollution and nonaccidental 
and cardiovascular mortality in residents 
older than 65 years of age in Phoenix, 
Arizona. Total mortality was associated with 
carbon monoxide and nitric oxide; cardiovas- 
cular mortality was associated with these 
gases, sulfur dioxide, and the PM2 5, PM10, 
and coarse fraction air particulates. 
m ni4 riff 
 
Adolescent Health and the 
Environment 
 
Golub (p. 355) reviews the unique coinci- 
dence of maturation, socialization, and novel 
exposures of adolescents in reference to their 
health and the environment. Their reproduc- 
tive, respiratory, skeletal, immune, and cen- 
tral nervous systems are maturing at a time 
of increased risk for infectious disease and 
accidental injury; pharmacokinetics are 
altered as blood volume, respiration, metabo- 
lism and capacity change; potential expo- 
sures change with increased food intake and 
possible voluntary drug intake; and adoles- 
cents are introduced to contaminants in the 
workplace. The author emphasizes the need 
for animal models that are appropriate for 
these distinctive human developmental 
stages and the need for risk assessment strate- 
gies that account for adolescent pharmacoki- 
netic and lifestyle factors. 
 
Respiratory Toxicity from 
Nitrates in Water 
 
Children up to 8 years of age who lived in 
five different villages with drinking water 
sources containing 26-459 mg nitrate ion/L 
were examined by Gupta et al. (p. 363). The 
authors examined acute respiratory infection 
in the children and suggested that methemo- 
globinemia secondary to high nitrate inges- 
tion in drinking water was a major cause of 
respiratory toxicity, leading to alveolar dam- 
age and decreased pulmonary circulation. 
 
Multiple Chemical Sensitivities 
 
Kipen and Fiedler (p. 377) report on multi- 
ple chemical sensitivities in a 37-year-old 
mechanic who was exposed to an unknown 
gas or vapor while working on an air-condi- 
tioning unit. The authors suggest that treat- 
ment for multiple chemical sensitivities 
should include avoiding substances that 
cause the most symptoms and minimizing 
exposures, and identifing symptoms that are 
associated with fear of exposure. 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 A 159 
 
The Beat 
 
|~ edited by Erin E. Dooley 
 
Safer Citrus Is Hot 
 
A citrus processing method developed by scientists 
at the USDA Agricultural Research & Extension 
Center in Weslaco, Texas, bypasses 
 
conventional fumigation with methyl 
 
bromide-a pesticide that depletes the 
 
ozone layer-and instead uses forced ho 
air to kill fruit flies. Using the new 
method, up to eight tons of fruit at 
a time is processed in a hot air 
chamber, where the fruit 
centers are quickly heated 
to 111?F and kept at that 
temperature long enou 
to kill any fruit flies insi 
 
The majority of the 
 
1.18 million tons of citrus 
fruit exported in 1998 by 
 
distributors required fruit fly 
 
extermination treatments. The forc 
 
treatment was approved by the USDA for grapefruit, 
tangerines, and Valencia oranges in 1998, and for 
navel oranges in 1999. 
 
Multiplying Microbials 
 
Scientists from Wageningen University in the 
 
Netherlands and the University of lowva have found 
that separating organic waste from other household 
waste can cause increases in microbial contaminants 
in house dust. Contaminants such as bacterial 
endotoxins, mold P(1->3)-glucans, and fungal 
 
extracellular polysaccharides (EPSs) of Aspergillus and 
Penicillium, which were determined to be markers of 
microbial exposure, may increase the risk for 
bioaerosol-related respiratory symptoms in 
susceptible people. 
 
The study, published in the February 2000 issue of 
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, found that 
 
when separated organic waste was stored for over one 
week, concentrations of endotoxins, glucans, and EPSs 
were 3.2-, 4.6-, and 7.6-fold higher, respectively, than 
in homes where only nonorganic waste was stored 
 
indoors. Separated organic waste stored indoors for 
less than one week increased endotoxin concen- 
trations 2.6-fold and EPS concentrations 2.1-fold. 
 
Indoor storage of nonseparated waste was found to 
have no effect on concentrations of microbial agents. 
 
Backyard Dioxin 
 
A report in the 1 February 2000 issue of Environ- 
 
mental Science and Technologywarns that burning 
 
typical household waste in barrels may produce dioxin 
and furan levels higher than those emitted by 
 
municipal waste incinerators serving thousands of 
people. Dioxins and furans cause immune dysfunc- 
tion, cancer, developmental abnormalities, and 
 
hormonal changes in laboratory animals, and are also 
a concern to human health. 
 
Scientists from the U.S. EPA and the New York 
State Department of Health found that, under test 
conditions, more polychlorinated compounds were 
emitted from trash burned in barrels than from 
 
municipal incinerators. Burning household waste in 
open barrels is banned in most areas of the United 
 
States; areas in which it is permitted are mostly rural. 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 A 165 
 
The Beat 
 
Organic Power 
 
A demonstration project conducted by the USDA 
 
Agricultural Research Service has found that diesel 
vehicles such as trucks, tractors, and buses can run 
more cleanly if organically based biodiesel is mixed 
with the regular diesel fuel. "B20" fuel (which is 
 
20% biodiesel, derived from soy or other seed oils or 
animal fat) requires no engine modifications in 
order for it to be used. 
 
Alan Weber, a representative of the National 
 
Biodiesel Board, says that credits for biodiesel fuel 
use are available to federal and state agencies and 
 
public utilities in large metropolitan areas under the 
1992 National Energy Policy Act. One of the goals of 
the USDA project, part of a federal initiative to 
 
reduce dependence on petroleum-based fuels and 
build new markets for U.S. crops, is to increase the 
federal government's use of bio-based fuel by 10% 
over the next five years. 
 
Country Roads Not Always 
Cleaner 
 
A new method of measuring road dust developed 
by researchers at Washington University's Air 
 
Quality Laboratory in St. Louis reveals that the 
 
average rural vehicle creates over six times more 
particulate matter (PM) than the average urban 
vehicle. The acidity and 
high volume of PM 
 
emissions, along with 
their heavy metal 
 
composition, may lead 
to such health effects 
as upper respiratory 
 
illnesses, cardiovascular 
disease, and cancer. 
 
The new method 
measures the net sum 
of PM emissions 
 
created by a vehicle by 
 
several means over each mile it travels, focusing on 
particles smaller than 2.5 microns in diameter. Using 
this method, regulatory and government agencies 
can more accurately measure particulate emissions 
and then strategize to reduce them. 
 
Texans Bogged in Smog 
 
Houston, Texas, must take strong measures to 
 
reduce its air pollution-cited as the worst in the 
United States-in order to comply with federal 
 
ozone standards, states a 23 December 1999 article 
in the Fort Worth Star-Telegram. The article reports 
that 75 measures, including restricting driving on 
every fourth day and reducing the highway speed 
limit to 55 miles per hour, were proposed during a 
 
December meeting of Texas environmental officials. 
 
To comply with federal law, Houston must 
 
reduce vehicle miles traveled by 25% and industrial 
 
nitrogen oxide emissions by 90%, but petrochemical 
industry emissions, along with those from 
 
automobiles and port traffic, are making this 
 
difficult. Texas commissioner Ralph Marquez said 
that even the measures proposed may not be 
 
enough to bring Houston in line with the Clean Air 
Act, which requires the city to meet federal ozone 
standards by 2007. 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 A 167 
 
Extramurally Speaking... 
 
*~~~~~~~~~~t v...1l ilit 
 
: :areer Development 
 
f;:and T rainin 9 
 
Op00^ portunities 
 
The NIEHS announces the availability ofsupport for career development and training awards to 
 
inaease the cadre ofscientits woing in areas ofparticular importance to the NIEHS. 
 
M.etored Patient-Oiented Research Cower :Devlopment Award .(K23). and 
 
Miwcarer nvetigtor Awr nPtetOretdRsac K24). 
 
* . : .;. F .......... u.ga.t .". .:in~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. ........ 
 
Thes tw awrdssu~o th caeerdeveogmnt f cinically trailned invsigtr s who 
 
......... .......... :..w 
 
arc;sj 8 Rnirted.. j to focusin thei reeac en: eaor on. pain-oine reeac in the.... 
 
environmental healh scence For t purp..oss of thi 1award ...opatient-oriented re1s 
 
0dfie as researc cnducted with humansubects (or on material of humnorigin, such 
as. a.ti.ss.ues, speci..mens, or cognitive phen.om.ena) in whic an investgordeclinras 
 
with. h .uman.subjects .......... .. 
 
.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ n the.... 
 
IndividualPotcorl Fellowships in Genoics and Related Ethical, Liegal, 
 
*and Scil I.. mp.licatin ..s Topics..... . ...... .......... ......... .. . ................ ......... .. 
 
These awrd willl uprovide scientsts wih the multidisciplinary sk ills that wrill enlable them 
.. t.o.: engag in. re searc to: accmls h Kshort andlong-term obetie of th 
 
* v . ? . . i . ; . .~~~~~~~~~~~~2 
 
and reources to sov biomdia ad bioetical poblems. Bodarsofreachtt 
 
* . .. : i.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~t bn .: i 
 
legal, and isocala impicatons of human geneticsi research. 
 
Natinal Researh Service Awrds Institutional Traiing Grants in 
Genomic An alyisnd nerpreaion:::: 
 
Moeua biog and mleua poeic hav beom essential tool in evrnmenta 
 
toiooya understnigtebiolgclproessa the moleua lee ha enbld:h 
study o the mechanisms of action of many to c u T 
 
exprssio contribute t.O increased. senst:ivt or........ resistance to toxic....2... envrnmetlaet 
 
in umns asbem ja prioitt heuroe oftis prga announcement is to tra:in 
scieotists who have the appropnate multidisciplinary expertise to develol?nnew approachsa 
an tol to stud th interlayo enviomenta epsure ad poplto geeis Fo 
structurlbiolol onio adst l sciences, ornonbiological 
 
needed*to eala h l. o i. ronment . inrts uigo m .utp.le 
w:;. umn suC incs 
 
muloipk gehes. 
 
For more in$radon5 contactcwl r, euh..di4am* ishrffiuihsnl.gv 
 
382 Vol\nmp i l0f NMi mhpr 4 Anril fnnn . Fn,iArnnmpntrl HPLIth PprcnIrtixIpC 
 
v xigul 1 gu 1 vu, I'YUI 1 ilici -r, rxfjf 11 'e-'UUU - F-1 ivii ut of 1 IC:1 it'Lli necifir 1 rtn ipcliivcs 
 
FellowshiQs Grants & Awards 
 
Exploratory Grants for Genomic Imprinting and 
Environmental Disease Susceptibility 
 
The NIEHS invites research grant applications from 
interested investigators to conduct timely, innovative, 
and mechanistic research on the importance of 
genomic imprinting in determining susceptibility to 
environmentally induced diseases through a program 
of exploratory investigator-initiated R21 grants. 
 
The exploratory/developmental (R21) grant 
mechanism is used for pilot projects or feasibility stud- 
ies to support creative, novel, high risk/high payoff 
research that may produce innovative advances in sci- 
ence. This announcement is to encourage applications 
from individuals who are interested in testing novel or 
conceptually creative ideas to understand the potential 
role that environmental agents play in causing epige- 
netic changes in the DNA that can alter imprint gene 
expression, thereby resulting in a multitude of genetic 
diseases including cancer and neurobehavioral disor- 
ders. The final receipt date will be 1 October 2002. 
 
Applications may be submitted by domestic for- 
profit and nonprofit organizations such as universities, 
colleges, hospitals, laboratories, units of state and local 
government, and eligible agencies of the federal gov- 
ernment. Applications may be from a single institu- 
tion or may include arrangements with one or more 
institutions (e.g., consortia, if appropriate). 
Racial/ethnic minority individuals, women, and per- 
sons with disabilities are encouraged to apply as prin- 
cipal investigators. 
 
Applicants will be responsible for the planning, 
direction, and execution of the proposed project. 
Applicants may request up to $100,000 per year in 
direct costs. The total project period for an applica- 
tion submitted in response to this announcement 
may not exceed two years. These grants are nonre- 
newable, and continuation of projects developed 
under this program will be through the traditional 
unsolicited investigator-initiated grant program. 
Amended applications will be accepted. Application 
kits may be obtained from the Division of 
Extramural Outreach and Information Resources, 
NIH, 6701 Rockledge Drive, MSC 7910, Bethesda, 
MD 20892-7910 USA, 301-435-0714, e-mail: 
grantsinfo@nih.gov. Inquiries concerning this 
announcement are strongly encouraged. 
 
Contact: Jose M. Velazquez, Scientific Program 
Administrator, Chemical Exposures and Molecular 
Biology Branch, Office of Program Development, 
Division of Extramural Research and Training, 
NIEHS, PO Box 12233, Mail Drop EC-21, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA, 919-541-4998, fax: 
919-316-4606, e-mail: velazqul @niehs.nih.gov. 
Reference: PA No. PA-00-034 
 
Environmental Health Training 
 
Applications for grants to support training programs 
in disciplines and research areas related to the envi- 
ronmental health sciences should be submitted to the 
NIEHS by 10 May 2000. 
 
The NIEHS is concerned with the effects of 
chemical, physical, and biological environmental 
agents on human health and well-being. Training 
programs may provide broad multidisciplinary train- 
ing that is built around a theme or problem area, or 
in-depth training in a particular discipline. 
 
This program seeks to 1) encourage institutions 
with outstanding departments and programs in rele- 
vant disciplines to develop a training program in envi- 
 
ronmental health, and 2) expand the number of insti- 
tutions capable of training scientists in this field. 
 
Contact: Carol K. Shreffler, Scientific Program 
Administrator, Organs and Systems Toxicology 
Branch, Division of Extramural Research and Training, 
NIEHS, Mail Drop EC-23, PO Box 12233, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA, 919-541-1445, fax: 
919-541-5064, e-mail: shreffll@niehs.nih.gov. 
Reference: PA No. PAR-00-038 
 
Indigenous Systems of Medicine 
 
The National Center for Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) is seeking develop- 
mental studies to establish the methodological 
feasibility and strengthen the scientific rationale for 
proceeding to full-scale clinical trials on the use of tra- 
ditional, indigenous systems of medicine as practiced 
in the United States. 
 
Potential studies might include 1) quantitative 
research (case studies, interviews) to describe diagnos- 
tic and treatment approaches and explore patient and 
health care provider preferences and beliefs; 2) diag- 
noses, including comparisons with those of other tra- 
ditional, indigenous systems of medicine as well as 
with conventional biomedicine; 3) studies to refine 
the intervention strategy; 4) studies to refine the con- 
trol strategy, including comparisons of different types 
of controls and validation of blinding procedures; 5) 
studies to refine the target population and develop 
adequate recruitment procedures; 6) studies to 
develop realistic protocols; 7) studies to establish the 
clinical usefulness of commonly used assessment pro- 
cedures, especially quality-of-life measures, as well as 
psychosocial, functional, and physiological measures; 
and 8) collection of preliminary data for establishing 
measures of efficacy and safety for subsequent sample 
size calculations. 
 
Contact: Marguerite Evans, NCCAM, Building 
31, Room 5B58, Bethesda, MD 20892 USA, 301- 
402-5860, fax: 301-402-4741, e-mail: mel6o@nih.gov 
Fellowships in Environmental Health Sciences 
 
The NIEHS Center for Environmental Health 
Sciences at the University of California at Davis has 
three graduate fellowships in the area of health effects 
of agrochemicals and related xenobiotics. In this fel- 
lowship program, a strong emphasis is placed on the 
mechanistic aspects of toxicology and on addressing 
the real-world health concerns of agricultural workers 
as well as the general population. 
 
Each award includes payment of tuition and fees, 
and provides a stipend equivalent to the salary of a 
half-time research assistant. Students must be admit- 
ted to a UC Davis graduate program, must have a 
high undergraduate grade point average, and must be 
nominated by an advisor, preferably a center faculty 
member who is working in one or more of the cen- 
ter's research cores: 1) genetic variability/sensitive 
populations, 2) primate/animal models, 3) epidemiol- 
ogy, 4) molecular neurotoxicology, 5) reproductive 
and developmental toxicology, or 6) respiratory 
toxicology. 
 
These are highly competitive fellowships; stu- 
dents are chosen on the basis of their academic record 
and interest in the area of environmental health sci- 
ence. Non-California residents must obtain supple- 
mental funding to cover their out-of-state tuition. 
These fellowships are sponsored by the UC Davis 
Office of Graduate Studies and Research. 
 
Contact: R. L. Morrison, Department of 
Environmental Toxicology, One Shields Avenue, 
University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA, 530- 
752-2732, e-mail: rlmorrison@ucdavis.edu, Internet: 
http://www.envtox.ucdavis.edu/cehs/fellowship.htm 
 
Organ-Specific Cancers 
 
Funds to support research programs in organ-specific 
cancers are available from the National Cancer 
Institute. Applicant institutions must be available to 
conduct the highest quality translational research on 
the prevention, etiology, screening, diagnosis, and 
treatment of a specific organ-site cancer. 
 
Application deadlines vary with the target cancer: 
1 June 2000 for lung and prostate cancers, and 1 
October 2000 for prostate and genitourinary cancers. 
Letters of intent are requested approximately 60 days 
prior to the application deadline. 
 
Applicants will be judged on their current and 
potential ability to translate basic research findings 
into innovative research settings involving patients 
and populations. Research on rehabilitation and qual- 
ity-of-life is also encouraged. This program is not 
intended to support basic research to the exclusion of 
clinical research or vice versa. 
 
Contact: Jorge Gomez, Organ Systems Branch, 
NCI, Executive Plaza North, Suite 512, 6130 
Executive Boulevard, MSC 7386, Rockville, MD 
20852-7386 USA, 301-496-8528, e-mail: 
jglw@nih.gov. Reference: PA No. PAR-99-167 
 
Senior Scientist Awards 
 
Applications for Senior Scientist Awards are invited 
by the National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol 
Abuse, the National Cancer Institute, the National 
Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, 
the National Institute on Drug Abuse, and the 
National Institute of Mental Health. These awards 
provide salary support for up to five years as a means 
of enhancing the recipients' skills and dedication to 
their area of research. 
 
Candidates must be senior scientists and recog- 
nized leaders in their fields with a record of original 
contributions. They should also have grant support at 
the time of the award. Scientists whose work is pri- 
marily theoretical may also apply. 
 
Applicants must use Application Form PHS 398, 
which has annual due dates of February 1, June 1, and 
October 1. Application kits are available by calling 
301-435-0714, e-mailing grantsinfo@nih.gov, or on 
the Internet at http://www.nih.gov/grants/forms.htm. 
 
Contact: 1) at NIAAA: Ernestine Vanderveen, 
Division of Basic Research, 301-443-2531, e-mail: 
tvanderv@willco.niaaa.nih.gov; Harold Perl, Division of 
Clinical and Prevention Research, 301-443-0788, 
e-mail: hperl@willco.niaaa.nih.gov; or Darryl Bertolucci, 
Division of Biometry and Epidemiology, 301-443-4898, 
e-mail: dbertolu@willco.niaaa.nih.gov; 2) at NCI: Lester 
Gorelic, 301-496-8580, e-mail: rjg2h@nih.gov; or 
Andrew Vargosko, e-mail: av8b@nih.gov; 3) at 
NCCAM: Neal West, 301-402-5867, e-mail: 
westn@od.nih.gov; 4) at NIDA: Andrea Baruchin, 
Office of Science Policy and Communications, 301- 
773-6071, e-mail: ab47j@nih.gov; Charles Sharp, 
Division of Basic Research, 301-443-1887, e-mail: 
cslO7m@nih.gov; Arthur Horton, Division of Clinical 
Research, 301443-4060, e-mail: ah61x@nih.gov; Ann 
Blanken, Division of Epidemiology and Prevention 
Research, 301-443-6543, e-mail: ablO8v@nih.gov; or 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 1 08, Number 4, April 2000 
 
A 185 
 
Fellowships, Grants, & Awards 
 
Jamie Biswas, Medications Development Division, 301- 
443-5280, e-mail: jbl68r@nih.gov; or 5) at NIMH: 
Henry Khachaturian, Office of Science Policy and 
Program Planning, 301-443-4335, e-mail: hkllb@ 
mail.nih.gov; Walter Goldschmidts, Division of Basic 
and Clinical Neuroscience Research, 301-443-3563, 
e-mail: wgoldsch@mail.nih.gov; Delia Hann, Division 
of Mental Disorders, Behavioral Research, and AIDS, 
301-443-9700, e-mail: dhann@mail.nih.gov; or Enid 
Light, Division of Services and Intervention Research, 
301-443-1185, e-mail: elight@mail.nih.gov. Reference: 
PA No. PA-00-021 
 
Request for Applications: Comparative Mouse 
Genomics Centers Consortium 
 
The purpose of this request for applications is to 
develop mouse models for studying the biological 
function of genetic variants of DNA repair and cell 
cycle control genes found in the human population. 
Mutant mice, protocols, assays, assessment criteria, 
and other materials and information generated in pro- 
jects funded under this program will be made available 
to the wider biomedical community for further inves- 
tigation or application. This initiative is intended to 
provide the scientific community with new transgenic 
and knockout mouse models to encourage researchers 
to study the functional expression of human genetic 
polymorphisms in the two categories of environmen- 
tally responsive genes: DNA repair and cell cycle con- 
trol. The NIEHS anticipates making up to five awards 
for project periods of five years. Application budgets 
may not exceed $700,000 in direct costs in the first 
budget period. Letters of intent are due 12 May 2000 
and applications are due 20 July 2000. 
 
Contact: Jose Velazquez, Chemical Exposures 
and Molecular Biology Branch, Office of Program 
Development, NIEHS, PO Box 12233, Research 
Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA, 919-541-4998, fax: 
919-316-4606, e-mail: velazqul@niehs.nih.gov, 
Internet: http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/ 
rfa-files/RFA-ES-00-005.html 
 
Racial Differences in Diabetes 
 
Research on underlying metabolic, genetic, epidemio- 
logic, sociocultural, and behavioral mechanisms that 
contribute to racial and ethnic differences in the etiolo- 
gy of type 2 diabetes mellitus is sought by the National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases. Approximately $2 million is available in 
FY 2000 to support six to eight awards. Similar fund- 
ing is anticipated for FY 2001. 
 
Examples of potential topics include 1) state-of- 
the-art, hypothesis-driven metabolic studies in 
representative samples of U.S. race-ethnic groups; 
2) behavioral, socioeconomic, psychosocial, cultural, 
family, and community factors that influence an indi- 
vidual's risk for developing diabetes, and how these 
factors can lead to racial and ethnic disparities in inci- 
dence; and 3) development of less expensive methods 
to assess beta cell function and insulin resistance, and 
techniques for measuring underlying metabolic and 
physiologic differences among population groups. 
 
Applicants must use Application Form PHS 398, 
which has annual due dates of February 1, June 1, and 
October 1. Application kits are available by calling 
301-435-0714, e-mailing grantsinfo@nih.gov, or on 
the Internet at http://grants.nih.gov/grants/forms.htm. 
 
Contact: Maureen I. Harris, Division of 
Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolic Diseases, 
 
NIDDK, Building 45, Room 5AN24, Bethesda, 
 
MD 20892 USA, 301-594-8801, fax: 301-480- 
3503, e-mail: harrism@extra.niddk.nih.gov. 
Reference: PA No. PAS-99-166 
 
Bioengineering Research Partnerships 
 
Awards to support bioengineering research partner- 
ships for conducting basic bioengineering research 
that addresses important biological or medical 
research problems are available under a program 
cosponsored by 19 federal agencies. Letters of intent 
are requested by 30 June 2000 for proposals that are 
due 10 August 2000. 
 
Each partnership will be a multidisciplinary 
research team that applies an integrative systems 
approach to develop knowledge or methods to pre- 
vent, detect, diagnose, or treat disease and to under- 
stand health and behavior. Partnerships must include 
bioengineering expertise in combination with basic 
and/or clinical investigators. Partnerships may pro- 
pose design-directed or hypothesis-driven research in 
universities, national labs, medical schools, industry, 
or other public and private entities. Approximately 
$12 million will be available for first-year support of 
awards under this program in FY 2001. The initial 
period of support can extend five years with possible 
renewal for an additional five years. 
 
Potential research topics include but are not 
limited to 1) biomechanics; 2) bioelectrics, ion chan- 
nels, and organ function; 3) combinatorial 
approaches to chemistry, materials, genes, and thera- 
peutics; 4) functional genomics, including microar- 
ray technology, integrated systems, and analysis 
tools; 5) nanotechnology; 6) complex biological sys- 
tems; 7) organ culture systems and organogenesis; 8) 
cell and tissue engineering; 9) tissue regeneration; 
and 10) drug bioavailability. 
 
Contact: Carol Dahl, National Cancer Institute, 
301-496-1550, e-mail: cd4 1 x@nih.gov; Richard 
Dubois, National Center for Research Resources, 301- 
435-0755, e-mail: rd42p@nih.gov; Loreanne 
McNicol, National Eye Institute, 301-496-5301, 
e-mail: 1m27f@nih.gov; Jeffery Schloss, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, 301-496-7531, 
e-mail: js173g@nih.gov; John Watson, National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 301-435-0513, 
e-mail: jw53f@nih.gov; Vicki Seyfert, National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 301-496- 
755 1, e-mail: vs62y@nih.gov; James Panagis, National 
Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases, 301-594-5055, e-mail: jpl49d@nih.gov; 
Louis Quatrano, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, 301-402-2242, e-mail: 
lq2n@nih.gov; Thomas Aigner, National Institute on 
Drug Abuse, 301-443-6975, e-mail: tal7r@nih.gov; 
Lynn Luethke, National Institute on Deafness and 
Other Communication Disorders, 301-402-3458, 
e-mail: lynn_luethke@nih.gov; Joan Harmon, 
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, 301-594-8808, e-mail: 
jh90u@nih.gov; Eleni Kousvelari, National Institute of 
Dental and Craniofacial Research, 301-594-2427, 
e-mail: ekl7w@nih.gov; Jose Velazquez, NIEHS, 919- 
541-4998, e-mail: velazqu1@niehs.nih.gov; Warren 
Jones, National Institute of General Medical Sciences, 
301-594-5938, e-mail: jonesw@nigms.nih.gov; 
Michael Huerta, National Institute of Mental Health, 
301-443-3563, e-mail: mhuerta@helix.nih.gov; 
William Heetderks, National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, 301-496-1447, e-mail: 
 
Nursing Research, 301-594-5970, e-mail: hilary_ 
sigmon@nih.gov; Evan Hadley, National Institute on 
Aging, 301-435-3044, e-mail: hadleye@ 
exmur.nia.nih.gov; or Peter Clepper, National 
Library of Medicine, 301-594-4882, e-mail: 
clepper@nlm.nih.gov. Reference: PA No. PAS-00-006 
 
Growth Factors and Diabetes 
 
Grants to study the role of growth factors in the eti- 
ology and pathogenesis of diabetes complications are 
available under a program jointly sponsored by five 
agencies of the National Institutes of Health. 
 
An understanding of the tissue- and cell-specific 
expression of growth factors in the eye, kidney, mouth, 
nerves, and vessels and of the molecular action of these 
growth factors in the pathophysiology of complica- 
tions will lead to improved, more specific therapies. 
This program will remain active for three years, 
through the receipt date of 1 October 2002 (other 
annual program deadlines besides October 1 are 
February 1 and June 1). The National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, one of 
the sponsors, will set aside $2 million a year for grants. 
The other agencies have not set aside specific funds. 
 
Contact: Barbara Linder, NIDDK, 301-594- 
0021, e-mail: linderb@extra.niddk.nih.gov; Peter 
Dudley, National Eye Institute, 301-496-0484, 
e-mail: pad@nei.nih.gov; Dennis Mangan, National 
Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, 301- 
594-2421, e-mail: dennis.mangan@nih.gov; Paul 
Nichols, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, 301-496-9964, e-mail: pnl3w@nih.gov; 
or Thomas Blaszhowski, National Heart, Lung, 
and Blood Institute, 301-435-0417, e-mail: 
tb33i@nih.gov. Reference: PA No. PA-99-159 
 
Geriatrics Research 
 
Grants are available for planning and protocol devel- 
opment of biomedical epidemiologic and interven- 
tion studies in research areas related to geriatrics 
under a program jointly sponsored by the National 
Institute on Aging and the NIEHS. 
 
These grants support the development of a 
refined study design, organizational plan, detailed pro- 
tocol, collection and analysis of biological or environ- 
mental samples to generate preliminary data, manual 
of procedures, and budget for implementation of stud- 
ies whose rationale and basic design are sufficiently 
meritorious. After these are completed, awardees may 
submit applications to conduct the full-scale study. 
Planning grants provide up to $150,000 for one year 
and cannot be renewed. 
 
Applicants must use Application Form PHS 398, 
which has annual due dates of February 1, June 1, and 
October 1. Application kits are available by calling 
301-435-0714, e-mailing grantsinfo@nih.gov, or on 
the Internet at http://grants.nih.gov/grants/forms.htm. 
 
Contact: Evan Hadley, NIA, 301-402-1784, 
e-mail: hadleye@exmur.nia.nih.gov; or Gwen 
Collman, NIEHS, 919-541-4980, e-mail: collman@ 
niehs.nih.gov. Reference: PA No. PA-99-145 
 
wh7q@nih.gov; Hilary Sigmon, National Institute of 
 
Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 * Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
A 186 
 
Position Announcements 
 
Postdoctoral Research Opportunities at the 
NIEHS 
 
Listed below are opportunities to conduct research 
with NIEHS scientists in Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina. Applicants must not possess more 
than five years of postdoctoral experience. To apply, 
submit a cover letter, curriculum vitae, bibliography, 
and names of three references to the hiring scientist at 
the corresponding laboratory and mail drop in care of 
NIEHS, PO Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27709 USA. The cover letter should include the posi- 
tion title and HNV number. These vacancies are also 
available on the NIEHS World Wide Web site 
(http://www.niehs.nih.gov/vacancy/postdoc.htm). 
 
Minorities, women, and handicapped individuals 
are encouraged to apply. All applicants receive consid- 
eration without regard to race, religion, color, national 
origin, sex, physical or mental handicap, political affili- 
ation, age (with statutory exceptions), or any other 
nonmerit factor. Positions are open until filled. 
 
Mitochondrial DNA Replication (HNV 97-19) 
 
A position is available to study the molecular mecha- 
nisms of DNA replication of human mitochondrial 
DNA. Research will focus on the in vitro characteriza- 
tion of human mitochondrial DNA replication pro- 
teins and investigate the kinetics of wild-type and 
mutant forms of the mitochondrial DNA polymerase. 
Candidates should have a Ph.D. in biochemistry, 
molecular biology, or biophysical chemistry, and 
research experience in nucleic acid enzymology 
and/or protein purification. 
 
Contact: William Copeland, Laboratory of 
Molecular Genetics, Mail Drop E3-01, 919-541-4792, 
fax: 919-541-7613, e-mail: copelanl@niehs.nih.gov 
Prostaglandins and Related Lipids in Cancer 
(HNV 97-25) 
 
This laboratory is studying the expression of 
prostaglandin H synthases and lipoxygenases in the 
development of colon, breast, and other cancers. We 
are especially interested in the interaction of 
prostaglandins and other lipids with the signaling 
pathways regulating cell growth or apoptosis. The 
applicant should have a Ph.D. and technical experi- 
ence in analytical methods, protein biochemistry, 
and molecular biology. Expertise in cell culture and 
experience with prostaglandin H synthases or 
lipoxygenases is beneficial. 
 
Contact: Thomas Eling, Laboratory of Molecular 
Carcinogenesis, Mail Drop A2-01, 919-541-3911, 
fax: 919-541-0146, e-mail: eling@niehs.nih.gov 
Molecular Neurobiology (HNV 98-29) 
 
The signal transduction pathways regulating expres- 
sion of neuropeptide and cytokine genes in neural 
and glial systems are being investigated through stud- 
ies on the effects of neuropeptides on the biosynthesis 
and release of cytokines in microglial cells and poten- 
tial roles of cytokines in neurodegeneration. 
Applicants should have experience in neuropharma- 
cology, neurochemistry, or molecular biology. 
 
Contact: Jau-Shyong Hong, Laboratory of 
Pharmacology and Chemistry, Mail Drop F-l01, 
919-541-2358, fax: 919-541-0841, e-mail: 
hong3@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Molecular and Cellular Biology (HNV 97) 
 
We are studying the regulation of gene expression 
during differentiation and the mechanism of action of 
retinoids, particularly the role of nuclear receptors and 
other transcriptional factors in the control of gene 
transcription. Studies involve characterization of pro- 
moters of several genes. Applicants must have experi- 
ence in molecular biology techniques. 
 
Contact: Anton Jetten, Laboratory of Pulmonary 
Pathobiology, Mail Drop D2-01, 919-541-2768, 
e-mail: jetten@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Cydooxygenases, NSAIDs, and Cancer 
(HNV 99-7) 
 
We have shown that the knockout of COX- 1 and 
COX-2 genes reduces the incidence of skin and 
intestinal tumorigenesis. Preliminary work has indi- 
cated that altered rates of apoptosis and terminal 
differentiation occur in these organs in the COX- 
deficient mice and may account for the reduced 
tumorigenesis. Further studies will focus on specific 
signal transduction pathways that are affected by 
COX deficiency and that alter apoptotic and differen- 
tiation pathways. A second research opportunity of 
this position will be the characterization of mice that 
overexpress COX-1 or COX-2, including their car- 
cinogenic susceptibilities and the signaling pathways 
altered due to COX overexpression. 
 
Contact: Robert Langenbach, Laboratory of 
Environmental Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis, Mail 
Drop Fl-05, 919-541-7558, fax: 919-541-1460, 
e-mail: langenbl@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Stress-Induced Signaling Pathways (HNV 98-5) 
 
We are investigating the cellular response to stress, 
including the stress-signaling pathways that protect 
against subsequent injury. We are studying precondi- 
tioning (in which brief intermittent periods of stress 
reduce lethal injury during a subsequent prolonged 
period of stress such as ischemia) using perfused hearts 
and isolated cells. We are also studying signaling path- 
ways involved in apoptosis, especially alterations in cal- 
cium homeostasis and its role in apoptosis. 
 
Contact: Elizabeth Murphy, Laboratory of 
Molecular Carcinogenesis, Mail Drop D2-03, 
919-541-3873, fax: 919-541-7880, e-mail: 
murphyl @niehs.nih.gov 
 
Regulation of Signal Transduction Pathways by 
Adaptor Proteins (HNV 98-22) 
 
A position is available to study the function of the 
ShcC adaptor protein in the regulation of signal 
transduction cascades controlled by tyrosine kinases. 
We are also interested in understanding the role of 
ShcC in neural development and differentiation 
using a combination of dominant negative proteins 
and activated forms of ShcC. Current evidence sug- 
gests distinct functions of the various Shc family 
members and we are interested in identifying brain- 
specific targets of ShcC using both yeast two hybrid 
as well as bacterial expression cloning strategies. A 
strong background in protein biochemistry, molecu- 
lar biology, and tissue culture is preferred. 
 
Contact: John O'Bryan, Laboratory of Signal 
Transduction, Mail Drop F3-06, 919-541-3619, fax: 
919-541-1898, e-mail: obryan@niehs.nih.gov 
 
- ' .C 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 
 
The Laboratory of Human 
Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic 
Sciences, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, has a long tradition of 
excellence in the investigation of 
the molecular carcinogenesis and 
epidemiology of human cancer. 
The laboratory now invites appli- 
cations for a tenure-track position 
to study the molecular epidemiol- 
ogy of human cancer. The appli- 
cant should have the potential to 
develop an independent research 
program that utilizes basic 
research discoveries to investigate 
gene-environment interactions in 
human carcinogenesis. 
 
This position is available for a 
Ph.D., M.D., or M.D.IPh.D., with 
a salary commensurate with 
education and experience. A one- 
or two-page statement of research 
interests and goals should be 
submitted in addition to three 
letters of recommendation and a 
curriculum vitae. 
 
Applications must be postmarked 
by 9 June 2000. 
 
NIH is an equal opportunity 
employer. 
 
Contact: Shirley Swindell 
 
Administrative Laboratory Manager 
 
LHC, DBS, NCI 
 
Building 37, Room 2C01 
 
Bethesda, MD 20892-4255 USA 
 
Phone: 301-496-2048 
 
Fax: 301-496-0497 
 
E-mail: 
 
swindels@exchange.nih.gov 
 
A 187 
 
Position Announcements 
 
Renal Secretory Transport Mechanisms 
(HNV 97-16) 
 
The transport mechanisms responsible for elimination 
of xenobiotics are studied in epithelial tissues includ- 
ing kidney and choroid plexus. Applicant will examine 
the mechanisms and energetics of organic anion trans- 
port using cultured monolayers, isolated membrane 
vesicles, and molecular probes. Experience in the bio- 
chemistry, molecular biology, or physiology of mem- 
brane function is expected. Applicant should have a 
Ph.D. or M.D. 
 
Contact: John B. Pritchard, Laboratory of 
Pharmacology and Chemistry, Renal Pharmacology 
Section, Mail Drop FI-03, 919-541-4054, fax: 919- 
541-5737, e-mail: pritchard@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Mechanisms By Which Organisms Produce 
Mutations (HNV 99) 
 
Studies seek to understand the mechanisms by which 
organisms produce mutations. Specific projects 
involve the isolation and molecular characterization of 
antimutator mutants in E. coli, genetic and biochemi- 
cal analysis of DNA replication fidelity in this organ- 
ism, and structure-function analysis of the dnaE and 
dnaQ genes (encoding, respectively, the DNA 
polymerase and exonudeolytic proofreading activity). 
 
Contact: Roel M. Schaaper, Laboratory of 
Molecular Genetics, Mail Drop E3-01, 919-541- 
4250, e-mail: schaaper@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Transgenic Molecular Biology (HNV 99-5) 
 
Two positions are available to elucidate the molecular 
events in the induction of tumors in transgenic 
mouse models. Part of our work focuses on skin 
tumorigenesis in the v-Ha-ras transgenic mouse 
model (Tg.AC), which expresses oncogenic ras from 
a zeta globin promoter. 
 
The first position will work on the characteriza- 
tion and identification of the inverted transgene pro- 
moter region from normal (expressing) and mutant 
(nonexpressing) Tg.AC mice. Several molecular bio- 
logical methodologies (molecular biology, genetics, 
and biochemistry) will be required to attack this pro- 
ject. The second position will work on the identifica- 
tion of endogenous factors (genes and gene products) 
induced by carcinogenic exposure and required for the 
induced expression of the transgene and, secondly, the 
molecular consequences of disrupted signal transduc- 
tion pathways as a consequence of constitutive overex- 
pression of the mutated v-Ha-ras transgene. 
 
Contact: Raymond W. Tennant, Laboratory of 
Environmental Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis, 
Mail Drop Fl-05, 919-541-4175, fax: 919-541- 
1460, e-mail: mitchel3@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Genomic Instability in Vitro and in Vivo 
(HNV 99-4) 
 
Two positions are available immediately to study the 
mechanisms by which genomic alterations arise either 
spontaneously or as the result of in vivo or in vitro 
mutagen/carcinogen exposure. In vivo studies include 
characterization and application of the Big Blue 
transgenic mouse mutation assay system. In addition, 
rodent and human cell lines are used for in vitro stud- 
ies of gene mutation and genomic instability. 
Candidates must have a strong background in molec- 
ular biology and/or somatic cell genetics. Individuals 
with experience in antisense regulation of gene 
expression are especially encouraged to apply. The 
 
initial appointment is renewable up to five years. 
 
Contact: Kenneth R. Tindall, Laboratory of 
Environmental Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis, 
Mail Drop F1-08, 919-541-3275, fax: 919-541- 
1460, e-mail: tindall@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Mechanism of Action and Function of Nudear 
Receptors (HNV 99-9) 
 
A postdoctoral position is available to study the mole- 
cular mechanism of action and function of nuclear 
receptors. The functions of these receptors are exam- 
ined by identifying target genes using cDNA array 
techniques and knockout models. Interaction of 
nuclear receptors with other nuclear proteins is stud- 
ied by two-hybrid system analysis. Candidates should 
have a strong background in molecular biology. 
 
Contact: Anton M. Jetten, Laboratory of 
Pulmonary Pathobiology, Cell Biology Section, Mail 
Drop D2-01, 919-541-2768, fax: 919-541-4133, 
e-mail: jetten@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Cellular Mechanisms of Xenobiotic Transport 
(HNV 99-13) 
 
We study the basic mechanisms that drive xenobiotic 
transport in excretory epithelia (kidney, liver) and bar- 
rier tissues (blood-brain barrier, choroid plexus, gut). 
Experience in the biochemistry, molecular biology, or 
physiology of membrane transport is expected. 
 
Contact: David S. Miller, Laboratory of 
Pharmacology and Chemistry, Mail Drop F1-03, 
919-541-3235, fax: 919-541-1898, e-mail: 
miller@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Cell Cycle Checkpoint Signaling Mechanisms and 
pATM Function (HNV 99-14) 
 
A position is available to investigate signal transduc- 
tion mechanisms regulating cell cycle checkpoints, 
with particular interest in the role of the ataxia telan- 
giectasia mutated (ATM) gene product. Studies will 
focus on the regulation of cyclin/cyclin-dependent 
kinase complexes in response to DNA damage follow- 
ing exposure to selected environmental carcinogens. 
Candidates should have a Ph.D. or equivalent degree 
in molecular biology, cell biology, biochemistry, or a 
related field. Recent graduates are encouraged to apply. 
 
Contact: Richard S. Paules, Laboratory of 
Environmental Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis, 
Mail Drop Fl-05, fax: 919-541-1460, e-mail: 
paules@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Biostatistical Methods in Genetics (HNV 99-15) 
 
A position is available in this branch to develop 
improved statistical methods for likelihood-based 
genetic inference using siblings and their parents. 
Outcomes of interest could be dichotomous disease 
states or quantitative traits. 
 
Contact: Clarice Weinberg, Biostatistics Branch, 
Mail Drop A3-03, 919-541-4927, fax: 919-541-431 1, 
e-mail: weinberg@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Molecular Biology (HNV 99-16) 
 
A position is available for an individual with solid 
training and experience in molecular biology (library 
formation, cloning, bacterial vectors, knockout tech- 
niques) to assume ongoing projects dealing with 
opioid receptors. 
 
Contact: L. H. Lazarus, Laboratory of Com- 
putational Biology and Risk Analysis, Mail Drop 
C3-04, 919-541-3238, fax: 919-541-0626, e-mail: 
lazarus@nichs.nih.gov 
 
Glucocorticoid and Orphan Nudear Receptor 
Action (HNV 99-17) 
 
A position is available to study novel mechanisms of 
glucocorticoid and orphan nuclear receptor action. 
Studies can include cloning of receptor-regulated 
genes, analysis of mechanisms of gene repression by 
nuclear receptors, evaluation of the role of receptor 
phosphorylation in receptor signaling, development of 
novel model systems to study coactivators/corepres- 
sors, and creation of tissue-specific receptor knockouts 
in animals. Expertise in molecular biology, biochem- 
istry, cell biology, or transgenics is desirable. The lab- 
oratory is highly interactive and equipped with state- 
of-the-art equipment. 
 
Contact: John Cidlowski, Laboratory of Signal 
Transduction, Mail Drop E2-02, 919-541-1564, fax: 
919-541-1367, e-mail: cidlowski@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Calcium Signaling (HNV 99-26) 
 
The initial appointment would be for two years with 
the possibility of extensions for an additional one or 
two years. This laboratory is interested in mechanisms 
of calcium signaling in a variety of nonexcitable cell 
models, including epithelial cells, lymphocytes, and 
fibroblasts. We investigate mechanisms of intracellular 
storage and release of calcium as well as mechanisms 
for regulation of calcium movements across the plas- 
ma membrane. Applicants will be considered with 
training in any related area of research, induding cell 
or molecular biology, physiology, or pharmacology. 
However, at this time we are particularly interested in 
individuals with prior training in the areas of either 
cell biology or molecular biology of ion channels. 
Individuals coming to the laboratory with one of 
these skills would have the opportunity to expand 
their training into new areas including molecular biol- 
ogy, electrophysiology, single cell microfluorimetry, 
and confocal microscopy. 
 
Contact: James W. Putney, Jr., Laboratory of 
Signal Transduction, Mail Drop F2-02, 919-541-1420, 
fax: 919-541-1898, e-mail: putney@niehs.nih.gov 
Eicosanoids and Pulmonary Immune Function 
(HNV 99-37) 
 
A position is available to study alterations in pul- 
monary immune function and host resistance in 
cyclooxygenase-deficient mice. Emphasis will be 
placed on delineation of the immunologic mecha- 
nisms involved in pulmonary hypersensitivity respons- 
es to allergens and the role of inflammatory mediators 
in asthma/airway hyper-responsiveness. Applicants 
should possess a Ph.D. in molecular biology, cell biol- 
ogy, biochemistry, immunology, toxicology, or a relat- 
ed field. Salary will be commensurate with experience. 
 
Contact: Dori Germolec, Laboratory of Toxicol- 
ogy, Mail Drop Cl-03, 919-541-3230, fax: 919-541- 
0870, e-mail: germolec@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Arachidonic Acid Metabolism (HNV 99-38) 
 
A position is available to study the biological signifi- 
cance of cytochrome P450 arachidonic acid metabo- 
lites in the lung and intestine. Emphasis will be placed 
on developing novel systems to study the effects of 
altered P450 expression on cell and organ function. 
Applicants should possess a Ph.D. in molecular biolo- 
gy, cell biology, biochemistry, toxicology, or a related 
field. Salary will be commensurate with experience. 
 
Contact: Darryl C. Zeldin, Laboratory of 
Pulmonary Pathobiology, Mail Drop D2-01, 919-541- 
 
1 169, fax: 919-541-4133, e-mail: zeldin@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 * Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
A 188 
 
Position Announcements 
 
Mechanisms of Cell Adhesion and Migration 
(HNV 99-39) 
 
A position is available for a highly motivated individ- 
ual to join a research group interested in characterizing 
molecular mechanisms of cell adhesion and migration 
focusing on the regulation of integrin receptors, 
adhesion-mediated signal transduction, and 
mechanisms of tumor cell migration, invasion, and 
metastasis. Applicants must have a Ph.D., M.D., or 
equivalent. A strong background in molecular and cell 
biology is required. 
 
Contact: Steven K. Akiyama, Laboratory of 
Molecular Carcinogenesis, Mail Drop A2-09, 
919-541-3467, fax: 919-541-5465, e-mail: akiyama@ 
niehs.nih.gov 
 
Protein NMR (HNV 99-40) 
 
The NMR group is seeking to fill a full-time position 
in the analysis of protein structure by NMR spec- 
troscopy. Current projects include the analysis of E. 
coli DNA polymerase structure and the development 
and application of interligand Overhauser effects. The 
successful candidate must have a significant back- 
ground in the analysis of complex NMR experiments 
using automated resonance assignment software such 
as NMR View, FELIX, or ANSIG, and structural 
analysis based on NMR data using XPLOR, DYANA, 
or analogous software. The initial appointment is for 
a period of two years, renewable for a maximum of 
five years. Available instrumentation indudes Varian 
Inova 600, UnityPlus 400 and 500 MHz spectrome- 
ters, and two Varian Unity 500 spectrometers. Salary 
is the standard NIH fellowship of $26,500 for appli- 
cants with no prior postdoctoral experience, with 
adjustments based on the experience of the candidate. 
 
Contact: Robert London, Laboratory of 
Structural Biology, Mail Drop MR-01, 919-541-7880, 
fax: 919-541-4879, e-mail: london@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Mechanisms of Chemical-Induced 
 
Hepatocarcinogenesis (HNV 99-41) 
 
A fellow position is available in the Metabolism and 
Exposure Markers Section of the Laboratory of 
Pharmacology and Chemistry. The incumbent will 
study the mechanisms of chemical-induced hepatocar- 
cinogenesis both in vivo and in vitro with emphasis on 
peroxisome proliferators. This research will include 
characterization of chemical and biological markers of 
exposure, as well as other mechanism-based biological 
end points such as cell proliferation, programmed cell 
death, and gene expression. Molecular biology experi- 
ence including isolation of RNA, DNA, and proteins, 
Western and Northern blot analysis, RTPCR analysis 
of mRNAs, and immunohistochemistry are desirable. 
Qualifications for this position are a doctorate degree 
in chemistry, pharmacology, toxicology, biochemistry, 
molecular biology, or a related area. 
 
Contact: Burhan Ghanayem, Laboratory of 
Pharmacology and Chemistry, Mail Drop B3-10, 
919-541-3369, fax: 919-541-4632, e-mail: 
ghanayem@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Cell Adhesion and Signal Transduction Tumor Cell 
Metastasis (HNV 99-42) 
 
Intramural Research Training Award positions are 
available in the Metastasis Section of the Laboratory of 
Molecular Carcinogenesis to study signaling pathways 
and mechanisms of cell adhesion and invasion in 
human tumor cells. A Ph.D. with a strong background 
 
in molecular biology and/or signal transduction is 
 
essential. Ongoing research emphasizes 1) protein 
kinase C and MAP kinase signaling pathways induced 
by fatty acids in tumor cells in vitro, 2) mechanisms of 
tumor cell adhesion, migration, and invasion in vitro, 
3) alterations in cytoskeletal structures in metastatic 
tumor cells, and 4) the role of protein glycosylation in 
tumor cell behavior. 
 
Contact: John Roberts, Laboratory of Molecular 
Carcinogenesis, Mail Drop C2-14, 919-541-5023, 
fax: 919-541-7784, e-mail: robertsl@niehs.nih.gov 
Nudear Receptors in Molecular Toxicology 
(HNV 99-43) 
 
An Intramural Research Training Award or Visiting 
Fellow position is available to study the roles of 
nuclear orphan receptors in the induction of drug- 
metabolizing enzymes such as cytochromes P450. 
The receptor CAR translocates to the liver nucleus 
following treatment with phenobarbital and acti- 
vates the P450 genes. The signal transduction path- 
way that regulates the phenobarbital-elicited 
nuclear translocation of CAR will be explored. 
Candidates should have a strong background in sig- 
nal transduction and demonstrated experience with 
molecular biology techniques. 
 
Contact: Masahiko Negishi, Laboratory of 
Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, Mail 
Drop E4-07, 919-541-2404, fax: 919-541-0696, 
e-mail: negishi@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Structure-Function Studies of Zinc Finger Proteins 
(HNV 99-44) 
 
A position is available to study the relationships 
between structure and function of a recently described 
family of zinc finger proteins, some of whose mem- 
bers appear to be involved in regulating mRNA stabil- 
ity. The research project will focus on several aspects 
of this process, from transcription of the genes encod- 
ing these proteins to functional studies of normal and 
mutant proteins. Candidates should have a Ph.D. in 
molecular or cellular biology, biochemistry, or a relat- 
ed discipline. 
 
Contact: Perry J. Blackshear, Laboratory of Signal 
Transduction, Mail Drop A2-05, 919-541-4899, fax: 
919-541-4571, e-mail: blackO09@niehs.nih.gov 
Structure-Function Studies of Prokaryotic 
 
Nudeotide Excision Repair Proteins (HNV 00-1) 
Two positions are available to study how nucleotide 
excision repair proteins recognize and process DNA 
damage. Studies using several biochemical and mole- 
cular biology approaches will characterize how the 
UvrABC nuclease system interacts with DNA sub- 
strates containing specific DNA lesions. Activities of 
the E. coli Uvr proteins are being compared with 
their thermophilic homologues from the bacteria 
Bacillus caldotenax. Studies will examine the thermo- 
dynamics and kinetics of repair protein binding to 
fluorescence DNA adducts using fluorescence spec- 
troscopy. X-ray diffraction and 2D-NMR tech- 
niques combined with site-directed mutagenesis will 
allow characterization of the pertinent amino 
acid-DNA contacts that provide favorable interac- 
tions for increased specificity and stability of the 
protein-DNA interactions involved in damage 
recognition and repair. 
 
Contact: Ben Van Houten, Laboratory of 
Molecular Genetics, Mail Drop D3-01, 919-541- 
2799, fax: 919-541-5064, e-mail: vanhoutl@ 
 
Functional Consequences of Mitochondrial 
Nucleic Acid Damage (HNV 00-2) 
 
One postdoctoral position is available to study the 
molecular consequences of damage to nucleic acids in 
the mitochondria. Mitochondrial DNA and RNA are 
vulnerable to damage by oxidative stress. We are cur- 
rently testing the hypothesis that reactive oxygen 
leads to alterations in mitochondrial function, rapid 
and extensive damage to mitochondrial nucleic acids, 
alterations in electron transport, and the production 
of more ROS. These events ultimately lead to a cata- 
strophic demise of mitochondrial function in a feed- 
forward damage cascade. Studies using biochemical 
and molecular biology approaches will characterize 
mitochondrial function, mitochondrial DNA dam- 
age, and mitochondrial RNA levels and apoptosis fol- 
lowing aging and oxidative stress. These approaches 
are being used in specific tissue culture and mouse 
models of neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Parkinson disease. 
 
Contact: Ben Van Houten, Laboratory of 
Molecular Genetics, Mail Drop D3-01, 919-541- 
2799, fax: 919-541-5064, e-mail: vanhoutl@ 
niehs.nih.gov 
 
Signal Transduction by Inositol Phosphates 
(HNV 00-3) 
 
This laboratory is recruiting biochemists/molecular 
biologists to join a productive research team that 
applies biochemical, molecular, and electrophysiologi- 
cal techniques to the study of signal transduction by 
inositol phosphates. Novel signaling proteins are being 
identified, and their actions are being analyzed at a 
molecular level using several approaches, including 
mutagenesis and the manipulation of their cellular 
expression in appropriate cell models. A strong back- 
ground in molecular biology and/or biochemistry is 
required. For details of the laboratory's recent achieve- 
ments, see http://dir.niehs.nih.gov/dirlst/shears.htm. 
 
Contact: Stephen B. Shears, Laboratory of Signal 
Transduction, Mail Drop F2-06, 919-541-1898, fax: 
919-541-0793, e-mail: shears@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Molecular Epidemiological Studies of 
 
Gene-Environment Interaction (HNV 00-5) 
 
Studies of gene-environment interaction are per- 
formed. A molecular biologist/toxicologist is sought 
to study human genetic susceptibility markers in envi- 
ronmental exposure-induced disease. The individual 
will participate in the ongoing development of assays 
for at-risk genotypes for genes that modulate carcino- 
gen exposure, DNA repair, and disease. These assays 
will be applied to multiple end point molecular epi- 
demiology studies of genetic toxicology and cancer. 
Samples from numerous human studies are available 
for analysis, and additional studies are in progress. 
Experience with PCR, DNA sequencing, and other 
molecular techniques is desirable. We offer excellent 
resources and opportunities for collaboration in a 
growing program. While candidates with five or fewer 
years of relevant postdoctoral research experience are 
eligible, recent graduates are encouraged to apply. 
 
Contact: Douglas A. Bell, Laboratory of 
Computational Biology and Risk Analysis, Mail Drop 
C3-03, 919-541-7686, fax: 919-541-1479, e-mail: 
bell1@niehs.nih.gov 
 
niehs.nih.gov 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 
 
A 189 
 
Position Announcements 
 
Genetic Basis for Human Gene Expression Profiles 
Using Microarray Technology (HNV 00-6) 
 
A postdoctoral position is available to investigate the 
role of human genetic variation on gene expression 
profiles following exposure to environmental toxicants 
and during disease development. Environmental 
genomic studies will focus on developing gene expres- 
sion profiles from human in vitro cell cultures and 
fresh lymphocytes that have been exposed to DNA- 
damaging agents and other carcinogens. The cells uti- 
lized are part of the NIEHS Environmental Genome 
Project and have an extensive database of genetic 
polymorphisms. Expression profiles will be related to 
specific exposures and genotypes, with the long-range 
goal of relating expression profiles to disease risk. 
Expression profiles will be generated using the 
NIEHS's state-of-the-art cDNA microarray facility. 
 
Candidates should have a Ph.D., M.D., or 
equivalent degree in molecular biology, cell biology, 
 
biochemistry, genetics, toxicology, or a related field. 
Additional knowledge of biostatistics and bioinformat- 
ics is desirable. While candidates with five or fewer 
years of relevant postdoctoral research experience are 
eligible, recent graduates are encouraged to apply. 
 
Contact: Douglas A. Bell, Laboratory of 
Computational Biology and Risk Analysis, Mail Drop 
C3-03, 919-541-7686, fax: 919-541-1479, e-mail: 
belll@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Mass Spectrometric Characterization of Proteins 
(HNV 00-8) 
 
A position will be available in September 2000 to 
study the application of mass spectrometry to protein 
structure analysis, including tertiary structure, protein 
complexes, and posttranslational modifications. 
Candidates should have a Ph.D. in analytical chem- 
istry (mass spectrometry) or biochemistry (protein 
chemistry) or a related discipline. 
 
Contact: Kenneth B. Tomer, Laboratory of 
Structural Biology, Mail Drop FO-03, 919-541-1966, 
fax: 919-558-7063, e-mail: tomer@niehs.nih.gov 
Regulation of Lactoferrin Gene Expression 
(HNV 00-9) 
 
A position is available immediately in the laboratory 
of Dr. Christina Teng to investigate the regulation of 
lactoferrin gene expression in a tissue-specific manner 
and to participate in the generation of knockout 
mice. Candidates should have a strong molecular 
biology background. Knowledge in steroid hormone 
action and cell biology is desired. Applicants must 
have a Ph.D. 
 
Contact: Christina Teng, Laboratory of 
Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, 
Mail Drop E2-01, 919-541-0344, fax: 919-541- 
0696, e-mail: teng@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Calendar 
 
June 
 
15-19 June, Thu-Mon. NEHA 64th Annual Educational 
Conference and Exhibition, Denver, Colorado. 
Information: NEHA, 720 South Colorado Boulevard, 
Suite 970-S, Denver, CO 80246-1925 USA, 303-756- 
9090, fax: 303-691-9490, Internet: http://www.neha.org/ 
 
18-22 June, Sun-Thu. 4th International Conference on 
Arsenic Exposure and Health Effects, San Diego, California. 
Information: Willard Chappell, University of Colorado at 
Denver, Campus Box 36, PO Box 173364, Denver, CO 
80217-3364 USA, 303-556-4520, fax: 303-556-4292, 
e-mail: as2000@carbon.cudnver.edu, Internet: http:// 
www.cudenver.edu/as2000/ 
 
20-24 June, Tue-Sat. Tuberculosis 2000: Past, Present, and 
 
Future, New York, New York. Information: American 
Society for Microbiology Conferences, 1325 Massachusetts 
Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005 USA, 202-942-9248, 
fax: 202-942-9340, e-mail: MeetingsInfo@asmusa.org 
 
21-24 June, Wed-Sat. 6th International Interdisciplinary 
Conference on the Environment, Montreal, Canada. 
Information: Kevin L. Hickey, Economics/Global Studies 
Department, Assumption College, 500 Salisbury Street, 
Worcester, MA 01615-0005 USA, 508-767-7296, fax: 508- 
767-7382, e-mail: khickey@assumption.edu, Internet: 
http://champion.iupui.edu/-mreiter/iea.htm 
 
22-25 June, Thu-Sun. Atlantic Coast Contaminants 
Workshop, Bar Harbor, Maine. Information: S. Wilcomb, 
The Jackson Laboratory, 600 Main Street, Bar Harbor, ME 
04609-1500 USA, 207-288-6419, fax: 207-288-6080, e-mail: 
slw@jax.org, Internet: http://www.meriresearch.org/ 
workshop.html 
 
25-26 June, Sun-Mon. Nanoscience and Nanotechnology: 
 
Shaping Biomedical Research, Bethesda, Maryland. 
Information: Mark Brown, MasiMax Resources, Inc., 
1375 Piccard Drive, Suite 360, Rockville, MD 20850 
USA, 240-632-5618, fax: 240-632-0519, e-mail: 
mbrown@masimax.com 
 
29-30 June, Thu-Fri. Genomics, Proteomics, Bio- 
 
informatics, and Developmental Toxicology in the 21st 
Century, Palm Beach, Florida. Information: Philip E. 
Mirkes, e-mail: pemst@u.washington.edu, Internet: 
http://teratology.org/ 
 
July 
 
4-6 July, Tue-Thu. URBAN 21: Global Conference on the 
Urban Future, Berlin, Germany. Information: Federal Office 
 
for Building and Regional Planning, Am Michaelshof 8, D- 
53177 Bonn, Germany, fax: +49-22-8826315, e-mail: 
info@urban2I.de, Internet: http://www.urban21.de/ 
 
8-13 July, Sat-Thu. 6th International Symposium on the 
 
Biosafety of Genetically Modified Organisms, Saskatoon, 
Canada. Information: College of Agriculture, University of 
Saskatchewan, 2D30-51 Campus Drive, Saskatoon SK S7N 
5A8, Canada, 306-966-7881, fax: 306-966-8894, Internet: 
http://www.ag.usask.ca/ 
 
10-14 July, Mon-Fri. MDO 2000: 13th International 
Symposium on Microsomes and Drug Oxidations, Stresa, 
Italy. Information: M. Di Paolo, c/o M.A.F. Servizi, Via G. B. 
Vico 7, 10128-Torino TO, Italy, fax: +39-0-1150-5976, 
e-mail: mdipaolo@mafservizi.it 
 
10-14 July, Mon-Fri. 4th Intemational Scientific Conference 
 
on Occupational Hygiene: Occupational Hygiene in 
Developing Countries, Cairns, Australia. Information: 
Cheryle Clynes, Australian Institute of Occupational Hygiene 
Administrator, Cairns 2000, PO Box 1205, Tullamarine VIC 
3043, Australia, +61-3-9335-2577, fax: +61-3-9335-3454, 
e-mail: aiohcc@ibm.net 
 
16-19 July, Sun-Wed. International Conference on 
Emerging Infectious Diseases 2000, Atlanta, Georgia. 
Information: D. Peter Drotman, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, Mail Stop A12, 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, 
GA 30333 USA, 404-639-4018, e-mail: dpdl@cdc.gov 
 
16-20 July, Sun-Thu. Beyond the Genome: Understanding 
 
and Exploiting Molecules and Cells in the Third 
Millennium, Birmingham, United Kingdom. Information: 
Congress Secretariat, Biochemical Society, 59 Portland Place, 
London, WIN 3AJ, United Kingdom, +44-1-715-803-481, 
fax: +44-1-716-377-626, e-mail: info@iubmb2000.org 
 
17-19 July, Mon-Wed. Engineering Solutions to Indoor Air 
Quality Problems Symposium, Raleigh, North Carolina. 
Information: Michael C. Osborne, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, MD-54, Research Triangle Park, NC 
27711 USA, 919-541-4113, fax: 919-541-2157, e-mail: 
osborne.michael@epa.gov 
 
August 
 
6-10 August, Sun-Thu. 11th World Conference on Tobacco 
 
or Health, Chicago, Illinois. Information: Anne Jenkins, 
Conference Manager, 515 North State Street, Chicago, IL 
60610 USA, 312-464-5159, fax: 312-464-4111, e-mail: 
1 1 thwctoh@ama-assn.org 
 
20-25 August, Sun-Fri. 15th International Congress of 
Tropical Medicine and Malaria, Cartagena, Colombia. 
Information: Felipe Guhl, Centro de Investigaciones en 
Parasitologia Tropical, Universidad de los Andes, Apartado 
Aereo 4976, Bogota, Colombia, +571-286-7593, fax: +571- 
284-1890, e-mail: fguhl@uniandes.edu.co 
 
20-25 August, Sun-Fri. American Chemical Society 220th 
National Meeting, Washington, DC. Information: ACS 
Meetings, 1155 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036- 
4899 USA, 202-872-4396, fax: 202-872-6128, 
e-mail: a nelson@acs.org 
 
26-29 August, Sat-Tue. 9th International Conference on the 
Combined Effects of Environmental Factors, Savonlinna, 
Finland. Information: Olavi Manninen, Labour Protection 
Department, PO Box 2672, FIN-33101 Tampere, Finland, 
+358-3-260-8820, fax: +358-3-260-8899, e-mail: 
olavi.manninen@tsp.stm.vn.fi 
 
27 August-1 September, Sun-Fri. 26th International 
Congress on Occupational Health, Singapore. Information: 
ICOH 2000, Kent Ridge, PO Box 1076 Singapore 911103, 
Republic of Singapore, +65-874-4988, fax: +65-779-1489, 
e-mail: icoh2000@postl.com 
 
September 
 
2-8 September, Sat-Fri. 4th International Conference on 
 
Integrating GIS and Environmental Modeling, Banff, 
Canada. Information: Bradley Parks, CIRES, University of 
Colorado, Campus Box 216, Boulder, CO 80309 USA, 303- 
497-6330, fax: 303-497-6513, e-mail: bparks@ 
colorado.edu 
 
3-8 September, Sun-Fri. Biotechnology 2000: 11th 
 
International Biotechnology Symposium and Exhibition, 
Berlin, Germany. Information: 11th IBS, Dechema e.V., 
Theodor-Heuss-Allee 25, D-60486 Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany, +49-69-7564241, fax: +49-69-7564201, e-mail: 
info@dechema.de, Internet: http://www.dechema.de/ 
 
9-16 September, Sat-Sat. International Health Funds 
Convention, Cairns, Australia. Information: Ruth Lilian, 
ICMS Australasia, GPO Box 2609, Level 8, 2 Bridge Street, 
Sydney NSW 2001, Australia, +61-2-9241-1478, fax: +61-1- 
9251-3552, e-mail: reply@icmsaust.com.au 
 
14-17 September, Thu-Sun. Annual Scientific Meeting of 
 
the North American Conference of Clinical Toxicology, 
Tucson, Arizona. Information: Contemporary Forums, 
11900 Silvergate Drive, Dublin, CA 94568-2257 USA, 925- 
828-7100, fax: 925-828-2121, e-mail: nacct@cforums.com 
 
Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 * Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
A 190 
 
Calendar 
 
18-19 September, Mon-Tue. 2000 Electronic Product 
Recovery and Recycling Conference, Washington, DC. 
Information: Environmental Health Center, 1025 
Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 1200, Washington, DC 
20036 USA, 202-293-2270, fax: 202-293-0032 
 
23-26 September, Sat-Tue. 18th International 
Neurotoxicology Conference: Children's Health and the 
Environment 2000, Colorado Springs, Colorado. 
Information: Joan Cranmer, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, 1120 Marshall, Room 304, Little Rock, AR 
72202 USA, 501-320-2986, fax: 501-320-4978, 
e-mail: CranmerjoanM@exchange.uams.edu 
 
25-28 September, Mon-Thu. Enviro-Pro Expo/ 
TECOMEX 2000, Mexico City, Mexico. Information: 
Susan Cantor, E. J. Krause & Associates, 6550 Rock 
Spring Drive, Suite 500, Bethesda, MD 20817 USA, 
301-493-5500, fax: 301-493-5705, e-mail: cantor@ 
ejkrause.com, Internet: http://www.ejkrause.com/ 
 
October 
 
3-6 October, Tue-Fri. 3rd Asian Conference on Food Safety 
 
and Nutrition, Beijing, China. Information: Lili C. Merritt, 
International Life Sciences Institute, 1126 16th Street NW, 
Washington, DC 20036-48 10 USA, 202-659-0074, fax: 
202-659-8654, e-mail: branch@ilsi.org 
 
3-7 October, Tue-Sat. American Society of Human Genetics 
Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Information: 
ASHG, 9650 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3998 
USA, 301-571-1825, fax: 301-530-7079, e-mail: 
mryan@genetics.faseb.org 
 
7-10 October, Sat-Tue. International Symposium on 
Growth Hormone in Immune Reconstitution, St. 
Petersburg, Florida. Information: Leslie Nies, Serono 
Symposia USA, 100 Longwater Circle, Norwell, MA 02061 
USA, 1-800-283-8088, fax: 781-982-9481 
 
16-18 October, Mon-Wed. e.hormone 2000- 
Environmental Hormones: Past, Present, Future, New 
Orleans, Louisiana. Information: John McLachlan, Tulane 
University, 1430 Tulane University SL-3, New Orleans, LA 
70112-2699 USA, 504-585-6910, e-mail: e.hormone@ 
tulane.edu 
 
16-19 October, Mon-Thu. 16th Annual International 
Conference on Contaminated Soils, Sediments, and 
Water, Amherst, Massachusetts. Information: Denise 
Leonard, Northeast Regional Environmental Health 
Center, N344 Morrill Science Center, University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003 USA, 413-545-1239, 
e-mail: dleonard@schoolph.umass.edu, Internet: 
http://www.aehs.com/ECC/echomepage2000.html 
 
24-28 October, Tue-Sat. 10th Meeting of the North 
American International Society for the Study of 
Xenobiotics, Indianapolis, Indiana. Information: Nancy 
Holahan, ISSX, PO Box 3, Cabin John, MD 20818 USA, 
301-983-2434, fax: 301-983-5357, e-mail: nholahan@ 
issx.org, Internet: http://www.issx.org/ 
 
26-27 October, Thu-Fri. Symposium on Isocyanates: 
 
Sampling, Analysis, and Health Effects, Orlando, Florida. 
Information: Irene D. DeGraff, Symposium Cochair, 
Supelco, Supelco Park, Bellefonte, PA 16823-0048 USA, 
814-359-5724, fax: 814-359-3409, e-mail: idegraff@sial.com 
 
29 October-3 November, Sun-Fri. ICE 2000: 11th 
 
International Congress of Endocrinology, Sydney, Australia. 
Information: Phil Peterson, ICMS Australasia, GPO Box 
2609, Sydney NSW 2001, Australia, +61-2- 9241-1478, fax: 
+61-2-9251-3552 
 
November 
 
5-8 November, Sun-Wed. American Association of Cereal 
Chemists Annual Meeting, Kansas City, Missouri. 
Information: AACC, 3340 Pilot Knob Road, St. Paul, MN 
55121-2097 USA, 651-454-7250, fax: 651-454-0766, 
e-mail: aacc@scisoc.org 
 
23-24 November, Thu-Fri. 2nd European Conference on 
 
Paediatric Asthma, London, United Kingdom. Information: 
Castle House Medical Conferences, 3 Linden Close, 
Tunbridge Wells, Kent, TN4 8HH, United Kingdom, +44- 
0-1892-539-606, fax: +44-0-1892-517-773, e-mail: 
asthma@castlehouse.co.uk 
 
25-29 November, Sat-Wed. 4th World Stroke Congress, 
Melbourne, Australia. Information: Congress Secretariat, c/o 
ICMS, 84 Queensbridge Street, Southbank VIC 3006, 
Australia, +61-3-9682-0244, fax: +61-3-9682-0288, e-mail: 
stroke@icms.com.au 
 
December 
 
9-13 December, Sat-Wed. American Society for Cell 
Biology 40th Annual Meeting, San Francisco, California. 
Information: American Society for Cell Biology, 9650 
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20814-3992 USA, 301-530- 
7153, fax: 301-530-7139, e-mail: ascbinfo@ascb.org 
 
13-16 December, Wed-Sat. Ground Water: A Trans- 
 
boundary, Strategic, and Geopolitical Resource, Las Vegas, 
Nevada. Information: Bob Masters, National Ground Water 
Association, 601 Dempsey Road, Westerville, OH 43081 
USA, 1-800-551-7379, extension 527, fax: 614-898-7786, 
e-mail: rmaste@ngwa.org, Internet: http://www.ngwa.org/ 
education/agwse2.html 
 
How to Reach Us 
 
If you have a Fellowships, Grants, & Awards, Position Announcements, or Calendar item you 
would like included, follow the instructions below. 
 
Fellowship, Grant, & Awards-Provide a concise description of the fellowship, grant, or award 
 
requirements including the application requirements, submission address, and deadline. These 
ads run free of charge. 
 
Position Announcem Provide a concise description of the position announcement including 
 
the application requirements, submission address, and deadline. Each inch of text for line classi- 
fieds costs $75.00 per issue (two-inch minimum; larger ads are available). All listings also appear 
online free of charge for the duration of the paid ad. 
 
Calendar of Events-Provide the name, date(s), location, and point of contact including address for 
 
each event. Include fax number and Internet address if possible. These ads run free of charge. 
 
Public Service Advertising-On a space-available basis, we will accept your public service 
 
announcements in a variety of formats. We can accept full- or half-page and one- or two- 
column camera-ready ads. If you do not have a formal ad but can provide an electronic ver- 
sion of your text via e-mail or on a diskette, we will include it for a limited time in the journal. 
How to Submit Material to EHP-We accept electronic submissions via e-mail or diskette, text 
 
copy, and camera-ready copy. Send your material to EHP Announcements, NIEHS, Mail Drop 
EC-15, PO Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 USA, fax: 919-541-0273, e-mail: 
surak@niehs.nih.gov 
 
Environmental Health Perspectives * Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 
 
Announcing... 
 
The Fifth Symposium 
 
of the U.S. EPA 
 
National Health and 
Environmental Effects 
Research Laboratory 
 
Indicators in Health and 
 
Ecological Risk Assessment 
 
w^EPA 
 
June 6-8,2000 
 
Research Triangle Park, 
 
North Carolina 
 
The Fifth Symposium of the National 
Health and Environmental Effects 
Research Laboratory (NHEERL) will 
explore indicators of risk for human 
health and ecological condition. 
Various aspects of human and ecosys- 
tem risk assessment may not always 
coincide, yet the scientific foundation 
for assessment is generated jointly in 
the research arena. In addition, a 
common process is used to generate 
assessment questions, assessment end- 
points, and appropriate indicators. Six 
interactive sessions at the Symposium 
will emphasize dialogue between risk 
assessors, managers, and research sci- 
entists toward a better understanding 
of indicator strategies, critical research 
needs, and development of comple- 
mentary-health and ecosystem-indi- 
cators. The six sessions include: 
 
Persistent Bioaccumulating Toxicants 
 
Endocrine Disrupting Chemicals 
 
Ambient Ozone 
 
Global Atmospheric Change 
 
Harmful Algal Blooms 
 
Coastal Ecosystem Integrity 
 
Further information on the Fifth 
 
NHEERL Symposium may be found at 
 
www.epa.gov/nheerl/symposium 
 
or by calling (919) 541-0328. 
 
Sponsored by: The National Health and 
 
Environmental Effects Research Laboratory 
 
(NHEERL), U.S. EPA 
 
A 191 
 
l 
 
- 
 
l 
 
New Books 
 
Adipocyte Biology and Hormone Signalling 
j M Ntambi, ed. 
 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2000, 300 pp. 
ISBN: 1-58603-002-7, $117 
 
Animal Models of Neurological Disease II: 
Metabolic Encephalopathies and Epilepsies 
 
Alan A. Boulton, Glen B. Baker, Roger F Butterworth 
Totowa, NJ: The Humana Press, 2000, 380 pp. 
ISBN: 0-89603-211-6, $152 
 
Antioxidant and Redox Regulation of Genes 
Chandan Sen, Helmut Sies, PatrzickA. Baeuerle 
 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1999, 500 pp. 
ISBN: 0-12-636670-5, $129 
 
Apoptosis in Toxicology 
 
Ruth Roberts, Gerry Cohen, eds. 
 
London: Taylor & Francis, 2000, 288 pp. 
ISBN: 0-7484-0815-0, $99 
 
The Biodiversity Crisis and Crustacea 
 
J Carel von Vaupel Klein, Frederick Schram, eds. 
 
Rotterdam, Netherlands: A. A. Balkema Publishers, 
2000, 800 pp. ISBN: 90-5410-478-3, $110 
 
Bioinformatics Basics: Applications in Biological 
Science and Medicine 
 
Hooman H. Rashidi, Lukas K Buehler 
 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1999, 200 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8493-2375-4, $69.95 
 
Chitin and Chitinases 
 
Pierre Joll?s, Riccardo A. A. Muzzarelli, eds. 
 
Basel, Switzerland: Birkhauser Verlag, 1999, 
360 pp. ISBN: 3-7643-5815-7, $175 
 
Clostridium Botulinunm A Practical Approach 
to the Organism and Its Control in Foods 
Chris Belt Alec Kyriakides 
 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell Science, Ltd., 
2000, 312 pp. ISBN: 0-6320-5521-9, $37 
 
The Effect of Environmental Pollution on 
 
Human Health in the Baltic States: Assessment 
and Regional Differences 
Ott Roots 
 
Tallinn, Estonia: Estonian Environmental 
Information Centre, 1999, 120 pp. 
 
ISBN: 9985-881-13-3, price not available 
 
Gene Therapy in Inflammatory Diseases 
C H. Evans, P. D. Robbins, eds. 
 
Basel, Switzerland: Birkhauser Verlag, 2000, 
250 pp. ISBN: 3-7643-5855-6, $145 
 
Global Environmental Change and 
Agriculture: Assessing the Impacts 
George Frisvolc4 Betsey Kuhn, eds. 
 
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 
1999, 368 pp. ISBN: 1-85898-631-1, $100 
 
Groundwater Flow and Contaminant 
Transport in Carbonate Aquifers 
 
Ira D. Sasowsky, Carol M Wicks, eds. 
 
Rotterdam, Netherlands: A. A. Balkema Publishers, 
2000, 200 pp. ISBN: 90-5410498-8, $60 
 
Handbook of Bacterial Adhesion: Principles, 
Methods, and Applications 
 
Yuehuei H. An, Richardj. Friedman, eds. 
 
Totowa, NJ: The Humana Press, 2000, 672 pp. 
ISBN: 0-89603-794-0, $135 
 
Hemochromatosis: Genetics, Pathophysiology, 
Diagnosis and Treatment 
 
James C Barton, Corwin Q. Edwards, eds. 
 
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge 
 
University Press, 2000, 588 pp. ISBN: 0-521- 
59380-8, $177 
 
The Horizontal Gene Pool: Bacterial Plasmids 
and Gene Spread 
 
Christopher M Thomas, ed 
 
Newark, NJ: Harwood Academic Publishers, 2000, 
440 pp. ISBN: 90-5702-462-5, $110 
 
Immune and Receptor Assays in Theory and 
Practice 
 
Patrick Englebienne 
 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1999, 400 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8493-0061-4, $99.95 
 
Information Resources in Toxicology, 3rd Edition 
Philip Wexler, PerttiJ Hakkinen, Gerald Kennedy, 
Frederick W Stoss, eds. 
 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 1999, 921 pp. 
ISBN: 0-12-744770-9, $159.95 
 
Intermolecular Cross-Talk in Tumor Metastasis 
G. G. Skouteris, G. L. Nicolson, eds. 
 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 1999, 314 pp. 
ISBN: 90-5199-456-7, $112 
 
Metal Ions in Biological Systems, Volume 37: 
 
Manganese and Its Role in Biological Processes 
Astrid Sigel, Helmut Sigel 
 
New York: Marcel Dekker, 2000, 816 pp. 
ISBN: 0-8247-0288-3, $250 
 
Micronutrients in Health and Disease 
 
Ian Bremner, Peterj Aggett, Philip James, eds. 
 
London: Royal Society of Medicine Press, 1999. 
ISBN: 1-85315-435-0, $57 
 
Molecular Genetics of Mycobacteria 
 
William R Jacobs, Graham F Ha#ll eds. 
 
Washington, DC: ASM Press, 2000, 500 pp. 
ISBN: 1-55581-191-4, $110 
 
Molecular Mechanisms of Signal Transduction 
J. L. Bos, K W A. Wirtz 
 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2000, 350 pp. 
ISBN: 1-58603-016-7, $117 
 
Monitoring Ambient Air Quality for Health 
Impact Assessment 
 
WHO Regional Office for Europe 
 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 1999, 196 pp. 
ISBN: 92-890-1351-6, $55.80 
 
Neurogenetics 
F M La Ferla 
 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell Science, Ltd., 
2000, 352 pp. ISBN: 0-6320-4388-1, $62 
 
Nutrition and Immunology: Principles and Practice 
M Eric Gershwin, J. Bruce German, Carl L. Keen, eds. 
Totowa, NJ: The Humana Press, 1999, 520 pp. 
ISBN: 0-89603-719-3, $149.50 
 
Pathology and Pathogenesis of Human Viral 
Disease 
 
John E Craighead 
 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2000, 472 pp. 
ISBN: 0-12-195160-X, $129.95 
 
Pesticide Removal by Combined Ozonation and 
Granular Activated Carbon Filtration 
Ervin Orlandini 
 
Rotterdam, Netherlands: A. A. Balkema Publishers, 
1999, 182 pp. ISBN: 90-5410-414-7, $40 
 
Pesticides and the Future: Minimizing Chronic 
Exposure of Humans and the Environment 
R J. Kuhr, N. Motoyama, eds. 
 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, 1999, 332 pp. 
ISBN: 90-5199-388-9, $149 
 
The Political Economy of Environmental 
Protectionism 
Achim Kirber 
 
Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar Publishing, 
2000, 172 pp. ISBN: 1-84064-242-4, $70 
 
Prediction: Science, Decision Making, and the 
Future of Nature 
 
Daniel Sarewitz, RogerA. Pielke, RadfordByerly, eds. 
Washington, DC: Island Press, 2000, 400 pp. 
ISBN: 1-55963-775-7, $60 (hardback); 
1-55963-776-5, $29.50 (paperback) 
 
A Primer of Population Genetics, 3rd Edition 
Daniel L. HartI 
 
Basingstoke, United Kingdom: Macmillan Press, 
1999. ISBN: 0-87893-304-2, $36 
 
Prokaryotic Development 
 
Yves V Brun, LawrenceJ Shimkets, eds. 
 
Washington, DC: ASM Press, 2000, 492 pp. 
ISBN: 1-55581-158-2, $112 
 
River Management: The Australasian Experience 
5. 0. Brizga, B. L. Finlayson, eds. 
 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1999, 352 pp. 
ISBN: 0-471-96976-1, $105 
 
Technology of Reduced Additive Foods 
J Smith, ed. 
 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell Science, Ltd., 
2000, 264 pp. ISBN: 0-6320-5635-5, $114 
 
Transcriptional Regulation in Eukryotes: 
Concepts, Strategies, and Techniques 
Michael Carey, Stephen Ti Smale 
 
Cold Spring Harbor, NY: CSHL Press, 2000, 
640 pp. ISBN: 0-87969-537-4, $150 
 
Volume 108, Number 4, April 2000 * Environmental Health Perspectives 
 
A 192