2546jareJournal of Advanced ResearchJ Adv ResElsevierPMC1300094413000944130009444061741010.1016/j.jare.2025.07.006Redistribution of super-enhancers promotes malignancy in human hepatocellular carcinoma
HuangJiacheng XuLiang ChenYe SunMengqing HuYiqing PanCaixu JiangLiangyu WangMenglan LiuJing DongHeng LiQian BuFangtian ChangCunjie ChenXuliang WangYu ZhengShusen LingQi ChenJianxiang QiaoYiting aDivision of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, ChinabSchool of Pharmacy and Department of Hepatology, the Affiliated Hospital of Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 311121, ChinacNHC Key Laboratory of Combined Multi-organ Transplantation, Key Laboratory of Organ Transplantation, Zhejiang Province 310003, ChinadKey Laboratory of the Diagnosis and Treatment of Organ Transplantation, Research Unit of Collaborative Diagnosis and Treatment For Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Cancer, Chinese Academy of Medical Science (2019RU019), ChinaeCollege of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, ChinafPediatric Cancer Research Center, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Children’s Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, ChinagKey Laboratory of Artificial Organs and Computational Medicine in Zhejiang Province, Shulan (Hangzhou) Hospital, Shulan International Medical College, Zhejiang Shuren University, Hangzhou 310015, ChinahKey Laboratory of Elemene Class Anti-Cancer Chinese Medicines, Engineering Laboratory of Development and Application of Traditional Chinese Medicines, Collaborative Innovation Center of Traditional Chinese Medicines of Zhejiang Province, School of Pharmacy, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 311121, ChinaiInstitute of Organ Transplantation, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310003, ChinajState Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou 310003, China⁎Corresponding authors at: Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310000, China. lingqi@zju.edu.cnyitingqiao@zju.edu.cn
⁎⁎Corresponding author. at: School of Pharmacy and Department of Hepatology, the Affiliated Hospital of Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 311121, China. chenjx@hznu.edu.cn
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
47202582803803–8192032026© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Graphical abstract
 Keywords: Hepatocellular carcinoma, H3K27ac, Super-enhancers, Epigenetics, Therapeutic targets

## Highlights
•The activated SEs promoted the malignancy by the upregulation of oncogenes in HCC.
•The HCC-loss SEs contributed to the decreased expression of tumor-suppressive genes.
•The SE-gain led to the upregulation of HSPA4 and played the oncogenic role in HCC.
•SE-regulatory TFs network might be potential drug targets for HCC treatment.

## Abstract

## Introduction
Super-enhancers (SEs) are defined as the regulatory region where intensive transcriptional cofactors bind. Dysregulation of SEs is related to multiple diseases, however, its role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains elusive.

## Objectives
This work aimed to reveal the dysregulation of SEs in HCC and the therapeutic potential for HCC treatment.

## Methods
Fifteen HCC and twelve paracancerous samples underwent chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing targeting H3K27ac, and subsequently the SEs were identified by the Rank Ordering of Super-Enhancers algorithm. Differential SEs featured by tumor or paracancerous tissues were identified, and cross-referenced with the differential expression genes and prognosis-related genes in 2 independent public or in-house HCC cohorts. The SE region of HSPA4 was deleted in the genome of HCCLM3 cell by CRISPR-Cas9, named HSPA4-SE-KO cells. The potential druggable transcriptional factors were identified by CRCmapper, GeneMANIA and Drug Gene Interaction Database (DGID).

## Results
Five targets, including CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2, were identified as HCC-gain SEs with oncogenic potential, which were further validated experimentally by SE inhibitors and ChIP targeting H3K27ac and BRD4. Cell proliferation and migration assays further confirmed that silencing of these HCC-gain SEs significantly suppressed the malignant phenotype of HCC cell lines. HSPA4 appeared strongest oncogenic functions among these targets, which was further verified by HCC mouse xenograft models and clinical sample investigation. Moreover, HSPA4-SE-KO cells obtained significantly suppressed HSPA4 expression and retarded tumorigenic capability. Finally, dysregulation of transcriptional factors engaged in the oncogenic role of SEs, and Danthron that targeting RXRA were identified from DGID for HCC treatment.

## Conclusion
The dysregulated SE landscape of HCC promoted the malignancy phenotype by the upregulation of oncogenes, and SE-regulatory network might be potential drug targets for HCC treatment. Our study deepened the insight of epigenetic dysregulation in HCC, offering the groundwork for SEs as potential therapeutic targets of HCC treatment.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2024 Sep 14; Revised 2025 Jun 9; Accepted 2025 Jul 2; Collection date 2026 Apr.

## Introduction
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most lethal malignancies in digestive tract globally [ ]. Although progression has been made for HCC treatment based on anti-angiogenesis compounds and immune regulators in recent decades [ ], the improvement of prognosis is still dismal when compared with lung cancer or breast cancer. The objective remission rate of first-line small-molecule targeted therapies (sorafenib and lenvatinib) is less than 10 % [ , ]. The difficulty of developing innovative therapeutics against HCC is partially attributed to the complex gene expression profile in the niche of liver, since HCC cells exploit an aberrant transcriptional program to sustain their infinite growth and progression.
Disequilibrium of genetic content between normal and cancer cells is the central logic for targeted therapy. A few frequently mutant genes have been identified among multiple HCC cohorts, and further mechanistic studies lead to the discovery of novel compounds with potential potency against HCC [ , , , , , ]. However, the population of HCC patients carrying driver mutations is surprisingly small, usually less than 10 %. Therefore, such a lack of universal high-frequency driver mutations pointed to the importance of genomic dysregulations at higher layers other than mutation. Epigenetic regulation refers to the control of gene expression without the alteration of DNA sequence, including DNA methylation and histone modification, whose imbalance substantially contributes to the development of HCC. For example, hypermethylation of tumor suppressors (e.g.: RSSFA1, APC or NEFH) and less methylation of oncogene IGF2 were identified in HCC tissue [ ]. Furthermore, Frank Jühling et al identified overexpressed oncogenes (e.g.: FGFR1, CCND2, MLLT3, CDH11, and MAML2) with enrichment of H3K27ac epigenetic modification, while downregulation of tumor suppressors (e.g.: FANCC and TSC2) was identified with very less H3K27ac modification [ ]. Therefore, therapeutics targeting epigenetic modifications have become an important category for HCC treatment.
Super-enhancers (SEs) are genomic regions associated with specific histone modifications or transcriptional regulatory elements (normally marked by condensed H3K27ac, coactivator Med1 or master transcription factors like MyoD), which led to excessively binding of active transcriptional factors and sustained gene expression [ , ]. SEs participate in the pluripotency and cell fate determination during embryonic development [ ], whose dysregulation play a pivotal oncogenic role in several cancer types, including triple-negative breast cancer [ ], prostate cancer [ ], ovarian cancer [ ], and colorectal cancer [ ]. Even though the mechanisms by which SE form and disassembly have not been fully elucidated, several key factors have been identified to contribute to SE hyper-activation during malignant transformation. For example, CDK7 phosphorylates carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase Ⅱ and promotes SE-mediated transcriptional initiation, whose inhibition could interrupt the linkage between SEs and the transcriptional amplification in MYCN-driven neuroblastoma [ ]. Meanwhile, a study on ERα+ breast cancer discovered a SE-controlled positive feedback loop of BRD4/ERα–RET–ERα potently facilitated the progression of cancer by revitalizing RAS/RAF/MEK2/ERK/p90RSK/ERα phosphorylation cascade [ ]. Recently, several SE inhibitors have been developed and entered clinical trials, such as OTX015, GSK2820151 and GSK525762 [ ]. However, little is known regarding the general landscape and the druggability of SEs in HCC.
In the present work, 15 HCC samples and 12 matched normal liver samples underwent chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) sequencing targeting H3K27ac, and SEs were identified by the Rank Ordering of Super-Enhancers (ROSE) algorithm. Fisher's exact test was applied to distinguish the potential SEs featured by tumor or normal tissues, and cross-referenced with the differential expression genes and prognosis-related genes in 2 independent public and in-house HCC cohorts. Five gene regions were identified as HCC-gain SEs with oncogenic potential, which were further validated by ChIP, proliferation and migration assays, as well as cytotoxicity assay for SE inhibitors. Among them, HSPA4 exhibited strongest oncogenic functions, which was further validated in HCC xenograft model and clinical specimens. Moreover, the SE region of HSPA4 was removed from genome by CRISPR-Cas9, and cell proliferation and transcription profile were analyzed for HSPA4-SE-KO cells both in vitro and in vivo. Finally, more potential druggable transcriptional factors were identified from SE analysis of stitched genome for HCC and normal tissues.

## Material and methods

## Cell culture
All cell lines involved in present work were tested free of mycoplasma (Vazyme, Cat #D101-01). HEK293T (ATCC), Hepa1-6 (ATCC) and HLE (ATCC) were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM). HCC-LM3 (ATCC) was maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 (RPMI1640). The complete culture media was supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum (BIOIND) and 1 % penicillin–streptomycin (BIOIND) in the basic media. In order to rule out the cross-contamination of cell lines, genome of cell lines was extract (Axygen) and the short tandem repeat information was analyzed with ABI 3730XL (Applied Biosystems, American) and referred to records in DSMZ database. All cells were cultured in 37℃ incubators with 5 % CO2 and saturated humidity.

## Reagents and plasmids
MZ 1 (Cat #HY-107425), ARV-771 (Cat #HY-100972), ARV-825 (Cat #HY-16954) and Danthron (Cat #HY-B0923) were derived from MedChemExpress, and JQ1 purchased from ApexBio (Cat #A1910). JQ1, an effective and highly specific bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) domain inhibitor, can compete with acetylated lysine to bind to BRD4 bromodomain 1 and BRD4 bromodomain 2. In D and E, Fig. S4E and Fig. S4H, 0.5 μ M and 1 μ M JQ1 were applied to HLE and HCCLM3. In F-G, 0.5 μ M JQ1 was applied. ARV-771 is Proteolysis Targeting Chimera (PROTAC) that targets BET protein family (BRD2, BRD3, and BRD4) for degradation, and MZ 1 and ARV-825 are PROTACs that specifically degrade BRD4. In G–I and Fig. S8, multiple HCC cell lines were exposed to ARV-771 and MZ 1 at the concentration gradient of 1 nM, 10 nM, 100 nM, 1 μ M and 5 μ M. In Figs. S4C-D, 0.25 μ M and 0.5 μ M ARV-771 and ARV-825 were applied to HLE and HCCLM3. In Figs. S4F and G, HLE was exposed to ARV-771 and ARV-825 at 0.1 μ M and 0.2 μ M. In Figs. S4I and J, 0.5 μ M and 1 μ M ARV-771 and ARV-825 were applied to HCCLM3. Equal DMSO was treated as negative control.
 Small interfering RNA (siRNA) was purchased from Beijing Tsingke Biotech Co., Ltd. siRNAs were transfected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). HSPA4 was stably knockdown by lentiviral vector infection in HCCLM3 and Hepa1-6 and further selected by antibiotic (puromycin, Beyotime, China, Cat #ST551). HEK293T cells were applied for the production of viral. The detailed information of oligonucleotides was listed in Table S10.

## Cell viability assay
Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) (MedChemExpress) assay was performed to evaluate the viability under certain treatment. Briefly, 2000–3000 cells were seeded into 96-wells plate and were cultured under certain treatment for a period of time. Once the treatment finished, the media was carefully aspirated and then added 100 μL diluted CCK-8 reagent. Plate was incubated in cell incubators for one or two hours, followed by reading with the 450 nm absorbance on ELx800 microplate reader (Biotek, America).

## Colony formation assay
Colony formation assay was performed to assess the ability of cell growing from one single cell to a population. Cells treated with siRNA or gene knockout were seeded into 6-well plate at the density of 2000–3000 cells per well. Plate was incubated in cell incubators for several days until the colony reached over 50 cells. The media was eliminated and the wells were washed by PBS twice. The cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for fifteen minutes followed by staining of 5 % crystal violet for 15 min.
The sensitivity of HCC cell line to Danthron was also assessed by colony formation assay. HCC cells were seeded at the density of 20,000 cells per well. Twenty-four house later, Danthron was added at the doubling concentration gradient of 2 ∼ 16 μM. After incubation for four days, the cells were fixed by paraformaldehyde and stained by crystal violet.

## 5-Ethynyl-20-deoxyuridine (EdU) proliferation assay
BeyoClick™ EdU Cell Proliferation Kit with Alexa Fluor 594 (Beyotime, China, Cat #C0078S) was applied for the EdU proliferation assay. The cells were seeded into 96-wells plate, and incubated with 20 μM EdU for 3 h. Later the cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature, followed by sequential incubation of 0.3 % Triton X-100 for 15 min, Click reaction buffer for 30 min in dark, and Hoechst 33,342 for 10 min in dark. The EdU and Hoechst signals were imaged by fluorescence microscope (OLYMPUS IX71). Three random fields were chosen, and the ratio of EdU positive cells and Hoechst positive cells was calculated.

## Transwell assay
Transwell assay was performed to evaluate the migration ability of HCC cells. 2 × 104 cells of HLE or 2 × 105 cells of HCCLM3 were seeded into the upper chambers without FBS, and the lower chambers was supplied with media containing 10 % FBS. The plate was cultured for one or three days, and the chambers were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for fifteen minutes followed by staining of 5 % crystal violet for 15 min.

## Soft agar colony formation assay
Soft agar colony formation assay was performed to evaluate the proliferative ability of HCC cells. Prepare 1 % and 0.6 % agarose followed by sterilization and make up 2 × complete culture medium with fetal bovine serum and penicillin–streptomycin. The lower layer gel was composed of equal volume of 1 % agarose and 2 × complete culture medium, and 500 μL mixtures was added into 24-wells plate waiting the solidification. Harvest the cells and resuspended with 2 × complete culture medium. The upper layer gel was composed of equal volume of 1 % agarose and 2 × cell suspension (final cell concentration 8000 cells for 500 μL), and 500 μL mixture was added upon the lower layer gel waiting the solidification. 500 μL medium was added, and cultured for approximately 3 weeks until the colonies were macroscopic. The colonies were stained by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium and then imaged. Three images were recorded and the colonies were counted.

## Animal experiment
All animal experiments complied with the requirements of the Animal Experiment Ethical Inspection of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine (Reference number: 20241187). Subcutaneous xenograft model was applied to assess the tumorigenic capacity of the HCC cells with HSPA4 knockdown or the SE region knockout. 100 μL cell suspension containing approximately 2 × 106 cells were inoculated in the right flank of BALB/C nude mice (male, six to eight weeks old) deriving from Hangzhou Ziyuan Laboratory Animal Science and Technology Co. Ltd. The xenograft was checked every three days, and the mice were sacrificed at the end point of the experiment. The volume of the subcutaneous xenograft was calculated according to the maximum diameter of tumor × (minimum diameter tumor)2/2. For orthotopic HCC mice model, 1 × 106 Hepa1-6 cells were resuspended with equal volume of FBS-free medium and Matrigel, and then 15 μ L mixture was injected into left lobe of the liver in C57BL/6 mice (male, six to eight weeks old).

## Western blot
Cells were lysed by RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, Cat #P0013C) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Beyotime, Cat #P1045), and placed the lysis on ice for half an hour. The lysis was then homogenized by ultrasound, and then centrifuged at the speed of 12,000 rpm for 15 min. The protein containing supernatant was pipetted into a clean tube, and the protein concentration was evaluated by Pierce™ Rapid Gold BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFish Scientic, Cat #A53225). The immunoblot procedure was performed according to the standard pipeline, and the information of the corresponding primary antibody was listed in Table S10. Tissues were lysed by homogenizer, and the following procedure was similar as previously described.

## Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
The tumor tissue was immersed in the 4 % paraformaldehyde at least three days, and then was dehydrated and fixed in paraffin. The paraffin-embedded tissue was sliced into 4 μm, and then was dewaxed by going through xylene and ethanol. The slides went through antigen retrieval and were sealed with 5 % FBS for half an hour at room temperature. The tissue lamella on the slides was circled by PAP pen (Abcam, Cat #ab2601). The corresponding primary antibody was dropped to cover the tissue lamella and incubated at 4 ℃ overnight. The slides were washed by PBS for three times and the second antibody was incubated at 37 ℃ for half an hour. After washing by PBS for three times, the diaminobenzidine was dropped to develop color.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
Pierce™ Magnetic ChIP Kit (Thermo Scientific, Cat #26157) was applied for ChIP rigorously according to the protocol. Briefly, the adherent cultured cells were cross-linked by 1 % formaldehyde at room temperature for 15 min and the cross-linking was quenched by 1 × glycine. The cell pellet was washed by cold PBS for three times. The membrane was lysed by Membrane Extraction Buffer and the nuclei was digested with micrococcal nuclease. The nuclei extraction was processed with a water bath sonicator (Diagenode, Bioruptor Plus) under optimal condition that broke the genome into pieces approximately 200–1000 bps in length. The fragmented chromatin was incubated with primary antibody at 4 ℃ overnight with shaking. Protein A/G Magnetic Beads were added and incubated at 4 ℃ for 2 h with shaking to precipitate the antigen–antibody-DNA complex. The beads were washed by IP Wash Buffer 1 for three times and IP Wash Buffer 2 once sequentially. The antigen–antibody-DNA complex was eluted and decrosslinking after incubation at 65 ℃ for 40 min with mixing. The DNA mixture was acquired after the elution was digested with Proteinase K. Finally, the DNA was extracted by DNA Clean-Up Column and Reagents. An equal amount of IgG was used as negative control. The information of primary antibody and the primer for ChIP were listed in Table S10.

## ChIP-seq analysis
All tissue samples involved in present work were collected with the written informed consent from the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, and was reviewed by Clinical Research Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine (Reference number: 20240516). Briefly, fresh tissues were cut into small pieces and fixed with 1 % formaldehyde. The tissues were homogenized via Dounce Homogenizer, followed by nuclei extraction and sonication. The sheared genomes were subject to quality check via decrosslinking, Proteinase K digestion and electrophoresis, followed by storage in −80 ℃ freezer till the expected number of samples were collected. Then, ChIP was performed using Pierce™ Magnetic ChIP Kit as described in the aforementioned paragraph of ChIP methodology. ThruPLEX® DNA-seq Kit (Rubicon Genomics) was applied for the construction of the ChIP-seq library, and was sequenced by BGI Tech Solutions Co. Ltd. Our in-house sample ChIP-seq data and the public ChIP-seq data from GEO database (Table S10) were analyzed following previously published methods [ , ]. Briefly, raw clean reads whose adapters were eliminated by Trim Galore were aligned to human hg38 reference genome by bwa [ ], followed by the removal of PCR duplication with Picard. MACS2 callpeak function was applied for peaks calling by extending reads to 200 bps based on the bam files, and ChIP signals (bedgraph) were generated followed by the subtraction of input signals with MACS2 bdgcmp function. UCSC bedGraphTobigWig was responsible for the conversion from bedgraph to bigwig files. HOMER annotatePeaks script was run for annotation of the detected peaks. The raw data of ChIP-seq and RNA sequencing were deposited in National Genomic Data Center under the GSA-human system with the accession HRA007389 (https://ngdc.cncb.ac.cn/). The principal codes with the parameters were publicly accessible at https://github.com/PoisonAlien/chiptk.
The Rank Ordering of Super-Enhancers (ROSE) algorithm was run to identify SEs (http://younglab.wi.mit.edu/super_enhancer_code.html) [ , ]. For each tissue sample, all enhancers were ranked ascendingly according to the input-subtracted ChIP-seq intensity of H3K27ac signals. Inflection point defined by geometry was considered the cut-off for discrimination of SEs and typical enhancers. In E and B, the rank of enhancers and the intensity of H3K27ac signals were normalized within each sample. For hierarchical clustering analysis, the signal intensity of H3K27ac was calculated into log2 scale followed by clustering with hclust function in R. For meta-SE analysis, the aligned H3K27ac signals of each sample within HCC or paracancerous group were merged into single file, respectively, and then followed by peaks calling. Core transcriptional regulatory circuitry (CRC), namely core transcription factors (TFs) network that formed interconnected auto-regulatory loop, was in silico inferred by CRCmapper [ ] when matching the TFs motif and the according SE domain. The top-ranked CRCs were visualized with GeneMANIA [ ] in Cytoscape. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis were performed to identify the significant pathway using clusterProfiler package [ ].
 

## RNA extraction, RT-qPCR, RNA-seq, and expressional analysis
The total RNA of cells and tissue was extracted by NecleoZol (MACHEREY-NAGEL) according to the protocols from the manufacturer. cDNA for the real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was reversely transcribed according to template RNA by using HiScript III RT SuperMix for qPCR kit (Vazyme, Cat #R323-01). RT-qPCR was performed using ChamQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme, Cat #Q711-02) on QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR System A28135 (Applied Biosystems, American). The RT-qPCR primers involved in this study was listed in Table S10.
The RNA-seq library was constructed by NEBNext Ultra Ⅱ RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (New England Biolabs, USA), and sequenced at Biomedical Big Data Center of the First Hospital of Zhejiang University. The adapters in raw data were trimmed by Trim Galore. The cleaned paired-end reads were aligned to hg38 human genome using HISAT2 [ ], and the bam files were generated simultaneously. The aligned reads of each transcript were quantified by htseq-count [ ]. DESeq2 [ ] was utilized for differential expression analysis with lfcThreshold set at 1. The expression value of each gene was converted from counts to transcripts per million.
TCGABiolinks package [ ] was utilized for the download of transcriptome data in TCGA-LIHC cohort. Metastatic sample and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma were excluded for further analysis. DESeq2 was applied for differential expression analysis. As for microarray dataset from Singapore cohort, differential expression analysis was performed by limma package [ ].

## CRISPR-Cas9 for SE removal
The gRNAs transcribed from ssDNA in vitro and recombinant Cas9 was incubated to assemble into ribonucleoprotein, which was delivered into 1 × 106 HCCLM3 by Neon Transfection System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA, Cat# MPK5000) at the suitable parameters for electroporation according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 24 h, the transfected cells were harvested and doubly diluted at the concentration of 5 cells/mL for the inoculation of single cell. After amplification, the colony derived from single cell was harvested, and the DNA was extracted. The genotype of the colony was confirmed by PCR and agarose gel electrophoresis. Meanwhile, Sanger sequencing was further performed, and the sequencing results were aligned by Snapgene (Dotmatics, USA) to confirm the genotype of the colony. All the experiment for the knockout of the genome region was performed by Obio Technology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China).

## Statistical analysis
Shapiro-Wilk test was applied to evaluate the normality of continuous variables. Two-tailed Student’s t-test was utilized to compare the difference between two groups when both variables passed normality test and were characterized by the same standard deviation. If the two group met the normality criteria and had different standard deviation, Welch's t test was applied to analyzed the statistical difference. If the two variables were non-normal, Mann-Whitney test was applied to compare the difference between two groups. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was applied for multigroup comparison. Continuous and normal variables were described as mean ± Standard Error of Mean (SEM), non-normal variables were described as median and quartile. Log-rank test was utilized for survival analysis, and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were drawn to display the survival outcome of patients group and experiment group. The sample sizes were not precalculated statistically. In H and I and Fig. S8, the correlation between the expression of genes and the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) was analyzed by Pearman Correlation. n.s. represented not significant; * represented P < 0.05, ** represented P < 0.01, *** represented P < 0.001, and **** represented P < 0.0001.

## Results

## Differential landscapes of H3K27ac modifications and SEs in HCC and paracancerous tissues
H3K27ac is the one of the most marked features for the active transcription regions in mammalian genome, and condensed H3K27ac modifications are commonly used to identify SEs [ ]. Here in this study, we aimed to investigate whether dysregulated SEs were associated with malignant transformation of hepatocytes in patients’ samples. Therefore, ChIP-seq targeting H3K27ac was performed on 15 HCC and 12 paracancerous patients’ samples (among which 11 paracancerous samples were paired samples). Base on the 121 most varying loci (mean, ≥10; median absolute deviation, >1), unsupervised hierarchical clustering was performed to display the H3K27ac signals of all samples ( A). HCC samples and paracancerous samples exhibited different landscapes of H3K27ac signal based on unsupervised hierarchical clustering. Five HCC samples exhibiting universally higher signal intensity in most of these loci were separately clustered at the first branch, while the other 22 samples could be categorized into 2 clusters as HCC samples and non-HCC samples at the second branch according to the overall H3K27ac pattern in 121 most varying loci, indicating that H3K27ac modifications exhibited significantly different patterns in HCC tissues and non-HCC paracancerous tissues, while heterogeneity existed within HCC tissues.
Subsequently, potential SEs of each sample were identified by ROSE algorithm, and the identified SEs were compared between HCC and paracancerous samples. 286 SEs with fisher’s P value less than 0.05 was considered differential SEs, including 67 HCC-gain SEs (odds ratio, > 1) and 219 HCC-loss SEs (odds ratio, < 1) (Table S1). KEGG analysis revealed that differential SEs were mostly enriched in the biological processes related to Regulation of actin cytoskeleton, Focal adhesion, Rap1 signaling pathway, Shigellosis, and Yersinia infection ( B, Table S2). Afterwards, HCC-gain SEs were then intersected with the upregulated genes from both TCGA-LIHC cohort (fold change, > 0; adjusted P value, < 0.05) (Table S3) and a microarray dataset from Singapore (SGP-HCC) (fold change, > 1.5; adjusted P value, < 0.05) ( C, Table S4), while the HCC-loss SEs were parallelly cross-referenced with the downregulated genes in the aforementioned cohorts ( D). Subsequently, the synchronously regulated 6 HCC-gained SEs and 41 HCC-loss SEs were subject to geometrically projection and indicated as red dots and blue dots respectively in 4 pairs of HCC and paracancerous tissues. As expected, HCC-gain SEs exhibited remarkably higher identification frequency and were mainly clustered on the right region of overall SE distribution in HCC tissues, while they were distributed on the left region in paracancerous tissues, and vice versa for the 41 HCC-loss SEs ( E). In addition, the HCC-loss SEs were involved in liver physiology, such as glycometabolism (PCK1, FBP1, ALDH4A1), lipid metabolism (SORL1, SLC27A5, LCAT), amino acid metabolism (SLC1A1), and blood coagulation (F2, SERPINA10). GO and KEGG analysis revealed that the 41 HCC-loss SEs were associated with gluconeogenesis, Alanine, aspartate and glutamate metabolism and so on (Figs. S1A–D, Table S5).
Taken together, both overall H3K27ac distribution and SEs exhibited significantly diverged patterns in HCC and paracancerous tissues, which might contribute to the malignant transformation of HCC.

## Validation of the prognosis-associated genes with SE disorder in multiple HCC cohorts
The alteration of SE distribution in genome would eventually lead to a change in gene expression pattern [ ]. Therefore, we analyzed whether SE disorders were correlated with the dysregulation of gene expression in HCC, especially key genes associated with disease prognosis.
As shown by A of paired HCC and paracancerous samples, the peaks of H3K27ac covered on the aforementioned key HCC gain SEs-driven genes were generally elevated in HCC tissues (Figs. S1E–I). Then, we compared the RNA expression level of these genes in SGP-HCC ( B), TCGA-LIHC cohort ( C) and an in-house cohort consisting of 67 paired HCC patients (ZJU-HCC) ( D), which showed that HCC tissues exhibited higher transcriptional level of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2 in all cohorts. The expression of JCAD was not significant in our in-house cohort (Fig. S2A), and therefore excluded for further analysis. In order to distinguish the SE, promoter and enhancer region of these 5 genes, the peaks of H3K27ac, H3K4me1, and H3K4me3 in HepG2 were visualized (Figs. S2B–F). The typical SE region of each gene possessed intensive H3K27ac signals without or with low promoter signals characterized by H3K4me3, regardless of enhancer signals marked by H3K4me1 (Figs. S2B–F). Later, overall survival (OS) analysis demonstrated that the higher expression of CDKN2C and HSPA4 was significantly associated with poor outcome of HCC patients in both SGP-HCC ( E) and TCGA-LIHC cohorts ( F). Meanwhile, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2 exhibited a similar negative correlation with OS for HCC patients, even though the correlation was not statistically significant ( E, Figs. S3A and B).
 In parallel, the H3K27ac distribution, gene expression pattern and prognostic value of 2 genes with HCC-loss SEs, FBP1 and SLC22A1, were investigated in details. The results showed that HCC tissues exhibited a lower H3K27ac peaks in these genes (Fig. S3C, Figs. S1J and K). Similarly, RNA expression levels of FBP1 and SLC22A1 were down-regulated in HCC tissue in the aforementioned 3 cohorts (Figs. S3D–F). Survival analysis revealed that the lower expression of FBP1 (logrank P value, 0.0043) and SLC22A1 (logrank P value, 0.0089) was significantly correlated with poor prognosis in SGP-HCC cohort (Fig. S3G). In TCGA-LIHC cohort, FBP1 and SLC22A1 displayed similar obsequent correlation with OS though not statistically significant (Fig. S3H).

## Hyper-activated SE led to augmented transcription of oncogenic genes in HCC cell lines
To validate whether the aforementioned 5 critical HCC-gain SEs exhibited similar dysregulation in HCC cell lines, H3K27ac ChIP-seq datasets of multiple HCC and hepatocyte cell lines were retrieved from published database and underwent in-depth investigation, including HCCLM3 (GSM2425731) [ ], SNU398 (GSM3082675) [ ], HepG2 (GSM5597548) [ ], Huh7 (GSM5597553) [ ], HLE and Hep3B (present work), and L02 (GSM6564285) [ ]. Visualization of the bigwig file showed that the H3K27ac peaks covered on the SEs region were significantly elevated in multiple HCC cell lines compared to that in hepatocyte cell line L02 ( A). As for HCC-loss SEs, the signals of H3K27ac covered on SLC22A1 were stronger in L02 compared to HCC cell lines, while H3K27ac peaks on FBP1 was maintained at baseline level (Figs. S4A and B). In addition, the H3K27ac modification was validated via ChIP-qPCR targeting H3K27ac for the aforementioned critical HCC-gain in HLE ( B) and HCCLM3 ( C) cells.
BRD4 is a core epigenetic reader protein that recognizes SE and recruits transcription elongation complex to initiate gene expression [ ]. Therefore, BRD4 inhibitors and ChIP targeting BRD4 are often applied for the analysis of transcriptional activity of SEs. To further validate the role of SEs in the regulation of gene transcription for the aforementioned key genes, JQ1, a BRD4 inhibitor, was applied to suppress the SE-driven genes expression, and RT-qPCR analysis showed that the transcription level of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2 was all significantly suppressed in both HLE ( D) and HCCLM3 ( E) after JQ1 treatment. Moreover, ChIP targeting BRD4 showed that JQ1 treatment resulted in a remarkable reduction in the BRD4 binding to the genomic regions of aforementioned genes with key HCC-gain SEs in HLE ( F) and HCCLM3 cells ( G). Apart from JQ1, two PROTACs that targeted BRD4 for proteasome-mediated degradation, ARV-771 and ARV-825, were applied to validate the regulatory role of SEs for the expression of the aforementioned key genes. The treatment of ARV-771 and ARV-825 decreased the transcription level of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2 to a different extent in both HLE (Fig. S4C) and HCCLM3 (Fig. S4D). In addition, JQ1, ARV-771 and ARV-825 significantly inhibited the proliferation of HLE and HCCLM3 (Figs. S4E-J).
Taken together, our analysis demonstrated that hyper-activated SEs led to enhanced transcription of oncogenic genes in HCC cell lines, which could be suppressed by inhibitor and PROTACs against BRD4.

## Genes regulated by HCC-gain SEs, especially HSPA4, promoted the malignant phenotypes of HCC in vitro and in vivo
According to our previous analysis ( B–F), the expression of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2 were elevated in HCC tissues and they were negatively correlated with prognosis. At the same time, the expression of these genes was positively regulated by SEs ( D–G, Figs. S4C and D). Therefore, we speculated that SE dysregulation might contribute to the malignant phenotype of HCC via upregulating the transcription of these genes. Therefore, we firstly evaluated the influences on cell functions after the silencing of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2 in HCCLM3 and HLE cells. RT-qPCR and western blot experiments showed that the siRNAs applied in this work could significantly reduce the mRNA (Figs. S5A and B) and protein level (Fig. S5C) of corresponding genes. The protein level of PDGFA could not be detected, possibly due to its external secretion. Cell proliferation and migration assays were further performed in HCCLM3 ( ) and HLE (Fig. S6). CCK-8 assay showed that knockdown of most genes could suppress the proliferation of both HCCLM3 and HLE to a different extent (Fig. S7), and the doubling time of HCC cells was significantly increased after the silencing of HSPA4, CAP2 and PDGFA ( A). Colony formation assay showed that the siRNAs against HSPA4 and PDGFA significantly reduced the number of colonies formed from single cells by HCCLM3 cells ( B), while HLE formed less colonies after the silencing of HSPA4 (Fig. S6A). In EdU proliferation assay, cells transfected with siRNAs against CDKN2C, HSPA4 and PDGFA exhibited significantly less EdU incorporation in HCCLM3 cells ( C-D), while siRNA against all the five genes reduced EdU positive HLE cells (Figs. S6B-C). In transwell cell migration assay, significantly fewer cells were stained on the bottom side of chamber for HCCLM3 cells transfected with all indicated siRNAs except siGGH#2 ( E-F), and for HLE cells transfected with HSPA4, GGH, and CAP2 (Figs. S6D and E), suggesting the migration ability was weakened by the silencing of these genes.
Based on the above observations, we concluded that the silencing of 5 aforementioned genes with HCC-gain SEs all led to a reduction of both proliferation and migration capacity for HCC cells. Furthermore, the contribution to SE-associated oncogenic phenotype for these 5 genes was evaluated by analyzing the strength of correlation between expression level of each gene and the sensitivity to MZ 1 and ARV-771 (2 compounds degrade BRD4) in multiple HCC cell lines. The Pearman correlation analysis showed that the expression level of HSPA4 was inversely correlated with the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) to ARV-771 ( G–I, Fig. S8), and the expression level of CAP2 was negatively correlated with the IC50 to MZ 1 ( G, Fig. S8). In consistence with this observation, HCC cells exhibited significantly reduced sensitivity to ARV-771 after silencing HSPA4 ( J and K).
Collectively, SE-driven up-regulation of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, PDGFA, and CAP2 contributed to the malignant phenotypes of HCC cells in vitro, among which HSPA4 exhibited the most potent stimulative influences on cell proliferation, migration and sensitivity to SE inhibitor. Therefore, the oncogenic function of HSPA4 was evaluated further in more details. HSPA4 silencing by shRNA ( A and B) resulted in a significant decreasing of colony numbers in soft agar colony formation assay for Huh1 and HCCLM3 cells ( C and D). Moreover, the xenograft tumors formed by HCCLM3 cells carrying shHSPA4 grew significantly more slowly compared to cells carry scramble shRNA ( E–G). In addition, IHC analysis of HSPA4 and Ki67 demonstrated that HCCLM3 xenografts with HSPA4 silencing exhibited much less Ki67-positive cells, indicating a relatively lower proliferative potential in these tissues ( H). As shown by orthotopic HCC model, luciferase-labeled Hepa1-6 carrying shHspa4 ( I) exhibited significantly weakened luciferase signal ( J and K) and smaller tumor size ( L and M) in vivo, indicating impaired tumorigenic capacity after silencing Hspa4. To further elucidate the potential pathways of HSPA4 involved in carcinogenesis, RNA-seq was performed and the transcriptome discrepancy between siHSPA4#2 and control was analyzed ( N, Table S6). Multiple cancer-related pathways were identified for the differentially expressed genes, such as ErbB signaling pathway, Bladder cancer, Colorectal cancer, EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor resistance, Glioma, Non-small cell lung cancer, Hippo signaling pathway, p53 signaling pathway, and Proteoglycans in cancer ( O, Table S7). Western blot analysis also demonstrated that knockdown of HSPA4 significantly inhibited Erbb2 and HIPPO pathways (Fig. S9). Most importantly, western blot analysis of 24 pairs of HCC and paracancerous tissues demonstrated that HCC tissues generally exhibited higher HSPA4 protein expression compared to normal liver tissues ( P), which was further validated by IHC analysis of HSAP4 in paraffin-embedded specimens of HCC and paracancerous tissues in our in-house cohort ( Q). Taken together, HSPA4 promoted the development of HCC both in vitro and in vivo.
 

## The hyper-activated SE directly mediated the overexpression of oncogenic HSPA4 in HCC
In our previous experiments, we noticed that HCC tissues exhibited strong SE signal in the genomic region of HSPA4 ( A, 3A), and the expression level of HSPA4 was strictly regulated by SE complex in vitro ( D–G, Figs. S4C and D). Therefore, we aimed to investigate whether SE signal at the promoter region of HSPA4 was directly involved in the malignant phenotype induced by HSPA4 overexpression in HCC. Firstly, a pair of gRNAs was designed to delete the promoter region of HSPA4 carrying SE signal (chr5: 133050976–133051978, length 1003 bp) while the other part of HSPA4 gene (chr5: 133052013–133106449) remained intact ( A and B). RT-qPCR assay showed that the transcription level of HSPA4 was remarkably decreased in HCCLM3-SE-KO cells compared to that in parental cells ( C). The landscape of transcriptome of HCCLM3-SE-KO revealed that HSPA4 was indeed one of the most prominently downregulated genes ( D, Table S8). Moreover, cell function experiments showed that loss of promoter region with SE signal for HSPA4 also significantly suppressed the proliferation, colony formation, and migration ability of HCCLM3 cells ( E and G). Subcutaneously xenograft model showed HCCLM3-SE-KO xenograft grew significantly more slowly compared to parental cells ( H and I). Furthermore, the malignancy of HCCLM3-SE-KO was enhanced when HSPA4 was overexpressed via transient transfection ( J and K), as shown by CCK8 assay ( L), colony formation assay ( M), and transwell assay ( N).
 Taken together, the hyper-activated SE in the promoter region of HSPA4 directedly promoted malignant phenotype of HCC cells by inducing the overexpression of HSPA4.

## SE signal was weakened in some tumor-suppressive genes in HCC
During our cross-reference analysis regarding the correlation between SE dysregulation and gene expression in HCC, we noticed that a number of down-regulated genes parallelly exhibited loss of SE signal in their gene region. Moreover, some of these genes, represented by FBP1 and SLC22A1, were positively associated with the prognosis of HCC patients, indicating that they potentially play a tumor-suppressive role in liver. Therefore, the cell functions of FBP1 and SLC22A1 in proliferation and migration were evaluated in vitro by lentivirus-mediated overexpression in HCCLM3 and Huh7 cells (Fig. S10A). CCK-8 assays showed that overexpression of FBP1 and SLC22A1 significantly inhibited the proliferation of HCCLM3, which was not significant in Huh7 (Fig. S10B). Meanwhile, overexpression of FBP1 and SLC22A1 significantly reduced the ratio of proliferative cells as shown by EdU assay (Fig. S10C), while it did not lead to obvious change in colony formation assay (Fig. S10D). In addition, the transwell assay showed that the migration ability was significantly impaired by FBP1 overexpression in HCCLM3 and Huh7 cells, while SLC22A1 overexpression did not cause any significant change for migrated cell number (Fig. S10E).
Taken together, the above analysis of FBP1 and SLC22A1 indicated that these 2 gene played tumor-suppressive functions in HCC cells, and the loss of SE signal in their gene region might partially contribute to the malignant transformation of HCC.

## Transcription factors engaged disequilibrated super-enhancers
Previous studies have shown that dysregulation of SEs was strongly correlated with the disequilibrated transcriptional factors in glioblastoma and liposarcoma [22, 23). The interactive regulatory signaling circuit formed by SEs and transcriptional factors occupies a dominant upstream position in the destabilization of signal transduction, and can be developed into effective drug intervention targets. Therefore, we propose whether a similar phenomenon exists in HCC, and whether it is possible to identify intervention targets for HCC that are associated with overall alterations in SEs. Firstly, the aligned H3K27ac signals of HCC samples and paracancerous samples were stitched respectively, and the H3K27ac signals lied mainly on proximity ± 2 kb of transcription start sites ( A), namely promoter region. Furthermore, H3K27ac signals were compared between HCC and paracancerous tissues in the way of geometric inflection ( B). Approximately 48.5 % of meta-SE targets were shared in both HCC and paracancerous tissue, and 23.5 % and 28.0 % of meta-SE targets were exclusive in HCC and paracancerous tissue respectively ( C). It suggested that HCC-associated SEs might be derived from the preexisting enhancers, which developed and evolved during malignant transformation. In HCC tissue, GO annotations of meta-SEs associated genes were strongly enriched in transcriptional regulation (e.g. E2F1) ( D and F), which indicated the SEs’ extensive involvement in transcriptome. In addition, the top 10 TFs driven by HCC-gain SEs were significantly upregulated in TCGA LIHC cohort ( G), which further demonstrated the role of SEs for transcriptional dysregulation in HCC. To uncover the transcriptional circuit in HCC and paracancerous tissue, CRCmapper [ ] was applied for reversely identification of core TF network based on SE involvement. In silico analysis uncovered 156 and 93 circuitries of SE-driven master TFs in HCC and paracancerous tissues respectively (Table S9), which orchestrated on crosslinked regulatory circuitries ( H-I). In the top list, SMAD3, FOXO3, RUNX1, RREB1, KLF13, and FOXK1 were common master TFs among HCC and paracancerous tissue. HNF1A, RXRA, IRF1, RARA, E2F1, TFAP4, TEAD1, ELF3, HOXA3, ATF4, GATA6, BCL6, and MAFB were identified as tumor-specific core TFs ( H), while YY1, FOXO1, RORA, ESR1, SOX15, TEF, SP1, ELF1, SOX18, ONECUT2, XBP1, and NR1I2 were identified as exclusive master TFs in paracancerous tissues ( I).
In order to further investigate whether the HCC-specific SEs could facilitate the identification of druggable targets for current pharmaceutical industry, the 594 HCC-stitched SEs were retrieved based on DGIdb (Drug Gene Interaction Database), and the results showed that 45 % (270/594) targets could be druggable by existing compounds including multiple small molecules, e.g., CD34, STAT3, RHOD, PDK4, RXRA, E2F1, FOXA1 ( J). Considering the significance of the TF network that occupied the upstream signaling transduction for the transcriptional overactivation of downstream oncogenes, small molecules targeting core TFs in the CRC network might be promising for HCC treatment. Among the hits of drug-target analysis of HCC-stitched SEs in DGIdb database, we noticed Danthron, an antagonist targeting RXRA [ , ], and Danthron achieved significant anti-proliferative effects against HLE and HCCLM3 cells at 16 μM by colony formation assay ( K). Furthermore, overexpression of BRD4 ( L) sensitized HCCLM3 and HLE to Danthron, indicating that RXRA’s therapeutic significance was positively associated with SE activity in vitro ( M and N). In vivo oral administration of Danthron significantly inhibited tumor growth for orthotopic ( O) and subcutaneous HCC models ( P and Q).
Collectively, the aforementioned results demonstrated that dysregulation of SEs perturbed the transcriptional network in HCC, and disseverment of the linkage between SEs and the transcriptional circuitries could effectively suppress the proliferation of HCC and be potential therapeutic target for HCC treatment.

## Discussion
In this study, the genomic distribution of SEs was depicted in 15 HCC and 12 paracancerous specimens, and the linkage between aberrant SE and the transcription of prognosis-associated genes was further analyzed and validated in multiple HCC cohorts. Key oncogenic genes whose overexpression was promoted by HCC-gain SEs were identified and experimentally validated in HCC cell lines. Among these genes, HSPA4 exhibited most potent oncogenic functions both in vitro and in vivo, and the deletion of its promoter region with SE signal led to a substantial loss of malignant phenotype related to HSPA4 overexpression. Meanwhile, gene function analysis also demonstrated that the loss of SE signal contributed to decreased expression of genes with tumor-suppressive functions. Finally, the HCC-specific regulatory circuitries between SEs and TFs were investigated, and cross-referenced with druggable targets associated with SE dysregulation, further contributed to the identification of pharmaceutical compounds with potential application for HCC treatment.
Emerging studies in a number of common cancer types have revealed that the aberrant acquisition of SEs enables the activation of oncogenic signaling pathways. For example, Denes Hnisz et al. reported that colorectal cancer showed tumor-specific SEs in the genomic region of transcription factor 4 (TCF4), the effector TF of Wnt pathway [ ]. Similarly, triple-negative breast cancer specimens showed remarkably distinguished H3K27ac patterns [ ], and augmented SE contributed to estrogen receptor (ER) overexpression in ER+ breast cancer [ ]. Moreover, other studies of breast cancer discovered that SE-driven upregulation of PD-L1 and CD47 led to immunosuppression [ , ]. Recently, a few gene-specific or cell line-specific studies have also pointed out the importance of SE for aberrant transcription in HCC. For example, Li Peng et al. reported the interaction between ZEB1 and SE enhanced HCCL5 expression and promote the proliferation and metastasis of HCC [ ]. Jingxia Han et al. demonstrated that the SE at Quaking’s promoter region caused to Quaking overexpression, thus leading to epithelial-mesenchymal transition in HCC [ ]. Meanwhile, Felice Ho-Ching Tsang et al. compared the SE landscape of adult liver tissue with HepG2 and Huh7, 2 cell lines frequently used as in vitro experimental models for HCC [ ]. Our work here provides a comprehensive and clinically relevant understanding of SE landscape in both HCC and paracancerous liver tissues, covering both HCC-gain and HCC-loss SEs. Our research, together with the recent progress of other groups, would inspire more in-depth research regarding the mechanism, outcome, as well as pharmaceutical potential for epigenetic network in HCC [ , , , , ].
The biological mechanisms by which malignant cells acquire oncogenic SE have not been fully illustrated. Different research models suggest that genomic variations, three-dimensional chromatin structural drift, and viral infections could all be potential initiating factors for SE dysregulation. To be specific, medulloblastoma, acute myeloid leukemia, T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and colorectal cancer showed DNA translocation, somatic mutation, single nucleotide polymorphism or amplification at the locus of SE or in adjacent region [ , , , , ]. Oncoproteins associated with Epstein–Barr virus are also found to bind with SEs to activate SE in lymphoblastoid cell line [ , ]. Moreover, epigenetic alterations and mutations of CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF), the critical protein topologically regulating chromatin structure, are also observed in a fraction of cancer tissues [ , ].
Collectively, the initiating factors for SE dysregulation are highly diverse and appear random in population. However, the clones which eventually expand to form malignant lesions must show certain survival advantage mediated by enhanced oncogenic signaling and suppressed tumor-suppressive signaling. In this work, we identified a sizable quantity of prognosis-associated genes showing significantly varied SE signal in HCC and paracancerous tissues. To our surprise, the number of SE-loss genes is remarkably larger than SE-gain genes in HCC. However, our cell functional experiments showed that SE-gain genes, especially HSPA4, exhibit potent oncogenic functions. Moreover, the application of SE inhibitors results in significant proliferation retardation and cell death in multiple HCC cell lines. These data indicate that gain of SEs dominantly mediate the malignant phenotypes of HCC, while loss of SE signal for tumor suppressive genes play a relatively minor role in the established HCC tissues, which is the theoretical basis for testing SE inhibitor for HCC treatment. However, we have to recognize the equal importance for the balance (which means both gain and loss) of SEs during development and homeostasis, and probably the early transformation of hepatocyte and other cell types, HCC-targeted drug delivery strategy could be incorporated for the research of innovative therapies associated with SE inhibitors.

## Conclusions
Our work demonstrated the featured SE landscape of HCC promoted the malignancy phenotype by the upregulation of oncogenes. The SE inhibitors suppressed the tumor proliferation by the amelioration of the SE-driven oncogenes, and several TFs were involved in the SE-regulatory network that might be potential drug targets for HCC treatment.

## Compliance with ethics requirements
All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2008 (5). Informed consent was obtained from all patients for being included in the study.

All Institutional and National Guidelines for the care and use of animals (fisheries) were followed.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jiacheng Huang: Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Liang Xu: Formal analysis, Software, Visualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft. Ye Chen: Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. Mengqing Sun: Formal analysis, Investigation, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Yiqing Hu: Validation, Writing – review & editing. Caixu Pan: Validation, Writing – review & editing. Liangyu Jiang: Software, Validation, Visualization. Menglan Wang: Formal analysis, Investigation, Validation. Jing Liu: Investigation, Methodology. Heng Dong: Investigation, Methodology. Qian Li: Investigation, Methodology. Fangtian Bu: Investigation, Methodology. Cunjie Chang: Resources, Software, Writing – review & editing. Xuliang Chen: Investigation, Resources. Yu Wang: Investigation, Resources. Shusen Zheng: Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Qi Ling: Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Jianxiang Chen: Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Yiting Qiao: Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgements
This work was funded by “Pioneer” and “Leading Goose” R&D Program of Zhejiang Province (2022C03004 to Jianxiang Chen); Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (LR21H160001 to Jianxiang Chen and LZ23C060002 to Liang Xu); National Natural Science Foundation of China (82373888 to Yiting Qiao, 82072646 and 82372664 to Jianxiang Chen); The joint foundation of National Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine & Zhejiang Province - Major Project (GZY-ZJ-KJ-24045 to Jianxiang Chen); Non-profit Central Research Institute Fund of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
(2023-PT320-02 to Yiting Qiao); Research Unit Project of Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (2019-I2M-5-030 to Shusen Zheng).

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.07.006.

## Contributor Information
Qi Ling, Email: lingqi@zju.edu.cn.
Jianxiang Chen, Email: chenjx@hznu.edu.cn.
Yiting Qiao, Email: yitingqiao@zju.edu.cn.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary material
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:

## Supplementary Data 1
The enrichment analysis of HCC-loss SE-related genes and H3K27ac deposition across paired HCC tissues. A-D. GO and KEGG analysis of the HCC-loss SE-related genes. E-K. Differential deposition of H3K27ac signals across the regulatory region of CDKN2C (E), HSPA4 (F), GGH (G), PDGFA (H), CAP2 (I), FBP1 (J), and SLC22A1 (K) based on 11 paired HCC tissue samples

## Supplementary Data 2
A. The expression of JCAD in ZJU-HCC cohort. B-F. The visualization of the peaks of H3K27ac, H3K4me1 and H3K4me3 in HepG2 for CDKN2C (B), HSPA4 (C), GGH (D), PDGFA (E), and CAP2 (F)

## Supplementary Data 3
The expression and prognosis of the key genes associated with HCC-loss SEs. A-B. The survival curves of the indicated genes expression in SGP-HCC cohort (A) and TCGA-LIHC cohort (B). C. Differential occupation of H3K27ac signals across the regulatory region of FBP1 and SLC22A1 based on paired HCC tissue samples. D-F. The relative expression of FBP1 and SLC22A1 in SGP-HCC (D), TCGA-LIHC (E), ZJU-HCC cohorts (F). G-H. The survival curves of FBP1 and SLC22A1 in SGP-HCC cohort (G) and TCGA-LIHC cohort (H)

## Supplementary Data 4
Deposition of H3K27ac signal of the two HCC-loss SEs associated genes, FBP1 (A) and SLC22A1 (B), in multiple HCC cell lines and immortalized hepatocyte cell line. C-D. The transcription level of the five key HCC-gain SE related genes was suppressed exposed to ARV-771 and ARV-825, PROTACs that target BRD4 for proteasome-mediated degradation, in HLE (C) and HCCLM3 (D). E-G. The relative cell viability exposed to JQ1 (E), ARV-771 (F), and ARV-825 (G) at different time points in HLE. H-J. The relative cell viability exposed to JQ1 (H), ARV-771 (I), and ARV-825 (J) at different time points in HCCLM3

## Supplementary Data 5
The knockdown validation of siRNAs targeting the five HCC-gain SE regulated genes by RT-qPCR and western blot. A-B. The expression of the indicated genes treated with the corresponding siRNAs in HCCLM3 (A) and HLE (B) validated by RT-qPCR. C. Protein expression of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, and CAP2 treated with the corresponding siRNAs in HLE and HCCLM3

## Supplementary Data 6
Genes regulated by HCC-gain SEs promoted the malignant phenotype in HLE. A-E. Colony formation assay (A), Edu assay (B-C) and transwell assay (D-E) when knockdown of the indicated genes in HLE

## Supplementary Data 7
CCK-8 assay when treated with the indicated siRNAs in HCCLM3 and HLE

## Supplementary Data 8
The correlation between the expression of the indicated genes and the IC50 of MZ 1 and ARV-771 in multiple HCC cell lines

## Supplementary Data 9
Knockdown of HSPA4 inhibited Erbb2 and HIPPO pathways

## Supplementary Data 10
Genes regulated by HCC-loss SEs mitigated the malignant phenotypes in HCCLM3 and Huh7. A. RT-qPCR of FBP1 and SLC22A1 overexpression. B-E. CCK-8 assay (B), Edu assay (C), colony formation assay (D) and transwell assay (E) when overexpression of the indicated genes in HCCLM3 and Huh7

## Supplementary Data 11

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Supplementary Data 1
The enrichment analysis of HCC-loss SE-related genes and H3K27ac deposition across paired HCC tissues. A-D. GO and KEGG analysis of the HCC-loss SE-related genes. E-K. Differential deposition of H3K27ac signals across the regulatory region of CDKN2C (E), HSPA4 (F), GGH (G), PDGFA (H), CAP2 (I), FBP1 (J), and SLC22A1 (K) based on 11 paired HCC tissue samples

## Supplementary Data 2
A. The expression of JCAD in ZJU-HCC cohort. B-F. The visualization of the peaks of H3K27ac, H3K4me1 and H3K4me3 in HepG2 for CDKN2C (B), HSPA4 (C), GGH (D), PDGFA (E), and CAP2 (F)

## Supplementary Data 3
The expression and prognosis of the key genes associated with HCC-loss SEs. A-B. The survival curves of the indicated genes expression in SGP-HCC cohort (A) and TCGA-LIHC cohort (B). C. Differential occupation of H3K27ac signals across the regulatory region of FBP1 and SLC22A1 based on paired HCC tissue samples. D-F. The relative expression of FBP1 and SLC22A1 in SGP-HCC (D), TCGA-LIHC (E), ZJU-HCC cohorts (F). G-H. The survival curves of FBP1 and SLC22A1 in SGP-HCC cohort (G) and TCGA-LIHC cohort (H)

## Supplementary Data 4
Deposition of H3K27ac signal of the two HCC-loss SEs associated genes, FBP1 (A) and SLC22A1 (B), in multiple HCC cell lines and immortalized hepatocyte cell line. C-D. The transcription level of the five key HCC-gain SE related genes was suppressed exposed to ARV-771 and ARV-825, PROTACs that target BRD4 for proteasome-mediated degradation, in HLE (C) and HCCLM3 (D). E-G. The relative cell viability exposed to JQ1 (E), ARV-771 (F), and ARV-825 (G) at different time points in HLE. H-J. The relative cell viability exposed to JQ1 (H), ARV-771 (I), and ARV-825 (J) at different time points in HCCLM3

## Supplementary Data 5
The knockdown validation of siRNAs targeting the five HCC-gain SE regulated genes by RT-qPCR and western blot. A-B. The expression of the indicated genes treated with the corresponding siRNAs in HCCLM3 (A) and HLE (B) validated by RT-qPCR. C. Protein expression of CDKN2C, HSPA4, GGH, and CAP2 treated with the corresponding siRNAs in HLE and HCCLM3

## Supplementary Data 6
Genes regulated by HCC-gain SEs promoted the malignant phenotype in HLE. A-E. Colony formation assay (A), Edu assay (B-C) and transwell assay (D-E) when knockdown of the indicated genes in HLE

## Supplementary Data 7
CCK-8 assay when treated with the indicated siRNAs in HCCLM3 and HLE

## Supplementary Data 8
The correlation between the expression of the indicated genes and the IC50 of MZ 1 and ARV-771 in multiple HCC cell lines

## Supplementary Data 9
Knockdown of HSPA4 inhibited Erbb2 and HIPPO pathways

## Supplementary Data 10
Genes regulated by HCC-loss SEs mitigated the malignant phenotypes in HCCLM3 and Huh7. A. RT-qPCR of FBP1 and SLC22A1 overexpression. B-E. CCK-8 assay (B), Edu assay (C), colony formation assay (D) and transwell assay (E) when overexpression of the indicated genes in HCCLM3 and Huh7

## Supplementary Data 11