pmciScienceiScience3532isciiScience2589-0042ElsevierPMC13233810PMC13233810.113233810132338104225629910.1016/j.isci.2026.115970S2589-0042(26)01345-31159701ArticleThyroid hormones maintain parvalbumin neuron functions in the mouse neocortex
RenJuan MarkossianSuzy GuyotRomain AubertDenise RietFabrice BrocardJacques DescampsAlice WongJiemin LiDongdong CauliBruno GallopinThierry FlamantFrédéricfrederic.flamant@ens-lyon.fr RichardSabinesabine.richard@ens-lyon.fr 1Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, INRAE, CNRS, Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, 69364 Lyon, France2Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences and School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China3CNRS, INSERM, CELPHEDIA, PHENOMIN, Institut Clinique de la Souris (ICS), Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch Graffenstaden, France4SFR Biosciences, UAR3444/CNRS, US8/Inserm, ENS de Lyon, UCBL, Lyon, France5Brain Plasticity Unit, CNRS, ESPCI-Paris, PSL Research University, Paris, France6Sorbonne Université, CNRS, INSERM, Neuro-SU, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine, 7 quai Saint Bernard, 75005 Paris, France∗Corresponding author frederic.flamant@ens-lyon.fr∗∗Corresponding author sabine.richard@ens-lyon.fr7Lead contact
196202626520262965133611159709720253320262432026260520260506202608062026© 2026 The Authors2026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

## Summary
Parvalbumin-expressing GABAergic interneurons are crucial for maintaining excitation/inhibition balance in the neocortex. The postnatal maturation of parvalbumin neurons is highly sensitive to thyroid hormone deficiency. The present study addressed the role of thyroid hormones in mature parvalbumin neurons. Using genetically modified mouse models, we selectively disrupted thyroid hormone signaling in parvalbumin neurons after the onset of parvalbumin expression. Genomic, histological, electrophysiological, sleep, and behavioral analyses were conducted. Mutant mice showed reduced expression of perineuronal net components, decreased neuron excitability, altered gamma oscillations, behavioral hyperactivity, increased wakefulness, delayed sleep onset, and greater susceptibility to seizures. These results demonstrate that thyroid hormones are essential not only for the maturation but also for the maintenance of cortical parvalbumin neuron function after the onset of parvalbumin expression. Disruption of thyroid hormone signaling, during development or adulthood, may thus contribute to neurological and psychiatric disorders involving impaired cortical oscillations.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•We produced mice with a mutated thyroid hormone receptor in parvalbumin neurons
•Genes encoding perineuronal net components were down-regulated in these neurons
•Mutant mice displayed mild, but significant, behavioral and neurological defects
•Thyroid hormones maintain the inhibitory function of cortical parvalbumin neurons

Health sciences

## Subject areas
Health sciencespmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC

## Introduction
The dynamic balance between excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmissions plays a fundamental role in the function of neocortical neuronal circuits in mammals. Inhibitory GABAergic interneurons account for approximately 15% of the neuronal population of the neocortex. They control the excitatory signaling of neighboring pyramidal neurons and prevent runaway feedforward excitation. Among neocortical GABAergic interneurons, parvalbumin-expressing (PV) neurons have a fast-spiking phenotype. They provide powerful inhibition to excitatory neurons, which is crucial for generating gamma oscillations (30–100 Hz) in the neocortex. By synchronizing the activity of pyramidal neurons, they facilitate rhythmic patterns that support a variety of cognitive processes. Alteration of their function notably alters the homeostatic regulation of sleep and results in anxiety-like behavior. 
The appearance of parvalbumin in the neocortex, which occurs during the second postnatal week in mice, is a relatively late and protracted event of neocortical circuit maturation. In the end, Pvalb is expressed in all PV neurons of the neocortex only by the end of the first postnatal month. The induction of parvalbumin expression in the neocortex is highly dependent on the presence of thyroid hormones (THs). THs (thyroxine, or T4, and 3,3′,5-triiodo-L-thyronine, or T3, its active metabolite) mainly act by binding to nuclear receptors called TRα1, TRβ1, and TRβ2, which are encoded by the Thra and Thrb genes in mice. These receptors, collectively called TRs, act as TH-dependent transcription factors, activating the expression of target genes. In both humans and mice, Thra mutations have dramatic consequences on development, notably neurodevelopment. , , In the neocortex, the most visible consequence of Thra mutations is an impairment of PV neuron maturation, as evidenced by a strong reduction in the expression of parvalbumin. , 
Currently, it is unclear whether the requirement for TH signaling persists in PV neurons once their maturation is complete. The alternative would be that THs are necessary for PV neurons only during a short postnatal period and that early alterations would have long-lasting consequences. We address here this question by using a mouse model in which a mutated Thra allele, ThraAMI, drives the expression of the TRα1L400R dominant-negative receptor exclusively in PV neurons (ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice). This leads to a specific blockade of TH signaling in PV neurons after the onset of Pvalb gene expression, which encodes parvalbumin. Unlike mice that express this mutation at an earlier stage in all GABAergic neurons, 
ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice were viable and did not display any major neurological defect. Multiscale phenotyping of ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, which combined genomic, histological, electrophysiological, and behavioral observations, revealed alterations in the functions of neocortical PV neurons. These observations suggest that TH signaling in PV neurons is required for their proper function in the adult neocortex.

## Results

## Genomic consequences of TRα1L400R expression in PV neurons
Our first aim was to analyze the long-term and cell-autonomous consequences of the inhibition of TH/TRα1 signaling in PV neurons, using gene expression analysis. Therefore, we combined the floxed ThraAMI and Pvalb-Cre transgenes with the ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox reporter construct ( ), which produces a green fluorescent protein in the nuclei of PV neurons after Cre/loxP recombination. Fluorescent cell nuclei were sorted from the neocortex of adult mice expressing the dominant-negative TRα1L400R in PV neurons and from the cortex of control littermates (ThraAMI/+
ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice vs. Thra+/+
ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+
Pvalb-Cre control littermates). RNA was extracted from the sorted nuclei and used for RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). Differential gene expression analysis identified 281 genes whose expression was either increased or decreased in PV neurons of ThraAMI/+
ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice ( A). 
We then attempted to make a distinction among these 281 genes between direct TR target genes, whose transcription is normally up-regulated by the liganded TRs, and genes whose deregulation is only secondary to the long-term expression of TRα1L400R. In order to distinguish between these two categories, we searched for genes whose expression is rapidly modified in PV neurons when adult hypothyroid mice are treated with THs. Hypothyroidism was induced in a group of adult ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice by a prolonged pharmacological treatment. Some of these hypothyroid mice then received a single intraperitoneal injection of THs to restore the circulating levels of THs, and gene expression was analyzed 24 h later. In this setting, TH response takes place in all cell types and influences gene expression in PV neurons both directly and indirectly, as it modifies their microenvironment. In sorted nuclei of PV neurons, only 13 genes (Acan, Ampd2, Cacnb3, Ece1, Frmpd1, Gm13067, Gpcpd1, Klhl33, Npnt, Sema7a, Tesc, Tet1, and Vash2) behaved like bona fide TR target genes in PV neurons, being sensitive to both TRα1L400R expression and TH treatment ( B and 1C; ). However, only few of these were expressed at lower level in hypothyroid mice, compared to control. More generally, the statistical filters that we have used are very stringent, so that the statistical analysis that we performed probably underestimates the number of TR target genes in PV neurons.
Another approach to pinpoint TR target genes would be to identify the TR-binding sites (TRBSs) in chromatin. We could not use a chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis to directly analyze chromatin occupancy by TRs, because of the limited amount of chromatin extracted from sorted nuclei of PV neurons. Therefore, we chose an indirect approach, relying on the fact that chromatin opening occurs in a ligand-dependent manner near TRBSs. , We thus used ATAC-seq to assess the influence of THs on chromatin accessibility in PV neurons ( D). Differential data analysis (hypothyroid mice vs. hypothyroid mice treated with THs) identified 11,207 differentially accessible sites ([DASs], that were more accessible after TH treatment), representing 25% of all the detected accessible sites. However, the set of genes located near the DASs (<30 kb), was not enriched in genes that were identified as differentially expressed after TH treatment. Other comparisons (mutant vs. control mice; hypothyroid vs. control mice) identified only 54 DASs, and none of them was proximal to a TH-regulated gene. These data indicate that only a fraction of DASs is associated to TRBSs and that ATAC-seq alone is not sufficient to identify TR target genes.
In order to predict the position of at least some of the TRBSs in PV neurons, we assumed that a fraction of these would be shared across cell types, as indicated by a recent atlas of ChIP-seq datasets. Using Zekri et al.‘s ChIP-seq atlas, we extracted 4,181 TRBSs that are shared by GABAergic neurons and at least one unrelated cell type (cardiomyocyte, hepatocyte, or adipocyte), from the total 18,064 TRBSs present in striatal GABAergic neurons. We then focused on 1,013 of these 4,181 TRBSs that overlap with the above-defined DASs in PV neurons (called TRBS/DAS), and compared them to the 281 genes that we found to be differentially expressed in ThraAMI/+
ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice (see above). This allowed to pinpoint 12 genes (Galnt14, Rhobtb2, Kmt5c, Rgcc, Nudt7, Ece1, Ampd2, Gpr83, Sema7a, Arl4d, Bhlhe40, and Zfp691) that fulfill two criteria indicating that they are TR target genes: they are down-regulated in ThraAMI/+
ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice and their transcription start site is located within 30 kb of a TRBS/DAS ( ). Importantly, none of the TRBS/DAS was located near a gene up-regulated in TRα1L400R-expressing PV neurons or down-regulated by THs, which is consistent with the fact that liganded TRs activate transcription.
The 281 differentially expressed genes that were identified in TRα1L400R-expressing PV neurons have various known functions in signal transduction, ion exchanges, and enzymatic activities. Among them, 31 genes (11%) encode proteins that are found in the extracellular domain, mainly extracellular matrix components, of which several fulfill several of the criteria used above to recognize TR target genes (Acan, Npnt, Sema7a, Vash2, and Tesc; see ). This suggests a possible defect in the perineuronal net (PNN), a specialized and highly glycosylated extracellular matrix that surrounds many cortical PV neurons. PNNs provide PV neurons with a mesh-like structure accommodating numerous synaptic terminals, a physical barrier between the neuronal surface and the extracellular space, and its diverse interacting molecules. These functions allow PNNs to regulate the plasticity of PV neurons. 

## Histological consequences of TRα1L400R expression in PV neurons
We have previously found that PV neurons display a marked sensitivity to alterations in TH signaling during brain development. We thus set out to study if the density of PV neurons in the adult mouse neocortex differed between ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice (n = 9) and Thra+/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre control littermates (n = 7), which produce a red fluorescent protein in the cytoplasm of PV neurons after Cre/loxP recombination. Immunohistochemistry was performed to label parvalbumin, and Wisteria floribunda agglutinin (WFA) was used to label N-acetyl-galactosamine-β1 residues of PNN glycoproteins in the somatosensory cortex.
We found no difference between the two groups of mice in the density of Tomato-expressing cells ( A–2C), which indicates that the expression of TRα1L400R did not compromise the viability of the targeted cells, namely, PV neurons. Compared to controls, mutant mice exhibited a slightly, but significantly, higher density of PV cells ( A, 2B, and 2D), accompanied by a slightly, but significantly, lower ratio of PV cells that were surrounded by PNNs ( A, 2B, and 2F). Interestingly, the reduction in the density of cells that were surrounded by PNNs was most salient in the deep layers of the cortex ( ). As a whole, unlike what we have previously observed in mice with TRα1L400R expressed from a prenatal stage in all GABAergic neurons, the maturation of PV neurons is not drastically altered in ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice. Since PNNs surrounding PV neurons allow them to regulate plasticity, the above results suggest that TH signaling in PV neurons might be of physiological importance in the regulation of neural plasticity in the neocortex. 
The fast-spiking properties of PV cells impose a heavy metabolic burden, rendering them susceptible to oxidative stress, against which PNNs have a protective effect. As the percentage of PV neurons surrounded by PNNs were significantly lower in ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice than in control mice, we hypothesized that long-term expression of TRα1L400R in PV neurons might increase oxidative stress in these neurons. To test this hypothesis, we labeled cortical sections with an antibody against the oxidative stress marker 8-oxo-2′-deoxyguanosine (8-oxo-dG). There was no difference between ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre and control mice in the density of Tomato+ 8-oxo-dG + cells or in the intensity of 8-oxo-DG labeling in Tomato+ cells ( ).

## Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings of PV neurons expressing TRα1L400R in 16- to 24-day-old mice
The fact that TRα1L400R expression in PV neurons deregulated genes encoding PNN components and ions channels, and reduced the ratio of PV neurons surrounded by PNNs, prompted us to evaluate the electrophysiological properties of PV neurons expressing TRα1L400R. Whole-cell current-clamp recording was performed on acute slices in the somatosensory cortex, which were prepared from 16- to 24-day-old ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice (n = 10) and Thra+/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre control littermates (n = 8). Current steps were injected to fluorescent PV neurons, and voltage responses were recorded ( A and 3B). In the end, 35 mutant and 19 control PV neurons were recorded, and 37 parameters were measured for each cell in accordance with Petilla terminology. This allowed for a comprehensive analysis of the intrinsic electrophysiological behavior of each recorded PV neuron ( ). 
Recorded neurons displayed the archetypal properties of fast-spiking PV neurons, with a relatively low membrane resistance (Rm), short spikes with sharp after-hyperpolarizations, and an ability to fire action potentials at a high firing rate with little or no frequency adaptation ( A and 3B; ). Three parameters differed significantly in the PV neurons of ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, compared to controls. The rheobase ( C), which is the minimal depolarizing current pulse intensity generating at least one action potential, was significantly higher in mutant PV neurons. The two other parameters that were also higher in mutants were the thresholds of the first and second action potential generated by a rheobasic current injection ( D). Membrane resistance did not differ significantly between mutant and control PV neurons ( E). Collectively, these alterations indicate that PV neurons expressing TRα1L400R exhibit a lower excitability at the end of the third week of life.

## In vivo local field potential recording of cortical electrical activity
PV neurons play a crucial role in the generation and maintenance of gamma oscillations, as they are key regulators of inhibitory network synchronization. Given their central role in circuit dynamics, we sought to determine whether gamma activity was modified in mutant mice, potentially reflecting impairments in inhibitory network function. To this end, we implanted electrodes to record local field potential in vivo in adult ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mutant mice (n = 4) and their Thra+/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre control littermates (n = 4) and assessed spectral activity. In parallel, we characterized and quantified vigilance states in mutant mice to gain insights into potential disruptions in sleep architecture and state-dependent oscillatory dynamics.
To determine whether mutant mice exhibit alterations in sleep-wake regulation, we analyzed the proportion of time spent in wakefulness, non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, as well as sleep onset latencies. As shown in A, mutant mice spent significantly more time awake (53.8% ± 3.7%) compared to controls (32.6% ± 3.4%, p = 0.028), which was accompanied by a reduction in NREM sleep duration in mutants (41.7% ± 3.6%) relative to controls (59.4% ± 3.5%, p = 0.028). The proportion of REM sleep remained unchanged between groups. In addition, sleep onset latencies were altered in mutant mice ( B). Indeed, the latency to REM sleep onset was significantly prolonged in mutants (206.3 ± 45.7 min) compared to controls (66.3 ± 17.9 min, p = 0.028, B). The latency to NREM sleep onset also showed a trend toward an increase (133.0 ± 36.8 min in mutants vs. 38.9 ± 16.3 min in controls, p = 0.057, B). These results indicate that mutant mice experience prolonged wakefulness and delayed sleep onset, suggesting disruptions in the neural mechanisms governing sleep initiation. To further investigate sleep microarchitecture, we analyzed the mean number and duration of wake, NREM, and REM sleep episodes. No significant differences were detected between groups ( ), suggesting that while the overall distribution of vigilance states is altered in mutant mice, sleep fragmentation remains unchanged. 
To compare the spectral properties of control and mutant mice during wakefulness, we first computed the normalized mean power spectra for each group. Both control and mutant mice exhibit a characteristic 1/f power decay as frequency increases ( C), which is usual in the brain. Mutant mice show a notable increase in power at the highest gamma frequencies compared to controls ( C). To isolate genuine oscillatory components from the overall power decay, we applied a 1/f fitting procedure to the normalized mean spectra ( C, inset). We then applied a 1/f correction to remove the influence of broadband power decay, allowing us to focus specifically on deviations from the expected 1/f distribution, which reflect true oscillatory activity rather than global shifts in power ( D). After normalization, clear differences in gamma power emerge between groups, particularly in the 80–90 Hz range, where mutant mice exhibit a significantly higher power peak compared to controls (p = 0.03, E). Gamma power also tended to be lower in mutants within the 50–60 Hz range ( D and 4E), but this difference was not statistically significant. Interestingly, the peak frequency of gamma oscillations appeared to be shifted toward higher frequencies in mutant mice compared to controls ( D). To quantify this shift, we analyzed the dominant frequency of spectral power within the 40–100 Hz range for each mouse. As shown in F, the peak gamma frequency was significantly higher in mutant mice (87.2 ± 1.4 Hz) compared to control mice (52.5 ± 4.1 Hz, p = 0.029). These results indicate that mutant mice exhibit a shift in gamma oscillatory dynamics, characterized by an increase in high-frequency gamma power (80–90 Hz) and a higher peak gamma frequency, suggesting potential alterations in inhibitory network activity.
To assess potential alterations in low-frequency oscillatory activity in mutant mice, we analyzed the normalized mean power spectra during wakefulness, NREM sleep, and REM sleep, focusing on two key frequency bands: delta (1–4 Hz) and theta (6–10 Hz). The spectral profiles of control and mutant mice exhibited a similar pattern across vigilance states ( ). During wakefulness and REM sleep, both groups showed a dominant power peak in the theta band ( A, S5B, S5E, and S5F), and quantitative analysis confirmed that delta and theta power did not differ significantly between groups. Similarly, during NREM sleep, both control and mutant mice displayed the expected high-amplitude delta activity associated with slow-wave sleep ( C), with no significant differences in delta or theta power between groups ( D). These findings indicate that low-frequency oscillations, including delta and theta rhythms, remain unaltered in mutant mice, suggesting that the observed electrophysiological differences are specific to gamma activity rather than broad changes in neocortical oscillatory dynamics.

## Behavioral consequences of TRα1L400R expression in PV neurons
The results reported above show that gene expression, extracellular matrix glycosylation, and electrophysiological properties are significantly altered in the neocortical PV neurons of ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, which might result in an alteration of the excitation-inhibition balance in the neocortex. We thus explored the possible behavioral consequences of TRα1L400R expression in PV neurons. Two groups of adult females, ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice and Thra+/+
Pvalb-Cre control littermates, underwent a series of behavioral tests ( ).
The most salient observation was that ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice exhibited a higher level of general activity. They traveled significantly higher distances than control mice in the open-field, novel object recognition as well as social interaction tests ( A; ). Moreover, in the acquisition phase of the test for novel object recognition, they spent significantly more time exploring objects ( D). Finally, in the marble-burying test, they buried significantly more marbles than controls ( E). This reflects a higher level of digging behavior, which is a typical behavior that mice display when they are provided with sufficient substrate to displace. 
We next addressed the susceptibility of ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice to an epileptogenic drug, the GABA receptor antagonist pentylenetetrazole. In this test, they displayed more frequent and more severe seizures than controls ( G).
Assessment of cognitive abilities revealed that, in spite of good learning abilities, ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice exhibited less behavioral flexibility than controls. Indeed, in the test for novel object recognition, control and mutant mice did not differ significantly in their ability to discriminate a novel object from a known object ( D). Similarly, in a touch-screen test, there was no difference between genotypes in visual discrimination learning ( C, left). However, adapting to a change in the rule proved to be more difficult for mutant mice. In the reversal learning phase, mutant mice reached the learning criterion (% of correct responses higher than chance) during the tenth session, whereas control mice reached the criterion during the ninth session ( C, right).
In a social interaction test, ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice initiated significantly more social approaches and contacts than control mice did ( F; ). However, the mean duration of social contacts initiated by mutant mice was shorter, so that the total contact duration did not differ between genotypes. Thus, the higher numbers of social approaches and contacts in mutant mice appear to reflect their higher level of general activity rather than a higher degree of social motivation.
ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice did not show any overt sign of increased anxiety. There was no significant difference between genotypes in the amounts of time spent in anxiogenic parts of test devices: open arms in the elevated plus maze test ( B) and center of the arena in the open-field and social interaction tests ( ).

## Discussion
THs play a crucial role in PV neuron maturation. Notably, TH/TRα1 signaling is instrumental in triggering the expression of the Pvalb gene. We demonstrate here that in the mouse neocortex, TH signaling is still required in PV neurons after they express the Pvalb gene, which is a late step in their maturation process. This expression starts in a protracted manner, at different time points in different neocortical areas, after the first postnatal week. , In the present study, we have found that blocking TH signaling in PV neurons at that stage, by expressing the dominant-negative TRα1L400R mutated receptor (ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice), does not compromise the survival of PV neurons. It induces alterations in the expression of a small set of genes, impaired elaboration of PNNs with decreased PV neuron excitability, and a change in cortical gamma oscillation dynamics. These network defects correlate with increased wakefulness, hyperactivity, and increased susceptibility to epileptic seizure. The strength of the mouse model used in this study lies in its ability to specifically isolate the effects of disrupting TH signaling within PV neurons, ensuring that the observed phenotype stems directly from PV neuron dysfunction rather than from alterations in their microenvironment, which also plays a crucial role in regulating their physiology.
The mild consequences observed in mice expressing TRα1L400R in PV neurons (ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, present paper) contrast with the postnatal lethality caused by spontaneous epileptic seizures observed in mice expressing TRα1L400R in all GABAergic neurons from embryonic day 12.5. A major difference between these two models is that in ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, the blockade of TH signaling is triggered at a late stage of PV neuron maturation, i.e., when Pvalb starts to be expressed, after the end of the first postnatal week. The different results obtained with ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre and ThraAMI/+
Gad2-Cre mice might also reflect an indirect effect of TH/TRα1 signaling on PV neuron maturation, via other GABAergic cell types. Indeed, the action of THs in PV neurons has been found to rely on a combination of cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous effects. However, compared to other cortical GABAergic neuron subtypes, PV neurons are, by far, the most sensitive to early TRα1L400R expression in GABAergic neurons, as previously shown with histology and gene expression analyses. Therefore, the decreased severity of the phenotype observed in ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, compared to ThraAMI/+
Gad2-Cre mice, is likely to result from the delayed inhibition of TH signaling in PV neurons, rather than from its restriction to a fraction of the GABAergic neuronal population. To our knowledge, there is no indication that THs also directly regulate the maturation of other neocortical GABAergic neurons in the neocortex. Thus, TH signaling not only plays a major role for PV neuron maturation before the onset of Pvalb expression but also appears to be required for the lifelong maintenance of specific characteristics of PV neurons.
Gene expression analysis indicates that THs directly regulate the transcription of only a small set of genes in PV neurons, of which several influence the elaboration of the PNN. As chromatin accessibility and gene expression analyses (ATAC-seq and RNA-seq respectively) are not always convergent, the number of genes whose transcription is directly regulated by TR in PV neurons remains uncertain. However, it appears that several of the most likely candidate genes contribute to PNN elaboration, which is consistent with previous results showing the role of TH signaling in PNN elaboration. , The present study notably pinpoints Acan, Sema7a, and Npnt genes, which encode extracellular matrix proteins: aggrecan is a major component of the PNN, semaphorin 7a is anchored to the cell membrane, and nephronectin is an integrin-interacting glycoprotein. Furthermore, the deregulation of Galnt14 and Has3 genes, respectively, encoding N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase and hyaluronan synthase, might account for alterations of the carbohydrate fraction of PNNs, revealed by WFA staining. However, mechanisms that are more indirect can also be at work. For example, down-regulation of Me1, Ampd2, and Nudt7, which encode enzymes, suggests alterations of the energy metabolism in PV neurons, which might translate into PNN defects. Such a metabolic hypothesis has been previously put forward to explain the PNN phenotype of mice lacking the PGC1α TR coactivator in cortical GABAergic neurons. This PNN defect could explain why PV neurons expressing TRα1L400R have a reduced sensitivity to stimulation, as revealed by patch-clamp analysis. However, additional molecular mechanisms might also be involved in the reduced excitability of PV neurons in ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, like the deregulated expression of the Tesc gene, which encodes tescalcin, a calcium-binding protein, and of the Cacnb3 gene, encoding a voltage-dependent calcium channel subunit. Of note, Cacnb3 was previously found to be up-regulated after TH treatment in PV neurons of the motor cortex, and it has emerged as a genetic risk factor for bipolar disorder in humans. As a whole, the changes in gene expression induced by the blockade of TH signaling in PV neurons are consistent with the observed decrease in PNN abundance and in PV neuron excitability. Experiments involving gain and loss of function of individual genes, for example, using AAV-mediated somatic gene transfer, may help find the most relevant pathways.
The alteration of electrophysiological properties of PV neurons caused by TRα1L400R expression was accompanied by an increase in high-frequency gamma power (80–90 Hz) in the somatosensory cortex. This observation is counterintuitive because PV neurons are known to drive gamma oscillations in the cortex. However, this apparent discrepancy can be explained by considering the broader network impact of PV interneuron dysfunction. Reduced excitability of PV interneurons decreases inhibitory control over pyramidal neurons, which is expected to cause a disinhibition and increased excitatory drive. This elevated excitatory activity likely enhances gamma oscillations, particularly at higher frequencies, consistent with findings from studies on neocortical circuit dynamics. , Furthermore, impaired PV interneuron function could disrupt the precise timing required for effective inhibition, altering network synchronization and shifting gamma oscillations toward higher peak frequencies, as observed in our mutant mice. In excitation/inhibition network frameworks, gamma frequency and power are set by effective pyramidal drive together with residual fast inhibition, not by PV firing alone. In regimes where inhibition is weakened but not abolished, increasing net excitatory drive can shift gamma toward higher frequencies. , In addition, the small, but significant, increase in PV neuron density that was recorded in mutant mice may be a compensatory mechanism, which may, in turn, increase the power of high-frequency gamma oscillations. Finally, other inhibitory neurons, notably somatostatin-expressing interneurons, also significantly modulate cortical oscillatory activity, and they might be recruited to compensate PV neuron defects. As a whole, the shift toward higher gamma frequencies likely results from chronic PV interneuron dysfunction and changes in cortical gamma oscillations are likely to impact cognitive processing. 
In vivo recordings also showed that, compared to controls, mutant mice expressing TRα1L400R selectively in PV neurons exhibited significantly increased wakefulness during the day, along with a prolonged sleep latency. A possible causal relationship between hypothyroidism and short sleep duration has been suggested in humans, but the link could not be firmly established, as sleep quality and duration rely on a combination of factors. PV neuron activation has previously been shown to reduce slow wave activity while increasing NREM sleep duration. In mouse somatosensory cortex, PV neuron activity is higher during NREM/REM than during wake. Therefore, a decrease in PV excitability is expected to reduce perisomatic inhibition primarily during sleep, shifting the excitation/inhibition balance toward wakefulness, consistent with the increased wake and prolonged sleep latency that was observed in mutant mice in the present study. Moreover, the fact that ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice exhibit hyperactivity and increased wakefulness is consistent with the increase in high-frequency gamma power (80–90 Hz) and with the shift of the peak gamma frequency to higher values during wakefulness. Indeed, electroencephalogram activity recorded in human patients with insomnia have previously revealed that elevated activity in high-frequency bands typically reflects hypervigilance. Similarly, the increased high-frequency gamma activity observed in our mutant mice likely represents a comparable hyperarousal state, which might translate into heightened motor activity, as observed in behavior tests. This hyperarousal might compromise sleep initiation, thereby contributing to prolonged sleep latency and heightened wakefulness. As a whole, our results highlight that TH signaling in PV neurons plays a direct role in sleep-wake regulation. In addition, the changes in cortical gamma oscillations induced by blocking TH/TRα1 signaling in PV neurons are consistent with the hyperactivity and reduced sleep duration observed in mutant mice.
The behavioral phenotype of mice expressing TRα1L400R only in PV neurons was mainly characterized by a general increase in activity, reduced behavioral flexibility, and an increased susceptibility to pentylenetetrazole-induced seizures ( G). These findings likely derive from an imbalance between excitation and inhibition in the brain and may notably result from a disinhibition of pyramidal neurons, suggesting that altered TH signaling in PV neurons underlies part of the symptoms experienced by patients with altered TH signaling. Of note, an involvement of cortical PV neuron activity in reward-related behavioral flexibility had been reported before. The behavioral defects observed in the present study differ notably from those reported for mice expressing TRα1R384C in the whole body, which display high anxiety, memory defects, , and reduced seizure susceptibility. The susceptibility to epilepsy is an indication of an increase in the excitation drive, compared to the inhibition drive, in neural circuits, a feature observed in many neuropsychiatric disorders. , Thus, the heightened susceptibility to epilepsy that we have observed is congruent with the reduced excitability of PV neurons in mice expressing TRα1L400R only in PV neurons. Moreover, as THs also exert a cell-autonomous influence in other brain cells, such as adult excitatory cortical neurons and glial cells, the behavioral traits observed in mice expressing TRα1R384C in all cells reflect a combination of direct and indirect effects of the mutation, starting from prenatal developmental stages. As a consequence, the deregulation of gene expression in adult PV neurons is unlikely to play a major part in the phenotype of TRα1R384C mice. By contrast, the present paper uncovers specific consequences induced by disrupting TH/TRα1 signaling in PV neurons, notably in terms of general activity, behavioral flexibility, and susceptibility to epilepsy.
The genomic, histological, electrophysiological, and behavioral traits induced in mice by blocking TH/TRα1 signaling in PV neurons form a coherent whole, suggesting that in the context of reduced TH signaling, PV interneuron dysfunction induces complex network adaptations in the neocortex. These observations provide new insights into the role of TH signaling in maintaining inhibitory network function, with potential implications for neurological and psychiatric disorders involving altered cortical network oscillations, such as autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s disease, attention-deficit disorders, or epilepsy. In humans, adult onset of hypothyroidism may cause memory impairment, depression, forgetfulness, difficulty focusing, and “brain fog.” It is also linked to poor sleep quality. In these patients, concomitant fatigue, muscle weakness, bradycardia, and decrease in resting energy expenditure can indirectly cause the cognitive and mood disorders. The current study highlights that the decrease in TH signaling in PV neurons alone accounts for at least some of the symptoms of adult hypothyroidism, which could result from an imbalance between neuronal excitation and inhibition.

## Limitations of the study
The mouse model used in the present paper allows to block TH signaling specifically in PV neurons after they start expressing Pvalb, which means that PV neurons are not necessarily fully mature when TH blockade starts. As a consequence, it cannot be excluded that part of the phenotype that was observed in these mice results from defects in the late maturation stages of PV neurons. The fact that 20% of cortical cells expressing tomato in ThraAMI/+
ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice were not stained with anti-parvalbumin antibody ( ) suggests that the sensitivity of immunostaining was not sufficient to stain all PV neurons, notably when the level of PV in the cell was low. Moreover, we cannot formally exclude that a small proportion of cortical cells that express the tomato reporter belong to different, but uncharacterized, cell types that only transiently express the Pvalb-Cre driver.
The identification of TR target genes in PV neurons is incomplete, because we were not able to perform a Chip-seq analysis to firmly establish the positions of TRBSs in the genome, due to an insufficient amount of chromatin extracted from sorted PV neuron nuclei.
For technical reasons, whole-cell current-clamp recording was carried out in juvenile mice, so it cannot be excluded that PV neuron excitability might evolve at later stages. Previous results suggest that the excitability of mouse cortical PV neurons does not evolve dramatically after the third week of life. At the molecular level, after a notable switch that occurs between PND8 and PND15, gene expression in PV neurons appears to be fairly stable between PND25 and PND40. Thus, it is likely that the electrophysiological properties of PV neurons do not change significantly after the third week of life. Moreover, the electrophysiological properties of control PV neurons from 3-week-old mice that were recorded in the present study were very similar to those that were reported in a previous study involving patch-clamp recording of PV neurons in adult mice, including the input resistance and rheobase of PV neurons, which are the two parameters that were altered in ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice. Nevertheless, as significant changes in cortical circuits occur during adolescence, including changes in PNN development, future studies are needed to directly assess whether blocking TH signaling in PV neurons affects their excitability in adulthood.
The present study was focused on the neocortex, but as PV neurons are present in other brain areas, it is likely that blocking TH/TRα1 signaling in PV neurons also affected other neural circuits. As a consequence, part of the behavioral phenotype observed in ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice might originate from alterations in brain areas other than the neocortex.
Finally, further research is needed to better understand the links between all the observed alterations caused by TRα1L400R expression: changes in gene expression, electrophysiological properties of PV neurons, network oscillations, and behavior traits.

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Sabine Richard (sabine.richard@ens-lyon.fr).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Data and code availability

•RNA-seq data are hosted on the GEO database: Gene Expression Omnibus: GSE304025 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi), and the accession number is also provided in the .
•The code for the original macro used to analyze images for the 8-oxo-DG labeling experiment is hosted on the GitHub platform: https://github.com/jbrocardplatim/Macro_8oxo (https://github.com/), and the specific access link is also provided in the .

## Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the contribution of SFR Biosciences (10.13039/501100006687Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS
UAR3444, 10.13039/501100001677Inserm US8, 10.13039/501100018692ENS de Lyon): Nadine Aguilera and the Plateau de Biologie Expérimentale de la Souris (ANIRA-PBES) for mouse breeding, ANIRA-CYTOMETRIE and particularly Sébastien Dussurgey for nuclei sorting, and ANIRA-AGC for mouse genotyping. We acknowledge Benjamin Gillet and Sandrine Hughes of the deep sequencing facility (PSI IGFL, Lyon). We thank Hugues Jacobs, Olivia Wendling, Emel Laghouati, Tania Sorg-Guss, and Yann Hérault for the behavioral tests performed at Mouse Clinical Institute (Strasbourg, France). We acknowledge the contributions of the CELPHEDIA Infrastructure (http://www.celphedia.eu/), especially the center AniRA in Lyon. We also thank Isabelle Dusart (Institut de Biologie Paris Seine, France) for helpful discussions. We sincerely thank Karim Benchenane, Sophie Bagur, and Baptiste Maheo (Brain Plasticity Unit, eMOBBS team) for their valuable advice and discussions regarding the analysis of in vivo electrophysiological data. We also thank Ke Sun for writing Python programs (https://jupyter.org/try-jupyter/lab/index.html) that automated part of the data analysis. We acknowledge Chinese Scholarship Council for a scholarship to J.R. (# 202106140005) to do her PhD project in ENS de Lyon (https://www.chinesescholarshipcouncil.com/fr/). F.F. received research fundings from 10.13039/501100007601European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (https://research-andinnovation.ec.europa.eu/funding/funding-opportunities/funding-programmes-and-opencalls/horizon-2020_en) under grant agreement no. 825753 (ERGO), 10.13039/501100001665Agence Nationale de la Recherche (https://anr.fr/, Thyromut2 program; ANR-15-CE14-0011-01), Joint Research Institute for Science and Society (JORISS 2022, https://www.enslyon.fr/indexation/structures-affiliees-lens-et-partenaires/joint-research-institutescience-and-society), and the PHENOMIN program of AIN INSB CNRS 2022 (https://www.insb.cnrs.fr/fr/appel-projets-developpement-des-infrastructuresnationales-de-recherche).

## Author contributions
Conceptualization, F.F., S.R., J.R., B.C., T.G., and F.R.; investigation, J.R., R.G., D.A., A.D., T.G., J.B., S.M., D.L., F.R., F.F., and S.R.; writing – original draft, J.R., F.F., and S.R.; writing – review and editing, all authors; funding acquisition, F.F. and J.W.; supervision, S.R., F.F., D.L., B.C., and T.G.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Experimental model and study participant details
All experiments were carried out in accordance with the European Community Council Directive of September 22, 2010 (2010/63/EU) regarding the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes. Experiments involving the use of live animals for the current project were approved by local ethics committees (C2EA015 and C2EA017) and subsequently authorized by the French Ministry of Research (Projects #33279 and #38581). Mice were bred and maintained at Plateau de Biologie Expérimentale de la Souris (SFR BioSciences Gerland - Lyon Sud, France). To date, sex has not been identified as an influential factor in the role of thyroid hormones in mouse cortical development. Unless otherwise specified, mice of both sexes were used indiscriminately in the experiments.
The ThraAMI allele allows the expression of the dominant-negative TRα1L400R after the Cre/loxP-mediated deletion of a cassette with polyadenylation signals. The ROSA-tdTomatolox reporter transgene (also known as Ai9, RRID: MGI: 4436851) drives the Cre-dependent expression of a cytoplasmic red fluorescent protein. The ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox transgene encodes the GS-EGFP-L10a protein, which is a green fluorescent protein fused to the N-terminus part of the large subunit ribosomal protein L10a, mainly localized in cell nuclei. This transgene allows for a strong and specific staining of the nuclei. The additional N-terminal GS tag, combines a fragment of protein G and a fragment of streptavidin suitable for protein purification. The entire reading frame and a drug-selection gene (NeoR) were inserted in the pHL-HH vector construct which contains 2 LoxP sequences and 2 LoxP2272 sequences. The resulting vector was inserted into the ROSA26 locus of mouse embryonic stem cells by homologous recombination ( A). The combination of LoxP and LoxP2272 sites is organized so that Cre/LoxP recombination, taking place only between identical sequences, results in a two-step inversion/deletion ( B). This design makes the expression of GS-EGFP-L10a strictly dependent on Cre recombination. All transgenes were in C57Bl6/J genetic background. Pvalb-Cre is a knock-in allele in which the Cre recombinase reading frame is inserted into the Pvalb gene in order to restrict the expression of the recombinase to PV neurons. The ROSA-tdTomatolox reporter system has allowed us to assess the specificity of PV neuron targeting. Of note, we have observed that in ROSA-tdTomatolox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice, Cre-mediated recombination occurred not only in PV neurons throughout the brain, but also in cerebellar granule cells.
Hypothyroidism was induced in adult ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+
Pvalb-Cre mice by feeding them for 2 weeks with iodine deficient food supplemented with 0.15% of propylthiouracyl (PTU). TH levels were restored by a single intraperitoneal injection in half of the mice (40 μg T4 + 4 μg T3 dissolved in 200 μL of phosphate buffer saline (PBS). The other PTU-treated mice were injected with 200 μL of PBS.

## Method details

## Nuclei sorting
Individual neocortex was frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately after dissection. Samples were thawed and resuspended in 1.5 mL of Nuclei EZ Lysis Buffer and transferred in a 2 mL Dounce tissue grinder (Sigma, ref D8938) for cell lysis (25 strokes with A pestle and 25 strokes with B pestle, on ice). Suspensions were transferred in tubes containing 2.5 mL of cold lysis buffer and centrifuged (5 min 500 g 4°C, swinging rotor). Supernatants were discarded and nuclei pellets were washed once with 4 mL Nuclei EZ Lysis Buffer and once with 4 mL of Nuclei Suspension Buffer (NSB) (PBS w/o Mg and Ca; 0.01% bovine serum albumin (BSA); 40 U/mL RNAsin). For each of these washes, pellets were first resuspended by pipetting 10 times with 1 mL of buffer, after which the remaining 3 mL of buffer were added. Final pellets were resuspended in 0.5 mL NSB containing DAPI (1 μL at 1 mg/mL) and were filtrated in tubes with 35 μm cell strainer (Corning, ref 352235). For each condition, Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS Aria IIμ cytometer BD) was used to isolate all GFP positive nuclei. These were sorted in low binding Eppendorf tubes containing 0.5 mL NSB and centrifuged (5 min 20 000 g). Supernatants were discarded and nuclei pellets were resuspended in 350 μL RNA lysis buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol for RNA extraction (Qiagen RNeasy Microkit).

## RNA-seq analysis
Nuclear RNA was extracted from sorted nuclei (RNeasy Micro Kit) and quantified using Tapestation4150 (Agilent). Then, 1 ng of RNA was reverse-transcribed using the SMART-Seq v4 Low Input RNA kit (Takara). cDNA was quantified and qualified using Qubit (Invitrogen) and Tapestation4150 (Agilent). Libraries were then prepared from 1 ng of cDNA using the Nextera XT DNA Library Kit (Illumina). Libraries were sequenced (> 2.107 reads/library) on a Nextseq500 DNA sequencer (Illumina). Reads were aligned on the mouse genome (mm10 GRCm38 release) with Bowtie2. Count table was prepared using htseq-count (mode union, feature type: gene). Differential gene expression analysis was performed with DEseq2 using the following thresholds: False Discovery Rate < 0.05; p-adjusted value < 0.05; expression > 10 reads per million; fold-change > 1.5). Hierarchical clustering was performed using Euclidian distance and Ward’s distance with Clustvis. 

## ATAC-seq analysis
Neocortex nuclei were purified as above and collected by centrifugation (500 g 5 min) for immediate use in ATAC Library preparation (Tagmentase-loaded; Diagenode). The nuclei pellets were suspended in 25 μL 2xTagmentation Buffer before addition of 22.5 μL of H20 and 2.5 μL of Tn5 transposase. This mix was incubated under agitation (1400 rpm) for 30 min at 37°C. DNA fragments were purified using the MinElute PCR Purification Kit. The eluate (10 μL) was amplified by PCR after the addition of 12.5 μL H20, 25 μL NEBNext® High-Fidelity 2xPCR Master Mix and 2.5 μL of index primers (Nextera® XT Index kit) as follows: 72°C for 5 min, 98°C for 30 s, followed by 5 cycles (98°C 10 s, 63°C 30 s, 72°C for 60 s). A preliminary qPCR was then performed with a fraction of the reaction product to determine the optimal number of amplification cycles needed for a second round of amplification without saturation: to this end 5 μL of iQ SYBR Green Supermix were added to 5 μL preamplified DNA and used for qPCR (98°C 30 s denaturation), followed by 20 cycles of amplification: (98°C 10 s, 63°C 30 s, and 72°C 60 s). The entire preamplified DNA was then amplified (usually 9–11 cycles). DNA from the final reaction was purified using 1.8x SPRI magnetic beads quantified with Qubit 4 fluorometer (Invitrogen) and qualified using Tapestation4150 (Agilent). Libraries were mixed in equimolar amounts and sequenced (> 2.108 reads/library; Nextseq500 DNA sequencer Illumina). Reads were aligned on the mouse genome (mm10 GRCm38 release) with Bowtie2. Peaks were identified using MACS2. MACS2 was also used for differential occupancy analysis using a set of reference library to define background.

## Brain slice collection
Each mouse was given a lethal intraperitoneal injection (6 mL/kg) of a mixture of ketamine (33 mg/mL) and xylazine (6.7 mg/mL). The thorax was opened and each mouse was perfused with 3.7% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer at room temperature. Each brain was dissected out, immersed in fixative at 4°C for 3 h and then in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) at 4°C until sectioning. Coronal sections (50 μm thick) were cut with the aid of a vibrating microtome (Integraslice 7550 SPDS, Campden Instruments, Loughborough, UK), in PBS at room temperature. Brain sections were stored at -20°C in cryoprotectant (30% ethylene glycol and 20% glycerol in 10 mM low-salt PBS).

## Brain slice histology
Immunohistochemistry was performed on free-floating brain sections. For PV labeling, a mouse anti-PV primary antibody (PARV19, Sigma P3088, 1:2000) and a secondary antibody made in donkey (anti-mouse DyLight 633, ThermoFisher Scientific, 1:1000) were used. For the concurrent PNN labeling, a biotinylated Wisteria floribunda lectin (WFL/WFA, Vector Laboratories B-1355, 20 μg/mL), and Streptavidin coupled to DyLight 488 (Vector Laboratories, SA-5488, 1:1000) were used. For oxidative stress labeling, a mouse monoclonal 8-Hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine primary antibody (8-oxo-dG, Abcam ab48508, 1:2000), and a secondary antibody made in donkey (anti-mouse DyLight 488, ThermoFisher Scientific, 1:1000) were used. Non-specific binding sites were blocked by incubating sections for 1 h in PBS with 1% BSA and 0.2% Triton X100. Brain sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with PV antibody and biotinylated WFA, which were diluted in PBS with 1% BSA, 0.2% Triton X-100 and 1% dimethyl sulfoxide. Sections were washed in PBS and further incubated for 15 min at room temperature with DAPI (Sigma, 1:5000). Incubation with the secondary antibody lasted for 3 h at room temperature. Sections were mounted in FluoroshieldTM (Sigma), coverslipped and imaged using an inverted confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM 780 and Zeiss LSM 800).

## Image analysis
Image analysis was performed using ImageJ. Final images resulted from the z projection of 3 optical sections (Maximum intensity tool) that were 2 μm apart (the resulting images thus reflected the fluorescence collected over a thickness of 4 μm). Tomato+, PV+ and WFA+ cells were counted with the Cell Counter in ImageJ plugin in the whole area of one image taken in the Somatosensory cortex area. 3–4 images in both hemispheres were analyzed for each mouse. For the 8-oxo-DG labeling experiment, Tomato+ 8-oxo-DG+ cells were detected from final images using the Cellpose wrapper for Fiji. Numbers of double-labelled cells per slice, 8-oxo-DG labeling intensity in Tomato+ cells and 8-oxo-DG labeling intensity outside Tomato+ cells were measured automatically from 3-4 slices per animal. The code of the original macro may be found here: https://github.com/jbrocardplatim/Macro_8oxo.

## Acute slice preparation
Juvenile ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre RosatdTomato and Pvalb-Cre RosatdTomato littermates (16-24-day-old) were deeply anesthetized with isoflurane and decapitated. The brains were quickly removed and placed into cold oxygenated artificial CerebroSpinal Fluid (aCSF): 126 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 26 mM NaHCO3, 10 mM glucose, 15 mM sucrose, and 1 mM kynurenic acid (nonspecific glutamate receptor antagonist; Sigma). Coronal slices (300 μm thick) from mouse Somatosensory cortex were prepared as described previously. Slices were cut with a vibratome (VT1000S; Leica), transferred to a holding chamber containing aCSF saturated with O2/CO2 (95%/5%), and held at room temperature.

## Whole-cell electrophysiological recording
Individual slices were transferred to a submerged recording chamber and perfused (1–2 ml/min) with oxygenated aCSF. Patch pipettes (∼10 MΩ) pulled from borosilicate glass were filled with 12 μl of internal solution: 144 mM K-gluconate, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.2 (285/295 mOsm). Neurons were first identified in the slice by their tdTomato fluorescence and then patched under infrared differential interference contrast illumination (SliceScope Pro, Scientifica). No specific layer of the cortex was targeted, but in practice most of the recorded neurons were located in layers IV and V. Whole-cell recordings in current-clamp mode were performed at room temperature (24.5 ± 1.5°C) using a patch-clamp amplifier (MultiClamp 700B; Molecular Devices). Data were filtered at 10 kHz and digitized at 100 kHz using an acquisition board (Digidata 1440A; Molecular Devices) attached to a personal computer running pClamp 10.7 software package (Molecular Devices). All membrane potentials were corrected for theoretical liquid junction potential (-15.6 mV). 4 cells (out of 58 that were recorded in total) exhibited immature characteristics, such as spiking pattern and lower highest spiking frequency. Such immature characteristics were seen equally in controls and mutants (1 mutant mouse and 1 control mouse). These 4 neurons were not included in the statistical analysis.

## Stereotaxic surgery for in vivo extracellular local field potential recording
8-week-old male ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice and Thra+/+
Pvalb-Cre control littermates were anesthetized in an induction chamber with 3% isoflurane. Following induction, they received analgesia via a subcutaneous injection of buprenorphine (0.1 mg/kg) and were placed in a stereotaxic frame (David Kopf Instruments, USA). Throughout the procedure, anesthesia was maintained with 1.5–2% isoflurane, and core body temperature was regulated at 37°C using a heating pad. Prior to the skin incision, a local subcutaneous injection of lidocaine (4–5 mg/kg) was administered for additional analgesia. Tungsten wire electrodes were bilaterally implanted in the olfactory bulb (OB) (AP: +4.3, ML: ±0.5, DV: −1.5), the CA1 hippocampal layer (AP: −2.2, ML: ±2.0, DV: −1.0), and the Somatosensory cortex (AP: −2.0, ML: ±3.5, DV: −1.2). A reference electrode was positioned on the cerebellar surface. Additionally, two wires were inserted into the nuchal muscles to record the electromyogram (EMG). Upon completion of the implantation, electrodes were secured to the skull using wax and dental cement (SuperBond C & B). The electrode leads were then connected to an EIB32 interface board, which was fixed onto the skull using Parafilm and dental cement. Brain activity recordings commenced after a minimum recovery period of one week.

## In vivo electrophysiological recordings
Neural signals from all implanted electrodes were recorded using an Intan Technologies amplifier chip (RHD2216) at a sampling rate of 20 kHz. Local field potentials (LFPs) were down sampled and stored at 1,250 Hz for further analysis. Signal processing and data analysis were conducted using custom-made MATLAB scripts, based on publicly available toolboxes, including Battaglia’s computing tools and the FMA Toolbox. LFPs were recorded using tungsten wire electrodes with PFA insulation (0.002” bare diameter).

## Sleep scoring
Automatic vigilance state classification was performed using a MATLAB-based algorithm developed in-house This approach integrates two parallel data streams: LFP recordings from the hippocampus and accelerometer measurements from the head-mounted EIB sensor, which finely monitor movement of the animal along the x, y, and z axes. Wakefulness versus sleep is distinguished based on accelerometer activity levels, with sustained low activity indicating sleep. The differentiation between NREM and REM sleep was based on the theta (5–10 Hz) / delta (2–4 Hz) power ratio in the hippocampus. Specifically, NREM sleep is characterized by a predominance of slow waves, reflected by high delta power, whereas REM sleep is marked by strong theta oscillations. Latency to NREM and REM sleep was calculated from the start of the recording session to the onset of the first sustained episode of each state. NREM and REM onset were defined as the first episodes lasting ≥ 10 s and ≥ 5 s, respectively; transient or ambiguous episodes were excluded.

## Behavior tests
Adult female ThraAMI/+
Pvalb-Cre mice and Thra+/+
Pvalb-Cre control littermates were transferred to PHENOMIN-ICS platform (Illkirch, France), where they underwent the following series of behavioral tests ( ). 1. Open field: Each mouse was placed in the periphery of a 44∗44 cm arena (Panlab, Barcelona, Spain), under 150 Lux illumination, and allowed to explore freely the apparatus for 30 min. The distance traveled, the number of rearings as well as the time spent in the central and peripheral regions were recorded (periphery width = 8 cm). 2. Elevated-plus maze: The apparatus comprised two open arms (30 X 5 cm) opposite one to the other and crossed by two closed arms (30 x 5 x 15 cm), all arms being equipped with infrared captors allowing automatic detection of the position of the mouse (Imetronic, Pessac, France). Mice were individually tested for 5 min. The following parameters were recorded: number of entries into and time spent in each arm, head dips, rearings, stretched-attend posture. 3. Visual discrimination and reversal task: Mice were tested in Mouse Touch Screen Systems (Campden Instruments). In order to increase the motivation of the animals, the drinking water in the housing cages was acidified during test days. After pre-training to learn to touch an image that appeared on the screen in order to obtain a reward, mice were tested in a visual discrimination task. Touching the correct image was rewarded with strawberry milk (12% sucrose). Touching the incorrect image was punished with a timeout. Once the task was learnt, the correct image became incorrect and vice versa. Each animal performed a session of 1 hour maximum per day, involving up to 60 trials per session, during which the percentage of correct responses was recorded. 4. Novel object recognition: Mice were first habituated for 10 min in a closed circular arena (30 cm diameter and 50 cm height, homogeneously illuminated at 20 Lux). The next day, mice were submitted to a 10-min acquisition trial, during which they were placed in the same arena in presence of two identical objects (A). The time spent exploring the objects (sniffing) was manually recorded. Two hours later, mice were placed again in the same arena, where one of the objects had been replaced by a novel object (B). During this 10-min retention trial, the times spent exploring the objects (tA and tB) were recorded. A recognition index (RI) was defined as (tB / (tA + tB)) x100. Locomotor activity was recorded with EthoVision XT video tracking system. 5. Marble burying: Mice were tested individually for 15 minutes in a cage (Tecniplast GM500, illuminated at 25 lux) containing 3 cm high clean bedding and 20 black glass marbles (10 mm diameter) arranged in 5 lines of 4 marbles. EthoVision XT video tracking system was used for video recording. The number of marbles fully covered by bedding was measured every minute, between the 5th and 15th minutes of the test. 6. Social interaction with a newcomer: Mice were tested in an open arena of 50∗50 cm with sawdust. The animals were previously equipped with an RFID chip so that each animal could be tracked independently and its social behaviors recorded by the Live Mouse Tracker system. For the habituation session, the mouse under test was allowed to freely explore the arena for 20 minutes. An unknown female adult C57Bl/6 mouse (“newcomer”) was then placed in the arena for 30 min. The social behaviors, including social approaches, contacts, following the other mouse, were recorded as well as the distance traveled by each mouse. 7. Pentylenetetrazole-induced seizure: Each mouse received an intraperitoneal injection of pentylenetetrazole (with 40 mg/kg) and was placed in a translucent cage. Different types of seizures were manually recorded for 20 minutes following the injection: myoclonic (short jerking in parts of the body), clonic (periods of shaking or jerking parts on the body), tonic (muscles in the body become stiff).

## Quantifiation and statistical analyses
Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. Data analyses were performed with Excel 2016 and GraphPad Prism software (v.8.). The level of significance was set at p < 0.05. For histological analysis, the data was systematically analyzed as a fraction of the corresponding values observed in control littermates. The two groups were compared using a two-tailed unpaired T-test. In whole-cell electrophysiological analysis, 37 parameters were manually defined ( ) as described, adopting Petilla terminology. The normality was analyzed using Shapiro-Wilk test. Quantitative patch clamp data were analyzed using a Mann-Whitney test or a two-tailed unpaired T-test. For mouse behavior analysis, the normality was analyzed using Shapiro-Wilk test. Quantitative behavior data were analyzed using either a two-tailed unpaired T-test, Mann-Whitney test or a two-way ANOVA followed by Sidak’s multiple comparisons test. For the comparison with chance, a one-group T-test was used. Outliers were identified with the ROUT method (Q = 1%). A Chi-square test was used to analyze the susceptibility to pentylenetetrazole-induced seizures. The analysis of in vivo local field potential recordings was performed in the MATLAB environment. This included the classification of vigilance states and the computation of spectral power in the somatosensory cortex. For statistical comparisons, non-parametric analyses were conducted using the Mann-Whitney U test to assess differences across vigilance states and spectral power distributions in the somatosensory cortex.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S5 and Tables S2–S4

## Table S1. Genomic consequences of TRα1L400R expression in PV neurons, related to Figure 1
Differential analysis of gene expression (DESeq2) and chromatin occupancy (ATAC-seq) data that was used to identify TRα1 target genes in cortical parvalbumin-expressing neurons in adult mice. This analysis included gene expression data from ThraAMI/+ROSA-GS-GFP-L10loxPvalb-Cre mice (aka “mutant mice”, n = 4), euthyroid Thra+/+ROSA-GS-GFP-L10lox/+Pvalb-Cre control littermates (n = 4), and hypothyroid wild-type mice with (n = 4) and without (n = 4) TH treatment. Only the 983 genes for which at least one p value < 0.05 are shown. Columns A–G, DESeq2 analysis, comparison between hypothyroid mice with and without TH treatment. Column H, regulation with fold-change >2 or <0.5. Columns I–O, DESeq2 analysis, comparison between euthyroid wild-type and mutant mice. Column P, regulation with fold-change >2 or <0.5. Columns Q–W, DESeq2 analysis, comparison between hypothyroid mice and euthyroid mice. Column X, regulation with fold-change >2 or <0.5. Columns Y and Z, differential chromatin occupancy, according to ATAC-seq analysis. Columns AB–AQ, adjusted base counts. Column AR, gene name. Column AS, genes known to be regulated during PV neuron postnatal maturation, based on previous work by Okaty et al., 2009. 

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2026.115970.