pmcMol MetabMol Metab2172molmet101605730Molecular Metabolism2212-8778ElsevierPMC11458544PMC11458544.111458544114585443927854610.1016/j.molmet.2024.102028S2212-8778(24)00159-51020281Original ArticleReversing Pdgfrβ signaling restores metabolically active beige adipocytes by alleviating ILC2 suppression in aged and obese mice
BenvieAbigail M.BerryDaniel C.dcb37@cornell.edu Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University Ithaca, NY 14853, USA⁎Corresponding author. Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, 526 Campus Rd. 307 Biotechnology Building Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. dcb37@cornell.edu112024139202489470984102028282024292024792024130920240810202402022026© 2024 The Authors2024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Reversing Pdgfrβ Signaling Restores Metabolically Active Beige Adipocytes by Alleviating ILC2 Suppression in Aged and Obese Mice
18620242024.06.17.599436bioRxiv10.1101/2024.06.17.599436PMC1121298638948810

## Objective
Platelet Derived Growth Factor Receptor Beta (Pdgfrβ) suppresses the formation of cold temperature-induced beige adipocytes in aged mammals. We aimed to determine if deleting Pdgfrβ in aged mice could rejuvenate metabolically active beige adipocytes by activating group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2), and whether this effect could counteract diet-induced obesity-associated beige fat decline.

## Methods
We employed Pdgfrβ gain-of-function and loss-of-function mouse models targeting beige adipocyte progenitor cells (APCs). Our approach included cold exposure, metabolic cage analysis, and age and diet-induced obesity models to examine beige fat development and metabolic function under varied Pdgfrβ activity.

## Results
Acute cold exposure alone enhanced metabolic benefits in aged mice, irrespective of beige fat generation. However, Pdgfrβ deletion in aged mice reestablished the formation of metabolically functional beige adipocytes, enhancing metabolism. Conversely, constitutive Pdgfrβ activation in young mice stymied beige fat development. Mechanistically, Pdgfrβ deletion upregulated IL-33, promoting ILC2 recruitment and activation, whereas Pdgfrβ activation reduced IL-33 levels and suppressed ILC2 activity. Notably, diet-induced obesity markedly increased Pdgfrβ expression and Stat1 signaling, which inhibited IL-33 induction and ILC2 activation. Genetic deletion of Pdgfrβ restored beige fat formation in obese mice, improving whole-body metabolism.

## Conclusions
This study reveals that cold temperature exposure alone can trigger metabolic activation in aged mammals. However, reversing Pdgfrβ signaling in aged and obese mice not only restores beige fat formation but also renews metabolic function and enhances the immunological environment of white adipose tissue (WAT). These findings highlight Pdgfrβ as a crucial target for therapeutic strategies aimed at combating age- and obesity-related metabolic decline.

## Highlights
•Cold temperature exposure reinstates metabolic homeostasis in aged mice.
•Pdgfrb signaling impairs ILC2 accrual and activation to impair beiging.
•Pdgfrb deletion restores functional beige adipocytes in aged and obese mice.
•Pharmacologically blocking Pdgfrb restores beige fat in diet-induced obese mice.

## Keywords
AgingObesityPdgfrβImmune cellThermogenesisBeige fatpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## Abbreviations
WATwhite adipose tissue
Ucp1uncoupling protein 1
SMAsmooth muscle actin
Pdgfrβplatelet derived growth factor receptor beta
iWATinguinal white adipose tissue
gWATperigonadal white adipose tissue
RTroom temperature
CEcold exposure
TMXtamoxifen
RERrespiratory exchange ratio
IL-33interleukin 33
ILC2group 2 innate lymphoid cells
APCsadipocyte progenitor cells
NCDnormal chow diet
HFDhigh fat diet
Stat1signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
1

## Introduction
Aging is associated with the development of obesity, increasing the risk of developing type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic diseases [ , ]. Obesity—excess fat mass—is often associated with altered energy balance and the consumption of nutrient-low calories, which drives white adipose tissue dysfunction. This dysfunction prevents glucose uptake, reduces adipocyte lipid storage, enables ectopic fat deposition, and augments blood lipid levels [ , ]. Accordingly, identifying molecular regulators opposing fat mass accumulation could enable metabolic changes in aged and obese individuals.
Cold temperature exposure reduces fat mass and improves systemic metabolism and energy expenditure [ , ]. It does so, in part, by recruiting and activating thermogenic beige adipocytes within white adipose tissues (WAT) to burn free fatty acids and glucose. Like brown adipocytes, beige fat cells are multilocular and have specialized mitochondria that express uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) to collapse the proton gradient to release heat [ ]. Indeed, stimulated beige adipocytes have been identified in cold-exposed (15 °C) adult humans [ , , , , ]. Markedly, the capacity to generate beige adipocytes reduces the risk of developing obesity and metabolic disease [ ]. For instance, beige fat transplantation studies have shown host recipient changes in glucose metabolism, insulin sensitivity, reduced adiposity, and lower body mass [ , ]. Moreover, the ability to recruit or activate beige adipose tissue is associated with changes in body fat distribution, such as reducing visceral fat [ ]. On the other hand, preventing thermogenic fat formation increases the risk of developing metabolic diseases [ ], suggesting that thermogenic fat has metabolic utility and emphasizing the ability to generate more. Indeed, recent efforts to engage human thermogenic fat activation have focused on modulating ambient temperature to reduce body weight and attenuate metabolic pathologies [ ].
To generate beige adipocytes, cold temperatures trigger the adipogenic action of WAT-resident perivascular smooth muscle cells. These beige fat progenitors resemble mural cells and express key vascular markers, such as smooth muscle actin (SMA), SM22 (Tagln), Myh11, and CD81 [ , , ]. However, the ability of cold temperatures to generate mammalian beige adipocytes declines with age, dampening the therapeutic promise of beige fat within aging populations [ , , , , , ]. Moreover, patients with obesity also show a decline in cold-induced beige fat development [ ]. Remarkably, the decline in beige fat development can be observed in humans starting in their mid-30s, before the decline of age-related tissue homeostasis and obesity [ ]. Cold-induced beige adipocyte failure can be attributed to several pathways and processes, such as cellular senescence, WAT fibrosis, inflammation, and mitophagy [ , , , , ]. Our previous study identified the age-dependent upregulation of platelet derived growth factor receptor beta (Pdgfrβ) within senescent beige progenitor cells [ ]. Deleting Pdgfrβ in aged mice restores Ucp1+ multilocular beige adipocytes within WATs. Conversely, beige adipocyte development was diminished in young mice harboring a constitutively activated Pdgfrβ, mirroring an aging phenotype. Changes in Pdgfrβ expression were associated with lower Th2-cytokine signaling pathways [ ]. Yet, several limitations existed, such as whether beige adipocytes induced by Pdgfrβ deletion are metabolically active and how Pdgfrβ remodels the immunological niche. Moreover, does Pdgfrβ activation contribute to obesity-associated beige adipocyte decline?
A growing body of evidence suggests the metabolic benefits of repeated cold exposure in humans, such as boosting energy expenditure and promoting whole-body fatty acid and glucose use [ , , , ]. Here, we use Pdgfrβ signaling to identify the contribution of metabolically active beige fat development to energy regulation and metabolism in aging and obese mice. This study shows that aging and obesity reprogram beige adipocyte progenitors by upregulating Pdgfrβ signaling to suppress ILC2 recruitment, preventing beige fat development and reducing energy expenditure.

2

## Methods
2.1

## Mouse models
All animal experiments were performed according to the procedures approved by the Cornell University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee under the auspices of protocol number 2017-0063. The Sma-CreERT2 mouse model was previously obtained from Drs. Pierre Chambon and Daniel Metzger [ ]. Sma-CreERT2 mice were then crossed with either PdgfrβD849V (stock #018435 [ ]) or Pdgfrβfl/fl (stock #010977 [ ]) purchased from the Jackson Laboratories. Prior to experimentation, offspring were intercrossed for six generations and maintained on a mixed C57BL6/J-129SV background. Mice were maintained on a 14:10-hour light/dark cycle with free access to food and water. To induce recombination, mice were administered one dose of TMX (50 mg/kg; Cayman Chemical: 13258) dissolved in sunflower seed oil (Sigma, item no: S5007) for two consecutive days via intraperitoneal (IP) injection. Mice were maintained for 7 day at room temperature (RT, ∼25 °C) after TMX injection. For cold temperature exposure, mice were housed in a 6.5 °C cold chamber (Power Scientific RIS70SD). For pharmacological inhibition of Pdgfrβ, mice were administered one dose of vehicle (5% DMSO) or SU16f (2 mg/kg; Tocris Bioscience: 3304) dissolved in 5% DMSO 1XPBS solution for 5 consecutive days via intraperitoneal injection. Recombinant IL-33 was administered to young mice at one dose of vehicle (1X PBS 0.1% BSA), IL-33 (12 μg/kg; PeproTech 210-33) for 5 consecutive days via intraperitoneal injection. For anti-IL-33 neutralizing antibody experiments, TMX-induced 12-month-old mice were administered one dose of mouse IgG control (1 μg/mouse; Invitrogen 31903) or anti-IL-33 antibody (1 μg/mouse; R&D systems AF3626) by intraperitoneal injection for 5 consecutive days. All animal experiments were performed on 3 or more mice per cohort and performed at least twice.

2.2

## Physiological measurements
Rectal temperatures were monitored daily (∼18:00 EST) using a TH-5 Thermalert Clinical Thermometer (Physitemp) attached to a RET-3 rectal probe for mice (Physitemp). The probe was lubricated with glycerol and then inserted 1.27 cm (1/2 inch), and once stabilized, the temperature was recorded. For glucose tolerance tests, mice fasted for 6 h at room temperature. Random glucose was measured prior to fasting. Tail blood glucose levels were first measured at time 0 (fasted). Mice were intraperitoneally injected with glucose (1.25 g/kg; Sigma G8270, dissolved in sterile water). Tail blood glucose levels were measured at 15, 30, 45, 60, 90- and 120 min post-injection with a Bayer Contour Next glucometer and strips. For high-fat diet (HFD; Research diets; D12492; 60% fat), mice were fed a normal chow diet (NCD) or HFD for four or eight weeks before TMX injection and cold exposure. Mice were maintained on the diet throughout TMX injections and the cold temperature challenge.

2.3

## Metabolic cage analysis
Before data collection, all mice were singly housed and acclimated for 2 day at room temperature (RT; ∼23 °C) in a Promethion Core Metabolic System from Sable Systems International. All cages were housed in an environmentally controlled cabinet. Cages were equipped to measure body weight, food and water intake, locomotion, oxygen consumption, and carbon dioxide production. After the acclimation period, the chamber was cooled to 6.5 °C for cold temperature exposure. Data was recorded from mice maintained at 6.5 °C for seven days. Collected data was analyzed using the web-based indirect calorimetry software CalR ([ ]).

2.4

## Blood chemistry
Blood samples were obtained via heart puncture and left to coagulate for 2 h at room temperature. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged at 7500 rpm for 5 min to separate serum, which was then aliquoted and frozen. Serum triglyceride levels were determined using the Triglyceride Quantification Colorimetric/Fluorometric Kit (Sigma–Aldrich Catalog: MAK266) from Millipore-Sigma as per the manufacturer's instructions, with a 1:25 serum dilution before assessment. Serum cholesterol levels were measured with the Cholesterol Quantification Kit (Sigma–Aldrich Catalog: MAK043) from Millipore-Sigma, following a 1:25 serum dilution. Adiponectin serum concentrations were quantified using the Quantikine ELISA Mouse Adiponectin/Acrp30 (Catalog: MRP30) from R&D Systems in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines after a 1:2000 serum dilution.

2.5

## Adipose SV cell isolation
The adipose tissue stromal vascular cell isolation procedure was adapted from Hausman and colleagues [ ]. Adipose tissues were removed from a single mouse, and the inguinal or perigonadal depots were finely diced before being immersed in 10 ml of isolation buffer composed of 0.1 M HEPES, 0.12 M NaCl, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM d-glucose, 1.5% BSA, and 1 mM CaCl2, supplemented with collagenase type I (10,000 units). Samples were incubated at 37 °C with gentle agitation for approximately 1 h. Following digestion, the tissue was combined with serum-free Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium Nutrient Mixture F-12 Ham (Sigma, cat. no. D8900 and D6421) (DMEM/F12) and filtered through a 100 (iWAT) or 70 (gWAT) μm cell strainer. Samples were then centrifuged at 1250 rpm for 10 min, after which the supernatant was discarded, and the remaining pellet resuspended in 10 ml of erythrocyte lysis buffer containing 155 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, and 0.1 mM EDTA and incubated for 5-minutes. Growth media (DMEM/F12 with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)) was added to the erythrocyte lysis buffer, mixed and stained through a 40 μm cell strainer. The sample was then centrifuged at 1250 rpm for 5 min, the supernatant removed, and the pellet resuspended in growth media and plated. Alternatively, cells were harvested for flow cytometric analysis.

2.6

## IL-33 ELISA
The iWAT SV cells were isolated from the denoted mice as described above, and cells were plated in a 96-well plate in growth media (DMEM/F12 with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)). Growth media was changed the following morning (∼18 h) post plating. At day three (∼72 h) post plating, cells were placed in serum free media (DMEM/F12) overnight and collected for analyses. For in vitro pharmacological treatments, cells were treated with 50 ng Pdgf-BB or 1 μM Fludarabine while maintained in growth media for 48 h prior to IL-33 measurements. To measure IL-33 secretion, we used the mouse & rat IL-33 ELISA Quantikine Kit (M3300) from R&D systems following the manufactures protocol. Cell culture supernatants were collected and spun at 500×g for 5 min to remove particulates, per the manufacture's suggestion. 50 μl of sample was then assayed immediately in duplicate and absorbance measured using TECAN infinite F-nano + spectrophotometer.

2.7

## Flow cytometry
The iWAT or gWAT SV cell compartment was isolated as described above and resuspended in 1X PBS along with blue fluorescent reactive dye. Cells were then pelleted and resuspended in 0.3–0.5 ml of FACS buffer consisting of 2.5% horse serum; 2 mM EDTA in 1X PBS with 1X protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail in and filtered through a 5 ml cell-strainer capped FACS tube (BD Falcon). Cell sorting was performed on BD Biosciences FACS Aria Fusion. Alternatively, cells were analyzed on a Thermo-Fisher Attune NxT cytometry. Viable cells were gated from the blue fluorescent reactive dye negative population followed by singlet forward and side scatter pattern. Cells were fixed for 30 min in 4% paraformaldehyde on ice, permeabilized, stained and analyzed for phosphorylated Stat1 (1:200; 9167 S Cell Signaling) or total Pdgfrβ (1:200; 4564 S Cell Signaling) conjugated to Cy5 donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibody (1:200; A10523 Invitrogen). Alternatively, CD45+ (1:200; 103151 Biolegend) cells were FACS isolated from the total iWAT or gWAT SV cell population of respective mice. For ILC2 analysis, live CD45+ cells were stained with the anti-mouse lineage negative cocktail (1:200; 133303 Biolegend), CD25 (1:250; 135019 Biolegend), and CD127 (1:250; 101907 Biolegend) antibodies and analyzed for their respective conjugated fluorophore. For ILC2 validation, cells were additionally stained for either Gata3 (1:200; 12-9966-41 Invitrogen) or IL33R (1:200; 566311 BD Biosciences) and analyzed for their respective conjugated fluorophore.

2.8

## RNA isolation and qPCR
Approximately 200 mg of WAT, BAT, or the quadricep muscle from a single mouse was placed into Precellys tubes containing ceramic (WAT and BAT) or metal (skeletal muscle) beads and 1 ml of TRIzol reagent (ABI). Tissues were then homogenized in a Precellys 24 homogenizer using the following the settings: 3 pulses at 4500 rpm for 30 s with a 30 s rest between pulses with a final rest of 4 min. RNA was isolated through conventional chloroform extraction and isopropanol precipitation technique. The concentration and quality of RNA were measured using a TECAN infinite F-nano + spectrophotometer. Subsequently, 1 μg of RNA was reverse transcribed into complementary DNA (cDNA) utilizing the high-capacity RNA to cDNA kit (Life Technologies #4368813). For qPCR, cDNA was diluted 1:10 and added to PowerUp™ SYBR™ Green Master Mix (Life Technologies A25742) along with denoted primers ( ). qPCR analysis was performed on an Applied Biosystems QuantStudio™ 3 Real-Time PCR System using the DD-CT method compared to the internal control, Rn18s. Data points correspond to individual biological replicates, with each data point assessed in quadruplicate technically. Details regarding the qPCR primer sequences can be accessed in .

2.9

## Histological staining and immunostaining
Adipose tissues were dissected, weighed and immediately placed in 10% formalin (neutralized with 1X PBS) for 24 h. Tissues were then processed using Thermo Scientific™ STP 120 Spin Tissue Processor with the following conditions: Bucket 1: 50% ethanol (45 min); Bucket 2: 70% ethanol (45 min) Bucket 3: 80% ethanol (45 min); Bucket 4 and 5: 95% ethanol (45 min); Bucket 6 and 7: 100% ethanol (45 min); Bucket 8–10: Xylene Substitute (45 min); Bucket 11 and 12: paraffin (4 h each). A Histostar™ embedding station was used to embed tissues into cassettes using and blocks were refrigerated for at least 24 h prior to sectioning. 8-12-micron tissue sections were generated using a HM-325 microtome using low profile blades. Sections were placed in a 40 °C water bath and positioned on microscope slides. Slides were then baked overnight at 55 °C prior to staining. For Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, slides were rehydrated using the following protocol: xylene (3 min 3X), 100% reagent alcohol (1 min 2X); 95% reagent alcohol (1 min 2X); water (1 min). Slides were stained in hematoxylin for 2 min 30 s followed by 10 repeated submerges in eosin staining. Slides were then dehydrated in the reverse order of the above rehydration steps. Slides were then cover slipped with Cryoseal 60 mounting media. Brightfield images were acquired using a Leica DMi8 inverted microscope system. For immunofluorescent staining, slides were rehydrated as described above. Antigen retrieval was performed using 1X Citrate Buffer, made from 10X stock (Electron Microscopy Sciences R-Buffer A, 10X, pH 6; Catalog: 62706-10) diluted in diH2O, and placed into an antigen retriever pressure cooker (EMS Catalog #62706) for 2 h. Slides were then permeabilized using 0.3%TritonX-100 in 1X TBS for 30 min and washed three times in 1X TBS. Slides were then blocked with 10% donkey serum in 1X TBS for 30-minutes and incubated with primary antibody diluted in blocking solution overnight at 4 °C. The following primary antibodies were used: guinea pig anti-perilipin (1:200; Fitzgerald 20 R–PP004) and rabbit anti-Ucp1 (1/200; abcam: ab10983). Secondary antibodies from Invitrogen or Jackson ImmunoResearch were used at 1/200 dilutions and incubated for 2 h at room temperature. The following secondary antibodies were used: Cy5 donkey anti-guinea pig, or Texas red donkey anti-rabbit. Slides were washed and stained with Hoechst (H3570; Life Technologies) (1 μg/ml in 1X TBS) for 10 min and cover slipped with Thermo Scientific™ Shandon™ Immu-Mount™ mounting media. Fluorescent images were collected on a Leica DMi8 inverted microscope system.

2.10

## Quantification and statistical analysis
For adipocyte area quantification, three 10X images were assessed from at least three mice/cohort for adipocyte area quantification. The Fiji ImageJ Adiposoft plugin was used to calculate adipocyte area; adipocyte areas below 50 microns were omitted due to reliability and edges. NIH Fiji Image J software was additionally used to quantify fibrotic tissue area. For beige area quantification, three 20X immunofluorescent images containing the individual channel for Ucp1 from 3 mice per group were quantified for the percent of beige positive area utilizing ImageJ Fiji software. Images were converted to the appropriate color threshold and highlighted to determine percent fluorescence over total fluorescent signal. Output values were then corrected for background signal and averaged in their respective groups. Statistical significance was assessed by either paired or unpaired Student's t-test or one-way ANOVA for multiple comparisons. Data are means and error bars are expressed as ± SEM. A P value of <0.05 was considered significant in all experiments. The statistical parameters and the number of mice used per experiment are found in the figure legends. Mouse experiments were performed in biological duplicate or triplicate with at least three mice per cohort. The Leica Application Suite X Microscope software was used for image acquisition and analyses. The flow cytometric analysis software, FlowJo, was used to analyze cell populations, antibody staining, and generate flow cytometric plots. All graphs and statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9. Excel was used for raw data collection, analysis, and quantification. Experimental designs and schematics were designed and created using PowerPoint.

3

## Results
3.1

## Cold exposure can improve age-associated changes in physiology
To evaluate the impact of aging and beige fat decline on cold-induced metabolism, we exposed 2-month- (young) and 12-month-old (aged) male and female mice to room temperature (RT) (23 °C) or cold exposure (CE) (6.5 °C) for seven days ( A). We first examined whether CE could alter several physiological parameters in the aged setting. As expected, RT-aged male and female mice were heavier than RT-juvenile mice ( B and C). Aging in male mice at RT was also associated with impaired glucose clearance compared to their young RT counterparts, whereas aged RT female mice appeared protected against age-related changes in glucose clearance ( D–G). However, in response to CE, we observed a significant reduction in body weight in both young and aged male and female mice ( B and C). Additionally, CE improved glucose clearance in aged male and female mice, indicating a cold-induced metabolic benefit ( D–G). Interestingly, RT aged males showed an increase in serum triglycerides and cholesterol whereas, females only showed an age-associated increase in serum cholesterol ( H–K). Nevertheless, CE significantly reduced serum triglycerides and cholesterol levels regardless of age ( H–K). 
Next, we evaluated whether CE could reduce adiposity in aged mice. As expected, aged male and female mice had expanded inguinal (iWAT) and perigonadal (gWAT) adipose tissues compared to young mice ( L-O). Yet, CE reduced adipose depot weight in both young and aged male and female mice ( L-O). Consistent with this observation, histological staining revealed that CE decreased the size of unilocular white adipocytes in iWAT and gWAT depots compared to RT-aged controls ( P and 1Q, and ). To confirm these findings, we measured adiponectin, an adipokine associated with WAT size and health [ ]. We observed downregulation of serum adiponectin levels in RT-aged male and female mice, presumably due to increased WAT size and age-related decline in tissue function ( ). Conversely, CE boosted adiponectin levels in both young and aged male and female mice, suggesting that CE improves adipose tissue function and systemic metabolism, independent of beige fat biogenesis ( ).
In response to CE, young male and female mice readily developed Ucp1+ beige adipocytes within the dorsal lumbar region of iWAT depots ( P–U). Notably, female mice developed pronounced CE-induced Ucp1+ beige fat formation in perigonadal white adipose tissue (gWAT) depots whereas, small Ucp1+ “pockets” could be observed within male gWAT ( ). Notably, female gWAT recruited beige adipocytes could be observed along the uterine horn and ovary ( ). Moreover, the appearance of beige adipocytes in young mice was associated with the induction of a thermogenic program ( ). In contrast, aged male and female mice rarely developed cold-induced beige adipocytes in either iWAT or gWAT depots, underscoring an age-associated decline in beige fat biogenesis ( P–U and ). Overall, our results demonstrate an age-associated decline in beige fat biogenesis in both male and female mice, but CE restores several age-associated metabolic perturbations.

3.2

## Pdgfrβ deletion restores metabolically functional beige fat in aged mice
We previously identified the age-related upregulation of Pdgfrβ mRNA and protein expression within WAT [ ]. Correspondingly, deleting Pdgfrβ in aged beige APCs restored beige fat appearance. To extend these findings, we sought to understand whether Pdgfrβ-KO induced metabolically functional beige adipocytes and, if so, whether these beige adipocytes bolster metabolism in aged mice. To test this notion, we combined the Pdgfrβfl/fl conditional mouse model with the tamoxifen (TMX)-inducible Sma-CreERT2 [ , ]. Aged mice (12-months-old) were administered TMX to delete Pdgfrβ within Sma + beige precursors [ ]. After TMX induction, we subsequently cold exposed mice for seven days and evaluated metabolic parameters ( A). As expected, cold exposed aged Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice upheld homothermic responses compared to age-matched controls ( B,C). Strikingly, aged Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice displayed a significant increase in energy expenditure, indicating that Pdgfrβ deletion appeared to generate functional beige adipocytes ( D and E, and ). In addition to elevated energy expenditure, Pdgfrβ-KO mice had a lower respiratory exchange ratio (RER), suggesting a macronutrient shift to lipids ( F and G). However, changes in RER appeared to be independent of food intake ( H and I). Next, we assessed if Pdgfrβ deletion improved blood glucose clearance after CE by performing an intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test. After CE, the blood glucose peak and decline were significantly enhanced in Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice ( J and K). Consistently, we observed improvements in other serum indicators, such as triglycerides and cholesterol levels in cold-exposed Pdgfrβ-KO mice ( ). Together, deleting Pdgfrβ in SMA cells appears to shift several physiological surrogates of beige fat development. 
Even though we observed changes in energy expenditure, body weight remained relatively constant in male control and mutant mice ( ). However, we observed that Pdgfrβ deletion slightly reduced body weight in female mice ( ). Cold temperature exposure was also associated with reduced adiposity in mutant males and females compared to controls ( ). Yet, we did not observe significant differences in non-adipose tissue organ weight ( ). Likewise, we did not observe changes in skeletal muscle shivering genes [ ] ( ). Hematoxylin and eosin staining and Ucp1 immunostaining of aged control dorsal lumbar iWAT [ ] sections after CE revealed minimal Ucp1+ multilocular beige adipocytes. In contrast, Pdgfrβ deletion significantly restored iWAT and gWAT beige fat development in aged male and female mice ( L–O and ). Moreover, gene expression revealed that deleting Pdgfrβ restored thermogenic gene expression in iWAT and gWAT depots after CE in aged male and female mice ( ). Overall, deleting Pdgfrβ in aged mice restores functional beige adipocytes to improve metabolism.

3.3

## Pdgfrβ activation blunts the development of metabolically active beige fat in young mice
The data suggest that aging prevents beige fat generation, but Pdgfrβ deletion can restore beige fat development and boost several health benefits of CE. To realize the contribution of Pdgfrβ-induced blockade on beige fat development and metabolism, we impaired beige adipocyte formation, independent of brown fat, in young two-month-old mice to mimic aging. To do so, we previously generated a mouse model in which a constitutively Pdgfrβ activated allele is expressed within SMA + beige fat progenitors [ ]. In this model, the PdgfrβD849V conditional mouse model is combined with the Sma-CreERT2 driver to create PdgfrβSmaD849V. Notably, this Cre-inducible constitutively active Pdgfrβ allele is controlled by the Pdgfrβ promoter and expressed at endogenous levels, but basal Pdgfrβ signaling is elevated [ , ]. Because we observed Pdgfrβ acting in an age-dependent manner to regulate beige fat formation negatively, we evaluated the necessity of Pdgfrβ in young mice using the Pdgfrβ-KO mouse model as a control. To induce recombination in young mice, we administered one dose of TMX for two consecutive days to delete Pdgfrβ or activate the PdgfrβD849V allele. After the TMX washout [ ], we cold exposed male and female mice for seven days ( A). As anticipated, juvenile control and Pdgfrβ-KO mice maintained similar body temperature defenses in response to CE. However, young mice harboring the PdgfrβD849V had impaired body temperature defense during CE ( B and C). In agreement with compromised homeothermic control, after three days of CE, PdgfrβD849V male and female mice had significantly lower energy expenditure than control and Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice ( D and E and ). We also observed that PdgfrβD849V male and female mice had a lower RER ( F and G). However, changes in PdgfrβD849V RER appeared to be independent of food intake ( H and I). Since brown adipose tissue is the primary site of thermogenesis and energy regulation [ ], we have previously evaluated brown adipose tissue characteristics in PdgfrβD849V male mice and found no significant differences in thermogenic genes or histological appearance [ ]. Moreover, Sma + cells do not serve as a brown adipocyte precursor [ , ]. 
Next, we evaluated whether reduced energy expenditure was associated with changes in glucose responses. Consistent with this notion, the blood glucose peak and subsequent decline in PdgfrβD849V male and female mice remained elevated throughout a glucose tolerance test ( J and K). PdgfrβD849V dampened glucose clearance was also associated with elevated serum triglyceride and cholesterol levels ( ). While body weight remained comparable between control and mutant female mice, male mice harboring the PdgfrβD849V mutation were slightly heavier ( ). Consistently, adiposity remained higher in PdgfrβD849V male and female mice compared to control and Pdgfrβ-KO mice ( ). However, non-adipose tissue organ weight remained comparable between control, Pdgfrβ-KO, and PdgfrβD849V ( ). As previously observed [ ], histological analysis revealed a paucity of beige fat development throughout PdgfrβD849V iWAT depots ( L). Additionally, qPCR analysis revealed that thermogenic genes were uninduced within iWAT depots from PdgfrβD849V mice ( ). Moreover, larger adipocyte areas could be observed within PdgfrβD849V iWAT sections ( ). The lack of beige fat development was confirmed by Ucp1 immunostaining and quantification within iWAT sections from male and female PdgfrβD849V mice ( M and ). Likewise, gWAT sections from male and female PdgfrβD849V mice revealed larger white adipocytes and lack of cold-induced beige fat formation ( ). Furthermore, Ucp1 immunostaining and mRNA expression exposed the lack of beige adipocyte development within male and female gWAT depots was significantly blunted ( ). Thus, activating Pdgfrβ prevents functional beige fat formation in young mice to blunt metabolism.

3.4

## Pdgfrβ signaling coordinates ILC2 accrual
We previously found that Pdgfrβ expression negatively correlated with interleukin 33 (IL-33) expression to suppress Th2 cytokine signaling [ ]. However, the regulation of IL-33 by Pdgfrβ signaling and its role in ILC2 accrual required further investigation. To determine if Pdgfrβ influences IL-33 bioavailability, we assessed IL-33 mRNA expression and secretion from beige APCs isolated from iWAT depots of aged control and mutant mice. Indeed, IL-33 expression was elevated within iWAT depots of Pdgfrβ-KO mice ( A). Strikingly, IL-33 secretion was nearly undetectable in aged control mice, but Pdgfrβ ablation significantly elevated IL-33 protein levels within the media ( B). 
We extended our analysis to young beige APCs to examine the impact of Pdgfrβ activation on IL-33 secretion. Consistent with our hypothesis, PdgfrβD849V beige APCs exhibited reduced IL-33 levels in culture media compared to young controls, indicating that Pdgfrβ signaling modulates IL-33 bioavailability ( C). In agreement, activating Pdgfrβ via Pdgf-BB treatment blunted IL-33 secretion within the media ( D). We then focused on elucidating the mechanistic link between Pdgfrβ signaling and IL-33 regulation, particularly the role of Stat1 [ ]. Our previous data showed that Stat1 mediates Pdgfrβ signaling in aged beige APCs [ ]. To test this, we inhibited Stat1 using fludarabine in aged SV cells from PdgfrβD849V mice in vitro [ ]. Remarkably, fludarabine treatment significantly elevated IL-33 secretion from these cells ( E).
IL-33 regulates the recruitment and activation of ILC2s [ , , ]. Therefore, we evaluated if changes in IL-33 secretion and expression correlated with ILC2 recruitment. To do so, we FACS isolated CD45+/Lin-/CD25+/CD127+ cells from iWAT and gWAT depots from control and Pdgfrβ-KO aged male and female mice maintained at RT or CE for seven days ( ). We confirmed that these were ILC2s by GATA3 and IL-33 R staining [ , ] ( ). In response to Pdgfrβ deletion, we observed more ILC2s within iWAT and gWAT depots of aged male and female mice ( F–I and ). To assess the requirement of IL-33 in mediating Pdgfrβ-KO induced beige fat development, we previously treated aged Pdgfrβ-KO mice with anti-IL-33. We found that blocking IL-33 prevented beige fat development and reduced Th2 immune cell activation [ ]. As a next step, we evaluated if blocking IL-33 also reduced ILC2 accrual within Pdgfrβ-KO iWAT. Indeed, aged Pdgfrβ-KO mice treated with anti-IL-33 had significantly reduced ILC2 abundance compared to IgG treated Pdgfrβ-KO mice ( J and ). Next, we evaluated if Pdgfrβ activation in young mice prevented ILC2 recruitment. Flow cytometric analyses of ILC2s showed that activating Pdgfrβ in young iWAT and gWAT depots prevented ILC2 recruitment in response to cold temperature challenge ( K-N and ). Accordingly, expression levels of ILC2 genes within iWAT depots of PdgfrβD849V males and females were downregulated compared to control and Pdgfrβ-KO mice ( ). To assess if IL-33 could bypass Pdgfrβ signaling to restore beige fat development, we previously treated PdgfrβD849V male mice with vehicle or IL-33. We had found that IL-33 could induce beige fat development and activate Th2 immune cells within iWATs of constitutively activated Pdgfrβ mice [ ]. We performed FACS analysis on iWAT depots from PdgfrβD849V mice to assess if ILC2s were recruited by IL-33. We found more ILC2 recruitment in PdgfrβD849V mice treated with IL-33 compared to vehicle ( O and . Altogether, it appears that Pdgfrβ signaling negatively impacts IL-33 expression to stifle ILC2 accrual.

3.5

## Diet-induced obesity impairs beige fat biogenesis and elevates Pdgfrβ signaling
Obesity prevents the formation of beige adipocytes [ , , , ]. We queried whether Pdgfrβ signaling was involved in diet induced obesity-associated beige fat decline. To examine the impact of diet-induced obesity on beige fat biogenesis, we subjected our genetic background control mice (C57BL6/J/129SV) to either a normal chow diet (NCD) or high fat diet (HFD) for four and eight weeks, followed by a seven-day CE protocol ( A). Notably, both male and female mice gain weight on the HFD over the 8-week period ( ). At the four-week mark, both NCD and HFD mice exhibited no significant differences in their ability to maintain body temperature during CE ( ). However, after eight weeks on HFD, male and female mice displayed a compromised ability to defend their body temperature during CE ( B,C). At four weeks of diet, adiposity levels were also comparable between NCD and HFD after cold exposure whereas at eight weeks, HFD mice remained elevated ( D–G). Histological examination using H&E staining and Ucp1 immunostaining revealed a similar presence of Ucp1+ multilocular beige adipocytes within the dorsal lumbar region of iWAT depots across both dietary conditions after four-weeks. However, after eight weeks of HFD, multilocular Ucp1+ beige adipocytes were scarce ( H–K). This was further supported by Ucp1 quantification revealing a reduction in beige adipocyte biogenesis ( ). Moreover, qPCR analysis revealed that after eight weeks of HFD thermogenic markers were unresponsive to CE unlike NCD fed mice ( L and ). Additionally, H&E staining and Ucp1 immunostaining revealed the diminished appearance of gWAT multilocular beige adipocytes at both four and eight weeks of HFD in male and female mice ). 
Next, we tested if Pdgfrβ expression was induced by HFD administration. Like aging, we observed by qPCR analysis that Pdgfrβ was elevated in iWAT depot of HFD male mice ( M). Moreover, flow cytometric analysis revealed an increase in PDGFRβ protein levels on beige APCs (SMA+) ( N). The age-associated upregulation of Pdgfrβ signaling appears to be mediated by the signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (Stat1) to prevent beige fat development [ ]. Consistent with this observation, we found that STAT1 phosphorylation was also elevated in SMA + beige APCs after eight-weeks of HFD ( O). Additionally, we observed less IL-33 in the eight-week obese state, as previously observed in obese humans and mice, suggesting less ILC2 accrual and activation ( ). Thus, diet-induced obesity appears to block beige fat formation which may be attributed to the upregulation of the beige suppression signaling of Pdgfrβ.

3.6

## Restoration of cold-induced beige adipogenesis in HFD mice via Pdgfrβ deletion
To determine whether Pdgfrβ deletion could rescue beige fat biogenesis in the context of HFD, we fed control and Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice a HFD for eight weeks, followed by TMX administration and a subsequent seven-day CE protocol ( A). Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice on HFD maintained homeothermic control more effectively than their HFD control counterparts during CE ( B,C). However, both groups showed similar cold-induced reductions in body weight ( ). Yet, Pdgfrβ deletion improved glucose tolerance tests, suggesting enhanced glucose clearance in response to CE ( D,E). In agreement, we observed improved serum triglycerides levels in cold exposed HFD fed Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice ( ). 
In line with beige adipogenesis, Pdgfrβ-KO mice exhibited a significant reduction in adiposity compared to HFD controls ( F–I). However, non-adipose tissue weight remained comparable between control and mutant mice ( ). Histological analysis of iWAT sections from Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice revealed the presence of smaller white adipocytes and the emergence of multilocular beige adipocytes ( J and ). Immunostaining for Ucp1 confirmed robust beige adipocyte formation in the iWAT of Pdgfrβ-KO mice ( K and ). Although gWAT depots were reduced in size, beige fat development was not detected post-CE ( ). Supporting these histological findings, qPCR analyses demonstrated a restoration of thermogenic gene expression in iWAT samples from HFD-fed Pdgfrβ-KO mice ( ). While we observed changes in metabolic responses, we did not observe changes in BAT weight, morphology, or gene expression in response to HFD administration between control and mutant mice ( ). Together, these results indicate that Pdgfrβ deletion effectively reinstates the ability to generate beige adipocytes in response to cold exposure, even under conditions of diet-induced obesity.
IL-33 bioavailability and ILC2 recruitment and activation are reduced in obese mice and humans [ , , , , ]. Therefore, we investigated if Pdgfrβ deletion reinstated IL-33 expression and ILC2 accrual and activation. Indeed, we observed that Pdgfrβ deletion elevated IL-33 expression within iWAT depots of male and female mice after CE ( L). In addition, we observed higher levels of IL-13, a byproduct of ILC2 activation [ , ] ( M). Furthermore, FACS analysis revealed more ILC2s within iWAT depots of Pdgfrβ-KO male and female mice ( N and O). Consistent with Pdgfrβ deletion, we observed less STAT1 phosphorylation in male and female iWAT depots, suggesting that Stat1 may mediate Pdgfrβ signaling in HFD administered mice ( ). Taken together, it appears that HFD invokes Pdgfrβ upregulation and signaling to prevent IL-33 expression and ILC2 accrual and activation thereby blunting beige fat development.

3.7

## Pharmacological blockade of Pdgfrβ restores cold-induced beige formation under HFD conditions
We previously observed that treating aged mice with Pdgfrβ inhibitors could restore beige fat formation. Therefore, we explored whether pharmacologically blocking Pdgfrβ with SU16f, a potent and selective Pdgfrβ kinase inhibitor [ ], could restore beige fat biogenesis in mice subjected to HFD. After eight weeks on HFD, male and female mice were treated with vehicle or SU16f for five days and subsequently cold exposed for seven days ( A). While both vehicle and SU16f treated mice experienced similar cold-induced reductions in body weight, SU16f-treated HFD mice maintained homeothermic body temperature defense whereas, vehicle-CE HFD mice did not ( B and C and , and ). Moreover, glucose tolerance tests showed that SU16f treatment improved glucose clearance in HFD mice ( D and E). In agreement, SU16f treatment lower serum insulin levels after SU16f treatment and CE ( ). In addition, serum triglycerides levels were reduced in mice treated with SU16f and CE compared to HFD vehicle CE mice ( ). 
In agreement with metabolic improvements induced by Pdgfrβ inhibition, SU16f-treated male and female mice displayed a significant reduction in in WAT weight compared to untreated HFD mice ( F–I). Yet, non-adipose tissue organ weights remained comparable between groups ( ). Histological analysis of iWAT sections from SU16f-treated mice revealed the presence of smaller white adipocytes and the formation of multilocular beige adipocytes ( J and ). Ucp1 immunostaining confirmed the development of beige adipocytes in the iWAT of SU16f-treated mice ( K and ). Moreover, qPCR analysis revealed that SU16f stimulated a thermogenic program within iWAT depots of HFD male and female mice ( L,M). Although gWAT depots were smaller in size and contained smaller adipocytes, we did not detect the presence of beige fat development after CE in either vehicle or SU16f treated HFD male and female mice ( ). Additionally, we did not observe changes in BAT weight, morphology, or gene expression in response to HFD administration between control and mutant mice ( ). Thus, pharmacological inhibition of Pdgfrβ with SU16f can effectively restore the capacity for beige adipocyte formation in response to cold exposure, even under conditions of diet-induced obesity.
Because Pdgfrβ deletion increases IL-33 and ILC2 accrual and activation in aged and obese mice, we examined if SU16f could restore ILC2 levels in HFD fed cold exposed mice. Indeed, blocking Pdgfrβ activation with SU16f resulted in an upregulation in IL-33 mRNA expression in iWAT depots ( ). SU16f induced changes in IL-33 expression was also associated with elevated IL-13 mRNA expression within iWAT depots of male and female HFD mice ( ). Consistent with changes in IL-33 and IL-13, we observed more ILC2s within the iWAT SV compartment of SU16f treated HFD male and female mice after CE ( N and 7O, and ). Corresponding with Pdgfrβ inhibition, we observed less STAT1 phosphorylation in male and female iWAT beige APCs, suggesting that Stat1 activity is linked Pdgfrβ signaling ( ). Overall, it appears that pharmacologically blocking Pdgfrβ activation under HFD conditions upregulates IL-33 expression to augment ILC2 accrual and activation to promote beige fat development.

4

## Discussion
Cold temperatures stimulate the formation of beige adipocytes to coordinate thermogenesis and metabolism. The appearance of beige adipocytes upsurges metabolic demand by increasing energy expenditure, shrinking adipose tissues, and lowering serum lipid levels [ , , , , , ]. This effect is considered protective against obesogenic cues. However, the ability to generate beige fat declines with age and obese conditions, a time when beige fat would be the most valuable [ , ]. While aging and obesity are associated with an increased risk of metabolic dysfunction, the underlying mechanisms of beige fat decline remain complex. This study highlights the pivotal role of Pdgfrβ signaling in the regulation of beige APC function and metabolic health, particularly in the contexts of aging and obesity. Our findings demonstrate that deletion of Pdgfrβ in aged mice not only restores the formation of metabolically functional beige adipocytes but also enhances energy expenditure, improves glucose tolerance, and promotes lipid oxidation. These metabolic improvements underscore the potential of targeting Pdgfrβ signaling to counteract the detrimental effects of aging and obesity on metabolic health.
Interestingly, cold exposure (CE) has been shown to exert metabolic benefits beyond beige fat development [ ]. Our data reveal that CE effectively reduces body weight, enhances glucose metabolism, improves blood lipid profiles, and decreases adiposity in both young and aged mice, independent of beige fat formation. This suggests that the metabolic demand induced by CE alone is sufficient to drive favorable metabolic changes, especially in the aged setting. Yet, we do not know how long these effects may persist and whether these favorable changes alter disease susceptibility or healthspan. Moreover, the precise tissues and mechanisms mediating these effects remain to be elucidated. Multiple tissues likely orchestrate responses to meet the energy demands induced by CE, thereby maintaining homeostasis under colder environmental conditions. In agreement with this, we found that deleting Pdgfrβ within the smooth muscle cell lineage also evokes metabolic changes that may be independent of beige fat development. Notably, while constitutively activating Pdgfrβ in young mice blocks beige fat development, we unexpectedly observed a lower RER, suggesting shifts in micronutrient utilization that could be due to changes in Pdgfrβ activity in other cell and tissue types. In agreement with this notion is the observed changes in glucose regulation between young male and female mice. While sex steroids control white and beige fat development [ , , ], age-associated changes in sex steroids in metabolic regulation are an evolving field [ ]. Importantly, our data reveal that Pdgfrβ function does not alter BAT weight, morphology, or thermogenic gene expression, indicating that BAT, may not be the sole mediator of these metabolic adaptations. Moreover, human isotope tracer studies have provided insights into the tissues and substrates responsive to cold temperature exposure [ ]. This aligns with findings in human studies where skeletal muscle, rather than adipose tissue, may play a more significant role in thermogenesis and metabolism during cold exposure [ , , ]. Continued research into substrate utilization and tissue-specific responses will be essential to fully understand how different tissues contribute to the metabolic adaptations observed under cold exposure, including the role of thermogenic fat cells.
The interplay between Pdgfrβ signaling and the immune niche is particularly intriguing to beige adipocyte regulation. Our study associates Pdgfrβ activation with reduced IL-33 secretion from beige adipocyte progenitors, leading to decreased ILC2 accrual and activation. This immunological shift appears to be a key mechanism by which Pdgfrβ signaling impedes beige fat formation. Despite the critical role of these signals in coordinating beige fat development, the specific cellular sources or pools of beige adipocytes remain unidentified. Our previous fate mapping analysis revealed that beige adipocyte progenitor cells remain senescent following Pdgfrβ deletion, raising questions about the cell types involved in generating beige adipocytes without Pdgfrβ signaling [ ]. Changes in Pdgfrβ signaling could be attributed to cellular utility in white and beige adipogenesis. For instance, Pdgfrβ signaling has been linked to white fat cell development and specification and it is plausible that Pdgfrβ signaling favors white fat lineage development over beige fat biogenesis [ ]. Comparably, the role of ILC2s in inducing beige fat development warrants further investigation. Although methionine-enkephalin, an ILC2 bioproduct, has been implicated in promoting beige fat formation, the underlying mechanisms remain undefined [ , ]. Broadly, dietary and age-associated changes in WAT are accompanied by immune cell composition modifications [ ]. Whether Pdgfrβ regulates a more diverse immunological cell composition remains to be explored.
Our findings also shed light on the impact of diet-induced obesity on beige fat biogenesis, paralleling the effects of aging. Mice fed a HFD exhibited reduced thermogenic capacity and increased adiposity, alongside an upregulation in Pdgfrβ signaling. Remarkably, Pdgfrβ deletion reinstated beige adipocyte generation in response to CE, even in the obese state. These interventions led to improved thermogenesis, enhanced glucose metabolism, and reduced adiposity, highlighting the therapeutic potential of targeting Pdgfrβ signaling in metabolic diseases. However, a deeper understanding of the transcriptional regulation of Pdgfrβ in beige progenitor biology is essential. Elucidating the upstream mechanisms governing Pdgfrβ will uncover the molecular underpinnings driving beige APC dysfunction and niche regulatory signals. Interestingly, several studies have indicated that perivascular cells express and produce IL-33 [ , ]. Moreover, beta-adrenergic receptor activation promotes gene transcription of IL-33 within Pdgfrβ+ APCs [ , ]. However, the molecular mediators regulating the age-dependent upregulation of Pdgfrβ expression to limit IL-33 transcription remains to be define.
In summary, our study emphasizes the critical role of Pdgfrβ in regulating beige fat progenitor function and metabolic health. Aging and obesity are often associated with impaired beige fat formation, blunting the metabolic benefit of thermogenic adipocytes. By modulating Pdgfrβ signaling, genetically or pharmacologically, we can restore the beneficial effects of ILC2s and beige fat biogenesis to mitigate the metabolic detriments associated with aging and obesity. These findings open new avenues for therapeutic strategies aimed at enhancing beige fat formation and improving metabolic outcomes in susceptible populations.

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Abigail M. Benvie: Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Daniel C. Berry: Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

 Appendix A

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## Acknowledgements
The authors thank the Berry lab help advice and discussions, specifically Caila Low and Derek Lee. The authors thank the Cornell Biotechnology Resources Center Flow Cytometric Core Facility and the Center of Animal Resources and Education for excellent assistance with experimental collection and mouse husbandry, respectively. This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health from NIDDK [R01-DK132264] to D.C.B.
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmet.2024.102028.