2481acelAging CellAging CellWileyPMC1241985612419856124198564066267910.1111/acel.70163Age‐Dependent Histone Deacetylase 3 Regulation by βA3/A1‐Crystallin and Inositol Hexaphosphate in Retinal Pigmented Epithelial Cells Reveals a Novel Pathway in Age‐Related Macular Degeneration
ChatterjeeSujan GhoshSayan SinZachary BabuVishnu Suresh PrevalLoretta Viera DavisEmily TranNguyen BammidiSridhar GautamPooja HoseStacey SergeevYuri Flores‐BellverMiguel RitterKevin JessenHenning J Al DiriIssam SinhaDebasish GuhaPrasun 
1
Nevada Institute of Personalized Medicine, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA
2
The Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
3
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
4
National eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA
5
CellSight ‐ Ocular Stem Cell and Regeneration Program, Department of Ophthalmology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA
6
Faculty of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany*

Correspondence:
 
Debasish Sinha (debasish@jhmi.edu), 
Prasun Guha (prasun.guha@unlv.edu)

✉Corresponding author.
1572025249e70163e701631092025© 2025 The Author(s). Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

## ABSTRACT
Age‐related macular degeneration (AMD), a leading cause of vision loss affecting retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells, remains largely unexplained by current genome‐wide association studies (GWAS) risk variants. Our research on Cryba1, encoding βA3/A1‐crystallin protein, reveals its crucial role in RPE cell function via a novel epigenetic mechanism, also evident in human atrophic AMD samples. Loss of Cryba1 in mouse RPE cells triggers epigenetic changes by reducing histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) activity through two mechanisms. First, Cryba1 depletion reduces inositol polyphosphate multikinase (IPMK) expression, which potentially reduces inositol hexakisphosphate (InsP6) generation since IPMK's kinase activity is essential for producing InsP4 and InsP5 as precursors to InsP6. Since InsP4, InsP5, or InsP6 is crucial for HDAC3's interaction with the corepressor's DAD domains, reduced IPMK expression in Cryba1‐depleted cells likely diminishes the HDAC3‐DAD interaction, leading to a reduction in HDAC3's activity. Second, reduced βA3/A1 protein in Cryba1‐deficient cells impairs HDAC3's interaction with casein kinase 2 (CK2), resulting in decreased HDAC3 phosphorylation. Collectively, this increases H3K27 acetylation at the RET promoter region, likely enhancing the transcription of RET, a receptor tyrosine kinase critical for cell survival. Although RET is transcriptionally increased, Cryba1 loss disrupts its protein maturation, causing immature RET protein accumulation. This triggers age‐dependent endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, potentially contributing to the pathogenesis of AMD. Interestingly, although Cryba1 is not identified as an AMD‐linked variant in current GWAS, its loss may be linked to AMD mechanisms. These findings underscore the potential of gene‐agnostic and epigenetic therapeutic strategies for treating AMD.
Keywords: atrophic age‐related macular degeneration, casein kinase II (CK2), endoplasmic reticulum stress, HDAC3, histone acetylation, inositol hexaphosphate, inositol polyphosphate multikinase, βA3/A1‐crystallin

βA3/A1‐crystallin regulates HDAC3 activity and epigenetic processes in the RPE. (A) The illustration demonstrates that βA3/A1‐crystallin plays a crucial role in maintaining IPMK protein expression, which in turn activates HDAC3. (B) When βA3/A1‐crystallin is absent (Cryba1 KO ), IPMK protein expression decreases, resulting in the deactivation of HDAC3. This deactivation leads to increased H3K27 acetylation at the RET promoter, subsequently enhancing RET gene transcription. In knockout cells (Cryba1
KO) lacking βA3/A1‐crystallin, RET protein maturation is impaired, causing immature RET to accumulate within the cell. This intracellular sequestration of immature RET ultimately triggers endoplasmic reticulum stress.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 May 11; Received 2025 May 3; Accepted 2025 Jun 11; Collection date 2025 Sep.

1.

## Introduction
The retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells serve as specialized phagocytes of the eye and persevere throughout an organism's entire lifespan (Boya et al.  ). These post‐mitotic cells play a vital role in maintaining the homeostasis of the neural retina, a function essential for normal vision (Boya et al.  ). In recognizing the pivotal role of RPE in ocular health, it has become evident that alterations in RPE function can trigger the atrophic (dry) form of age‐related macular degeneration (AMD) (Boya et al.  ; Ghosh et al.  ; Handa et al.  ; Shang et al.  ; Valapala et al.  ; Wang et al.  ), a debilitating eye disease prevalent in the aging population with limited therapeutic options. Despite Genome‐Wide Association Studies (GWAS) identifying several AMD risk variants, their effects remain modest, leaving approximately 70% of AMD risk unexplained. Notably, early‐stage AMD is associated with decreased chromatin accessibility in the RPE (Wang et al.  ), suggesting a potential link between epigenetic changes in RPE cells and disease onset. Additionally, it has been previously shown that in age‐related multifactorial neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's, Parkinson's disease, and in particular AMD, epigenetic changes can play a critical role in disease pathogenesis (Mallik et al.  ; Sharma et al.  ; Song et al.  ). In particular, class I, II, and III HDACs such as HDAC3, HDAC4/5, and Sirtuin 1(Sirt1), respectively, have been shown to have critical roles in transcription repression during aging and neurodegenerative diseases (Morris and Monteggia  ; Razick et al.  ). However, they differ significantly in structure and mechanism of deacetylation. The enzymatic activity of most class I HDACs such as HDAC3 relies on recruitment into multi‐subunit corepressor complexes like the SMRT co‐repressor's deacetylase activation domain (DAD) and association with inositol tetraphosphate (Ins(1,4,5,6)P4), which are brought to chromatin by repressive transcription factors, potentially explaining the regulatory role of inositol phosphates in transcription (Watson et al.  ). Inositol phosphates have also been associated with aging mechanisms involving the immune system and the brain cortex (Samochocki and Strosznajder  ; Xu et al.  ). Furthermore, the enzymatic activity of most Class II HDACs depends on their interaction with the N‐CoR, BCoR, MEF2 transcription factor, and CtBP corepressors (Bertos et al.  ). Their activity is also regulated through subcellular compartmentalization controlled by site‐specific phosphorylation and binding of 14‐3‐3 proteins (Bertos et al.  ). Additionally, Class III HDACs such as Sirt1 are dependent on NAD+ and are controlled by a C‐terminal regulatory element (CTR) where the catalytic domain‐CTR interface brought about by the interaction between β‐hairpin structure of the CTR and the β‐sheet of the NAD+ ‐binding domain regulates the enzyme activity (Davenport et al.  ). These findings highlight the notion that, in a multifactorial aging disease like AMD, epigenetic factors like HDACs may exert a substantial influence beyond genetic variations.
AMD remains a significant challenge despite two decades of GWASs identifying over 60 risk loci (He et al.  ). The lack of effective treatments for atrophic AMD highlights the need to explore novel targets and signaling pathways, particularly epigenetic changes affecting RPE health and disease progression. Our research has revealed the critical role of crystallins in RPE function, with particular focus on βA3/A1‐crystallin encoded by the Cryba1 gene (Boya et al.  ). While crystallins were initially characterized as lens‐specific proteins, where they constitute over 90% of total soluble protein and create the transparency essential for vision, they also represent an interesting example of “gene sharing” or protein moonlighting, having been recruited from pre‐existing proteins with diverse functions (Zigler and Sinha  ). The β/γ‐crystallin superfamily exhibits a distinctive structure, since each polypeptide contains two domains composed of two “Greek key” motifs (four‐stranded anti‐parallel beta sheets). What makes βA3/A1‐crystallin unique is that the Cryba1 gene produces two polypeptides through leaky ribosomal scanning, βA3‐crystallin (215 residues) and βA1‐crystallin (198 residues). These isoforms are identical except for 17 additional amino acids at βA3's N terminus, suggesting they may be directed to different subcellular compartments with distinct functions. This structural diversity underlies βA3/A1‐crystallin's functional versatility across tissues. In the lens, it primarily serves as a structural protein, whereas in RPE cells and astrocytes, it performs various regulatory functions critical for maintaining cellular and tissue homeostasis (Zigler and Sinha  ). Mechanistically, βA3/A1‐crystallin exhibits distinct subcellular localizations and functions depending on cell type. In astrocytes, it is found in both nucleus and cytoplasm, where it regulates Notch signaling, astrocyte template formation, and retinal vascular patterning (Zigler and Sinha  ). In RPE cells, however, it localizes to the lysosomal lumen, interacting with the V0 subunit of V‐ATPase, a proton pump essential for lysosomal acidification, thereby regulating mTORC1 signaling, phagocytosis, and autophagy (Valapala et al.  ). βA3/A1‐crystallin also modulates phosphoinositide metabolism through binding to PITPβ, influencing PI(4,5)P2 levels, ezrin phosphorylation, amino acid regulation, inflammation, microvilli organization, and EGFR signaling (Shang et al.  ). These processes are crucial for maintaining RPE polarity and preventing epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT), with abnormalities in these pathways implicated in AMD. Our previous studies with RPE‐specific knockout mice (Cryba1 cKO) have demonstrated that loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin leads to an age‐dependent atrophic AMD‐like phenotype characterized by drusen‐like deposits, lipofuscin accumulation (autofluorescence), large vacuoles/debris, melanosome accumulation in the RPE, inflammatory changes, photoreceptor loss, and declining retinal function (Ghosh et al.  ; Shang et al.  ; Zigler and Sinha  ).
Given the limited availability of human atrophic AMD tissue, mouse models provide crucial platforms for studying the underlying mechanisms of multifactorial diseases such as AMD. While mice lack the distinct anatomical structures of nonhuman primates or human eyes, particularly the fovea/macula, functional studies have revealed important similarities. The central mouse retina shares functional characteristics with the peripheral human macula, especially regarding photoreceptor density and phagocytic load of the RPE (Volland et al. ). This is significant because macular degeneration often begins in these peripheral macular regions (Volland et al. ). Therefore, mouse models such as the Cryba1 cKO serve as valuable tools for investigating the complex mechanisms underlying AMD, including epigenetic changes in the RPE. Our research with this RPE‐specific knockout model offers critical insights into how epigenetic alterations contribute to AMD development, providing a foundation for validating these findings in human disease contexts. The involvement of RPE‐dependent changes in AMD pathogenesis is now well‐established (Ghosh et al.  ; Shang et al.  ; Zigler and Sinha  ), aligning with our findings on βA3/A1‐crystallin's crucial role in RPE function. While the initial insult, whether aging, genetics, environmental factors, oxidative stress, or inflammation, and the precise location of disease onset remain uncertain, the RPE's central role is increasingly evident. Although various studies indicate that photoreceptors, Bruch's membrane, and the choriocapillaris also contribute to AMD development (Boya et al.  ), the RPE's strategic anatomical position and its diverse functions in maintaining photoreceptor health and retinal homeostasis highlight its significance (Ghosh et al.  ). Recent evidence further supports this premise, showing that global chromatin accessibility decreases in the RPE of dry/atrophic AMD eyes, while similar changes in the neurosensory retina occur only in advanced disease stages (Wang et al.  ). This temporal sequence of epigenetic alterations provides compelling evidence that RPE dysfunction represents a critical and potentially initiating event in AMD progression, reinforcing the relevance of our Cryba1 cKO model for understanding the molecular mechanisms of this complex disease.
Our study reveals a novel regulatory axis in RPE cells where βA3/A1‐crystallin orchestrates epigenetic regulation through dual mechanisms: facilitating HDAC3‐CK2 interaction for phosphorylation and maintaining optimal InsP6 levels by restoring IPMK protein level critical for HDAC3 function (Watson et al.  ). This previously unrecognized role of βA3/A1‐crystallin in epigenetic regulation provides fundamental insights into RPE cell homeostasis and suggests that targeting the βA3/A1‐crystallin‐HDAC3 axis, particularly through modulation of InsP6 signaling or HDAC3 activity, could offer therapeutic opportunities for treating non‐exudative AMD. Furthermore, our findings underscore the importance of investigating non‐GWAS‐identified genes in complex diseases like AMD, where understanding the interplay between genetic and epigenetic factors may be crucial for developing effective treatments.

2.

## Results
2.1.

## Loss of βA3/A1‐Crystallin in the RPE Triggers Reduction in HDAC3 Activity and Altered Epigenetic Signatures
To understand how βA3/A1‐crystallin regulates epigenetic factors in the RPE, we first analyzed the RNA‐seq data from RPE cells of Cryba1 cKO mice (Ghosh et al.  ). Our analysis revealed that the loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin has a significant impact on global transcription, leading to the upregulation of 144 genes and the downregulation of 114 genes (Figure  , Tables  and ). Histone acetylation is a reversible epigenetic modification crucial in regulating gene expression (Allis and Jenuwein  ). This dynamic process involves the addition of acetyl groups to histone proteins, which can directly influence the accessibility of DNA and, consequently, the activation or repression of specific genes (Allis and Jenuwein  ). Interestingly, we observed a marked increase in global H3/H4 acetylation in Cryba1 cKO RPE cells compared to Cryba1 floxed (Cryba1
fl/fl) controls, including H3K9, H3K18, H3K27, H4K12, and H4K16 acetylation (Figure  ). These effects closely resembled the impact of suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA; Figure  ), a pan‐histone deacetylase inhibitor used as a positive control, which is known for enhancing global histone acetylation (Allis and Jenuwein  ).
In cells, histone acetylation levels are controlled by histone “writers” such as P300 and CBP, which add acetyl groups to histone lysines, and “erasers” such as histone deacetylases (HDACs), which remove acetyl groups from histone lysines (Dancy and Cole  ). Our hypothesis suggests two possibilities: (i) the loss of Cryba1 increases the activity of histone acetyltransferase (HAT), or (ii) it reduces the activity of HDACs, resulting in a significant rise in histone acetylation. Interestingly, when Cryba1 is deleted, global class I HDAC activity is notably reduced in the cKO RPE, compared to floxed controls (Figure  ), but HAT activity remains unchanged (Figure  ). A comprehensive examination of all class I HDACs (HDAC1, 2, 3, and 8) revealed that the loss of Cryba1 selectively diminished HDAC3 activity (> 82.97%), leaving other class I HDACs unaffected (Figure  ). Intriguingly, Cryba1 loss did not alter the levels of HDAC3 protein (Figure  ). Moreover, reintroducing Cryba1 using an adenoviral vector in cKO RPE cells restored HDAC3 activity to near‐normal levels, unlike the control vector (Figure  ). Additionally, Cryba1 overexpression reduced histone acetylation levels, particularly for H3K9 and H3K27 (Figure  ). These findings highlight the role of Cryba1 in selectively regulating HDAC3 activity and modulating histone acetylation in RPE cells.
 
Cryba1 produces two protein isoforms, βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin, from the same mRNA by leaky ribosomal scanning (Ghosh et al.  ). It is now recognized that different isoforms resulting from alternative translation pathways may exhibit unique and novel functionalities (Ghosh et al.  ). Notably, our findings revealed that RPE cells obtained from CRISPR/cas9 gene‐edited mice with βA1‐crystallin knockdown (KD) had a more pronounced decrease in HDAC3 activity than those with βA3‐crystallin knockout (KO); however, the protein levels of HDAC3 remained unchanged in both mouse lines (Figure  ).
It is known that HDAC3 requires direct binding to silencing mediator of retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) or nuclear receptor corepressor 1 (NCoR1) corepressor proteins to function as a deacetylase in cells (Watson et al.  , ). In our investigation into HDAC3 regulation, we conducted immunoprecipitation of both NCoR1‐HDAC3 and SMRT‐HDAC3 corepressor complexes from Cryba1 cKO and floxed RPE cells. The data demonstrated a substantial reduction (> 83.7% and 81.4%) in HDAC3 activity within both complexes in Cryba1 cKO RPE cells (Figure  ) despite no changes in the protein levels for both NCoR1 and SMRT (Figure  ). This suggests that βA3/A1‐crystallin likely modulates HDAC3 activity in RPE cells independently of corepressor complexes.

2.2.

## Loss of βA3/A1‐Crystallin Causes Abnormal Acetylation Signatures in the RET Gene and Contributes to ER Stress in RPE Cells
Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP‐seq) analysis of acetylated H3K27 from Cryba1 cKO RPE cells revealed significant alterations in acetylation patterns across various genomic regulatory regions influencing biological pathways including stress response and apoptotic pathways (Figure  ). Our investigation focused on hyperacetylated peaks, which indicate areas of open chromatin potentially facilitating gene expression. We observed a notable distribution of these hyperacetylated peaks across different genomic regulatory regions in the Cryba1 cKO RPE cells (Figure  ). To elucidate the relationship between hyperacetylation and changes in gene expression, we conducted an overlap analysis between the RNA sequencing data showing increased expression in Cryba1 cKO RPE cells (Figure  ) and the regions exhibiting increased acetylation (Table  , Extended Excel 3). This revealed a noticeable intersection between genes associated with hyperacetylated peaks in genomic regulatory regions and genes showing a significant increase in expression from our RNA sequencing data (Figure  ). Of particular interest are increases in acetylation at transcription start site (TSS), as these could expose DNA to transcription factors, potentially increasing gene expression. Our analysis identified RET (proto‐oncogene tyrosine‐protein kinase receptor) as having both a significant increase in TSS acetylation (Figure  ) and a marked upregulation in gene expression (Figure  ), probably owing to the MITF (a major transcription factor in the RPE cells) binding site at the RET promoter (Ma et al.  ; Figure  ). This finding was subsequently validated through western blot analysis. Interestingly, our data revealed a significant accumulation of immature RET protein (150 kDa) and a corresponding reduction in mature RET protein (175 kDa) levels in the RPE cells from Cryba1 KO mice (Figure  ). RET, a receptor tyrosine kinase crucial for cell survival, is typically located in the cell membrane (Guo et al.  ). The glycosylation of RET protein, which increases its molecular weight (175 kDa), is essential for its maturation and membrane localization (Guo et al.  ). These alterations in the RET protein profile in Cryba1 KO RPE cells suggest an impairment in the proper maturation and trafficking of this protein, potentially leading to compromised RPE cell survival, functionality, and retinal homeostasis, which are key aspects in the pathophysiology of AMD (Zigler and Sinha  ). This observation suggests an accumulation of unprocessed RET within the cell, which could potentially trigger endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, as when RET remains in its immature form (150 kDa), it may not undergo proper glycosylation or cleavage, which can lead to its accumulation in the ER and induce stress responses (Jing et al. ).
 To explore the possibility of ER stress response in the RPE cell, we performed western blot analysis for ER stress responsive proteins such as IRE1α/β, BiP, PD1, and CHOP (Chen et al.  ) in WT and Cryba1 KO RPE. Our results revealed increased expression of IRE1α/β and PD1 in the RPE cells from younger Cryba1 KO mice, but a decline in aged animals (Figure  ). Interestingly, CHOP, which has been implicated in programmed cell death in response to impaired function of the ER (Chen et al.  ) showed significant increase in aged Cryba1 KO RPE cells with no noticeable change in its expression in young animals (Figure  ). This differential expression of ER stress response regulators such as IRE1α/β, PD1, and CHOP in Cryba1 KO RPE cells suggests a shift toward cell death from the cellular response to ER stress with increasing age. The decline of IRE1α/β and PD1 in aged compared to young RPE cells implies a diminished adaptive response to ER stress over time, potentially accelerating cell damage. Furthermore, increased expression of CHOP in aged Cryba1 KO RPE cells indicates a potential progression toward ER stress‐induced apoptosis (Chen et al.  ), which may contribute to cellular dysfunction and degeneration in the absence of Cryba1. While we identified additional genes exhibiting enrichment of acetylated H3K27 in cKO mice (Table  , Extended Excel 3), those potentially involved in AMD or age‐related diseases will be investigated in subsequent studies.

2.3.

## 
βA3/A1‐Crystallin Regulates HDAC3 Phosphorylation/Activity by Modulating Its Binding With CK2

To elucidate the mechanisms through which βA3/A1‐crystallin influences the activity of HDAC3 in RPE cells, we utilized the UCSF Chimera program for protein modeling and observed the potential formation of a complex involving βA3/A1‐crystallin (depicted in light blue), HDAC3 (depicted in orange), and the deacetylase‐activation domain (DAD) from the SMRT corepressor (depicted in magenta) as illustrated in (Figure  ).
To gain further insight into these protein–protein interactions, co‐immunoprecipitation studies on RPE cells from Cryba1‐floxed mice, which overexpress either RFP (adenovirus‐RFP infected) or RFP‐βA3/A1‐crystallin (adenovirus‐RFP‐Cryba1), were performed. These studies utilized anti‐RFP beads, followed by immunoblotting for HDAC3 and RFP proteins, demonstrating a robust binding between βA3/A1‐crystallin and HDAC3 (Figure  ). This observation was supported by copurification experiments using endogenous proteins (βA3/A1‐crystallin and HDAC3) and HDAC3 pulldown followed by immunoblot for both proteins from Cryba1‐floxed RPE cells, indicating a binding interaction. However, such an interaction was not observed when the proteins were copurified from Cryba1 cKO RPE cells (Figure  ). To further validate the physical interaction between HDAC3 and βA3/A1‐crystallin, an in vitro pull‐down experiment was also conducted. Equal concentrations of recombinant Cryba1‐myc were incubated with recombinant HDAC3‐GST and immunoprecipitated with GST followed by immunoblot, which revealed binding between the two recombinant proteins (Figure  ). These results confirm the physical interaction between βA3/A1‐crystallin and HDAC3. To determine the subcellular localization of the Cryba1‐HDAC3 interaction, we employed a proximity ligation assay (PLA) followed by confocal microscopy analysis, which revealed that endogenous βA3/A1‐crystallin and HDAC3 proteins interact predominantly within the nucleus (Figure  ).
Next, we wondered how Cryba1 binding to HDAC3 influences the activation of HDAC3's deacetylase activity. It has been shown that phosphorylation of HDAC3 at serine 424 by CK2 is crucial in activating the enzymatic function of HDAC3 (Zhang et al.  ; Figure  ). Our data showed approximately a 60% decrease in HDAC3 phosphorylation upon deletion of Cryba1 in the RPE cells (Figure  ). Remarkably, this reduction was effectively reversed upon overexpression of Cryba1 (βA3/A1‐crystallin adenoviral vector) in the Cryba1 cKO RPE cells (Figure  ). Considering the potential interaction between βA3/A1‐crystallin and HDAC3 indicated by protein modeling and pull‐down assays, we investigated whether the deletion of Cryba1 could affect the interaction between CK2 and HDAC3, consequently impacting CK2‐mediated HDAC3 phosphorylation. Our data from endogenous pull‐down assays demonstrated a marked reduction in the interaction between CK2 and HDAC3 upon Cryba1 deletion (Figure  ). This suggests that βA3/A1‐crystallin may serve as a linker protein, facilitating interaction between CK2 and HDAC3. To substantiate this premise, we performed additional endogenous pull‐down assays confirming the direct interaction between βA3/A1‐crystallin and CK2 (Figure  ). These results suggest that βA3/A1‐crystallin may play a crucial role as a linker protein, mediating the interaction between CK2 and HDAC3, thereby influencing HDAC3 phosphorylation and enzymatic activity.
 
2.4.

## βA3/A1‐Crystallin Depletion in the RPE Cells Alters the InsP6‐Mediated Regulation of SMRT (NcoR2) and NCoR1‐Dependent HDAC3 Activity
HDAC3's enzymatic activity is critically dependent on its binding to corepressor proteins SMRT or NCOR1, with the DAD domain playing a crucial role in this interaction (Watson et al.  , ; Figure  ). Recent crystal structure and biochemical analysis has revealed that a highly charged higher order inositol phosphate (InsP 4, 5, or 6) coordinates the HDAC3‐DAD interaction (Watson et al.  , ). The loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin, which diminishes HDAC3 activity (Figure  ), does not disrupt the integrity of the HDAC3‐corepressor complex (Figure  ), suggesting a potential loss of DAD domain interaction (Watson et al.  , ). Notably, HDAC3 purified from Cryba1 cKO RPE cells restored activity when treated with InsP6 in vitro, in a dose‐dependent manner (Figure  ). At 100 nM, more than 50% of the activity was rescued, while 500 nM restored activity to levels comparable to the Cryba1
fl/fl control. This rescue data suggest that the loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin may impede the higher order inositol phosphate (HOIP) pathway, diminishing InsP levels. IPMK (inositol polyphosphate multikinase), the rate‐limiting enzyme in the HOIP pathway (Chatterjee et al.  ; Guha et al.  ), was found to be substantially reduced in RPE cells lacking βA3/A1‐crystallin (Figure  ). Overexpression of wild‐type IPMK in Cryba1 cKO RPE cells restored histone acetylation levels by reducing H3K9 and H3K27 acetylation (Figure  ), strongly suggesting that the loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin reduces IPMK levels, subsequently impairing HDAC3 activation due to reduced intracellular InsP levels. To further confirm this hypothesis, Cryba1 cKO cells were treated with cell‐permeable InsP6. Regular InsP6 (phytic acid) is impermeable to cells due to its high negative charge, so a chemically modified form was used (Kim et al.  ). This modified form masks the charged phosphates, allowing cellular entry, and the mask is dismantled once inside the cells, releasing active InsP6 (Pavlovic et al.  ). Treatment with cell‐permeable InsP6 reduced H3K9/27 acetylation in cKO RPE cells to levels comparable to wild‐type (Cryba1
fl/fl) RPE cells, while IPMK expression remained reduced (Figure  ). This confirms that the loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin reduces HDAC3 activity and elevates histone acetylation by reducing IPMK protein expression, which can be rescued by InsP6 treatment.
 
2.5.

## Diminished HDAC3 Activity in RPE Cells of Human Atrophic AMD Donors Was Associated With Increased Histone Acetylation
Since we observed marked alterations in histone acetylation and HDAC3 activity in RPE cells from Cryba1 cKO mice, which exhibit an atrophic AMD‐like phenotype, we next investigated the status of these epigenetic mediators in individuals with the atrophic form of AMD. Our data showed that in the RPE of human AMD donor eyes graded by the Minnesota Grading System for disease severity (Olsen et al.  ), HDAC3 activity was significantly reduced (Figure  ) relative to age‐matched controls, without concurrent changes in HDAC3 protein levels (Figure  ). In addition, there was a significant increase in the acetylation levels of H3K9 (Figures  and ) and H3K27 (Figures  and ) in RPE cells from individuals with AMD. Interestingly, HDAC3 activity was not significantly different in normal and AMD retina samples from the same donors (Figure  ). Hence, our study suggests that decreased HDAC3 activity and increased histone acetylation specifically in RPE cells may play a crucial role in AMD, and understanding the underlying mechanism could lead to a novel treatment strategy for this condition.
 

3.

## Discussion
Epigenetic changes refer to heritable or reversible alterations in gene expression or phenotype through mechanisms such as DNA methylation and histone modifications, which are influenced by environmental factors without involving changes to the DNA sequence (Allis and Jenuwein  ). These epigenetic alterations within chromatin play a fundamental role in regulating various biological processes, and their dysregulation has been linked to aging hallmarks and the development of complex age‐related diseases, including cancer, Alzheimer's, and Huntington's diseases (Mallik et al.  ; Morris and Monteggia  ). HDAC3 has been implicated in these diseases through its involvement in chromatin remodeling and gene expression regulation (Zhang et al.  ). Additionally, HDAC3‐mediated repression of transcription has been associated with cognitive decline both in aging and neurodegenerative diseases (He et al.  ). However, the role of Class I HDACs, specifically HDAC3, in the pathogenesis of atrophic AMD has not been previously explored. In this study, we show a significant reduction in HDAC3 activity both in AMD human patients (Figure  ) and in a mouse AMD model (Figure  ). Interestingly, while HDAC inhibitors have demonstrated therapeutic potential in treating neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's (He et al.  ), our results suggest that an alternative therapeutic strategy may be required for AMD. Our findings indicate that, rather than inhibiting HDAC3, enhancing its activity in RPE cells may be a more effective therapeutic approach for AMD, owing to the reduction in HDAC3 activity rather than expression in both human and mouse RPE cells during AMD progression. Furthermore, we showed that βA3/A1‐crystallin, a moonlighting protein with diverse cellular functions, regulates HDAC3 activity in RPE cells. Our study indicates that βA3/A1‐crystallin interacts with HDAC3 to influence its activity (Figure  ), highlighting an unexpected role of crystallin in regulating chromatin accessibility and transcription through epigenetic modifications. Previous research has shown that HDAC3 also influences major transcription regulators such as HIF‐1α (Wu et al.  ) and Yin Yang 1 (YY1) (Sankar et al.  ), which play critical roles in RPE/photoreceptor health and disease (Forooghian et al.  ; Fu et al.  ). This suggests a strong correlation between HDAC3 loss in cKO mice or AMD patients and potential downstream transcriptional changes in RPE cells during AMD.
Furthermore, we observed that the loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin leads to a reduction in HDAC3 activity, and this deficit can be rescued by the addition of InsP6 (Figure  ). InsP6, a naturally occurring compound found in foods like rice, potatoes, and legumes (Pujol et al.  ), has been implicated in cellular processes such as chromatin remodeling and gene expression (Gonzalez et al.  ). Our results suggest that InsP6 may activate HDAC3 in RPE cells by modulating the complex formation between HDAC3 and its DAD domain.
Our study also uncovered a crucial role for CK2‐mediated HDAC3 phosphorylation in regulating its enzymatic activity (Zhang et al.  ). Loss of Cryba1 in RPE cells triggered impairment of this phosphorylation (Figure  ), and we identified βA3/A1‐crystallin as a linker protein necessary for the HDAC3‐CK2 interaction (Figure  ).
Interestingly, InsP6 can bind to CK2 and enhance its kinase activity (Lee et al.  ). In cKO mice, the significant reduction in IPMK protein levels (Figure  ), along with decreased CK2‐mediated HDAC3 phosphorylation (Figure  ), suggests that reduced InsP6 production may lower CK2 activity and further diminish HDAC3 phosphorylation. Taken together, our results suggest that potentially reduced InsP6 levels resulting from the loss of IPMK in Cryba1 cKO RPE cells may impair HDAC3 activation through two mechanisms: (i) disruption of the DAD‐HDAC3 complex and (ii) partial inhibition of CK2 kinase. These observations open up a new avenue for therapeutic intervention in AMD by targeting HDAC3 regulation and restoring its activity through either βA3/A1‐crystallin overexpression or InsP6 supplementation.
At the downstream transcriptional level, our study reveals a novel mechanism linking βA3/A1‐crystallin deficiency to RPE cell dysfunction through epigenetic regulation and ER stress pathways. We demonstrated that loss of βA3/A1‐crystallin leads to reduced HDAC3 activity, resulting in hyperacetylation of chromatin, particularly at the RET gene promoter (Figure  ). This increased acetylation may facilitate MITF binding (Figure  ) and subsequent expression of RET, a receptor tyrosine kinase crucial for cell survival, typically located in the cell membrane (Guo et al.  ). The glycosylation of RET protein, which increases its molecular weight, is essential for its membrane localization (Guo et al.  ). Our research revealed an accumulation of immature RET (Figure  ), coinciding with increased transcription (Figure  ). This observation supports the hypothesis that in Cryba1 KO mice, the loss of membrane‐bound RET protein in RPE cells triggers downstream epigenetic changes, leading to enhanced transcription. However, due to defective glycosylation, this results in the accumulation of immature RET. Importantly, the buildup of unprocessed RET appears to induce an age‐dependent ER stress response in RPE cells (Figure  ). In young Cryba1 KO mice, we observed elevated levels of adaptive ER stress markers (IRE1α/β and PD1), indicating an initial compensatory response (Figure  ). However, this protective mechanism appears to fail with age, as evidenced by the decline in IRE1α/β and PD1 levels in aged KO RPE cells, coupled with a significant increase in the pro‐apoptotic factor CHOP (Figure  ). This age‐dependent shift from adaptive to pro‐apoptotic ER stress response suggests that chronic ER stress, initially triggered by impaired protein processing, may be a key mechanism driving RPE cell dysfunction and degeneration in the absence of βA3/A1‐crystallin.
Our findings reveal a complex interplay between βA3/A1‐crystallin, HDAC3 activity, and ER stress in RPE cells, establishing a previously unrecognized mechanistic link in AMD pathogenesis (Figure  ). The identification of βA3/A1‐crystallin as a crucial regulator of HDAC3 activity through both CK2‐mediated phosphorylation and InsP6‐dependent complex formation provides new insights into the epigenetic regulation of RPE cell function. Furthermore, the age‐dependent transition from adaptive to maladaptive ER stress responses in Cryba1‐deficient RPE cells suggests a temporal component in disease progression that may explain why AMD primarily affects aging populations. These discoveries not only advance our understanding of AMD pathobiology but also present multiple therapeutic opportunities. Potentially, InsP6 supplementation or enhancement of βA3/A1‐crystallin function could restore HDAC3 activity and normalize chromatin accessibility, while interventions mitigating ER stress might help maintain RPE cell viability. As AMD continues to be a leading cause of vision loss worldwide (Kaarniranta et al.  ; Zigler and Sinha  ), these novel therapeutic approaches could provide much‐needed alternatives to current treatments, particularly for patients with atrophic AMD, where treatment options remain limited. Future studies investigating the clinical applicability of these findings may lead to the development of more effective treatments for this devastating disease.
 
4.

## Materials and Methods
4.1.

## Animals
All animal studies were conducted in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Animals (National Academy Press) and were approved by the University of Pittsburgh Animal Care and Use Committee. Both male and female mice were used in this study. RPE‐specific βA3/A1‐crystallin conditional (Cryba1 cKO), as well as global βA3 KO and βA1 KD mice were generated on a C57BL/6J background as previously described. All mice that were used in this study were negative for the RD8 mutation. Animals were euthanized as per approved guidelines, and the RPE was harvested for downstream experiments (immunoblot, HDAC activity assays) as explained previously (Ghosh et al.  ; Shang et al.  ; Valapala et al.  ).

4.2.

## 
RPE Explant Culture and Pan‐HDAC Inhibitor SAHA Treatment as Well as Adenovirus‐Cryba1 Construct Infection
Eyes from 4 to 5 month‐old Cryba1‐floxed and cKO mice were enucleated, and the RPE‐choroid‐sclera (RCS) complex was harvested and placed onto PVDF membranes after flattening them by making several relaxing cuts. The explants were then cultured face up in complete media as previously described. Cryba1
fl/fl RPE explants were incubated with 2 μM of SAHA (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# SML0061‐5MG) and incubated overnight, followed by estimation of histone acetylation by immunoblot. Cryba1 cKO RPE explants were also infected with either adenovirus(Ad)‐Cryba1 construct or vehicle control at a dose of 105 vg/mL for 24 h, and subsequent experiments were performed (Shang et al.  ).

4.3.

## Human AMD Donors
The human AMD donor sections were provided by Dr. Flores‐Bellver's laboratory at the University of Colorado. The donors were all of Caucasian descent and had an average age of 78 ± 3 years. The control donors did not have any eye diseases. Both sexes were included in the study, and n = 6 individual donors were included for both control and AMD. The disease was staged according to the 4‐point Minnesota Grading System (MGS), and all the controls were classified as MGS1 (no AMD) and the AMD donors were classified as MGS2 (early AMD; Olsen et al.  ).

4.4.

## Western Blot Analysis
Cell lysates were prepared through syringe flush by using a salt‐free (NaCl‐free) lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 50 mM potassium acetate, 5% v/v glycerol, 0.3% v/v Triton X‐100, one tablet of Roche complete protease inhibitor). We used salt‐free (NaCl‐free) lysis buffer for all the assays because a high a salt concentration dissociates higher‐order inositol phosphates (HOIPs) from HDAC3/1, which is essential for their deacetylase activity. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min, and the protein concentration of the supernatant was measured. Proteins were resolved by SDS‐polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (NuPAGE Bis‐Tris Midi GEL, Life Technologies, Cat #: WG1402BX10) and transferred to Immobilion‐P PVDF (Millipore‐Sigma, Cat #: IPVH00010) transfer membranes. The membranes were incubated with primary antibody diluted in 3% BSA in Tris‐buffered saline with Tween 20 (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.02% Tween 20) overnight at 4°C. Respective antibodies for western blot were anti‐Cryba1 (Abcam, Cat #: ab151722), anti‐HDAC3 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat #: sc‐376957), anti‐HDAC1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat #: sc‐81598), anti‐HDAC2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat #: SC‐7899), anti‐HDAC8 (Biolegend, Cat #: 685504), anti‐pHDAC3 Ser424 (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Cat #: PA5‐99339), anti‐CK2 (ProteinTech, Cat #: 10992‐1‐AP), anti‐β‐actin (ProteinTech, Cat #: 81115‐1‐RR), anti‐lamin (ProteinTech, Cat #: 12987‐1‐AP), anti‐SMRT (Bethyl Laboratories, Cat #: A301‐148A), anti‐Ncor1 (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 5948), anti‐H3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #s: 12648 and 4499), anti‐H3K8Ac (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 2598), anti‐H3K9Ac (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 9649), anti‐H3k18Ac (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 13998), anti‐H3K27Ac (Abcam, Cat #: ab4729; Invitrogen, Cat#: PA5‐40096), anti‐H3K56Ac (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 4243), anti‐H4K8Ac (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 2594), anti‐H4K12Ac (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 13944), anti‐H4K16Ac (EMD Millipore Corp., Cat #: 07‐329) and anti‐Myc (ProteinTech, Cat #:16286‐1‐AP), RET (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 14556) and ER Stress Sampler Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 9956), particularly antibodies against BiP, IRE1α, PDI, CHOP, and β‐actin (loading control, Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 4970S). Following primary antibody incubation, the PVDF membrane was washed three times with Tris‐buffered saline/Tween‐20, and incubated with HRP‐conjugated secondary antibody (ECL, Cat #: NA934V and NA931V), and the bands visualized by chemiluminescence (Super Signal West Pico, Pierce, Cat #: 34579). The depicted blots are representative replicates selected from at least three experiments. Densitometric analysis was performed using ImageJ software. Blots for acetylated histones were stripped using Restore Western Blot stripping buffer (Thermo Scientific, Cat # 21059), then reprobed with H3 antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 12648S) at room temperature for 2 h followed by secondary antibody incubation and development (Ghosh et al.  ; Guha et al.  ).

4.5.

## 
HAT Activity
HAT activity was measured by following the HAT Assay Kit (Abcam, Cat #: ab‐204709) protocol. Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO cells were lysed in salt‐free (NaCl‐free) lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 50 mM potassium acetate, 5% v/v glycerol, 0.3% v/v Triton X‐100, Roche complete protease inhibitor). Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min, and the protein concentration of the supernatant was measured. About 20 μg total protein from the lysate was incubated against anti‐p300 CBP HAT antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 86377) at 4°C for 1 h, followed by capturing the antibody with EZview A/G beads (Millipore‐Sigma, Cat #: E3403). Beads were washed three times with an ice‐cold reaction buffer (supplied with kit). Immunoprecipitated P300 was used as a protein source. Absorbance was measured after specific substrate reaction by using a Spectramax iD5 plate reader (Molecular Devices). All measurements were performed in triplicate, and data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism (version 6.0, GraphPad Software Inc).

4.6.

## 
HDAC Activity
To study global HDAC activity from Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO cell lysates, we used an HDAC activity assay kit (Active Motif, Cat #: 56200). In brief, we lysed cells in a low‐salt lysis buffer, as stated before, followed by centrifugation at 15,000 g to isolate the supernatant. About 20 μg of protein from Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO lysates was incubated with the substrate provided with the kit, and then fluorescence was measured using a plate reader.
To study individual HDAC activity, the HDAC1, 2, 3, and 8 were individually immunopurified, followed by an activity assay using the following kits: HDAC Assay Kit (Active Motif, Cat#: 56200 for HDAC1, 2 and 8) and the HDAC3 Assay Kit (BPS, Cat#: 10186‐628). In brief, Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO cells were lysed in salt‐free (NaCl‐free) lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 50 mM potassium acetate, 5% v/v glycerol, 0.3% v/v Triton X‐100, one tablet of Roche complete protease inhibitor; Xu et al.  ). Then, the lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min, and the protein concentration of the supernatant was measured. Around 20 μg total protein from the lysate was incubated against anti‐HDAC1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat # sc‐81598), anti‐HDAC2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat #: sc‐7899), anti‐HDAC3 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Cat #: sc‐81600) and anti‐HDAC8 (Biolegend, Cat #: 685504) antibodies, respectively, at 4°C for 1 h, followed by capturing antibody with EZview A/G beads (Millipore Sigma, Cat #: E3403). Beads were washed 3× with an ice‐cold reaction buffer (supplied with the kit). After a specific substrate reaction, fluorescence was measured using a Spectra max iD5 plate reader (Molecular Devices). All measurements were performed in triplicate, and data was analyzed using GraphPad Prism (version 6.0, GraphPad Software Inc; Watson et al.  , ).

4.7.

## 
InsP6 Rescuing HDAC3 Activity

Cryba1 cKO cells were lysed in salt‐free (NaCl‐free) lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 50 mM potassium acetate, 5% v/v glycerol, 0.3% v/v Triton X‐100, and one Roche complete protease inhibitor tablet) because high salt concentration dissociates HOIPs from HDAC3/1, which is essential for their deacetylase activity. Samples were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min, and the protein concentration of the supernatant was measured. 20 μg total protein from the lysate was incubated against anti‐HDAC3 antibodies, respectively, at 4°C for 1 h, followed by capturing antibodies with EZview A/G beads (Millipore Sigma, Cat #: E3403). Beads were washed 3× with an ice‐cold reaction buffer (supplied with the kit). Following washing, beads were resuspended in reaction buffer and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with 10, 100, 500 nM, and 1 μM concentrations of IP6 (Sigma Aldrich Cat #: P8810‐100G). After incubation, beads were washed 3× with reaction buffer. HDAC3 activity was measured by the addition of a fluorogenic substrate provided by the HDAC3 Assay Kit (BPS, Cat #: 10186‐628) and read using a Spectramax iD5 plate reader (Molecular Devices). All measurements were performed in triplicate, data analyzed, and the IC50 value was calculated using GraphPad Prism (version 6.0, GraphPad Software Inc; Watson et al.  , ).

4.8.

## Immunoprecipitation
To ascertain HDAC3 and βA3/A1‐crystallin binding in overexpression conditions, Cryba1
fl/fl RPE explants were infected with Ad‐RFP (Vector Biolabs, Cat # 1660) or Ad‐Cryba1‐RFP (Vector Biolabs, customized) constructs at 105 vg/mL for 24 h. The RPE lysates were prepared, and immunoprecipitation was performed using anti‐RFP beads, followed by immunoblot for HDAC3. The whole cell lysates were also used to immunoblot for HDAC3 and RFP as input controls. To analyze endogenous binding, RPE cells were lysed in salt‐free lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 50 mM potassium acetate, 5% v/v glycerol, 0.3% v/v Triton X‐100, and one Roche complete protease inhibitor tablet). For the endogenous immunoprecipitation (IP) study, respective antibodies against βA3/A1‐crystallin, CK2, or HDAC3 were used, followed by western blot of the binding partners. In brief, the IP was performed from 500 μg of protein lysate. Protein lysates were incubated for 2 h at 4°C with respective antibodies; then, the antibody‐protein complex was captured with EZview A/G beads (Millipore Sigma, Cat #: E3403). Beads were pelleted and washed with lysis buffer 3×, followed by elution in sample buffer. Immunoprecipitated samples were resolved on a NuPAGE Bis‐Tris gel, followed by western blotting.

4.9.

## Cell Permeable InsP6 Treatment
Cells plated in a flatmount overnight treated with cell permeable InsP6 (CP‐InsP6) at a dose of 50 μM (Kim et al.  ; Pavlovic et al.  ).

4.10.

## In Vitro Binding Assay
Equal amount of recombinant myc‐βA3/A1‐crystallin (Origene, Cat #: TP321965) was co‐incubated with either recombinant GST‐HDAC3 (Signal Chem, Cat #: H85‐30G) or GST (Signal Chem, Cat #: G52‐30U) in lysis buffer, and the complex was maintained for 30 min at 4°C. After the addition of GST beads, incubation continued for an additional 45 min and was washed 3× with ice‐cold lysis buffer. SDS sample buffer was added, and binding was confirmed by western blotting of anti‐Myc antibodies (Guha et al.  ).

4.11.

## Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA)
Proximity ligation assay was carried out on RPE flat mounts following the manufacturers' protocol (Navinci Diagnostics, NaveniFlex Tissue MR Red, Cat #: NT.MR.100). Antibody for HDAC3 (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat #: 3949) was used at a 1:100 dilution with beta crystallin A3 (Abcam, Cat #: ab‐151722) for the first set of PLA to check the interaction between crystallin and HDAC3.

4.12.

## Molecular Modeling
Models of molecular structure for human βA3/A1‐crystallin, HDAC3 and SMRT‐DAD were obtained from the AlphaFold Protein Structure Database (https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/). Molecular modeling of the possible interaction between these proteins was done using the “movement” tool in the extensible molecular modeling system UCSF CHIMERA, VER. 1.17.1 (https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/).

4.13.

## 
RNA‐Seq Data Analysis
The following published RNA‐Seq datasets from 5‐month‐old mouse RPE cells were downloaded: GSM4043956 (Cryba1
fl/fl (WT)‐5 Months) and GSM4043957 (Cryba1 cKO‐5 Months). The FASTQ files were analyzed in Partek (v 12.0.0). All pre‐ and post‐alignment QA/QC was performed in Partek. Reads were aligned to whole mm10 genome using STAR (v 2.7.8a). Aligned reads were quantified to mm10 Ensembl Transcripts release 102 using HTSeq (v 0.11.0). Differential gene expression was performed using DESeq2 (v 3.5; Amemiya et al.  ; Ramirez et al.  ).

4.14.

## Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
Dissected RPE were incubated with 1% formaldehyde in PBS at room temperature for 10 min. Fixation was stopped by the addition of 1× glycine. TruChIP Chromatin Shearing Kit (Covaris, Cat #: 520127) was used to shear chromatin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was performed using iDeal ChIP‐seq kit (Diagenode, Cat #: C01010051) on 25 μg of sheared chromatin using 5 μL of H3K27‐Ac antibody (Abcam, Cat #: ab‐4729). Crosslinking was reversed by overnight incubation at 65°C using proteinase K treatment. DNA was then purified using MinElute Reaction Cleanup Kit (Qiagen, Cat #: 28204). To confirm the significant enrichment, qPCR was performed on control genes. Libraries of samples were prepared using a NEBNext Ultra II DNA Library Prep Kit (NEB, Cat #: E7645). The library was sequenced using single‐end reads (150 base pair reads) on a NextSeq 500 system at the ULNV/NIPM Genomics Core.

4.15.

## 
ChIP‐Seq Data Analysis
FASTQ files from sequencing were aligned to the Mouse mm10 genome in Partek (v 12.0.0) using BWA‐MEM (v 0.7.17). The peaks were identified using MACS2 (v 3.0.0a7), broad region and q‐value cutoff of 0.05, compared with respective input samples and annotated using mm10 Ensembl Transcripts release 102. Differential peak analysis was performed comparing cKO H3K27 versus FL H3K27 samples using DESeq2 (v 3.5). Peaks with a p value <= 0.05 were considered significant. RET gene acetylation was evaluated by aligning FASTQ files to the reference genome (GRCm38/mm10) using BWA, generating BAM files. Peak calling was performed with MACS to identify regions of significant enrichment, producing BED files. Differential peak analysis was performed using DESeq2 (p ≤ 0.05, FC ≥ 1.5) to identify significant acetylation differences between groups. Data were visualized and annotated using the Integrated Genomics Viewer (IGV). The FASQ file for ChIP seq data has been uploaded in Sequence Read Archive (SRA, NCBI) Bio Project ID: PRJNA1142537. To generate TSS plots, BAM files from alignment performed in Partek were downloaded and converted to bigwig files with DeepTools (v 3.5.5) bamCoverage function (Kaarniranta et al.  ). Reads were extended to a fragment length of 200 base pairs. Read coverage was calculated using a 10‐base pair window and normalized to 1× depth using an effective genome size of 2,650,000,000. Chromosome X was ignored for normalization and blacklisted regions were downloaded from https://github.com/Boyle‐Lab/Blacklist (Amemiya et al.  ; Ramirez et al.  ) and excluded. Count matrices for all samples were generated with the DeepTools compute Matrix function using a bin size of 10. TSS were downloaded from the UCSC Table Browser for mm10 NCBI RefSeq Track (https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi‐bin/hgTables; Amemiya et al.  ; Ramirez et al.  ). The reference point was 2000 base pairs above and below TSS. DeepTools plot Heatmap function was used to generate TSS plots. To generate chromosome plots, FL H3K27 samples were averaged with DeepTools bigwigCompare function. The same operation was performed for Cryba1 cKO H3K27 samples. Integrative Genomics Viewer (v 2.17.4) was used to generate chromosome plot views (https://igv.org/; Amemiya et al.  ; Ramirez et al.  ).

4.16.

## Pathway Analysis and Transcription Factor Binding Prediction
Pathway analysis was performed on significant peaks (p value <= 0.05) with GREAT v4.0.4 using mouse GRCm38 assembly (http://great.stanford.edu/public/html/). The whole genome was used as the background region. The whole genome was used as the reference set. Transcription factor binding site prediction for MITF in the RET promoter region was performed using the Eukaryotic Promoter Database (EPD) referenced to the mouse genome. Binding sites were identified using a significance threshold of p ≤ 0.001 (McLean et al.  ).

4.17.

## Statistical Analysis
All plots and statistical analyses were performed with Prism 9 (GraphPad) software. Statistical significance was determined by either Student's t‐test (two‐tailed) for two groups or 1‐way ANOVA for multiple groups with similar samples. For ER stress protein mediators, western blot analysis was performed, and the data points were tested using the Shapiro–Wilk normality test. For data sets that passed the normality test, statistical analysis was performed using two‐way ANOVA followed by Tukey's post hoc test. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean and indicate replicates or the number of animals employed. Results were representative of at least three independent experiments (n). Statistical significance was indicated as p ≤ 0.05, p ≤ 0.01, p ≤ 0.001, and p ≤ 0.0001.

## Author Contributions
Prasun Guha and D.S. designed the study. S.C. performed histone acetylation studies, HDAC activity‐related experiments, and other biochemical assays, which included endogenous immunoprecipitation studies and inositol rescue experiments. Z.S. and L.V.P. performed NGS data analysis. L.V.P. and N.T. performed biochemical experiments. S.G., V.S.B., S.B., and Pooja Gautam generated, genotyped, and isolated RPE cells for the Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO, βA1 KD, and βA3 KO mice. All assays conducted in this research utilized these cells. S.G. conducted the binding assay, V.S.B. helped with the epigenetic and ER stress assays, while S.B. performed the immunofluorescence assay. Additionally, S.G. and S.B. did the RPE explant cultures for in vitro experiments, both with and without specific treatments. E.D. and I.A.D. did the ChIP‐seq assay. Y.S. generated the computer model. M.F.‐B. provided the human tissues and characterized them. S.C. and S.H. designed the figures. K.R. and H.J.J. generated cell‐permeable InsP6. D.S. and Prasun Guha wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript.

## Conflicts of Interest
D.S., S.G., and S.H. have patents on Cryba1 as a therapy for eye‐related diseases. D.S. is a co‐founder of Ikshana Therapeutics Inc.

## Supporting information

Figure S1.
Cryba1 deletion impacts the global transcriptome in mouse RPE cells. Volcano plot (log 10[p value] vs. Fold change) displays differentially expressed genes after Cryba1 deletion. Yellow dots represent upregulated gene expression, whereas green dots represent downregulated gene expression. The y‐axis denotes −log10 p value, whereas the x‐axis denotes log2 fold change value. The result is representative of eight individual experiments (n = 8).

Figure S2.
Cryba1 deletion enhances histone acetylation in mouse RPE cells. Western blot analysis demonstrated that histone acetylation increased in RPE cells from Cryba1 cKO mice compared to Cryba1
fl/fl. Cryba1
fl/fl RPE cells treated with 2 μM of the pan HDAC inhibitor SAHA was used as a positive control. Immunoblotting was performed against acetylated (A) anti‐H3K14, (B) anti‐H3K9, (C) anti‐H3K18, (D) anti‐H3K27, (E) anti‐H3K56, (F) anti‐H4K5 and (G) anti‐H4K8 (H) anti‐H4K12, and (I) anti‐H4K16 followed by stripping and reprobing against anti‐H3 or anti‐H4 antibodies, respectively, followed by densitometric analysis (J). Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3).

Figure S3. Overexpression of Cryba1 can rescue HDAC3 activity and H3K9/27 acetylation in RPE cells. (A) p300 activity in Cryba1 cKO was comparable to Cryba1
fl/fl. p300 protein was immunoprecipitated from Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO RPE cells, followed by an in vitro histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity assay. IgG was used as a negative control. Data has been presented as fold change compared with blank value. Immunoblot analysis of p300 from total lysate isolated from Cryba1

fl/fl
 and Cryba1 cKO RPE cells was represented as input control, while actin was used as loading control. The result was representative of three individual experiments (n = 3, NS, not significant) (B) Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with Cryba1 plasmid by using an adenoviral transfection procedure (Cryba1 cKO + Cryba1). HDAC3 activity was significantly rescued in Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 compared to Cryba1fl/fl. Lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO, and Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 were immunoprecipitated with anti‐HDAC3 antibody followed by an analysis of HDAC3 activity. Immunoblot analysis against anti‐HDAC3 antibody from the lysate isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO, and Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 RPE cells was used as control while actin was used as loading control. Results were representative of three independent experiments (n = 3, NS, not significant, ****p < 0.0001). (C, D) Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with wild‐type Cryba1 adenoviral construct and vector control using an adenoviral transfection procedure. Immunoblot analysis indicated significant rescue in H3K9 and H3K27 acetylation in Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1. Lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO, and Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 RPE cells were immunoblotted with anti‐H3K9‐Ac (C) or anti‐H3K27‐Ac (D) antibodies. This was followed by stripping and reprobing against anti‐H3 antibodies, which was used as a loading control. Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3). (E, F) represent densitometric analysis of H3K9/27 acetylation. n = 3 (***p < 0.001).

Figure S4. Deletion of Cryba1 in RPE cells influences epigenetic changes. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis depicting upregulated pathways in Cryba1 cKO mouse RPE with enrichment H3K27 acetylation peaks.

Figure S5. βA3/A1‐crystallin physically interacts with HDAC3. (A) In silico binding analysis predicted Cryba1 binding with HDAC3 by using 3D computational modeling. βA3/A1‐crystallin (blue), HDAC3 (orange), and SMART‐DAD (green). (B) In the over expression system, βA3/A1‐crystallin‐RFP interacts with endogenous HDAC3. Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with AD‐RFP and βA3/A1‐crystallin‐RFP, respectively, followed by immunoprecipitation with anti‐RFP antibody, then immunoblotted against anti‐HDAC3 antibody. Whole cell lysates from the respective groups were then immunoblotted against anti‐HDAC3 and anti‐RFP antibodies and were represented as input control (n = 3). (C) Endogenous βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin binds to endogenous HDAC3. To analyze endogenous binding between HDAC3, βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin, cell lysates isolated from Cryba1

fl/fl
 and Cryba1 cKO RPE were immunoprecipitated with anti‐HDAC3 antibody followed by immunoblotting against βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin. IgG was used as a negative control. Immunoblotting against anti‐HDAC3 and anti‐Cryba1 antibodies from the lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO was used as input control (n = 3). (D) Recombinant βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin‐myc binds with recombinant HDAC3‐GST in in vitro conditions. βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin‐myc were incubated with either HDAC3‐GST or GST recombinant protein and then immunoprecipitated with anti‐GST beads followed by immunoblotting against anti‐Myc antibody. Whole cells lysates were immunoblotted against anti‐myc, anti‐HDAC3 and anti‐GST antibodies (input control) (n = 3). Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3). (E) The representative image illustrates the interaction between βA3/A1‐crystallin and HDAC3 within the nucleus of the RPE in flat mounts. The PLA reveals prominent red puncta in the Cryba1
fl/fl controls, indicating a robust interaction. Conversely, no puncta are observed in the nucleus of the Cryba1 cKO RPE flat mounts, owing to the absence of crystallin. n = 3, Scale bar = 10 μm.

Figure S6. Overexpression of Cryba1 can rescue HDAC3 phosphorylation at Ser424 in the Cryba1 cKO RPE. (A) Adenoviral‐mediated overexpression of Cryba1 significantly rescued HDAC3 phosphorylation at Serine 424. Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with wild‐type Cryba1 construct or vector control using an adenoviral transfection procedure. Lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO + vector control, and Cryba1 cKO + Cryba1 were immunoblotted with anti‐phospho HDAC3 Ser 424 antibody, followed by stripping and reprobing against an anti‐HDAC3 antibody, which was used as a loading control. (B) Densitometric analysis of pHDAC3 Ser424/HDAC3 acetylation confirms the rescue of HDAC3 phosphorylation at Serine 424. Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3, ***p < 0.001).

Figure S7. Increase in H3K9/H3K27 acetylation in human AMD. (A, B) Immunoblot analysis indicated a significant increase in the level of H3K9 acetylation in AMD patients as compared to healthy human individuals. Lysates isolated from RPE cells of healthy and patients suffering from AMD were immunoblotted with anti‐H3K9‐Ac (A) or anti‐H3K27‐Ac (C, D) antibodies. This was followed by stripping and reprobing against anti‐H3 antibody, which was used as a loading control (n = 3). (B, D) represent densitometric analyses of H3K9/27 acetylation. Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3). n = 3 (***p < 0.001).

Table S1. Top 10 protein coding genes with increased expression.

Table S2. Top 10 protein coding genes with decreased expression.

Table S3. Top 10 genes with increased expression and increased acetylation in promoter region (−1 kb to TSS).

## Acknowledgments
We would like to thank J. Samuel Zigler, Jr. for his help during the preparation of the manuscript and the NIPM genomic core facility for the NGS studies. This work was supported by NIH 5P20GM121325 COBRE and R16GM154726 grants to Prasun Guha. This study was also supported by NIH 1R01EY031594‐01A1 (DS), NIH 1R01EY032516‐01A1 (DS), The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine start‐up funds (DS), Edward N. & Della L. Thome Memorial Foundation Awards Program in Age‐Related Macular Degeneration (DS), NIH K99EY033421 (SG), P30 core award (EY001765) from the National Eye Institute, NIH to the Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and unrestricted funds from The Research to Prevent Blindness Inc., NY to the Wilmer Eye Institute, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and funds from the Frieda Derdeyn Bambas Professorship in Ophthalmology (DS). The authors who generated the data for this study are responsible for their respective datasets.

Funding: This work was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH 5P20GM121325 COBRE, R16GM154726, NIH 1R01EY031594‐01A1, NIH 1R01EY032516‐01A1, NIH K99EY033421) and National Eye Institute (EY001765).
Sujan Chatterjee and Sayan Ghosh contributed equally to this work.

## Contributor Information
Debasish Sinha, Email: debasish@jhmi.edu.
Prasun Guha, Email: prasun.guha@unlv.edu.

## Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the Figures  and Tables  of this article.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Figure S1.
Cryba1 deletion impacts the global transcriptome in mouse RPE cells. Volcano plot (log 10[p value] vs. Fold change) displays differentially expressed genes after Cryba1 deletion. Yellow dots represent upregulated gene expression, whereas green dots represent downregulated gene expression. The y‐axis denotes −log10 p value, whereas the x‐axis denotes log2 fold change value. The result is representative of eight individual experiments (n = 8).

Figure S2.
Cryba1 deletion enhances histone acetylation in mouse RPE cells. Western blot analysis demonstrated that histone acetylation increased in RPE cells from Cryba1 cKO mice compared to Cryba1
fl/fl. Cryba1
fl/fl RPE cells treated with 2 μM of the pan HDAC inhibitor SAHA was used as a positive control. Immunoblotting was performed against acetylated (A) anti‐H3K14, (B) anti‐H3K9, (C) anti‐H3K18, (D) anti‐H3K27, (E) anti‐H3K56, (F) anti‐H4K5 and (G) anti‐H4K8 (H) anti‐H4K12, and (I) anti‐H4K16 followed by stripping and reprobing against anti‐H3 or anti‐H4 antibodies, respectively, followed by densitometric analysis (J). Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3).

Figure S3. Overexpression of Cryba1 can rescue HDAC3 activity and H3K9/27 acetylation in RPE cells. (A) p300 activity in Cryba1 cKO was comparable to Cryba1
fl/fl. p300 protein was immunoprecipitated from Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO RPE cells, followed by an in vitro histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity assay. IgG was used as a negative control. Data has been presented as fold change compared with blank value. Immunoblot analysis of p300 from total lysate isolated from Cryba1

fl/fl
 and Cryba1 cKO RPE cells was represented as input control, while actin was used as loading control. The result was representative of three individual experiments (n = 3, NS, not significant) (B) Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with Cryba1 plasmid by using an adenoviral transfection procedure (Cryba1 cKO + Cryba1). HDAC3 activity was significantly rescued in Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 compared to Cryba1fl/fl. Lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO, and Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 were immunoprecipitated with anti‐HDAC3 antibody followed by an analysis of HDAC3 activity. Immunoblot analysis against anti‐HDAC3 antibody from the lysate isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO, and Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 RPE cells was used as control while actin was used as loading control. Results were representative of three independent experiments (n = 3, NS, not significant, ****p < 0.0001). (C, D) Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with wild‐type Cryba1 adenoviral construct and vector control using an adenoviral transfection procedure. Immunoblot analysis indicated significant rescue in H3K9 and H3K27 acetylation in Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1. Lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO, and Cryba1 cKO + Ad‐Cryba1 RPE cells were immunoblotted with anti‐H3K9‐Ac (C) or anti‐H3K27‐Ac (D) antibodies. This was followed by stripping and reprobing against anti‐H3 antibodies, which was used as a loading control. Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3). (E, F) represent densitometric analysis of H3K9/27 acetylation. n = 3 (***p < 0.001).

Figure S4. Deletion of Cryba1 in RPE cells influences epigenetic changes. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis depicting upregulated pathways in Cryba1 cKO mouse RPE with enrichment H3K27 acetylation peaks.

Figure S5. βA3/A1‐crystallin physically interacts with HDAC3. (A) In silico binding analysis predicted Cryba1 binding with HDAC3 by using 3D computational modeling. βA3/A1‐crystallin (blue), HDAC3 (orange), and SMART‐DAD (green). (B) In the over expression system, βA3/A1‐crystallin‐RFP interacts with endogenous HDAC3. Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with AD‐RFP and βA3/A1‐crystallin‐RFP, respectively, followed by immunoprecipitation with anti‐RFP antibody, then immunoblotted against anti‐HDAC3 antibody. Whole cell lysates from the respective groups were then immunoblotted against anti‐HDAC3 and anti‐RFP antibodies and were represented as input control (n = 3). (C) Endogenous βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin binds to endogenous HDAC3. To analyze endogenous binding between HDAC3, βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin, cell lysates isolated from Cryba1

fl/fl
 and Cryba1 cKO RPE were immunoprecipitated with anti‐HDAC3 antibody followed by immunoblotting against βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin. IgG was used as a negative control. Immunoblotting against anti‐HDAC3 and anti‐Cryba1 antibodies from the lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl and Cryba1 cKO was used as input control (n = 3). (D) Recombinant βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin‐myc binds with recombinant HDAC3‐GST in in vitro conditions. βA3‐ and βA1‐crystallin‐myc were incubated with either HDAC3‐GST or GST recombinant protein and then immunoprecipitated with anti‐GST beads followed by immunoblotting against anti‐Myc antibody. Whole cells lysates were immunoblotted against anti‐myc, anti‐HDAC3 and anti‐GST antibodies (input control) (n = 3). Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3). (E) The representative image illustrates the interaction between βA3/A1‐crystallin and HDAC3 within the nucleus of the RPE in flat mounts. The PLA reveals prominent red puncta in the Cryba1
fl/fl controls, indicating a robust interaction. Conversely, no puncta are observed in the nucleus of the Cryba1 cKO RPE flat mounts, owing to the absence of crystallin. n = 3, Scale bar = 10 μm.

Figure S6. Overexpression of Cryba1 can rescue HDAC3 phosphorylation at Ser424 in the Cryba1 cKO RPE. (A) Adenoviral‐mediated overexpression of Cryba1 significantly rescued HDAC3 phosphorylation at Serine 424. Cryba1 cKO RPE cells were stably overexpressed with wild‐type Cryba1 construct or vector control using an adenoviral transfection procedure. Lysates isolated from Cryba1
fl/fl, Cryba1 cKO + vector control, and Cryba1 cKO + Cryba1 were immunoblotted with anti‐phospho HDAC3 Ser 424 antibody, followed by stripping and reprobing against an anti‐HDAC3 antibody, which was used as a loading control. (B) Densitometric analysis of pHDAC3 Ser424/HDAC3 acetylation confirms the rescue of HDAC3 phosphorylation at Serine 424. Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3, ***p < 0.001).

Figure S7. Increase in H3K9/H3K27 acetylation in human AMD. (A, B) Immunoblot analysis indicated a significant increase in the level of H3K9 acetylation in AMD patients as compared to healthy human individuals. Lysates isolated from RPE cells of healthy and patients suffering from AMD were immunoblotted with anti‐H3K9‐Ac (A) or anti‐H3K27‐Ac (C, D) antibodies. This was followed by stripping and reprobing against anti‐H3 antibody, which was used as a loading control (n = 3). (B, D) represent densitometric analyses of H3K9/27 acetylation. Results are representative of three individual experiments (n = 3). n = 3 (***p < 0.001).

Table S1. Top 10 protein coding genes with increased expression.

Table S2. Top 10 protein coding genes with decreased expression.

Table S3. Top 10 genes with increased expression and increased acetylation in promoter region (−1 kb to TSS).

## Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the Figures  and Tables  of this article.