pmcCell GenomCell Genom4382cgenCell Genomics2666-979XElsevierPMC10363807PMC10363807.110363807103638073749209810.1016/j.xgen.2023.100327S2666-979X(23)00095-21003271ArticleBlood cell traits’ GWAS loci colocalization with variation in PU.1 genomic occupancy prioritizes causal noncoding regulatory variants
JeongRaehoon BulykMartha L.mlbulyk@genetics.med.harvard.edu 1Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA2Bioinformatics and Integrative Genomics Graduate Program, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA3Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA∗Corresponding author mlbulyk@genetics.med.harvard.edu4Lead contact
12720231752023374412921003271910202210220232542023170520232507202319062025© 2023 The Author(s)2023https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).Colocalization of blood cell traits GWAS associations and variation in PU.1 genomic occupancy prioritizes causal noncoding regulatory variants
30320232023.03.29.534582bioRxiv10.1101/2023.03.29.534582PMC1008126937034747

## Summary
Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have uncovered numerous trait-associated loci across the human genome, most of which are located in noncoding regions, making interpretation difficult. Moreover, causal variants are hard to statistically fine-map at many loci because of widespread linkage disequilibrium. To address this challenge, we present a strategy utilizing transcription factor (TF) binding quantitative trait loci (bQTLs) for colocalization analysis to identify trait associations likely mediated by TF occupancy variation and to pinpoint likely causal variants using motif scores. We applied this approach to PU.1 bQTLs in lymphoblastoid cell lines and blood cell trait GWAS data. Colocalization analysis revealed 69 blood cell trait GWAS loci putatively driven by PU.1 occupancy variation. We nominate PU.1 motif-altering variants as the likely shared causal variants at 51 loci. Such integration of TF bQTL data with other GWAS data may reveal transcriptional regulatory mechanisms and causal noncoding variants underlying additional complex traits.

## Graphical abstract
 

## Highlights
•69 PU.1 binding QTLs colocalize with blood cell trait associations
•PU.1 motif-altering variants are likely causal at 51 colocalized loci
•Variants affect chromatin accessibility, histone marks, and gene expression levels
•TF-centered strategy pinpoints likely causal variants and mechanisms at GWAS loci

Identifying the causal variants and mechanisms of noncoding genomic loci associated with traits is challenging. Jeong and Bulyk present a computational strategy to utilize population-level data on transcription factor (TF) occupancy to pinpoint trait-associated loci that are likely driven by variants altering the TF’s binding site motif and binding levels.

## Keywords
genome-wide association studytranscription factor binding quantitative trait locusTF bQTLcolocalizationvariant-to-functionfine-mappingnoncoding variantsPU.1blood cell traitstranscription factorsChIP-seqpmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDPublished: May 17, 2023

## Introduction
A recurring challenge in genome-wide association studies (GWASs) is the difficulty of identifying causal variants as well as formulating corresponding variant-to-function (V2F) hypotheses. Pinpointing causal variants is important because it guides subsequent validation experiments , , and development of potential therapies. More precise identification of causal variants (e.g., fine-mapping) also leads to better genetic risk predictions across various traits and diseases. , However, widespread linkage disequilibrium (LD) typically prevents effective statistical fine-mapping, especially for common variants. , Moreover, most of the genome-wide significant loci are noncoding and likely have regulatory functions. , Variants predicted to affect transcription factor (TF) binding across the genome explain a large proportion of genetic associations with traits (i.e., heritability enrichment). , In practice, noncoding variants are much harder to interpret than coding variants because predicting the effects of noncoding variants on TF binding in vivo is challenging. Some commonly used approaches to predict affected TFs include searching for overlapping TF chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) peaks , and TF binding site motifs. , However, such approaches lack evidence specifically demonstrating the variants’ effects on in vivo TF binding. Furthermore, many TFs within a TF family recognize very similar motifs while also binding to distinct genomic loci, adding to the challenge of pinpointing the causal TF. Therefore, an approach to effectively pinpoint regulatory variants and their effects on in vivo TF binding at individual GWAS loci is essential.
An effective method to capture the genetic effects on in vivo TF binding is TF binding quantitative trait loci (bQTLs) , , (i.e., genomic loci where the TF occupancy level, as measured by ChIP-seq, is significantly associated with a genetic variant). An earlier study attempted to link specific TF bQTLs to individual GWAS loci simply based on a single variant’s association signal, but this method is prone to false positive findings because the two associations could be driven by distinct variants merely in LD with each other. Instead, we aimed to link TF bQTLs and GWAS loci by applying colocalization analysis, , , , which is a widely accepted statistical approach to specifically test the hypothesis that genetic signals are shared between a pair of traits (e.g., TF binding and GWAS trait). Significant colocalization suggests that a genetic variant affects TF binding as well as the studied downstream trait. 
A key benefit of TF bQTL colocalization lies in the observation that TF binding variation is often driven by variants altering the motif of the corresponding TF at its binding site. , With a TF motif model, such as gapped k-mer support vector machine (gkm-SVM), , we can recognize a variant that overlaps the TF’s binding motif and changes its predicted affinity in the direction concordant with the changes in TF binding level. This is advantageous because we can pinpoint such a motif-altering variant at the binding site even when association statistics alone cannot readily identify the likely causal variant because of LD. In other words, if some TF’s bQTL significantly colocalizes with a GWAS signal, and that TF’s motif-altering variant is among the top associated variants, then that variant is likely to explain the GWAS association. We contrast this with expression QTL (eQTL) or methylation QTL (mQTL) colocalization, , where the TF is unknown. By pinpointing the candidate causal TF in a GWAS locus through TF bQTL colocalization, we can also prioritize the corresponding TF motif-altering variants as the likely causal regulatory variants underlying TF binding variation and the GWAS traits.
Hence, we present a strategy (1) to analyze colocalization of TF bQTLs at GWAS loci to highlight TF binding sites that potentially mediate the GWAS associations and (2) to utilize TF motif models to nominate variants altering the corresponding TF motifs at those binding sites as likely shared causal variants underlying both phenotypes ( A). By performing TF bQTL colocalization analysis with GWAS data to fine-map putative causal variants that affect in vivo TF binding within individual GWAS loci, we aim to add to the understanding of the direct molecular consequences of trait-associated genetic variation. 
We carried out this strategy with blood cell trait GWAS and bQTL data for the hematopoietic master regulator PU.1 from lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs), , which are immortalized B cell lines. PU.1 bQTLs in neutrophils have been found previously to colocalize with immune disease susceptibility loci but have not been used to fine-map the causal variants. Blood cell traits (e.g., lymphocyte counts, hemoglobin concentrations) are indicators of various diseases; for instance, individuals with low lymphocyte counts are more susceptible to infections, including severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). , , PU.1 has a role in specifying myeloid and lymphoid lineages during hematopoiesis, , and SPI1, the gene encoding PU.1, is expressed throughout progenitor cell types ( ). A recent fine-mapping analysis of blood cell trait GWASs reported that PU.1 was the TF with the highest number of fine-mapped noncoding variants altering its DNA binding site motif, suggesting that PU.1 motif-altering variants might drive many blood cell trait association signals.
To identify blood cell trait associations that may be driven by a variant altering PU.1 binding, we analyzed publicly available PU.1 ChIP-seq data from LCLs across 49 individuals , and identified 1,497 PU.1 bQTLs. PU.1 bQTLs colocalized with at least one blood cell trait association at 69 loci; for 51 of these loci, we identified PU.1 motif-altering variants as the likely causal variants. Our approach allowed us to overcome the limitations of statistical fine-mapping in resolving these GWAS signals to single causal variants. Most of those PU.1 motif-altering variants were also associated with other regulatory phenotypes, such as chromatin accessibility and histone mark levels, in LCLs. By also incorporating transcriptome data for LCLs, we identified several putative causal genes for traits, including lymphocyte and monocyte counts. Our results illustrate the utility of TF bQTL datasets for fine-mapping trait-associated noncoding loci and in generating mechanistic V2F models of gene dysregulation for traits of biomedical importance.

## Results

## PU.1 motif-altering variants are likely causal for PU.1 bQTL associations
First, we reanalyzed available PU.1 ChIP-seq data for LCLs from 49 individuals. , These individuals are all of European ancestry, and their genotypes are available through the 1000 Genomes Project ( ). After peak calling and normalization of the PU.1 ChIP-seq read counts, we tested for significant genetic associations with common variants (minor-allele frequency [MAF] > 0.05) within 100 kb of each ChIP-seq peak. In total, we identified 1,497 significant PU.1 bQTLs (false discovery rate [FDR] < 5%).
We next inspected the contribution of PU.1 motif-altering variants to PU.1 bQTLs. First, we verified that PU.1-occupied regions were enriched for a match to the PU.1 binding site motif, identified by a position weight matrix (PWM), near the center of the ChIP-seq peaks ( A). This suggests that most of these sites are bound directly by PU.1. Next, we evaluated whether PU.1 motif-altering variants affect PU.1 binding by training a motif score model gkm-SVM to learn gapped k-mers that are overrepresented in PU.1-occupied sequences. PU.1 can bind DNA as a monomer and as a heterodimer with either interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) or IRF8, and the model correctly captured PU.1 and PU.1:IRF composite motifs ( B). Changes in gkm-SVM scores predict effects of variants on TF binding better than PWMs, which imprecisely assume each nucleotide to affect binding independently. Consistent with our expectations, the predicted change in gkm-SVM scores for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within PU.1 motifs was significantly correlated with estimated PU.1 bQTL effect sizes (Pearson r = 0.80, p = 3.6 × 10−310; B; ). This strong positive correlation supports the model that PU.1 motif-altering variants, if present, are likely causal for those PU.1 bQTLs. Furthermore, significant PU.1 bQTLs with a motif-altering variant (determined by gkm-SVM) showed that such variants are more concentrated toward the peak centers compared with PU.1 bQTLs without one (two-sided Fisher’s exact test, p = 3.1 × 10−18; C), consistent with the expectation that PU.1 motif-altering variants directly affect PU.1 occupancy. Hence, we considered that PU.1 bQTLs colocalized with blood cell trait association would likely be driven by PU.1 motif-altering variants, if present ( A).

## PU.1 binding sites and PU.1 bQTLs in LCLs are enriched for blood cell trait association
To verify the relevance of these PU.1 bQTLs for investigations of blood cell traits, we evaluated whether the PU.1 bQTLs are more likely to be significantly associated with blood cell traits than expected by chance. We analyzed GWAS data for 28 blood cell traits from the UK Biobank ( ). As a background expectation, we constructed 250 sets of null variants matched with PU.1 bQTL lead variants for allele frequency, number of tagging variants (LD r2 > 0.5), and distance to the closest transcription start site (TSS). The significant PU.1 bQTLs were more likely to tag lead variants associated (i.e., p < 5 × 10−8) with myeloid lineage traits (e.g., monocyte and neutrophil count) and lymphoid lineage traits (e.g., lymphocyte count) than the sets of null variants (adjusted empirical p < 0.05) ( A and C). This is consistent with the known role of PU.1 in myeloid and lymphoid differentiation. , In contrast, PU.1 bQTLs were not enriched for other traits like type 2 diabetes or height ( A and D). 

## PU.1 bQTL colocalization with blood cell trait associations
To identify candidate loci to test for potential colocalization of PU.1 bQTL and blood cell trait associations, we filtered all significant PU.1 bQTLs for loci with at least one blood cell trait association at p < 10−6. We reasoned that suggestive loci with p < 10−6 that colocalize with PU.1 bQTLs could be weaker, but likely functional, associations. This resulted in a total of 1,621 such PU.1 bQTL-trait pairs, comprising 367 unique loci. We then applied two distinct colocalization methods, joint likelihood mapping (JLIM) and Coloc, to test for robust colocalization ( ). JLIM is a frequentist method testing the significance of the shared association by a permutation p value, while Coloc is a Bayesian method estimating the posterior probability of colocalization. Each method can exhibit different performance depending on the LD structure of the loci; therefore, we reasoned that requiring significant colocalization by both methods would enrich true positive cases. We used a significance threshold of p < 0.01172 (FDR < 5%) for JLIM and posterior probability of colocalization (PP[colocalization]) > 0.5 for Coloc.
The statistically significant colocalization of PU.1 bQTL-trait pairs identified by JLIM and Coloc was overall consistent (Pearson r = 0.73, p = 6.8 × 10−270; B). We identified a total of 190 (11.7%) PU.1-trait pairs, spanning 69 unique loci, that were significant by both methods. We also found 1,196 (73.8%) cases where a variant that was significant for PU.1 bQTL and blood cell traits did not exhibit significant colocalization by either JLIM or Coloc. This highlights the importance of performing colocalization analysis to distinguish loci with statistical evidence of shared causal variants from those where the variants associated with each trait are merely in LD with each other. The remaining 235 (14.5%) pairs showed discordant results between the two methods, which could potentially stem from lack of statistical power due to weak association signals or many variants showing high LD with the lead variant ( ; ). This discrepancy justifies the rationale of applying both methods to identify high-confidence colocalization.
Most (56 of 69) loci showing high-confidence colocalization had some biologically plausible putative causal variants that directly affect PU.1 binding sequences ( C and A; ). 43 (62.3%) loci had a SNP altering a PU.1 motif, while 7 (10.1%) had a short insertion or deletion (indel) variant. In addition, there was one locus where two adjacent SNPs were in perfect LD (r2 = 1) and altered a single PU.1 motif sequence ( A; ). These SNPs and short indels showed a balance of gained and lost PU.1 binding (two-sided binomial test, p = 0.67), and changes in gkm-SVM motif scores were highly correlated with the estimated PU.1 bQTL effect sizes (Pearson r = 0.89, p = 5.2 × 10−18; B). The PU.1 motif-altering SNPs at colocalized loci were distributed within the PU.1 or PU.1:IRF motif, with the highest frequencies at the core “GGAAG” positions ( D; ). There were also 5 loci with large deletions that completely removed the PU.1 binding site, which we were able to uncover because the 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP) genotypes included structural variants ( C). Whether the deletions are true causal variants will need to be tested experimentally in future studies. From here on, “PU.1 motif-altering variants” refers to the 51 variants that are not structural variants.
To evaluate the benefits of our approach in pinpointing the putative causal variant and TF, we retrieved fine-mapping results for 25 colocalized loci with a PU.1 motif-altering variant (i.e., SNP or indel) from a recent blood cell trait GWAS study ( ). 19 of these 25 (76%) loci had more than 10 variants in the 95% credible set (i.e., minimal set of variants that have 95% posterior probability of containing the causal variant), none of which was fine-mapped to a single variant ( E; ). Without TF bQTL colocalization, existing approaches to narrow down candidate variants and hypothesize the causal TF typically include filtering for variants in accessible chromatin and scanning for any TF motif alterations. When we applied such an approach to the 25 PU.1 bQTL colocalized loci, it still led to multiple candidate variants (on average, 4.9 variants per locus), corresponding to numerous LCL-expressed (transcripts per million [TPM] > 1) TFs with motif alterations (on average, 13.8 unique TFs with a motif alteration per SNP; ). In contrast, despite the difficulty in fine-mapping due to LD structure, we were able to pinpoint single putative causal variants in these loci using a specific TF’s (i.e., PU.1) motif information. Because PU.1 bQTL colocalization nominates PU.1 as the causal TF in those blood cell trait GWAS loci, it also narrows down the search for putative causal variants to PU.1 motif-altering variants.
Across the blood cell traits, those related to white blood cells (e.g., white blood cell count, lymphocyte count, neutrophil count) showed a higher proportion of the tested loci showing colocalization than red blood cell or platelet traits ( A). This relative enrichment is similar to that of tagging variants observed in B. Some loci showed association with multiple blood cell traits; those traits were mostly closely related, like neutrophil count and neutrophil percentage ( B and 3C). 

## Most PU.1 bQTLs alter chromatin activity, and some affect gene expression
Additional regulatory phenotype data allowed us to derive specific hypotheses about gene-regulatory mechanisms that are perturbed by the variants. First, we reanalyzed assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq) and histone mark ChIP-seq data for LCLs to generate QTL statistics for chromatin accessibility and active histone mark (histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation [H3K27ac] and histone H3 lysine 4 monomethylation [H3K4me1]) levels. These chromatin phenotypes can indicate regulatory regions in the genome, , and a direct consequence of PU.1 binding alteration is likely to be in the cognate chromatin region. In fact, the majority (>60%) of the colocalized PU.1 binding sites with PU.1 motif-altering variants showed overlap with each of the chromatin phenotypes ( A). The presence of PU.1 binding sites that are not accessible is consistent with earlier observations. Moreover, there were significant QTL signals (FDR < 5%) that were in LD (r2 > 0.8) with the PU.1 motif-altering variants in more than 70% of the overlapping peaks. 20 of the PU.1 bQTLs showed chromatin accessibility QTLs (caQTLs), H3K27ac histone QTLs (hQTLs), and H3K4me1 hQTLs, while 16 showed at least one of the three ( B; , , and ). These effects all showed concordant directions as the effects of PU.1 motif-altering variants on PU.1 binding ( C). Thus, most PU.1 motif-altering variants are supported by measured chromatin effects. The rest of the variants may show chromatin effects in a different cellular context. 
To further corroborate the variants’ effect on PU.1 binding, we estimated their ChIP-seq allelic imbalance effects in heterozygous individuals. A PU.1 motif-altering variant that is causally associated with PU.1 binding would exhibit allelic imbalance signals that are consistent with estimated bQTL effects. , For all 44 PU.1 motif-altering SNPs, the estimated allelic imbalance effects showed directions and magnitudes that are concordant with those of the PU.1 bQTL estimates (Pearson r = 0.94, p = 4.2 × 10−43; D; ).
We next searched to see whether PU.1 motif-altering variants that colocalized with blood cell trait association signals were in LD (r2 > 0.8) with eQTLs in LCLs. Interestingly, just 9 PU.1 motif-altering variants were in LD with eQTL lead variants, and one was in LD with a secondary eQTL signal (i.e., a weaker signal independent of the strongest, primary eQTL; ). Nine of 10 of these variants showed the same effect directions for PU.1 bQTLs and eQTLs ( E). The remaining colocalized PU.1 motif-altering variants might drive eQTL signals under other experimental conditions and/or cell types. Among the examples with an eQTL signal in LCLs, we selected 3 loci to describe further. We show one example where a PU.1 motif-altering SNP (rs12517864) represents a secondary eQTL for ZNF608 in LCLs, and only this secondary signal colocalizes with lymphocyte count association. An eQTL-centric analysis in LCLs would have missed this locus without accounting for multiple independent signals, highlighting the power of the use of TF bQTL data in colocalization analysis with GWAS data. Two other examples show reporter assay results corroborating the regulatory effects of PU.1 motif-altering variants identified in colocalized loci.

## bQTL colocalization reveals a putative causal variant that is not the primary eQTL
Causal genes at a trait-associated locus frequently have been identified using eQTL data for nearby genes. , However, eQTLs can often have multiple independent signals, and these signals detected in any one cell type may not all be associated with a GWAS trait, such as when the regulatory effects manifest themselves only in certain cellular contexts. This complicates colocalization analyses that often assume a single shared causal variant at a locus. , In contrast, TF bQTLs capture regulatory effects of individual regulatory elements. Therefore, TF bQTL colocalization analysis can isolate the effects of variants on specific regulatory elements, lowering the probability of multiple causal variants compared with that of eQTLs.
For example, the ZNF608 locus shows significant colocalization of PU.1 bQTLs and lymphocyte count association (JLIM p = 2.0 × 10−5 and Coloc PP[colocalization] = 0.78; A and A; ). As expected, the top association signal for PU.1 binding and lymphocyte count align ( A). The exact molecular function of ZNF608 remains unclear. Nonetheless, a study of follicular lymphoma (FL), a type of cancer in which B lymphocytes divide uncontrollably, found ZNF608 to be among the 39 genes significantly enriched for missense or predicted-loss-of-function (pLOF) somatic mutations in FL patients. This finding suggests that the gene may play a role in B lymphocyte development. The associated PU.1 binding site is located about 257 kb upstream of the ZNF608 promoter, and the SNP rs12517864, which increases the PU.1 binding motif score (0.68→2.69), is located near the center of the PU.1 occupancy site ( B). 
Multiple lines of evidence support the regulatory effect of rs12517864. Based on our reanalysis of ATAC-seq and histone mark ChIP-seq data for LCLs, we found that rs12517864 is significantly associated with each of these molecular phenotypes that overlap the PU.1 binding site ( C and 5D). This observation suggests that the variant, if causal, likely affects gene regulation. Consistent with the observation that PU.1 is generally an activator, , increased PU.1 binding was associated with increased chromatin accessibility and active histone marks—H3K27ac and H3K4me1 (p = 1.9 × 10−24, 9.0 × 10−20, and 1.4 × 10−10, respectively; , , and ). Furthermore, the variant falls within a fragment that physically interacts only with the ZNF608 promoter in primary B cells according to promoter-capture Hi-C (PCHi-C) data, supporting the model that rs12517864 directly regulates ZNF608 ( E).
Surprisingly, initial inspection of ZNF608 eQTL signals in LCLs seemed contradictory because the lead variant for this eQTL (rs2028854) is located elsewhere, 200 kb upstream of the ZNF608 promoter, and is not strongly associated with lymphocyte count (p = 0.04; E and 5F). We therefore examined the possibility of multiple independent ZNF608 eQTL signals in LCLs by performing a conditional analysis on the lead variant as well as fine-mapping using the “sum of single effects” (SuSiE) model, which can detect multiple signals. When conditioned on the lead eQTL SNP rs2028854, association of rs12517864 to ZNF608 expression became much stronger (p = 2.03 × 10−7), with a positive effect direction ( F; ). The effect direction is consistent with the increased chromatin activity of the enhancer by rs12517864 ( D). Moreover, the fine-mapping analysis identified two independent credible sets for ZNF608 eQTL signal, one of which contained rs12517864 as the variant with the highest posterior inclusion probability (PIP = 0.07), demonstrating that this variant is likely to be causally associated with ZNF608 expression level ( G).
Because only one of the two independent ZNF608 eQTL signals in LCLs is associated with lymphocyte count, we hypothesized that even though both SNPs are significant eQTLs in LCLs, only rs12517864 (i.e., the secondary eQTL signal), and not rs2028854 (i.e., the primary eQTL signal), modulates ZNF608 expression in the causal cell type. Analysis of RNA-seq data for various blood cells revealed that ZNF608 is highly expressed in common lymphoid progenitors and B cells ( H). Inspection of eQTL data for B cells in the eQTL Catalogue , showed that only rs12517864, and not rs2028854 (p = 0.25), is significantly associated with increased ZNF608 expression (p = 4.39 × 10−5; I). Although we cannot unambiguously conclude that B cells are the causal cell type, rs12517864 is likely the only variant that increases lymphocyte count through increased ZNF608 expression ( B).
Because the ZNF608 locus demonstrates an interesting genetic architecture, we searched for additional such examples. Based on conditional eQTL analysis, the ZNF608 locus was the only example with a PU.1 motif-altering variant representing a secondary eQTL signal. We also applied statistical fine-mapping on eQTLs at PU.1 bQTL colocalized loci to look for GWAS loci with only one of multiple eQTL signals colocalizing. However, the ZNF608 locus was the only example with a gene with more than one independent eQTL signal at blood cell trait GWAS loci that colocalized with PU.1 bQTL signals.

## Blood cell trait-associated PU.1 motif-altering variants show regulatory effects in reporter assays
To verify that the nominated PU.1 motif-altering variants are indeed regulatory variants, we inspected massively parallel reporter assay (MPRA) study data, , which measured the regulatory effects of two such variants. rs5827412, a PU.1 motif-altering short deletion in the LRRC25 locus, was associated with a lower monocyte percentage (p = 1.3 × 10−96) and lowered reporter activity (two-sided t test, p = 6.9 × 10−5). rs3808619, a PU.1 motif-altering SNP at the promoter of ZC2HC1A, was associated with a lower lymphocyte count (p = 2.3 × 10−98) and increased reporter activity (two-sided t test, p = 0.006).
LRRC25, also called monocyte and plasmacytoid-activated protein (MAPA), is a gene necessary for differentiation of granulocytes, which share lineages with monocytes. At this locus, we found that the PU.1 bQTL signal showed significant colocalization with monocyte count and percentage, neutrophil count and percentage, and white blood cell count association signals , (JLIM p = 5 × 10−5, 4 × 10−5, 1 × 10−5, 1 × 10−5, and 1 × 10−5, respectively, and Coloc PP[colocalization] = 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, and 0.98, respectively; A and A; ). As the association Z scores show, variants significantly associated with lower PU.1 binding are also associated with a lower monocyte percentage, consistent with colocalization ( A). In contrast, the direction of effect is reversed for neutrophil count and percentage and white blood cell count ( A). The corresponding PU.1 binding site contains a short deletion rs5827412 that lowers the PU.1 motif score and is associated with reduced PU.1 binding as well as chromatin accessibility, active histone mark levels, and LRRC25 expression , , ( B and B), which is expected from PU.1’s likely role as an activator. , Consistent with reduced PU.1 binding, rs5827412 significantly reduced regulatory activity in a reporter assay (two-sided t test, p = 6.9 × 10−5; C, left bar); data from another study suggested concordant direction of effect despite not being statistically significant (negative binomial regression, p = 0.26; C, right bar). Next, we analyzed available ATAC-seq data from SPI1, the gene encoding PU.1, knockout pro-B cell lines (RS4;11) to verify whether PU.1 is likely to be the trans factor for the regulatory variant. We found that, across triplicates for each genotype, SPI1 knockout resulted in significantly reduced chromatin accessibility at sites of PU.1 occupancy genome wide (chi-square test, p < 1 × 10−300; C). Indeed, the activity of the regulatory element that contains rs5827412 is likely dependent on PU.1 binding because SPI1 knockout cell lines showed reduced chromatin accessibility at this region (DESeq2-adjusted p = 8.73 × 10−5; D). RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data for 13 blood cell types indicate that LRRC25 is specifically expressed in monocytes at a much higher level than in other blood cell types and is sharply upregulated as progenitor cells differentiate to monocytes ( E and D). Consistent with the variant’s strongest effect on monocyte percentage (p = 1.3 × 10−96) and monocyte-specific expression of LRRC25, we found that rs5827412 is also significantly associated with reduced LRRC25 expression in monocytes (p = 3.78 × 10−22; F) and is in a regulatory element that is accessible throughout monocyte differentiation ( G). Altogether, our results provide strong support for rs5827412 reducing LRRC25 gene expression levels in monocytes and decreasing monocyte percentage while increasing neutrophil percentage. 
In the ZC2HC1A locus, which is primarily associated with lymphocyte count and percentage (p = 1.9 × 10−84 and 6.3 × 10−58, respectively), a PU.1 motif-altering SNP, rs3808619, is among more than 40 tightly linked (LD r2 ≈ 1) variants ( A, 7B, A and S7B; ). Currently, ZC2HC1A is a functionally uncharacterized gene. Based on a UK Biobank fine-mapping study, 44 variants comprise the 95% credible set at this locus, and none has a PIP greater than 0.1 ( C). From statistical fine-mapping alone, one would not be able to pinpoint the causal variant. However, we found that rs3808619 is the only PU.1 motif-altering variant found within the associated PU.1 binding site at the ZC2HC1A promoter. rs3808619 increases the strength of a PU.1 motif, resulting in a higher-affinity DNA binding site ( A). Of multiple variants in this locus that were in high LD with rs3808619 and were tested for reporter activity (59 variants in Abell et al. and 30 variants in Tewhey et al. ), only rs3808619 showed significantly increased reporter activity (negative binomial regression p = 5.7 × 10−5 and two-sided t test p = 0.006, respectively) that is concordant in direction with that of the variant’s associations with elevated chromatin accessibility, active histone mark levels, and ZC2HC1A expression in LCLs , , ( D–7F). Finally, similar to the previous example, we detected significantly reduced chromatin accessibility levels at the ZC2HC1A promoter in SPI1 knockout cell lines (DESeq2-adjusted p = 1.76 × 10−13), supporting the likely role of PU.1 at this promoter ( G). rs3808619 is also associated with multiple sclerosis (p = 1.1 × 10−9; C and S7D), suggesting that it plays a multifactorial role in immune-mediated diseases. Our results suggest that a direct consequence of rs3808619, which is associated with a lower lymphocyte count, is likely ZC2HC1A upregulation ( ). 

## Discussion
Our results with PU.1 binding and blood cell trait GWAS data demonstrate the utility of TF bQTL data in identifying which of many variants in LD are the likely causal regulatory variants underlying GWAS trait associations. If a TF bQTL signal shows significant colocalization with a GWAS signal, and if there is a motif-altering variant for that TF in the binding site, then that variant is likely to be the causal variant for both associations. Incorporating PU.1 bQTLs in our colocalization analysis conferred two key advantages: (1) identification of trait-associated regulatory elements, in which PU.1 binding is altered, and (2) identification of putatively causal PU.1 motif-altering variants. Together, they highlight a likely transcriptional regulatory mechanism underlying the trait association. In contrast, alternative approaches to narrow down variants in accessible chromatin and search for altered motifs often do not show the same level of precision. Moreover, eQTL colocalization cannot assist fine-mapping in this way because there is no prior expectation that a specific noncoding region regulates the associated gene and that a regulatory variant alters a certain TF binding site motif. TF bQTLs offer a unique opportunity in this aspect.
For instance, in the ZNF608 locus, pinpointing the putative causal variant and associated regulatory element would have been difficult without PU.1 bQTLs. The lead eQTL signal for ZNF608 in LCLs did not colocalize with the lymphocyte count association ( ). Such a situation may partially explain the observation that many significant eQTL signals failed to colocalize with the GWAS associations using existing colocalization methods. However, this locus was the only such example in our study. Nevertheless, this example motivates applying TF bQTL colocalization to isolate independent eQTL signals and generating eQTL data in trait-relevant cell types. Moreover, applying colocalization methods that allow multiple causal variants to eQTLs would be useful when accurate LD matrices or individual genotypes are available for both traits, which is often not the case for GWAS data.
Despite finding several examples of PU.1 motif-altering variants driving a change in gene expression level, only 10 of 51 such loci showed eQTL signals in LCLs. This observation is not unlike reports showing that, although GWAS loci are enriched in eQTL signals, only a small subset of GWAS loci shows colocalization with eQTLs. , , Nevertheless, most PU.1 motif-altering variants that colocalized with blood cell trait associations showed effects on allelic imbalance in PU.1 ChIP-seq, on chromatin accessibility, and on histone marks ( ). These variants are likely to be true functional regulatory variants, so it is mysterious that eQTL effects are not detected in the same cell type (i.e., LCLs). A possible explanation is that, even though the variants alter PU.1 binding in LCLs, their effects on gene expression are manifested in a different cell type, such as progenitor cell types during hematopoiesis, or under particular environmental conditions. Uncovering other possible reasons for the lack of eQTL signals at those loci is crucial for understanding how the different layers of gene regulation affect complex traits.
A prior study that performed colocalization analysis of neutrophils' PU.1 bQTLs and immune disease GWASs found that a minority (<50%) of colocalized variants altered PU.1 motifs. In contrast, we found that the majority (87%) of the colocalized blood cell trait GWAS loci had a variant that altered a PU.1 motif ( C). This is an enrichment over just 34% of all LCLs’ PU.1 bQTLs, colocalized or not, harboring a PU.1 motif-altering variant ( C). The increased proportion of PU.1 motif-altering variants present in this study may be due to PU.1’s central role in blood cell traits and highlights the increased likelihood that PU.1 binding is mediating the genetic effects on blood cell traits.
We observed that only a minority of the tested GWAS loci (69 of 367) showed significant colocalization. This is not surprising because we selected candidate loci solely based on the marginal association with PU.1 binding and blood cell traits without filtering for high LD between the two lead variants to “cast a wide net” for discovery. This observation is a testament to the importance of performing colocalization analysis to distinguish loci with a single causal variant for the two phenotypes (here, PU.1 binding and a particular blood cell trait) from those with distinct tagging variants responsible for the individual phenotypes. Furthermore, even though PU.1 bQTLs were enriched for blood cell trait association ( A), they explained only a subset of all associated loci, likely indicating that other TFs are mediating genetic effects at other associated loci.
We offer guidelines for broad application of colocalization analysis with TF bQTLs. First, high-quality ChIP-grade antibodies or, alternatively, cell lines in which the TF has been epitope tagged are essential. Second, TFs for bQTL analysis, as well as the cell type for the ChIP experiments, must be selected to be relevant to the trait or disease of interest. The feasibility of our analysis relied on the importance of PU.1, a known hematopoietic master regulator, and LCLs, a model of mature B cells, for specific blood cell traits, such as lymphocyte count and monocyte count. Because generating TF ChIP-seq data across multiple genotyped samples can be cumbersome, selecting the trait-relevant TF and cell type is critical. Future studies will need to validate the regulatory functions of the variants in the relevant primary cell types.
Future studies could use TF bQTL data in colocalization analysis to elucidate the ever-increasing number of trait-associated loci. When TFs important for a trait are known, TF bQTLs identified in the relevant cell type(s) could mediate a subset of trait associations, shedding light on putative causal variants as well as the pathogenic mechanisms. Such colocalization analysis with TF bQTL data uniquely provides a path to pinpointing causal regulatory elements and variants and, thus, a smaller set of mechanistic hypotheses to test experimentally to verify the underlying causes of the disease.

## Limitations of the study
The power of statistical tests, including QTL analysis (i.e., linear regression) and colocalization analysis, depends on the sample size of the data. In this proof-of-concept study, in which we analyzed PU.1 ChIP-seq data from 49 samples, we detected 1,497 significant PU.1 bQTLs and 69 robustly colocalized loci across blood cell traits. However, we anticipate that a larger sample size could increase the power to detect more loci with weaker but significant bQTL and colocalization signals. Moreover, colocalization and genetic association are not, in themselves, tests of causality. We incorporated colocalization and PU.1 motif analyses to identify strong candidates for causal variants and their molecular mechanisms at blood cell trait-associated loci. For two examples, we were able to show that MPRA studies measured the significant regulatory effects of the identified variants in an episomal context ( and ). However, whether the associated regulatory effects of these variants cause downstream changes in blood cell traits needs to be validated with a genetic perturbation experiment that models blood cell traits.

## STAR★Methods

## Key resources table

 

## Resource availability

## Lead contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Martha L. Bulyk (mlbulyk@genetics.med.harvard.edu).

## Materials availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.

## Method details

## PU.1 ChIP-seq data processing
We downloaded PU.1 ChIP-seq fastq files from EMBL-EBI ArrayExpress under accession “ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-3657” (n = 45) and “ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-1884” (n = 4). The list of samples is provided in . We mapped the reads to the hg19 reference genome supplemented with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome using Bowtie 2. In order to eliminate reference allele bias in read mapping, we applied WASP to filter reads that mapped to a different position when variants were added, and used GSNAP, which is an SNP-tolerant read alignment method, to remap filtered out reads.
PU.1 ChIP-seq peaks were called using model-based analysis of ChIP-seq version 2 (MACS2). For equal representation, we subsampled 5 million reads from each sample and performed peak calling on the aggregate alignment file. To account for the size of the merged read set, we downloaded 8 available control ChIP-seq samples in GM12878 from ENCODE (File IDs: ENCFF032WUR, ENCFF426WJH, ENCFF508HCX, ENCFF537DAJ, ENCFF812HUT, ENCFF837IOW, ENCFF849LYY, ENCFF892TNJ) for peak calling. To define 200-bp sequences occupied by PU.1, we took the summits and extended them by 100 bp in each direction. In total, there were 78,720 peaks.

## PU.1 binding quantitative trait loci
First, we quantified the PU.1 binding levels at identified occupancy sites. We counted the number of reads overlapping each 200-bp peak using featureCounts. For each sample, the read counts were normalized for library size using trimmed mean of M-values so that the values are comparable across the samples. Then, the phenotype values were further normalized to follow a standard normal distribution across the samples, using quantile normalization, similar to the GTEx protocol. Finally, in order to eliminate the effect of variables, such as batch, gender, and ancestry, we used PEER to residualize the phenotype values, correcting for batch (i.e., which publication), sex, and 3 genotype principal components, as well as 10 PEER factors.
Second, we obtained the genotypes of the LCL samples from the 1000 Genomes Project data. 4 out of 49 samples only had microarray genotype data from Illumina Omni2.5 chips, and these genotypes were phased and imputed using the European samples of the 1000 Genomes project phase 3 data on the Michigan Imputation Server. Genotypes of all samples were converted to biallelic form and aggregated. Afterward, variants with minor allele frequency less than 5% were removed from the PU.1 binding quantitative trait loci analysis.
Finally, we tested for genetic associations to PU.1 binding levels using the phenotype matrix and the genotype data. We utilized QTLtools to approximate linear regression efficiently while also correcting for multiple hypotheses tested with permutations and false discovery rate estimation. For each PU.1 occupancy site, variants within 100 kb were included in the QTL analysis. In the end, there were 1,497 significant PU.1 bQTLs at FDR <5%.

## UK Biobank blood cell trait GWAS summary statistics
We downloaded 28 blood cell trait GWAS summary statistics from UK Biobank for the colocalization analysis. The authors performed a linear mixed model-based regression analysis on 452,264 White British individuals using rank-normalized phenotypes. The 28 blood cell traits are listed in . One limitation of these summary statistics is that the authors used the Haplotype Reference Consortium imputation panel, which only included SNPs by design, for imputation ( ). Thus, short deletions like rs5827412 were missing in these summary statistics. For , we verified that the variant is associated with decreased monocyte percentage and increased neutrophil percentage in summary statistics from another analysis of the UK Biobank data, and utilized these data for visualization.

## Fold enrichment of GWAS signal in PU.1 bQTLs
We first generated 250 sets of null variants matched with the significant PU.1 bQTL lead variants for allele frequency, number of tagging SNPs (LD r2 > 0.5), and distance to the closest transcription start site (TSS), using SNPsnap. 250 sets of null variants were successfully generated for 1,292 of the PU.1 bQTL lead variants, so we restricted the downstream analysis within them. Using the distribution of number of variants tagging (r2 > 0.8) trait-associated lead variants as the background, we computed the fold enrichment of the number of PU.1 bQTLs tagging those variants. The empirical p values are derived for each blood cell trait by counting how many sets had SNPs tagging (r2 > 0.8) trait-associated variants more than or equal to the number of PU.1 bQTLs tagging them and dividing by 251. The p values were adjusted using qvalue package in R. For non-blood traits, lead SNPs from GWAS of type 2 diabetes and height were used.

## Position weight matrix and gkm-SVM PU.1 motif models
To initially scan for the position of PU.1 motif sequences within occupancy sites, we used PWMScan. With a PU.1 (SPI1) motif position weight matrix (PWM) selected within the tool (CISBP: M6119_1) we scanned for the motif (p < 10−5) within PU.1 occupancy sites, which resulted in a total of 30,812 instances. To determine the relative location of PU.1 motifs within the PU.1 occupancy sites, we subtracted the start or end position of the motif from the center position of the 200-bp PU.1 peak, depending on the strand ( A).
Afterward, we trained a PU.1 motif model using gkm-SVM, as a more sophisticated counterpart to PWM. We used the 200-bp sequences detected to be PU.1 occupancy sites for positive sequences in the training set. We left out PU.1 occupancy sites with a variant overlapping PU.1 motifs identified using PWMs (i.e., one of the alleles with log likelihood score >8) from the training set so that the model effectively captures the motif sequences and excludes potentially causal PU.1 bQTLs. We generated negative sequences using the ‘genNullSeqs’ function in the gkmSVM R package. Then, we trained the model using default parameters with LS-GKM, which is a faster implementation from the developers. Throughout the study, we defined PU.1 motif-altering variants as those where one of the alleles shows a gkm-SVM score greater than 0 for a 30-bp sequence centered at the variant, and the variant induces a non-zero change.

## Colocalization analysis using JLIM and Coloc
We selected 1,621 PU.1-trait pairs at loci where the significant PU.1 bQTLs also show at least one blood cell trait association at p < 10−6 to perform colocalization. For JLIM, , we used the default parameters. p values were derived by permuting the PU.1 binding level matrix. For Coloc, we used the prior parameters p1 = 10−4, p2 = 10−4, and p12 = 10−6, which is more conservative than the default, and ran Coloc on the summary statistics. For both analyses, we considered variants within a 200-kb window around the GWAS lead variant. We used a significance threshold of p < 0.01172 (FDR <5%) for JLIM and posterior probability of colocalization (PP(Colocalization)) > 0.5. The FDR cutoff for JLIM was determined by the equation:FDR(pcutoff)=pcutoffN#{PJLIM≤pcutoff},where pcutoff is the p value cutoff, N is the number of PU.1-trait loci tested, and PJLIM is the JLIM p value.

## Chromatin accessibility, histone mark, and expression QTLs in LCLs
ATAC-seq (n = 100), histone mark ChIP-seq (n = 15813 and n = 234, respectively), and RNA-seq (n = 373) data were downloaded from European Nucleotide Archive ("ENA: ERP110508"), EMBL-EBI ArrayExpress ("ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-3657" and "ArrayExpress: E-GEUV-1"), respectively. ATAC-seq data were only available as bam files, so we used bamtofastq command from bedtools to extract reads. We processed ATAC-seq and histone mark ChIP-seq read data similarly to PU.1 ChIP-seq data (i.e., alignment, duplicate removal, peak calling, quantification, and then probabilistic estimation of expression residuals [PEER] normalization). The processed gene expression matrix derived from RNA-seq was downloaded directly.
We obtained the genotypes of the LCL samples from the 1000 Genomes Project data. We imputed 9 out of 100, 9 out of 160, and 15 out of 373 samples, respectively, from available microarray data to the 1000 Genomes Project phase 3 data on the Michigan Imputation Server. Common variants (MAF >5%) from the merged genotypes and the prepared phenotype matrices were used to test genetic associations to the corresponding molecular phenotypes with QTLtools. 
We counted the number of significant chromatin accessibility QTLs (caQTLs) and histone QTLs (hQTLs) that are in LD (r2 > 0.8) with PU.1 motif-altering variants. Since PU.1 binding alteration would affect chromatin that it binds, we considered only those ATAC-seq and ChIP-seq peaks that overlapped the corresponding PU.1 ChIP-seq peak. LD between the lead variants was determined using the genotypes of 373 European samples with gene expression data.
To count how many eQTL signals are in LD with colocalized PU.1 motif-altering variants, we searched not only for primary eQTL signals but also for secondary eQTL signals by conditioning on the primary lead variants. For fine-mapping the ZNF608 locus, as in D, we applied SuSiE using default parameters and the genotype matrix of variants within 1 Mb of the gene’s transcriptional start site. This same fine-mapping approach was used to search for other examples of colocalized PU.1 motif-altering variants with multiple eQTL signals where only one colocalizes with the GWAS signal.

## Searching for accessible variants in GWAS credible sets and their TF motif alterations
We first ascertained 25 PU.1 bQTL colocalized GWAS loci that had a credible set provided in a published blood cell trait GWAS fine-mapping study. Chromatin accessibility annotation was derived from the 100 LCL ATAC-seq samples mentioned above. We scanned the ascertained credible set variants for those in accessible chromatin using bedtools. Then, we searched for which TFs’ motifs were altered by these variants, using motifbreakR. We considered all 2,817 human TF motifs collected in the tool’s dataset “motifbreakR_motif”. The dataset includes multiple versions of some TFs’ motifs because the PWMs were collected from multiple sources. We used “filterp = TRUE” option with threshold of p = 5 × 10−4. The PWM scoring method was set to “ic”. Since there can be redundant occurrences of motif alterations for the same TF across the PWM databases, we considered the number of unique TFs. Lastly, to filter the motifs for those corresponding to TFs expressed in LCLs, we considered TFs with median gene expression TPM >1 across 373 LCL samples. 

## QTL analysis for rs74267027 missing in 1000 Genomes phase 3 data
PU1_67321 (chr17:16,171,568-16,171,767) significantly colocalized with blood cell traits – lymphocyte percentage, neutrophil percentage, neutrophil count, and white blood cell count (JLIM p = 5 × 10−5, 5 × 10−5, 5 × 10−5, and 6 × 10−5, respectively, and Coloc PP(Colocalization) = 0.85, 0.85, 0.82, and 0.71, respectively). Initially with 1000 Genomes project phase 3 data, there was no PU.1 motif-altering variant. However, with closer inspection, a short deletion rs74267027 that alters a PU.1 binding motif at this site was present in the recently published high-coverage genotype data ( ). Therefore, we used the genotype information in the high-coverage genotype data to estimate its QTL effect for PU.1 binding, chromatin accessibility and histone mark levels.

## PU.1 ChIP-seq allelic imbalance effects of PU.1 motif-altering variants
We analyzed PU.1 ChIP-seq data across 49 individuals to estimate the effect of prioritized variants on allele-specific PU.1 binding. First, we counted the number of PU.1 ChIP-seq reads containing the reference or the alternate allele using createASVCF.sh script from the robust allele-specific quantification and quality control (RASQUAL) package . For 44 PU.1 motif-altering SNPs that colocalized with blood cell traits association, we identified heterozygous individuals and determined the log2 allelic fold change between the two haplotypes within each sample. In order to account for samples with no reads containing either allele, we added a pseudocount of 0.5 to both the denominator and the numerator. Consider an individual with the genotype “1|0”, where 0 and 1 are reference and alternate alleles, respectively. Haplotype 1 reads would contain the alternate allele, while haplotype 2 reads would contain the reference allele. Then,log2allelicfoldchange=log2(num_readshap1+0.5num_readshap2+0.5).
Next, we followed the allelic imbalance model presented by Liang and colleagues to estimate the variant effect on allelic imbalance across individuals. The only difference from that model is the pseudocount of 0.5 that we added to the number of reads from each haplotype. Individuals with “1|0” and “0|1” genotypes will be encoded as “1” and “-1”, respectively. We performed weighted linear regression where the weights were(num_readshap1+0.5)×(num_readshap2+0.5)(num_readshap1+0.5)+(num_readshap2+0.5)to estimate the variant’s effect on allelic imbalance. This weighting scheme effectively puts more weight on samples with a higher number of reads.

## Chromatin accessibility and gene expression levels across blood cell types
ATAC-seq and RNA-seq data from multiple blood cell types throughout hematopoiesis were downloaded from GEO series GSE74912 and GSE74246, respectively. We aligned ATAC-seq read data to the hg19 reference genome, and merged data from each cell type for visualization. The genome tracks in G were generated with fold enrichment over average genome coverage to account for library size differences. We downloaded the count matrix for RNA-seq and converted them to counts per million for comparison across cell types.

## MPRA data analysis
We downloaded MPRA analysis tables from the two studies. , We extracted statistics for rs5827412 and rs3808619, which were the only two putative causal PU.1 motif-altering variants at colocalized loci with MPRA data. For rs3808619, we also extracted the statistics for the other 29 and 58 variants tagging rs3808619 from Tewhey et al. and Abell et al., respectively. From Tewhey et al. data, we referred to the combined LCL analysis statistics, and from Abell et al. data, we referred to the allele effect statistics to measure the regulatory effects of variants.

## Differential accessibility analysis in SPI1 knockout RS4; 11 lines
ATAC-seq data from wild type and SPI1 knockout RS4; 11 cell lines were downloaded from EMBL-EBI ArrayExpress under accession “ArrayExpress: E-MTAB-8676”. We aligned the reads using Bowtie2 and removed duplicate alignments using scripts from WASP. Then, we pooled the three replicates per genotype to call accessible regions using MACS2 with q < 0.05 cutoff, and the two sets of accessible regions were merged using bedtools. After counting the number of reads from each region using featureCount, we tested for differential accessibility using DESeq2. PU.1 ChIP-seq and input DNA data from unstimulated RS4; 11 cell lines were downloaded from GEO series GSE71616. After alignment using Bowtie2 and duplicate removal, we called peaks using MACS2. Accessible regions were stratified by whether they intersect identified PU.1 occupancy sites. The significance of observing reduced accessibility in SPI1 knockout lines was tested using a chi square test.

## Quantification and statistical analysis
Details of the statistical analyses are described in the relevant sections of the or in the figure legends.

 

## Supplemental information

## Document S1. Figures S1–S7, Tables S1 and S3, and Notes S1–S3

## Table S2. PU.1 motif-altering SNPs at PU.1 bQTLs, related to Figure 1

## Table S4. JLIM and Coloc colocalization result, related to Figure 2
GWAS statistics are based on Canela-Xandri et al. [S8].

## Table S5. PU.1 motif alteration by single variants at colocalized loci, related to Figure 2

## Table S6. PU.1 motif alteration by multiple variants at colocalized loci, related to Figure 2

## Table S7. Positions of PU.1 motif-altering SNPs, related to Figure 2

## Table S8. Credible set size of PU.1 motif-altering variants, related to Figure 2
GWAS statistics and fine-mapping results are from Vuckovic et al. [S7].

## Table S9. TF motif analysis on credible set variants in accessible chromatin, related to Figure 2
Only single nucleotide polymorphisms were included in the analysis. Each locus is defined by blood cell trait and a colocalized PU.1 bQTL.

## Table S10. caQTL signal at colocalized PU.1 motif-altering variants, related to Figure 4

## Table S11. H3K27ac hQTL signal at colocalized PU.1 motif-altering variants, related to Figure 4

## Table S12. H3K4me1 hQTL signal at colocalized PU.1 motif-altering variants, related to Figure 4

## Table S13. PU.1 ChIP-seq allelic imbalance of colocalized PU.1 motif-altering SNPs, related to Figure 4

## Table S14. PU.1 motif-altering variants in LD with eQTLs, related to Figure 4
Rank is based on conditional analysis.

## Document S2. Article plus supplemental information

## Data and code availability
Code and processed data for performing colocalization analysis in this study are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7837982. Code and processed data for generating the figures are available at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7837894. All other data used in the analysis are publicly available and listed in the .

## Acknowledgments
We thank all members of the Bulyk lab and members of the Raychaudhuri lab including, but not limited to, Soumya Raychaudhuri, Kazuyoshi Ishigaki, Saori Sakaue, Tiffany Amariuta, Yang Luo, and Samira Asgari for valuable feedback. We thank Vijay Sankaran, Shamil Sunyaev, and Alexander Gusev for helpful discussions throughout the work. We also thank Shubham Khetan, Shamil Sunyaev, and Soumya Raychaudhuri for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was funded by a grant from the 10.13039/100005292Brigham and Women's Hospital's Fund to Sustain Research Excellence and 10.13039/100000002NIH grant R01 HG010501.

## Author contributions
R.J. and M.L.B. conceived and designed the research project. R.J. performed all analyses and prepared the figures. M.L.B. supervised the research. R.J. and M.L.B. wrote the manuscript.

## Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Inclusion and diversity
We support inclusive, diverse, and equitable conduct of research.

Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100327.