pmcCancer Cell IntCancer Cell Int96cancellCancer Cell International1475-2867BMCPMC12870383PMC12870383.112870383128703834146628510.1186/s12935-025-04150-w41501ReviewThe role of m6A modification in non-small cell lung cancer: functional insights and impact on therapy resistance
YangYufei ]. Co-transcriptional regulation relies on dynamic and reversible mechanisms, including “writers” (m6A methyltransferases), “erasers” (demethylases) and “readers” (proteins bind to m6A) [ , ].
Approximately 85% of lung cancers (LC) are classified as non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), which includes adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and giant cell carcinoma [ , ]. Surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, and targeted therapy are all viable treatment options for NSCLC. However, due to the high prevalence of drug resistance and metastatic progression, patient survival rates remain dismal [ ]. Drug resistance in NSCLC may involve genetic alterations in tumor cells, restructuring of signaling systems, and shifts in the tumor microenvironment (TME), among other factors. The interactions and effects of these mechanisms may enhance the diversity and complexity of drug resistance.
There is a strong correlation between m6A methylation and various cancers, particularly NSCLC. The dynamic features of m6A modifications render them appealing targets for innovative therapeutic approaches. This study aimed to elucidate the intricate relationship among m6A expression, NSCLC progression, and drug resistance by integrating molecular, cellular, and clinical approaches. This study aimed to elucidate the potential mechanisms by which m6A modifications affect NSCLC tumorigenesis, disease progression, and drug resistance, with the ultimate goal of identifying novel therapeutic targets that may enhance efficacy, improve drug resistance, and improve patient prognosis.

## Functional regulation and underlying mechanisms of m6A in NSCLC
This chapter explored the complex context-dependent roles of m6A modifications in the regulation of gene expression and signal transduction pathways in NSCLC. Several studies have demonstrated that alterations in the m6A protein can either promote or suppress malignant phenotypes, highlighting its dual function as an oncogene and tumor suppressor, depending on the context in which it is expressed (Fig.  ; Table  ). A balanced understanding of this duality is crucial to harnessing the potential of m6A in precision medicine for the treatment of NSCLC.

## Classification and core functions of m6A regulators
Three types of regulators work together to control the changing landscape of m6A modifications in NSCLC: “writers,” “erasers,” and “readers.” The writers, which include the core methyltransferase complex made up of methyltransferase-like 3 (METTL3), methyltransferase-like 14 (METTL14), and Wilms’ tumor 1-associated protein (WTAP), as well as other components such as vir like m6a methyltransferase-associated (VIRMA), methyltransferase-like 7 A/B (METTL7A/B), RNA binding motif protein 15 (RBM15), and zinc finger CCCH-type containing 13 (ZC3H13), catalyze m6A deposition on specific RNA substrates through coordinated recognition of consensus motifs. The erasers, including AlkB homolog 5 (ALKBH5), fat mass, and obesity-associated protein (FTO), function as demethylases that dynamically remove m6A marks to fine-tune the fate of RNA. The readers, including cytoplasmic YT521-B homology-domain family proteins (YTHDF1/2/3), nuclear YTH domain-containing proteins (YTHDC1/2), Insulin-like growth factor II mRNA-binding proteins 1/2/3 (IGF2BP1/2/3), and members of the heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (HNRNP) family such as HNRNPA2B1 and HNRNPC, decode m6A modifications to direct transcript-specific outcomes.

## Writer

## VIRMA
VIRMA, also known as KIAA1429, directs methyltransferase components to designated RNA regions. VIRMA downregulation inhibits proliferation, migration, and invasion in lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) cells. It transcriptionally regulates genes involved in cell migration and proliferation, such as death-associated protein kinase 3 (DAPK3) and BTG anti-proliferation factor 2 (BTG2) in an m6A-dependent manner to produce LUAD [ , ]. By increasing TRERNA1 stability via m6A modification, VIRMA epigenetically silences HOXA6 expression by recruiting EZH2 [ ]. VIRMA promotes NSCLC progression by inhibiting p53 signaling and ferroptosis. Utilizing the p53 inhibitor pifithrin-µ has been demonstrated to hinder VIRMA’s capacity to enhance tumor cell growth [ ]. Through the PI3K/AKT pathway, VIRMA enhances the stability and expression of ARHGAP30, influencing NSCLC cell proliferation and metastasis [ ].

## METTL3-METTL14 writer complex
The METTL3–METTL14 heterodimer constitutes the core catalytic module of the mammalian m6A methyltransferase complex. METTL3 is the first methyltransferase and the core methyltransferase subunit involved in catalyzing m6A modification [ ]. METTL14 is critical for substrate recognition by METTL3. A stable heterodimeric complex is established through the specific interactions between the two proteins. M6A is correctly positioned on nuclear RNA through this complex, which considerably improves catalytic efficiency [ ].
NSCLC progression is affected by the interaction between METTL3 and lncRNAs. The expression of METTL3 was found to enhance the stabilization of PHKA1 and facilitate NSCLC progression by preventing the ubiquitylated degradation of actinin alpha 4 (ACTN4) [ ]. The positive effect of DGUOK-AS1 on METTL3/IGF2BP2 in NSCLC leads to enhanced stability of transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily M member 7 (TRPM7) mRNA [ ]. Negative prognosis was associated with METTL3-mediated ABHD11-AS1 transcription. The Warburg effect and proliferation of NSCLC are enhanced by ABHD11-AS1 [ ]. METTL3 stabilizes and upregulates the oncogenic lncRNA SCIRT through m6A modification, which promotes NSCLC progression by binding to the RNA-binding protein SFPQ in the nucleus to regulate transcription [ ].
METTL3 is also involved in the development and progression of NSCLC through its interactions with other molecules and downstream targets. METTL3 activation by the transcription factor c-MYC elevates LINC01006 levels and facilitates NSCLC progression [ ]. NFIC is an NSCLC tumor suppressor that forms a complex regulatory network by directly binding to METTL3, which subsequently regulates lysine acetyltransferase 2 A (KAT2A) expression through m6A methylation [ ]. METTL3 stabilizes splicing factor 3b subunit 4 (SF3B4) mRNA through m6A alterations, and further SF3B4-LSM4 interactions promote NSCLC cell proliferation, metastasis, and stemness [ ]. VGF expression in LUAD is synergistically controlled by METTL3-mediated m6A and histone modifications (SETD2), revealing novel therapeutic vulnerabilities [ ]. METTL3 also regulates a variety of other downstream targets through m6A modification, such as Cytochrome P450 Family 19 Subfamily A Member 1(CYP19A1) [ ], Secreted Frizzled Related Protein 2(SFRP2) [ ], SRSF Protein Kinase 1(SRPK1) [ ], EMAP Like 4(EML4) [ ], and solute carrier family 7 member 11 (SLC7A11) [ ].
Studies have shown that METTL3 in exosomes derived from cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) plays multiple roles in NSCLC progression, including tumor proliferation, invasion, and immunosuppression. A study indicates that the CAF-METTL3-Rac family small GTPase 3 (RAC3) m6A modification-dependent regulatory system via the AKT/NF-κB pathway facilitates metastasis in NSCLC [ ].
Under specific conditions, METTL3 has been shown to have an anti-cancer effect, although most studies have pointed to its oncogenic role in NSCLC. For example, METTL3 increases the expression of F-box and WD repeat domain-containing 7 (FBXW7), thereby promoting its tumor-suppressive functions [ ]. RNA binding motif protein 10 (RBM10) recruits METTL3, which decreases metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1(MALAT1) expression and stability, suppressing the invasion and migration of NSCLC via the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway [ ]. These results suggest that METTL3’s involvement in NSCLC may be complex and requires additional investigation for a thorough understanding.
Differentiation and M stage were associated with elevated METTL14 expression in NSCLC [ ]. In NSCLC, METTL14 deletion reduces cell viability and promotes ferroptosis. METTL14 modifies GPX4, enhances its mRNA stability mediated by IGF2BP2, and increases its expression [ ]. METTL14 also modulates glycolytic activity in LUAD cells by post-transcriptionally upregulating glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) expression via m6A-IGF2BP2, thereby stabilizing G6PD mRNA [ ]. METTL14 also catalyzes the methylation of non-coding RNAs. Through METTL14-mediated m6A modification of KCTD21-AS1, TIPRL expression is regulated by miR-519d-5p as a ceRNA, leading to the enhanced proliferation of NSCLC cells [ ]. H3K36me3 guides co-transcriptional m6A deposition via direct recruitment of METTL14, coupling histone modification with RNA methylation in gene regulation [ ].​ By reducing the m6A modification of EBI3 transcripts, METTL14 deficiency in tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) contributes to CD8 + T cell dysfunction and tumor progression [ ].

## METTL7A/B
METTL7A and METTL7B are methyltransferases that facilitate the addition of methyl groups to S-adenosyl-L-methionine-containing receptor substrates. Although both enzymes play a role in NSCLC, their individual roles show both similarities and differences. METTL7A’s mechanism of action in NSCLC remains unknown. In contrast, most NSCLC tissues overexpress METTL7B, which is associated with poor prognosis. METTL7B positively regulates Cyclin D1, cancer cell growth, and the cell cycle [ ].

## RBM15
RBM15 is an essential regulator of m6A RNA methylation that binds to target RNAs and recruits WMM complexes [ ]. In patients with LUAD, RBM15 expression is upregulated and associated with unfavorable survival outcomes. RBM15 increases LUAD progression via m6A demethylation. RBM15 knockdown reduces methylation levels, decreases proliferation, increases apoptosis, and suppresses tumor growth [ ]. RBM15-mediated m6A modification inhibits RASSF8 levels. These findings emphasize the need to understand the complex interactions between RBM15 and its target RNAs in LUAD [ ].

## WTAP
WTAP co-assembles with METTL3 and METTL14 through interactions with a protein complex with specific functions. A positive interaction between METTL3 and METTL14 improves the localization and penetration of the heterodimer, making METTL3–METTL14 more biologically active. Specifically, deletion of WTAP from METTL3 or METTL14 greatly reduces the RNA-binding effectiveness of the methyltransferase complex, interfering with its biological activity [ ].
Exposure to PM2.5 exposure significantly increases the expression of piR-27,222. In addition to deubiquitinating and stabilizing Parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (PARK2), PiR-27,222 directly binds to eIF4B, reducing its interaction with PARK2. It also alters the EIF4B/WTAP/m6A regulatory axis and suppresses cell panoptosis [ ]. In LUAD tissues and cells, circEEF2 is highly expressed. A WTAP-mediated change in circEEF2 recruits IGF2BP2 to stabilize calcium activated nucleotidase 1(CANT1), which promotes LUAD development and progression [ ].

## ZC3H13
ZC3H13 links WTAP to Nito, which regulates mRNA processing, stability, and translation. A comprehensive study analyzing m6A effector variants at the genomic level revealed that of 567 LUAD samples, 150 had at least one mutation in the m6A effector. Notably, ZC3H13 had the highest mutation frequency, accounting for 4% of cases [ ]. Overexpression of ZC3H13 has a significant impact on cancer cell behavior. Specifically, it has been shown that by inhibiting m6A modification of ZC3H13, arsenic trioxide promotes tumor cell ferroptosis and inhibits tumor stem cell differentiation [ ].

## Eraser

## ALKBH5
ALKBH5 was the second m6A demethylase to be identified, and it reduces m6A content in nuclear speckles, thereby affecting mRNA export and RNA metabolism [ ].
Several studies have shown that ALKBH5 promotes NSCLC malignancy. It impairs proliferation and increases apoptosis in NSCLC cells, and its upregulation is positively correlated with angiogenesis, PD-L1 expression, and immunotherapy response. ALKBH5-mediated m6A modification promotes NSCLC progression via JAK2/p-STAT3 activation [ ]. ALKBH5 increases CALML3-AS1 stability, whereas YTH N6-methyladenosine RNA binding protein C2 (YTHDC2) weakens it. Epigenetic inhibition inhibits butyrophilin like 9 (BTNL9) expression, which drives NSCLC progression [ ]. In a m6A-dependent manner, enolase 1 (ENO1) stimulates glycolysis and cancer. Methylation at 359 A improved ENO1 mRNA binding to the m6A reader YTHDF1. There was a positive relationship between ENO1 and METTL3, and a negative relationship between ENO1 and ALKBH5 [ ].
However, ALKBH5 interacts with other molecules to suppress NSCLC progression. Metastatic NSCLC results in α-ketoglutarate depletion and decreased ALKBH5 expression and activity due to metabolic reprogramming, specifically branched-chain amino acid catabolism. Deletion of ALKBH5 enhances the proliferation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of brain NSCLC cells by maintaining m6A methylation [ ]. ALKBH5 decreases the m6A modification of YAP mRNA and modulates miR-107/LATS2 through a HuR-dependent mechanism to inhibit NSCLC tumor growth and metastasis [ ]. ALKBH5 silences m6A mutations in NSCLC cells. ALKBH5 inhibits TGF-β-induced EMT and invasion of NSCLC cells by inhibiting YTH N6-methyladenosine RNA binding protein F1/3(YTHDF1/3)-mediated TGFβ-R2 and SMAD3 mRNA stability and preventing SMAD6 mRNA degradation [ ].

## FTO
FTO, located within nuclear speckles, significantly contributes to the demethylation of m6A residues in RNA and is involved in various biological processes in NSCLC [ ].
Under varying conditions, FTO exerts distinct effects on the progression of NSCLC. The expression of FTO in NSCLC samples was significantly lower, preventing the growth and metastasis of NSCLC tumors. Mechanistically, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) mRNA has two unique m6A modification sites in its 3’UTR (5243 A and 5409 A), and FTO decreases their levels [ ]. In contrast, FTO promotes the expression of E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1) and inhibits m6A modification. The FTO/E2F1/Neural EGFL like 2 (NELL2) axis promotes NSCLC progress [ ]. FTO stabilizes PHF1 mRNA by demethylating m6A and preventing YTHDF2 degradation. Increased FOXM1 expression of the FTO/PHF1 axis enhances self-renewal [ ]. Wnt signaling reduces FTO expression by binding EZH2 to β-catenin. FTO expression is inhibited by this protein complex, which interacts with the LEF/TCF-binding site of the FTO promoter. MYC increased the m6A levels when FTO expression was downregulated. The m6A level in MYC mRNA increases translation, glycolysis, tumor cell proliferation, and carcinogenesis [ ].

## Reader

## HNRNPA2B1
HNRNPA2B1, a heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein family RNA-binding protein, recognizes m6A and is overexpressed in several malignancies [ ]. It regulates cancer progression through intricate modulation of RNA metabolism via multiple messenger pathways. HNRNPA2B1 expression increases tumor growth, metastasis, and survival. It is an independent significant factor in determining the prognosis of patients with NSCLC. These findings highlight the significant influence of HNRNPA2B1 on NSCLC aggressiveness [ , ].
HNRNPA2B1 exerts its oncogenic effects by binding to m6A sites on the lncRNA Maternally Expressed 3(MEG3), a long non-coding RNA. This interaction increases MEG3’s m6A level, leading to a decrease in mRNA levels. Blockade of phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)/PI3K-AKT leads to proliferation and invasion of NSCLC cells [ ]. HNRNPA2B1 promotes miR-106b-5p maturation by attaching to its m6A site. SFRP2 is targeted by miR-106b-5p through this relationship, activating the Wnt/β-catenin pathway. LUAD development and cell stemness are boosted as a result of this activation [ ]. LINC01234 recruits HNRNPA2B1 and DGCR8 to facilitate pri-miR-106b processing. HNRNPA2B1 induced cell proliferation and suppressed apoptosis, highlighting its oncogenic properties [ ].

## HNRNPC
HNRNPC predominantly binds to RNA in the nucleus and regulates transcript levels and selective splicing by binding to m6A-modified mRNAs [ ].
HNRNPC regulates cell proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis, which contribute to the poor prognosis of NSCLC [ ]. DLG associated protein 5 (DLGAP5) mRNA may be modified to facilitate NSCLC growth and metastasis [ ]. The lncRNA TBUR1 is overexpressed in LUAD tissues. By binding to the 1–200 nucleotide region of HNRNPC, TBUR1 facilitates EMT and is responsible for LUAD cell migration and invasion [ ]. Increasing XB130 mRNA stability and translation through HNRNPC overexpression promotes NSCLC progression by activating the PI3K/Akt pathway, ultimately promoting cell proliferation and EMT [ ].

## IGF2BP1/2/3
IGF2BPs, including IGF2BP1/2/3, function as m6A “reader” proteins, which recognize and bind to m6A-modified RNAs. These proteins contribute to tumorigenesis and cancer development. IGF2BPs regulate m6A-modified RNA expression by enhancing RNA stability and translational efficiency [ ].

IGF2BP1

IGF2BP1 expression is upregulated. There is a strong association between elevated levels of IGF2BP1 and poor outcomes. LUAD cells are stimulated to proliferate, invade, and migrate by IGF2BP1 while apoptosis is inhibited [ ]. In addition, IGF2BP1 knockdown decreased NSCLC cell motility, EMT, CSC stemness and self-renewal [ ]. The upregulation of transient receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) in NSCLC is associated with poor prognosis. METTL3 binding to IGF2BP1 enhances m6A recognition of TRPV1 mRNA by IGF2BP1, increasing TRPV1 mRNA stability and expression and NSCLC cell growth and metastasis [ ]. NSCLC progression is facilitated by IGF2BP1, which stabilizes SIK2 mRNA through m6A modification [ ]. CircXPO1 may enhance CTNNB1 mRNA stability by binding to IGF2BP1, resulting in LUAD progression [ ].

IGF2BP2

IGF2BP2 expression positively correlates with survival in NSCLC. It is uniquely expressed in LUAD cells (LUAD_IGF2BP2) and endothelial cells (En_IGF2BP2), according to a single-cell atlas comprising 93,610 cells obtained from patients with primary and metastatic LUAD. Exosomes preferentially secrete IGF2BP2 from the LUAD_IGF2BP2 subpopulation during metastasis. Angiogenesis and metastasis are facilitated by IGF2BP2, which modifies the FLT4 RNA via m6A modifications. The LUAD_IGF2BP2 subpopulation serves as a crucial coordinator of these processes and is a potential target for anti-angiogenic therapy [ ]. IGF2BP2 plays a pivotal role in cancer progression via various mechanisms. LCAT1 promotes LC cell proliferation and metastasis by forming a complex with IGF2BP2, which stabilizes CDC6 mRNA in an m6A-dependent manner [ ]. DGUOK-AS1 silencing reduces TRPM7 stability and inhibits NSCLC growth and metastasis via the METTL3/IGF2BP2 axis [ ]. The lncRNA SOX2OT facilitates GLI1 regulation by METTL3/14/IGF2BP2, and pharmacological inhibition of this loop suppresses LC carcinogenesis [ ]. In LUAD, IGF2BP2 assists in the process by which METTL3 directly methylates and stabilizes SRPK1, which promotes LUAD progression by enhancing glycolysis [ ].
CircRNAs also interact with IGF2BP2 during cancer progression. For example, circDHTKD1 is upregulated and stabilized in NSCLC, facilitating the binding of PFKL to IGF2BP2, upregulating PFKL and promoting glucose metabolism [ ]. Inhibition of circPACRGL expression and malignant activity is mediated by trans-3,5,4’-trimethoxystilbene (TMS), which reduces Hippo signaling and M2 polarization through the exosomal circPACRGL/IGF2BP2/YAP1 axis [ ]. CircNDUFB2 expression is downregulated in NSCLC and promotes the anti-tumor immune response through circNDUFB2-RIG-I-MAVS, in addition to inhibiting tumor growth and metastasis through the TRIM25/circNDUFB2-IGF2BPs axis [ ].

IGF2BP3

IGF2BP3 is a key player in multiple cellular processes and is highly expressed in NSCLC tissues. ISL, a compound derived from Chinese herbs, isosideroside (ISL), inhibits the malignant phenotype of NSCLC cells. This process is facilitated by a decrease in m6A modifications and the downregulation of IGF2BP3 in NSCLC. Because IGF2BP3 stabilizes twist family BHLH transcription factor 1 (TWIST1) mRNA, ISL therapy combined with TWIST1 knockdown reduced NSCLC proliferation, migration, and invasion [ ]. Additionally, IGF2BP3 induces the transcription of SLC7A11 and GPX4, iron homeostasis and antioxidant capacity genes, which are closely related to ferroptosis. IGF2BP3 inhibits ferroptosis in NSCLC cells by transcribing these genes [ , ]. IGF2BP3 also recognizes the m6A-modified minichromosome maintenance complex component 5 (MCM5) mRNA, prolonging its stability and upregulating MCM5 protein expression. It inhibits NICD1 deacetylation via SIRT1, stabilizes NICD1 and promotes cellular plasticity. Furthermore, IGF2BP3 stimulates Notch signaling in an m6A-dependent manner, enhancing metastasis and EMT [ ].

## YTHDC1/2

YTHDC1

YTHDC1 regulates aberrant RNA splicing and the tumor suppressor network. Low LINC00641 expression increases ferroptosis sensitivity, suggesting a potential therapeutic target for ferroptosis-related diseases. The nuclear m6A reader YTHDC1 regulates the stability of LINC00641 and affects its expression level in the tumor suppressor network [ ]. MALAT1’s m6A modification preserves nuclear speckle structure and genome-binding sites by attracting YTHDC1 to nuclear speckles, which controls key oncogenes [ ]. YTHDC1-mediated recognition of m6A-modified SFTA1P promotes tumor suppressor function in NSCLC by orchestrating the TGFBR2 and P-TEFb pathways, offering a novel prognostic indicator [ ].

YTHDC2

YTHDC2 is essential for inhibiting tumorigenesis in LC by modulating m6A-modified mRNAs and their subsequent effects. Overexpression of YTHDC2 inhibits NSCLC malignant progression. Through increased YTHDC2 recognition of the “GAACU” site, METTL14 overexpression accelerates LINC02747 mRNA decay and induces m6A methylation [ ]. In NSCLC, CALML3-AS1 deletion decreased NSCLC cell malignancy, tumor development, and liver metastasis. Its stability is increased by ALKBH5 via m6A demethylation and decreased by YTHDC2 [ ]. YTHDC2 inhibits the SLC7A11-dependent antioxidant function to suppress LUAD tumorigenesis. In particular, it accelerates degradation of m6A-modified SLC7A11 mRNA in the 3′–5′ direction [ ]. In addition, YTHDC2 indirectly inhibited SLC3A2 expression by destabilizing Homeobox A13 (HOXA13) mRNA in an m6A-dependent manner. LUAD patients with high levels of SLC7A11, SLC3A2, and HOXA13 have poor clinical outcomes, further emphasizing the importance of YTHDC2 that can be used therapeutically as an endogenous inducer of ferroptosis [ ].

## YTHDF1/2/3
YTHDF family members promote translation initiation and protein synthesis by interacting with initiation factors and ribosomes [ ].

YTHDF1

In patients with KRAS/TP53 mutations, YTHDF1 expression is significantly upregulated. YTHDF1 enhances the translation of cell cycle protein B1 and facilitates tumor proliferation through an m6A-dependent mechanism. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that both YTHDF1 and cell cycle protein B1 levels were elevated in patients harboring KRAS/TP53 mutations, with YTHDF1 correlating with an advanced clinical stage and increased tumor size [ ]. By promoting S100P translation with YTHDF1, RNA-binding protein (RBMS1) accelerates NSCLC lymph node metastasis. RBMS1 depletion or inhibition decreases cancer cell invasion and metastasis. The RBMS1 inhibitor NTP reduced tumor metastasis in mice [ ]. Dual specificity phosphatase 5 (DUSP5) strongly predicts poor prognosis in LUAD and is positively associated with EMT and TGF-β pathways. Through m6A alteration, YTHDF1 enhances DUSP5 expression and promotes LUAD malignancy, EMT, and metastasis [ ].

YTHDF2

YTHDF2 identifies m6A and destabilizes target mRNA transcripts, leading to reduced stability [ ]. YTHDF2 expression was significantly higher in LUAD than in normal tissues. However, YTHDF1 and YTHDF2 were expressed at lower levels in advanced malignancies than in early-stage tumors. NSCLC patients with high YTHDF1 and YTHDF2 expression levels had better prognoses and lower TIL and PD-L1 levels. YTHDF1 and YTHDF2 may be potential prognostic and pharmacological targets [ ]. EMT, cell invasion, migration, and invasion were enhanced when YTHDF2 was knocked down. Further research revealed that YTHDF2 blocks migration and invasion via the FAM83D-TGFβ1-pSMAD2/3 pathway, revealing a potential role in LC metastasis [ ]. The YTHDF2 receptor directly targets AXIN1, spurring LUAD cell proliferation, colony formation, and migration by accelerating AXIN1 mRNA degradation and activating Wnt/β-catenin signaling [ ]. This illustrates that the function of YTHDF2 in NSCLC metastasis is multifaceted and depends on synergistic interactions between several variables. YTHDF2 is capable if impeding metastasis in specific circumstances, while facilitating it in others. This dual function of YTHDF2 is a crucial research focus and provides an enhanced understanding of the complex mechanisms underlying NSCLC. Additionally, YTHDF2 undergoes SUMOylation at K571, a major site where hypoxia promotes SUMOylation. However, oxidative stress and SUMOylation inhibitors diminish SUMOylation, implying that YTHDF2 SUMOylation may regulate its function under stress conditions [ ]. YTHDF2 also interacts with circFUT8 and induces its destabilization when associated with mFUT8. The competitive interaction of circFUT8 with YTHDF2 diminishes its affinity for mFUT8, consequently stabilizing FUT8 mRNA levels and revealing a unique mechanism by which YTHDF2 regulates circRNA and mRNA stability [ ]. PHF1 mRNA was stabilized by FTO demethylation, which prevented its degradation by YTHDF2. Poor prognosis is associated with low FTO and PHF1 expression. FTO inhibition enhances LUAD progression, whereas PHF1 overexpression reverses this effect. Furthermore, the downregulation of the FTO/PHF1 axis stimulates FOXM1 expression and enhances self-renewal. The FTO/PHF1 axis-YTHDF2 connection is important for the development of LUAD, as shown in these findings [ ].

YTHDF3

YTHDF3 regulates m6A-modified RNA stability and translation. YTHDF3 was extensively expressed in NSCLC tissues and independently predicted patient survival. The expression of YTHDF3 diminishes CD8 + T cell anti-tumor effectiveness, intensifying immune evasion in NSCLC [ ].
To understand the dynamics of NSCLC progression, m6A-modifying enzymes have been extensively studied. However, there are several modifying enzymes whose specific roles in NSCLC are yet to be determined. These included METTL5, METTL16, CBLL1, ZCCHC4, ELAVL1, FMR1, HNRNPG, PRRC2A, PRMT5, and LRPPRC. The complexity of the NSCLC regulatory networks mediated by m6A highlights the need for further research. Additionally, studies on these under-researched enzymes may reveal potential therapeutic targets in NSCLC.

 

 

## General mechanisms of drug resistance in NSCLC
Over the past two decades, significant progress has been made in the evaluation and treatment of NSCLC. However, numerous challenges remain, among which drug resistance is the most critical. Understanding the universal mechanisms underlying drug resistance is a prerequisite for developing strategies to overcome resistance.
Anticancer drug resistance is broadly categorized into two types: intrinsic resistance, which refers to pre-existing resistance in tumors prior to initial treatment, and acquired resistance, which develops over time through evolutionary selection and adaptation following successful initial treatment. Mechanisms underlying acquired resistance often involve de novo mutations, epigenetic alterations, and clonal evolution. The development of resistance to various therapies in NSCLC is a complex process governed by diverse biological mechanisms ( ). Moving beyond temporal classification, these mechanisms can be broadly categorized into three key pillars: pharmacokinetic alterations affecting drug availability; tumor cell intrinsic adaptations that promote survival and proliferation; and dynamic interactions with the TME that provide a protective niche [ ]. The following sections describe each of these mechanistic classifications.

## Pharmacokinetic alterations
Pharmacokinetic resistance arises from two primary obstacles: aberrant systemic metabolism and failure of targeted drug delivery. Abnormal systemic metabolism leads to insufficient drug exposure, often owing to patient-specific variations in absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion. Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4)-inducing agents enhance drug clearance by upregulating P-glycoprotein efflux pumps. Therefore, the area under the concentration-time curve falls below the effective therapeutic threshold, compromising sustained inhibition of the target [ ].
There are two main types of failure in targeted drug delivery. First, antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) barriers lead to inefficient target-mediated internalization (e.g., insufficient HER2/EGFR internalization), as well as impaired lysosomal escape or payload release (e.g., pH-dependent cleavage defects), which significantly reduce the cytotoxic effect [ ]. Second, monoclonal antibodies present immunogenicity issues. There is a high induction rate of anti-drug antibodies (ADAs) in the early humanized versions (up to 70%) owing to the presence of residual murine epitopes. Despite subsequent engineering strategies, such as modifying Fc glycosylation (e.g., removing N-linked glycans) and reducing immunogenicity, they cannot completely eliminate the adverse effects of ADA formation on treatment outcomes [ ].

## Cell-intrinsic adaptations
Tumor cells can evade targeted immunotherapy primarily through three mechanisms: target al.teration, signal reprogramming, clonal heterogeneity evolution, and immune escape pathways [ ]. Drug resistance is caused by structural target inactivation resulting from mutations in the kinase domains (such as EGFR T790M and ALK L1196M, which weaken TKI binding) or covalent site mutations (such as EGFR G724S, which induce resistance to osimertinib). Moreover, solvent-front mutations (e.g., EGFR G796X/L718X) aggravate this resistance [ – ]. Furthermore, resistance is closely associated with the activation of bypass signaling pathways. Mutations in KRAS/NRAS can restart the RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, PTEN loss continuously activates the PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway, MET amplification/RET rearrangements compensate for upstream inhibition, and IL-8/APLN upregulation can result in alternative angiogenesis pathways [ – ]. A significant association was found between the accumulation of mutations mediated by extrachromosomal DNA and the development of polyclonal drug resistance. This process accelerates the development of spatial and temporal tumor heterogeneity and exhibits synergistic effects when combined with coexisting mutations within specific genetic contexts. This manifests as co-mutations of TP53/RB1/PIK3CA in EGFR-mutant NSCLCs and CDKN2A/TP53 in ALK-rearranged tumors [ – ]. In addition, phenotypic plasticity contributes to malignant evolution via two key mechanisms: first, by transforming histologically (for example, approximately 3–14% of LUAD is converted to SCLC); and second, by generating drug-tolerant and persistent cells and activating EMT, stem-like adaptive alterations are achieved. The tumor uses two strategies to evade immune clearance under immunotherapy: exploiting antigen presentation defects (including neoantigen loss/masking and HLA-I defects caused by B2M mutations and TAP dysfunction) while actively causing T-cell exhaustion by overexpressing inhibitory receptors (Programmed cell death receptor 1 (PD-1), cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4), lymphocyte activation gene-3 (LAG-3), T cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin domain-3 (TIM-3), and CD39) and promoting terminal differentiation to terminally terminal effector CD8 + T cells (TTE), which lose their proliferative and cytotoxic functions [ – ].

## Microenvironment-mediated protection
The primary barrier to drug resistance is the combination of an immunosuppressive TME and a microenvironment characterized by substantial metabolic waste accumulation. In this context, TAMs, CAFs, and regulatory T cells (Tregs) form a dynamic inhibitory network. Abnormal vasculature and stromal fibrosis impede immune cell infiltration. Tumor cells release toxic byproducts, such as lactate, adenosine, and homovanillic acid, while competing with T cells for nutrients, starving them, and depleting immune cell function.
The TME contributes to tumor resistance by forming immunosuppressive networks, constructing physicochemical barriers, and mediating neuroimmune interactions. Within TME, multiple immunosuppressive cells constitute a dynamically interactive network: CAFs recruit TAMs and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) through the secretion of TGF-β and CXCL12, while also physically obstructing T cell infiltration by increasing extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness [ , ]. TAMs release cathepsin I and IL-10, thereby activating the MAPK/PI3K signaling pathway and promoting tumor survival [ , ]. Adenosine within Tregs suppresses CD8 + T cell immune function through signaling pathways, whereas high intracellular expression of CTLA-4 enhances the inhibitory effects of adenosine [ ]. In addition, MDSCs produce nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species (ROS) that disrupt T-cell mitochondrial function [ ].
Endothelial dysfunction, an abnormal vascular architecture, and stromal fibrosis restrict immune cell infiltration and impede cell migration [ , ]. Glycolysis of T cells is accompanied by the rapid uptake of glucose and glutamine by tumor cells [ , ], whereas the depletion of essential amino acids (tryptophan) inhibits T cell proliferation. The highly immunosuppressive nature of the tumor microenvironment is associated with the accumulation of numerous toxic metabolites. For instance, lactic acid accumulation directly inhibits NK cells and effector T cells [ , ]; adenosine suppresses TCR signaling [ ] and ornithine reduces IFN-γ secretion [ ].
Furthermore, neuroimmune-metabolic cross-regulation plays a crucial role in the TME, and sensory nerve input enhances macrophage anti-inflammatory effects via sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), whereas GABAergic signaling pathways directly suppress T cell cytolytic functions [ , ]. As a result of these multilayered, interconnected mechanisms, TME plays a central role in driving tumor resistance as well as its systemic complexity.

 

## m6A-driven therapeutic resistance in NSCLC
M6A modification plays a pivotal role in NSCLC drug resistance by regulating various signaling pathways and gene expression, thereby influencing tumor cell sensitivity to radiotherapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapies such as TKIs, and immunotherapy ( ; Table  ).

 

 

## m6A modification in radio/Chemotherapy resistance
The molecular underpinnings of resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy in NSCLC involve m6A-mediated epitranscriptional reprogramming, which orchestrates enhanced DNA damage repair and dysregulates drug efflux and metabolic pathways.
Radiation with carbon ions is effective and biologically potent for the treatment of NSCLC. METTL3-mediated m6A mutation in H2AX reduces NSCLC therapeutic susceptibility to carbon-ion radiation. H2AX mRNA is stabilized by METTL3-mediated m6A alterations, which enhances its expression and DNA damage repair pathways, ultimately fostering cell survival [ ].
Chemotherapy is central to NSCLC management. In addition to extending patient survival and alleviating symptoms, these cytotoxic agents provide a solid foundation for subsequent treatments, such as surgery and radiation. CircVMP1 enhances resistance to cisplatin (DDP) through the circVMP1-miR-524-5p-METTL3/SOX2 axis [ ]. Lactate promotes DDP resistance in NSCLC by modulating the FOXO3/MAGI1-IT1/miR-664b-3p/IL6R axis in YTHDF2-mediated m6A modifications [ ]. As a result of targeting METTL3, NSCLC cells are more sensitive to paclitaxel or carboplatin when its expression is diminished in an m6A-YTHDF1-dependent manner, thereby identifying METTL3 as a potential therapeutic target for reducing resistance to these agents [ ]. Furthermore, the mitochondrial RNA processing endonuclease (RMRP) lncRNA component is highly upregulated in NSCLC and is enriched with m6A modifications that modulate TGFBR1/SMAD2/SMAD3 pathways to enhance RNA stability and tolerance to radiotherapy and DDP [ ].

## m6A modification in targeted therapy resistance
Through three interconnected axes, m6A-mediated resistance to targeted therapies in NSCLC consists of epitranscriptional dysregulation that orchestrates target mutations, bypasses signaling activation, and apoptotic evasion. Oncogenic transcripts are stabilized by m6A writers/erasers, signaling cascades are rewired by non-coding RNA networks, and drug tolerance is conferred by metabolic adaptations.
The initial generation of TKIs has exhibited significant clinical efficacy in improving progression-free and overall survival. These drugs hinder the growth and dissemination of malignancies by blocking the access of cancer cells to essential survival signals [ ]. Through complex molecular mechanisms, m6A modification increases resistance to erlotinib by downregulating TUSC7 expression, activating the Notch signaling pathway, and cascade reactions involving miR-146a, METTL3/Snail, and YTHDF2 [ ]. VIRMA increases NSCLC resistance to gefitinib by increasing HOXA1 mRNA stability, positively regulating MAP3K2, and activating JNK/MAPK [ ]. Research has shown that METTL3 contributes to the development of gefitinib resistance in LUAD cells by upregulating SNHG17 and inhibiting LATS2 expression [ ]. Gefitinib resistance in NSCLC is also associated with METTL3’s interaction with LINC00969/EZH2 and its regulation of cellular pyroptosis and NLRP3 expression [ ]. YTHDF1 promotes malignancy and gefitinib resistance in LUAD cells by binding to and increasing DUSP5 mRNA [ ]. By promoting ASK1/JNK/p38 signaling in LUAD cells, CircASK1 is downregulated in gefitinib-resistant cells. YTHDF2-modified m6A downregulates circASK1 expression in drug-resistant cells by increasing endonuclease cleavage [ ]. In gefitinib-resistant patients, FTO expression in exosomes is abnormally elevated, and FTO reduces gefitinib sensitivity by upregulating ATP-binding cassette transporter family member 10 (ABCC10) [ ]. IGF2BP3-m6A-COX6B2 axis enhances oxidative phosphorylation and promotes resistance to gefitinib [ ]. This study provides a new perspective on gefitinib resistance in NSCLC and lays a foundation for future therapeutic options.
Osimertinib targets the T790M mutation, which makes many patients resistant to first-generation epidermal growth factor receptor inhibitors [ ]. Overexpression of METTL14 promotes Bim mRNA stability and expression and osimertinib-induced apoptosis in NSCLC [ ]. Increased METTL7B expression in TKI-resistant LUAD cells induces drug resistance and activates ROS metabolism. METTL7B knockdown re-sensitizes cells, revealing a novel link between glutathione metabolism and drug resistance [ ]. This study demonstrated that the combination of metformin and osimertinib promoted METTL3-mediated Let-7b maturation, which further inhibited Notch signaling and increased sensitivity to osimertinib treatment, providing novel ideas for drug development targeting this pathway in LC patients [ ]. M6A simultaneously regulates stemness via METTL3 and YTHDF2, which, in conjunction with miR-146a/Notch signaling and the suppression of TUSC7, results in a resistance signature. The concurrent use of TKIs and Notch-specific inhibitory non-coding RNAs may offer a novel approach for targeted therapy in LC [ ]. CircFBXW7 expression is reduced in osimertinib-resistant cells, and its short peptide affects β-catenin stability and hinders Wnt signaling. A positive feedback loop is formed between let-7d and YTHDF3, which affects the modification and translation of m6A in NSCLC [ ].
Crizotinib targets c-MET, ALK, and ROS1. Chlordamide reduces m6A methylation of mRNA by inhibiting METTL3 and WTAP. This resulted in decreased c-MET expression and increased susceptibility of NSCLC cells to crizotinib. In NSCLC with increased c-MET expression or gene amplification, the synergistic use of chlordamide and crizotinib may be a promising therapeutic strategy [ ].
Metastasis of NSCLC caused by FTO overexpression was inhibited by the FAK inhibitor (VS6063). FTO mechanistically altered FAP m6A levels in a YTHDF2-dependent manner, thereby promoting metastasis. This process is dependent on the interaction between FAP and FAK signaling. Thus, the FTO/FAP/FAK axis is a promising target for NSCLC treatment [ ].

## m6A-mediated TME remodeling and immunotherapy regulation
The epitranscriptional circuitry of NSCLC that mediates immunotherapy resistance orchestrates a tripartite immunosuppressive program mediated by m6A: dynamic control of PD-L1 stability by writers/readers, metabolic reprogramming of immune cell trafficking, and epigenetic remodeling of chemokine networks, which collectively results in a non-inflammatory TME.
PD-1 and PD-L1 immunotherapies have demonstrated significant improvement as first-line treatments for driver-negative advanced NSCLC, achieving 20% and 40%, respectively [ ]. One study discovered that METTL3 modifies the TME to influence NSCLC cell characteristics and immunotherapy efficacy. METTL3 enhances c-Myc-induced tumorigenic chemokines and destabilizes PD-L1 mRNA via m6A, creating a non-inflammatory TME. In mouse LC models, METTL3 inhibition increases TME inflammation and anti-PD-1 treatment [ ]. By promoting PD-L1 degradation via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, LINC02418 suppresses PD-L1 expression and increases CD8 + T cell infiltration. METTL3/YTHDF2 facilitates m6A modification that regulates LINC02418 expression [ ]. The expression of CCL2/CXCL10 and JAK2/p-STAT3 is modulated by ALKBH5 during anti-tumor immunity, resulting in the influx of TAMs and upregulation of PD-L1. It may be possible to predict the clinical response to anti-PD-L1 immunotherapy by identifying the ALKBH5 status [ ]. YTHDF3 overexpression also reduced apoptosis in NSCLC cells. As a downstream target of YTHDF3, the transcriptional stability of PD-L1 is positively influenced by YTHDF3. In summary, YTHDF3 upregulates PD-L1 expression to protect NSCLC cells from CD8 + T cell-mediated cytotoxicity and anti-tumor immune responses [ ]. Through the modification of m6A, METTL14 inhibits the function of CD8 + T cells by downregulating circZNF548 through exosomal miR-7108-3p (reduced expression of CD107a, IFN-γ, perforin, and granzyme B) and modulating the JMY-p53 pathway. This ultimately alters the immune microenvironment and promotes the progression of NSCLC [ ]. The efflux of m6A-MCT4 lactate, mediated by hnRNPA2B1, exacerbates microenvironment acidification, increases PD-L1 expression, and suppresses lymphocyte function in NSCLC, ultimately driving immune escape [ ].
Increasing evidence suggests that m6A methylation remodels the tumor immune microenvironment. According to a public data analysis study, reduced expression levels of ALKBH5, METTL3, HNRNPC, and KIAA1429 in patients were positively correlated with enhanced sensitivity to anti-PD-1 therapy. This suggests that m6A modifiers may serve as predictive and therapeutic biomarkers for improving the efficacy of immunotherapy [ ]. METTL3 deficiency reduces the efficacy of PD-1 therapy, potentially owing to the promotion of TAM and Treg infiltration in the microenvironment [ ].

## Discussion
Abnormal m6A modification affects the stability, translation, and expression of tumor-associated gene mRNAs. In gastric cancer, upregulation of VIRMA correlates with poor prognosis and promotes RASD1 mRNA stability via the m6A-YTHDF2 pathway [ ]. M6A-related genes are differentially expressed in colorectal cancer, and methylation regulators, such as METTL14, may be independent prognostic variables [ ]. Current research focuses on finding effective treatments for patients with NSCLC, owing to their significant tumor heterogeneity, poor treatment response, and eventual drug resistance. Recent studies have shown that m6A alterations regulate gene expression in NSCLC by changing gene methylation status. This regulatory system affects tumor cell biology and NSCLC development.
This system-level understanding is essential for recognizing its potential as a therapeutic target. The reciprocal regulation between METTL14 and H3K36me3 suggests that the co-regulation of m6A and histone modifications represents a major avenue for future research, although further in vivo validation and development of multitarget epigenetic therapies are required. Current studies have predominantly focused on the oncogenic role of m6A in NSCLC. However, its tumor-suppressive functions warrant further exploration. Future research should focus on elucidating the mechanisms by which m6A regulators (e.g., METTL3 and YTHDF2) exert tumor-suppressive effects under specific genetic or microenvironmental conditions. Further clarification of the context-dependent mechanisms governing m6A functional switching in tumors will deepen our understanding of m6A regulatory networks and facilitate the application of precision therapies targeting m6A dual functionality in NSCLC.
Although this study focuses on the function of m6A in NSCLC and the mechanisms influencing therapeutic resistance; these findings are also relevant for other cancer types. Across various malignancies, including glioblastoma, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), breast cancer, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), fundamental processes such as the regulation of mRNA stability, translation efficiency, and splicing are consistently modulated by m6A [ – ]. For example, METTL3 frequently exhibits oncogenic properties by promoting the translation of proteins, such as EGFR in NSCLC and MYC in AML [ ]. Nevertheless, the biological effects triggered by an imbalance in m6A modification are largely regulated by multiple environmental factors, including cellular origin, local microenvironment, and specific genetic mutation background. FTO is an example of a demethylase that promotes leukemia progression by catalyzing RNA demethylation and is generally considered to be an oncogene in AML [ ]. Conversely, in certain subtypes of gastric cancer and NSCLC, FTO exhibits tumor-suppressing functions, with its reduced expression levels significantly correlated with poor patient prognosis [ ]. Therefore, it is difficult to categorize m6A regulatory factors as oncogenic or tumor suppressors because they exhibit pronounced context dependence. The investigation of m6A-targeted therapeutic approaches for NSCLC is crucial for overcoming EGFR-TKI and immunotherapy resistance. Consequently, the advancement of m6A-targeted therapies requires personalized strategies. Treatment plans should be tailored for each patient based on histological type, molecular characteristics, and unique m6A epigenomic information.
Research indicates that m6A mutations impair the activity of drug-metabolizing enzymes. In pancreatic cancer, downregulation of FTO expression leads to demethylation of NEDD4, which subsequently activates the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway and ultimately results in resistance to gemcitabine [ ]. In colorectal cancer treatment, targeting WTAP-NRF2-PANoptosis may enhance the anti-tumor efficacy of oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy [ ]. Furthermore, we studied the effects of m6A modifications on therapeutic resistance. Changes in m6A can affect chemotherapy and targeted therapy by altering drug target expression or activity. It has been confirmed that m6A modification regulates the expression of resistance genes. The main m6A-modifying enzymes are VIRMA, METTL14, METTL3, FTO, IGF2BP2, and YTHDF1/2/3. This study provided novel insights into the mechanisms underlying drug resistance in NSCLC cells.
Research on m6A modifications in cancer therapy has become increasingly prominent. It holds significant promise as a diagnostic biomarker and a therapeutic response predictor for NSCLC. m6A RNA levels are elevated in the peripheral blood of patients with NSCLC and are more effective than traditional biomarkers. ALKBH5 and FTO, m6A-modifying enzymes, are negatively associated with m6A levels and influence T cell immunity, suggesting that m6A is a significant biomarker for NSCLC [ ]. The detection of peripheral blood m6A levels or specific m6A modification sites may allow us to diagnose NSCLC earlier and more accurately, and predict patient treatment response.
Targeted therapies and combinations of m6A modification may be an innovative direction for the treatment of NSCLC. Therefore, m6A modification has high potential application value in clinical diagnosis, prognostic assessment, and therapeutic strategy development for NSCLC. This finding warrants further exploration. FTO promotes tumor immune escape and impairs CD8 + T cell function by upregulating transcription factors such as c-Jun, JunB, and C/EBPβ. The small-molecule inhibitor, Dac51, effectively suppressed FTO activity, restored anti-tumor immune responses, and synergistically enhanced anti-tumor effects in combination with immune checkpoint blockade therapy. This demonstrated that targeting FTO is an important immunotherapeutic strategy. Therefore, future research should focus on developing highly selective m6A inhibitors for precise treatment of NSCLC. It may be necessary to design synergistic drugs targeting multiple sites or protein complexes based on a deeper understanding of m6A regulatory mechanisms (e.g., dual-site FTO inhibitors and MTC interaction disruptors) to enhance selectivity and efficacy while actively exploring novel technologies, such as PROTACs and molecular glues.
The clinical translation of m6A modification remains in its early research stages, with its widespread adoption and application facing three major challenges: sensitivity, specificity, and feasibility. To optimize the draggability of candidate compounds, their pharmacodynamic, pharmacokinetic, and toxicological properties must be evaluated systematically. Regarding sensitivity, the m6A modification levels varied significantly across different tumor regions or metastatic sites. The results of a single biopsy sample may not accurately reflect the overall condition, possibly leading to false negatives. Currently, the detection and quantification of m6A faces numerous methodological challenges. The primary methods for m6A detection are m6A-seq, MeRIP-seq, and ELISA; however, these approaches have limited detection limits and may overlook critical signals in low-abundance transcripts. MeRIP-seq relies heavily on antibodies, which frequently yield false positives because of cross-reactivity. High-throughput sequencing technologies (such as nanopore direct sequencing) are prone to base recognition biases [ ]. These limitations not only compromise the accuracy and reliability of the results, but also complicate comparisons and integration across studies. Therefore, to enhance the reliability and translational value of m6A epigenomic studies, the validation of key findings using complementary techniques is essential. Research should focus on developing highly sensitive technologies (e.g., nanopore direct RNA sequencing and single-cell m6A sequencing) and employing multiple dynamic monitoring and longitudinal sample analyses.
However, the specificity and feasibility of clinical m6A detection remain a significant challenge. Variation in m6A levels across cancer types and molecular subtypes complicates the development of NSCLC biomarkers. Non-neoplastic conditions, such as inflammation and infection, can also alter m6A levels, resulting in false positives. Translating m6A detection technologies into clinical practice faces multiple hurdles. These include difficulties in obtaining reproducible samples, RNA instability during liquid biopsies, and unclear sample preservation standards. The high costs and complex workflows of the existing techniques fail to meet the clinical demands for rapid, cost-effective testing. Future research should focus on classifying m6A biomarkers according to tumor type and molecular subtype. Standard operating procedures and quality control systems must be established, along with the development of low-cost and rapid quantitative detection methods. Furthermore, to optimize the transition of m6A biomarkers from basic research to clinical applications, emphasis should be placed on the combined use of m6A with existing commonly used biomarkers such as EGFR and PD-L1.

## Conclusion
This review analyzed the regulatory functions of m6A-modifying enzymes in NSCLC and their effects on drug resistance. Several novel drug resistance pathways have been identified in NSCLC through comprehensive studies on m6A modifications. Because the molecular mechanisms underlying m6A modification, and its precise regulation of gene expression and treatment responsiveness, remain poorly understood, further research is necessary. Thus, it may be possible to combat drug resistance in NSCLC using targeted m6A modification therapy. The integration of patient m6A modification status should enhance personalized treatment in the future.

## Abbreviations
ABCC10ATP-binding cassette transporter family member 10
ACTN4Actinin Alpha 4
ADAsAnti-drug antibodies
ADCAntibody-drug conjugate
ALKBH5AlkB homolog 5
BTG2BTG anti-proliferation factor 2
BTNL9Butyrophilin like 9
CANT1Calcium activated nucleotidase 1
CTLA-4Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen-4
CYP19A1Cytochrome p450 family 19 subfamily a member 1
CYP3A4Cytochrome P450 3A4
DAPK3Death associated protein kinase 3
DDPCisplatin
DLGAP5DLG associated protein 5
DUSP5Dual specificity phosphatase 5
E2F1E2F transcription factor 1
ECMExtracellular matrix
ENO1Enolase 1
ESR1Estrogen receptor 1
FBXW7Box and WD repeat domain containing 7
FTOFat mass and obesity-associated protein
G6PDGlucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
HNRNPA2B1Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein a2/b1
HNRNPCHeterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein c
HOXA13Homeobox a13
Igf2bp1/2/3Insulin Like Growth Factor 2 Mrna Binding Protein 1/2/3
KAT2ALysine acetyltransferase 2a
LAG-3Lymphocyte Activation Gene-3
LUADLung adenocarcinoma
m6AN6-methyladenosine
Malat1Metastasis Associated Lung Adenocarcinoma Transcript 1
Mcm5Minichromosome Maintenance Complex Component 5
MDSCsMyeloid-derived suppressor cells
MEG3Maternally expressed 3
METTL14Methyltransferase-like 14
METTL3Methyltransferase-like 3
METTL7A/BMethyltransferase-like 7 A/B
NELL2Neural EGFL like 2
NSCLCNon-small cell lung cancer
PARK2Parkin RBR e3 ubiquitin protein ligase
PD-1Programmed cell death receptor 1
PTENPhosphatase and Tensin Homolog
RAC3Rac Family Small GTPase 3
Rbm10Binding Motif Protein 10
RBM15RNA Binding Motif Protein 15
RBMS1RNA-binding protein
RMRPMitochondrial RNA processing endonuclease
ROSReactive oxygen species
S1PSphingosine-1-phosphate
SF3B4Splicing Factor 3b Subunit 4
SFRP2Secreted Frizzled Related Protein 2
SLC7A11Solute Carrier Family 7 Member 11
SRPK1SRSF protein kinase 1
TIM-3T cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin domain-3
TRPM7Transient Receptor Potential Cation Channel Subfamily M Member 7
TRPV1Transient Receptor Potential Cation Channel Subfamily V Member 1
TTETerminal effector CD8+ T cells
TWIST1Twist Family BHLH Transcription Factor 1
VIRMAVir-like m6A methyltransferase-associated
WTAPWilms’ tumor 1-associating protein
YTHDC1/2YTH n6-methyladenosine RNA binding protein c1
YTHDF1/2/3YTH n6-methyladenosine RNA binding protein f1/2/3
ZC3H13Zinc finger CCCH-type containing 13
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the “Biorender” for providing a mapping platform.

## Author contributions
Conceptualization and design: YY. Writing of first draft: YY and JZ. Figures and tables: YY, YS and ZT. Final editing of text: YS and JZ. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

## Funding
This work was supported by the Scientific Research Project Plan of the Wuxi Municipal Health Commission [Grant Number Q202566].

## Data availability
Not applicable.

## Declarations

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

## Consent for publication
Not applicable.

## Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.