pmcCell RepCell Rep319nihpaCell reports2211-1247pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC12828775PMC12828775.11282877512828775NIHMS21327674139114710.1016/j.celrep.2025.116691NIHMS2132767NIHPA21327671ArticleRif-seq reveals Caulobacter crescentus mRNA decay is globally coordinated with transcription and translation
DilrangiKulathungage H. AretakisJames R. VaidyaKavya Al-HusiniNadra MuthunayakeNisansala S. KimSangjin SchraderJared M. 1 Indiana University, Department of Biology, Bloomington, IN, USA2 Wayne State University, Departments of Chemistry and Biological Sciences, Detroit, MI, USA3 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Department of Physics, Urbana, IL, USA4 Present address: Department of Biology, Oakland Community College, Auburn Hills, MI, USA5 Present address: School of Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA6 Present address: Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Wayamba University, Kuliyapitiya, Sri Lanka7 These authors contributed equally8 Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.M.S. and S.K. designed the study, wrote the paper, and secured funding. K.H.D. performed data analysis, generated all reporter constructs, performed all reporter measurements, and wrote the paper. J.R.A., N.A.-H., and N.S.M. performed global Rif-seq experiments. J.R.A. performed data analysis and bioinformatics analysis. K.V. and S.K. performed smFISH and analysis.
*Correspondence: sangjin@illinois.edu (S.K.), jaschrad@iu.edu (J.M.S.)2312202513122025441250588211669111669116012026230120262401202624012026https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## SUMMARY
While transcription and translation have been shown to be coordinated with mRNA decay across various single-gene studies, their global coordination remains poorly defined. Therefore, we utilize rifampicin sequencing experiments in Caulobacter crescentus to measure genome-wide mRNA lifetimes and analyze the impact of transcription and translation. Based on the RNA polymerase elongation speed, we identify that approximately 20% of the transcriptome is cotranscriptionally degraded. To investigate translation’s impact on mRNA decay, we find that translation efficiency measured by ribosome profiling correlates with mRNA lifetime. We compare the 5′ P cleavage sites to ribosome occupancy and find that cleavage sites occur preferentially in regions of low ribosome occupancy. Using the translation initiation inhibitor retapamulin, which traps ribosomes at the start codon, and chloramphenicol, which arrests elongating ribosomes, we show that ribosomes directly protect the occupied mRNA regions. Taken altogether, mRNA decay is globally interconnected with transcription and translation.

## In brief
In this study, using genome-wide approaches, Dilrangi and Aretakis et al. demonstrate that Caulobacter crescentus mRNA decay is coordinated with transcription and translation across the transcriptome. Co-transcriptional decay is broadly utilized by long mRNAs in the transcriptome, and polysome occupancy globally protects mRNAs from decay.

## Graphical abstract

 

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Gene expression is an essential process, spatially coordinated within the cytoplasm of bacterial cells. While mRNA transcription and mRNA translation have been studied extensively, less is known about the coordinated global regulation of mRNA decay. Most studies of mRNA decay in bacteria have been performed in E. coli; however, the localization pattern of the mRNA decay machinery varies across bacterial species, , suggesting a potential difference in mRNA decay patterns across species. The major mRNA decay enzyme, RNase E, is the most common scaffold for the RNA degradosome. , In E. coli, RNase E is localized to the inner membrane, away from the nucleoid, where RNA polymerase (RNAP) transcribes mRNA, and co-transcriptional mRNA degradation is suggested to be very rare due to the spatial separation. Conversely, RNase E is localized in the cytoplasm in other species, such as Caulobacter crescentus (C. crescentus), suggesting more prevalent co-transcriptional decay in those species. While lacZ mRNA was observed to be co-transcriptionally degraded in C. crescentus, the potential for genome-wide co-transcriptional mRNA decay has not been fully explored in this organism.
Finally, mRNA translation is known to modulate mRNA lifetimes across various organisms, suggesting that these processes are strongly coordinated. In yeast, translation elongation has been found to have a strong impact on mRNA decay, where optimal codons protect mRNAs from decay. Additionally, estimates of translation initiation rate have also been observed to globally impact mRNA decay, where stronger initiation protects mRNAs from decay. Across a variety of bacterial species with the 5′ to 3′ exonuclease RNase J, the pattern of mRNA cleavage shows 3-nt periodicity, suggesting decay follows ribosomes. In E. coli, recombinant protein expression libraries showed that codon usage was correlated with mRNA abundance and lifetime, suggesting that codon optimality may be implicated in protecting mRNA from decay as observed in yeast. However, unlike E. coli, the C. crescentus transcriptome is dominated by non-Shine-Dalgarno-initiated ribosome binding sites, suggesting it predominantly uses different modes of translation initiation than E. coli. While C. crescentus was one of the first bacteria with ribosome profiling data, no systematic studies have investigated the global relationship between translation and mRNA decay in C. crescentus.
To explore the global coordination between transcription and translation with mRNA decay in C. crescentus, we performed rifampicin sequencing (Rif-seq) in C. crescentus. Rif-seq measures genome-wide RNA stability upon transcription shutoff by the antibiotic rifampicin. By comparing the transcription elongation rate with the mRNA lifetimes, we observed that a significant fraction of the transcriptome undergoes co-transcriptional mRNA decay, likely aided by the cytoplasmic localization of C. crescentus RNase E. An important aspect of rifampicin-induced transcriptional shutoff is that unstable RNAs are rapidly degraded, allowing the mapping of stable non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), which have been identified in large numbers across diverse bacterial species. , Therefore, we also utilized this approach to map novel stable RNAs expressed from the C. crescentus genome. By measuring the absolute mRNA copy number and combining it with mRNA lifetime, we calculated the absolute mRNA transcription rate (molecules/cell/min) and found that some functional gene categories have distinct mRNA turnover rates. The absolute RNA copy number, mRNA half-lives, and mRNA transcription rates will provide a useful resource for systems biology modeling of the C. crescentus cell cycle and asymmetric cell division. , 
To investigate the relationship between mRNA translation and mRNA decay, we compared ribosome profiling data to mRNA half-lives and found that translation efficiency (TE) is correlated with mRNA half-life. We found that mRNA cleavage sites predominantly occur in regions of low ribosome occupancy, suggesting that ribosomes may directly protect mRNAs from endonuclease cleavage. Additional experiments with translation inhibitors and synthetic reporter genes revealed that combinatorial control of ribosome occupancy by translation initiation and elongation influences mRNA lifetime.

## RESULTS

## Global measurement of mRNA half-life
To measure mRNA half-lives across the C. crescentus transcriptome, we performed Rif-seq, which stops transcription initiation with the antibiotic rifampicin and allows the measurement of mRNA lifetime by RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) at specific time points after transcription inhibition ( ). Samples were taken at 1, 2, 4, 8, and 15 min after rifampicin addition in mid-log C. crescentus cells grown in M2G minimal media. Importantly, as rifampicin only blocks transcription initiation and not elongation, a lag in mRNA decay can often be observed in longer mRNAs ( ). To account for this lag, which is a result of RNAP runoff, we used the Rifcorrect package, which calculates the runoff time based on the average RNAP elongation rate and distance of a given coding sequence (CDS) from the transcription start site (TSS; depicted in ). In addition, as many mRNAs can have alternative mRNA isoforms, arising from processing sites or alternative TSSs or terminators, which could lead to differences in half-lives, we focused on “simple” mRNAs, which are known to contain only a single CDS and lack alternative TSSs, alternative terminators, or processing sites ( ). Importantly, an up-to-date annotation of the transcriptional units in the C. crescentus genome was available to allow for the differentiation of complex and simple operons. Using the Rif-seq data, we also identified 45 new stable ncRNAs ( ) that were updated in the transcriptional unit annotation. In total using Rif-seq, we were able to measure the mRNA half-lives of 1,439 mRNAs across the 3,885 annotated CDSs in the C. crescentus genome, while only a few mRNAs had half-lives longer than the Rif-seq time points used (>30 min calculated half-life), preventing half-life determination, the vast majority of mRNAs that were not quantified were either too lowly expressed to detect or low abundance transcripts with half-lives that were too fast to be measured by the RNA extraction time points in our dataset (<0.5 min estimated half-life).

## mRNA decay is coordinated with transcription
Since rifampicin only blocks transcription initiation and not elongation, we examined the rates of RNAP runoff of long mRNAs. Indeed, by exploring mRNA transcriptional units above 7 kb, we find that the average RNAP density drops at the 5′ end corresponding to the time of transcription initiation shutoff ( ). By extracting the one-half maximal median read density at each time point after transcription initiation shutoff, we used a linear regression of the distance that RNAP traveled over time, yielding an estimated RNAP elongation rate of 19 nt averaged across long operon mRNAs ( ). This C. crescentus RNAP elongation rate measured at 28°C is slower than the E. coli RNAP elongation rate for mRNAs when grown in lysogeny broth (LB) at 37°C (42 nt ), but close to the elongation rates measured in LB at 30°C (25 nt ) or M9 glycerol at 30°C (20–30 nt ). Using the average RNAP elongation rate, we calculated the transcription times for all the simple mRNAs across the C. crescentus genome and compared them with their lifetimes ( and ). Here, we found that a significant fraction of mRNAs have a lifetime that is shorter than the calculated elongation time, suggesting they are degraded cotranscriptionally (73/375). Functional enrichment analysis of the 73 cotranscriptionally degraded mRNAs found that their encoded proteins are enriched in ATP-binding domains, suggesting they may be involved in housekeeping functions when ATP levels are abundant. While evidence for co-transcriptional mRNA decay in C. crescentus was reported for a single gene lacZ, our Rif-seq showed that this mechanism is broadly utilized across the transcriptome, likely aided by the cytoplasmic localization of the C. crescentus RNA degradosome.
To better understand the relative importance of transcription and mRNA decay in determining mRNA levels, we performed absolute quantitation of C. crescentus mRNA abundances. In E. coli, it was observed that RNA-seq, which measures genome-wide relative RNA abundance, is correlated with single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smFISH) that measures absolute mRNA copy numbers. Therefore, we sought to use an approach where we convert the arbitrary RNA-seq units into absolute mRNA copy numbers by measuring the absolute mRNA copy number of a highly expressed and a poorly expressed mRNA. We first determined the absolute mRNA copy numbers of two C. crescentus mRNAs using single-molecule mRNA FISH ( ). Here, we utilized 12 Cy5-labeled probes tiling the YFP sequence and a xylose-inducible YFP construct (JS86) for single-molecule control, where we can obtain FISH intensity coming from one yfp transcript under a repressed condition. We collected data for one high-abundance mRNA (Hu-YFP, 2.57 copies/cell ± 0.04 [ste]) and one medium-abundance mRNA (cckA-YFP, 0.252 copies/cell ± 0.009) ( ). Using these measurements, we performed a linear regression on these values compared to the RPKM values from the RNA-seq data and generated a conversion to the absolute mRNA copy number. The absolute mRNA copy numbers calculated from the smFISH calibration curve were rather close to estimates of the mRNA copy number predicted by assuming an average of 1,400 mRNA per cell, as in Passalacqua et al. and Neidhardt et al. , ( ). Across the transcriptome, we found that the highest abundance mRNA (rsaA) is present at 12 copies per cell ( ). While RsaA is the major protein making up the C. crescentus S-layer, which is needed in very high abundance, all other mRNAs were present at lower copy numbers. The distribution of mRNA copy numbers was quite broad, with the average copy number of 0.087 copies/cell and a standard deviation of 0.269. Only a small fraction of mRNAs, 40 total, were not detected at all in this growth condition, suggesting that most genes in the C. crescentus chromosome are expressed during logarithmic growth.
As the steady-state mRNA level is determined by both the absolute mRNA production rate (molecules/cell/min) and the half-life (min), we can calculate the transcription rate based upon the absolute measurement of copy number and mRNA half-life measurements (absolute mRNA production rate = absolute mRNA copy number(measured)/lifetime (half-life/ln[2]) (measured)). The absolute mRNA production rates varied from 8.4 mRNAs/min, with many ribosomal protein mRNAs among the top transcribed genes, to 0.00055 mRNAs/min ( ; ). To visualize the data, we generated a proteomap of the calculated absolute mRNA production rates, with each polygon’s area representing the summed transcription rates of all the mRNA representing each category ( ). The area of each polygon represents the load of RNAP toward its transcription. Here we find that indeed, ribosomal protein mRNAs are transcribed at the highest rate, which is consistent with the needs of nascent ribosomes in logarithmically growing bacteria. Other categories of genes, for example, flagellar assembly, have a much lower summed transcription rate. We also generated a proteomap of the mRNA half-lives to allow us to compare the rates of mRNA decay of the same classes of mRNAs ( ). Here, we observe the converse, where ribosomal protein mRNAs have quite short mRNA lifetimes, while other classes of mRNAs, like flagellar assembly, were observed to have much higher mRNA lifetimes ( ). When examining the absolute mRNA production rates for all mRNAs in each category, we indeed observed that all mRNAs encoding ribosomal proteins have higher absolute mRNA production rates as compared to flagellar assembly mRNAs; however, only a subset of flagellar mRNAs had long half-lives ( ).
Importantly, flagellin mRNAs, which are needed at very high copy number to build the flagellar filament, were generally quite stable, while the mRNAs encoding basal body proteins were generally less stable ( ). Overall, this presents two distinct strategies to yield the desired mRNA copy number the cell needs. Ribosomal proteins’ mRNAs are abundant through high absolute mRNA production rates but have short half-lives, presumably to allow rapid shutoff in the event of a sudden change in growth conditions. Conversely, flagellin mRNAs are quite abundant but are transcribed at a rather low rate and are therefore stable from mRNA degradation, potentially allowing the cell to maintain its flagella even under conditions of nutrient limitation. As this apparatus can be used to swim toward gradients of higher nutrients, the slower turnover of the flagellin mRNAs may be an advantageous adaptation under such nutrient-depleted conditions.

## mRNA decay is globally coordinated with translation
We next investigated the potential global role of coordination of mRNA decay and translation. As mRNA decay in many bacteria initiates with endonucleolytic cleavage by RNase E, yielding 5′ P sites, , we first investigated the pattern of 5′ P sites present in the C. crescentus transcriptome. To identify the sites of endonucleolytic cleavage, we utilized a previous 5′ global rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) dataset in which total RNA or tobacco acid pyrophosphatase (TAP)-treated total RNA was subjected to 5′ end sequencing. , Since primary transcripts’ 5′ end should contain a 5′ triphosphate (PPP), the log2 ratio between the TAP-treated and untreated 5′ end libraries can be used as a proxy for the 5′ end state of an RNA. As depicted for a tRNA gene in , an increased log2 TAP+/− ratio is observed in the TSS, while reads with a low log2 TAP+/− ratio were observed at the mature 5′ P sites, indicative of endonuclease cut sites—in this case by RNase P that processes the 5′ end of tRNAs. Indeed, the log2 ratio of reads in TAP ± samples can be used to distinguish 5′ PPP sites from 5′ P sites ( ). As prior analysis only focused on 5′ PPP sites, here, we used the 5′ P sites across the C. crescentus transcriptome. Across all 19,356 5′ P sites identified, we observed a cut site motif with a slight preference for an A at the cut site, and a preference for a U 1 nt away from the 5′ end ( ), which is very similar to the RNase E cut site motif determined for RNase E in Salmonella. As the global RACE method identifies global 5′ P cut sites and is not inherently specific to RNase E cleavage sites, the presence of an RNase E cut site motif from the 5′ P cut sites suggests that RNase E is likely the dominant mRNA decay nuclease generating 5′ P ends in C. crescentus. Analysis of 5′ P cut sites of mRNAs also revealed that these sites contain a less stable average predicted secondary structure content ( ), suggesting cutting occurs in regions of the mRNAs that are more likely to be single stranded. We then analyzed the locations of the mRNA cut sites within mRNAs ( ). Here, we find most cut sites (~4,000) are present in the CDS, followed by the 5′ UTR (~1,100), near the start codon (~500), near the stop codon (~250), and in the 3′ UTR (~50). As a control, we also examined the cut site density of 5′ P sites tRNAs, as these RNAs are processed by RNase P to yield mature 5′ P ends. As each of these regions varies significantly in size, we also examined the density of cut sites/nt within each of these features ( ). tRNAs, which ideally contain one 5′ P site, had the highest 5′ P cutting density, largely due to their relatively small size. 5′ UTRs and around the start codon contain a similar high 5′ P site density, which may be due to scanning by RNase E from the 5′ end. Despite having the most overall cut sites identified, CDSs conversely show a rather low cut site density (~4 every 1,000 nt), which is in part due to the much larger size of CDSs relative to UTRs, start codon region, or stop codon region.
To better understand how the patterns of mRNA cut sites might influence translation or vice versa, we next compared ribosome profiling datasets measuring TE to the mRNA half-lives generated by Rif-seq in the same growth conditions. Here, as observed in other studies, , , there is a positive correlation between the TE of mRNAs (here it is defined as the ribosome profiling read density divided by the RNA-seq read density) and mRNA half-lives (R2 = 0.58). In total, we observe a 4-fold difference in mRNA lifetimes across the different bins of TE ( ). To test whether ribosome occupancy globally impacts mRNA lifetime, we treated the cells with translation inhibitors, which either arrest a ribosome at the initiation codon or arrest ribosomes throughout the coding sequence ( and ). After treating the cells with retapamulin, which is known to trap ribosomes over the start codon and allow runoff of elongating ribosomes, we observed a slight increase in mRNA half-lives across the transcriptome. Chloramphenicol treatment, which arrests elongating ribosomes across the mRNA and leads to higher polysome occupancy, led to a very strong stabilization of the transcriptome ( and ). We examined the patterns of mRNA stability within the mRNAs and found that retapamulin protects the region around the start codon from mRNA decay, showing slower decay than untreated, while the downstream CDS is destabilized, showing faster decay than untreated cells ( and ). Chloramphenicol stabilizes the entire CDS, including the region surrounding the start codon, both showing significantly longer lifetimes than untreated cells ( and ). Taken together, these data suggest that ribosome occupancy acts to stabilize the occupied regions of mRNAs from decay.
To explore the role of ribosome occupancy in mRNA decay, we analyzed the pattern of mRNA cleavage sites identified by 5′ global RACE with ribosome occupancy. We hypothesized that we would observe fewer RNA cut sites within the regions of mRNA more highly occupied by ribosomes, while we would observe more RNA cut sites in regions of mRNAs with lower ribosome occupancy. Because rates of initiation and termination differ from those of elongation, we removed the start and stop codon regions from the analysis. In line with this hypothesis, we observed that there is approximately 2-fold higher probability of finding an RNA cut site in a region of the mRNA with low ribosome density as compared to high ribosome density ( ). We next compared the location of RNA cut sites with the average position of ribosomes within the mRNA CDS as determined by ribosome profiling ( ), again omitting the start and stop codon regions from the analysis. We hypothesized that if ribosomes are able to protect the mRNA from cleavage, we would expect a lower density of ribosomes at RNA cut sites. In line with this hypothesis, we observe that on average, there is an approximately 20%–30% reduction in ribosome density surrounding the RNA cut sites ( ). While we observed a small peak with approximately 15%–20% higher ribosome occupancy after the RNA cut site, which could indicate RNA cleavage at the 5′ end of stalled ribosomes, this peak was not statistically significant ( ). Taken together, the patterns of RNA cleavage sites suggest that ribosomes play a role in directly protecting the mRNA from decay.
To further explore whether C. crescentus ribosome occupancy influences mRNA lifetime, we first examined the codon adaptation index (CAI) across C. crescentus mRNAs ( ). The CAI is related to the relative abundance of a particular codon across the entire transcriptome, with a strong correlation of CAI and tRNA abundance, leading to faster translation of codons with high CAI and slower translation of codons with low CAI. Across C. crescentus mRNAs—the CAI values range from 0.34 to 0.89—we utilized the ribosome profiling data to compare the CAI to TE. TE is a measure of ribosome occupancy along the mRNA arising from the initiation, elongation, and termination rates of individual mRNAs. In order to achieve a high TE, an mRNA must have a strong translation initiation site to facilitate the high ribosome occupancy. TE is not a direct measure of translation, as TE can also be influenced by ribosome pausing, where slow-/non-moving ribosomes may lead to increases in TE, such as that observed for E. coli secM stall sequence. To examine how CAI relates to translation, we compared CAI to TE and observed a mild positive correlation between CAI and TE with an R2 of 0.20 ( ). Interestingly, we observed that mRNAs with low CAI appeared to show increased TE above the trend line, suggesting that slow-moving ribosomes may be increasing polysome occupancy. Next, we compared CAI to mRNA half-lives, and we observed a negative correlation between CAI and mRNA half-life ( ) with a stronger R2 of 0.66. The lowest CAI bin appears to lead to a strong stabilization (average half-life = 6.9 min), while the other variants have average half-lives between 2 and 3 min. This was surprising, as optimal codons in eukaryotic mRNAs are typically found to increase polysome occupancy and stabilize the mRNAs. However, some studies in eukaryotes have also implicated translation initiation in impacting polysome occupancy and, in turn, mRNA lifetimes. To further examine the role of low CAI in protecting mRNA by increasing the ribosome occupancy, we separated mRNAs into two groups: high TE (top 25%, >1.5 TE) as a proxy for high ribosome occupancy, and low TE (bottom 25%, <0.77) as a proxy for low ribosome occupancy ( ). By examining the relationship between CAI and half-life in the high TE mRNAs, we observed that the low CAI mRNAs were stabilized, with a median mRNA half-life of 8.5 min compared to medium and high CAI bins, whose half-lives were faster, ranging between a median mRNA half-life of 2.3 and 4 min ( ). Conversely, the CAI and mRNA half-lives showed no significant variation in the low TE samples, suggesting that CAI’s role in stabilizing mRNAs is through ribosome occupancy protection. While this trend was statistically significant, it was based on a small number of mRNAs that contain both low TE and low CAI.
To further test the role of CAI and the translation initiation on mRNA decay, we designed synthetic YFP mRNAs with various translation initiation regions (TIRs) and codon usage frequencies to systematically alter the rates of translation initiation and elongation. This should yield a wide range in polysome occupancies across the YFP TIR/CAI variants. To control the rate of transcription, all the constructs were driven by the xylose promoter. We selected one weak and one strong TIR and combined these with codon usage ranging from highly suboptimal (CAI = 0.38) to highly optimal (CAI = 0.94) for the range of C. crescentus mRNAs ( ). Across these engineered YFP mRNAs, we observed that the YFP fluorescence varied from as high as 1,100 arbitrary units (AU) to as low as 36 AU ( ). In confirmation of their known roles, we observed that increasing the TIR and CAI both positively contributed to the amount of YFP produced ( ). CAI had a stronger impact on the variant with a strong TIR, varying over a 17-fold range from the lowest to highest CAI constructs, while it had a smaller impact on the constructs with the weak TIR, varying over a 2.7-fold range from the lowest to highest CAI constructs ( ). This suggests that the CAI may have become rate-limiting for translation with the strong TIR, while initiation may be rate-limiting for translation in the weak TIR construct. We then measured the mRNA lifetimes of these YFP mRNAs using quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (RT-qPCR) and found that with a strong TIR, the lowest CAI variant led to a significant stabilization of mRNA half-life (6.7 min) compared to the 3.2- to 4.2-min half-lives observed for the higher CAI variants ( ). This suggests that poor CAI may be causative for the observed longer mRNA lifetimes. Interestingly, with the weak TIR, we observed no stabilization with low CAI, and the half-lives across the weak TIR variant remained fast (2.1–3.6 min). To confirm that strong TIR low CAI stabilization results were not limited to YFP, we also performed the same experiments in mCherry and found similar results ( and ). This suggests that a higher translation initiation rate combined with a lower CAI likely yields higher polysome occupancy, which protects mRNAs from RNase cleavage, yielding longer mRNA lifetimes. To test this, we performed 10%–55% sucrose density gradients to separate polysome fractions and measured the occupancy of the strong TIR 0.4 CAI and 0.9 CAI variants across different polysome fractions ( ). We observed that the 0.4 CAI variant peaked in a higher density fraction as compared to the 0.9 CAI variant, suggesting that strong initiation combined with slow elongation leads to higher polysome occupancy. This suggests that ribosome occupancy is an influential determinant of mRNA stability, regardless of whether the ribosomes are rapidly translating.

## DISCUSSION

## Global resource of C. crescentus mRNA stability
Genome-wide absolute mRNA quantitation ( ), together with the absolute synthesis and decay rates of those mRNAs ( , , and ), provides a useful resource for modeling gene expression in C. crescentus. As C. crescentus is a premier model of bacterial systems biology, these data will help to aid in future modeling efforts of its gene expression programs. Together with the absolute quantitation of mRNA translation data by ribosome profiling, absolute quantitation of the steps of gene expression is now available from transcription to translation, leaving the absolute quantitation of proteolysis rates the only remaining global dataset without global absolute quantitation rates. While regulated proteolysis is a key step in the gene expression programs of C. crescentus, early proteomics data suggest that a majority of proteins are more stable than the duration of the cell cycle, suggesting protein synthesis provides a larger influence on the levels of most proteins.
By analyzing our Rif-seq data, we identified multiple stable ncRNAs that were not previously annotated. Many stable ncRNAs identified are parts of mRNAs, including presumed processing from 3′ rho-independent terminators, similar to organisms like Salmonella, while many appeared to be processed from CDSs and intergenic ncRNAs ( ). Rif-seq is a rather simple strategy for mapping stable ncRNAs, as the vast majority of the transcripts are unstable, the remaining sRNAs are very simple to detect, as there is a very low background of reads outside their boundaries. The functions of the newly identified stable ncRNAs are not yet known, but they may provide important functions to the cell and have been annotated in our map of the C. crescentus transcriptome. 

## mRNA decay coordinates with transcription
C. crescentus mRNA decay was revealed to be coordinated with transcription across the transcriptome, with coordination observed between mRNA synthesis and turnover rates and co-transcriptional degradation ( and ). We observed that some gene categories have high rates of transcription and short half-lives, while others have slow rates of transcription but long half-lives ( ). While original observations in yeast mRNA turnover pointed to functional specificity by gene function categories, the roles in C. crescentus may suggest that some cellular pathways can be shut off quickly in response to environmental changes, such as ribosomal protein mRNAs. As ribosomal production is one of the most energetically costly pathways in bacteria, this may help to rapidly adapt their expression to conditions of low nutrients or cell stress. Other mRNAs, like flagellin mRNAs, are more stable, yet they use far less cell resources than ribosome production and help the cells swim toward more favorable environments, suggesting they may provide fitness across various conditions. Therefore, it seems as if the functional specificity of mRNA turnover in bacteria is coordinated with the cell’s program of gene expression to optimize fitness during adaptation to uncertain and changing environmental conditions.
We observed that a significant fraction of mRNAs undergo co-transcriptional decay ( ), suggesting a broader coordination between transcription elongation/termination and mRNA decay. These mRNAs undergoing cotranscriptional decay tend to be longer and likely spend their lifetimes adjacent to the DNA loci they were synthesized from. In C. crescentus, the RNA degradosome proteins are largely cytoplasmic, within close proximity to RNAP and the nucleoid, which likely facilitates cotranscriptional decay. Interestingly, bacterial ribonucleoprotein bodies (BR-bodies), which are biomolecular condensates that are composed of the RNA degradosome and facilitate mRNA decay, , were found to contain transcription machinery such as Rho, suggesting that the coordination between transcription elongation and decay may be occurring through BR-bodies.
Cotranscriptional decay likely varies across bacterial species depending on the RNA degradosome localization. Unlike C. crescentus, E. coli and B. subtilis possess membrane-anchored RNA degradosomes and BR-bodies , Consistent with this, lacZ mRNA showed negligible cotranscriptional decay in E. coli and B. subtilis, but in C. crescentus, its cotranscriptional decay rate was comparable to posttranscriptional decay. The spatial separation of nascent mRNAs from the RNA degradosomes in E. coli and B. subtilis likely prevents cotranscriptional decay, even when measured mRNA half-lives and transcription elongation times are similar. Therefore, while comparing mRNA half-life (mostly affected by post-transcriptional decay) to transcription elongation time provides a reasonable measure of cotranscriptional decay in C. crescentus, it can be misleading in species with membrane-bound RNA degradosomes. Apparent similarities in cotranscriptional decay fractions between E. coli (88/263) and C. crescentus (73/375 in this study) likely reflect overestimation in E. coli and may result from coincidental similarities in mRNA half-lives and elongation rates. Moving forward, it will be important to understand how mRNA transcription and decay are globally coordinated across species and how the observed differences in RNA degradosomes, transcription and translation machinery, and localization of these factors contribute to coordinated decay.

## mRNA decay coordinates with translation
We observed a global correlation between TE and mRNA half-life, suggesting that the translation machinery may be protecting mRNAs from decay. As it has long been known that ribosomes protect a footprint on the mRNA, we observed that via chloramphenicol treatment, which increases ribosome occupancy on mRNAs, there is a transcriptome-wide stabilization of mRNAs ( and ). Conversely, treating cells with retapamulin, which reduces ribosome occupancy, led to stabilization of the TIR, while the CDS, where ribosomes have run off, is destabilized ( ). In yeast, treatments with hippuristanol and cycloheximide led to similar effects on mRNA decay, both supporting a model in which mRNA is protected by coverage with ribosomes. In line with the role of polyribosome protection, we observed that most 5′ P cut sites identified in the transcriptome tend to occur in the CDS, and more specifically in locations with low structure content and low ribosome occupancy ( and ). Interestingly, it was previously found in other organisms that codon optimality, which promotes faster translation elongation rates, could promote longer mRNA lifetimes , , ; however, we observed an opposite trend in C. crescentus, where CAI was anti-correlated with mRNA lifetime ( ). By use of orthogonal synthetic gene constructs, we found that mRNAs with strong translation initiation sites and low CAI appear to be specifically stabilized by having increased polysome occupancy, while strongly initiated mRNAs with high CAI dramatically increased translation but reduced polysome occupancy and were less stable ( , , and ) Codon optimality driven stabilization in eukaryotic species is thought to be driven by the Ccr4-Not complex, which promotes deadenylation of 3′ poly(A) tails by recognition of empty E-site in the ribosome. Interestingly, C. crescentus lacks Ccr4-Not, and the mRNA decay machinery is thought to initiate by endonucleolytic cleavage in the mRNA by RNase E, , suggesting that the different mRNA decay pathways may be responsible for the differences in codon usage’s effect on mRNA decay observed between organisms.

## Limitations of the study
While we have explored the coordination between mRNA decay and transcription/translation in C. crescentus, our current analysis has been restricted to simple mRNAs containing a single coding sequence. It is therefore unclear how mRNA decay, transcription, and translation coordinate with complex mRNAs (polycistronic mRNAs, mRNAs with multiple transcription start sites, or mRNAs known to undergo processing). In addition, our observation that mRNAs with poor CAI tend to stabilize mRNAs through their ribosome occupancy is restricted to a small number of mRNAs. Due to the large variations in the mRNA decay machinery across bacterial species, it is also unclear how many bacteria will show similar relationships between mRNA decay and transcription/translation to C. crescentus.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information and resources should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Jared M. Schrader (jaschrad@iu.edu).

## Materials availability
All strains and plasmids generated in this work will be made available upon request to the lead contact without restriction.

## Data and code availability
RNA-seq data generated for this paper have been deposited in the NCBI GEO with accession numbers GEO: GSE157432 and GSE228591 as listed in the section and are publicly available as of the date of publication.
This paper does not report the original custom code.
Any data not found in this paper can be requested from the lead contact. Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS
All Caulobacter crescentus strains used in this study were derived from the wild-type strain NA1000. E. coli cells used in this study are derived from MG1655. Unless otherwise specified, C. crescentus cells were grown at 28°C at 240–250 rpm in M2 minimal medium supplemented with 0.2% D-glucose (M2G) to mid-log phase (OD600 0.3–0.5). E. coli cells were grown in M9 minimal media supplemented with glucose at 37°C. When appropriate, the indicated concentration of xylose (0.2%) and kanamycin (Kan) (5 μg/mL) was added.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Rif-seq Cell Harvesting
25 mL of C. crescentus cells were grown overnight to mid-log phase in M2G media. Cells were grown in an incubator shaker at 28°C at 250 rpm in a 250 mL conical flask. Mid-log phase was confirmed as an optical density OD600 reading between 0.3 and 0.5. 2 mL of Qiagen RNAprotect bacteria reagent is brought to room temperature in 15 mL falcon tubes. Rifampicin dissolved in DMSO is added to the 25 mL culture at a final concentration of 200 μg/mL. 1 mL of culture is pulled out of the conical flask at each time point after the addition of rifampicin and added to 2 mL of RNAprotect and vortexed for 5 s to stabilize mRNAs. Timepoints of RNA collection were 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, and 15 min after rifampicin addition. After the last time point was taken, the cells are incubated at room temperature for at least 5 min in the RNAprotect. The cells were then spun down and pelleted in preparation for RNA Extraction by trizol. RNA was extracted according to protocol and libraries were constructed according to a published protocol. RNA-seq libraries were deposited into NCBI GEO with accession number GSE157432.

## Rif-seq with retapamulin or chloramphenicol pretreatment
Cell Harvesting - 25 mL of C. crescentus cells were grown overnight to mid-log phase in M2G media. Cells were grown in an incubation shaker, in a 250 mL conical flask at 250 rpm. Mid-log phase was confirmed as an OD600 reading between 0.3 and 0.5. 2 mL of Qiagen RNAprotect bacteria reagent was brought to room temperature in 15 mL falcon tubes. At time = −2 min (two minutes before the addition of rifampicin at time = 0 min) the 25 mL were pretreated with either retapamulin or chloramphenicol to a final concentration of 100 μg/mL, or retapamulin to a final concentration of 12.5 μg/mL. After this pre-incubation of retapamulin or chloramphenicol, the cells were harvested for rif-seq as described in the rif-seq section. RNA-seq libraries were deposited into NCBI GEO with accession number GSE228591. mRNA half-lives of simple mRNAs after the retapamulin and chloramphenicol treatments are listed in .
Metagene plots were generated for untreated, and 2 min after rifampicin treatment samples. Metagene plots were generated by first calculating the normalized read density for each gene within −25 to +100nt from the start codon. For each position of each gene, the number of reads mapped was normalized per sample ( ) where corresponds to the total number of reads at a given position from −25 to +100nt. Then we normalized the read counts from the −25 to +100nt region based upon the maximal number of normalized reads in the pre-rif sample , where normalized reads at position I relates to the location in the −25 to 100nt region. All CDS regions less than 200nt in length were removed from the analysis.
To estimate the half-lives of the 5’+RBS and CDS regions of the dnaK mRNA we sectioned the mRNA into the 5′ UTR to 30nt after the start codon as 5’+RBS, and 31nt to the stop codon as CDS. We counted the normalized number of reads in each region for all the rif-seq time points, discarded points with less than 50 read counts, calculated the ln (Fraction RNA remaining) of each time course for each region. The half-lives where then calculated from the for each region of the mRNA in each sample.

## smFISH
C. crescentus cells were grown in M2G at 28°C until OD660 becomes 0.2, and E. coli cells were grown in M9 minimal media supplemented with glucose at 37°C until OD660 becomes 0.2. For both species, we followed the same smFISH protocol previously published. In short, 0.9 mL of cell culture was withdrawn and immediately mixed with 0.3 mL of 16% formaldehyde for fixation. Cells were adhered to a poly-L-lysine treated coverslip surface and permeabilized by 70% ethanol. For yfp mRNA labeling, we used 12 tiling probes for yfp, labeled by a single Cy5 at the 5′ end. The sequences are provided in . The probe hybridization solution included 20% formamide, 2× saline sodium citrate (SSC), and 10 nM of the Cy5-labeled probes. The hybridization was performed for 2 h at 37°C, followed by washing with a solution of 25% formamide and 2× SSC. For imaging, we used a Nikon Eclipse Ti-2 microscope equipped with a 640 nm laser, a phase-contrast objective Plan Apochromat 100×/1.45 NA (Nikon), and an Andor iXon Ultra 897 EMCCD camera. For analysis, we used MicrobeTracker for cell outlines and spot identification. 
We used the wild-type strains (NA1000 and MG1655) as a negative control for yfp probes. For a single-molecule control, we constructed an E. coli strain with a chromosomal copy of tsr-yfp under the lac promoter (using the same yfp sequence as used in C. crescentus strains; SK346). We also used a C. crescentus strain expressing yfp from a xylose-inducible promoter (JS86) as a single-molecule control. The mean fluorescence spot intensity found in the single-molecule control was used as a normalization factor to convert the fluorescence intensity of hu-yfp and cckA-yfp mRNAs into the absolute copy numbers in C. crescentus strains, MS307 and NJH429, respectively ( ).

## Design of synthetic YFP and mCherry expression plasmids
Synthetic YFP and mCherry reporter gene fragments with different CAI values were synthesized from twist biosciences as listed in the . These reporter gene fragments contained an EcoRI cut site at 5′ end and a NheI cut site at 3′ end. The pBXYFPC-2 plasmid containing the Kan resistant gene and the reporter gene fragments were subjected to restriction digestion with EcoRI and Nhe1 and ligated together in a way that the reporter gene is under the control of an inducible xylose promoter. Inverse PCR followed by ligation was used to generate the variants with CCNA_03380 or CCNA_03024 TIR regions as described in Ghosh and Bharmal, 2023. The list of the nucleotide sequences of reporter genes is available in the . Then the ligation mixture was transformed into DH10β cells and plated on the LB/Kan (50 μg/mL) plates. The resulted colonies were inoculated in 5 mL of liquid LB/Kan (30 μg/mL) and incubated overnight at 37°C at 200 rpm. After 12–16 h the cultures were miniprepped using a Thermo Fisher GeneJET Plasmid Miniprep Kit. The DNA samples were sent to Genewiz for plasmid sequencing to verify the correct insert DNA sequences, using the DNA primer pXYL forward (cccacatgttagcgctaccaagtgc) and the TIR using the DNA primer UTR forward (cgtgaggccgaggatttcgcg). After the sequences were verified, the plasmids were transformed into C. crescentus NA1000 cells as described in Ghosh and Bharmal, 2023. 

## Synthetic YFP and mCherry fluorescence measurement
Fluorescence protein measurements were carried out for each of the variants using a fluorescence plate reader (Microplate Reader, Fluorescence - Gemini XPS02226). First the C. crescentus cells harboring reporter plasmids were grown overnight in liquid M2G/Kan. The next day, cells in the mid-log phase were serially diluted with 5 mL of fresh liquid M2G/Kan to have an OD600 of 0.05–0.1. The cells in the mid-log phase were then induced with xylose (0.2%) and the cells were grown for 6 h at 28°C at 240 rpm. After 6 h 150 μL of the cell culture were pipetted out to each well (three technical replicates per biological sample) of Corning 96-Well flat-bottom black microplate and fluorescence protein measurements were taken at 25°C. For YFP, exposure and emission wavelengths were 485 nm and 538 nm respectively. For mCherry, exposure and emission wavelengths were 550 nm and 620 nm respectively. The OD600 was measured using the same fluorescence plate reader at the time of fluorescence measurements. A C. crescentus strain which does not contain any fluorescence proteins (JS178) was used as the negative control. The mean fluorescence value for each variant was divided by the OD600 to normalize the fluorescence data. Fluorescence reading of the negative control strain was subtracted from the normalized fluorescence values of each variant to remove any background fluorescence.

## Synthetic YFP and mCherry mRNA half-life measurement using qRT-PCR
mRNA half-life measurements were carried out for each of the variants using qRT-PCR. First the C. crescentus cells harboring reporter plasmids were grown overnight in liquid M2G/Kan. The next day, cells in the mid-log phase were serially diluted with 25 mL of fresh liquid M2G/Kan to have an OD600 of 0.05–0.1. The cells in the mid-log phase (OD600 0.3) were then induced with xylose (0.2%) and the cells were grown for 2 h at 28°C at 240 rpm. Meanwhile, 2 mL of Qiagen RNAprotect bacteria reagent is brought to room temperature in 15 mL falcon tubes. After 2 h 1 mL of the culture was pipetted out to the 2 mL of RNAprotect and vortexed for 5 s to stabilize mRNAs. Then, 200 μg/mL of Rifampicin dissolved in DMSO is added to the 25 mL culture while the culture is shaking, and 1 mL of the culture was pipetted out to the 2 mL of RNAprotect and vortexed for 5 s at 1,3 and 9 min after the addition of rifampicin. After the last time point was taken, the cells were incubated at room temperature for at least 5 min in the RNAprotect. The cells were then spun down at 18407 × g (Eppendrof 5420, Rotor FA-24 × 2) for 10 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in 1 mL of prewarmed trizol (65°C) by gently pipetting up and down and incubated for 10 min at 65°C. 200 μL of chloroform was added to the mixture, gently mixed by inverting the tube few times and incubated for 5 min at room temperature. The sample was spun down at 18407 × g (Eppendrof 5420, Rotor FA-24 × 2) for 10 min and the supernatant was removed to a siliconized tube with 500 μL of chloroform. Subsequently, the mixture underwent vortexing and was spun for ten minutes at 18407 × g (Eppendrof 5420, Rotor FA-24 × 2). The supernatant was then pipetted out and combined with 1/10 of volume of 3M sodium acetate, 700 μL of ice-cold isopropanol and 2 μL of glyco-blue. This mixture was then incubated at −80°C overnight. The mixture was then spun down for 60 min at 18878 × g (accuSpin Micro 21R Microcentrifuge, 24 × 1.5/2.0 mL Rotor) at 4°C and washed with 80% ice-cold ethanol followed by resuspending the pelled in 30–50 μL of nuclease free distilled water. The concentration of RNA was measured using a NanoDrop 2000C from Thermo Scientific. Primers for qRT-PCR were designed using the IDT primer quest tool. Each 20 μL of qRT-PCR reaction contained Luna Universal One-Step Reaction Mix (2×), Luna WarmStart RT Enzyme Mix (20×) Forward primer (10 μM), Reverse primer (10 μM), 200 ng of extracted RNA and nuclease free water. The reactions were quickly spun down and qRT-PCR was carried out using Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 3 Real-Time PCR System. In addition, the same qRT-PCR experiment was done using 5S forward and reverse primers to be used for the normalization of mRNA at each time point. The amount of RNA was calculated from the Ct using a standard curve. The natural log of the percentage of RNA still present in every sample was divided by the natural log of RNA at time zero. Then the slope of the linear curve fit was calculated, and it was translated into mRNA half-lives by dividing −ln(2) by the slope. Primer sequences for qRT-PCR experiment are available in .

## Polysome profiling
Harvesting the cells - C. crescentus cells harboring reporter plasmids (CAI 0.9 and CAI 0.4 with the CCNA_03024 TIR) were grown up to mid-log phase (OD600 0.3) in 200 mL of liquid M2G/Kan. Cells were then induced with xylose (0.2%) and grown for two hours at 28°C at 240 rpm. After two hours cells were treated with chloramphenicol (final concentration of 100 μg/mL) and incubated in 28°C shaker for 2 min at 240 rpm. Meanwhile four 50 mL falcon tubes were filled with 15 mL ice cubes of M2G minimal media with 100 μg/mL of Chloramphenicol and the tubes were kept in ice. After 2 min, the cell cultures were immediately poured into 50 mL falcon tubes with the ice cubes, capped the tubes and immediately centrifuged in a prechilled centrifuge (4°C) at 22786 × g (Sorvall X1R Pro Centrifuge, F15–8 × 50cy Fixed-Angle Rotor) for 2 min. Then the supernatant in each tube was discarded by decanting and the cell pellets were resuspended in 20 mL of prechilled Resuspension Buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NH4Cl, 1 mM chloramphenicol). Cells were centrifuged again at 22786 × g (F15–8 × 50cy Fixed-Angle Rotor) for 1.5 min to pellet cells in the prechilled (rotor). Then supernatant was discarded by decanting, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 600 μL of Lysis Buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10 mM MgCl2, 100 mM NH4Cl, 0.4% Triton X-100, 0.1% NP-40, 1 mM chloramphenicol, 100 U/mL RNase-free DNase I (Roche). Meanwhile, a few holes were poked in a 50mL conical lid using a hot needle and dipped in liquid nitrogen and the cell suspension in lysis buffer was slowly dripped into that 50 mL falcon tube filled with liquid nitrogen. Then the falcon tubes with the cell pellets were stored in a −80°C freezer until proceeded with the lysis of the cells.
Cell lysis - Cell lysis was performed in the Mixer Mill MM 400 (Roche). First the grinding jar (25 mL) and grinding ball (25 mm) were chilled in liquid nitrogen for few minutes. Then, the jar was opened, and the frozen cell pellets were added into the chilled jar with grinding ball, and the lid was closed. Then the cell pellets were milled 5 times at 15 Hz for 3 min. The sealed jar was chilled in liquid nitrogen between each run. Next the grinding jar was opened, and each half of the jar was kept upright in warm 30°C water for 2 min until the pulverized cells were thawed. Then the lysate was pipetted out into prechilled 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube and the tubes with the Incubate lysate in ice for 20 min. Then the lysates were pelleted at 20,000 × g (accuSpin Micro 21R Microcentrifuge, 24 × 1.5/2.0 mL Rotor) for 10 min in a 4°C microfuge to remove insoluble debris and the supernatant was carefully transferred to a pre-chilled 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube. Then 1 μL of clarified lysate was mixed with 99 μL of 10 mM Tris 7.0 and A260 of the dilution was measured by Nanodrop blanked with lysis buffer and the concentration of clarified lysate was calculated (1 A260 unit equals 40 μg/mL). Afterward the lysates were stored in −80°C freezer until proceeded with polysome isolation using the sucrose gradient fractionation.
Polysome isolation by sucrose gradient fractionation - The clarified cell lysates were thawed on ice for about an hour. The SW41 rotor and buckets were chilled to 4°C. Then the open top polyclear tubes were filled with 6 mL of 55% sucrose solution and 10% sucrose solution was carefully layered on top. Then the tubes were capped and established the gradient using BIO-COMP Gradient Master. Then the caps were opened, and the cell lysates were carefully layered on the top of the gradient. The tubes were placed in buckets, and the buckets were balanced. Next the buckets were spun at 35,000 rpm (209874 × g) for 2.5 h at 4°C (Thermo Sorvall WX Ultra 80 ultra centrifuge - SW41 rotor). Then the sucrose gradients were fractionated using BIO-COMP Fractionator keeping the piston speed at 0.22 mm/s. The polysome fractions were collected to 2 mL microcentrifuge tubes and the fractions were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until the RNA extraction was carried out.
RNA extraction - To 0.7 mL of each polysome fraction, 40 μL of 20% SDS and 0.7 mL of acid phenol pre-warmed to 65°C were added and mixed by vortexing. The mixtures were Incubate at 65°C for 5 min and chilled on ice for 5 min. Tubes were spun at 20,000 × g (accuSpin Micro 21R Microcentrifuge, 24 × 1.5/2.0 mL Rotor) for 2 min and the aqueous phase of each fraction was transferred to fresh tubes separately. Then 0.7 mL of RT acid phenol was added, mixed by vortexing, incubated at RT for 5 min, spun at 20,000 × g for 2 min and the aqueous phase of each fraction was transferred to fresh tubes separately. Then to each tube 0.6 mL of chloroform was added, mixed by vortexing, immediately spun at 20,000 × g for 1 min and transfer aqueous phase to fresh tubes separately. Then, 75 μL of 3 M NaOAc pH 5.5 and 0.8 mL of 100% isopropanol were added to each tube, mixed by vortexing and chill at −80°C overnight. Next day, polysomal RNA were pelleted at 20,000 × g for 1 h in a 4°C microfuge, pellets were washed with 0.8 mL of ice-cold 80% ethanol and air dried the pellets for 5 min and resuspended the pellets in RNase Free MQ water. Finally, qRT-PCR using Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 3 Real-Time PCR System was carried out to measure the RNA concentration in each fraction. For each qRT-PCR reaction 50 ng of RNA was used.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

## mRNA half-life calculation using rif-correct software
Half-life for each gene was calculated from Rif-Seq according to the protocol in (Aretakis & Schrader BioRxiv ). To calculate lag time (or RNAP runoff time), RNAP elongation time was calculated to the middle of each CDS feature. This distance was calculated from half the distance from the farthest upstream TSS site, or first CDS start codon if no TSS is known (for operons this would be the first gene in the operon), to the end of the CDS site for that specific gene. This was used as a correction, and the linear regression of the natural log of the RPKM data gives a slope calculation which represents the mRNA half-life.

## Detection of ncRNAs
45 ncRNAs were discovered by searching the 15′ post rifampicin samples for contiguous stretches of RNA above 15 reads/nt. New ncRNAs were categorized as CDS if they overlapped with the CDS region, as 3′ UTR or 5′ UTR if they overlapped with a previously known UTR region or overlapped with the region within 30 nucleotides of an upstream or downstream start or stop codon, antisense if they overlapped with the region on the opposite strand of a CDS, or intergenic if they met none of the previous criteria and where not overlapping a known CDS or ncRNA. These stable ncRNAs were reported in our previous work and have been updated to the current version of the NA1000 genome in GenBank (NC_011916.1).The half-lives of the ncRNAs are available in .

## Calculating average RNAP elongation rate on mRNAs
For each time point (0, 1, 2, and 4 min) read data was combined for highly expressed operons greater than or equal to 7,000 bases in length in 300 nucleotide bins. The half-max distance for each timepoint was calculated. Then each time point in seconds was plotted against the half-max, and a linear regression was performed, and the slope of the linear regression corresponded to the average RNAP elongation rate on mRNA in nucleotides per second (19 nt/s). 33 mRNAs >7kB were used in this analysis.

## Half-life vs. elongation time
Elongation time was only calculated for genes that had non-complex mRNA such as those genes that are monocistronic, and without multiple known isoforms (multiple TSS’s or internal TSS’s). Elongation time was calculated as the length of the gene in nucleotides (from known TSS or start of CDS to end of CDS) divided by the average RNAP elongation rate on mRNA’s (19 nt/s). mRNA lifetimes and the comparison with transcription elongation times of all simple mRNAs across the C. crescentus genome is available in . We performed NCBI DAVID functional annotation clustering for mRNAs that undergo co-transcriptional decay and the data is available in .

## Estimated mRNA copy number per cell by smFISH
Using the copy numbers of hu and cckA mRNAs determined by smFISH, we performed a linear regression between the mRNA copy number and RPKM values of the RNA-Seq data from cells grown in M2G media (mRNA copy number = 0.0011 * RPKM R2 = 0.9952). We then used the conversion formula from the linear regression to convert the RPKM values into mRNA copy numbers across the transcriptome.

## Estimated mRNA copy number per cell
To compare the smFISH mRNA copy numbers to independent estimates, we performed mRNA copy number estimation from RNA-seq. First, we assumed that C. crescentus has a similar number of mRNA per cell to E. coli, estimated from the literature at 1400 mRNA per cell. Hence, we used this number to convert C. crescentus RNA-Seq relative mRNA copy number into an absolute copy number for each gene. The RPKM for C. crescentus RNA-Seq in log phase steady state conditions, grown in M2G media was summed across the genome, the percentage as calculated for each individual gene by dividing each gene’s RPKM by the total RPKM. Then this per gene percentage was multiplied by the total mRNA estimate for E. coli (1400/cell), to estimate the absolute mRNA copy number for each mRNA per cell for Hu and cckA mRNAs.

## Individual mRNA genome-wide transcription rate
For this analysis all ORF’s half-lives were used to provide a systemic view of absolute mRNA transcription rate. Estimated mRNA copy number for each gene was divided by the decay rate to give an absolute transcription rate within the units of molecules per cell per minute.

## Proteomap generation
See for explanation of how C. crescentus gene ontology categories were determined. For genes where a mRNA half-life had been calculated, individual gene copy number per cell was divided by the mRNA half-life in minutes to give a mRNA transcription rate in mRNA’s transcribed per minute. The categorized genes along with the mRNA transcription rate data were used to create the Proteomap for mRNA transcription rate, and mRNA half-lives were used to create the other Proteomap for mRNA half-lives. Data for all categories can be found in . We further compared the transcription rates, translation efficiencies, mRNA decay rates and CAI of the mRNAs code for ribosomes and flagella and data is available in .

## 5′ global RACE data analysis
Data was originally collected and analyzed in. Since the dataset was analyzed to examine sites of 5′ PPP sites previously, we reanalyzed this dataset to search for 5′ P sites. We defined 5′ P sites as sites with <0.594 log2 TAP ratio ( ) supported with >25 reads in both TAP+ and TAP− libraries. tRNAs which are known to be processed by RNase P to yield a 5′ P end was used as a positive control. A list of 5′ P sites fitting these criteria can be found as .

## Sequence logo of 5′ degradation ends
The 5′ P ends located in mRNAs from the 5′ global RACE experiment were fed into WebLogo. The 5′ P site and 5nt before and after were used to generate the sequence logo.

## RNA folding energy at 5′ P cut sites
A 50 nt sliding window was to calculate the minimum free energy by RNAfold and reported for the nucleotide centered in the middle of the window. From 100 nt upstream to 100 nt downstream of an identified 5′ P site, minimum free energy was reported as a median and graphed along with lines representing upper and lower quartiles.

## mRNA cutting in different mRNA regions
mRNAs in this analysis were limited to those mRNA and tRNA that are monocistronic, and without multiple known isoforms (multiple TSS’s or internal TSS’s). Also, mRNAs were limited to those with known UTR’s greater than or equal to 30 nucleotides. These mRNA were divided up into different regions. With the 5′ UTR region defined as from the TSS site to −16 from CDS start. With the start region defined as −15 from CDS start to +15 from CDS start. With the coding region defined as CDS +15 from CDS start to −15 from CDS end. With the end region from −15 from CDS end to +15 from CDS end. The tRNA region was grouped together as a whole. From our 5′ end degradation detection we sorted those cuts that fell into any of the mRNA regions, or for tRNA. This gave us total number of cuts in those regions. Then the total number of cuts was divided by the length of all of those regions across our selected mRNA to give our cut site per nucleotide probability, the error bars show the calculated Wald confidence interval. Finally, the total number of cuts from the 5′ end degradation detection for each strand was randomly assigned a position in the genome, on their respective strands, using the Random Python library function “randint()”. Then the cuts that fell in each mRNA region across the genome was summed.

## Translation efficiency vs. half-life
mRNAs in this analysis were limited to those simple mRNAs that are monocistronic, and without multiple known isoforms (multiple TSS’s or internal TSS’s) yielding 366 mRNAs. Average translation efficiency was calculated according to. mRNA were then separated into eight bins based on their translation efficiency and then the average translation efficiency of that bin was graphed vs. average half-life of mRNA in that bin. Lower and upper error bars represent the 25% and 75% quartile for mRNA half-life, respectively. Center weighted ribosomal footprints Ribosomal profiling data was used to determine the ribosomal occupancy across the genome, for footprints that had greater than 1 read per nucleotide, and the resulting footprint was center weighted. The region around the 5′ end degradation site (100 nucleotides upstream and downstream) in was graphed versus the ribosomal occupancy with the average set to 1 and represented by the red line. The metagene plot below shows a heatmap of ribosomal occupancy (the darker red the higher ribosomal occupancy). The center represents the 5′ end degradation site, and shows where there is low ribosomal occupancy, middle ribosomal occupancy and stalled ribosomes at the degradation site.

## Cut site probability per nucleotide
Cut site analysis was performed on highly expressed mRNAs that had greater than 1 ribosome footprint per nucleotide on average. From that set of mRNAs, the average ribosomal occupancy was calculated. Each nt along the CDS were then put into one of three categories; those nucleotides with five times or less ribosomal occupancy than average, those nucleotides with five times or more ribosomal occupancy than average, and those nucleotides with ribosomal occupancy in between. The total number of cuts in each of those ribosome occupancy categories was summed and divided by the total number of nucleotides in that category to get cuts per nucleotide probability in each category.

## Codon adaptation index calculation
CAI was calculated across all CDSs in the C. crescentus genome. The Codon Usage table for C. crescentus was obtained from Artemis gene browser. Considering the regular EYFP gene’s nucleotide sequence as the template, the codons of the sequence were randomly altered to generate sequences with different CAI values ( ).

## Supplementary Material
124567891011SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116691.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The funding support is as follows: NIGMS GM124733 to J.M.S.; WSU Rumble fellowship to J.R.A.; Indiana University startup funds to J.M.S.; and NSF Center for Physics of Living Cells (1430124), NSF Science and Technology Center for Quantitative Cell Biology (2243257), NIH (R35GM143203), and Searle Scholars Program to S.K.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
 

## Highlights
Quantitative analysis yields absolute mRNA abundance and half-lives for C. crescentus
Both transcription and translation are globally coordinated with mRNA decay
Ribosome occupancy is a positive determinant of mRNA stability
Translation initiation and elongation impact mRNA decay through ribosome occupancy