Yale J Biol Med504yjbmThe Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine0044-00861551-4056Yale Journal of Biology and MedicinePMC2588768PMC2588768.125887682588768125303921Research ArticleYale School of Medicine thesis abstracts 2002.
May-Jun2002753173904121181010520022811200829062011pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 75 (2002), pp. 121-181. 
Copyright ? 2002. All rights reserved . 
 
Yale University School of Medicine 
Thesis Abstracts - 2002 
 
POSITIONAL CLONING OF THE CHROMOSOMAL TRANSLOCATION 
BREAKPOINT IMPLICATED IN HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS. Felix Adler, 
John G. Greally, David C. Ward, Thomas 0. Carpenter, and Richard P. Lifton. 
Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con- 
necticut. 
 
Phosphate homeostasis is controlled by a complex but poorly understood interplay of 
hormonal and non-hormonal mechanisms. In recent years, the identification of several 
genes for certain congenital forms of hypophosphatemic rickets has led to the emergence 
of a fascinating phosphate regulating system. We describe a patient with a rare form of 
hypophosphatemic rickets who carries a de novo, balanced, t(9;13)(g22;ql4) transloca- 
tion. The finding of a sporadic translocation in concordance with a rare phenotype strong- 
ly suggests that the translocation is causal to the disease. We used fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) to physically map the translocation breakpoint to within 183 kb and 
147 kb on chromosomes 9 and 13, respectively, and identified a number of interesting can- 
didate genes in the vicinity of the breakpoints. We hypothesize that the translocation is 
disrupting a gene required for normal phosphate metabolism, either by direct physical dis- 
turbance or by other mechanisms that alter gene expression. While we have not demon- 
strated direct disruption of a candidate gene, this is being evaluated by molecular genetic 
means. As the study of affected individuals with cytogenetic abnormalities has proven to 
be a powerful approach to identifying disease-causing genes, we anticipate that this pur- 
suit will result in the identification of a new factor involved in phosphate homeostasis and 
will increase our understanding of related metabolic disorders. 
 
SURVIVAL OUTCOME OF PATIENTS WITH CERVICAL CARCINOMA TREAT- 
ED BY THERAPEUTIC RADIOLOGY AT THE YALE CANCER CENTER FROM 
1980-2000. Arash Steven Afari, David H. Kim, Susan A. Higgins, and Barry 
Matthew Kacinski. Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale Cancer Center, Yale 
New-Haven Hospital and Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven Con- 
necticut. 
 
The aim of our study was to assess the long-term overall survival and recurrence-free 
survival of patients treated with primary radiation therapy and to evaluate the impact of 
patient and treatment-related factors on treatment efficacy. 
 
We performed a detailed retrospective analysis from patients treated from years 1980 
to 2000 for 202 consecutive cervix cancer patients treated with primary external beam 
radiation therapy (EBRT) and two treatments of intracavitary radiation therapy (ICRT). 
The mean age at diagnosis was 58.9 years (range, 26 to 94 years). The histologic charac- 
teristics of the primary lesions included squamous cell carcinoma 170 (84.16 percent), 
adenocarcinoma 16 (7.92 percent), adenosquamous nine (4.46 percent), and other six 
(0.50 percent). Patients were staged with the use of Perez modification of the Internation- 
al Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) staging system for primary cervical 
carcinoma. There were 46 (22.7 percent) stage IB. 22 (10.8 percent) stage IIA, 65 (32 per- 
 
121 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
cent) stage IIB, eight (3.9 percent) stage IIIA, 51 (25.1 percent) stage IIIB, nine (4.4 per- 
cent) stage IVA, and one (0.5 percent) stage IVB patients. The median dose to point A was 
83.8 Gy (range, 7.0 to 107.1 Gy), and the median dose to point B was 52.6 Gy (range, 
7.03 to 151.0 Gy). Median follow-up for patients alive at last follow up was 3.9 years 
(mean, 4.3 years; range, 0.13 to 14.6 years). Forty-three percent of patients were followed 
until death with median follow up of 1.5 years. The impact of patient-, tumor-, and thera- 
py-related factors on the treatment outcome was evaluated with Cox proportional hazard 
regression analysis. Survival analyses were performed with Kaplan-Meier curves and sta- 
tistical analyses was performed using the Statistica software package. 
 
The five-year overall survival for all patients studied was FIGO IB = 77 percent, IIA 
= 69 percent, IIB = 63 percent, IIIA was 23 percent, IIIB was 57 percent, and IVA was 33 
percent. Including all patients, the five-year disease-free survival for FIGO stage IB = 67 
percent, HA = 55 percent, IIB = 52 percent, IIIA = 42 percent, IIIB = 57 percent, IVA = 
43 percent. Using the Cox proportional hazard regression model, improved overall sur- 
vival was statistically significantly correlated with higher Karnofsky score (p < .05), squa- 
mous cell histology (p < .05), negative para-aortic node status (p < .05), and lack of 
chemotherapy usage (p < .05). The local controlled survival was statistically significantly 
correlated with higher Karnofsky score (p < .05), squamous cell histology (p < .05). neg- 
ative para-aortic node status (p < .05), and lack of chemotherapy usage (p < .05). 
Improved recurrence-free survival was statistically significantly correlated with higher 
karnofsky score (p < .05). squamous cell histology (p < .05), negative para-aortic node sta- 
tus (p < .05), and lack of chemotherapy usage (p < .05). Most cases of chemotherapy were 
used in a neoadjuvant manner. 
 
Higher Karnofsky score and negative para-aortic nodal status in cervix cancer 
patients treated with definitive EBRT and ICRT leads to longer overall survival, recur- 
rence free survival, and locally controlled survival. These should play a large role in the 
patients' prognosis. We plan to further assess the differences between CT diagnosed para- 
aortic nodal status versus biopsy diagnosed status. Patients with both squamous cell and 
adenosquamous histology had equivalent and improved survival over those with adeno- 
carcinoma histology. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is correlated with poorer survival. 
 
IMPACT OF FEDERAL BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH FUNDING ON THE 
GROWTH OF U.S. BIOTECHNOLOGY CLUSTERS. Vishal Agrawal (Sponsored 
by William D. White). Section of Health Policy and Administration, Department of 
Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
 
Much has been said about the biotechnology industry's potential to improve health- 
care and develop state or regional economies. However, there is relatively little scholar- 
ship analyzing the local effects of forces underlying the sector's rapid growth. This study 
examines the correlation between non-profit biomedical research activity by metropolitan 
area (MA) and the size of the local biotech industry "cluster." A database of current (year 
2000) and cumulative (1985 to 2000) dollars granted by the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) to extramural non-profit biomedical research organizations was created and 
mapped to corresponding MAs. Another database of over 350 US-based, publicly traded 
biotech parent companies and subsidiaries focused on human therapeutics was created to 
assess cluster sizes. SA bivariate analysis of NIH funds versus public biotech employees 
was plotted for each MA that either has at least one research center with a minimum $10 
million in NIH funding or a public biotech company (n = 70). A statistically significant 
correlation (p < .0001) is observed with an r2 = 68 percent. When a single outlier (San 
 
122 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
Francisco Bay area) is removed the r2 increases to 87 percent. These data support the 
notion that federal funding to academic medical centers (AMCs) and other non-profit 
research institutes is among the primary drivers shaping local biotech sector growth. 
Inspection of the data suggests, as a hypothesis for future research, that growth may be 
higher in MAs where mature "anchor companies" have emerged. These may be associat- 
ed with their own spin-offs, independent of traditional industry-academia collaboration. 
 
TRANSPLANTATION AMELIORATES THE HYPERCOAGULABILITY OF END- 
STAGE RENAL DISEASE. Fred Aslan, Jane C.K. Fitch, Rex L. Mahnensmith, 
and Amy L Friedman. Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut and Department of Anesthesiology, Baylor University 
School of Medicine, Houston, Texas. 
 
It has been suggested that hypercoagulability associated with ESRD may be attribut- 
able to diminished circulating levels of antithrombin III (ATIII). Whole blood clotting and 
rheological assessment of blood, by thromboelastography (TEG) and Sonoclot (SCT) 
analyses, was performed on fresh specimens from four patient groups: control (C), 
hemodialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD) and well-functioning kidney transplant recip- 
ients (Txp). TEG indices included r (rate of thromboplastin generation), r + (coagulation 
time), Ang (rate of clot formation), MA (clot strength), LY30 and LY60 (percent fibrinol- 
ysis at 30 and 60 minutes). SCT indices included SonACT (activation time) and SonR 
(rate of fibrin formation). ATIII levels were collected and assayed subsequently. 
 
C PD HD Txp 
 
(n = 20) (n = 13) (n = 21) (n = 20) p value 
 
MA 64.5 + 5.4 77.2 + 4.2 73.4 + 6.9 66.5 + 13.8 <.001A,B,D 
Ang 68.3 + 8.8 74.1 + 5.6 74.6 + 4.7 64.1 + 14.3 .006CD 
LY30 2.1 + 1.8 0.7 + 0.9 1.3 + 1.3 1.5 + 1.9 .036 
LY60 5.8 + 3.8 2.5 + 2.2 3.2 + 2.7 3.4 + 3.3 .014A 
SonR 16.3 + 4.3 32.4 + 16.9 33.5 + 29.3 24.5 + 7.8 <.001B 
SonACT 118.8 + 19.2 145 + 35.8 142.6 + 41.9 127.6 + 24.9 .019 
ATIII 84.6 + 19.4 69.7 + 20.6 68.7 + 22.0 70.4 + 22.3 .049 
 
p < 0.05: A = PD vs. C; B = HD vs. C; C = HD vs. Txp; D = PD vs. TxpS 
 
TEG and SCT measure quantitative and qualitative platelet and coagulation factor 
function. ESRD patients manifest thrombotic tendencies by TEG, SCT, and ATIII levels. 
Txp appears to correct these values. Lowered levels of ATIII in both dialysis groups were 
not normalized post-transplant. It remains to be determined whether the benefits of trans- 
plant are attributed to platelet function or other coagulation factors. 
 
ELEMENTARY STUDENTS' UNDERSTANDING OF THE COMMON COLD. 
Rupal V. Badani. Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study examines children's understanding of the causality, treatment, and pre- 
vention of the common cold. Using a standardized, developmentally-based, semistruc- 
tured interview (ASK [AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) Survey for Kids]), 
800 children (43 percent Black; 38 percent White; 18 percent Hispanic; 48 percent 
 
123 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
female) in kindergarten through sixth grade attending six public elementary/middle 
schools in New Haven, Connecticut, were asked open-ended questions about the causali- 
ty, treatment, and prevention of the common cold. Responses were scored for factual con- 
tent. With increasing grade level, a greater percentage of students mentioned contagion 
and germs as causes of the cold, medicine as a means of treatment, and avoidance of casu- 
al contact as a means of prevention. Further, even some of the youngest children demon- 
strated some factual knowledge of each of these three illness concepts. Common miscon- 
ceptions were identified across all grade levels. These misconceptions did not decrease as 
children acquired more factual information about colds. Additionally, these misconcep- 
tions did not appear to stem from developmental constraints in children's ability to com- 
prehend illness concepts, indicating that health education can and should begin early in 
school. 
 
STRONG WORK: THE FORCES THAT SHAPE A MEDICAL STUDENT INTO AN 
INTERN. Brooke Carlisle Bailey. Section of History of Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The study investigates how a newly matriculated medical student is shaped by his 
medical school training into an intem. Which challenges are common to most, if not all, 
students? How do they shape the students? Autobiographical accounts of medical school 
written between 1976 and 1999 were examined, along with a comparable sampling of 
first-person accounts of medical school taken from non-authors. Challenges faced by mul- 
tiple reporters from diverse backgrounds, locations, and times were identified and char- 
acterized. These were: the struggle to balance the empathetic urge to identify with the 
patient with the need to learn to identify with the medical team; fears of inadequacy, igno- 
rance, and failure; and the uncomfortably uncertain role and constantly shifting status of 
the medical student. 
 
THE EFFECT OF AN ER-SELECTIVE CALCIUM ATPASE INHIBITOR ON 
NASAL POTENTIAL DIFFERENCES IN CYSTIC FIBROSIS AFFECTED MICE. 
Naomi J. Balamuth (Sponsored by Marie E. Egan). Department of Pediatrics, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of 2,5-di-(tert-butyl)-l,4-hydro- 
quinone (DBHQ) on chloride transport in wild-type, heterozygote, and cystic fibrosis 
(CF) affected mice. It has been proposed that DBHQ by altering the ER calcium concen- 
tration, interferes with the ability of chaperone proteins to recognize AF508-CFTR as mis- 
folded, thereby allowing escape of the misfolded protein to the cell surface. This study 
will contribute to a larger investigation that is evaluating potential therapeutic agents for 
cystic fibrosis. 
 
Nasal potential difference studies were performed in wild-type, heterozygote, and 
cystic fibrosis affected mice prior to treatment with DBHQ. As has been previously report- 
ed, CF-affected mice displayed an increased nasal potential difference, reflecting an 
increase in sodium reabsorption. CF affected cells with a defective CFTR are incapable of 
secreting chloride; therefore, the apical membrane cannot depolarize in response to iso- 
proterenol, and the nasal potential difference does not hyperpolarize. Wild-type, het- 
erozygote, and CF-affected mice were treated with nebulized DBHQ and nasal potential 
difference studies were repeated. CF-affected mice showed normalized electrophysiolog- 
ic parameters following treatment with DBHQ. 
 
124 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
YOGA INTERVENTION FOR ADULTS WITH MILD TO MODERATE ASTHMA. 
Sandeep Bansal, Alyse Behrman, Elaine Rodriguez, Anna-Leila Williams, and 
David L. Katz. Yale Prevention Research Center, Department of Epidemiology and 
Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to ascertain the effectiveness of yoga as adjunctive 
treatment for adult patients with mild to moderate asthma. A parallel group, randomized 
controlled trial, double-blinded to subjects and outcomes evaluators, was conducted. Sub- 
jects were randomly allocated to an Iyengar yoga treatment group or a control condition. 
Both yoga and control subjects attended twice-weekly training classes for four weeks, and 
were then asked to continue exercises on their own for an additional three months. Yoga 
subjects learned breathing techniques, postures, and meditation thought to be of benefit to 
asthmatics. Control subjects underwent a sham intervention consisting of stretching exer- 
cises. Outcome measures included rescue inhaler use, quality of life measured by the Mini 
Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (MiniAQLQ), forced expiratory volume in one sec- 
ond (FEVI), daily peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) variability, and a composite symptom 
score. In interim results, six of 13 subjects randomized to yoga, and six of 15 subjects ran- 
domized to control were available at their first follow-up assessment. Preliminary analy- 
sis of these data found no significant differences between treatment groups in the out- 
comes of interest. Data from an additional 40 subjects will be needed before the final 
analysis may be conducted. Despite the lack of final results, this trial overcomes limita- 
tions of previous studies by presenting a design that controls for the placebo effect 
received by yoga subjects. Investigators may be able to benefit from such a design when 
conducting future studies. 
 
CARDIAC MECHANICS AND FLOW IN TRANSMYOCARDIAL LASER REVAS- 
CULARIZATION IN A MODEL OF CHRONIC ISCHEMIA. Hany S. Bdair, Donald 
R Dione, James A. Arrighi, Xenios Papademetrix, Yihua Liu, Peter Borek, Spiros 
Condos, Robert S. Constable, James S. Duncan, Robert T. Constable, James S. 
Duncan, Robert Soufer, and Albert J. Sinusas. Section of Cardiology, Department 
of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Transmyocardial laser revascularization (TMLR) has been employed as an alterna- 
tive treatment for patients with coronary artery disease, however the mechanism by which 
patients improve remains poorly defined. A potential mechanical effect of TMLR was 
evaluated by measuring changes in regional flow and function in chronically ischemic 
dogs before and after TMLR. TMLR was performed with an excimer laser in dogs (n = 5) 
six weeks post ameroid implantation. Flow was assessed with dynamic N13 ammonia PET 
imaging at four and 11 weeks post ameroid implantation. Absolute PET flow was assessed 
in 24 myocardial segments at rest and during adenosine stress. Regional and global left 
ventricular (LV) function was assessed with ECG-gated cine magnetic resonance (MR) 
imaging 5 and 12 arks post ameroid implantation. Endocardial and epicardial 3-dimen- 
sional (3D) surfaces from the MR images were segmented using a semi-automatic algo- 
rithm. Radial strains (thickening) were derived using a 3D shape tracking algorithm, finite 
element analysis, and an anisotropic linear elastic biomechanical model for the same 24 
myocardial segments. Prior to TMLR there was a reduction in the resting flow in ischemic 
(IS) regions (IS: 0.36 ? 0.05 ml/min/g; non-ischemic (NI): 0.45 ? 0.03 ml/min/g; p < .05), 
which improved at five weeks after TMLR (IS: 0.53 ? 0.08 ml/min/g: NI: 0.59 ? 0.07 
ml/min/g; p < .05 vs. pre). TMLR also tended to increase adenosine flow in IS regions 
(pre-TMLR: 0.90 ? 0.2 ml/min/g; post-TMLR: 1.3 ? 0.4 ml/min/g; p = ns) and NI regions 
 
125 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
(pre-TMLR: 1.6 ? 0.4 ml/min/g; post-TMLR: 2.0 ? 0.5 ml/min/g; p = ns). TMLR 
improved global LV ejection fraction (pre-TMLR: 33 ? 3 percent; post-TMLR: 38 ? 1 
percent; p = .07), while LV endiastolic volume remained unchanged. Prior to TMLR, there 
was a reduction in resting radial strain in the ischemic regions relative to the non-ischemic 
regions (IS: 0.12 + 0.05; NI: 0.16 ? 0.03; p < .05). There was a non-significant increase 
in radial strain in the ischemic regions and non-ischemic regions at six weeks after TMLR 
(IS: 0.15 ? 0.04; NI: 0.20 ? 0.02; p = ns vs. pre). TMLR significantly improved resting 
PET flow in the ischemic region and also tended to improve global LV function and 
regional myocardial thickening. 
 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN PHYSICIANS AND PATIENTS' FAMILIES ON PROG- 
NOSTIC ESTIMATES IN THE CRITICALLY ILL. Premila Bhat and Mark D. Siegel. 
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
 
Decisions to withhold or withdraw care have become increasingly common in inten- 
sive care units (ICUs). Disagreements between physicians, patients, and surrogates on the 
value of ICU care may result in conflicts when discussing the merits of continued life-sus- 
taining treatment. One potential source of disagreement is discord between physicians and 
surrogates on estimates of prognosis. To determine whether physicians and surrogates 
agreed on prognostic estimates we asked the surrogate and primary ICU physician for 
each of 40 critically ill patients admitted to the Medical ICU of Yale New-Haven Hospi- 
tal to estimate the likelihood that the patient would survive to hospital discharge, 28 days, 
and six months. Answers were elicited in a yes/no format and as a predicted percentage 
of the likelihood of survival. There was significant agreement between physicians and 
families responses for all three endpoints for yes/no responses (survival to discharge: KC = 
0.7532, p < .0001; 28-day survival: K = 0.6679, p < .0001; 6-month survival: K = 0.7106, 
p < .0001). However, discord occurred more frequently when defined as a 20 percent dif- 
ference between percent-estimates (survival to discharge, K = 0.383; 28-day survival: K = 
0.4795, p < .0002; six-month survival: K = 0.3921, p = .002). Disagreement was not sig- 
nificantly related to whether physicians and families had discussed prognosis. When there 
was discord, surrogates were usually more optimistic than physicians. In five instances, 
families gave prognostic estimates equal to or more than 49 percent higher than physi- 
cians. Thus while physicians and families give generally concordant estimates, there is 
frequent disagreement that may cause conflict and drive treatment choices when decisions 
about life-sustaining therapy must be made. 
 
SCHOOL-BASED INTERVENTIONS FOR THE TREATMENT AND PREVEN- 
TION OF CHILDHOOD OBESITY. Elizabeth M. Bird, Meghan O'Connell, and 
David L. Katz. Yale Prevention Research Center, Derby, Connecticut. 
 
This paper examines school based interventions designed either to prevent or treat 
obesity with the goal of establishing the "best practices" to date. A search for relevant 
studies was performed using four databases: Pubmed (2000 to 2001), HealthStar (2000 to 
2001), Embase (2000 to 2001), and Cochrane Library (2000 to 2001). Twenty-four stud- 
ies meeting inclusion criteria were retrieved. Quality assessment was performed indepen- 
dently by two reviewers utilizing techniques from the Cochrane collaboration and The 
Guide to Community Preventive Services developed by the Centers for Disease Control. 
The literature searched revealed limited data on the effectiveness of school-based obesity 
 
126 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
prevention and management. There is evidence to support the school-based promotion of 
increased vigorous activity and decreased sedentary behavior, in particular, decreases in 
television use, both as primary and secondary prevention efforts. There is no evidence to 
support the broad-based cardiovascular disease prevention efforts that have gained popu- 
larity over the past fifteen years. No generalizable conclusions can be drawn as to nutri- 
tion education, food service changes, or the importance of family involvement in school- 
based obesity management or prevention. There continues to be a need for well-designed 
interventions. 
 
CLINICAL AND BIOLOGICAL STUDIES ON NEUROCUTANEOUS 
MELANOSIS. Diana Ivette Bojorquez, Mayra Alvarez-Franco, and Miguel Reyes- 
Mugica. Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Neurocutaneous melanosis (NCM) is a rare and frequently lethal neurocristopathy 
characterized clinically by the presence of giant and/or multiple pigmented nevi involving 
the midline or scalp, associated with hydrocephalus, seizures, and other neurologic abnor- 
malities. Melanocytes arise from a transient population of precursor cells that form at the 
neural crest. Histologically, there is an abnormal melanocytic proliferation involving the 
skin, meninges and/or central nervous system. The proliferating nevus cells feature vari- 
able phenotypes ranging from well-differentiated to highly atypical melanoma-like mor- 
phology. There are two genes related to familial melanoma development: CDK4 and p16. 
Germline mutations in p16 have been identified in approximately 50 percent of families 
with familial melanoma and are common in sporadic melanomas. Two mutations are 
known to date involving exon 2 of the CDK4 gene in melanoma families and in some spo- 
radic melanomas without p16 mutations. This study was directed to explore the presence 
of these mutations in melanocytic lesions of patients with NCM. In addition, clonality 
analysis of the melanocytic proliferations was also attempted. Twelve patients, nine with 
confirmed NCM, a one-year old girl with a congenital nevus, whose sibling died with 
NCM, and a three-year old girl with pigment synthesizing malignant melanoma with pen- 
etration of the dura mater were included in our study. DNA was extracted from 
melanocytes of normal skin, nevi, brain lesions, and/or blood samples. PCR amplification 
and sequencing for the 3 exons of p16 were carried out. The R24C mutation of the CDK4 
gene was evaluated by restriction enzyme digestion (the mutation creates a Stu I site), No 
mutations were found in either p16 or CDK4. Clonality analysis using the HUMARA 
gene essay was carried out successfully in two girls and showed a chromosome X-inacti- 
vation pattern consistent with a monoclonal (neoplastic) proliferation in melanocytic 
lesions of NCM patients. A larger series of NCM cases is required to confirm these results. 
 
THE PREDICTIVE ACCURACY OF PRE-ADOPTION VIDEO REVIEW IN 
ADOPTEES FROM RUSSIAN AND EASTERN EUROPEAN ORPHANAGES. 
Jon L. Boone, Margaret K. Hostetter, and Carol Cohen Weitzman. Department of 
Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The major purpose of this study was to examine whether the assessment of pre-adop- 
tion video (pre-vid) by an experienced pediatrician accurately predicts the post-adoption 
developmental (post-dev) status of the adoptee on arrival and to examine any difference 
in the extent of developmental delay between those adoptees with and those without a pre- 
vid review. As a foundation for the study, an extensive database for all adoptees seen at 
 
127 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
the Yale International Adoption Clinic was created and their demographic characteristics 
were analyzed. 
 
The developmental status of 20 children from Russian and Eastern European orphan- 
ages was assessed by an experienced pediatrician using a pre-vid review while the post- 
dev status was evaluated by a developmental-behavioral pediatrician. Using the Denver 
Developmental II Scoring Test (pre-vid) and the Bayley Scale of Infant Development - 
Second Edition (post-dev), children were scored (0, 1, 2, or 3) to indicate the degree of 
developmental delay in fine motor, gross motor, and language domains. A control group 
of international adoptees was assembled on the basis of age, gender, length of time in 
orphanage, length of stay in the United States before developmental exam, and country of 
origin. The degree of post-dev delay in the cohort with a pre-vid was then compared to 
that of the control group without a pre-vid using a chi-square test and Fisher's exact test. 
 
The Pearson r coefficient between the pre-adoption video and post-adoption devel- 
opmental ratings indicated a significant correlation, r = 0.53 and two-tailed p = .01, 
between the two ratings. chi-square and Fischer test analysis examining the extent of 
developmental delay between the cohort and control groups were not significant. 
 
Although there is no significant difference in the extent of developmental delay 
between the adoptees who did and did not receive a pre-vid assessment, results of this 
study show that a video review by an experienced pediatrician predicts with statistically 
significant accuracy the child's developmental status after arrival. 
 
THE ROLE OF THYROID DYSFUNCTION IN UTERINE FIBROID GROWTH. 
Hyacinth N. Browne (Sponsored by Ervin Jones). Section of Reproduction 
Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Uterine fibroids are the most common solid pelvic tumors in women and are present 
in 20 to 30 percent of reproductive-age women. They represent the single most common 
indication for hysterectomy. Although their origins remain a mystery, attempts have been 
made to show factors that may control their growth and size. This study attempts to ascer- 
tain an association between hypothyroidism and uterine fibroids possibly by a mechanism 
that results in increased uterine cell sensitivity to and uptake of estrogen. A case-control 
study was performed reviewing 351 medical records of women, over the age of 18, who 
were hypothyroid or euthyroid to ascertain how many of these women also had uterine 
fibroids. Results showed that more hypothyroid women were diagnosed with uterine 
fibroids compared to euthyroid women (16 versus six), however this finding was not sta- 
tistically significant (p = .067). Moreover, black women with hypothyroidism had a high- 
er probability of developing uterine fibroids compared to white women (p = .018 and .892, 
respectively). And, hypothyroidism was shown to be the most significant risk factor asso- 
ciated with uterine fibroids and was the strongest predictor of fibroids in this study (p = 
.017). Although a significant positive association between hypothyroidism and uterine 
fibroids was not established in this medical record review, thyroid hormone may play an 
indirect role in uterine fibroid growth necessitating further investigation. 
 
128 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
THE EFFECT AND UTILITY OF COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHIC EXAMS ON THE 
DIAGNOSIS OF ACUTE APPENDECTOMIES. Jeffrey Bush, Leigh Evans, and 
Gail D'Onofrio. Section of Emergency Medicine, Department of Surgery, Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Background: Numerous studies have examined the utility of abdominal computed 
tomographic examinations (CT) in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Several factors 
must be considered: the signs and symptoms of appendicitis, the diagnostic benefit of CT 
with contrast and without it, the negative appendectomy rate, and the appendicitis perfo- 
ration rate. In 1998, Rao et al. recommended routine CT in patients suspected of appen- 
dicitis. Numerous other studies have found that CT scans are highly sensitive, specific, 
and accurate at diagnosing appendicitis. However, a recent study by Flum et al. found that 
CT scans do not improve the negative appendectomy rate or the perforation rate. The role 
of routine CT scans in patients with acute appendicitis is not clear. 
 
Objectives: 1) To determine if the proportion of patients that had abdominal CT scans 
performed increased from 1996 to 1999. 2) To determine if this has resulted in the 
improvement of diagnosing appendicitis as measured by decrease in elapsed time from 
emergency department presentation to operating room, decrease in perforation, and nega- 
tive appendectomy rates. 
 
Methods: A retrospective chart review study conducted at two urban teaching hospi- 
tals from January 1, 1996, to December 31, 1996, and January 1, 1999, to December 31, 
1999. Patients were included if they were 18 years old or greater and underwent an appen- 
dectomy. Operative logs were reviewed during these two calendar years for patients who 
underwent an open appendectomy, laparoscopic appendectomy, diagnostic laparoscopy, 
or abdominal exploratory surgery. Patients were excluded if: 1) they underwent inciden- 
tal appendectomy during a procedure for other intra-abdominal pathology; and 2) abdom- 
inal/pelvic CT was performed prior to ED arrival. The patient's entire chart was reviewed. 
The data points collected included age, gender, whether or not the patient had a CT scan, 
elapsed time from emergency department presentation to operating room, negative appen- 
dectomy rate, and perforation rate. 
 
Results: a group of 322 patients were included in the study. In 1996, 126 patients 
were included. The 1999 group had 196 patients. The groups were similar in terms of age 
and gender. In 1996, 37 patients (29 percent) had a CT scan performed prior to surgery 
compared to 125 patients (64 percent) in 1999 (p < .001). The patients, from both years, 
who did not receive a CT scan prior to surgery had a mean elapsed time of 7.6 hours from 
presentation to the emergency department to operation compared to 14.25 hours for the 
patients who had CTs performed (p < .001). The differences in perforation rates between 
years (28 percent vs. 22 percent) and negative appendectomy rates (11 percent vs. 14 per- 
cent) were not statistically significant. 
 
Conclusions: There were more CT scans performed on patients undergoing an 
appendectomy in 1999 than in 1996. Patients who received a CT had a longer delay in 
going to the operating room. There was no significant difference in the perforation or neg- 
ative appendectomy rates between the two study groups of 1996 and 1999. 
 
129 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
EFFECT OF HIGH CARBOHYDRATE AND HIGH FAT MEALS ON 24-HOUR CIR- 
CULATING INSULIN, LEPTIN, AND FREE FATTY ACIDS. James S. Castle, James 
Dziura, Allison Smitten, Mary Savoye, Barbara Teague, and Sonia Caprio. Depart- 
ment of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The effect that macronutrients have on circulating leptin levels remains unclear. We 
studied the effect of a high carbohydrate and high fat diet on 24-hour circulating levels of 
leptin, as well as glucose, insulin, C-peptide, free fatty acids, and triglycerides in ten 
female adolescent subjects with a wide variety of BMI (19.8 to 37.2). Previous studies 
have suggested a role of circulating glucose in leptin release, but this relationship was not 
clearly known to be due to glucose, or to the insulin secretion associated with circulating 
glucose. We found that 24-hour circulating leptin levels were significantly higher during 
the high carbohydrate diet (p < .001). Although glucose was not significantly different 
during the two diet days (p > .1), insulin (p < .001) and C-peptide (p < .002) were higher 
during the high carbohydrate day. A significant relationship was found between daytime 
insulin levels (9 a.m. to 4 p.m.) and evening leptin levels (5 p.m. to 12 a.m.) during both 
diet days (r = .66, r = .48, p < .05, p < .05), but no relationship was found between day- 
time glucose and evening leptin during either day (r = .05, r = .05, p > .5, p > .5). This 
suggests that circulating insulin may be the driving force behind leptin, not circulating 
glucose. Free fatty acids were significantly higher during the high fat diet than the high 
carbohydrate diet. These results indicate that a high carbohydrate diet results in higher cir- 
culating leptin levels, and given leptin's inhibitory role on appetite and feeding behavior, 
lower short-term food intake. Furthermore, given the role of free fatty acids in insulin 
resistance, a diet high in fat may exacerbate short-term insulin resistance. 
 
PHYSICIANS' ATTITUDES AND PRACTICES REGARDING THE CARE OF 
PATIENTS WITH CHRONIC NONCANCER PAIN. Anita R. Chandrasena and M. 
C. Reid. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Chronic noncancer pain (CNCP) is common in primary care and often treated with 
opioid analgesics, but information regarding primary care providers' (PCPs) attitudes and 
practices in the care of patients with CNCP is lacking. We determined PCPs prior train- 
ing in CNCP and assessed their levels of comfort caring for CNCP patients, prescribing 
opioid analgesics, and diagnosing/managing opioid analgesic misuse (OAM). 
 
Participants included resident physicians (RPs) and attending physicians (APs) at a 
primary care clinic affiliated with an urban teaching hospital. A self-administered ques- 
tionnaire was used to obtain information on PCPs' demographic status, prior training in 
the management of CNCP and use of opioids. We measured PCPs' levels of comfort car- 
ing for patients with CNCP and prescribing opioid analgesics, and determined their self- 
rated ability to diagnosis OAM. Open-ended questions were used to ascertain how PCPs 
diagnose and manage OAM. 
 
Of the 57 PCPs surveyed, 53 (93 percent) responded. A majority was male (54.7 per- 
cent), the mean number of years (range) since medical graduation was 4.3 (1 to 33) and 
71.7 percent were RPs. A minority of PCPs reported high levels of comfort when caring 
for patients with CNCP (41.5 percent) or when prescribing opioid analgesics (30.2 per- 
cent). APs expressed greater comfort than RPs in both areas (66.7 percent vs. 31.6 per- 
cent, p = .020, and 53.3 percent vs. 21.5 percent, p = .021, respectively). Only 20.8 per- 
cent of PCPs rated their ability to diagnose OAM as high. APs were more likely to rate 
their ability to diagnose OAM as high when compared with RPs (40 percent vs. 18.4 per- 
 
130 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
cent, p = .100). Formal training in CNCP was correlated with higher comfort levels in the 
care of CNCP patients (53.3 percent vs. 26.1 percent, p = .046). Formal training in CNCP 
and prescribing opioid analgesics had no significant impact on PCP comfort in the pre- 
scription of opioid analgesics and ability to diagnose OAM. Commonly reported patient 
behaviors cited as evidence of OAM included multiple requests for early refills (60.4 per- 
cent), reports of lost/stolen medications (39.6 percent), and requests for specific drugs or 
formulations (39.6 percent). Strategies commonly used to manage patients suspected of 
OAM included confronting patients to discuss concerns about OAM (69.8 percent), 
implementing opioid contracts in those lacking contracts (24.5 percent), and stopping opi- 
oid medications (17 percent). 
 
Most participants felt uncomfortable providing care for patients with CNCP, pre- 
scribing opioid analgesics and diagnosing OAM. PCPs currently used a broad array of 
methods to diagnose and manage OAM. These data suggest that further education and the 
establishment of formal guidelines could help PCPs better manage patients with chronic 
noncancer pain. 
 
ASTROCYTE-DERIVED VEGF MEDIATES SURVIVAL AND TUBE STABILIZA- 
TION OF HYPOXIC BRAIN MICROVASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL CELLS IN 
VITRO. Jen Chow. Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Chronic sublethal hypoxia has been associated with changes in neurovascular behav- 
ior, mediated, in part, by induction of vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-AI65). 
In this report, we demonstrate that RBE4 cells (derived from rodent cerebral microvascu- 
lature), when cultured in three-dimensional collagen gels: 1) are induced to undergo 
increased tube formation in response to VEGF-A165 in a dose-dependent manner; 2) 
undergo apoptosis under mild hypoxic conditions; 3) are rescued from the effects of 
hypoxia by the addition of exogenous VEGF-A165 in a dose-dependent and inhibitable 
manner or by co-culture with primary newborn rat astrocytes, which are induced to 
express increased amounts of VEGF-A in hypoxic conditions. Further, we demonstrate 
that: 4) the observed astrocyte-produced, VEGF-mediated protection from apoptosis (sur- 
vival) is inhibitable with soluble recombinant VEGF receptor-l (sFlt), and is associated 
with a robust induction of MAPK tyrosine phosphorylation. These findings illustrate the 
importance of VEGF in the process of neurovascular survival in response to injury in 
developing brain and provide insight into the signaling pathways involved. 
 
DOES HISTORY OF TRAUMA PREDICT HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY- 
ADRENAL DIFFERENCES AS MEASURED BY CORTISOL AND DHEA 
AMONG HEALTHY INDIVIDUALS FOLLOWING EXPOSURE TO STRESS? 
Antony Fu-Chin Chu. Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medi- 
cine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Stressful events have been associated with a wide range of physiological and psy- 
chological disturbances. It is generally believed that an individual's physiological and psy- 
chological response to stress is influenced by previous stress exposure. This belief has 
been based, in part, upon animal and clinical studies which have demonstrated behavioral 
and endocrine alterations associated with stress sensitization. 
 
131 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
In mammals, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) response to stress is an 
essential adaptive mechanism. It is believed that alterations in HPA responsivity to stress 
play a fundamental role in the pathogenesis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
 
The purpose of this study was to prospectively assess whether history of trauma 
influences HPA axis differences (as measured by cortisol and DHEA) in healthy individ- 
uals exposed to stress. Stress sensitization data in animal and clinical studies suggest that 
history of trauma will predict HPA axis upregulation in healthy individuals exposed to 
stress. 
 
In order to investigate our hypothesis, the current study prospectively assessed the 
degree to which history of trauma would predict differences in HPA axis responses among 
healthy individuals exposed to stress. Specifically, this group of individuals was comprised 
of healthy soldiers without post-traumatic stress disorder participating in combat diver 
training (the Combat Diver Qualification Course [CDQC]). There were three principal 
findings of this study. First, recovery plasma cortisol levels were significantly higher in par- 
ticipants with a higher number of previously experienced traumas. Second, baseline and 
recovery DHEA levels were elevated in participants with a greater history of previously 
experienced trauma. Third, we did not observe a correlation between IES score and alter- 
ations in plasma cortisol or DHEA. 
 
We conclude that history of trauma in healthy soldiers without PTSD is associated 
with HPA axis upregulation (as measured by plasma cortisol and DHEA) when exposed 
to stress (combat diver training). 
 
MECHANISM OF ESTROGEN'S TRANSCRIPTIONAL REPRESSION ON THE 
EXPRESSION OF CELL ADHESION MOLECULES IN HUMAN ENDOTHELIAL 
CELLS. Emmanuelle Marie Clerisme. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The protective effects of ovarian steroid hormones on the development of cardiovas- 
cular disease are mediated, in part, through inhibition of immune and inflammation cas- 
cades involving the vasculature. We have previously demonstrated that engagement of the 
estrogen receptor (ER) represses cytokine-mediated transcriptional activation of endothe- 
lial cell adhesion molecule (CAM) genes. Using E-selectin as the model target CAM pro- 
moter and the human endothelial ECV304 cell line, we have performed a series of pro- 
moter induction experiments co-transfecting full or truncated E-selectin promoter- 
luciferase reporter constructs with full length or mutant ER expression constructs to iden- 
tify the mechanisms) by which estrogen mediates this inhibitory effect. Cells were estro- 
gen deprived, transfected, estrogen or vehicle-treated, IL-1 induced and analyzed for 
luciferase. 
 
Estrogen (10 ng/ml) inhibited IL-- (20 U/ml) mediated induction of E-selectin 
luciferase promoter only in the presence of co-transfected ER. This 50 to 100 percent 
repression was abrogated by the ER antagonist, ICI 182780. Use of E-selectin promoter 
deletion constructs revealed that the critical target(s) of repression is contained within 126 
base pairs of the transcription start site. Both full-length ERa and ERI transfected recep- 
tors were capable of mediating repression. Expressed ERa lacking either N-terminal AF- 
1 transactivation or the hormone-binding domain (HBD) failed to reconstitute the 
inhibitory response. Kinetic analyses displayed a rapid (30 minutes) repressive effect of 
estrogen. However, electrophoretic mobility shift assays using an E-selectin promoter 
based oligonucleotide target containing the critical 3 NF-KB elements demonstrated that 
estrogen has no effect on cytokine-induced NF-kcB nuclear translocation or DNA binding. 
 
132 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
Taken together, these data demonstrate that ligand activation of an AF-land HBD 
intact ER rapidly induces posttranscriptional modifications and/or complex formations 
which do not effect NF-kB nuclear translocation, but do impact cytokine-mediated trans- 
activation of a critical 126 bp region of the E-selectin promoter. This may represent one 
of the key mechanisms through which estrogen exerts its anti-inflammatory, protective 
effect on cardiovascular disease. 
 
KOSOVAR CHILDREN'S WARTIME DRAWINGS: GENDER, AGE AND PROX- 
IMITY TO VIOLENCE AS CORRELATES TO CONTENT IN DRAWINGS. Aaron 
S. Covey (Sponsored by Linda C. Mayes). Child Study Center, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Since Vietnam, these has been a shift in the way war has been fought, away from sol- 
dier vs. soldier combat and into civilian populated villages. The 1999 war in Kosovo is an 
example of a "new age" conflict. As a result, the children of Kosovo were exposed to a 
high level of war violence within their own villages which included or involved killings, 
beatings, thievery, stealing, rape, destruction of property, forced departure from home, 
separation from family, etc.... Hence, these children are at risk for PTSD and other psy- 
chiatric symptoms related to war stress. 
 
This project systematically examines 516 drawings of Kosovar refugee children who 
were asked to "draw a picture of your village." Using Chi-Square and logistic linear 
regression analysis, we determined the differences in feature content in the children's 
drawings according to three categories: age, gender and proximity (in time) to the war. 
Though theories relating drawing features and children's emotional state remain highly 
speculative, our data give us an understanding of the content of war and non-war items 
that a large war-exposed child population decided to draw. 
 
Fifty-three percent of children drew war images, 44 percent drew hostile images, and 
19 percent drew friendly images. Older and recently exposed children were more likely to 
draw war images. Older kids, boys, and recently exposed kids drew hostile images more 
frequently, whereas older kids and boys drew more friendly images. In comparison to 
girls, boys drew friendly images (all three) in greater proportion than hostile images (1/4). 
Older children drew more friendly images (2/3) vs. hostile images, as well (1/4). In con- 
trast, New Campers were more likely to draw all four hostile images, and none of the 
friendly images. This may suggest that boys, kids more removed from war and possibly 
older children are more likely to use a positive coping strategy in dealing with the stress 
of war, as "us" images, which signify identification, rather than desolation. 
 
SURVEY OF INTERNATIONAL HEALTH TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES IN 
INTERNAL MEDICINE RESIDENCY PROGRAMS. Marc A. Davis, Anu R. Gupta, 
Michele Barry, and Frank J. Bia. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to assess opportunities and support for international 
electives during internal medicine residency training and to identify program factors asso- 
ciated with these opportunities. An 18-item survey of all 389 internal medicine residency 
program directors in the United States and Puerto Rico was conducted between June 2001 
and April 2002. The survey response rate was 49 percent (191/389). International electives 
were offered by 45 percent (85) of responding program directors with an additional 48 (45 
percent) program directors interested in offering these opportunities. Only 51 percent of 
 
133 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
program directors offering international electives had formal international health pro- 
grams. Residency program factors associated with offering an international elective 
include training at a university teaching hospital (p = .012), having a larger class size (p 
= .037), training residents in cultural awareness (p = .049) and alternative/complementary 
medicine (p = .001), and having a higher percentage of yearly outpatient training (p = 
.022). While less than half of internal medicine residency program directors offer their 
residents international electives, and these electives vary widely in how they are support- 
ed by the residency programs, many more express an interest in providing these opportu- 
nities, suggesting that the interest in international health training is not being met by cor- 
responding opportunities. 
 
LIVER-SPLEEN SCINTIGRAPHY IN THE NON-INVASIVE DIAGNOSIS OF 
COMPENSATED CIRRHOSIS. Michelle W Diu and Guadalupe Garcia-Tsao. 
Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Digestive Disease, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The detection of compensated cirrhosis is important for the early initiation of screen- 
ing, prevention, and treatment of associated complications that carry high mortality. The 
aim of this retrospective study was to investigate the usefulness of the liver-spleen scan 
(LSS), in combination with laboratory markers, in the non-invasive diagnosis of compen- 
sated cirrhosis. A total of 14 variables (five LSS parameters: liver size, spleen size, col- 
loid shift to spleen and/or bone marrow, liver pliability, and hepatic tracer distribution; 
eight laboratory markers: total bilirubin, albumin, alanine and aspartate transaminase 
[ALT, AST], alkaline phosphatase, prothrombin time, INR, and platelet count, and age), 
were collected for 110 patients divided into two groups: positive cirrhosis (METAVIR 
Stage 4) and negative cirrhosis (METAVIR Stage 0 to 3). Using liver biopsy as the stan- 
dard for comparison, stepwise logistic regression analysis identified platelet count and the 
LSS parameters of left-lobe prominence and colloid shift to both the spleen and bone mar- 
row to be most significantly associated with the presence of compensated cirrhosis. Based 
on these three variables, we calculated relative risks (RR) of compensated cirrhosis, rang- 
ing from 1 to 254.0, and constructed a simple RR table that stratifies patients into differ- 
ent risk groups according to platelet count and scintigraphic evidence of the two LSS para- 
meters. From the receiver operating characteristic curve, we selected a RR cut-point of 
45.0 that has a 95 percent specificity and up to 98.2 percent positive predictive value in 
the diagnosis of compensated cirrhosis. In conclusion, we found that liver-spleen scintig- 
raphy is a highly specific noninvasive modality for detecting compensated cirrhosis. When 
guided by clinical suspicion based on platelet count, the LSS is a useful confirmatory test 
for compensated cirrhosis where a liver-biopsy can be avoided. 
 
DIFFERENTIAL UPREGULATION OF BDNF mRNA IN THE RAT HIPPOCAM- 
PUS AFTER SINGLE AND RECURRENT HYPERTHERMIA-INDUCED 
SEIZURES. Trac M. Doung. Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Whether febrile seizures produce the neuropathology observed in human TLE 
patients remains controversial. In this study, we determine the pattern of BDNF mRNA 
expression in the rat hippocampus after single and recurrent hyperthermia-induced 
seizures, using the warm-water-immersion method. BDNF mRNA was detected in hip- 
pocampal sections by in situ hybridization with an 35S-radio-labeled oligonucleotide 
 
134 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
probe complementary to the sequence of rat BDNF mRNA. Signal from the probe was 
visualized using plane-film autoradiography, and the intensity was quantified by comput- 
erized densitometry. In the hippocampi of both control and hyperthermic rats, BDNF 
mRNA was most highly localized to the dentate granular cell layer, CA3 pyramidal cell 
layer, CAl pyramidal cell layer, the hilus, the molecular layer, CA3 stratum radiatum and 
CA1 stratum oriens and radiatum, in descending order. The earliest increase in BDNF 
mRNA expression compared to controls was recorded in the granular cell layer after three 
seizures. By nine seizures, an upregulation of BDNF mRNa was observed in all eight 
measured regions of the hippocampus. The granular cell layer demonstrated the greatest 
maximum increase in BDNF mRNA (4.2-fold) compared to control levels. In contrast, the 
CAI and CA3 pyramidal cell layers exhibited the smallest maximum increase (1.5-fold) 
of the regions measured in the hippocampus. 
 
In the dentate granular cell layer, a statistically significant increase in BDNF mRNA 
expression is observed between the following groups: three seizures vs. control; six 
seizures vs. control; nine seizures vs. control; and nine seizures vs. three seizures. A sta- 
tistically significant increase in BDNF expression was observed in CAl stratum oriens 
and the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus after nine seizures compared to controls. A 
strong positive correlation was found between the number of seizures experienced and the 
seizure duration. In addition, linear regression analysis revealed a strong correlation 
between the severity of the seizure and its duration. These findings suggest that BDNF 
mRNA upregulation during hyperthermic seizures protects hippocampal neurons from 
injury. The pattern of BDNF mRNA upregulation in the hippocampus suggests that cell 
populations that mount an insufficient BDNF response to seizures may be more vulnera- 
ble to injury and death during prolonged seizures. In addition to conferring neuroprotec- 
tive properties, an increase in BDNF mRNA expression may enhance neuronal excitabil- 
ity and lengthen the seizure duration. 
 
CHANGES IN CBF-BOLD COUPLING DETECTED BY MRI DURING AND 
AFTER REPEATED TRANSIENT HYPERCAPNIA IN RAT. Michael V. Dutka and 
John C. Gore. Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Med- 
icine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The effect of hypercapnia on cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen consumption 
(CMRO2) remains incompletely understood. This study examined the relationship 
between susceptibility (Blood Oxygenation Level Dependent, BOLD) and perfusion- 
weighted (Flow-sensitive Alternating Inversion Recovery, FAIR) MRI techniques both 
during induction of repeated transient hypercapnia (THC), and after return to normocap- 
nia during.whisker barrel functional activation. During induction of THC, the FAIR sig- 
nal became significantly elevated over control after 100 seconds of hypercapnia (p = .039) 
with a trend of increasing significance to five minutes (p = .000008). The FAIR signal in 
the activated cortex during subsequent normocapnia was significantly increased compared 
to pre-THC control after each successive period of THC. The mean grouped FAIR signal 
increased by 81 ? 63 percent after one exposure (p = .021), by 163 + 55 percent after the 
second exposure (p = .0002), and by 240 ? 54 percent after the third exposure (p = 
.000002). The mean grouped BOLD signal trended upward, but did not increase signifi- 
cantly during, or after, exposure 1, 2, or 3. These data demonstrate increased uncoupling 
of perfusion-weighted from susceptibility imaging techniques, both in non-activated cor- 
tex during hypercapnia, and with activation after multiple exposures to THC. These results 
are consistent with saturation of BOLD contrast as well as with increases in CMRO2 with 
stimulation after multiple exposures to THC. 
 
135 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
RADIOGRAPHIC MEASUREMENTS OF THE WRIST: A DATABASE OF NOR- 
MAL CARPAL MEASUREMENTS. Kier J. Ecklund (Sponsored by Manohar M. 
Panjabi). Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Radiographs from 27 women and 18 men that spanned two age groups (16 to 40 
years old and 41 to 80 years old) were scanned and measured using computer software to 
determine the carpal height ratio (CHR), revised carpal height ratio (RCHR), and a new 
measurement defined in our lab - the styloid metacarpal ratio (SMR). The SMR is 
defined as the distance from the radial styloid to the proximal convex point of the second 
metacarpal divided by the length of the capitate. Mean values of CHR and RCHR (0.54 + 
0.03 and 1.57 ? 0.06, respectively) were identical to those in the literature. The normal 
mean value of SMR was determined to be 1.10 ? 0.06. Mean ulnar variance was -0.6 ? 
1.8 while radial inclination was 23.9 ? 2.7, and both were similar to previous published 
results. No significant difference was found between left and right wrists. Differences 
between left and right side for each measurement within patients were small and insignif- 
icant. Length measurements were significantly smaller in women, but RCHR, SMR, ulnar 
variance, and radial inclination were not different. Only radial inclination was different 
according to age (23.0 ? 2.40 for younger patients vs. 24.9 ? 2.7? for older patients). A 
number of parameters showed significant correlations (R2 = 0.04 to 0.67, p < .05), with 
length of capitate vs. length of third metacarpal being the strongest. Normal anatomical 
information such as this is important for clinical diagnosis, determining prognosis, and 
deciding on treatment for a variety of wrist disorders including Kienbock's disease, carpal 
instability, distal radius fractures, and scaphoid fractures. The SMR, which has been 
shown to be useful for the avoidance of over-distraction in patients receiving external fix- 
ation for distal radius fractures, has been appropriately defined in the normal population. 
 
CHILDREN WITH SPECIAL HEALTH CARE NEEDS AND WELL CHILD CARE: 
ASSESSING QUALITY OF MEDICAID MANAGED CARE. Amy Michelle 
Fahrenkopf. Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study is to determine if children with special health care needs 
(CSHCN) enrolled in four Massachusetts Medicaid managed care organizations (MCOs) 
receive preventive health care that is comparable to care provided to healthy children. A 
retrospective medical record review was performed of a random sample of all children 
enrolled in MassHealth MCOs, as well as a selection of children determined to have spe- 
cial health care needs through the use of diagnostic codes. Participants included 670 chil- 
dren aged one month to 17 years old who received Medicaid insurance benefits through 
the state of Massachusetts and who were enrolled in the same MCO for the period of one 
year. Quality of care was measured by determining the degree to which certain preventive 
services were completed. CSHCN were significantly more likely than healthy children to 
have had a physician visit (OR 1.94, 95 percent CI 1.12, 3.34), have appropriate body mea- 
surements taken, and receive indicated or catch up immunizations (OR 1.50, 95 percent CI 
1.21, 1.84), lead screening (OR 3.04, 95 percent CI 1.00, 9.34), hearing screening (OR 
2.65, 95 percent CI 1.20, 5.06) and vision screening (OR 2.30, 95 percent CI 1.22, 4.35). 
CSHCN were no more or less likely than healthy children to have a well child visit, have 
developmental screening, or receive anticipatory guidance for sexuality and substance 
abuse. CSHCN enrolled in MassHealth MCOs receive preventive health care that is at least 
comparable to, and often better than, healthy children enrolled in the same MCOs. 
 
136 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
FOOT DEFORMITY IN SPASTIC HEMIPLEGIA: A RETROSPECTIVE REVIEW 
OF 29 PATIENTS USING GAIT ANALYSIS. Michael N. Fehm and Peter A. DeLuca 
(Sponsored by Peter A. DeLuca). Center for Motion Analysis, Department of Pedi- 
atric Orthopaedics, Connecticut Children's Medical Center, Hartford, Connecticut. 
 
Foot deformities in children with cerebral palsy (CP) spastic hemiplegia are common 
and often require surgical intervention to restore balance to the developing foot before the 
onset of rigid deformities. The purpose of this retrospective study was to classify foot 
deformity in this population and to evaluate the outcomes of surgical treatment. 
 
Five clinicians experienced in gait analysis examined slow motion, close-up, and pla- 
nar video from gait analysis of 29 patients (average age nine years) with dynamic spastic 
hemiplegia. All twenty-nine patients were evaluated at the Center for Motion Analysis 
Gait Laboratory both pre-operatively and post-operatively (pre-post) at a mean study fol- 
low-up time of 26 months (range 6.3 to 79 months). All patients underwent soft tissue 
surgery for correction of foot deformity, which included equinovarus and other deformi- 
ties, such as forefoot supination and forefoot/midfoot adduction. 
 
Of these 29 patients, 13 patients received a combined split anterior tibialis tendon 
transfer and intramuscular posterior tibial tendon lengthening procedure (SPLATT/Frost). 
Simultaneous heel-cord lengthening was performed in 12 of these 13 patients. Pre-opera- 
tively, 12 of these 13 patients had supination or varus deformity or both. Postoperatively, 
all pre-operative hindfoot varus and forefoot supination deformities corrected to neutral 
foot position. We concluded, based upon review of pre-post gait analyses, that the com- 
bined SPLATT/Frost is an effective surgical package for correction of excessive dynamic 
forefoot supination and hindfoot varus in patients with CP spastic hemiplegia. 
 
THE IMPACT OF PICTURE ARCHIVING AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS 
(PACS) ON RADIOLOGY SERVICES. Devesh Gandhi and Howard Forman. 
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to assess if PACS improved radiology workflow, 
expenses, capability, and user-satisfaction. We conducted a before and after study at Yale- 
New Haven Hospital to assess each of the four areas - we utilized a time and motion 
study to assess workflow, developed two cost-accounting models to assess pre- and post- 
PACS expenses, used direct observation and interviewed experts to document new capa- 
bilities, and surveyed clinicians before and after PACS implementation to gauge satisfac- 
tion. PACS eliminated five steps in the radiology workflow streamlining the process. In 
addition, a 33 percent reduction in the scanning process time can be expected in a truly 
film-less environment. PACS has the potential to reduce unit CT costs 15 percent if main- 
tenance costs turn out to be lower than projected. Third, teleradiology was a new capabil- 
ity engendered by PACS not possible in a film-based environment. Finally, clinicians 
reported a 26 percent and 28 percent increase in satisfaction in image availability and 
image retrieval speed with PACS respectively. We conclude that PACS has and will con- 
tinue to significantly improve radiology workflow, capability, and user-satisfaction and 
may provide direct cost savings. 
 
137 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
IN UTERO INDOMETHACIN ALTERS 02 DELIVERY TO THE FETAL DUCTUS 
ARTERIOSUS: IMPLICATIONS FOR PERSISTENT POSTNATAL PATENCY. 
Seth H. Goldbarg and Ron 1. Clyman (Sponsored by George Lister). Cardiovas- 
cular Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San 
Francisco, California. 
 
Exposure of the fetus to indomethacin produces constriction of the fetal ductus arte- 
riosus (DA) and hypoxia in the avascular muscle media of the vessel wall. Hypoxia 
induces cell death, which increases the incidence of patent DA in the newborn period. We 
used a fetal sheep model to determine the factors that were responsible for indomethacin- 
induced hypoxia at various degrees of DA constriction. Indomethacin produced DA con- 
striction in all fetuses studied in vivo. Cell death in the DA wall was directly related to the 
degree of indomethacin-induced DA constriction and was present at both moderate (pres- 
sure gradient across DA < 16 mmHg) and marked (> 16 mmHg) degrees of constriction. 
Indomethacin did not alter oxygen consumption in DA rings studied in vitro, indicating 
that oxygen demand in the constricting tissue is not significantly increased by 
indomethacin. Both moderate and marked degrees of DA constriction reduced vasa vaso- 
rum flow to the ductus (moderate = 69 + 25 percent; marked = 30 ? 16 percent of prein- 
domethacin exposure values) and increased the thickness of the ductus wall. In contrast, 
DA luminal blood flow was not affected by moderate degrees of constriction and was 
reduced only after marked constriction. Our findings suggest that changes in vasa vaso- 
rum blood flow and muscle media thickness are the primary contributors to hypoxia- 
induced cell death at moderate degrees of indomethacin-induced constriction. Diminished 
luminal blood flow only appears to contribute to the induction of cell death following the 
development of marked degrees of constriction. These findings help to explain why in 
utero exposure to indomethacin in late gestation fetuses, which depend on vasa vasorum 
to supply 02 to the DA muscle media, leads to hypoxia-induced remodeling and increased 
incidence of postnatal patent DA. 
 
APOLIPOPROTEIN E GENOTYPE AND SEVERITY OF COGNITIVE AND PSY- 
CHOTIC SYMPTOMS IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE. Monique Grey. Department 
of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The fact that the ?4 allele of the apolipoprotein ? (apoE) gene increases the risk of 
developing Alzheimer's disease (AD) and decreases the age of onset of the disease sug- 
gests that it accelerates the neurodegenerative processes thought to cause AD. If this is the 
case, apoE genotype may be expected to affect the rate of clinical progression in AD, pre- 
dicting a more severe course of cognitive and behavioral decline as the number of ?4 alle- 
les increases. The purpose of this study was to determine if the presence and dosage of the 
?4 allele of the apoE gene affects the severity of cognitive and behavioral symptoms in 
AD. 
 
Three hundred and fourteen patients with AD were studied: 45 were ?4 homozy- 
gotes, 129 were ?4 heterozygotes, and 140 had no ?4 allele. Sixty-four age-matched 
healthy controls were also studied. For this cross-sectional study, the AD patients and 
healthy controls' characteristics and neuropsychiatric status were measured. The duration 
of the patients' disease was estimated from review of medical records and interviews with 
their primary caregivers. The battery of neuropsychiatric tests and ratings used were the 
Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE), Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-Cog), 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL), and Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI). 
The effect of apoE genotype on both the cognitive and non-cognitive measurements was 
 
138 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
determined using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA). The group of e4 homozygotes had 
an earlier age of onset than the ?4 heterozygotes (p = .042). Contrary to hypothesis, apoE 
genotype had no effect on MMSE, ADAS-Cog, IADL or total NPI scores. However, pres- 
ence of the ?4 allele was strongly correlated with more severe delusions (F1 210 = 7.43, p 
= 0.007), and subjects with two ?4 alleles had more severe delusion scores than those with 
one e4 allele (F2,209 = 3.77, p = .025). A trend toward more severe hallucinations was seen 
in patients with at least one ?4 allele (F1 212 = 3.10, p = .080), but there was no statisti- 
cally significant dose effect of the allele (F2, 211 = 2.05, p = .155). Our findings suggest 
that while the apoE ?4 allele is an important susceptibility gene and plays a role in the 
onset of the disease (as demonstrated by the earlier age of onset of AD in patients with the 
?4 allele), it does not play a role in the rate of cognitive decline in AD. However, the ?4 
allele is associated with more severe delusions in AD. 
 
QUALITY OF LIFE OF PEDIATRIC AND YOUNG ADULT PATIENTS WITH 
TOURETTE SYNDROME. Rebekah G. Gross and James F. Leckman. Yale Child 
Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study is the first to document quality of life (QOL) of pediatric-aged and young 
adult patients with Tourette Syndrome (TS) and to investigate whether this outcome mea- 
sure is informed by symptom severity or by antinuclear or antineural antibody status. 
Forty-four patients under 24 years of age meeting DSM IV diagnostic criteria for TS were 
included in the study. QOL was measured using the Short Form-36 Health Survey Ques- 
tionnaire (SF-36), while symptom severity was gauged using the Yale Global Tic Severi- 
ty Scale, the Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale, and the Attention Deficit/Hyper- 
activity Disorder Scale. Subjects' autoantibody status was detected via indirect immuno- 
fluorescence, and SPSS was used to analyze this data and to compare it with data collect- 
ed for subjects within the past decade. Results indicate that SF-36 scores for this TS pop- 
ulation approximate general U.S. population norms but are slightly higher than those 
reported for an older population of TS patients followed at the Institute of Neurology in 
London. Within the young TS study population, QOL did vary significantly with age and 
with symptom severity, with younger and more mildly symptomatic subjects scoring sig- 
nificantly better on the Social Functioning and Role Emotional subscales of the SF-36. 
The predictive value of autoantibodies in determining QOL was less certain, with current 
antibody status, but not previous antibody status or change in status over time, correlating 
with SF-36 scores. Overall, findings suggest that young patients with TS do not experi- 
ence markedly inferior quality of life as measured by the SF-36. To the degree that scores 
are impaired, the effect is most evident on the Social Functioning subscale which, like the 
Role Emotional subscale, is influenced significantly by symptom severity. The association 
between autoantibodies and QOL is less convincing. A large prospective longitudinal 
study would be useful to clarify these relationships. 
 
PATIENTS WITH CANCER AT THE END OF LIFE. Anna Gibb Hallemeier and 
Elizabeth C. Bradley. Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purposes of this study were to evaluate the frequency of documented prognosis 
discussions among terminally ill cancer patients, to identify correlates of having docu- 
mented prognosis discussions and to describe the content of prognosis discussions as doc- 
umented in patient medical records. Sample data were collected from the randomly select- 
 
139 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
ed medical records of inpatients (n = 210) aged 65 years or older and admitted with diag- 
noses of brain, pancreas, liver, gall bladder, or inoperable lung cancer from six large Con- 
necticut hospitals. A standardized instrument was used to extract data concerning patient 
demographics, hospital course, prognosis discussions, and evidence of advance care plan- 
ning. Prognosis discussions were recorded in 79 (38 percent) of medical records and were 
correlated with emergency admission status (p = .004) and longer length of hospital stay 
(p = .003) on multivariate analysis. Of the documented prognosis discussions, 63% were 
within one week of admission but after the first day, and 57 percent included the patient, 
76 percent included the family, 77 percent included the doctor, and 69 percent did not 
include another health staff member (n = 79). Life sustaining treatment discussions and 
DNR orders were both associated with prognosis discussions (p = .001 and p = .001, 
respectively) and were more often documented after the prognosis discussions. Prognosis 
discussions included planning for care and treatment in 33 (42 percent) of discussions 
documented. In conclusion, we found that prognosis discussions were infrequently docu- 
mented during the hospitalization of terminally ill patients diagnosed with cancer. We also 
found that advance care planning, such as discussions of life-sustaining treatment and 
DNR orders, was significantly associated with prognosis discussions and more often 
occurred after prognosis was discussed. 
 
FACTORS PREDICTING THE USE OF THE EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT: 
WHO, WHY, AND WHAT FOR? Dawn Harris (Sponsored by Linda Degutis). Sec- 
tion of Emergency Medicine, Department of Surgery, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study attempted to characterize the Emergency Department (ED) population in 
general and also to investigate what specific criteria there maybe among those who regard 
the ED as their usual source of care. This study took place in the ED of the Yale-New 
Haven Hospital, an urban, Level I trauma center, serving as a principal university teach- 
ing hospital and treating more than 95,000 emergency patients annually. More than 4,500 
adult ED patients were surveyed, using a 72-question questionnaire, between December 
8, 1999 and December 8, 2000. The data were compared with U.S. Census data compiled 
for 1990, and when available, 2000. 
 
The factors which were most predictive of ED use by the general population includ- 
ed being of African-American race or of Hispanic ethnicity; having less than a high school 
education or having a high school diploma as a terminal degree; being single; coming 
from a lower-income area; and being of closer proximity to the YNHH ED. Factors that 
predicted the use of the ED as a usual source of care included being of male gender; being 
single; having no income or to a lesser extent, having an income derived from working for 
a salary; lacking insurance coverage; lacking a primary care physician; being from a 
lower-income area; being of closer proximity to the YNHH ED; and being less concerned 
with affording medication. 
 
THE IMPACT OF PRENATAL COCAINE EXPOSURE ON LANGUAGE DEVEL- 
OPMENT IN PRESCHOOL-AGE CHILDREN: A MEDIATIONAL MODEL. Eric R 
Hazen and Linda C. Mayes. Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medi- 
cine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to assess the effect of prenatal cocaine exposure on 
language development in preschool-age children and to identify potential mediators of 
this effect. A total of 359 children participated in this study. Subjects were recruited prior 
 
140 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
to birth from patients presenting for prenatal care at the Women's Center at Yale-New 
Haven Hospital, an obstetrical clinic serving a primarily uninsured population of low 
socioeconomic status. Subjects were categorized by exposure status based upon substance 
abuse history, meconium toxicology, and maternal urine toxicology. The cocaine-and 
other-drug-exposed (CE) group was defined as infants prenatally exposed to cocaine, with 
or without additional exposure to alcohol, marijuana, or tobacco. The polydrug but-not- 
cocaine-exposed (PE) group was defined as infants prenatally exposed to alcohol, mari- 
juana, and/or tobacco with no evidence of cocaine exposure. Infants in the non-drug- 
exposed (NE) group had no evidence of exposure to cocaine, alcohol, marijuana, or tobac- 
co. Subjects' language development was assessed at ages 36, 48, and 60 months using the 
Reynell Developmental Language Scales (RDLS). Cognitive development was assessed 
using the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children (K-ABC) at ages 48 and 60 months. 
Parents completed the Parenting Stress Inventory 24 and 54 months after their child's 
birth. The NE and PE groups performed similarly on all language measures and were col- 
lapsed to form a larger control group of non-cocaine exposed (NCE) children. Compared 
to the NCE group, the CE group demonstrated modest deficits in receptive language 
scores at 36, 48, and 60 months and expressive language scores at 48 months (p < .05). 
The negative impact of prenatal cocaine exposure on language development was found to 
be mediated by less favorable perinatal outcome, increased parenting stress, and deficits 
in cognitive development. The significance of these findings is discussed with regard to 
models of cumulative risk and implications for intervention. 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CHILD DEVELOPMENT SEMINARS FOR POLICE OFFI- 
CERS, MENTAL HEALTH CLINICIANS, AND SCHOOL PROFESSIONALS. 
Heather Lee Heimerdinger (Sponsored by Robert Murphy). Department of Child 
Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Today's children are witnesses to violence on a chronic basis. As a result, they are 
experiencing lasting psychological symptoms. New Haven's Child Development Commu- 
nity Policing Program aims to provide police officers with increased resources and skills 
with which to deal with children exposed to violence. This study examined the effects of 
a seminar in child development provided by the CDCP to police officers, school officials, 
and clinicians. A pretest-posttest design was used - all participants answered questions 
about child development, views and actions regarding children exposed to violence, situ- 
ations in which to use the CDCP services and vignettes used as examples of real-life sit- 
uations of children exposed to violence. MANCOVA analysis indicated that all subjects 
improved their knowledge of core child development principles from pretest to posttest. 
Analysis of professional groups showed clinicians scoring higher than police officers at 
pretest with persisting elevated scores at posttest; no professional group improved signif- 
icantly more than any other. Subjects' scores on views and actions regarding children 
exposed to violence did not change significantly between pretest and posttest. Subjects did 
indicate significantly more situations in which to use CDCP services at posttest than at 
pretest. Overall, it appeared that participants improved in knowledge of child development 
and were better able to identify situations in which to use the CDCP program. Views and 
actions did not seem to change which may be due to limited time period between pretest 
and posttest in which participants could put their new skills to use. Further research needs 
to be conducted to elucidate the real-life effects of participation in this seminar. 
 
141 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
MATERNAL BEHAVIOR REVISITED: CIRCUITS, GENES, AND THE CRUCIAL 
ROLE OF EARLY LIFE EXPERIENCE. Amy E. Herman and James F. Leckman. 
Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
In recent years, gene knockout technology has identified specific genes associated 
with maternal behavior. Recent studies have also broadened our understanding of the role 
of environmental influences on maternal behavior. This thesis reviews recent develop- 
ments in the neurobiology, genetics, and epigenetics of maternal behavior in animal model 
systems. It is hypothesized that specific genes encode proteins that are crucial for the 
development of neural substrates that underlie specific features of maternal behavior. The 
emergent neural circuitry is subsequently modified by early environmental influences. An 
understanding of the cascade of genetic factors and the resulting neural circuits required 
for the expression of maternal behavior may be valuable in understanding some forms of 
psychopathology, such as autism. 
 
Relevant studies addressing the role of genetics and environment in maternal behav- 
ior of rodents were identified in a search of literature in peer-reviewed journals published 
from January 1990 to December 2000 and in a search of the Mouse Genome Informatics 
database at the Jackson Laboratory. Gene knockout studies were evaluated on such crite- 
ria as mouse strain, method of behavioral phenotyping, quantification of the degree of 
deficit of specific behaviors, and the use of "behavioral" controls. Following this review, 
the gene knockout data were analyzed using a cluster analysis technique designed by 
Eisen and colleagues (1998). 
 
At least nine genes have been found to be necessary for the expression of one or more 
aspects of maternal behavior. These genes encode: three transcription factors; three 
enzymes, including dopamine beta hydroxylase and neuronal nitric oxide synthase; two 
receptors, including the prolactin receptor and the estrogen receptor, alpha; and one neu- 
ropeptide, oxytocin. Cluster analysis suggested possible relationships between specific 
genes. Review of recent epigenetic studies revealed a number of experimental interven- 
tions that lead to enduring consequences for adult offspring, including deficits in mater- 
nal behavior. 
 
The review of genetic and environmental influences on maternal behavior suggests 
that the expression of this behavior is governed by events that occur during a critical peri- 
od of early development. This work may inform models of disease pathogenesis. 
 
THE BCL-XL PROTEIN MODIFIES SYNAPTIC TRANSMISSION. Daniel A. Hoit, 
Erin McCarthy, Jun Zhang, Iva lvanovska, John A. Hickman, J. Marie Hardwick, 
Leonard K. Kaczmarek, and Elizabeth A. Jonas (Sponsored by Joel Dubin). Yale 
University School of Medicine, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, 
Division of Biostatistics. New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The BCL-2 family protein BCL-,L, found throughout mammalian brain, is believed 
to regulate the permeability of mitochondrial membranes. By influencing the movement 
of calcium and energy metabolites such as ATP across mitochondrial membranes, this pro- 
tein could influence synaptic transmission. We measured the amplitude and rate of rise 
(mv/ms) of postsynaptic potentials evoked by stimulation of the presynaptic nerve before 
and after injection of BCL-XL into the squid giant synaptic terminal. Statistical analysis 
using linear mixed effects modeling demonstrated that several minutes after injection, the 
amplitude and rate of rise of the synaptic potentials were increased when compared to 
preinjection controls. Direct injection of ATP mimicked the effects of BCL-XL, suggest- 
 
142 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
ing that BCL-XL may act by increasing ATP release from mitochondria. In addition, ruthe- 
nium red, a mitochondrial calcium uptake blocker, decreased synaptic transmission in 
control cells, but its effect on BCL-XL treated cells was somewhat mitigated. To measure 
the BCL-XL effect on recovery from synaptic depression, cells were tetanized at 50 hz for 
2 to 3 seconds. There was a significant difference in the degree of depression during 
tetanus in the BCL-XL treated cells when compared to controls, and the time dependent 
course of synaptic recovery may be somewhat different in treated cells versus controls as 
well. Our results suggest that BCL-XL may regulate both long and short-term changes in 
synaptic transmission. 
 
'8F-FLUORODEOXYGLUCOSE UPTAKE AS A MARKER OF REVERSIBLE 
MYOCARDIAL ISCHEMIA. Joshua A. Horenstein and James A. Amghi. Section 
of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medi- 
cine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the potential of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose as 
a diagnostic tool for myocardial ischemia. It has been known for over two decades that 
acute myocardial ischemia is accompanied by increased exogenous glucose utilization in 
experimental models. Thus, glucose uptake serves as an indirect measure of myocardial 
ischemia. To measure glucose uptake by the myocardium, the positron-emitting, metabol- 
ic tracer 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose is commonly used. Experiments were performed on five 
fasting adult mongrel dogs. An incision was made in the pericardium, and the proximal 
left anterior descending or circumfles coronary artery was isolated for placement of the 
ameroid occlusion device, which causes a gradual reduction in coronary artery luminal 
diameter over time, maturing in three weeks, creating a model of chronic ischemia with 
minimal infarction. Ninety to 120 minutes following myocardial perfusion studies, ani- 
mals were injected with 5 to 10 mCi 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose for assessment of cardiac 
metabolism. FDG images were acquired dynamically for one hour. This study showed that 
FDG uptake was increased in ischemic cardiac tissue in the dog model, though there was 
some variability in the data in these animals. Thus, further studies in humans are war- 
ranted to determine the diagnostic utility of '8F-fluorodeoxyglucose as a marker of 
myocardial ischemia. 
 
PATTERNS OF PSYCHIATRIC PATHOLOGY AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICE 
UTILIZATION IN A COMMUNITY SAMPLE OF URBAN ADOLESCENTS WITH 
SCHOOL ATTENDANCE PROBLEMS. Rocco A. lannucci (Sponsored by Mary 
Schwab-Stone). Child Study Center, Department of Child Psychiatry, Yale Univer- 
sity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This investigation was conducted to examine the patterns of psychiatric disorder and 
types of mental health services used in a community sample of older adolescents with 
records of poor school attendance. Thirty-one students and their guardians participated in 
a multifaceted assessment including the administration of diagnostic interviews with mul- 
tiple informants, psychiatric symptom scales, and individual cognitive testing. Approxi- 
mately half of students met DSM-IV criteria for a current psychiatric disorder (48.4 per- 
cent, SE = 9.0 percent). Female non-attenders reported significantly more symptoms of 
depression and anxiety than males (p < .025) and more anxiety symptoms than girls from 
the normal school population (p < .05). Males who did not meet criteria for a current diag- 
 
143 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
nosis had significantly lower mean nonverbal IQ than males with a current disorder (80.3 
+ 8.1 vs. 101.8 ?, p < .05). 
 
Having a current disorder was predictive of being seen in any service setting (sum of 
juvenile justice, psychiatric, and school settings; p < 0.05), with 95 percent of absentees 
being referred to some service. However, only about half of disordered subjects received 
any psychiatric care. When considered individually, presence of a psychiatric disorder was 
more predictive of juvenile justice involvement (p < .025) than of care in school or psy- 
chiatric settings. 
 
These findings illustrate the high levels of psychiatric problems experienced by stu- 
dents who fail to attend school, with girls at particular risk for emotional disorders. Fur- 
thermore, disordered adolescents have insufficient access to psychiatric care. Implications 
for clinical practice are discussed. 
 
ASSOCIATION OF SRDSA2 GENOTYPE AND PATHOLOGICAL CHARAC- 
TERISTICS OF PROSTATE TUMORS. Julie M. Jaffe. Department of Therapeutic 
Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The enzyme product of SRDSA2, 5a-reductase type II, is responsible for converting 
testosterone to the more metabolically active dihydrotestosterone, which is able to induce 
cell proliferation in the prostate. It is, therefore, biologically plausible that SRDSA2 may 
be involved in the development and growth of prostate tumors. To examine the effects of 
allelic variants in the gene SRDSA2 on the presentation of prostate tumors, we studied a 
sample of 265 primarily Caucasian men with incident prostate cancer who were treated 
by radical prostatectomy. We assessed the relationship of the A49T and V89L polymor- 
phisms at SRDSA2 with clinical and pathologic tumor characteristics of these patients. We 
found no association of V89L genotypes with any of the characteristics studied. The pres- 
ence of the A49T variant was associated with a greater frequency of extracapsular disease 
(OR = 3.16, 95% CI: 1.03 to 9.68) and a higher pathologic tumor-lymph node-metastasis 
(pTNM) stage (OR = 3.11, 95 percent CI: 1.01 to 9.65). In addition, the A49T variant was 
over-represented in two poor prognostic groups that have been correlated with reduced 
rates of biochemical disease-free survival. These included men with at least two of the fol- 
lowing poor prognostic variables: stage T3 tumor, PSA level > 10, and/or Gleason score 
7 to 10 (OR = 3.46, 95 percent CI: 1.04 to 11.49), and men with positive margins and high 
Gleason score (OR = 6.28, 95 percent Cl: 1.05 to 37.73). Our results suggest that the A49T 
mutation may influence the pathological characteristics of prostate cancers, and thus may 
affect the prognosis of these patients. 
 
PARENTAL PERSPECTIVES ON NEONATAL CIRCUMCISION. Amit K. Jha 
(Sponsored by Eve Colson). Section of Neonatology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Jack Weiler Hospital of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York. 
 
Purpose: The study was designed to gain an understanding of the common factors 
affecting the parental decision making process with regard to neonatal circumcision, 
including identifying common sources of information and to document parental attitudes 
regarding routine neonatal circumcision. 
 
Methods: The parents of 61 newborn boys were interviewed using a semi-structured 
format during June and July 1999 in the Bronx, NY. Parents were asked multiple ques- 
tions regarding circumcision, including whether their son was going to be circumcised, 
when they made the decision, if the father of the baby was circumcised, and what their 
 
144 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
attitudes were regarding circumcision. Chi-square analysis was used to assess for statisti- 
cal significance. 
 
Results: The overall rate of circumcision was 64 percent in the sampled population. 
African-American parents, fathers who were circumcised, fathers who made the circum- 
cision decision alone, and parents who thought the circumcised penis looked better were 
all more likely to circumcise their sons (p < .001, p < .001, p = .03, p < .001, respective- 
ly). Hispanics, Catholics, more educated mothers, and parents who did some reading on 
circumcision were all less likely to circumcise their sons (p = .01, p = .005, p = .03, p = 
.03, respectively). The primary source of information regarding circumcision for parents 
was from their friends. The most common reason for circumcision was that it prevented 
disease and was a healthier option. The most common reason against circumcision was 
that the procedure was unnecessary and had no benefits. 
 
Conclusions: Parents make the decision for or against circumcision for various rea- 
sons. However, at least some of the reasons are based on medical misconceptions. Health 
care providers are in a position to correct such misconceptions thereby allowing parents 
to make a more informed choice when deciding to circumcise their newborn sons. 
 
AIDS REVOLUTION: THE POWER OF YOUTH. Kebba M. Jobarteh. Department 
of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study presents an exploration of alternative methods of engaging in the struggle 
to prevent HIV/AIDS amongst African youth. This exploration utilized the frameworks of 
human rights ideology in conjunction with a Freireian pedagogical approach. Historical 
analysis of the history of public health, human rights, education and the HIV/AIDS pan- 
demic provides the background for this endeavor. Field research involving interviews with 
numerous NGOs engaged in this struggle throughout the African continent as well as with 
individuals engaged in said struggle provides the justification for the claims put forth. 
 
The conclusions reached were that if the international public health community were 
to employ a strategy of empowering young people using a Freireian framework of dia- 
logue and contextualization, it is possible that true behavior change with respect to the 
sexual lives of young Africans may occur. 
 
HYPERTENSION AMONG PREGNANT WOMEN IN THE URBAN AREA OF 
YAOUNDE, CAMEROON. Damita L. Johnson-LaBorde, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Yaounde, the capital of Cameroon, is a large highly urbanized city in West Africa. 
The frequency of hypertension among 1,042 pregnant women in Yaounde was determined 
in the present study at the Maternal and Infant Protection Center and at the Central Hos- 
pital High Risk Pregnancy Clinic using a standard mercury sphygmomanometer. Since 
systolic blood pressure (SBP) predicts preeclampsia better than diastolic blood pressure, 
only SBP was used to classify patients as hypertensive or normotensive. Patients were 
grouped as hypertensive if their SBP measured greater than or equal to 140 mm Hg. A 
total of four measurements were taken on each patient, three on their initial visit and a 
fourth taken on their subsequent visit. The frequency of hypertension based on first read- 
ings was 6.04 percent, but when repeated the frequency dropped to 1.9 percent, a 69 per- 
cent reduction. The fourth measurements, taken on subsequent days, revealed a 0.58 per- 
cent frequency of hypertension in the same population. The frequency was highest among 
 
145 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
pregnant women below the age of 20 (7.9 percent) or above the age of 40 (27.3 percent). 
There was a corresponding increase in SBP as gestational weeks increased among hyper- 
tensive pregnant women; however, the SBP decreased as gestational weeks increased 
among normotensive patients. The data also indicate that SBPs are elevated in patients 
who report adding salt to their food. The odds of being hypertensive among patients with 
a body mass index greater than or equal to 32.3, the cutoff for obesity, were 1.56 times 
greater than for those who were not obese. A standardized protocol improved sensitivity 
in Yaounde. Hypertension during pregnancy predicts preeclampsia, prematurity, placental 
hypoxia, and/or neonatal death. Hypertension detected and adequately managed prevents 
maternal strokes, seizures, and death. 
 
EFFECTS OF THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS ON PREGNANCY OUTCOMES IN 
HIGH-RISK OBSTETRIC PATIENTS. Anita Karne, Tulin Ozcan, and Urania 
Magriples. Section of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of anticoagulation on pregnan- 
cy outcomes in women with thrombophilia. We performed a case-control study using ret- 
rospective medical records analysis of women who were referred to the Division of Mater- 
nal-Fetal Medicine for poor obstetric outcomes. Patients found to have thrombophilic 
mutations were treated with Heparin or Lovenox after confirmation of fetal viability. 
Demographic and clinical data on history, ultrasounds, and pathology reports were col- 
lected. Outcomes of treated and untreated pregnancies of mutation positive women versus 
those of the mutation negative comparison group were compared. 
 
Rx/mutation+ No Rx/mutation+ No Rx/mutation- p 
 
SAB 4% 49% 46% <.0001 
PIH 2% 18% 19% .025 
Good outcome 80% 26% 30% <.0001 
Living child 91% 40% 42% <.0001 
 
There were a total of 418 pregnancies in 96 patients studied: 45 (47 percent) in the 
mutation positive group and 51 (53 percent) in the mutation-negative comparison group. 
Of the women with mutations, 30 (67 percent) were heterozygous for FVL, nine (20 per- 
cent) were heterozygous for PTG, and 17 (38 percent) were homozygous for MTHFR. 
There was a significant improvement in the chance of overall good outcome and birth of 
a living child and reduction in spontaneous abortions (SAB) and preeclampsia. 
 
In addition, there was a significant increase in the percentage of normal ultrasounds 
in the treated mutation positive group compared to the non-treated mutation-positive and 
mutation-negative group (72 percent, 47 percent, and 46 percent; p = .016.) Specifically, 
there was a reduction in the percentage of abnormal Dopplers and IUGR noted in the third 
trimester. When placental pathology was analyzed, there were no differences with treat- 
ment, although mutation-positive patients had significantly greater rates of abnormal pla- 
centas than mutation negative patients. Mutation-positive women were more likely to have 
placental infarction (30 percent vs. 14.9 percent; p < .05) or intervessel thrombosis (18 
percent vs. 6.0 percent; p = 0.04.) 
 
In conclusion, Heparin or Lovenox therapy significantly improves pregnancy out- 
comes in women with thrombophilia. 
 
146 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
DOSIMETRY PARAMETERS USING ULTRASOUND-GUIDED TRANSPER- 
INEAL IMPLANTS FOR EARLY PROSTATE CANCER. Robert Griffin Kelley. 
Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Previous analysis has shown a strong correlation between 10-year disease-free sur- 
vival rates and three-dimensional volume-dose parameters when using the retropubic 
prostate implant technique. This study was undertaken to determine if the newer transper- 
ineal approach for prostate implants achieves these previously established dosimetry 
goals. Ninety-one consecutive patients with clinical stage Tlc or T2 prostate cancer 
underwent an ultrasound-guided transperineal prostate implant using 125-Iodine or 103- 
Palladium. All patients received pelvic radiography approximately one month after the 
implant deeds visible on the radiographs were digitized and their positions in three dimen- 
sions calculated, and volumes receiving 100 percent, 50 percent, and 150 percent of pre- 
scription dose (V1oo, V50, and V150, respectively) were calculated. Prostate volume by 
transrectal ultrasound planimetry was used to establish average prostate dimension to cal- 
culate total activity implanted per average dimension (activity/dimension). Using the older 
retropubic approach, 52 percent of patients achieved dose distributions greater than the 
values that predict superior 10-year disease-free survival. Eighty-seven percent of patients 
receiving the transperineal approach had implants that achieved all five dosimetry goals 
(V1 I> 16 cc, V50 > 55 cc, V150 > 3 cc, Activity/Dimension > 30 mCi/cm, and Total Activ- 
ity > 12 mCi). Ultrasound-guided transperineal implants routinely achieve three-dimen- 
sional volume-dose parameters that predict superior ten-year disease-free survival out- 
comes. Using the transperineal technique produces an improvement in the three-dimen- 
sional dosimetry quality indicators compared with the older retropubic implant approach. 
 
DIFFUSION TENSOR MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING IN THE HUMAN 
SPINAL CORD WITH A SINGLE SHOT, FAST SPIN ECHO SEQUENCE. Har- 
dave S. Kharbanda, David A. Hackney, and David C. Alsop (Sponsored by Adam 
W. Anderson). Department of Diagnostic Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
 
As the recent clinical introduction of Diffusion Tensor Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI) has proven to be an excellent tool for rapidly and non-invasively diagnosing cer- 
tain pathologies in the brain, we wished to analyze and overcome the problem of cardiac 
cycle-related motion of the human spinal cord to be able to apply Diffusion Tensor MRI 
to the cord. We applied motion-compensation gradient pulses, designed to cancel out 
potential proton velocity gradients in the cord arising from bulk motion of the cord, to sin- 
gle shot, fast spin echo Diffusion Tensor MRI. Using a total of 672 Diffusion MRI images 
in our study, we found a decrease in our measurements of the diffusion trace (p < .0001), 
the largest diffusion eigenvalue (p < .0001), the third-largest diffusion eigenvalue (p < 
.005) and the principal diffusion eigenvector orientation (p < .05) when motion-compen- 
sation was applied. We did not find a significant change in our measurement of diffusion 
"volume index" anisotropy (p = .1983). This experiment was the first, to our knowledge, 
to formally demonstrate that significant proton velocity gradients do exist in the cord as a 
result of its complex bulk motion. Furthermore, by being able to measure diffusion trace, 
eigenvalues and eigenvector orientation with greater accuracy than before, we hope that 
this research is an important step to one day being able to non-invasively localize and 
diagnose stroke, multiple sclerosis, and trauma in the human spinal cord. 
 
147 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
CAVUM SEPTI PELLUCIDI IN TOURETTE SYNDROME. Karen J. Kim and 
Bradley S. Peterson. Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
An enlarged cavum septum pellucidum (CSP) has been associated with a variety of 
neuropsychiatric disorders and is a putative marker of disturbed brain development. The 
goal of this study was to characterize systematically the CSP and the related cavum ver- 
gae in individuals with Tourette Syndrome (TS). The overall size and anteroposterior 
length of the CSP in 161 children (97 with TS and 64 normal pediatric controls) and 107 
adults (43 with TS and 64 normal adult controls) were rated on high-resolution magnetic 
resonance images in the coronal view. The associations of CSP size with diagnosis and 
symptom severity scores were assessed using ordinal logistic regression analysis. 
 
CSP size in TS children was significantly smaller than in normal control subjects and 
was inversely associated with ADHD symptom severity in the TS subjects. CSP size was 
not significantly associated with the comorbid diagnoses of OCD or ADHD. These results 
were replicated in an independent sample of TS and normal control adults. The presence 
of a cavum vergae was not significantly associated with a diagnosis of TS. These findings 
suggest that the pathophysiology of TS may involve abnormalities in the early develop- 
ment of the CSP or in the neighboring corpus callosum, septal nuclei, or related portions 
of the limbic system. 
 
POSTERIOR STABILIZATION OF THE CERVICOTHORACIC SPINE: A BIOME- 
CHANICAL EVALUATION. Jennifer Kreshak, Derek Lindsey, Daniel Kim, Andrew 
Kam, Scott Yerby, and Manohar Panjabi. RR&D, VA, Palo Alto, California and the 
Department of Biomechanical Engineering, Stanford University Stanford, Califor- 
nia. 
 
The cervicothoracic spine is a complex site for stabilization of traumatic and degen- 
erative disorders and has proven to be a difficult challenge in both approach and fixation 
of injuries. The objective of this study was to biomechanically test three posterior cervi- 
cal fixation devices and evaluate them for stability with two- and three-column injuries at 
the cervicothoracic junction. 
 
Twenty-one human cadaver spines (C3-T3) were loaded in flexion/extension, lateral 
bending, and axial torsion. A posterior two-column injury was created at C7-TI by tran- 
secting all posterior ligamentous elements and the posterior half of the intervertebral disc. 
One of three fixation systems was applied; fixation included two posterior rod/screw sys- 
tems and one posterior plate/screw system, all with screws placed bilaterally at C5,C6 and 
Tl,T2. The spines were tested again. A three-column injury was then created by transect- 
ing the remaining anterior structures, and the spines were tested a final time. 
 
For all three systems tested in flexion/extension, there were no significant differences 
in stiffness between intact spines and instrumented two-column injuries, however, the 
three-column injury was significantly less stiff than the intact and two-column injury in 
extension. The range of motion and neutral zone decreased from intact to two-column 
injury and increased from intact to three-column. in lateral bending and axial rotation, all 
systems were significantly stiffer than the intact spine for both injuries; the range of 
motion and neutral zone were decreased for both injuries when compared to intact speci- 
mens. 
 
These results suggest that all three systems stabilize the cervicothoracic junction with 
a posterior two-column injury in flexion/extension, lateral bending, and axial rotation, 
 
148 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
however, none were adequate for a three-column injury, particularly in extension. A three- 
column injury at this level would warrant supplemental anterior fixation. 
 
THE IMPACT OFTHE INTERNET ON THE DOCTOR-PATIENT RELATIONSHIP. 
Stephen Krieger and Seth Powsner. Department of Psychiatry, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Purpose: There is a vast amount of medical information available on the Internet, and 
millions of patients go online to retrieve it each year. Many researchers and writers in pop- 
ular media have stated that the Internet and World Wide Web are having a profound impact 
on the doctor-patient relationship, however no attempt has been made to characterize and 
quantify these effects. This study seeks to assess what it is patients do based on their use 
of the Internet, and how their use of online medical information is affecting their medical 
care and relationships with their physicians. 
 
Methods: As the doctor-patient relationship is an inherently experiential phenome- 
non, structured interviews were used to gather both quantifiable data as well as anecdotal 
information. Interviews were conducted with 40 patients of the Yale Hematology-Oncol- 
ogy Clinic who had used the Internet for medical information. 
 
Results: 88 percent of patients reported bringing information learned online to the 
attention of their doctors, and 73 percent also stated the Internet had brought up new ques- 
tions to ask their physicians. Based on their use of the Internet, 33 percent of patients 
sought second opinions from new doctors, including 13 percent who decided to change 
physicians entirely. These patients were significantly more likely than the other patients 
in the study to have found information online that contradicted what they had been told 
by their doctor. Sixty-three percent of respondents reported searching for clinical trials 
online, and 15 percent of patients reported having been part of a clinical trial they learned 
about on the Internet. 
 
Conclusions: This study's results are incompatible with the position that patients' use 
of the Internet and World Wide Web has had no measurable effect on the doctor-patient 
relationship. Several recommendations are made that can facilitate improved doctor- 
patient communication by taking into account current and potential future impact of the 
Internet. 
 
DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION OF A NEW DEFINITION OF BIOCHEMI- 
CAL FAILURE IN PROSTATE CANCER. Tara Lagu, David Penson, Carolyn 
Wells, Alvan Feinstein, and John Concato. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Different definitions of biochemical "failure" have been developed, based on levels 
of prostate specific antigen (PSA), to evaluate patients who receive treatment for cancer 
of the prostate (CaP). Two commonly used definitions are treatment-specific and have 
limitations. For example, the radiologic oncologic definition is cumbersome methodolog- 
ically as it requires documentation of three consecutive rises in PSA level after a nadir, 
whereas the surgical definition considers any detectable PSA significant, increasing the 
likelihood of false positives. Our purpose was to define and validate a new definition of 
PSA failure, and to compare its performance characteristics to the existing definitions. 
The new definition was developed in a cohort of 180 patients diagnosed or treated for CaP 
at Yale-New Haven Hospital in the years 1991 to 1992. Two independent reviewers (a 
urologist and an internist) evaluated time vs. PSA curves constructed for each patient. 
 
149 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
Reviewers used clinical judgement to determine whether there was evidence of PSA fail- 
ure. From these data, a slope cut-off of 1 ng/mL/year was established (with sensitivity = 
0.94 and specificity = 0.93) for the Yale definition of biochemical failure. This definition 
was then validated in a group of 238 patients diagnosed with CaP during 1991 to 1995 at 
eight VA medical centers. PSA failure and median time-to-failure were determined for the 
new definition and for definitions for prostatectomy and for radiotherapy. These defini- 
tions were applied independent of therapy. Criteria for surgical failure were met in 165 
patients (69 percent) with the post-radiation definition classifying 66 patients (28 percent) 
as having failed. The Yale definition was intermediate between these two, identifying 1 12 
(47 percent) as having failed. The Yale definition was also intermediate in its median time 
to PSA failure 3.2 months for the surgical definition vs. 13.8 months for Yale definition 
vs. 15.5 months for the post-radiation definition. The Yale definition of PSA failure is 
practical, clinically, and epidemiologically applicable regardless of treatment, and inter- 
mediate between current definitions of PSA failure. 
 
UTILITY OF INTRAOPERATIVE PTH MONITORING IN PREDICTING META- 
BOLIC CONTROL OF PTH LEVELS IN SECONDARY HYPERPARATHY- 
ROIDISM. Vasanthi P. Lakshminarayan, Barbara K. Kinder, and Sanziana Roman. 
Section of Surgical Oncology and Endocrinology, Department of Surgery, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study is to evaluate whether the intraoperative PTH (iPTH) assay 
may be used in the surgical management of secondary hyperparathyroidism to predict 
metabolic control of PTH levels in patients with chronic renal failure (CRF). Between 
August 1999 and December 2001, 20 patients underwent surgical parathyroidectomy for 
secondary hyperparathyroidism at Yale-New Haven Hospital. Each patient had intraoper- 
ative PTH monitoring during parathyroidectomy with levels measured at baseline (pre- 
excision) and at five-minute intervals post-excision of each hyperplastic gland. Study 
patients had an average preoperative PTH level of 659 pg/mL (1098 percent normal PTH 
assumed to be 60 pg/mL) and a final intraoperative decline of 84 percent from baseline at 
the end of the procedure. Follow-up PITH levels (range 1 to 24 months) were obtained for 
17 patients through dialysis centers. Correlation of intraoperative measures with follow- 
up levels indicated that final iPTH (expressed as an absolute value or percent of normal 
PTH) is more predictive of follow-up PTH levels (r = 0.472, p < .05) than percent decline 
from baseline (r = 0.244, p > 0.05). When patients were separated into two groups based 
on follow-up PTH levels remaining at or below versus higher than final intraoperative 
PTH, no statistically significant difference was seen in intraoperative PTH values (p > .05) 
between the two groups. Based on our data, final intraoperative PTH levels (absolute or a 
percentage of normal PTH levels and not percent decline from baseline) provide the best 
marker of follow-up levels in an individual overtime but not necessarily in the initial post- 
operative period. Larger numbers of patients with longer and more consistent follow-up 
periods are necessary to confirm that the final intraoperative PTH level can be used as a 
criterion for endocrine surgeons to be assured of future metabolic control in patients with 
secondary hyperparathyroidism. 
 
150 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
UNMASKING CRYPTIC EPITOPES AFTER LOSS OF IMMUNODOMINANT 
TUMOR ANTIGENS THROUGH EPITOPE SPREADING. Kate M. Lalya,b, 
Simone Mocellina, Galen A. Ohnmachtc, Mai-Britt Nielsenc, Maria Bettinottia, Mon- 
ica C. Panellic, Vladia Monsurroa, and Francesco M. Marincolaa,c (Sponsored by 
Joseph Craft). aDepartment of Transfusion Medicine, Clinical Center, bHHMI-NIH 
Research Scholar, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and cSurgery Branch, Divi- 
sion of Clinical Sciences, NCI, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. 
 
The basis of intra-tumoral and systemic T-cell reactivity toward cancer remains 
unclear. In particular the role that peripheral stimuli play in shaping the acquired immune 
response toward cancer is still poorly understood. In this study we document the surfac- 
ing of systemic immunity toward a nine residue cryptic epitope from a member of the 
Melanoma Antigen family (MAGE-12:170-178), following temporary regression of a sin- 
gle melanoma metastasis, in response to vaccination against another molecule 
(gplOO/PMell7). This emergence was unlikely to be related to unusually high expression 
of MAGE-12 by the tumor, or by the influence of analog epitopes to MAGE-12:170-178. 
Since MAGE-12 was unlikely to be expressed at sites other than the tumor, the demon- 
stration of MAGE-12:170-178 reactivity in post- but not pre-vaccination circulating lym- 
phocytes suggests that the systemically observed immune response was influenced by 
events induced by the vaccine at the tumor site or in draining lymph nodal areas. Possi- 
bly, as suggested by pre-clinical models, immunologic ignorance is the default response 
toward cancer unless unusual stimulatory conditions occur. Surfacing of MAGE- 12 speci- 
ficity occurred in association with loss of gplOO/PMel 17 targeted by the vaccine. This 
finding suggests that vaccinations might have effects beyond their intrinsic specificity and 
may trigger broader immune responses through epitope spreading by inducing changes 
within the tumor microenvironment. This may have important practical implication for the 
development of immunization strategies. 
 
MD/MBA PROGRAMS IN THE UNITED STATES: EVIDENCE OF A CHANGE IN 
HEALTHCARE LEADERSHIP. David B. Larson and Howard R Forman. Depart- 
ment of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
 
Financial constraints and poor design of the healthcare delivery system are increas- 
ingly demanding the attention of medical professionals. Managerial sciences offer a rich 
source of potential solutions to many of these challenges. This has created a perceived 
need for cooperation between management and the medical profession, as well as for 
individuals who are members of both groups. The popular media have reported a rising 
number of physicians acquiring a background in management through joint MD/MBA 
(Master of Business Administration) degree programs. However, no recent study has ana- 
lyzed these programs. The objective of this study was to measure changes in the number 
and nature of the affiliations between management and medicine in the form of joint 
MD/MBA degree programs. Surveys of admissions officers of 125 US allopathic medical 
schools and of the overseers of each joint MD/MBA degree program were administered 
in May-December 2001. The number of joint MD/MBA degree programs has grown from 
six to 33 since 1993; 17 more medical schools are considering establishing the joint- 
degree program. 10, 15, and 20 programs produced a total of 27, 42, and 61 graduates in 
1999, 2000, and 2001, respectively, and over 100 students are expected to graduate per 
year when all 33 programs mature. Program structure and oversight indicate a spectrum 
of philosophies regarding the appropriate integration of the two degrees. The joint 
 
151 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
MD/MBA degree programs apparently attempt to complement medical education with 
management education rather than the converse. The growth in the number of joint 
MD/MBA degree programs and participants indicates a relatively sudden increase in 
cooperation between medical and business schools and a rising interest in management 
education early in the careers of graduating physicians. 
 
EFFECTS ON LIPID METABOLISM OF METFORMIN AND TROGLITAZONE IN 
PATIENTS WITH TYPE 2 DIABETES MELLITUS. Ingi Le, David G. Maggs, David 
Katz, Geralyn R. Spollett, Stephanie L. Page, Frances S. Rife, and Silvio E. Inzuc- 
chi. Section of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Metformin (M), a biguanide, and troglitazone (T), a thiazolidinedione, comprise two 
antidiabetic classes with unique mechanisms of action. Both have lipid lowering proper- 
ties, which have not been adequately compared. To determine the effects on lipid metab- 
olism of M and T, alone and in combination (MT), subjects were randomized to receive 
M 1000 mg PO BID (n = 15) or T 400 mg PO QD (n = 12) for three months, followed 
by three months of MT. Both groups had similar baseline characteristics: mean age 53.4 
years, HbAlc 9.5 percent, and BMI 33.7 kg/m2. Results were as follows: 
 
Lipid Treatment Pre- Post- Percentage p 
 
parameter group treatment treatment change value 
 
HDL (mg/dL) M 40.7 + 10.1 43.2 + 15.1 +6.0% NS 
 
T 40.6 + 8.0 43.1 + 8.7 +6.2% NS 
MT 40.4 + 9.1 45.3 + 12.8 +12.0% .0044 
LDL (mg/dL) M 122.4 + 33.2 113.2 + 32.5 -7.5% .036 
 
T 133.9 + 35.0 144.8 + 37.3 +8.1% NS 
MT 127.0 + 30.0 125.0 + 27.7 -1.6% NS 
Fasting TG M 191.3 + 118.1 162.0 + 77.9 -15.3% NS 
(mg/dL) T 229.0 + 161.2 191.3 + 101.9 -16.4% NS 
 
MT 219.7 + 145.3 160.5 + 117.6 -27.0% .0083 
Postprandial TG M 253.2 + 116.6 228.4 + 95.5 -9.8% NS 
(mg/dL) T 290.7 + 147.9 262.6 + 128.0 -9.7% NS 
 
MT 265.2 + 117.1 225.2 + 122.6 -15.1% .0059 
Fasting M .873 + 271 .871 + 227 -27.0% NS 
FFA (nmol/L) T .98 + .42 .69 + .24 -30.0% .033 
 
MT .94 + .35 .78 + .31 -17.3% .0017 
Postprandial FFA M .39 + .20 .26 + .13 -32.7% .0091 
 
T .37 + .21 .19 + .10 -48.7% .0013 
MT .28 + .21 .18 + .12 -53.0% <.0001 
 
In summary, although M and T have similar glucose lowering properties, they exhib- 
ited differing effects on lipid metabolism. M decreased LDL and postprandial FFA while 
T decreased fasting and postprandial FFA. Meanwhile, MT demonstrated beneficial addi- 
tive effects on HDL, and fasting and postprandial TG. 
 
152 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE NEONATAL NECROTIZING ENTEROCOLITIS IN 
EXTREMELY LOW BIRTH WEIGHT INFANTS (WEIGHING <1000 g): ROLE OF 
PERITONEAL DRAINAGE. Susan J. Lee and Richard A. Ehrenkranz. Section of 
Newborn Special Care, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Med- 
icine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The aim of this retrospective study was to determine whether the employment of 
peritoneal drainage (PD) in extremely low birth weight infants (ELBW) with severe NEC 
was associated with a lower or higher mortality and morbidity than that of exploratory 
laparotomy (EL). This study also aimed to identify those infants with severe NEC in 
whom PD might be the appropriate procedure of choice. 
 
The hospital records of all ELBW infants treated for NEC at the Yale-New Haven 
Children's Hospital between 1991 and 1998 were reviewed. Data were abstracted from 45 
patients with Stage III NEC weighing < 1 1000 g. Six of the 45 patients were treated with 
initial PD, and the other 39 were treated with initial EL. The following parameters were 
collected from the records for analysis: birth weight, gestational age, gender, Apgar 
scores, age at NEC diagnosis, presence or absence of preoperative risk factors, type of 
procedure, length of postoperative stay, postoperative management, death, and survival. 
Statistical analysis was performed using Fischer's test for proportional analysis and the 
two-tailed unpaired student's t-test for comparing continuous sample parameters. 
 
No statistically significant differences were found between ELBW infants with NEC 
Stage III who underwent PD and those with NEC Stage III who underwent EL with 
respect to birth weight, gestational age, age at diagnosis, and age at procedure. In addi- 
tion, no statistically significant differences were found for these patients in terms of the 
severity of the illness at the time of procedure. There was, however, a significant differ- 
ence in the outcome of these patients. Of the six patients that underwent PD, five (83.3 
percent) died; of those, 4 (80.0 percent) died within one week of the procedure. In com- 
parison, of those who underwent EL, only 17 (43.6 percent) died; of those, five (29.4 per- 
cent) died within one week of the procedure. The mortality of PD patients was nearly 
twice as great as that of EL patients, and yet there was no difference in patient character- 
istics between the two groups. 
 
This review was unable to identify clear criteria leading to the selection of an initial 
surgical procedure, either PD or EL. Although the outcome of infants with severe NEC 
and BW less than 1000 g appeared markedly improved with EL compared to PD, limita- 
tions in the sample size of our study cautions against drawing firm conclusions. Therefore, 
we recommend that a randomized controlled trial of PD versus EL be performed to deter- 
mine the role of PD in the management of ELBW infants with severe NEC. 
 
MICROVASCULAR OSCILLATIONS ELICITED LOCALLY BY COMBINED ION- 
TOPHORESIS OF PHENYLEPHRINE AND ACUPRESSURE. Frederick C. 
Lewis, Michael Scannell, Julie Park, and David G. Silverman. Department of 
Anesthesiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study tested the hypothesis that organized vasomotion of the peripheral 
microvasculature consistent with cholinergic oscillatory control could be elicited by local 
iontophoresis of phenylephrine and that the response would be enhanced by acupressure 
at the Lung point of the ear (a method known to increase vagal tone). 
 
Heart rate, respiration, and forehead flow (via a 1 mm2 laser Doppler surface probe) 
were monitored in eight healthy volunteers. Forehead flow was measured at three sites 
receiving iontophoresed phenylephrine, iontophoresed normal saline (NS), or no ion- 
 
153 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
tophoresis (control site), respectively. Volunteers received iontophoresis for an average of 
30 seconds, followed by a ten-minute rest period, then bilateral ear acupressure for two 
minutes. 
 
The phenylephrine site showed a 25 percent reduction in flow following iontophore- 
sis (p < .01 using a paired t test), while iontophoresis induced no significant change in 
flow at the NS or control sites. During the period of ear acupressure, the phenylephrine 
site showed an increase in the amplitude and organization of oscillatory activity as docu- 
mented by an increase in intermediate-frequency (IF, 0.12-0.18 Hz) spectral power when 
compared with the other two forehead sites and with the phenylephrine site at baseline (p 
< 0.01 for all comparisons). This increase in forehead oscillatory power, which is consis- 
tent with parasympathetic but not sympathetic oscillatory activity, was independent of res- 
piration and of the major oscillatory power of the ECG. No obvious or consistent change 
occurred in heart rate, standard deviation of heart rate, or heart rate oscillatory power in 
the IF range, suggesting that there was no systemic effect from either the phenylephrine 
or the acupressure. 
 
These findings indicate that IF microvascular oscillations can be elicited by local ion- 
tophoresis of phenylephrine in combination with enhancement of vagal tone by acupres- 
sure. The study provides a model for investigating effects of acupuncture and may help 
advance the development of clinical monitoring of autonomic function. 
 
ROLE FOR SIALIC ACID IN THE FORMATION OF TIGHT LYSOSOME-DERIVED 
VACUOLES DURING TRYPANOSOMA CRUZI INVASION. Monica E. Lopez, 
Chau Huynh, Luciana 0. Andrade, and Norma W. Andrews. Section of Microbial 
Pathogenesis, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Previous studies have shown that sialic acid plays a role in cell invasion by Try- 
panosoma cruzi, the etiologic agent of Chagas disease in humans. Recently, work from 
our laboratory revealed that T cruzi entry into nonphagocytic cells involves the recruit- 
ment and fusion of host cell lysosomes with the plasma membrane, which contribute to 
the formation of the parasitophorous vacuole. Initial electron microscopy studies of vac- 
uole morphology showed that the membranes of the vacuole and of the parasite are very 
tightly apposed, resulting in very small intravacuolar volumes. We hypothesized that sial- 
ic acid, a molecule present in abundance on lysosomal membrane glycoproteins, might 
mediate this strong interaction. To gain insight into the role of sialic acid in the formation 
of these vacuoles, we studied the trypanosomal parasitophorous vacuole morphology in 
wild-type Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO-K1) cells and in a sialic acid-deficient mutant 
cell line (Lec2) using transmission electron microscopy. 
 
Here we confirm previous reports that sialic acid-deficient Lec2 cells are 50 percent 
less susceptible to invasion by T cruzi than wild-type CHO-KI cells. We ruled out faulty 
Ca2+ signaling and lysosomal exocytosis as possible mechanisms for the decreased sus- 
ceptibility to T cruzi invasion of Lec2 cells. 
 
On transmission electron microscopy, Lec2 parasitophorous vacuoles display an 
atypical morphology that is characterized by a frail apposition of parasite and vacuole 
membranes. Stereology analysis using the point-counting method then confirmed that 
Lec2 vacuoles indeed have 40 percent greater "unoccupied" volume density than their 
wild type CHO-KI counterparts. Furthermore, B-hexosaminidase assays detected that 
sialic-acid deficient Lec2 cells have a 65 percent increase in extracellular release of their 
lysosomal contents during T cruzi invasion, when compared to wild-type CHO-KI cells. 
 
154 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
Taken together, these findings suggest that sialic acid associated with lysosomal gly- 
coproteins is necessary for the formation of tightly-sealed parasitophorous vacuoles 
required for efficient invasion by T cruzi. 
 
REACTIVE GLIOSIS FOLLOWING HIPPOCAMPAL IMPLANTATION: A B10- 
COMPATIBILITY EVALUATION OF FIVE MATERIALS. Karl A. Lozanne (Spon- 
sored by Dennis D. Spencer). Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The present study aimed to determine the biocompatibility of several materials pro- 
posed for the development of a novel intracranial biosensor. The filial reaction induced by 
short-term (14 day) and long-term (90 day) implantation of potential biosensor substrates, 
namely carbon, silicon, gold, platinum, and Pyrex, into the hippocampus was measured 
and characterized. Needle shaped implants of each material, 0.5 mm in diameter, were 
implanted into the hippocampi of adult rats for 14 or 90 days. Glial fibrillary acidic pro- 
tein immunohistochemistry coupled with mean optical density (MOD) measurements 
were used to determine the level of reactive gliosis following implantation. The extent of 
gliosis varied depending on the implant type and was lowest for platinum followed in 
increasing level by gold, carbon, silicon, and Pyrex. The glial reaction decreased in vol- 
ume over time for each substrate except Pyrex, leaving behind a thin, porous glial mem- 
brane at the brain-implant boundary. We conclude that platinum and gold are the best sub- 
strates for a chronically implanted neural biosensor, but that carbon and silicon are also 
suitable. We caution against the long-term use of Pyrex as a substrate because a chronic 
glial reaction develops following its implantation. 
 
PSYCHOLOGICAL SEQUELAE AND PERCEPTION OF TRAUMATIC EXPERI- 
ENCES AMONG SURVIVORS OF TORTURE. George Lui, Allen S. Kellera, and 
John Concatob. aDepartment of Internal Medicine, New York University School of 
Medicine, New York, New York; and bDepartment of Internal Medicine, Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Purpose: This study evaluated survivors of torture to: 1) describe demographic char- 
acteristics and torture history, 2) quantitatively assess psychological sequelae of patients 
over time, and 3) qualitatively assess patients' perception of their traumatic experiences. 
 
Methods: We interviewed patients in the Bellevue/NYU Program for Survivors of 
Torture at intake, three and six months. Anxiety and depression were measured with the 
Hopkins Symptom Checklist-25 (HSCL-25). PTSD was diagnosed by a psychologist or 
psychiatrist at intake and measured with the Harvard Trauma Questionnaire (HTQ) at 
three and six months. Open-ended questions were asked about what most bothered the 
patient about their traumatic experience, and their reactions to the events of September 11, 
2001. 
 
Results: At intake, 79 percent (n = 15/19) were symptomatic for anxiety (HSCL-25 
> 1.75), 84 percent (n = 16/19) for depression (HSCL-25 > 1.75), and 80 percent (n = 
12/15) for PTSD (by psychologist or psychiatrist). Among 10 patients with follow-up 
data, there was an improvement in symptoms of depression by HSCL-25 (10/10, 100 per- 
cent at baseline vs. 3/10, 30 percent at 6 months; p = .003) and of PTSD by HTQ (9/10, 
90 percent at baseline vs. 0/10, 0 percent at 6 months; p < .001). Patients were most dis- 
turbed by recurrent memories of their past experience and reacted predominately with 
confusion and re-experiencing degradation and loss. After the events of September 11, 
 
155 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
nine of the 11 patients responded with sympathy for the people who died. Eight patients 
reported increased memories of their past trauma, and seven stated that they were more 
afraid of discrimination after September 11. 
 
Conclusion: This thesis suggests a high prevalence of anxiety, depression, and PTSD 
symptoms among survivors of torture. When receiving care in a multidisciplinary pro- 
gram, many of these patients showed improvement in their psychological sequelae over 
six months. Finally, both standardized instruments and open-ended questionnaires are use- 
ful in identifying and understanding how to treat survivors of torture. 
 
AN APPRAISAL OF HONG KONG'S PUBLIC HOSPITAL SYSTEM IN 2001. 
Yee-Bun Benjamin Lui. Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The Hong Kong Government established the Hospital Authority in 1990 to manage 
all public hospitals in Hong Kong. In so doing, the Government had followed the chief 
recommendations of the 1985 Scott Report to separate hospital care from primary care, 
and to establish a statutory body independent of the civil service structure but accountable 
to the Government to oversee this new public hospital system. This essay examines this 
important transformation in Hong Kong's public hospital system. It first provides the 
background and history of this public hospital system. It then examines the system's prob- 
lems that had led to the Scott Report's recommendations and the subsequent creation of 
the Hospital Authority, and delineates the HA's objectives. Next, using multiple sources 
of available evidence, this essay assesses the Hospital Authority's degree of success/fail- 
ure in meeting its objectives and addressing the system's problems. 
 
This essay found that while the Hospital Authority appeared to have met some of its 
objectives, it has not met or only partially met some of its other objectives. Moreover, new 
problems have arisen from the creation of the Hospital Authority, namely 1) the vertical 
division between management personnel from the Head Office above and clinical person- 
nel from the hospitals below, and 2) the further fragmentation of the public healthcare 
delivery structure by separating hospital care from primary care. The essay concluded, 
therefore, that the present management transformations embodied in the creation of the 
Hospital Authority could not alone solve many of the problems in Hong Kong's public 
hospital system. In light of this assessment, this essay gives a set of recommendations for 
improving Hong Kong's public hospital system. 
 
CHRONIC RENAL FAILURE IN IRANIAN CHILDREN. Kamyar Madani and Has- 
san Otoukesh (Sponsored by Scott Van Why and Asghar Rastegar). Department 
of Nephrology, Ali-Asghar Children's Hospital, Iranian University of Medical Sci- 
ences, Teheran, Iran. 
 
We investigated chronic renal failure (CRF) in Iranian children in order to generate 
baseline data including incidence, prevalence, etiologies, and modalities of renal replace- 
ment therapy, and to define strategies to identify those subjects at risk for renal disease 
later in life. We reviewed charts of 166 Iranian children (95 boys and 71 girls) from July 
1991 to June 1999 at a tertiary referral center. The mean age at onset of CRF was 7.9 ? 
4.5 years. The most common cause of CRF was congenital urological malformations (78 
cases). The second most common cause of CRF was hereditary nephropathy (21 percent). 
High rates of cystinosis and primary hyperoxaluria were seen, and these elevated rates 
could be due a high prevalence of parental consanguinity. The difference in the parental 
 
156 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
consanguinity rate for patients with non-hereditary nephropathies (24 percent) and those 
with hereditary nephropathies (46 percent) was statistically significant (p = .027). Eighty- 
six patients required renal replacement therapy, of which the majority underwent 
hemodialysis. The prevalence of primary reflux nephropathy as a cause of CRF was high 
compared to reports from Western countries. Earlier diagnosis and management of urinary 
tract infections in this group could reduce the prevalence of reflux as a cause of CRF in 
this population. Genetic counseling programs may be of benefit in the prevention of 
hereditary nephropathies. 
 
REGULATION OF G-PROTEIN SIGNALING BY POST-TRANSLATION PRO- 
TEIN MODIFICATIONS. Louis A. Marotti. Jr. and Henrik G. Dohiman. Department 
of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine. New Haven. Connecticut. 
 
Heterotrimeric G proteins play a role in many important biological processes. There- 
fore, it is essential that we gain an understanding of the mechanisms underlying the regu- 
lation of their activity. One way in which protein activity can be regulated is through the 
addition of specific post-translational modifications. Here, we examine the effects of two 
post-translational modifications on G protein signaling - ubiquitination of Gpal, a yeast 
G protein a-subunit, and phosphorylation of Sst2, a yeast RGS protein and cognate RGS 
of Gpal. First, the site of ubiquitin attachment on Gpal is mapped using mass spectrome- 
try. This information is then used to construct ubiquitination-resistant Gpal mutants, and 
the activities of these mutants are examined in functional assays of yeast pheromone sig- 
naling. Sst2 is phosphorylated by a mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase in response 
to pheromone stimulation. The phosphorylation takes place in a MAP kinase consensus 
sequence, Pro-X-Ser-Pro. Here, we evaluate the importance of the "X' residue in deter- 
mining, the substrate specificity of MAP kinase phosphorylation in vivo. Substitution of 
the "X" residue with all 20 possible amino acids, as well as deletion of it, alters Sst2 phos- 
phorylation. We conclude that, contrary to existing dogma, the amino acid identity of "X" 
is important in determining the efficiency of MAP kinase interaction. This work provides 
further insight into mechanisms of G protein signaling regulation. 
 
INFLUENCES OF BACK-UP PRESCRIPTIONS ON SATISFACTION AND 
ANTIBIOTIC USE. Corey L. Martin and David L. Katz. Department of Epidemiol- 
ogy and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con- 
necticut. 
 
While the etiology of most diagnoses of acute rhinosinusitis is viral, many physicians 
continue to prescribe antibiotics for treatment of acute rhinosinusitis. This retrospective 
survey study sought to determine if providing patients control over the use of antibiotics, 
(i.e., giving a back-up prescription and guidelines for appropriate use) would decrease the 
inappropriate use of antibiotics, while maintaining patient satisfaction with medical treat- 
ment. 
 
A total of 114 patients completed the survey. Seventy-six percent of patients expect- 
ed antibiotic treatment for their illness. When patients expected antibiotic treatment for 
their illness, satisfaction rates were significantly associated with receiving an antibiotic 
prescription (p = .0465). Furthermore, the likelihood of not consulting another physician 
due to dissatisfaction was significantly associated with receiving an antibiotic prescription 
(p = .01 11). Patients in our study group were also queried about the use of back-up pre- 
scriptions. Over two-thirds of patients (69.7 percent) preferred future treatment for acute 
 
157 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
rhinosinusitis with a back-up antibiotic prescription. Ninety-one percent of patients (91.1 
percent) stated they would wait at least one day to fill the antibiotic prescription with 52.7 
percent of patients stating they would wait at least seven days to fill the prescription. Sat- 
isfaction with the concept of back-up prescriptions was not significantly different than sat- 
isfaction with conventional treatment (p = .662). Our results suggest that antibiotics are 
associated with satisfaction in patients who expect an antibiotic. Patients are accepting of 
the concept of back-up antibiotic prescriptions, and patients would have at least equal sat- 
isfaction with back-up antibiotic prescriptions versus conventional treatment for acute rhi- 
nosinusitis. By inquiring if patients expect an antibiotic we may be able to decrease antibi- 
otic prescriptions in acute rhinosinusitis. Also, the fact that 91 percent of the patients 
would wait at least one day to fill their prescription and 52.7 percent of the patients would 
not fill their prescriptions until they had symptoms for at least seven days suggests a 
potential health care cost savings. 
 
CHARACTERIZATION OF THE IMMUNE RESPONSES TO THE TUMOR-ASSO- 
CIATED HY-ANTIGEN. Melissa A. McKirdy, Terry J. Fry, Fraia Melchionda, and 
Crystal L. Mackall (Sponsored by Gregory Plautz). Pediatric Oncology Branch, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. 
 
Our purpose was to characterize the naturally occurring T cell response to a model 
tumor antigen. Using a tumor, MB49, that naturally expressed the male minor histocom- 
patibility antigen, HY, we studied whether tolerance vs. immunity to HY was induced dur- 
ing tumor growth. Our model involved analysis of HY-specific T cell expansion using 
tetrames of MHC I molecules bound to the immunodominant epitope of HY, analysis of 
cytokine production to HY using ELISPOT, and analysis of the capacity of tumor-exposed 
T cells to mediate HY-disparate skin graft rejection. We found that male mice show more 
rapid primary tumor growth than females, that T cell depleted females show faster tumor 
growth than T cell replete hosts, and that reconstituting HY-specific T cell immunity con- 
trols tumor growth. Furthermore, lymph node (LN) cells from tumor-bearing hosts 
showed enhanced capacity to reject skin grafts following adoptive transfer. Thus, MB49 
does not induce tolerance to HY; instead, naturally acquired T cell dependent and HY-spe- 
cific immune responses are induced during tumor growth. However, in tumor-bearing 
hosts, ELISPOT revealed low-level reactivity to HY, and expansion of HY-reactive cells 
via tetramer were not detected. Therefore, the failure to adequately amplify anti-tumor 
responses limits hosts' ability to control tumor growth. We investigated to what degree T 
cell active cytokines (IL-2, IL-15, IL-7) could amplify antigen-specific immune respons- 
es and found IL-7 to dramatically increase HY-reactive T cells following immunization. 
Thus, in an attempt to enhance the endogenous HY-specific response, IL-7 was adminis- 
tered to thymectomized/T cell depleted recipients of transferred LN cells that were then 
challenged with tumor. Although IL-7 lowered the requirement for transferred LN cells 
needed to achieve skin graft rejection, IL-7-treated T cells could not mediate tumor rejec- 
tion. Together, these data indicate that tumor antigens weakly prime for a T cell-mediat- 
ed, anti-tumor immune response but that limitations in effector cell expansion prevent 
control of tumor growth. Future studies are needed to identify optimal regimens for ampli- 
fying naturally occurring weak anti-tumor immunity. 
 
158 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
CONDITIONAL EXPRESSION OF WNT-1, A REGULATOR OF GAP JUNC- 
TIONS, IN THE MURINE HEART. Jeffrey M. Miller and Glenn 1. Fishman (Spon- 
sored by Steve Goldstein). Section of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medi- 
cine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York. 
 
The goal of this study was to determine whether overexpression of the transcription 
factor Wnt-1 in the mucine heart in vivo would induce upregulation of Connexin43 
(Cx43). Cx43, the primary gap junction protein in the heart, is downregulated in several 
types of cardiac disease predisposing to arrhythmia, and restoration of Cx43 could theo- 
retically reduce arrhythmogenesis. This hypothesis was tested using the tetracycline trans- 
activator (tTA) system, which permits conditional expression of a transgene in vivo. A new 
line of transgenic mice harboring the tetO-wntl DNA construct was successfully created 
via transgenesis. As binding of tTA to tetO induces genes downstream of tetO, tetO-wnt- 
1 mice were subsequently mated with a line of transgenic mice expressing tTA constitu- 
tively in cardiac myocytes. Interaction between tTA and tetO in double-transgenic mice 
was competitively inhibited via administration of doxycycline until adulthood, at which 
point doxycycline was withdrawn from drinking water to induce cardiac expression of 
Wnt- 1. 
 
Studies of heart lysates from double-transgenic mice via Northern and Western 
analysis revealed a significant doxycycline-dependent induction of Wnt-1. Initial North- 
ern and Western analysis did not show an accompanying increase in Cx43 in response to 
Wnt-1 expression (18 percent decrease in Cx43 by Western, p = .50). These findings may 
result from a lack of secretion of Wnt- 1 by the myocytes in which it is expressed, a nec- 
essary step in the Wnt-1 pathway. Interestingly, we observed that expression of tTA, an 
intermediary in the transgenic system, led to a significant reduction in Cx43 mRNA and 
protein as compared to wild-type controls (52 percent reduction by Western, p = .033; 50 
percent reduction by Northern, p = .01). Further studies will seek to understand the mech- 
anism by which tTA downregulates Cx43, and to elucidate the differences between in vitro 
and in vivo expression of Wnt- 1. 
 
THE USE OF PLATELET CONCENTRATE IN POSTEROLATERAL LUMBAR 
SPINAL FUSION: A BIOMECHANICAL, HISTOLOGIC, AND RADIOGRAPHIC 
ANALYSIS. Jose J. Miranda. Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the potential use of platelet concentrate as 
an adjunct to autograft and as an autograft extender in the New Zealand white rabbit. Pos- 
terolateral fusions were performed at the L5-L6 level using two different volumes of iliac 
crest autograft: 1.5 cc and 3.0 cc, with and without platelet concentrate, for a total of four 
groups. The platelet concentrate used was prepared using blood collected from donor rab- 
bits and had an approximate concentration of 1,000,000 platelets/LI. Animals were sacri- 
ficed five weeks after surgery, and bone growth and fusion were evaluated using radi- 
ographic, biomechanical, and histologic analysis. At the 3.0 cc graft volume, the fusion 
rates approached 90 percent in both the groups with and without platelet concentrate. At 
the 1.5 cc graft volume, the platelet concentrate group had a fusion rate of 58 percent, 
which was double that of autograft alone (29 percent). We therefore conclude that when 
the amount of bone graft is limited, platelet concentrate may function as a graft extender 
in posterolateral fusion with a marked increase in the fusion rate. No effect of the platelet 
concentrate supplementation could be established on the high fusion rates achieved with 
adequate volume of bone graft. 
 
159 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
A COMPARISON OF THE RATE OF ARTERIOSCLEROSIS IN PATIENTS WITH 
THE MARFAN SYNDROME AND THE GENERAL POPULATION. Biren P. Modi 
and John A. Elefteriades. Section of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of 
Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to determine the prevalence of arteriosclerosis in 
patients with the Marfan syndrome in comparison to control individuals from the general 
population. The study arm consisted of eight patients with Marfan syndrome who had 
available preoperative computed tomography (CT) scans of the chest without intravenous 
contrast. The control arm consisted of eight age- and gender-matched patients who also 
had available CT scans of the chest. The CT scans were evaluated for the presence of cal- 
cium in the thoracic aorta and the coronary arteries using a semi-quantitative scale score 
of 0 to 3 for each artery. For all patients, a thorough chart review was conducted to search 
for body mass index and any history of hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, diabetes, 
prior stroke, prior myocardial infarction, or smoking. Though the differences were not sig- 
nificant, the Marfan group was younger, leaner, more likely to qualify as hypertensive due 
to beta-blocker administration, and less likely to be diabetic. The mean aortic calcium 
scores for Marfan patients and control patients were 0.000 and 0.125, respectively (p = .5). 
The mean coronary calcium scores for Marfan patients and control patients were 0.000 
and 0.125, respectively (p = .5). These results suggest that some trends do exist which 
could indicate that and explain why Marfan patients have less advanced arteriosclerosis. 
Future studies will bear out these trends. 
 
RADIAL SCARS OF THE BREAST: CORRELATION OF MAMMOGRAPHIC 
FEATURES WITH ASSOCIATED HISTOPATHOLOGY. Rashida B. N'gouamba, 
and Liane E. Philpotts. Section of Breast Imaging, Department of Diagnostic Radi- 
ology, Yale University, School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study will try to determine if there is an association between radial scars and 
breast cancer and the correlation with mammographic features. 
 
Pathology reports of breast biopsies performed at our institution (1988 to 1998) were 
reviewed to identify cases of radial scars. The pre-biopsy mammograms were available in 
154 of these cases. These were blindly reviewed to assess the mammographic lesions 
(mass [with or without calcifications], calcifications, or architectural distortions). The 
associated histopathologic findings were categorized as malignant, borderline (atypical 
ductal/lobular hyperplasia or lobular carcinoma in situ), or benign. The mammographic 
features were correlated with the pathologic findings. 
 
Of the 154 cases, the mammographic features were calcifications in 80 (52 percent), 
masses in 54 (35.1 percent), and architectural distortion in 20 (13 percent). The associat- 
ed pathology revealed 28 (18.2 percent) carcinomas (39.3 percent invasive carcinoma and 
60.7 percent ductal carcinoma in situ), 28 (18.2 percent) borderline, and 98 (63.6 percent 
benign lesions. Of the calcifications, 17 (21.3 percent) were malignant and 1 (21.3 percent 
were borderline. Eight (14.8 percent) of the masses were malignant, and 7 (13 percent) 
were borderline. Of the architectural distortions, three (15 percent) were malignant, and 
four 20 percent were borderline 
 
Radial scars diagnosed on breast biopsy were found associated with malignancy 
(18.2 percent) or borderline (18.2 percent) histology in more than a third of cases. The 
incidence of associated malignancy was similar for all mammographic features. 
 
160 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
FETAL RENAL DOPPLER PEAK SYSTOLIC VELOCITY AND PERINATAL 
OUTCOME IN INTRAUTERINE GROWTH RESTRICTION. Hung Dinh Nguyen 
and Raymond Bahado-Singh. Section of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con- 
necticut. 
 
The purpose of our study is to evaluate the clinical usefulness of the renal artery 
Doppler peak systolic velocity in predicting small for gestational age fetuses (SGA), 
severe SGA, and perinatal complications resulting from poor fetal growth. In addition, we 
also wanted to compare the diagnostic accuracy of the peak systolic velocity (PSV) with 
that of the resistance index (RI), an angle-independent Doppler index. Renal artery 
Doppler PSV and RI were measured prospectively in fetuses at risk for small for gesta- 
tional age. Maternal and neonatal outcome data were extracted from hospital charts and 
recorded. Normative data were generated from appropriately grown fetuses delivering at 
37 weeks or more without complications. The Doppler indices were expressed as multi- 
ples of the normal median (MOM) for gestational age. Using receiver operator character- 
istics curves, optimal Doppler thresholds for the detection of SGA cases, severe SGA 
cases, and adverse perinatal outcome were determined. Stepwise logistic regression analy- 
ses were used to compare the diagnostic accuracy of the PSV with that of the RI. There 
were 406 study patients of which 119 (29.3 percent) were SGA and 78 (19.2 percent) were 
severe SGA. The renal artery Doppler PSV was a statistically significant predictor of 
SGA, severe SGA, and perinatal complications. The areas under the curve (p value) were 
0.572 (.023), 0.581 (0.026), and 0.630 (< .001), respectively. When compared to the renal 
artery RI, the PSV was a superior predictor of severe SGA and perinatal complications 
with p values of .014 and .021, respectively. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that 
the renal artery PSV is a significant independent predictor of SGA, severe SGA, and peri- 
natal complications resulting from fetal growth restriction. Furthermore, the renal artery 
PSV is a better predictor of severe SGA and perinatal complications when compared to 
the renal artery RI, a traditional angle-independent measure. 
 
USE OF SPECT DIFFERENCE IMAGING TO ASSESS SUBCORTICAL BLOOD 
FLOW CHANGES DURING EPILEPTIC SEIZURES. Andrew D. Norden and Hal 
Blumenfeld. Departments of Neurology and Neurobiology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Seizures are thought to arise primarily from the cerebral cortex. However, the prop- 
agation and behavioral manifestations of seizures involve a network of both cortical and 
subcortical structures. The medial thalamus and upper brainstem reticular formation are 
crucial areas for the maintenance of normal consciousness. Bilateral involvement of these 
structures may be responsible for loss of consciousness during partial seizures. Therefore, 
we sought to investigate the role of the medial thalamus and brainstem in seizures. We per- 
formed SPECT ictal-interictal difference imaging co-registered with high-resolution MRI 
scans to localize regions of cerebral blood flow changes in patients undergoing inpatient 
monitoring for epilepsy. Ictal-interictal SPECT scans from 43 seizures in 40 patients were 
analyzed. The medial thalami showed SPECT difference imaging changes of more than 
20 percent in 18 patients. Of patients with medial thalamic changes, the majority (13 of 
18) had seizure onset in the temporal lobe, while only one had confirmed onset in 
extratemporal structures, and the remainder were non-localized. In contrast, in the 22 
patients without greater than 20 percent SPECT changes in the medial thalami, six had 
extratemporal onset, six had temporal onset, and the remainder were non-localized. In 
 
161 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
patients with temporal lobe seizures, the side of greater medial thalamic and brainstem 
reticular formation involvement was strongly related to SPECT injection timing such that 
there was a sequential pattern of ipsilateral followed by contralateral changes. Brainstem 
structures showed greater than 20 percent SPECT changes in 27 of 43 seizures with no 
clear relation to temporal or extratemporal onset. We conclude that the medial thalamus is 
preferentially involved in seizures arising from the temporal lobes, possibly reflecting the 
strong connections between limbic temporal structures and the medial thalamus. Sequen- 
tial involvement of ipsilateral followed by coniralateral structures in the medial thalamus 
and upper brainstem may explain how seizures produce peri-ictal loss of consciousness 
despite incomplete involvement of the cerebral cortex. 
 
RISK FACTORS FOR DELAYED DIAGNOSIS OF SUBARACHNOID AND 
INTRACEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE. Joyce M. Oen-Hsiao, Walter M. Kernan, 
Catherine M. Viscoli, and Lawrence M. Brass. Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut; Lewis B. Morgenstern, University of Texas School of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas; Issam A. Awad, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut; Janet L. Wilterdink and Edward Feldmann, Brown Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, Providence, Rhode Island; Thomas Brott, Mayo Med- 
ical School, Rochester, Minnesota; Ralph 1. Horwitz, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
To identify risk factors for delayed diagnosis of subarachnoid (SAH) or intracerebral 
(ICH) hemorrhage in younger patients (ages 18 to 49), we performed a subsidiary case- 
control study among 702 subjects from the Hemorrhagic Stroke Project (HSP). Case sub- 
jects were the 54 HSP patients (7.7 percent) who did not receive an appropriate diagnos- 
tic evaluation (brain CT scan, and if CT negative, LP) within 24 hours of consulting a 
physician for symptoms consistent with hemorrhagic stroke. For each case subject with a 
delayed diagnosis, we identified two subjects from the HSP with a prompt diagnosis, all 
successfully matched on recruitment site. We calculated odds ratios (ORs) for the associ- 
ation between risk factors and delayed diagnosis. 
 
Four features were associated with risk for delayed diagnosis (criteria: OR > 2.0 or 
< 0.5): initial evaluation in a physician's office (OR = 23.1), absence of alarm symptoms 
(photophobia, loss of consciousness, focal weakness) (OR = 4.6), no effortful activity pre- 
ceding focal time (OR = 5.5), and Hispanic ethnicity (OR = 2.4). Risk factors associated 
with delayed diagnosis were different in patients who presented to the hospital compared 
to patients who presented to an office. In a separate analysis, risk factors associated with 
delayed diagnosis were different for patients with SAH compared with patients with ICH. 
 
In conclusion, patients with SAH or ICH are at greater risk for a delay in their diag- 
nosis if they do not have alarm symptoms, especially if they present to an office rather 
than a hospital emergency department. Efforts to reduce delayed diagnosis should be 
directed at primary care physicians who see low-risk patients with milder symptoms. Our 
findings also indicate that there are different risk factors associated with delayed diagno- 
sis of hemorrhagic stroke based on location of presentation and on stroke type. Future 
research to understand and prevent delayed diagnosis must consider location of presenta- 
tion and stroke type. 
 
162 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
ABILITY OF PERIORBITALLY APPLIED ANTI-GLARE PRODUCTS TO 
IMPROVE CONTRAST SENSITIVITY IN CONDITIONS OF SUNLIGHT EXPO- 
SURE. Patricia J. Pahk and Brian M DeBroff. Department of Ophthalmology and 
Visual Science, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Sun glare decreases an athlete's contrast sensitivity and impairs his ability to distin- 
guish objects from background. Many commercial products claim to reduce glare but have 
not been proven effective in clinical studies. We determined whether glare-reducing prod- 
ucts such as EyeBlack grease and No Glare sticker reduce glare and improve contrast sen- 
sitivity during sunlight exposure. 
 
Forty-six students were tested for contrast sensitivity using a Pelli Robson Contrast 
Chart. Each subject served as an internal control and was initially tested using no product. 
Each was then tested again after being randomized to either application of EyeBlack 
grease (n = 16), No Glare sticker (n = 14), or Vaseline (placebo, n = 16) on the skin at the 
level of the infraorbital rim. All testing was performed in conditions of direct and unob- 
structed sunlight exposure to the subject. ANOVA test revealed a significant difference 
between EyeBlack grease (Pelli Robson value 1.87 + 0.09) and No Glare sticker (1.75 + 
0.14) in binocular testing (p = .0182). No statistical difference was found between the 
groups in the right eye, left eye or in the combined data of the right and left eyes. Paired 
T-test demonstrated a significant difference between control (1.77 + 0.14) and EyeBlack 
grease (1.87 + 0.09) in binocular testing (p = .0364). There was also a significant differ- 
ence between control (1.65 + 0.05) and EyeBlack grease (1.67 + 0.06) in the combined 
data of the right and left eyes (p = .0208). There was no statistical difference found 
between control and treatment group in any other combination. 
 
Our data suggest that EyeBlack grease reduces glare and improves contrast sensitiv- 
ity in conditions of sunlight exposure as compared to control and to No Glare sticker in 
binocular testing. Further testing with larger sample sizes and controlled glare conditions 
are needed to determine if glare reduction occurs in a manner that would reduce sun glare 
in actual athletic conditions. 
 
PREGNANCY AND CHILDBIRTH PRACTICES AND POPULAR LITERATURE 
IN TWENTIETH-CENTURY AMERICA: HISTORICAL AND SOCIAL PERSPEC- 
TIVES. Jacqueline J. Park (Sponsored by Susan E. Lederer). Section of the His- 
tory of Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of the study was to demonstrate how pregnancy and childbirth practices 
and popular literature throughout twentieth-century America served as agents that 
expressed, affirmed, and challenged cultural ideologies regarding motherhood, feminini- 
ty, and gender roles, and to demonstrate how historical, social, and cultural contexts influ- 
enced pregnancy and childbirth practices. 
 
Primary sources consisted of instructional pregnancy and childbirth handbooks, as 
well as works of advocacy that endorsed particular pregnancy and childbirth methods or 
philosophies. Representative text and images that reflected the influence of contempora- 
neous cultural contexts, as well as historical and social contexts, were selected, docu- 
mented, and analyzed. 
 
Data were organized into five periods. In the early twentieth century, Victorian 
notions of femininity and sexual propriety were evident in the dictates of practical hand- 
books for pregnant women. During the twilight sleep debate of 1914 to 1915, doctrines 
linked to first wave feminism and the women's suffrage movement were manifest in 
demands for childbirth reform. The 1950s-era Natural Childbirth method's glorification of 
 
163 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
pregnancy and childbirth reflected postwar ideals of a "feminine mystique" of mother- 
hood and domesticity. In the 1960s, the popularity of the Lamaze technique defined a 
more active role for women in labor and delivery, and allowed for greater male participa- 
tion. Finally, the home birth and midwifery movement in the 1970s to early 1980s articu- 
lated aims of the women's liberation movement and the counterculture's suspicion of tra- 
ditional institutions. 
 
As pregnancy and childbirth practices changed form throughout the century, each 
successive development bore the imprints of a unique combination of social forces that 
were discernible in the text and images of popular pregnancy and childbirth literature. 
 
POST-MASTECTOMY CHEST WALL RECURRENCE: PROGNOSTIC SIGNIFI- 
CANCE OF CLINICAL AND IMMUNO-HISTOCHEMICAL VARIABLES. Analene 
Pentopoulos and Bruce Haffty. Department of Therapeutic Radiology. Yale Univer- 
sity School of Medicine, New Haven Connecticut. 
 
Purpose: To determine survival (OS), distant metastasis (DM) and chest wall pro- 
gression (CWP) following isolated postmastectomy chest wall relapses (PM_CWR) treat- 
ed with radiation therapy (RT) and to evaluate the prognostic significance of immunohis- 
tochemical (IHC) markers at the time of PM-CWR. 
 
Methods and Materials: Between 1979 and 2000, 113 patients presented with a 
PM_CWR for treatment with RT. Paraffin-embedded blocks of the recurrent tumor for 43 
cases were arranged into a tissue micro-array and processed for IHC staining of ER, PR, 
N53 and HER-2-neu (H2N). Based on intensity and percentage of tumor staining, each 
case was as classified as positive or negative. 
 
Results: As of September 2001, median follow-up from the time of PM_CWR was 
11 years. At five years following PM_CWR, OS was 46 percent, DM was 51 percent, and 
CWP was 21 percent. Patients sustaining a PM_CWR within two years of initial diagno- 
sis fared poorly. ER and PR negativity correlated with early PM_CWR. PR+ correlated 
most significantly with DM following CWR with DM observed in eight percent of PRY 
compared to 60 percent of PR- (p < .01) at five years. CWP significantly correlated with 
H2N. with 14 percent H2N- patients progressing locally compared to 46 percent H2N+ (p 
< .01). 
 
Conclusions: For patients with PM_CWR, PR negativity in the recurrent tumor is a 
poor prognostic factor. PR+ patients had later PM_CWR and survived longer without DM 
than PR- patients. H2N+ was associated with CWP. These preliminary findings have 
potential implications for local and systemic management of PM_CWR. 
 
CERVICAL CANCER INFORMATION ON THE INTERNET: HEALTH INFORMA- 
TION SEEKERS AT RISK. Nikki Pinkerton (Sponsored by Ervin Jones, Michael 
Berman, and Frederick Haeseler). Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
A cross-sectional survey was designed to reveal what health information consumers 
are likely to find about cervical cancer on the Internet. Do web sites address common 
questions, and is their information accurate? Do common indicators of fundamental site 
quality, such as authorship, help health information consumers identify higher quality 
websites? And, do some search engines find more relevant websites than others? Two 
standardized rating instruments were developed. The first measured relevancy and quali- 
 
164 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
ty by evaluating website's coverage of 55 elemental responses derived from nine cervical 
cancer-related topics. 
 
More than 50 percent of the 242 unique websites located using 12 popular search 
engines were irrelevant by failing to address a single elemental response and a single 
search engine, Google significantly outperformed the other search engines. Only a minor- 
ity (41.6 percent) of key elements deemed important were covered by websites (mean 
Quality of Information score: 22.9 out of 55) and to varying degrees, potential misinfor- 
mation was found on every topic surveyed. The second rating instrument measured eight 
indicators of fundamental website quality (mean score 6.51 out of 12). 
 
Higher overall Quality of Information scores were not correlated with higher quality 
information, but a single indicator, the ownership of the website, was correlated with high- 
er quality websites. In summary, relevancy of cervical cancer-related information depends 
in part on the search engine used to locate the website; the quality of information varies 
greatly among websites; and Indicators of Fundamental Quality are insufficient for eval- 
uating websites with respect to quality of information, with the possible exception of uni- 
versity ownership. Consumers who use the Internet as their sole source of health infor- 
mation are truly at risk because they are ill-prepared to make critical health care decisions 
based upon the largely irrelevant, variable quality of health information on the Internet 
that may be conflicting, incomplete, and potentially harmful. 
 
EFFECTS OF BRAIN REGION AND GENDER ON PROTON MAGNETIC RES- 
ONANCE SPECTROSCOPY IN NORMAL SUBJECTS. Marlyanne M. Pol- 
Rodriguez and Robert K. Fulbright. Section of Neuroradiology, Department of 
Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecti- 
cut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to acquire spectra using proton magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy (MRS) with a long echo time (TE) to measure clinically important brain 
metabolites in normal subjects. We aimed to determine whether these metabolites vary 
across brain regions and between men and women. The results of this study will consti- 
tute a normative database that will be used as a reference for MRS studies of patients with 
neurological disease. 
 
Single voxel proton ('H) spectra were acquired in 72 subjects ranging in age from 20 
to 44 years. Ten brain regions were examined. Six gray matter sites in the cerebrum 
included four cortical areas in the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes, and two 
deep nuclear sites in the basal ganglia and the thalamus. Two cortical white matter regions 
were in the parietal and the frontal lobes. Two posterior fossa sites included the pons and 
the cerebellum. For each spectrum, the metabolites N-acetyl aspartate (NAA), creatine 
(Cr) and choline (Ch) were identified. Ratios of NAA/Cr and Ch/Cr were calculated for 
each brain region. A multifactorial analysis of variance was performed with the two meta- 
bolic ratios as dependent variables and with brain region and gender as independent vari- 
ables. Posthoc statistical analysis consisted of the Scheffe's F statistic for significant dif- 
ference between pairs of brain regions for both metabolic ratios. 
 
There was significant regional variation for both the NAA/Cr ratio (p < .0001) and 
the Ch/Cr ratio (p < .0001). The NAA/Cr ratio was consistent within cortical gray and 
white matter but differed between cortical gray (smaller ratio) and white matter (larger 
ratio). The Ch/Cr ratio was variable in the gray matter, differed between some but not all 
gray and white matter regions, but was consistent within cortical white matter regions. 
There was no difference between men and women for either metabolic ratio. These find- 
 
165 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
ings provide the requisite normative values to use single voxel, long TE MRS in adult 
patients with neurological disorders. 
 
A HISTORY OF QUALITY OF LIFE MEASUREMENTS. Jordan M. Prutkin and 
Alvan R. Feinstein (Sponsored by Harlan M. Krumholz). Department of Internal 
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Purpose: To review the origins and early development of "quality of life" measure- 
ments in the medical literature. 
 
Methods: a comprehensive literature review of Medline from 1966 to 1986 examin- 
ing articles with "quality of life" as a subject heading. Studies were included if they were 
the original article describing a scale's development or used scales developed in the social 
science literature. 
 
Results: The measurements have been derived from two separate sources: a transfer 
and expansion of medical appraisals for "health status," and an application of sociometric 
and psychometric methods for populational assessment of happiness, well-being, and 
other "affects." Neither source of measurements used the basic principle that a person's 
"quality of life" is a state of mind, not a state of health, and that a suitable personal expres- 
sion should allow the opportunity to cite distinctive individual feelings. In addition, the 
existing approaches are often unsatisfactory for denoting changes. 
 
Conclusions: Since "quality of life" of individual patients was not directly sought 
with the two original sources, its appraisal may be improved with an old clinical method 
of asking patients what they believe. 
 
A NOVEL MODEL FOR STUDYING MECHANISMS OF FEAR/STRESS IN 
RATS: INVESTIGATION OF A PREDATOR ODOR. Andy J. Redmond, Bret A. 
Morrow, John D. Elsworth and Robert H. Roth. Laboratory of Neuropsychophar- 
macology, Departments of Psychiatry and Pharmacology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Dysregulation of the neurochemical fear response pathways may be the basis of psy- 
chiatric disorders such as panic disorder and post-traumatic disorder (PTSD). Traditional 
stress-inducing procedures alter working memory and increase serum corticosterone lev- 
els, immediate-early gene expression in the brain, and dopamine (DA) turnover in the 
stress-sensitive mesoprefrontal dopaminergic neurons. In these experiments, we used a 
novel approach, examining the effects of a predator odor, 2,5dihydro-2,4,5-trimethylthia- 
zoline (TMT) on the fear response in rats. TMT results in a unique pattern of biochemi- 
cal activation. Both conditioned fear and acute TMT exposure increased serum corticos- 
terone and DA metabolism in the mPFC; however TMT, but not conditioned fear, activat- 
ed DA turnover in the amygdala, but not the nucleus accumbens core and shell. Condi- 
tioned fear, but not TMT, increased typical behaviors associated with the fear response. 
Second, we used a spontaneous, delayed, non-matching-to-sample task to assess working 
memory after TMT exposure. Rats demonstrated a robust working memory in the absence 
of TMT. Exposure to TMT during a 15-minute delay disrupted working memory without 
altering exploratory behavior. Finally, we examined the effects of TMT on the expression 
of the immediate-early gene product, Fos, in the amygdala, and in the midbrain, presum- 
ably on DA neurons. Both TMT and footshock activated Fos in the lateral and basolater- 
al nuclei of the amygdala, and in the Al0, but not the A9 neurons. We conclude that TMT, 
 
166 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
is an ethologically relevant, nonpainful, stressor that fulfills basic criteria for studying 
mechanisms of fear in rats. 
 
CALCITROPIC HORMONES AND BONE RESORPTION MARKERS IN 
HEALTHY OLDER MEN. Sarah R. Rettinger, Amy Arnold, and Barbara Gulanski. 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut and VA Connecticut 
Healthcare System, Section of Endocrinology, West Haven, Connecticut. 
 
In the past two decades many studies have investigated the formidable problem of 
osteoporosis in post-menopausal women. Yet osteoporosis and osteoporosic fractures rep- 
resent tremendous health challenges in older men as well. NHANES III estimated that 
three to six percent of American men over 50 years of age have osteoporosis, 28 to 47 per- 
cent have osteopenia, and one in eight men over 50 experiences a fragility-related fracture 
in his lifetime (Looker, 1997). The mechanisms of age-related bone loss in men remain 
unclear. Little or conflicting data exist addressing the role of calcitropic hormones in age- 
related bone loss and the changes in biochemical markers of bone metabolism in older 
men. In this study, we measured the calcitropic hormones, gonadal steroids, interleukin-6 
(IL-6), markers of bone turnover, and bone mineral density (BMD) of healthy, communi- 
ty-dwelling men over age 50. Seventeen healthy, eugonadal subjects were included in the 
final analysis. None had secondary causes of bone loss or took medications known to 
affect bone metabolism. Study patients had a mean age of 68 (range 50 to 90) and were 
predominately (94 percent) Caucasian. Thirty-six percent of subjects had either osteope- 
nia (12/17) or osteoporosis (2/17). Elevated serum PTH values were found in 5/17 (29 per- 
cent) subjects. The group's 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D levels demonstrated a wide range, but 
all were within the normal limits. Urinary excretion of type I collagen N-telopeptide 
(NTX), a marker of bone resorption, was above the upper limit of normal in 4/17 (24 per- 
cent) subjects. Serum IL-6 was well above the normal limit in 14/17 (82 percent) subjects, 
with a mean value of 6.3 (? 3.5) pg/mL (normal < 3 pg/mL). IL-6 and PTH demonstrated 
a significant positive correlation (r = 0.56, p < .02) while IL-6 and 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin 
D demonstrated an even stronger positive correlation (r = 0.71, p < .02). Similarly, urinary 
excretion of type I collagen N-telopeptide (NTX) was associated with PTH (r = 0.69, p < 
.002), but more strongly associated with 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D (r = 0.81, p < .002). 
Finally, IL-6 demonstrated significant strong correlation with bone resorption marker NTX 
(r = 0.82) but no correlation with bone formation marker osteocalcin. Larger studies are 
required to assess the impact of these biochemical findings on bone density. 
 
DIFFERENCES IN PATHOLOGICAL AND MOLECULAR FEATURES OF 
INTRADUCTAL BREAST CANCER BETWEEN YOUNGER AND OLDER 
WOMEN. Neesha A. Rodrigues, Deborah Dillon, Darryl Carter, Nicole Parisot, 
and Bruce Haffty. Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Young age at diagnosis has been reported to be a risk factor for local recurrence in 
patients with ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the breast treated with breast-conserving 
therapy (BCT). What confers this greater risk, however, is still unclear. We compared var- 
ious pathological and molecular features of DCIS arising in a cohort of young women to 
those of DICS arising in a cohort of older women to identify potential biological differ- 
ences that could help to explain why younger patients have a worse prognosis. Our study 
population consisted of 20 patients < 42 years of age and 34 patients > 60 years of age 
 
167 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
who were treated at our institution with BCT and whose archival paraffin blocks were 
available and had sufficient tumor for staining. One representative specimen block from 
each case was obtained. Pathological characteristics evaluated included histology, grade, 
and presence of necrosis. Paraffin-embedded sections were immunohistochemically eval- 
uated for expression of HER-2/neu, ER, PR, bcl-2, cyclin DI, ki-67, and p-53. Although 
there was no difference in pathological features of the tumors between the two groups, 
HER-2/neu was overexpressed in a greater percentage of the younger population (p = .06). 
There was no difference in expression of the other markers. Of note, HER-2/neu expres- 
sion was correlated with high nuclear grade (p = .004), necrosis (p = .06), and ER and PR 
negativity (p = .01 and .03 respectively) in the combined population. Our data suggest that 
HER-2/neu overexpression in younger patients may characterize a biological difference in 
their tumor and may partially contribute to their higher risk of recurrence. Further studies 
are needed to assess whether this difference holds independent of grade and to evaluate 
the prognostic significance of HER2/neu overexpression in DCIS. 
 
HEALTH NEEDS OF WOMEN PRESENTING TO THE EMERGENCY DEPART- 
MENT: HIGH-RISK BEHAVIORS AND PREVENTABLE CONDITIONS. Sandra 
M. Scott, Gail D'Onofrio, and Linda C. DeGutis. Section of Emergency Medicine, 
Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. 
 
This study was designed to identify unmet health needs of women presenting to the 
Emergency Department (ED). A convenient sample of patients presenting to the Yale-New 
Haven ED were interviewed by multicultural community-based health promotion advo- 
cates (HPAs). A Health Needs History elicited socio-demographic characteristics, high- 
risk behaviors, health care utilization patterns, and use of standard preventive screening. 
Between 12/08/99 and 12/07/00, 3033 women were screened. 15.3 percent of women 
were without health insurance, and the majority (62.1 percent) said they could not afford 
medication. Many women (15.7 percent) reported that they did not have a regular physi- 
cian, and 9.9 percent either used the ED for regular care or had no usual source of care. 
Standard screening rates for disease prevention among women were at or above popula- 
tion norms: in the last year 74 percent reported having a Papanicolaou smear, and 54.2 
percent over 40 reported having a mammogram. A usual source of medical care and health 
insurance coverage were significantly associated with having had each of these preventive 
tests. High-risk behaviors and conditions among women surveyed included. smoking 
(33.9 percent), failure to use seat belts (12.3 percent), lack of safe sex practices (54.2 per- 
cent), illicit drug use (11.9 percent), depression (25.7 percent), domestic abuse (9.7 per- 
cent), alcohol consumption (32.4 percent), unsafe alcohol use (51.3 percent of female 
drinkers), and alcohol dependence (10.7 percent). Women were more likely than men to 
inconsistently use condoms, report intimate partner violence, and take pills for depression 
or nerves. More risk behaviors than expected were greatest in women in the middle (30 to 
54) as opposed to the youngest (29 and under) age group. In conclusion, high-risk behav- 
iors and preventable conditions pose health threats to women presenting to the ED. Rates 
of standard clinical prevention measures, while similar to national norms, need improve- 
ment. The ED visit offers an opportunity for detection, intervention, and referral. 
 
168 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
URINE AND SERUM DETECTION OF SURVIVIN, AN ANTI-APOPTOSIS PRO- 
TEIN, IN GENITOURINARY MALIGNANCY. Jennifer D. Sharp, Marcia A. Wheel- 
er, and Robert M. Weiss. Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Yale Univer- 
sity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Survivin, an apoptosis inhibitor, is over-expressed in numerous human cancers and 
correlates with aggressive disease and unfavorable outcomes. Previously, survivin has 
been isolated from the urine of patients with bladder cancer. Detection of urinary survivin 
may be a sensitive, specific, and noninvasive tool in the diagnosis of genitourinary malig- 
nancies. Further, detection of serum survivin may provide important predictive/prognos- 
tic information. Survivin levels of urine and serum samples from five groups (bladder can- 
cer, prostate cancer, other genitourinary malignancy, benign genitourinary disease, and 
normal controls) were assayed via an antibody-based detection system. Urine survivin 
was detected in 14 of 17 patients with bladder cancer, seven of 11 with prostate cancer, 
four of five with other malignancies, three of 11 with benign genitourinary disease, and 
one of 13 normal volunteers; overall, sensitivity and specificity for malignancy were 76 
percent (82 percent for bladder cancer) and 83 percent, respectively. Patients with bladder 
or prostate cancer had significantly higher urine survivin levels than patients with benign 
genitourinary disease and normal controls (p < .0001, p < .005). Serum survivin was 
detected in 14 of 17 patients with bladder cancer, seven of 10 with prostate cancer, five of 
five with other malignancies, nine of 11 with benign disease, and three of 10 normal vol- 
unteers; serum survivin did not significantly correlate with presence of malignancy, stage 
of disease, or urine survivin levels. Urine survivin detection appears to be a sensitive, spe- 
cific, and noninvasive test to identify patients with new or recurrent genitourinary malig- 
nancies. High levels of urinary survivin correlate positively with advanced grade and/or 
stage of genitourinary malignancy. 
 
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY AND WOUND-HEALING PROPERTIES OF THYMOSIN 
M4 PEPTIDES IN THE SKIN. Michael Sherlinga, Efstathios Theodoridisb, Renata 
Fillera, Adrian Haydayb, Robert Tigelaara, and Michael Girardia. aDepartment of 
Dermatology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; and bDept of 
Immunobiology, Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom. 
 
Pro-thymosin-s4 (pTP4) was recently identified as a major transcript in a serial 
analysis of gene expression (SAGE) library of gut intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs). To 
determine whether dendritic epidermal T cells (DETCs), the IELs of the skin, produce 
pTP4, quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was per- 
formed on freshly isolated DETCs. DETCs produced both splice variants of TP4, lym- 
phoid-T,B4 (LTP4) and ubiquitous-T,B4 (UT,4), and LT,4 was selectively up-regulated 
with activation. To study the relative anti-inflammatory properties of LTP4 and UT04 in 
the skin, the peptides were synthesized and tested in 8 to 10 week-old BALB/c and FVB 
mice. Three different models of cutaneous inflammation were utilized: neutrophil infil- 
tration by foot-pad X-carrageenan injection, irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) to a- 
methoxy-a-(trifluoromethyl) phenylacetic acid (TPA), and allergic contact dermatitis 
(ACD) to 2,4 dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB). In all cases, mice received intradermal and 
intraperitoneal (IP) injections of either UTP4 or LT,B4, methionated ubiquitous-T,B4 
(mUTP4) or methionated lymphoid-TP4 (mLT,B4), or PBS vehicle prior to elicitation, and 
peptide IP six hr later. Footpad or ear thickness was measured at 0, 6, 24, 48, and 72 hr. 
In the X-carrageenen model, LT04 suppressed footpad swelling 40 percent more than 
UTP4 at 24 hr (.22 ? .03 mm vs. .37 ? .03 mm, p < .001), and much more than saline at 
 
169 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
6hr(.47?.04mmvs. .60?.02mm,p<.01),24hr(.22?.03mmvs. .53?.03mm,p< 
.0001) and 48 hr (.34 ? .04 mm vs. .58 ? .05 mm, p < .00001). Likewise, mLT,B4 sup- 
pressed footpad swelling 30 percent more than mUTM4 at 6 hr (.36 + 0.06 mm vs .51 ? 
.05 mm, p < .03), and 26 percent more at 24 hr (.28 ? .04 mm vs .38 + .01 mm, p < .02), 
and much more than saline at 6 hr (.36 ? .06 mm vs .72 ? .06 mm, p < .001), 24 hr (.28 
+.04mmvs.69?.03mm,p<.0001)and48hr(.55?.03mmvs.53?.03mm,p<.01). 
In the ICD model, mLT4 decreased ear swelling by more than 25 percent vs. mUTi4 at 
6 hr (.18 ? .02 mm vs .24 ? .02 mm, p < .01) and much more than saline at 6 hr (.18 ? .02 
mm vs. .31 ? .01 mm, p < .0001), and at 24 hrs (.17 ?.02 mm vs .22 ?.02 mm, p < .02). 
In the ACD model, LT34 suppressed ear swelling 16 percent more than UT,4 at 24 hrs 
(.19 ? .01 mm, vs .23 ? .01 mm, p < . 02), and 22 percent more at 72 hr (.15 ? .01 mm vs 
.20 ? .01 mm, p < .002), and more than saline at 24 hrs (.19 ? .01 mm vs .24 ? .01 mm, 
p < .001), and 72 hrs (.15 ? .01 mm vs .20 ? .01 mm, p < .001). Likewise, mLT,B4 sup- 
pressed ear swelling 17 percent more than mUTfr at 24 hr (.17 ? .00 mm, vs .20 ? .02 
mm, p < . 03), and 18 percent more at 72 hr (.15 ? .00 mm vs .20 ? .02 mm, p < .01), and 
more than saline at 24 hrs (.17 ? .00 mm vs. .23 ? .01 mm, p < .0001), and 72 hr (.15 ? 
.00 mm vs .26 ? .01 mm, p < .0001). These studies indicate that LTM4 is an effective anti- 
inflammatory factor in the skin in vivo and is more potent than UT34; in addition, they 
suggest that one of the mechanisms of DETC down-regulation of cutaneous inflammation 
is the production and secretion of LT34. 
 
THYMIDINE PHOSPHORYLASE/PD-ECGF AND CYTOSKELETAL CO- 
LOCALIZATION IN HUMAN KERATINOCYTES IN VITRO. Shannon M. Sheu, 
Rosalind L. Russell, John G. Haggerty, and Pauline M. Schwartz. Department of 
Dermatology, West Haven Veterans Affairs, West Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Thymidine phosphorylase/platelet-derived endothelial cell growth factor (TPase/PD- 
ECGF) is active in human keratinocytes in vitro and in vivo. As keratinocytes differenti- 
ate, TPase activity increases and intracellular localization changes. The aim of this study 
was to better characterize the sub-cellular localization of TPase/PD-ECGF in ker- 
atinocytes. Immunofluorescence studies suggested that TPase/PD-ECGF has a filamen- 
tous distribution in cultured keratinocytes maintained under low calcium conditions. 
Dual-labeled immunofluorescence was employed to examine the possible colocalization 
of TPase/PD-ECGF with microfilaments, microtubules, intermediate filaments, and mito- 
chondria. From these results, it appears that the intermediate filaments keratin and 
vimentin co-localize with TPase in cultured keratinocytes grown under low and high cal- 
cium conditions. An immunoprecipitation studied verified colocalization of TPase with 
vimentin under low and high calcium conditions, and with keratin under low calcium con- 
ditions. Thus, as TPase appears to associate with such intermediate filaments, it may par- 
ticipate in keratinocyte structure, differentiation, and in wound healing. The relationship 
between the filamentous localization of TPase and its possible mechanism of action in 
keratinocytes requires further extensive study. 
 
170 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
GENETIC RISK FACTORS IN TAMOXIFEN-ASSOCIATED THROMBOEMBOL- 
IC EVENTS DURING BREAST CANCER ADJUNCT THERAPY. Nara Chi Sun 
Shin. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Over the past decade, venous thrombosis has been characterized as a multifactorial 
disease with both genetic and acquired risk factors. The most prevalent genetic risk fac- 
tors are the Factor V (FV) Leiden (G1691a) mutation and the Factor II (FII) prothrombin 
gene (G20210A) mutation. A likely acquired risk factor is treatment with tamoxifen, a 
selective estrogen-receptor, as an increased incidence of thromboembolic events was 
observed in treatment arms involving tamoxifen therapy for breast cancer. To test our 
hypothesis that these patients with thromboembolic events were more likely to have 
underlying genetic risk factors, we examined 189 blood samples from breast cancer 
patients on adjuvant tamoxifen therapy for the FV Leiden and FII prothrombin gene muta- 
tions. For every patient who experienced thrombosis, there were two age- and stage- 
matched patients without thrombosis serving as controls. Mutations were easily detected 
using multiplex PCR and RFLP with restriction enzymes MnII and HindIll. Of the 189 
patient samples, there were 16 FV heterozygotes, eight FIl heterozygotes, and three FV 
and FII double heterozygotes; the remaining 162 samples were wild-type. This was a dou- 
ble-blinded study, and sample acquisition has not yet been completed. Consequently, it is 
unfortunately not yet possible to identify cases and controls in order to analyze the rela- 
tive risk of thrombosis in patients with FV Leiden and FII prothrombin mutations. The 
two potential outcomes of this statistical analysis are: 1) the prevalence of FV and FIT 
mutations is significantly greater in patients who experienced a thromboembolic event 
than in control patients, or 2) there is no statistically significant difference in the preva- 
lence of these mutations among the two groups. If the former is found to be true. then this 
study would bear important clinical significance. Screening for these two mutations is 
inexpensive, and pre-treatment testing could allow either the choice of nonhormonal ther- 
apeutic agents or the possible incorporation of anticoagulant therapy for patients who 
carry these mutations. The benefits of this intervention should substantially reduce mor- 
bidity and mortality from venous thromboembolism and be cost-effective. If the latter is 
found to be true, then no association could be made between these genetic mutations and 
the risk of thrombosis during tamoxifen therapy. However, the overall higher prevalence 
of FV and FII heterozygotes in this study population versus the general population war- 
rants an explanation. One possibility is an association between these genetic mutations 
and the predisposition to developing breast cancer. 
 
ATTITUDES TOWARDS CROSS-CULTURAL MEDICINE AMONG MEDICAL 
STUDENTS IN THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT. Nathan Siegel, Liza Cariaga-Lo, 
and Forrester Lee. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Purpose of Study: a survey of medical students enrolled at the University of Con- 
necticut and Yale University sought to determine: (1) how supportive medical students are 
of cross-cultural medicine; (2) how useful and relevant they believe cross-cultural medi- 
cine will be in their future medical practices; (3) how comfortable students are in dealing 
with cross-cultural issues; (4) the interest in, satisfaction with, and impediments to, cul- 
tural competency training; and (5) what influence demographic factors have on students' 
attitudes towards cultural competency. 
 
171 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
Methods: All medical students at the University of Connecticut and Yale University 
in their first through fourth years of study, or medical students from these schools that 
were on extended study but currently doing clinical training were eligible. A three-page 
survey was developed, and the finished, anonymous questionnaire distributed in April of 
2001. Univariate and bivariate statistical analysis of the data was conducted. 
 
Results: The cumulative response rate from the two schools was 49.3 percent yield- 
ing 373 completed questionnaires. Students were broadly supportive of cross-cultural 
medicine. However, students on the whole did not report confidence in their cross-cultur- 
al knowledge. Medical students tended to be more tolerant of alternative health practices 
that were more familiar to them. Overall, students expressed a qualified interest in cross- 
cultural training. A respondent's political philosophy highly correlated with multiple sur- 
vey responses. Liberal students supported cultural competency concepts, belief in the 
physician's important role in cross-cultural interactions, and acceptance of cross-cultural 
education when compared to moderate and conservative students. Students in both pre- 
clinical and clinical stages of training agreed that cross-cultural issues were important, but 
clinical stage student responses reflected a more constrained, practical approach to its 
application. Minority ethnicity was independently and significantly associated with posi- 
tive attitudes towards cross-cultural medicine. In univariate analysis, female students 
expressed more positive attitudes towards cultural competency, but after controlling for 
political persuasion, no gender difference was observed. Life experiences, volunteer activ- 
ities, peer-to-peer discussions, and clinical exposure significantly influenced cross-cultur- 
al attitudes whole formal courses and lectures were least influential. However, students 
supported the introduction of curriculum features addressing cultural competency. 
 
Conclusions: In general, medical students in Connecticut believe that cross-cultural 
medicine is an important component of the medical encounter and express qualified sup- 
port for cross-cultural education training programs. Positive attitudes were most strongly 
expressed by politically liberal students, ethnic minorities, and students in the pre-clinical 
stages of medical school. Students also expressed qualified support for introducing 
aspects of cross-cultural education into the curriculum but acknowledged that their atti- 
tudes are more strongly influenced by personal and clinical experiences than lectures or 
courses on cross-cultural issues. These findings should help guide the development of 
appropriate curricular materials in cross-cultural medical education. 
 
THE RISK OF INJURY TO PAKISTANI CHILDREN. Michael S. Singera and Abdul 
Ghaffarb (Sponsored by David Katz). aYale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut; and bMinistry of Health, Islamabad, Pakistan. 
 
Injury is responsible for one million child fatalities every year, 98 percent of which 
occur in developing countries. There is a critical need to determine how these children are 
injured, who is most at risk, and when. Pakistan, home to 60 million children, is ideal for 
this work. Our Specific Aims were (1) to determine the primary causes of injury to Pak- 
istani children; (2) identify demographic factors that predispose children to injury; (3) test 
when, in the context of their schedules, children were more likely to be injured, and 
whether these patterns differed for preschool versus school children; (4) interview fami- 
lies for the circumstances and consequences of injuries; and (5) distill our findings into 
culturally and economically feasible recommendations. We interviewed 300 inpatients at 
the Children's Hospital in Islamabad: 150 injury patients and 150 controls. For each Spe- 
cific Aim, responses were analyzed by appropriate descriptive, case-control, or cohort 
methods. The most common causes of injury were falls (59 percent), road collisions (16 
percent), and burns (13 percent). Most children (79 percent) were unsupervised. Except 
 
172 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
for burns, boys outnumbered girls 2:1. The case-control study found differences in (1) the 
mother's level of education, (2) size of the home, and (3) number of children in the home 
(all p < .05). The most perilous time of day was 3 to 6 p.m. Compared to preschoolers, 
school children showed elevated risk on weekends (OR = 4.0, p < .001) and reduced risk 
during school (OR = 0.2, p < .0001). The risk for preschoolers remained stable over the 
week. In summary, poor supervision, poor education, and crowded homes contributed to 
injury in our sample of Pakistani children. We discuss steps to (1) keep children off roofs 
and isolate them from fires and traffic, (2) promote supervision, (3) educate parents, and 
(4) provide safe play options. 
 
COMMUNITY-BASED NUTRITION INTERVENTIONS FOR THE TREATMENT 
OF OBESITY IN ADULTS. Jennifer Solomon, Meghan O'Connell, and David L. 
Katz. The Yale Prevention Research Center, Derby, Connecticut. 
 
This systematic review examines nutrition-based randomized controlled trials for the 
treatment of obesity in adults. The objective is to discern "best practices" to date. The 
study search was performed in 2000 to 2001 utilizing Pubmed, HealthStar, Embase, and 
Cochrane Library. Twenty-one retrieved studies met the inclusion criteria. Quality assess- 
ment was done by two independent reviewers using techniques developed by the Centers 
for Disease Control. Study quality and divergence precluded the use of meta-analysis. 
Best practices suggested by current data are that prolonged group follow up is helpful in 
prolonging weight loss and in slowing the process of weight regain. Total caloric intake 
rather than macronutrient composition of diet is more predictive of weight loss. Specific 
approaches, such as providing shopping lists, meal plans, food storage protocols, plate 
size, etc., are more effective than general behavior therapies. Weight loss research in this 
area remains rather sketchy and non-amenable to meta-analysis. Consistency in interven- 
tions and outcome measures in future studies would allow for meta-analysis and poten- 
tially more conclusive data. 
 
THE TEMPORAL RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PEDIATRIC ASTHMA ADMIS- 
SIONS AND POLLEN COUNTS. Steven J. Song (Sponsored by Ramsay Fulei- 
han). Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut). 
 
This study was intended to analyze pediatric admissions to Yale-New Haven Chil- 
dren's Hospital in relation to the counts of four different types of pollen. In a retrospective 
study, we determined the number of pediatric admissions for asthma to Yale New Haven 
Children's Hospital (YNHCH) over a period of three years (1998 through 2000). For each 
year, pollen counts for trees, weeds, grasses, and molds were averaged per week and plot- 
ted against the total number of admissions for asthma at YNHCH for that week. At that 
point, we examined the plots to see if there was a correlation between the various pollen 
counts and the number of admissions for each week. During mid-May, there was a con- 
sistent spike in admissions over the three years studied, while the end of September and 
beginning of October revealed a larger spike in admissions. Tree pollen counts only spiked 
in early May, while weeds only spiked in September. Plotting admissions vs. pollen counts 
revealed a consistent one to two week lag between the mid-May admission spike and the 
tree pollen count spike, and a two to four week lag between the September/October admis- 
sion spike and the weed pollen count spike. Based on the current understanding of the 
 
173 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
IgE-mediated basis of asthma, we concluded that a Type-I hypersensitivity reaction alone 
could not have produced the admission spike in mid-May and September/October. 
 
SEQUENCE AND EXPRESSION ANALYSIS OF A13-1, AN IL-3 AND RETINOIC 
ACID RESPONSE GENE EXPRESSED IN MYELOID DIFFERENTIATION. 
Charles P Stowell, Noel A. Maun, David K. Thomas, Nathan D. Lawson, and 
Nancy Berliner. Section of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
IL-3 and all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) induce myeloid differentiation of the murine 
multipotential, stem cell factor-dependent hematopoietic cell line EML (Erythroid, 
myeloid, and lymphoid potential). Prior to this study, in a search for genes guiding 
myeloid differentiation, cDNA representation difference analysis (RDA) was used to 
identify immediate-early genes expressed during induction of EML cells with IL-3 and 
ATRA. Two RDA fragments were identified whose pattern of expression by Northern blot 
analysis revealed optimal expression in the presence of a combination of IL-3 and ATRA, 
suggesting a synergistic mode of induction. Sequence analysis revealed one fragment to 
be from the murine homologue of B-box protein EBBP. The second fragment was a frag- 
ment from a novel gene, designated A13-1 (ATRA and HL-3 induced gene 1). The second 
fragment was used to probe a X-Zap cDNA library derived from RNA of EML cells fol- 
lowing short-term induction, and we identified three clones. In this study, we performed 
sequence analysis on these three clones in an attempt to better characterize the structure 
and function of A13-1. We also sought to characterize the pattern of expression of AI3-l 
by Northern blot analysis of RNA isolated from murine hematopoietic cell lines and other 
murine tissues. A13-1 encodes a protein of 524 amino acids with a hydropathy profile con- 
sistent with a molecule spanning the cell membrane seven times. Sequence homology 
searches placed A13-1 in a subclass of the secretin-like family of G-protein-coupled recep- 
tors. Northern blot analysis confirmed the synergistic induction of A13-1 by IL-3 and 
ATRA in EMLs and suggested that A13-1 is expressed at several of the stages of 
myelopoiesis examined as well as in spleen and lung. 
 
MEDICAL COSTS OF CHILD MALTREATMENT: YALE-NEW HAVEN HOSPI- 
TAL AND CONNECTICUT. K. Claire Stylianopoulos, Bonnie D. Kerker, Karen 
Santucci, and John M. Leventhal. Departments of Pediatrics and Epidemiology 
and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to estimate the medical costs of child mal- 
treatment at Yale-New Haven Hospital and in Connecticut. 
 
Methods: Several approaches were used to estimate maltreatment costs: (1) Costs at 
Yale-New Haven Hospital (YNHH) were obtained from hospital discharge data, chart 
review, emergency department (ED) logs, pediatric billing office and hospital financial 
data. Inpatient costs were estimated between 1/1/96 and 12/31/98. ED costs were esti- 
mated for the 1997 to 1998 fiscal year; (2) Maltreatment admissions in Connecticut were 
estimated from hospitalization incidences for maltreatment at YNHH, the maltreatment 
literature, and the Connecticut hospital administrative database; (3) ED evaluations in 
Connecticut were estimated by adjusting maltreatment evaluations at YNHH to total pedi- 
atric ED evaluations in the state; (4) Costs in Connecticut were estimated by adjusting 
YNHH costs to admissions and ED evaluations in the state. 
 
174 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
Results: Costs at YNHH. There were 15 maltreatment admissions per year between 
1/1/96 and 12/31/98, and 121 ED evaluations during the 1997 to 1998 fiscal year. Aver- 
age cost of a maltreatment admission was $25,731, and average cost of an ED evaluation 
was $513. Total annual cost at YNHH, including hospitalizations, ED evaluations, follow- 
up appointments, and sexual abuse clinic was estimated to be $833,848. Costs in Con- 
necticut. We estimated 76 to 79 maltreatment admissions and 1,397 ED evaluations per 
year. Annual cost in Connecticut, including hospitalizations, ED evaluations. follow-up. 
sexual abuse evaluations, and neglect evaluations in the primary care setting was estimat- 
ed to be $6.3 million. 
 
Conclusions: Maltreatment evaluations in the hospital, ED and outpatient setting are 
costly. Pediatricians and child advocates must continue to implement and support pro- 
grams targeted towards the prevention of child maltreatment. 
 
A STUDY OF HEPATITIS C SEROPREVALENCE IN HIV-INFECTED CHILDREN 
AT YALE-NEW HAVEN CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL. Scott M. Sutherland and War- 
ren A. Andiman. Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study was designed to determine the prevalence of hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
infection in the pediatric HIV-infected population at Yale-New Haven Hospital and to 
examine the potential for HCV co-infection to accelerate the progression of HIV disease. 
As a correlate, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were examined to determine 
whether ALT elevations might be used to predict HCV infection in this population. Stored 
serum samples from a living cohort of HIV-infected children (n = 66) and a deceased 
cohort of HIV-infected children (n = 40) were screened for antibodies to HCV using a 
third generation Enzyme Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay (ELISA) and subjected to confir- 
matory testing using a 3rd generation Recombinant Immunoblot Assay (RIBA). HIV dis- 
ease progression parameters, such as age at which an AIDS-defining illness developed and 
age at death, as well as ALT values, were collected to compare HCV-Infected and HCV- 
uninfected HIV-positive children. None of the 66 living patients and one of the 40 
deceased patients (2.5 percent) had serological evidence of HCV infection. 4.5 percent of 
living patients and 65.4 percent of deceased patients had elevated ALT levels. The preva- 
lence of HCV infection was negligible in the pediatric HIV-infected population in New 
Haven. Due to the low prevalence of HCV infection, it was not possible to investigate 
whether HCV infection hastens HIV disease progression. However, it was evident that 
elevated ALT levels in this population do not correlate with HCV infection status and that 
these abnormalities cannot be attributed to HCV-mediated liver damage 
 
AXON REGENERATION AFTER SPINAL CORD INJURY IN ADULT RATS. 
Bayan T. Takizawa and Stephen M. Strittmatter. Department of Neurology, Yale 
University. School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to determine whether axon regeneration can be 
induced in the injured spinal cord by administration of the Clostridium botulinum C3 
exoenzyme, an inactivator of the Rho protein, or the drug Y-27632, an inhibitor of the pro- 
tein kinase pl6OROCK, a downstream effector of Rho. To evaluate this, the posterior two 
thirds of the spinal cord at T3-4 was transected in adult rats. An osmotic pump with a 
small catheter was used to deliver the C3 protein, the Y-27632 drug, or an appropriate con- 
trol to the injured spinal cord. Behavioral studies showed that the C3 exoenzymetreated 
 
175 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
rats had a poorer outcome and that the ROCK inhibitor-treated rats walked better than 
their respective controls immediately after the surgery and over the ensuing three weeks. 
The behavioral tests from the fourth week showed almost complete recovery by all three 
groups, with insignificant differences. The ROCK inhibitor-treatment group showed sig- 
nificant increases in corticospinal axon sprouting in the gray matter above and below the 
lesion. There were also a few fibers observed entering the lesion site and passing through 
it. The C3 experiments were inconclusive and need to be re-explored, while the ROCK- 
inhibitor experiments are promising, as the animals did better functionally and histologi- 
cally. 
 
THE DIAGNOSTIC ACCURACY OF KERNIG'S SIGN, BRUDZINSKI'S SIGN, 
AND NUCHAL RIGIDITY IN ADULTS WITH SUSPECTED MENINGITIS. Karen 
E. Thomas, Rodrigo Hasbun, James Jekel, and Vincent J. Quagliarello. Depart- 
ments of Internal Medicine and Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
To determine the diagnostic accuracy of Kemig's sign, Brudzinski's sign, and nuchal 
rigidity, 297 adults with suspected meningitis were prospectively evaluated for the pres- 
ence of these meningeal signs before lumbar puncture. Kernig's sign (sensitivity = 5 per- 
cent, likelihood ratio positive = 0.97), Brudzinski's sign (sensitivity = 5 percent, likeli- 
hood ratio positive = 0.97), and nuchal rigidity (sensitivity = 30 percent, likelihood ratio 
positive = 0.94) did not accurately discriminate patients with and without meningitis (> 6 
white blood cells [WBC]/ml of cerebrospinal fluid [CSF]). The diagnostic accuracy of 
these signs did not significantly improve in the subset of patients with moderate 
meningeal inflammation (2 100 WBC/ml of CSF) or in the subset of patients with micro- 
biologic evidence of CSF infection. Only in four patients with severe meningeal inflam- 
mation (2 1000 WBC/ml of CSF) did nuchal rigidity show diagnostic value (sensitivity = 
100 percent, negative predictive value = 100 percent). In adults with suspected meningi- 
tis, neither the presence nor absence of these classic meningeal signs reliably indicate the 
presence or absence of meningitis; better bedside diagnostic signs are needed. 
 
ANESTHESIA OF CHORDA TYMPANI NERVE AND EFFECT ON ORAL PAIN. 
Karen Tie, Katherine Fast, John Kveton, Zachary Cohen, Valerie Duffy, Jordan 
Prutkin, Barry Green, and Linda Bartoshuk. Department of Otolaryngology, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Two nerves innervate the fungiform papillae on the anterior (mobile) tongue: the 
chorda tympani (CN VII, taste) and the trigeminal nerves (CN V, pain) with CN V 
accounting for 75 percent of the innervation. There is genetic variation in the density of 
fungiform papillae and the ability to taste the compound, 6-n-propylthiouracil (PROP). 
Supertasters have the greatest density of fungiform papillae, perceive the greatest intensi- 
ty from oral irritants and the greatest bitterness from PROP. Previous research has shown 
inhibitory interactions within taste areas in the central nervous system; input via CN VII 
inhibits that via CN IX (glossopharyngeal nerve; taste, posterior tongue), resulting in 
increased perceived intensity of taste stimuli as well as taste phantoms at areas innervat- 
ed by CN IX when CN VII is anesthetized or damaged. 
 
The data in the present study suggest inhibitory interactions between taste and oral 
pain. Seventeen subjects underwent unilateral anesthesia of CN VII (in separate experi- 
ments, CN VII was anesthetized on each side). Anesthesia of the chorda tympani nerve 
 
176 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
resulted in contralateral intensification of burn sensation with 10 ppm and 100 ppm cap- 
saicin. The magnitudes of these effects depended on genetic taste status (i.e., density of 
fungiform papillae): supertasters experienced the greatest intensification. We conclude 
from the contralateral intensification that input via CN VII normally inhibits that via CN 
V. These data suggest that supertasters may be at special risk for oral pain disorders as the 
result of damage to CN VII because of the loss of that inhibition. 
 
THE RECOGNITION AND DETERMINANTS OF DEPRESSION AT A SOUTH 
AFRICAN PRIMARY CARE CLINIC. Virginia A. Triant, Beverley R. Schweitzer, 
and Jeffrey M. Levine. Division of Primary Health Care and Family Medicine, Uni- 
versity of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. Departments of Psychiatry and 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Depression leads to substantial morbidity and mortality on a global scale, but it is fre- 
quently under-recognized in primary care settings, particularly in under-resourced set- 
tings. This study attempts to determine rates of recognition and treatment of depressive 
disorders at a community clinic in the Cape Flats, South Africa. 
 
The diagnostic instrument PRIME-MD was administered and charts reviewed for a 
sample of 222 patients presenting to the Lotus River Community Health Centre. Out- 
comes sought were (1) the prevalence of depressive disorders and (2) rates of detection 
and treatment as indicated by antidepressant prescription. 
 
The prevalence of depressive disorders in the group was found to be 32 percent (n = 
70), with 13 percent meeting criteria for major depressive disorder (n = 29). There was a 
statistically significant correlation between a diagnosis of depression and prescription of 
a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) (p = .028). The sensitivity and specificity of a TCA pre- 
scription for depression were 20 percent and 91 percent, respectively. Multiple logistic 
regression analysis demonstrated that the most predictive factor of either a diagnosis of 
depression or a prescription of an antidepressant was the presence of somatic symptoms. 
 
In this primary care setting, patients with depressive diagnoses were frequently dis- 
tinguished from those without depression as indicated by a significant correlation between 
depression and antidepressant receipt. Physicians appeared to respond primarily to somat- 
ic rather than psychological presentations. While depressed patients received antidepres- 
sants more frequently than non-depressed, only a minority of depressed patients was actu- 
ally recognized as such. Analyzing patterns of detection requires an understanding not 
only of physician practices but also of the cultural setting and the health care system. 
 
AROUND-THE-CLOCK EMERGENCY RADIOLOGY ATTENDING COVERAGE 
IN THE INTERPRETATION OF ABDOMINAL CT SCANS. Jeanne K. Tyan, Harry 
C. Moscovitz, and Howard P. Forman. Section of Emergency Medicine, Depart- 
ment of Surgery and Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Our study examined the effect of two recent interventions instituted by the Depart- 
ment of Radiology at Yale-New Haven Hospital on reducing the error rate in the interpre- 
tation of radiological studies in the emergency department (ED). The first intervention 
increased coverage of on-site board-certified radiologists to 24 hours a day, every day. The 
second required those radiologists to provide a finalized dictation contemporaneous with 
the clinical case and also required an over-read of every study done in the ED within 24 
hours by a radiologist specializing in that type of film. We compared the finalized radiol- 
 
177 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
ogy reports of patients who had abdominal CT scans during the three time periods sur- 
rounding the two interventions with the documentation of the ED scan which represents 
the radiology interpretation by which management and diagnosis was based in the emer- 
gency department. We analyzed a total of 670 patients in these three groups and found that 
major discrepancy rates between the initial and final interpretations were significantly 
decreased by both of these two interventions (p = .018). This effect was especially signif- 
icant during weekends and nights (5 p.m. to 8 a.m.) (p = .006). Our study proves that the 
institution of a two-phase QI process can significantly reduce the rate of errors in inter- 
pretation and communication of CT scans. It is hypothesized that these changes might 
result in improved patient care. 
 
FACE PERCEPTION: DEVELOPING A PARADIGM USING FUNCTIONAL MRI 
TO ASSESS AUTISTIC DISORDER. M. Reza Vagefi and Robert T. Schultz. Child 
Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Autistic disorder is a pervasive developmental disorder diagnosed in infancy or early 
childhood. The current understanding of face perception has served as an initial modality 
for elucidating the neuro-pathophysiology of the autistic brain. Studies of individuals with 
autism have demonstrated deficits that suggest a failure of holistic processing mechanism 
when perceiving faces. A functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study on seven 
normal controls was performed to assess the role that the fusiform face area (FFA) plays 
in configural versus featural processing of faces. The new task attempted to demonstrate 
the priority and affinity that the FFA has for configural information by comparing how 
faces presented as wholes and separately as parts are processed. Behavioral results from 
the study's task showed a fair amount of inter-subject variability with significant main 
effects for subjects, image types, and response types, as well as two-way and three-way 
interactions between these factors. Response accuracy for the group showed that correct 
responses were given for more often for whole face stimuli than any other stimuli and 
more incorrect answers were given for cut face stimuli. Reaction times indicated that most 
subjects were fastest at processing objects, followed by whole faces, and slowest at pro- 
cessing cut faces. Analysis of composite and individual fMRI's surprisingly revealed that 
the cut face stimuli not only activated the object areas of the brain as hypothesized, but 
also engaged the FFA over whole face stimuli. These results question the specificity of the 
FFA for holistic processing. Several suggestions are offered as to why this may have 
occurred, as well as, comments on improving the task and its applicability to an autistic 
population. 
 
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR XBP-1 IS ESSENTIAL FOR TERMINAL DIFFER- 
ENTIATION OF B CELLS INTO IMMUNOGLOBULIN SECRETING PLASMA 
CELLS. Prashanth Vallabhajosyula, Andreas Reimold, Neal Iwakoshi, John 
Manis, Ahn Wee, Ellen Gravallese, Daniel Friend, Michael Grusby, Frederick Alt, 
and Laurie Glimcher (Sponsored by Sankar Ghosh). Department of Immunology 
and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachu- 
setts. 
 
B cell differentiation is a complex process marked by antigen independent and anti- 
gen dependent maturation processes. Transcription factors play important roles in regu- 
lating the various stages of B cell differentiation. Though several such factors have been 
shown to be important in regulating the various stages of B cell development, very few 
 
178 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
factors have been implicated in mediating the terminal differentiation of B cells into 
immunoglobulin-secreting plasma cells. XBP-1 is the first transcription factor identified 
to be essential for terminal B cell differentiation. XBP-1 -4- RAG2 -4- chimeric mice were 
found to have undetectable levels of immunoglobulin of all classes. Further, these mice 
failed to mount an antibody response to both B cell dependent and B cell independent 
antigenic stimulation. XBP-1 -4- B cells showed normal activation and proliferation para- 
meters but displayed a severe impairment in immunoglobulin synthesis upon stimulation 
with various stimuli. XBP-1-deficient B cells show an intrinsic defect in terminal differ- 
entiation into plasma cells. XBP-1 is the first transcription factor known to be essential for 
plasma cell formation in a stage-specific manner. 
 
THE ROLE OF CT ANGIOGRAPHY IN SURVIVAL PROGNOSIS AFTER PAN- 
CREATICO-DUODENECTOMY FOR PANCREATIC CANCER. Jennifer Y. Wang, 
Jeffrey B. Matthews, and Pierre F. Saldinger (Sponsored by Dana K. Andersen). 
Department of General Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital, Harvard Med- 
ical School, Boston, Massachusetts. 
 
CT angiography (CTA) has been shown to predict penampullary tumor resectability, 
but whether CTA is useful in anticipating survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy for pan- 
creatic cancer is unknown. Vascular involvement of penampullary neoplasms was scored 
by CTA (0 = not involved to 4 = encased). From February 1996 to September 2000, 73 
patients with histologically proven pancreatic adenocarcinoma and CTA score 0 to 3 were 
explored for pancreaticoduodenectomy, with 57 patients found to be resectable. Hazard 
ratios for all covariates were estimated using Cox's Regression, and survival was estimat- 
ed by the Kaplan-Meier method. Overall resectability was 78 percent, with a median sur- 
vival after resection of 25 months. In multivariate analysis, only poor differentiation pre- 
dicted poor outcome (HR = 2.81, p = .014), while CTA score did not (p = .250). For 
patients with CTA score 0, Stage III disease had a worse prognosis than Stage I (HR = 
6.56, p = .004). For Stage I disease, CTA score 1 to 3 compared with CTA score 0 trend- 
ed to poorer outcome (HR = 4.99, p = .054). Surprisingly, for Stage III disease, a CTA 
score 1 to 3 had better survival than score 0 (HR = 0.23, p = .010). CTA alone is not an 
independent predictor of survival. The paradoxical finding that with Stage III disease, 
CTA score 1 to 3 fared better than 0 suggests that evidence of vascular involvement by 
CTA in pancreatic adenocarcinoma is not a contraindication to resection in terms of 
expected outcome. Preoperative CTA not only predicts resectability but may also be a 
valuable adjunct to tumor staging for predicting survival after pancreaticoduodenectomy 
for pancreatic cancer. 
 
179 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 
 
THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF MALNUTRITION ON IQ AND ADAPTIVE 
BEHAVIOR IN INDONESIAN CHILDREN. Kinari E. Webb, Sara S. Sparrow, 
Nicholas J. Horton, Paul Geary, and David L. Katz. Yale Child Study Center and 
Yale University Department of Psychology, New Haven, Connecticut; Department 
of Biostatistics, Section of General Internal Medicine, Boston University School of 
Public Health and School of Medicine, Boston Massachusetts; Section of Internal 
Medicine, Bethesda Mission Hospital, West Kalimantan, Indonesia; Department 
of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This research explored the relationship between malnutrition, environmental factors, 
and the cognitive and developmental skills of Dyak children in West Kalimantan, Indone- 
sia. We compared a child's stature with their IQ and adaptive behavior skills at age seven 
to eight years old as measured by the Test of Non-Verbal Intelligence, third revision, and 
the Vineland adaptive behavior skills test (n = 92). The effect of timing and duration of 
malnutrition on IQ and adaptive behavior was also examined by using anthropometric 
data that had been collected monthly during the children's first five years of life (n = 38). 
Shorter children were found to have decreased IQs and composite adaptive behavior 
scores although these associations were not significant after the confounding effects of 
parental IQ, schooling, and economic variables were taken into account. Shorter children 
had poorer scores in the motor skills subsection of the Vineland and this effect remained 
after controlling for environmental factors. Children with low weight-for-age z-scores at 
17 and 30 months had decreased IQs and children who weighed less at 48 months had 
reduced adaptive behavior scores. This suggests that malnutrition at different ages may 
have differential effects on cognitive and developmental outcomes. Children with an 
increased duration of malnutrition had lower IQs but this effect did not remain when envi- 
ronmental factors were included in the.analyses. The complex interactions and potential 
causal relationships between measures of nutritional status, other environmental variables, 
and cognitive and developmental skills are discussed. While malnutrition may have detri- 
mental effects on cognitive and developmental skills, these effects appear to be relatively 
small in comparison to the large negative effects of other risk factors such as lack of 
schooling. 
 
EVALUATION OF AN EMERGENCY RADIOLOGY QUALITY ASSURANCE 
PROGRAM AT A LEVEL ONE TRAUMA CENTER. Luke S. Yoon and Howard P 
Forman. Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven. Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate the use of a redundant system in improv- 
ing quality of care in the trauma setting by examining a subset of our Quality Assurance 
(QA) program. 531 consecutive abdominal/pelvic CT studies performed on trauma 
patients in a Level I trauma center from 08/22/99 to 08/21/00 were retrospectively 
reviewed. Each case was initially interpreted by a board-certified or board-eligible radiol- 
ogist during the emergency department evaluation and was subsequently reviewed by a 
subspecialty abdominal imaging radiologist as part of a QA program. Nineteen were 
excluded due to incomplete information being available, resulting in 512 in our study. 
Cases with discordant interpretations had follow-up to discern management change. Of 
the 512 trauma cases, 153 cases showed discordant readings (29.9 percent). Review of 
patient records demonstrated changes in patient management in 12 cases (12/153; 7.8 per- 
cent). Three cases (3/153; 7.8 percent) were reviewed in morbidity and mortality records 
 
180 
 
Yale School of Medicine - Thesis abstracts - 2002 181 
 
of the Department of Trauma Surgery as a direct result of misinterpretations. Six cases had 
additional diagnostic imaging studies for re-evaluation; Four of six cases confirmed the 
QA reader's interpretation while two of six cases were shown to favor the initial interpre- 
tations. Our experience suggests that discordant radiologic interpretations most often do 
not result in a change in patient management and outcome. However, the QA program did 
identify and lead to changes in management of a number of cases by providing clinically 
significant additional findings.