Yale J Biol Med504yjbmThe Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine0044-00861551-4056Yale Journal of Biology and MedicinePMC2589101PMC2589101.1258910125891011M.D. Thesis Abstracts Yale University School of MedicineThesis Abstracts 1997
May-Jun1997703173927233282010519970112200829062011pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 70 (1997), pp. 233-282. 
Copyright ? 1997. All rights reserved. 
 
Thesis Abstracts 1997 
 
Yale University School of Medicine 
 
Evaluation of Child Safety Seat Law Enforcement in Southern Connecticut. Winifred 
V. Agard (sponsored by Alyssa R. French). Department of Surgery, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New, Haven, Connecticut 
 
The use of child safety seats is the principle prevention strategy to reduce injury, and 
death for young children involved in motor vehicle crashes. The enforcement of the cur- 
rent safety seat laws by law enforcement officials is a vital component of that strategy. The 
purpose of the present study is to determine how the personal characteristics of police offi- 
cers influence their tendency to use child safety seats in their personal lives, and to enforce 
safety seat laws in their professional lives. Police departments in New Haven, Branford, 
and Troop F of the Connecticut State Police were surveyed using multiple-choice graded 
responses. Responses were coded for the purpose of analysis using the Microsoft Excel 
computer program. Questions pertaining to demographic profile. personal use of child 
safety seats. and professional enforcement were analyzed to determine the relative fre- 
quencies of the graded responses, in order to provide a descriptive interpretation of the 
data. We found that the greater an officer's knowledge of the benefits of safety seat use. 
the more likely the officer will use safety seats in their personal lives. We also determined 
that the younger the officer, the more likely a child riding with that officer would be 
restrained. With regards to enforcement, officers reported that they enforce child safety 
seat laws infrequently as compared with other traffic laws. We conclude that while edu- 
cation on injury prevention affects personal use of child safety seats, enforcement prac- 
tices are not necessarily affected in the same way. Further studies are needed to elucidate 
other potential barriers to enforcement, however emphasis should be placed on a higher 
level enforcement of child safety seat laws by police officials. 
 
Genetic Variants of the Angiotensinogen Gene and Their Effects on Blood Pressure 
Regulation among People of African Descent. Anthony Aizer, Chrys A. Delling, Carol 
Nelson-Williams, and Richard P. Lifton. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The purpose of this study was to determine the influence of the angiotensinogen gene 
on blood pressure regulation among people of African descent. Using DNA from 222 indi- 
viduals from the island of Dominica, we established through polymerase chain reaction 
that a polymorphic GT repeat marker in close proximity to the angiotensinogen gene is 
associated with systolic, diastolic, and mean blood pressure variation in males. Using sin- 
gle strand conformational polymorphism and oligonucleotide hybridization, we searched 
the angiotensinogen gene for variants associated with blood pressure variation. We iden- 
tified six previously published variants: guanine replaced by adenine at position -385 5' 
to the gene, guanine replaced by adenine at position -218, adenine replaced by cytosine at 
position -20, guanine replaced by adenine at position -6, cytosine replaced by thymine at 
position +521 in exon 2, and thymine replaced by cytosine at position +704 in exon 2. In 
addition, two previously unpublished variants were identified: guanine replaced by ade- 
nine at position 432 in exon 2 and guanine replaced by cytosine at position 898 in exon 3. 
 
233 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Analyses of variance, t-tests and chi square analyses were performed in an attempt 
to identify any variant closely associated with blood pressure variation. Although a num- 
ber of variant genotypes were weakly and inconsistently associated with blood pressure 
variation, none were as strongly and consistently associated with blood pressure variation 
as the GT repeats 3' of the gene. Citing the recent research by Bennet, et al. that demon- 
strated linkage disequilibrium of predisposition to insulin dependent diabetes mellitus to 
within a variable number tandem repeat, we offer speculation that the GT repeat alleles, 
rather than serving as markers for functional variants of the angiotensinogen gene, are the 
functional variants responsible for the blood pressure variation influencing up and down 
regulation of the angiotensinogen gene. 
 
Altered Expression of p53 and mdm2 in Superficial Bladder Cancer. Julian N. 
Anthony, Amy Darefsky, and David Esrig. Department of Surgery, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
p53 is a tumor suppressor gene shown to be involved in regulation of the cell-cycle. 
Alterations in the expression and function of p53 have been implicated in a number of 
human malignancies. Recently a cellular protein, mdm2, has been found to have the abil- 
ity to bind wild-type p53 and inactivate its function. The purpose of this study was to ana- 
lyze the frequency of alterations in the tumor markers p53 and mdm2 for superficial blad- 
der cancer. Patient data were compiled from clinical charts of 84 patients at Yale-New 
Haven and West Haven Veterans Hospitals who underwent transurethral resection for sus- 
pected bladder tumors. Tumor specimens were reviewed and the most representative sec- 
tions were selected for immunohistochemical staining with monoclonal antibodies spe- 
cific to the p53 and mdm2 proteins. The p53 and mdm2 status was then analyzed in rela- 
tion to probability of recurrence. P53 nuclear reactivity was detected in 41 of 66 bladder 
tumors. Mdm2 nuclear reactivity was detected in 8 of 66 bladder tumors. Bladder tumors 
that were negative for p53 and positive for mdm2 had a rate ratio for tumor recurrence that 
was 20.02 times that of the reference group (p53 negative, mdm2 negative) (p = .01). 
Tumors that were positive for p53 and negative for mdm2 had a rate ratio for tumor recur- 
rence that was 3.25 times that of the reference group (p = .02). Tumors that were positive 
for p53 and positive for mdm2 had a rate ratio for tumor recurrence that was 4.00 times 
that of the reference group (p = .05). Any aberration in the tumor markers p53 and mdm2 
have a rate ratio of tumor recurrence 3.31 times that of the reference group (p = .01). The 
expression of mdm2 may function to inactivate wild-type p53 and contribute to tumori- 
genesis in superficial bladder cancer. 
 
Effects of Ambient Air Quality on Children's Lung Function in Urban and Rural 
Iran. Maryam M. Asgari (sponsored by William S. Beckett). Department of Internal 
Medicine. Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
A cross-sectional epidemiological study comparing the pulmonary function of chil- 
dren in Tehran with those in a rural town in Iran was conducted in the summer of 1994. 
Four hundred children ages 5-11 were studied. Daytime ambient NO2, S02, and PM1O 
were measured by portable devices in the children's neighborhoods on the days they were 
studied. Levels of these ambient substances were markedly higher in urban Tehran. 
Children's parents were questioned about home environmental exposures (including heat- 
ing source and environmental tobacco smoke) and children's respiratory symptoms. 
Pulmonary function was assessed both by spirometry and peak expiratory flow meter. 
 
234 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
FEVI and FVC as a percent of predicted for age, sex and height were significantly lower 
for urban children compared with rural children. Both measures showed significant asso- 
ciations with levels of NO2, SO2, and PMlo. Differences in spirometric lung function were 
not explained by nutritional status as assessed by height and weight for age, nor by home 
environmental exposures. Reported airway symptoms (cough, phlegm, and wheeze) were 
higher among rural children, while reported physician diagnosis of bronchitis and asthma 
were higher among urban children. This association of higher pollutant concentration with 
lower pulmonary function in this urban rural comparison suggests an effect of urban air 
pollution on short-term lung function and/or lung growth and development during the pre- 
adolescent years. 
 
Containing the Backlash Against Managed Care Limits: A Rational Approach 
Towards Legislating Mandated Health Benefits Coverage. K. Leslie Avery (sponsored 
by Angela Holder). Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
In an effort to control spiraling health care costs, managed care has become the dom- 
inant form of health care in America over the past few years. Managed care organizations 
have utilized increasingly unpopular mechanisms, such as shortening hospital lengths of 
stay, that have caught the attention of the media and resulted in a rash of new regulation, 
such as laws designed to squelch "drive-through" deliveries and outpatient mastectomies. 
Notably, these laws may implicitly or explicitly specify a standard of medical care in addi- 
tion to mandating health benefits coverage. The purpose of this paper was twofold: (1) to 
analyze various mandatory health benefits laws enacted primarily in response to coverage 
limits imposed by managed care organizations and (2) to develop a set of rational guide- 
lines for use in determining not only whether a particular health benefit should be leg- 
islatively mandated, but whether a standard of medical care may accompany such man- 
date. The primary research method used for this inquiry was a review of the relevant med- 
ical and legal literature and federal and state legislation and judicial decisions defining the 
necessity for and impact of a legal right to such coverage. The results of the study demon- 
strated that the current trend towards legislating mandated health benefits coverage lacks 
a cohesive, rational approach and thus, risks unintended adverse consequences on both 
individual and public health. The author concludes that the inclusion of standards of med- 
ical care within legislation mandating health benefits coverage is inappropriate except 
when necessary for the promotion of public health. Further, mandating coverage for a spe- 
cific health benefit (excluding any standard of medical care) should be considered only 
under prescribed circumstances: (1) when it is necessary to protect the public health, (2) 
when it is clearly medically necessary and has been singled out for exclusion by insurers, 
and (3) when its medical necessity is uncertain, but it presents a strong public policy ratio- 
nale, and legislation remains the only feasible alternative to provide such coverage. 
 
The Search for Mechanisms of Resilience: Consideration of Caretaking Behavior by 
Children of Mentally Il Mothers. Michele S. Baker and Jacob Kraemer Tebes. 
Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
During the past two decades a body of research has shown that some children, 
despite significant exposure to risk, thrive. Such children have been labeled "resilient," a 
term which has been coined to refer to continued non-native development despite adverse 
circumstances. In recent years researchers have suggested that the competence of resilient 
 
235 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
children may be in part due to environmental requirements for efficacy. For example, chil- 
dren who have been compelled to act in caretaking roles have found in required tasks a 
ground for efficacy. The present study sought to test this formulation as part of a larger 
study of children of mentally ill mothers. Seventy-three children, ages eight to 16 whose 
mothers have a severe mental disorder treated through public sector mental health ser- 
vices, served as subjects. Children were assessed for their levels of child caretaking by a 
measure developed by the authors specifically for this study: the Child Caretaking Scale 
(CCS). Trained interviewers administered the CCS as well as several published measures 
of child and parent psychopathology and functioning in person-to-person interviews. 
Results were then analyzed statistically. Child caretaking was considered as a moderator 
and as a mediator of child competence and dysfunction. No significant results for either 
hypothesis were found. We therefore conclude that caretaking behavior as measured by 
the CCS is unlikely to be a mechanism of resilience for the group of children studied. 
Results are discussed for implications for future research. 
 
Muscle Contusion Injuries: Impact Biomechanics, Healing, and Treatment Aspects. 
John M. Beiner, Jacek Cholewicki, Manohar M. Panjabi, and Peter Jokl. Department of 
Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Muscle contusion injuries are among the most common sports-related injuries. We 
studied the mechanisms of injury, impact dynamics, normal healing, and healing in the 
presence of two common clinical pharmacologic agents, an anabolic steroid and a corti- 
costeroid. In the first part of the experiments, we attempted to evaluate what factors affect 
the impact dynamics and which factors predict the injury. Using a drop mass technique, 
we evaluated the effect of the contractile status of the impacted muscle, the effect of con- 
straining the muscle with walls, and the effect of different impactor shapes on the impact 
dynamics and on the overall injury. We found that contraction of the impacted muscle 
decreases the stiffness of the muscle-bone composite limb, and protects the muscle from 
injury relative to relaxed impacted muscle. While the use of a bar versus a sphere for the 
impactor shape had relatively little effect on the injury, the use of walls to constrain the 
muscle significantly increased the stiffness of the limb relative to unconstrained limbs, 
and tended to worsen the injury with our model. As anabolic steroids use is prevalent 
among athletes, and corticosteroids are often used to treat muscle contusions, in the sec- 
ond part of the experiments we attempted to determine how these drugs affect the healing 
process. Healing from the injury was evaluated in the presence of the anabolic steroid and 
corticosteroid as judged by the recovery of force-generating capacity and by the histolog- 
ical appearance of the muscle. The corticosteroid was found to accelerate healing in the 
early phase, but was detrimental in the long term to the fiber architecture and to the force- 
generating capacity of the muscle. In contrast, anabolic steroids were found to have little 
effect in the short term but were observed to accelerate healing in the long term. Our find- 
ings indicate that in our animal model while corticosteroids may be beneficial in the short 
term, they cause irreversible damage to healing muscle in the long term, including disor- 
dered fiber structure and a marked diminution in force generating capacity. Anabolic 
steroids aid in the healing of muscle contusion injury and speed the recovery of force gen- 
erating capacity. 
 
236 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
The Effects of Hormone Replacement Therapy on the Microcirculation of the Skin. 
Elizabeth D. Coch Benstock (sponsored by Philip M. Sarrel). Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
This study assessed the effects of different combinations of hormone replacement 
therapy on the microvasculature of the fingertip skin using laser Doppler flowmetry 
(LDF). 
 
Data were derived from two studies. The first study was an open label study of post- 
menopausal women on estrogen only, estrogen plus progesterone and estrogen plus a 
vaginal progesterone. The second study was a double blind study of postmenopausal 
women on estrogen, and then withdrawal from hormone replacement. Afterwards the 
women were randomly assigned to estrogen only treatment or estrogen plus testosterone 
treatment. Fingertip baseline blood flow (flux) and hyperemic response were recorded at 
each visit using LDF 
 
The most significant finding was the increase in baseline flux with the addition of 
testosterone to estrogen replacement therapy (p < .001). Measures of hyperemic response 
did not show statistically significant differences (except for the ratio of maximal post- 
occlusion flux to baseline pre-occlusion flux (MBR) for estrogen treatment versus estro- 
gen withdrawal in the second study, which was not confirmed with other hyperemic 
response measures). 
 
The effect of testosterone on the microcirculation of the skin appears to mirror the 
vasodilatory actions of testosterone in the macrocirculation. Hence, LDF, may be used as 
an inexpensive, noninvasive method of assessing testosterone's effects on the macrocircu- 
lation. 
 
Expression and Characterization of a Novel Adenosine Receptor (A) from the Shark 
Rectal Gland in Xenopus laevis Oocytes. Sumeet Bhanot (sponsored by John Forrest 
Jr.). Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Adenosine (Ado) receptors are G-protein coupled purinoceptors that have been pro- 
posed to regulate chloride secretion via the CFTR Cl- channel (Cystic Fibrosis 
Transmembrane conductance Regulator) in human airway and kidney tubular cells. 
However, direct coupling of adenosine receptors and CPFR has not been demonstrated in 
an expression system. We recently cloned the oldest known Ado receptor (AO), from the 
rectal gland of the dogfish shark (Squalus acanthias). Sequence homology indicates that 
Ao is only -40% homologous to all previously cloned adenosine receptors and is equally 
different from each, forming the first branch in phylogenetic analysis. We have co- 
expressed the shark AO receptor with human CF1R in Xenopus oocytes and have charac- 
terized the coupling of AO to the CFlR chloride channel. Two electrode voltage clamping 
was performed at a holding potential of -6OmV and current voltage (I-V) relationships 
were defined by voltage pulses (varying the clamping voltage between -120mV to +6OmV 
over 2 msec). In co-injected oocytes, 2-chloroadenosine (10 nM-10 pM) produced a dose 
dependent increase in a non-rectifying negative current and a shift of the reversal poten- 
tial towards that of chloride, consistent with the electrophysiological signature of CFlR. 
An identical profile was observed with forskolin. Addition of DPCPX, an adenosine 
receptor antagonist, reversibly inhibited the effects of 2-chloroadenosine to activate 
CFTR. In activating CFTR, Ao has a unique functional profile for adenosine receptor ago- 
nists (R-PIA>S-PIA>CGS21680>CPA>2ClAdo>CV1808>DPMA>NECA) and antago- 
nist profile (DPCPX>PDl 15199>8PT>CSC>CGS15943) that differs markedly from all 
 
237 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
previously cloned adenosine receptor subtypes. We conclude that: (1) Ao is a novel and 
unique adenosine receptor subtype, by both functional and structural criteria; (2)Ao acti- 
vates human CFT7R and may regulate this channel in mammalian epithelial tissues; (3)Ao 
appears to be the evolutionary predecessor of all previously cloned adenosine receptors. 
 
Genetic Contribution of the Human Epithelial Sodium Channel (hENaCh) to the 
Pathogenesis of Human Hypertension. Christopher M. Bositis, Richard A. Shimkets, 
Yin Lu, Carol Nelson-Williams, Joni H. Hansson, Cecilia M. Canessa, and Richard P. 
Lifton. Departments of Internal Medicine and Genetics, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
In spite of strong evidence indicating a genetic component to hypertension, the mul- 
tifactorial nature of this trait has thus far hindered attempts to identify genes which play a 
role in its development. We have taken two approaches to elucidate its genetic basis: first, 
the use of classic linkage analysis to identify the gene responsible for a Mendelian form 
of hypertension; and second, direct search for mutations in candidate genes from a group 
of essential hypertensives. 
 
Patients with Liddle's syndrome, an autosomal dominant form of hypertension, were 
identified from the original kindred described by Liddle (K100). Linkage analysis in this 
family demonstrated linkage between the disease locus and the ,B-subunit of the epithelial 
sodium channel (hPENaCh). The polymorphic marker ,3ENaCGT- 1 from this subunit was 
localized to the interval between the pericentromeric markers DI 6S412 and DI 6S401 on 
chromosome 16, and multipoint linkage analysis revealed complete linkage between 
Liddle's syndrome and hiENaCh (LOD score of 9.0 at a recombination fraction of zero). 
Sequence analysis of hfENaCh in the Liddle's kindred revealed a premature stop codon 
in the carboxy-terminal region of this channel in all the affected members but in none of 
the unaffected members or controls. Affected subjects from four additional kindreds with 
Liddle's syndrome all were found to have premature stop or frameshift mutations in this 
same region, proving these mutations cause Liddle's syndrome. 
 
These findings motivated the search for additional molecular variants in hENaCh in 
a group of essential hypertensive patients. Using this second approach, a common variant 
near the highly conserved SH3 binding domain of the carboxyl tail in the a subunit of this 
channel was identified, suggesting that mutations in this region may contribute to varia- 
tions in blood pressure in the population at large. 
 
A Comparison of Management of the Difficult Airway in Latin America and the 
USA. Carlos A. Caceres and William Rosenblatt, Department of Anesthesiology, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Given the myriad of causes of the difficult airway, the choice of anesthetic induction 
and intubation is controversial. The purpose of this study was to delineate differences of 
management of the difficult airway, if any existed, between Latin American 
Anesthesiologist and their U.S. counterparts. This project was made possible by a previ- 
ous study by William Rosenblatt, M.D. (Yale School of Medicine, Dept. of 
Anesthesiology) were he set out to assess the different methods used by the practicing 
U.S. Anesthesiologist. The survey used in the previous study was translated to Spanish 
and administered to Anesthesiologist practicing in Latin America. 
 
The results of the surveys showed a statistically significant difference between induc- 
tion techniques. The Latin American anesthesiologist had a tendency to prefer general 
 
238 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
anesthesia with an apneic patient over their United States (U.S.) counterparts. Intubation 
techniques did not vary considerably except for the tendency of Latin American anesthe- 
siologists preferring a blind nasal technique over their U.S. counterparts. Overall the U.S. 
anesthesiologist were more conservative in their methods. 
 
The reasons for these discrepancies may be due to different teachings, liability 
issues, or fundamental beliefs of the difficult airway. 
 
Relationship Between Modulation of Glomus Cell K+ Current and Hypoxia 
Transduction in Rat Carotid Body. Phillip M. Cheng and David F. Donnelly. 
Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
This study was undertaken to test the hypothesis that carotid body hypoxia chemo- 
transduction is mediated by an inhibition of glomus cell K+ current. Sinus nerve activity 
and glomus cell membrane currents were measured simultaneously in intact rat carotid 
bodies, in vitro. Brief hypoxia (30-45 s) caused a rapid and marked increase in nerve 
activity to 21.6 + 2.7 times baseline spiking frequency (n = 59), but caused no significant 
change in glomus cell membrane resistance, outward current, or holding current. 
Tetraethylammonium (TEA, 20 mM) reduced glomus cell outward current to 55 + 7 per- 
cent (n = 15) of predrug current, but nerve activity increased only slightly to 2.0 + 0.3 
times baseline spiking frequency. Brief hypoxia in the presence of TEA caused a marked 
increase in nerve activity to 30 + 13 times baseline spiking frequency (n = 3), demon- 
strating that organ function was not impaired by TEA. Charybdotoxin (10 nM, n = 11) and 
apamin (100 nM, n = 13) reduced outward current by 12.1 + 3.0 percent and 11.4 + 6.1 
percent respectively, but did not significantly affect nerve activity, glomus cell membrane 
resistance, or holding current. The results suggest that hypoxia inhibition of glomus cell 
K+ current is not the primary initiating step in the nerve response to hypoxia. 
 
Managed Care Enterprise Liability: Toward a New Paradigm of Medical 
Malpractice. Willis Chou (sponsored by Angela Holder). Department of Pediatrics, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
This thesis examines the law of medical malpractice in light of managed care, and 
argues that the traditional physician-centered model of malpractice liability is incompati- 
ble with the cost reforms of managed care. Managed care organizations employ a host of 
strategies to reduce or contain medical costs, many of which invariably have clinical con- 
sequences. Physicians are no longer autonomous with respect to medical decision mak- 
ing, yet they remain the primary targets in malpractice litigation. A potentially superior 
alternative to the current tort system is managed care enterprise liability, where the risk of 
malpractice would be borne exclusively by the integrated health care enterprise. 
 
After tracing the origins of enterprise liability from products liability law, this thesis 
argues for its applicability in the health care context. First, theories of managed care lia- 
bility are examined in order to establish a legal basis for enterprise liability. Next, enter- 
prise liability is supported from a public policy perspective, because it best reconciles the 
normative goals of a liability system (compensation of victims, prevention of injuries, pro- 
motion of quality care, and reduction of administrative expenses) with cost reform. 
 
239 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Analysis of Family Pedigrees Supports a Paternal Genetic Contribution to 
Preeclampsia. Daniella Courban, K.K. Kidd, and Phyllis August. Department of 
Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, and Department 
of Medicine, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New York 
 
Previous studies suggest that preeclampsia (PE) is inherited; however, the mode of 
inheritance is undefined. We evaluated the inheritance patterns in families with multiple 
affected members. Index cases (IC) were identified by 1) reviewing the records of women 
with PE seen at Cornell from 1990-1995, and mailing questionnaires about family histo- 
ry; 2) advertisement in a community newspaper, looking for women with PE; and 3) cre- 
ation of a PE website on the Internet. 23 families with 2 or more affected members were 
identified. Extensive pedigree information has thus far been obtained from 11 families. 4 
pedigrees were significant for the suggestion of paternal genetic contribution to the phe- 
notypic expression of the disease in the mother. In family A, the IC, her sister, and her hus- 
band's sister all had PE. In family B, the IC, her sister, and her husband's first wife had 
PE. In family C, the IC, and her husband's two sisters had PE. In family D, the IC, her sis- 
ter, and her brother's wife had PE. Our findings support the conclusion of others that the 
genetic basis of PE likely involves a maternal-fetal genotype x genotype interaction. Thus, 
future genetic studies of PE must include spouses and offspring of preeclamptic pregnan- 
cies, as well as others not biologically related to the IC, such as wives of brothers of an 
IC, and sisters of the husband of an IC. Linkage analysis of marker data on such pedigrees 
will require genetic models that incorporate the genotype x genotype interaction. 
 
Effects of Tamoxifen on Prostaglandin E2 Induced Insulin-like Growth Factor 11 
Expression in Fetal Rat Osteoblasts. Kristina A. Crothers and Thomas L. McCarthy. 
Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Despite its use as an antiestrogen in the treatment of breast cancer, tamoxifen also 
functions as a partial estrogen agonist, protecting against postmenopausal bone loss in 
these patients unable to receive estrogen replacement therapy. Among the many cytokines 
and growth factors under investigation, insulin-like growth factor 1 1 (IGF- 11) has been 
one of those implicated as playing a role in the pathogenesis of postmenopausal osteo- 
porosis. IGF- 11 gene expression is stimulated by agents such as prostaglandin E2, (PGE2) 
that increase intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) via a protein kinase 
A (PKA) dependent mechanism. Treatment of primary cultures of fetal rat osteoblasts 
with 17-1-estradiol suppresses the PGE2 dependent stimulation of IGF-1 1, suggesting a 
role for estrogen in maintaining a basal level of bone turnover. Through preparation of cell 
cultures transiently transfected with estrogen receptor (ER) and the luciferase reporter 
plasmid controlled by promoter 11 of the IGF- 11 gene (IGF-1 1 PI), we demonstrate that 
tamoxifen, though less potently than estrogen, also decreases PGE2 stimulated IGF- 11 
promoter activity. Like estrogen, tamoxifen treatment alone does not influence IGF- 11 
expression. Tamoxifen treatment was not cytotoxic to cells, as equal concentrations weak- 
ly stimulated luciferase reporter expression under the control of a typical estrogen 
response element (ERE). Nuclear extracts from tamoxifen treated cells were prepared and 
used in gel mobility shift assays with DNA containing the atypical cAMP response ele- 
ment (CRE) in the IGF- 11 promoter required for PGE2 activation. As with estradiol, 
tamoxifen decreased the PGE2 induced bands detected by gel-mobility shift assay. Thus 
tamoxifen appears to function similarly to estrogen in suppressing IGF- 11 in the absence 
of a typical estrogen response element within the IGF-1 1 PI, These findings provide fur- 
ther evidence for an ERE-independent pathway of estrogen action, and help to elucidate 
the mechanism of the estrogen agonist effect of tamoxifen on bone. 
 
240 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
MRI Diagnosis of Meniscal Cysts with Arthroscopic Correlation. Katherine V. Day, 
Lee D. Katz, Robert Lange, and Shirley McCarthy. Department of Diagnostic Radiology, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The purpose of the study was to investigate the accuracy of MRI in the diagnosis of 
meniscal cysts. 
 
One hundred and twenty-nine MRI records with the diagnosis of meniscal cyst or 
suspicion of meniscal cyst from 1988 to 1995 were identified. Thirty-six of these patients 
underwent arthroscopy and their operative reports were reviewed. A musculoskeletal radi- 
ologist, blinded to previous results, retrospectively re-evaluated the scans for meniscal 
cysts, cyst location and concomitant pathology. Arthroscopic reports were reviewed with 
arthroscopy held as the gold standard for meniscal cyst diagnosis. Statistical analysis 
using logistic regression was performed to assess associations between meniscal cyst 
diagnosis and concomitant pathology. Retrospective review of the MRI scans was then 
performed unblinded to arthroscopic findings. Cyst size, location, and possible pitfalls to 
diagnosis were examined. 
 
Blinded MRI evaluation identified twenty meniscal cysts, fourteen lateral and six 
medial. Arthroscopy identified thirteen meniscal cysts, ten lateral and three medial. MRI 
identified eleven true positives, nine false positives, two false negatives and fourteen true 
negatives. Overall accuracy was 69 percent, sensitivity 85 percent, specificity 61 percent, 
negative predictive value, 97 percent, and positive predictive value 33 percent. Sensitivity 
and positive predictive value were lower for the medial than the lateral meniscus. Logistic 
regression analysis of concomitant pathology identified on MRI or at arthroscopy showed 
no association between the diagnosis of meniscal cyst and internal knee derangements. 
MRI was found to be a sensitive modality for diagnosing meniscal cysts. 
 
Unblinded review of true positives revealed ten anterior cysts and one posterior cyst. 
Of the false positives, two intrameniscal cysts, four posterior cysts, and two anterior cysts 
were diagnosed; and of the false negatives, one meniscal cyst located near extrameniscal 
gadolinium collections and one "ganglion" were identified. The unblinded review indi- 
cated that arthroscopy may not be the best method for diagnosing intrameniscal cysts or 
medial cysts associated with the posterior horns of the menisci. 
 
Transforming Growth Factor-5 Iype II Receptor Mutants in Human Cancer. 
Malabika De and Michael Reiss, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Transforming growth factor-5 (TGF-,B) controls the cell cycle of normal cells of 
epithelial origin by blocking the GI-S progression. Recently, two human head-andneck 
carcinoma cell lines (A253 and SqCC/Yl) each with a missense mutation in the highly 
conserved subdomain XI of the TGF-1 type 11 receptor (TORII) serine-threonine kinase 
(R537P and E526Q) were identified. Both A253 and SqCCNYl tumor cells were refracto- 
ry to TGF-p-mediated growth arrest. Furthermore,TGF-0 failed to induce the production 
of plasminogen activator inhibitor-l(PAI-1) in either cell line and fibronectin (FN) in 
SqCC/Yl cells. To determine the effects of the E526Q and R537P mutations on receptor 
function, they were introduced into a wild-type T,BRII cDNA sequence using site-direct- 
ed mutagenesis. Repression of cyclin A gene transcription by TGF-1 correlates with its 
ability to inhibit cell cycle progression. Transfection of a wild-type TIRII cDNA into 
T47D human breast carcinoma cells that fail to express endogenous TJRII resulted in a 
greater than 90 percent inhibition of a cyclin A promoter luciferase reporter gene con- 
struct. In contrast, the E526Q and R537P mutants inhibited luciferase expression by only 
 
241 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
25 percent, and 50 percent, respectively. Additionally, expression of each mutant receptor 
exhibited a reduced response to TGF-I with regards to the activity of a PAI-i promoter- 
luciferase reported gene construct when compared to cells transfected with a control vec- 
tor, indicating that they may be dominant negative inhibitors of the wild-type TfRI func- 
tion. On the other hand, co-transfection of the wild-type and mutant TORII cDNAs failed 
to inhibit normal T1RII function, indicating that the wild type T,BRII is dominant over the 
mutants. These results indicate that the amino acid residues at positions 526 and 537 are 
essential for normal Tf3RII signaling activity. 
 
The Utility of Abdominal Radiographs in the Evaluation of the Emergency 
Department Patient with Abdominal Pain. Tamara Raquel Dildy (Sponsored by Karen 
Restifo). Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Abdominal pain is a common chief complaint presenting to the Emergency 
Department (ED). This study was undertaken to determine whether plain films of the 
abdomen in the ED contribute significant information to the clinical judgement of physi- 
cians. In our study we assessed the expected probability of the plain film to predict the 
presence of obstruction, perforation, biliary disease, renal/ureteral stones, appendicitis, 
foreign body, and any helpful finding. In order to this, over the course of nine months a 
questionnaire was administered to the attending or resident caring for a patient with 
abdominal pain each time a plain film of the abdomen was ordered. There were 195 ques- 
tionnaires analyzed. We found that in 23.1 percent (n = 45)the abdominal series changed 
the clinical management of patients. 76.9 percent (n = 150)of patients who also had the 
abdominal series had no change of management as a result of the film. In these patients 
the abdominal series was an unnecessary exam, resulting in additional cost, time spent in 
the ED, and radiation exposure. In these patients alone, an estimated $41,850 could have 
been saved had the exam not been undertaken. In the patients who had a change of man- 
agement as a result of the film, we found several statistically significant associations. We 
found positive associations between the film changing the management of patients in the 
presence of specific symptoms and positive past medical histories, i.e., vomiting, diabetes, 
malignancy, inflammatory bowel disease, and obstruction. We found statistically signifi- 
cant associations with bowel obstruction as an expected and final diagnosis and change of 
management. In addition, we found a statistically significant relationship between the 
physicians' prediction of the presence of bowel obstruction and the X-ray interpretation of 
bowel obstruction. Thus leading us to conclude that physicians appropriately order the 
abdominal film with the suspicion of the diagnosis of bowel obstruction. Finally, physi- 
cians demonstrated that they were cautious in their differential diagnosis and over-antici- 
pated the presence of abnormalities on the abdominal series. This is reflected by the 76.9 
percent of patients whose abdominal films were noncontributory to their management. In 
these instances the abdominal series provided reassurance, an opportunity to rule-out 
more serious abdominal pathology. 
 
Detection of the Mutated K-ras Biomarker in Colorectal Carcinoma. Benjamin R. 
Doolittle, Janet Emanuel, and Jose Costa, Department of Pathology, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
This study describes an advantageous, effective protocol for detecting k-ras muta- 
tions in human stool as a prototype screen for colorectal carcinoma (CRC), the third most 
 
242 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
common malignancy in the United States. A reliable screening test that detects early 
lesions would contribute to a decrease in mortality. Currently, the only noninvasive screen 
for CRC is the heme-occult test which has a high false-positive rate. Previously, several 
investigators have identified genetic biomarkers for CRC in stool DNA. The k-ras onco- 
gene, mutated in 46-50 percent of CRC tumors, serves as one molecular marker by which 
stool samples may be evaluated for early detection of adenocarcinomas. 
 
DNA was isolated from stool samples, by a new method specifically designed for 
extracting high quality DNA, using tetradecyltrimethylammonium oxalate (Catrimox-14). 
This protocol produces an optimal yield of high purity DNA, suitable for genotyping. 
Detection of the human gene in stool samples was enhanced by hybrid selection of the k- 
ras sequences, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and single-strand conformation poly- 
morphism (SSCP analysis). 
 
Tumor tissue and pre-operative stool samples for eight patients were k-ras genotyped 
and compared; stool samples from two asymptomatic, healthy patients were also evaluat- 
ed in a double blind format. In seven of eight samples (87 percent), the genotype of the 
stool and colon tissue DNA was the same. Both healthy patients showed wildtype k-ras. 
This protocol shows promise for the development of an efficient and accurate screen for 
CRC. 
 
Breast Tumor Growth Rate: Are HER-2/neu Overexpression and Auxometry 
Associated? Andrea G. Edwards, Stuart Flynn, Sandra Moody-Ayers, and Michael 
DiGiovanna (sponsored by David F. Stem). Department of Pathology, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
In breast cancer management, tumor markers or indices that predict the clinical 
aggressiveness of tumors are highly desired. Both HER-2/neu oncoprotein overexpression 
and the Auxometric Staging System are independent predictors of the growth behavior 
and the clinical aggressiveness of breast carcinomas. Therefore, it would be useful to 
know whether HER-2/neu overexpression and the auxometric growth stages are associat- 
ed. Specifically, rapid auxometric stage tumors may have higher HER-2/neu overexpres- 
sion. 
 
In this retrospective case-control study, immunohistochemistry evaluated HER-2/neu 
expression in 16 breast tumor "cases" in the rapid auxometric growth stage and 16 "con- 
trols" in the slow auxometric growth stage. Flow cytometry evaluated the percentage of 
cells in Sphase as an added measurement of tumor growth rate. HER-2/neu overexpres- 
sion was detected in 15.6 percent of the total population. Of the 16 controls, 4 subjects (25 
percent) overexpressed HER-2/neu while only I of the 16 cases (6.25 percent) overex- 
pressed HER-2/neu. Although the controls were four times more likely to overexpress 
HER-2/neu, the difference was not statistically significant (Fisher's exact, 2 tail, p = .22). 
A chi-square analysis of the percentage of cells in S-phase showed a trend toward a dif- 
ference between cases and controls (mantel-haenszel chi-square, p = .08), but it was not 
statistically significant. However, it was found that those subjects who overexpressed 
HER-2/neu had a statistically significant poorer five-year survival than those who did not 
(Fisher's exact, 2 tail, p = .05). 
 
Although a statistically significant difference in HER-2/neu overexpression was not 
found between cases and controls, this study is a first investigation of this hypothesis and 
unpredicted confounders could have affected the results. Some possible confounders are 
discussed as well as several other characteristics of the patients and features of their 
tumors. 
 
243 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Quality of Life Indicators in Williams Syndrome. Suzannah Ehret (sponsored by 
Barbara Pober). Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
A pilot study designed to assess quality of life and life satisfaction in a sample of 78 
intellectually handicapped adolescents and adults with Williams Syndrome, as reported by 
their parents, was conducted. The quality of life measure consisted of a questionnaire 
divided into four subscales of 1) Emotional Well-Being, 2) Interpersonal Relations and 
Social Inclusion, 3) Self-Determination, Rights and Personal Development, and 4) 
Physical Well-Being. Fifty-one structured questions and nineteen open-ended questions 
were designed to provide information about outcomes and satisfaction with those out- 
comes. Areas assessed included emotional and psychological health, experience and sat- 
isfaction with social relationships, employment and/or school, living situation and health. 
Results of analyses indicated that the variables most highly correlated with poorer life 
quality were psychological and emotional variables, notably the presence of anxiety or 
depression and low self esteem. Other psychological measures such as the ability to adapt 
to changes in routine and having fewer worries also had positive correlations with quali- 
ty of life, but to a lesser degree. Having engaged in some form of psychotherapy was not 
correlated with a higher reported quality of life. Social interactions also figured strongly 
in quality of life assessments. Having more friends and friends of the same age were 
strong positive predictors of overall quality of life score. Having the opportunity to meet 
new people often and having the personal quality of enjoying meeting new people were 
also modestly correlated with a better quality of life. Modest negative effects on life qual- 
ity were found for the demographic variables of increased age, female gender and lower 
IQ. Various other factors were assessed which had only minimal or no effect on quality of 
life including living situation, involvement in work or school and leisure activities. 
 
Quality of life analyses were also conducted for a small comparison group of 8 mild 
to moderately retarded individuals without Williams Syndrome. The most significant 
associations with quality of life were psychological and emotional variables and social 
variables, similar to findings for the Williams Syndrome population. Social factors corre- 
lated more strongly with quality of life assessments than psychological and emotional fac- 
tors in the comparison groups, a reversal of the findings for the Williams Syndrome study 
group. 
 
Our results suggest that psychological and emotional factors play the most important 
role in overall quality of life for individuals with Williams Syndrome, with social issues 
playing the next most important role and demographics of age, gender, and IQ contribut- 
ing only minor amounts to the variance observed. While emotional factors also make 
important contributions to quality of life for individuals with intellectual handicaps who 
do not have Williams Syndrome, the preliminary evidence suggests that emotional factors 
may be especially important for individuals with Williams Syndrome. These data suggest 
that early efforts and intervention should be focused on the mental health of individuals 
with Williams Syndrome. Additionally, continuing emphasis in the social sphere would be 
well placed. 
 
Training in socialization skills and other measures designed to facilitate the develop- 
ment of reciprocal friendships by individuals with Williams Syndrome could also be valu- 
able. 
 
244 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
DCC Expression is Altered by Multiple Mechanisms in Brain Timors. Bradley C. 
Ekstrand (sponsored by Eric R. Fearon). Department of Pathology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) candidate tumor suppressor gene spans 
greater than 1350 kilobases at chromosome 18q21.1 and encodes a transmembrane pro- 
tein thought to be involved in neuronal differentiation and axon targeting. Because of 
these potential functions and its putative role as a tumor suppressor, we have sought to 
determine if DCC inactivation might contribute to tumors arising in the central nervous 
system. Alterations in DCC expression were noted in more than 50 percent of the thirty 
brain tumors studied. A variety of mechanisms underlie the altered expression of DCC, 
including allelic loss, aberrant splicing of transcripts, allele-specific loss of transcripts, 
and alterations in its post-transcriptional and/or posttranslational regulation. The data sug- 
gest DCC inactivation may be critical to the pathogenesis of brain tumors. Moreover, the 
findings provide further support for the proposal that DCC functions as a tumor suppres- 
sor gene. 
 
Modulation of Cellular Migration by Nitric Oxide. Eric Fan, Guillermo Garcia- 
Cardena, and William C. Sessa. Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The involvement of nitric oxide (NO) in cellular migration has been controversial. 
By using NIH3T3 cells heterologously expressing endothelial nitric oxide synthase 
(eNOS) we have been able to study more accurately the role of NO in cellular migration. 
By immunofluorescense microscopy we have found that eNOS is being expressed at the 
leading edge of migrating cells. We have also shown that platelet derived growth factor- 
BB (PDGF-BB) - a known chemoattractant, is able to stimulate NO release in these cells 
and that the tyrosine phosphorylation of several proteins involved in the PDGF signal 
transduction cascade is regulated by NO. To test the actual effect of NO production on 
PDGF-BB induced chemotaxis, we used the Boyden chamber chemotaxis assay to show 
that NIH3T3 cells producing NO migrated significantly faster toward PDGF-BB than 
NIH3T3 cells not producing NO. Therefore, we have demonstrated for the first time that 
NO acts through the PDGF signal transduction cascade to significantly enhance cellular 
chemotaxis. 
 
Thom -coabdominal Asynchrony in the Detection of Obstructive Sleep Apnea 
Syndrome in Children. Jennifer Ann Femiano, Patricia Moore, and Carol Lynn Rosen. 
Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is an important pediatric problem char- 
acterized by snoring, labored paradoxical breathing, partial and complete airway obstruc- 
tion, gas exchange abnormalities and sleep disruption. While there is normative data for 
obstruction and oxyhemoglobin desaturations, there are little quantitative data about para- 
doxical breathing. Therefore, we measured thoracoabdominal phase angles obtained from 
respiratory inductance plethysmography (RIP) as an index of paradoxical breathing and 
examined their relationship with severity of sleep-disordered breathing. Otherwise 
healthy, non-obese children (N = 94; M/F = 59/35; ages 3 to 17 years) underwent 
overnight polysomnography including EEG, EOG, EMG, ECG, pulse oximetry, capnog- 
raphy and calibrated RIP. Based on PSG data, the children were stratified into five groups: 
No Snore, Snore, Upper Airway Resistance Syndrome (UARS), OSAS without hypoxia, 
 
245 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
and OSAS with hypoxia. REM phase angle measurements increased significantly with 
severity of sleep-disordered breathing: mean values were 29.60 for non-snoring children; 
46.90 for snorers; 59.10 for children with UARS; 63.30 for those with OSAS without 
hypoxia; and 84.50 for children with OSAS with hypoxia. Our findings show that thora- 
coabdominal phase angles are a sensitive marker for the detection of OSAS in children. 
 
Comparing Perceived Self-efficacy among Adolescent Bosnian and Croatian 
Refugees with and without Post-traumatic Stress Disorder. Peter M. Ferren (sponsored 
by Donald J. Cohen). Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
This study examines the relationship between post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
and perceived self-efficacy (PSE) in the adolescent Bosnian and Croatian refugee cultur- 
al context. One hundred-four Bosnian and Croatian adolescent refugees ages 13-18 com- 
pleted Bandura's Children's Multidimensional Scales of Perceived Self-Efficacy 
(CMSPSE), which measures self-predicted social functioning in nine areas. Subjects were 
then interviewed and categorized as traumatized PTSD-positive, traumatized PTSD-neg- 
ative, and non-traumatized according to DSM-IV diagnostic criteria. Analyses of covari- 
ance (ANCOVAS) showed that traumatized PTSD-positive subjects exhibit significantly 
higher PSE in five of nine subject areas than non-traumatized subjects (p < .05). No sig- 
nificant differences among three diagnostic groups of females were observed (p > .05). 
However, non-traumatized males demonstrated significantly lower PSE in seven of nine 
subject areas than the two traumatized male diagnostic groups (p < .05). Therefore, PTSD 
does not have a negative impact on PSE in this cultural context. Comparative deficits 
among non-traumatized refugees (particularly males), however, suggest that the post-war 
refugee experience may negatively impact PSE. While self-efficacy theory is appropriate 
for mental health interventions to improve social functioning among non-traumatized ado- 
lescent refugees, an alternative strategy must be found to decrease symptoms in adoles- 
cent refugees with PTSD, 
 
An Investigation of Medical Student Attitudes Towards Obesity. Jill S. Fischer (spon- 
sored by Nora Groce). Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Studies indicate that obese patients are commonly undertreated or treated disre- 
spectfully by health care providers. The present study attempted to characterize first- and 
fourth-year medical students' attitudes towards obese patients. Twenty-one Likert-scale 
type attitude statements were created and included in a survey which also elicited data 
about students' prior experience with obesity. The survey was administered to incoming 
first-year and rising fourth-year students at an urban medical school in August, 1996. Very 
few significant differences were found between groups of first-and fourth-year students in 
their attitudes towards obesity. In addition, both groups were generally neutral in response 
to attitude statements about obesity and obese patients. Students who had themselves been 
overweight or who had overweight family members, however, indicated stronger feelings 
of empathy towards obese patients. These students were also more interested in the treat- 
ment of obesity. An examination of methods used to improve attitudes towards patients 
who are HIV positive finds that integration of commonly stigmatized patients into inter- 
viewing and physical exam courses can improve student attitudes. Similarly, early clini- 
cal contact with obese patients could provide students without personal experience with 
obesity an opportunity to develop more positive attitudes towards the treatment of obese 
patients. 
 
246 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Excess Sample Size and the 'Delta Wobble' in Randomized Controlled Trials. 
Michael A. Fischer and Alvan R. Feinstein. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
To determine the occurrence and consequences of excess sample sizes in large ran- 
domized controlled trials, we reviewed 158 randomized controlled trials, each containing 
more than I 00 patients, published in Lancet, Journal of the American Medical Association 
[JAMA], and New England Journal of Medicine during the three years 1990-1992. 
 
Of 98 trials with statistically significant differences between control and experimen- 
tal groups, the reported P values were less than .001 in 27 (28 percent) and less than .01 
in an additional 35 (36 percent). Since sample sizes are usually calculated to provide P 
values of .05, the occurrence of values less than .01, and particularly below .001, suggests 
either that sample size was excessive or that the investigators found differences much larg- 
er than 8 (the anticipated difference for "clinical importance"). The original anticipations 
were difficult to determine, however, because sample size calculations were not reported 
consistently: among the 158 trials, the details were presented completely in 78 (49 per- 
cent), but wholly omitted in 58 (37 percent). Of 54 trials that stated the value of 8 and that 
found "statistical significance," 31 had P values below 0.01, but only 10 of these trials had 
observed differences that were at least 25 percent larger than 8; in the remaining 21, the 
small P value was attained only by excess sample size. On the other hand, 15 trials found 
P < .05 and claimed statistical significance although the observed difference was at least 
25 percent smaller than 8. 
 
The problems of excessive sample size (and resources) probably arise from the cus- 
tomary Neyman-Pearson strategy, which tries to satisfy two (contradictory) statistical 
hypotheses, thereby making sample size much larger than what is needed for a single null 
hypothesis. The excessive sample size may then allow "statistical significance" to be 
found and emphasized for differences much smaller than what was originally anticipated. 
 
A Comparison of Patients with Familial and Sporadic Cutaneous Melanoma. Nina 
Jennifer Myerson Fisher (Sponsored by Jean Bolognia). Department of Dermatology, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
A comparison of patients with familial (n = 51) and sporadic (n = 163) cutaneous 
melanoma who attended the Yale Pigmented Lesion Clinic between January 31, 1995 and 
January 31, 1996 was performed. The two groups did not differ in their phenotypic char- 
acteristics or in the histologic subtypes, Breslow depth, or location of their melanomas. 
Familial melanoma patients were found to have a greater number of clinically atypical 
nevi (p = .02), to develop melanoma at a younger age (p = .05), to have had more skin 
biopsies of benign lesions performed prior to their diagnosis of melanoma (p = .02), and 
to have had at least 3 histologically confirmed atypical nevi removed in the first five years 
after their diagnosis (p = .007). As a reflection of medical surveillance, the number of skin 
biopsies performed in both groups of patients and their histologic diagnoses were 
reviewed. Age had a positive correlation [0.20] with the total number of biopsies prior to 
the diagnosis of melanoma (p = 0.004). Independent of family history, the number of skin 
biopsies performed in the five years after diagnosis of the initial melanoma correlated pos- 
itively with the physician's estimate of the number of clinically atypical nevi (p = .0001). 
However, having had skin biopsies performed in the five years, two years or one year prior 
to the diagnosis of melanoma did not predict a thinner Breslow depth. Our data demon- 
strate that dermatologists routinely detect thinner melanomas than nondermatologists, i.e., 
while < 0.40 mm (p = .05). Familial patients had more clinically atypical nevi and devel- 
 
247 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
oped melanoma at a younger age. Therefore, one explanation for why medical surveil- 
lance did not predispose to thinner Breslow depths is the lack of total body skin exami- 
nations. 
 
Halo Nevus Phenomenon Secondary to Cutaneous T-cell Lymphoma and 
Concurrent Lymphomatoid Papulosis: Implications of These Dermatologic 
Manifestations of Immune Dysregulation. Joshua P. Fogelman and Jennifer M. McNiff. 
Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Halo congenital melanocytic nevi are uncommon, and the halo nevus phenomenon 
has not been identified with increased frequency in the nevi of patients with lymphoma. 
This thesis describes immune dysregulation in a patient who developed a halo nevus phe- 
nomenon in a congenital melanocytic nevus associated with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma 
(CTCL), concurrent with lymphomatoid papulosis (LyP) at another cutaneous site. The 
purposes of this study are to review the literature regarding halo nevi, CTCL and LyP; to 
evaluate the clinical and histopathologic features in this case; to perform immunohisto- 
chemical studies with anti-lymphocyte and anti-melanocyte antibodies; to perform indi- 
rect immunofluorescence studies in search of antibodies in the patient's serum directed 
against melanocytes or melanoma; to perform polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies to 
identify lymphocyte clonality; and thereby to determine the role of the malignant lym- 
phocytes in these phenomena. This appears to be the first reported case of infiltration of a 
melanocytic nevus by CTCL associated with destruction of the nevus. The results of this 
study demonstrate that this halo nevus phenomenon was associated with infiltration of the 
nevus by T-lymphocytes which showed the same clonal T-cell receptor gene rearrange- 
ment by PCR as did the malignant lymphocytes of the patient's underlying CTCL. 
Serologic studies were negative for circulating antibodies directed against normal 
melanocytes and melanoma. Finally, tissue from the LyP lesion showed infiltrates of T- 
lymphocytes positive for CD30, as expected in this condition, and demonstrated T-cell 
clonality similar to that of the patient's underlying lymphoma. I conclude that cell-medi- 
ated mechanisms of immunity gone awry were operative in this patient; both the destruc- 
tion of melanocytes by the halo nevus phenomenon and the involution of the LyP lesion 
are due to similar cell-mediated reactions in which the atypical lymphocytes of both 
CTCL and LyP recruited cytotoxic T-cells leading to regression of the lesions. 
 
Perinatal Prediction of Maltreatment and Changes of Caretaker in Children Born to 
Cocaine-abusing Mothers: the Test of a Screening Instrument. Eric J. Frehm and John 
M. Leventhal. Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
The Kung-Leventhal Parenting Skills Survey was designed to screen newborns for 
their risk of future maltreatment. The purpose of this study was to determine the predic- 
tive validity of that survey as a screening tool for maltreatment and changes in caretaker 
in a population of children born to cocaine-abusing mothers. Medical records were sought 
through the second birthday for forty-seven children who were prenatally exposed to 
cocaine and for whom the Kung-Leventhal Survey was completed as part of a routine 
social work evaluation. All evidence of caretaker changes, and their precipitating circum- 
stances, was recorded. The evaluation and determination of maltreatment outcomes was 
made by a two physician review of available data. Eleven episodes of maltreatment were 
 
248 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
revealed. Twenty-four children experienced at least one caretaker change; sixteen of these 
were judged to represent a complete failure of parenting, i.e. a mother's inability to pro- 
vide adequately for her child, necessitating a long-term or permanent custody change. For 
this subset of changes in caretaker the Kung-Leventhal Survey demonstrated a sensitivity 
of 81 percent, specificity of 55 percent, and positive predictive accuracy of 48 percent. 
The Kung-Leventhal Parenting Skills Survey was useful in identifying newborns at high 
risk for those changes in caretaker associated with complete failure of adequate parenting. 
The survey was not predictive of maltreatment. 
 
Partial Sequence Comparison of Soluble and Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored 
Isoforms of BEHAB/Brevican from Human Glioma and Normal Brain. Janette 
Uyecio Gaw (sponsored by Susan Hockfield). Department of Neurobiology, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
BEHAB (Brain-Enriched HyAluronan Binding protein) is a CNS-specific extracel- 
lular matrix protein that is developmentally regulated. Highest levels of BEHAB expres- 
sion coincide with gliogenesis. In the normal adult human brain, BEHAB is expressed at 
very low levels, however, BEHAB is expressed at high levels in surgical samples of 
gliomas. In addition, BEHAB is expressed by invasive, but not by noninvasive glioma cell 
lines. Recent work has indicated that BEHAB is either the N-terminal proteolytic product 
of a larger proteoglycan, brevican, or an alternatively spliced form of brevican. 
 
Brevican is a member of the aggrecan-like family of proteoglycans which includes 
aggrecan, neurocan, and versican. There are common domains that appear in all of the 
members of this group including an N-terminal hyaluronan binding region, an EGF-like 
domain, a lectin-like domain, and a complement regulatory protein-like domain. In addi- 
tion, there is evidence for a highly conserved proteolytic site immediately following the 
hyaluronan binding region of brevican. Brevican has been found in its intact form and a 
cleaved form and has been shown to have two isoforms, a soluble form and a glyco- 
sylphosphatidylinositol-anchored (GPI-anchored) form in normal rat brain. 
 
These data raised several questions: 1) Are both the soluble and GPI-anchored iso- 
forms expressed in human glioma, and if so, which is the predominant form? 2) Is 
BEHAB an alternatively-spliced form of brevican that is upregulated in glioblastoma mul- 
tiforme or is it a proteolytic product that is likely to be physiologically significant? The 
goals of this project were to establish the human sequence of BEHAB/brevican, to deter- 
mine if there is any sequence divergence between the normal sequence and that expressed 
in glioma, and to determine which isoform is expressed in glioma. 
 
To achieve these ends, several partial clones of brevican from normal human brain 
was obtained from the EST-project (Expressed Sequence Tag) of Washington University, 
St. Louis. These clones were sequenced and primers were then designed. Primers includ- 
ed those that were common to both isoforms of brevican and those that were unique to 
each of the isoforms. Both isoforms were isolated and sequenced from a total RNA prepa- 
ration of a glioblastoma multiforme sample. Sequence from the 3'end of soluble brevican 
was obtained using 3' RACE (Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends). 
 
Here I report the partial sequence of human brevican. The sequence of brevican 
appears identical between normal brain and glioma. In addition, I show that both isoforms 
of brevican are present in glioma, with the soluble form predominating. Also, a partial 
sequence of both isoforms of human brevican were obtained from a glioma sample and 
from normal human brain. Finally, I present evidence that BEHAB is most likely to be a 
functional N-terminal proteolytic product of brevican, rather than an alternatively-spliced 
form. 
 
249 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Alteration in Expression of the Motility-related Proteins Thymosin _15 and P120cas 
in Human Cancer. Jason S. Gold, Rola A. D. Goussoub, and David L. Rimm. Department 
of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Metastasis, the invasion of distant tissues, is a poor prognostic sign in cancer. Cell 
motility is involved in mediating metastasis. Thymosin 115 is a 5300 Da protein known 
to function as an actin monomer binding protein. Over-expression of thymosin J15 has 
been shown to cause increased motility. P120cas is part of a complex of proteins that is 
critical for cell-cell adhesion, though the precise function of pl20cas is not known. The 
complex is also involved in motility, differentiation, and signal transduction. Given the 
functions of these two proteins, it is hypothesized that thymosin f315 expression should be 
increased and pl20cas expression should be decreased in the metastatic phenotype. 
Human cancers were assessed for alterations in these potential prognostic markers. The 
expression of thymosin 1315 was examined in human breast cancer, and pl20cas was 
examined in human colorectal cancer. Surgical pathology slides were stained using stan- 
dard immunohistochemical methods. Thymosin 115 expression was found to be increased 
in malignant breast tissue compared with benign breast epithelium (p = .0002) . This 
change is found in intra-epithelial cancers as well as in metastatic and nonmetastatic infil- 
trating cancers. Expression of the adhesion-related protein p120cas is decreased in col- 
orectal cancer compared to benign epithelium. Decreased p120cas expression correlates 
with advanced stage (p = .0470), nodal metastasis (p = .0426), and lymphovascular inva- 
sion (p = .0156). Decreased p120cas expression is also associated with larger tumors 
(p = .0120). Loss of pl20cas furthermore corresponds with decreased survival (p = .0126) 
and decreased disease-free survival (p = .0313). 
 
Population-based 'Nested' Case-control Study to Identify Risk Factors Associated 
with a Newly Emerging Focus of Leishmaniasis in Northwest Argentina. Celia Flores 
Golden, Sergio Sosa Estani, Roberto Chuit, Elsa Segura, and Robin W. Ryder. Department 
of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, and the Instituto Nacional de Investigacion de Enfermedad de Chagas 'Dr. 
Mario Fatala Chaben,' Buenos Aires, Argentina 
 
Background: An outbreak of American tegumentary leishmaniasis caused by 
Leishmaniasis braziliensis occurred in 1985-1987 in the northwest Argentine state of 
Salta. We conducted a socio-epidemiological study on cases and matched controls in order 
to identify risk factors associated with infection. 
 
Methods: We selected 30 incident cases of cutaneous leishmaniasis diagnosed from 
January 1, 1992 to August 15, 1994 in the Argentine towns of Pichanal, Embarcacion, and 
General Mosconi. Each confirmed case was matched by sex, age, and location of resi- 
dence with two negative controls. A socio-epidemiologic interview was conducted on all 
30 cases and 60 controls. 
 
Results: Analysis of these data demonstrated the following risk factors associated 
with disease (odds ratio, > 95 percent confidence intervals): raising cattle near the resi- 
dence (3.86), residence located 50 meters or closer from a cultivated area (3.28), sleeping 
overnight at work site (3.76), and hunting (4.33). Sleeping inside the place of residence 
was found to be protective (0.27). 
 
Conclusions/Recommendations: Both peridomestic and sylvatic cycles of transmis- 
sion were implicated. Since peridomestic transmission in rural areas occurred it was rec- 
ommended but unlikely that the impoverished local government would be able to spray 
insecticide on the interior and exterior surfaces of residences in rural areas and perido- 
 
250 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
mestic structures (pigpens, latrines, etc.). Hunters were encouraged to use insecticide. 
Agricultural employers that required their workers to sleep at the farms were asked to 
spray the workers' accommodations with insecticide. Unfortunately these recommenda- 
tions are not likely to be feasible in such an impoverished region. The most effective 
method of prevention is a vaccine which is nonexistent at the present. 
 
Determining the Mechanism of Whiplash Injuries: An in Vitro Study. Jonathan N. 
Grauer, Manohar M. Panjabi, Jacek Cholewicki, and Kimio Nibu. Department of 
Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Whiplash injuries are reported to be on the rise. Although the symptoms associated 
with whiplash have been described, the understanding of the injury mechanism remains 
poor. The prevailing view is that hyper-extension of the head causes whiplash injury, but 
this has not been definitively proven. The present study addresses the question of whiplash 
mechanism with a human cadaveric model. Eight human cadaveric cervical spine speci- 
mens were prepared and traumatized at varying sled accelerations under controlled con- 
ditions using a bench-top simulation of whiplash trauma. Intervertebral rotations were 
tracked with high speed cinematography. Head motions were recorded with electronic 
potentiometers. Before and after each trauma, the specimens were studied with a previ- 
ously established flexibility test to assess the severity of injuries. The experiments demon- 
strated a distinct bi-phasic kinematic response of the cervical spine to whiplash trauma. In 
the first phase, the spine formed an S-shaped curvature with flexion at the upper levels and 
extension at the lower levels. In the second phase, all levels of the cervical spine were in 
extension. The lower cervical levels extended significantly beyond physiologic limits dur- 
ing the initial S-shaped phase, but not during the full extension phase. The first phase was 
thus identified as that responsible for whiplash injuries. The occurrence of lower cervical 
anterior injuries suggested by the described hyper-extension was supported by the results 
of flexibility testing. These findings provide a more accurate understanding of whiplash 
trauma and may help in improving the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of these 
injuries. 
 
The International Health Program: Evaluating Fifteen Years' Experience in Internal 
Medicine Residency Training at Yale University School of Medicine. Anu R. Gupta, 
Carolyn K. Wells, Ralph I. Horwitz, Frank J. Bia, and Michele Barry. Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
In times of high technologic sub-specialty training, an elective rotation in a develop- 
ing country might potentially influence the career of a resident-in-training. The Yale 
University International Health Program (IHP) has been sending residents during their 
internal medicine residency training overseas for the last 15 years. The purpose of this ret- 
rospective study was to evaluate the impact of the IHP on participants in terms of profes- 
sional lives and personal behaviors. Internal medicine residency classes of 1982 to 1996 
were divided into two cohorts, participants (PIHP) and nonparticipants (NIHP), and sent 
a self-administered questionnaire-based survey. The overall response rate to the instru- 
ment was 60 percent. IHP participants were more likely to be in nonprocedure oriented 
fields, practicing in academic settings involved in research and teaching. Their counter- 
parts were more likely to be specialists in private practice providing patient care. IHP par- 
ticipation appeared to influence participants attitudes regarding health care resource uti- 
 
251 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
lization and alternative/complementary medicine. In fact, participants felt that US physi- 
cians under-utilized the physical examination as a diagnostic skill. In addition, they were 
more likely to refer their patients to practitioners of alternative/ complementary medicine, 
perceive those services as useful, and know more about them than nonparticipants, The 
PIHP group also reported a significant association between participation and personal 
beliefs and behaviors in terms of cultural diversity and community service. Participation 
exceeded expectations impacting the personal lives of a majority of the PIHP group. IHP 
participants felt strongly that medical training should include opportunities for interna- 
tional rotation and overwhelming reported the importance of this elective in their choice 
to train at Yale. International health experiences during medical residency can have a sig- 
nificant and measurable influence on the clinical behaviors, knowledge, and practice of 
medicine. 
 
'The Moral Treatment': An Evolution of Thought and Practice. Janel Hackney (spon- 
sored by Stanley W. Jackson). Section of History of Medicine, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The purpose of this paper is to analyze the progression of the theory of moral treat- 
ment from its creator, Philippe Pinel, to Andr6 Rech who practiced this theory in 19th cen- 
tury provincial France. The "moral treatment" is divided into four main principles - (1) 
gentle manner towards patients, (2) observation and classification of patients, with statis- 
tical analysis of data, (3) diversion from the false idea, and (4) authoritative qualities of 
the director. While the writings of Rech clearly demonstrate his commitment to humane 
treatment of his patients and the statistical analysis of his data, his actual one-on-one inter- 
actions with his patients are not documented, and thus we are left wondering as to his 
actual methods of psychotherapy. 
 
Transcapillary Fluid and Protein Flux During Exercise-Induced Hypervolemia. 
Andrew Haskell, Gary W. Mack, and Ethan R. Nadel. Departments of Cellular and 
Molecular Physiology and Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
In order to examine mechanisms that contribute to maintenance of exercise-induced 
hypervolemia, we performed a number of experiments on human subjects. Eight men 
were infused with 3.19 ? 0.09 ml/ kg of 5 percent human serum albumin over 30 min. 
Plasma volume (PV) and plasma albumin content were significantly elevated at one and 
two hr after the start of infusion (p < .05) but returned to control levels at 24 hr. 
Aldosterone showed a trend to decrease at 2 hr after infusion (p = .06). Three men and one 
woman underwent repeated measurement of transcapillary escape rate of albumin 
(TERalb) using Evan's blue dye, demonstrating test re-test reliability of 0.85. 
Subsequently, seven men and two women underwent measurement of TER b and micro- 
circulatory variables before and 24 hr after exercise. TERalb showed a trend to decrease 
(8.4 ? 0.5 to 6.5 ? 0.7 % / hr, p = .11) and ATERalb showed a significant negative corre- 
lation with APV (p < .05). Leg capillary filtration coefficient increased (3.2 ? 0.2 to 4.3 + 
0.5 ul/100 g/min/mm Hg, p < .05) while leg muscle interstitial fluid pressure showed a 
trend to increase (2.8 ? 0.7 to 3.8 ? 0.3 mm Hg, p =.08). Finally, capillary pressure was 
measured in the forearm by rapid venous occlusion in five men and two women before 
and 24 hr after exercise, demonstrating a decrease in capillary pressure relative to venous 
pressure (slope of regression line 1.16 ? 0.05 to 1.04 ? 0.08, p < .05). The infusion study 
 
252 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
demonstrates the need for continued activity of volume expanding mechanisms to sustain 
exercise-induced hypervolemia. Two such mechanisms, TERalb and capillary pressure, are 
shown to vary in a direction that supports maintenance of plasma volume expansion 24 hr 
after exercise. 
 
Fetal Doppler Velocimetry of the Middle Cerebral and Umbilical Arteries for 
Prediction of Neonatal Complications in Post Dates Pregnancy. Basia Holub, Abhay 
Dhond, Ozgur Deren, and Ray Bahado-Singh. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
We hypothesized that Doppler velocimetry would identify fetuses at risk for perina- 
tal complications and correlate significantly with perinatal outcome. This hypothesis was 
based on the theory that the mechanism of pathological poor outcome in postdatism is 
similar to that seen in growth-retarded fetuses, namely, placental insufficiency leading to 
decreased transfer of oxygen and nutrients. 
 
Fetal Doppler velocimetry studies were performed on 173 consecutive patients 
referred for evaluation of postdates pregnancies (241 completed weeks). Using color flow 
and pulse Doppler, averages of the peak systolic velocity (S), end diastolic velocity (D), 
and resistance indices (RI) of the cerebral and umbilical arteries were determined. The 
cerebroplacental ratio (CPR) was calculated by dividing the middle cerebral artery RI by 
the umbilical RI. An abnormal CPR was defined as <1. Maternal and neonatal charts were 
reviewed regarding pregnancy, labor, and neonatal outcomes. Data were analyzed using 
the SAS program. 
 
We found a slight but significant increase in the umbilical artery velocities in the 
group experiencing perinatal complication vs. normal outcomes. In those experiencing 
severe complications there was a significant increase in CPR while the umbilical systolic 
velocity decreased. However, despite these findings receiver operating characteristics 
curves indicated that none of the Doppler indices was a good screening test for perinatal 
complications in postdates pregnancies. 
 
We did not find a strong correlation between middle cerebral or umbilical artery 
Doppler indices and fetal outcome in postdates pregnancies. Doppler velocimetry of the 
umbilical and cerebral artery does not appear to be a clinically useful tool for assessing 
fetal well-being in prolonged pregnancies. These findings suggest that the mechanism of 
fetal compromise in postdatism is not primarily related to loss of placental vessels and 
increased vascular resistance as that observed in IUGR fetuses. Doppler velocimetry was 
not found to have clinical utility for assessing postdates pregnancies. 
 
The Effect of Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide on Chloride Conductance in Airway 
Epithelial Cells. Shelagh A. Houghton (sponsored by Marie E. Egan). Department of 
Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The aim of this study was to characterize the effect and describe the mechanism of 
action of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) on chloride conductance in tracheal epithe- 
lial cells. 
 
Two established cell lines were examined using single channel inside-out excised 
patch clamping technique: the IB3-1 line, a cell line from a cystic fibrosis (CF)-affected 
child, and the S9 line, obtained by transfection of the 1B3-1 line with wild-type cystic 
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). All cells were pretreated with VIP 
(1 pM) for ten minutes and then examined in both cell-attached and excised patch mode. 
 
253 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
If channel rundown occurred in the excised mode, ATP (1 mM) was added to the bathing 
solution. 
 
In the IB3-1 line, 69 percent (9/13) of patches demonstrated no channel activity. The 
remaining four patches (31 percent) contained channels characterized by a large ampli- 
tude and activation only after depolarizing voltages > +70 mV. Both attributes are consis- 
tent with outwardly rectifying chloride channel (ORCC) activity. These channels dis- 
played no rundown and were not affected by addition of ATP 
 
In the S9 cell line, 83 percent (10/12) of excised patches demonstrated channel activ- 
ity consistent with CFTR chloride channels. Mean conductance was 10.4pS ? 0.39pS. 
Channel activity ran down in 80 percent (8/10) of these channels; 75 percent (3/4) of 
patches treated with ATP after rundown demonstrated restoration of channel activity. In 
addition, 50 percent (5/10) of S9 patches with channels also demonstrated a larger chan- 
nel suggestive of ORCC. 
 
This study strongly suggests that VIP increases chloride conductance by stimulation 
of CFT1R chloride channels in the apical membrane. VIP may activate CFTR directly, or 
indirectly through the second messenger cAMP. The data support potential therapies that 
would maximize or complement cAMP-stimulated chloride current, particularly in 
patients with CF mutations productive of suboptimally functioning CFTR. 
 
A Critical Analysis of Interpregnancy Intervals as an Explanation for the Persistent 
Disparities in Adverse Perinatal Outcome Between Black and White Women. Abike 
T. James, Michael B. Bracken, and Ellice Lieberman (sponsored by Michael B. Bracken). 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts 
 
Short interpregnancy intervals have been repeatedly associated with elevated rates of 
adverse perinatal outcome. It has been suggested that differences in interpregnancy inter- 
vals between the races may explain a significant portion of the racial disparities in peri- 
natal outcome. In a hospital-based cohort of 3978 black and white women whose last 
pregnancy resulted in a term live birth, the role of interpregnancy intervals in explaining 
the elevated risk among black women of delivering small for gestational age (SGA) 
infants was examined using multiple logistic regression models. Preterm delivery and low 
birthweight were other outcome measures studied in order to compare with prior results 
in the literature. 
 
Women with intervals of 6 months or less were 3.33 times as likely (95 percent con- 
fidence interval: 1.71-6.51) to have an SGA delivery than those with intervals of greater 
than 24 to 36 months (reference interval). Black women were 1.71 times as likely to deliv- 
er an SGA infant (95 percent confidence interval: 1.17-2.49). An elevation in risk of SGA 
delivery to black women was present at every interpregnancy interval. Black women were 
also more likely than white women to have short interpregnancy intervals (9.2 percent of 
black women had intervals of 6 months or less, compared to 4.8 percent of white women). 
After controlling for interpregnancy interval, black women remained at increased risk of 
SGA delivery (odds ratio 1.67, 95 percent confidence interval: 1.13-2.45). When the 
socioeconomic variables were placed in the model, the increased risk of SGA delivery 
among black women disappeared (adjusted odds ratio 0.99, 95 percent confidence inter- 
val: 0.61-1.62). 
 
In our analysis, an excess of short interpregnancy intervals among black women did 
not explain the racial disparities in SGA births. Socioeconomic factors, particularly edu- 
cational attainment, were more important contributing factors to the racial disparities. 
 
254 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
The Effectiveness of the Saunders Septal Dermoplasty for Controlling Incapacitating 
Epistaxis in Patients with Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT). Basem M. 
Jassin, Robert 1. White, and Douglas A. Ross. Department of Surgery, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connectictut 
 
Septal dermoplasty is a surgical procedure used to treat incapacitating epistaxis in 
patients with Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia (HHT). The operation consists of 
scraping away the nasal mucosa of HHT patients and relining the nose with a graft of 
squamous epithelium from the thigh. This procedure has often been advocated as the pre- 
ferred way to treat severe epistaxis in HHT patients, but its efficacy has not been ade- 
quately verified by quantitative data. We conducted a retrospective chart review of 60 
patients who had undergone the Saunders septal dermoplasty procedure over a nine year 
period. From this group of patients we identified six patients (10 percent) who suffered 
from severe epistaxis, and as a result had a preoperative need for blood transfusions. For 
this group of six patients we measured pre- and postoperative hemoglobin and hematocrit 
levels, transfusion requirements, and frequency of epistaxis episodes. We found that after 
undergoing the septal dermoplasty procedure, five out of six patients experienced a statis- 
tically significant increase in their hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. Hemoglobin levels 
increased an average of 2.2 g/dl and hematocrit levels rose by an average of 7.3 percent. 
Transfusion requirements decreased by 3.3 units/year and epistaxis episodes decreased by 
17 episodes per week. The patients also reported that the nature of the epistaxis had 
changed. That is, after the surgery the epistaxis episodes tended to last less and they could 
be easily controlled by the patients. This critical study confirms the clinical impression 
that the Saunders septal dermoplasty is an effective treatment for patients afflicted with 
HHT and severe epistaxis. 
 
Long-term Outcomes Following Closed Head Injury in the Elderly. Stephen Michael 
Kavic (sponsored by Stephen M. Cohn). Department of Surgery, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The aim of this thesis was to evaluate the long-term functional outcome and quality 
of life of patients 65 years of age and older with mild-to-moderate closed head injuries. 
This project was designed as a retrospective review with prospective follow-up. 
Admission data were obtained through the computerized Trauma Registry of the Yale- 
New Haven Hospital for patients having suffered head trauma between 7/22/92 and 
4/22/95. Inclusion criteria were age > 65 years, closed head injury, and survival beyond 
one week. Patients were then contacted and administered the Medical Outcomes Study 
Short Form-36 supplemented by seven additional questions in order to evaluate quality of 
life. From the selected cohort of 112 patients, 16 patients were excluded due to death with- 
in one week of hospitalization. Of the remaining sample, 24 patients were located and 
agreed to respond to the survey. The difference in quality of life, between those suffering 
closed head injury and age-matched national norms, was not found to be statistically sig- 
nificant on any of the eight scales of the MOS-SF 36. Although this study involved a 
small, select population, elderly patients with mild-to-moderate closed head injury do not 
have markedly different quality of life than elderly persons without such injury. 
 
255 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Sickle Cell Anemia and the Politics of Health Policy. Brigitte Kerpsack (sponsored by 
Howard Pearson). Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
In the early 1970s, as civil rights issues continued to unfold, sickle cell anemia 
emerged from relative obscurity to become a prominent national health issue. Members of 
the black community charged that sickle cell anemia had been neglected for years because 
it was primarily a black disease. The government, which was divided over the implemen- 
tation of other civil rights initiatives such as school desegregation, responded with nearly 
unanimous support for legislation that granted substantial funding to sickle cell research 
and education. Yet premature attempts at widespread screening of the black population 
caused a backlash of fear that such identification would only lead to further discrimina- 
tion. In addition, there was still no effective therapy for the disease and the only means of 
prevention was for those who carried the trait to refrain from having children, which to 
some was equivalent to genocide. The following explores the social and political forces 
which led to this sudden focus on sickle cell anemia and to the backlash that followed. 
 
The Epidemiology of Necator americanus Infection in Rural Thailand. Karen M. 
Kiang, Jeffrey Bethony, and Peter J. Hotez. Departments of Pediatrics, and Epidemiology 
and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
We determined the prevalence, intensity, and distribution of human hookworm infec- 
tion (as well as degree of co-infection by Ascaris lumbricoides and Trichuris trichiura) 
along the central Thai-Myanmar border. 660 individuals from 3 villages underwent stool 
examination for fecal egg counts using the McMaster's counting technique. Age of par- 
ticipants ranged from 0-85 years old. Hookworm larvae were cultured and brought back 
to the United States for species determination using a PCR-RFLP technique. Using PCR- 
RFLP, the predominant species was found to be Necator americanus, with very little if 
any evidence for Ancylostoma duodenale in our population. Hookworm distribution was 
highly aggregated, with 65.8 percent of those infected having light infections (<1000 eggs 
per gram stool). On the other end of the intensity spectrum, 14.8 percent of infected sub- 
jects accounted for 55.8 percent of the total hookworm egg production. Overall hookworm 
prevalence was found to be 57.2 percent. Prevalence and mean intensity varied co-linear- 
ly and showed a strong age-dependence. They climbed steadily throughout childhood and 
adolescence before plateauing in the 26-30 year old age group, where they were main- 
tained through to the oldest age group. They did not increase or decrease with age. 
Hookworm levels also varied by village, with Village 2 showing significantly lower preva- 
lence and mean intensities of Necator than Villages 1 and 3. Sex was not a statistically sig- 
nificant factor. 
 
Co-infection by Ascaris and Trichuris was rare. Overall Ascaris prevalence was 6.4 
percent (data for Trichuris was unavailable). Only 5.8 percent of those infected with 
Necator were co-infected with Ascaris. Ethnically, the Mon group had a higher risk of 
being infected than the Karen group, and were infected at higher levels. However, since 
Village 2 is made up of mostly Karen people and Villages 1 and 3 by Mon people, it is 
impossible to distinguish between "village" and "ethnic group" as separate risk factors. 
Other risk factors proved to be both the lack of a latrine, and the types of bathroom floor. 
Dirt and bamboo floors carried a higher risk for infection, while cement floors were pro- 
tective. Shoe-wearing as a risk factor was eliminated during statistical analysis due to 
reporting inaccuracies. In comparing the frequency of hookworm-infected mother-infant 
 
256 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
pairs to pairs in which one or neither were infected, no evidence for vertical transmission 
was found. 
 
Role of Platelet-Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule-1 in Endothelial Ceil Migration 
and Angiogenesis. Chang Soo Kim (sponsored by Joseph Madri). Department of 
Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Endothelial cell migration during angiogenesis occurs in the processes of embryon- 
ic development, chronic inflammation, wound healing and tumor growth and metastasis. 
Tile mechanisms involve a complex interplay of cytoskeletal reorganization, cell-cell 
adhesion and cell-extracellular matrix interactions. Platelet-endothelial cell adhesion mol- 
ecule-I is a 130 kDa membrane-associated glycoprotein member of the immunoglobulin 
gene superfamily. It is constitutively expressed on endothelial cells, leukocytes and 
platelets. Functionally, PECAM-1 mediates homophilic and heterophilic interactions dur- 
ing the modulation of cell migration. Studies in transfected 3T3 fibroblasts suggest that 
PECAM-1 modulates cell migration by changes in the phosphorylation state of the #686 
cytoplasmic tyrosine. We investigate an endothelial cell model by retroviral transduction 
of epitope tagged, wild-type and #686 tyrosine to phenylalanine mutant (#686F) PECAM- 
1 into ECV 304 cells. In two dimensional cell sheet migration assays, untransduced and 
vector-only transduced cells show no significant difference in rates of migration (p = .06). 
In contrast, ECV 304 cells expressing either wild-type or #686F mutant PECAM- I exhib- 
it a 42 ? 6 percent decrease (p = .02 and .002 respectively) in endothelial cell migration. 
In three dimensional collagen type I gel (in vitro angiogenesis) assays, expression of 
PECAM-1 in ECV 304 cells does not restore the ability to form branching tube-like struc- 
tures. We propose that PECAM-l positive ECV 304 cells modulate 2-D cell migration via 
different mechanisms than transfected 3T3 fibroblasts. Our data suggests either het- 
erophilic interactions mediated by low levels of PECAM- 1 expression or simultaneous 
changes in phosphorylation state of both #663 and #686 tyrosines. Furthermore, PECAM- 
1 negative ECV 304 cells lack other important cellular elements such as VE-cadherin or 
important regulatory mechanisms which appear to be required to mediate, signal and 
maintain tube formation in vitro. 
 
Transplantation of the Rabbit Submandibular Gland to Alleviate Irradiation- 
Induced Xerostomia. Jane Kim and Douglas Ross. Department of Surgery, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Xerostomia or dry mouth has long been recognized as a serious sequela of radiation 
therapy, which is often unavoidable in the treatment of head and neck cancer. Salivary 
glands are usually inescapably included in the field of radiation and the resulting salivary 
dysfunction often leads to serious conditions such as dental caries, mucositis, candidiasis, 
and dysphagia. The severe discomfort caused by these side effects makes reduction of 
radiation damage to salivary glands an important research interest in head and neck oncol- 
ogy. We investigated whether the effects of salivary gland hypofunction could be obviat- 
ed by first removing a submandibular gland from the area undergoing radiation therapy 
with the aim of later replanting it once radiation therapy was completed so that its saliva 
could fumish protection to the mouth. The submandibular gland has previously been 
transplanted successfully for the treatment of xerophthalmia, or dry eye. In our experi- 
ments utilizing rabbits, we transplanted the gland inferiorly in the neck, leaving the vas- 
culature intact and cannulating the duct out to the skin edge. One month later, the gland 
 
257 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
was harvested, from which pathology samples were retrieved. None of these gland sam- 
ples retained their normal architecture. They had lost their acinous structures, were 
replaced by tubular metaplasia, and had varying degrees of inflammation and fibrosis. The 
rabbits were inspected periodically to visualize emittance of saliva through the duct out to 
the skin. However, only one rabbit produced saliva up to ten days postoperatively. Most 
likely, the glands were all obstructed, which is consistent with our pathology results. Also 
of note, was that ligating the duct had the same histological effect as transplanting the duct 
to another location. They both had strikingly similar obstructive-type changes. 
 
Ghost Dance: the Legacy of Susan Dimock, Nineteenth Century Surgeon. William R. 
King (sponsored by Maria J. Trumpler). Section of History of Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The question of who was the first woman physician of America has been argued by 
many authors. The question of who was the first woman surgeon of America has seldom, 
if ever, been asked. This thesis argues that Susan Dimock, M.D. (1847-1875), was among 
the first formerly and fully trained female surgeons to practice in the United States. As a 
vehicle of exploration into the this claim, I will trace the life of Susan Dimock and the 
influences she encountered from childhood through medical education and surgical train- 
ing, to operative career and tragic death at the age of twenty-eight. This thesis will demon- 
strate that in the era that she lived and worked, her formal training, her technical skill, and 
her immense knowledge, qualify her as one of the earliest documented woman surgeons 
in America. Furthermore, Dr. Dimock created the first formal training program for nurses 
in the United States, she was among the earliest women to have scholarly work published 
in the medical journals of the time, and she was among the first women to attack the bar- 
riers of medical education and medical societies with some success. In brief, it will be dis- 
played that Susan Dimock, M.D., can be considered, in many ways, the Mother of 
American Surgery. 
 
Development and Application of the MTT Viability Assay for Human Skin: 
Metabolic and Microbiologic Considerations in the Banking of Human Allograft 
Skin. Matthew Brady Klein (sponsored by Charles Cuono). Department of Surgery, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
This study addresses in an integrated fashion, three major problems central to the 
cryopreservation and storage of human skin for clinical use. In brief, the problems are: a) 
assessment of viability of allograft skin; b) optimization of viability during post-procure- 
ment storage; and c) reduction of allograft bioburden. 
 
In this study, the development and application of the 3[4,5-dimethylthiaol-2-yl]-2,5- 
diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MiT) assay of skin viability are described. In the first part 
of the study, the MTT assay is used to evaluate the viability of fresh and cryopreserved 
human allograft skin under a wide variety of conditions. The M1T assay was then used to 
determine the effect of hyperosmolarity and phosphagen supplementation of storage solu- 
tions on skin viability. The M1T assay was then used to assess fluxes in skin viability fol- 
lowing treatment of skin grafts with varying concentrations of peracetic acid (PAA), a 
well-known microbicidal agent. 
 
The MTT assay provides a precise and reproducible index of viability for both fresh 
and cryopreserved skin. The precision, simplicity and economy of the MIT assay would 
support its role in the routine assessment of skin viability in burn centers and skin banks. 
 
258 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
This study also demonstrates that hyperosmolar solutions exert a beneficial effect on 
skin viability in the critical period between skin procurement and cryopreservation. In 
addition, skin stored for over two weeks in hyperosmolar solutions supplemented with 
phosphocreatine retain viability levels comparable to those measured immediately fol- 
lowing procurement. 
 
Finally, this study demonstrates the ability of PAA to provide powerful bactericidal 
effects on contaminated skin while maintaining acceptable levels of skin viability. 
Treatment of allograft skin following procurement with PAA can significantly reduce 
residual bacterial bioburden, thereby increasing allograft safety, while preserving skin via- 
bility. 
 
Studies of Testosterone Fatty Acid Esters in Human Blood and Ovarian Foilicular 
Fluid. Wendy Kuohung and Richard B. Hochberg. Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Studies over the past decade have confirmed the existence of steroidal fatty acid 
esters. These are the most potent of the naturally occurring steroids. Some steroid esters 
have been found in human blood and ovarian follicular fluid, where they are synthesized 
by lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT). Previous reports claim that testosterone 
fatty acid esters (TL) are present in male serum. Because of their potential physiological 
importance, we have investigated whether TL is present in blood as well as in ovarian fol- 
licular fluid. We quantified testosterone and TL (after saponification) in serum and follic- 
ular fluid by radioimmunoassay (RIA). We also sought to identify the source of TL by per- 
forming biosynthetic experiments, incubating [3H]testosterone ([3H]T) with follicular 
fluid. Surprisingly, we did not detect TL in human blood, although it appeared to be pre- 
sent in follicular fluid. However, the biosynthetic experiments with [3H]T did not yield 
any LCAT-synthesized TL. The absence of esterification was puzzling since [3H]estradi- 
ol was esterified at a comparatively high rate in the same follicular fluids. To determine if 
the steroid in the follicular fluid was in fact testosterone ester, we combined the follicular 
fluid with [3H]T stearate, a representative ester, and subjected the mixture to extraction, 
column chromatography, and saponification. The material was then chromatographed by 
high performance liquid chromatography, and each fraction was counted for radioactivity 
and analyzed by RIA. Although we detected immunoassayable material, the fractions in 
which it was found did not coincide with those containing radioactivity, indicating that the 
saponified steroid was not testosterone and that the RIA was cross-reacting with other 
steroid species. Hence, these studies demonstrate that TL is not present in blood or follic- 
ular fluid. Because TL is such a potent androgen, its presence in blood would have been 
important. However, it exists in other tissues, especially fat, in significant quantities and 
may serve as a paracrine source of androgenic stimulation and a possible cause of hyper- 
androgenic states. The currently unidentified androgen esters in follicular fluid may play 
a critical role in oocyte development; they may serve as a marker for egg quality in assist- 
ed reproductive technologies. 
 
259 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Mechanisms of Calcium-Dependent Regulation of ROMK1 and ROMK2 Potassium 
Channels. Monique Hara Lawrence, C.M. McNicholas, G.G. MacGregor, and G. 
Giebisch. Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The apical low-conductance K+ channel of the rat cortical collecting duct is inhibit- 
ed by increased intracellular calcium. This effect is mediated by two second messengers, 
protein kinase C (PKC) and calcium-dependent protein kinase II (CaMK II). Two inward- 
ly rectifying, ATP-regulated K+ channels, ROMK1 and ROMK2, were recently cloned 
from rat renal medulla and share many functional characteristics with the native channel. 
The cloned channels are splice variants; ROMK1 possesses an additional 19 amino acids, 
including two putative PKC phosphorylation sites, at its amino terminus. We used patch- 
clamp techniques and the Xenopus oocyte expression system to show that ROMK1 and 
ROMK2 exhibit different inhibitory responses toward increased intracellular calcium. We 
examined the roles of PKC and CaMK II in mediating these effects. We also investigated 
the effect of increased intracellular calcium on the activity of ROMK1 channels contain- 
ing point mutations of the putative PKC phosphorylation sites. 
 
In cell-attached patches, no significant channel inhibition was observed with 
ROMK2 in the presence of 1 mM Ca 2+ and ionomycin (29 percent decrease, n = 10). 
ROMK1 exhibited significant channel inhibition (46 percent decrease, n = 14) toward the 
effects of raised intracellular calcium concentration using 1 mM Ca 2+ and 2 jM iono- 
mycin. The inhibitory effect of calcium on ROMK1 channel activity was effectively abol- 
ished by pretreatment of ROMK1 with either a PKC inhibitor, GF109203X (16 percent 
decrease, n = 9) or a CaMK II inhibitor, KN-62 (17 percent decrease, n = 3). A ROMK1 
isoform containing point mutations (RlS4A/T17V) of the putative PKC phosphorylation 
sites also abolished the inhibitory response (15 percent decrease, n = 8) to the effects of 1 
mM Ca 2+ ionomycin. 
 
Our results suggest that both PKC- and CaMK II-mediated phosphorylation of spe- 
cific sites of the amino-terminal contribute to the Ca 2+-dependent regulation of ROMK1 
channel activity. 
 
The Effect of Cyclic Strain on Adhesion Molecule Expression. Daniel Lee and Bauer 
E. Sumpio. Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Vascular endothelial cells are in direct contact with blood and bear the forces impart- 
ed by the flow of viscous fluid, namely shear and circumferential stress, and the resulting 
physical deformation, or strain. These hemodynamic forces have been postulated to mod- 
ulate endothelial gene regulation. Vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM) and intercel- 
lular adhesion molecule- 1 are transmembrane proteins that mediate monocyte and leuko- 
cyte recruitment in atherogenesis and inflammation. Recent studies have described the 
regulation of VCAM and ICAM by shear stress. The effect of cyclic strain, however, 
remains unexplored. 
 
The study investigates the hypothesis that cyclic strain upregulates the expression of 
VCAM and ICAM. 
 
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were cultured onto Collagen- 
based, flexible well plates and exposed to strain by an oscillating vacuum (0 to -20 kPa) 
at 60 cycles per minute for 4 hr. Average resultant strain across the surface of the well was 
10 percent. Total cellular RNA was harvested, electrophoresed, and hybridized with 
 
260 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
VCAM and ICAM cDNA probes on Northern blot analysis. Results were quantitatively 
analyzed by autoradiography and densitometry. 
 
Results showed that cyclic strain failed to upregulate expression of VCAM or ICAM. 
To determine a possible synergistic or downregulatory effect of cyclic strain, baseline 
mRNA expression was also increased in some samples by the addition of tumor necrosis 
factor-a , a known adhesion molecule-inducing agent, to the culture medium Expression 
of VCAM and ICAM was then found to decrease relative to TNF-induced samples by 
54.8 ? 8.34 percent (n = 4) (p = .06) and 41.7 ?+ 20.6 percent (n = 3) (p > .1), respec- 
tively, but these changes were not statistically significant. 
 
These results suggest, but do not conclusively demonstrate, a downregulatory effect 
of cyclic strain on VCAM. Downregulation of VCAM would be consistent with the long- 
observed association of atherogenesis with regions of reduced flow velocity and shear 
stress. 
 
Differences in Insulin Sensitivity and Diet-induced Obesity in Male Sprague-Dawley 
Rats. Kathryn R. Leinhardt, Jennifer M. Otis, and Gerald I. Shulman, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
When lean male Sprague-Dawley rats are fed a "cafeteria" diet that is high in sucrose 
and moderately high in fat, approximately 50 percent of them become obese. To assess 
whether differences in insulin sensitivity precede the development of dietary obesity, a 
euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp was carried out in 3-month-old lean male Sprague- 
Dawley rats (n = 14) prior to feeding a cafeteria diet over a 100-day period. A control 
group (n = 8) was fed a chow diet over the same period to define the range of normal 
weight gain for the study group. Although there was a 300 g range of weight gain among 
the cafeteria-fed group, the rats did not develop the expected bimodal distribution of 
weight gain, and their weight gain curve was identical to that of the chow-fed animals. Not 
surprisingly, there was a strong positive correlation between weight gain and food intake 
(R = .91, p < .001). There was an even stronger correlation between feed efficiency and 
weight gain (R = .98, p < .001), suggesting that food intake was not the sole factor 
explaining differences in weight gain in the study group. There was no correlation 
between insulin sensitivity and weight gain as assessed by the euglycemic clamp, but both 
basal insulin and fasting glucose were negatively correlated with weight gain (R = .53, p 
< .05 and R = .6121, p = .02, respectively). Thus the results of the study were mixed, with 
some data suggesting no relationship between insulin sensitivity and weight gain, and 
other data suggesting a positive correlation. Further studies with a larger group of animals 
are needed to clarify this relationship. 
 
Feeding Patterns of Culicidae Mosquitoes in Three Ecological Zones of Senegal, West 
Africa: Implications for Arbovirus and Plasmodium Transmission. Dana Loo, Didier 
Fontenille, Thomas Aitken, Jean-Paul Gonzalez and Mark Wilson. O.R.S.T.O.M. at the 
Pasteur Institute in Dakar, Senegal, and Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
A study of the feeding patterns of Culicidae was conducted in Senegal, West Africa 
during the months of June and July 1993. This time interval corresponds to "I'hivernage" 
- the rainy season of West Africa which is a period of extreme mosquito proliferation 
throughout Sdnegal. Our objectives were to document the prevalence and distribution of 
endemic species of mosquitoes in three ecological zones - the wet savannah zone around 
 
261 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Dielmo (N13?17', W17?30'), the dry savannah enclosing Barkedji (N15?17', W14?52'), 
and the rainforest encompassing Kedougou (N12?30', W12?30'). Previous research has 
shown that many mosquito species display rather distinct gastronomical patterns, dis- 
criminating among humans or various types of animals including sheep, goats, cattle, or 
monkeys. Additionally, certain species of mosquitoes have been implicated in the trans- 
mission of arboviruses and protozoa that cause diseases such as Rift Valley fever, yellow 
fever, dengue, and most notably malaria. We identified 12,575 mosquitoes and analyzed 
nineteen species of Culicidae with respect to their trophic preferences. By linking the 
species of mosquito with the animal on which it feeds, potential reservoirs of infection 
may be identified. 
 
The REMEDY Utilization Study: a Model for Donations Evaluations. Julia W. 
MacRae, William H. Rosenblatt, and David Silverman, Department of Anesthesiology, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The purpose of this study was to test our hypothesis that all of the supplies donated 
by the REMEDY materials recovery program at the Yale School of Medicine to one hos- 
pital in Le6n, Nicaragua were needed and used in a timely fashion. This study created a 
method for efficient and accurate evaluation of the utilization of donated supplies. 
 
One shipment of REMEDY medical supplies (over 8000 items) was sorted and items 
individually labeled with removable bar coded identification stickers. Upon use of the 
item at the recipient hospital, the sticker was removed from the item and placed in an 
envelope bearing the date and place of the item's use. This was continued for 8 weeks, 
after which the data were collected, entered into analysis programs, and graphed to eval- 
uate the patterns of use of individual items as well as general categories of supplies. 
 
Results of the study showed that certain items were greater than 90 percent con- 
sumed by the end of the study, but that there were many items which had over 50 percent 
of the original stock remaining by the end of the study. 
 
Item Packaging used at half way used by end 
 
gloves non-sterile, wrapped 92% 100% 
sponges open 99% 99% 
endotracheal tubes open 74% 100% 
chromic gut sutures sterile 64% 99% 
Pop 'n Count boxes open <1% <1% 
drapes open 11% 47% 
Bovie cautery pens open 35% 35% 
3-way stopcocks open 13% 13% 
 
The main reason for inability to utilize supplies was the lack of sterilization equip- 
ment since the hospital only had available autoclave capabilities, whereas the single-use 
plastic items melted in the autoclave and required gas sterilization. 
 
This study provided a model for evaluating a donation shipment that used simple and 
easily available technology to collect the necessary data. For the many other hospitals with 
donating programs similar to REMEDY, this evaluation model is easy to modify to any 
hospital's available supplies. Not only did the study identify items which were not being 
used, but it also gave the donor organization an idea of how quickly certain items were 
used in order to customize an appropriate donation. In addition, it demonstrated that even 
in an established, regular system of donations with efficient communication in both direc- 
 
262 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
tions (donor-recipient), modifications to donations can be made which would further 
increase the efficiency of the effort. Despite the numerous communications between the 
donors and recipients prior to the present assessment, there was a failure to appreciate how 
certain supplies, although inherently useful items, could not be utilized in the condition 
they were supplied. This underscores the idea amongst donating organizations that they 
must take responsibility for evaluating their own donations, with the support of personnel 
from the recipient country. 
 
Changes in Cellular Retinoic Acid Binding Proteins and Nuclear Retinoic Acid 
Receptors in Murine Melanoma Cell Lines Following Retinoic Acid Exposure. 
Rabum M. Mallory and Laura M. Roman. Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Physiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Retinoic acid (RA), a Vitamin A metabolite, has been shown to inhibit carcinogene- 
sis in a variety of animal models and suppress in vitro transformation of certain cell lines. 
Growth inhibition by RA is associated with a commitment to differentiation induced by 
an altered pattern of gene expression. Evidence exists that two classes of proteins medi- 
ate these effects: (1) the nuclear RA receptors (RARs and RXRs), members of the 
steroid/thyroid superfamily of ligand-activated transcription factors, which modulate the 
expression of RA-responsive genes, and (2) cellular retinoic acid binding proteins 
(CRABPI and CRABPII), which are found in many RA-responsive embryonic tissues and 
tumor cells. We hypothesize that these proteins sequester RA in the cytoplasm limiting its 
availability to the nuclear receptors. 
 
Our studies focused on defining the roles of these proteins and the tissue plasmino- 
gen activator (tPA) system in tumor metastasis. Using two sublines of murine melanoma 
that differ in their metastatic potential (B 16 Fl low potential and B 16 FlO high potential) 
we have shown a clear dose-dependent inhibition of proliferation following RA treatment 
(10-5 M to 10-7M), with Fl cells demonstrating greater sensitivity to RA's effects. Both cell 
lines show induction of RAR a mRNA after RA exposure, with higher levels of transcript 
noted in FlO cells. Changes in RAR a were not seen. Administration of RA also resulted 
in a dose-dependent increase in CRABPII mRNA in FIO cells. In contrast high concen- 
trations (10-5M) of RA were required for induction in Fl cells. These results were corrob- 
orated by western analysis. CRABPI mRNA and protein were not detected either before 
or after RA incubation. RA administration resulted in a dose-dependent increase in tPA 
secretion, with no differences between cell lines apparent. 
 
RA treatment of murine melanoma cell lines induces clear changes in proliferation, 
tPA secretion and the levels of RA binding proteins. Increased levels of CRABPII in FIO 
cells may confer resistance to RA treatment. 
 
Immunolocalization, Sequencing, and Germline Transformation of Wild Iype and 
Gain of Function Alleles in Suppressor of Hairless. Laertes A. Manuelidis, Mark E. 
Fortini, and Spyros Artavanis-Tsakonas, Department of Cell Biology, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The Notch signaling pathway has been shown to play a fundamental role in the dif- 
ferentiation of uncommitted cells during development. A recently identified gene in 
Drosophila, named Suppressor of Hairless, interacts on a genetic and molecular basis with 
Notch, a transmembrane protein. The human homologue of Suppressor of Hairless, 
termed C-Promoter Binding Factor I (CBFI), associates with Epstein Barr virus nuclear- 
 
263 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
antigen-2 (EBNA2) to mediate B-cell immortalization. In both Drosophila and humans, 
Suppressor of Hairless and CBF-1 have been postulated to relay Notch signals from the 
cytoplasm to the nucleus of the cell. Using monoclonal antibodies raised against the Notch 
and Suppressor of Hairless proteins, we demonstrate that Suppressor of Hairless localizes 
to cells of the developing peripheral nervous system of Drosophila. To better understand 
the relationship of Suppressor of Hairless to the Notch signaling pathway, we sequenced 
two rare gain of function mutations termed T4 and 05 alleles in the Suppressor of Hairless 
gene. A glutamate to valine shift at position 137 in the T4 allele was identified. Two mis- 
sense mutations were identified in the 05 allele: a lysine to methionine shift at position 
132 and an asparagine to isoleucine shift at position 281. To further assess the biological 
significance of Suppressor of Hairless gain of function mutations, we cloned both wild 
type and the strongest gain of function allele, T4, into a UAS (Upstream Activating 
Sequence) promoter and have obtained transgenic flies containing both constructs. 
 
Tat-dependent Regulation of 3'-end Processing Efficiency in HIV-1. Dana Meinke, 
Heiner Schaal, and Andreas Scheid (sponsored by David Coleman). Department of 
Virology, Heinrich-Heine Universitaet, Duesseldorf, Germany 
 
The cis-acting sequences that signal transcriptional termination and 3' processing are 
duplicated in the 5' and 3' LTRs of HIV-1, as well as in other retroviruses. Use of their 
respective poly(A) sites must therefore be tightly regulated in order to prevent premature 
termination of 5'-initiated transcripts in the 5' LTR and to ensure adequate amounts of 
full-length transcripts. Although the trans-activator regulatory protein, Tat, has been 
shown to mainly function in relief of a transcriptional block to elongation at the 5' end of 
the genome, we propose that Tat also acts to increase the efficiency of cleavage and 
polyadenylation at the 3' end, thereby contributing to poly(A) site regulation. 
 
Transient CAT expression assays were carried out following transfection of lin- 
earized HIV-1 3' LTR constructs containing a heterologous promoter into HeLa cells. In 
the presence of Tat, CAT expression increased 154-fold for the linearized 3' LTR con- 
struct, as opposed to 5-fold for the circularized construct and no increase for the linearized 
negative controls. This marked rise in CAT expression was confirmed with Northern blot 
analysis, suggesting that Tat may further contribute to transcriptional regulation in HIV- 1 
through an enhancing effect on transcriptional termination and 3' processing events. 
 
Local Infusion of a Monoclonal Antibody Against Tissue Factor in the Prevention of 
Restenosis after Angioplasty in Rabbits. David B. Meyer (sponsored by Michael D. 
Ezekowitz). Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
No previous study has directly examined whether local infusion of pharmacologic 
agents would improve their delivery to an artery undergoing balloon angioplasty (BA). To 
determine if such enhanced delivery of drugs is possible and might augment their effica- 
cy in preventing restenosis after BA, a local delivery system was developed and the effect 
of a locally-delivered antibody against tissue factor (AP-1) on smooth muscle cell (SMC) 
proliferation initially following (BA) in rabbits was measured. 
 
To compare drug delivery via local and intravenous infusion, non-atherosclerotic rab- 
bits underwent femoral artery BA (2.5 mm balloon, 3x 1 min at 10 atm) and then intra- 
venous (0.5 mg/kg; n = 12) or local (5 min at 1 atm, 0.5-1.0 mg total; n = 12) infusion of 
AP-1. Animals were sacrificed at 5 min (n = 5 for each group), 20 min (n = 4 for each 
 
264 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
group), and 4 hr (n = 3 each group) following infusion. AP- 1 was localized by immuno- 
histochemistry and its delivery graded: 1= +adventitial delivery; 2=++adventitial delivery; 
3= ++adventital delivery, + media] delivery; 4=++adventitial delivery, ++ medial delivery- 
5= +++ adventital delivery, +++ medial delivery. 
 
To evaluate the effect of locally-delivered AP-l on SMC proliferation initially after 
BA, non-atherosclerotic rabbits underwent femoral artery BA (2.5 mm, 3 x 1 min at 10 
atm; n = 5). Group A (n = 5) underwent no further infusion. Group B underwent local 
infusion of normal saline (5 min at 1 atm; n = 5). Group C underwent local infusion of 
AP-1 (5 min at 1 atm, 0.5-1.0 mg total; n = 4). Four days following BA, 20 mg of bro- 
modeoxyuridine (BrdU), a nucleoside analogue taken up by the nuclei of proliferating 
cells, was administered 4 hr prior to sacrifice. BrdU was localized by immunohistochem- 
istry. The ratio of BrdUpositive nuclei to the total SMC nuclei and the ratio of BrdU-pos- 
itive nuclei per unit crosssectional area in the vessel wall were determined. 
 
There was a significant increase in AP-ldelivery at each time point (p < .05, 
Wilcoxon test): [at 5 min, score 1.2 ? 0.4 vs. 4.6 ? 0.5; at 20 min, 1.8 ? 0.5 vs. 4.5 ? 0.6; 
at 4 hr, 1.3 ? 0.8 vs. 4.3 ? 0.6]. This improvement was particularly notable in the tunica 
media of the vessel. There was no significant difference in the percentage of total SMC 
nuclei staining positive for BrdU between any of the groups [Group A, 37 ? 11 percent; 
Group B, 34 ? 14 percent; Group C, 26 ? 9 percent; p > .16, Students' t-test]. There was 
a significant reduction in the number of BrdU-positive nuclei per unit cross sectional area 
of the vessel wall in Group C as compared to Group A and to Group B (p < .03 in both 
cases, Student's t-test), [Group A, 280 ? 50/mm2; Group B, 290 ? 70; Group C, 160 ? 50]. 
 
Local infusion significantly improves drug delivery into the vessel wall, particularly 
to the vessel media, with little to no increase in vessel trauma. Local infusion of an anti- 
body blocking the activity of tissue factor may reduce neointimal SMC proliferation fol- 
lowing BA. 
 
Studies of a DCC-Related Protein and a Candidate DCC Ligand: The Cloning and 
Characterization of the Human Homologues of Neogenin and Netrin-1. Jeffrey A. 
Meyerhardt and Eric R. Fearon. Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan and Department of Pathology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The Deleted in Colorectal Cancer (DCC) gene is a candidate tumor suppressor gene 
in chromosome band 1 8q21.2 whose expression is decreased or absent in greater than 50 
percent of colorectal cancers, as well as tumors of other types. In addition to its likely role 
in tumorigenesis, DCC appears to have important roles in vertebrate development. 
However, much remains to be learned about its function in normal and cancer cells. 
 
Neogenin, a protein with roughly 50 percent amino acid identity to DCC, was recent- 
ly identified because of its dynamic expression in the developing nervous system and gas- 
trointestinal tract of the chicken. To explore the function of the DCC/Neogenin family of 
proteins, we have cloned the human neogenin (NGN) gene and localized it to chromosome 
band 15q22. NGN encodes a 1462-amino acid protein, with similar structure to DCC and 
50.2 percent amino acid identity. NGN transcripts were found in a variety of adult tissues 
and over 50 cancer cell lines and xenografts of seven tumor types, including tumors in 
which DCC expression was absent. 
 
Interestingly, the Caenorhabditis elegans unc-40 gene encodes a protein with simi- 
lar structure to DCC and NGN and about 20-25 percent amino acid identity. Among other 
potential functions, UNC-40 is critical for the circumferential migration of a subset of 
cells and axons in the developing nematode. A candidate ligand for UNC-40 is encoded 
 
265 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
by unc-6. A chicken homologue of UNC-6, termed netrin- 1, has been identified. We have 
cloned the human netrin- I gene and localized it to chromosome 17pl2-13, near the p53 
gene. We have demonstrated interaction between netrin-1 and DCC through crosslinking 
experiments. Further, a subset of tumors have been identified that have loss of heterozy- 
gosity at 17p, but do not have alterations in p53 gene at 17pl3.1. We have demonstrated 
that upwards of 40-50 percent of neuroblastoma cell lines and medulloblastoma and 
glioblastoma xenografts have absent or reduced netrin-l expression. Though further stud- 
ies are needed, the DCC/NGN/netrin-l genes appear to have critical roles in cell migra- 
tion, cell fate determination and cancer. 
 
Aging Changes in the Optic Nerve Appearance of Normal Individuals: A 
Longitudinal Study. Frank J. Moya, Luca Brigatti, and Joseph Caprioli. Department of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
To determine whether aging causes clinically detectable changes in the optic disc 
appearance, we performed a retrospective longitudinal study of 224 eyes of 224 subjects 
in three study groups: 100 normal patients, 68 glaucoma patients, and 56 subjects who had 
disc images taken on the same day. Three expert observers performed qualitative evalua- 
tion. Quantitative measurement was performed by an observer with computer-aided 
planimetry. Intra-observer variability had a 95 percent confidence interval of 10 percent; 
therefore, >10 percent change in rim-disc area ratio from the baseline to the follow-up 
images was considered progression. All observers were masked to the identity and 
chronology of the stereoscopic images. In quantitative evaluation, normal (mean 13 year 
follow-up) and same-day eyes displayed no significant differences (p = .10) in rim-disc 
area ratios change (0.0049 ? 0.049 vs. -0.011 ? 0.056), nor in progressed discs (p = 1.00), 
5 percent vs. 4 percent. Glaucoma eyes (mean nine year follow-up) showed disc rim ratio 
loss (0.094 ? 0.18) in 35 percent, differing from the normal eyes both in change of rim- 
disc area ratio (p=0.00) and progressed discs (p = .00). With qualitative evaluation, the 
progressed discs in the normal eyes (3 percent) did not differ significantly (p = .55) from 
the same day eyes (0 percent), but differed significantly (p = .00) from the glaucoma eyes 
(31 percent). The power of the study to detect a 10 percent difference between the means 
of the three study groups was determined to be 0.99. The novel computer planimetry was 
able to detect glaucomatous changes. Over a period of follow-up appropriate for long- 
term outcome studies in glaucoma, there was no clinically detectable neuroretinal rim loss 
in normal, aging optic nerves. 
 
Homeobox Genes in Mouse Fetal Thymocyte Development Christiana Muntzel, 
Connie Sommers, Jennifer Lee, and Paul E. Love (sponsored by Agnes Vignery). 
Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
 
The development of mature, functional T-cells that recognize foreign antigens but not 
self-peptides is a complicated process involving multiple steps. Immature T-cells originate 
in the fetal liver and adult bone marrow and migrate to the thymus, where they undergo 
negative and positive selection, events that depend upon the specificity of their T-cell anti- 
gen receptor (TCR). During development, thymocytes differentiate from TCR-CD4-CD8- 
to TCRIoCD4+CD8+, and finally to mature TCRhiCD4+CD8- (helper) and 
TCRhiCD8+CD4- (killer) T-cells, whereupon they migrate to the periphery to carry out 
 
266 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
effector functions. Our laboratory seeks to identify and characterize molecules involved in 
the T-cell development process. 
 
Using an RT-PCR approach on fetal thymus mRNA, we have identified several 
potentially novel genes in the homeobox superfamily, which are expressed during fetal 
thymic development in 13.5 day mouse embryos. Homeobox genes are ubiquitous devel- 
opmental regulating genes thought to act as transcription factors. While they have been 
extensively studied in other systems, and are known to play important roles in determin- 
ing cell fates along the anterior-posterior body axis, their role in T-cell development has 
not yet been thoroughly explored. We therefore seek to characterize potentially novel 
homeobox genes and determine how they influence T-cell development. Initial studies are 
geared toward identifying their expression pattern in fetal and adult tissues using such 
techniques as RT-PCR and Northern Blot. 
 
A Retrospective Analysis of Regional Versus General Anesthesia for Anterior 
Cruciate Ligament Reconstruction: Cost, Time, and Follow-up. Shawn J. Nakamura, 
Anthony Conte-Hemandez, and Marc T. Galloway. Department of Orthopaedics and 
Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Arthroscopically assisted anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction is a com- 
monly performed orthopaedic procedure. Until recently, the majority of these procedures 
were performed on an inpatient basis using general anesthesia. This study was undertak- 
en to determine whether ACL reconstructions using femoral sciatic nerve block anesthe- 
sia is a safe and cost-effective alternative to the use of general anesthesia. This retrospec- 
tive study evaluated 67 consecutive patients who underwent an arthroscopically assisted, 
autogenous bone-patellar ligament-bone ACL reconstruction. General endotracheal anes- 
thesia was used for 36 patients and regional femoral sciatic nerve block was used for 31 
patients. The mean anesthesia time for patients receiving a femoral sciatic nerve block was 
4 hr 12 min, whereas the mean anesthesia time for patients receiving general anesthesia 
was 3 hr 53 min. The operative time for nerve block and general anesthesia was 3 hr 17 
min and 3 hr 2 min respectively. The difference between both anesthesia and operative 
time was not statistically significant. The recovery room time for nerve block and gener- 
al anesthesia was 2 hr 30 min and I hr 56 min respectively. The difference of 34 min 
increased time in the recovery room for patients receiving nerve block anesthesia was sta- 
tistically significant. 
 
Patients receiving general anesthesia were more likely to spend the night in the hos- 
pital based on their degree of postoperative pain. The cost savings of doing ACL recon- 
structions under regional anesthesia as compared to general anesthesia was calculated to 
be $2,907 per case. This study showed that the difference in anesthesia time and operative 
time was not significantly different for the two types of anesthesia, and that most of the 
cost savings of regional over general anesthesia was associated with overnight stays in the 
hospital. 
 
A telephone follow-up was conducted to assess patient satisfaction with both types 
of anesthesia and to asses pain both during the operation and postop. Patients who 
received regional anesthesia felt less postoperative pain and were more likely to use 
regional anesthesia for future knee surgeries. Regional anesthesia with same day dis- 
charge was well-tolerated by our patients and provides a cost and time efficient alterna- 
tive to ACL reconstructions performed as inpatient procedures. 
 
267 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Characterization of an Ectopic Endochondral Ossification System in Transgenic 
Mice with Overexpression of Parathyroid Hormone Related Peptide Targeted to 
Chondrocytes. Helena C. Nolasco, Eleanor C. Weir, and Arthur E. Broadus. Department 
of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Parathyroid hormone related peptide (PTHrP) is the etiologic agent in humoral 
hypercalcemia of malignancy. In this paraneoplastic syndrome, tumors, notably squamous 
cell carcinoma, secrete PTHrP hematogenously. In turn, PTHrP acts at parathyroid hor- 
mone receptors in bone and kidney to induce hypercalcemia. Presently, it is known that 
PTH and PTHrP are related since both genes arose by duplication and their peptides act 
at the same receptor. Moreover, several normal tissues express PTHrP mRNA and the pro- 
tein product, and although the actions of PTHrP are not fully known, it presumably has a 
paracrine function. Recent work indicates that PTHrP participates in the development of 
many normal tissues including endochondral bone. overexpression of PTHrP targeted to 
chondrocytes through the mouse collagen-2 promoter results in transgenic mice (collagen- 
2-PTHrP mice) born with cartilaginous endochondral skeletons and short limbed 
dwarfism. Histologically, these mice reveal a delay in chondrocyte differentiation and a 
reversal in the normal pattern of endochondral ossification that are attributed to over- 
abundant PTHrP. In the present study, an ectopic bone formation system, characterized by 
one cycle of endochondral ossification, was introduced to further delineate the actions of 
PTHrP from the complex processes inherent in a growing bone's formation, resorption, 
and remodeling. This system involved the subcutaneous implantation of collagen-2- 
PTHrP mice with collagen matrix infiltrated with bone morphogenic protein-2 (BMP-2), 
a molecule which induces endochondral ossification. Ossicles from time-course experi- 
ments were analyzed via histology, alkaline phosphatase quantification, and RNAse pro- 
tection assays. These experiments revealed no apparent difference in the endochondral 
ossification rate and equivocal differences in cellular activity and disorganization between 
the transgenic and control implants. The variable developmental stages of an implant's tis- 
sues and the undetectable expression of transgene-derived PTHrP mRNA in transgenic 
implants account for these findings and demonstrate that this system is not optimal for 
studying PTHrP's effect on chondrocyte differentiation. 
 
Analysis of Perfusion, Metabolism, and Ventricular Function in a Canine Model of 
Coronary Artery Disease. Jeremiah P. O'Regan, Albert J. Sinusas, and James A. Arrighi. 
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Purpose: The purpose of this study is to describe the alterations in myocardial blood 
flow, glucose uptake, and regional function using N- 13 ammonia and fluorine-i 8-fluoro- 
2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) in myocardium subtended by coronary arteries with induced, fixed occlu- 
sions. 
 
Methods: An ameroid occlusion device was placed around a single proximal coro- 
nary artery in 5 dogs (A, B, C, G, and H). Over the course of several weeks, these devices 
narrowed to produce a fixed coronary stenosis mimicking a stable atherosclerotic plaque. 
The dogs were then imaged with PET and MRI. 
 
Results: Dogs B and C demonstrated wall motion abnormalities, stress-induced per- 
fusion defects, and FDG "hot spots" without alterations in resting blood flow in the coro- 
nary distribution of the ameroid occlusion. Semiquantitative analysis confirmed the pres- 
ence of enhanced FDG activity greater than 115 percent in both dogs. We did not find 
 
268 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
focally enhanced FDG activity in the reversible perfusion defects of dogs G and H. In fact, 
only 1 segment in these dogs displayed FDG activity above 100 percent. 
 
Conclusions: The complex interactions among myocardial blood flow, metabolism, 
and regional function in the presence of a critical stenosis are incompletely understood. 
Using dynamic PET to examine a canine model of chronic ameroid coronary stenosis, we 
found heterogeneous patterns in these parameters. Although we will have to wait for the 
results from the revascularization and postmortem wings of the study to be sure, the pres- 
ence of relative FDG activity greater than 115 percent may be an accurate marker of 
myocardial ischemia in this canine model. It is of particular interest that we found no sig- 
nificant difference in resting perfusion between those segments with stress-induced per- 
fusion defects and those segments without such defects on semiquantitative analysis. The 
considerable overlap in resting blood flows between both sets of segments suggests that 
resting blood flow alone cannot be used to distinguish the two. Our results further suggest 
that the mechanism of LV dysfunction in dogs B and C may be repetitive stunning. 
 
A Prevention Strategy for Insect-Borne Diseases Using the Chagas' Disease Model. 
Anil A. Panackal, Ravi V. Durvasula, Charles B. Beard, Andrew Gumbs, Oleg Kruglov, 
Allegra I. Broft, Serap Aksoy, and Frank F. Richards. Departments of Internal Medicine, 
and Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 
 
Insects transmit many disease causing organisms, thereby rendering a tremendous 
medical and financial load. Chagas' disease, which is caused by the parasite, 
Trypanosoma cruzi, is disseminated by reduviid bugs such as Rhodnius prolixus and 
affects 16-18 million people in Latin America. Traditionally, insecticides have been used 
to control such arthropod borne diseases leading to the development of insecticide resis- 
tance in many instances. 
 
Our group aims to reduce arthropod vector competence - the ability of insect vec- 
tors to transmit pathogens effectively -via genetic manipulation of symbiotic bacteria 
which make essential nutrients for the insects' survival (The Vector-Symbiont Method 
 
VSM). We have transformed Rhodococcus rhodnii, the natural actinomycete-like sym- 
biont of R. prolixus, with a gene encoding cecropin A, a 37 amino acid pore-forming pep- 
tide toxic to T cruzi. These recombinant bacteria when introduced into parasite-carrying 
R. prolixus render these insects free of trypanosomes. Cecropin A was detected in insect 
gut preparations by Western blot analysis and produced little, if any, short-term deleteri- 
ous effects to insect gut cells and R. rhodnii. We are trying to reduce the potential long- 
term cumulative toxicity of recombinant antitrypanosomal factors by: (1) utilizing a pre- 
cursor form of cecropin A-procecropin A - which is cleaved sequentially in two steps by 
the insect gut's native dipeptidylpeptidase, (2) ligating the promoter/signal peptide gene 
of the alpha antigen of Mycobacterium kansasii, MKa, to the procecropin A gene to 
actively export this antimicrobial peptide, and (3) using monoclonal antibody fragments 
against T cruzi epitopes. 
 
R. prolixus acquires its symbionts by coprophagy. In some areas, it lives in the cracks 
of adobe walls and palm-thatched roofs of human huts. We have exploited these features 
by manufacturing synthetic R. prolixus feces, CRUZIGARD, impregnated with the 
recombinant R. rhodnii as a transgene dispersion mechanism. In the lab, CRUZIGARD 
does not seem to be toxic to the insect or symbiont. It allows for the acquisition of the 
genetically altered symbiont (GAS) to permit normal maturation, development, and sur- 
vival of R. prolixus. The GAS in CRUZIGARD competes effectively with the wildtype 
symbiont under short-term lab conditions. 
 
269 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
In summary, development of gene constructs expressing antitrypanosomal factors 
coupled with safe, effective delivery mechanisms could decrease T cruzi transmission in 
natural settings. 
 
Advanced Glycation Endproducts and the Development of Accelerated 
Atherosclerosis in Diabetic Apolipoprotein E Deficient Mice. Lisa Park, David Stern, 
and Ann Marie Schmidt (sponsored by Joseph Madri). Department of Physiology, 
Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York 
 
Diabetes mellitus is associated with accelerated disease of both the micro- and 
macrovasculature, with the major morbidity and mortality in this population attributable 
to cardiovascular disease. Under hyperglycemic conditions, proteins and lipids are modi- 
fied by non-enzymatic glycation, resulting in the formation and accumulation of advanced 
glycation endproducts, or AGEs. This heterogeneous class of compounds shares a number 
of characteristics including the ability to interact with specific cellular receptors, the best 
characterized of which is RAGE, the receptor for AGE. To investigate the possible contri- 
bution of AGEs to accelerated diabetic vascular disease, we studied apolipoprotein E defi- 
cient mice, which develop atherosclerosis on a normal chow diet. Diabetes was induced 
by multiple intraperitoneal injections of streptozotocin (55 mg/kg x 6 days). Sustained 
hyperglycemia was documented by elevated plasma glucose levels (> 300 mg/dl) and a 
1.8-fold increase in HbAlc (p < .05) in the streptozotocin-treated mice. Animals were sac- 
rificed after 4, 6, 8, 10, and 24 weeks of diabetes. Gross examination of the arterial tree at 
8 and 24 weeks of diabetes revealed an increase in the size as well as the number of lesions 
in the diabetic mice when compared to their age-matched, non-diabetic controls. 
Quantitation of atherosclerotic lesions at the aortic root revealed a 3.7-fold increase in 
mean lesion area in diabetic mice (143,967 ? 12,319 gm2) compared with vehicle-treated 
controls (39,415 ? 9,875 im2 ) (p < .0001). Total plasma cholesterol was 2.0-fold higher 
in diabetic mice (p < .05), while total plasma triglycerides remained unchanged. Further 
analysis by density ultracentrifugation revealed a 1.4-fold increase in LDL cholesterol, 
and a 2.0-fold increase in the VLDL fraction, with relatively no change in HDL choles- 
terol. Increased AGE formation was confirmed by a 1.5-fold increase in AGE-reactive epi- 
topes (p < .05) as measured by ELISA using affinity-purified anti-AGE IgG in diabetic 
liver extracts. Immunohistochemistry of aortic lesions demonstrated markedly enhanced 
AGE-reactive epitopes in the vasculature of diabetic mice which co-localized with strik- 
ing immunoreactivity for RAGE. Taken together, these data suggest an AGE-RAGE inter- 
action in diabetic vessel wall may contribute to the pathogenesis of accelerated athero- 
sclerosis in diabetes. 
 
Src-Dependent lyrosine Phosphorylation of the c-Cbl Proto-Oncogene Protein 
Product. U. Patel, J.B. Levy, and R. Baron. Department of Orthopaedics and 
Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The primary phenotypic defect in mice lacking the c-src gene is osteopetrosis, a defi- 
ciency in bone resorption by osteoclasts. A putative target of Src in osteoclasts has recent- 
ly been indentified to be the proto-oncogene product, c-Cbl. However, it is yet unknown 
what downstream signaling events occur following tyrosine phosphorylation of c-Cbl. We 
have undertaken to develop a model system to identify and further characterize the Src- 
dependent tyrosine phosphorylation site(s) of c-Cbl in vivo using classical phosphopep- 
tide mapping techniques. We report that c-Cbl is rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated in IC21 
 
270 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
macrophages following macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) stimulation. 
Phosphopeptide mapping studies of 32P-labeled c-Cbl recovered from untreated and M- 
CSF stimulated IC21 cells show that c.Cbl is phosphorylated upon a number of sites fol- 
lowing stimulation. To better study tyrosine phosphorylation specifically resulting from 
Src signaling, we transiently transfected wild-type c-src and a kinase activated mutant c- 
src (c-src-378) into human embryonic kidney 293T cells. We show that c-Cbl is heavily 
tyrosine phosphorylated in cells expressing c-Src-378 but not tyrosine phosphorylated in 
cells expressing wild-type c-Src. Furthermore, c-Src-378 associates with c-Cbl in the Cbl 
immune complex in vivo while no association is seen with wild-type c-Src. Finally, phos- 
phopeptide mapping of c-Cbl recovered from c-src and c-src-378 transfected cells yield 
different patterns, with sufficient metabolic 32P- labeling for further biochemical analy- 
sis. Thus, using transient transfection of src-containing plasmids followed by phospho- 
peptide mapping analysis, we have developed an authentic model in which to study the 
Src-dependent in vivo tyrosine phosphorylation of c-Cbl, a crucial step in a signaling cas- 
cade critical for normal osteoclast function. 
 
Characterization of an in Vitro Rabbit Model for the Evaluation of Arterial Wall 
Dysfunction after Mechanical Injury to the Endothelium. Rachel Rapaport and 
Michael S. Conte. Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
The pathophysiologic remodeling of the arterial wall following vascular interven- 
tions often results in the development of a fibrocellular lesion that leads to arterial occlu- 
sion. Mounting evidence suggests a critical role for the endothelial cell in modulating 
vasomotor function during arterial repair and vascular remodeling. The aim of this project 
was to develop an ex-vivo system to study the effects of gentle intimal injury on arterial 
vasoreactivity in the presence of a regenerative endothelium. 
 
Excised rabbit aortic rings were maintained in organ culture as either native "unin- 
jured" (UI) rings, or after disruption of the endothelium following "wire-loop injury" 
(WLI). After variable culture times, the specimens were evaluated for a) endothelial cell 
(EC) coverage by phase microscopy, b) full-thickness vessel wall integrity by histology, 
and c) vasoreactivity to the chemical agonists - KCI, phenylephrine (PE), acetylcholine 
and sodium nitroprusside (SNP). 
 
The organ culture conditions were able to sustain arterial tissue viability for 7-9 days, 
and complete re-growth of the endothelium occurred within 7 days regardless of the extent 
of the original injury. Responses to contractile agonists (KCI and PE) were diminished 
over time. Starting on day 5, a significant injury-associated impairment in PE responsive- 
ness was noted. Endothelium-dependent response to Ach in the UI rings paralleled the 
extent of EC coverage such that after a nadir at 2 days in culture, vasorelaxation improved 
with time. At 7 days, a significant impairment in Ach responsiveness was found to be 
related to the degree of the original injury despite complete EC regeneration. SNP elicit- 
ed endothelial cell-independent relaxation of all rings studied. 
 
This system provides an alternative approach to conventional structural vascular 
studies by using vasomotor responsiveness over time as a marker of vessel wall function 
following mechanical injury. We expect this system to be instrumental in characterizing 
vascular remodeling following arterial injury. 
 
271 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
The Role of CT Scanning the NO Neck in the Decision to Perform Elective Neck 
Dissection. Alexander Z. Rivkin, Douglas A. Ross, James A. Abrahams, Bevan Yueh, and 
Clarence T. Sasaki. Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
Management of the clinically negative neck has been a source of considerable debate 
in the ENT literature. The danger of occult metastasis developing into cervical adenopa- 
thy prompts head and neck surgeons to perform elective neck dissection (END) based 
upon the risk of occult metastasis by primary site. The purpose of this paper is to review 
the END debate and to determine if CT scanning should play a role in the decision to per- 
form END. 
 
A retrospective review was performed at a tertiary care hospital to document the 
value of pre-operative CT scans in detecting occult cervical metastasis. Out of 280 
patients reviewed, 40 NO patients who had undergone prophylactic neck dissections were 
identified to have had pre-operative cervical CT scans. False positive and, more impor- 
tantly false negative rates were found to exceed 30 percent. The CT scan's sensitivity for 
discovering occult metastasis in the NO neck was found to be only 29 percent. 
 
Our findings underscore the need for developing a more sensitive tool to identify 
those NO patients who require neck dissections. Our review of the literature suggests that 
randomized, prospective clinical trials evaluating the merits of elective neck dissection are 
required to resolve the debate once and for all. 
 
HIV Risk Assessment, Service Provision, and Training Needs in Outpatient Mental 
Health Care: A Survey Study of New York State Outpatient Mental Health Facilities. 
Rachel Rothschild (sponsored by Jeanne Steiner). Department of Psychiatry, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Seroprevalence studies have repeatedly documented that people with severe mental 
illness have been disproportionately affected by the AIDS epidemic and recent research 
has documented significant intravenous drug use and risky sexual practices by individu- 
als with serious mental illness. In addition, the HIV epidemic has coincided with the dein- 
stitutionalization of mental health care such that the bulk of psychiatric treatment is cur- 
rently rendered on an outpatient basis. However, as of yet, there are no published data con- 
cerning the availability of HIV risk assessment and HIV related services in the outpatient 
mental health facility. In an effort to assess whether or not outpatient mental health 
providers are prepared for the HIV epidemic and its disproportionate affect on the seri- 
ously mentally ill, a survey study was conducted of HIV risk assessment, staff training 
needs, and HIV specialty service provision in outpatient mental health services in New 
York State. Thirty-five percent of the surveys were returned. While 65 percent of clinics 
reported some staff training in HIV service provision, only approximately one-third per- 
formed HIV risk assessment, and even fewer offered HIV related specialty services. 
Known HIV positivity of patient population was found to have significant linear associa- 
tions with HIV related training and service provision. As the number of known HIV+ 
clients increased, the frequency of staff training in HIV service provision, HIV risk assess- 
ment, and the provision of HIV related service increased. Similar linear trends were found 
for substance abuse. Clinics located in urban settings more frequently employed staff 
trained in HIV related service provision, more frequently performed some HIV risk 
assessment, and more frequently offered only some of the HIV related services about 
which we inquired. Overall, the majority of clinics expressed an interest in additional staff 
training. However, clinics with more than 100 HIV+ clients least frequently desired train- 
 
272 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
ing in risk reduction groups and risk assessment. Presumably, direct experience with HIV+ 
clients, geographical location in an area of high HIV prevalence, and the link between 
substance abuse and HIV has alerted some clinics to the vulnerability of this population 
HIV infection. However, given the low overall frequency with which sites offered HIV 
assessment and services, it seems that outpatient mental health care providers have not 
realized that severe psychiatric illness itself seems to place individuals at risk for HIV 
infection. Our findings indicate an urgent need to train outpatient mental health staff in 
HIV risk assessment and to institute HIV related services in the outpatient mental health 
facility. 
 
Insomnia in an Outpatient Population with HIV Infection. Mark L. Rubinstein and 
Peter Selwyn. Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut 
 
The authors' objective was to determine the prevalence, characteristics and clinical 
recognition of insomnia in HIV seropositive outpatients. Systematic sample of patients 
attending an outpatient clinic at an urban teaching hospital. Patients were recruited for 
standard interviews including Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQl); Mini Mental Status 
Exam (MMSE); Trail Making Test A&B and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. 
Abstraction of medical records was used to assess clinician identification of insomnia. 
One hundred and fifteen of 127 approached (93.5 percent) agreed to be interviewed (79 
male, 36 female; 38 black, 64 white, 12 Hispanic, 1 native American). Eighty four (73 per- 
cent) subjects were classified as having a sleep disturbance according to the PSQI com- 
pared with 30-35 percent of the general population. Patients with neurologic impairment 
had a higher prevalence of insomnia (100 percent vs. 70 percent; p = .034). In fact, using 
multivariate analysis, neurologic impairment was the best predictor of insomnia. Only 28 
(33 percent) patients with insomnia had any medical record of sleep disturbance. The 
authors conclude that insomnia is widespread and under-diagnosed in HIV seropositive 
patients. Insomnia is especially prevalent among those with neurologic impairment. These 
findings suggest the importance of clinicians inquiring specifically about sleep disorders 
in HIV seropositive patients. Prompt diagnosis and treatment may improve the quality of 
life in patients living with HIV. 
 
Sources of Cynicism in Graduating Medical Students. Lisa Sanders (sponsored by 
Alvan R. Feinstein). Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Cynicism among medical students has been a concern to educators since it was first 
documented by L.D. Eron's study of Yale medical students in 1955. This study is intend- 
ed to assess the extent to which Yale medical students become cynical over the course of 
their education and to learn from the students themselves which medical school experi- 
ences contributed to this change. 
 
Of the 94 students who graduated from Yale Medical School in 1995, 72 (77 percent) 
were interviewed by telephone and evaluated for level of cynicism using a modified ver- 
sion of the instrument developed by Eron for his 1955 study. Each of the students was also 
asked to assess their own level of cynicism and the cause of any increase in cynicism over 
the course of their education. In addition, 47 students were asked about the role of patient 
lifestyle choices in the development of chronic diseases. 
 
273 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Although the Yale class of 1995 was found to be no more cynical than the class test- 
ed with essentially the same instrument 40 years earlier, 49 students (68 percent) report- 
ed that they had become more cynical over the course of their education. Perceived 
increases in cynicism were not linked to age, sex, race, or expected specialty but decreased 
with amount of teaching received from attending physicians (P = .007) and rose with more 
teaching from interns (P = .03) and more disappointment in personal ideals (P = .00012). 
The 49 students who reported increased cynicism attributed it to experiences during their 
clinical years with patients, doctors, and their colleagues. Also cited was the "cynical envi- 
ronment" generated by medical personnel, the amount of work expected of students and 
residents, and disappointment in what medicine can do, particularly in the treatment of 
chronic disease. Of the 47 students who were asked about the role of patient life-style in 
the development of chronic disease, 21 believed that at least half of the patients in the hos- 
pital were there because of "self-inflicted" injuries. 
 
Thus, despite an apparent increase in cynicism during medical school, students in the 
class of 1995 were no more cynical than those who graduated 40 years ago. An unex- 
pected finding was that many students, perhaps giving too much weight to life-style choic- 
es, tended to "blame the victim" for the development of chronic disease. 
 
An Association Study of the G472a Polymorphism of the Catechol-O-Methyl 
Transferase Gene in Unipolar Depression. Amal A. Sawires (sponsored by Joel 
Gelernter). Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Noradrengeric abnormalities have been theorized to play a role in the pathogenesis 
of depression at the molecular level. In this study, we evaluate the contribution of a func- 
tional single-base sequence variant in exon 4 of the catechol-O-methyltransferase gene 
(COMT) to the susceptibility to developing unipolar depression. Rationale for selection of 
this point mutation is based upon (a) a recent report of association between rapid cycling 
bipolar disorder and the A2 allele created by the single base pair (G -+ A) substitution; 
and (b) another report demonstrating that this is a functionally important mutation that is 
a genetic determinant of COMT activity levels. The former finding is especially com- 
pelling because the cohort in which the association was reported are likely hemizygotes 
for the COMT gene, a situation that gave the investigators a fortuitous opportunity to cor- 
relate a single allelic variant with psychiatric manifestations. We genotyped 64 unrelated 
subjects carrying the diagnosis of unipolar depression using the NlaIII restriction frag- 
ment length polymorphism (RFLP) created by the (G -- A) base change, as well as 107 
European-American, 53 African-American, and 44 Japanese population controls. The 
NlaIII recognition site occurs on allele A2, purported to create the low-activity variant of 
the COMT enzyme. The Al allele is the high-activity variant. Using a chi-square analy- 
sis, we found no significant allelic or genotypic association with phenotype in a cohort of 
white, unrelated patients carrying the diagnosis of unipolar depression, but we did find 
significant population differences. 
 
Duties of Patients to Doctors. Noah Scheinfeld (sponsored by Robert Levine). 
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
This study investigates the duties of patients to doctors. Non-legal and legal models 
that define patients' duties are reviewed. The major non-legal models include Parsons' 
 
274 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
sick role, Freidson's conflict model, Szasz's tripartite schema of the doctor-patient rela- 
tionship, Stimson and Webb's negotiation model, "autonomy" models of patients' duties, 
the AMA's list of patient responsibilities, and the consumerist model of patients' behav- 
ior. These models are assessed for their explication of the doctor-patient relationship's 
symmetry, reciprocity, level of cooperation, expectations of patient activity, expectations 
as to the value of patient statements and reasons why patients' statements to doctors some- 
times fail to convey full information. American legal sources that utilize analyses of 
patients' duties in adjudicating the physician's defense of contributory negligence in med- 
ical malpractice actions and in assessing the hearsay exception for statements that patients 
make to their treating doctors are reviewed. Two legal standards of duty for assessing 
patients' statements were found to exist-the "duty to cooperate" and the "duty of ordinary 
care." The "duty to cooperate" is a legal duty unique to patients and firmly places patients 
in a dependent position in the doctor-patient relationship, mirroring Parsons' sick role. 
This thesis is the first study to identify and analyze a legal "duty to cooperate" by a patient 
towards a doctor. The tensions between legal standards of patients' duties and research 
from sociological, behavioral and clinical studies concerning patients' actual behavior 
exist. These tensions show that communication gaps and duty-fulfillment gaps exist in the 
doctor-patient relationship. These tensions are reviewed and defined. 
 
The Use of an Attractor Neural Network Model to Explore Normal Brain Function 
and the Pathogenesis of Schizophrenia. Peter Siekmeier, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The aim of this study is to develop a computer-based Hopfield, or "attractor", neur- 
al network model that can simulate semantic priming seen in normal subjects as well as 
the enhanced level of priming noted in schizophrenics. (Semantic priming is the phenom- 
enon in which new memory retrieval is enhanced by the previous retrieval of a memory of 
the same category, or semantic class.) Our objectives are (1) to elucidate a commonly 
accepted aspect of learning and memory access occurring under normal brain functioning; 
and (2) to give us further insight into the pathogenesis of schizophrenia at the level of the 
neuron or assemblies of neurons. 
 
The study uses a version of the standard Hopfield network created by Dr. Ralph 
Hoffman, which is written in QuickBASIC and executed on the IBM PC 466DX2VD. We 
modified it by the incorporation of neural fatigue. Briefly stated, this assumes that the 
more an inter-neuronal connection is repeatedly activated, the weaker the signal becomes. 
It allows the system to flow from memory state to memory state in a dynamic way, and is 
thought to more accurately represent human cognitive processes. To test semantic prim- 
ing, we created a set of 25 memories, five in each of five categories. Each memory was 
encoded by 120 neurons; the first 40 were designated "categorical", and were identical for 
all memories in a given category. We primed on each of the 25 memories and subsequently 
tested all memories. The outcomes of these trials were then analyzed for the presence or 
absence of priming effects. 
 
We found that as we increased the level of axonal pruning between noncategorical 
neurons in our model from 90.5 percent, corresponding to control subjects, to 97.3 per- 
cent, corresponding to schizophrenics: (1) baseline performance (i.e., the ability of the 
network to recall memories) decreased by 19 percent, mirroring the decline in cognitive 
functioning seen in schizophrenics; and (2) the calculated priming effect increased from 
16.25 percent to 38.5 percent. This was in close agreement with recent published data on 
human subjects which showed a priming effect of 15.2 percent in normals and 42.8 per- 
cent in schizophrenics. Our findings (1) shed light on the mechanisms underlying cogni- 
 
275 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
tive priming among normals, and how it may be achieved from a neurodevelopmental per- 
spective; (2) suggest that excessive pruning of intra-modular connections in association 
cortex is associated with the emergence of schizophrenia, and (3) suggest that fatigue is 
important in neurocognitive processes, and predict a possible cellular location. 
 
Immunohistochemistry of Intracranial Aneurysms. Mark Skirgaudas and Issam Awad. 
Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Little is known about the biologic mechanisms associated with the genesis, growth 
and rupture of intracranial saccular aneurysms. It is postulated that the vascular wall 
pathologic response of aneurysmal disease is associated with abnormal angiogenesis fac- 
tor expression. We have examined the expression and distribution of immunoreactivity to 
angiogenesis growth factors (vascular endothelial growth factor and basic fibroblast 
growth factor) and selected vascular wall matrix proteins (fibronectin, type IV Collagen, 
and alpha smooth muscle actin) in the walls of human intracranial aneurysms from surgi- 
cal biopsy or autopsy specimens. Double antibody immunohistochemical stains were per- 
formed in contiguous fixed sections from 3 control circle of Willis arteries, 5 berry 
aneurysms, 4 giant aneurysms and one mycotic aneurysm (3 unruptured, 7 ruptured 
lesions). The aneurysmal wall exhibited diffuse disorganized expression of matrix pro- 
teins as compared to their organization in control vessels. There was strong patchy expres- 
sion of VEGF within the walls of' all aneurysms, including marked staining of capillaries 
and small vessels within the thickened walls of giant lesions. The expression of bFGF was 
more diffuse and occurred around the fibrocytes and myocytes within the disrupted media 
of 9 of 10 aneurysms. These results confirm the gross architectural molecular disruption 
in the walls of intracranial aneurysms, and illustrate an apparent biologic response involv- 
ing angiogenesis growth factors. Further research should elucidate the time course and 
possible causal relationships of these changes to aneurysm growth and rupture with the 
aim of possible therapeutic manipulation. 
 
Particle Bombardment for Gene Transfer in Brain. Carole Smarth and Matthew 
During. Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
The gene gun or particle bombardment method involves propelling high density 
microparticles at high velocities to transport DNA through a membrane. This experiment 
was designed to assess the efficacy of the gene gun as a method of neuronal transduction 
in vivo. Using j-galactosidase as a marker gene, the DNA was complexed to 0.95 gm gold 
particles using a technique which involves mixing plasmid DNA, gold particles, spermi- 
dine, and calcium chloride to precipitate DNA onto the beads. The mixture was washed in 
ethanol and smeared onto plastic tubing to produce gene gun cartridges. Male Sprague- 
Dawley rats underwent surgery to expose two 2.5 mm diameter holes, bilaterally, in the 
skull. Helium pressures of varying amounts were used to propel the gold particles within 
the tubing into the superficial cortex. The brains were sectioned, stained with x-gal, and 
analyzed microscopically for 3-galactosidase expression. Pressures of 300-350 psi of heli- 
um proved to be most effective. Pressures of 500 psi and above were lethal to the animals. 
Pressure less than 200 psi showed no f-galactosidase expression. The ideal size of gold 
particle for transfection was 0.95 gm. The concentration of DNA:gold was most effective 
at a ratio between 2-2.5 pg of DNA/mg of gold. Using these optimal treatment variables, 
 
276 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
a cone-like area of cortical tissue was transfected, despite a variable amount of tissue dam- 
age. High level expression was observed at 5-7 days. Our data suggest that particle bom- 
bardment can result in very high levels of gene transfection in superficial cortex; greater 
than that observed with any viral vector or previously used non-viral system. However, we 
have been unable to obtain expression without some superficial injury and inflammatory 
infiltrate. Ultimately, the gene gun may be useful in neurobiology both for cortical trans- 
duction studies and in the treatment of gliomas. 
 
Effect of Phenobarbital on Extracellular Matrix Production, Cell Replication, and 
Transfroming Growth Factor-4l Receptor Profile in Rat Dermal Fibroblast 
Cultures. Rani K. Spudich, Sandra Casinghino, and Michael Centrella. Department of 
Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Transforming growth factor-PI (TGF-11) enhances cell replication and extracellular 
matrix synthesis, and associates with distinct cell-surface binding sites in human fibrob- 
last cultures. Phenobarbital therapy for seizure disorders has been shown to result in a 10 
percent increase in incidence of connective tissue disorders in patients taking the drug, an 
effect that may be mediated in part by changes in local TGF-f1 actions in dermal tissue. 
The purpose of our study was to evaluate whether phenobarbital stimulates extracellular 
matrix production via TGF-41 -mediated effects in fibroblasts, thus directly playing a role 
in connective tissue disorder pathogenesis. DNA and collagen synthesis were measured 
by metabolic labeling techniques, while TGF-I1 receptors were examined by polyacry- 
lamide gel electrophoresis coupled either with 1251-ligand binding, or specific anti-recep- 
tor antibody probing. Preexposure of rat dermal fibroblast cultures derived from fetal rat 
scalp to 30 gM phenobarbital did not alter basal DNA or collagen synthesis, nor did it 
affect the stimulatory effects of TGF-,B1 on these parameters. Binding studies revealed 
that phenobarbital caused decreased TGF-f1 binding within Mr 250,000 (betaglycan), Mr 
85,000 (type II), and Mr 65,000 (type I) TGF-[-binding complexes. In addition to 
decreased binding, total protein amounts of TGF-j receptor types I and II also decreased 
after exposure to 30 pM phenobarbital. In order for phenobarbital to cause a pathologic 
increase in matrix deposition, we had expected to see an increase in TGF-131 binding to 
the cell-signaling receptors (types I and II), and perhaps a concurrent decrease in betagly- 
can which functions as a storage site for the TGF-41 molecule. Our present data therefore 
suggest that phenobarbital does not directly modulate TGF-01-stimulation of extracellu- 
lar matrix protein synthesis or cell proliferation in rat dermal fibroblasts. 
 
The Effect of Amlodipine Delivered Locally via Double-Balloon Catheter on 
Vascular Smooth Muscle Cell Proliferation: An in Vivo Study in the Postangioplasty 
Rabbit Femoral Artery. Kent T. Ta, FanWen Bangeter, and Michael D. Ezekowitz . 
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Restenosis continues to complicate 20 to 55 percent of percutaneous intervention 
procedures and is an important cause of recurrent symptomatic angina. The pathogenesis 
of restenosis can be divided into four phases: early elastic recoil (hours to days), mural 
thrombus formation (hours to days), neointimal proliferation and extracellular matrix for- 
mation (weeks), and chronic geometric arterial changes (months). Restenosis is device- 
nonspecific except for intravascular stents, which have been shown to decrease restenosis 
by inhibiting elastic recoil. With the exception of the antiplatelet IIb/Illa integrin inhibitor 
 
277 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
c7E3, the systemic administration of other antithrombotics and antiproliferative agents 
has thus far failed to achieve a significant reduction in the incidence of restenosis. 
 
One explanation for the failure of such trials is that submaximal doses of standard 
pharmacologic agents have been used because of concerns that serious side effects might 
result from systemic administration of the required doses. We hypothesize that the deliv- 
ery of novel agents to the site of injury using a double-balloon local infusion angioplasty 
catheter (LIAC) offers a potential solution to this limitation. The novel antiproliferative 
agent selected in our study is amlodipine. Amlodipine is a dihydropyridine calcium antag- 
onist that has recently been shown to inhibit vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) prolif- 
eration derived from human saphenous vein culture. 
 
To evaluate the in vivo effect of amlodipine on VSMC proliferation, 25 male New 
Zealand white rabbits (3.5-4.5 kg) underwent angioplasty (balloon inflation diameter, 2.5 
mm; inflation pressure, 10 atm; balloon length, 10 mm; drug delivery area, 15 mm) on 
both femoral arteries. The animals were then randomized to one of four groups: Group 1 
(n = 5 rabbits, 10 vessels) received intravenous infusion of amlodipine (amlodipine ED- 
G-147-690, Pfizer; 0.5 mg/kg IV concentration); Group 2 (n = 4 rabbits, 7 vessels) 
received intravenous infusion of the vehicle as control (10 percent propylene glycol in 
saline); Group 3 (n = 8 rabbits, 11 vessels) received local delivery of amlodipine (100 mM 
IV solution); Group 4 (n = 4 rabbits, 7 vessels) received local delivery of the vehicle as 
control (10 percent propylene glycol in saline solution). These treated rabbits were sacri- 
ficed on day 4 postangioplasty, with their vessels isolated for determination of smooth 
muscle cell proliferation using bromodeoxyuridine (BRDU) analysis. In addition to these 
treatment groups, two animals (n = 4 vessels) receiving intravenous infusion of amlodip- 
ine (0.5 mg/kg) and another two (n = 4 vessels) receiving local delivery of amlodipine (100 
mM solution) were sacrificed after the delivery of agents for the determination of 
amlodipine level in the vessel wall by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). 
 
The local delivery of amlodipine using the double-balloon intravascular catheter 
achieved a significantly higher concentration of amlodipine level in the rabbit femoral 
arterial wall (p < .01) versus intravenous delivery. Total vascular smooth muscle cell pro- 
liferation in the media and intima at day 4 post angioplasty were evaluated by direct count 
of BRDU. The mean ? SD of total proliferation per femoral cross-section within the group 
was calculated and compared to other groups. The results showed no significant difference 
in vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation among all 4 treated groups. The p values for 
all the group comparisons are p = .64 for local amlodipine (group 3) vs. intravenous 
amlodipine (group 1); p = .522 for local amlodipine (group 3) vs. intravenous control 
(group 2); p = .64 for local amlodipine (group 3) vs. local control (group 4); and overall 
p = .52 for the groups treated with amlodipine (groups 1 and 3) vs. control groups (groups 
2 and 4). We conclude that significantly higher level of pharmacologic agent can be 
achieved in the rabbit femoral vessel wall using the double-balloon local catheter. Our sec- 
ond conclusion is that the local delivery of amlodipine did not appear to significantly 
inhibit VSMC proliferation in vivo at four days following angioplasty, as compared to 
both control (without amlodipine) and intravenous amlodipine delivery. Overall there was 
no significant in vivo antiproliferative effect of amlodipine observed at day 4 post angio- 
plasty in the nonatherosclerotic rabbit femoral artery. 
 
278 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Statistical Parametric Mapping Analysis of Positron Emission Tomography Images 
for the Detection of Seizure Foci: Results in Temporal Lobe Epilepsy. Jeffrey R. 
Tseng, Rajesh Krishnamurthy, Douglas Bremner, Susan S. Spencer, Dennis D. Spencer, 
and Holley M. Dey. Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy of statistical parametric map- 
ping (SPM) of [18F]-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) 
images of the brain for the localization of seizure foci in patients with temporal lobe 
epilepsy (TLE). 
 
Preoperative PET brain scans from 36 patients with TLE and from 8 healthy control 
subjects were retrospectively analyzed with SPM95 software written for Matlab version 
4.2. Scans were transformed to Talairach space, globally normalized, and smoothed. 
Differences between each patient's scan and the control group were then computed with 
the t statistic on a voxel by voxel basis. SPM maps were thresholded at p < .001 and 
reviewed for areas of significant hypometabolism relative to the control group. All 44 clin- 
ical 18FDG brain scans were also visually interpreted and regions of metabolic asymme- 
try noted. Localization of the seizure focus by both SPM and visual analyses were com- 
pared with each patient's temporal lobe resection site and with that patient's postsurgical 
outcome. A good postsurgical outcome was defined as > 90 percent reduction in seizure 
frequency six months after operation. 
 
SPM analysis predicted the surgical excision site in 32/36 patients (89 percent); visu- 
al analysis also correctly lateralized the temporal lobe resection site for 32/36 patients (89 
percent). The SPM and visual analyses were concordant in 30/36 (83 percent) cases; both 
provided a false negative result in one case. Of the 36 TLE patients, 31 had a successful 
surgical outcome with > 90 percent reduction in seizure frequency six months after 
surgery. SPM analysis identified the temporal lobe seizure focus in 28/31 of these patients 
(90 percent). Visual analysis identified 29/31 (94 percent). Of the 5 patients with poor sur- 
gical outcome, SPM analysis showed significant contralateral frontotemporal hypometab- 
olism in 3 cases, and contralateral perihippocampal localization in 2 cases. 
 
We conclude that SPM analysis of 1 8FDG PET images is useful for the localization 
of temporal lobe seizure foci in clinical and research settings. SPM provides a more objec- 
tive and consistent means of image analysis for the evaluation of patients with epilepsy, 
particularly for inexperienced observers. Our data suggest that SPM analysis may also 
prove useful for the prediction of clinical outcome after temporal lobe resection. 
 
The Effect of Peripheral Perfusion on the Accuracy of Pulse Oximetry in Children. 
Rachel Villanueva and Charlotte Bell. Department of Anesthesiology, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven Connecticut 
 
Studies have considered the effects of blood flow and pulse pressure on pulse oxime- 
ter function in adults, but not in children. This study examines the effect of perfusion on 
accuracy of pulse oximetry in children and attempts to determine the threshold below 
which the pulse oximeter becomes inaccurate or ceases to function 
 
After obtaining institutional approval and parental consent, 19 patients < 10 years of 
age were studied. A radial artery catheter, laser Doppler probe (Periflux Laser Doppler 
Flowmeter PF2B, Perimed [Sweden]), skin temperature sensor and band probes of two 
oximeters, Ohmeda 3700 (Boulder, CO) and Nellcor N200 (Hayward, CA), were attached 
to the same hand. Baseline pulse oximeter and Doppler readings were obtained with 
simultaneous hemoximetry (AVL Model 912 CO-Oxylite, Roswell, GA), skin and 
 
279 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
esophageal temperatures, total hemoglobin and transduced arterial pressure. Readings of 
all parameters (N = 94) were obtained during periods of low perfusion or by occluding the 
upper arm to 70-100 percent of systolic pressure. Bias (SpO2-SaO2) of each oximeter was 
compared to each variable to determine effect on accuracy. Data was analyzed using step- 
wise multivariate linear regression, Pearson correlation coefficients and independent 
paired t-test. P < .05 was considered significant. 
 
Less than 2 percent mean bias was seen with either oximeter (Nellcor 1.55 ? 2.33; 
Ohmeda 0.78 ? 2.25). Backward linear regression with univariate analysis identified inde- 
pendent predictors of bias and correlation for each machine; weight (r = -.377, p = .006) 
and pulse pressure (r = .250, p < .001) for the Nellcor, and weight (r = -.390, p < .001), 
percent flow (r = .223, p = .035) and core temperature (r = .307, p = .003) for the Ohmeda. 
Only the skin temperature threshold of 30? C was identified as a significant predictor 
below which oximeter accuracy was affected. 
 
In conclusion, changes in peripheral perfusion have little impact on accuracy of pulse 
oximetry in children. Although the oximeter will not function in the absence of pulsatile 
flow, the thresholds below which accuracy is affected have not been identified. 
 
'Chicken Pot Pie?': A Phenomenology of Questions Asked by Patients During 
Primary Care Visits. David E. Walker (sponsored by Nicholas H. Fiebach). Department 
of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Studies designed to enhance communication within the medical dialogue have 
focused attention on patient questions as a key indicator of patient participation. However, 
investigators usually have simply counted questions without further characterizing what 
patients are asking. We sought to describe and analyze the content and purposes of patient 
questions. Using audiotapes of patient-physician encounters which occurred in the gener- 
al medicine clinic of an urban, academic medical center, and employing a qualitative 
(grounded theory) approach, we developed a methodology to characterize patient ques- 
tions. In a sample of 62 patient-physician encounters, patients were found to ask over 12 
questions per encounter, 2 - 4 times the average counts previously reported, at a rate of 1 
question per 2 minutes of encounter time. The number and rate of question-asking was not 
related to gender of the patient or provider, nor to the patient's educational or socioeco- 
nomic status. Most questions were about medications, the logistics of the visit, or person- 
al or interpersonal matters. Few questions were about health risks, prevention and prog- 
nosis, and even fewer were about matters of diagnosis, disease etiology, and pathophysi- 
ology. Although most questions were asked to further the patient's factual information, 
many were intended to express or appeal to emotions. Despite the restricted generaliz- 
ability of specific findings from this limited sample of patients and physicians, the 
methodology employed and some of the results may provide useful information for addi- 
tional studies of patient questions. 
 
Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis (EAE): Induction in Genetically B- 
Cell-Deficient Mice and a Study of Encephalitogenic T-Cell Regulation. Susan D. 
Wolf, Bonnie N. Dittel, Fridrika Hardardottir, Charles A. Janeway, Jr. and Robert E. 
Tigelaar. Section of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is an animal model for autoim- 
mune CNS disease which is mediated by CD4+ T-cells. To examine the role(s) of B-cells 
 
280 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
in the induction of EAE, we used B lO.PL (I-AU) mice rendered genetically deficient in B 
cells by deletion of their j chain transmembrane region (B I O.PLgMT). Following immu- 
nization of BIO.PL and BlO.PLgMT mice with the N-terminal myelin basic protein 
(MBP) encephalitogenic peptide Ac 1-1 1, we observed no difference in the onset or sever- 
ity of disease in the absence of mature B-cells. There was, however, a greater variation in 
disease onset, severity, and especially in recovery in the B-cell-deficient mice compared 
to controls; B lO.PLgMT mice rarely returned to normal compared to B-cell-replete 
B 1O.PL controls. In addition, preliminary results showed that B 1O.PLgMT mice develop 
EAE using whole mouse MBP as antigen and also that isolated CD4+ T-cells from spleen 
taken at day 40 from these mice proliferate to the encephalitogenic peptide MBP Ac 1-1 1. 
Taken together our data suggests B-cells do not play a major role in activation of 
encephalitogenic T-cells, but may contribute to the immune modulation of acute EAE. 
Recovery in EAE occurs spontaneously and its mechanism is unknown, although some 
evidence suggests a role for anti-idiotypic, downregulatory T-cells. We attempted to iso- 
late an effective T-cell clone associated with recovery by immunizing PLSJ/L (H-2Uxs) 
mice with a synthesized 18-mer peptide based on the VP3 chain TCR variable region of the 
encephalitogenic T-cell clone, C19. A set of CD4+ T-cell clones reactive to the 18-mer 
peptide were isolated, but did not respond to APCs separated from splenocytes of EAE 
recovered mice. If endogenous TCR peptides of encephalitogenic cells are presented and 
are responsible for activation of down regulatory T-cells, then it may be the T-cell clones 
isolated in our experiments are not specific to the TCR peptide being presented in the 
PLSJ/L mice. 
 
Regional Ischemia Alters Coronary Flow Reserve in the Remote Area: Implication 
for Stress Perfusion Scintigraphy. Joseph C. Wu, James J. Yun, Donald P. Dione, Eliot 
N. Heller, Lawrence Decklebaum, and Albert J. Sinusas. Department of Internal 
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 
 
Coronary flow reserve (CFR) may be abnormal in regions remote from a stenosis. 
This could lead to underestimation of flow heterogeneity in patients with coronary artery 
disease using perfusion scintigraphy. Therefore, we sought to determine the possible rela- 
tionship between stenosis severity and impairment of CFR in remote zone. 
 
Methods: In 7 open-chest dogs with acute graded LCX stenosis, epicardial Doppler 
flow probes were placed on proximal LCX and LAD arteries. Stenosis severity was deter- 
mined by trans-stenotic (aortic-distal LCX) pressure gradient (mmHg) and regional thick- 
ening. CFR was assessed by intracoronary injection of adenosine (36 .g). Effects of alter- 
ations in heart rate and aortic pressure on CFR were corrected by rate-pressure product. 
Relative CFR ratio was calculated by dividing ischemic LCX CFR by nonischemic LAD 
CFR to assess flow heterogeneity. 
 
Results: Increasing LCX stenosis severity caused progressive impairment of LCX 
CFR: baseline (2.22 ? 0.1), stenosis 10 (1.80 ? 0.06), stenosis 20 (1.56 ? 0.08), stenosis 
30 (1.30 ? 0.04), and stenosis 40 (1.17 ? 0.06) (p < .01, all vs. baseline). Remote LAD 
CFR was not altered by mild to moderate LCX stenosis (baseline: 2.33 ? 0.19, stenosis 
10: 2.30 ? 0.25, stenosis 20: 2.15 ? 0.26). However, critical LCX stenosis producing mild 
to moderate reduction in ischemic thickening was associated with a significant impair- 
ment of LAD CFR: stenosis 30 (1.90 ? 0.26), and stenosis 40 (1.80 ? 0.22) (p < .01, both 
vs. baseline). CFR in ischemic and remote regions were also impaired after RPP correc- 
tion. Thus, only a moderate flow heterogeneity was produced during critical LCX steno- 
sis due to concurrent reduction of LAD CFR: baseline (0.99 ? 0.10), stenosis 30 (0.75 ? 
0.09) and stenosis 40 (0.71 ? 0.10) (p < .05, both vs. baseline). 
 
281 
 
Thesis Abstracts 
 
Conclusion: In the presence of a critical LCX stenosis, significant impairment of 
remote nonischemic LAD CFR blunts the maximum provokable flow heterogeneity. This 
phenomenon may in part explain the lower sensitivity of stress perfusion scintigraphy for 
detection of single vessel disease. 
 
Oxygen Tension Monitoring and the Delay Phenomenon. Jerome Raymond Zink and 
Richard Restifo. Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut 
 
Despite advances in surgical technique and flap design, complications resulting from 
flap failure continue to plague surgeons. Several techniques have been developed to 
enhance the survival of flaps. One such technique, the delay phenomenon, is established 
by first inducing ischemia across a flap for a period of days to weeks. While the exact 
mechanism of the delay phenomenon is unknown, it is the only flap enhancing technique 
that has proven truly effective in increasing survival. 
 
Flap monitors provide the surgeon with advance notice of impending flap failure. 
The ideal flap monitor is accurate, rapid, safe, portable and inexpensive. While many flap 
monitoring techniques have been developed, none have met this ideal. One such tech- 
nique, oxygen tension monitoring, has shown promise but has yet to be generally applied. 
 
We hypothesize that oxygen tension measurements can be used to effectively moni- 
tor a flap and predict survival. We further hypothesize that the delay phenomenon acts by 
augmenting vascular perfusion and, hence, increases oxygen tension across a flap, result- 
ing in enhanced survival. Lastly, we hypothesize greater flap ischemia during the delay 
procedure results better flap survival than a less invasive delay technique. 
 
This experiment was broken into three sections designed to evaluate the ability of 
serial oxygen tension measurements to adequately monitor a flap and assess the effect of 
the delay phenomenon on the flap. The first section consisted of measuring oxygen ten- 
sion along delayed and non-delayed dorsal flaps in a rat model 24 hours after flap eleva- 
tion. Results showed that flap areas that fell below 15 mm Hg eventually died whereas 
those that remained above this level survived, confirming our hypothesis that oxygen ten- 
sion measurements are effective in predicting flap survival. 
 
The second section of the experiment investigated the oxygen tension levels of the 
flap before and during the delay period. The results verify that the delay technique initially 
resulted in ischemia to the flap, but subsequently resulted in higher oxygen levels after 
elevation compared to control flaps. This supports our hypothesis that the delay technique 
results in vascular augmentation. 
 
The last section of the experiment compared two delay techniques, four border inci- 
sion-only delay versus two border incision with undermining and perforator ligation. 
Results show that undermining resulted in greater survival, supporting the hypothesis that 
greater ischemia results in greater survival. 
 
Together, these studies verify the beneficial effects of the delay phenomenon and val- 
idate oxygen tension measurements as a monitoring technique. 
 
282