Yale J Biol Med504yjbmThe Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine0044-00861551-4056Yale Journal of Biology and MedicinePMC2588673PMC2588673.1258867325886731Yale M.D. Thesis AbstractsThesis Abstracts 2000
Jan-Feb20017411738972970010120012811200829062011pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightyespmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articleyespmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyes
 
YALE JOURNAL OF BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE 74 (2001), pp. 29-70. 
Copyright X) 2001. All rights reserved . 
 
Yale University School of Medicine 
Thesis Abstracts - 2000 
 
Mutations in Yeast Methionine Aminopeptidase-2 Interfere with Binding of 
the Anti-Angiogenic Agent Fumagillin. John A. Abraham and Craig M. Crews. 
Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
 
The ability of tumors to induce angiogenesis, or new blood vessel formation, is crit- 
ical to their growth and spread. As a result, factors that inhibit angiogenesis are targets for 
cancer therapy. Onie anti-angiogenic agent, TNP 470, is derived from a compound, fumag- 
illin, that induces cell cycle arrest specifically in endothelial cells. Although the anti- 
angiogenic mechanism of fumagillin is unclear, it has been shown to inhibit the action of 
a metalloprotease, methionine aminopeptidase-2 (MetAP-2), which is found in both 
endothelial and non-endothelial cell types. A crystal structure of MetAP-2 with bound 
fumagillin has recently been solved, which suggests that there are several residues of 
MetAP-2 in close approximation to bound fumagillin. These residues may be important 
in determining specificity of the drug for this enzyme. It was hypothesized that by mutat- 
ing these residues, it would be possible to generate mutant versions of MetAP-2 resistant 
to fumagillin binding. The purpose of this study was to identify mutations in MetAP-2 that 
confer fumagillin resistance to cells carrying the mutation. Mutations were created using 
a site-directed mutagenesis approach and used to transform a yeast strain normally sensi- 
tive to fumagillin. The mutant yeast strains were then studied for resistance to otherwise 
lethal concentrations of fumagillin. Three mutations, G341D, G341S, and H339F, have 
been identified in this study that confer resistance to 10 nM, 5 nM, and 1 nM concentra- 
tions of fumagillin, respectively. These concentrations would normally completely inhib- 
it wild type MetAP-2. These findings support the hypothesis that it is possible to interfere 
with fumagillin binding to MetAP-2 by generating mutations in the enzyme. The signifi- 
cance of these findings is that they provide a framework in which to study the anti-angio- 
genic mechanism of action of fumagillin in endothelial cells. That is, if endothelial cells 
expressing these same mutations are resistant to the cell-cycle arrest normally induced by 
this drug, it constitutes significant functional evidence that the antiangiogenic effect of 
this drug can be attributed to its specific interaction with MetAP-2. 
 
Community-Acquired Bacterial Meningitis: Categorization of Causes and 
Timing of Death. Donna A. Akutagawa, Carol Y. Lin, Steven 1. Aronin, and Vin- 
cent J. Quagliarello. Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medi- 
cine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The goal of this study was to investigate the causes and timing of death of patients 
with community-acquired bacterial meningitis (CABM). 
 
Adults (above age 16 years) diagnosed with CABM from January 1970 through 
December 1998 at four Connecticut hospitals were identified. Strict criteria of microbio- 
logical and clinical resolution and underlying and immediate causes of death (COD) 
according to the World Health Organization and the National Center for Health Statistics 
were applied Scventy-four pattents were classified into three categories of COD: 1) 
meningitis was the underlying and immediate COD, 2) meningitis was the underlying but 
 
29 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
not immediate COD, and 3) meningitis was the the underlying nor immediate COD. The 
number of days from admission to death was compared among the three categories. 
 
Of 294 patients with CABM, 77 patients (26 percent) died during hospitalization. Of 
those, almost half (38/77 [49 percent]) died within seven days of admission. Of the 74 
patients whose COD was successfully categorized, 44 patients (59 percent) had meningi- 
tis as the underlying and immediate COD (Category 1), 13 patients (18 percent) were clas- 
sified as Category 2, and 17 patients (23 percent) were classified as Category 3. Median 
survival times for patients in Categories 1, 2, and 3 were 5 (range 2 to 30), 10 (range 2 to 
18), and 32 (range 16 to 66) days, respectively (p = .0001 comparing Category 1 versus 2 
versus 3). For the 57 patients in whom meningitis was at least the underlying COD (i.e., 
Categories 1 and 2 combined), 50 (88 percent) died within 14 days of admission; 100 per- 
cent of Category 3 patients died after 14 hospital days (p = .001 comparing Categories 1 
and 2 versus 3). In a significant proportion of patients with CABM who died during hos- 
pitalization, meningitis was not the immediate or underlying COD. A survival of 14 days 
appeared discriminate between deaths attributable to CABM and those of another cause. 
 
Benzodiazepines in Chilean Primary Care: How Health Care Affects Use by 
Women in a Developing Country. Karin Andersson, Ricardo Araya, and Nora 
Groce. School of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut; and Department of Psychiatry, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, 
Chile. 
 
Benzodiazepine (bzd) overutilization among women represents a significant health 
problem, particularly in developing countries. Studies have revealed widespread bzd use 
in Chile, often attributed to past over-the-counter availability. This study attempts to iden- 
tify how the health care system contributes to elevated prescription use of tranquilizers in 
the years following bzd regulation. Four hundred female patients and 20 general physi- 
cians in five primary care clinics were interviewed using a structured, open-ended survey 
about bzd use, expectations of the doctor-patient relationship, and the role of the health 
care system in treating anxiety. The lifetime prevalence of use among female patients was 
61.8 percent, with 47.6 percent currently taking bzds and 25 percent taking them for an 
extended period of time. Bzd users and physicians agreed that severe anxiety, bzd effica- 
cy, and lack of alternative therapies prompt use. Physicians also attributed use to depen- 
dence, gender-related care-seeking behavior, pharmacotherapy preference, and a health 
care system with limited visit time and few mental health specialists. In Chile, social anx- 
iety, gender stereotyping, preference for pharnacologic treatment of anxiety, and lack of 
non-drug therapies perpetuates prescription use of bzds by women in primary care. This 
study highlights the influence of economic development on anxiety and consumption of 
psychotropic medications in a system with limited health resources. 
 
Using an Electronic Reminder to Improve Physician Practices at Yale-New 
Haven Hospital. Alicia 1. Arbaje and Victor Morris. Department of Internal Medi- 
cine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The inappropriate use of diphenhydramine (BenadrylTm) can lead to iatrogenic com- 
plications, such as cognitive decline. Electronic reminders can be effective in implement- 
ing clinical guidelines, providing decision support to clinicians, and reducing medical 
errors. The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of an electronic reminder 
 
30 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
screen on physicians' routine use of diphenhydramine as a pretreatment prior to blood 
transfusions and to assess their attitudes regarding this reminder. 
 
The researchers reviewed diphenhydramine use in adult inpatients before, immedi- 
ately after, and one year after implementation of the reminder screen. A total of 752 trans- 
fusion episodes (467 patients) were reviewed, with 253 in the pre-screen group, 249 in the 
post-screen group, and 250 in the post-screen comparison group. The mean age in each 
group was 66 years (SD = 15), 64 years (SD = 15), and 69 years (SD = 12), respectively. 
Diphenhydrarnine use decreased significantly after screen implementation from 41 per- 
cent to 20 percent (p < .005) the first year and down to 12 percent (p < .005) the second 
year. An analysis in the medical, surgical, and obstetrics/gynecology services demonstrat- 
ed significant absolute reductions over time (38.6 percent, 28.1 percent, and 4.6 percent 
reductions, respectively, p < .05). Only 17 percent of all treated patients had a document- 
ed indication for diphenhydramine. Treated patients had higher rates of mental status 
change than non-teated patient: 32/83 (39 percent) vs. 92/513 (18 percent, p < .0005). 
 
Fifty-six house staff completed a questionnaire regarding the electronic reminder 
(estimated response rate, 53 percent). Sixty-nine percent reported ordering diphenhy- 
dramine less than 25 percent of the time (SD = 0.9), 71 percent were aware of blood bank 
pretreatment recommendations (SD = 0.5), 55 percent had seen the reminder (SD = 0.5), 
59 percent changed their behavior due to the reminder (SD = 0.7), and 65 percent felt the 
reminder was helpful and should remain in the system (SD = 0.9). 
 
Diphenhydramine use significantly declined immediately and over time with the 
implementation of an electronic reminder, supporting the use of this mechanism to impact 
physician practice pattems. 
 
Abusive Head Trauma: A Clinical Examination. Bridgett D. Broz (Sponsored by 
John M. Leventhal). Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of the study is to create a large scale, comprehensive clinical picture of 
the child who has suffered from abusive head trauma. 
 
This is a retrospective review of the medical records of 79 children (ages 0.9 months 
to 11 years) with abusive head trauma who were treated at Yale-New Haven Hospital 
between January 1, 1986, and November 10, 1999. 
 
Of the 79 children with abusive head trauma, 33 percent presented with only bruis- 
ing or soft tissue injuries to their heads and/or faces; of the 60 children at or below 24 
months of age, 97 percent had serious or life-threatening injuries. Of the 34 children with 
subdural hematomas, 68.8 percent had retinal hemorrhages. Unilaterality was observed in 
20 percent of the retinal hemorrhages. Nearly 9 percent of the overall sample died. Forty- 
four percent of all children came from healthy-appearing families, without a clear history 
of substance abuse, criminality, family violence, or psychiatric illness. Only 37 percent of 
perpetrators lived with the children they were abusing, and the majority (67 percent) did 
not live with the children. Nearly 13 percent of the children were victims of child abuse 
at a later date, 
 
Children with abusive head trauma may present to medical attention in a variety of 
ways, and the diagnosis is very difficult to make. 
 
31 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Women Warriors: A History of Courage in the Battle Against Reproductive 
Cancer. Darcy Nikot Bryan and Vemanne Bryan. Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, UCLA Medical Center, University of California, Los Angeles, Califor- 
nia. (Sponsored by Jose Costa, Department of Pathology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
Through the comprehension of medicine as art, it has become increasingly notewor- 
thy that there is a need for a refined education in the disciplines that have traditionally 
explored human-values questions, namely the humanities: philosophy, history, literature, 
language, and theology. Contemporarily, these disciplines have lost the influence of their 
pristine authority through fragmentation and specialization; however, it is these basic dis- 
ciplines that retain the possibility for providing the cognitive and affective tools requisite 
to an intelligent formulation of the methodologies of health professional schools and, 
thereby, the responsible practice of the professions taught within those schools by the pro- 
duced health care givers. 
 
The historian's role is to relish such human complexity, to hold several dimensions 
of a problem or period together long enough to offer the most productive and realistic 
framework for cooperation among the humanistic disciplines and those of medicine. The 
consistent challenge within this text was to address imaginatively, pose, and respond to 
the stimulus of interaction between the humanistic and medical disciplines affecting the 
sensitivity of those involved in the various determinants of illness and health; the influ- 
ence of individual character on the values and practices of medicine in historical periods; 
the impact of individual philosophical conunitments regarding the nature of the person 
and the manner in which health is defined; analysis of the ambiguities and tensions 
between the humanistic and medical fields in juxtaposition with the culture of specific his- 
torical moments by utilizing the information contained within the many forms of docu- 
mented research of the disciplines selected for analysis. The antithesis of such research 
and analysis being the purpose of strengthening the intellectual link to medicine through 
the Humanities encouragement for originality of thought and knowledge in both fields - 
perhaps even motivating the creation of a new paradigm, shifting at last to the care for 
cancer. 
 
Chiamydia trachomatis Screening in Costa Rica: A Community-Based 
Approach Using Urine Ligase Chain Reaction. Candice Carnacho. Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Chlamydia trachomatis is the most common sexually transmitted disease worldwide. 
Sequelae of untreated infection include pelvic inflammatory disease, ectopic pregnancy, 
and infertility. Little is known about the epidemiology of C. trachomatis infections in 
emerging third-world countries. The objective of this study was to determine the preva- 
lence of chlamydial infection and assess risk factors predictive of infection in a sample 
representative of the general population of Costa Rican women. A cross-sectional preva- 
lence study was done on a community-based sample of women aged 13 to 35 from Barva 
de Heredia, Costa Rica using urine ligase chain reaction; 266 women were interviewed 
and screened for chlamydial infection. Thirty-six were excluded due to antibiotic use in 
the prior month, having urinated in the last hour, or having a visibly sanguinous urine sam- 
ple. Of the final study population of 230, 34 percent denied sexual activity. C. trachoma- 
tis prevalence was determined to be 3 percent overall, and 3.3 percent in those who report- 
ed history of sexual activity (2/7 positives denied sexual activity). The highest prevalence 
was in the 16 to 19 age group (6.8 percent). Risk factors found to be significantly associ- 
 
32 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
ated with chlamydial infection were age of first sexual relation at 15 years old or younger 
(odds ratio: 7.3), having been pregnant at least once (odds ratio: 10.5), and having the sta- 
tus of not working and not attending school (odds ratio: 8.4). History of sexual intercourse 
and young age were not found to be statistically significant risk factors in this population. 
Questionable validity of sexual history data and small sample size resulted in insufficient 
power to determine true differences in reported risk factors. In conclusion, a low preva- 
lence of C. trachomatis infection was found in the first community-based survey done in 
Costa Rica, and age-bascd screening of women less than 30 years old would have detect- 
ed all infection. 
 
CD4+ T Helper 1 Cells Facilitate Carditis Regression in Borrelia Burgdorferi- 
Infected Mice. Christopher Chang, Mary Campbell, Stephen W. Barthold, and 
Linda K. Bockenstedt. Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Lyme carditis is an important manifestation of disseminated Lyme disease caused by 
the tick-bome spirochete Borrelia burgdoJferi (Bb). Disease manifestations, including 
carditis in SCID mice, do not undergo regression suggesting that specific immunity medi- 
ated by B and T cells is important in host defense against Lyme borreliosis. We have pre- 
viously shown a critical role for T cells in carditis regression in Bb infected mice selec- 
tively deficient in B cells or a,B T cells. Whereas carditis resolves in infected B cell defi- 
cient mice, carditis persists for at least 45 days in infected cxP T cell deficient (TCRca-/-) 
mice, independent of mouse genotype. In order to characterize the T cells mediating cardi- 
tis resolution, c43 T cells or CD4+ and CD8+ T cell subsets from infected immunocompe- 
tent mice were adoptively transferred into infected TCRx-/- mice (C3H and C57BL/6 
backgrounds). T cell production of cytokines, Bb-specific antibody titers, and histopathol- 
ogy of hearts were determined at 14 days (peak disease) and at 41 days of infection, a time 
when disease had regressed in control mice. Lymph node cells from infected control but 
not from infected TCRa-/- mice produced the T helper 1 cytokine IFN-y after in vitro res- 
timulation with Bb lysate. Reconstitution of TCRa-/- mice with c43 T cells, CD4+, or 
CD8+ T cell subsets, restored T cell IFN-y production and Bb-specific IgG, which had 
been diminished in infected TCRa-/- mice. IL-4 was not detectable in any mouse group. 
Histopathology showed that carditis resolved in the majority of CD4+ T cell reconstituted 
TCRa-/- mice by Day 41, but not in CD8+ T cell reconstituted and control infected 
TCRa-/- mice. These results indicate that ap T cells are necessary for timely resolution 
of Lyme carditis and specifically implicate CD4+ Thl cells in the process. 
 
Beta-Adrenergic Blockers for Secondary Prevention of Acute Myocardial 
Infarction in Elderly Patients with Coronary Revascularization, Diabetes Mel- 
litus, or Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. Jersey Chen (Sponsored by 
Dr. Harlan M. Krumholz). Section of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; 
and Section of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology and 
Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut). 
 
We sought to evaluate the use and effectiveness of beta-blocker therapy after acute 
myocardial infarction (AMI) for elderly patients for which beta-blocker therapy has not 
been routinely considered. Using data from the National Cooperative Cardiovascular Pro- 
ject, we examined the use and effectiveness of beta-blockers at discharge in elderly 
 
33 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
patients with coronary revascularization, diabetes mellitus or chronic obstructive pul- 
monary disease. After adjusting for potential demographic and clinical confounders, beta- 
blockers were significantly associated with lower one-year mortality in patients who 
underwent CABG (Hazard Ratio [HR] = 0.70; 95 percent CI: 0.55 to 0.89) or PTCA (HR 
= 0.85; 95 percent CI: 0.74 to 1.00), in patients with diabetes mellitus (insulin-treated dia- 
betics, HR = 0.87; 95 percent CI 0.72 to 1.07; non-insulin-treated diabetics, HR = 0.77;95 
percent CI: 0.67 to 0.88) and in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who 
were not on beta-agonist therapy (HR = 0.85; 95 percent CI 0.72 to 1.00). Increasing the 
use of beta-blockers in elderly patients who had undergone coronary revascularization and 
in patients with diabetes mellitus, COPD who are not using beta-agonists represent oppor- 
tunities to improve the care and outcomes of these patients after AMI. 
 
Inhibitory Smads: Patterns of Expression and Effects of Overexpression in 
Cells of the Osteoblast Lineage. John Michael Christopher Coombes (Spon- 
sored by Mark C. Horowitz) Department of Orthopaedics, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this thesis was a) to examine Smad 6 and 7 gene expression in cells 
of the osteoblasts lineage and b) to investigate the ability of Smad 6 or 7 overexpression 
to disrupt TGF-,B/BMP-induced alkaline phosphatase (ALP) responses in these cells. 
Smad 6 and 7 gene expression was examined in murine osteoblasts and D1.4 osteoprog- 
enitor cells. Cells were grown to subconfluence, and RNA isolated daily for one week and 
weekly for one month. Cells were also treated +/- TGF-1 or BMP, and RNA collected over 
24 hours. Northern analysis was then performed on all samples to detect Smad 6 and 7 
MRNA. Additionally, D1.4 cells were transfected with adenoviral vector containing Smad 
6 or 7 construct; overexpression was confirmed by fluorescent activated cell sorting. The 
cells were also treated +/- TGF-3 or BMP, and the effect of Smad 6/7 overexpression on 
ligand stimulation was examined by comparing ALP activity between infected and con- 
trol cells. Smad 6 and 7 MRNA display heterogeneous expression in the unstimulated 
state in mOB and D1.4 cells; Smad 6 MRNA is generally higher than Smad 7. TGF-3 and 
BMP both up-regulate Smad 6/7 MRNA levels. Responses to TGF-3 are more short-lived 
than for BMP. BMP induces Smad 6 and 7 expression to a greater extent than TGF-, in 
both cell lines, Smad 6 overexpression fails to inhibit ALP up-regulation by BMP, while 
Smad 7 overexpression prevents TGF-,B suppression of ALP activity. We conclude that 
inhibitory Smads are differentially expressed in both the basal state and following TGF- 
f/BMP stimulation. The up-regulafion by TGF-P/BMP suggests a negative feedback loop 
in response to ligand treatment. The antagonistic effect of Smad 7 overexpression on 
TGF-f3 responsiveness confirms the negative regulatory nature of this protein, while Smad 
6 overexpression does not impede BMP signaling. 
 
Regulation of Murine and Human Osteocalcin in Normal and Hyp 
Osteoblasts by Vitamin 1,25-D3 and Phosphate. Sereena Carol Tamburri 
Coombes and Caren Gundberg Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation. 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this work was to: 1) Determine if the Hyp phenotype affects regula- 
tion of the human osteocalcin (hOC) transgene. 2) Provide evidence for, or against, an 
intrinsic abnormality in Hyp osteoblasts. 3) Determine if an organic or inorganic phos- 
phate source makes a difference in the function and mineralization of normal or Hyp 
 
34 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
osteoblasts. We mated Hyp or normal C57B/6 mice with transgenic mice, producing off- 
spring carrying the hOC transgene, +/- Hyp phenotype. Calvarial osteoblasts were isolat- 
ed and cultured in media supplemented with 2 mm p-glycerolphosphate ([BGP), 2mm 
sodium phosphate (NaPhos),100 um ascorbic acid-2-phosphate, or no additive. At 1, 2, 
and 3 weeks post confluence, cells were stimulated +/- 1,25-D3 for 72 hours. Conditioned 
media and cell layers were collected for hOC, murine osteocalcin (mOC), calcium, and 
phosphorus determination. We found the hOC transgene to be upregulated +14 percent to 
+47 percent in the Hyp osteoblasts compared with the normals, while the mOC was upreg- 
ulated +40 percent to +123 percent. In both cell lines the hOC maintained its stimulation 
following 1,25-D3, while the mOC was suppressed. Though further experiments are need- 
ed, this suggests that the hOC transgene may be affected by the Hyp phenotype, and that 
an intrinsic defect is present in Hyp osteoblasts. We found that either 2mm iGP or NaPhos 
was sufficient to stimulate mineralization, causing markedly elevated calcium and phos- 
phorus levels in the cell layers. Also, there was a partial redistribution of the hOC and 
mOC from the media to cell layer. Interestingly, the Hyp cells favored deposition of hOC 
rather than mOC in either media, yet deposited more phosphorus when grown in the 
NaPhos than the [3GP. Thus there may be differential availability of phosphate to the Hyp 
cells depending on its source, and this may affect the regulation of the hOC and mOC 
genes as well as mineral deposition. 
 
Health Care Antitrust and the Myth of the Medical Market. Matthew R. Cooper- 
berg (Sponsored by Ruth J. Katz). Department of Internal Medicine, Yale Univer- 
sity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
As part of a broad strategy of enlisting market forces to restrain the rate of growth in 
health care costs, Federal regulators have in the past quarter century adapted antitrust law, 
developed for the industrial economy of the late nineteenth century, to the modem health 
care system, with little evidence to suggest that patients or other consumers will benefit. 
This study examines the results of this strategy in terms of both economic theory and 
recent empirical research on the impact of the profit motive on the delivery of health care. 
Antitrust regulations prevent physicians from colluding to set fees or, particularly, from 
collectively bargaining with managed care organizations (MCOs). In their view of MCOs 
as proxies for consumer interests, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and the Depart- 
ment of Justice (DOJ), which enforce antitrust law, have allowed MCOs to consolidate to 
the point at which they are able to exert overwhelming economic power over both health 
care providers and patients, with significant negative impacts on patient care as well as 
physicians' practices. Both theory and, increasingly, empirical evidence support the asser- 
tion that Federal antitrust policy in health care is failing utterly in its mission to protect 
consumers, that regulators' reliance on profit-driven market forces to reform the health 
care system is leading to reduced health care quality, patient access to care and choice of 
providers, and provider and patient satisfaction, while failing to decrease consumer health 
care costs. Movements for antitrust reform and trends toward physician unionization, 
while hardly constituting a panacea for the health care system's problems, have the poten- 
tial to benefit both patients and physicians in the short term and, potentially, to obviate the 
need for third-party insurers altogether in the long term. 
 
35 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
High-Speed Subfailure Stretch Affects Failure and Relaxation Behavior of 
Anterior Cruciate Ligament. Thomas W. Courtney and Manohar M. Panjabi. 
Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medi- 
cine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Although ligamentous sprains occur more frequently in the clinical setting than com- 
plete failure, only a few studies have investigated the effects of such injuries on a liga- 
ment's biomechanical properties. The purpose of our study was to document the changes 
in both the stretch-to-failure and viscoelastic properties of a ligament that had been sub- 
jected to a high speed, 80 percent subfailure stretch at an elongation rate of 1.0 m/s. 
 
Thirteen paired fresh adult rabbit bone-anterior cruciate ligament-bone preparations 
were used. One ligament of each pair (control) was subjected to two relaxation tests and 
then stretched until failure. The other ligament (experimental) was subjected to an initial 
relaxation test, subsequently stretched to 80 percent of the failure deformation of the con- 
trol, subjected to a second relaxation test, and finally failed. The load deformation curves 
recorded during the failure stretches were characterized by eight parameters: failure force 
(Ffail), failure deformation (Dfai,), energy to failure (Efail), deformations measured at 5, 10, 
25, 50, and 80 percent of the failure load (D5, D1o, D25, D50, and D80, respectively), and 
stiffness measured at 50 percent of the failure force (K50). Stress relaxation curves were 
parameterized by measuring five force values at times 10, 30, 50, 130, and 180 seconds. 
 
There were no significant differences in the values for Ffail (283.8 ? 111.7 N vs. 
355.0 ? 52.4 N) or K50 (212.3 + 81.7 N/mm vs. 244.1 + 64.6 N/mm) between the exper- 
imental and control ligaments (p > .09). Values for Dfail (2.57 ? 0.32 mm vs. 2.33 ? 0.36 
mm) were significantly increased and Efail values (225.5 ? 109.0 Nmm vs. 312.0 ? 57.1 
Nmm) decreased for the experimental ligaments compared to controls (p < .03). The 
deformations D5, DI0, D25, D50, and D80 were respectively 79.6, 61.9, 42.4, 25.3, and 13.2 
percent greater for the experimental ligaments compared to controls (p < .003). The sub- 
failure stretch affected the ligament's viscoelastic behavior, resulting in an approximate 
67 percent decrease in force at the five time points quantified along its relaxation curve. 
These results indicate that although the ultimate strength of a ligament was not changed 
by a high-speed subfailure stretch, its behavior in terms of displacement at given load and 
relaxation parameters were affected. 
 
Propylthiouracil Bitterness Correlates with Ethanol Burn on Fungiform and 
Circumvallate Papillae. Kathryn E. Cunningham and Linda M. Bartoshuk. Sec- 
tion of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medi- 
cine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study created a protocol for testing ethanol as an oral irritant and examined the 
relationship between 6-n-propylthiouracil (PROP) tasting ability and perceived burn of 
ethanol. Fifty-three subjects were asked to use the Labeled Magnitude Scale to rate the 
burn intensity of 0, 30, 40, 50, 60, and 70 percent ethanol solutions on both the fungiform 
and the circumvallate papillae. The same subjects rated the intensity of the bitterness of 
PROP presented on a piece of filter paper. This study supports previous research that 
ethanol bum on the fungiform papillae correlates significantly with the intensity of PROP 
perception, with p < .01 at 30 percent, and p < .005 at 40, 50, 60, and 70 percent ethanol. 
This investigation demonstrates a correlation between ability to taste PROP and the burn 
of ethanol on the circumvallate papillae, with p < .005 at 30, 40, 50, 60, and 70 percent 
ethanol. PROP tasting ability is known to correlate with the density of taste buds in fungi- 
form papillae. This experiment's results might suggest that PROP tasters also have more 
 
36 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
taste buds in circumvallate papillae. This study might also help explain why alcoholics are 
more likely to be PROP non-tasters than tasters; burn of ethanol in PROP tasters might 
discourage this group from excess alcohol consumption. The graphs of ethanol burn made 
from these normal subjects can also be used clinically to assess lingual or glossopharyn- 
geal nerve damage. 
 
Measurement of the Temporal fMRI in the Human Auditory Cortex. Jennifer 
L. Dorosz, Matthew D. Robson, and John C. Gore. Department of Diagnostic Radi- 
ology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of these studies is to characterize the time-course of the functional mag- 
netic resonance imaging (fMRI) signal in the auditory cortex, to determine if the fMRI 
signal is linear with respect to the stimuli and to ascertain how the signal is affected by 
the imaging noise. Average single trials (AST) is a paradigm that allows the fMRI 
response to be measured at high temporal resolution. Using this paradigm we investigat- 
ed the transient signal response to 100 ms tone bursts in trains of between 100 ms and 25.5 
s in total duration. The resulting responses were compared to the predicted function where 
linearity was assumed. In fact, the temporal fMRI response is not linear, as assumed pre- 
viously; rather, it follows a model of adaptation where subsequent tones produce a pro- 
gressively lower degree of activation. In addition to AST, a novel paradigm of image col- 
lection that eliminated the effects of the magnet noise was preformed in order to study the 
influence of scanner noise during fMRI experiments in the auditory cortex. It is demon- 
strated that the temporal response to 800 ms tone stimuli is only slightly modified when 
performed in the absence of scanner noise, the modification being a small, but significant 
increase in the magnitude of the response. This result is consistent with the theory of adap- 
tation where the magnet noise acts like an initial stimulus and causes a decrease in acti- 
vation for subsequent stimuli. Results from this thesis serve to increase the understanding 
of the relationship between neuronal activity and fMRI signals and are a cornerstone for 
future research in language, reading, and music. 
 
Cyclin E AND p27 Expression in the Human Endometrium: Role in Endome- 
trial Assessment. Rebecca L. Dubowy, Ronald F Feinberg, and Harvey J. Kli- 
man. Section of Reproductive Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
In this study, we investigated the inadequacies of the standard histologic endometri- 
al assessment method as well as the use of cyclin E and p27 markers for increasing the 
yield of information gleaned from the endometrial biopsy. First, endometrial biopsy 
assessments from three commercial pathology laboratories were compared to the mor- 
phometric readings of a gynecopathologist (HK) who assessed glandular and stromal 
development individually. We found that 43 percent of these biopsy readings differed by 
> 2 days and, remarkably, 15 percent differed by more than four days. Then, using 
immunohistochemical staining, cyclin E and p27 expression was determined in both nor- 
mal endometrial biopsies and those with glandular-stromal dyssynchrony. Both cyclin E 
and p27 were found to have a standard progression of expression in normal biopsies 
throughout the menstrual cycle. Further, cyclin expression was consistent with the appar- 
ent cycle day of the glands and stroma individually when glandular-stromal dyssynchrony 
was present. This phenomenon was termed Differentiation Specific Expression (DSE). 
Conclusions are that the standard histologic endometrial assessment is insufficient as a 
 
37 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
diagnostic tool and that cyclin E and p27 may be used to aid in the assessment of the indi- 
vidual development of the glands and stroma. In addition, DSE indicates that glandular- 
stromal dyssynchrony represents a true arrest in glandular development (Glandular Devel- 
opmental Arrest, GDA), which supports the contention that the glands and stroma devel- 
op independently and should each be considered individually when evaluating the 
endometrium. 
 
Tuberculosis Prophylaxis in New Haven Welfare Recipients: A Trial to Pro- 
mote Compliance with Treatment. Evelyn H. Duvivier and Lynn Tanoue. Section 
of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Med- 
icine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
One of the most enduring obstacles in the treatment of latent tuberculosis is lack of 
patient adherence to medication. The purpose of this study was to determine the efficacy 
of monetary incentives and outreach on improving completion of chemoprophylaxis for 
tuberculosis in a population that had previously been found to comply poorly with this 
medical regimen: welfare recipients. 
 
This study was designed as a randomized, controlled trial. Newly registered welfare 
applicants were screened for latent tuberculosis. Those who tested positive were coun- 
seled about tuberculosis, then referred to Winchester Chest Clinic (WCC), where they 
were randomly assigned to either monetary incentive or control groups. If recommended 
treatment, the monetary incentive group received $10 per clinic visit, and $25 if twelve 
months of treatment were completed. Staff at the clinic were blinded to the grouping of 
the patients. If a patient in either group missed an appointment, an outreach worker con- 
tacted the patient. 
 
During a one-year period, 414 Welfare applicants were screened for tuberculosis. 
Thirty-two (8 percent) had positive PPD results. Twenty (63 percent) presented for their 
initial appointment. This compares to a 56 percent WCC attendance rate among welfare 
recipients in prior years. Six monetary incentive patients initiated chemoprophylaxis. One 
(17 percent) completed six months of therapy, and two (33 percent), twelve months. Seven 
control patients initiated chemoprophylaxis. Two (29 percent) completed six months of 
therapy, and none (0 percent), twelve months. In prior years, none of the welfare recipi- 
ents referred to WCC completed chemoprophylaxis. 
 
In summary, the combination of patient education, bus tokens, monetary incentive, 
and outreach appeared to improve compliance compared to historic controls, with the 
monetary incentive having an independent positive impact. However, the small sample 
size limited the power of the study to draw statistically significant conclusions and, there- 
fore, hindered the validity of the results. Additional studies are needed to further explore 
effective chemoprophylactic strategies. 
 
Comparative Assessment of Hyperventilation, Tilting, and Phenylephrine 
Bolus on Autonomic Activity. Brian J. Egan, Mihai Podgoreanu, and David G. 
Silverman Department of Anesthesiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study tested the hypothesis that organized vasomotion of the peripheral vascu- 
lature consistent with cholinergic oscillatory control could be elicited by global sympa- 
thetic challenges (which are not classically associated with vagal activation), as well as by 
infusion of an alpha-agonist (which is classically associated with a vagal response). 
 
38 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Heart rate, blood pressure, respiration, and finger and forehead flow (via a 1 mm2 
laser Doppler surface probe) were monitored in 11 healthy volunteers undergoing a three- 
minute hyperventilation challenge and a three-minute tilting challenge; 10 also received a 
phenylephrine bolus. Hyperventilation and tilting were repeated after pretreatment with 
atropine. 
 
Hyperventilation induced a 26 percent reduction in finger perfusion (p = .018 using 
a paired t test) and phenylephrine bolus produced a 54 percent reduction in finger perfu- 
sion (p < .001). In contrast, these effects were associated with sustained or increased per- 
fusion at the forehead as well as an increase in the amplitude and organization of oscilla- 
tory activity as documented by a significant increase in mid-frequency (0.12-0.18) spec- 
tral power (p = .004 and .03, for hyperventilation and phenylephrine, respectively). This 
increase in forehead oscillatory power, which is consistent with parasympathetic but not 
sympathetic oscillatory activity, was independent of respiration and of the major oscilla- 
tory power of the ECG. Pretreatment with atropine during hyperventilation prevented the 
increase in mid-frequency power, confirming cholinergic mediation of the response. 
Although tilting induced a 24 percent decrease in finger perfusion (p = .008), spectral 
power in the mid-frequency band did not increase to the same degree, 
 
The present findings confirm that cholinergic oscillatory control can be elicited by 
the noninvasive sympathomimetic challenge of hyperventilation as well as by phenyle- 
phrine bolus. The ability to selectively elicit and monitor a response hypothesized to play 
an important homeostatic role in response to vasoconstriction has important implications 
concerning the development of clinical monitoring of autonomic function 
 
Abuse of Pregnant Adolescents: A Study of Prevalence and Associated Fac- 
tors. Lisa Eiland and Danielle Laraque. Department of Pediatrics, College of 
Physician's and Surgeons, Columbia University at Harlem Hospital Center, New 
York, New York and John Leventhal, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Purpose: Although there exists an extensive body of literature examining abuse of 
pregnant woman, in regard to abused pregnant adolescents the literature is limited. The 
purpose of this study, therefore, was to assess the prevalence of abuse in pregnant adoles- 
cents and to identify factors associated with this abuse. 
 
Methods: From October 1993 to June 1995, 148 pregnant adolescents were recruit- 
ed from a school for parenting and pregnant adolescents and from an adolescent prenatal 
clinic in New York City. The participants were privately interviewed during regularly 
scheduled prenatal visits, using a 115-item fixed choice questionnaire. Adolescents who 
reported being in a physical fight, being hit and/or having a sexual encounter against their 
will during pregnancy were classified as abused. 
 
Results: The reported prevalence of abuse was 26 percent. Of the adolescents who 
were involved in a physical fight, 32 percent reported a female peer as the perpetrator and 
24 percent reported the father of the baby as the perpetrator. Three adolescents reported 
sexual abuse during pregnancy, and in all three cases, the father of the baby was the named 
assailant. When compared to their non-abused counterparts, abused adolescents reported 
greater teen-parent conflict/depression (p = .03), greater cigarette use during pregnancy (p 
= .005), greater alcohol use during pregnancy (p < .005), greater lifetime use of marijua- 
na (p < .001); were more often afraid in their buildings (p = .019); were less likely to dis- 
cuss their pregnancy (p = .032); and had more STDs during pregnancy (p = .016). 
 
Conclusions: Prevalence of abuse during adolescent pregnancy rivals if not surpass- 
es those rates reported in pregnant adults. Substance use, lack of social support, and 
 
39 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
involvement in risk behaviors were factors more commonly reported by abused adoles- 
cents. The relationship of these factors to abuse is not known. Knowledge of these factors, 
however, is imperative in developing clinical strategies to support and prevent adverse 
outcomes of adolescent pregnancy. 
 
The Sequential Schedule for Poliovirus Immunization: Factors Associated 
with Its Adoption by Primary Care Providers. Melissa S. Ellis, Philip LaRussa, 
Sally Findley, and Matilde Irigoyen. Department of Pediatrics, Columbia Universi- 
ty, New York, New York. (Sponsored by Eugene Shapiro, Department of Pediatrics, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
Background and objectives: In January 1997, the Advisory Committee on Immu- 
nization Practices (ACIP) recommended switching from a schedule consisting solely of 
oral polio vaccine to a sequential one consisting of both an inactivated, injectable vaccine 
and an oral vaccine. The objectives of this project were to gain a better understanding of 
how providers learn about changes in immunization policy and to identify factors that 
were important to them in deciding whether to adopt the sequential schedule. Methods: 
Providers in Northern Manhattan were surveyed between July and August 1997. Data 
were collected on the professional qualifications of the providers, their practice demo- 
graphics, providers' preferences for immunization sources, and their current polio immu- 
nization practices. 
 
Results: 24 percent of providers had already adopted the sequential schedule, 40 per- 
cent were planning to adopt it, and 36 percent were not planning to adopt it. Compared 
with those who had no plans to switch, providers who either had already switched or 
planned to switch were more likely to be members of the American Academy of Pediatrics 
(AAP) (64.9 percent vs. 33.3 percent, p = .02 1), to have a faculty appointment (75.7 per- 
cent vs. 42.9 percent, p = .012), and to prefer using MEDLINE (56.8 percent vs. 28.6 per- 
cent, p = .039) or the "Red Book" (51.4 percent vs. 23.8 percent, p = .041) as sources of 
vaccination information. All providers identified similar factors that were important in 
their vaccination decision making: compliance with ACIP, medical issues, personal judg- 
ment, and parental concerns were considered more important than legal issues, logistic 
issues, and cost. When asked what would make them switch to the sequential schedule, 
providers who were planning to adopt the sequential schedule most commonly cited 
stronger recommendations by ACIP while those not planning to adopt cited a legal man- 
date by the New York City Department of Health. 
 
Conclusions: Providers who were not planning to adopt the sequential schedule were 
less likely to be affiliated with an academic institution, to be AAP members, and to pre- 
fer the use of MEDLINE or the "Red Book" for vaccination information. Our study iden- 
tified a group of providers that would benefit from more direct educational interventions 
to increase compliance with new vaccination practices. 
 
Maternal and Neonatal Outcomes of Induced Labor in Women with a Prior 
Cesarean Delivery. Leigh C. Elmore (Sponsored by Kelly Bennett and David C. 
Jones). Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Med- 
icine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Our purpose is to test the null hypothesis that induction of labor after cesarean deliv- 
ery incurs no increased risk of adverse neonatal and matemal outcomes. Data for this ret- 
rospective cohort study was collected from the records of the Yale-New Haven Hospital 
 
40 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
41 
 
from the years of 1995 through 1999. The study group consisted of those women with pre- 
vious cesareans who received induction with either oxytocin (124) or prostaglandins (79). 
The control group consisted of all women with previous cesareans who labored sponta- 
neously (560). Overall, the cesarean rate was elevated in the induction group (Induction 
[I]: 44.3 percent vs. spontaneous [S]: 22 percent, p < .001) along with rates of uterine rup- 
ture (5.4 percent vs. 2.3 percent, p = .03), transfusion (3 percent vs. 0.7 percent, p = .03), 
hysterectomy (I: 1.5 percent vs. S: 0.2 percent, p = .05), operative injury (I: 1.0 percent 
vs. S: 0.2 percent, p = .17), and matemal mortality (I: 0.5 percent vs. S: 0.0 percent, p = 
.27). The induction group also had an increase in neonatal intensive care unit (ICU) 
admissions (I: 28.1 percent vs. S: 17.7 percent, p = .002), APGARs below five at ten min- 
utes (I: 1.0 percent vs. S: 0.2 percent, p = .17), neonatal sepsis (I: 3.4 percent vs. S: 2.7 
percent, p = .57), and birth asphyxia (I: 1.0 percent vs. S: 0.2 percent, p = .17). Subgroup 
analysis revealed several differences between induction with oxytocin and prostaglandins. 
The mean induction time was found to be less in the oxytocin group vs. the prostaglandin 
group (Ox: 613 ? 376 minutes vs. Pr: 1317 ? 928 minutes). The rate of Cesarean delivery 
was not significantly different (48.1 percent Pr vs. 41.9 percent Ox, p = 0.39). The rate of 
uterine rupture was elevated in the prostaglandin group (10.5 percent Pr vs. 2.4 percent 
Ox, p = .02). In conclusion, our data indicates that induction of labor in women with pre- 
vious Cesarean delivery results in an increased rate of failed induction and an increased 
rate of uterine rupture especially with the use of Prostaglandins. 
 
Validation of a Whole Blood Serology Test for Diagnosing Helicobacter 
pylori in Chinese Patients. Matthew S. Falk and Joseph J. Y. Sung. Department 
of Medicine and Therapeutics, Prince of Wales Hospital, Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong. (Sponsored by Matthew E. Cohen, Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut). 
 
Purpose: To assess the accuracy of the FlexPack HP (Abbott Laboratory), a rapid 
whole blood immunochromatographic serology test, for diagnosing Helicobacter pylori 
infection in Hong Kong Chinese patients. 
 
Methods: Consecutive patients with dyspepsia presenting for endoscopic examina- 
tion were recruited for FlexPack BP testing. Those having received previous anti-H. pylori 
therapy or those currently taking antibiotics or acid-suppressive drugs were excluded. In 
addition to having the FlexPack BP test, all patients were tested for H. pylori using his- 
tology, rapid urease test, and a [I 3C] urea breath test. Patients were considered to be infect- 
ed with H. pylori when two or more of these three reference tests were positive. 
 
Results: One hundred patients were studied. The average age was 51 +/- 15 years 
(range 21 to 90 years), 55 percent of whom were female. Endoscopy revealed gastric 
ulcers in 5 percent, duodenal ulcers in 6 percent, gastric erosions in 7 percent, gastric ery- 
thema in 20 percent, and no apparent disease in 62 percent. Fifty-four (54 percent) of the 
patients had H. pylori infection based on study definitions. FlexPack BP test characteris- 
tics were: sensitivity 82 percent (95 percent CI: 73 to 88 percent), specificity 85 percent 
(95 percent CI: 74 to 92 percent), positive predictive value 86 percent (95 percent CI: 77 
to 93 percent) and negative predictive value 80 percent (95 percent CI: 70 to 86 percent). 
A faint line, interpreted as positive, was seen in 15 (15 percent) of the FlexPack BP results. 
No invalid tests occurred as assessed by the control panel integral to the FlexPack HP test. 
 
Conclusion: FlexPack HP was quick, convenient, and accurate when used in a sec- 
ondary care setting in Hong Kong Chinese patients. This test may be useful for in-office 
H. pylori testing. 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Investigating the Cutaneous Anti-inflammatory and Anti-carcinogenic 
Effects of y8 T Cells. Cristina Ferrari and Michael Girardi. Department of Derma- 
tology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Nonmelanoma skin cancers (NMSC), both basal cell carcinoma (BCC) and squa- 
mous cell carcinoma (SCC), comprise the most common cancer in the United States, with 
an estimated annual incidence of more than 600,000 cases. The cause of BCC and SCC is 
multifactorial, with both environmental and genetic factors playing significant roles. Evi- 
dence from clinical studies in humans and from analysis in experimental systems strong- 
ly supports the concept that the cell-mediated immune response of the host is a dominant 
force responsible for containing the growth of NMSC. Given that y6 T cells include the 
unique population of Vy5+ dendritic epidermal T cells (DETCs), we hypothesized that 
these cells play a role in the regulation of cutaneous immune response and prevention of 
the progression of papillomas to SCC. 
 
Utilizing FVB mice genetically deficient in y5 T cells (&-1-), we assayed for the devel- 
opment of papillomas and squamous cell carcinoma in a chemical carcinogenesis proto- 
col. Chemically-induced tumor initiation (DMBA) and promotion (TPA) of eight-week- 
old FVB mice, (6'-1 vs. 6+8k), yielded results that showed no significant difference in tumor 
development (p = .73). However, we observed a striking difference between &-1- and 6+&- 
mice in their response to contact dermatitis. As determined by ear swelling, &'1- mice 
demonstrated an increase in their inflammatory response to both allergen (DMBA: p = 
.00000002) and irritant (TPA: p = .0001) induced contact dermatitis. Histological analy- 
sis of ears post chemical challenge showed a marked increase in infiltrating dermal and 
epidermal inflammatory cells in 6&-1 mice. These results demonstrate the role of y6 T cells 
in down-regulating cutaneous inflammatory responses. 
 
Apoptosis as the Mechanism of Glutamate-Induced Death in Motoneuron 
Cell Culture. David J. Friedman and Robert G. Kalb. Department of Neurology, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
As many as half of the motoneurons in the rat embryo die during the course of nor- 
mal development. The activity of individual motoneurons, as modulated by glutamate 
receptors, may play a role in this selection process. We studied the role of glutamate 
receptor activation in embryonic motoneuron selection using purified day 15 embryonic 
rat motoneurons in cell culture. We found that the cell death caused by glutamate treat- 
ment was due at least in part to increased apoptosis. In TUNEL assays, glutamate treat- 
ment increased TUNEL positive cells from 50.3 percent +/- 1.09 (SEM) to 62.6 percent 
+/- 1.81 (SEM), p < .002. Hoechst staining for nuclear morphology showed more apop- 
tosis in glutamate treated cells than controls: 12.48 percent +/- 0.5 (SEM) vs. 19.16 per- 
cent +/- 1.96 (SEM), p = .016. Lastly, the protein synthesis inhibitor cyclohexamide pre- 
vented cell death in glutamate treated motoneurons: 76.6 percent +/- 2.9 (SEM) survival 
for glutamate treated cells compared to controls, and 102.2 percent +/- 5.7 (SEM) survival 
for glutamate treated cells rescued by co-treatment with cyclohexamide, p = .007. These 
results indicate that glutamate receptor activation is an apoptotic signal for a subset of 
embryonic motoneurons, and potentially plays an important role in the patterning of the 
developing spinal cord. 
 
42 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Stroke in Thoracic Aortic Surgery: Incidence, Impact, Etiology, and Preven- 
tion. Lee J. Goldstein, Javier J. Davila, Matthew R. Cooperberg, Gary S. Kopf, and 
John A. Elefteriades. Section of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Stroke is a devastating complication of thoracic aortic surgery. This study determines 
its incidence, clinical impact, etiology, and correlates for prevention. 
 
200 thoracic aortic operations on 197 patients (127 male, 70 female) ages 15 to 86 
(mean age of 61) were reviewed. There were 131 ascending or arch procedures, and 69 
descending procedures. In ascending cases, 51 were performed with cardiopulmonary 
bypass (CPB), 77 with deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (DHCA) (31.5 ? 9.6 minutes 
at 17.9 C), and 3 with selective antegrade cerebral perfusion. In descending cases, 15 were 
performed by "clamp and sew," 46 with CPB (either left heart or full), and 8 with DHCA 
(41.8 ? minutes at 17.8 C). 127 cases were elective and 73 were emergent. 
 
18/200 operations (9 percent) were complicated by permanent neurologic injuries 
consistent with stroke. Eleven strokes occurred in ascending and seven in descending 
operations (8.40 percent vs. 10.14 percent, p = NS). Stroke occurred in 10/74 (13.5 per- 
cent) of emergent and 8/126 (6.4 percent) of elective operations (p = .09). Seven of 18 
stroke patients died prior to discharge (39 percent). Analysis of operative reports, brain 
images, and neurologic consults revealed 11/18 strokes were embolic, 4/18 ischemic, 2/18 
hemorrhagic, and 1/18 indeterminate. Patients with stroke had. longer ICU stays (20.0 
days vs. 7.4 days, p < .001), times to extubation (18.9 days vs. 4.5 days, p < .0001) and 
post-operative stays (34.6 days vs. 16. 1 days, p < .005). Kaplan-Meier analysis showed 
decreased age-adjusted survival for stroke patients (RR 2.97, p < .004). 
 
This study concludes that: (1) Stroke is a common complication of thoracic aortic 
surgery that warrants consideration in decision making. (2) Stroke complicates both 
ascending and descending aortic operations. (3) Strokes are largely embolic. (4) Anti- 
embolic measures for particles/air are essential, including: gentle aortic manipulation, 
impeccable debridement, transesophageal echocardiography to identify aortic atheromas, 
C02 flooding of the field, and (in descending cases) proximal clamp application prior to 
initiating femoral perfusion. 
 
Physical Activity in College as a Predictor of Future Activity in 395 Yale 
Women Alumni. Dawn M. Grosser (Sponsored by Marc Galloway). Section of 
Sports Medicine, Department of Orthopaedics, Yale University School of Medi- 
cine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The primary purpose of this study was to assess the relationship between former col- 
lege physical activity and current activity in female alumni to determine whether physi- 
cally active women in college were able to maintain a recommended level of activity 10 
and 20 years after graduation. The secondary interests of this study were to evaluate the 
effects of age, weight, and health on physical activity level, to determine whether former 
individual sports participants are more likely to maintain a higher level of activity than 
former team sports participants, to determine whether former college athletes are more 
likely than former non-athletes to continue participation in organized sports, to evaluate 
whether women's perceptions of physical activity are consistent with their actual activity 
level, and to assess the most common barriers to exercise in this population of women. 
This is a retrospective study using a physical activity questionnaire developed from two 
well-known questionnaires, College Alumni Questionnaire (Paffenbarger) and the Min- 
nesota Physical Activity Questionnaire. Two mailings were sent to 1058 Yale women 
 
43 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
alumni from the graduating classes of 1979 and 1989 with a response rate of 40 percent. 
The women were questioned about their forner athletic status (i.e., varsity or junior var- 
sity athlete, intramural participant, non-competitive exerciser, and nonexerciser) as well 
as their current physical activity as flights of stairs/day, city blocks/day, weekly and year- 
ly sport activity, and household physical activity, which was calculated as kcals/week. The 
primary question was assessed initially with a one-way analysis of varience using the indi- 
vidual kcals for each activity with the independent variable being sports participants ver- 
sus non-participants. The question was also assessed with a X-square analysis using cate- 
gorical kcals (i.e., more than 3000 kcallwk, 1000 to 3000 kcal/wk, <1000 kcallwk). The 
results showed that athletes have a higher percentage (40 percent) than intramurals (29 
percent) and non-competitive exercisers (30 percent) in the highest exercise category, but 
the majority of women (-84 percent) who exercised consistently in college, whether or 
not it was a school sponsored activity, are now exercising at the recommended level of 
activity. Also, the majority of women (87 percent) who were former non-exercisers are 
expending a recommended amount of energy in household physical activity. 
 
Iron Uptake in Human Keratinocytes Exposed to Photodegraded Nifedipine. 
Alison B. Gruen, Jing Zhou, Kathryn Morton*, and Leonard M. Milstone, Depart- 
ments of Dermatology and Radiology*, Yale University School of Medicine, and VA 
Medical Center, West Haven, Connecticut and Portland, Oregon. 
 
Photodegraded nifedipine (PDN) has been shown to increase uptake of nontransfenin 
bound iron in erythroid cells. We investigated the ability of photodegraded nifedipine to 
mediate iron transport in human keratinocytes with the underlying goal of exploiting the 
process of epidermal desquamation for the purpose of eliminating toxic chemicals such as 
iron. Nifedipine was exposed to direct outdoor daylight for 1 hour to allow for the forma- 
tion of the active nitroso metabolite. The adequacy of photodegradation was confirmed by 
thin-layer chromatography on silica gel. Keratinocytes were incubated at 37'C with 15 uM 
59Fe and either 25 uM PDN or ethanol. The monolayer was trypsinized and centrifuged 
through a dibutylphthalate:paraffin oil column. Cell pellets were collected for gamma 
counting and protein assay. PDN stimulated a 20-fold increase in iron uptake in 30 min- 
utes relative to controls. The keratinoctye's ability to accumulate and retain iron was test- 
ed by pulsing cells for one-hour in 25 uM PDN and 20 uM Fe on four successive days. 
After a four day washout, the total iron content of keratinocytes - measured by induc- 
tively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy - was three-fold greater in PDN-treated 
dishes than in controls. The effect of time, dose, and cellular differentiation were similar- 
ly investigated. PDN provides an effective method for loading iron into keratinocytes. 
 
The Effect of Anti-CD45RB on the Immune Response of B7-1/B7-2 Knockout 
Mice. Liza C. Halpern, Giacomo Basadonna, and David Rothstein. Section of 
Transplant Surgery and Nephrology, Departments of Surgery and Internal Medi- 
cine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
CD45 is a family of transmembrane protein tyrosine phosphatases that are expressed 
by hematopoeitic cells and are involved in regulation of T cell activation. Studies have 
shown that anti-CD45RB monoclonal antibody can induce tolerance to murine renal 
transplants and islet allografts in chemically diabetic mice. Recent studies suggest that 
one mechanism through which anti-CD45RB acts is by altering CD45 isoforins and 
upregulating the expression of CTLA4, an integral down-regulatory molecule. Here, we 
 
44 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
studied the effect of anti-CD45RB on the immune response of C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) 
mice, and mice that lack two costimulatory molecules, B7-1 and B7-2, using foot pad 
injections of allogeneic cells as an in vivo model of alloreactivity. We anticipated that 
these double knockout mice would have the ability to express CTLA4 and, thus, be capa- 
ble of anti-CD45RB mediated down-regulation in the presence of an antigenic challenge. 
 
Anti-CD45RB was shown to block the immune response in C57BL/6 WT animals as 
indicated by comparing average weights of allogeneically-stimulated popliteal lymph 
nodes from untreated mice compared to the respective lymph nodes in anti-CD45RB 
treated mice (2.84 mg. in untreated mice compared to 1.19 mg in treated mice, p < .05). 
Conversely, anti-CD45RB had no effect on the lymph node weights of B7-I/B7-2 double 
knockout mice (.92 mg in untreated group compared to .90 mg in anti-CD45RB treated 
group, p = NS). Flow cytometry performed on lymphocytes isolated from the popliteal 
lymph nodes of the double knockout mice demonstrated a lack of intracellular CTLA4 
expression. This information may explain why the anti-CD45RB mAb, which is hypoth- 
esized to require intact CTLA4 to down-regulate the immune response, was ineffective in 
these B7-1/B7-2 knockout mice. 
 
QUALE: A Hemorrhagic Stroke-Specific Quality-of-Life Instrument. Azita. G. 
Hamedani, Carolyn K. Wells, Lawrence M. Brass, Walter N. Kernan, Catherine M. 
Viscoli, J. Nozipo Maraire, Issam A. Awad, and Ralph 1. Horwitz. Department of 
Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven Connecticut. 
 
Although hemorrhagic stroke (HS) patients suffer a high initial mortality rate, sur- 
vivors often make good motor recovery. As a result, patients score highly on outcome 
measures that emphasize neurologic impairment, disability, or handicap, and often have 
deficits that are not fully evaluated by generic quality-of-life (QOL) instruments. Thus, 
the purpose of this study is to develop and validate a hemorrhagic stroke-specific QOL 
instrument. 
 
Methodological guidelines for instrument development were initially established. 
Based on the content of 40 open-ended HS patient interviews, QUALE (54 items, 7 
domains) was developed. Data collected from the administration of QUALE, three com- 
monly used outcome measures, and four unidimensional instruments to one-year HS sur- 
vivors were used to assess QUALE's reliability (test-retest and internal consistency) and 
validity (content and construct). 
 
The study included 71 patients, aged 18 to 49 years old (63 percent women, 77 per- 
cent Caucasian). QUALE demonstrated reproducibility (test-retest K's = 0.40 to 0.96) and 
internal consistency (Cronbach's a > 0.80 for 5/7 domains). For content validity, QUALE 
scores had a broad frequency distribution (< 33 percent of subjects scored in any single 
score decile) and avoided ceiling effects of other outcome measures (e.g., 94 percent of 
subjects scored in the highest decile on the Barthel Index, and 40 to 58 percent of patients 
scored in the top decile for 5/8 SF-36 domains). For construct validity, QUALE discrim- 
inated among clinically distinct subject groups (e.g., mean overall scores were lower for 
subjects with intracerebral [30 + 36] than subarachnoid [50 + 34] hemorrhages, p < .05). 
 
In summary, QUALE is a reliable and valid QOL instrument. It assesses a broader 
range of deficits and is better able to discriminate among hemorrhagic stroke patients than 
other commonly used outcome measures, suggesting it may have an important role in 
evaluating patient outcomes. 
 
45 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Family History, BRCA1/BRCA2 Status, and Local Recurrence in Conserva- 
tively Treated Breast Cancer Patients. Elizabeth V. Harrold, Ellen T. Matloff, 
Bruce C. Turner, and Bruce G. Haffty. Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New, Haven, Connecticut. 
 
This study explores the relationship among young age at diagnosis, family history, 
BRCA1/2 status, and ipsilateral breast tumor relapse (IBTR) in conservatively treated 
breast cancer patients. First, age was examined as a prognostic factor for IBTR using clin- 
ical information from 984 patients in a computerized database. Second, 52 case patients 
who had experienced an IBTR were matched to 52 control patients from the database to 
determine if IBTR was associated with family history. For these 104 patients, detailed 
family history interviews were conducted; all data were recorded in a pedigree. A genet- 
ic counselor blind to the clinical histories then scored each pedigree as highly suggestive, 
moderately suggestive, or not suggestive of a hereditary breast cancer. Third, to assess the 
role of BRCA1/2 status in IBTR, 52 case patients, and 15 control patients underwent 
genetic testing. For the database, the overall actuarial 10-year survival was 73 percent 
with a median follow-up of 12.3 years; 112 patients had experienced a local relapse result- 
ing in a 10-year actuarial IBTR rate of 15 percent. Patients age 40 and younger had a sig- 
nificantly higher IBTR rate than patients over age 40 (p < .001). In the family history 
study, no differences were found between the cases and the controls. The BRCAI/2 muta- 
tion rate was 15 percent in the IBTR group (n = 52). However, 40 percent of case patients 
age 40 and younger had mutations, compared to 6.6 percent of matched controls. In sum- 
mary, young age at diagnosis is a significant risk factor for IBTR but family history is not. 
Young patients with IBTR have an elevated frequency of BRCA1/2 mutations; the IBTRs 
in these patients may represent new primaries, which has implications for mutation carri- 
ers considering lumpectomy and radiation therapy. 
 
Effects of Adenosine and ATP on Calcium Current Modulation in the Rat 
Retinal Ganglion Cell. Johnathan E. Henderson and Ethan D. Cohen. Depart- 
ment of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Adenosine (P1 Purinergic) and ATP (P2 Purinergic) nucleotides are thought to act in 
the central nervous system as neurotransmitters or modulators, but little is known about 
their physiological actions in the retina. This study examined whether purine nucleotides 
and their agonists exert physiological effects on cultured rat retinal ganglion cells by mod- 
ulating voltage-dependant calcium channels. Ganglion cells were purified using Thy-i 
antibody and placed in cell culture. Their voltage-gated calcium currents were whole-cell 
recorded using the patch clamp technique. At doses > 1 ,uM, adenosine significantly 
depressed (p < .05) high voltage-activated calcium currents. Three selective adenosine 
receptor agonists, (1) cyclohexyladenosine (CHA), (2) [2-p(2 carboxyethyl) phenethy- 
lamine 5'-N-ethyl-carboxamidoadenosine] (CGS21680), and (3) [N6-iodobenzyl-5' N- 
carboxamidoadenosine] (IBMECA), all produced reductions in the calcium current. CHA, 
which acts at Al adenosine receptors, was the most potent (44 percent) of the three in 
reducing the current. The reducing effects of CHA and adenosine were antagonized by 
[1,3 dipropyl-8-(2-amino-4-chlorophenyl)-xanthine] (DPCPX). ATP and LTTP also sig- 
nificantly reduced (p < .05) calcium currents in rat retinal ganglion cells without showing 
any marked inward current at a holding potential of -80 mV. The reduction caused by 1 
,uM UTP (52 percent) was the greatest of all the nucleotides, but exhibited rapid desensi- 
tization at higher doses. Our data suggest calcium currents are modulated by multiple 
 
46 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
47 
 
adenosine receptor types, with a predominance of the A, receptor. A P2YATP-type recep- 
tor is also present as UTP > ATP. Since these nucleotide receptors all caused calcium cur- 
rent reductions, they may be pharmacologically important in preventing cell death due to 
excessive calcium influx in retinal ganglion cells. This could have potential clinical utili- 
ty in diseases such as glaucoma and the retinopathies. 
 
Search for Mutations in the GABAB Receptor Gene in Patients with Schizo- 
phrenia. Masha Huseinovica, Joel Gelernterb, and Vita L. Goeia. Departments of 
aPediatrics, and bPsychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
 
The gene for the GABAB receptor is an important candidate gene for neurobehav- 
ioral disorders linked to chromosome 6p. The aim of this study was to screen this gene for 
polymorphisms in a schizophrenic patient population, using a case-control, genetic asso- 
ciation study design. A total of 70 subjects were studied, 20 diagnosed schizophrenics 
(cases), and 50 anonymous DNA donors (controls). Mutations were detected using the 
technique of single strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP). Presence or absence of 
mutations was verified by direct DNA sequencing. 
 
Fourteen novel mutations were detected. Of those, five mutations are in exons, four 
are in introns, and five are in the 3' untranslated region. Only one mutation results in a 
conservative amino-acid change in the putative N-terminal extracellular domain, Ala -* 
Val at codon 20. None of the detected polymorphisms were found to be associated with 
the disease phenotype. The SSCP technique used in the study was determined to be 93 
percent sensitive, 90 percent specific, with false-positive and false-negative rates of 11 
percent, and 6 percent, respectively. 
 
Given the study's limitations, most importantly the small sample size and lack of 
control for ethnic ancestry, these results will need to be replicated in order to be widely 
accepted. Nevertheless, the fourteen polymorphisms described here may prove useful in 
future association and pharmacogenetic studies. 
 
Development of a Rabbit Knee Injury and Instability Measurement Protocol. 
Robert G. Kadoko (Sponsored by Manohar M. Panjabi). Department of 
Orthopaedic Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecti- 
cut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to develop and test a protocol that would consistently 
produce a soft tissue injury in, and measure the mechanical properties of, a rabbit knee in 
vivo. The goal of this model, once developed, would be investigation of the change in knee 
biomechanical properties with healing after subfailure injury. Most previous knee models 
have included an injury by surgical incision, which does not simulate real-life conditions. 
 
This study shows a reproducible method of non-surgical, clinically relevant adult 
rabbit knee injury and varus-valgus instability measurement in vivo. The work was done 
in four phases: first, the design of a rabbit knee injury/measurement physical setup and 
test protocol. Second, an in vitro study to develop the setup using rabbit cadavers. Third, 
an in vivo study to evaluate the setup on live rabbits, and finally, a time-zero study. Aver- 
age pre-trauma mechanical stiffiless, measured as varus-valgus instability, was 11 N- 
mm/deg with a standard deviation of 10 percent. This changed to 6 N-mm/deg after a trau- 
ma impact of 18J (7 Kg mass dropped from 265 mm). Gross histologic evaluation in the 
time-zero study showed that the most frequent injury was a combined MCL/ACL injury, 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
with occasional meniscal and PCL damage. X-rays of several knees after trauma showed 
no structural damage to the bones, indicating that the goal of producing soft-tissue knee 
injury was achieved. 
 
An Analysis of the Growth of HIV-Infected Children During the School-Age- 
and Pre-Adolescent Years. Saba F. Kaiseruddin, Brian W.C. Forsyth, and There- 
sa O'Connor. Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut and Cooperative Studies Program Coordinating Center Vet- 
erans Administration Hospital, West Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to examine the relationship between the progression 
of HIV infection over time and the growth of HIV-infected children as they progress 
through the school-age and pre-adolescent years. The study is a retrospective review of 
medical records of a cohort of children followed at the pediatric AIDS clinic at Yale-New 
Haven Hospital. The data abstracted included sociodemographic variables, growth para- 
meters, information on clinical status, CD4+ T-cell and viral load (RNA PCR) measure- 
ments, and anti-retroviral therapy, with specific emphasis on the use of protease 
inhibitors. Data are presented for ages one year, three years, and every third year, there- 
after, through age 12 years. 
 
Thirty-two percent of subjects dropped below the 5th percentile in weight and an 
additional 12 percent dropped two or more percentiles, but not below the 5th percentile. 
However, a greater proportion of the population had short stature. Forty-six percent 
dropped below the 5th percentile in height, and another nine percent dropped two or more 
percentiles, but not below the 5th percentile. The clinical and immune stages of subjects, 
as defined by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention criteria, became worse with age, 
and CD4+ T cell counts were associated with weights and heights at some ages. 
 
In conclusion, growth abnormalities are prevalent among children with perinatally- 
acquired HIV infection, and height tends to be more severely affected than weight. This 
abnormality in weight and height is less prevalent among older children. Also, these 
abnormalities in growth are associated to some extent with the progression of HIV dis- 
ease. 
 
Risk Factors for Dizziness Among Older Persons Attending a Geriatric 
Assessment Center. Albert Kao, Aman Nanda, Christianna Williams, and Mary 
Tinetti. Section of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
In most previous studies of dizziness in older people, the prevalence of specific diag- 
noses has varied widely, depending on the diagnostic studies used and, often, on the spe- 
cialty of the investigators. Recently, a community-based study showed dizziness in older 
people to be associated with multiple chronic and situational factors, suggesting that 
dizziness in this age group may commonly be a multifactorial problem rather than solely 
a symptom of single diseases. To validate these findings, the present study was performed 
to determine the predisposing chronic and situational factors associated with dizziness 
among older people attending a geriatric assessment center. Medical history and physical 
examination data on consecutive, eligible, dizzy and non-dizzy patients were ascertained 
by chart review, and patient characteristics between these groups were compared using 
bivariate statistics followed by logistic regression modeling. Seven variables were inde- 
pendently associated with a history of dizziness: cataracts, depressive symptoms, the use 
 
48 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
of three or more medications, postural hypotension, problems with balance or gait, dia- 
betes, and a history of myocardial infarction. The association of dizziness with multiple 
predisposing factors in this study, similar to the findings of the earlier community-based 
study, argues for consideration of dizziness as a multifactorial geriatric syndrome. A tar- 
geted, multifactorial intervention may be effective in reducing the frequency or severity 
of dizziness in this population. 
 
Protease Inhibitor Therapy in HIV-lnfected Children. Naomi L. Katz, Michael B. 
Bracken, and Warren A. Andiman. Section of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, 
Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con- 
necticut. 
 
While protease inhibitors (Pls) have been found to dramatically decrease viral bur- 
den and increase CD4+ T-cells in adults infected with human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV), studies in children treated with PIs have been limited. This study was designed to 
assess the effect of PIs on viral load and CD4+ T-cell count in a cohort of 79 HIV-infect- 
ed children followed for a mean of 24 months, and to determine the effect of prior anti- 
retroviral exposure on the success of PI therapy. Subjects treated with PIs were compared 
to those subjects never treated with PIs. There were no significant differences overall 
between the PI and non-PI treated groups with respect to changes in viral load, CD4+ T- 
cell count, and CD4+ T-cell percent, after controlling for baseline values. The PI-treated 
group was subdivided into a "dual therapy" group and a "triple therapy" group, based on 
medication regimen just prior to PI initiation. The "dual therapy" group was found to have 
a faster rate of achieving a significant drop in viral load than the "triple therapy" group 
after initiating Pls (54 percent vs. 14 percent at 12 months, p = .05), which was indepen- 
dent of baseline viral load and more likely attributable to previous antiretroviral exposure. 
The "triple therapy" group was found to have a faster rate of achieving a significant rise 
in CD4+ T-cell count than the "dual therapy" group after initiating Pls (100 percent vs. 53 
percent at 12 months, p = .03), which appeared to be due to a higher baseline CD4+ T-cell 
count. In conclusion, although there was no overall improvement in subjects treated with 
PIs over a long term follow-up, there was a trend toward improved immune status in the 
PI treated subjects. In addition, subjects who had less antiretroviral experience and high- 
er immune status at baseline had a more rapid response to Pls, with respect to viral load 
suppression and CD4+ T-cell count improvement. This study supports the use of Pls in 
HIV-infected children early in the disease course to provide maximal immune reconstitu- 
tion. 
 
The Emergence of Compartmental Organization in the Olfactory Bulb 
Glomerulus. Hanna Kim. Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con- 
necticut. 
 
The olfactory bulb glomerulus is a discrete and heterogeneous neurophil where 
olfactory receptor cell axons synapse with dendrites of mitral, tufted, and periglomerular 
neurons. In the first study, we investigated the organization of the glomerular neuropil by 
using antibodies to both single and double-labeled constituents for analyses with confocal 
microscopy. Electron microscopy was used to assess the distribution of synapses within 
the glomerulus. The olfactory bulbs of adult Sprague-Dawley rats were processed for ocy- 
tochemistry with olfactory marker protein (OMP), synaptophysin, synapsin 1, glial fibril- 
lary acidic protein (GFAP) and/or microtubule associated protein 2 (MAP2). Double 
 
49 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
labeling for OMT and MAP2 revealed two distinct subcompartments within glomeruli. 
Synaptophysin and synapsin I also showed differential labeling with the glomerulus. Elec- 
tron micrograph reconstructions of glomeruli revealed interdigitating axonal and dendrit- 
ic subcompartments, where primary afferent axodendritic and local circuit dendrodendrit- 
ic synapses segregated within the glomerulus into the axonal and dendritic subcompart- 
ments, respectively. These results support the hypothesis of subcompartmental organiza- 
tion within olfactory bulb glomeruli. In the second study, we employed similar techniques 
to better understand the maturation of glomeruli and to examine the spatio-temporal inter- 
actions that occur during postnatal development. Sprague-Dawley rats at postnatal days 1, 
6, 12, and 18 were processed for single and double label immunocytochemistry for OMP, 
growth associated protein (GAP-43), and synaptophysin. Mature adult-like subcompart- 
mental organization within the glomerulus emerged by postnatal day 12. Earlier in devel- 
opment, immature axons entered the core of the glomerulus and moved to the periphery 
as they matured. However, beginning around 12 days postnatal, immature axons distrib- 
uted in the periphery and moved toward the core as they matured. This change in the tra- 
jectories of axons into glomeruli suggests that different rules may be followed in estab- 
lishing vs. maintaining glomeruli. 
 
Childhood Pneumonia in Nuwakot District Nepal: Perceptions, Management, 
and the Impact of a Community Intervention. Amy B. Levin (Sponsored by 
Michael Cappello). Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) is one of the major causes of preventable death 
among children in the developing world. Pneumonia accounts for the majority of these 
deaths. This two-part study was undertaken in the remote district of Nuwakot, Nepal to 
assess the management of pneumonia in children under two years of age. The baseline 
work was intended to provide a snapshot of the treatment of pneumonia in this population 
through the characterization of local health providers' and mothers' perceptions and prac- 
tices. The findings were used to guide the design of a community-based intervention for 
Save the Children. In the second portion of the study, a follow-up evaluation of the pilot 
program was conducted. The tools for both studies included interviews, observations, 
record review and focus groups. 
 
Results of the baseline study demonstrate that the local goverrunent health infra- 
structure does not adequately provide care for respiratory infections. Health Post Workers 
lack pneumonia-specific knowledge; only 50 percent could site tachypnea and chest 
retractions as the two most important signs for diagnosing pneumonia. Health posts are 
understocked, often without the first-line antibiotic of choice to treat pneumonia. Mothers 
are uninformed about pneumonia signs and symptoms. They delay in seeking care at 
health posts, waiting an average of 3.7 days from symptom onset. Over 55 percent of 
mothers rely on traditional medicine, which contributes to this delay in care-seeking. The 
follow-up evaluation revealed that pneumonia training may improve knowledge and prac- 
tices of Community Health Volunteers. However, the impact of the program appears lim- 
ited due to lack of community participation. Implications of the study findings are dis- 
cussed in the context of global ARI strategies. 
 
50 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Management of Acute Myocardial Infarction in Veterans: A Study According 
to Hospital Sophistication. Jody A. Levine and Michael D. Ezekowitz. Section of 
Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Employing baseline data from the CHAMP study, a prospective, randomized study 
of 5018 patients post acute myocardial infarction (AMI), conducted in the VA to evaluate 
aspirin/warfarin in combination vs. aspirin, we investigated whether a relationship exist- 
ed between the availability of resources and the type of medical care delivered. In addi- 
tion, we assessed for temporal trends in pharmacologic treatment to determine if practice 
patterns reflect the results of clinical trials. Accordingly, participating hospitals were 
divided into three groups: group 1 did not perform cardiac catheterization procedures, 
angioplasty (PTCA), or cardiovascular surgery (CABG); group 2 performed cardiac 
catheterization procedures, but not PTCA or CABG; group 3 provided PTCA and CABG. 
Procedure and pharmacologic use were examined for each hospital group and plotted over 
time (1993-1997). 
 
Patients admitted to group 3 hospitals were more likely to undergo "early" (within 
14 days of AMI) PTCA (23.4 percent) as compared with other interventions, i.e., "later" 
(14-90 days after AMI) PTCA (8.8 percent), "early" CABG (7.69 percent), and "later" 
CABG (14.64 percent). The rate of "early" PTCA increased with increasing hospital 
sophistication: 5.04 percent, 8.55 percent, and 23.45 percent in groups 1, 2, and 3, respec- 
tively (p = .001). For group 1, "later" CABG was more common compared with groups 2 
and 3: 19.16 percent vs. 13.00 percent vs. 14.64 percent, respectively (p = .001). In all 
hospital groups, utilization rates of beta-blockers, ACE inhibitors, and hypolipidemic 
agents increased, while use of calcium channel blockers decreased (p = 0.001 for each 
drug). 
 
We conclude that procedure use in VA patients with AMI increased over time (1993- 
1997) and differed by level of hospital sophistication: greater "early" PTCA rate in 
sophisticated and greater "later" CABG rate in patients admitted to unsophisticated hos- 
pitals. The impact of these findings will be better understood when outcome analyses are 
performed. Trends in pharmacologic treatment provide evidence that clinical trial results 
are being translated into patient care. 
 
Methylphenidate Inhibits the Growth of Children in a Community Pediatric 
Population. Megan C. Lisska (Sponsored by Scott Rivkees). Section of 
Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The use of methylphenidate (Ritalin) for treatment of attention deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD) has increased dramatically over the last decade. The surge in prescrip- 
tions has not been accompanied by scrutiny of methylphenidate's side effects, including 
the potential for growth suppression, in the community pediatric population. 
 
We examined the growth of 84 ADHD patients treated with methylphenidate in two 
community pediatric practices. We used height standard deviation (SD) scores to compare 
their growth to that of their untreated biological siblings. We also analyzed the patients' 
daily dose of methylphenidate in relation to changes in their growth over the treatment 
period. In addition, we surveyed community pediatricians regarding their perceptions of 
the prevalence and severity of stimulant-associated growth problems in ADHD patients. 
 
After three years of treatment with methylphenidate, we found significant differences 
in mean height SD scores between treated boys and their age-matched siblings (0.57, p = 
 
51 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
.01) and a difference of less statistical significance between treated girls and their age- 
matched siblings (0.70, p = .10). When we compared mean SD scores during the treatment 
period, we found similar differences between treated girls and their siblings (0.53, p = .12) 
and treated boys and their siblings (0.19, p = .01). After three years of treatment, there was 
a significant correlation between daily dose of methylphenidate and changes in growth 
rate for boys (R2 = .18), but not for girls (R2 = .04). In contrast to our direct observations, 
surveyed pediatricians perceived the potential effects of methylphenidate on growth to be 
minimal. Seventy-three percent of pediatricians reported they had not observed 
methylphenidate-associated growth suppression in their practices. Sixty-six percent of 
pediatricians reported minimal concerns about the possibility of such effects on growth. 
Twenty-six percent of pediatricians did not monitor the growth of methylphenidate-treat- 
ed patients. 
 
Our study shows that prolonged use of methylphenidate results in significant growth 
retardation in children. This effect is dose-dependent and is more commonly seen at doses 
in excess of 35 mg per day. The prevalence of this growth suppression is greater than pre- 
viously suspected, and most pediatricians underestimate the potential effect of 
methylphenidate on growth. Therefore, the growth of children treated with 
methylphenidate should be closely monitored. 
 
Subfailure Injuries of the Rabbit Medial Collateral Ligament: An in Vivo 
Study. James Mackey, 111, Robert Kadoko, and Manohar M. Panjabi. Biomechan- 
ics Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Subfailure injuries, or grade I and II ligament sprains, are among the most common 
of all musculoskeletal injuries, but their treatment is based on anecdote rather than scien- 
tific evidence. The goal of this study is to consistently produce subfailure injuries in the 
knee joints of live rabbits and assess the post-injury changes in the affected joint. Four- 
teen New Zealand white rabbits were subjected to a traumatic, medial-sided knee injury. 
Seven rabbits were tested for baseline and post-trauma laxity in the affected knee and 
immediately sacrificed for anatomical review while the other seven were assessed for an 
additional six weeks post-trauma. All laxity measurements were completed with a .652 
Nm pure moment. In the six-week trial baseline pre-trauma laxity was 14.95 ? 3.50 
degrees and post-trauma laxity increased to 21.22 ? 2.67 degrees, a 43 percent increase. 
Laxity dropped to 15.76 ? 1.55 degrees in week one due to the severe swelling in the 
affected knee, and increased to 21.57 ? 5.21 degrees at week six. The experiments demon- 
strated the ability to create a reproducible, traumatic, physiologic injury and track it over 
time, using a potentiometer to consistently quantify laxity measurements. Although the 
injuries created in this study needed to be full thickness ligament tears or avulsions in 
order to accurately track them with the existing laxity assay, the model should provide the 
foundation for future studies designed to assess subfailure injuries. With additional mod- 
ifications to increase the sensitivity of the laxity measurement, the model will provide a 
means to scientifically quantify ligament healing after sustaining a subfailure injury. 
These data will have a direct affect on the treatment of these injuries in the human popu- 
lation. 
 
52 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Utilization of Eye Care Among Elderly Residents of Low Income and High 
Income Housing in New Haven County. Michele W. Mak and Susan H. Forster. 
Department of Ophthalmology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study is to determine eye care utilization and factors associated 
with eye care utilization among elderly residents in low-income and high-income senior 
housing. We conducted a survey among 121 residents aged 60 years or above from three 
low-income housing complexes and one high-income housing complex in New Haven 
County. Questions on demographics, eye care use, awareness of physician-diagnosed eye 
diseases and diabetes, barriers to access to eye care were asked using an interviewer- 
administered survey, and visual function based on the National Eye Institute Visual Func- 
tion Questionnaires were asked using an interviewer-administered survey or a self-admin- 
istered survey. Among the entire study population, 10 percent of those who reported fair 
or worse vision and 35 percent of those who did not recall having any physician-diag- 
nosed eye diseases have not had an eye exam within the past two years. The percentage 
of low-income housing residents who had an eye exam within the past year and past two 
years are 64 percent and 81 percent, respectively. The percentage of high-income housing 
residents who had an eye exam within the past year and past two years is 86 percent and 
93 percent, respectively. Among low-income housing residents, significant predictors of 
not using eye care within the past two years are inability to always afford eye care (OR 
14.3, 95 percent CI = 2.2-92.9), lack of supplemental insurance (OR 5.6, 95 percent CI = 
1.3-24.6), and unawareness of any physician-diagnosed eye diseases (OR 4.9, 95 percent 
CI=1.2-20.8). Whereas among high income housing residents, unawareness of any physi- 
cian-diagnosed eye diseases (OR 36.0, 95 percent CI = 3.0-430.9) is the only significant 
predictor. The importance of regular eye exams should be emphasized to the elderly 
regardless of their income and educational level. A free mobile eye clinic may be useful 
in increasing public awareness of the importance of regular eye exams and may reduce 
the barrier to access to eye care, especially for low-income elderly people without sup- 
plemental insurance. 
 
Impaired Osteoclast Function and Increased Bone Mass in Proline-Rich 
Tyrosine Kinase 2 (PYK2) Knockout Mice. M. Maragh, N. Sims, K. Aoki, L. Neff, 
Z. Bogdanovic, J. Schlessinger, and R. Baron. Departments of Cell Biology and 
Orthopaedics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut and 
Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York. 
 
Since Proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2) interacts with Src and Src knockout mice 
become osteopetrotic, the purpose of this study was to investigate the bone changes that 
occur in Pyk2 knockouts in vivo and in vitro. By using histomorphometry, we examined 
the tibias of 15, 50, and 75-day-old mice with Pyk2 homozygous deletions and their lit- 
ter-matched controls. Histomorphometric analysis revealed a dramatic increase in trabec- 
ular bone volume. At 15 days old, BV/TV was 6.309 percent ? 1.739 in controls versus 
11.642 percent ? 1.357 in Pyk2 knockouts (p = .0138). There was a dramatic increase in 
osteoclast surface in the knockout mice. Normally, we would expect osteoclast surface to 
be no greater than 15 percent in mice of these ages, but it was 22.938 percent + 3.928 (p 
= .0271) and 51.351 percent ? 8.665 for 15 and 75-day-old Pyk2 knockouts, respectively. 
We also observed a slight increase in osteoblast surface in the knockout mice. 
 
53 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
In vitro studies using confocal immunofluorescence and pit assays demonstrated 
changes in the cytoskeleton and reduced pit formation of the Pyk2 knockout osteoclasts. 
The mean pit area for the control osteoclasts was 0.0656 mm2 ? 0.0390 while the mean 
for the Pyk2 knockout osteoclasts was 0.00791 mm2 ? 0.00526 with p < .05. These results 
are consistent with the increased bone volume we observed in the other experiments. 
 
These results demonstrate that a mild osteopetrosis occurs in Pyk2 knockout mice, 
and the increase in osteoclast number may be a compensatory mechanism for their func- 
tional deficiency. Given the role of Pyk2 in adhesion and motility downstream of integrin 
signaling, and the changes in cytoskeletal structure, we can conclude that adhesion and/or 
motility are deficient in the absence of Pyk2, leading to deficient bone resorption and high 
bone mass. 
 
Investigation of a Putative Pharmacological Animal Model of Schizophrenia. 
Evelyn L. Maxwell and Bita Moghaddam. Department of Psychiatry, Yale Univer- 
sity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Characterization of a putative pharmacological animal model of schizophrenia and a 
better understanding of its clinical relevance were the goals of this study. A single high 
dose of the psychotomimetic drug phencyclidine (PCP) was used as a putative pharma- 
cological model of schizophrenia. Schizophrenic patients manifest psychotic exacerbation 
in response to amphetamine. This study sought to determine whether animals in the PCP 
model of schizophrenia would also manifest exaggerated behavioral patterns and 
dopamine output in response to amphetamine challenge. 
 
Microdialysis probes were used to measure dopamine in the nucleus accumbens of 
rats after intraperitoneal injections of vehicle, low-dose or high-dose PCP on Day 1, and 
amphetamine on Day 2. Measurement of locomotor activity and stereotyped behavior was 
coordinated with microdialysis collection and recorded on both days of the experiment. 
Probe placement was verified at the end of the experiment. 
 
PCP produced a dose-dependent increase in extracellular dopamine in the nucleus 
accumbens and increases in locomotor activity and stereotyped behavior on Day 1. On 
Day 2, amphetamine caused a similar increase in stereotyped behavior and extracellular 
dopamine in all groups. However, a profound and disproportionate increase in locomotor 
activity was observed in the high dose PCP group. 
 
The novel aspect of this study is the augmented behavioral response to amphetamine 
in animals previously treated with high-dose PCP and the dissociated dopamine response. 
The results suggest that the delayed effects of high-dose PCP pretreatment may be inde- 
pendent of dopamine function and may alter the neurochemistry of the mesocortical sys- 
tem, inducing the exaggerated amphetamine response. 
 
A Novel Kunitz-Type Serine Protease Inhibitor from the Hookwarm, Ancy- 
lostoma ceylanicum. Aaron M. Milstone, Lisa M. Harrison, and Michael Cappel- 
lo. Section of Infectious Diseases, Departments of Pediatrics and Epidemiology & 
Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Hookworms, blood feeding intestinal nematodes, infect more than one billion people 
in the developing world. Because little is known about the role of protease inhibitors in 
the pathogenesis of human hookworm disease, we have recently devised a molecular 
strategy aimed at isolating cDNAs that encode related serine protease inhibitors from 
adult Ancylostoma ceylanicum, a human hookworm parasite. Using a combination of RT- 
 
54 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
PCR and 3' RACE, we have recently cloned the first Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitor 
from A. ceylanicum. The translated sequence of the CDNA encoding the mature A. cey- 
lanicum Kunitz-type Inhibitor 1 (AceKI-1) predicts a 68 amino acid protein with a MW 
of 7889 Da and a presumed methionine residue at its putative P1 inhibitory reactive site. 
The AceKI- 1 CDNA was cloned into the pET28a expression vector, and recombinant pro- 
tein (rAceKI-1) was purified from induced lysates of E. Coli transformed with the rAce- 
KI-1/pET 28a plasmid. Using single stage chromogenic assays, we have determined that 
rAceKI-1 is a potent inhibitor of the serine proteases chymotrypsin (Ki* = 485 pM), 
porcine pancreatic elastase (Ki* = 277 pM), and human neutrophil elastase (Ki* = 1.06 
nM). The inhibitor shows weaker inhibitory activity against trypsin (Ki* = 21 nM) and no 
activity against coagulation proteases factor Xa and thrombin. Additional studies have 
revealed that soluble protein extracts from the hookworms A. ceylanicum, A. caninum and 
Necator americanus contain identical inhibitory activities, suggesting that chy- 
motrypsin/elastase/trypsin inhibition is a broadly conserved evolutionary strategy of adult 
hookworms. To confirm this biological activity in vivo, we have purified the native 
inhibitor from soluble extracts of A. ceylanicum, using size exclusion and rpHPLC chro- 
matographies. Work is currently underway to further characterize the unique mechanism 
of protease inhibition by AceKI- 1, as well as to determine its biologic role in parasite sur- 
vival and the pathogenesis of hookworm anemia. 
 
Characterization of Non-NMDA lonotropic Glutamate Receptors in White 
Bass Retinal Horizontal Cells. Victoria Morrison, Daisy Lembke, Eduardo 
Solessio, Kevin Rapp, and Eric M. Lasater. Department of Ophthalmology, Uni- 
versity of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah. (Yale Thesis Sponsor: 
Fred J. Sigworth, Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale Universi- 
ty School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
This study was undertaken to characterize the non-NMDA ionotropic glutamate 
receptors in white bass (Morone chrysops) retinal horizontal cells. Horizontal cells fresh- 
ly dissociated from the white bass retina were used to record the whole-cell responses to 
rapid application of glutamate, a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
(AMPA), and kainate. At hyperpolarized levels (holding potential equal to -50 mV), glu- 
tamate application induced a moderate inward current. At levels of glutamate below 200 
gM, responses were sustained and graded with concentration reaching a maximum value 
of 126.95 +/- 48.9 pA. At concentrations above 200 jM, however, sustained currents 
began decreasing with further increases in concentration. The dose-response relationship 
illustrates the non-monotonic nature of the sustained responses to glutamate. The rising 
phase of the curve was fit with the Hill function giving a C1/2 of 53 [M and a Hill coef- 
ficient of approximately 2. 
 
To determine the glutamate receptor subtype, whole-cell responses to the application 
of GYKI-52466 (a noncompetitive diazepine antagonist of AMPA preferring receptors) 
and NS- 102 (a competitive antagonist of kainate preferring receptors) were used. Results 
of the study demonstrated that the ionotropic glutamate receptors of white bass horizon- 
tal type 2 cells are predominantly of the AMPA-preferring type. NS- 102 had no effect on 
the kainate-induced inward currents; however, GYKI-52466 significantly suppressed cur- 
rents, thus suggesting that under our experimental conditions, kainate-activated currents 
predominantly arise from activation of AMPA receptors. 
 
55 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
An Analysis of Transcriptional Regulation of Macrophage Differentiation 
Using Oligonucleotide Arrays. Lisa R. Natkin and Todd R. Golub. Section of 
Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Uni- 
versity, Boston, Massachusetts. (Sponsored by Nancy Berliner, Department of 
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
Macrophage differentiation is a complex process mediated by the transcriptional reg- 
ulation of cell-specific gene expression. Array technologies provide a new method for the 
analysis of gene expression patterns on a global scale. In this study, we use oligonu- 
cleotide arrays to identify patterns of gene expression involved in the process of 
macrophage differentiation. Using this technique, we were able to identify a gene not pre- 
viously known to be involved in this process. In addition, we confirmed the validity of the 
detection of this gene by array technology by confirming the presence of the MRNA by 
Northern blotting. U937 and HL-60 cells stimulated with PMA were used as a model of 
macrophage differentiation. MRNA from these cells was hybridized to the oligonu- 
cleotide arrays. Data analysis was performed using a computer program, GENECLUS- 
TER, which arranged the genes into clusters with similar gene expression patterns. We 
partially confirmed the efficacy of the oligonucleotide arrays by performing Northern 
blots with a probe for proteolipid protein 2 (PLP2), a gene found to be upregulated in both 
U937 and HL-60 cells treated with PMA. Based on our findings, oligonucleotide arrays 
appear to be a valuable tool for studying broad patterns of gene expression and for iden- 
tifying new genes involved in macrophage differentiation. 
 
Analysis of Serial Confocal Scanning Laser Images to Detect Regional 
Topographic Change in Glaucoma. Constance Nduaguba, Maan Joudeh, Doug 
Hoffman, and Joseph Caprioli. Division of Glaucoma, Ophthalmology Depart- 
ment, UCLA/Jules Stein Eye Institute, Los Angeles, California. (Sponsored by M. 
Bruce Shields, Department of Ophthalmology, Yale University School of Medi- 
cine.) 
 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate regional topographic changes in the optic 
nerve with serial images obtained with confocal scanning laser ophthalmoscopy in 
patients with glaucoma. Custom software was developed to analyze mean topographic 
images of 96 eyes of 59 glaucoma patients obtained with confocal scanning laser oph- 
thalmoscopy (Heidelberg Retina Tomograph [HRT] Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, 
Germany). Three topographic images at baseline and three topographic images at follow- 
up were acquired. Each set of images, respectively, was averaged to create one mean topo- 
graphic image (MOP), totaling two. Each 256 x 256-pixel MOP image was condensed 
into a 128 x 128-pixel image. A paired t-test was performed for each pair of condensed 
pixels to determine p-values for changes in the topographic measurements between ses- 
sions. A unique probability map was developed from these repeated measurements and 
graphically color-coded to evaluate each eye for statistically significant change. The 
graphical representations for statistically significant change were qualitatively evaluated 
and graded as "stable," "improved," or "worse." Qualitative analysis of these maps showed 
7/96 (7.3 percent) worse, 85/96 (88.5 percent) stable, and 4/96 (2.2 percent) improved 
over a mean (? SD) follow-up period of 2.5 ? 0.69 years. Eyes categorized as "worse" 
generally showed statistically significant change in the NFL clustered at the inferior and 
superior disc poles. In summary, this approach provides unique regional and global mea- 
sures for topographic change in the optic nerve that use confidence intervals based on 
measurements of variance for each eye. Probability maps can be useful in determining if 
 
56 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
a change in a region is statistically significant. Long-term longitudinal follow up is 
required to further test the validity of this methodology. 
 
Examining the Diagnostic Values of Physical Examination vs. Contrast Mag- 
netic Resonance Imaging in Adult Shoulder Disorders. Gilbert R. Ortega, Jeff 
Matheny, and John Daigneault. Yale Sports Medicine Center, Department of 
Orthopaedic Surqery and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose, of this time-series cross-sectional study was to compare the diagnostic 
accuracy and reliability of physical examination tests to contrast MRI with respect to par- 
tial and full rotator cuff tears, bicep tendon tears, and glenoid labral tears. The same 
orthopaedic surgeon performed all histories, physical examinations, and surgical 
arthroscopy. The data collection was completed on 20 patients visiting the Yale Sports 
Medicine Center with symptoms of shoulder pain and/or discomfort. There were 11 men 
and nine women (average age, 55.5 years). The results of eight physical examination tests 
(Hawkin's test, Jobe's test, Drop arm test, lift off test, lag signs-external rotation lag sign, 
internal rotation lag sign, drop sign, and weakness in external rotation) for detecting 
shoulder rotator cuff tears, two tests for bicep tendon tears (Yergason test, Speed Test), 
and three tests for glenoid labral tears (Crank test, anterior slide test, clunk test) were com- 
pared to contrast MRI and arthroscopic findings. Contrast MRI was significantly more 
accurate and reliable than physical examination in the diagnosis of full rotator cuff tears 
(p < .05). Physical examination was significantly more accurate and reliable than contrast 
MRI in the diagnosis of both bicep rupture (p < .001) and glenoid labral tears (p < .01). 
Physical examination showed higher or equal predictive values when compared to con- 
trast MRI with respect to clinical diagnosis of full rotator cuff tears with tear sizes 
between 1 to 5 cm, full supraspinatus and infraspinatus rotator cuff tears, and both poste- 
rior and SLAP glenoid tears. With the escalating pressures of maintaining high quality 
health care and low patient costs, this study attempted to show that expensive studies such 
as contrast MRI may or may not improve clinical diagnosis of shoulder disorders includ- 
ing observable, full rotator cuff tears, bicep ruptures, and glenoid labral tears. 
 
Physical Forces Enhance Colon Cancer Cell Adhesion Through Mechanism 
Involving SRC Kinase. Ashish R. Patel, Stephen M. Kavic, and Marc D. Basson. 
Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Colon cancer cells are subjected to physical forces during open or laparoscopic pro- 
cedures due to insulation pressure, manipulation of the tumor, and turbulence created by 
fluid jets. Previous work from our laboratory has shown that physical forces can activate 
intracellular signals that lead to increased adhesiveness in human colon cancer cells in 
vitro. We have studied the effects of pressure, shear stress, and turbulence on SW620 
colon cancer cell adhesion using two paradigms - the first focusing on the effects of 15 
mmHg increased pressure, and the other on the combined effects of shear stress and tur- 
bulence. Pressure was applied to cells using a custom-designed lucite box. Shear stress 
and turbulence were applied by stirring cells in suspension at 600 rpm for 10 minutes. 
SW620 cells plated on a collagen I matrix at 15 mmHg increased pressure for 30 minutes 
showed a 30 percent + 4 percent (n = 15, p = .0009) increase in adhesion compared to con- 
trol cells plated at atmospheric pressure. When SW620 cells in suspension were pre- 
incubated at 15 mmHg increased pressure for 30 minutes and subsequently plated on a 
 
57 
 
Thesis abstracts -2000 
 
collagen I matrix under ambient conditions, adhesion increased by 105 percent + 20 per- 
cent (n = 9, p = .0005) compared to control cells pre-incubated at atmospheric pressure. 
Pressure-induced enhancement of adhesion was inhibited by the Src family inhibitor 
PPlat 1 uM and 0.1 uM. In-vitro kinase assay for Src showed that Src activity was 
increased in cells exposed to pressure compared to control cells. Pre-treatment of cells 
with shear and turbulence combined by stirring at 600 rpm and subsequent plating on a 
collagen I matrix enhanced adhesion by 85 percent + 22 percent (n = 9, p = .0047) com- 
pared to non-stirred control cells. Shear-induced enhancement was also inhibited by the 
Src family inhibitor PP1 at 0.1 uM. In-vitro kinase assay for Src confirmed that Src was 
activated in response to shear and turbulence. 
 
We concluded that SW620 colon cancer cell adhesion in-vitro was stimulated by 
pressure, shear stress, and turbulence. This enhancement is accompanied by Src kinase 
activity and could be blocked by the Src family inhibitor PPl. 
 
Modulation of the Hedgehog Signaling Pathway by Retinoic Acid in HaCaT 
Cells and Basal Cell Carcinomas. William Posten. Advisors: Allen Bale and 
David Leffell. Departments of Genetics and Dermatology, Yale University School 
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The hedgehog signaling pathway plays a critical role in the development of basal cell 
carcinomas. Systemic retinoids are used in the chemoprevention of basal cell carcinomas. 
The hypothesis is that the effect of retinoids on basal cell carcinomas may be mediated via 
the hedgehog signaling pathway. This work explored the role of retinoic acid in modulat- 
ing components of the hedgehog signaling pathway by examining the expression of vari- 
ous genes in HaCaT cells and basal cell carcinoma biopsies. The results show a decrease 
in expression of PTCH and GLI3 in HaCaT cells exposed to retinoic acid and a decrease 
in the expression of PTCH in basal cell carcinomas after topical application of retinoic 
acid. No significant change was observed in TGF-,B, BMP4, or WNT1O expression in 
HaCaT cells. These results suggest that the antiproliferative effect of retinoic acid on basal 
cell carcinomas may be mediated through the hedgehog signaling pathway and particu- 
larly via GLI gene expression. 
 
Overexpression of 0-linked N-Acetylglucosaminyl Transferase Inhibits 
Nuclear Transport. Jose M. Prince, Dona C. Love, Thomas D. Sweitzer, William 
A. Lubas, Wendy Wu, and John A. Hanover. Laboratory of Cell Biology and Bio- 
chemistry, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland. (Sponsored by James D. 
Jamieson, Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
0-linked GlcNAc Transferase (OGT) post-translationally modifies nuclear pore pro- 
teins and transcription factors by the addition of N-acetylglucosamine. The hexosamine 
biosynthetic pathway (HBP) metabolizes glucose to produce the UDP-GlcNAc substrate 
utilized by OGT. The highly regulated nucleocytoplasmic modification catalyzed by OGT 
has been proposed to modulate transcription and nuclear transport. We have utilized a 
chimeric protein constructed with the full-length HIV Rev sequence, the hormone bind- 
ing region of the glucocorticoid receptor, and the green fluorescent protein (Rev-GR-GFP) 
to study nuclear import and export in living cells. Uninduced HeLa cells stably express- 
ing this construct in their cytoplasm will transport the fluorescent chimera to the nucleus 
 
58 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
upon glucocorticoid stimulation. A blue variant of GFP was fused to OGT (BFP-OGT) 
permitting simultaneous visualization of both BFP-OGT and Rev-GR-GFP. BFP-OGT is 
distributed in both the cytoplasm and the nucleus when examined by confocal 
microscopy. Overexpression of BFP-OGT completely inhibits nuclear import of Rev-GR- 
GFP. Furthermore, cells transiently overexpressing BFP-OGT demonstrate greatly 
enhanced O-GlcNAc at the nuclear periphery, visualized with the O-GlcNAc-specific 
monoclonal antibody, RL-2. Further supporting these observations, BFP-OGT overex- 
pression also blocks the nuclear transport of the SV-40 large T antigen in COS- I cells. 
 
To delineate the role of the HBP in modulating nuclear transport through OGT medi- 
ated glycosylation, we examined the effect of glucosamine, which bypasses the rate lim- 
iting step of the pathway to yield increased intracellular UDP-GlcNAc levels. Glu- 
cosamine pre-treatment for 24 hours blocked nuclear transport of Rev-GR-GFP in living 
cells. In a manner consistent with the effects of BFP-OGT overexpression, glucosamine 
pre-treated cells demonstrated a greatly increased level of O-GIcNAc at the nuclear 
periphery with RL-2 staining. Furthermore, digitonin permeabilized HeLa cells pre-treat- 
ed with glucosamine are unable to support nuclear transport in vitro. Taken together, our 
findings suggest that 0-linked GlcNAc addition by OGT may play a direct role in the reg- 
ulation of nuclear transport. 
 
The Effects of a Home Intervention Program for Cocaine-Using Mothers. 
Michal Radzynski, Kim Freudigman, and Brian W.C. Forsyth. Department of Pedi- 
atrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to evaluate outcomes among the children of cocaine- 
using mothers who participated in the Coordinated Intervention for Women and Infants 
(CIWI) home visitation program. The program was based on an ecological model, and 
goals included treatment for substance abuse, the improvement of child well-being, and 
the reunification of mothers with children who had been removed from their care. Spe- 
cific outcomes assessed were health care maintenance, immunization status, maltreat- 
ment, and change of primary caretaker. The study design was a retrospective chart review 
comparing matched cohorts. Comparison subjects were children of a similar socioeco- 
nomic background who had no cocaine exposure and were matched on five variables. 
 
Forty-three children were eligible for inclusion in the cocaine-exposed (CIWI) 
group. Rates of well-child care and immunizations were as good in the CIWI group as in 
the non-exposed comparison group, and maltreatment rates among CIWI children were no 
worse than among comparison subjects. These results show an improvement compared to 
the outcomes of previously studied cocaine-exposed children who did not receive an inter- 
vention. Rates of placement, however, were significantly higher in the CIWI group, with 
over half of the CIWI children experiencing a change of primary caregiver in the first year 
of life (p < .001). Although the high incidence of placement may partially account for the 
study outcomes, these results nevertheless suggest a role for the CIWI program in improv- 
ing the outcomes of children born to cocaine-using mothers. 
 
59 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
TGF-1 Is a Crucial Counter-Regulatory Cytokine that Inhibits DNA Synthesis 
and Function of CD4+ TH1 Cells Responsible for Colitis in Murine Models of 
Crohn's Disease. Andrew S. Resnick and Bjorn R. Ludviksson. Mucosal Immuni- 
ty Section. NIAID. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland (Sponsored 
bv Dr. John Seashore, Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
In the late 1980s, it became apparent that under certain experimental conditions, 
CD4+ T cells would differentiate into either IFN-y (Thl) or IL-4-producing (Th2) cells. In 
the past decade, murine models of Crohn's disease have demonstrated that this condition 
may reflect an over-active Thl cell response. In several of these models, decreased colonic 
inflammation has been associated with increased levels of the cytokine, TGF-p. Howev- 
er, it is presently unknown how TGF-1 affects the proliferation, cytokine production, or 
intra-cellular signaling found in Thl cells. 
 
We primed CD4+ Ova Tg T cells in conditions favoring Thl differentiation, and also 
used the previously-established A.E7 Thl cell line. In both cell lines, TGF-, produced a 
dose-dependent reduction of DNA synthesis during antigen-specific stimulation. In func- 
tional assays we found that TGF-,B had a dose-dependent inhibitory effect on IFN-y pro- 
duction (A.E7: 1 ng/ml TGF-1 reduced IFN-y production by 34 percent, p < .01; 10 ng/ml 
reduced production by 61.9 percent, p < .007. Thl cell line: 1 ng/ml TGF-p reduced IFN- 
y production by 20.9 percent, p < .017; 10 ng/ml TGF-P reduced production by 30 per- 
cent, p < .0004). However, this counter-regulatory effect of TGF-f was not due to the lack 
of IFN-y or IL-12 since addition of these cytokines into the cultures did not reverse the 
effects of TGF-4. Furthermore, this effect was not attributed to apoptosis since addition 
of TGF-4 did not induce apoptosis of Thl cells significantly above baseline. 
 
It is known that STAT4 phosphorylation is up-regulated by IL-12 during Thl cell 
activation. Therefore, we evaluated whether TGF-3 could interfere with IL-12-mediated 
signaling of Thl cells. In both the Thl and A.E7 cell lines, TGF-,B significantly down- 
modulated the phosphorylation of STAT4. Together with the data on DNA synthesis and 
cytokine production, these experiments suggest that TGF-f regulates the function of fully- 
differentiated CD4+ Thl cells by inhibiting the phosphorylation of the intracellular pro- 
tein, STAT4. 
 
T-Cell Rich B-Cell Lymphoma: Clinical Distinctiveness and Response to 
Treatment in 45 Patients. Jonathan A. Ripp, Diane S. Louie, Wendy Chan, Haq 
Nawaz, and Carol S. Portlock. Department of Lymphoma, Memorial Sloan-Ketter- 
ing Cancer Center, New York, New York. (Sponsored by Stuart Flynn, Department 
of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
T-cell rich B-cell lymphoma (TCR-BCL) is a recently defined pathologic diagnosis 
without a place among traditional lymphoma classification systems. The study of TCR- 
BCL cohorts may help further elucidate clinical distinctiveness, response to the therapy, 
and the effect of treatment regimen on outcome. Between 1992 to 1997, a hematopatho- 
logist at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center diagnosed 45 patients with TCR- 
BCL according to published criteria. Clinical data were collected through chart review and 
communication with other patient providers. Our patients presented most commonly as 
males in their fourth decade with late-stage nodal involvement. Extranodal involvement 
also was not uncommon. Three-year OS and FFS were 73 ? 7 percent and 47 ? 8 percent, 
respectively. Three-year OS and FFS for patients treated with intermediate grade non- 
Hodgkin's lymphoma-directed (IGL) therapy were 62 ? 10 percent and 45 ? 10 percent, 
 
60 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
61 
 
respectively, whereas, three-year OS and FFS for patients treated with Hodgkin's disease- 
directed therapy were 79 ? 13 percent and 30 ? 14 percent, respectively. The difference 
was not statistically significant for either OS (p = .474) or FFS (p = .511); however, IGL- 
directed treatment appears to have a clinically significant benefit in initial and sustained 
response rates, particularly when compared to the previously observed expected rates of 
HD-directed treatment. TCR-BCL behaves distinctly from lymphocyte predominant HD 
in terms of extranodal presentation, response to therapy, and survival rates. Awareness of 
such differences may avoid what appears to be the misapplication of HD-directed therapy. 
 
Wolbachia Infection and Cytoplasmic Incompatibility in Glossina austeni 
and Glossina brevipalpis. Theodore Ruel, Scott O'Neill, and Serap Aksoy. Sec- 
tion of Vector Biology, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale Uni- 
versity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of the study was to ascertain the Wolbachia infection status of wild 
Glossina austeni and Glossina brevipalpis flies, and investigate the effect of infection on 
tsetse's reproductive physiology. Wild flies were trapped over a two week period in July 
1996. Whole fly abdomens were dissected, DNA extracted, and a PCR-based assay ampli- 
fying a portion of the Wolbachia ftsZ gene was used to screen for infection. Of 61 G 
austeni, 32 were found to be infected (52 percent). Of 36 G brevipalpis, 26 were infect- 
ed (72 percent). To assess whether Wolbachia infection induced cytoplasmic incompati- 
bility, eight wild virgin G austeni females were mated with eight colony males that were 
known to be Wolbachia infected. The females were sacrificed after eight days, their preg- 
nancy status determined by dissection, and their infection status was determined by the 
same screening assay. Of the four females found to Wolbachia infected, one was pregnant, 
two not pregnant, one indeterminate; of the four uninfected, one was pregnant, two were 
not pregnant, and one was indeterminate. In conclusion, Kenyan wild populations of G 
austeni and G brevipalpis were found to be polymorphic for Wolbachia infection, in con- 
trast to established findings of 100 percent infection rates in colony populations. Prelim- 
inary hybridization studies suggest that Wolbachia infection may induce unidirectional 
cytoplasmic incompatibility in tsetse. 
 
The Role of Internet-Based Instructions in the Teaching of Anatomy to First 
Year Medical Students. Maya J. Salameh (Sponsored by William B. Stewart). 
Section of Gross Anatomy, Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Med- 
icine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this project was to devise a series of internet-based quizzes to pro- 
vide first-year anatomy students with interactive, easily accessible computer programs 
that would offer them immediate feedback and allow them to gauge their progress in the 
course of the semester. The web-based anatomy quiz system was developed on a Windows 
NT server located at the Center for Advanced Instructional Media (CAIM). Eighteen mul- 
tiple choice quizzes were developed using a template coded in extensive HTML format. 
 
The effectiveness of the web-based quiz programs was tested in a non-randomized 
study comparing midterm performance of students who used the quizzes vs. those who 
did not use them as part of their study. Furthermore, the computer programs were evalu- 
ated by responses to a survey in which students rated their access to the internet as well 
as the effectiveness and ease of use of the web-based quizzes. 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Results showed a statistically significant difference on midterm performance 
between users and non-users of the quizzes. The users did better on the midterm overall 
as well as on the sections of the midterm covered in the web-based quizzes (p = .0013). 
Results also showed that the web-based quizzes were very well received by the students. 
A majority of the students used the quizzes and most found them accessible and easy to 
use. 
 
The computer programs available to students can enhance their learning by provid- 
ing several advantages which other teaching methods cannot provide: Self-paced learning 
and self-testing, immediate feedback, and practice by repetition; they may even improve 
student performance on in-class midterms and exams. Advantages of CAI are unparalleled 
in this new era of technology, and while computers cannot replace traditional teaching 
methods, they can add to them in a way that is positive, efficient, and beneficial to both 
students and teachers. 
 
The Effects of Chronic Hypoxia on the Developing Rat Brain. Carl J. Seashore 
and William B. Stewart. Section of Anatomy, Department of Surgery, Yale Univer- 
sity School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The developing brain in premature infants is vulnerable to hypoxic injury. Clinical 
studies have correlated chronic postnatal hypoxia in very low birth weight infants with the 
development of neurological handicap later in life. Animal studies investigating this phe- 
nomenon have found that hypoxia induces angiogenesis in the developing brain but have 
not established a cause and effect mechanism for hypoxic injury. Since new vessels may 
have different permeability properties than mature vessels, we hypothesized that chronic 
hypoxia causes changes in properties of the blood brain barrier. 
 
Rat pups were raised, beginning on postnatal day three (PND 3), in a chamber with 
an FiO2 of 9.5 ? 1 percent for a period of 10 or 30 days (H10, H30). A subgroup of H30 
rat pups was retumed to normoxia for an additional 30 days prior to sacrifice (H30/N30). 
The brains of these animals were evaluated using immunohistochemical markers and elec- 
tron microscopy. A separate subset of the H30 animals was injected with horseradish per- 
oxidase (HRP), which circulated for five minutes prior to sacrifice. The brains of the HRP 
perfused animals were examined for leakage of HRP across the blood brain barrier. 
 
We found a pronounced increase in vascular permeability in both H10 and H30 ani- 
mals compared to controls. Additionally, a dramatic increase in the size of the lateral ven- 
tricles and associated decreases in cross sectional area of the corpus callosum and corti- 
cal volume were noted in H30/N30 animals. These findings suggest that chronic hypoxia 
increases blood brain barrier permeability as well as ventricular volume in the developing 
rat brain. 
 
Factors Associated with Differences in the Long-Term Care Preferences of 
Older Adults. Joanna B. Sheinfeld, Carol van Doorn, John R. O'Leary, Terri R. 
Fried. Section of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Although many older people will require some daily assistance as they age, little is 
known about the type of care they prefer. This study examines the long-term care prefer- 
ences of older adults as well as the characteristics associated with differences in stated 
preference in order to better define the desires of this growing segment of the population. 
 
62 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
Previously hospitalized medical patients 65 years of age and older were interviewed 
by telephone and asked to predict the type of care they would receive if they required help 
with (1) dressing or bathing; (2) ambulating or toileting; or (3) due to moderate to severe 
dementia. They were also asked to explain why they would not choose certain long-term 
care modalities. 
 
In the first two scenarios, approximately 50 percent of people preferred help from a 
home health aide, 30 percent desired help from family and friends, and 20 percent want- 
ed nursing home care. Factors significantly associated with differences in long-term care 
preference include prior experience providing extended care, female gender, age more 
than 85, having daughters, being married, never wanting more help when ill, and current 
ADL limitations. In the third scenario, the respondents were fairly evenly divided between 
long-term care options. Living with a spouse and never wanting more help when ill were 
significantly associated with long-term care preference differences. 
 
Despite perceptions that older people want to be cared for at home, our results sug- 
gest that considerable percentages prefer nursing home care, especially those with less 
extensive social support networks. This finding may reflect an inability of some older 
adults to envision a home-based long term care system able to adequately meet their 
needs. 
 
Describing the Geriatric Assessment: Patients with Cognitive Impairments 
and Their Caregivers. Grace Shih and Sidney Bogardus. Section of Geriatrics, 
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut. 
 
In providing care for older patients with cognitive impairments, physicians must 
meet the needs of both patients and caregivers. Treating patients with chronic, progressive 
conditions such as dementia may be particularly difficult because of the incurable and 
complex nature of the disease. As a common meeting ground for patients with cognitive 
impairments, caregivers, and physicians, the geriatric assessment plays an important role 
in the care of such patients. The purpose of this thesis is to describe the experiences of 
patients with cognitive impairments and caregivers during the assessment: how the visit 
was helpful as well as if and how the goals for patient care changed after the visit. Two 
hundred patients and caregivers were asked open-ended questions following the comple- 
tion of initial comprehensive geriatric assessment at the Dorothy Adler Center, Yale-New 
Haven Hospital. Results showed that patients and caregivers came to the visit mostly 
because of referrals (61 percent and 25 percent, respectively), general evaluations (23 per- 
cent and 34 percent), and mental status problems (20 percent and 46 percent). Patients and 
caregivers found the visit helpful mostly for the reassurance/support (45 percent and 41 
percent), information/education (20 percent and 30 percent), and specific diagnosis/eval- 
uation (11 percent and 25 percent) received. Roughly one-third of the patients and half of 
the caregivers had a change in goals. For both the patients and caregivers, the most com- 
mon changes in goals were in the management of social or functional problems (44 per- 
cent and 57 percent), medical issues (27 percent and 22 percent), and coping (17 percent 
and 22 percent). Increased number of chronic conditions (mean number 3.60; p value = 
.02 1) was positively correlated with change in patient goals. Patient age older than 80 
years (relative ratio, 1.4; p value = .018) and adult child caregiver (relative ratio, 1.5; p 
value = .019) were positively correlated to change in caregiver goals. The commonness 
with which patients and caregivers express reassurance and education as helpful under- 
lines the value patients and caregivers place on communication. The results also show that 
patient and caregiver goals are not static. The changes in goals suggest that physicians 
 
63 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
may influence the process of goal-setting, thus stressing the importance of identifying 
goals during the visit. 
 
Prognostic Significance of Histologic Regression in Thin Cutaneous Malig- 
nant Melanoma. Jason C. Sluzevich. (Sponsored by Rossitza Lazova.) Depart- 
ment of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecti- 
cut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to clarify the prognostic significance of histologic 
regression in patients with thin cutaneous malignant melanoma (CMM). The computer- 
ized records of all patients with CMM biopsy specimens catalogued by the Yale Tumor 
Registry in 1993 to 1994 were examined. Excluding in situ disease, 371 patients with a 
Breslow depth of 1.5 mm were identified. This cohort was then entered into a retrospec- 
tive analysis to evaluate the influence of histologic regression on five-year disease pro- 
gression defined as either local site recurrence or metastasis. Disease-free survival rates 
were calculated according to the Kaplan-Meier method from the date of pathologic diag- 
nosis to the first event of disease, progression and tested for statistical significance using 
a log rank test and Cox regression. The five-year disease-free survival rate for the study 
population was 95.6 percent. The median months of followup for all patients was 46 
months with a range of 8 to 60 months. Ten patients (3 percent) underwent disease pro- 
gression with four cases (40 percent) exhibiting histologic regression. Disease-free sur- 
vival differed significantly between thin and thick lesions (96.7 percent versus 90 percent; 
hazard ratio 1.4 [1.2-15.4]; p = .01) and between cases with regression and those without 
regression (90.3 percent versus 96.6 percent; hazard ratio 5.0 [1.2-20.3]; P = .02). Nodu- 
lar melanoma and lentigo malignant melanoma were associated with markedly worse dis- 
ease free survival (p < .0023) compared to superficial spreading melanoma. By multi- 
variate Cox regression, only histologic type and regression exhibited an independent 
prognostic effect on disease-free survival, although the small number of adverse events 
limits the precision of the risk estimation. The results of this study confirm that thin CMM 
generally has a favorable prognosis with the risk of disease progression modified by his- 
tologic type and the presence of histologic regression. 
 
Breast Cancer Relapse: True Recurrence Versus New Primary Tumors. Tanya 
E. Smith, Daesung Lee, and Bruce G. Hafty. Department of Therapeutic Radiolo- 
gy, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The purpose of this study was to classify all ipsilateral breast tumor relapses (IBTR) 
in patients treated with conservative surgery and radiation therapy (CS + RT) as either 
new primary tumors (NP) or true local recurrences (TR) and to assess the prognostic and 
therapeutic implications of this classification. Of the 1152 patients who have been treated 
at Yale-New Haven Hospital prior to 1990, 136 patients have experienced IBTR. These 
relapses were classified as either NP or TR on the basis of changes in histology, location 
and/or DNA flow cytometry. As of 2/99, with a mean follow up of 14.2 years, the overall 
ipsilateral breast relapse-free rate for all 1152 patients was 86 percent at 10 years. Using 
the classification scheme outlined above, 60 patient relapses were classified as TR, 70 
were classified as NP, and six were unable to be classified. NP patients had a longer mean 
time to breast relapse than TR patients (7.3 yrs. vs. 3.7 yrs, p < .0001) and were signifi- 
cantly younger than TR patients (48.9 years vs. 54.5 years p < .05). Seventeen percent of 
the patients tested (8/52) had deleterious BRCA1/2 mutations, and all of these patients 
 
64d 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
had NP IBTR. The overall survival following breast relapse was 64 percent at 10 years 
and 49 percent at 15 years. With a mean follow-up of 10.4 years following breast relapse, 
patients with NP had better 10 year overall survival (TR: 55 percent vs. NP: 75 percent, 
p < .0001), distant disease-free survival (TR: 41 percent vs. NP: 85 percent, p < .0001), 
and cause-specific survival (TR: 55 percent vs. NP: 90 percent, p < .0001). In conclusion, 
it appears that a significant portion of patients who experience IBTR following CS + RT 
have NP as opposed to TR. In addition, patients with deleterious BRCA1I/2 mutations are 
significantly more likely to develop new primary tumor relapses as opposed to true local 
recurrences. True recurrence and new primary tumor IBTR have different natural histo- 
ries, different prognoses and in turn, different implications for therapeutic management. 
 
Characterization of the Proline-Rich Domain of p137: A Mammalian COPII 
Protein. Jakub Svoboda, Christine A. Shugrue, and Fred S. Gorelick. Section of 
Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Proteins are transported from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi complex 
via vesicular carriers. Formation of these vesicles, their translocation, and fusion with tar- 
get membranes are facilitated by specific proteins known as coatomers. p137 is the mam- 
malian protein homolog of yeast Sec3l and a member of the COPII coatomer complex that 
mediates the initial phase of ER-to-Golgi transport. In order to identify proteins interact- 
ing with p137, we have performed yeast two-hybrid analysis, column affinity chromatog- 
raphy, immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence studies. We have focused our atten- 
tion on the proline rich domain (PRD) of p137 since similar regions in other proteins 
(dynamin, synapsin) are important for protein-protein interactions. Using yeast two- 
hybrid analysis, we found that the PRD of p137 interacts with mammalian Sec23. Using 
affinity columns with p137's PRD attached to sepharose beads, we identified another bind- 
ing partner of p1 37 in rat liver lysate. This 220 kDa protein was analyzed by MALDI-MS 
and Q-tof spectrometry and found to be rat nonmuscle myosin heavy chain A. Anti-pI37 
antibody immunoprecipitated a 220 kDa protein from rat liver lysate which immunore- 
acted with anti-myosin antibody on Western blot. Immunofluorescence studies in Clone 9 
cells using double labeling with anti-p 137 and anti-myosin antibodies suggested that there 
may be some overlap of the two proteins withinthecells. In conclusion, our findings sug- 
gest that the PRD of p137 is likely to interact with other proteins. The interaction of 
p137's PRD with another member of the COPII coatomer complex, Sec23, has confirmed 
that p137 is the mammalian homolog of yeast Sec3l. The interaction of p137 with myosin 
(a motor protein, whichgenerally has not been associated with ER-to-Golgi compartment) 
may be important for vesicular transport or for generating forces required for vesicular 
scission. 
 
Impaired Stimulation of Lipolysis by a Selective Beta2-Adrenergic Agonist 
in Obsese Adolescent Girls. Meredith W. Talbot, Staffan Enoksson, Fran Rife, 
William V. Tamborlane, Robert S. Sherwin and Sonia Caprio. Section of 
Endocrinology, Departments of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
In humans, catecholamines are the only hormones with potent lipolyticaction. It is 
known from several in vitro and in vivo studies that the lipolytic actionof catecholamines 
is blunted in the subcutaneous adipose tissue of obesewomen. What is not known is 
 
65 
 
66 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
whether this catecholamine resistance is present early in the development of obesity. In 
order to further explore this question, we studied the subcutaneous adipose tissue of 10 
obese adolescent girls, 6 lean adolescent girls, 13 obese women, and 10 lean women. We 
compared the lipolytic response of the subjects subcutaneous adipose tissue when exposed 
to the ,BI- agonist dobutamine, at concentrations of 10-8 and 10-6 and when exposed to the 
p2-agonist terbutaline, at concentrations of 10-8 and 10-6. We showed that in both obese 
women and obese adolescent girls, there is a blunted lipolytic response to the ,32-agonist 
terbutaline. In women, this blunted response was significant at a terbutaline concentration 
of 10-8 (p = .001), while in girls it was significant at a terbutaline concentration of 10-6 (p 
= .012). There was no difference between the lipolytic response of obese and lean subjects 
to the 0,B-agonist dobutamine at either 10-8 and 10-6. In conclusion, we have confirmed 
that catecholamine resistance exists in the subcutaneous adipose tissue of obese women, 
and we have demonstrated for the first time that catecholamine resistance also exists in 
the subcutaneous adipose tissue of obese adolescent girls. We also proved that the cate- 
cholamine resistance in both obese women and girls is related to the 32-receptor. 
 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases Among Women in Peru: Current Practices 
and Potential Markers. Darcy A. Thompson, Y.K. Tsai, Maritza Calderon, and 
Robert Gilman. Department of Medicine and Public Health, Johns Hopkins Uni- 
versity, Baltimore, Maryland. (Sponsored by Michele Barry, Department of Medi- 
cine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.) 
 
Little data exist on sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) in family planning and ante- 
natal clinics in Peru. The goal of this study was to evaluate 1) the prevalence of common 
sexually transmitted infections, 2) associated characteristics, symptoms and signs, 3) cur- 
rent clinical practices, and, 4) the sensitivity of whiff and pH testing for identifying vagi- 
nal infections, in Lima, Peru. We conducted a study of 363 women from an antenatal (n 
= 259) and a family planning (n = 104) clinic in central Lima, Peru, that included oral his- 
tories and physical exams. Samples were collected for laboratory diagnosis of common 
STDs, which included trichomonas, gonorrhea, chlamydia, syphilis, and the sexually 
related infection of bacterial vaginosis (BV). Overall, 10.8 percent of antenatal patients 
and 15.4 percent of family planning patients had a STD. The sensitivity of health 
providers' ability to diagnose infections was low, especially for cervical infections (sensi- 
tivity: 0 percent). In addition, few factors were associated with cervical infections or tri- 
chomoniasis. In the family planning clinic, pH testing was 100 percent sensitive for tri- 
chomoniasis and bacterial vaginosis (BV). In both clinics, whiff testing for amines was 84 
percent sensitive and 47 percent specific for trichomoniasis, and 88 percent sensitive and 
53 percent specific for BV. 
 
In conclusion, the burden of STDs was high and the sensitivity of current diagnostic 
practices was low. These results point to the need for simple diagnostic tools. Whiff and 
pH testing was found potentially useful for the diagnosis of vaginal infections. These sim- 
ple tests should be implemented as screening tools. New diagnostic tests for cervical 
infections need to be identified. 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
67 
 
Severity of Illness and Prognosis of Liver Transplant Candidates at Yale. 
Arvind Venkat and Amy L. Friedman. Section of Transplantation and Immunology, 
Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con- 
necticut. 
 
The increasing number of patients with end-stage liver disease (ESLD) listed for 
transplantation has forced physicians to examine the disparities in waiting times (WT) for 
this procedure across the United States. The debate has centered upon whether physicians 
within regions with longer WT, such as that of Yale, are listing patients prematurely com- 
pared to regions with shorter WT. Using regional variations in WT, per this argument, to 
analyze access to organs is, therefore, misleading. To determine the appropriateness of 
listing practices at Yale, the authors applied stratification guidelines for liver transplant 
candidates adopted by the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) on 1/19/98 to 
patients listed for transplantation at Yale as of 11/14/97. Medical records were reviewed 
to confirm clinical histories, and referring physicians were contacted to obtain data from 
within four months of 11/14/97. Patients were reclassified per UNOS guidelines and fol- 
lowed until 7/1/99 to determine prognosis. Of the original cohort of 89 patients, eight 
patients had died prior to reclassification; two had been lost to follow-up. Of the remain- 
ing 79 patients, 40/79 (50.6 percent) met criteria for severe ESLD, and an additional 29/79 
(36.7 percent) met minimal listing criteria (MLC); a total of 87.3 percent met criteria for 
listing for transplantation. Of the 10 patients who did not meet MLC, by 7/1/99, four were 
listed after appeal to the regional review board under circumstances not covered by UNOS 
guidelines, four clinically worsened and were actively listed, and two remained clinically 
well. By 7/1/99, one patient was found to meet MLC, but was clinically too well to offer 
transplantation, and one additional patient had been lost to follow-up. On 7/1/99, 3/86 (3.4 
percent) patients in the original cohort did not meet MLC for transplantation. There is no 
evidence that long WT have led to premature listing of liver transplant candidates at Yale. 
 
Genotype-Phenotype Correlations in Gitelman's and Bartter's Syndromes. 
Stacey F. Weiss, Dinna Cruz, David Sitnon, and Richard P Lifton. Department of 
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Gitelman's patients congenitally lack function of NCCT, the target of thiazide diuret- 
ics, which have been tarnished as antihypertensive agents because of their adverse effects 
on glycemic control and lipid metabolism. A variety of studies in patients taking thiazides 
have suggested that hypokalemia associated with diuretic use may affect glycemic control 
by decreasing insulin secretion. Recent in vitro studies in mice suggest that thiazides may 
decrease insulin secretion by inhibiting carbonic anhydrase in pancreatic P-cells leading 
to increased intracellular pH, activation of Kca channels, ,B-cell hyperpolarization and 
decreased intracellular calcium levels. To further evaluate whether non-target effects or 
NCCT inhibition is responsible for thiazide-associated metabolic alterations, results of 
twohour 75g OGTTs and fasting lipid profiles in 17 Gitelman's patients were compared 
to those of nine age, sex, and BMI-matched relatives, known to be wild-type at the NCCT 
locus. No statistically significant differences in glucose or insulin levels between the two 
groups were detected despite statistically significant differences in potassium levels 
throughout the OGTT (p < .001). No differences in fasting total cholesterol, triglycerides, 
LDL, or HDL were found. The power of the study to detect a true difference in glucose 
and insulin levels between groups with the current sample size is approximately 15 per- 
cent; however, it is interesting to note that the Gitelman's group had the better glycemic 
control, with normal glucose control by current ADA criteria whereas the control group 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
fell into the impaired glucose tolerance category. These initial findings support the notion 
that any disturbance in glucose or hpid metabolism in patients treated with thiazides is 
most likely attributable to non-target effects, rather than NCCT inhibition. The signifi- 
cance of this result is that agents that are highly selective for NCCT should not adversely 
affect glucose or lipid metabolism motivating further pharmaceutical development. 
 
The identification of mutations in NKCC2, ROMK, and CIC-Kb that cause relative- 
ly severe disease in Bartter's patients raises the possibility that such alleles might have 
more modest effects in the far more common heterozygous state, such as lowered blood 
pressure potentially conferring protection from development of hypertension, and/or 
altered renal calcium handling predisposing to nephrocalcinosis, nephrolithiasis and 
osteoporosis. To determine whether a detectable phenotype exists in Bartter's heterozy- 
gotes, the following were measured in known carriers of a-Bartter's gene: blood pressures, 
serum and urine electrolytes, PTH, vitamin D, bone turnover markers, and bone mineral 
density by DEXA scanning at the lumbar spine, femoral neck, hip, and forearm. As com- 
pared to the 50th percentile for age, sex, and race-matched population controls from 
NHANES 11, Bartter's heterozygotes had significantly lower blood pressures than 
expected by chance (p < .001, with 63 percent below the 50th percentile for SBP and 76 
percent for DBP). Laboratory testing revealed normal mean serum and urine electrolyte 
levels. The mean serum calcium, serum phosphorus and urine calcium-to-creatinine ratio 
were in the normal range, as were 25-hydroxyvitaniin D, 1,25 dihydroxy vitamin D, urine 
pyridinoline, urine deoxypyridinoline, and BMD z-scores despite elevated PTH (207 
pg/ml). These findings suggest that Bartter's heterozygotes have modestly lowered blood 
pressure but do not have chronically altered renal calcium handling. 
 
In Hospital Costs for Caring for Elderly Patients Discharged with Heart Fail- 
ure. Deborah Wexler, Jersey Chen, Martha Radford, ShlomitYaari, W. David Brad- 
ford, and Harlan M. Krumholz. Section of Cardiology, Department of Internal Med- 
icine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Investments in programs to improve outcomes and reduce readmissions for patients 
who survive hospitalization with heart failure will be economically most favorable for 
those who have the highest risk. Little information is available, however, to stratify the 
risk of incurring costs after discharge. We sought to characterize costs of and risk-stratify 
patients in this population. The study reviewed medical records of 2,181 patients aged > 
65 years who were discharged alive from 18 Connecticut hospitals in 1994 and 1995 with 
a principal discharge diagnosis of heart failure. Outcomes six months after discharge, 
including all-cause readmission and cost, heart failure-related readmission and cost, and 
death, were obtained from the Medicare administrative database. A two-stage sample 
selection model was used to identify the independent correlates of cost. Risk scores were 
calculated to identify subsets of patients at risk for generating high costs. On average, 
patients discharged with heart failure incurred costs of $2,388 due to heart failure-related 
admissions and $7,101 due to admissions from any cause during the six months after dis- 
charge. An average admission for heart failure cost $7,174, while an admission due to any 
cause costs $8,589. The multivariate models explained 7 percent of the variation in cost. 
Clinical characteristics such as recent heart failure admissions, renal failure, and hyper- 
tension were significant independent correlates of increased cost. Older age and a history 
of stroke were independently associated with decreased cost. Patients without any of the 
risk factors associated with increased costs still incurred $1,500 to $5,000, on average, in 
the six months after discharge. Heart failure patients generate substantial costs in the six 
months after discharge. Given the emerging evidence for effective programs to reduce 
 
68 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
69 
 
readmission, investments in interventions in this population that produced even modest 
reductions in risk could be economically favorable. 
 
Risk Factors Associated with the Development of Pre-eclampsia in Adoles- 
cents. Amy L. Winkelstein, Sara J. Marder and Chaur-Dong Hsu. Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Con- 
necticut. 
 
This study aimed to identify risk factors associated with the development of 
preeclampsia during adolescent pregnancy. We performed a retrospective cohort study of 
435 pregnant adolescent women, age <18 years, between January 1, 1994 and April 26, 
1997. Demographic data, gynecologic age (GA) (years between menarche and concep- 
tion), chronologic age (CA), prepregnancy body mass index (PBMI), weight gain, med- 
ical, surgical, obstetric, gynecologic, social and family history were abstracted from 
records. Preeclampsia (PE) was defined as hypertensive proteinuria. PBMI was defined as 
weight/height (kg/M2). Data were analyzed using contingency table, simple and multiple 
logistic regression analyses. Data were expressed as odds ratios with 95 percent confi- 
dence intervals (OR; 95 percent CI). Fifty-six out of 435 pregnant adolescent women 
(12.9 percent) developed PE. Simple logistic regression analysis revealed that GA (OR: 
0.82; 95 percent CI: 0.69-0.96; p = .02) and CA (OR: 0.81; 95 percent CI: 0.67-0.99; p = 
.04) were negatively correlated with PE. PBMI (OR: 1.11; 95 percent CI: 1.05-1.17; p = 
.0003), prepregnancy weight (OR: 1.01; 95 percent CI: 1.01-1.02; p = .0008), total weight 
gain (OR: 1.046; 95 percent CI: 1.02-1.07; p = .0001), weight gain per week (OR: 2.40; 
95 percent CI: 1.42-4.06; p = .001), and urinary tract infection (OR: 2.00; 95 percent CI: 
1.03-3.89; p = .04) were positively correlated with PE. When GA greater than four years 
(OR: 2.12; 95 percent CI: 1.20-3.75; p = .01), CA less than 17 years (OR: 1.99; 95 per- 
cent CI: 1.10-3.62; p = .02) or PBMI greater than 30 obese adolescents were at signifi- 
cantly increased risk for PE. After adjustment for significant factors, the risk for PE with 
GA less than four years (OR: 2.22; 95 percent CI: 1.121-4.407; p = .02), CA less than 17 
years (OR: 2.85; 95 percent CI: 1.374-5.889; p = .005), GA less than four years and CA 
less than 17 years (OR: 3.27; 95 percent CI: 1.627-6.552; p = .0009), or PBMI greater than 
30 (OR: 4.54; 95 percent CI: 1.46-14.14; p = .009) remained significant. The incidence of 
PE is higher in pregnant adolescent women than in the general population. Low gyneco- 
logic and chronologic age and obesity prior to pregnancy are strong risk factors for PE in 
adolescent pregnancy. 
 
Pressure Stimulates Proliferation in Human Colon Cancer Cells in Vitro. 
Russell K. Woo, Stephen Kavic, Matthew Sanders, Cheng Fang Yu, and Marc D. 
Basson. Section of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
The phenomenon of port site metastasis following laparoscopic resection of colon 
carcinomas has given rise to the question of whether factors specific to the laparoscopic 
environment, such as increased pressure, may alter tumor cell biology. We sought to deter- 
mine the effects of increased pressure, in the range of laparoscopic pneumoperitoneum, 
on proliferation and signal transduction in human colon cancer cells in vitro. SW620 cells 
were incubated for three to 24 hours at 15 mm Hg above atmospheric and 37TC. Cell pro- 
liferation was measured using a Coulter Particle Counter and compared to controls. Phar- 
mocological inhibitor studies were used to investigate the effects of pressure on MAPK 
 
Thesis abstracts - 2000 
 
activity, specifically p38 and ERK1,2. SW620 cell proliferation was pressure-responsive, 
demonstrating a 51.4 ? 6.7 percent (n = 14, p < .05) increase in cell proliferation after 24 
hours. Furthermore, time-course experiments indicated that this phenomenon was dura- 
tion-dependent, requiring at least three hours of pressure to display an effect, with maxi- 
mal effects achieved after six hours of pressure. MEK (ERK1,2 pathway) inhibition (5 uM 
PD 98059) significantly attenuated pressure-induced proliferation (26 ? 9.4 percent 
increase compared to 57 ? 8.8 percent increase in positive controls, n = 4, p < .05), while 
p38 inhibition (20 uM SB 203580) did not (n = 4, p = NS). The results suggest that pres- 
sure increases in the range commonly used in laparoscopic surgery stimulate proliferation 
in colon cancer cells in vitro, and that this phenomenon may be regulated by the ERK1,2 
MAPK pathway. Whether this effect is involved in the clinical issue of laparoscopic port 
site metastases awaits further investigation. 
 
Vectors for Functional and Genetic Analysis of the Epstein-Barr Virus Pro- 
tein: EBNA-1. Ronald L. Yap, Weiling Wang, Thanyaphong Nanakom, Lihua Yin, 
Siquing Fu, and Albert B. Deisseroth. Department of Internal Medicne, Section of 
Medical Oncology, Yale Univeristy School of Medicine New Haven, Connecticut. 
 
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-I (EBNA-1) is a multifunctional protein that is 
pivotal to the replication of Epstein-Baff virus (EBV). Because of its many actions in 
EBV persistence, a single function of EBNA-1 was studied. In this project, we hypothe- 
sized that the transcriptional enhancement activity of EBNA-1 can be effectively quanti- 
tated in vitro through the use of plasmid DNA reporting vectors. Though other groups 
have constructed EBNA- 1 responsive plasmids, our system differs in that we are using an 
array of reporters containing some, none, or all of the EBNA- 1 binding region oriP. This 
system exhibited EBNA-1 responsive behavior and showed varied activity depending on 
the plasmid and cell line used. We illustrate large differences in EBNA-1-mediated gene 
transcription between transformed and non-transformed cell lines and propose distance 
related enhancement activity between regions of oriP and heterologous promoters. This 
plasmid array has future use in the analysis of EBNA-1 's functional interaction with EBV 
DNA. Further, since our lab is also producing peptidomimetic EBNA-1 inhibitors, the 
system can be used to test lead compounds for future drug development. 
 
70