eLife1894elifeeLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC4383249PMC4383249.1438324943832492562616910.7554/eLife.04517045171Research ArticleGenomics and Evolutionary BiologyEnhanced stability and polyadenylation of select mRNAs support rapid
thermogenesis in the brown fat of a hibernator
GrabekKatharine R ). Hibernation persists
for 5–8 months before emergence in spring and maintenance of more typical
mammalian homeostatic physiology throughout the summer period of growth and reproduction
( , see ; for review). Although of broad medical
interest for their ability to tolerate these extraordinary physiological extremes ( ; ; ; ), many
aspects of the hibernation phenotype remain poorly understood. Some of hibernation's
most defining mysteries are the mechanisms that underlie the highly dynamic oscillations
of the torpor–arousal cycle. 
Transcription and translation effectively cease at low body temperature during
hibernation ( ;
 ), yet organs
maintain integrity and in some cases are quickly reactivated after 2 weeks of near
inactivity in torpor. The need for immediate intense metabolic activation at low
temperature is most pronounced in brown adipose tissue (BAT); early re-warming depends
exclusively on non-shivering thermogenesis in this organ ( ). Because of the constraints on gene
expression during torpor, the rapid burst of metabolic activity that characterizes early
re-warming may be particularly challenging for BAT.
To balance the decreased transcription, mRNA degradation during torpor also must be
reduced to maintain cellular integrity and permit function in early arousal. Just as
with transcription, low body temperature (i.e., Q10 effects) will slow rates of RNA
degradation ( ; ), but it is unclear how these two opposing
activities will converge after two weeks to determine the steady-state abundance of
specific RNAs at the end of a torpor bout. While the general consensus is that the
transcriptome is largely stable during torpor (reviewed by ), this view is based upon results ( ; ; ; )
where ongoing degradation is not readily distinguishable from a stable transcriptome
because of the sampling and normalization strategies employed. There are few clear
examples of transcripts that diminish across a torpor bout ( ) and others that appear to increase
( ), largely because few
studies provide the necessary temporal resolution to quantify changes across a torpor
bout.
In this study, we interrogate BAT mRNA dynamics in 13-lined ground squirrels across the
torpor–arousal cycle and the circannual rhythm of hibernation ( ). We chose BAT because of its unique
requirement to function quickly and maximally in the earliest moments of arousal, after
spending two weeks at the transcriptionally prohibitive body temperatures of torpor. We
used a transcriptional profiling approach developed for non-model organisms, EDGE ( ), on five precisely timed sample
groups to capture multiple phases of the torpor–arousal cycle ( ) and, for comparison, three groups from
the non-hibernating, homeothermic portion of the year ( ).

## Results
A total of 38 EDGE-tag libraries, representing 8 distinct sampling groups ( ), were sequenced, processed ( ), and analyzed
for changes associated with hibernation physiology. For each of the libraries, 90.1
± 2.6% of the sequence reads aligned to ground squirrel genomic (Supplementary file
3A in ) or mitochondrial DNA
( ). After normalization, filtering,
and annotation ( , ), 14,798 EDGE-tags
representing 8,089 unique genes remained (Supplementary file 3B in ). We first clustered the individual sample
libraries by tag abundance using Random Forests ( ). Three main groups were evident ( ): (1)‘spring’, independent of ambient
temperature, spring cold (SpC), and spring warm (SpW); (2) ‘winter warm’:
interbout aroused (IBA), entrance (Ent), and summer active (SA); (3) ‘winter
cold’: early torpor (ET), late torpor (LT), and early arousal (EAr). Notably, BAT
samples harvested from winter animals at warm body temperature clustered separately from
those at low body temperature. This separation indicates the transcriptome is dynamic
across a torpor bout. 

The 14,798 tags were next tested for significant differential expression among the three
main groups; changes were detected in 2,159 tags (14.6%; q < 0.05) representing
1,638 unique genes (Supplementary file 3C in ). These correlated well with quantitative changes in the BAT
transcriptome of this species reported previously ( ); 91% of overlapping differentially expressed
transcripts exhibited changes in the same direction among comparable states (see
‘Materials and methods’). DIANA hierarchical clustering identified six
expression patterns among the differentially expressed tags ( and Supplementary file 3C in ); those in Clusters 1 and 2 were generally
increased in spring compared to winter, while those in Clusters 3–6 were
increased in winter, particularly in late torpor and early arousal. Distinct from the
spring-enriched tags, those increased in winter were overwhelmingly enriched ( ) for functions related to
BAT activation, such as lipid metabolism, lipid droplet formation, lipid transport,
mitochondria and the TCA cycle ( and
Supplementary file 3D in ). 
Surprisingly, a preponderance of winter-increased tags (i.e., transcripts) reached their
highest relative abundance during early torpor, late torpor, and/or early arousal ( , Clusters 4–6) despite near
cessation of transcription in hibernators at low body temperature ( ). One clue to resolve this apparent
paradox was provided by RPPH1, the RNA subunit of RNaseP, whose
relative abundance increased several 100-fold by early arousal (q < 10^−14,
 ). Because RPPH1 is
transcribed by Pol III, it is not typically polyadenylated ( ) and should not have been recovered in these
sequencing libraries. Nevertheless, RPPH1 acquired a long poly(A) tail
at low body temperature ( ), explaining
its presence in the libraries and increase in the cold. 
We considered three potential mechanisms that might explain increased transcript
abundance at low body temperature: (1) elevated transcription; (2) relative
stabilization; and (3) acquisition of a poly(A) tail. To probe these mechanisms, we
quantified abundance and the effect of poly(A) tail length on the dynamics of
RPPH1 and thirteen other transcripts, including three additional
ncRNAs and ten mRNAs ( ; note that there are two isoforms of
LIPE), during the torpor–arousal cycle. The absolute
abundance of these transcripts was measured by RT-qPCR in total RNA, and short and long
poly(A) RNA fractions ( ; ) from interbout aroused, late torpor, early arousal,
and spring warm animals (n = 3). Two classes of RNA dynamics were
apparent; transcripts were either decreased (labeled as Class I) or stabilized (labeled
as Class II) during torpor but not newly transcribed.
Five Class I transcripts decreased during torpor, with poly(A) and total RNA mirroring
the abundance of their EDGE tags (compare IBA to LT in ; see also and ). Interestingly, during early arousal, when core body
temperature was still low, some of these transcripts increased, likely because heat
generated early in the arousal process has returned BAT to a temperature permissive for
transcription ( ).
These transcripts were largely bearing long poly(A) tails, which also appeared to
shorten during torpor ( ). Class I dynamics explain the DIANA Clusters 1–3, where
RNA decreased during torpor but then increased at the elevated body temperature of
interbout arousal (compare IBA to LT in ), and likely the even larger collection of transcripts that were not
differentially expressed (e.g., GAPDH, ). Thus, it appears that most
BAT transcripts slowly degrade over two weeks in torpor and are not replenished until
body temperature recovers during the short euthermic period. 
 
 
 

Nine Class II transcripts were stabilized during torpor. While their EDGE-tags appeared
to increase during torpor ( , left),
this increase was not mirrored in total RNA ( , middle-left). We further sub-divided this class by differences in
polyadenylation. Total RNA for five Class IIA transcripts remained stable among states
( , middle-left; ). However, these transcripts
increased in the short and long poly(A) fractions during late torpor and particularly
early arousal ( , right; , ) with
concurrent poly(A) tail lengthening ( ), correlating with their EDGE-tags ( , left; ; ). Total RNA decreased in torpor and early
arousal for four transcripts in Class IIB ( , ), whereas their polyadenylated fraction remained stable ( , middle-right; ), resulting in an apparent
increase ( , right; ; ) and
consistent with the EDGE-tag pattern ( ,
left; ;
 ).
Thus, in contrast to Class I, Class II transcripts are stabilized throughout torpor with
maintenance or acquisition of a poly(A) tail. The enhanced stability of this subset
relative to all other transcripts apparently leads to their relative increases at low
body temperature ( , DIANA Clusters
4–6).
We next tested whether the observed transcript dynamics in torpor–arousal cycles
could impact the corresponding protein by measuring PNPLA2. Three
PNPLA2 protein isoforms, whose sizes were consistent with those predicted for mouse in
UniProt ( ), were
detected by Western blot ( ). All
appeared to cycle, but only the 48-kD band changed significantly ( ), following the dynamics of the transcript with the
long poly(A) tail despite no change in overall transcript abundance ( ). Hence, the dynamics of this PNPLA2
protein isoform appears to be explained by polyadenylation changes in its
transcript.
To investigate how changes in rates of transcription and degradation could affect
differential gene expression in torpor, we developed a mathematical model of transcript
dynamics across the torpor–arousal cycle. We simulated a population of 50
‘protected’ transcripts and a bulk population of 1,400 transcripts; these
numbers are proportional to the 531 tags that were either increased or stabilized across
a bout of torpor (DIANA Clusters 5 and 6, ) compared to the 14,267 tags in the full dataset. For this simulated
population, the abundance of each RNA transcript was governed by a differential equation
describing temperature-dependent rates of RNA synthesis and degradation ( ). To model RNA
transcript dynamics across the torpor–arousal cycle ( ), we introduced a
representative 12-day body temperature profile, incorporating temperature-dependence
into the rates of RNA synthesis and degradation based on Q10 effects ( ; ), as described in detail in .
In the 50-transcript subset, we implemented either fixed or temperature-dependent
alterations to degradation and synthesis rates to determine the resulting protective
effects on normalized transcript abundance following 10 days of torpor. We found that a
temperature-dependent mechanism that protected a subset of transcripts relative to bulk
RNA degradation ( ) was most consistent
with the increased abundances observed experimentally. For a body temperature threshold
of 10°C and degradation set to 3% of its rate in the warm animal, the relative
abundance of the protected transcripts increased over twofold ( ), best reflecting the experimental data. This effect
was dose-dependent with the level of protection and was relatively insensitive to
thresholds above 10°C ( ). Although
temperature-independent decreases in degradation rates also led to increases in the
relative abundance of protected transcripts, this mechanism required implausible
compensatory changes to either steady state RNA abundance or transcription rates in the
warm animal ( ). Due to the differential Q10 effects on transcription and degradation,
increasing transcription rate did not produce relative abundance increases ( ). Thus, in
agreement with RT-qPCR data, mathematical modeling supports enhanced stabilization of a
subset of transcripts via a temperature-dependent protective mechanism; this, rather
than increased transcription, leads to the observed increase in their relative
abundances at the low body temperature of torpor. 
 
 

Finally, to address the possible mechanism underlying protection of selected transcripts
from degradation, we examined transcript 3′ untranslated region (UTR) sequences
for shared motifs ( ); because ground
squirrel 3′ UTRs are largely unannotated, we defined 3′ UTRs as the 500 nt
region immediately downstream of the stop codon. This choice was validated by taking a
random sampling of 3′ UTR sequences in all clusters, which returned enrichment
for a motif resembling the polyadenylation signal ( ) when compared to a scrambled background set ( ; [ ]). To identify motifs unique to the protected RNA subset, the
significantly changed transcripts were divided into two groups for comparison ( ): (1) the positive set of transcripts that
appeared to be stabilized (e.g., , DIANA
Cluster 6) or increased in torpor (e.g., , DIANA Clusters 4–5); and (2) the negative set of transcripts that
appeared to decrease in torpor (e.g., ,
DIANA Clusters 1–3). When the positive set was compared to the negative set,
EXTREME ( ) identified two
significantly enriched C-rich motifs (Motif 1 and 2, ). Significantly, DIANA Cluster 5, comprised of the transcripts
that most clearly increased in relative abundance from early to late in torpor,
contained the greatest percentage of mRNAs with the two motifs (Motif 1: 59.1%; Motif 2:
66.7% of transcripts, ). DIANA Cluster
6, comprised of transcripts that remained elevated and stable across a torpor bout,
contained a higher proportion of transcripts with Motif 2 (50.8%, ) relative to the other DIANA clusters (8.5–39.8%,
 ) and the control, non-significant
transcripts (21.1%, NS in ).
Additionally, the other winter-increased DIANA Clusters, 3 and 4, were relatively
enriched for these motifs as compared to the spring-increased DIANA Clusters 1 and 2
(38.4–43% vs 8.5–23.3%, ), suggesting that these motifs play a broader role in enhanced transcript
stability and/or translation during winter heterothermy. Although the transcripts in
DIANA Cluster 4 appeared elevated in early torpor ( ), their motif enrichment was similar to that of Cluster 3. In
contrast to those in Clusters 5 and 6, these transcripts also appeared to largely
degrade by late torpor (compare ET to LT, ); hence their reduced motif enrichment is consistent with reduced
transcript stability across a bout of torpor. 
To identify putative binding protein(s) for these enriched sequence motifs, we used
TOMTOM ( ), searching against
a database of RNA binding motifs ( ; ). Our motifs
significantly matched those reported by ( ), implying binding by
a poly(C) binding protein. We detected expression of two poly(C) binding protein
paralogs in our dataset: PCBP3 and PCBP4. While
PCBP4 did not vary with hibernation physiology,
PCBP3 expression increased significantly in the winter groups (q
= 0.0067, ). The enrichment of PCBP
binding motifs in the subset of transcripts that increased at low body temperature,
together with the increased PCBP3 abundance in winter, suggest a role
for PCBP3 in protecting a subset of BAT transcripts via its binding to the 3′ UTR
C-rich motifs during torpor.

## Discussion
Our results show that enhanced stabilization and polyadenylation of a crucial group of
transcripts, with evidence of ongoing bulk RNA degradation, occur during torpor and are
likely tied to rapid activation of BAT. Dynamic polyadenylation has been demonstrated to
control temporal and spatial regulation of translation in many systems ( ; ), including maternal Xenopus oocyte
maturation (reviewed in ). Generally, poly(A) tail elongation causes translational activation,
whereas shortening leads to silencing and/or RNA degradation ( ). Similar to oocyte maturation, in hibernation,
the transcriptional machinery is silenced during the two week period of torpor;
therefore, post-transcriptional mechanisms affecting mRNA stability and translation
serve in the rapid switch between a hypo- and hyper-metabolic state in BAT. For
instance, PNPLA2 catalyzes the first committed step in triacylglycerol hydrolysis,
resulting in diacylglycerol and free fatty acid ( ). Its increased translation via poly(A) tail
lengthening in early arousal would ensure immediate generation of free fatty acids for
thermogenesis, while poly(A) shortening during interbout arousal offers a parsimonious
means to silence protein translation and lower free fatty acids as metabolic activity
declines. Additionally, dynamic polyadenylation likely controls translation of the other
Class IIA transcripts. Although there is currently no evidence for this type of
mechanism operating in human BAT, our results suggest a potential therapeutic strategy
by which translation of key proteins can be prioritized for recovery from metabolic
repression, and more specifically, for rapid activation of thermogenesis in BAT.
A role for post-transcriptional regulation in hibernation was posited previously, based
on poor correlations between mRNA and protein levels ( ). In this study, we provide evidence for stabilization of a
specific, functionally relevant subset of mRNAs during torpor. Moreover, our findings
are consistent with reports of mRNA degradation during torpor ( ) and with global maintenance of poly(A)
tails and their increased length ( ). These results also provide further explanation to histological
observations, as RNP granules containing both ncRNAs and mRNAs are formed during torpor
in BAT nucleoli ( ; ). The Class II ncRNAs
identified in our study are located in nucleoli, suggesting that sequestration into
these RNP granules protects a subset of transcripts from the degradation affecting bulk
BAT RNA, which is also consistent with the results of our mathematical modeling.
Our results propose that a mechanism underlying enhanced stabilization of a subset of
RNAs involves their binding by one of the poly(C) binding proteins (PCBPs), as we
detected their corresponding C-rich motifs in the 3′ regions of the
torpor-stabilized mRNAs. Intriguingly, PCBPs are involved in many aspects of
post-transcriptional control that are consistent with our observations, including
enhanced stability of long-lived mRNAs ( ). Further roles include 3′ end-processing and
alternative polyadenylation ( ;
 ), and the addition,
maintenance ( ), and elongation
of poly(A) tails ( ).
Finally, these proteins are involved in both translational silencing and enhancement
( ). Although
these roles are established for the predominantly studied PCBP1 and PCBP2, these
paralogs were not detected in our dataset. Rather, we detected increased expression of
PCBP3 during winter heterothermy, a pattern that would be expected
for a role involving enhanced mRNA stabilization and polyadenylation during torpor.
Furthermore, PCBP3's pattern runs in contrast to most of the other RNA
binding proteins detected in this dataset, which, if changed, were largely decreased
during winter heterothermy (see ,
functional annotations for DIANA Clusters 1 and 2).
In addition to a PCBP, other 3′ UTR binding proteins may be involved in enhancing
mRNA stability during torpor. The poly(A) binding protein PABP1 and the TIA-1/R RNA
binding proteins were recently shown to localize to discrete sub-nuclear foci during
torpor in the livers of 13-lined ground squirrels ( ). PABP1 specifically binds to the poly(A) tails of
transcripts, influencing their length as well as overall transcript translation and
stability ( ).
Significantly, the PCBPs 1 and 2 functionally interact with PABP1 in order to prevent
deadenylation and to maintain mRNA stability ( ). While further research is needed to determine whether the
protection identified here extends to other tissues during torpor and to thoroughly
examine the role of PCBP3 or its homologs in this protection, our results of enhanced
stabilization and polyadenylation for a subset of crucial transcripts suggest a
mechanistic link to PABP1 observations in other organs ( ; ). Although there are reports of elevated RBM3, a cold-induced RNA
binding protein, in several organs including BAT from ground squirrels and bears during
hibernation ( ; ; ), we found no evidence for enrichment of RBM3
recognition motifs ( ; ) in our subset of stabilized
transcripts.
More broadly, our study highlights the importance of how transcriptome data is
interpreted. While it is generally assumed that changes in steady-state mRNA levels stem
from changes in the rate of transcription, varying the rate of degradation also changes
steady-state levels; this phenomenon has been observed at both mRNA and protein levels
in the cold acclimation of fish ( ;
 ). Recently, the
balance between mRNA synthesis and degradation rates was examined on a global scale in
cultured mammalian cells, demonstrating complex gene-specific effects of transcription,
processing, decay, and translation ( ; ). In
our study, the modeling results shown in 
demonstrate that transcript-specific variability in the rate of degradation may cause a
subset of transcripts to increase in relative abundance. These transcripts are
degrading, but more slowly than most of the bulk transcripts and therefore exhibit a
small increase in relative abundance across the torpor bout. Thus, many of the smaller
fold changes observed in gene expression datasets from hibernators ( ; ; ; )
likely reflect intrinsic differences in the stability of specific mRNAs rather than
specific mechanisms to regulate their transcription or decay. However, for changes
greater than approximately twofold in a substantial number of transcripts, here
∼3.5% of the total, a specific regulatory mechanism appears to be required.
Furthermore, particularly large fold changes, as observed here with
RPPH1, likely reflect the addition or lengthening of poly(A)
tails.
Our data suggest a model ( ) of RNA
dynamics in hibernator BAT wherein key RNAs for BAT function are selectively stabilized
during torpor while bulk transcripts decline through degradation in the absence of new
transcription. Stabilization likely occurs by a temperature-dependent protective
mechanism that is in place before body temperature reaches 5°C, such as PCPB3
binding to the 3′ UTRs of protected transcripts, which then leads to their
relative increase as torpor progresses. At the end of torpor and onset of arousal, the
stabilized mRNA subset with the longest poly(A) tails is translated immediately as BAT
temperature becomes permissive. As BAT temperature rises, further polyadenylation of the
remaining stabilized RNAs facilitates their translation, transcription resumes ( ), and, during interbout
arousal, transcripts that were previously degraded during torpor are replenished to
their baseline levels. This dynamic cycle of transcription, degradation, stabilization,
and polyadenylation in BAT leads to translation of the correct transcripts at the
correct time with minimal energy expenditure. Specifically: (1) energy intensive
translation during early arousal is directed to proteins needed for BAT activation; (2)
the cell is not dependent on de novo transcription at the onset of the short bursts of
metabolic activity, which could delay thermogenesis and induce stress; (3) inhibition of
translation via shortening of poly(A) tails while body temperature is high or begins to
decline conserves energy compared to mRNA degradation and subsequent re-synthesis. Thus,
given a general suppression of transcription by low body temperature during two-week
torpor periods, stabilization and dynamic polyadenylation provide an alternative
mechanism to prioritize transcripts for immediate translation when BAT metabolic
activity rapidly resumes. 

## Materials and methods

## Animal and tissue collection
13-lined ground squirrels were procured and housed as described previously ( ). All animals except
those in the summer active group (SA; n = 5; ) were surgically implanted in late
August or early September with both an intra-peritoneal datalogger (iButton, Embedded
Data Systems) and a radiotelemeter (VM-FH disks, Mini Mitter, Sunriver, OR) for
remote body temperature monitoring until tissue collection. All animal protocols were
approved by the University of Colorado Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee.
BAT samples were collected from the axillary pads in animals representing eight
different seasonal and physiological groups. All groups with their approximate body
temperature and time of year are depicted in . Five groups represent animals in the winter hibernating portion of the
year, including: early torpor (ET; Tb = 4°C for 5–10% of previous
torpor bout; n = 4) and late torpor (LT; Tb = 4°C for
80–95% of prior torpor bout, n = 4), early arousal (EAr;
Tb = 5–12°C, n = 5), interbout-arousal (IBA;
Tb = 37°C for 2–3 hr after Tb stabilization, n
= 4), and entrance into torpor (Ent; Tb = 23–27°C,
n = 5). Three groups consisted of animals in the
non-hibernating portion of the year: summer active (SA; n = 5),
collected in late July or early August, and two spring groups: (1) spring cold (SpC;
n = 5) animals had spontaneously aroused from hibernation
terminally, exhibiting no torpor for 10–20 days despite remaining in constant
darkness at 4°C; and (2) a spring warm group (SpW; n = 6),
at least 7 days after ambient temperature was raised first to 9°C for 5 days and
then to 14°C. Animals were euthanized by exsanguination under isoflurane
anesthesia, perfused with ice cold isotonic saline, and decapitated before
dissection. Upon collection, BAT tissue was immediately snap-frozen in liquid
nitrogen and then stored at −80°C.

## EDGE-tags
Total RNA was extracted from each BAT sample using the RNeasy Lipid Mini extraction
kit (Qiagen, Venlo, the Netherlands) and assessed for quantity via NanoDrop and
quality via the Bioanalyzer (RIN ≥ 8; Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA).
EDGE-tag libraries were created according to the protocol described by and submitted for massively
parallel high-throughput sequencing at the genomic services lab at the HudsonAlpha
Institute of Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL. The EDGE-tag libraries for all groups
except ET and SA were sequenced on individual lanes of an Illumina GAIIx (Illumina,
San Diego, CA). The ET and SA sample libraries were prepared subsequently; these were
barcoded and all 10 samples sequenced on a single lane of an Illumina HiSeq, with two
technical replicates added from the first round of sequencing.

## EDGE-tag read processing and annotation
The resulting reads were filtered for the presence of the NlaIII
”CATG” site, trimmed of adapter sequences, and first aligned to the
ground squirrel mitochondrial genome ( ) using Bowtie, allowing for two mismatches. Remaining
unaligned reads were next aligned to the ground squirrel nuclear genome (Ensembl
fasta v.71) using Bowtie with the same parameters. Resulting uniquely aligned
nuclear reads were combined into read counts by tag position in the genome
(requiring a minimum of 1 bp overlap). Poorly expressed tags were removed by
converting the read counts into tags per million (TPM) counts for each library and
requiring that at each tag position there will be a minimum of two TPM in
n-1 samples in at least one sample group. The tags were
annotated to their nearest known gene using the Ensembl annotations (.gtf, v. 71)
or by homology to eutherian mammals in Ensembl; we required tags to be overlapping
or within 3-kb downstream of the gene annotation to be considered annotated.
Because we suspected that multiple, unannotated transcript isoforms of the same
gene likely exist, tags that mapped to different positions within the same gene
were not combined.

## Data analysis
Tags were normalized among all libraries using the full quantile method from the
EDAseq ( ) package in
Bioconductor. There was a noticeable bias between the libraries sequenced on the
GAIIx and the libraries later sequenced on the HiSeq; several steps were taken to
remove tags that did not normalize well and contributed to this bias: (1) tags
that differed by means of threefold between the technical replicates were removed;
(2) remaining tags were then normalized by the full quantile method and tested for
significant changes between sequencing platforms using the negative binomial GLM
test in DESeq ( ).
Those with significant differences after a Benjamini–Hochberg false
discovery rate correction (q < 0.05) were removed from the dataset. Finally,
the remaining tags were again normalized using the full quantile method. The
technical replicates were removed from all downstream analyses.

## Random Forests
The Random Forests using Variable Selection package ( ) first defined the subset of tags that
produced the least amount of out-of-bag error in sample clustering. Here, 120,000
trees were created in the initial forest, 10,000 trees created in the remaining
iterations, and 20% of the variables dropped at each iteration. The selected tags
then classified individual samples into groups using RF supervised clustering with
60,000 trees in R ( ).

## Differential expression
Significant changes in tag expression among groups were detected by the negative
binomial GLM test in DESeq. Both the test and null model included sequencing
platform to discount changes introduced by library construction. The resulting
p-values were adjusted for multiple testing with a Benjamini–Hochberg false
discovery rate correction. Tags with a q-value of <0.05 were considered
significant for differential expression among groups.

## Comparison with a previous BAT transcriptome dataset
A Pearson's correlation test was used to compare our mean tag expression values to
the recent RNA-seq data of , who identified 2,083/14,573 distinct transcripts differentially
expressed among October, torpid, interbout-aroused and April 13-lined ground
squirrels. Our late torpor, interbout-aroused and spring warm groups are roughly
comparable to the last three of these, and 523 unique transcripts were identified
as significant for differential expression in both datasets; these were tested for
positive correlation (r ≥ 0.3). Additionally, 1,466/2,083
significant transcripts detected by were represented by tags in our study, of which 80% (1,170
transcripts) showed changes in the same direction (for at least one tag mapping to
the same transcript; r ≥ 0.3).

## DIANA clustering of tag expression patterns
The mean abundance value for each physiological group was first calculated for
every significant differentially-expressed tag; these values were then
mean-scaled. Pearson's correlation coefficients were calculated between every tag
pair and were used to build a DIANA tree. The resulting tree was examined and cut
at a height with the longest branches to produce individual DIANA clusters.

## Biological functional annotation
We assigned biological function to the tags within each DIANA cluster using the
DAVID functional annotation clustering algorithm ( ). The functional annotation clusters
were set at a medium or high stringency depending on which yielded the most
biologically informative results. For each annotation cluster, the term with the
most informative biological meaning was used. We also set the cut-off enrichment
score of 1.3 for the term to be considered significantly enriched.

## RT-PCR

## cDNA synthesis
We first treated total BAT RNA from n = 3 samples in the
IBA, LT, EAr, and SpW groups with DNase I (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). A portion of
this RNA was saved for direct conversion into cDNA while the rest was fractionated
based on poly(A) tail length into short (≈25 nt) and long (>25 nt)
poly(A) tail fractions using the PolyATtract mRNA Isolation System IV (Promega,
Fitchburg, WI) as described ( ). The resulting RNA fractions were concentrated using the RNA Clean
and Concentration Kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA). Random hexamer primed cDNA was
synthesized using SuperScript III (Invitrogen). 3′ RACE cDNA was
synthesized ( ) with
the reverse primer
5′-GCGAGCACAGAATTAATACGACTCACTATAGGTTTTTTTTTTTTVN-3′. ePAT and
TVN-PAT (TVN) cDNA ( )
from one poly(A) short and one poly(A) long RNA sample in each group was
synthesized using the ePAT primer
5′-GCGAGCTCCGCGGCCGCGTTTTTTTTTTTT-3′; the TVN-PAT primer was the
same, except that it had a (VN) added to the 3′ end.

## PCR
Gene-specific primers were designed and purchased using the ground squirrel
transcript sequences in Ensembl and the PrimerQuest design tool (IDT, Coralville,
IA; www.idtdna.com). Where possible,
the primer pairs encompassed an EDGE-tag of interest ( );
these were chosen using several criteria, including fold change, q-value
significance, correlation with RPPH1's expression pattern, and
biological relevance to BAT function. Random hexamer and 3′ RACE primed
cDNA were amplified using FastStart Taq (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) with either
the specific primer set or the 3′ RACE universal reverse primer (3′
RACE cDNA; 5′-GCGAGCACAGAATTAATACGACT-3′). The resulting amplicons
were separated in 2% agarose 1× TAE gels and visualized with Sybr-safe DNA
gel stain (Invitrogen); the gel bands were imaged with a Typhoon scanner (GE
Healthcare, Pittsburg, PA) and analyzed using ImageQuant TL software (GE
Healthcare).
In order to confirm fractionation of RNA based upon poly(A) tail length, one TVN
and all ePAT cDNA samples were amplified with the creatine kinase brain
(CKB) forward primer ( ) and the ePAT universal reverse
primer 5′-AGCTCCGCGGCCGCG-3′; the resulting amplicons were
visualized and analyzed as described above. The ePAT band sizes were subtracted
from the TVN band size to estimate the poly(A) tail length of each sample ( ).

## PCR amplicon cloning and sequencing
The PCR amplified bands were cut from gels and DNA purified using a mini-elute gel
extraction kit (Qiagen). Between 1–4 μl of eluted PCR product were
inserted into pCR4-TOPO-TA or pCR2.1-TOPO-TA (Invitrogen) and transformed into
TOP10 Chemically Competent Escherichia coli cells (Invitrogen).
Plasmids containing an insert of the correct size were sequenced using M13 forward
or reverse primers. Sequences were aligned to the Ictidomys
tridecemlineatus genome using BLASTN or BLAT in Ensembl.

## Quantitative PCR
RT-qPCR was performed using a StepOnePlus instrument (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA) with FastStart Universal SYBR Green Master (ROX; Roche). All biological
samples were measured in triplicate using a standard curve specific for each
transcript/primer set. Outlier measurements were removed and transcript abundance
values were calculated for all biological samples using the mean of the technical
replicates for each sample. To correct for sample loading inaccuracies using a
method independent of normalization to a housekeeping gene (which assumes constant
expression of that gene), we instead created a custom normalization factor for
each biological sample based upon the sample's overall tendency to be higher or
lower for transcript expression within its own respective sample group (e.g.,
within EAr or within LT). We first calculated each
transcript's fold change for a given sample relative to the median transcript
abundance measurement within its respective sample group. We then created a
normalization factor for each biological sample by calculating the mean of that
sample's within-group transcript fold change across all transcripts. Each of the
individual transcript abundance measurements were next divided by their respective
sample's normalization factor. After normalization, transcripts were tested for
significant expression changes among sample groups via one-way ANOVA (α
= 0.05) and for correlation with their corresponding EDGE-tag using a
Spearman's rank correlation test.

## Western blot
Protein homogenates were prepared from BAT axillary tissue as described ( ) from
n = 3 samples for each IBA, LT, EAr, and SpW groups.
Western blots were used to measure PNPLA2 (1:1000, rabbit pAb #2138, Cell
Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) and β-tubulin (1:1000, goat pAb #ab21-57,
Abcam, Cambridge, MA), both detected using IRdye-conjugated secondary antibodies
(1:20,000 IRDye 800CW anti-rabbit and 1:10,000 IRDye 680LT anti-goat; Li-Cor,
Lincoln, NE). Proteins were imaged (Odyssey near-infrared imaging system, Li-Cor)
and analyzed with ImageQuant TL software (GE Healthcare). To correct for
inconsistencies in protein loading, each PNPLA2 band was normalized to the
β-tubulin band within the same lane. Changes in PNPLA2 abundance among the
sample groups were assessed by a one-way ANOVA (α = 0.05).

## Mathematical modeling of transcript dynamics
To investigate RNA transcript dynamics across a torpor–arousal cycle, we
developed a differential equations-based mathematical model simulating the
abundance of 1,400 bulk and 50 protected transcripts. This ratio of bulk Class I
transcripts to protected Class II transcripts reflects the ratio observed in the
data (14,267 bulk; 531 protected in DIANA Clusters 5 and 6, ). All modeling and model analysis were performed in
MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA). The mathematical model is described in detail in
 .

## Motif discovery and enrichment
We examined the transcripts that appeared to increase in torpor for shared motif
enrichment in their 3′ UTRs. Due to uncertainty in 3′ UTR structure and
length, we included only transcripts that contained significantly differentially
expressed (D.E.) tags <1 kb 3′ to their nearest protein coding feature.
First, the transcripts were divided by whether they fell into the
‘torpor-increased’ DIANA clusters 4–6 or
‘torpor-decreased’ DIANA clusters 1–3. Each transcript was
counted only once; in cases where multiple tags mapped to the same transcript, the
most 3′ D.E. tag was used for assignment of the transcript to a particular
cluster. Annotation of the 3′ UTRs in the ground-squirrel genome is currently
sparse and likely imprecise; thus, for each gene, we conservatively defined the
‘3′ UTR’ to be the 500-nt region immediately 3′ to the
stop codon. To identify enriched motifs, we used the motif discovery algorithm
EXTREME ( ) with the
default settings, except allowing 0 gaps, and with the 500-nt ‘3′
UTR’ sequences from ‘torpor-increased’ transcripts input as the
positive set and the 500-nt ‘3′ UTR’ sequences from the
‘torpor-decreased’ transcripts input as the negative set. We considered
resulting motifs with E values <1 as significantly enriched in the positive set.
The enriched motifs were used as input in the MAST tool ( ) of MEME Suite ( ), which counted the number of transcripts
containing the motif (E-value <10) within each DIANA cluster. As a control, we
also counted the number of motif occurrences in the 500-nt
‘3′UTRs’ of 484 non-significant D.E. transcripts (q > 0.97;
500 transcripts were originally chosen but 16 lacked 3′ sequence data, hence
484 transcripts). Finally, to detect motifs enriched in all clusters, 3′ UTR
sequences from 20 randomly chosen transcripts in each cluster (120 total) were
compared against a scrambled background set in MEME ( ), with the settings set at a maximum width of 8-nt
and a search of the given strand only.
To identify the putative RNA binding proteins that might recognize these motifs, the
significantly enriched motifs were uploaded into the TOMTOM motif comparison tool
( ) of the MEME Suite.
The database against which these motifs were first searched consisted of the RNA
binding protein motifs described by ; however, no significant matches were found. We next added the nine
C-rich motifs reported and provided by to the RNA binding protein motif database and repeated the search
for significantly enriched motifs. The significance values for motif matches were
calculated via Pearson correlation coefficient in TOMTOM. All motif logos were
generated in TOMTOM.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000062National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases
R21DK095180 to Sandra L Martin.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000121Division of Mathematical Sciences
1121361 to Cecilia Diniz Behn.

## Acknowledgements
We thank S Clark, C Henegar, A Hindle, J Spalding, and A Zukowski for help with
experiments and useful discussion. We thank J Wan, X Ji, Y Xing, and SA Liebhaber for
their assistance in providing the PCBP motif files.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
The authors declare that no competing interests exist.

## Author contributions
KRG, conceived the project, generated and analyzed EDGE, RT-qPCR and western blot
and motif data and drafted the manuscript, Conception and design, Acquisition of
data, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
CDB, developed and implemented the mathematical modeling, Acquisition of data,
Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
GSB, assisted with EDGE-tag study design, EDGE data generation, analysis and
interpretation, and assisted with revising of manuscript, Acquisition of data,
Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article, Contributed
unpublished essential data or reagents.
JRH, assisted with processing and annotation of EDGE-tag libraries, interpretation
of data and writing of manuscript, Acquisition of data, Analysis and
interpretation of data, Drafting or revising the article.
SLM, directed the project, interpreted data and drafted manuscript with KRG,
Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation of data, Drafting or revising
the article, Contributed unpublished essential data or reagents.

## Ethics
Animal experimentation: This study was performed in strict accordance with the
recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the
National Institutes of Health. All animals were handled according to the
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocol 44309(03)1E approved by the
University of Colorado. All surgeries and euthanasia were performed under
isoflurane anesthesia, and every effort was made to minimize suffering.

## Additional files
10.7554/eLife.04517.019Supplementary file 1.RT-qPCR Measurements. (A) Oligonucleotide primers used in RT-qPCR. (B) Spearman's
rank correlations of RT-qPCR abundance measurements to EDGE-tag abundance
measurements. (C) One-way ANOVA p-values of RT-qPCR measured RNA abundance changes
among sample states.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04517.019
10.7554/eLife.04517.020Supplementary file 2.Mathematical Modeling of Transcript Dynamics.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04517.020

## Major dataset
The following dataset was generated:
GrabekKR, Diniz BehnC, BarshGS, HesselberthJR, MartinSL, 2014, Data from: Enhanced stability and
polyadenylation of select mRNAs support rapid thermogenesis in the brown fat of
a hibernator, doi:
10.5061/dryad.5hh54, Available at Dryad Digital
Repository under a CC0 Public Domain Dedication. Contains: Supplementary file
3. (A) EDGE-tag raw counts. (B) EDGE-tag normalized counts. (C) EDGE-tags
significant for changed expression. (D) List of All DAVID Functional Annotation
Clusters
Reporting standards: Standard used to collect data: The dataset
published is in accordance with the guidelines listed in the required minimum
information about a high-throughput nucleotide sequencing experiment, MinSeqe.

 10.7554/eLife.04517.021Decision letter
BlencoweBenjamin JReviewing editorUniversity of Toronto,
CanadaeLife posts the editorial decision letter and author response on a selection of the
published articles (subject to the approval of the authors). An edited version of the
letter sent to the authors after peer review is shown, indicating the substantive
concerns or comments; minor concerns are not usually shown. Reviewers have the
opportunity to discuss the decision before the letter is sent (see review
process). Similarly, the author response typically shows only responses
to the major concerns raised by the reviewers.
Thank you for sending your work entitled “Enhanced stability and polyadenylation
of select mRNAs support rapid thermogenesis in the brown fat of a hibernator” for
consideration at eLife. Your article has been evaluated by Randy
Schekman (Senior editor) and, a Reviewing editor, and 2 reviewers.
The Reviewing editor and the reviewers discussed their comments before we reached this
decision, and the Reviewing editor has assembled the following comments to help you
prepare a revised submission.
This manuscript investigates the transcriptome dynamics of hibernating ground squirrels.
The authors performed RNA-Seq profiling of brown adipose tissue (BAT) in ground
squirrels across different periods of the torpor-arousal cycle. Three major observations
were made: (1) unsupervised clustering of the samples revealed three main
groups—spring, winter warm, and winter cold. Between these three groups, 1638
genes with significant differential steady-state transcript levels were detected. Gene
ontology analysis identified processes associated with BAT function in the winter
groups; (2) a subset of transcripts in the winter groups reached their highest abundance
during early torpor, late torpor, and early arousal despite suppressed transcription
rates at low body temperatures. RT-PCR analysis revealed two classes of transcripts
during torpor: transcripts were either degraded and not replenished, or they were
stabilized by the maintenance or acquisition of a long poly(A) tail; (3) the authors
propose a mathematical model to describe the changes in transcription rates and
degradation could affect differential gene expression in torpor. A temperature-dependent
mechanism was identified that protected a subset of transcripts relative to bulk RNA
degradation.
This study provides novel insight into the transcriptional dynamics of hibernating
animals. In particular, how certain transcripts are activated/maintained despite
suppressed transcription during low body temperatures is poorly understood. The findings
in this study would appeal to those interested in hibernation dynamics, as well as those
who study post-transcriptional regulation. While it is known that polyadenylation is
important for mRNA stability, localization, and translation, the authors present
evidence for the first time that this mechanism is implicated in the torpor-arousal
cycle.
Overall, the manuscript reads very well written with clearly reported observations and
results. A significant limitation of the manuscript, as was discussed by the three
reviewers, is the lack of experimental data addressing the molecular mechanisms
underlying the authors' observations.
Main comments:
1) The authors' manuscript would be significantly strengthened if they could
provide mechanistic insight into the temperature-dependence of poly(A) tail length. For
example, the reviewers wonder whether BAT samples from torpor-arousal cycling animals
could be used to assess differential cross-linking/binding of PABP1 and/or RBM3 to
transcripts that display polyA length changes, to test the authors' proposal (based
on previous observations they have cited) that these factors may be associated with
differential transcript stability dynamics. This experiment could potentially be
performed using CLIP-Seq, or CLIP-qRT-PCR on selected transcripts, by employing
commercial antibodies that bind to conserved epitopes on these proteins (which overall
are highly conserved). Related to this, have the authors examined the levels of
transcripts from genes that encode factors involved in the control of polyA tail length
(i.e. deadenylation or polyadenylation factors) across their RNA-Seq datasets? Such
information may lead to mechanistic insight as well.
2) The authors are requested to provide basic information on polyA site usage in the
different samples. How many sites were detected and how does the rate of detection of
polyA site usage relate to the steady-state expression of the corresponding
transcripts?
3) The authors should provide a more basic description (i.e. for the general reader) of
how the mathematical model they developed was conceived and how well it reliably models
the experimental data. In this regard, it is also not clear in the main text or Methods
how levels of bulk and protected transcripts were determined.
10.7554/eLife.04517.022Author response
1) The authors' manuscript would be significantly strengthened if they
could provide mechanistic insight into the temperature-dependence of poly(A) tail
length. For example, the reviewers wonder whether BAT samples from torpor-arousal
cycling animals could be used to assess differential cross-linking/binding of PABP1
and/or RBM3 to transcripts that display polyA length changes, to test the
authors' proposal (based on previous observations they have cited) that these
factors may be associated with differential transcript stability dynamics. This
experiment could potentially be performed using CLIP-Seq, or CLIP-qRT-PCR on selected
transcripts, by employing commercial antibodies that bind to conserved epitopes on
these proteins (which overall are highly conserved). Related to this, have the
authors examined the levels of transcripts from genes that encode factors involved in
the control of polyA tail length (i.e. deadenylation or polyadenylation factors)
across their RNA-Seq datasets? Such information may lead to mechanistic insight as
well.
We agree that our manuscript could be strengthened by providing mechanistic insight into
the temperature-dependence of poly(A) tail length and selective transcript stability.
Although the suggested strategy of either CLIP or CLIP-Seq using antibodies to PABP1 or
RBM3 might enhance our understanding of the molecular mechanism involved, this is often
not a trivial undertaking in ground squirrels in terms of identifying useful antibodies.
We do not think that evidence for PABP1 binding would be particularly helpful because it
is unlikely to provide the specificity needed to explain the selectivity among
transcripts that is evident in our data. Before embarking on a potentially difficult
search for an appropriate immunoprecipitating RBM3 antibody, we employed a
motif-searching bioinformatics approach to see whether RBM3 binding sites were enriched
in the protected transcript subset. Although neither of the two (worrisomely unrelated)
RBM3 binding sites that have been reported by others are significantly enriched in our
population of protected transcripts (see ), we believe that the motif searching strategy employed set us on a
path that has proven to be extremely fruitful. Specifically, we detected two C-rich
motifs that are significantly enriched in the 3’ regions of the stabilized
transcripts; these motifs were the only enriched motifs (see figure) and are predicted
to be bound by a poly(C) binding protein (PCBP). Significantly, the mRNA expression for
one of the PCBP family members, PCBP3, increased during the winter in our dataset, in
contrast to most of the other RNA binding proteins that were differentially expressed.
We document this motif and its link with PCBP3 in a new Figure in the manuscript ( ) and now suggest, based on the motif
enrichment analysis, that a PCBP paralog, most likely PCBP3, may be mechanistically
linked to the observed transcript stability. We believe this analysis adds significant
mechanistic insight underlying mRNA stabilization and polyadenylation and paves the way
for the next step, which would be to identify the RNAs that are bound by PCBP3 (or its
paralogs) at different hibernation timepoints using CLIP-Seq. We would like to argue
here, however, that such a next step is well beyond the scope of this study. 
2) The authors are requested to provide basic information on polyA site usage in
the different samples. How many sites were detected and how does the rate of
detection of polyA site usage relate to the steady-state expression of the
corresponding transcripts?
We hesitate to make any inference regarding poly(A) site usage at this point. If
NlaIII cut to completion, we at best have identified the 3’
most “CATG” site within each transcript, not the 3’ end itself.
Thus, we do not think these tags should be viewed as a conclusive proxy for defining
3’UTR’s and poly(A) site usage. However, we do provide all tag locations
within their respective transcripts in the supplementary tables, so that others doing
poly(A)-Seq analysis on ground-squirrel transcripts can easily make such comparisons.
Our observations of enhanced mRNA stabilization and polyadenylation during torpor were
an unanticipated finding from the digital transcriptome data that were collected to
identify differentially-expressed genes linked to the phenotypic dynamics of
hibernation. Although in the process we have detected what we suspect are alternative
polyadenylation sites, focusing on them here would detract from the main findings of
this work.
3) The authors should provide a more basic description (i.e. for the general
reader) of how the mathematical model they developed was conceived and how well it
reliably models the experimental data. In this regard, it is also not clear in the
main text or Methods how levels of bulk and protected transcripts were
determined.
We made several changes throughout the manuscript to enhance this information in the
main text.