NeuronNeuron319nihpaNeuron0896-62731097-4199pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleNIHPA Author ManuscriptsPMC5508517PMC5508517.155085175508517NIHMS8724832847265610.1016/j.neuron.2017.04.022NIHMS872483NIHPA8724831ArticleThe Dynamic Epigenetic Landscape of the Retina During Development, Reprogramming, and Tumorigenesis
AldiriIssam XuBeisi WangLu ChenXiang HilerDaniel GriffithsLyra ValentineMarc ShirinifardAbbas ThiagarajanSuresh SablauerAndras BarabasMarie-Elizabeth ZhangJiakun JohnsonDianna FraseSharon ZhouXin EastonJohn ZhangJinghui MardisElaine R. WilsonRichard K. DowningJames R. DyerMichael A. for the St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital – Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project
1Department of Developmental Neurobiology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA
2Department of Computational Biology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA
3Department of Cytogenetics Shared Resource, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA
4Department of Diagnostic Imaging, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA
5Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA
6Department of Cell and Tissue Imaging Shared Resource, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA
7The Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA
8Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA
9Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA
10Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA
11Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA
12Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815, USACorrespondence and requests for materials should be addressed to: Michael A. Dyer, PhD, Department of Developmental Neurobiology, MS 323, St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 262 Danny Thomas Place, Memphis, TN, 38105-3678, USA, Phone: (901) 595-2257, Fax: (901) 595-3143, michael.dyer@stjude.org*These authors contributed equally.
#Lead Contact
0352017943295217550568.e100805201703052018030520181407201717062024https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/This manuscript version is made available under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.

## SUMMARY
In the developing retina, multipotent neural progenitors undergo unidirectional differentiation in a precise spatiotemporal order. Here we profile the epigenetic and transcriptional changes that occur during retinogenesis in mice and humans. Although some progenitor genes and cell cycle genes were epigenetically silenced during retinogenesis, the most dramatic change was derepression of cell type–specific differentiation programs. We identified developmental stage–specific super-enhancers and showed that most epigenetic changes are conserved in humans and mice. To determine how the epigenome changes during tumorigenesis and reprogramming, we performed integrated epigenetic analysis of murine and human retinoblastomas and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from murine rod photoreceptors. The retinoblastoma epigenome mapped to the developmental stage when retinal progenitors switch from neurogenic to a terminal patterns of cell division. The epigenome of retinoblastomas was more similar to that of normal retina than was that of retina-derived iPSCs, and we identified retina-specific epigenetic memory.

pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptyespmc-prop-open-manuscriptyespmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-ND

## INTRODUCTION
Changes in gene-expression programs mark progression from proliferating multipotent progenitor cells to terminally differentiated neurons. Recent studies of neurogenesis of human and mouse cortices ( ), mouse photoreceptors ( ), other mature neuronal classes ( ), and neurons produced from stem cells in organoid cultures ( ) shed light on the changes that occur in the epigenome with the combination of transcriptome analysis, DNA methylation, and (in some studies) histone modification. The cell type–specific epigenome of differentiated cells is thought to be relatively stable once established during development and is thought to be a major barrier to reprogramming differentiated cells, such as neurons, into induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) ( ). For some cell types, the resulting iPSCs retain an epigenetic memory of their cellular origins ( ; ), which can influence subsequent lineage-specific differentiation.
Developmental changes in the epigenome are also central to human disease. For example, childhood cancers are developmental tumors that arise during crucial periods of development and genomic characterization of more than 2000 childhood cancers revealed that virtually every class of epigenetic regulator is mutated in developmental tumors ( ). Neuroblastomas arise of the sympathoadrenal lineage ( ); rhabdomyosarcomas emerge from the muscle lineage ( ); and osteosarcomas form during the period of rapid bone growth in adolescence ( ). Genomic characterization of more than 2000 childhood cancers revealed that virtually every class of epigenetic regulator is mutated in developmental tumors ( ). In this study, we performed a comprehensive analysis of the epigenomic and transcriptional changes that occur during retinogenesis and retinoblastoma in humans and mice, and iPSCs derived from murine rod photoreceptors to elucidate their epigenetic memory. We found that epigenetic changes play a more important role in activating differentiation genes than in silencing progenitor or proliferation genes during retinal maturation. Several retinal progenitor genes were sequestered in the domain of facultative heterochromatin (f-heterochromatin) in rod nuclei, suggesting an alternative mechanism of silencing developmental genes in neurons. Changes in the epigenome were evolutionarily conserved from mice to humans with retinoblastomas matching a narrow window of normal development consistent with their developmental origins. Finally, the genes most likely to be retained as epigenetic memory in iPSCs were not necessarily those that undergo the most dramatic epigenetic changes during differentiation. Together, these data show how a comprehensive profile of the changes in the epigenome during development can provide insight into the developmental stage–specific and cellular origins of pediatric cancer and the relations among the epigenomes of progenitors, stem cells, and cancer cells.

## DNA-Methylation Changes Associated with Neurogenesis in the Retina
Previous studies have shown changes in DNA methylation that correlate with changes in gene expression in the developing CNS ( ; ; ). Here we extend those studies to retina, an ideal tissue in which to study the dynamics of the epigenome during development. Retina growth has been extensively characterized ( ) ( , , ), and the birth order and birth dates of the 7 classes of retinal cell types are evolutionarily conserved across vertebrate species ( ) ( , ). To characterize the epigenetic landscape during mouse and human retinogenesis, we analyzed 8 developmental stages that span key developmental transitions ( ) ( , ). To profile DNA methylation changes, we performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analyses for each stage of mouse [embryonic day (E) 14.5, E17.5, postnatal day (P) 0, P3, P7, P10, P14, and P21] and human [developmental week (FW) 10, 14, 17–21, and 23] retinal development and compared the changes in DNA methylation with those in gene expression. In the developing mouse retina, the DNA methyltransferases (Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and Dnmt3b) have dynamic expression ( ), but there was no global change in DNA methylation during retinal development in mice or humans ( ). We identified 12% (473/3918) of genes with decreased expression and 26% (1143/4313) with increased expression during murine retinogenesis with significantly (p<0.05) inversely correlated changes in DNA methylation ( and , ). Similarly, 9% (208/2407) of the genes had decreased expression and 13% (445/3330) had increased expression during human retinogenesis with significant (p<0.05) inversely correlated changes in DNA methylation ( and , ). As expected, most downregulated genes encoded proteins that regulate proliferation, and most upregulated genes encoded proteins that contribute to neuronal differentiation ( , ).
To complement our unbiased analysis of the entire epigenome during retinogenesis, we performed a similar analysis of 4 validated retinal gene sets ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ) which included those important for the G2/M transition in the cell cycle of proliferating retinal progenitors, expressed in retinal progenitors that are not cell cycle genes, expressed in rods during differentiation, and ubiquitously expressed housekeeping genes ( , and ). Early in development (E14.5), most cells are proliferating retinal progenitors ( , ), so their epigenetic profile should be apparent in embryonic retinae ( and ), while in late postnatal retinae (P10, P14, and P21), the majority (80%) of cells are rods, so their epigenetic profile should be apparent ( and ) in contrast to control housekeeping genes whose expression does not change ( ).
DNA methylation and gene expression were inversely correlated over the course of murine retinal development in 3% (7/235) of the progenitor genes, 0% (0/43) of the G2/M genes, 38% (73/190) of the rod genes, and 4% (1/22) of the housekeeping genes ( , ). These trends were similar for other cell type–specific differentiation programs and in human retina ( , ) and show that changes in DNA methylation accompany critical changes in gene expression during retinogenesis, but only accounts for a small fraction (3%–38%) of the total number of developmentally regulated genes.

## Developmental Transitions during Retinogenesis Are Reflected in the Epigenome
To determine if other epigenetic changes accompany the gene-expression changes during retinogenesis, we performed ChIP-seq of 8 histone marks (H3K4me1, H3K4me2, H3K4me3, H3K27me3, H3K27Ac, H3K36me3, H3K9/14Ac, and H3K9me3), as well as for CTCF, Brd4, and RNA PolII across all 8 developmental stages in mice. Due to the limited availability of human retinal tissue, we analyzed 4 developmental stages in human retina (FW13/14, FW15/16, FW18/20, and FW23/24) corresponding to E17.5, P0, P3, and P7, respectively, in the mouse ( ) ( ). Temporal changes in the epigenetic landscape of the promoter’s proximal regions [± 2 kb from the transcription start site (TSS)] closely mirrored that of gene expression. For example, Uhrf1 is a progenitor gene encoding an E3 ubiquitin ligase, which regulates gene expression in proliferating cells via epigenetic mechanisms that involve interactions with Dnmt1 ( ). During embryonic stages of retinal development, when the proportion of proliferating progenitors is highest, Uhrf1 had H3K4me1/2/3, H3K27Ac, and H3K9/14Ac histone modifications spanning the promoter, H3K36me3 in the gene body and RNA PolII and Brd4 at the promoter ( ), consistent with active transcription and the stages when Uhrf1 expression is highest ( ). As development progressed and Uhrf1 expression was extinguished, the H3K36me3 modification was lost from the gene body; PolII, Brd4, and H3 acetylation were lost at the promoter; and H3K4me1/2/3 modifications were reduced ( ). Repressive histone marks (H3K27me3 and H3K9me3) and DNA methylation were absent from the TSS throughout development, suggesting that Uhrf1 is not actively silenced by H3K27me3, H3K9me3, or DNA methylation in mature retinal neurons ( ).
In contrast to Uhrf1, some progenitor genes showed accumulation of the H3K27me3 repressive mark as they were silenced during retinal differentiation. Ascl1 is a proneural bHLH protein expressed in retinal progenitors during murine development ( ). The pattern of histone marks and PolII/Brd4 binding for the Ascl1 gene during early development (E17.5) is similar to Uhrf1 ( ). However, when retinal progenitors are depleted (~P7), Ascl1 expression was silenced and H3K27me3 accumulated at the promoter and throughout the gene body ( ). The promoter and gene body DNA remained hypomethylated in the differentiated retina.
Rod-specific genes that are transcriptionally activated during later stages of development as the cells differentiate show the opposite pattern of epigenomic changes. For example, the Stx3 gene encodes a protein that is required for rod synaptic transmission ( ) and was marked by insulator protein CTCF ChIP-seq peaks from early in development ( ). There were H3K4me1/2/3 marks and H3 acetylation (H3K27Ac and H3K9/14Ac) marks at the promoter but no Brd4 or PolII present between E14.5 and P0 ( ). The colocalization of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3/H3K27Ac at the Stx3 promoter during early development suggested that it is a bivalent or poised promoter ( ) ( ). Consistent with the lack of expression and Brd4/PolII binding early during development, there was no H3K36me3 in the gene body. As rods differentiated and gene transcription increased, H3K27me3 was depleted at the promoter; PolII and Brd4 increased; H3K36me3 accumulated across the gene body and the active histone marks (H3K4me1/2/3, H3K27Ac, and H3K9/14Ac) spread 3′ into the body of the gene and a corresponding reduction in DNA methylation in this region downstream of the TSS ( ).

## Mapping Chromatin-State Dynamics during Retinal Development
To define the chromatin states and more efficiently analyze the transitions thereof across the genome, we performed chromatin Hidden Markov Modeling (chromHMM) using all 176 murine ChIP-seq datasets ( ). ChromHMM enables systematic annotation of the epigenetic states across the human and mouse genomes during retinogenesis. Based on computational methods and manual review, we selected 11 chromHMM chromatin states for analysis ( ). State 1 had epigenetic marks consistent with actively transcribed genes; states 2 and 3 were predominantly enhancers; and state 4 identified bivalent promoters ( ). State 5 was primarily defined by PolII binding, and states 6 and 7 were consistent with gene bodies (H3K36me3). State 8 represented polycomb-repressed chromatin (H3K27me3) outside of the promoter or enhancers; state 9 was empty chromatin; and state 10 was the H3K9me3-repressed chromatin. Finally, state 11 was marked by the insulator protein CTCF.
The transitions in chromHMM state at progenitor, G2/M, rod, and housekeeping genes across development were consistent with changes in gene expression and individual ChIP-seq data ( and ). Overall, the active promoter/enhancer marks (states 1–3) were increased for rod genes and decreased for progenitor and G2/M genes during development; states 1–3 were unchanged for the housekeeping genes ( ) and was conserved across human and mouse retinal development ( , , and , ). Analysis of the chromHMM-state transition for the 133 rod genes with the most robust changes in gene expression during retinal development ( , , cluster 1) identified 26 (20%) genes that had H3K27me3 marks (states 4 and 8) early in development and then transitioned to active promoters (states 1–3) as the rods differentiated ( , and ). We identified 19% (33/174) of the progenitor genes with the most robust changes ( , , cluster 1) that had the opposite pattern ( , and ). Similar trends were observed for human retina ( , and ).
Beyond those select rod and progenitor genes, an additional 584 genes had chromHMM-state transitions consistent with H3K27me3 derepression (loss of H3K27me3), and 486 had chromHMM-state transitions consistent with H3K27me3 repression (gain of H3K27me3) during murine retinogenesis with corresponding changes in gene expression ( , ). Similar trends were observed in human retina ( , ), with fewer genes due to the limited retinal stages available for ChIP-seq.
To extend our analysis, we performed hierarchical clustering of all the chromHMM data integrated with gene-expression data. We identified 4 groups of genes with developmental chromHMM and expression patterns similar to those of the rod gene set described above ( ). There were 314 genes that showed chromHMM-state transitions during development that were consistent with low or no expression early in development to very high expression in the mature retina, and an additional 206 genes that showed chromHMM-state transitions consistent with low or no expression early during development to intermediate expression during retinal differentiation ( and , ). We identified 756 genes that had developmental chromHMM and gene-expression patterns similar to those of the retinal progenitor and G2/M genes ( and , ).
Of the 4313 genes that increased expression during retinal development ( and , ), 1143 had changes in DNA methylation, 582 had changes in H3K27me3, and 520 had changes in epigenetic state, as measured by chromHMM modeling. In total, 40% (1734/4313) of upregulated genes had at least 1 type of correlated epigenetic change ( and , ). Of the 3918 genes that decreased expression during retinal development ( and , ), 472 had changes in DNA methylation, 484 had changes in H3K27me3, and 756 had changes in epigenetic state, as measured by chromHMM modeling. In total, 36% (1402/3918) of downregulated genes had at least 1 type of correlated epigenetic change ( and , ).
To explore the relations among DNA methylation, gene expression, and chromHMM state during development, we calculated the proportion of each chromHMM state for the genes that are upregulated, hypomethylated, and simultaneously increase expression and downregulate DNA methylation ( and , ). We performed a similar analysis for the downregulated genes ( and , ). Overall, the genes that change their expression and DNA methylation have more pronounced differences in their distribution of active and inactive chromHMM states ( and , ).

## Cell Type–Specific Regulation of Epigenetic State in the Retina
The adult retina is made up of 80% rods, and the other cell types account for 0.2%–7% of the tissue. Genes expressed in other cell types may be epigenetically repressed in rods. In our analysis, such genes would increase expression during development but be positively correlated with changes in H3K27me3 and/or chromHMM-repressive states since RNA-seq analysis is more sensitive than ChIP-seq analysis. Therefore, the increase in gene expression that accompanies differentiation could be detected from the less abundant cell types (cones, amacrine, horizontal, bipolar, ganglion, and Müller glia), but the epigenetic profile would be dominated by the rods. To test this, we analyzed the chromHMM and gene-expression data for 136 cone genes, 154 bipolar genes, 65 Müller glial genes, 486 amacrine cell genes, and 131 ganglion cell genes ( , ) ( ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ). Several of the cell type–specific genes were polycomb repressed in the mature retina ( , and ). To directly test whether polycomb repression occurred predominantly in rods, we purified those cells at P6/P7 from Nrl-GFP transgenic mice ( ) by fluorescence-activated cell sorting and performed RNA-seq and ChIP-seq for H3K27me3 and H3K4me3. 35% (48/136) of the cone genes, 49% (76/154) of the bipolar cell genes, 26% (17/65) of the Müller glia genes, 61% (300/486) of the amacrine cell genes, and 60% (79/131) of the ganglion cell genes had H3K27me3 at their promoters ( , and ), with similar results in the human retina ( and , ). Moreover, among the 4313 genes with increased expression during development, 1567 were not expressed in the purified rods (FPKM <1 cutoff). Among those genes, 66% (1031/1567) had H3K27me3 in the purified rods, suggesting that they were found in other cell types but were repressed in developing rods ( , ).

## Super-Enhancers Are Associated with Important Regulators of Retinogenesis
The mammalian genome is organized into discrete topologically associated domains (TADs), which are stretches of DNA (~1 Mb) that are delimited by sharp boundaries comprising CTCF-insulator sites and constitutively expressed housekeeping genes ( ; ). TADs are thought to be constant across cell types, but the chromatin landscape within individual TADs varies ( ). Individual enhancers and large clusters of enhancers called super-enhancers activate individual genes within TADs by looping-out the intervening DNA ( ). To map each enhancer and super-enhancer to their developmentally regulated genes in individual TADs, we used previously published data (Hi-C Data Browser) for mouse cortex ( ). Using our chromHMM data, we classified 1516 TADs in the mouse genome as active, polycomb repressed, null chromatin, or constitutive heterochromatin at each stage of mouse retinogenesis ( , ).
None of the TADs classified as null at E14.5 (228 TADs) or P21 (228 TADs) had any transitions in their classification based on TAD-delineated chromHMM states during development. Similarly, relatively few TADs classified as constitutive heterochromatin at E14.5 (4/68; 5%) or P21 (9/73; 12%) underwent large-scale chromHMM-state transitions during development. Consistent with analysis of individual genes within the genome, the largest transitions in TAD states were in the active and polycomb-repressed TADs. Of the TADs that were active at E14.5, 22% (17/76) transitioned to repressed chromatin (heterochromatin or polycomb) by P21, and 10% that were active at P21 had been polycomb repressed at E14.5 ( , ).
Next, we identified the putative poised and active enhancers at each stage of retinogenesis in humans and mice by using our ChIP-seq data for H3K4me1, H3K27Ac, and H3K27me3 ( ; ). In addition to the chromatin marks, enhancers have a more open chromatin configuration, as measured by DNAse hypersensitivity or ATAC-seq ( ). To identify regions of open chromatin in the developing mouse retina, we performed ATAC-seq on the 8 stages of murine retinal development in biological duplicates ( ). We annotated 3 classes of enhancers in our data based on previous studies ( ). Poised enhancers were at least 500 bp in size, had ATAC-seq peaks and H3K4me1 but lacked H3K27Ac and H3K27me3. Polycomb-poised enhancers were at least 500 bp in size, had ATAC-seq peaks, H3K4me1, and H3K27me3 but lacked H3K27Ac. Active enhancers were also at least 500 bp in size and had ATAC-seq peaks, H3K4me1, and H3K27Ac. To avoid overlap with promoters, our enhancer annotation focused on those regions that did not overlap with gene bodies or were within 2 kb of the TSS. We found dynamic enhancer profiles. For example, 128 active enhancers at E14.5 transitioned to poised enhancers at P21, and 46 active enhancers at E14.5 transitioned to polycomb-poised enhancers at P21 ( , ). Similarly, 208 poised enhancers and 29 polycomb-poised enhancers at E14.5 transitioned to active enhancers at P21 ( , ).
Looping within TAD domains, which is mediated by CTCF and cohesion, modulates interactions between enhancers and the TSS for developmentally regulated genes ( ). For this analysis, we focused on super-enhancers defined by clusters of H3K27Ac ChIP-seq peaks ( ). We further refined our classification of super-enhancers by the absence of H3K4me3 typically found at promoters and identified 1768 super-enhancers that were present in at least 2 stages of development ( , ). Among those super-enhancers, 26% (454/1761) increased with retinal differentiation, and 8% (153/1761) decreased with depletion of retinal progenitor cells ( and , ).
Next, we determined whether the distance from each super-enhancer was correlated with the change in gene expression for rod genes, progenitor genes, G2/M genes, and housekeeping genes. The majority of super-enhancers that showed developmental downregulation (75%; 80/107) or upregulation (89%; 231/260) were also within 100 kb ( and , ), though some downregulated super-enhancers were much farther away (400–500 kb) ( and , ). Several well-known G2/M and retinal progenitor cell genes (i.e., Cdk1, Top2a, Fgf15, Ube2c, Uhrf1, and Ascl1) were associated with developmentally downregulated super-enhancers ( ) while several rod genes (e.g., Pde6a, Guca1b, Guca1a, Nr2e3, Rbp3, and Crx) were associated with developmentally upregulated super-enhancers ( ). Among the 82 genes upregulated during development and with corresponding changes in DNA methylation, H3K27me3, and chromHMM state ( ), 37 had a corresponding developmentally regulated super-enhancer ( , and ). Of the 40 genes downregulated during development ( ), 11 had corresponding superenhancers ( , and ).
We performed a similar analysis using the human retina chromHMM data and identified 938 super-enhancers ( , ), among which 92% (861) overlapped with super-enhancers in the mouse retina, and 420 of those were developmental super-enhancers. When we restricted the super-enhancer analysis to the 686 that were identified using the ROSE algorithm ( ), 62% (424/686) were conserved across species ( , ).
To determine if the putative super-enhancers are sufficient to increase expression from a minimal promoter in the developing mouse retina, we cloned a portion of the rod-specific super-enhancers for Rbp3, Tulp1, Aipl1, and Guca1a upstream of a minimal promoter and the Nano-Glo reporter gene. The cloned region of genome lacking H3K27Ac was used as a negative control. P0 retinae were square-wave electroporated with each plasmid containing the putative super-enhancer element, Nano-Glo and a constitutive CMV renilla luciferase reporter plasmid to control for electroporation efficiency. After 5 days in culture to allow time for rod specification, each super-enhancer element had substantial activity in this assay ( ), including the previously reported cis-enhancer elements for Otx2 and Vsx2 ( ).
Super-enhancers are also useful for identifying core transcription factors that contribute to core regulatory circuits (CRCs) ( ). Specifically, genes encoding transcription factors that form CRCs often have cell type–specific super-enhancers that contribute to a positive feedback autoregulatory loop ( ). For example, the Otx2 super-enhancer has an Otx2-binding site ( ) and the ATAC-seq peak of the Crx super-enhancer has a Crx-binding site ( ). Using the CRC mapper ( ) with our ChIP-seq data, we identified several core transcription factors, such as Vsx2, that are important in retinal progenitors or for photoreceptor differentiation (Otx2 and Crx) during retinal development ( and , )( ; ; ). We also identified several core transcription factors in the CRC analysis that have not been extensively studied in the developing retina. For example, Esrrb is a nuclear orphan receptor that regulates metabolic genes important for photoreceptor homeostasis according to the circadian rhythm( ). This is intriguing because another gene from the CRC analysis was a master circadian regulator called Bhlhe41 ( , ) ( ). The expression of Esrrb and Bhlhe41 increases with photoreceptor differentiation, and their CRCs were identified in mature retina ( , ).

## The Retinal Epigenome Is Stable with Aging
We performed the same integrated ChIP-seq and chromHMM analyses in 11-month-old C57Bl/6 mouse retina ( ). Overall, the retinal epigenome was stable, and a detailed analysis of the chromHMM showed that the biggest difference in the retinal epigenome of aged retina was the expansion of chromHMM state 1, which was found at strong promoters ( ). Genes associated with the expansion of state 1 were significantly more likely to be associated with developmental super-enhancers (p <0.05; ), suggesting that the long-distance interactions between super-enhancers and promoters can expand the active chromatin domain with aging in the retina. The genes and pathways associated with a spreading chromHMM state 1 were significantly enriched in photoreceptor differentiation (p <0.05; , ).

## Three-Dimensional Mapping of the Retinal Epigenome
Previous studies have shown that during development, rods dramatically condense their chromatin into a central core and 2 concentric spheres ( ). This unusual organization for mammalian nuclei is thought to enhance light transfer through the cellular layers of the retina ( ). The central core contains a dense region of constitutive heterochromatin surrounded by a more diffuse region of noncentromeric f-heterochromatin ( ). Euchromatin is a thin shell that occupies the outer surface of the rod nuclei. These 3 regions can be distinguished using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for repetitive sequences characteristic of the C, G, and R bands of mouse chromosomes, immunofluorescence for histone marks, DAPI staining, and electron microscopy ( ) ( ). To measure the volume of the 3 concentric regions of the nucleus, we performed 3D electron microscopy (3D EM) using the Helios dual-beam system. Different chromatin domains were segmented using an algorithm designed to identify regional image features, and the volume of each region was calculated ( ).
To determine if there are differences in the 3D localization of genes within the nucleus based on their 2D epigenetic-state transitions during development (DNA methylation, H3K27me3, and chromHMM), we selected 22 genomic regions spanning genes with different epigenetic profiles during retinogenesis. We performed FISH with each probe and immunostained for H3K4me3 on the same tissue sections to mark the euchromatin domain ( ). We obtained confocal z-series and scored the colocalization manually and by using a customized automated segmentation and colocalization algorithm ( ). As expected, rod genes (Crx, Nrl, Nr2e3, and Rho) were localized to the euchromatin domain ( and data not shown). Several genes that are expressed in other cell types but are H3K27me3 repressed in rods (Gad1, Pax6, Lhx3, Rlbp1, Grm6, Ccnd3, and Arr3) were also localized to the euchromatin domain ( ). However, 3 of the 4 progenitor genes (Ascl1, Sfrp2, Myc) that are H3K27me3-repressed in rods were found in the f-heterochromatin domain ( ), as was the Cdkn2a tumor-suppressor gene, the Car10 bipolar cell–specific gene, and the Cav1 Müller glia–specific gene ( ). The subcellular localization (euchromatin or f-heterochromatin) was consistent across nuclei for each gene, suggesting that the 3D organization of the retinal epigenome is as precisely regulated as the 2D organization of histone marks and DNA methylation at individual genetic loci. Those genes that were primarily localized to the f-heterochromatin but were at the boundary between domains (Arr3 and Sfrp2) had a higher percentage of false-positive calls in euchromatin using the automated algorithm. Genes that are not expressed in the developing retina but are found in other neuronal lineages, such as those restricted to hair cells in the inner ear, were often found in the euchromatin domain ( ).

## Retinal Epigenetic Memory
To determine whether the genes with the most dramatic changes in their epigenetic state during rod differentiation are the ones most likely to retain epigenetic memory in iPSCs derived from rods (r-iPSCs), we profiled a series of r-iPSCs ( ; ). Specifically, we developed a new approach for reprogramming differentiated rod photoreceptors and showed that r-iPSCs are better at making retina in 3D organoid cultures using the STEM-RET protocol ( ; ) using EB5:Rx-GFP ESC line as our control, which were the source for fibroblast-derived iPSC (f-iPSC) lines ( ; ). All iPSC lines used in this study were passaged at least 20 times and were fully reprogrammed pluripotent cells. We performed the same analyses (RNA-seq, WGBS, ChIP-seq, chromHMM), as described above for the developing mouse retina.
The iPSC lines were similar in their gene expression ( ), which is consistent with data showing that they are fully reprogrammed pluripotent stem cells ( ). In principle component analysis of the RNA-seq data, the r-iPSCs were more similar to the EB5:Rx-GFP line than to the f-iPSCs, which is consistent with their efficient formation of retina in STEM-RET ( ). There were 444 genes with significantly elevated expression, and 436 genes with significantly decreased expression (2.0-fold cutoff; p≤0.05) in r-iPSCs relative to f-iPSCs ( , ). The significantly upregulated genes were associated with neuronal differentiation, which is consistent with their retinal origins ( , ). In r-IPSCs, 38% (171/444) of the upregulated genes were expressed in the retina and increased their expression during retinal differentiation; 26% (46/171) of those genes exhibited hypomethylation during retinogenesis; 18% (31/171) showed decreasing H3K27me3; and 5 genes had developmental super-enhancers ( , ).
Analysis of the DNA-methylation data identified 2115 genes that were significantly hypermethylated (p<0.05) and 583 genes that were significantly hypomethylated (p<0.05) in f-iPSCs relative to r-iPSCs ( and , ). Pathway analysis of the hypermethylated genes in f-iPSCs identified pathways involved in eye development, photoreceptor outer segment formation, and neurogenesis; that of hypomethylated genes in f-iPSCs identified genes associated with actin cytoskeleton, fibroblast migration, and intracellular signaling ( , ). Several genes with important roles in photoreceptor development and homeostasis, such as Rcvrn, Sag, Pde6h, and Myo7a, had differential DNA methylation in r-iPSCs ( and , ). However, only 7.4% (156/2115) of the hypermethylated genes in f-iPSCs were upregulated during retinal development, and 1.7% (10/583) of the hypomethylated genes in f-iPSCs were downregulated during retinal development with corresponding DNA hypermethylation ( , ).
To determine whether there were any significant differences in the chromHMM between f-iPSCs and r-iPSCs, we analyzed each of the 11 states individually. For the chromHMM states spanning genes or promoters that were significantly increased (p<0.05) in f-iPSCs relative to r-iPSCs, the largest changes were in the states with H3K27me3 (states 4 and 8) and the empty state (state 9) ( and ). For the genes and promoters significantly decreased (p<0.05) in f-iPSCs relative to r-iPSCs, the largest changes were in weak enhancers (state 3), the H3K9me3-repressed state (state 10), and the empty state (state 9) ( and ).
Pathway analysis showed substantial enrichment in neuronal development, axon morphogenesis, and synaptogenesis for the genes that had decreased H3K9me3 (state 10) and decreased H3K27me3 (states 4 and 8) ( , ). Examples of genes with differential H3K9me3 included Prkca, Rims1, Gng4, Kcnma1, Cacna2d3, Adcy2, and Ntrk2 ( , ). Examples of genes with differential H3K27me3 included Vax2, Axin1, Trpc6, Gabrb2, Gabra3, and Robo2 ( , ). Promoters with differential active states containing H3K4me3 (state 1) were much less common ( ).
To further refine the differences in the epigenetic landscape in r-iPSCs versus f-iPSCs, we analyzed the individual ChIP-seq data. Consistent with the chromHMM analysis showing that the repressive epigenetic states were among the most different between r-iPSCs and f-iPSCs, the most differential individual epigenetic marks were H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 ( and , ). The number of genes with differential H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 (6984) was more than 10-fold higher than that of genes with all active marks combined (594) ( and , ). Pathway analysis of the genes with reduced H3K9me3 in the promoter and gene bodies in f-iPSCs relative to r-iPSCs were enriched for nervous system development, neuron differentiation, axon formation, and synaptogenesis ( , ). Analysis of the promoters of the 1103 cell type–specific genes ( , ) identified 41 (4%) genes with differential H3K9me3 or H3K27me3 at their promoters ( , ). Together, this suggests that DNA methylation plays a relatively minor role in contributing to the epigenetic memory of iPSCs derived from neurons, and repressive histone marks are a more prominent feature of epigenetic memory than previously appreciated. Moreover, the genes that undergo the most dramatic epigenetic changes as rods differentiate are more likely to be reset to the embryonic state than to retain epigenetic memory.

## Epigenomic Mapping of Retinoblastoma
Retinoblastoma is a childhood cancer of the developing retina that begins in utero and is diagnosed in the first few years of life ( ). We analyzed the gene expression and epigenetic landscape of human and mouse retinoblastomas and compared those data to normal developing retinae from both species. For human retinoblastoma, we used orthotopic patient-derived xenografts ( ) and for mouse retinoblastoma, we used a GEMM (Chx10-Cre;RbLox/Lox;p107−/−MDMXTg) ( ), the most accurate preclinical model of the human disease among the 6 GEMMs of retinoblastoma available ( ). Murine retinoblastomas have chromHMM and express G2/M genes matching E14.5–E17.5 retina, and rod and progenitor genes best matching P0–P3 retina ( and , ). FW23/24 was the best match between human retinal development and human retinoblastoma ( , ). Unlike murine retinoblastoma, the correlation between human retinoblastoma and normal human retina for rod genes increased with developmental stage ( , ).
Mouse and human retinoblastomas have molecular features of several different cell types; human retinoblastoma have more photoreceptor features while murine retinoblastoma have more interneuron features ( ). To test this more directly, we identified the genes that were upregulated or downregulated in human and mouse retinoblastomas relative to those in normal retina and had corresponding changes in their epigenomic landscape ( , ). Pathway analysis showed that the photoreceptor genes were significantly downregulated (p <0.05) in murine retinoblastoma relative to later developmental stages, and this was consistent with their interneuron features ( , ). The significantly upregulated (p <0.05) pathways in murine retinoblastoma were all involved in proliferation ( , ). Human retinoblastomas express more photoreceptor genes than do mouse retinoblastomas, and the pathway analysis of differentially expressed genes for human retinoblastoma showed enrichment of synaptic proteins in the inner retina ( , ). Pathways involved in proliferation were upregulated in human retinoblastoma, but the most common upregulated pathways were those involved in RNA processing and metabolism ( , ).
The transcriptional network for photoreceptor maturation has been extensively studied and has led to a hierarchical transcriptional model ( ) ( ). We analyzed the chromHMM states and gene expression of human and mouse retinoblastomas for each of the key regulatory genes in the pathway ( and ). In human retinoblastoma, the transcriptional factor genes that specify photoreceptor precursors (CRX and OTX2) were both expressed at higher levels in retinoblastoma than in normal retina but had epigenetic states matching normal retina. Genes encoding transcription factors that promote rod differentiation (NRL and NR2E3) also showed expression and epigenetic states consistent with specification toward this lineage ( ). Downstream rod-differentiation genes were not expressed and had inactive epigenetic profiles. There was also evidence of cone specification based on THRB expression, but there was no expression of RXRG or ARR3 further downstream in the cone-differentiation pathway ( and data not shown). The S-cone fate is the default state for cone differentiation, and in our analysis, OPN1SW was expressed but not OPN1MW or OPN1LW ( and data not shown). In mouse retinoblastoma, there was little expression of photoreceptor lineage genes ( ), which was consistent with their progenitor/interneuron phenotype ( ).
To determine if the upregulated and downregulated genes in retinoblastoma were more likely to be those with dynamic DNA methylation, H3K27me3, chromHMM, or adjacent to a developmental super-enhancer, we overlaid the mouse and human tumor data with normal developmental profiles. Among the 470 genes that were downregulated in the mouse tumor relative to normal retinal development, 76% (357/470) were developmentally upregulated during retinogenesis ( , and ). Among those genes, 78% (278/357) were epigenetically regulated during development (DNA methylation, chromHMM, or H3K27me3) ( ). Only 5 genes overlapped with those that were downregulated during murine retinogenesis. Among the 783 genes that were upregulated in murine retinoblastoma relative to normal retina, 70% (553/783) were normally downregulated during retinogenesis ( , and ). Among those, 51% (284/553) were epigenetically regulated during development ( ). Similar trends were observed for human retinoblastoma (data not shown). Together, this suggests that epigenetically regulated genes during retinal development are most likely to be perturbed in retinoblastoma.
Genes that do not overlap with retinal development were enriched in nuclear transport and epigenetics (upregulated) and metabolism (downregulated) ( , ). More importantly, the epigenetic landscape of murine and human retinoblastoma matched the key transition from proliferative to a neurogenic pattern of cell division, and the human retinoblastomas initiated later during retinogenesis than did the murine retinoblastoma. This was reflected in the poised and active enhancers ( , ) and the CRC analysis (see , ). Among the 47 core transcription factors identified in the murine CRC analysis, 4 were found only in retinoblastoma (Tcf4, Hif1a, Foxj1, and Egr1). Tcf4 is upregulated 5 fold in retinoblastoma relative to normal retina and is an important regulator of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in cancer ( ). Foxj1 is thought to be a key transcriptional regulator of genes that encode proteins implicated in ciliogenesis ( ). Egr1 is a tumor suppressor ( ), and Hif1a is a master regulator of the response to hypoxia often induced in cancers ( ).

## DISCUSSION
During development, multipotent neural progenitors undergo unidirectional changes in competence to produce differentiated cells in a precise temporal and spatial order ( ). This is required to produce each class of neurons, in the correct place and time, to form neural circuits. Alterations in the balance between proliferation and differentiation in the developing CNS can cause evolutionary change in regions such as the cortex and retina ( ; ; ) or can lead to retinoblastoma ( ). Here we focused on the transcriptional silencing of retinal progenitor cell genes (including those required for proliferation) and the transcriptional activation of differentiation genes in rod photoreceptors and other retinal cell types. Changes in histone modifications at developmentally regulated genes were more prevalent than those in DNA methylation and were more predictive of changes in gene expression. Among the histone modifications, changes in H3K27me3 were the most strongly associated with developmental stage–specific transitions in gene expression. Changes in H3K27me3 and DNA methylation were more prevalent in differentiation genes than in progenitor genes. We used our epigenomic data to identify novel evolutionarily conserved developmental stage–specific super-enhancers and mapped their putative target genes within TADs and the 3D nuclear organization of rods.
Using these data as a backdrop, we mapped the developmental origins of human and mouse retinoblastomas and found they most closely resembled the stage when retinal progenitors transition from neurogenic to terminal patterns of division. The murine retinoblastoma epigenome was more similar to normal developing retina than to stem cells derived from retinal neurons, and epigenetic profiling of r-iPSCs relative to f-iPSCs showed that histone modifications are central to neuronal epigenetic memory.

## Dynamic Transitions during Development Are Reflected in the Epigenome
As murine retinal progenitors change competence and exit the cell cycle during retinogenesis, several thousand genes are downregulated, with about one-third showing corresponding changes in their epigenetic state. Most genes transitioned to an empty state suggesting they are either truly devoid of specific epigenetic marks, or other marks that were not included in our analysis contributed to the repression of proliferation and retinal progenitor cell–specific genes. One intriguing possibility is that the empty genes are sequestered in less accessible regions of the nucleus (heterochromatin) that do not require active epigenetic repression ( ). Genes that are not expressed but are localized in regions of the nucleus with active transcription may require epigenetic repression such as H3K27me3. It has been suggested that all genes are localized to the euchromatin domain in rods, irrespective of their expression or epigenetic state ( ). However, our data showed that a subset of developmentally regulated retinal genes are sequestered to the f-heterochromatin ring surrounding the constitutive heterochromatin in the center of rod nuclei.
Our 1D epigenomic map may serve as a valuable resource for elucidating the rules that govern 2D looping within TADs and 3D nuclear organization in this class of neurons in future studies. Our data suggest that the localization of genes to heterochromatin or euchromatin domains is cell type specific. For example, Car10, Cav1, and Arr3 are localized to the heterochromatin domain in rods but are expressed from the euchromatin domain in other retinal cell types. Moreover, the cell type–specific nuclear localization may extend to genes involved in disease; the Myc oncogene and Cdkn2a tumor-suppressor gene are both localized to the heterochromatin domain in rods. We have proposed that the 1D, 2D, and 3D organization of the genome during differentiation, a property that we call cellular pliancy ( ; ), contributes to cell type–specific susceptibility to disease. In this model, rods have low pliancy because more of their genome is epigenetically inactive at the 1D, 2D, or 3D level of organization, relative to interneurons such as horizontal cells that have a much more accessible genome ( ; ). Although our data are consistent with the cellular pliancy model of disease susceptibility, a more comprehensive profiling of individual cell types is required to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms.
As retinal neurons and glia differentiated during development, the expression of several thousand genes increased. Approximately half of those genes showed a corresponding change in at least 1 epigenetic parameter measured, which is probably an underestimate because of the mixed cell types in the adult retina. We discovered cell type–specific H3K27me3 repression of non-rod genes in rods, suggesting that the dynamics of H3K27me3 extends to cell type–specific programs. The portion of differentiation genes with corresponding epigenetic changes may exceed 50% based on estimates from the rod genes. Indeed, a major limitation of our study is the heterogeneity of the samples analyzed. Not only are the 7 major classes of retinal cell types present in different proportions in the adult retina, but also they are born in an evolutionarily conserved order, in a center-to-periphery gradient. Therefore, at any given stage of development (E14.5–P10), the tissue analyzed may be a mixture of proliferating retinal progenitor cells, newly postmitotic committed cells, and differentiating cells. Developmental analysis of individual cell types will be required to elucidate the key epigenetic programs within each cell type.
The epigenetic data were useful for identifying cis-regulatory elements, in particular super-enhancers, for developmentally regulated genes. Identification of stage-specific formation of super-enhancers and genes within the same TAD that are up or downregulated with the same kinetics, provided insight into the complex regulation of retinogenesis. Moreover, the CRC analysis identified master transcription factors that are central to mouse and human retinal development and retinoblastoma. It will be important to validate the role of those transcription factors and the function of their associated super-enhancers in vivo.

## Epigenomic Changes Are Conserved across Species
Epigenetic changes were strongly conserved across mouse and human retinal development with DNA-methylation changes being the least conserved (7%–8%); chromHMM more highly conserved (45%–56%); and the developmental stage–specific super-enhancers the most highly conserved (62%). This may be an underrepresentation because we had access to fewer developmental stages for human retinal development. Therefore, some genes may have changes in DNA methylation that accompany their dynamic changes in gene expression but were missed because the changes occurred later in development than we analyzed in our study. Also, species-specific difference may occur in the epigenomic regulation of retinogenesis based on the organization of the genome. Changes in histone modifications were more predictive of changes in gene expression across species. For example, nearly 90% of the genes with changes in H3K27me3 during development also had corresponding changes in their expression.

## Relating the iPSC Epigenome to Retinal Development
There was no evidence to support our initial hypothesis that the genes with the most dynamic changes in their epigenetic landscape were most likely to retain epigenetic memory in r-iPSCs. At every level of analysis, there was more evidence of epigenetic memory in r-iPSCs than in f-iPSCs with significant enrichment in genes important for neurogenesis. In addition, complementing the DNA-methylation analysis with ChIP-seq analysis provided a more complete landscape of retinal epigenetic memory. The most surprising result was the 10-fold greater contribution of H3K9me3 to epigenetic memory than other epigenetic marks. During rod differentiation, changes in H3K27me3 are the most numerous and the dramatic, but those changes are rapidly reversed in r-iPSCs. During reprogramming, the mechanisms that reset the H3K27me3 epigenome may be more efficient than those that reset the H3K9me3 epigenome. Indeed, large chromatin domains with H3K9me3 are impediments to reprogramming ( ). Also, a substantial proportion of the epigenetic memory was active repression of genes important for neurogenesis. This may indicate that rather than retaining a more permissive or active epigenetic state, the neurogenic program is more actively repressed in r-iPSCs as part of the reprogramming process, as seen with chromatin changes that occur during 3 key stages of reprogramming in MEFs ( ). With MEF reprogramming, active lineage-specific promoters are silenced during the initial stage, followed by silencing of the permissive enhancers/promoters that transition to a poised chromatin state ( ). During the final stage of reprogramming, the repressed genes (H3K9me3 and H3K27me3) such as Sox2 and Nanog are reset to their pluripotent state ( ). According to this model, the retinal neuron/rod genes would be the most likely to be reset in r-iPSCs, and the subset of those genes that are H3K27me3- or H3K9me3-repressed in MEFs would be least likely to be reset in f-iPSCs. Our data are consistent with this model.
On the basis of these data, we hypothesize that genes that undergo the most dramatic changes in epigenetic state during development are those most likely to be properly reset in iPSCs derived from those cell types. As a result, cells are more likely to produce the tissue they were derived from because the epigenome of the developmental program has been properly reset. Whether several genes are required for retinal differentiation or only a few are involved in early eye-field specification during neurogenesis remains unknown. Analyses of many iPSC lines from different neuronal types will be required to test this hypothesis.

## Mapping the Retinoblastoma Epigenome to Retinal Development
Previous studies suggest that retinoblastoma expresses multiple programs of photoreceptors, progenitor cells, and interneurons in single cells ( ; ). This may result from an uncoupling of the tightly coordinated epigenomic transitions during development, or it could reflect a developmental transition state that is fixed in the tumor. Our data favor the latter possibility with the epigenomes in human and murine retinoblastomas matching the developmental transition from neurogenic to terminal patterns of cell division. The human retinoblastomas had an epigenetic program consistent with photoreceptor specification, while the murine retinoblastomas were more consistent with amacrine cells and horizontal interneurons, potentially reflecting subtle differences in the developmental stage when the retinoblastoma forms. As peak birthdates for amacrine/horizontal neurons precedes that of rods, this suggests that murine retinoblastoma intiate earlier than human retinoblastoma. Most GEMMs of retinoblastoma use retinal progenitor cell–specific Cre transgenes to inactive Rb family members during retinal development, so it is not surprising that these tumors may initiate earlier in mice than in humans. Detailed lineage tracing experiments will be required to identify the cell of origin for retinoblastoma.
Of the 783 genes that were upregulated in murine retinoblastoma relative to E14.5 mouse retina, approximately one-third were epigenetically regulated during development. Of the 470 genes that were downregulated in murine retinoblastoma relative to P21 mouse retina, two-thirds were epigenetically regulated during retinogenesis. This suggests that a very specific, powerful selection for a particular epigenomic state occurs during retinogenesis, when malignant transformation is initiated as a result of Rb-pathway inactivation. Tumors preserved the earliest epigenetic state for their cell cycle genes (E14.5) but were further along in development (P0–P3) for the progenitor and rod genes. This concept of epigenomic vulnerability during particular stages of development may apply to other pediatric solid tumors that are arrested at an intermediate stage of development.

## STAR METHODS

## CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Michael A. Dyer (michael.dyer@stjude.org).

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

## Human Retina and Retinoblastoma
Human retina was provided by Advanced Bioscience Resources (ABR). The samples included: 6 fetal week 13, 7 fetal week 14, 6 fetal week 15, 2 fetal week 16, 4 fetal week 18, 8 fetal week 23 and 1 fetal week 24 pairs. Only fetal week 13 and 14 samples were combined to obtain enough tissue for ChIP. This is designated as FW13/14 in the manuscript. The project was reviewed and approved by the St. Jude Institutional Review Board. All samples were de-identified and only developmental stage was provided by ABR. Human patient-derived orthotopic xenografts were generated and expanded as described previously ( ).

## Murine Retina and Retinoblastoma
All animal procedures and protocols were approved by the St. Jude Laboratory Animal Care and Use Committee. All studies conform to federal and local regulatory standards. Mice were housed on ventilated racks on a standard 12 hour light-dark cycle. Wild type C57BL/6J mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME). For timed pregnancy, individual male mice were housed with 4 females in a single cage. Plugged/pregnant females (identified by visual examination and/or palpation) were isolated and embryos or pups were harvested at the appropriate time. Both males and females were combined for this study. The genetically engineered mouse model of retinoblastoma (Chx10-Cre;RbLox/Lox;p107−/−MDMXTg) was described previously ( ).

## iPSCs and ESCs
The generation and growth of the rod-derived iPSCs and f-iPSCs has been reported previously and is also provided below ( ; ). The EB5:Rx-GFP ESC line was purchased from the RIKEN cell line repository. It was validated by whole genome sequencing and comparison to the EB5 parental line that was also sequenced. All the lines used in this study are from males.

## Generation of fibroblast-derived iPSCs
RtOK MEFs were dissociated with 0.25% Trypsin (Gibco), and seeded at 10,000 cells/well on a gelatin-coated, 6-well tissue culture plate with an irradiated wild-type MEF feeder layer. Doxycycline (2 μg/ml) was added to the MEF maintenance media and cultured for two days with daily media exchanges. After two days, the MEF maintenance media was exchanged with ESC maintenance media with 2 μg/ml doxycycline added to maintain colony formation. On the sixth day after initiating reprogramming, the MEF lines were dissociated with 0.25% trypsin and re-seeded at 10,000 cells/well on a fresh irradiated wild-type MEF feeder layer. Reprogrammed MEFs were reseeded to reduce density of iPSC-like colonies per well, which made the isolation of individual colonies for sub cloning possible. After 10 days, individual iPSC colonies were isolated, dissociated with 0.25% trypsin for 5 minutes at room temperature, and dispersed on a gelatin-coated 24-well plate with an irradiated MEF feeder layer. Clones were expanded for twenty passages at which point, individual sub clone lines were frozen for further characterization (see below).

## Generation of retinal derived iPSCs
Rod photoreceptor neurons from Nrlwt-rtOK mice were harvested at two different developmental stages to elicit the reprogramming profile of a post-mitotic, photoreceptor committed retinal neurons. Nrl-GFP+ cells isolated on postnatal day 2–4 were considered “immature” rod photoreceptor neurons while Nrl-GFP+ cells isolated on postnatal day 21–23 were considered “mature” rod photoreceptor neurons.
At these two developmental time points, retinas from littermate animals were harvested and digested with 1 mg/mL trypsin (Sigma) in PBS for 5 minutes at 37°C. Retinas were triturated with a p1000 pipette 3–5 times to create a single cell suspension before an additional 3 minute incubation at 37°C. Soybean-trypsin inhibitor (STI, Sigma) and 0.2 mg/mL DNAse (Sigma) was added to each cell suspension and incubated for an additional 5 minutes at 37°C.
To remove cellular debris, each cell suspension was filtered through a bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma) gradient prior to collecting the population of Nrl-GFP+ cells via Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting (FACs). Each cell suspension was brought to a total volume of 3 mL PBS and layered on a column of chilled BSA media (DMEM/F12 media with 4% BSA). The BSA column was centrifuged at 500 rcf for 10 minutes at 4°C. We determined this procedure was optimal in ensuring the population of GFP+ cells collected had minimal extracellular contamination.
To facilitate the reprogramming of retinal neurons, the FACs sorted population of Nrl-GFP+ neurons were cultured as organotypic explant cultures with a C57B6/J wild-type retina acting as the substrate medium to maintain the cells in vitro. Sorted cells were seeding in a two-step limiting dilution series with a 1.5 e^6 retinae cell suspension from postnatal day 0–6 C57B6/J mice. A limiting dilution series (60,000, 6,000, 600, 60 or 30,000, 3,000, 300, 30 cells per pellet) was used to determine the minimum number of neurons required for a reprogramming to occur. Organotypic explant cultures were created by spinning the mixed cell suspension at 14,000 × g for 20 seconds in 1.5 mL tubes (Eppendorf). Organotypic explants were transferred with a p1000 pipette to a nuclepore track-etch membranes (Whatman) floating on 2 mL of retinal explant media. Retinal explant media contains DMEM/F12 (Gibco) supplemented with 10% FBS, 5 ug/mL Insulin (Gibco), Pen/Strep) with 2 ug/mL doxycycline and 2,000 units/mL of LIF. A 10 uL drop of retinal explant media was added to the explant cultures daily while reprogramming to feed the cells with a half media exchange of the media every third day. After 10 days of reprogramming, the remaining retinal pellets were collected and individually isolated and digested with trypsin as previously above. For these cell suspensions, the BSA cushion gradient was not used in order to preserve the number of cells harvested. Each pellet was then seeded on gelatin-coated 6-well culture dishes with an irradiated MEF feeder layer in a second limiting dilution series of 20,000, 2,000, 200 cells per well. Colony forming events were recorded for each pellet prior to isolation of individual iPSC colonies for subclone expansion. At this point the Nrl-GFP retinal neurons were renamed r-IPSC and expanded for twenty passages at which point, individual sub clone lines were frozen for further characterization.

## Characterization of iPSC lines
riPSC and fiPSC subclones established from reprogramming were initially characterized based on colony morphology and rate of growth. 24-subclones were established for each iPSC line and passaged five times after which the number of lines was reduced to 12 candidate lines, which were selected for further characterization. These 12 candidate lines were banked every five passages up until passage 20 and karyotyped to identify lines that had minimal chromosomal abnormalities. Of these 12 initial subclones, 4 lines were chosen for a complete characterization of cellular pluripotency and retinal differentiation.
Each iPSC line was passaged onto gelatin-coated, tissue culture plates containing inactivated feeder cells with or without exogenous LIF. iPSC cells were grown for several days in these culture conditions to monitor differentiation and loss of pluripotency via alkaline phosphatase (AP, Millipore) staining. iPSC lines grown on gelatin-coated chamber slides were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes, rinsed 3× with PBS, and incubated 3–4 hours at room temperature with an appropriate blocking serum supplemented with 0.5% Trition X-100. Slides were incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4°C, 1–2 hours with secondary antibody (Vector) at room temperature, and 30 minutes with an ABC Kit (Vectastain) at room temperature. Immunostaining was visualized by a 10 minute incubation in cyanine 3 conjugated-tyramide reagent (PerkinElmer) prior to DAPI counter staining. Day 28 retinal spheres were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde overnight at 4°C before immersion overnight in a 4% sucrose solution. To test the pluripotency of each iPSC line to produce all three germ layers, 200,000 cells were harvested and injected into each flank of adult CD1-Nude mice. Teratoma growth was monitored in these animals for up to 12 weeks after injection and removed before the tumor reached 20% of the animal’s body weight. Teratoma tumors were resected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C for several days prior to paraffin sectioning. Individual germ layers were identified by hematoxylin and eosin staining or with the following primary antibodies CK Oscar (endoderm), Vimentin and Desmin (mesoderm), or Synaptophysin (ectoderm).

## METHOD DETAIL

## Sequencing

## RNA Preparation
RNA was isolated from individual TRIzol (Life Technologies) preparations via a phenol–chloroform extraction. Samples were first homogenized at 17,000 rpm for 30 s with a tissue homogenizer (Polytron, PT10-35GT). A 1:4 volume of chloroform (Sigma) was then added to each sample and incubated at room temperature for 3 min followed centrifugation at 12,000 ×g at 4°C for 15 min. The aqueous layer was then transferred to a siliconized Eppendorf tube followed by the addition of 2.0 μL glycogen (Roche) and 500 μL isopropanol (Fisher Scientific). Samples were incubated at room temperature for 10 min followed by centrifugation at 12,000 ×g at 4°C for 15 min. Samples were then washed twice with ice-cold 80% EtOH (Fisher) to remove salts, resuspended in DEPC H2O, and the concentration was determined with a NanoDrop (Thermoscientific).

## Whole-Genome Bisulfite Sequencing
Genomic DNA was extracted from retinal tissues by using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (QIAGEN #69504) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Typically, 2 μg genomic DNA is used to make WGBS libraries. WGBS was conducted by the Hudson Alpha Research Institute for Biotechnology using the Cambridge Epigenetix TrumethylSeq kit (BS workflow) per the manufacturer’s instructions.

## ChIP antibody validation
All antibodies were independently validated and biological replicates were performed for each mark at each stage of development. For most antibodies, we also validated the data using an independent antibody. All antibody validation data and SOPs for ChIP are freely available through the CSTN (www.stjude.org/cstn). Specifically, for the H3K27me3 mark, we have two antibodies with two replicates each at every stage. To estimate the consistency between antibodies, we first called domains using SICER as above, then at each stage for each antibody domains overlapping common regions between two replicates have been merged, at last we merged the domains from two antibodies and counted extend reads for each sample overlapping these merged domains. At each stage, we draw the correlation plot between each pair of samples as ( ), as most of the correlation coefficient is > 0.9 (except one outlier at P7 as replicate 1 for AB3), we think both antibodies are working consistently and we used AB1 in the final analysis since it had better signal to noise profile.

## ChIP-Seq
All antibodies were independently validated, and those validation data and protocols are available through the Childhood Solid Tumor Network website (https://www.stjude.org/CSTN/) ( ). Freshly isolated retinae or cells were cross-linked for 10 min in 1% ChIP-seq–grade formaldehyde (Thermo scientific # 28906) in 1X PBS at room temperature. Glycine was added to a final concentration of 0.125 M to stop the cross linking reaction. The retinal tissue was washed in 1X PBS and then dispersed into a single cell suspension using a dounce homogenizer with 7 ml pestle (Fisher scientific # 06-435A). The nuclei were isolated and prepared for shearing using TruChIP chromatin shearing kit (Covaris #520127) according to manufacturer’s protocol. After shearing, ChIP was performed using the iDeal ChIP-seq kit (Diagenode # C01010051). Ten percent of chromatin from each ChIP reaction was used as an input. After de-crosslinking, DNA was extracted using MinElute PCR-purification kit (QIAGEN #28006), quantified using the Quant-iT PicoGreen ds DNA assay (Life Technologies #Q33120) and subjected to qPCR analysis and library construction for sequencing. The RNA-Pol II, Brd4 and H3K9me3 ChIP was performed by Active Motif.
Libraries were prepared from 5–10 ng DNA by using the NEBNext ChIP-Seq Library Prep Reagent Set for Illumina with NEBNext High-Fidelity 2× PCR Master Mix according to the manufacturer’s instructions (New England Biolabs) with the following modifications: a 1:1 Ampure cleanup was added after adaptor ligation a total of 2 times. The Ampure size-selection step prior to PCR was eliminated. The 72 °C extension step of the PCR was lengthened to 45 s. Completed libraries were analyzed for insert-size distribution on a 2100 BioAnalyzer High Sensitivity kit (Agilent Technologies) or Caliper LabChip GX DNA High Sensitivity Reagent Kit (PerkinElmer). Libraries were quantified using the Quant-iT PicoGreen ds DNA assay (Life Technologies) and Kapa Library Quantificaiton kit (Kapa Biosystems ) or low-pass sequencing on a MiSeq nano kit (Illumina). Fifty-cycle single-end sequencing was performed on an Illumlina HiSeq 2500.

## Retina dissociation
For each sample, retinae were dissociated with Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, T9935), and then incubated with soybean-trypsin inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, T6522) and DNaseI (Sigma-Aldrich, D4513). After dissociation, explant culture medium (25 ml of FBS, 2.5 ml of HEPES, 2.5 ml of penicillin-streptomycin and 125 μl of insulin in 219.9 ml of DMEM/F12 with GlutaMAX) was added to the cell suspension, and then it was filtered through a 40 μm cell strainer (Falcon, 352340) and pelleted at 1,200 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C.

## RNA-Seq
RNA was extracted from freshly isolated retinae by using RNeasy Plus Mini kit (Qiagen #74134). Libraries were prepared from ~500 ng total RNA with the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Library Prep Kit according to the manufacturer’s directions (Illumina). Paired-end 100-cycle sequencing was performed on HiSeq 2000 or HiSeq 2500 sequencers according to the manufacturer’s directions (Illumina.)

## ATAC-seq
ATAC-seq library preparation was performed as described ( ) with minor modifications. Briefly, for each experiment, 2×105 – 5×105 dissociated retinal cells were washed twice with PBS (Lonza, 17–516F) containing Proteinase Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich P8340), incubated with 50 μl of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2 and 0.3% IGEPAL CA-630) on ice for 10 min and centrifuged at 500 g for 10 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation, the pellet was immediately incubated with 50 μl of Tn5 transposition reaction mix (25 μl TD buffer, 2.5 μl TDE1 (Nextera DNA Library Prep Kit, Illumina, FC-121-1030) and 22.5 μl nuclease-free water) at 37 °C for 30 min. After purification with Qiagen MinElute PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen, 28006), transposed DNA fragments were amplified with NEBNext High-Fidelity 2× PCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs, M0541) for 5 cycles using the following PCR conditions: 72 °C for 5 min; 98 °C for 30s; and thermocycling at 98°C for 10s, 63°C for 30s and 72°C for 1 min. 5 μl of each library was amplified in a 25-μl qPCR reaction with KAPA SYBRFAST qPCR Kit (Kapa Biosystems, KK4603) to estimate the optimum number of additional cycles to finish amplification of the remaining 45-μl library.

## Computational Analysis

## RNA-Seq Analysis
FASTQ sequences were mapped to the mouse mm9 (MGSCv37 from Sanger) or human genome hg19(GRCh37) by StrongARM, developed for the PCGP ( ). To estimate the FPKM values, we first downloaded GTF files(mouse vM7, human v23) from GENCODE ( ) website and liftOver them to mm9 or hg19 by CrossMap version 0.1.5 ( ). Then only “transcript” and “exon” records from the GTF files were retained for compatible of feed to cuffdiff (from Cufflinks package version 2.1.1 ) along with default parameters and “--frag-bias-correct --multi-read-correct -time-series “.
Four gene sets (Rod, Progenitor, G2/M, Housekeeping) that were previously identified and validated by single-cell gene expression analysis ( , Trimarchi et al., 2007 and ) were clustered by their correlation of log2 (FPKM) across mouse development and the largest cluster has been used for .

## WGBS Analysis
Whole genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) data were mapped to GRCh37-lite (human) or mm9 (mouse) by BSMAP2.74 with the following parameters: -z 33 -f 5 -g 3 -r 0 -m 17 -x 600 –u and raw methylation status was called by Bis-SNP (Version 0.82.2). We developed a regression tree based approach to identify regional methylation pattern of a sample using m-values (
 ). Adjacent segments with insignificant (p > 1E-6, Student t-test) or small difference between average β-values (
 ) (< 0.1) were recursively merged.
Segmentation breakpoints from individual samples were pooled to generate an initial list of regions for testing correlation between methylation and gene expression. Correlation between regions with variable methylation (difference between highest and lowest average m-values >= 0.3) and adjacent genes with variable expression (methylation region overlapping 10 kb upstream of TSS to TES, at least 2 fold difference between highest and lowest FPKM, highest FPKM >= 1) were calculated. Gene/region pairs with FDR <= 0.5 were retained for merging, where adjacent regions for the same gene (no more than 1 kb apart) with the same orientation (positive or negative) of correlation were merged. Correlations were re-evaluated and pairs with final FDR <= 0.1 were used as differentially methylated regions that were significantly correlated with gene expression.

## ChIP-Seq Analysis
We first employ BWA (version 0.5.9-r26-dev, default parameter) to align the ChIP-Seq reads to mouse genome mm9(MGSCv37 from Sanger) or human genome hg19(GRCh37), Picard(version 1.65(1160)) then have been used for marking duplicated reads. Then only non-duplicated reads with have been kept by samtools (parameter “-q 1 -F 1024” version 0.1.18 (r982:295)). We followed the ENCODE criterion to quality control (QC) the data that non-duplicated version of SPP (version 1.11) have been used to draw cross-correlation and calculated relative strand correlation value (RSC) under support of R (version 2.14.0) with packages caTools(version 1.17) and bitops(version 1.0–6) and estimated the fragment size. We required > 10M unique mapped reads for point-source factor (H3K4me2/3, H3K9/14Ac, H3K27Ac, CTCF, RNAPolII, BRD4) and RSC > 1. We required 20M unique mapped reads for broad markers (H3K9me3, H3K27me3, H3K36me3). We required 10M unique mapped reads for INPUTs and RSC < 1. We noticed H3K4me1 is point-source factor in some stages while broad in other stages so we QC H3K4me1 as broad markers. Then upon manually inspection, the cross-correlation plot generated by SPP, the best fragment size estimated (the smallest fragment size estimated by SPP in all our cases) were used to extend each reads and generate bigwig file to view on IGV (version 2.3.40). All profiles were manually inspected for clear peaks and good signal to noise separation. For mouse data, all data broad markers with RSC < 0.8 have biological replicates except several samples with one of antibody for H3K9me3(due to availability of outsourcing), we think the quality of those H3K9me3 are good since they show clear peaks and RSC are bigger than most of the H3K9me3 data available in ENCODE or Epigenomics Roadmap(details of QC matrix could be found in ).
To estimate the consistence between biological replicates, for point-source factors, MACS2 (version 2.0.9 20111102, option “nomodel” with “extsize” defined as fragment size estimated above) have been used to call peaks with FDR corrected p-value cutoff 0.05(strong peak set) and 0.5(weak peak set) separately, peaks within 100bp have been merged by bedtools (version 2.17.0). We required > 80% of strong peak set from either one replicate overlapping the weak peak set from the other replicate (median percentage 96.8%). For broad peaks, SICER (version 1.1 redundancy threshold 1, window size 200bp, effective genome fraction 0.86, gap size 600bp, FDR 0.00001 with fragment size defined above) has been used for domain calling and we required > 70% of domains called overlapping the domains called from the other replicate(median percentage 89.9%). After confirmed the consistency between replicates, we pool extended reads and generate the final bigwig track for visualization.

## ATAC-seq data analysis
Nextera adapter were trimming by cutadapt (version 1.9, paired-end mode, default parameter with “ –m 6 –O 20 ”) for 2×100bp paired-end reads obtained from all samples and aligned to mouse genome mouse genome mm9 (MGSCv37 from NCBI) by BWA ( ; ; ; ; )(version 0.5.9-r26-dev, default parameter), duplicated reads were then marked with Picard(version 1.65(1160)) and only proper paired non-duplicated reads have been kept by samtools (parameter “-q 1 -F 1804” version 0.1.18 (r982:295)). After adjustment of Tn5 shift (reads were offset were offset by +4 bp for the sense strand and −5 bp for the antisense strand) we separated reads into nucleosome free, mononucleosome, dinucleosome, trinucleosome by fragment size and generated bigwig files by using the center 80bp of fragments and scale to 75M reads that fragments’ length less than 2kb. Observed reasonable nucleosome free peaks and pattern of mono-, di-, trinucleosome on IGV (version 2.3.40). All data have more than 20M nucleosome free reads and after manual review, we performed peaks calling for nucleosome free reads by MACS2(version 2.1.0.20150603 default parameters with “--extsize 200 --nomodel”, merged by bedtools if within 100bp) for individual samples. For each sample, we called twice individually as high confidence peaks(q-value cutoff 0.05) and low confidence peaks(q-value cutoff 0.5). To assure the reproducibility, we first finalized nucleosome free regions for each stages as only retained a peak if it called in one of the replicates and also overlap low confidence peaks from the other replicates and merged while keep the high confidence peak edges. Then we counted nucleosome free reads from each replicates and draw correlation plots, the pearson correlation coefficient all > 0.95 indicated our data were highly reproducible. Then we merged finalized nucleosome free regions from all 8 stages and annotated by whether they overlap each samples for each stage.
For comparison to the data in the previously published ATAC-seq analysis ( ) we performed a liftOver to build mm9. All 88 WT special ATAC peaks were identified in our P14 and P21 ATAC-seq for both replicates. We also identified 1355 out of 1491 NrlKO specific peaks in our data. In total, there was very good agreement between our data and the previously published data. Specifically, 98.2% of the 2463 peaks identified previously in the WT and NrlKO were identified in our data.

## Transcription Factor Analysis
For footprinting, bigwig files of the ATAC-seq data were normalized by autosomes reads to 200M reads(e.g. sample with 100M autosome reads would be scaled to double the bigwig profile). Then average bigwig files were generated by mean of replicates at each bp for each sample and motif matches within nucleosome free region were used for footprinting. The average profile across all motif matches at each bp from −100bp from motif match centers to +100bp. Finally, the footprinting profiles were smoothed with 10bp bins.

## Enhancer Analysis
Active enhancers were identified from the H3K27Ac ChIP-seq and the poised enhancers were identified from the H3K4me1 ChIP-seq. The H3K27Ac high confidence peaks (q-value cutoff = 0.05) and low confidence peaks(q-value cutoff = 0.5) were identified using MACS2 for each sample. For the biological replicates, if there was overlap with the high confidence peaks or a high confidence peak in one replicate and a low confidence peak in the other sample, it was selected as a putative active enhancer. For samples without replicates, we just used high confidence peaks from MACS2.
For H3K4me1, we first identified the domains using SICER for each replicate and extracted the common regions between replicates. These regions were selected as putative poised enhancers. For samples without replicates, we just used domains identified using SICER.
To determine if the enhancers were conserved between mouse and human, we used the liftOver algorithm with a 50% cutoff for conserved domains. If there was not any overlapping peak across species, we indicated the percentage of conservation between humans and mice.
For the analysis of iPSCs, we used the H3K27Ac high confidence peaks across f-iPSC and r-iPSC samples. To compare between the iPSC samples, we analyzed read counts using VOOM and those data are presented as Counts Per Million(CPM) in the tab “H3K27Ac-Rod_vs_Fibr”. Similar analyses were performed for H3K4me1 using domains identified with SICER. Mouse developmental enhancers were annotated in the column “H3K27Ac-Rod_vs_Fibr” and “H3K4me1-Rod_vs_Fibr” by Up2 (significant up that passed FDR 5% and > 2 fold in riPSC), Up (significant up that passed FDR 5% but not > 2 fold in riPSC), Down2 (significant down that passed FDR 5% and > 2 fold downregulated in riPSC), Down (significant down that passed FDR 5% but not > 2 fold down in riPSC), Other (overlap any peak in either fiPSC or riPSC but not significant).

## Chromatin State Modeling
Non-duplicated aligned reads were extend by fragment size define above and ChromHMM (version 1.10, with “-colfields 0,1,2,5 -center” for BinarizeBed ) was used for chromatin state modeling. To choose the state number we first modeling all mouse development stage together from 7 states to 33 states. We want choose the state number most correlated to the biological event as greatest up/down regulation of genes here. So we take the FPKM values from RNA-seq then remove all genes that are FPKM <1 across all stages of mouse development. Of those that remain, genes FPKM is <1 at a particular stage have been normalized to 1. Than for 311 genes down 10 fold from P0 to P21 and 366 genes up 10 fold from P0 to P21, we tested the significance that each state in each model occupied different percentage of gene and flank region (from −2kb of TSS to +2kb of TES) by t-test. Order the state and model by smallest p-value we found larger percentage of state 9 in model 11 at P0 is greatest associated with genes down-regulated 10 fold from P0 to P21 while larger percentage of state 1 in model 11 at P0 is greatest associated with genes up-regulated 10 fold. We repeat similar analysis for genes up/down 10 fold from E14.5 to P14, model 11 is still top in all the models so we choose HMM model with 11 states.
For better visualization of the dynamics of HMM state across stages, we normalized color intensity by the max total percentage of a state covered a gene and flanking region across mouse development and tumor. To determine the best region represent a gene, we first filtering annotated isoforms by TSS within 2kb of any H3K4me3/H3K4me2/H3K27Ac/H3K9-14Ac peaks at any development stages and then we selected the highest expressed isoform at any development stages estimated by cuffdiff or the longest isoform if no expression level estimated by cuffdiff. At last, we reduced the interval for a HMM state to half bar and the intensity to half of the normalized intensity if it didn’t ranked top 2 HMM state for a gene. For HMM states could be assigned by multiple genes, the max total percentage across genes have been used for these normalization.
For the HMM state in Human, after processing of ChIP-seq data similar to mouse, we applied the Mouse 11 states HMM model to human data. The selection of isoform is similar but using human data while the max total percentage used for normalization of intensity is based on mouse if there is mouse ortholog for that gene.

## ChromHMM Grouping
We first calculated the mahalanobis distance between each pair of variable genes(max FPKM across stages > 2 * min FPKM across stages) based on the normalized FPKM value and the percentage of 11 HMM states covered the gene flanking 2kb region along all development stages. Then we clustered genes from rod, progenitor, G2M, housekeeping groups by expression and identified subclusters for some groups as follows:
Rod_N2H : no active marks To highly active marks

Rod_N2M: no active marks To moderately active marks

Rod_L2H: low level of active marks To highly active marks

Rod_L2M: low level of active marks To moderately active marks

Progenitor_L2N: low level of active marks To no active marks

Progenitor_L2L: low level of active marks To low level of active marks

Progenitor_M2L: moderately active marks To low level of active marks

Progenitor_M2N: moderately active marks To no active marks

The G2/M genes and housekeeping genes did not separate into subgroups. For each variable gene, we calculated the average mahalanobis distances to each of these 10 groups and assign the group to a gene by the group with smallest average distance ( , “Group_HMM_Exp”). We then repeat the group assignment by using mahalanobis distances for log2 FPKM ( , “Group_Exp”). Since a gene could be assigned to one of these 10 groups but actually not similar to any of them, we indicated which 10 percentile the gene ranked across all genes to that group accordingly in by the columns started “HMMQ10”(by distance of HMM and Expression) or “ExpQ10”(by distance of log2 FPKM).

## Super-enhancer Analysis
At each stage, after called the H3K27ac peaks with MACS2, in addition to ROSE’s distance cutoff parameter, we first combine peaks from replicates as potential enhancer region (this significantly improve consistency of super enhancer called between replicates by avoid false negative “bridging” weak peaks) and excluded peaks overlapping H3K4me3 peaks to make sure the super enhancers called are not due to promoter signal. Then we use ROSE (stitched if within 12.5kb, not counted as stitch if within 2.5kb of TSS) to call super-enhancers (SEs) independently for both replicate and retain the SEs called in both replicates. In additional to the SEs called by ROSE (cutoff chose by slope 1, 1353 out of 1354 overlapping BRD4 peaks) we find many regions ranked top consistently in many stages and the percentage of these regions overlapping BRD4 peaks (1698 out of 1708) are high indicated those are SE regions. So we finalized SE regions by merging SE called by ROSE (in both replicates) at any stages or ranked as top 1000 at > 1 stages(in both replicates) and finally filtered by overlapping BRD4 peaks in any stages.
To identify the dynamically regulated superenhancers during retinal development, we used the ROSE identification combined with analysis of the H3K27Ac reads at E14.5 and P21. This was done to reduce the false positive calling of developmentally regulated superenhancers. Specifically, we scored the number of H3K2Ac reads for each SE region at E14.5 and P21 for both replicates, then we use Kolmogorov–Smirnov to determine if the number of reads was significantly different across those two stages (column “New_in_P21_by_Reads_Tests” or “Disappear_in_P21_by_Reads_Tests” in ).
After get the development regulated genes, we annotated SE in human and mouse if the development regulated genes is within 500kb of SE and tried to match the SE to development regulated genes both in mouse and human and result in tab “Dev_Regu_both”, SE and gene pair in this tab indicated gene has been identified as development regulated genes in both human and mouse meanwhile the SE in human is within 500kb of the gene and the conserved region in mouse from the same SE is within 500kb of gene in mouse(some might be development regulated in different direction but could be easily filtered out). “Human_Dev_Regu” and “Mouse_Dev_Regu” columns indicated how strong they have been regulated along development(suffix _fc2 indicated 2 fold change, suffix _trend indicated identified as development regulated genes above) and direction(“up” indicated higher expressed in latest stage). The tab include every potential development SE in human could be liftover(cutoff 20%) to mouse so it is recommend to filter by column “Overlap_Mm9_Development_SE” or “Enhancer_Loci_Mouse” that the first one assures after liftOver it’s in active SE region, the second one could help avoid regions between enhancers but within SE.
The CRC mapper was run as described previously ( ) except we performed two separate analyses to compare data with and without promoter regions. We used our H3K4me3 ChIP-seq data to remove those putative super-enhancers that overlap with promoters. This was done because some very actively expressed genes had large regions of H3K27Ac that are called as super-enhancers and it is difficult to distinguish between these putative super-enhancers and strong promoters at genes.

## H3K27me3 Analysis
Manually reviewed genes overlapping H3K27me3 domains called by SICER, we found many genes overlapping H3K27me3 domains at early stage but not later only have weak H3K27me3 signal. After HMM modeling, we calculated the percentage of a gene(+/− 2kb) or promoter(TSS-2kb) occupied by different chromatin state, genes with at least 20% promoter covered by state 4 or state 8 at P0 and twice larger than P21 or with at least 10% gene region covered by state 4 or state 8 at P0 and twice larger than P21 have been considered as genes active derepressed by H3K27me3. Similar, genes got larger state 4 and state 8 at P21 compared to P0 are considered as active repressed. To identify other genes sharing similar pattern, we further filtering genes meeting this criterion by 2 fold expression level change comparing P0 to P21 but opposite to direction of percentage of HMM state(e.g. higher expression level at P21 and smaller percentage of state 4 and state 8 together defines active derepressed genes). Finally, we counted H3K27me3 reads in Human at earliest stage and latest stage for these candidate genes and annotated the gene by whether the normalized reads number increase or decrease 2 fold(at least 20 reads for the bigger one) either at promoter or gene flanking 2kb region.

## TAD Annotation
Mouse Cortex TAD bed file have been downloaded from Bing Ren’s lab webpage. For each TAD we counted genes (The TSS and TES of a gene should both within the TAD to be counted) in each of the pre-defined groups (rod, progenitor, G2/M and housekeeping) and use Fisher’s exact test to calculate the p-value of how each those groups is enriched in this TAD compared to the background probability of observing genes in those groups within or not within a TAD. The group with lowest p-value have been assigned to the TADs. We then cluster TADs by the average mahalanobis distance of log2 FPKM of genes within one TAD to genes within another TAD. Coloring TADs by the above group assignment, we found one TAD cluster is enriched for rod genes and another one is enriched for progenitor genes. Finally, we calculated the percentage of a TAD have been covered by different HMM states, and annotated a TAD as “active” TAD if the total percentage of state 1,2,3,5,6,7 is top 5 percentile or “polycomb” if the total percentage of state 4,8 is top 10 percentile or “heterochromatin” if the percentage of state 10 is top 5 percentile or “null” if the percentage of state 9 is top 5 percentile. If a TAD was enriched for both polycomb and heterochromatin, it was labeled heterochromatin.

## Retinoblastoma Analysis
To identify the genes that were most significantly upregulated in human retinoblastoma, we started with the hg19 up gene list in . If the variability between xenograft and primary tumor was greater than 2-fold, the gene was eliminated from this analysis. Next, we filtered out those genes that had tumor values below 10 and then eliminated those that had a tumor/normal ratio below 2-fold. Finally, we sorted the list by the multiplying (tumor/normal)x(tumor-normal). In total 408 genes met this criteria. A similar analysis was carried out to identify the genes that were most significantly downregulated in human retinoblastoma. The only difference was that we filtered out the genes that had levels below 10 for the normal and we sorted based on a 2-fold cutoff for normal/tumor rather than tumor/normal. The final list of 500 genes was sorted by (normal/tumor)x(normal-tumor). The same approach was used for mouse retinoblastoma upregulated (784) and downregulated (470) genes. The only difference was that we only analyzed one MDMX tumor so eliminating those tumors with high variability was not necessary.

## Imaging

## 3D Electron Microscopy
The samples for 3D EM were stained with a modified heavy-metal staining method and processed through a graded series of alcohol and propylene oxide washes, and then embedded in Epon hard resin. Thick (0. 5-μm) sections were cut to determine the correct area and then coated with iridium in a Denton Desk II sputter coater. The 3D EM images were collected on a Helios Nanolab 660 Dualbeam system.

## DNA FISH
Freshly cut unfixed cryosections were fixed in 1% PFA in PBS for 5 minutes, followed by an additional fixation in 1% PFA and 0.05% NP40. Fixed samples were stored in 70% ethanol at −20° C until needed. Following fixation slides were subjected to immunostaining by first blocking in 1% BSA and 2X SSC for 10 minutes followed by protein detection using various antibodies at appropriate dilutions in the same blocking solution. Detections were carried out at RT for 45 minutes followed by washing in PBS for 5 minutes. Appropriate secondary antibodies were applied using the same procedure as for primary antibodies. Slides were then fixed in 4% PFA and 0.5% Tween 20 and 0.5% NP40 for 10 minutes, followed by treatment in 0.2N HCl containing 0.5% Triton X-100 for 10 minutes. Slides were then denatured in 70% formamide and 2X SSC at 80° C for 10 minutes. Following denaturation, the slides were dehydrated in a graded ethanol series consisting of 70%, 80%, and 100% ethanol for 2 minutes each. Denatured probes were then applied to the slides under 22 X 22 mm coverslips at 37° C overnight in a solution containing 50% formamide, 2X SSC, and 10% dextran. Slides were then washed in 50% formamide and 2X SSC at 37° C for 5 minutes followed by mounting in Vectashield containing DAPI.

## Confocal image analysis of FISH probes
Images were taken with Zeiss LSM 700 confocal microscope using 63X lens. To map FISH probe nuclear position, we employed machine-learning methods ( ) to segment different nuclear region types (core: blue channel, DAPI-ring: blue channel and Green ring: green channel, FISH spots: red channel) in each 2D plane of the z-stacks. The machine-learning classifier uses 85 feature images for each plane that are created based on texture, gray-scale intensity and neighborhood information. We then use the 3DROIManager ImageJ plug-in ( ) that calculates common surface area between the segmented regions in the 3D segmented image. We use the values of common surface area to identify FISH spots inside each region.

## Enhancer Validation

## Cloning Enhancers
DNA fragments that are likely to be a “hotspot” for activity were amplified from mouse genomic DNA. All primers used are listed in table. Enhancer regions were chosen based on the following criteria:
Strong overlapping peaks of BRD4 and H3K27Ac.
Strong ATAC-seq signal (P21) overlapping with BRD4 and H3K27me3 peaks
Regions within 2 kb from TSS were excluded.
Super enhancers that lie outside TADs were excluded.
Patterns of BRD4, H3K27Ac strongly resemble related gene expression.
If there are multiple regions, the one closest to the TSS (beyond 2 kb of TSS) were picked.
In selected SEs, multiple “hotspots” of interest were picked.
DNA fragments were cloned in XhoI site of Nanluc plasmid containing minimal promoter pNL3.1[Nluc/minP] (Promega N103A) using standard cloning techniques. The primer sequences and coordinates are available upon request.

## Luciferase reporter assay
90 ug of enhancer constructs and 10 ug of firefly luciferase plasmid (pGL4.51[luc2/CMV/Neo] (Promega E132A) (normalization control) were co-electroporated into C57/BL6 retinae that were dissected at P0. Retinae were cultured in explant culture media for 6 days. Then retinae were dissociated and Luciferase assay were performed using Nano-Glo Dual-Luciferase Reporter (NanoDLR) assay system (Promega N1610) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Luminescence measurements were taken as singlets using a SpectraMax M5 (Molecular Devices) plate reader. Experiments were performed in quadruplicates.

## Data Processing for Figures
To simplify visualization in and , averaged ChIP-seq data were manually traced and scaled in Adobe Illustrator and shaded according the indicated color scheme.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The statistical details of experiments can be found above in the METHODS DETAILS section for each type of analysis.

## DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
All of the software for the analysis is freely available and is described above in the METHODS DETAILS section for each type of analysis. All sequence data has been deposited in the GEO database with the following accession number: GSE87064.

## ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
We have developed a new website so users can browse the gene expression and chromHMM for any genomic region. The site is: https://pecan.stjude.org/proteinpaint/study/retina2017
 

## Supplementary Material
12
We thank Angela McArthur for editing the manuscript. This work was supported, in part, by Cancer Center Support (CA21765) from the NCI, grants to M.A.D from the NIH (EY014867, EY018599, and CA168875), and ALSAC. M.A.D. was also supported by a grant from Alex’s Lemonade Stand Foundation for Childhood Cancer, the Tully Family Foundation, and the Peterson Foundation. Most of this research was supported by HHMI. The human retina and retinoblastoma RNA-Seq and WGBS was performed as part of the St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital––Washington University Pediatric Cancer Genome Project. The murine retina, retinoblastoma, and iPSC sequencing were performed with assistance from the Hartwell Center at St. Jude. The 3D EM was performed with assistance from the Cell and Tissue Imaging Shared Resource at St. Jude, and the FISH analysis was performed with assistance from the Cytogenetics Shared Resource at St. Jude.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, I.A., B.X., X.C., M.V., and M.A.D.; Methodology, B.X., X.C., M.V., A.S., S.T., D.J., S.F., X.Z., J.E., and M.A.D.; Software, B.X., X.C., X.Z., and A.S. ; Formal Analysis, B.X., X.C., and A.S.; Investigation, I.A., L.W., D.H., L.G., M.V., M-E. B., and J.Z.; Resources, J.Z., E.R.M., R.K.W. and J.R.D.; Writing-Original Draft, I.A. and M.A.D.; Writing-Review and Editing I.A. and M.A.D.; Visualization, I.A., B.X., X.C., A.S., X.Z., and M.A.D.; Supervision, M.A.D.; Project Administration, M.A.D.; Funding Acquisition, M.A.D. and J.R.D.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.