445elsevierwtPharmacology & TherapeuticsPharmacol TherPMC6527860652786065278603067747310.1016/j.pharmthera.2019.01.002Novel genetic and epigenetic factors of importance for inter-individual differences in drug disposition, response and toxicity
LauschkeVolker M ZhouYitian Ingelman-SundbergMagnus 1Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of Pharmacogenetics, Biomedicum 5B, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden⁎Corresponding author. magnus.ingelman-sundberg@ki.se
52019197122122–1522852019© 2019 The AuthorsThis is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Individuals differ substantially in their response to pharmacological treatment. Personalized medicine aspires to embrace these inter-individual differences and customize therapy by taking a wealth of patient-specific data into account. Pharmacogenomic constitutes a cornerstone of personalized medicine that provides therapeutic guidance based on the genomic profile of a given patient. Pharmacogenomics already has applications in the clinics, particularly in oncology, whereas future development in this area is needed in order to establish pharmacogenomic biomarkers as useful clinical tools. In this review we present an updated overview of current and emerging pharmacogenomic biomarkers in different therapeutic areas and critically discuss their potential to transform clinical care. Furthermore, we discuss opportunities of technological, methodological and institutional advances to improve biomarker discovery. We also summarize recent progress in our understanding of epigenetic effects on drug disposition and response, including a discussion of the only few pharmacogenomic biomarkers implemented into routine care. We anticipate, in part due to exciting rapid developments in Next Generation Sequencing technologies, machine learning methods and national biobanks, that the field will make great advances in the upcoming years towards unlocking the full potential of genomic data.
Abbreviations: 5caC, 5- Carboxylcytosine; 5fC, 5- Formylcytosine; 5hmC, 5-hydroxymethylcytosine; ABC-HSS, Abacavir hypersensitivity syndrome.; ALL, Acute lymphoblastic leukemia; CAT, Catalase; CFTR, Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; ChIP, Chromatin immunoprecipitation; CNVs, Copy number variations; CPIC, Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium; DHR, Drug hypersensitivity reactions; DIHS, Drug-induced hypersensitivity syndrome.; DILI, Drug-induced liver injury; DNMTs, DNA methyltransferases; DPWG, Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group; DRESS, Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; eQTL, Quantitative trait locus; GPCR, G-protein coupled receptor; GST, Glutathione-S-transferase; HDACs, Histone deacetylases; MAF, Minor allele frequencies; MPE, Maculopapular exanthema; MS, Multiple sclerosis; PM, Poor metabolism; oxBS-seq, Oxidative bisulfite sequencing; PRC2, Polycomb repressive complex 2; PTMs, Posttranslational modifications; RA, Retinoic acid; SCAR, Severe cutaneous adverse reaction; SJS, Stevens-Johnson syndrome; SNVs, Single nucleotide variations; TAB-Seq, TET-assisted bisulfite sequencing; TEN, Toxic epidermal necrolysis; UM, Ultrarapid metabolism

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfnois-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractedno1.

## Introduction
The phenomenon that individuals differ in their response to pharmacological therapy has been known for a long time. The early beginnings of the field can be traced back to the identification of interindividual variability of fava bean poisoning by Pythagoras in the 6th century BC an effect much later shown to be linked to polymorphisms in the G6PD gene. Subsequent important contributions were made by Werner Kalow ( ) and Bill Evans ( ) identifying the polymorphism in butyrylcholinesterase and isoniazid metabolism, respectively. Seminal twin studies conducted by Sjöqvist and colleagues found that monozygotic and dizygotic twins differed significantly in nortyptiline pharmacokinetics ( ). Contemporaneously, similar observations were made by Vesell and Page for antipyrine ( ), dicoumarol ( ) and phenylbutazone ( ). While these studies clearly demonstrated the extent of heritability of pharmacokinetic variation, the genetic basis remained elusive.
Another important milestone in pharmacogenetic research was the identification of the genetic polymorphisms underlying differences in debrisoquine and sparteine metabolism by Bob Smith and Michel Eichelbaum in an autosomal locus, which later turned out to be CYP2D6 ( ; ; ). Subsequently, characterization of the responsible enzymes and their corresponding genes was only achieved more than a decade later in the 1980s and 1990s. A major development was the true biochemical purification of different cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes from liver that allowed the subsequent, often antibody assisted cDNA cloning. These breakthroughs allowed for the identification of the most common polymorphic variants using in vivo phenotype-to-genotype strategies and set the stage for modern pharmacogenetic research. For a comprehensive review about the historical origins of pharmacogenetics, we recommend the review by Lesko and Schmidt ( ).
Completion of the Human Genome Project in the early 2000s opened important new possibilities for pharmacogenetic biomarker discovery and set the stage for a plethora of studies that investigated associations between specific genetic polymorphisms and drug response, drug adverse reactions and disease risks. As a result, >200 pharmacogenomic biomarkers have been identified to date that can provide actionable information for clinicians and guide the choice and dosage of pharmacological therapy tailored for a specific patient. However, the societal benefits of these tests and their socioeconomic impacts are in most cases still uncertain and only nine pharmacogenetic biomarkers have received strict boxed warnings (abacavir, carbamazepine, clopidogrel, codeine, lenalidomide, pegloticase, rasburicase, tramadol and valproic acid). In addition, the literature is overwhelmed with a large number of inconclusive association studies that could not be replicated, primarily due to insufficient power to detect associations using agnostic approaches or incomplete phenotypic characterization of the analyzed patient cohorts.
In order to provide support for the further implementation of pharmacogenomic biomarkers, there is a clear need for more randomized, prospective clinical trials. However, as compared to clinical trials for newly developed medicines, the incentive for financing expensive trials that evaluate the added value of companion diagnostics is often rather low because the drugs in question have lost their patents, reducing the incentive to fund expensive trials that validate their use. The most successful example has been the identification of pharmacogenetic tests prior to initiation of abacavir therapy, funded by GlaxoSmithKline. In addition, few trials have been funded by governmental grants, such as the CoumaGen-II ( ), COAG ( ) and EU-PACT ( ) trials pertaining to warfarin treatment; however, with mixed results.
In this contribution we first provide a regulatory and clinical perspective of the current status of pharmacogenetic biomarkers ( ), highlight and comprehensively review emerging associations and critically reflect on the potential for the clinical implementation of these tests ( ), discuss the opportunities and challenges associated with the increasing application of Next Generation Sequencing technologies, and highlight exciting opportunities for pharmacogenomic research enabled by national biobank programs ( ). In addition, we provide an update of recent developments in pharmacoepigenetics ( ) and lastly give our view of current frontiers of pharmacogenomic research that aim to translate academic findings into clinical and societal benefits ( ).

2.

## Clinical implications of pharmacogenetic biomarkers
2.1.

## Current status of germline biomarkers
Most pharmacogenetic biomarkers with clinical importance reside in genes involved in drug pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics as well as in loci related to immune response. Genetic variability is generally analyzed in the germline genome of the patient of interest using non-invasive or minimally invasive methods to obtain the required DNA. In contrast, in oncological therapy, most biomarkers pertain to mutations within the neoplasm, i.e. the somatic genome, and thus require the genetic analysis of tumor biopsies.
Pharmacogenomic biomarkers in the germline genome mostly relate to genetic variants in loci affecting drug pharmacokinetics, including drug metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters. The clinical use of pharmacokinetic germline variants for preemptive guidance of therapy is most widespread in oncology, where variations in DPYD, TPMT and UGT1A1 are analyzed for the prediction of adverse reactions to fluoropyrimidines, mercaptopurines, and irinotecan, respectively ( ). While the frequency of defective TPMT and DPYD alleles is low, their clinical effects are remarkably high. TPMT genotype-guided dosing is already widely applied in clinical practice and is mandatory before commencing mercaptopurine therapy in childhood leukemia ( ). Also the NUDT15 genotype is recommended by the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) to be considered in this type of anticancer therapy . Implementation of preemptive DPYD genotyping into routine care is lagging behind despite firm evidence supporting lower incidences of severe toxicities while maintaining fluoropyrimidine exposure levels in the therapeutic range, as well as reduced health care costs ( ; ). Furthermore, pharmacogenetic testing is implemented in the clinics for genetic variants in CYP2D6, CYP2C19, CYP2C9 and VKORC1 for guidance of drug treatment in cardiology and psychiatry.
The only germline variation in a pharmacodynamic gene that has received pharmacogenetic labels, pertains to variants in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR, ABCC7) gene that cause cystic fibrosis (CF) and genotype-guided CF therapy already constitutes clinical reality. Here, >1900 different genetic variants have been identified that affect CFTR function, 1000 of which occur in fewer than five people in all cohorts studied to date ( ). Depending on the functional consequences of the variants found in a given patients, different drugs can be prescribed including ivacaftor for patients that harbor variants resulting in gating defects (CFTR class III variants) or lumacaftor for patients with CFTR folding defect mutations. Thus, for CF, preemptive pharmacogenetic testing is already of fundamental importance for successful treatment and about 60% of CF patients can benefit from such tailored therapies.
Genetic variability in ADRB2, the gene encoding the β2-adrenergic receptor, has long been considered as a promising biomarker to predict the response to β-agonists in the management of asthma ( ; ). However, results of different trials were conflicting and could, if at all, only explain a minor fraction of the observed variability in drug response ( ; ; ). Thus, the implementation of genotype-guided therapies for asthma utilizing β2-adrenergic receptor variants in the near future appears unlikely. Recent evaluation of sequencing data from 60,000 individuals revealed a surprisingly large number of rare variants in this class of receptors, many potentially important for altered ligand binding or ligand effects ( ). Combined, these data indicate the importance to consider such rare receptor variants for drug response predictions.

2.2.

## Current status of somatic biomarkers
At present oncology is the most important therapeutic area for preemptive prediction of drug outcomes. This area is the subject of very intensive research and in total > 268,000 publications are indexed in PubMed that concern oncological biomarkers, including genomic and epigenomic variants, but the work also encompasses a variety of other molecules, such as non coding RNAs, proteins, peptides and metabolites.
In addition to the aforementioned germline variants in DPYD, TPMT and UGT1A1 that affect the pharmacokinetics of chemotherapeutic agents, somatic mutations in various pharmacodynamic genes open possibilities for the treatment with therapeutics that specifically target the affected pathways. Examples for such targeted cancer drugs that require specific somatic mutations for their effectiveness include the EGFR inhibitors gefitinib, erlotinib and osimertinib, the BRAF inhibitors dabrafenib and vemurafenib and the ERBB2 targeting agents lapatinib, pertuzimab and trastuzumab. In addition, whole genome sequencing (WGS) of the somatic cancer genome is becoming more common, allowing to individualize oncological treatment beyond common mutations. We anticipate that these developments will further accelerate and establish WGS as an integral instrument in the area of anticancer therapy.
Current pharmacogenomic analyses are primarily focused on treatment with small molecules and biomarkers to predict treatment response to emerging biologics constitutes an important frontier. This need is exemplified by treatment outcomes of nivolumab, an antibody-based inhibitor of PD1, in melanoma. While nivolumab significantly improved overall survival compared to conventional dacarbazine chemotherapy, only 20–30% of patients responded to nivolumab and the reasons for the lack of response in the remaining patients remain unknown ( ). Similar response rates were observed for monoclonal antibodies for CTLA4, such as ipilimumab ( ).

2.3.

## Pharmacogenomic drug labels and guidelines
One instrument to support the application of genetic variations in the clinics are pharmacogenomic drug labels. These labels are prepared by the drug manufacturers and submitted for approval to the responsible regulatory agency, such as European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for Europe and the US, respectively. Where applicable, they recommend the genotyping of specific genes or variants to guide drug and dose selection, predict treatment outcomes or adverse reactions, or inform about potential effects on drug-drug interactions. By 2018, FDA has approved a total of 69 labels that carry information regarding indications, contraindications or dosage recommendation in relation to patient genotype, whereas about 107 have correspondingly based labels have been identified by EMA ( and a). In addition, pharmacogenomic advice is provided by guidelines from pharmacogenetic experts workgroups, such as the Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) and the Dutch Pharmacogenetics Working Group (DPWG).
 There are differences between drug labels and recommendations by the different regulatory agencies and consortia ( ). The majority of EMA labels (52%) refer to pharmacokinetic genes mainly in oncology, whereas the majority of FDA labels (66%) pertain to mutations or genomic rearrangements in the somatic genome of tumors and only 22% of labels refer to pharmacokinetic germline variations ( b). Notably, as published in 2015, several of the EMA labels merely refer to drug-drug interactions rather than to genetic variation. In addition it is important to emphasize that EMA labels only concern drugs approved by EMA, which was founded in 1995, whereas labels in older drugs are provided by the different EU National Medical Product Agencies.
Recommendations from expert consortia are focused exclusively on the genetic variation in the germline genome and a recent comparison between theses therapeutic recommendations concluded that CPIC and DPWG pharmacogenetic guidelines were overall in good agreement ( ). However, their alignment with drug labels is rather poor. Of 44 EMA labels with pharmacogenetic information referring to germline variants, only four (9%) overlap with CPIC or DPWG recommendations (abacavir and HLA-B, aripiprazole and CYP2D6, capecitabine and DPYD, ivacaftor and CFTR) ( f). Alignment for FDA labels is higher and 18 out of 45 labels (40%) are supported by independent expert recommendations. Abacavir constitutes the only drug for which EMA and FDA labels, as well as CPIC and DPWG guidelines concordantly recommend genotype-guided therapy. Overall, there is thus a need to critically reflect upon the different recommendations by regulators and expert groups to reach a consensus view on the role of pre-emptive genotyping in the clinics.
The regulatory agencies also provide guidelines for the integration of pharmacogenomic analyses into early and later phases of drug development (https://www.ema.europa.eu/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-good-pharmacogenomic-practice-first-version_en.pdf, https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/UCM337169.pdf). Furthermore, EMA and Industry (EBE and EFPIA) have worked out specific guidance concerning the use of NGS as an instrument for pharmacogenomic advice (https://www.ema.europa.eu/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-good-pharmacogenomic-practice-first-version_en.pdf, https://www.ebe-biopharma.eu/publication/ebe-efpia-position-paper-on-next-generation-sequencing-ngs/). This includes early identification of patients with extreme drug response phenotypes (outlier patients), the possibility to stratify patient groups based on their genetic makeup, methodological advice pertaining to genomic and phenotypic analyses, and planning of follow-up trials based on the pharmacogenomic experience in early phases. During this process also the incorporation of pharmacogenomic advice into the drug label must be considered. In line with a more genetically tailored drug therapy, the number of drugs released on the market with such labels has increased considerably in recent years ( ).

3.

## Emerging pharmacogenomic biomarkers
In the following section, we synopsize recent promising progress and updates in the field of pharmacogenomic biomarkers to predict safety and efficacy of pharmacological therapies.
3.1.

## Drug hypersensitivity associated with HLA variations
3.1.1.

## HLA biomarkers
Drug hypersensitivity reactions (DHR) are the most common idiosyncratic adverse events. DHRs can manifest immediately within the first hours after drug administration or have a delayed onset of weeks to months ( ). Prospective studies found that DHRs occurred with an overall prevalence of 0.2–0.8% of all hospitalized patients, of which >95% had cutaneous manifestations ( ; ; ; ). Delayed DHRs can manifest as severe cutaneous adverse reactions (SCARs) that encompass Stevens–Johnson syndrome (SJS), toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) and drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome, the latter involving also internal organs, such as liver (75–94% of patients), kidney (12–40% of patients) and heart (4–27% of patients) (Y.-T. ). Agents most commonly implicated in SCARs are sulfonamides, phenytoin, allopurinol, carbamazepine and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) of the oxicam class ( ; ; ; ; ). In addition, DHRs can manifest as drug-induced liver injury (DILI), with β-lactam antibiotics and NSAIDs as the major culprit drugs. Further manifestations include abacavir systemic hypersensitivity and clozapine-induced agranulocytosis.
Genetic predisposition constitutes the most important risk factor for both immediate and delayed hypersensitivity reactions. Immediate reactions to β-lactams and NSAIDs have been consistently associated with polymorphisms in pro-inflammatory cytokine and IgE signaling ( ). In addition, immediate hypersensitivity to NSAIDs was reproducibly associated with genetic variations in multiple arachidonic acid and leukotriene pathway genes, such as ALOX15, PTGDR, PTGER4, TBXAS1 and CYSLTR1 ( ; ; ; ). Anaphylactic reactions to both β-lactams and NSAIDs have also been associated with polymorphisms in class II HLA genes. A Spanish study with 387 patients that experienced immediate allergic reactions upon treatment with β-lactams and 1124 tolerant controls found multiple significant protective effects of HLA-DRA variations with odds ratios (ORs) around 0.6 that replicated in an Italian cohort of 299 patients and 362 control subjects ( ). In contrast, the HLA-DRB1*11 and HLA-DRB1*1302 alleles predisposed patients to NSAID-induced anaphylaxis and urticaria with ORs of 4 to 7.3 ( ; ).
For delayed hypersensitivity reactions >25 medications have been associated with MHC variability to date ( , , ). The most extensively reproduced HLA biomarkers pertain to the antiretroviral abacavir, the antihyperuricemic allopurinol and the antiepileptics carbamazepine, phenytoin and lamotrigine. Hypersensitivity to abacavir is strongly associated with a single genetic risk allele, HLA-B*5701 ( ). Prospective genotyping for HLA-B*5701 was found to significantly reduce the incidence of abacavir hypersensitivity syndrome (ABC-HSS) in a single center cohort study with no cases of ABC-HSS among 148 HLA-B*5701 negative patients compared to 5–8% in historic controls ( ). These encouraging results were confirmed in the prospective multicenter double-blind randomized PREDICT-1 trial in which the authors confirmed significantly lower incidence of ABC-HSS in the genotype arm (3.4% vs. 7.8% in the control group, p < .001) ( ). As a result, testing of HLA-B*5701 has been recommended by both FDA and EMA before commencing abacavir therapy in abacavir-naïve patients.
 For antiepileptics, the strongest associations have been identified for carbamazepine-induced SJS/TEN and HLA-B*1502 in South and East Asian populations, including Chinese, Koreans, Thai, Malaysians and Indians, with odds ratios between 10 and 2500 ( ). In contrast, HLA-A*3101 predicts SCARs in Koreans, Japanese and Europeans and a recent prospective cohort study with 1130 Japanese patients showed significantly reduced incidence of carbamazepine-induced cutaneous adverse reactions in the genotyped group (2% vs. 3.4–5.1% in historic controls)( ). Moreover, HLA-B*1511 and HLA-B*1521 were implicated as additional risk alleles in various Asian populations ( and ( )). HLA biomarkers for phenytoin-induced SCARs have to our knowledge only been reported in Asian populations. The strongest risk factor has been found for HLA-B*1502 with moderate odds ratios between 5 and 20, aligning with pharmacogenetic carbamazepine associations for these populations. However, the largest case-control study published to date in Thailand could not replicate this association and rather identified a multitude of other significantly associated HLA alleles, such as HLA-B*3802, HLA-B*5602 and HLA-C*1402 ( ). For lamotrigine, various HLA associations have been reported, of which HLA-B*1502 and HLA-A*2402 have been reproduced. Combined, the existing data provide irrefutable evidence for associations between HLA alleles and SCARs related to antiepileptics. Carbamazepine is consistently associated with HLA-B*1502 and HLA-A*3101. In contrast, risk factors for cutaneous adverse reactions to phenytoin and lamotrigine appear more heterogeneous.
Adverse cutaneous reactions following treatment with the xanthine oxidase inhibitor allopurinol, used for the treatment of gout and other conditions associated with an excess of uric acid, have been consistently linked with HLA-B*5801 across ethnicities with odds ratios between 40 and 580 ( ). Furthermore, a prospective multicenter study in Taiwan with 2910 Han Chinese participants found that preemptive genotyping eliminated SCARs due to allopurinol when HLA-B*5801 patients were instead referred to an alternate treatment ( ). In addition, one study in 25 Korean allopurinol SCAR patients and 57 tolerant controls indicated a strong protective effect of HLA-A*0201 (0/25 cases, 17/57 controls; OR = 0.04). However, this interesting observation requires further validations.
Cases of idiosyncratic DILI are generally much more rare than cases of adverse cutaneous reactions, which has made the identification of genetic factors predisposing to DILI difficult. Importantly, the establishment of large networks that collect and consolidate DILI cases, such as DILIN in the US and the DILIGEN study in the UK, have provided a significant step forward, increasing the study power and resulting in the identification of multiple HLA biomarkers in recent years. Notable examples include associations between flucloxacillin and HLA-B*5701 (OR = 80.6) ( ), terbinafine and HLA-A*3301 (OR = 40.5) ( ), minocycline and HLA-B*3502 (OR = 29.6) ( ) and flupirtine with the DRB1*1601-DQB1*0502 haplotype (OR = 18.7)( ).

3.1.2.

## Molecular mechanisms of drug hypersensitivity
The molecular and immunological mechanisms underlying drug hypersensitivity are diverse and drug specific. Abacavir hypersensitivity is restricted exclusively to carriers of the HLA-B*5701 allele with a negative predictive value of 100%. The abacavir parent compound binds specifically to the F-pocket of the peptide-binding groove of HLA-B*5701 and alters the repertoire of presented self-peptides, driving polyclonal alloreactive autoimmune responses ( ; ; ). Mechanistically similar immune activation has been suggested for nevirapine in some studies ( ), whereas others did not observe alterations in the repertoire of presented peptides in nevirapine exposed cells ( ). In contrast, carbamazepine has been shown to activate carbamazepine-reactive CD8+ T-cells in the absence of loaded peptides by directly interacting with the HLA variant HLA-B*1502 ( ). Similar direct HLA binding and T-cell activation has been reported for ticlopidine ( ) and the allopurinol metabolite oxypurinol ( ). Whereas carbamazepine and oxypurinol interact non-covalently with the MHC, hypersensitivity reactions to β-lactam antibiotics involve covalent protein binding. Specifically, flucloxacillin binds covalently to lysine residues on albumin and the resulting flucloxacillin haptens are high affinity binders at HLA-B*5701 ( ). Lastly, sulfamethoxazole has been suggested to directly affect T-cell receptor conformation, thereby modulating HLA recognition and autoimmunity ( ). For a more detailed overview of the mechanistic underpinnings of drug hypersensitivity, we refer the interested reader to excellent recent reviews on this topic ( ; ; ).

3.1.3.

## Clinical implications
Routine clinical implementation of pharmacogenetic tests requires not only a strong association with severe adverse events but also various other conditions need to be considered, including the availability, efficacy and safety of alternative drugs, supportive clinical and experimental data, permissive environmental factors, sufficiently high prevalence of hypersensitivity and high positive predictive value of the test ( ). Furthermore, test rollout depends on monetary considerations and various health economic studies have addressed whether pharmacogenetic testing constitutes a cost-effective use of healthcare resources. Testing of HLA-B*5701 prior to initiation of abacavir is suggested to be cost-effective in the UK ( ) and Germany ( ). Similarly, genotyping of HLA-A*3101 and HLA-B*1502 before starting carbamazepine therapy is likely cost-effective in the UK ( ; ), whereas its cost-effectiveness is dependent on patient ethnicity in Singapore due to differences in population allele frequencies ( ). Furthermore, a recent study suggested the cost-effectiveness of restricting long-term hematologic monitoring of patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia on clozapine to carriers of the HLA-DQB1 (126Q) and HLA-B (158 T) variants ( ). In contrast, preemptive testing of HLA-B*5801 and HLA-B*5701 prior to initiation of allopurinol and flucloxacillin therapy, respectively, has not been found to be cost-effective ( ; ).
Based on the considerations and data highlighted above, recommendations for pharmacogenetic testing of the respective HLA risk alleles have been incorporated into current guidelines for abacavir ( ; ; ) and carbamazepine therapy ( ), whereas other associations have not yet been implemented into clinical practice ( ).
 

3.2.

## Anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity
Anthracyclines are commonly used in chemotherapy regimens for the treatment of a variety of solid tumors and hematological malignancies in both pediatric and adult patients. However, depending on gender, age, cumulative dose and measured endpoints, 9–27% of patients experience cardiotoxicity that manifests in structural changes and left ventricular dysfunction after 1 year of follow-up ( ; ; ) and up to 5% suffer from congestive heart failure ( ). Mechanisms underlying anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity are complex and include oxidative and nitrosative stress, perturbation of myocardial calcium signaling and energy metabolism, as well as DNA damage ( ). Identification of biomarkers that can identify patients prone to anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity therefore represents an important strategy to maximize the clinical utility of anthracyclines and to personalize the choice of chemotherapy-regimen. Recent research implicated variations in >20 genes in anthracyclin-induced cardiotoxicity ( ).
 Carbonyl reductases metabolize anthracyclines to their alcohol metabolites and seminal studies demonstrated that these metabolites are potent inhibitors (up to 80-times more potent then the parent molecule) of sarcoplasmatic calcium handling and mitochondrial F-type proton ATPases that accumulate specifically in the heart after long-term anthracycine treatment ( ; ). The V244M variant of CBR3 exhibits 2.6-fold reduced metabolism per unit of time and multiple studies have associated the corresponding polymorphism rs1056892 with cardioprotective effects in pediatric ( ; ; ) and adult patients ( ), whereas other studies did not reproduce this association ( ; ; ; ).
Multiple genes involved in redox signaling and detoxification of reactive oxygen species have been implicated in anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity risk in multiple cohorts. These include the CYBA, RAC2 and NCF4 subunits of the NADPH oxidase complex, catalase (CAT) as well as the glutathione-S-transferase (GST) GSTP1 ( ). Strikingly, NADPH oxidase deficient mice were fully protected from anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity, further strengthening the link between ROS and myocardial dysfunction ( ). However, preconditioning of patients with antioxidants, such as coenzyme Q10 or N-acetylcysteine did not result in patient benefits ( ; ), and treatment with the iron chelator dexrazoxane remains the only cardioprotective treatment with regulatory approval. Thus, while pharmacogenetic associations between genes involved in redox signaling and anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity have been consistently reported, their low odds ratios (OR < 6) preclude their application for the guidance of therapy.
In addition to genes involved in anthracycline metabolism and redox signaling, pharmacogenetic studies implicated multiple transporter genes in cardiac dysfunction due to anthracylines, but only associations with ABCC1 ( ; ), ABCC2 ( ; ; ) and SLC28A3 ( ; ) have been replicated. ABCC1 (MRP1) and ABCC2 (MRP2) have been shown to transport anthracyclines ( ; ). Most supportive data are available for rs8187710 in ABCC2 that encodes a C1515Y amino acid exchange in MRP2 and results in reduced uptake of MRP2 substrates ( ), whereas rs3743527 resides in the untranslated region of ABCC1 and no direct effects of this variant on MRP1 have been reported. SLC28A3 has to our knowledge not been demonstrated to be an anthracycline uptake transporter and thus the pharmacogenetic association lacks mechanistic support.
Retinoic acid (RA) signaling mediated at least in part by its nuclear receptor RARG is essential for cardiac development, coronary vasculogenesis and cardiomyocyte proliferation ( ; ; ). Furthermore, levels of Raldh2, the central enzyme in RA biosynthesis, increased in the epicardium and the RA precursor retinol accumulates at the ischemic site in mouse models for myocardial infarction, resulting in significant activation expression of RA target genes ( ; ; ). Combined this data suggest that RA signaling might contribute to tissue repair in post ischemic hearts. Importantly, the missense variant rs2229774 encoding an S427L amino acid exchange in RARG is strongly associated with anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity in cohorts of European, African, Aboriginal Canadian, Hispanic and East Asian ancestry with odds ratios (OR) between 4.1 and 7 ( ). RARG binds to the TOP2B promoter ( ) and represses its transcription in cardiomyocytes in vitro ( ). TOP2B is necessary for intercalation of anthracyclines into DNA ( ) and cardiomyocyte-specific ablation of Top2b protects mice from anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity ( ). Importantly, the repressive effect of RARG on TOP2B expression is diminished when the S427L RARG variant was transfected ( ), thereby providing a mechanistic link between the identified polymorphism, TOP2B expression and anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity.
Fueled by these insights and the tremendous clinical relevance of anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity, a variety of mechanistically diverse cardioprotective adjuvant therapies have been proposed. Of these dexrazoxane (relative risk [RR] = 0.35, p < .00001), inhibition of adrenergic beta receptors (RR = 0.31, p = .001), or HMG-CoA reductase (RR = 0.31, p = .01) and angiotensin antagonists (RR = 0.11, p < .0001) are most extensively studied and were found to significantly prevent cardiotoxicity in a large meta-analysis ( ). Furthermore, the substantial available evidence has resulted in the development of clinical practice guidelines that recommend prospective genotyping of pediatric patients with an indication for anthracycline therapy and adjustment of frequency and aggressiveness of monitoring by genotype as well as off-label prescription of the cardioprotective agent dexrazoxane to high-risk patients ( ).

3.3.

## Corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis
The use of glucocorticoids prednisone and dexamethasone in the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) constitutes an essential component of ALL chemotherapy regimens and has contributed to significantly increased cure rates ( ). However, corticosteroid therapy can cause debilitating adverse reactions, including osteonecrosis, which occurs in 6% to 9% of pediatric and up to 20% of adolescent ALL patients and can result in life-long arthritis and pain in cancer survivors ( ; ). Mechanisms underlying osteonecrosis due to glucocorticoids are believed to be thrombophilia, hyperlipidemia, intraosseous accumulation of lipids and fat embolism, that together result in reduced intramedullary blood flow, bone marrow ischemia and osteonecrosis ( ). Furthermore, glucocorticoids might directly induce apoptosis of osteoblasts ( ).
Pharmacogenomic studies spearheaded primarily by the St. Jude Children's Research Hospital have implicated a variety of genetic factors in corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis ( ). While these candidate studies raised hopes to find genetic biomarkers that could efficiently stratify patients by osteonecrosis risk, results from two agnostic genome-wide association studies (GWAS) were chastening and none of the associations could be replicated. Instead, the first GWAS revealed variants in the ACP1-SH3YL1 locus to be associated with osteonecrosis (p = 1.2*10−6, OR = 5.8), whereas associations with TYMS, VDR and SERPINE1 were again not replicated ( ). While not reaching genome-wide significance (threshold p < 1*10−7), the implication of ACP1 as a key regulator of osteoblast differentiation ( ) provides biological plausibility to the role of ACP1 in corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis. The second and so-far largest GWAS study into corticosteroid adverse reactions encompassing 2285 children in the discovery cohort identified two loci encoding glutamate receptor subunits (GRIN3A and GRIK1) on separate chromosomes as their top two associations and replicated these associations using a candidate approach in two independent cohorts with OR pivoting around 2 and meta-analysis p-values of 2.7*10−8 and 1.3*10−6 ( ). Thus, while a variety of loci with biologically plausible effects have been identified, the absence of replication in independent cohorts indicates that pharmacogenetic testing of variants, which can predict the risk of developing osteonecrosis following corticosteroid therapy, can currently not result in actionable outcomes and thus do not warrant clinical implementation in the near future.
 
3.4.

## L-asparaginase hypersensitivity
In addition to corticosteroids, asparaginase constitutes a cornerstone of the therapy of ALL and other hematologic malignancies since the 1970s. While normal human cells can synthesize asparagine from aspartate and glutamine, many cancers have deficiencies in asparagine biosynthesis and rely on external asparagine supply to fulfill their demands ( ). Asparaginase exerts its anti-leukemic effect by catalyzing the degradation of asparagine in the circulation, thereby depriving cancer cells of needed asparagine, blunting tumor growth and inducing apoptosis. While treatment is overall effective, 20–30% of patients experience hypersensitivity reactions with anaphylaxis, rash, erythema, urticaria, pruritis, pain, respiratory problems and edema that require modification or discontinuation of the treatment regimen of choice ( ; ).
The glutamate receptor gene GRIA1 was identified as the top hit in a GWAS encompassing 485 children ( ) and was independently replicated in two additional cohorts of 576 and 146 pediatric patients ( ; ). These findings align with the association of the glutamate receptor subunits GRIN3A and GRIK1 with corticosteroid-induced osteonecrosis (compare and previous section). In addition, variations in the glutamate receptor GRIA2 and the glutamate decarboxylase GADL1 were also strongly implicated in the pharmacogenetics of lithium therapy in bipolar disorder ( ; ), providing evidence for an interesting broader implication of glutamate signaling in drug response phenotypes.
 The adaptive immunity has been strongly implicated in asparaginase hypersensitivity and antibodies against asparaginase are detectable in >50% of patients ( ). In line with these clinical observations, multiple studies point at associations of immune response-related genetic variations with adverse effects of therapy. The class II HLA allele DRB1*0701 was found to correlate anti-asparaginase antibodies (OR = 2.9) and with incidence of hypersensitivity (OR = 1.6) in GWAS study of a cohort of 1870 pediatric ALL patients from St. Jude Children's Research Hospital ( ). The effect of HLA-DRB1*0701 on hypersensitivity risk was moreover replicated (OR = 2.9) and an additional link with HLA-DQB1*0202 identified (OR = 3) in a Hungarian candidate study encompassing 359 pediatric ALL patients ( ). Additionally, the largest study published to date in which a total of 3308 patients of diverse ancestry were enrolled, validated HLA-DRB1*0701 as a risk factor with an OR of 1.6 ( ). Furthermore, the authors identified the intronic variant rs6021191 in NFATC2 to be associated with asparaginase hypersensitivity at genome-wide significance with an OR of 3.1 ( ). NFATC2 encodes a transcriptional modulator that impacts on the transcriptional program in regulatory T-cells ( ) and Nfatc2-deficient mice showed reduced cytokine levels in models of experimental chronic inflammation ( ). Thus, the available data provide convincing evidence that genetic variations in both glutamate receptor signaling and immune response modulate asparaginase hypersensitivity risk. However, the predictive power of these associations is generally low, precluding their routine implementation as therapeutic biomarkers.

3.5.

## Liver injury due to interferon-β
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous system, hallmarked by degradation of myelin sheaths and inflammation ( ). MS onset and progression is believed to be caused by autoimmune reactions and genetic studies suggest multifactorial etiology with most risk alleles residing in genes related to immune response, such as HLA type II ( ). No cure for MS is available and therapy is currently restricted to an inhibition of disease progression. Interferon-β constitutes the most widely used agent in MS therapy. However, 30–60% of interferon-β treated patients show increased liver enzyme levels and 1.4% experienced de novo liver injury with aminotransferases elevations >20 the upper limit of normal ( ; ).
Importantly, a recent 2-stage GWAS of MS patients of European ancestry identified variant rs2205986, an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) for the interferon regulatory factor IRF6, as a genetic risk factor for interferon-β-induced DILI ( ). The IRF gene family encodes transcription factors involved in the regulation of immune responses ( ) and some evidence had been presented that implicates IRF6 in interferon-β response ( ). The association was robustly detected irrespective of the adjustment for covariates with an OR of 8.3. Furthermore, the authors demonstrate that inclusion of this variant significantly improved the prediction of DILI compared to clinical factors alone. Strength and significance of the presented association suggest that rs2205986 might constitute a promising predictive biomarker for patient stratification in interferon-β therapy. However, further replication studies are needed before clinical implementation can be advocated.

3.6.

## Vincristine neurotoxicity
The natural vinca alkaloid vincristine is an antineoplastic agent used in multiple chemotherapy regimens for hematologic malignancies and solid tumors. Vinca alkaloids irreversibly bind to microtubule ends and prevent microtubule polymerization ( ). As a result formation of the mitotic spindle is inhibited, which blocks the activation of the anaphase promoting complex, thus causing arrest of dividing cells in metaphase. Furthermore, vinca alkaloids can cause apoptosis independent of cell cycle arrest by activation of NF-κB ( ). The clinical utility of vincristine is limited by often-irreversible peripheral sensorimotor neuropathies that vary in incidence from 20% in adult patients with myeloma ( ) to 70–80% of pediatric ALL patients ( ; ).
Multiple cohort studies indicated that the neurotoxic effects of vincristine are dose-related ( ; ), prompting a focused search for pharmacogenomic biomarkers in genes related to vincristine pharmacokinetics ( ). Vincristine is metabolized by CYP3A isoenzymes and, notably, the intrinsic clearance of CYP3A5 is 10-fold higher than that for CYP3A4 ( ). In individuals of European ancestry, around 90% of individuals are homozygous for the splicing defect CYP3A5*3 and do not express functional CYP3A5 compared to approximately 30% of non-expressers in African populations ( ). Indeed, presence of the CYP3A5*3 allele was found to impact vincristine clearance and reduced CYP3A5 expression was associated with reduced vincristine-induced neuropathy risk in two multiethnic cohorts of 533 and 107 pediatric ALL patients ( ; ). In addition, variants in the vincristine transporter ABCB1 (MDR1) associated with incidence of neurotoxicity ( ). However, other smaller studies did not replicate these associations ( ; ; ; ).
 Besides pharmacokinetic associations, multiple studies implicated cytoskeletal proteins in vincristine neurotoxicity ( ). Ceppi et al. found variations in the actin network related genes ACTG1 and CAPG ( ); however the mechanism behind these associations remained elusive. In addition, a recent study in 321 children implicated an eQTL variant (rs924607) in the promoter of the gene encoding the centrosomal protein CEP72 in vincristine-related toxicity ( ). The risk variant creates a binding site for the transcriptional repressor NKX6-3 and results in decreased CEP72 expression. Furthermore, knock-down of CEP72 increases vincristine toxicity in human stem cell-derived neurons and primary leukemia cells from homozygous rs924607 carriers showed increased vincristine sensitivity ( ), providing strong support for the hypothesis that reduced CEP72 levels sensitize patients to vincristine-related neuropathies.

3.7.

## CYP2C19 genotype and efficacy of antidepressant and antithrombotic treatment
One of the most polymorphic drug metabolizing enzymes is CYP2C19, which is principally involved in the metabolism of antithrombotic drugs, antidepressants and antipsychotics. The most prevalent CYP2C19 variant alleles are the loss-of-function variant CYP2C19*2 (minor allele frequencies [MAF] between 10 and 35% across populations) and the regulatory variant CYP2C19*17 (MAF 1.5 to 25%) that results in ultrarapid metabolism (UM) ( ). In addition, the population-specific stop-gain variant CYP2C19*3 is relevant in East Asians (MAF = 6%).
Much research has been devoted to understand the association between these genotypes and the effectiveness of antidepressant therapy. A recent study leveraged pharmacokinetic data and information pertaining to the switching of antidepressant medication within one year after commencing treatment of >2000 patients ( ). Importantly, the authors found that CYP2C19 genotype strongly affected the pharmacokinetics of the commonly used antidepressant escitalopram and only 60% of patients classified as CYP2C19 UM reached recommended therapeutic exposure levels (25 nM). In total 29% of the patients with UM genotype switched antidepressant medicine, likely because of lack of efficacy due to being underdosed. In contrast, CYP2C19 poor metabolizers (PM) experienced serum drug concentrations higher than the recommended range, resulting in 31% of PM patients switching likely due to adverse events. In comparison, only 11–14% of patients with the genotypes encoding normal CYP2C19 enzyme activity (extensive metabolizers) switched medicines. Preemptive CYP2C19 genotyping would allow to adjust the initial doses to 5 mg in PMs and 20 mg in UMs (compared to 10 mg as current standard-of-care), thereby increasing escitalopram treatment efficacy. Given the important role of CYP2C19 in the metabolism of many antidepressants, we anticipate that CYP2C19 genotype-guided dosing might provide patient benefits for a considerable number of the 216 million patients diagnosed with major depressive disorder worldwide ( ).
A CYP2C19 genotype-dependent outcome was also seen in a recent survey monitoring suicides of Finnish citalopram users ( ) The study compared the genotypes of 349 citalopram-positive completed suicide cases and 855 general population controls and found that PMs and UMs were significantly enriched in the suicide cases. This finding is in accordance with another study where high CYP2C19 enzymatic capacity was associated with higher suicidality in depressed suicide attempters ( ). Based on these findings, we conclude that psychiatry presents a promising and clinically important arena for an increased implementation of preemptive genotyping.
The clinical endpoint of drug switching was also recently used to evaluate the influence of CYP2C19 polymorphisms on antiplatelet treatment in 603 acute coronary syndrome patients ( ). The authors found that 38% and 67% of patients carrying one or two loss-of-function CYP2C19*2 alleles, respectively, switched from clopidogrel to prasugel due to insufficient platelet inhibition, whereas only 27% and 0% of patients switched medicine that carried one or two copies of the gain-of-function allele CYP2C19*17, respectively. Indeed, it appears evident that monitoring of drug switching might constitute an easily accessible, feasible and relevant endpoint to examine the influence of genetic polymorphisms on the success of drug therapy.

4.

## Pharmacogenomics and next-generation sequencing
4.1.

## Genetic determinants of drug disposition and response
Genetic factors are important modulators of the metabolism of medications and can influence their efficacy and toxicity. Overall, 20–30% of the inter-individual differences in drug-response are estimated to be due to genetic variations ( ; ). Yet, seminal twin studies in the 1960s and 70s indicated that this fraction can be even substantially higher with pharmacokinetic heritability estimates ranging from 80%–99% for most evaluated medications, including antipyrine, dicoumarol, nortryptiline and halothane.
However, results from more recent investigations are more heterogeneous. While additive genetic factors explain around 90% of differences in the pharmacokinetics of metoprolol and torsemide ( ), the clearance of metformin ( ) and talinolol ( ) is mostly governed by environmental factors. Importantly however, even for metoprolol and torsemide whose pharmacokinetics appear hereditary, common genetic polymorphisms in the genes involved in their metabolism and transport, explain only less than half of this heritability ( ). These findings imply that a major fraction of heritable factors governing drug pharmacokinetics are currently missing and remain to be identified.

4.2.

## Pharmacogenes harbor a plethora of rare population-specific variants
In recent years considerable interest focused on the role of rare variants in the heritability of disease risk and complex traits. Rare genetic variants with minor allele frequencies (MAF) below 1% in the general population are commonly not interrogated in GWAS analyses. However, it has long been postulated that such rare variants with large effect sizes could contribute towards narrowing the gap between explained and expected heritability of complex traits ( ).
Only in the last decade or so was it possible to systematically characterize the inventory of rare genetic variants, primarily fueled by spectacular technological advances in Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) methods that allowed comprehensive sequencing of individuals on a population-scale ( ; ). Importantly, these groundbreaking projects revealed a vast repertoire of rare genetic variants across the human genomes. Since these seminal findings, multiple studies focused their analyses on rare genetic variability specifically in genes involved in absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion (ADME) of drugs ( ). In the largest study of its kind published to date encompassing 60,706 unrelated individuals from five global human populations >98% of all identified variants in drug transporters, drug metabolizing enzymes and nuclear receptors were found to be rare with MAF < 1% ( ). Besides single nucleotide variations (SNVs) and small indels (insertions or deletions spanning <50 base pairs), most pharmacogenes harbor moreover copy number variations (CNVs), which account for >5% of all loss-of-function alleles in 87 out of 208 pharmacogenes analyzed ( ). Similar findings were reported for important human drug targets, such as the G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR) family ( ).
 Furthermore, around 80% of pharmacogenetic variants were found to be population-specific ( ; ; ). Population-specific variations were of particular importance in populations with pronounced founder effects and repeated bottlenecks, such as Ashkenazi Jews, where their aggregated frequency exceeded 20% ( ). Combined, these studies demonstrate that the pharmacogenetic landscape is complex and that pharmacogenes harbor a plethora of rare variants that are not considered in conventional association studies with potential importance for inter-individual differences in drug disposition and response.
4.2.1.

## Functional interpretation of rare pharmacogenetic variants
The tremendous genetic complexity and abundance of rare genetic variants in pharmacogenomic loci directly raises the question about the functional and phenotypic relevance variability ( ; , , ). The functional impact of genetic variants is generally studied using heterologous in vitro expression systems coupled to a quantitative characterization of appropriate endpoints, such as clearance of different substrates per unit of time in the case of metabolic enzymes or activation of downstream signaling cascades for drug targets. Additionally, the functional impacts of variants on drug disposition or response can be analyzed in sufficiently powered cohort studies. Examples for the latter are effects of VKORC1 and CYP2C9 variants on warfarin dose requirements ( ) and impacts of CYP2C19 genotype on escitalopram serum concentrations and treatment efficacy ( ).
However, the low throughput and high costs of in vitro assays for the interrogation of variant functionality do not permit a systematic characterization of the tens of thousands of rare variants identified in population-scale sequencing projects. Furthermore, in vivo rare variant association studies are anticipated to fail to identify significant variant-phenotype relationships due to the, by definition, low frequency of allele carriers. Lastly, when applied in a clinical scenario, neither aforementioned in vivo nor in vitro methods would allow to inform about putative functional consequences of the genetic makeup of a given patient sufficiently fast to support pharmacogenetic testing.
Driven by this lack of experimental strategies for the functional assessment of rare pharmacogenetic variants compatible with the sheer scale of the problem, much research has focused on the optimization of computational prediction methodologies. For an overview of methods available for the computational interpretation of pharmacogenomic NGS data we refer the interested reader to a recent comprehensive review ( ). Most attention has been centered on the evaluation of variants that result in amino acid exchanges (missense variants). However, this scope widened in recent years to also include the assessment of variations in enhancers, promoters, splice sites and untranslated regions. To infer the functional consequences of missense variations, most currently used algorithms base their predictions on evolutionary conservation of the respective residues, as well as structural information of the corresponding gene product. The most frequently used algorithms for missense variant interpretation include SIFT ( ), PolyPhen-2 ( ), MutationAssessor ( ) and PROVEAN ( ).
Genetic variation in non-coding regions that account for >99% of the human genome has been proposed to substantially contribute to inter-individual variability in gene expression by modulating the activity of promoter and enhancer elements ( ; ). By integrating molecular evolution patterns with functional genomic data, such as genome-wide maps of chromatin accessibility ( ), genome segmentation ( ; ), transcription factor binding ( ) and histone modifications ( ), computational methods are now in a position to predict the phenotypic relevance of non-coding variations with acceptable reliability. Notable methods for the functional interrogation of non-coding variation include GWAVA ( ), CADD ( ), Basset ( ) and LINSIGHT ( ). As predictions based on the regulatory logic underlying gene expression are highly cell type and context specific they rely on biologically appropriate training sets. In addition, a plethora of focused tools have been presented that analyze the impact of genetic variants on a multitude of diverse features and parameters, including splicing ( ; ; ), non-sense mediated decay ( ), miRNA binding ( ; ; ) and translational efficiency ( ).
Importantly, functional interpretation of pharmacogenomic variant data is attended by specific challenges. Firstly, the use of conservation as a metric to predict variant functionality might be problematic due to overall low evolutionary constraints in pharmacogenes ( ). Secondly, most algorithms are not designed to detect functionality but rather pathogenicity and fitness consequences associated with a given variant. Whereas altered functionality and pathogenicity overlap for regions of the genome that are directly associated with human disease, this association is less clear for pharmacogenes in which deleterious variants are generally not pathogenic. Lastly, training of machine learning methods with inaccurately annotated data sets translates into reduced predictive performance. One example of such a problem is the non-curated use of genetic variants that are common in the general population as functionally neutral training data. While these common variants are likely non-pathogenic, they can have pronounced functional consequences, particularly in pharmacogenes, as exemplified by the common functionally important pharmacogenetic polymorphisms rs1057910 (CYP2C9*2), rs4244285 (CYP2C19*2), rs3892097 (CYP2D6*4), rs34983651 (UGT1A1*28) and rs4149056 (SLCO1B1*5). Similarly, utilization of all phenotype associated GWAS polymorphisms as functional training data results is problematic as only 5% of GWAS index SNPs are estimated to be mechanistically responsible for the observed phenotypic consequences, i.e. have direct functional consequences ( ).
To overcome these problems, we have recently developed and cross-validated an algorithm trained specifically on pharmacogenetic variants with comprehensive and high-quality functional annotations ( ). This method outcompeted preexisting methods achieving 93% for both sensitivity and specificity. Importantly, the score provided by this prediction framework not only dichotomously classifies variants into functionally deleterious and neutral variants but rather provides estimates about the quantitative effects of the variant on the function of the gene product in question. We envision that such models can be useful for the prediction of phenotypic consequences pertaining to drug disposition and response in a personalized medicine framework.

4.2.2.

## Putative impact of rare pharmacogenetic variants on drug metabolism and response
The methodological toolbox presented above provides a sound basis to estimate the consequences of pharmacogenetic variation on drug disposition and response. Rare genetic variations in pharmacokinetic are enriched in variants with putative functional consequences and we ( ; ) and others ( ) have estimated that rare variants contribute around 10–40% to the entire genetically encoded functional variability in those loci. Importantly, the relevance of rare genetic variations was found to be highly gene-specific ( ).
 Using this information as a template we estimated the impact of rare genetic variability on pharmacokinetics and response of specific drugs with well-characterized pharmacology ( ). Depending on the genes involved in pharmacokinetics and –dynamics of the respective compounds and their metabolites, the overall functional relevance of rare genetic variants differed substantially across evaluated drugs. Rare genetic variants are expected to only explain a minor part in explaining the inter-individual differences in olanzapine serum levels or simvastatin-induced myopathies. By contrast, rare genetic variations are expected to account for 18.4% of the genetically encoded functional variability in CYP2C9, which is of central importance for warfarin response. Furthermore, >40% of the variability in irinotecan transport was found to be allotted to rare variants ( ). Thus, these analyses can be used to flag medications for which comprehensive NGS-based genotyping instead of candidate SNP interrogations can likely reveal significant additional information for the personalization of pharmacological therapy.
In an elegant study by Hauser et al., the authors characterized the genetic variability in the human GPCR gene family and, by utilizing available crystallographic data and literature information, found >2000 variants in known functional sites ( ). Moreover, they experimentally evaluated the effects of selected variants in OPRM1, encoding the μ-opioid receptor, on the response to different ligands. One variant resulted in generally reduced responses to different agonists, whereas other variants had ligand specific effects, exhibiting normal response to endomorphin and morphine but increased response to buprenorphine, a medication used in the treatment of opioid addiction. Most surprisingly, some variants conferred resistance to the opioid receptor antagonist naloxone, resulting in potentially life-threatening lack of efficacy in variant carriers when treated for opioid overdose. Combined, the presented studies indicate that rare genetic variants can have substantial clinically relevant impact on drug disposition and treatment efficacy and underscore the importance of comprehensive pharmacogenetic characterization for personalized medicine.
Notably, genetic variants that are rare globally might be common in specific geographical regions. One example is the functionally defective CYP3A4*20 allele which is found exclusively in parts of Spain, in which the frequency can be as high as 4% ( ). CYP3A4*20 affects paclitaxel metabolism and thus consideration of this polymorphism is clinically relevant in these specific regions ( ).

4.2.3.

## Missing pharmacogenomic heritability
Missing heritability refers to the difference between the estimated heritability of a complex phenotype and the contributions of common genetic variants associated with the trait of interest using a simplistic additive model. One simple explanation could be an overestimation of the phenotype's heritability in twin studies due to a violation of the equal-environment assumption, i.e. monozygotic twins tend to shape an environment for themselves that is more similar than that for dizygotic twins. However, elegant twin studies of antipyrine and theophylline pharmacokinetics showed no differences between twins living in the same household and twins living in different households, regardless of zygosity ( ; ).
As discussed above, available data suggest that rare genetic variations indeed explain a considerable fraction of the missing heritability in drug response phenotypes; yet, multiple other effects have been proposed that likely contribute as well. Particularly epistatic phenomena, i.e. the interaction between genetic variations, play important roles for pharmacogenomics. Specifically, we refer here to its classical physiological notion in which a combination of genetic variants gives rise to phenotypic consequences that are different from the additive of the individual variant effects ( ). For a comprehensive review of the different notions of epistasis, we refer to a recent comprehensive review by Sackton and Hartl ( ). To identify and quantify epistatic interactions in pharmacogenomic data a multitude of machine learning tools are available, including regression trees, random forests, deep neural networks and combinatorial partitioning ( ).
Importantly, epistatic mechanisms are already harnessed in clinical therapy, particularly in the area of oncology. Cancers accumulate genetic variants that drive cancer growth and these mutations can result in unexpected sensitivities to pharmacological interventions. For instance, breast cancers with mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2 become reliant on the cellular PARP excision repair system and treatment of BRCA-mutation positive breast cancer patients with the PARP inhibitor olaparib resulted in high toxicity specifically in tumors ( ). We expect that consideration of the genomic context can substantially improve drug response predictions, particularly for medications with complex pharmacology. Thus, systematic epistatic analyses represent an important frontier in contemporary pharmacogenomics.
In addition, missing heritability in complex phenotypes has been postulated to be due to insufficient power of the conducted studies to identify variants with limited effects. When the effects of all genetic variants, including those that do not reach statistical significance, are aggregated, the authors report that for Crohn's disease, bipolar disorder and type I diabetes common genetic variants explained substantially more (25–50%) of the estimated heritability compared to more conservative models ( ). Furthermore, based on findings from genetic model organisms, including plants ( ) and flies ( ), as well as human diseases, such as Huntington disease (OMIM identifier 143100), dentatorubro-pallidoluysian atrophy (OMIM 125370), spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (OMIM 313200) and spinocerebellar ataxias, tandem repeat variations have been suggested as major modulators of gene activity and additional sources of missing heritability of complex human phenotypes ( ; ). However, further studies are needed to quantify the importance of these postulated factors.

4.3.

## Opportunities of national biobanks
National biobanks in which clinical, phenotypic and lifestyle data are integrated with longitudinal health registries and extensive omics profiles (primarily genomics but also metabolomic, transcriptomic and epigenomic data sets) provide powerful resources for biomarker discovery and personalized medicine. By now multiple countries have established such biobanks, including Estonia ( ), Iceland ( ), Japan ( ) and the UK ( ). While these platforms have demonstrated their utility for epidemiological research, implementation of available personalized omics information into primary care still faces multiple important challenges. The most significant obstacles include the sensitivity, privacy and highly distinguishable nature of the data, as well as issues pertaining to insufficient acceptance or lack of knowledge on the part of clinicians ( ; ; ).
Estonia is among the countries that are spearheading the implementation efforts of NGS-guided therapy. Genome-scale genotype data are available for >44,000 individuals, corresponding to 3.5% of the entire population ( ). Importantly, >99% of these participants were found to harbor at least one pharmacogenetically actionable allele and implementation of genotype-guided prescribing is expected to affect drug choice or dosing for 55 daily drug doses per 1000 individuals in the general population. Furthermore, integrating genomic data with longitudinal health records of the respective individuals provides a powerful tool for the discovery of novel pharmacogenomic associations. In a first proof-of-concept study, Tasa et al. identified associations between CTNNA3 variations and myopathies in biobank participants taking oxicams and were able to replicate this finding in an independent validation cohort (meta-analysis p = 2.4*10−7) ( ).
Multiple other countries have launched initiatives intended to facilitate the implementation of NGS-based genotyping into the health care system to utilize genomic information for personalized therapy and diagnostics. Qatar aspires to expand its biobank program ( ) that already contains longitudinal clinical data with sequencing data from about one fifth of all Qatari citizens within the next years. Furthermore, Korea promotes a precision medicine initiative focusing mainly on pharmacogenomics ( ). These efforts include reimbursement of pharmacogenetic tests and the development of clinical decision support (CDS) systems to facilitate the implementation of genotype information into clinical care.
The US has presented strategies for the nationwide implementation of personalized medicine, termed Precision Medicine Initiative. The framework encompasses the All of US program in which >1 million volunteers will be sequenced and followed-up with periodic clinical evaluations. A current status report of the clinical implementation of pharmacogenomic testing in the US has been published recently ( ). In addition a large number of national biobanks centered on cancer samples have been established and we refer the interested reader to recent overviews for further information ( ; ).

5.

## Pharmacoepigenomics
The term “epigenetics” can be interpreted as a cellular or molecular phenomenon ( ). The former follows the classical Waddingtonian concept of cell state or fate determination, primarily in the context of embryonic development and stem cell biology, whereas the latter can describe any mechanism of gene regulation that can be passed on through cell divisions or, in its widest definition commonly applied particularly in the field of pharmacoepigenetics, alludes to any additional layer transcriptional regulation apart from transcription factors, thus also including non-coding RNA species. In the context of this review, we follow the restricted molecular definition of epigenetics, in which we consider a phenomenon as “epigenetic” if it pertains to chromosome-bound changes of gene expression that can be transmitted through mitosis and that are not caused by alterations in the primary DNA sequence, thus explicitly excluding regulatory RNAs.
5.1.

## Epigenetic regulation of gene expression
Epigenetic regulation plays an essential role in the modulation of gene expression across eukaryotes. Epigenetic signals can be encoded as modifications of the DNA itself or of associated histones. At the level of DNA, the predominant epigenetic mark is methylation of cytosine–guanine dinucleotides (5mC) affecting 3–5% of all cytosines. In recent years however multiple additional CpG modifications were discovered, including hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), formylcytosine (5fC) and carboxylcytosine (5caC) ( ; ). Of these “additional bases” 5hmC is most common, accounting for up to 1% of all cytosines in hmC-rich tissues, such as liver and central nervous system, compared to <0.02% for 5fC and 5caC ( ; ; ).
While these DNA modifications form during the oxidative removal of 5mC marks, they seem to be more than mere demethylation intermediates ( ); they appear to be temporally stable for multiple weeks in certain contexts and elicit distinct biological responses by changing DNA conformation and selectively binding to specific reader proteins ( ; ; ; ; ). Generally, 5mC, 5fC and 5caC inhibit transcription factor binding and promote condensation to heterochromatin, whereas 5hmC is commonly associated with actively transcribed genes. Thus, given their antagonistic functional roles and significant abundance in human liver, 5mC and 5hmC have received particular attention in pharmacoepigenetic research.
Compared to DNA marks, epigenetic modifications at the level of histones are more diverse and >35 chemically distinct modifications have been described to date, including acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitinylation, sumoylation, ADP-ribosylation, propionylation, butyrylation and deamination ( ; ). Depending on nature and position within the histone tail, histone modifications can associate with transcriptional activation or transcriptional silencing. Arguably the most extensively studied modifications are trimethylation of lysines 4 and 27 in histone 3 (H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, respectively) and acetylation marks in the tails of histones 3 and 4. Actively transcribed genes are generally marked by H3K4me3 and H3 and H4 acetylation in their promoters and gene bodies ( ; ; ). H3K4me3 promotes the recruitment of histone acetyltransferases, which entails coordination of different activating histone marks, jointly supporting the formation of a transcriptionally permissive chromatin state ( ; ). In turn, acetylated lysines promote transcription due to specific recognition by proteins containing bromodomains, which are part of many transcriptional regulators ( ). Importantly, recruitment of the DNA methyltransferase DNMT3 that catalyzed 5mC formation is blocked by H3K4me3, thus interlocking epigenetic signatures at the level of DNA and histones and resulting in mutual exclusivity of repressive 5mC and activating H3K4me3 marks ( ; ; ).
In contrast, repressive histone gene signatures feature H3K27me3 and H2AK119ub (ubiquitinylation of lysine 119 in histone H2A). Methylation of H3K27 is catalyzed by the Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), whereas the PRC1 catalyzes H2AK119ub ( ; ). PRC1 components of the CBX gene family recognize PRC2-catalyzed H3K27me3, resulting in largely overlapping maps of H3K27me3 and H2AK119ub modifications ( ; ; ). Furthermore, binding of the PRC2 to H3K27me3 provides a positive feedback that reinforces transcriptionally repressive domains ( ). For a more detailed overview of the mechanistic underpinnings of the various levels of epigenetic regulation, we refer the interested reader to recent reviews ( ; ).
Importantly, many epigenetic alterations appear to be the consequence rather than the cause of the observed phenotype they correlate with. By analyzing epigenetic signatures in whole blood of 3296 individuals phenotyped for fasting blood lipid levels using a Mendelian randomization framework, Dekkers and colleagues found strong evidence that triglycerides and cholesterol cause alterations in DNA methylation patterns and not vice versa ( ). Similar observations were obtained for associations between DNA methylation patterns and adiposity ( ; ; ; ) or lung cancer risk ( ). Thus, while more data about the functional role of epigenetic patterns are warranted, these data incentivize analyses of forward and reverse causality in epidemiological studies of epigenetic phenomena.

5.2.

## Analytical methods
A plethora of protocols has been presented to decode epigenomic profiles. These methods differ by their input requirements, feature resolution, scalability and costs ( ; ; ). For analyses of DNA modifications, approaches are based on bisulfite conversion, enzymatic digestion or affinity enrichment. Bisulfite conversion exploits differences in chemical reactivity of modified and unmodified cytosine variants and constitutes the most widely used method. Bisulfite deaminates unmodified cytosine, as well as 5fC and 5caC to uracil, whereas 5mC and 5hmC are protected. Thus, these conventional bisulfite-based methods cannot distinguish between “repressive” 5mC and “activating” 5hmC marks, which can confound biological conclusions and limits the usefulness of these protocols, particularly for epigenetic studies of liver biology or hepatic metabolism in which 5hmC levels are high.
To overcome these limitations multiple techniques have been presented that change bisulfite sensitivity between 5mC and 5hmC. Oxidative bisulfite sequencing (oxBS-seq) employs chemical oxidation of 5hmC to 5fC before bisulfite conversion ( ). As a result, 5mC remains protected from bisulfite conversion (thus appearing as cytosine during sequencing), whereas 5hmC is deaminated to uracil during the bisulfite conversion step. In a second method, termed TET-assisted bisulfite sequencing (TAB-Seq), 5hmC is first glycosylated enzymatically by β-glucosyltransferase to 5gmC ( ). Subsequently, 5mC is oxidized to 5caC by recombinant TET enzymes and deaminated in the bisulfite conversion step. In contrast, 5gmC is protected from TET-mediated oxidation and subsequent bisulfite-mediated deamination. Thus, comparison of results from conventional bisulfite sequencing (5mC and 5hmC are not deaminated and appear as cytosine after bisulfite treatment) with TAB-Seq (5mC appear as uracil, whereas 5hmC appears as cytosine, as it is protected from bisulfite treatment), allows to identify 5hmC positions with base-pair resolution. In a conceptually similar approach, Schutsky and colleagues presented a bilsufite-free enzymatic approach that utilizes cytidine deaminases of the APOBEC gene family, termed APOBEC-coupled epigenetic sequencing (ACE-seq) ( ). In a first step 5hmC is glucosylated to 5gmC as in TAB-Seq. Subsequently, 5mC is deaminated enzymatically by AID/APOBEC enzymes, whereas 5gmC is protected. Notably, as deamination is achieved by enzymes rather than harsh chemical conditions, ACE-Seq requires >1000-fold less input material, thus allowing epigenetic analyses of samples with limited availability.
In addition, single molecule sequencing methods can be used to decode cytosine modifications independent of bisulfite conversion. In SMRT-Seq a single DNA molecule of interest is sequenced by measuring the polymerase-mediated integration of fluorescently labeled nucleotides into the complementary strand ( ). Importantly, differences in polymerase kinetics as evident from sequencing fluorescence traces allow to directly distinguish cytosine, 5mC and 5hmC ( ). Furthermore, all five different cytosine species (C, 5mC, 5hmC, 5fC and 5caC) can be identified by changes in ionic current signal using nanopore sequencing ( ; ; ).
In contrast to the analyses of covalent DNA modifications discussed above, methods for studies of posttranslational modifications (PTMs) on histones are primarily antibody based, such as such as Western blot and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). However, generation of antibodies that specifically recognize a histone modification of interest with suitable sensitivity is difficult and time-consuming ( ; ). Furthermore, these approaches are poorly scalable and can only analyze one or few modifications per experiment. Besides antibody-based detections of histone PTMs, proteomic approaches constitute a quantitative and high-throughput compatible approach to obtain overall histone modification profiles on global chromatin ( ; ; ).

5.3.

## Effect of epigenetic gene regulation on pharmacokinetics and drug response
In the past decade a multitude of studies have revealed correlation between epigenetic modifications and expression levels or activity of genes involved in drug ADME and pharmacodynamics and we refer to comprehensive recent reviews for further details ( ; ). Prominent examples for such associations are the correlations between DNA methylation in the promoters of CYP3A4, CYP1A2, CYP2C19 and UGT1A1 with the respective expression levels ( ; ; ; ). In hepatic cell lines (HepG2) transcriptional activation of CYP3A4 has been shown to require the histone methyltransferase PRMT1, as knock-down of PRMT1 resulted in 20-fold reduced activation of CYP3A4 by rifampicin ( ). Furthermore, PXR-mediated induction of CYP3A4 by rifampicin results in changes of the histone profile with increased levels of H3K4me3 and H3ac, as well as decreased levels of the repressive histone mark H3K27me3 ( ). Notably, these changes are the consequence of transcriptional activation as knock-down of PXR prevents both transcriptional activation and epigenetic alterations. In addition, histone modification patterns have been found to correlate with expression levels of multiple drug transporters, such as ABCB1 (MDR1) and ABCG2 (BCRP) ( ; ); in light of above-mentioned data, a similar cause-consequence relationship is likely.
The promoters of various CYP genes, including CYP1A1, CYP1B1, CYP2D6 and CYP2E1, are hypermethylated in hepatocyte-like cells derived from embryonic stem cells, correlating with drastically reduced expression (multiple orders of magnitude) of these genes compared to primary human hepatocyte cultures ( ). Notably, pharmacological inhibition of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) resulted in 10-fold increased expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1B1, whereas changes of CYP2D6 and CYP2E1 were negligible ( ). Combined, these findings provide evidence that epigenetic remodeling and ADME gene expression levels can be directly linked.
Epigenetic changes in ADME genes particularly correlate with expression patterns during embryonic development. While CYP3A7 constitutes the predominant CYP3A isoform in embryonic liver, expression switches to CYP3A4 in postnatal stages and this switching is paralleled by changes in methylation levels of transcription factor binding sites within the CYP3A promoters in mice and humans ( ; ). A further example is the regulation of CYP2W1 expression. Whereas the gene is expressed in fetal gut, neonatal methylation inhibits further expression in healthy adult tissues ( ). However, in transformed colon cancer cells and metastases, a critical CpG island in the exon 1 - intron 1 junction is hypomethylated and expression of CYP2W1 is reactivated ( ). Since the enzyme can bioactivate anticancer prodrugs its specific expression in cancer cells makes it as an interesting target for future anticancer drug development ( ).
Notably, global hmC content varies by a factor of four between human livers and we could show that hydroxymethylation in coding regions positively correlates with the expression levels of the corresponding human ADME genes ( ). These data suggest that hmC variability contributes to the epigenetic control of hepatic gene expression, possibly by causing chromatin alterations that facilitate gene transcription.
Importantly, epigenomic profiles are highly tissue-specific with each cell type having its unique signature and correlations between the epigenomes of different tissues, particularly blood, are generally poor ( ; ; ; ). Yet, most epigenetic association studies are performed using peripheral blood as surrogate tissue. Thus, we emphasize our previously raised concerns ( ) that conclusions about epigenetic regulation critically require the analysis of carefully isolated biopsy material from the given tissue of interest to account for this tissue-specificity.
Mutations in epigenetic modifiers, such as DNMT, HDAC, and TET enzymes are found in up to 50% of all cancers, resulting in profound changes of their epigenetic landscape ( ; ; ). Thus, exploiting these epigenetic changes provides an appealing therapeutic avenue and six small molecule inhibitors of epigenetic modifiers (azacitidine, decitabine, belinostat, panobinostat, romidepsin, and vorinostat), termed epidrugs, have already received regulatory approval for the treatment of various cancers and hundreds of additional clinical trials are currently ongoing. Furthermore, epidrugs are in various stages of development for the treatment of autoimmune disorders, neurodegenerative diseases and type 2 diabetes. For a status update of the clinical implementation of epigenetic therapy and the utilization of epigenetic biomarkers we refer to our recent comprehensive review ( ).

6.

## Clinical implementation efforts
Our understanding of the complexity of pharmcogenomic loci has made tremendous advances. As discussed above, only during the last years has it become evident that genes involved in pharmacokinetics and -dynamics harbor a plethora of rare genetic variants and copy number variations that can have important consequences for human drug response. However, today's array-based pharmacogenomic analyses only interrogate common genetic variants. We advocate for a methodological paradigm shift that allows to embrace the entire pharmacogenomic complexity, including rare variants and copy number variations, by comprehensively interrogating loci of interest using NGS-based technologies ( ). Only then will it be possible to take into account the entire repertoire of genetic variability of a given patient to inform and enhance treatment decisions.
 At present, we recommend to focus pharmacogenetic analyses on loci with importance for drug ADME, adverse reactions or response. Restricting analyses to those genes as well as their surrounding regions with potential regulatory importance (e.g. 50 kb) allows to drastically reduce sequencing costs and analytical complexity with minimal loss of information. Targeted sequencing libraries supporting such focused analyses have already been developed and, when applied to 5000 individuals, revealed >40,000 variants across 82 pharmacogenes ( ; ). However, little is known about the impact of variants on interindividual variability in drug response that reside in genomic areas beyond well-characterized pharmacogenes and thus library designs might have to be expanded in the future.
Advances in machine learning and artificial intelligence have resulted in a rapid improvement of the methodological toolbox for the functional interpretation of genetic variations identified by NGS-based sequencing. Novel algorithms can predict loss-of-function and functionally neutral missense mutations with reasonable accuracy of >90%. Moreover, tools have been presented that can not only dichotomously distinguish between deleterious and functionally neutral variations but rather provide with quantitative estimates about the extent of functional impact for a given variant. This opens up possibilities to rapidly translate NGS-based sequences into gene activity scores, which can be used in conjunction with existing pharmacogenetic guidelines to advise treatment decisions.

7.

## Conclusions and future outlook
The translation of pharmacogenomic findings into patient or societal benefits in the past has been relatively slow. However, in light of the rapid methodological developments in the areas of genomics, statistical genetics and machine learning, as well as the multitude of ongoing efforts to quantify the added value of preemptive pharmacogenomic tests, we anticipate that their clinical implementation will accelerate in the near future. With decreasing costs of genetic testing, concerns will shift away from monetary considerations and the main hurdle in the future process will be the accuracy of phenotypic interpretation of a given genotype, particularly pertaining to the rare mutations which are often specific for a given individual. Importantly, computational methods are not (and likely will never be) able to predict alterations of gene function with complete accuracy. However, we believe that they are useful to flag patients with genotypes that indicate an increased likelihood of an outlier response. This information can be of value for the physician who in such cases can adjust follow-up schedules and initiate therapeutic drug monitoring and dose titrations.
Our knowledge of pharmacogenomic variation is rapidly increasing; however, there is still much to learn. Important frontiers include the understanding and functional interpretation of regulatory parts of the genome. Furthermore, non-coding RNAs might be important, currently underappreciated modulators of drug response, as suggested for the response to lithium treatment in bipolar disorder ( ). Most importantly, there is an urgent need for prospective, randomized clinical trials that evaluate patient benefits and cost effectiveness of preemptive NGS-based genotyping coupled to state-of-the-art computational prediction tools across diseases, medicines and health care systems, as a more wide-spread clinical implementation of personalized medicine can only be achieved by providing a solid base of evidence. Overall, we envision that ongoing development, optimization and validation efforts in the area of pharmacogenomics will pave the way for an increased personalization of drug therapy, resulting in more cost-efficient health care, increased drug development efficiency and improved public health.

## Financial & competing interests disclosure
V.M.L. and M.I.-S. are founders and owners of HepaPredict AB. The work in the authors' laboratories is supported by the Swedish Research Council [grant agreement numbers: 2015-02760, 2016-01153 and 2016-01154], by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program U-PGx [grant agreement No. 668353], by the Strategic Research Programme in Diabetes at Karolinska Institutet, by the Lennart Philipson Foundation, by the Harald and Greta Jeansson Foundation and by the ERC-AdG project HEPASPHER (grant agreement number 742020).
No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.

## References