ACS Synth BiolACS Synth Biol822acssd101575075sbACS Synthetic Biology2161-5063pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleACS AuthorChoicePMC7610768PMC7610768.2761076881689172826455910.1021/acssynbio.6b003202Research ArticleA Family of Single Copy repABC-Type Shuttle Vectors Stably Maintained in the Alpha-Proteobacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti
DöhlemannJohannes WagnerMarcel HappelCarina CarrilloMartina SobetzkoPatrick ErbTobias J. ThanbichlerMartin http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4561-9184BeckerAnke †LOEWE Center for
Synthetic Microbiology, Marburg, 35043, Germany‡Faculty
of Biology, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Marburg, 35043, Germany§Biochemistry
and Synthetic Biology of Microbial Metabolism Group, Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology, Marburg, 35043, Germany*Tel.: +49 (621) 28-24451. E-mail: anke.becker@synmikro.uni-marburg.de.06032017160620176638296496898428102016010620211305202122042026761076810.1021/acssynbio.6b00320EMS123369120032017816891710.1021/acssynbio.6b003202060320172017American Chemical Societyhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/Permits non-commercial access and re-use, provided that author attribution and integrity are maintained; but does not permit creation of adaptations or other derivative works (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/). 
A considerable
share of bacterial species maintains segmented genomes.
Plant symbiotic α-proteobacterial rhizobia contain up to six repABC-type replicons in addition to the primary chromosome.
These low or unit-copy replicons, classified as secondary chromosomes,
chromids, or megaplasmids, are exclusively found in α-proteobacteria.
Replication and faithful partitioning of these replicons to the daughter
cells is mediated by the repABC region. The importance
of α-rhizobial symbiotic nitrogen fixation for sustainable agriculture
and Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation as
a tool in plant sciences has increasingly moved biological engineering
of these organisms into focus. Plasmids are ideal DNA-carrying vectors
for these engineering efforts. On the basis of repABC regions collected from α-rhizobial secondary replicons, and
origins of replication derived from traditional cloning vectors, we
devised the versatile family of pABC shuttle vectors propagating in Sinorhizobium meliloti, related members of the Rhizobiales, and Escherichia coli. A modular plasmid library
providing the elemental parts for pABC vector assembly was founded.
The standardized design of these vectors involves five basic modules:
(1) repABC cassette, (2) plasmid-derived origin of
replication, (3) RK2/RP4 mobilization site (optional), (4) antibiotic
resistance gene, and (5) multiple cloning site flanked by transcription
terminators. In S. meliloti, pABC vectors showed
high propagation stability and unit-copy number. We demonstrated stable
coexistence of three pABC vectors in addition to the two indigenous
megaplasmids in S. meliloti, suggesting combinability
of multiple compatible pABC plasmids. We further devised an in vivo cloning strategy involving Cre/lox-mediated translocation of large DNA fragments to an autonomously
replicating repABC-based vector, followed by conjugation-mediated
transfer either to compatible rhizobia or E. coli.

plasmid cloning vehicleCre/loxPrepABCin vivo cloningSinorhizobiumRhizobialesH2020 European Research Council10.13039/100010663637675Land HessenNANAMax-Planck-Gesellschaft10.13039/501100004189NADeutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft10.13039/501100001659TRR 174Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft10.13039/501100001659INST 160/536-1pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC-NDdocument-id-old-9sb6b00320document-id-new-14sb6b00320ccc-pricePlasmid vectors are valuable tools in genetic engineering and synthetic
biology. Most well established cloning vectors have specifically been
selected and designed to be applied in Escherichia coli. Plasmids with a broader host range that can be transferred between
different microorganisms and function in diverse genomic backgrounds
represent a natural source of orthogonal DNA elements autonomously
replicating in bacteria. While medium to high copy plasmids are usually
randomly distributed during cell division, low copy plasmids employ
a segregation mechanism to assort plasmid copies to each daughter
cell. Plasmids can be considered as ideal
DNA-carrying vectors with respect to the ease of plasmid engineering,
modularization, and standardization. Yet,
variations in copy number and propagation stability, as well as limited
cloning capacity and combinability are unfavorable properties of plasmid
vectors. Unreliable plasmid propagation has to be overcome by selection
pressure that may negatively affect cell growth and physiology. The
main bacterial chromosome has been used as vector for assembly and
stable propagation of megasize DNA, − and also engineered or
synthetic chromosomes potentially offer high propagation stability
and cloning capacity. − 
Several members of the Rhizobiales belonging to
the class of α-proteobacteria are best known for their ability
to establish a nitrogen-fixing symbiosis with legumes , or as plant pathogens of the genus Agrobacterium causing crown gall tumors on many vascular plants. , Advances in synthetic biology have increasingly moved utilization
of genetic resources and processes underlying the microbe-plant interactions
of these α-proteobacteria into focus. This includes the high
value of symbiotic nitrogen fixation for sustainable agriculture, but also their biotechnological potential with
respect to polysaccharide , and vitamine , production and Agrobacterium-mediated plant transformation. However, the toolbox of available plasmid vectors
is underdeveloped in this group of bacteria.
In α-proteobacteria,
genome segmentation is a common phenomenon.
Especially the fast-growing rhizobia harbor multipartite genomes which
are usually composed of a main chromosome and additional low or unit-copy
replicons classified as secondary chromosomes, chromids, or megaplasmids, , some of which even exceed 2 Mb in size. For instance, Mesorhizobium
loti MAFF303099 possesses a chromosome and two megaplasmids
(pMla, pMlb), whereas Sinorhizobium
meliloti Rm1021 harbors a chromosome, a chromid (pSymB),
and a megaplasmid (pSymA). Rhizobium
etli CFN42 even contains six megaplasmids (p42a-f) beside
its main chromosome, and Agrobacterium
tumefaciens C58 maintains two chromosomes, a circular and
a linear one, and two plasmids (pTi, pAt). , The unrivaled variety of α-rhizobial genome architecture offers
a rich resource of megaplasmids that are faithfully inherited to the
daughter cells. These are ideal candidates for plasmid vector construction.
DNA replication origins of these extra-chromosomal replicons usually
belong to the repC superfamiliy, , , named after the DNA replication initiator
RepC, which appears to be unique to α-proteobacteria. In repABC family plasmids, repC including
the cognate oriV forms an operon with repA and repB. RepA and
RepB belong to the ParAB family of partitioning proteins mediating segregation of newly replicated oriVs. Segregation is initiated by specific binding of RepB
to its cognate cis-acting centromere-like repS sites. Highly reliable inheritance, even of dispensable repABC-type replicons such as most of the R. etli megaplasmids, − can be attributed to proper function of the segregation
machinery. , , 
Replicon copy number is supposed to be mainly transcriptionally
controlled by RepAB-mediated autorepression of the repABC operon , and post-transcriptionally by a small counter-transcribed
RNA, which is usually encoded by a locus between repB and repC (ctRNA). , , Strict regulation of repABC expression
is the mechanistic basis of incompatibility groups allowing stable
coexistence of several repABC replicons in the cell. , , − High variability of incompatibility
factors, such as repS sites, the ctRNA and occasionally
the C-terminal domain of RepC, may explain the compatibility of heterologous
megaplasmids in related species. 
Here, we explored the naturally occurring low or unit-copy number
extrachromosomal elements of members of the Rhizobiaceae and Phylobacteriaceae to design the versatile family
of modular standardized pABC plasmids for this important group of
bacteria. In S. meliloti, pABCs were shown to mimic
megaplasmid-like characteristics, such as high propagation stability,
unit-copy number and combinability of compatible repABC-type plasmids,
rendering them highly suitable for complex ectopic expression systems.
We further devised an in vivo cloning strategy based
on Cre/lox-mediated site-specific recombination and
an IPTG-inducible engineered oriVrepABC, allowing for translocation of DNA fragments to an autonomously
replicating repABC-based vector and conjugation-mediated
transfer either to compatible rhizobia or to E. coli.

## Results and Discussion

## Autonomous Plasmid Replication Mediated by
Heterologous repABC Regions in S. meliloti
Initially, we tested the ability of various repABC regions to mediate plasmid maintenance in S. meliloti, which is a well-characterized model of nitrogen-fixing plant-symbiotic
α-rhizobia. To this end, repABC regions derived
from megaplasmids of S. meliloti (pSymA), Rhizobium etli (p42b, p42d, p42e, p42f), Mesorhizobium
loti (pMla, pMlb), Sinorhizobium medicae (pSMED01, pSMED02), Sinorhizobium fredii (pNGR234b),
and Agrobacterium tumefaciens (pTi) were inserted
into the suicide vector pK18mob2 ( ), which is replicative in E. coli, but nonreplicative in S. meliloti. Plasmids carrying the repABC cassettes from R. etli, M. loti and A. tumefaciens were successfully established
in the S. meliloti Rm1021 wild type strain. In contrast,
plasmids carrying the repABC regions derived from
pSymA, pSMED01, pSMED02, and pNGR234b were not maintained in this
strain, probably due to incompatibility between the indigenous megaplasmids
and these heterologous replicons derived from closely related α-rhizobia.
In line with this observation, the construct harboring the repABCpSymA cassette propagated in the pSymA-cured S. meliloti Rm1021 derivative SmA818, but not in the wild
type. The identified set of eight heterologous repABC regions autonomously replicating in the S. meliloti Rm1021 wild type strain provided the foundation for construction
of the family of pABC vectors.
 

## pABC Vector Design
Simple design concepts and modularity
facilitating assembly and exchange of functional modules have become
standard in vector development for applications in synthetic biology. − a depicts
the blueprint of the pABC vector family composed of five basic modules:
oriVSm (repABC cassette for propagation in S. meliloti), oriVEc (plasmid-derived origin of replication
for propagation in E. coli), oriT (RK2/RP4 mobilization
site), AR (antibiotic resistance gene cassette), and synTer-MCS (multiple
cloning site flanked by transcription terminators).
 One of our motivations for developing this vector family
is the
possibility of coexistence of multiple pABC replicons derived from
compatible megaplasmids in one cell. Natural occurrence of α-rhizobial
species with up to six compatible repABC-type replicons
indicate the high potential of combinability. Previously, for a high-throughput plasmid integration study, we determined 220 bp sharing at least 80% sequence
similarity with the target region as the minimal size promoting homologous
recombination at a significant frequency in S. meliloti Rm1021. To limit the possibility of homologous recombination between
corresponding members of the
pABC vector family, parts were designed on the premise of avoiding
high and extended sequence identity (Table S1). Multiple parts per module allow for assembly of combinable pABC
vectors. The only exception is the oriT module that comprises the
∼100 bp common mob site within a 464 bp fragment. Because of extended sequence identity, it is
therefore not recommendable to combine pABC plasmids with this module
in one cell.
Three basic pABC types were devised ( b). pABCs of type A, lacking
the oriT module,
have to be introduced to S. meliloti by electroporation.
pABCs of type B contain an oriT module (pABC-mob) enabling conjugal
transfer. Hence, unintended co-integration by homologous recombination
between type B pABC vectors through the oriT module appears possible.
This is circumvented by design type C which offers the possibility
of excision of the oriVEc and oriT modules by Cre/lox-mediated site-specific recombination in S. meliloti. , 
LCR (ligase cycling reaction) is our
procedure of choice for restriction enzyme-independent assembly of
the building blocks to pABC vectors. LCR was shown to efficiently
assemble up to ten 2 kb DNA fragments. Library plasmids serving as a template for PCR amplification of
the 23 parts generated in our study were constructed ( ). Each part is flanked by a
module-specific linker, which enable LCR-based assembly promoted by
the standardized bridging oligonucleotides BO1-4 ( c, Table S2). Following in vitro assembly, E. coli DH5α was directly transformed with the purified
LCR reaction mix, and correct assembly of pABC vectors was verified
by DNA sequencing. Usually more than 75% of tested clones exhibited
correct assembly, indicating a suitably efficient assembly system.
Library parts for each module ( and Table S3) and pABC vectors ( and Table S4) generated in this study are described
in the SEVA-SIB database (http://seva.cnb.csic.es). To translate individual pABCs into
the SEVA-SIB collection, a unique identifier was assigned to each
insert in accordance with an adapted SEVA nomenclature (Tables S3 and S4).
 

## Parts Characterization

## oriVSm Module
The common element of
the pABC vector
family is the repABC region which naturally acts
as replication origin of megaplasmids of various α-proteobacteria. , repABC cassettes of different megaplasmids were
integrated into pK18mob2 derivative pLoriVSm resulting in library
module vectors which provide the repABC cassettes
of R. etli p42b,d,e,f (pLoriV-42b, -42d, -42e,
-42f1, -42f2), M. loti pMla,b (pLoriV-Mla,
-Mlb), and A. tumefaciens pTi (pLoriV-Ti). a depicts the genetic
structure of the eight repABC regions, which constitute
the basis of the oriVSm module parts used in this study. To test for
autonomous propagation and stability in the absence of selective pressure, S. meliloti Rm1021 was transformed with the pLoriVSm library
plasmids. Restriction enzyme-digested pLoriVSm plasmids purified from
the S. meliloti transformants showed the expected
electrophoresis banding patterns (Figure S1), verifying autonomous propagation of these replicons in S. meliloti.
 pLoriV-42b, -42d, -42e, -Mlb, and -Ti exhibited
highly stable propagation
despite cultures being kept in exponential growth for 72 h in nonselective
rich medium ( b). The repABCp42e region used for construction
of library plasmid pLoriV-42e is characterized by a 542 bp 3′UTR.
A shorter variant with a 26 bp 3′UTR (p42e_s) was less stable,
indicating that genetic elements required for faithful replication
or segregation of these replicons can be located further downstream
of the repABC operon. Plasmids harboring oriVp42f1, oriVp42f2, and oriVpMla derived cassettes were virtually lost in the same period of time.
Expanding the 3′UTR of repABCpMla from 45 bp (pMla_s) to 556 bp (pLoriV-Mla) did not improve plasmid
maintenance. Slight incompatibility between repABCpMla and the oriV regions of the indigenous
megaplasmids may account for this viable but unstable coexistence.
Cross-interactions between components of indigenous and heterologous
RepABC systems may impair regulatory control of the repABC operons or function of the gene products in replication initiation
or plasmid segregation. This may affect cell cycle progression and
diminish cell growth. Indeed, pLoriV-42f1, -42f2, and -Mla negatively
affected S. meliloti cell growth, whereas stably
propagating plasmids bearing oriV cassettes from
p42b, p42e, pMlb, and pTi had no significant influence on growth ( c and S2). This is supposed to be a critical prerequisite
for a multi-pABC setup under nonselective conditions since a negative
effect on cell growth would promote plasmid loss.
We aimed at
preserving the unit-copy number or low copy number
of megaplasmids in the free-living state as an important attribute
of pABC vectors. The copy number of pLoriVSm plasmids in S.
meliloti was determined by qPCR and data were normalized
to pK18mob2-repABCpSymA, which in a calibration
experiment was shown to exhibit the same copy number as the chromosome
(Table S5). The stably propagating pLoriV
library plasmids roughly matched a unit-copy number, whereas instable
plasmids showed values below 1 ( d and Table S6). Since a
qPCR-based copy number determination was performed on crude cell extracts,
a significant number of pLoriV plasmid-negative cells could account
for the low values determined for the unstable plasmids pLoriV-42f1
and -42f2 ( d).
Considering stability and copy number, the oriVSm module
vectors
pLoriV-42b, -42d, -42e, -Mlb, and -Ti exhibited the desired megaplasmid-like
characteristics and thus appear to be highly suitable for construction
of the pABC vector system.

## synTer-MCS Module
This module provides
a multiple cloning
site offering recognition sites for the rare-cutting restriction enzymes
PmeI, PacI, and NotI. Transcriptional read-through into the repABC operon was found to interfere with its strict native
expression control. The MCS module was therefore additionally equipped
with flanking transcription terminators to protect the oriVSm module
and the MCS position from transcriptional read-through emanating from
sequences inserted into the MCS or adjacent modules. To this end,
synthetic termination regions (synTer1–3) flanking the MCS were designed based on the E.
coli rrnBT1 and rrnBT2 terminators ( a) and cloned into
pK18mob2 to generate the pLsynTer library plasmids ( ). Effective transcription termination
was verified by interrupting expression of an egfp reporter gene from a strong constitutive promoter by inserting the synTer1–3 cassettes downstream of
the promoter (Figure S3).
 

## oriVEc and oriT Modules
The oriVEc module enables E. coli-based cloning
of pABCs. However, construction of
standardized library plasmids carrying a further E. coli replication origin (besides the native oriVpMB1) failed. For this reason, oriVEc parts harboring oriVpMB1, oriVp15A, and oriVpSC101* were PCR-amplified
from nonlibrary plasmids by use of extended primers carrying the module
specific linker sequences. The oriT module provides an RP4-derived mob site which mediates conjugal transfer from E.
coli to a wide range of Gram-negative bacteria including S. meliloti. This
module is available on the pLoriT library plasmids ( ).
The low variability
of oriVEc and oriT module parts is associated with a reduced combinability
of pABC vectors since homologous regions provoke unintended replicon
fusions. For this reason we equipped the synTer-MCS and oriT modules
with Cre recognition (lox) sites, resulting in the
pLsynTer-x-lox and pLoriT-x-lox library plasmids, respectively ( a–b, ). These lox sites allow Cre-mediated deletion of these modules from the pABC
vectors in the α-rhizobial host strain SmCreΔhsdR as demonstrated
in Figure S4.

## AR Module
This
module comprises selection markers conferring
resistance to the antibiotics gentamicin, hygromycin, kanamycin, tetracycline,
trimethoprim, and spectinomycin in E. coli and S. meliloti (Figure S5). For
the AR module, we chose a standardized design with the 72 bp Pmin2 promoter driving expression of the resistance genes
( c). This promoter
was selected from PaacC1 and Ptrp derivatives (Figure S6). AR module parts
are available on the pLAR library plasmids ( ).

## Characterization of pABC
Shuttle Vectors
We constructed
14 pABCs representing design types A to C utilizing all oriVSm module
parts described above ( and Table S7). pABCa-c are based on constructs lacking the standard linker
sequences flanking the module library parts. They basically match
the structure of pABC1 to six that are composed of library parts assembled
via module-specific linker sequences and include an additional transcription
terminator downstream of the MCS (Figure S7a). Dependent on the pABC design, transformation of S. meliloti Rm1021 was carried out via electroporation or E. coli S17-1 mediated conjugal transfer. Following electroporation, transformation
rates of S. meliloti Rm1021 with pABCs were massively
higher than with the common replicative vectors pSRKGm and pPHU231. Compared to pSRKGm, pABCa, pABCb, and pABCc
achieved ∼7200-, 88-, and 22-fold higher transformation efficiencies,
respectively, making cotransformation of S. meliloti with up to three pABCs possible (Figure S7b). Successful introduction of pABCs into S. meliloti and autonomous propagation was verified by plasmid purification
from transconjugants and restriction enzyme digest-derived fragment
patterns (Figure S8).
Inheritance
of pABC vectors was studied by flow cytometry-based single cell analysis
applying S. meliloti strains carrying pABC-egfp derivatives
(Table S8). In contrast to the preliminary
selection marker-based assay of maintenance of the pLoriVSm library
plasmids ( b),
which tends to preselect fast growing cells, the flow cytometry-based
assay allows for unbiased determination of the ratio of pABC-positive
and -negative cells and is highly sensitive (Figure S9). Cultures were incubated in nonselective rich medium and
diluted twice a day to allow for continuous growth in the range of
OD600 of 0.05 to 1.0.
Consistent with the properties
of the corresponding pLoriVSm plasmids,
derivatives of pABCa (oriVpMlb), pABCb
(oriVp42b), pABCc-mob (oriVp42d), pABC1 (oriVp42b), and
pABC4 (oriVp42e) were remarkably stably
propagated over the time course of 96 h ( a,i). After 24 h even ∼99% of measured
cells were eGFP-positive and therefore supposed to maintain the respective
pABC replicon. After 96 h of incubation still 97% of cells were positive,
indicating a highly reliable propagation of the pABC derivatives in S. meliloti Rm1021. In contrast, egfp expressing
derivatives of pABC2 (oriVpMla) and the
low-copy plasmid pPHU231 showed a pronounced plasmid loss of ∼20%
after 24 h ( a,ii). After 96 h, the proportion of positive cells even decreased
to 13% and 39%, respectively. Notably, flow cytometry revealed dramatic
variations in propagation stability between biological replicates
of clones bearing the oriVpTi-based pABC3-egfp
(99%, 49%, and 2% positive cells after 48 h) ( a,ii). Mutation of the cognate repABC cassette was excluded by resequencing. However, we cannot exclude
mutations in other pABC modules or the S. meliloti background genome. Previously, regulatory mechanisms affecting replication
and thereby the copy number of pTi in A. tumefaciens have been reported. The heterogeneity
in propagation stability observed in our study and variations in copy
number of pTi characterize oriVpTi as
unsuitable part for construction of stably propagating single copy
pABC vectors in S. meliloti. The pABC maintenance
assay identified oriVpMlb, oriVp42b, oriVp42d, and oriVp42e as highly suitable origins of replication
for generation of S. meliloti pABC vectors.
 To rule out mutual influences
of the repABC cassettes
in multi-pABC setups we further studied replicon stability in S. meliloti strains simultaneously carrying two or three
pABCs. pABCa–pABCc retained highly stable propagation (>96%)
throughout the time course and achieved stability values which were
only marginally lower as compared to that of the strains carrying
only one of these pABCs ( b). pABC3 and pABC4 were combined to study the influence
of an instably propagating pABC on maintenance of a stably inherited
pABC. In combination, pABC3 and pABC4 showed the same properties as
each did individually; namely, biological replicates show great variation
in the maintenance of pABC3, while pABC4 was stably inherited (Figure S10). In accordance with the previous
growth studies of strains harboring stably propagating pLoriVSm plasmids
( c and S2), the corresponding pABCs did not affect S. meliloti cell growth even when present in combination
(Figure S11).
We further tested maintenance
of stably propagating pABCs under
more challenging conditions by loading pABC vectors with the expR gene, whose presence restrains growth of S.
meliloti. In the reference strain
Rm1021, expR is disrupted by an insertion element. Complementation of this mutation results in
a strong increase in galactoglucan production since the LuxR-type
regulator ExpR is a key activator of biosynthesis of these exopolysaccharides. − expR under the control of PlacZ was integrated into pABCs based on repABC cassettes
derived from pMlb (pABCa-egfp-expR), p42b (pABCb-egfp-expR), p42d
(pABCc-egfp-expR), p42e (pABC4-egfp-expR), and pMla (pABC2-egfp-expR).
Constitutive expression of expR significantly decreased
cell growth and resulted in a mucoid colony phenotype, indicating
a proper function of the expR cassette in the pABCs
(Figure S12a). We compared maintenance
of expR-positive and expR-negative
pABCs reliably and unreliably propagating in S. meliloti. After 96 h, the expR-positive derivative of the
unreliably propagating pABC2 (pABC2-egfp-expR) was virtually lost
( c), whereas
the derivative lacking expR (pABC2-egfp) was still
present in 17% of the cells ( a,ii). Maintenance of pABCs characterized as very reliably
inherited to the daughter cells was less affected by the presence
of expR. After 96 h, 63%, 83%, and 92 to 94% of cells
contained pABC4, pABCa, and pABCb,c, respectively. Nevertheless, derivatives
of pABCa to pABCc and pABC4 were reliably maintained with 98 to 99%
positive cells after 24 h, despite carrying a functional copy of expR throughout the entire time course (Figure S12b). Hence, vectors bearing oriV cassettes derived from p42b, p42d, p42e, and pMlb exhibit remarkable
inheritance even when imposing a fitness burden on the cell.
To validate the unit copy number of stably propagating pABCs and
to rule out potential morphological aberrations of pABC-bearing cells,
fluorescently labeled pABC derivatives were applied for microscopy
analysis. To this end, Yersinia pestis and fluorescent
repressor operator system (FROS) derived parS/mChr-ParB and tetO/TetR-YFP pairs were applied as a taurine-inducible dual
color label system. Heterologously expressed DNA-binding proteins
mChr-ParB and TetR-YFP bind to parS and tetO sequences, respectively, allowing for specific labeling of individual
pABCs. Localization patterns of parS/mChr-ParB and tetO/TetR-YFP clusters implied single copy replication of
pABCa to pABCc, pABC1 and pABC4, since the number of fluorescent
foci never exceeded two per cell (Figure S13a). This observation is in accordance with the copy number of pLoriVSm
constructs determined by qPCR ( d). Cell populations of the S. meliloti strains with the unreliably inherited pABC2 (oriVpMla), pABC5 (oriVp42f1) and pABC6 (oriVp42f2) vectors contained a substantial proportion of cells lacking fluorescent
foci, indicating loss of the respective vector (Figure S13b). Aberrant cell morphologies, such as branching
and elongation, were not observed. Previously, we observed that the repA2B2C2 region derived from pSymA is sufficient to confer
the spatiotemporal pattern of this megaplasmid to a small plasmid. Although, spatiotemporal dynamics and integration
of pABC into the cell cycle must be examined in more detail in future
studies, microscopic analyses suggest a megaplasmid-like coordination
with subpolar localization in small cells at the beginning of the
cell cycle and in elongated predivisional cells ( a).
 A well-defined insulated cloning
site is a main requirement for
the applicability of the pABC vectors. Insulation was tested by measuring
fluorescence derived from promoter-less reporter gene insertions into
the cloning site ( b and S14). Thus, pABCa, pABCb,
pABCc, pABC1, and pABC4 are supposed to be the most reliable candidates
for applications in S. meliloti.

## repABC Mediated in Vivo Cloning
in S. meliloti (ABC Cloning)
Several methods
have been developed which enable direct cloning of large gene clusters,
including transformation-associated recombination (TAR) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, − RecET-mediated linear-plus-linear
homologous recombination (LLHR) in E. coli, and φBT1 integrase-mediated site-specific
recombination in Streptomyces species. The Cre/loxP plus BAC strategy and oriT-directed cloning are well established in vivo approaches which facilitate cloning of large DNA fragments derived
from α-rhizobia. The former strategy is based on Cre/loxP-mediated circularization of the DNA fragment of interest
bearing a BAC oriV, which is purified from the crude
cell culture and introduced to E. coli by electroporation. The latter strategy involves a Flp-mediated
excision of the FRT site bordered DNA fragments including an oriT site and an E. coli plasmid oriV, instantly followed by mobilization of the excised
DNA to E. coli. These
direct cloning methods have proven to be very useful. However, they
do not allow reliable maintenance of excised DNA in propagating donor
cells, but require either DNA purification from treated cells and
subsequent transformation of the crude mix into a suitable host or
excision and transfer in a single step and therefore entail reduced
efficiency and increased screening efforts. Properties of α-rhizobial
megaplasmids such as single copy number, faithful inheritance to daughter
cells, and large size make repABC-type oriVs ideal tools for in vivo cloning strategies. We
devised an in vivo cloning strategy involving Cre/lox mediated excision of the target region, followed by
stable extrachromosomal establishment of the excised region on an
autonomously replicating repABC-type replicon, and
demonstrated its feasibility by translocation of the ∼24 kb exo gene cluster from pSymB to a repABC-type replicon ( ).
 This strategy requires genomic integration of a repABC-type oriV region adjacent to the
region of interest.
To enable stable integration, we constructed a LacI-silenced and IPTG-inducible repABCpMlb operon by insertion of a lac operator sequence into the repABC promoter region
( a). Constitutive lacI expression strongly affected the capacity of pMlb_lacO bearing the engineered repABCpMlb-lacO to transform S. meliloti, most probably due to repression of the repABC operon
(Figure S15a). Whereas establishment of
pMlb_lacO in S. meliloti carrying
the medium copy plasmid pSRKGm as LacI donor was completely abolished, S. meliloti harboring the single copy plasmid pABCb-lacI exhibited still sufficiently reduced transformation
rates. Thus, lacI expression from a single copy locus
achieved sufficient inactivation of repABCpMlb-lacO.
 b,i depicts
the genomic situation of S. meliloti SmCre_exo-IN
bearing pIso and Pmin2-loxR-aacC1 integrated up- and downstream of the exo gene cluster, respectively. Whereas the downstream fragment constitutes
a functional gentamicin resistance cassette which is separated from
the exo gene cluster by the Cre recognition site loxR, pIso provides a loxL site which is
preceded by a terminator sequence preventing transcription of the
promoter-less spectinomycin resistance gene aadA1. pIso further offers a constitutively expressed lacI gene encoding the transcriptional repressor which mutes the adjacent repABCpMlb_lacO operon in the
absence of IPTG. This repression of oriV activity
enables integration of pIso into the genome. Accordingly, the efficiency
of S. meliloti transformation with pIso was ∼4000-fold
decreased when mating mixtures were incubated on TY agar lacking IPTG
and ∼20% of transconjugants carried the construct integrated
into the genome (Figure S15a). Induction
of Cre expression and simultaneous activation of oriVpMlb_lacO by IPTG resulted in excision
and maintenance of the floxed DNA fragment, respectively, giving rise
to strain S. meliloti SmCre_exo-OUT carrying pIso-exo
as an autonomous mini-replicon. Successful Cre-mediated recombination,
resulting in an active loxP site on pIso-exo and loxLR remaining on pSymB, was verified via sequencing (Figure S15b). Since the recombination event caused
an antibiotic resistance switch, the screening effort for identifying
positive clones was minimized. ABC cloning provided high efficiency
rates of ∼75% after Cre/lox-mediated isolation,
which can be attributed to highly efficient Cre recombination in SmCre
derivatives in general, and suitable
function of the engineered repABC-type oriV in particular. Since multiple lox sites recombine
in an unpredictable manner, a single copy number of activated repABCpMlb-lacO plasmids is
an important prerequisite for manageable Cre reactions. Promoter modification
appeared to affect the propagation stability of pMlb_lacO and pIso-exo, while retaining copy number control, as suggested
by the qPCR-based copy number determination (Figure S15c).
Transfer of pIso-exo to E. coli was achieved via
triparental mating. oriVpMB1 on the pIso backbone enabled replication in E. coli due to the high copy number efficient purification of the large
DNA molecule from this host ( b,ii). Moreover, conjugation-mediated transfer to A. tumefaciens C58 exoB resulted in complementation of the
exopolysaccharide-deficient phenotype ( b,iii), demonstrating propagation of the engineered repABC cassette also in this host (Figure S15d).

## Applicability of repABC-Based Plasmids in the Rhizobiales
To further
explore the potential applicability
of heterologous repABC-based vectors beyond S. meliloti, a pilot survey was performed in Agrobacterium
tumefaciens C58, Mesorhizobium loti MAFF303099, Sinorhizobium medicae CC169, Sinorhizobium fredii NGR234, Rhizobium leguminosarum Norway, Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 Δcel, and Caulobacter crescentus CB15N (Table S9). In the diverse tested members of the Rhizobiales, four to seven of the eight probed repABC regions mediated plasmid replication. Even in the distantly related C. crescentus, one of the eight repABC regions
(oriVpMlb) mediated plasmid replication,
although growth on medium selecting for presence of this repABC-based plasmid was impaired. This may indicate unreliable replication
or segregation of this plasmid, or interference with cellular functions
in C. crescentus. The initial survey of the pilot
set of repABC modules in α-proteobacteria suggests
that this vector family is probably applicable in the Rhizobiales beyond the Rhizobiaceae, particularly considering
the possibility of further expanding the portfolio of repABC modules in the future.

## Conclusions
The currently available
ectopic expression
systems applicable in S. meliloti and related bacteria
are based on a small number of low-copy and multicopy vectors. Because
of incompatibilities, options for combining different vectors in one
cell are very limited. Moreover, different copy number ranges and
cell-to-cell variation complicate balanced gene expression even from
a set of compatible plasmids. While chromosomal integration of expression
constructs solves copy number problems, stable integration of multiple
constructs is still cumbersome and integration sites may influence
gene expression. In this study, we established the pABC vector family
which circumvents these issues and highly facilitates the setup of
combinatorial expression systems.
pABC vectors provide a well-defined
integration site in single copy and we demonstrated stable coexistence
of up to three compatible pABCs. Occurrence of α-rhizobial species
harboring up to six RepABC-family plasmids suggests that even more than three pABC plasmids may be combined
in a suitable host. The number of available resistance cassettes and
restraints in the applicability of multiple antibiotics selection
pressure potentially hampers combinatorial use of pABC vectors. However, oriVrepABC-based multireplicon
systems benefit from robust inheritance under nonselective conditions.
A future route to further stabilization of pABC plasmids, independent
of antibiotic resistance cassettes, could be the integration of toxin–antitoxin
(TA)-based maintenance systems, which frequently occur in S. meliloti. Integration of
additional modules is facilitated by the modular pABC design, which
also facilitates construction of pABCs with multifarious part combinations.
pABC plasmids were designed as shuttle vectors capable of replication
in E. coli and S. meliloti. This
is an advantageous feature when it comes to E. coli-based cloning procedures and plasmid DNA purification. Nevertheless,
some applications in S. meliloti may favor pABC plasmids
lacking oriVEc and oriT. We demonstrated that these modules can be
efficiently removed on demand by induction of Cre/lox-mediated site specific recombination in S. meliloti.
Furthermore, we took a stab at the broad potential of pABC
applications
by devising the in vivo ABC cloning procedure, which
provides high flexibility due to isolation and immediate maintenance
of the fragment of interest in a repABC-based vector.
This opens up multifarious follow-up processes including intracellular
relocation of the isolated fragment by Cre/lox mediated
recombination or conjugal transfer to a compatible host organism.
In a future perspective, the available set of nonpromiscuous lox spacer mutants paves the
way to serial engineering steps, such as in vivo assembly
of indigenous or heterologous DNA fragments on pABC plasmids. Thus,
the family of pABC vectors has the potential to significantly advance
metabolic and genome engineering in S. meliloti and
related species and to provide a platform for in vivo DNA assembly.

## Methods

## Bacterial Strains and Growth
Conditions
Bacterial strains
used in this study are derivatives of Escherichia coli K12, Sinorhizobium meliloti Rm1021, Agrobacterium
tumefaciens C58, Rhizobium etli CFN42, Sinorhizobium fredii NGR234, Mesorhizobium loti MAFF303099, Rhizobium leguminosarum Norway, Methylobacterium extorquens AM1 Δcel, Sinorhizobium
medicae WSM419 and CC169, and Caulobacter crescentus CB15N. E. coli strains were cultivated at 37 °C,
whereas A. tumefaciens, M. loti, R. etli, S. fredii, and S. medicae were grown at 30 °C in Luria–Bertani (LB) medium. S. meliloti strains were cultivated
at 30 °C in tryptone yeast extract (TY) medium. C. crescentus was grown at 28 °C on peptone-yeast
extract (PYE) medium. If necessary, the
following antibiotics were used: gentamicin (8 μg/mL for E. coli, 30 μg/mL for S. meliloti, and 50 μg/mL for A. tumefaciens), kanamycin
(25 μg/mL for C. crescentus, 30 μg/mL
for S. fredii, and R. leguminosarum, 50 μg/mL for E. coli, M. loti, and M. extorquens, 70 μg/mL for A. tumefaciens, 200 μg/mL for S. meliloti), streptomycin
(600 μg/mL for S. meliloti and R. leguminosarum), spectinomycin (100 μg/mL for E. coli, 200
μg/mL for S. meliloti, and 500 μg/mL
for A. tumefaciens), hygromycin (100 μg/mL
for both E. coli and S. meliloti), nalidixic acid (10 μg/mL for A. tumefaciens, S. fredii, M. loti, and S. medicae), trimethoprim (1000 μg/mL for E. coli, 700
μg/mL for S. meliloti), chloramphenicol (20
μg/mL for E. coli) or tetracycline (10 μg/mL
for E. coli and 3 μg/mL for S. meliloti). Cre/lox applications were performed as described before, excluding tetracycline supplementation during
induction of cre expression. Calcofluor fluorescence
assays of A. tumefaciens C58 exoB carrying pIso-exo
were performed on LB agar supplemented with gentamycin and spectinomycin,
200 μg/mL calcofluor, and 500 μM IPTG. Cultures of an
optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.2 were spotted on
agar medium and grown overnight at 30 °C. Calcofluor fluorescence
was excited by UV transillumination.

## DNA Manipulation and Plasmid
Extraction
Standard techniques
were employed for common cloning procedures. Primers and PCR products were 5′-phosphorylated applying
T4 Polynucleotide Kinase (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Dephosphorylation
of 5′-ends of DNA was achieved by use of FastAP Thermosensitive
Alkaline Phosphatase (Fermentas). Blunting of DNA ends was performed
by use of DNA Polymerase I (Large Klenow fragment) (New England Biolabs
(U.K.)). Plasmid DNA was generally purified using the “E.Z.N.A.
Plasmid Mini Kit” (Omega Bio-Tek). For gel extractions of DNA
the “illustra GFX PCR DNA and Gel Band Purification Kit”
(GE Healthcare Life Sciences) was employed.

## Plasmid and Strain Construction
Strains and constructs
generated in this study are listed in and Table S10. Assembled pABCs are listed in . A detailed description
of plasmids is given in Tables S7 and S11. Oligonucleotides and synthetic DNA fragments were provided by Sigma-Aldrich
(USA) and Integrated DNA Technologies (USA), respectively (Table S2). DNA fragments were PCR amplified using
Q5 High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (New England Biolabs) or Taq DNA Polymerase
(New England Biolabs). DNA sequence verification was performed by
Eurofins Genomics (Germany). For transformation of S. meliloti, the respective strains were either conjugated or electroporated
as described before. Preparation of electrocompetent
cells was done as described by Ferri et al. (2010).
Construction
of pABC mini-replicons: Amplification of module parts from library
plasmids was performed with Q5 polymerase applying module specific
primer sets oriVSm_for/rev (pLoriVSm derivatives), synTer-MCS_for/rev
(pLsynTer derivatives), oriT_for/rev (pLoriT derivatives), and AR_for/rev
(pLAR derivatives). oriVEc module parts were amplified from pK18mob2
(pMB1), pACYC184 (p15A), and pX-G10 (pSC101*) with primer sets pMB1_for/rev,
p15A_for/rev, and pSC101*_for/rev, respectively. Subsequently, matching
DNA fragments (blunt-end and 5′ phosphorylated) were fused
via ligase cycling reaction (LCR) according to de Kok et al. (2014).
For LCR 0.3 U Taq ligase (New England Biolabs), 3 nM DNA parts, 30
nM bridging oligos, and 8% (v/v) DMSO were applied. The following
conditions were used: 2 min at 94 °C and then 50 cycles of 10
s at 94 °C, 30 s at 60 °C, and 60 s at 65 °C, followed
by incubation at 4 °C. Reaction mixtures were purified using
the E.Z.N.A. Cycle-Pure Kit (Omega Bio-Tek). A detailed pABC construction
manual is provided in the Supporting Information.
For live-cell localization studies of pABC vectors, a dual
label
system based on the fluorescent reporter gene fusions tetR-eYFP (derived from the fluorescent repressor operator system, FROS ) and mChr-parBYp (parB derived from Yersinia pestis) was developed. Homologous regions comprising
the upstream region of tauA (pSymB position 1050453–1050952)
and PtauAB-tauA (pSymB position
1050781–1051458) were integrated into pK18mobsacB, thereby
flanking tetR-YFP-mChr-parBYp. S. meliloti Rm1021 was transformed with
the resulting plasmid pJD120. Loss of the plasmid backbone was forced
by sucrose selection resulting in strain JDSm106 carrying the tetR-YFP-mChr-parBYp reporter
construct stably integrated into the chromosome downstream of the tauA promoter. Localization studies of pABCs carrying either
a pLAU44-derived tetO array (position 5117-9290) or a pMT1-derived, 86 bp parSYp sequence were performed in this dual label S. meliloti reporter
strain JDSm106.
Control strains for cell growth and plasmid
inheritance experiments
were generated as follows. A homologous region comprising exsA (pSymB position 1166189-1166773) was cloned into pK18mob2,
resulting in pMW1. Integration of a Pmin2-egfp cassette upstream of the exsA region
in pMW1 gave rise to pMW28. pMW1 was integrated into pSymB in S. meliloti Rm1021 by homologous recombination, resulting
in the kanamycin resistant strain MWSm8. Integration of pMW28 into
the genome of S. meliloti ΔhsdR by homologous
recombination gave rise to strain MWSm37 exhibiting constitutive egfp expression.
An S. meliloti strain
suitable for ABC cloning
of the exo gene cluster was constructed in a two-step
cloning strategy applying cloning-free genome editing (CFGE). Pmin2-loxR-aacC1 (PCR amplified
from pJD211 with primers Uni/Rev) was blunt-end ligated with a ∼550
bp fragment covering the exoP-thiD intergenic region (pSymB position 1190665-1191220; PCR amplified
with primers 86/87). Purified ligation products were then introduced
to SmCreΔhsdR by electroporation. Finally, a transformant exhibiting
Pmin2-loxR-aacC1 correctly integrated into the genome
downstream of the exo gene cluster was transformed
with pIso, giving rise to strain SmCre_exo-IN.

## DNA Transfer
Preparation
of electrocompetent cells
and transformation of S. meliloti, A. tumefaciens, R. etli, S. fredii, M.
loti, R. leguminosarum, and S. medicae cells was performed as described by Ferri et al., 2010. Electroporation
of M. extorquens and C. crescentus was carried out as described previously. , To transfer pISO-exo from S. meliloti into different
species, triparental matings between S. meliloti SmCre_exo-OUT
and E. coli XL1blue-pRK2013, with A. tumefaciens C58 exoB or E. coli AB3219 were performed.
For triparental matings the cell density of fresh overnight cultures
was adjusted to an OD600 of 2.0 and equal volumes of donor,
recipient, and helper strain were mixed. A 50 μL aliquot of
cell suspension was dropped on LB agar supplemented with 500 μM
IPTG and incubated overnight. Cells were recovered in 1 mL sterile
0.9% (w/v) NaCl solution. For the determination of conjugation efficiency,
OD600 of the cell suspensions was adjusted to 2.0 and appropriate
dilutions were plated on selective LB agar containing 500 μM
IPTG. The efficiency of conjugation was determined by plating the
conjugation cell suspension on media selective for transconjugants
as well as on media selective for all recipient cells. Conjugation
frequency was expressed as the number of colony forming units (CFU)
transconjugants per CFU recipient cells.

## Plasmid Stability Assays
To assess inheritance stability
of pLoriVSm derivatives, S. meliloti cultures were
grown over 72 h at 30 °C in TY medium supplemented with streptomycin.
Cell suspensions were diluted every 12 h to an OD600 of
∼0.05. Finally, dilution series were plated on nonselective
TY agar and emerging colonies were streaked on both selective (Km)
and nonselective TY agar. Antibiotic resistance was correlated with
the presence of the assessed plasmid.
For determination of propagation
stability of pABC-egfp derivatives, S. meliloti cultures
were incubated over 96 h at 30 °C in TY medium. Probes were taken
0, 24, 48, and 96 h postinoculation and immediately diluted to an
OD600 of 0.1 in 0.9% (w/v) NaCl. eGFP fluorescence was
detected using a BD Fortessa flow cytometer. For FACS analysis 10.000
gated events were acquired giving rise to the ratio between eGFP-negative
and positive cells. Sufficient sensitivity was verified (Figure S9).

## qPCR-Based Copy Number
Determination
S. meliloti cultures were
grown in selective TY medium until OD600∼1.0 was reached
and adjusted to ∼1.39 × 105 cells/μL
(≙ 1 ng DNA/μL). Cell suspensions that had been incubated
at 95 °C for 15 min served as template. The DNA concentration
of cell lysates containing pLoriVSm derivatives was verified via Qubit
fluorometric quantitation (HS Assay Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific).
qPCR was carried out in a qTOWER Thermal Cycler (Analytik Jena,
Germany) using the TaykonNo Rox SYBRMasterMix dTTP Blue Kit. Reactions
were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions
in a 5 μL reaction volume. Replicon copy number was calculated
according to Lee et al. (2006). 

## Microscopy
Phase contrast and fluorescence pictures
of S. meliloti were taken using an Eclipse Ti-E inverse
research microscope (Nikon) and the live imaging modus of the NIS
elements software (Nikon). For fluorescence microscopy with a 100x
CFI Apo TIRF Oil objective (numerical aperture of 1.49) a green DPSS
solid state laser (561 nm, 50 mW; Sapphire) and a multiline Argonlaser
(65 mW; Melles Griot) were applied with AHF HC filter sets F36-504
TxRed (excitation bp 562/40 nm, beam splitter 593 nm, emission bp
624/40 nm) and F36-513 YFP (excitation bp 500/24 nm, beam splitter
520 nm, emission bp 542/27 nm). Background fluorescence was reduced
by applying the highly inclined laminated optical sheet (HILO) technique. Cell cultures were grown in TY medium supplemented
with suitable antibiotics to an OD600 of 0.1 and expression
of the fluorescent labeling system was induced with 15 mM taurine
for 4 h. Living cells were placed onto 1% (w/v) TY agarose pads.

## Bioinformatics Tools
To generate neutral orthogonal
DNA sequences for module linker fragments, the web-based tool R2oDNA
Designer was applied. To estimate the
recombination potential of distinct pABCs we investigated the local
sequence homology of all module parts (including linker sequences).
We applied a window-based local alignment approach to focus on the
local sequence homology. For a pair of parts we therefore extracted
all 200 bp sequence fragments of one part and performed a local alignment
on the full sequence of the second part. The best alignment similarity
of all 200 bp fragments with the second vector was taken as the similarity
value of both vectors.

## Supporting Information Available
The Supporting Information
is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.6b00320.Table S1: Examination
of sequence identity of pABC module
parts. Table S2: Primers and synthetic DNA fragments used in this
study. Table S3: Designation of pABC library parts according to the
SEVA-SIB nomenclature. Table S4: Translation of pABC plasmids into
the SEVA-SIB collection. Table S5: qPCR indicates a unit copy number
of plasmids carrying a repABCpSymA cassette.
Table S6: Copy number determination of oriVSm library plasmids. Table
S7: Detailed description of pABCs generated in this study. Table S8:
Flow cytometry measurements of S. meliloti Rm1021
carrying pABC-egfp derivatives. Table S9: Replication capacity of repABC-based replication origins in various α-proteobacteria.
Table S10: Strains and plasmids used in Supporting Information. Table
S11: Detailed description of constructs generated in this study. Figure
S1. Electrophoresis banding patterns of oriVSm library plasmids. Figure
S2. Growth of S. meliloti carrying stably propagating
pLoriVSm library plasmids. Figure S3. Activity of E. coli transcription terminators derived from rrnBT1 and rrnBT2 in S. meliloti. Figure S4. Cre-mediated
deletion of modules oriVEc and oriT in S. meliloti strain SmCreΔhsdR. Figure S5. Examination of standardized
antibiotic resistance cassettes. Figure S6. Examination of promoter
activity of Ptrp derivatives in S. meliloti. Figure S7. pABC setup and electroporation efficiency. Figure S8.
Electrophoresis banding pattern of digested pABCs purified from S. meliloti. Figure S9. Verification of Flow Cytometry measurements.
Figure S10. Propagation stability of pABC3-egfp and pABC4-egfp. Figure
S11. Growth of S. meliloti Rm1021 harboring stably
propagating pABCs. Figure S12. Characterization of pABC-egfp-expR
derivatives. Figure S13. Fluorescence microscopy analysis of fluorescently
labeled pABCs. Figure S14. Analysis of transcriptional insulation
of the multiple cloning site of pABCa–c. Figure S15. Examination
of ABC cloning procedures (PDF)

## Supplementary Material
sb6b00320_si_001.pdf

## Author Contributions
# J.D. and M.W.
contributed equally. A.B., J.D., and M.W. designed
the research. J.D., M.W., and C.H. performed the experimental work.
M.C., T.J.E., and M.T. contributed to the assays of repABC-based plasmids in diverse bacteria. P.S. computationally analyzed
parts for sequence similarities. J.D. and M.W. analyzed all data.
J.D. and A.B. wrote the paper.
The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

## Acknowledgments
We thank Gabriele Malengo for
supporting the FACS analyses,
Daniela Kiekebusch and Maritha Lippmann for technical assistance in Caulobacter handling, and Macarena Marín for providing R. leguminosarum strain Norway. Financial support from the
German Research Foundation (Collaborative Research Centre TRR 174
“Spatiotemporal dynamics of bacterial cells” and INST
160/536-1 FUGG), the LOEWE program of the State of Hesse (Germany)
(SYNMIKRO), the Max Planck Society, and the European Research Council
(ERC 637675 “SYBORG”) is acknowledged.

## Abbreviations
Clmchloramphenicol
Gmgentamicin
hhour
Hyghygromicin
Kmkanamycin
oriVreplication origin
SDShine–Dalgarno sequence
Spspectinomycin
Strstreptomycin
TAtoxin–antitoxin
Tctetracycline
Tmptrimethoprim