3815pheelsevierThe Dictionary of Cell & Molecular BiologyThe Dictionary of Cell & Molecular BiologyPMC71583277158327715832710.1016/B978-0-12-384931-1.00018-0R
LackieJM412013553553–5801542020Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the company's public news and information website. Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre remains active.statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoIssue date 2013.

RSingle-letter code for arginine.
R17 bacteriophageBacteriophage with RNA genome that codes for RNA synthetase and for the coat protein, a protein to which the RNA is attached and that is involved in attachment to the bacterium.
rab genes
(1) One of the three main groups of -like genes specifying a family of small GTP-binding proteins (the others are and ). Rab proteins are involved in vesicular traffic and seem to control translocation from donor to acceptor membranes (see 
). The Rab escort protein-1 (REP1) is component A of RAB geranylgeranyl transferase, a heterodimeric enzyme (A and B subunits) that attaches a geranylgeranyl moiety to rab1A and rab3A: mutations cause choroideremia. Rim1-alpha, a Rab3a-interacting molecule, is involved in hippocampal late-phase long-term potentiation. (2) In plants, a gene family ‘responsive to abscisic acid’ that encode proteins such as dehydrin Rab18 (186aa), although there are also rab-like proteins related to the ras-family.
rabaptinA protein (rab GTPase-binding effector protein 1, rabaptin-5, 862aa) that acts as a linker between gamma-adaptin, rab4A and rab5A and involved in endocytic membrane fusion. See adaptor proteins.
rabies virusSpecies of the that causes rabies in humans. The virus infects the cells in the brain, causing a fatal encephalomyelitis.
rabinA human protein (rab-3A-interacting protein, rabin-3, 476aa) that also interacts with SSX2 protein. See SSX proteins.
rabphilinsCytosolic proteins expressed in neurons and neuroendocrine cells that bind with high affinity to members of the rab3 family of GTPases when they have GTP bound, and to actin indirectly through alpha-actinin. There is a rab3A binding domain at the amino terminus of the protein and two C2 domains that bind to phospholipids in a Ca2+-dependent manner at the carboxyl terminus. Rabphilin-3A (exophilin-1, 694aa) is probably involved with rab-3A in synaptic vesicle traffic. Rabphilin-3A-like protein (no C2 domains protein, 315aa) has a rab-binding domain and is involved in the late steps of regulated exocytosis, both in endocrine and exocrine cells. It may act as a rab3B effector protein in epithelial cells. Rabphilin-11 (WD repeat-containing protein 44, 913aa) is the downstream effector for rab11. Research article: http://www.jbc.org/content/280/41/34974.full

racMembers of the superfamily of small GTP-binding proteins, involved in regulating the actin cytoskeleton. The activated form of rac (GTP-rac) seems to induce membrane ruffling (whereas acts on stress fibres). Rac may be activated by specific GAPs such as bcr and N-chimaerin. Rac1 (p21-Rac1, ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1, ras-like protein TC25, cell migration-inducing gene 5 protein, 192aa); rac2 and rac3 have similar properties but different tissue distributions with rac2 restricted to haematopoietic tuissue; defects in rac2 are the cause of neutrophil immunodeficiency syndrome. See .
RAC/ROP small GTPasesRho-family plant-specific ras-related G proteins that interact with a range of receptors and are involved in signalling systems that regulate actin dynamics, production of reactive oxygen species, proteolysis and gene expression. Rac1 (RAC-ROP-like G-protein, 218aa in Hordeum vulgare) is only one of a set of similar proteins. Abstract of article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2006.04.003

Rac1 immune complexAn innate immune system in rice (Oryza sativa) in which the small GTPase, Rac1, plays a key role. Rac1 interacts with RACK1A. (See )
RACESee .
racemeA flower cluster arranged in a linear array with the lowest flowers usually opening earliest.
racemic mixture
racemate A mixture containing equimolar amounts of two enantiomers (D- and L-forms) of a chiral molecule.
rachiticSee .
RACKsProteins (receptors for activated C kinase), usually anchored to specific areas of the cell, which selectively bind activated protein kinase C and thus control the regions of the cell on which it acts. They have multiple WD40-repeats. RACK1 (guanine nucleotide-binding protein beta-2-like 1, 317aa) is implicated in numerous signalling pathways. In plants RACK genes are regulators of development and RACK1 proteins regulate innate immunity by interacting with multiple proteins in the Rac1 immune complex in rice.
rad
(1) Abbreviation for radian. (2) Unit of radiation 1rad=0.01Gy. (3) rad1 is a S. pombe checkpoint control gene important in both DNA damage-dependent and replication-dependent cycle control; various rad genes are of comparable function in other organisms (Hrad1 from man, Mrad1 from mouse, RAD17 from S. cerevisiae). (4) See .
rad proteinsYeast proteins coded by genes originally identified as being particularly sensitive to X-rays, many of which are involved in DNA repair and required for spontaneous and induced mitotic recombination, meiotic recombination and mating-type switching. Human homologues of many of these proteins were subsequently identified. Rad21 (double-strand-break repair protein, 631aa) is a component of the cohesin complex that is proteolytically cleaved at the metaphase-anaphase transition by separin, allowing sister chromatids to separate. Rad23 (398aa in S. cerevisiae) is important in nucleotide excision repair; the N-terminal domain has similarity with ubiquitin and links rad23 to the proteasome. It binds to rad14 and TFIIH and forms a stable complex with rad4. Rad51 (400aa in S. cerevisiae, 339 in humans) is the functional homologue of recA and promotes ATP-dependent homologous pairing and DNA strand exchange; binds Rad52. The role of these proteins in DNA repair means that mutations are associated with tumour susceptibility.

radial cleavageCleavage pattern, in holoblastic eggs, characteristic of the deuterostomes, in which the spindle axes are parallel or at right angles to the polar axis of the oocyte. Cf. spiral cleavage.
radial glial cellA type of glial cell, organized as parallel fibres joining the inner and outer surfaces of the developing cortex. They are thought to play a role in neuronal guidance in development. See contact guidance.
radial spokeThe structure that links the outer microtubule doublet of the ciliary axoneme with the sheath that surrounds the central pair of microtubules and restricts the sliding of doublets relative to one another; digestion of the radial spokes will allow sliding apart of the doublets. The spokes are arranged periodically along the axoneme every 29 nm, have a stalk about 32 nm long and a bulbous region adjacent to the sheath. Among the 18 spoke proteins (RSPs) identified in Chlamydomonas so far, at least 12 have apparent homologues in humans. Many of them have domains associated with signal transduction, suggesting that the spoke stalk is both a scaffold for signalling molecules and itself a transducer of signals.
radiation inactivationAn old method in which high energy particles (e.g. electrons) were used to inactivate lyophilised proteins and give an indication of the molecular weight (proportional to the target size).
radicicolA macrocyclic antifungal compound, structurally unrelated to geldanamycin, but that competes for the same binding site on Hsp90. Inhibits src tyrosine kinase.
radioimmunoassay
RIA Any system for testing antigen-antibody reactions in which use is made of radioactive labelling of antigen or antibody to detect the extent of the reaction. A standard approach is to spike the sample with a known amount of radio-labelled analyte and estimate the concentration of analyte in the sample by measuring how much radiolabel is bound. Analyte in the sample competes with the labelled material for binding. A radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) is used to confirm the presence of antibodies using protein A to precipitate immune complexes that have bound added radiolabelled antigenic fragments.
radioisotopeForm of a chemical element with unstable neutron number, so that it undergoes spontaneous nuclear disintegration. Major use in biology is to trace the fate of atoms or molecules that follow the same metabolic pathway or enzymic fate as the normal stable isotope, but that can be detected with high sensitivity by their emission of radiation. Also used to locate the position of the radioactive metabolite, as in autoradiography, and to measure relative rates of synthesis of compounds from radioactive precursors.
RadiolariaSubclass of the Sarcodina. Marine protozoans with silicaceous exoskeleton and radiating filopodia. Database: http://www.radiolaria.org/

radixinBarbed-end capping actin-binding protein (583aa) found in adherens junctions and in the cleavage furrow of many cells. Has a FERM domain.
rafSerine/threonine protein kinase implicated in signal-reponse transduction pathways involving tyrosine-kinases. Originally identified as a viral oncogene (v-raf) in a murine sarcoma. Raf-1 (c-raf, EC 2.7.11.1, 648aa) is part of the ras-dependent signalling pathway and defects are the cause of one form of Noonan syndrome. Various tissue-restricted forms are known, A-raf (606aa) in the urinogenital system, B-raf (766aa) in neural tissue and testis. Defects in B-raf are a cause of cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome. The avian mil oncogene is the avian homologue of murine raf.
raffinose
mellitose A non-reducing trisaccharide found in sugar beet and many seeds, consisting of the disaccharide sucrose bearing a D-galactosyl residue linked α(1-6) to its glucose group.
rag
(1) The RAG complex is a multiprotein complex that mediates the DNA cleavage phase during V(D)J recombination in the production of immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor diversity. Rag1 (V(D)J recombination-activating protein 1, 1043aa) has domains with endonuclease activity and with E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase activity. Rag2 (527aa) is another component. RAG1-activating protein 1 (stromal cell protein, 221aa) is thought to activate Rag1. Defects in components of the complex lead to severe combined immunodeficiency disease and Omenn syndrome. (2) Members of a ras-related GTP-binding protein family (ragA, 313aa; ragB, 374a; ragC, 399aa; ragD, 400aa) that are involved in the RCC1/Ran-GTPase pathway. Bind GTP but do not seem to have GTPase activity.
RAGE
(1) Receptor of Advanced Glycation Endproducts, an immunoglobulin superfamily member (237aa) that binds advanced glycation endproducts (AGE), amphoterin, amyloid β peptide, and members of the S100 family. May be important in triggering inflammatory response. (2) Renal tumour antigen 1 (RAGE, MAPK/MAK/MRK overlapping kinase, EC 2.7.11.22, 419aa).
RAIDDA dual-domain adapter protein (receptor-interacting protein RIP-associated ICH-1/CED-3-homologous protein with a death domain, death domain-containing protein CRADD, 199aa) that mediates the recruitment of caspase-2 to tumour necrosis factor receptor-1 (TNF-R1) signalling complex through RIP kinase. May have an additional function in cell differentiation and RAIDD-deficiency may be embryonically lethal.
Raji cellsA line of EBV-transformed lymphocytes with surface Fc receptors that grows in suspension; derived in 1963 from a Nigerian boy with Burkitt's lymphoma. Article: http://www.nature.com/leu/journal/v19/n1/full/2403534a.html; Details: http://www.lgcstandards-atcc.org/attachments/17457.pdf

rakA src-family tyrosine kinase (FRK (fyn-related kinase)/RAK, 505aa) found in nucleus, originally isolated from breast cancer cells. Has N-terminal SH2 and SH3 domains and has similarities with src. Binds to protein and leads to growth suppression. Formerly GTK (gut tyrosine kinase)/Bsk (beta-cell src-homology kinase) /IYK (intestinal tyrosine kinase).
ralOncogene related to . Protein product (ralA, 206aa; ralB 206aa) is a multifunctional small GTPase involved in tumorigenesis and in controlling intracellular membrane trafficking. It is mainly activated by factors downstream of ras.
Raman spectroscopyMethod for measuring the Raman spectrum, the plot of Raman scattering of light that produces weak radiation at frequencies not present in the incident radiation. The spectrum is characteristic of the compound and independent of the wavelength of the incident light.
RAM domain
(1) An N-terminal region (RBP-Jkappa-associated module) in notch essential for interaction with other proteins in the signalling pathway. (2) A domain associated with transcriptional regulation of amino-acid metabolism in prokaryotes. The RAM domain binds small ligands. Archaea and Bacteria also have proteins with a RAM domain, but lacking the DNA-binding domain, called stand-alone RAM-domain (SARD) proteins (headless Lrp/AsnC proteins, demi-FFRPs) with uncertain function. Article: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2242884/

ramoplaninA peptide antibiotic that works by sequestration of lipid intermediates for peptidoglycan biosynthesis, making them unavailable to the late-stage peptidoglycan biosynthesis enzymes. Ramoplanin is structurally related to two cell wall active lipodepsipeptide antibiotics, janiemycin, and enduracidin, and is functionally related to members of the lantibiotic class of antimicrobial peptides (mersacidin, actagardine, nisin, and epidermin) and glycopeptide antibiotics (vancomycin and teicoplanin).
RAMPs
(1) Type I transmembrane proteins (receptor activity modifying proteins) that determine receptor phenotype of various G-protein-coupled receptors. If the calcitonin receptor-like receptor is transported to the membrane by RAMP1 (148aa) it behaves as a calcitonin gene related peptide-receptor; if associated with RAMP2 (175aa) its glycosylation pattern is different and it acts as an adrenomedullin-receptor. RAMP3 (148aa) has similar effects to RAMP1. (2) Retinoic acid-regulated nuclear matrix-associated protein (RAMP, denticleless protein homologue, 730aa) that is a substrate-specific adapter of a DCX (DDB1-CUL4-X-box) E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase complex required for cell cycle control and the DNA damage response.
ramusA physically and physiologically independent individual plant.
ran
(1) Small G-protein (216aa) required, together with importins α and β and pp15, for protein transport into the nucleus. The only known nucleotide exchange factor for ran is nuclear (RCC1), whereas the only known activating factor is cytoplasmic. This would provide a mechanism for vectorial transport. Ran-GTP binds importin and may cause dissociation of the transport complex. GTP-loaded Ran also induces the assembly of microtubules into aster-like and spindle-like structures in Xenopus egg extract. (2) In Arabidopsis a copper-transporting ATPase (RAN1, EC 3.6.3.4, RESPONSIVE TO ANTAGONIST 1, 1001aa) involved in copper import into the cell and essential for ethylene signalling. N.B. plants also have ran G-proteins (ran1, 221aa; ran2, 221aa.
ran-binding proteinsProteins that bind the small G protein . Ran-binding protein 1 (ranbp1, 210aa) inhibits GTP exchange on ran whereas ran-binding protein 2 (358 kDa nucleoporin, 3224aa) is an E3 SUMO-protein ligase which facilitates SUMO1 and SUMO2 conjugation by the conjugating enzyme UBE2I and is involved in transport factor (Ran-GTP, karyopherin)-mediated protein import. Ran-binding protein 3 (567aa) acts as a cofactor for exportin-mediated nuclear export. Others, such as ran-binding protein 9 (729aa) and ranbp10 (620aa) act as adapters or are importins.
Rana pipiensCommon European frog.
ranatensinSubfamily of bombesin-like peptides from the skin of Rana pipiens, of which neuromedin-B (NMB) is the mammalian form. See phyllolitorin.
random amplification of polymorphic DNASee .
random coilA term originally invented by polymer chemists to describe a disordered tangle of a linear polymer chain with curved sections. In DNA parlance the random coil refers to the structure that results from melting or other forms of separation of the double helix, ie. helix-coil transition.
random primingMethod of labelling a DNA probe for use in hybridization. Double-stranded DNA is denatured to form a single stranded template. Random oligonucleotide primers (usually hexamers) are allowed to anneal, nucleotides and DNA polymerase added, and new DNA fragments synthesized in the presence of trace amounts of radioactive or non-radioactive label. The result is a population of short, labelled DNA molecules of indeterminate length that represent the whole length of the template DNA.
random walkA description of the path followed by a cell or particle when there is no bias in movement. The direction of movement at any instant is not influenced by the direction of travel in the preceding period. If changes of direction are very frequent, then the displacement will be small, unless the speed is very great, and the object will appear to vibrate on the spot. Although the behaviour of moving cells in a uniform environment can be described as a random walk in the long term, this is not true in the short term because of persistence.
RANKA TNF superfamily receptor (TNFRSF11A, 616aa) that activates NFκB. Ligand is . See Paget’s disease of bone.
RANKLLigand for RANK (receptor activator of NFκB), and the decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG); part of the regulatory system for osteoclast development and function.
RANTES
Cytokine of the C-C subfamily (regulated upon activation normal T-expressed and secreted, CCL5, 91aa) produced by T-cells, and chemotactic for monocytes, memory T-cells and eosinophils. Uniquely among the chemokines, it is down-regulated when the secreting cells are activated.
RAP
(1) An oncogene (rap) related to that encodes small G-proteins of the ras family (rap1B, 184aa; rap2A, 183aa) that are key regulators of cell adhesion and cell migration in a number of systems. Rap seems to antagonise activity. (2) N-RAP (nebulin-related anchoring protein, 1175aa) is muscle-specific and concentrated in myofibril precursors during sarcomere assembly and at intercalated disks in adult heart. (3)
Bacillus subtilis has several Rap proteins that are regulators antagonised by Phr signalling peptides that are imported into the cell. The processes regulated by many of these Rap proteins and Phr peptides are unknown but rapK-phrK regulates the expression of a number of genes activated by the response regulator ComA such as those involved in competence development and the production of several secreted products. (4) In S. cerevisiae a DNA binding protein (RAP1, 827aa) homologous to human TRF involved in regulating telomere structure. (5) Rhoptry-associated protein 1 (rap1) of Plasmodium falciparum, a potential component of an anti-malarial vaccine. (6) Rap2.4 is a redox-sensitive transcription factor that regulates expression of 2-cysteine peroxiredoxin in the chloroplast. (7) RAP74 is the large subunit of the transcription initiation factor (TFIIF). (8) In Arabidopsis a transcription factor (MYC2, JASMONATE INSENSITIVE 1, 623aa). (9) See (RAP).
rapamycinImmunosuppressive macrolide antibiotic with structural similarity to FK506; inhibits T- and B-cell proliferation but at a much later stage than FK506, despite binding to the same immunophilin. Inhibits TOR (target of rapamycin) in the Ras/MAP kinase signalling pathway.
RAPDRandom amplification of polymorphic DNA, a variant of the polymerase chain reaction used to identify differentially expressed genes. mRNA from two different tissue samples is reverse transcribed, then amplified using short, intentionally nonspecific primers. The array of bands obtained from a series of such amplifications is run on a high resolution gel and compared with analogous arrays from different samples. Any bands unique to single samples are considered to be differentially expressed; they can be purified from the gel, and sequenced and used to clone the full-length cDNA. Similar in aim to subtractive hybridization. See also differential display PCR.
raphide crystalA needle-shaped crystal, usually of calcium oxalate, found in the vacuole of some plant cells.
raphidosomeRod-shaped particle found in bacterial cells near the DNA-rich region.
rapid amplification of DNA ends
RACE Techniques, based on the polymerase chain reaction, for amplifying either the 5′ end (5′ RACE) or 3′ end (3′ RACE) of a cDNA molecule, given that some of the sequence in the middle is already known. The two procedures differ slightly; in the more straightforward 3′ RACE, first strand cDNA is prepared by reverse transcription with an oligo-dT primer (to match the poly-A tail), from an mRNA population believed to contain the target. PCR then proceeds with a gene-specific, forward-facing primer and an oligo-dT reverse facing primer. 5′ RACE is an example of anchored PCR; the first-strand cDNA population is tailed with a known sequence, either by homopolymer tailing (e.g. with dA) or by ligation of a known sequence. PCR then proceeds as before with a primer specific for the gene, and one specific for the added tail.
rapsynSee postsynaptic protein.
raptorBinding partner (regulatory associated protein of mTOR, 1335aa) of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR); the raptor-mTOR complex is a key component of a nutrient-sensitive signalling pathway that regulates cell size by controlling the accumulation of cellular mass. The raptor-mTOR complex phosphorylates the rapamycin-sensitive forms of S6K1, while the distinct -mTOR complex phosphorylates the rapamycin-resistant mutants of S6K1.

rasOne of the family of oncogenes involved in cellular transformation by murine sarcoma viruses but acquired when the Harvey virus was passaged through rats where it caused a sarcoma. The gene product, p21ras is a small GTP-binding protein that acts as a regulatory G-protein. See . The K-ras, H-ras and N-ras genes encode the human cellular homologues of the Kirsten and Harvey murine sarcoma virus oncogenes and the neuroblastoma oncogene respectively. The products (189aa) are functionally similar although antigenically different.
ras-like GTPasesFamily of small G-proteins (rac, rab, rag, ran, rad, rheb, rho, gem/kir, ric, rin, rit, Ypt). The rab subfamily is required for membrane traffic in eukaryotic cells, has been associated with growth factor-induced DNA synthesis and oncogenic transformation. is highly conserved and found in the nucleus. and are involved in cytoskeletal control. Rin, ric and rit lack prenylation sequences and are well conserved between Drosophila and man; rin is confined to neuronal cells. Ypts are the yeast homologues, of which 11 are known. The rad subfamily – rad (ras associated with diabetes, 308aa), gem (immediate early gene expressed in mitogen-stimulated T-cells, kir, 296aa) – bind calmodulin in a calcium-dependent manner via a C-terminal extension. and also have various serine phosphorylation sites so their activity may be regulated by kinases including CaMKII, PKA, PKC and CKII. is a ras homologue enriched in brain. The GTPases are linked to the mTOR system, has been associated with oncogenic transformation. NFκB inhibitor-interacting ras-like protein 1 (192aa) is atypical and acts as a potent regulator of NFκB activity by preventing the degradation of NFκB inhibitor beta.
Rat Genome DatabaseA genomic and genetic database for the rat (Rattus norweigicus). Link: http://rgd.mcw.edu/

ratio-imaging fluorescence microscopyA method of measurement of intracellular pH or intracellular calcium levels, using a fluorescent probe molecule (see fura-2), in which the two different excitation wavelengths are used, and the emitted light levels compared. If emission at one wavelength is sensitive to the intracellular ion level, and emission at the other wavelength is not, then standardisation for intracellular probe concentration, efficiency of light collection, inactivation of probe and thickness of cytoplasm can all be performed automatically.
Rauber’s cellsCells from the caudolateral deep part of the avian blastoderm (Rauber’s sickle) or from the thin layer of trophoblast (Rauber’s layer) that covers the inner cell mass in the early mammalian embryo.
Rauwolfia serpentinaIndian snake-root. Source of various pharmacologically-active compounds, including the alkaloids , serpentine, sarpagine and ajmalicine, that have been used in traditional Ayurvedic medicine.
RAW 264.7 cellsMurine monocyte/macrophage line derived from ascitic tumour induced with Abelson leukaemia virus in Balb/C mice. Passaging protocol: http://www.signaling-gateway.org/data/cgi-bin/ProtocolFile.cgi/afcs_PP00000159.pdf?pid=PP00000159

Rb
Tumour suppressor gene encoding a nuclear protein that, if inactivated, enormously raises the chances of development of cancer, classically , but also other sarcomas and carcinomas.
rbcRed blood cell or erythrocyte.
RBD
(1) Ras-binding domain, originally described in kinase. (2) Receptor-binding domain, a rather general term for a domain in a viral protein or a toxin that binds to a receptor on the surface of a target cell.
RBL-1 cellsRat basophilic leukaemia cell line: shows wide variation but can be used as a model for basophils.
R bodyA protein structure, refractile in the optical microscope, found in various bacteria, probably related to plasmid presence. Found both in free-living pseudomonads and in various bacteria endosymbiotic in Paramecium. Has toxic activity against Paramecium and confers killer characteristics on Paramecium that ingest bacteria containing the structure.
RBS
(1) Rutherford backscattering spectrometry. (2) The rbs operon encodes the genes responsible for ribose utilization in bacteria. (3) Ribosome binding site.
RC3See neurogranin.
rDNADNA that codes for ribosomal RNA.
RDPRibosomal Database Project, a database of aligned and annotated rRNA gene sequences. Database: http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/

RDW
(1) Red cell distribution width, a standard parameter in haematology, actually a measure of deviation of the mean corpuscular volume (MCV): (Standard deviation of MCV / mean MCV) 100. (2) See .
RDW ratsStrain of dwarf hypothyroid rats isolated from Wistar-Imamichi rats. There is a missense point mutation of the thyroglobulin (Tg) gene.
RE1-silencing transcription factorA transcriptional repressor (REST, neuron-restrictive silencer factor, 1069aa) of neuronal genes in non-neuronal tissues that binds to the neuron-restrictive silencer element (NRSE) and acts in conjunction with the or the Sin3 corepressor. Reported to blocks the expression of an miRNA (miR-21) that prevents embryonic stem cells from reproducing themselves and causes them to differentiate into specific cell types. Article: http://www.molecularstation.com/science-news/2008/03/re1-silencing-transcription-factor-rest-proteins-dual-role/

reaction centreThe site in the chloroplast that receives the energy trapped by chlorophyll and accessory pigments, and initiates the electron transfer process.
reactive oxygen species
ROS Oxygen-containing radicals or reactive ions such as superoxide, singlet oxygen and hydroxyl radicals, the product of the in phagocytes and responsible for bacterial killing as well as incidental damage to surrounding tissue.
ReactomeA free online curated resource of core biological pathways and reactions developed through collaboration between Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, The European Bioinformatics Institute, and The Gene Ontology Consortium. Link: http://www.reactome.org/

reading frameOne of the three possible ways of reading a nucleotide sequence. As the genetic code is read in non-overlapping triplets (codons) there are three possible ways of translation of a sequence of nucleotides into a protein, each with a different starting point. For example, given the nucleotide sequence: AGCAGCAGC, the three reading frames are: AGC AGC AGC, GCA GCA, CAG CAG.
readthroughTranscription or translation that continues beyond the normal termination signals in DNA or mRNA respectively.
reaginReaginic antibodies; an outdated name for IgE.
real time PCR
RT-PCR A method in which the rate of accumulation of PCR products is measured in real time using a fluorescent marker. The signal increases in direct proportion to the amount of PCR product which allows, from the kinetics, an estimation of the original concentration of the target. Rather misleadingly often called RT-PCR bringing the risk of confusion with reverse-transcriptase PCR.
reannealingRenaturation of a DNA sample that has been dissociated by heating. In reannealing the two strands that recombine to form a double-stranded molecule are from the same source. Differences in the rate of reannealing led to the early recognition of repetitive sequences – which rapidly recombine (have low values on the C
0
t curve).
reaperRegulator of apoptosis (65aa) in Drosophila, acts on the effector caspase, dredd. Has no known homology with vertebrate proteins but reaper-induced apoptosis is blocked by caspase inhibitors and human inhibitor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs). See also grim and hid.
rebeccamycinWeak topoisomerase I inhibitor, structurally similar to staurosporine but without kinase-inhibitory properties.
rec proteinsProteins encoded by recombination (rec) genes and required for genomic repair and recombination in all organisms. RecA (339aa) aligns a single strand of DNA with a duplex DNA and mediates a DNA strand switch; recB, C and D are subunits of the bipolar DNA helicase that employs two single-stranded DNA motors of opposite polarity to drive translocation and unwinding of duplex DNA and thus facilitates loading of RecA protein onto ssDNA produced by its helicase/nuclease activity. This process is essential for RecBCD-mediated homologous recombination. As part of the process a loop of single stranded DNA (D-loop) is generated. Rec-8 (human homologue, 547aa) is a cohesin. Many other rec proteins are known, often suffixed by a number (e.g. rec104 from S. cerevisiae, a potential transcriptional regulator of a number of early meiotic genes (182aa)).
recapitulationThe outmoded theory that the stages of development (ontogeny) recapitulated the evolutionary stages through which an organism had passed (phylogeny).
receiver cellCells in the photosynthetic tissues of plants into which the solutes from xylem are pumped.
receptorIn general terms, a relatively large molecule, often membrane-bound, that binds to, or responds to something more mobile (the ligand), with high specificity. Examples: acetylcholine receptor, photoreceptors, nuclear receptors. In a few unusual cases both receptor and ligand are membrane bound (e.g. plexins and their ligands, semaphorins). The term is occasionally misused: Concanavalin A receptors are really ligands for a soluble receptor (lectin).
receptor activator of NFκB
RANK See osteoclast differentiation factor.
receptor downregulationA phenomenon observed in many cells: following stimulation with a ligand the number of receptors on the cell surface for that ligand diminishes because internalisation exceeds replenishment. Often used very loosely, thus destroying the utility of the term.
receptor interacting protein kinasesA serine/threonine protein kinase (RIP kinase, RIP1, RIPK1, 671aa) that plays a key role in TNFα-induced IκB kinase (IKK) activation and subsequent activation of transcription factor NFκB. The death domain (DD) of RIP interacts with the DD of
TRADD (TNFR1-associated death domain protein) in two different ways: one that subsequently recruits CRADD (apoptosis/inflammation) and another that recruits NFκB (survival/proliferation). Multiple isoforms (RIP1, 2, 3, & 4) have been described. See and RIP-like kinase ( ).
receptor interacting protein-1A name conferred on a disparate set of proteins and thus extrememely ambiguous, even when prefixed to indicate which is meant. (1) NRIP1 (nuclear receptor-interacting protein 1, RIP140, 1158aa) associates with a transcriptional activation domain of steroid receptors. (See N-CoR). Nuclear receptor coactivator 2 is glucocorticoid receptor-interacting protein 1 (GRIP1) but this is also ambiguous. (2) GRIPs (glutamate receptor-interacting proteins, e.g. GRIP1, 1128aa) are scaffold proteins for neurotransmitter receptors. (3) Other RIP1s interact specifically with the C-terminal tail of the angiotensin II type 2 receptor (angiotensin II type 2 receptor-interacting protein 1, ATIP1) or with the leucine-rich repeat Ig domain-containing Nogo receptor, or the cannabinoid receptor 1 (CRIP-1, 164aa). (4) TRIP1 is eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit 2 (325aa) or TGFβ receptor interacting protein 1 in Clonorchis sinensis (TRIP1, 327aa). TRIP1 (406aa) is the thyroid-hormone receptor associated protein 1 (TRIP1, 406aa). (5) Another RIP1 is part of the NFκB signalling network. (6) See .
receptor potentialThe transmembrane potential difference of a sensory cell. Such cells are not excitable (do not generate an action potential), but their response to stimulation is a gradual change in their .
receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase
RPTP A family of protein tyrosine phosphatases (receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatases, RPTPs, EC 3.1.3.48).
receptor tyrosine kinasesSee tyrosine kinases.
receptor-associated proteinSee low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein. See also and TRAFs.
receptor-mediated endocytosisEndocytosis of molecules by means of a specific receptor protein that normally resides in a coated pit, but may enter this structure after complex formation occurs. The structure then forms a coated vesicle that delivers its contents to the endosome whence it may enter the cytoplasm or the lysosomal compartment. Many bacterial toxins and viruses enter cells by this route.
receptors for activated C KinaseSee .
receptosomeSynonym for endosome.
recessiveAn allele or mutation that is only expressed phenotypically when it is present in the homozygous form. In the heterozygote it is obscured by dominant alleles.
recombinant DNASpliced DNA formed from two or more different sources that have been cleaved by and joined by ligases.
recombinant proteinProtein product from a gene that has been cloned and introduced into an appropriate expression system.
recombinaseEnzymes that mediate site-specific recombination in prokaryotes. See , tyrosine recombinase retroelements and flp- recombinase.
recombinationThe creation, by a process of intermolecular exchange, of chromosomes combining genetic information from different sources, typically two genomes of a given species. Site-specific, homologous, transpositional and non-homologous (illegitimate) types of recombination are known. Recombination can be intragenic, between two alleles of a gene (cistron), or intergenic where there is information exchange between non-allelic genes. See site-specific recombination and homologous recombination.
recombination noduleTransient structures (about 90 nm diameter) associated with the synaptonemal complex during pachytene. The number of nodules corresponds to the number of genetic exchanges and so it seems probable that they are the site of recombination events.
reconUnit of genetic , the smallest section of a chromosome that is capable of recombination. Until intragenic recombination was shown it was thought to represent a gene, it may be no more than a single base pair. More details: http://www.microbiologyprocedure.com/genetics/fine-structure-of-gene/modern-definition-of-gene.htm

recoverinCalcium-binding protein (cancer-associated retinopathy protein, p26, 200aa) containing 4 EF-hand motifs that inhibits rhodopsin kinase and prevents premature phosphorylation of rhodopsin until the opening of cGMP-gated ion channels causes a decrease in intracellular calcium levels, signalling completion of the light response. At one time was wrongly thought to be an activator of photoreceptor guanylate cyclase. When it binds calcium ions a conformational change causes a myristoyl group to be displaced from a binding pocket thus altering its physicochemical properties and allowing interaction with other proteins. Found in serum of patients with cancer-associated retinopathy. A member of a family of neuronal calcium sensors that includes visinin, hippocalcin, neurocalcin, S-modulin, visinin-like protein, and frequenin. Entry in signalling gateway database: http://www.signaling-gateway.org/molecule/query?afcsid=A004096

RECQ helicasesIn E. coli an ATP-dependent DNA helicase (recQ, EC3.6.4.12, 609aa) involved in mismatch repair. Five human homologues, RECQ-like helicases, are known: the RECQL2 gene is defective in Werner’s syndrome, RECQL3 gene in Bloom’s syndrome and RECQL4 in . Mutations in RECQL1 and RECQL5 are not associated with known disorders.
rectifying synapseAn electrical synapse at which current flow can only occur in one direction.
red blood cellSee erythrocyte.
red chlorophyll catabolite reductaseThe constitutively expressed chloroplast enzyme (RCCR, EC 1.3.1.80, accelerated cell death protein 2, 319aa) that degrades primary fluorescent catabolite produced by the action of pheophorbide a oxygenase on pheophorbide in the linked series of reactions involved in chlorophyll breakdown. (See chlorophyll).
red drop effectExperimental observation that the photosynthetic efficiency of monochromatic light is greatly reduced above 680 nm, even though chlorophyll absorbs well up to 700 nm. Led to the discovery of the two light reactions of photosynthesis; see photosystems I and II.
redox potentialThe reducing/oxidising power (oxidation/reduction potential) of a system measured by the potential at a hydrogen electrode.
Reed-Sternberg cellGiant histiocytic cells, a common feature of Hodgkin’s disease.
reelerAn autosomal recessive mouse mutant, with ataxia and a reeling gait. The defect is in which leads to major developmental defects in neuronal architecture in the brain.
reelinProtein product (3461aa) of mouse releer gene, an extracellular matrix serine peptidase produced by pioneer neurons and important in cortical neuronal migration. Regulates microtubule function in neurons and modulates cell adhesion by enzymic activity. It is secreted by Cajal-Retzius cells in the forebrain and by granule neurons in the cerebellum. The human homologue (3460aa) is deficient in a form of lissencephaly.
REEPReceptor expression-enhancing protein. A multi-pass membrane protein (e.g. REEP1, 201aa; REEP2, 252aa) that promotes functional expression of G-protein coupled odorant receptors on the cell surface. Mutations of REEP1 are associated with a form of spastic paraplegia (SPG31).
refractileAdjective usually used in describing granules within cells that scatter (refract) light. Not to be confused with refractory.
refractory periodMost commonly used in reference to the interval (typically 1 ms) after the passage of an action potential during which an axon is incapable of responding to another. This is caused by inactivation of the sodium channels after opening. The maximum frequency at which neurons can fire is thus limited to a few hundred Hertz. An analogous refractory period occurs in individuals of Dictyostelium discoideum, which are insensitive to extracellular cyclic AMP immediately after a pulse of cAMP has been secreted. The term can be applied to any system where a similar insensitive period follows stimulation.
Refsum’s diseaseA rare recessive lipid disorder in which there is accumulation of the branched chain fatty acid, phytanic acid, because of deficient alpha-oxidation of (14)C-phytanic acid to pristanic acid, the normal mechanism of degradation. Clinical features include retinitis pigmentosa, chronic polyneuropathy, and cerebellar signs. The adult form can be caused by mutation in either the gene encoding phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase or that encoding peroxin-7. The infantile form is caused by mutation in peroxins 1, 2 or 3.
REG
(1) A family of small secreted C-lectins implicated in regeneration, proliferation, and differentiation of the pancreas, liver, and gastrointestinal mucosa. Reg1 (lithostathine, pancreatic stone protein, REG1A, REG1B, 166aa) is encoded by the reg1 gene (regenerating gene 1) and may be associated with neuronal sprouting in brain, and with brain and pancreas regeneration. Others (REG2, 3, 4) are associated with other tissues and may be stress proteins. (2) In S. cerevisiae REG2 (338aa) is a regulatory subunit that binds to type-1 protein phosphatase. (3) Components of the 11S proteasome activator that stimulates peptidase activity and enhances the processing of antigens for presentation. REGα (PA28α, 249aa) forms a heptamer in solution with a 2−3 nm cone-shaped pore, but will preferentially form a heteromeric complex with REGβ (PA28β, 239aa) and REGγ (PA28γ, Ki antigen, 254aa). (4) See flotillins.
regenerationProcesses of repair or replacement of missing structures.
regulatory sequenceDNA sequence (control element) to which regulatory molecules such as promotors or enhancers bind, thereby altering the expression of the adjacent gene.
regulatory T-cellSee T-regulatory cells.
regulonA situation in which two or more spatially separated genes are regulated in a coordinated fashion by a common regulator molecule. The term is also applied to sets of coexpressed genes in eukayotes.
Reifenstein’s syndromePartial androgen insensitivity, a type of male pseudohermaphroditism caused by mutation in the androgen receptor gene on the X-chromosome.
Reina elementsPlant Ty3/Gypsy LTR retrotransposons of the chromovirus type.
relProtein product of the rel oncogene of avian reticuloendotheliosis virus that forms homo- or heterodimeric complexes with other rel-homology domain (RHD)-containing proteins (RELA/p65, RELB, NFκB1/p105, NFκB1/p50, REL and NFκB2/p52). The dimers bind at kappa-B sites in the DNA of their target genes and different dimer combinations act as transcriptional activators or repressors. v-rel (503aa) is a truncated and mutated form of c-rel (619aa) and transforms cells by increasing the expression of genes regulated by rel/NFκB proteins and inhibits apoptosis.
rel homology domainDomain (RHD, ~300aa) found in a family of eukaryotic transcription factors, including NFκB, Dorsal, Relish, NFAT, among others. Phosphorylation of the domain may regulate its activity. Has two immunoglobulin-like beta-barrel subdomains that grip the DNA in the major groove. See .
relaxasePart of the nucleoprotein complex that facilitates bacterial plasmid conjugation. Mobilization protein A (mobA, DNA strand transferase, 709aa) has two domains: DNA relaxase (EC 5.99.1.2, DNA nickase) and DNA primase (EC 2.7.7.-) responsible for locally unwinding DNA and cleaving one of the DNA strands. MobA forms a complex with mobB (148aa) and mobC (94aa).
relaxation timeTime taken for a system to return to the resting or ground state or a new equilibrium state following perturbation. Often used in context of receptor systems that have a after responding and then relax to a competent state. Can be used more precisely to mean the time for a system to change from its original equilibrium value to 1/e of this original value. In magnetic resonance imaging the spin-lattice and spin-spin relaxation times are important time constants.
relaxinPolypeptide hormone structurally similarity to insulin, produced as a prohormone (prorelaxin-H2, 185aa) by the corpus luteum and found in the blood of pregnant animals. Acts to cause muscle relaxation during parturition, but is a multi-functional endocrine and paracrine factor that is important in several organs, including the normal and diseased cardiovascular system. Among other things it regulates matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and thus the properties of extracellular matrix. Human relaxin has an A chain of 24aa and a B chain of 29aa linked by two disulphide bonds. Prorelaxin-H1 is restricted to the prostate. Relaxin-3 may play a role in neuropeptide signalling processes. The receptors are G-protein-coupled. See .
relaxin-like factorA hormone (insulin-like peptide 3, 131aa) produced by Leydig cells that has a role in regulating the onset of puberty in males and in control of the normal positioning of the gonads in the male fetus. It binds to the receptor.
relaxosomeComplex multi-subunit structure forming at the plasmid origin of replication during bacterial conjugation. The relaxosome introduces a site- and strand-specific nick from which the physical transfer of a single strand of DNA is initiated. Some components are encoded by the tra genes but there is one host-encoded protein, integration host factor. TraI is a DNA helicase I (EC 3.6.4.12, 1756aa), TraJ (228aa) regulates the expression of transfer genes, TraK lipoprotein (242aa) is involved in pilus formation, TraY (131aa) is required for strand-specific nicking at oriT, the transfer origin. There are other components involved in the process. See relaxase. Research article: http://www.jbc.org/content/270/47/28381.full

relay cellAn interneurone of the central nervous system, particularly one linking afferent and efferent neurones of a reflex arc.
release factor
(1) Proteins that recognise termination codons and trigger the release of the polypeptide from the ribosome-mRNA complex. In E. coli there are three release factors (peptide chain release factors 1, 2 and 3; 360aa, 365aa and 529aa). RF-1 is specific for UAG/UAA codons and RF-2 for UGA/UAA; RF-3 is not codon-specific. In eukaryotes the release factor (eukaryotic peptide chain release factor, ERF1, 437aa) forms a heterodimer with a GTP-binding subunit (ERF3B, 628aa). It is also a component of the mRNA surveillance SURF complex. Mitochondrial release factors are in the same family as the prokaryotic ones. (2) Releasing factors are a set of hormones secreted by the hypothalamus that stimulate the pituitary gland to release other hormones.
RELTOne of the TNF receptor superfamily (receptor expressed in lymphoid tissues, TNFRSF19L, 430aa). The ligand is not one of the known TNF superfamily.
renal cell carcinomaThe commonest kidney tumour, arising from proximal tubule cells.
renal-coloboma syndrome
papillorenal syndrome An autosomal dominant disorder characterized by both ocular and renal anomalies caused by heterozygous mutation in the PAX2 gene.
renaturationThe conversion of denatured protein or DNA to its native configuration. This rarely occurs for most proteins. DNA renaturation is also termed .

Renilla reniformisA soft coral, the sea pansy, source of Renilla luciferase (36 kDa monomeric protein that does not require post-translational modification for activity. Often included in vectors as a reporter gene. Therefore, like firefly luciferase, the enyzme may function as a genetic reporter immediately following translation and is often used as an internal control reporter in combination with experimental reporter vectors. Technical bulletin: http://www.promega.com/tbs/tb550/tb550.html

reninAn aspartic peptidase (angiotensinogenase, EC 3.4.23.15, 406aa) released from the walls of afferent arterioles in the kidney when blood flow is reduced, plasma sodium levels drop, or plasma volume diminishes. Catalyses splitting of angiotensin I from angiotensinogen, an α2-globulin of plasma. Renin inhibitors are used to treat hypertension. The renin/prorenin receptor (350aa) is expressed as a membrane protein in various tissues and may mediate renin-dependent cellular responses by activating ERK1 and ERK2.
rennetA preparation containing the enzyme chymosin (rennin) that cleaves κ-casein and causes milk to curdle. Used in the production of cheese; originally prepared from the mucous membrane of the stomach of calves but now generally made by engineered bacteria.
ReoviridaeA family of viruses (Class III), with a segmented double-stranded RNA genome. Each of the 8−10 segments encodes a different polypeptide and only one strand of the RNA (minus strand) acts as template for mRNA (plus strand). They have an icosahedral capsid, and the virion includes all the enzymes needed to synthesize mRNA. The viruses originally included in this group (Respiratory, Enteric, Orphan viruses) did not seem to cause any disease in humans but several pathogenic viruses are now classed as reoviruses including orbivirus, a tick-borne virus that causes Colorado tick fever, and . Virus database: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ICTVdb/ICTVdB/00.060.htm

repair nucleasesClass of enzymes involved in DNA repair. It includes endonucleases that recognize a site of damage or an incorrect base pairing and cut it out, and exonucleases that remove neighbouring nucleotides on one strand. These are then replaced by a DNA polymerase. See cernunnos, damaged DNA binding proteins, DNA ligase, DNA polymerase, excision repair, mismatch repair, NHEJ (non-homologous end-joining) and the SOS system.
repetinProtein (784aa), product of one of the fused gene family, involved in cornified cell envelope formation. Contains EF hands of the S100 type and internal tandem repeats typical of cell envelope precursor proteins.
repetitive DNANucleotide sequences in DNA that are present in the genome as numerous copies. Originally identified by the value on the C
0
t curve derived from kinetic studies of DNA renaturation. These sequences are not thought to code for polypeptides. One class of repetitive DNA, termed highly repetitive DNA, is found as short sequences, 5−100 nucleotides, repeated thousands of times in a single long stretch. It typically comprises 3−10% of the genomic DNA and is predominantly satellite DNA. Another class, which comprises 25−40% of the DNA and termed moderately repetitive DNA, usually consists of sequences about 150−300 nucleotides in length dispersed evenly throughout the genome, and includes Alu sequences and transposons.
replica methodsMethods in the preparation of specimens for transmission electron microscopy. The specimen (for example, a piece of freeze fractured tissue) is shadowed with metal and coated with carbon and then the tissue is digested away. The replica is then picked up on a grid and it is the replica that is examined in the microscope.
replica platingTechnique for testing the genetic characteristics of bacterial colonies. A dilute suspension of bacteria is first spread, in a petri dish, on agar containing a medium expected to support the growth of all bacteria, the master plate. Each bacterial cell in the suspension is expected to give rise to a colony. A sterile velvet pad, the same size as the petri dish, is then pressed onto it, picking up a sample of each colony. The bacteria can then be ‘stamped’ onto new sterile petri dishes, plates, in the identical arrangement. The media in the new plates can be made up to lack specific nutritional requirements or to contain antibiotics. Thus colonies can be identified that cannot grow without specific nutrients or that are antibiotic-resistant, and cells with mutations in particular genes can be isolated.
replicaseGeneric (and rather unhelpful) term for an enzyme that duplicates a polynucleotide sequence (either RNA or DNA). The term is more usefully restricted to the enzyme involved in the replication of certain viral RNA molecules (e.g. Replicase polyprotein 1a, 4382aa of human SARS coronavirus which is cleaved into 11 peptides).
replicationCopying, but usually the production of daughter strands of nucleic acid from the parental template.
replication factorsProteins involved in eukaryotic DNA replication. Replication factor A (replication protein A) is a heterotrimeric single-stranded DNA-binding protein (subunits p70, 616aa; p32, 270aa; p14, 121aa) that associates, together with the kinase ATM, at sites where homologous regions of DNA interact during meiotic prophase and at breaks associated with meiotic recombination after synapsis. It is essential for replication of SV40 virus. Replication factor C (activator 1) in S. cerevisiae has five-subunits (RFC1, 861aa; RFC2, 353aa; RFC3, 340aa; RFC4, 323aa; RFC5, 354aa.) and is an ATP-dependent clamp-loader important for assembling the components of the DNA replicating machinery at the replication fork.
replication foci
replication factories Small regions (~150 nm diameter) within the nucleus that form transiently during S phase and where DNA synthesis occurs. There are high local concentrations of the appropriate enzymes.
replication forkPoint at which DNA strands are separated in preparation for . Replication forks thus move along the DNA as replication proceeds.
replicative intermediateIntermediate stage(s) in the replication of a RNA virus; a copy of the original RNA strand, or of a single-strand copy of the first replicative intermediate. Essentially an amplification strategy.
repliconsTandem regions of replication in a chromosome, each about 30 μm long, derived from an origin of replication. By definition a replicon must contain an origin of replication.
replisomeComplex of proteins involved in the replication (elongation) of DNA that moves along as the new complementary strand is synthesized. On this basis a minimum content would be DNA polymerase III and a primosome, but the components are actually far more complex. An RNA-replisome has been proposed as a putative ancestor of the ribosome.
reporter geneA gene that encodes an easily assayed product (e.g. CAT) that is coupled to the upstream sequence of another gene and transfected into cells. The reporter gene can then be used to see which factors activate response elements in the upstream region of the gene of interest. A commonly used reporter is green fluorescent protein which can easily be detected microscopically.
repressor proteinA protein that binds to an operator of a gene preventing the transcription of the gene. The binding affinity of repressors for the operator may be affected by other molecules. Inducers bind to repressors and decrease their binding to the operator, while co-repressors increase the binding. The archetype of repressor proteins is the lactose repressor protein that acts on the lac operon and for which the inducers are β-galactosides such as lactose; it is a polypeptide of 360aa that is active as a tetramer. Other examples are the λ repressor protein of lambda bacteriophage that prevents the transcription of the genes required for the lytic cycle leading to lysogeny, and the cro protein, also of lambda, which represses the transcription of the λ repressor protein establishing the lytic cycle. Both of these are active as dimers and have a common structural feature, the helix-turn-helix motif, that is thought to bind to DNA with the helices fitting into adjacent major grooves.
reproductive cloningCloning of an organism, by intracytoplasmic nuclear transfer into an enucleated oocyte in vitro, with the intention that full development should occur; in the case of mammals this means that the blastocyst must successfully implant in a surrogate mother and the fetus must come to term. In most countries this is illegal for humans, although the technique has been used in sheep and a few other species. Strictly speaking the embryo is chimeric since only nuclear genes have been transferred and mitochondrial genes are derived from the egg into which the nucleus was transplanted.
repulsive guidance molecule
repellant guidance molecule A GPI-linked protein involved in neuronal differentiation, apoptosis and repulsive axon guidance. Binds to neogenin. Three RGM isoforms (RGM-A, 450aa; RGM-B, 437aa; RGM-C, hemojuvelin, 426aa), a-RGMc) exist in vertebrates. Other repellant molecules include draxin (dorsal repulsive axon guidance protein, neucrin, 349aa) and homologues of slit. See also netrin.
RERSee .
resactA peptide hormone (14aa) from the sea urchin Arbacia punctulata affecting sperm motility and metabolism. Receptor is a plasma-membrane guanylate cyclase (986aa) and resact is a chemoattractant for sperm.
resealed ghostsMembrane shells formed by lysis of erythrocytes that are resealed by adjusting the cation composition of the medium. Relatively impermeable, although more permeable than the original membrane.
reserpine
Alkaloid derived from Rauwolfia serpentina or R. vomitoria; blocks the packaging of noradrenaline into presynaptic vesicles. Useful experimental tool to determine the involvement of sympathetic innervation.
residual body
(1) Secondary lysosomes containing material that cannot be digested. (2) The surplus cytoplasm shed by spermatids during their differentiation to spermatozoa. Usually the cytoplasm from several spermatids connected by cytoplasmic bridges. (3) Surplus cytoplasm containing pigment and left over after production of merozoites during schizogony of malaria parasites.
resilinAmorphous rubber-like protein (pro-resilin, 620aa) found in insect cuticle: similar to elastin, though there is no fibre formation. One of the most elastic materials known and very important in insect flight. The first exon of the resilin gene has been expressed in a bacterial system and the cross-linked product has a resilience (recovery after deformation) greater than that of unfilled synthetic polybutadiene, a high resilience rubber.

resiniferatoxinHighly potent analogue of capsaicin from Euphorbia resinifera (flowering cactus) that is an agonist at vanilloid receptor-1. Research article: http://www.molecularpain.com/content/4/1/3

resistinAn adipokine (cysteine-rich secreted protein FIZZ3 (found in inflammatory zone 3), 108aa produced by adipocytes; seems to suppress the ability of insulin to stimulate glucose uptake into adipose cells. FIZZ2 (resistin-like protein beta, 111aa) probably has similar functions.
resolutionComplete return to normal structure and function: used, for example, of an inflammatory lesion, or of a disease. See also .
resolvaseA enzyme complex found in all living organisms that will sort out (resolve) the tangle produced by a recombination event between two DNA duplexes. They fall into two main families, the phage integrases and the site-specific . In E. coli resolvase (protein D, 268aa) is one of the ‘phage’ integrase family and cleaves at the rfsF site. Tyrosine recombinases (xerC, 298aa; xer D, 298aa) are other members of the phage integrase family and form a heterotetrameric complex that catalyzes two consecutive pairs of strand exchanges. Transposon gamma-delta resolvase (183aa) catalyzes the site-specific recombination of a transposon and is one of the site-specific recombinase resolvase family. The Holliday junction resolvase (EC 3.1.22.4, 120aa) is one of the rusA family of endonucleases that resolves Holliday junction intermediates made during homologous genetic recombination and DNA repair. They seem to be related to the Type II restriction endonucleases. http://nar.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/28/22/4540.pdf

resolving power
(1) The resolution (resolving power) of an optical system defines the closest proximity of two objects that can be seen as two distinct regions of the image. This limit depends upon the Numerical Aperture (N.A.) of the optical system, the contrast step between objects and background and the shape of the objects. The often quoted Airy limit applies only to self-luminous discs. (2) In genetics, the smallest map distance measurable by an experiment involving a certain number of classified recombinant progeny.
resolvinsFamily of endogenous 17R-hydroxy docosanoids (atypical eicosanoids analogous to lipoxins) biosynthesised from omega-3 fatty acids, especially if aspirin is present, that exert an anti-inflammatory effect. The resolvin E series derive from eicosapentaenoic acid, the D series from docosahexaenoic acid. Article: http://jem.rupress.org/content/196/8/1025.full

resonance energy transferSee fluorescence energy transfer.
resorufinPink fluorescent dye; a caged form of resorufin (non-fluorescent unless activated - released – by irradiation with UV) coupled to G-actin and microinjected has been used as a marker for microfilaments in the leading lamella of moving cells.
respirationTerm used by physiologists to describe the process of breathing and by biochemists to describe the intracellular oxidation of substrates coupled with production of ATP and oxidized coenzymes (NAD+ and FAD). This form of respiration may be anaerobic as in glycolysis, or aerobic in the case of oxidations operating via the tricarboxylic acid cycle and the electron transport chain.
respiratory burstSee metabolic burst.
respiratory burst oxidase homologuesPlant respiratory burst oxidase homologues (Rboh) are NADPH oxidases homologous to those of the human neutrophil phox system. For example, RBHO-A (EC 1.6.3.-, EC 1.11.1.-, 902aa) is a calcium-dependent enzyme that generates superoxide. Others produce reactive oxygen species important in the response to pathogens.
respiratory chainThe mitochondrial electron transport chain.
respiratory enzyme complexThe enzymes that make up the : NADH-Q reductase, succinate-Q reductase, cytochrome reductase, cytochrome C and cytochrome oxidase.
respiratory quotient
RQ Molar ratio of carbon dioxide production to oxygen consumption. Varies according to the main substances being oxidised (RQ is 1 for pure carbohydrate but ~0.7 for fats).
respiratory syncytial virusAn enveloped ssRNA virus of the Paramyxoviridae family responsible for common respiratory tract infections.
response elementsThe recognition sites of certain transcription factors, e.g. CREB, ISRE. Most are located within 1 kb of the transcriptional start site.
REST corepressorAn essential component (coREST1, 426aa) of a BHC histone deacetylase complex that represses transcription of neuron-specific genes in non-neuronal cells. The BHC complex acts by deacetylating and demethylating specific sites on histones. There are several releated corepressors (REST corepressors 2 and 3, 523aa and 495aa)
resting potentialThe electrical potential of the inside of a cell, relative to its surroundings. Almost all animal cells are negative inside; resting potentials are in the range −20 to −100 mV, −70 mV typical. Resting potentials reflect the action of the sodium pump only indirectly; they are mainly caused by the subsequent diffusion of potassium out of the cell through potassium leak channels. The resting potential is thus close to the Nernst potential for potassium. See action potential.

restriction endonucleaseSee .
restriction enzymesClass of bacterial enzymes (restriction endonucleases) that cut DNA at specific sites. In bacteria their function is to destroy foreign DNA, such as that of bacteriophages (host DNA is specifically modified and protected by methylation at these sites). Type I restriction endonucleases occur as a complex with the methylase and a polypeptide that binds to the recognition site on DNA. They are often not very specific and cut at a remote site. Type II restriction endonucleases are the classic experimental tools. They have very specific recognition and cutting sites. The recognition sites are short, 4−8 nucleotides, and are usually palindromic sequences. Because both strands have the same sequence running in opposite directions the enzymes make double-stranded breaks, which, if the site of cleavage is off-centre, generates fragments with short single-stranded tails; these can hybridize to the tails of other fragments and are called sticky ends. They are generally named according to the bacterium from which they were isolated (first letter of genus name and the first two letters of the specific name). The bacterial strain is identified next and multiple enzymes are given Roman numerals. For example the two enzymes isolated from the R strain of E. coli are designated Eco RI and Eco RII. The more commonly used restriction endonucleases are shown in 
. Type III restriction enzymes recognize two separate non-palindromic sequences that are inversely oriented and cut DNA about 20−30 base pairs after the recognition site. Restriction enzyme database: http://rebase.neb.com/rebase/rebase.html

restriction fragment length polymorphism
RFLP Technique (DNA fingerprinting) that allows familial relationships to be established by comparing the characteristic polymorphic patterns that are obtained when certain regions of genomic DNA are amplified (typically by PCR) and cut with certain restriction enzymes. In principle, an individual can be identified unambiguously by RFLP (hence the use of RFLP in forensic analysis of blood, hair or semen). Similarly, if a polymorphism can be identified close to the locus of a genetic defect, it provides a valuable marker for tracing the inheritance of the defect.
restriction fragmentsThe fragments of DNA generated by digesting DNA with a specific restriction endonuclease. Each of the fragments ends in a site recognized by that specific enzyme.
restriction mapMap of DNA showing the position of sites recognized and cut by various .
restriction nucleasesSee .

restriction pointA point, late in G1 of the cell cycle, after which the cell must, normally, proceed through to division at its standard rate. See checkpoint.
restriction siteAny site in DNA that can be cut by a .
restrictive temperatureSee permissive temperature.
restrictocinA ribonuclease (mitogillin, EC 3.1.27.-, 176aa) produced by Aspergillus restrictus and A. fumigatus. It cleaves 28S rRNA in eukaryotic ribosomes and inhibits protein synthesis. Has some antitumour activity and can cause an allergic reaction. One of the ribonuclease U2 family (aspergillins; see alpha-sarcin).
resveratrolA fungicidal phenol (trans-3,5,4′-trihydroxystilbene) with antioxidant properties found in grape skins and other plant tissues.
retA human oncogene (rearranged during transfection, ret), encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase (EC 2.7.10.1, 1114aa) the ligands for which are members of the glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family. Gain of function mutations cause hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma, loss of function mutations gene are associated with Hirschsprung’s disease. Ret mutations are also associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia.
retention signalThe sequence of amino acids on proteins that indicates that they are to be retained in the secretory processing system, for example the Golgi apparatus, and not passed on and released. Can be applied to any similar situation in which sorting of macromolecules into different compartments occurs. The carboxy-terminal tetrapeptide KDEL sequence is an important retrieval sequence for retention in the mammalian ER (HDEL in yeast).
reticular dysgenesisOne of the rarest and most severe forms of combined immunodeficiency caused by mutation in the mitochondrial adenylate kinase-2 gene. There are no granulocytes or lymphocytes in the blood and the condition leads to fatal infection very quickly.
reticular fibresFine fibres of (Type III collagen) found in extracellular matrix, particularly in lymph nodes, spleen, liver, kidneys and muscles.
reticular laminaThe lower region of extracellular matrix underlying an epithelial monolayer, separated from the basal surface of the epithelial cells by the basal lamina. The reticular lamina contains fibrillar elements (collagen, elastin etc.) and is probably secreted by fibroblasts of the underlying connective tissues. The reticular lamina and the basal lamina together form what older textbooks referred to as the basement membrane.
reticulinConstituent protein of : collagen Type III.
reticulocalbinsLow-affinity calcium-binding proteins with 6 EF-hand motifs (but only 4 functional calcium-binding sites) found in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. Include: reticulocalbin-1 (331aa), reticulocalbin-2 (calcium-binding protein ERC-55, E6-binding protein, 317aa), reticulocalbin-3 (EF-hand calcium-binding protein RLP49, 328aa). See CREC family.
reticulocyteImmature red blood cells found in the bone marrow, and in very small numbers in the circulation.
reticulocyte lysateCell lysate produced from ; used as an in vitro translation sytem.

reticuloendothelial systemThe phagocytic system of the body, including the fixed macrophages of tissues, liver and spleen. Rather old-fashioned term that is coming back into use; mononuclear phagocyte system is probably better when only phagocytes are meant.
reticulolAn antibiotic isolated from the culture broth of a strain of Streptoverticillium sp. that inhibits topoisomerase I and cAMP-phosphodiesterase.
reticulum cellsCells of the , found particularly in lymph nodes, bone marrow, and spleen. In lymph nodes they are stromal cells and probably not reticuloendothelial cells in the current sense of that term.
retinaLight-sensitive layer of the eye. In vertebrates, looking from outside, there are four major cell layers: (i) the outer neural retina, which contains neurons (ganglion cells, amacrine cells, bipolar cells) as well as blood vessels; (ii) the photoreceptor layer, a single layer of rods and cones; (iii) the pigmented retinal epithelium (PRE or RPE); (iv) the choroid, composed of connective tissue, fibroblasts, and including a well-vascularised layer, the chorio capillaris, underlying the basal lamina of the PRE. Behind the choroid is the sclera, a thick organ capsule. See , , . In molluscs (especially cephalopods such as the squid) the retina has the light-sensitive cells as the outer layer with the neural and supporting tissues below.
retinalAldehyde of (vitamin A); complexed with opsin forms . Photosensitive component of all known visual systems. Absorption of light causes retinal to shift from the 11-cis form to the all-trans configuration, and through a complex cascade of reactions excites activity in the neurons synapsed with the rod cell.
retinal coneA light-sensitive cell type of the retina, that, unlike , is differentially sensitive to particular wavelengths of light, and is important for colour vision. In the human eye there are three types of cones, sensitive respectively to long wavelengths (564−580 nm, yellow), medium-wavelengths (534−545 nm, green) and shorter wavelengths (420−440 nm, violet). Defects can lead to colour blindness. They are concentrated in the fovea and are important for high-acuity vision. The membrane infoldings of the outer segment are incompletely separated in cones.
retinal ganglion cellSee ganglion cell.
retinal pigmented epithelial cellSee pigmented retinal epithelium and .
retinal rodMajor photoreceptor cell of the vertebrate retina, columnar cells (about 40 μm long, 1 μm diameter) having three distinct regions: a region adjacent to, and synapsed with, the neural layer of the contains the nucleus and other cytoplasmic organelles, below this is the inner segment, rich in mitochondria, connected through a thin neck to the outer segment which consists of a stack of discs (membrane infoldings) that are continually replenished near the inner segment and that are shed from the distal end and phagocytosed by the pigmented epithelium. The membranes of the discs are rich in which undergoes a conformational change when it absorbs light and triggers a cascade of amplification reactions that eventually produce a depolarization. The thin linking region betwen the inner and outer segments contains a ciliary body, There are about 125 million rods in a human eye, more in the peripheral areas; they are responsible for vision at low light levels.
retinitis pigmentosaDisease caused by abnormalities of rods, cones or pigmented retinal epithelial cells, with progressive loss of vision. Many different mutations can lead to the condition including defects in an oxygen-regulated photoreceptor protein ORP1 (2156aa), the homologue of Drosophila
crumbs, the retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator (1020aa), peripherin, tubby-like protein-1, and PIM1-associated protein. Other forms are known and mutations in at least 35 genes are associated with the condition.
retino-tectal connectionThe developmental process in which nerve fibres from the developing retina are mapped on to the tectum of the brain. There seems to be a good positioning system in operation, and a variety of mechanisms probably operate, including control of the fasciculation of fibres in the optic nerve, and some specific recognition of the correct target area by the nerve growth cone.
retinoblastomaMalignant tumour of the retina, caused by mutation in gene encoding the tumour suppressor Rb, a nuclear protein (928aa) that is a negative regulator of cellular proliferation and interacts with transcription factors such as E2F to block transcription of growth-regulating genes. The Rb gene plays a role in normal development, not just that of the retina. See .
retinoblastoma-binding proteinsA diverse set of proteins that bind to the gene product. Most regulate transcription in one way or another. See 
.
retinoic acid
vitamin A The aldehyde ( ) is involved in photoreception, but retinoic acid has other roles. There are cytoplasmic retinoic acid binding proteins and retinoic acid response elements that regulate gene transcription. See also Table V1.
retinoic acid-receptor-related orphan receptorsMembers of the nuclear hormone receptor family. Retinoid-related orphan receptor-alpha (RORα, nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group F member 1, NR1F1, 556aa) regulates a number of genes involved in lipid metabolism and interacts with hypoxia-inducible factor 1. RORβ (NR1F2, 470aa) is required for normal postnatal development of rod and cone photoreceptor cells. RORγ (NR1F3, 518aa) is highly expressed in skeletal muscle; RORγ-deficient mice lack all lymph nodes and Peyer’s patches.
retraction fibresThin projections from crawling cells associated with areas where the cell body is becoming detached from the substratum, but focal adhesions persist. Usually contain a bundle of microfilaments that are under tension.
retrograde axonal transportThe transport of vesicles from the synaptic region of an axon towards the cell body: involves the interaction of microtubule-associated protein-1C (cytoplasmic dynein) with microtubules.
retrolental fibroplasiaRetinal detachment (retinopathy of prematurity) which is the consequence of overproduction of fibrous tissue linked to excessive vascularisation and scarring of the neonatal retina. Excessive oxygen is a risk factor but not the main cause.
retromerMulti-subunit complex that regulates retrieval of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network. See sorting nexins.
RetrOryzaA database of the rice LTR-retrotransposons. Long terminal repeat (LTR)-retrotransposons comprise a significant portion of the rice genome. See Oryzabase. Database: http://www.retroryza.org/

retrotransposonA transposable element that replicates by producing an RNA transcript of itself, translating this back into a DNA copy with reverse transcriptase and inserting this DNA copy at a different site on the chromosome or in a different chromosome in the same cell. Retrotransposons account for a significant part of the overall genome (around 40−45% in humans, 50% in maize and more than 90% in wheat). Retroelements (retrotransposons and retroviruses) can currently be divided into four systems or groups; LTR retrotransposons, non-LTR retrotransposons, the tyrosine recombinase (YR) retroelements and the Penelope retrotransposons. LTR-retrotransposons only differ from retroviruses in the absence of the env gene that encodes the envelope proteins necessary for cell-to-cell transfer. See also short interspersed nuclear elements, long interspersed nuclear elements (SINEs, LINEs),
mammalian-wide interspersed repeats. The Gypsy Database (GyDB) of mobile genetic elements: http://gydb.uv.es/index.php/Intro

retroviral vectorSee . Retroviral vectors are used in the genetic modification of cells as a means of introducing foreign DNA into the genome and RVs encoding histochemical markers ( ) are used in the study of cell lineages in vertebrates.
RetroviridaeA family of viruses with a single-stranded RNA genome (Class VI). The viral generates a DNA replica within the host cell. The old classification into subfamilies (oncovirinae, lentivirinae, spumavirinae) is no longer considered appropriate and the retroviridae are currently separated into the sub-family Orthoretrovirinae with six genera, alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta- and epsilon-retroviruses and lentivirus and the Spumaretrovirinae as a separate sub-family. See . Virology databases: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ICTVdb/ICTVdB/00.061.html & http://www.virology.net/Big_Virology/BVretro.html

Rett’s syndromeSevere progressive neurological disorder that mainly affects baby girls, causing dyspraxia and impaired learning and communication. The gene associated with the disorder is on the X chromosome, and encodes methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2, 486aa), which regulates transcription of various other proteins. Lethal in males. An atypical form of Rett’s syndrome can be caused by mutation in the cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) gene and a variant by mutation in the FOXG1 gene that encodes a forkhead-box transcription factor. Patient website: http://adam.about.com/encyclopedia/001536.htm

reverse antagonistSee inverse agonist.
reverse geneticsThe technique of determining a gene’s function by first sequencing it, then mutating it, and then trying to identify the nature of the change in the phenotype.
reverse passive haemagglutinationA test for the presence of multivalent antigen that uses antibodies are bonded to the surface of red blood cells; if the antigen is present there is haemagglutination. Used as a test for e.g. Hepatitis B virus in serum.
reverse transcriptaseRNA-directed DNA polymerase. Enzyme first discovered in retroviruses, that can construct double-stranded DNA molecules from the single-stranded RNA templates of their genomes. Reverse transcription now appears also to be involved in movement of certain mobile genetic elements, such as the Ty plasmid in yeast, in the replication of other viruses such as Hepatitis B, and possibly in the generation of mammalian pseudogenes. See hTERT and telomerase.
reversionReversion of a mutation occurs when a second mutation restores the function that was lost as a result of the first mutation. The second mutation causes a change in the DNA that either reverses the original alteration or compensates for it.
Revesz’s syndromeA developmental disorder characterised by characteristic bilateral exudative retinopathy. See TIN2.
Reynold’s numberA dimensionless constant that relates the inertial and viscous drag that act to hinder a body moving through fluid medium. For cells the Reynold’s number is very small; viscous drag is dominant, and inertial resistance can be neglected.
RF
(1) See . (2) Retardation factor (Rf) in chromatographic separation, is the ratio of the distance travelled by the substance of interest to the distance simultaneously travelled by the mobile phase: always less than 1.
RFC
(1) Replication Factor C. (2) Reduced-folate carrier, (solute carrier family 19 member 1, SLC19A1, 591aa) one of the major proteins mediating transmembrane folate transport.
RFLPSee .
RGDA domain found in fibronectin and related proteins such as disintegrins; recognized by integrins. In most cases, the consensus is -R-G-D-S- (arginine-glycine-aspartic acid-serine).
RGS proteinsRegulators of G-protein signalling proteins; a large and diverse family initially identified as GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) of heterotrimeric G-protein Gα-subunits, now recognised to have a broader range of activities. Characteristically have a RGS domain with a conserved stretch of 120aa responsible for direct binding to activated G-protein alpha subunits
RH factor
(1) Rhesus factor: see . (2) RH maps are radiation hybrid genetic maps produced by a technique that was originally developed for constructing long-range maps of mammalian chromosomes. It involved fragmenting chromosomes with X-irradiation and estimating the distance between genes on the basis of the probability of them being separated.
rhabdomThe photosensitive portion of each ommatidium of the compound eye of arthropods. The rhabdom is formed by a cluster of rod-like cells that are tightly packed and have, on their inner faces, densely packed microvilli (forming the rhabdomeres) orthogonally disposed with respect to the long axis of the cells composing the rhabdom and containing rhodopsin in their membranes. In the majority of insects, the rhabdomeres of the neighbouring cells are interlaced to form a fused rhabdom. The orientation of the microvilli may be important for detecting the polarity of light.
rhabdomereSee .
rhabdomyosarcomaMalignant tumour (sarcoma) derived from satellite cells of striated muscle.
RhabdoviridaeClass V viruses with a single negative strand RNA genome (11,000−15,000 nucleotides long) and an associated virus-specific RNA polymerase. The capsid is bullet shaped 45−100 nm in diameter, 100−430 nm long, with surface projections (spikes 5−10 nm long and about 3 nm in diameter). The virus is enveloped by membrane formed when it buds out of the plasma membrane of infected cells. The budded membrane contains host lipids but only viral glycoproteins that form the spikes. The group includes , vesicular stomatitis virus and a number of plant viruses. Virus database: http://www.virology.net/Big_Virology/BVRNArhabdo.html

rhamnogalacturonanPlant cell-wall polysaccharide consisting principally of rhamnose and galacturonic acid. Present as a major part of the pectin of the primary cell wall. Two types known: rhamnogalacturonan I (RG-I), the major component, which contains rhamnose, galacturonic acid, arabinose and galactose, and rhamnogalacturonan II, (RG-II), containing at least four different sugars in addition to galacturonic acid and rhamnose.
rhamnolipidSimple glycolipids, normally produced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, composed of a fatty acid tail with either one or two rhamnose rings at the carboxyl end of the fatty acid. They have biosurfactant properties that are exploited in bioremediation of oil and heavy-metal contaminated soils. Rhamnolipids also have antifungal properties and are used as agricultural fungicides. Orthologs have been found in non-infectious Burkholderia thailandensis, and pathogenic B. pseudomallei.
rhamnoseA sugar (6-deoxy L-mannose) found in plant glycosides.
rhebA ras-related GTP-binding protein (ras homologue enriched in brain, 184aa) that activates the protein kinase activity of mTOR through FK506 binding protein-8 (FKBP38). Despite the name the highest levels are found in skeletal and cardiac muscle. See Currarino’s syndrome.
rheotaxisA taxis in response to the direction of flow of a fluid.
Rhesus blood groupHuman blood group system with allelic red cell antigens C, D and E. The D antigen is the strongest. Red cells from a Rhesus-positive fetus cross the placenta and can sensitise a Rhesus-negative mother, expecially at parturition. The mother’s antibody may then, in a subsequent pregnancy, cause haemolytic disease of the newborn if the fetus is Rhesus-positive. The disease can be prevented by giving anti-D IgG during the first 72 hours after parturition to mop up D+ red cells in the maternal circulation.
rheumatic feverDisease involving inflammation of joints and damage to heart valves that follows streptococcal infection and is believed to be autoimmune, ie. antibodies to streptococcal components cross-react with host tissue antigens.
rheumatoid arthritisChronic inflammatory disease in which there is destruction of joints. Generally considered to be an autoimmune disorder in which immune complexes are formed in joints and excite an inflammatory response (complex-mediated hypersensitivity), although the antigen(s) responsible is unclear. Cell-mediated (Type IV) hypersensitivity also occurs, and macrophages accumulate. This in turn leads to the destruction of the synovial lining (see pannus). For reasons that are also unclear, the pattern of joint damage tends to be bilaterally symmetrical. The most effective therapies involve blocking the effects of TNF either with antibodies or decoy receptors.
rheumatoid factorComplex of IgG and anti-IgG formed in joints in . Serum rheumatoid factors are more usually formed from IgM antibodies directed against IgG.
rhinovirus
Picornaviridae that largely infect the upper respiratory tract. Include the common cold virus and foot-and-mouth disease virus.
RhizobiumGram-negative bacterium that fixes nitrogen in association with roots of some higher plants, notably legumes. Forms root nodules, in which it is converted to the nitrogen-fixing bacteroid form. See nif
genes.
rhizoidPortion of a cell or organism that serves as a basal anchor to the substratum.
rhizoplastStriated contractile structure attached to the basal region of the cilium in a variety of ciliates and flagellates. May regulate the flagellar beat pattern, and is sensitive to calcium concentration. Composed of a 20 kDa protein rather similar to spasmin.
RhizopodaPhylum of protozoa that move with pseudopods. Includes single celled amoebae such as Amoeba proteus.
rhizopodinCytostatic drug, a potent actin-binding macrolide, from the culture broth of the myxobacterium, Myxococcus stipitatus. Causes adherently growing L929 mouse fibroblasts and PtK2 potoroo kidney cells to produce long, narrow, branched extensions in the same way as latrunculin and apparently disrupts the actin cytoskeleton.

rhizoxinAn antimitotic drug that binds to beta-tubulin at the maytansine-binding site and blocks microtubule assembly. It is produced by Burkholderia rhizoxina, an endosymbiont of the pathogenic plant fungus, Rhizopus microsporus.
rhoSee .
rho factors
ρ factors A hexameric ring-shaped helicase (419aa) that uses the energy derived from ATP hydrolysis to dissociate RNA transcripts from the ternary elongation complex in E. coli. Mutations in rho may cause the RNA polymerase to read through from one operon to the next. Not to be confused with rho (see ).
rho kinases
ROCKs The best-characterized effectors of the small G-protein rhoA, activated by binding of rhoA. Rho-associated protein kinase 1 (ROCK-1, EC 2.7.11.1, 1354aa) is a serine/threonine kinase that phosphorylates and activates death-associated protein kinase 3 (DAPK3), which then regulates myosin light chain phosphatase. ROCK2 (1388aa) regulates the assembly of the actin cytoskeleton, promotes formation of stress fibres and focal adhesions and has a role in smooth muscle contraction.
rhodaminesA group of triphenylmethane-derived dyes are referred to as rhodamines, lissamines and so on. Many are fluorescent and are used as fluorochromes in labelling proteins and membrane probes.
Rhodnius prolixusReduviid blood-sucking bug, vector of Trypanosoma cruzi in South America. Much used by insect physiologists because the the transition from one instar to the next is triggered by a blood meal. The blood meal, which may substantially exceed the body weight of the insect, triggers complex changes in the mechanical properties of abdominal cuticle allowing the insect to swell, and activates excretory mechanisms. The haemolymph contains relatively few haemocytes, which made some of the classical parabiosis experiments much easier.
Rhodophyta
red algae Division of algae, many of which have branching filamentous forms and red coloration. The latter is due to the presence of phycoerythrin. The food reserve is floridean (starch), found outside the plastid. The walls contain sulphated galactans such as carrageenan and agar.
rhodopsinLight-sensitive pigment (visual purple, opsin-2, 348aa) formed from l linked through a Schiff’s base to opsin: rhodopsin is an integral G-protein coupled membrane protein comprising some 40% of the membrane.of the discs of . The opsins in cones are related. See also bacteriorhodopsin and opsin sub-families.
rhodopsin kinaseA G-protein dependent receptor kinase (GRK1, 563aa) that mediates adaptation of photoreceptors to light and protects against light-induced injury. Phototransduction initiated by light is quenched rapidly by RK-phosphorylation of photoexcited rhodopsin. The phosphorylated rhodopsin is then bound by cytosolic arrestin, and thereby uncoupled from the G protein transducin. Defects in GRK1 are a cause of one form of stationary night blindness. GRK4 specifically phosphorylates the activated forms of G protein-coupled receptors but only one of the four isoforms (GRK4-alpha, 578aa) can phosphorylate rhodopsin. See GRKs, .
Rhodospirillum rubrumA purple nonsulphur bacterium with a spiral shape; contains the pigment bacteriochlorophyll and under anaerobic conditions photosynthesises using organic compounds as electron donors for the reduction of carbon dioxide. The purple colour results from the presence of carotenoids, though the bacteria are often more red or brown.
rhomboid
rho Members of the peptidase S54 family involved in intramembrane proteolysis that releases active polypeptides from their membrane anchors. In Drosophila rhomboid-1 (EC 3.4.21.105, 355aa) promotes the cleavage of the membrane-anchored TGFalpha-like growth factor Spitz, allowing it to activate the Drosophila EGF receptor. See dodo. In humans some members of the family do not have peptidase activity (rhomboid family member 1, p100hRh, rhomboid 5 homolog 1, 855aa; rhomboid 5 homolog 2, rhomboid veinlet-like protein 5, 856aa) but rhomboid-related proteins do have enzymic activity (EC 3.4.21.105, rhomboid-related protein 1, RHBDL1, 438aa; RHBDL-2, 303aa; RHBDL3, 404aa). Presenilins-associated rhomboid-like protein (mitochondria intramembrane cleaving protease, PARL, 379aa) is required for the control of apoptosis during postnatal growth. Yeast rhomboid proteins are involved in processing various mitochondrial proteins such as cytochrome c peroxidase.
rhombomere
Neuromeres or segments in the hindbrain region that are of developmental significance. Shown to be lineage restriction units in that cells of adjacent rhombomeres do not mix with each other. Regulatory genes have been shown to be expressed in patterns in the developing hindbrain that relate to the neuromeric or segmentation pattern.
rhophilinA GTPase (643aa) that has sequence homology with the N terminal region of protein kinase N though possesses no catalytic activity. Has a PDZ domain at the carboxy terminus suggesting that it may act as an adaptor molecule. Rhophilin-associated tail protein 1 (Ropn1, ropporin, 212aa) is found in the sperm flagellum where it may form a complex with rhophilin. Ropn1-like protein (AKAP-associated sperm protein, 230aa) has homology with ropporin. Abstract: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8571126

rhoptryElectron-opaque dense body found in the apical complex of parasitic protozoa of the Phylum Apicomplexa.
rhotekinA protein (rhotekin-1, 563aa) that mediates signalling to activate NFκB; overexpressed in many cancer-derived cell lines. Rhotekin-2 (pleckstrin homology domain-containing family K member 1, 609aa) may have a role in lymphopoiesis.
RIASee .
ribbon synapseUltrastructurally distinct type of synapse found in a variety of sensory receptor cells such as retinal photoreceptor cells, cochlear hair cells and vestibular organ receptors, as well as in a non-sensory neuron, the retinal bipolar cell. Unlike most neurons, these cells do not use regenerative action potentials but release transmitter in response to small graded potential changes. Ribbon synapses have different exocytotic machinery from conventional synapses in containing dense bars or ribbons anchored to the presynaptic membrane covered with a layer of synaptic vesices. The ribbons have been proposed to shuttle synaptic vesicles to exocytotic sites. See and bassoon.
ribeyeAn isoform of C terminal binding protein 2 that probably acts as a scaffold for in the retina.
ribityl side chainUnivalent radical derived from ribitol found, for example, in riboflavin.
ribityllumazineA precursor (6,7-dimethyl-8-ribityllumazine) for riboflavin.
riboflavin
vitamin B2 Ribose attached to a flavin moiety that becomes part of FAD and FMN. See also Table V1.
ribonuclease
RNAse, RNAase Any enzyme that cleaves RNA. May act as endonucleases or exonucleases depending upon the type of enzyme. Generally recognize target by tertiary structure rather than sequence. Examples include RNAse 1 (ribonuclease A, EC 3.1.27.5, 156aa) a secreted pancreatic enzyme, extremely heat-stable and often used experimentally. RNAse 2 (eosinophil cationic protein, 161aa) is not secreted and is found in granules of eosinophils; it is selectively chemotactic for dendritic cells. Ribonuclease 3 (drosha, EC 3.1.26.3, 1374aa) is a double-stranded (ds) RNA-specific endoribonuclease that is involved in the initial step of microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis. Ribonuclease 4 (RNAse L, 741aa) functions in the interferon antiviral response. RNAse 5 is angiogenin. Ribonuclease 6 (ribonuclease T2, EC 3.1.27.-, 256aa) is a ubiquitous secreted form. Ribonuclease E is an RNAase involved in the formation of 5S ribosomal RNA from pre-rRNA, F is stimulated by interferons and cleaves viral and host RNAs and thus inhibits protein synthesis. Ribonuclease H1 (EC 3.1.26.4, 286aa) specifically degrades the RNA of RNA-DNA hybrids. RNAse P (EC 3.1.26.5) is a protein complex involving a RNA moiety and at least 8 protein subunits that generates mature tRNA molecules by cleaving their 5′-ends.
ribonucleic acidSee .
ribonucleoprotein
RNP A protein / RNA complex. Besides (with which RNP was originally almost synonymous), in eukaryotic cells both initial RNA transcripts in the nucleus (hnRNA) and cytoplasmic mRNAs exist as complexes with specific sets of proteins. Processing (splicing) of the former is carried out by small nuclear RNPs (snRNPs). Other examples are the signal recognition particle responsible for targeting proteins to endoplasmic reticulum and a complex involved in termination of transcription.
ribonucleotide reductaseEnzyme (EC 1.17.4.1) that catalyzes the biosynthesis of deoxyribonucleotides, the precursors necessary for DNA synthesis, from the corresponding ribonucleotides. Heterodimer of a large (RRM1, 792aa) and a small subunit (RRM2, 389aa; RRM2B, 351aa).
ribophorinsGlycoproteins of the rough endoplasmic reticulum that interact with ribosomes whilst co-translational insertion of membrane or secreted proteins is taking place. They are involved in post-translational glycosylation and are also part of the regulatory subunit of the 26S proteasome. Ribophorin-1 (dolichyl-diphosphooligosaccharide-protein glycosyltransferase subunit 1, EC 2.4.1.119, 607aa) catalyzes the transfer of a high mannose oligosaccharide to an asparagine residue as does ribophorin 2 (631aa).
riboprobeSomewhat casual term for an RNA segment used to probe for a complementary nucleotide sequence, either in the mRNA pool or in the DNA of a cell.
riboseA monosaccharide pentose of widespread occurrence in biological molecules, e.g. RNA.
ribose-binding proteinPeriplasmic binding protein of the bacterial solute-binding protein 2 family (296aa in E. coli) that interacts either with the high-affinity ribose transport system or with the methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein, MCP III (trg).
ribosomal proteinProteins present within the ribosomal subunits. In prokaryotes there are 34 proteins in the large (50S) subunit and 21 in the small (30S) subunit. In eukaryotes there are 50 in the large (60S) subunit and 33 in the small (40S) subunit) proteins. Mitochondrial ribosomes have 48 in the large (39S) subunit and 29 in the small (28S) subunit. The proteins of Archaean ribosomes resemble those of eukaryotes rather than of bacteria.
ribosomal RNA
rRNA The RNA found in ribosomes. In bacteria the small 30S ribosomal subunit contains the 16S rRNA, the large 50S subunit contains 5S and 23S rRNAs. In Archaea, the ribosomal RNA is more similar to eukaryotic rRNA; the sequence of archaeal 16S rRNA has been important in constructing the phylogentic tree. The 18S rRNA in most eukaryotes is in the small ribosomal subunit, and the large subunit contains three rRNA species (5S, 5.8S and 28S rRNAs). Mammalian cells have 2 mitochondrial (12S and 16S) rRNAs. Ribosomal RNA database: http://www.arb-silva.de/ & http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/

ribosomeA heterodimeric multi-subunit enzyme complex composed of and . Interacts with aminoacylated tRNAs, and mRNAs and translates protein coding sequences from messenger RNA. During protein elongation, the nascent protein is held at the P-site (peptidyl-tRNA complex), while aminoacyl-tRNAs bearing new aminoacids are bound at the A-site. Similar ribosomes are found in all living organisms, all composed of large and small subunits, as well as in chloroplasts and mitochondria. Differences are apparent between prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribosomes; ribosomes of Archaea resemble those of eukaryotes rather than those of bacteria.
riboswitchGenetic control elements that can be found in the 5′-untranslated region of certain messenger RNAs of prokaryotes. They bind specifically to small molecules, usually a metabolite, which causes an allosteric change in the mRNA and alters the expression of the gene. Riboswitches triggered by thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) have been shown to control operons in E. coli but several eukaryotes (Arabidopsis, Neurospora) have RNA domains that conform to the consensus sequence and structure of the bacterial TPP riboswitch class. http://rnajournal.cshlp.org/content/9/6/644.full

ribotypeA strain-specific characteristic based upon ribosomal RNA sequence polymorphisms. Ribotyping of bacterial strains, such as those in Corynebacteria, is important in clinical microbiology. Diptheria ribotype database: http://www.dipnet.org/home.php

ribozymeRNA with catalytic capacity – an enzyme made of nucleic acid not protein. Of particular interest because of the implications for self-replicating systems in the earliest stages of the evolution of (terrestrial) life.
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphateAn intermediate in the Calvin-Benson cycle of photosynthesis.
ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase
RUBISCO A multisubunit enzyme complex composed of 8 large (479aa) and 8 small (180aa), disulphide-linked (D-Ribulose 1,5-diphosphate carboxylase; EC 4.1.1.39) that is responsible for CO2 fixation in photosynthesis. Carbon dioxide is combined with ribulose diphosphate to give two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate, as part of the Calvin-Benson cycle. It is the sole CO2-fixing enzyme in C3 plants, and collaborates with PEP carboxylase in CO2 fixation in C4 plants. In the presence of oxygen the products of the reaction are one molecule of phosphoglyceric acid and one molecule of phosphoglycolic acid. The latter is the initial substrate for photorespiration and this oxygenase function occurs in C3 plants where the enzyme is not protected from ambient oxygen; in C4 plants the enzyme acts exclusively as a carboxylase since it is protected from oxygen. Also known as Fraction 1 protein, the major protein of leaves.
ribulose diphosphate carboxylase
RuDPC, RuDP carboxylase. See , the recommended name.
RICDThe Rice Indica cDNA Database, an online database for Oryza sativa L. indica subspecies, hyperlinked to the Rice Annotation Project Database (RAP-DB) and The TIGR Rice Genome Annotation Resource. Link: http://202.127.18.228/ricd/index.html

Rice Annotation Project Database
RAP-DB An annotated resource for the rice genome. Version 6.1 was released in June 2009. http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/, http://rapdb.lab.nig.ac.jp/.and
http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/

Rice yellow mottle virus
RYMV A single-stranded RNA virus (Sobemovirus) encoding four open reading frames. Probably the most damaging pathogen of rice, widespread in Africa.
RICH-1See nadrin.
ricinSee 
agglutinins.
Ricinus communis agglutininsGlycoprotein lectins isolated from seeds of the castor bean, Ricinus communis. Agglutinin I (RCA-I, 564aa) has binding specificity similar to ricin, but is much less toxic. Agglutinin-II (ricin) is an AB toxin; the A subunit (267aa) enzymically inactivates ribosomes by depurinating A4324 in the 28S rRNA fragment of the eukaryotic 60S rRNA, and is disulphide-linked to the carbohydrate-binding B subunit (262aa) specific for β-galactosyl residues. See sarcin/ricin loop.
RICKReceptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 2 (RIP2, EC 2.7.11.1, RIP-like-interacting CLARP kinase, 540aa) that activates pro-caspases 1 and 8, potentiates caspase 8-mediated apoptosis and activates NFκB. Important in the innate and adaptive immune responses.
Ricker’s syndromeSee myotonic dystrophy.
ricketsDisease (rachitis) due to deficiency of vitamin D that leads to defective ossification and softening of bones. Adj. rachitic.
RickettsiaGenus of Gram-negative bacteria responsible for a number of insect-borne diseases of man (including scrub typhus and ). Obligate intracellular parasites.
rictorThe rapamycin-insensitive companion (1708aa) of mTOR that forms a complex which modulates the phosphorylation of PKCalpha and the actin cytoskeleton and regulates cell growth signalling pathways. Rictor shares homology with pianissimo from D. discoideum and STE20p from S. pombe. See .
Rieger’s syndromeAn autosomal dominant disorder of morphogenesis in which there is abnormal development of the anterior segment of the eye. One form is caused by mutation in the paired homeobox transcription factor ptx2.
Rieske proteinIron-sulphur protein components of the cytochrome bc1 complex and cytochrome b6-f complex. The bacterial and mitochondrial bc1 complex catalyses the oxidoreduction of ubiquinol and cytochrome c, generating an electrochemical potential. In the chloroplast a component of the cytochrome b6-f complex (petC, EC 1.10.99.1, plastohydroquinone:plastocyanin oxidoreductase iron-sulphur protein, 229aa), an essential protein for photoautotrophism that confers resistance to photo-oxidative damage. The Rieske subunit acts by binding either a ubiquinol or plastoquinol anion, transferring an electron to the 2Fe-2S cluster, then releasing the electron to the cytochrome c or cytochrome f haem iron. The Rieske domain has a 2Fe-2S centre: two conserved cysteines coordinate one Fe ion while the other is coordinated by two conserved histidines.
rifamycinAntibiotic produced by Streptomyces mediterranei that acts by inhibiting prokaryotic, but not eukaryotic DNA-dependent RNA synthesis. Blocks initiation, but not elongation of transcripts. Rifampicin is a semi-synthetic variant.
RIG1
(1) Product of the retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 (RIG1, DDX58, 925aa) an RNA helicase of the DEAD/H box family responsible for the initial sensing of infection by RNA viruses. When RIG1 binds double-stranded viral RNA it forms multimers and activates NFκB and interferon regulatory factors through the adaptor MAVS. Multimer formation is blocked by LGP2. (2) Retinoic acid receptor responder protein 3 (RIG1, 164aa) may mediate some of the growth suppressive effects of retinoids.
rigorStiffening of muscle as a result of high calcium levels and ATP depletion, so that actin-myosin links are made, but not broken.
RIMs
(1) A family of proteins (rab-3-interacting molecule 1, regulating synaptic membrane exocytosis 1, rim1, 1692aa; rim2, 1411aa;) that regulate release of synaptic vesicles at synapses in the CNS during short-term plasticity. (2) Retinoblastoma-interacting myosin-like protein, RIM. (retinoblastoma-binding protein 8, 897aa) See . (3) In S. cerevisiae RIM proteins are regulators of IME2 (e.g. RIM20, regulator of IME2 protein, pH-response regulator protein palA, 661aa) cleaves the transcriptional repressor RIM101 in response to alkaline ambient pH).
RIN
(1) A MADS-box transcription factor involved in ripening of fruit. (2) RPM1-interacting proteins (E3 ubiquitin protein ligases) in Arabidopsis involved in regulating plant resistance protein (RPM1 and RPS2) -dependent hypersensitive responses. (3) In humans, Ras interaction/interference protein 1 (RIN1, ras and rab interactor 1, 783aa) that interacts with the GTP-bound form of ras proteins and prevents the association between raf1 and Ras.
RINGSee E3 ligase and .
RING finger motifA zinc finger motif (40−60aa) found in various nuclear proteins and in some receptor-associated proteins. The RING (Really Interesting New Gene) finger, or Cys3HisCys4, family of zinc binding proteins play important roles in differentiation, oncogenesis, and signal transduction.
Ringer’s solutionIsotonic salt solution used for mammalian tissues; original version (for frog tissues) has been much modified and the term is often used loosely to mean any physiological saline.
rINNsRecommended International Non-Proprietary Names for medicinal substances. British Approved Names (BANs) have been harmonised with rINNs.
RIP140Receptor-interacting protein 140 (nuclear receptor-interacting protein 1, 1158aa) a corepressor that modulates transcriptional activation by steroid receptors.
RIPA
(1) HTH-type transcriptional repressor of iron proteins A (RipA, 331aa in Corynebacterium glutamicum), an AraC-type regulator of bacterial genes under conditions of iron limitation. (2) In Dictyostelium discoideum, ras-interacting protein A (ripA, 838aa) involved in integrating chemotaxis and signal relay pathways that are essential for aggregation. (3) Radioimmuno-precipitation assay. See .
Ripk2
Receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 2.
rippling muscle diseaseA rare disorder in which mechanical stimulation of skeletal muscle causes visible ripples to move over the muscle. One form is caused by a defect in caveolin-3.
RISCsRNA-induced silencing complexes involved in : siRNAs incorporate into RISCs and provide guide functions for sequence-specific ribonucleolytic activity. Protein components of RISCs include argonaute family members, dicer, nucleases, and other factors.

ristocetinMixture of the antibiotics ristocetin A and B: isolated from actinomycete, Amycolatopsis (Nocardia) lurida. Used experimentally to induce platelet aggregation.
rit 1One of the ras-like small GTPases (ras-like without CAAX protein 1, 219aa) involved in the NGF signalling pathway.
R-loopStructure formed when RNA hybridizes to double-stranded DNA by displacing the identical DNA strand.
RLTPRA protein (RGD-, leucine-rich repeat, tropomodulin domain and proline-rich domain containing protein, 1435aa) that is expressed in most tissues. One of the CARMIL family.
RMI complexA complex that plays an important role in the processing of homologous recombination intermediates to limit DNA crossover formation in cells. The complex contains topoisomerase 3A (TOP3A) and RecQ-mediated genome instability proteins, RMI1 and RMI2. The RMI complex interacts with Bloom’s syndrome protein (BLM).
RMP pathwayA metabolic pathway (ribulose monophosphate pathway, allulose phosphate pathway) used by methylotrophic bacteria for the conversion of formaldehyde to hexose sugars amongst others. In the first stage ribulose-5-phosphate is condensed with HCHO.
RNARibonucleic acid. A linear polymer of 3′−5′-linked ribose moieties with a purine (A or G) or pyrimidine (C or U) base attached to each in the 1 position. RNA has an informational role, a structural role and an enzymic role and is thus used in a more versatile way than either DNA or proteins. Considered by many to be the earliest macromolecule of living systems. RNA is transcribed from a DNA template and may be subsequently modified to include bases such as pseudouridine, ribothymidine and hypoxanthine. See catalytic RNA, double stranded RNA, guide RNA, heterogenous nuclear RNA, masked messenger RNA, messenger RNA, microRNA, non-coding RNA, nuclear RNA, RNA editing, , , , short hairpin RNA (shRNA), small interfering RNA, small nuclear RNA, TAR, transfer RNA (tRNA), wobble hypothesis.
RNA editingA process responsible for changes in the final sequence of mRNA that are not coded in the DNA template but alter the information content. Excludes mRNA splicing and modifications to tRNA. Various kinds of editing are known, the commonest being cytidine (C) to uridine (U) substitution, though polyadenylation of mitochondrial mRNA and guanosine (G) insertion in paramyxoviruses are other examples of editing. The process involves guide RNA (gRNA) in some cases but not all. Though the commonest examples are in organelles, the process of editing does also occur in nuclear transcripts. See ADARs.
RNA helicasesA large family of highly conserved enzymes (EC 3.6.4.13) that unwind nucleic acid helices using ATP as an energy source. RNA helicases are involved in transcription, splicing and translation. Examples include ATP-dependent RNA helicase A (DEAH box protein 9, 1270aa) that unwinds double-stranded DNA and RNA in a 3′ to 5′ direction, spliceosome RNA helicase BAT1 (428aa), part of the TREX complex specifically associated with spliced mRNA, dicer, the DEAD-box helicases and .
RNA interferenceAn important mechanism of translational regulation in which mRNA is selectively degraded, following the binding of small interfering RNA (siRNA) and the formation of . It can be used experimentally to selectively delete a particular protein. See microRNA.
RNA plasmid
(1) Double-stranded RNA found in yeasts, also known as killer factors. (2) In maize there is a family of autonomously replicating single- and double-stranded RNA plasmids in mitochondria. (3) Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) can be introduced into cells as part of an RNA plasmid to silence selected genes.
RNA polymerase mediator complexSee mediator complex.
RNA polymerasesEnzymes that polymerize ribonucleotides in accordance with the information present in DNA. Prokaryotes have a single enzyme for the three RNA types that is subject to stringent regulatory mechanisms. Eukaryotes have type I that synthesizes all except the 5S component, type II that synthesizes mRNA and hnRNA and type III that synthesizes tRNA and the 5S component of rRNA.
RNA primaseSee DNA primase.
RNA primerThe short RNA sequence synthesized by DNA primase.
RNA processingModifications of primary RNA trancripts that do not alter the information content, unlike . Includes splicing, cleavage, base modification, capping and the addition of poly-A tails.
RNA recognition motif
RRM A common motif (RNA-binding domain or ribonucleoprotein domain) found in a variety of RNA binding proteins, including various hnRNP proteins, proteins implicated in regulation of alternative splicing, and protein components of snRNPs. The domain is structurally flexible although characterized by the packing of two alpha-helices on a four-stranded beta-sheet. Database entry: http://pfam.sanger.ac.uk/family?acc=PF00076

RNA splicingSee alternative splicing.
RNA thermometerAn unusual class of mRNAs that regulate their translation initiation rate with temperature.
RNA tumour virusSee .
RNAse protection assaySensitive and quantitative alternative to Northern blots for the measurement of gene expression levels. Labelled antisense cRNA is transcribed from a DNA clone in an appropriate vector, hybridized with an mRNA sample, and single stranded RNA digested away with RNAse, then run out on a gel. The amount of labelled RNA surviving is directly proportional to the amount of target mRNA present in the sample.
RNAses
RNAases See .
RNPSee .
RO-3306An inhibitor of CDK1/cyclin B1 and CDK1/cyclin A that reversibly arrests human cells at the G2/M border of the cell cycle.
Robertsonian translocationA special type of non-reciprocal translocation that can occur in the five human acrocentric chromosome pairs, 13, 14, 15, 21, and 22. The two chromosomes break at their centromeres and the long arms fuse to form a single chromosome with a single centromere. The short arms, which have non-essential genes, form a reciprocal product but this is usually lost within a few cell divisions. Originally described in grasshoppers.
Robinow’s syndromeA genetically heterogeneous developmental disorder some forms of which are caused by mutation in the ROR2 gene (neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor-2, NTRKR2) which can also cause brachydactyly type B. NTRKR2 is involved in the early formation of chondrocytes.
Robinow-Sorauf syndromeA phenotypic variant of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome caused by mutation in twist.
roboReceptor (roundabout), for slit. There are multiple roundabout homologues expressed in different tissues (e.g. roundabout homolog 1, 1651aa).
RockSee .
Rocky Mountain spotted feverAcute infectious tick-borne rickettsial disease caused by Rickettsia rickettsii.
rod cellSee .
rod outer segmentSee .
rodent ulcerSee basal cell carcinoma.
rolling circle mechanismA mechanism of DNA replication in many viral DNAs, in bacterial F factors during mating, and of certain DNAs in gene amplification in eukaryotes. DNA synthesis starts with a cut in the+strand at the replication origin, the 5′ end rolls out and replication starts at the 3′ side of the cut around the intact circular DNA strand. Replication of the 5′ end (tail) takes place by the formation of Okazaki fragments.
rolling pebbles
Drosophila proteins, one isoform, Rols7 (1900aa), is essential for myoblast fusion and overlaps with alpha-actinin and the N-terminus of D-titin/kettin/zormin in the Z-line of the sarcomeres.
Romanovsky-type stainComposite histological stains including methylene blue, Azure A or B and eosin, sometimes with other stains. Often used to stain blood films and allow differentiation of the various leucocyte classes. Examples are Giemsa, Wright’s, and Leishman’s stain.
ROMKAn inwardly-rectifying ATP-dependent potassium channel (renal outer medullary potassium channel, Kir1.1, KCNJ1, 391aa) that transports potassium out of cells in the kidney. Mutations lead to a form of Bartter’s syndrome.
ronA receptor tyrosine kinase (recepteur d’origine nantaise, CD136) for macrophage stimulating protein, a member of the receptor family that includes the proto-oncogene met and the avian oncogene sea. It is a trans-membrane heterodimer (one alpha- and one beta-chain disulphide-linked and derived from a 1400aa precursor).
root capTissue found at the apex of roots, overlying the root apical meristem and protecting it from friction as the root grows through the soil. The outer cells slough off as the root penetrates the soil. Secretes a polysaccharide mucilage as a lubricant.
root hair cellRoot epidermal cell, part of which projects from the root surface as a thin tube, thus increasing the root surface area and promoting absorption of water and ions. It provides a mechanism for entry of a symbiotic bacterium that causes the tip of the hair to wrap around it, into a shepherd’s crook configuration.
root noduleGlobular structure formed on the roots of certain plants, notably legumes and alder, by symbiotic association between the plant and a nitrogen-fixing microorganism (Rhizobium in the case of legumes and Frankia in the case of alder and a variety of other plants).
rootlet systemMicrotubules associated with the base of the flagellum in ciliates and flagellates. Also associated with this region is the .
ros
(1) An oncogene, ros, identified in bird sarcoma but highly-expressed in a variety of tumour cell lines, encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase that has high homology with the Drosophila
sevenless protein. (2) Reactive oxygen species (ROS); see metabolic burst. (3) In Agrobacterium transcriptional regulator Ros is a prokaryotic zinc finger protein that regulates the plant ipt
oncogene.
roscovitineA purine derivative that is a potent and selective inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinases.
Rosetta Stone methodA method in bioinformatics used to detect functional linkage between two proteins based on the principle that if two proteins A and B are found as separate sequences in some species but as a fused protein with both A and B regions in others then it is probable that the proteins are functionally associated. For example yeast genes Pur2 and Pur3 encode enzymes in the purine synthesis pathway: in C. elegans the single Ade 5,7,8 protein has sequences highly homologous with both Pur2 and Pur3. Knowing that both are found in a single protein makes it very probable that they are involved in a linked function. See phylogenetic profile, gene neighbour method.
rotamaseProkaryotic peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase, homologue of immunophilins but not inhibited by cyclosporin. Located in the periplasm. E. coli rotamase surA (EC 5.2.1.8, survival protein A, 428aa) is a chaperone involved in the correct folding and assembly of outer membrane proteins, In Arabidopsis rotamase CYP20-3 (peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase, 260aa) accelerates the folding of proteins in chloroplasts.
rotamerA rotational isomer – conformationally different by rotation at a single bond.
rotatinA protein (2226aa) involved in the genetic cascade that governs left-right specification and required for correct asymmetric expression of nodal, lefty and PITX2.
RotavirusGenus of the Reoviridae having a double-layered capsid and 11 double stranded RNA molecules in the genome. They have a wheel-like appearance in the electron microscope, and cause acute diarrhoeal disease in their mammalian and avian hosts. A web-based tool for rotavirus genotype differentiation: http://rotac.regatools.be

rotenoneAn inhibitor of the electron transport chain that blocks transfer of reducing equivalents from NADH dehydrogenase to coenzyme Q. A very potent poison for fish and for insects.
Rothmund-Thomson syndromeA rare autosomal recessive dermatosis associated with multiple developmental defects, caused in some cases by mutation in the RECQ-like helicase, RECQL4.
RotiferaSmall, unsegmented, pseudocoelomate animals (wheel animalcules) of the phylum Aschelminthes. Found in many freshwater environments and in moist soil, where they inhabit the thin films of water around soil particles. Move using cilia which may cause them to rotate, hence their name.
rottlerinA compound originally thought to be a selective protein kinase C delta (PKCδ) inhibitor but selectivity is poor and it is also an uncoupler of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
rough endoplasmic reticulum
RER Membrane system of eukaryotes that forms sheets and tubules. Contains the receptor for the signal receptor particle and binds ribosomes engaged in translating mRNA for secreted proteins and the majority of transmembrane proteins. Also a site of membrane lipid synthesis. The membrane is very similar to the nuclear outer membrane. The lumen contains a number of proteins that possess the C-terminal signal KDEL.
rough microsomeSmall vesicles obtained by sonicating cells and that are derived from the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Have bound ribosomes and can be used to study protein synthesis.
rough strainBacterial strains that have altered outer cell wall carbohydrate chains causing colonies on agar to change their appearance from smooth to dull. In Streptococci the smooth strains are virulent whereas the rough strains are not. This is partly because the rough strains are much more readily phagocytosed.
rouleauxCylindrical masses of aggregated red blood cells. Horse blood will spontaneously form rouleaux, in other species it can be induced by reducing the repulsion forces between erythrocytes, for example by adding dextran of appropriate molecular weight.
Rous sarcoma virus
RSV The virus responsible for the classic first cell-free transmission of a solid tumour, the chicken sarcoma reported by Rous in 1911. An avian C-type oncorna virus, original source of the src
gene.
royalisinInsect defensin found in honeybee royal jelly.
R plasmidA conjugative plasmid (R factor; drug resistance factor) that confers resistance to one or more antibiotics or other poisonous compounds in a bacterium. Conjugation permits rapid spread through a population and R plasmids are a major problem in clinical medicine. For example, R100, a 94.3 kbp plasmid able to transfer between enteric bacteria, encodes resistance to sulphonamides, streptomycin, spectinomycin, fusidic acid, chloramphenicol, tetracycline and mercury.
RPMI 1640Culture medium developed at Roswell Park Memorial Institute that utilizes a bicarbonate buffering system. Widely used for the culture of human normal and neoplastic leukocytes and when properly supplemented, will support growth of many types of cultured cells, including fresh PHA-stimulated human lymphocytes.
RPOTsA small family of nuclear-encoded T3/T7 phage-type DNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RPOTs, EC 2.7.7.6) responsible for transcription of mitochondrial and chloroplast genes in Arabidopsis. At least two nuclear-encoded RPOTs (RPOTm and RPOTmp) are located in mitochondria. RPOTm is important for normal pollen tube growth, female gametogenesis and embryo development. Abstract: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20231244

RQSee .
RRMSee .
rRNASee .
RSC complexA chromatin-remodelling complex, related to the SWI/SNF complex, binds nucleosomes and naked DNA with comparable affinities. The RSC complex of S. cerevisiae is closely related to the SWI/SNF complex and they share conserved components. The RSC proteins Sth1, Rsc8/Swh3, Sfh1 and Rsc6 are homologues of the SWI/SNF proteins Swi2/Snf2, Swi3, Snf5 and Swp73 respectively.
RS domainSee SR proteins.
R-spondinSee spondins

RSVSee .
RTEA region of an RNA molecule (RNA transport element) that is found in retrotransposons. RTE-directed mRNA export is mediated by a unknown cellular factor that act independently of the CRM1 nuclear export receptor, and is conserved among vertebrates.
RTFA plasmid that carries antibiotic resistance factors. There are two parts, one the RTF (resistance transfer factor) carrying genes for replication and transmission of the plasmid and the second consisting of one or more sequentially linked R determinants (resistance determinants).
RT-PCRA common form of PCR (reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; reverse transcription PCR) in which the starting template is RNA, so an initial reverse transcriptase step is required to make a DNA template. Although some thermostable polymerases have appreciable reverse transcriptase activity it is more common to perform an explicit reverse transcription, inactivate the reverse transcriptase or purify the product, and proceed to a separate conventional PCR. Abbreviation ambiguous because also used sloppily for .
RTX toxinsA group of related cytolysins and cytotoxins produced by Gram-negative bacteria including E. coli, Proteus vulgaris (haemolysin), Pasteurella haemolytica (leukotoxin) and Bordetella pertussis (adenylate cyclase-haemolysin). Characteristically contain a repeat domain (hence the designation, repeats in toxins) with glycine and aspartate-rich motifs repeated within the domain. All are produced in inactive pro-form that must be post-translationally modified to generate an active toxin and are calcium-dependent pore-forming toxins. See E. coli
haemolysin. Vibrio cholerae RTX toxin causes the depolymerization of actin stress fibers, through the unique mechanism of covalent actin cross-linking. Article: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC314022/

R-type channelsA class of neuronal voltage-sensitive calcium channels of the ‘high-voltage activated’ (HVA) group that are blocked by nickel, and partially by omega-agatoxin-IIIA but are unaffected by dihydropyridines, phenylalkylamines and conotoxins. The alpha subunit is alpha-1E (2313aa), the beta and alpha-2/delta subunits regulate the activity. Thought to carry much of the current, stimulated by glutamate release in response to ischaemia, that induces neuronal death.
rubidium
Rb One of the alkali earth metals, used to substitute for potassium in some ion flux experiments.
Rubinstein-Taybi syndromeA syndrome of mental retardation and morphological abnormalities that can be caused by mutation in the gene encoding CREB-binding protein or in the EP300 gene (see p300).
RUBISCOSee .
rubpSee .
RUDP carboxylaseSee .
Ruffini’s corpusclesOvoid encapsulated sensory nerve ending in subcutaneous tissue. Probably mechanosensors.
rufflesProjections at the leading edge of a crawling cell. In time lapse films the active edge appears to ruffle. The protrusions are apparently supported by a microfilament meshwork, and can move centripetally over the dorsal surface of a cell in culture.
rugaeWrinkles. Adj. rugose, or if the wrinkles are relatively small, rugulose.
runtA protein (510aa) that regulates the expression of pair-rule genes in Drosophila. The runt domain is found in a range of transcription factors such as .
RunxA family of transcription factors containing a domain. Chromosomal aberrations involving Runx1 (runt-related transcription factor-1, 453aa) are associated with a variety of disorder such as acute myelogenous leukaemia and some platelet disorders. Runx2 (521aa) is a global regulator of osteoblast differentiation, expressed several days before osteoblast genes in bone anlage and is inhibited by twist. Runx3 (acute myeloid leukemia 2 protein, oncogene AML-2 product, 415aa) binds to promoters of lck, IL-3 and GM-CSF and enhancers of the T-cell receptor genes.
Russell-Silver syndromeA growth retardation disorder (Silver-Russell dwarfism ) caused by epigenetic changes of DNA hypomethylation at the telomeric imprinting control region (ICR1) on chromosome 11p15, involving the H19 and IGF2 genes.
rutabaga
Drosophila memory mutant; gene codes for calcium/calmodulin-responsive adenylyl cyclase (2248aa); net result is elevated cAMP levels and a comparable behavioural defect to dunce.
ruthenium redA stain used in electron microscopy for acid mucopolysaccharides on cell surfaces. Also binds tightly to tubulin dimers and the .
rutinA phenolic compound produced as a defensive secondary metabolite by plants; it has generalized detrimental effects on herbivores and pathogens.
RXL motif
Cy motif A hydrophobic region on some cyclin substrates that enhances the binding interaction with a hydrophobic region on the cyclin (although is neither necessary nor sufficient).
ryanodineDrug that blocks the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle. Ryanodine-binding proteins have also been found in the CNS. The water-soluble plant extract ryania from the powdered stem of the tropical shrub Ryania speciosa has been used as an insecticide. The extract contains several structurally related ryanoids including ryanodine. See .
ryanodine receptor
RyR Large transmembrane proteins that form tetrameric Ca2+ channels in association with 4 calstabin molecules which release calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol during muscle contraction. They are stimulated to transport Ca2+ into the cytosol by recognizing Ca2+ on the cytosolic side of the SR (calcium-induced calcium release) a positive feedback that leads to a rapid response. There are tissue-specific isoforms (skeletal muscle (RyR1, 5032aa) in skeletal muscle, RyR2 (4965aa) in cardiac muscle and RyR3 (4872aa) in brain. Show sequence similarity with InsP3-gated calcium channels of the endoplasmic reticulum but are pharmacologically distinct. RyR1 mutations are associated with malignant hyperthermia.
rykIn atypical receptor protein tyrosine kinase (604aa) that is a coreceptor along with Frizzled for Wnt ligands and binds to dishevelled, through which it activates the canonical Wnt pathway.