Breast Cancer Res TreatBreast Cancer Res. Treat3814phenaturepg8111104Breast Cancer Research and Treatment0167-68061573-7217pmc-is-collection-domainyespmc-collection-titleSpringer Nature - PMC COVID-19 CollectionPMC7104560PMC7104560.1710456071045601637492210.1007/s10549-005-1234-612341ArticleAbstract
200594Suppl 1354964S1S301300320203103202021032026© Springer 2005This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.pmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementnopmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyesissue-copyright-statement© Springer 2005

## ML1

## Update on HER-2 directed therapy.

## Slamon D.
Data Not Provided

## P1

## Treatment guidelines for systemic adjuvant therapy of breast
cancer: strengths and weaknesses

## Piccart-Gebhart MJ. Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels,
Belgium
The rapidly expanding knowledge base generated by an increasingly
more efficient clinical trials process reinforces the need for
periodic “clinical practice guidelines”, which are an important tool
to facilitate evidence-based research. These guidelines are prepared
by experts whose delicate task is to digest the evidence provided by
the clinical trials – which may indicate a weak or a strong average
treatment effect for a patient
population – and to translate this evidence into
implications for individual patient
care.
Guidelines are thought to enhance the quality of care by reducing
under-treatment, over-treatment and wrong treatment. At least one
study has shown an adverse impact on overall mortality if treatment
guidelines are not followed (Hebert-Croteau N et al., JCO 2004; 22:
3685–93). Guidelines that have “authority” in the adjuvant treatment
of breast cancer are the NIH and NCCN guidelines (in the US mainly)
and those developed in St. Gallen. In addition, many countries develop
their own national guidelines, which are more likely to take into
account cultural and socio-economic factors.
The recently updated St. Gallen Guidelines will be the main focus
of this lecture. They will be compared to the NCCN Guidelines, and
adjuvant systemic treatment options will be discussed from the
perspective of the author’s own biases.
As the result of a major shift in thinking, risk of relapse is no
longer the major determinant in the new St. Gallen algorithm for
clinical decision making: it comes second after determining a
patient’s “endocrine-responsiveness”.
The rationale for this paradigm shift is at least three-fold: 1)
there is growing evidence of much larger benefits from chemotherapy
(CT) in endocrine non-responsive disease; 2) substantial additional
progress has been made lately in adjuvant endocrine therapy with the
use of aromatase inhibitors, reducing the magnitude of additional
benefit brought by CT in endocrine-responsive disease; and 3)
gene-expression profiling studies nicely show that the estrogen
receptor status is the major discriminator of expression subtypes and
are likely to improve prediction of response to treatment in the near
future.
The St.Gallen risk classification has also undergone fine-tuning:
node positive disease is no longer synonymous with “high risk”, with
the 1–3 positive node group joining the intermediate risk category in
case of a negative HER-2 status. Positive HER-2 status, in contrast,
is sufficient to upgrade a node negative patient to the intermediate
risk category.
The threshold to recommend adjuvant chemotherapy is lowest in the
non-endocrine responsive group and highest in the endocrine responsive
category.
The author will “jump in the water” and present slightly modified
algorithms for the specific use of “stronger” CT regimens and/or
aromatase inhibitors. An algorithm for trastuzumab prescription alone
or in combination with CT will also be proposed.

## P2

## Emerging ethical issues in cancer genetic testing.

## Offit K. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY
During the decade following the discovery of genes associated with
predisposition to common adult cancers, genetic testing has become
part of the clinical practice of preventive oncology. At the same
time, ethical and legal issues have emerged as challenges to the
responsible translation of these advances to the practice of molecular
medicine. Among these challenges include: 1) conflicting directives
regarding the physician’s “duty to warn” relatives of inherited
genetic risk; 2) implications of genetic testing on reproductive
choices; 3) concerns regarding testing of children; and 4) concerns
regarding social stigmatization and possible discrimination based on
results of genetic testing. Each of these issues will be examined with
special emphasis on the relationship to breast cancer genetic testing.
It will be concluded that the potential benefits of genetic testing
for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer outweigh the documented harms
and liabilities, however, significant and important ethical issues
remain. Further discussion of these issues is required if scientific
advances in cancer genetics are to be most effectively translated to
the care of breast cancer patients and their families.

## P3

## In situ proteomics in cancer tissues using mass
spectrometry.

## Caprioli RM. Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
A detailed understanding of protein expression in breast cancer
will require the use of new tools and methodologies with which to
probe molecular changes underlying this disease. One new approach
utilizes Imaging Mass Spectrometry and brings new and extraordinarily
powerful capabilities to the laboratory in allowing either direct
molecular profiling or molecular imaging of a tumor tissue sample. MS
offers a unique high-accuracy molecular specificity for such in situ
that is essential to the discovery of molecular events in these
tissues and also the spatial distribution of peptides and proteins
within the section. Applications range from lowresolution profiling
experiments where typically 5–10 spots on the tissues are analyzed to
high resolution images where many thousands of spots, or pixels, are
analyzed in an ordered array. Each spot on the sample irradiated by
the laser is approximately 30–50 microns in diameter and typically
covers the m/z range 1000–100,000. Individual m/z values from each
mass spectrum in the data array can then be plotted to produce
selected molecular images. Sections obtained from any tissue type can
be imaged to locate tissue specific peptides and proteins in X, Y
coordinates along with relative intensity. Tumors present in breast as
well as lung, brain, colon, and other organs have been profiled and
imaged, comparing new proteins differentially expressed in the various
tumor grades and in the corresponding normal tissue. Major differences
in protein expression have been found in tumor subtypes. This will be
illustrated with studies of breast tumor biopsies and also those for
human glioblastomas. In the latter, MS patterns have also been
correlated with patient outcomes. Laser capture microdissection has
been employed to isolate individual types of cells from heterogeneous
cell populations in tissues and these isolated cells profiled for
proteins by MALDI MS. Imaging MS has also been applied to drug
targeting and metabolic studies with analysis of specific tissues
after systemic drug administration. Whole animal sagittal sections
have been imaged to measure molecular changes in proteins in multiple
organs and correlating this with drug concentrations in these same
organs.

## P4

## Identification and testing of a gene expression signature for
invasion and metastasis in mammary tumors.

## Condeelis JS. Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
NY
Cell motility has been implicated in the spread of cancer cells and
is an essential step in metastasis. Chemotaxis to blood vessels is
involved in the escape of cancer cells from primary mammary tumors.
The recent convergence of technologies for expression profiling and
intravital imaging has revealed the identities of the genes involved
in the survival, motility and chemotaxis of cancer cells inside living
tumors, the invasion signature. The invasion signature indicates that
the invasive cancer cells are a population that is neither
proliferating nor apoptotic but highly chemotactic. Of particular
relevance to the chemotactic behavior of invasive cancer cells is the
finding that the genes coding for pathways leading to the minimum
motility machine, i.e., the cofilin, capping protein and Arp2/3
pathways, that regulate -actin polymerization at the leading edge, and
the directionality of cell protrusion, are coordinately up-regulated.
Key genes in the invasion signature have been studied for their
ability to alter metastatic outcome and these results confirm the
importance of the invasion signature in predicting metastasis. The
invasion signature predicts that invasive tumor cells, upon escaping
the primary tumor, are non-dividing and resistant to chemotherapy,
predictions that have been confirmed in vitro. Finally, the invasion
signature provides several new target opportunities for preventing
metastasis from otherwise silent metastatic tumors.

## P5

## Tomosynthesis: a new tool for breast cancer detection.

## Rafferty EA, Kopans DB, Wu T, Moore RH. Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA
Mammography is the only imaging test to date that has been shown to
decrease mortality from breast cancer, however mammography is an
imperfect tool; as many as 20% of women presenting with a breast
cancer will have had a negative mammogram within the year. A major
factor contributing to this limitation of mammography is the
“structured noise” that is created by the overlap of normal breast
structures which are superimposed on each other in the acquisition of
a two-dimensional mammographic projection. These overlapping
structures and the resultant “structured noise” can obscure a lesion,
rendering it mammographically occult, an effect which becomes more
pronounced as the breast density increases. Breast tomosynthesis is an
imaging technique developed on a conventional digital mammography
platform. The moving x-ray tube acquires angled images of the breast
at radiation doses comparable to conventional mammography and the
images are synthesized to display a threedimensional mammographic
study of the breast.
The principle advantage of breast tomosynthesis over conventional
mammography is the elimination of structured noise. Through the
removal of structured noise, tomosynthesis allows for greater
visibility of suspicious mammographic lesions. Pilot studies confirm
equal or superior visualization of masses and architectural distortion
in 89% of cases and equal or superior visualization of malignant
calcifications in 88% of cases. Conventional two-view mammography also
has a significant false positive rate; as many as 25% of women
recalled from screening mammography are ultimately shown to have no
abnormality at all. This situation results from overlapping structures
(“structured noise”) mimicking abnormality where none exists. Our
initial work suggests that approximately 80% of these callbacks can be
avoided by screening with tomosynthesis. Additionally, through the
removal of structured noise, marginal analysis of breast lesions is
facilitated. It is principally through assessment of a lesion’s
margins that radiologists assign probability of malignancy.
Tomosynthesis allows lesions to be visualized in isolation from
surrounding structures thus enabling more accurate marginal analysis
and consequently more accurate prediction of the benign or malignant
nature of a lesion. Furthermore, the acquisition of the data as a
three dimensional volume also permits precise lesion localization
within the breast; knowledge critical for intervention. One of the
distinct advantages offered by tomosynthesis is that it extends the
capabilities of conventional mammography, an imaging modality which is
affordable, available, well-studied and wellunderstood. The
simultaneous increase in the cancer detection rate coupled with a
decrease in the callback rate (simultaneously increasing sensitivity
and specificity) at a radiation exposure comparable to conventional
digital mammography represents a clear advance in breast cancer
screening.

## MS1-1

## New carbon nanostructures for imaging and therapy of breast
cancer.

## Wilson LJ. Rice University, Houston, TX,
Paramagnetic gadolinium(Gd3+)-containing
carbon nanostructures derived from fullerenes
(C60) and single-walled carbon nanotubes are
being pursued as a new paradigm in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
contrast agent (CA) design. These new materials demonstrate dramatic
fundamental advantages over current clinical MRI CAs
(Gd3+ chelate compounds) by offering the
potential for early-stage detection and therapy of breast cancer and
other malignancies. Our recent work with the derivatized
Gd3+@C60- based
nanomaterials,
Gd3+@C60[C(COOH)2]10
and Gd3+@C60(OH)x, have shown them to exhibit exceptionally large
proton relaxivities approaching
100 mM−1 s−1
or approximately 20x larger than current clinical agents. Water-proton
relaxivities have been measured in aqueous solution at variable
temperatures (278–355 K) and as a function of magnetic field
(5×104−9.4 T; NMRD profiles) to investigate
the proton relaxation mechanism of these unusual nanoscale
materials.1 The proton relaxivities also
display a remarkable pH-dependency, increasing with decreasing pH (pH:
3–12). Water-soluble fullerene materials, such as these
Gd3+@C60- derived
CAs, readily cross cell membranes, suggesting an application for the
gadofullerenes as the first intracellular, as well as pHresponsive,
MRI CAs. Most recently, we have also prepared the first carbon
nanotube-based MRI CAs.2 These CAs are
derived from ultra-short (20–50 nm) carbon nanotubes (US-tubes) which
have been internally loaded with superparamagnetic clusters of
Gd3+ ions to yield
Gd3+
n @US-tube species with relaxivities 50–100x
greater than current clinical agents. These new magnetic
nanostructures are especially exciting since they offer the potential
for targeted, MRI-guided cancer therapy by hyperthermia.
References
1) E. Toth, et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 799–805. 2) B.
Sitharaman, et al., Chem. Commun. 2005, 3915–2917.

## MS1-2

## Gold nanoshells as a new treatment strategy for breast
Cancer.

## West J.
Data Not Provided

## MS1-3

## Nanotechnology in terms of biomedical applications in cancer and
opportunities for funding.

## Ferrari M.
Data Not Provided

## MS2-1

## Detection of circulating breast cancer cells: are these the cells
that really matter?

## Hayes D.
Data Not Provided

## MS2-2

## Identification and testing of a gene expression signature for
invasion and metastasis in mammary tumors.

## Condeelis JS. Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
NY
Cell motility has been implicated in the spread of cancer cells and
is an essential step in metastasis. Chemotaxis to blood vessels is
involved in the escape of cancer cells from primary mammary tumors.
The recent convergence of technologies for expression profiling and
intravital imaging has revealed the identities of the genes involved
in the survival, motility and chemotaxis of cancer cells inside living
tumors, the invasion signature. The invasion signature indicates that
the invasive cancer cells are a population that is neither
proliferating nor apoptotic but highly chemotactic. Of particular
relevance to the chemotactic behavior of invasive cancer cells is the
finding that the genes coding for pathways leading to the minimum
motility machine, i.e., the cofilin, capping protein and Arp2/3
pathways, that regulate -actin polymerization at the leading edge, and
the directionality of cell protrusion, are coordinately up-regulated.
Key genes in the invasion signature have been studied for their
ability to alter metastatic outcome and these results confirm the
importance of the invasion signature in predicting metastasis. The
invasion signature predicts that invasive tumor cells, upon escaping
the primary tumor, are non-dividing and resistant to chemotherapy,
predictions that have been confirmed in vitro. Finally, the invasion
signature provides several new target opportunities for preventing
metastasis from otherwise silent metastatic tumors.

## MS2-3

## Breast cancer metastasis genes and functions.

## Massague J. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY
Reasoning that each organ site places different demands on
circulating breast cancer cells for the development of metastatic
lesions, we sought to identify genes whose expression in breast cancer
confers organ-specific metastatic functions. The bone and the lung are
frequent sites of breast cancer metastasis, and metastases at these
sites differ in terms of their evolution, treatment, morbidity and
mortality. By means of in vivo selection in the mouse, aided by
bioluminescence technology, we isolated from a single patient breast
cancer cells that are highly metastatic either to the bone or the
lung. Using transcriptomic analysis, we identified gene sets whose
expression is closely correlated with these organ-specific metastatic
activities. Most of these genes encode extracellular proteins and many
are of previously unknown relevance to cancer metastasis. By
overexpression of these candidate metastasis genes in poorly
metastatic cells, as well as by RNAi-mediated knockdown in highly
metastatic cells, we functionally verified their ability to mediate
breast cancer metastasis either to the bone or the lung. Clustering
analysis of transcriptomic datasets from a cohort of primary tumors
obtained from patients at MSKCC, we demonstrated that a subset of
these metastasis genes is frequently expressed in primary tumors with
high risk of relapsing to the lung as the principal site of
metastasis. The lung met gene-expression signature as well as a
18-gene subset of this signature can predict risk of lung metastasis
better than other markers in use (estrogen receptor, HER2, basal cell
markers, poor prognosis signature). Evidence of clinical relevance was
also obtained for the bone metastasis gene set. Thus, these sets of
genes appear to mark, mediate and predict the propensity of breast
tumors to metastasize selectively to lung or bone. Some of these genes
serve metastagenicity functions whereas others confer metastatic
virulence. The ability to diminish the rate of metastasis by
RNAimediated depletion of some of these genes, including EREG, MMP1,
MMP2, and COX2, shows their potential as targets of combined
anti-metastasis therapy. We are also defining the role of the TGFb/
Smad pathway in the activation of metastasis genes. These findings
shed new light into the biology of cancer metastasis and its clinical
implications.

## MS3-1

## Developmental and therapeutic implications of molecular profiles of
ER-positive and ER-negative breast cancers.

## Perou CM. University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,
NC
Many studies have shown that breast cancer is not a single disease,
but rather, several diseases. Gene expression profiling of Invasive
Breast Carcinomas (IBC) has shown that there are at least 4 Intrinsic
subtypes (Luminal A, Luminal B, Basal-like, and HER2+/ ER−). The
Luminal A and B subtypes are ER+, and the Basal-like and HER2+/ER−
subtypes are ER-negative and PR-negative. These subtypes were
identified using IBC, and thus, two questions remain: First, can these
subtypes be identified in early breast lesions? Second, what are the
cellular origins of each subtype? We evaluated the gene expression
profiles of a set of 25 Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) samples and
found that Luminal/ER+, HER2+/ER− and Basal-like DCIS lesions exist;
thus, the Intrinsic subtypes are present in the DCIS stage. Additional
studies are underway to determine if within a single sample,
Basal-like and Luminal/ER+ DCIS lesions co-exist, and if ER+ Atypical
Ductal Hyperplasias might co-exist with Basal-like or HER2+/ER− DCIS
lesions. Clues to the cellular origins of the subtypes can be seen in
the patterns that define these groups, which categorize the tumors
into those with Luminal/Alveolar features (Luminal A, Luminal B and
HER2+/ER−) and those with Basal/Myoepithelial features (Basal-like).
The Basal-like tumors are the only subtype that express
Basal/Myoepithelial keratins (5, 6A, 6B, 14 and 17), while the
Luminal/Alveolar subtypes express keratins 8 and 18; we have also
determined that half of the Basal-like tumors coexpress
Basal/Myoepithelial and Luminal keratins. IHC studies of Basal-like
tumors show that they do not express CD10, p63 or SMA, and therefore,
are not likely derived from Myoepithelial cells. Basal-like tumors are
all rapidly growing, express some stem cell markers including a Sca-1
like protein (LY6D) and c-KIT, and show expression of Wnt-Catenin
pathway genes. Analyses of the Luminal/Alveolar patterns show that the
Luminal A and B tumors express ER, ER-regulated genes (XBP1, PR and
RERG), Androgen Receptor (AR), GATA3 and many GATA3- regulated genes
(CK8, CK18 and FOXA1). This expression signature is lower in Luminal B
tumors, and the data suggests they have a worse prognosis and are less
hormone responsive. Part of this expression signature is also present
in HER2+/ER− tumors (CK8, CK18, AR), while another part is not (ER,
GATA3, and their regulated genes). Our hypothesis is that a tumor’s
subtype is maintained during progression from DCIS to IBC, and that
tumors do not change subtype. Second, the subtypes are derived either
from cells that represent discrete stages of epithelial cell
development or from stem cells that develop and arrest at specific
stages of development. The Basal-like tumors may represent a
“transient amplifying” cell that is a committed progenitor with
bi-potent potential, while the Luminal A tumors represent a well
differentiated Luminal/ Alveolar cell. The Luminal B and HER2+/ER−
tumors may be derived from developmental steps between the committed
progenitor and mature Luminal/Alveolar cell.

## MS3-2

## How epidemiologic risk factors differ according to receptor status
of breast cancer.

## Colditz GA, Rosner BA. Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA
Drawing on the prospective Nurses’ Health Study we have evaluated
risk factors for breast cancer classified according to receptor
status. During 22 years of follow-up from 1980 to 2002 we confirmed
2783 incident cases of breast cancer with ER and PR status reported.
Of these cases 1728 were ER+PR+, 518 were ER−PR−, 440 were ER+PR−, and
97 were ER−PR+. We fit a log-incidence model of breast cancer and used
polytomous logistic regression to compare coefficients for breast
cancer risk factors. To evaluate differences in odds ratios for ER and
PR we evaluated ER status controlling for PR status and vice versa. We
observed significant heterogeneity among the four ER/PR categories of
breast cancer for some risk factors as previously reported based on
2096 incident cases (JNCI 2004;96:218–28). The one-time adverse effect
of first pregnancy was present for ER+/PR− and for ER−PR− but not for
ER+PR+ and ER−PR+ tumors. There was statistically significant
heterogeneity for the adverse association of first pregnancy with
breast cancer incidence. Further evaluation of risk factors according
to ER and PR status showed that PR status was statistically
significantly related to breast cancer incidence after controlling for
ER status (p=0.03).
Parity, on the other hand showed a strong inverse association with
incidence of ER+PR+ and ER+PR− tumors, but not with ERtumors. The
difference in relative risk of tumors based on receptor status was not
statistically significant, however. Duration of use of oral estrogen
alone and of estrogen plus progestin both increased risk of breast
cancer. The difference in relative risk according to receptor status
was significant for PR controlling for ER status for both formulations
of postmenopausal hormones. No differences in the breast cancer
associations according to receptor status were observed for family
history and benign breast disease. These discordant results point to
different etiologies for cancer classified according to receptor
status. These data from the largest epidemiologic study of risk
factors for breast cancer according to receptor status will be review
in the context of results from other epidemiologic studies to
highlight conclusions regarding etiologic pathways and future breast
cancer risk prediction.

## MS3-3

## Tomosynthesis: A new tool for breast cancer detection.

## Rafferty EA, Kopans DB, Wu T, Moore RH. Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA
Mammography is the only imaging test to date that has been shown to
decrease mortality from breast cancer, however mammography is an
imperfect tool; as many as 20% of women
presenting with a breast cancer will have had a negative mammogram
within the year. A major factor contributing to this limitation of
mammography is the “structured noise” that is created by the overlap
of normal breast structures which are superimposed on each other in
the acquisition of a two-dimensional mammographic projection. These
overlapping structures and the resultant “structured noise” can
obscure a lesion, rendering it mammographically occult, an effect
which becomes more pronounced as the breast density increases. Breast
tomosynthesis is an imaging technique developed on a conventional
digital mammography platform. The moving x-ray tube acquires angled
images of the breast at radiation doses comparable to conventional
mammography and the images are synthesized to display a
threedimensional mammographic study of the breast. The principle
advantage of breast tomosynthesis over conventional mammography is the
elimination of structured noise. Through the removal of structured
noise, tomosynthesis allows for greater visibility of suspicious
mammographic lesions. Pilot studies confirm equal or superior
visualization of masses and architectural distortion in 89% of cases
and equal or superior visualization of malignant calcifications in 88%
of cases. Conventional two-view mammography also has a significant
false positive rate; as many as 25% of women recalled from screening
mammography are ultimately shown to have no abnormality at all. This
situation results from overlapping structures (“structured noise”)
mimicking abnormality where none exists. Our initial work suggests
that approximately 80% of these callbacks can be avoided by screening
with tomosynthesis. Additionally, through the removal of structured
noise, marginal analysis of breast lesions is facilitated. It is
principally through assessment of a lesion’s margins that radiologists
assign probability of malignancy. Tomosynthesis allows lesions to be
visualized in isolation from surrounding structures thus enabling more
accurate marginal analysis and consequently more accurate prediction
of the benign or malignant nature of a lesion. Furthermore, the
acquisition of the data as a three dimensional volume also permits
precise lesion localization within the breast; knowledge critical for
intervention. One of the distinct advantages offered by tomosynthesis
is that it extends the capabilities of conventional mammography, an
imaging modality which is affordable, available, well-studied and
wellunderstood. The simultaneous increase in the cancer detection rate
coupled with a decrease in the callback rate (simultaneously
increasing sensitivity and specificity) at a radiation exposure
comparable to conventional digital mammography represents a clear
advance in breast cancer screening.

## MS4-1

## Pharmacogenomics in the endocrine treatment of breast
cancer.

## Flockhart D.
Data Not Provided

## MS4-2

## Effects of genetic variability on breast cancer risk and
prognosis.

## Ambrosone C.
Data Not Provided

## MS4-3

## Searching for low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility alleles
in East Anglia.

## Dunning AM, for the SEARCH Breast Cancer Study Team. CR-UK
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Much of the familial clustering of breast cancer is due to the
combined effects of genetic variants. However the number of such
alleles, their frequencies and the magnitudes of the risks they confer
are, as yet, unknown. For the past few years we have been using
candidate gene based association studies, with an increasing emphasis
on using high-throughput systems, to find low-penetrance breast cancer
susceptibility alleles in a large East Anglian population-based
case-control study. Most recently we have been attempting complete
exclusion from associations of all variants in each candidate gene
using a SNP-tagging approach. To this end we have studied 500 SNPs in
95 genes using a 2 stage study design in which a first set of 2300
cases and controls is analysed, and any SNP with a significance value
of P<0.05 is then tested in a second, similar-sized case/control
set. We have detected some alleles conferring mild risks but no SNP
has, to date, given a level of statistical significance (P- value for
difference in genotype distribution) of
<10−3. Many of our potential
associations will be false positives - the consequence of multiple
testing. To exclude these, we still require confirmation of our
findings in other large studies, which we are working to assemble
through international collaboration. In an attempt to hasten the
discovery process, we have initiated (with collaborators in the UK and
Perlegen Science Inc) a genomewide scan. Here we will use a 3-stage
design. In the first stage we are evaluating 266,000 SNPs in 800
breast cancer cases and controls. The cases are ’enriched’ for genetic
effects by choosing those with a family history but without mutations
in the BRCA1 / 2 genes. In the second stage, the most significant 5%
of SNPs from Stage 1 will be evaluated in 4600 cases and controls. A
final stage of evaluation for positives from Stage 2 will again
require confirmation in very large case/control sets (n>10,000)
from international collaboration.

## 1

## Phase III randomized trial comparing doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel (AC®T) with doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel and trastuzumab (AC®TH) with
docetaxel, carboplatin and trastuzumab (TCH) in HER2 positive early
breast cancer patients: BCIRG 006 study.

## Slamon D, Eiermann W, Robert N, Pienkowski T, Martin M, Pawlicki
M, Chan A, Smylie M, Liu M, Falkson C, Pinter T, Fornander T, Shiftan
T, Valero V, Von Minckwitz G, Mackey J, Tabah-Fisch I, Buyse M,
Lindsay MA, Riva A, Bee V, Pegram M, Press M, Crown J, on behalf of
the BCIRG 006 Investigators. UCLA, Los Angeles, CA; GBG, Munchen,
Frankfurt, Germany; US Oncology, Houston, TX; Maria Sklodowska-Curie
(MSC) Centre, Warsaw, Poland; GEICAM, Madrid, Spain; MSC Institute,
Krakow, Poland; Mount Hospital, Perth Australia; Cross Cancer
Institute, Edmonton, Canada; Sun Yat-Sen Cancer Center, Taipei,
Taiwan; University of Alabama, Birmingham, AL; Petz Aladar Korhaz,
Gyor, Hungary; Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden;
Sharp Healthcare, San Diego, CA; MDACC Houston, TX; Sanofi- Aventis,
Paris, France; IDDI, Brussels, Belgium; CIRG, Paris,
France4; USC, LA, CA; ICORG, Dublin,
Irelan.D

Background: This study evaluates the
benefit of two trastuzumabbased (H) regimens in HER2 amplified breast
cancer with the intent of integrating H to maximize efficacy and
minimize known cardiotoxicity.

Material and Methods: HER2 amplified
(centralized FISH) patients with axillary lymph node (LN) positive or
high risk LN negative were randomized to either AC (60/600 mg/m2 q3wk
x4) followed by T (100 mg/m2 q3wk x 4) or two H-containing regimens;
AC followed by T with H x 1 year (q1wk during chemo/q3wk during FUP)
or TCarbo (75 mg/m2 / AUC6 q3wk x 6) with H x 1 year. Patients were
prospectively stratified by positive LN (0, 1–3 vs 4+) and hormone
receptor (HR) status. Patients with HR+ tumors received hormonal
therapy for 5 yrs after chemotherapy. The primary endpoint was
disease-free survival (DFS) with 80% power (0.05 significance level)
to detect an absolute difference of 7%. Secondary endpoints included
OS, safety, including cardiotoxicity (symptomatic events -CHF, gr3/4
ischemia/ infarction, gr3/4 arrhythmia- and asymptomatic LVEF
decline). We report the results of the first planned,
protocol-mandated interim analysis conducted after 322 events (breast
cancer relapse, second primary malignancy or death).

Results: A total of 3222 pts (1073 in
AC-T, 1074 in AC-TH and 1075 in TCH) were recruited between Apr 2001
and Mar 2004. At a median follow-up of 23 months, the two H-containing
arms have both met the DFS endpt: hazard ratio of 0.49 with AC-TH,
p-value = 0.00000048 and 0.61 with TCH, p-value = 0.00015 (as compared
to AC-T). At this time, there is no statistically significant
difference btw the two H-containing arms perhaps due to the small
number of events currently separating them. Symptomatic cardiac
events: AC-T: 1.2% vs AC-TH: 2.3%, p-value = 0.046; ACT vs TCH: 1.2%,
p value = 1.00. Absolute LVEF decline >15% and below lower limit of
normal occurred in 0.6% pts in AC-T, 2.4% in AC-TH and 0.4% in TCH
arms respectively (AC-T vs AC-TH (p = 0.001); AC-T vs TCH
(p = 0.54).

Discussion: Result of this trial
confirms the benefit of H when combined with docetaxel (AC-TH) or with
docetaxel and carboplatin (TCH) without an anthracycline. There are
fewer severe cardiac adverse events when H is administered without
prior A. Longer follow-up is needed in order to confirm whether
non-A-based adjuvant H regimens will have efficacy comparable to
A-based regimens.

## 2

## Trastuzumab in combination with docetaxel or vinorelbine as
adjuvant treatment of breast cancer: the FinHer Trial.

## Joensuu H, Kellokumpu-Lehtinen P-L, Bono P, Alanko T, Kataja V,
Asola R, Utriainen T, Kokko R, Blanco G, Isola J. Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland

Background: Trastuzumab (T) is
effective as adjuvant treatment of HER2-positive early breast cancer
(BC).We investigated the safety and efficacy of T given for only nine
weeks concomitantly with presumably synergistic chemotherapy agents in
the treatment of early BC.

Patients and methods: Women
(n = 1,010) with either axillary node positive (pN+) BC or with node
negative (pN0) cancer with tumor >20 mm and PgR- were randomly
allocated to receive either three 3-weekly cycles of docetaxel
(100 mg/m2) or eight weekly cycles of
vinorelbine (25 mg/m2) as adjuvant therapy.
Single-agent docetaxel/vinorelbine was followed in both arms by three
3-weekly cycles of cyclophosphamide, epirubicin and 5- fluorouracil
(C600E60F600),
and tamoxifen was given for five years for ER or PgR positive disease.
Patients whose tumor showed erbB2
amplification in chromogen in situ hybridization (CISH, n = 232, 23%)
had a second randomization to receive nine weekly cycles of T
(2 mg/kg, first dose 4 mg/kg) concomitantly with either docetaxel or
vinorelbine, or to no T. CISH analysis for presence of erbB2 amplification was done prior to
randomization in one of two laboratories using the same protocol.
Cardiac left ventricular ejection fractions (LVEFs) were measured at
baseline, after completion of chemotherapy, and 12 and 36 months after
study entry. The median follow-up is 38 months. One patient with overt
distant metastases at study entry was excluded from survival
analyses.

Results: BC recurrence (distant or
locoregional recurrence, or contralateral BC) was less frequent among
patients treated with docetaxel/CEF than among those treated with
vinorelbine/CEF (39/502 vs. 68/507, HR 0.58, log-rank test
P = 0.0036). Distant cancer recurrence was also less frequent among
patients who received docetaxel (32 vs. 56 events, HR 0.58, log-rank
test P for DDFS 0.0087). Adjuvant 9-week T was effective in preventing
any BC recurrence (11/115 vs. 26/116, HR 0.46, P for recurrence-free
survival 0.0078). Three-year distant disease-free survival of patients
who received T was 93% and that of patients who did not receive T 76%
(P = 0.0078, 11/115 vs. 26/116 events, HR 0.43). There was a trend
towards superior overall survival of patients treated with T (6/115
deaths vs. 14/116, HR 0.43, P = 0.08). T was well tolerated, and the
LVEFs were maintained during the 3-yr follow-up.

Conclusions: Single-agent
docetaxel/CEF was more effective than vinorelbine/CEF as adjuvant
treatment of BC. T given concomitantly with docetaxel or vinorelbine
for 9 weeks was well tolerated, and was not associated with a decrease
of LVEFs making monitoring of the LVEFs unnecessary for most patients.
Short duration administration of T is highly effective in preventing
recurrence of BC with erbB2
amplification when given concomitantly with potentially synergistic
chemotherapy, and may be better tolerated than one-year use of
T.

## 3

## A randomized phase III trial of paclitaxel versus paclitaxel plus
bevacizumab as first-line therapy for locally recurrent or metastatic
breast cancer: a trial coordinated by the Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group (E2100).

## Miller KD, Wang M, Gralow J, Dickler M, Cobleigh MA, Perez EA,
Shenkier TN, Davidson NE. Indiana University Cancer Center,
Indianapolis, IN; Dana Farber Cancer Institute; Pudget Sound Oncology
Consortium; Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center; Rush University
Medical Center; Mayo Clinic; Vancouver Cancer Center; Johns Hopkins
Oncology Center

Purpose: This randomized phase III
trial compared the efficacy and safety of paclitaxel (P) with or
without bevacizumab (B), a monoclonal antibody to vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), as initial chemotherapy in patients with
metastatic breast cancer (MBC). Methods: Patients were randomly assigned to receive P
(90 mg/m2) Days 1, 8, and 15 every
4 weeks alone or in combination with B (10 mg/kg) Days 1 and 8. The
primary endpoint was progression-free survival (PFS); response was
assessed by RECIST criteria every 3 cycles. The study provided 85%
power to detect a 33% improvement in PFS assuming a one-sided type one
error = 2.5%. Results: From December
2001 to May 2004, 722 patients were enrolled. Treatment arms were well
balanced for median age, disease-free interval, ER status, sites of
disease, and exposure to adjuvant chemotherapy. Hypertension requiring
treatment (13.5% vs. 0; p<0.0001), Grade 3/4 proteinuria (2.5% vs. 0;p=0.0004) and Grade 3/4 neuropathy (20.2%
vs. 14.2%; p=0.01) were more
frequent in patients receiving P+B. Thromboembolic events and serious
bleeding episodes were infrequent and similar (<1.5%) in both
groups. Combination therapy significantly increased the response rates
in all patients (28.2% vs. 14.2%; p<0.0001) and in the subset of patients with measurable
disease (34.3% vs. 16.4%; p<0.0001). With 355 events in the current analysis, P+B
significantly prolongs PFS (10.97 mos. vs. 6.11 mos.; HR = 0.498,
p<0.001). Though the data is
immature, early follow-up suggests that P+B improves overall survival
(HR = 0.674, p=0.01).Conclusions: P+B significantly prolongs
disease-free survival compared to P as initial chemotherapy for MBC
with minimal increase in toxicity. Updated analysis of overall
survival, quality of life and potential surrogates of response will be
presente.D

## 4

## Metronomic chemotherapy with and without bevacizumab for advanced
breast cancer: a randomized phase II study.

## Burstein HJ, Spigel D, Kindsvogel K, Parker LM, Bunnell CA,
Partridge AH, Come SE, Ryan PD, Gelman R, Winer EP. Dana- Farber /
Harvard Cancer Center, Boston, MA; Sarah Cannon Cancer Center,
Nashville, TN
Background: Low-dose, repetitive “metronomic” chemotherapy can
inhibit tumor growth in animal models and in patients with advanced
cancer. Laboratory studies suggest that pairing metronomic
chemotherapy with a dedicated anti-angiogenesis therapy may be
particularly effective. We sought to evaluate this concept in a
randomized, phase II clinical trial.
Patients and Methods: Eligible patients have stage IV breast cancer
with measurable disease by RECIST criteria, 0-1 prior chemotherapy
regimens in the metastatic setting, no prior oral cyclophosphamide
chemotherapy, ECOG PS 0–1, and LVEF > 45%. Patients with bleeding
or clotting diatheses, brain metastases, or large effusions are
ineligible. Patients with visceral metastases were required to have
prior anthracycline exposure in the adjuvant or metastatic setting.
Patients were randomized to metronomic chemotherapy alone
(cyclophosphamide 50 mg PO QD and methotrexate 2.5 mg PO BID x 2 days
each week), or to the same treatment plus bevacizumab (10 mg/kg IV q
14 days). The primary study endpoint is response rate; secondary
endpoints include progression-free survial, toxicity, and correlative
measures of angiogenesis.
Results: To date, 42 patients have enrolled on the study. A
protocolspecified stopping rule called for discontinuation of accrual
to a treatment arm if 4 or fewer patients had objective response among
the first 18 patients in each arm. Based on this planned interim
analysis, accrual to the metronomic chemotherapy alone arm has
stopped, while accrual of an additional 13 patients to the combination
arm continues. Final clinical data from all patients including
response and toxicity analyses will be available.
Conclusion: Metronomic chemotherapy in combination with bevacizumab
has clinical activity in advanced breast cancer.

## 46

## Trastuzumab sensitivity of breast cancer with coamplification of
HER2 and cMYC suggests pro-apoptotic function of dysregulated cMYC in
vivo.

## Kim C, Bryant J, Horne Z, Geyer CE, Wickerham DL, Wolmark N,
Paik S. NSABP Operations and Biostatistical Center, Pittsburgh,
PA

Background: Addition of trastuzumab
to adjuvant chemotherapy reduces 4 year relapse risk of patients
diagnosed with HER2 amplified/overexpressing tumors by 53%. To further
improve outcome, addition of other targeted therapies to trastuzumab
regimen is being considered. However, toxicity and high cost demands
careful selection of patients who may best benefit from such an
approach. Predictive markers for response to trastuzumab are needed.
In an effort to identify amplified genes in breast cancer that
correlate with poor prognosis in patients treated with standard
adjuvant chemotherapy, we have screened for the presence of gene
amplification at 27 gene loci (amplicons that are associated with
increased mRNA expression) in 1900 cases of node positive breast
cancer enrolled in NSABP trial B-28, using fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). In multivariate analysis, 3 amplicons (HER2,
cMYC, HTPAP) were associated with poor prognosis independent of other
known prognosticators. While coamplification of HER2 and HTPAP was
rare, a significant number of cases had co-amplification of HER2 and
cMYC with worse outcome than when each one was amplified alone. This
has prompted us to examine the significance of cMYC amplification in
HER2 amplified breast cancer treated with trastuzumab. Our a priori
hypothesis was that patients with cMYC amplified tumors would derive
less benefit from trastuzumab due to independent signaling through
cMYC.

Patients, materials, and methods: In
NSABP B-31, 1736 patients with follow-up were randomized to receive
adjuvant chemotherapy of 4 cycles of doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide
followed by 4 cycles of paclitaxel with or without trastuzumab, which
was given for total of one year beginning with the first cycle of
paclitaxel. cMYC FISH results were available from 1549 cases. cMYC was
amplified in 432 cases (30%). We examined Recurrence Free Survival as
a primary clinical end point.

Results: Numbers of events and hazard
ratios (HR) for recurrence and death are shown below (C =
chemotherapy, C+T=chemotherapy and trastuzumab): 

Conclusion: While patients with
co-amplification of cMYC and HER2 had worse outcome when treated with
chemotherapy alone, addition of trastuzumab reversed this trend,
achieving 4 year recurrence free survival of over 90%. Although these
data contradict our a priori hypothesis, they are consistent with
preclinical models that suggest that the pro-apoptotic function of
dysregulated cMYC needs to be counterbalanced by an antiapoptotic
signal by another activated oncogene in order for such cells to
develop into cancer. Amplified HER2 may provide such anti-apoptotic
signaling that is reduced by treatment with trastuzumab, resulting in
triggering of apoptosis. These data suggest that indirect targeting of
dysregulated cMYC may be possible if co-operating oncogenes providing
anti-apoptotic signals are identifie.D

## 5

## Meta- and pooled analysis of the prognostic value of bone marrow
micrometastasis on disease outcome in 4,703 breast cancer patients: final
results after 10 years of follow-up.

## Vogl FD, Braun S, Pantel K, Collaborative Group Bone Marrow
Micrometastasis. Innsbruck Medical University, Insbruck; City
Hospital, Meran; Inst. Tumorbiology, Epppendorf University,
Hamburg
Background: Available prognostic data on outcome of breast cancer
patients with bone marrow micrometastasis (BMM) is limited due to
small sample sizes of individual studies. Statistically powerful
studies are needed to provide the evidence for implementation of BMM
in clinical decision making.
Methods: Individual patient data of 9 studies, involving 4,703
patients with stage I-III breast cancer, were combined to analyze
long-term clinical outcome. Meta-analysis was conducted to summarize
the results of included studies. Using the pooled data, piecewise
proportional hazards regression models were estimated for the complete
set of patients and in subgroup analysis.
Results: The prevalence of BMM was 30.6%, and was significantly
associated with larger tumor size, higher grade, lymph node metastasis
and endocrine non-responsiveness (each P<0.001). Meta-analytic
hazard ratios indicated a more than 2-fold increased risk of either
dying or relapse for overall (OS), cancer-specific (CCS), disease-free
(DFS) and distant disease-free survival (DDFS). Assessment of
statistical heterogeneity in the pooled data set revealed significant
inter-study variation of hazards ratio estimates (Q-test, P = 0.007
for OS; P<0.001 for DFS). According to sensitivity analysis,
however, there was no bias for the pooled survival estimates. Residual
heterogeneity was removed by stratifying by center. Multivariable
regression analysis including established prognostic factors revealed
that BMM was an independent prognostic variable for all investigated
endpoints. This effect was strongest during the first years following
primary breast cancer diagnosis: adjusted hazards ratios were 1.81
(95% CI, 1.51–2.16) for OS, 1.93 (1.58–2.36) for CCS, 1.85 (1.59–2.14)
for DFS, and 2.03 (1.72–2.39) for DDFS. On univariate analysis,
survival of patients with BMM in subgroups with either endocrine
therapy or chemotherapy alone was significantly reduced (each
P<0.001). Among patients with pT1N0 disease, who received no
systemic adjuvant treatment, patients with BMM had significantly
reduced OS (P = 0.001), CSS (P<0.001), DDFS (P = 0.007), and DFS
(P = 0.01).
Conclusions: This combined analysis provides conclusive level-I
evidence that presence of bone marrow micrometastasis is a significant
indicator of poor prognosis in breast cancer patients.

## 6

## Prognostic and predictive value of circulating tumor cells in
metastatic breast cancer patients treated with endocrine or
chemotherapy.

## Ellis MJ, Miller MC, Cristofanilli M, Budd GT, Stopeck A, Hayes
DF, Doyle GV, Matera J, Terstappen LWMM. Washington University, St
Louis, MO; Immunicon Corporation, Huntingdon Valley, PA; MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland,
OH; Arizona Cancer Center, Tuscon, AZ; University of Michigan
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ann Arbor, MI

Background: Elevated (≥5) circulating
tumor cells (CTC) / 7.5 mL of whole blood in patients with measurable
metastatic breast cancer (MBC) are associated with poor clinical
outcomes (Cristofanilli, et al; NEJM, 2004). This report expands this
original dataset to include patients with bone dominant
(non-measurable) disease and identifies the optimal timing of CTC
assessment for different therapies.

Methods: CTCs were enumerated in
patients with MBC prior to commencing a new therapy, and at 3–5, 6–8,
9–14 and 15–20 weeks after initiation of therapy. CTC counts were
correlated with progression free and overall survival (OS), with the
time to progression and/or death calculated from the time of each
followup blood draw.

Results: Of the total 223 patients,
46 (21%) had non measurable while 177 (79%) had measurable disease.
The patients were separated by treatment type, i.e. chemotherapy,
combination therapy and endocrine therapy. The incidence of CTCs /
7.5 mL of blood and the median survival of patients with <5 vs. 5
CTCs are provided in the table below.

Conclusions: In measurable and
non-measurable metastatic breast cancer, CTCs provide an early,
reliable indication of disease progression and survival for patients
irrespective of therapy. Patients on endocrine therapy (more indolent
disease) survived longer than those on chemotherapy. However, the
magnitude of the difference in OS between the groups is similar. It
was also observed that follow-up assessment of patients on endocrine
therapy by CTCs should be delayed several weeks as anti-tumor activity
of endocrine therapies seems to lag behind those of chemotherapy TABLE
1. 

## 7

## Radiotherapy in breast-conserving treatment for ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS): ten-year results of European organization for research and
treatment of cancer (EORTC) randomized trial 10853.

## Bijker N, Meijnen PH, Bogaerts J, Peterse JL, on Behalf of the
EORTC Breast Cancer Group & Radiotherapy Group. The Netherlands
Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands; EORTC, Brussels,
Belgium

Background: DCIS is present in up to
30% of screen detected breast cancer patients. Controversy regarding
the most optimal local therapy for women diagnosed with these
non-invasive lesions still exists. We present the 10-year results of
the EORTC 10853 study investigating the role of radiotherapy after
local excision of DCIS.

Patients and Methods: After complete
excision of the lesion, women with DCIS were randomly assigned to
receive either no further treatment or radiotherapy, to a dose of 50
Gray in five weeks to the whole breast. Between 1986 and 1996, 1010
women with clinically or mammographically (71%) detected DCIS,
measuring ≤5 cm were entered in the trial. The median follow-up was
10.2 years.

Results: The 10-year local
relapse-free rate was 75% in the group treated with local excision
alone compared with 85% in the women treated by local excision plus
radiotherapy (logrank p<0.0001, HR = 0.55 (95%CI 0.41–0.73)). The
risks of DCIS and invasive local recurrence were both reduced with 42%
(p = 0.009 and p = 0.006, respectively). The risk of contralateral
breast cancer was similar in both groups. There was no difference in
the development of distant metastases and death between the treatment
groups. Twenty-two patients (2%) developed distant metastases as a
result of an invasive local recurrence. At multivariate analysis,
factors significantly associated with an increased risk of local
recurrence were, young age (≤40 years, HR = 1.95 (95%CI 1.16–3.30)),
symptomatic detection (HR = 1.53 (95%CI 1.09–2.16)), intermediately or
poorly-differentiated DCIS (as opposed to well-differentiated DCIS,
HR = 1.77 (95%CI 1.13–2.78) and HR = 1.37 (95%CI 0.78–2.39)
respectively), solid or cribriform growth pattern (as opposed to
clinging/micropapillary subtypes, HR = 2.21 (95%CI 1.31–3.71) and
HR = 2.28 (95%CI 1.23–4.24) respectively), doubtful margins (HR = 1.82
(95%CI 1.30–2.54)), and treatment by local excision alone (HR = 1.74
(95%CI 1.28–2.42)). Some groups were at high risk of recurrence: women
of 40 years of age or younger and treated with excision plus
radiotherapy had a 27% local recurrence rate. When excision margins
were doubtful, 23% of the patients developed a local recurrence after
treatment with radiotherapy. DCIS with a clinging or micropapillary
growth pattern had the lowest recurrence rate of 6% after
radiotherapy.

Conclusions: With long-term
follow-up, radiotherapy after local excision for DCIS continued to
reduce the number of ipsilateral breast tumor recurrences, with a 45%
reduction at 10 years. Treatment with radiotherapy reduced the risk of
local recurrence in all clinical and pathological subgroups of
patients. Women who appear at high risk for local recurrence are those
of 40 years of age or younger, and those with lesions that cannot be
excised with tumor-free margins.

## 8

## Breast conservation without radiotherapy in low risk breast cancer
patients - results of 2 prospective clinical trials of the Austrian
Breast and Colorectal Cancer Study Group involving 1,518 postmenopausal
patients with endocrine responsive breast cancer.

## Gnant MFX, Poetter R, Kwasny W, Tausch C, Handl-Zeller E,
Pakesch B, Schmid M, Hausmaninger H, Stierer M, Kubista E, Sedlmayer
F, Draxler W, Luschin-Ebengreuth G, Jakesz R, Austrian Breast and
Colorectal Cancer Study Group. Medical Universities of Vienna, Graz,
Salzburg, and Innsbruck, Vienna, Austria
Background: In postmenopausal women with favourable prognosis
endocrine responsive (HR+) early breast cancer (BC) treated by breast
conservation plus adjuvant endocrine treatment it remains unclear
whether whole breast irradiation is necessary with regard to local
control, disease-free and overall survival. In two consecutive
prospective clinical trials, the Austrian Breast and Colorectal Cancer
Study Group tried to define a sub-group of patients with lowest
locoregional risk and the subsequent chance to avoid adjuvant
radiotherapy (RT).
Methods: Within the prospective clinical trial ABCSG-06 (randomized
2,020 HR+ postmenopausal BC patients, Schmid M et al, JCO 2003), a
low-risk sub-group was prospectively defined as follows: tumor size
<3 cm, node negative disease, received tamoxifen±aminoglutethimide
(n = 713). For 698 patients of this subgroup (97.9%), complete data
and follow-up is available, ABCSG- 6B. Furthermore, 875 postmenopusal
women of the ABCSG-08 trial (n = 3,935; 5 yrs of Tam vs. 2 yrs Tam
+3 yrs Anastrozole, Jakesz R et al, SABCS 2004) were randomly assigned
to receive whole breast irradiation (group I, n = 410) or not (group
II, n = 416) (ABCSG-8A). Favourable early BC was again specified as
tumour size <3 cm, N0, ER+ and/or PgR+, and breast conserving
surgery. RT was performed after lumpectomy with two tangential opposed
breast fields with 50 Gy and 2 Gy per fraction in 5 weeks. Primary
endpoint was locoregional relapse (LR). Further endpoints were
controlateral BC, DDFS, DFS, and OS.
Results: Median FU was 121 months for ABCSG-6B and 48 months for
ABCSG-8A. In ABCSG-6B, with more than 10 years of FU, LR was 3.58%.
For patients receiving RT, LR was 3.26%, for those treated without
radiotherapy LR was 5.17%, p = n.s. In the randomized ABCSG-8A trial,
overall LR was 1,71%, with 0.24% (n = 1/413) in group I receiving RT
and 3.19% (n = 13/407) in group II, p<0.0008. In terms of OS, there
was no significant difference in neither trial.
Conclusion: Breast conserving therapy can be performed without
adjuvant RT in a selected group of lowest risk breast cancer patients
with very low long-term locoregional relapse rates. In a prospective
randomized comparison, however, even in this favourable patient
sub-group and with extremely low overall LR rates, there remains a
significant reduction of locoregional relapse risk for those who
received RT after breast conserving surgery. In fact, the risk of LR
can be nearly diminished by proper multimodality treatment. These data
from 2 large clinical trials may assist patients and physicians in
their clinical decision-making.

## 9

## Inhibiting the growth factor receptor (GFR) pathway preserves and
enhances the expression of the estrogen receptor (ER) in HER-2/neu (HER2)
over-expressing human breast tumors and xenografts.

## Rimawi MF, Mohsin SK, Gutierrez MC, Arpino G, Massarweh SA,
Chang JC, Osborne CK, Schiff R. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX; King Hussein Cancer Center, Amman, Jordan

Background and Purpose: Data from the
clinic and our xenograft model suggest that ER expression in breast
cancer cells may be influenced by endocrine therapy and GFR targeted
therapy. We hypothesized that the expression of ER and HER2 is a
dynamic interrelated process and that inhibiting the GFR pathway may
lead to enhancement and emergence of ER expression and function.
Further understanding of these expression patterns will provide
insight into the clinical management of breast cancer.

Methods: Patient core biopsies and
xenograft samples on tissue arrays were assessed by
immunohistochemistry for ER, progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2
expression.Clinical samples were obtained from a neoadjuvant
trastuzumab trial in 35 patients with HER2 over-expressing tumors
(Mohsin et al.; J Clin Oncol. 2005
23:2460). MCF7/HER2 over-expressing xenografts were
established in nude mice with exogenous estrogen. Mice were then
randomized and treated for different periods of time with continued
estrogen or estrogen deprivation (ED), each alone or with a potent
anti-HER2 regimen composed of gefitinib, trastuzumab and pertuzumab
(GTP). Additionally, a set of tumors treated with ED until resistance
developed were randomized to continued ED with or without treatment
with GTP, or reintroduction of estrogen.

Results: 7/35 (20%) HER2
over-expressing human tumors were ER positive. Of those, 3 tumors
(43%) had an increase in ER and/ or PR expression after receiving
trastuzumab therapy. In addition, one initially ER negative tumor
converted to ER positive after treatment. Likewise, in our xenograft
model, treatment with GTP reduced in half the ER loss observed with
ED. Furthermore, GTP treatment led to a significant increase in
expression of ER (>2.5 fold) as well as PR (>1.5 fold) in the
presence of estrogen. The enhanced PR expression suggests increased
classical pathway signaling of ER. We have previously shown that
resistance to ED in this model is associated with increased HER2
levels and a complete loss of ER expression. Reintroducing estrogen
led to only minimal ER re-expression but considerably higher
reexpression of PR. Anti-HER2 therapy in these ED resistant tumors
resulted in re-expression of substantial levels of ER in 50% of the
tumors. Notably, this re-expression of ER correlated with response to
anti-HER2 treatment, implying its predictive value.

Conclusions: Anti-HER2 therapy leads
to enhanced expression of ER and PR in our xenograft model and in
human tumors. Upregulation of the GFR pathway leads to ER loss
observed upon resistance to ED in our model. This ER loss can be
reversed with anti-HER2 therapy. The re-expression of ER may restore
sensitivity to endocrine therapy suggesting its important predictive
and therapeutic implications which warrant further study.

## 10

## PC-cell derived growth factor (PCDGF/GP88, progranulin) stimulates
Her-2 phosphorylation and confers herceptin resistance to Her-2
overexpressing breast cancer cells.

## Kim W, Serrero G. University of Maryland School of Pharmacy,
Baltimore, MD; A&G Pharmaceutical Inc., Columbia, MD; University
of Maryland, Baltimore, MD
Her-2 overexpression is observed in approximately 25% of breast
carcinomas, and is correlated with poor prognosis and aggressive
tumors. To date, the most popular form of treatment for breast cancer
patients overexpressing Her2/erbB2 is the use of an anti- Her2
antibody known as Herceptin. However, Herceptin is only effective in
about 25–30% of the patients administered this drug. We show here that
the expression of the autocrine growth factor PC Cell Derived Growth
Factor (PCDGF/GP88, progranulin) in Her2 overexpressing breast cancer
cell lines leads to Herceptin resistance. PCDGF/GP88 is an 88 kDa
protein that is the largest member of the epithelin-granulin family of
polypeptides characterized by a unique cysteine rich motif. PCDGF/GP88
plays a critical role in breast tumorigenesis. Its expression
increases in breast cancer cells in a positive correlation with their
tumorigenesis. Inhibition of PCDGF/GP88 action or expression blocked
the proliferation of human breast carcinoma cells, as well as leading
to a 98% reduction in tumor incidence and growth rate in vivo.
Pathological studies of paraffin embedded breast cancer biopsies have
shown that PCDGF/GP88 is expressed in 80% of infiltrating ductal
carcinoma and correlated with parameters of poor prognosis such as
tumor grade, p53 expression and Ki67 proliferation index. In contrast,
PCDGF/GP88 expression was independent of Her2. However, about 20% of
Her-2 overexpressing breast cancer biopsies also displayed a high
GP88expression. Based on this observation, we investigated the effect
of PCDGF/GP88 in Her-2 overexpressing cell lines. Using several Her-2
overexpressing human breast adenocarcinoma cell lines such as SKBR3,
BT-474 and ErbB2-MCF-7 cells, we show that PCDGF/GP88 stimulated
erbB2/Her2 phosphorylation in a time- and dose-dependent manner. In
addition, PCDGF/GP88 activates erbB2, c-Src and ultimately c-myc by
utilizing ERK1/2 and Akt pathways, both of which are involved in
mitogenic signaling pathways. We demonstrate that overexpression of
PCDGF/GP88 blocked the inhibitory effect of Herceptin on the cell
proliferation, soft agar colony formation and MAP kinase activation of
Her-2 overexpressing cells. Our findings provide a novel paradigm for
the acquisition of Herceptin resistance in Her-2 overexpressing breast
cancers.

## 11

## Trastuzumab (H: Herceptin®) following adjuvant chemotherapy (CT)
significantly improves disease-free survival (DFS) in early breast cancer
(BC) with HER2 overexpression: the HERA Trial.

## the HERA Study Team.

Background: The Breast International
Group (BIG), in collaboration with Roche, conducted an international,
multi-center, randomized, 3-arm trial to compare 1 year of 3 weekly H
(8 mg/kg iv day 1; 6 mg/kg iv q 3 weeks thereafter) with observation
and 2 years of 3 weekly H with observation in patients with HER2
overexpressing, node-negative (T size > 1 cm) or node-positive BC
who had completed at least 4 cycles of an acceptable (neo)adjuvant
chemotherapy (CT) regimen. Adjuvant endocrine therapy (mostly
tamoxifen) also followed CT for patients with hormone receptor
positive disease. Prior to randomization, eligibility criteria
included central confirmation of HER2 overexpression (3+) or
amplification (FISH+) and a baseline LVEF (echo or MUGA) >55 %
following CT.

Methods: 5090 patients were enrolled
from 12/2001 to 4/2005 by 478 institutions from Europe, Canada, South
Africa, Israel, the Asia Pacific Region, Japan, and Latin America:
median age = 49 yrs, node negative = 32%, hormone receptor
negative = 49%, prior anthracyclines (A) = 68%, prior A and
taxanes = 25%.

Results: At a median follow-up of
1 year, 475 events were observed in the database and triggered the
first and only interim analysis. The Independent Data Monitoring
Committee (IDMC) recommended release of the results for the 1 year H
arm (1694 pts; 127 events) versus observation (1693 pts; 220 events),
which were presented at ASCO 2005 (see table below). The 2 year H arm
also improved DFS compared with observation (p<0.0001). H-treated
patients had a higher incidence of NYHA class III-IV CHF (cardiologist
confirmed) with LVEF drop at least 10 EF points from baseline to below
50%: 9 (0.5%) with H v. 0 without H. Cardiac deaths were rare: 0 with
H v. 1 without H.

Discussion:One year H significantly
improves outcome compared with observation. The trial continues to
assess 2 years v 1 year of H, and monitor late side effects. Updated
results and information on cardiac AEs will be presented TABLE
2. 

## 12

## Surgical biopsy to diagnose breast cancer adversely affects
outcomes of breast cancer care: finding from the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network.

## Edge SB, Ottesen RA, Lepisto EM, Niland JC, Theriault RL,
Bookman MA, Weeks JC. Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY; City
of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA; National Comprehensive
Cancer Network, Jenkintown, PA; MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX; Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA; Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA

Objective: The choice between needle
and surgical biopsy as the initial diagnostic method for evaluation
may affect the quality of subsequent breast cancer care. We examined
the frequency of reexcision (more than one surgery on the breast
parenchyma) and the total number of open surgical operations (breast +
axilla) based on the type of initial breast biopsy and the time to
complete cancer surgery with re-excision vs. none.

Methods: The type of initial biopsy
for Stage 0, I and II breast cancer at 8 cancer centers was classified
as needle or surgical for patients
seen between July 1997 and June 2002. Needle biopsy included any type
of core biopsy or FNA with or without image localization. Surgical
biopsy included any open surgical procedure. Endpoints included
re-excision, the total number of trips to surgery, and elapsed time to
complete surgery.

Results: Among 6,282 women, the
initial biopsy was needle in 57% and surgical in 43%. The table shows
the proportion of requiring re-excision and the mean number of
surgical procedures by type of initial biopsy. Using multivariable
logistic regression and controlling for age, cancer stage, image
localization, and institution, re-excision was significantly
associated with type of initial biopsy (p<0.0001). Multivariable
mean score response modeling adjusted for the same covariates,
demonstrated that on average women whose initial biopsy was surgical
had 0.83 more surgeries than women with initial needle biopsy
(p<0.0001). The mean time to complete surgery was 30 days without
re-excision and 48 days with re-excision.

Conclusions: Surgical biopsy for
breast cancer adversely affects quality of care, increasing the need
for repeated surgery and the time to complete surgery. These data
support the measurement of the proportion of women who receive needle
biopsy for diagnosis as a measure of the quality of care for breast
cancer. 

## 47

## Genetically engineered human breast tumors in mice.

## Wu M, Boynton G, Cooper A, Breault L, Vincent S, Richardson A,
Depinho RA, Robinson M, Kuperwasser C. AVEO Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA; Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA;
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA; Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
It has been demonstrated that tumorigenesis varies in a species-,
tissue-, and context-dependent manner. To define the genetic elements
and stromal changes that promote human breast cancer, we developed an
in vivo human breast tumor model
system through tissue reconstitution in mice. Using this model system,
we have demonstrated that, unlike mouse cancer models, overexpression
of dominant oncogenes in combination with knockdown of p53 in human breast epithelial cells only
led to the development of pre-neoplastic lesions. Development of
invasive human breast adenocarcinomas in
vivo requires the concomitant expression of dominant
oncogenes and the SV40 early region. In addition, the development of
these tumors was also dependent on specialized stromal fibroblasts, as
tumors rarely developed in the absence of this microenvironment.
Furthermore, in contrast to in
vitro transformation, in
vivo breast cancer development did not require the
transduction of hTERT in primary
human mammary epithelial cells (HMECs). This model system will be
invaluable for further elucidating the mechanisms involved in human
breast tumor progression and for the development of new therapies
against breast cancer.

## 13

## The benefits of sequencing adjuvant tamoxifen and anastrozole in
postmenopausal women with hormoneresponsive early breast cancer:
5 year-analysis of ABCSG Trial 8.

## Jakesz R, Gnant M, Greil R, Tausch C, Samonigg H, Kwasny W,
Kubista E, Stierer M, Luschin G, Mittlboeck M. Vienna Medical School,
Austria

Background: The aromatase inhibitor
(AI) anastrozole has been proven to be more effective than tamoxifen
as adjuvant monotherapy for postmenopausal women with
hormone-sensitive early breast cancer (EBC). There is also strong
evidence to suggest that switching from tamoxifen to an AI after
2–3 years’ adjuvant therapy improves outcomes for patients compared
with completing 5 years’ tamoxifen. This evidence includes data from
the combined analysis of ABCSG Trial 8 and ARNO 95 where the hazard
ratio (HR) for event-free survival with anastrozole versus tamoxifen
was 0.60 (95% CI 0.44, 0.81; p = 0.0009) at a median follow-up of
28 months (SABCS 2004). However, unlike other switching trials, ABCSG
Trial 8 randomized newly diagnosed patients, rather than randomizing
at the point of switch, and the data for the full 5-year adjuvant
period have now been analyzed. We therefore present here the results
from the first tamoxifen-AI sequencing trial, which compares using
5 years of tamoxifen with 2 years of tamoxifen, followed by 3 years of
anastrozole.

Methods: Eligible patients were
postmenopausal women with histologically verified G1 or G2, locally
radically treated invasive or minimally invasive hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer. Patients were randomized to receive
5 years of tamoxifen therapy or 2 years’ tamoxifen followed by
anastrozole for 3 years. The primary endpoint was event-free survival
(EFS), including locoregional, contralateral, or distant metastatic
recurrences. Secondary endpoints included safety and overall
survival.

Results: 3700 patients were eligible
for the analysis at the data cutoff of March 31, 2005. After a median
follow-up of 30 months, 158 events (local or metastatic recurrence, or
contralateral breast cancer) have been reported. The HR for EFS with
tamoxifen followed by anastrozole versus tamoxifen was 0.68 (95% CI
0.49, 0.91; p = 0.02). This HR represents a 32% reduction in the risk
of disease recurrence for patients receiving tamoxifen followed by
anastrozole versus those receiving tamoxifen alone.

Conclusions: These data demonstrate
that for postmenopausal women newly diagnosed with EBC, a sequencing
strategy of 2 years of tamoxifen followed by 3 years of anastrozole is
superior to treatment with 5 years of tamoxifen.

## 14

## Optimal duration of adjuvant tamoxifen (TAM) in early breast cancer
(EBC): ten year results of a randomized trial (TAM-01) of the FNCLCC
Breast Group.

## Delozier T, Spielmann M, Janvier M, Fourquet A, Veyret C, Weber
B, Mauriac L, Petit T, Kerbrat P. Centre Francois Baclesse, Caen,
France; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Centre Rene
Huguenin, Saint Cloud, France; Institut Curie, Paris, France; Centre
Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France; Centre Alexis Vautrin, Nancy, France;
Institut Bergonie, Bordeaux, France; Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg,
France; Centre Eugene Marquis, Rennes, France

Background: Although adjuvant
hormonal treatment has been proved to reduce recurrence and mortality
in early breast cancer, the optimum duration of therapy is still
controversial

Aim: In 1986, a multicentric
randomized trial was initiated to assess the efficacy and tolerance of
long term adjuvant TAM. A short duration of adjuvant TAM was compared
to lifelong adjuvant TAM.

Material and method: were eligible
patients with EBC receiving adjuvant TAM since 2–3 years, disease-free
since primary treatment, aged 75 years or younger. From 9/1986 to
5/1995, 3,793 patients were randomized; 1,882 (49.6%) patients stopped
TAM (short) while 1,911 (50.4%) patients continued TAM (long) at the
same dose as previously prescribed until recurrence or death. The
trial protocol was amended in February 1997, limiting tamoxifen
treatment to ten years after randomization, thus giving a comparison
between 2–3 years treatment and 12–13 years treatment. Preliminary
results have been published previously. Data from 2,826 patients was
updated in 12/2004. The median follow up time was 120 months. Mean TAM
duration was 29 and 127 months respectively in the short and long
duration group.

Results: Overall, 453 and 397
patients respectively have relapsed in the short and long duration
group, leading to a 5-year disease-free survival (DFS) rate of 77% and
82%, and a 10-year DFS rate of 67% and 72% (p = 0.0022). In contrast,
overall survival (OS) does not differ between the two arms (p = 0.16).
The hazard ratio analysis shows that the reduction in breast cancer
recurrence is transient ; The annual reduction in the odds of
recurrence decreased rapidly after 5 years of tamoxifen. After 5 years
of tamoxifen the annual rate of relapse is the same in both groups. We
conclude that there is no benefit in prolonging TAM over
5 years.
Complete data of the whole population will be presente.D

## 15

## Withdrawn by Author.

## 16

## Updated analysis of NCIC CTG MA.17 (letrozole vs. placebo to
letrozole vs placebo) post unblinding.

## Goss PE, Ingle JN, Palmer MJ, Shepherd LE, Tu D. Massachusetts
General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA; Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN; Cancer Research Institute, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON,
Canada

Background and Rationale: In MA.17,
5187 postmenopausal women were originally randomized to receive
letrozole (LET) or placebo (PLAC) after 5 years of tamoxifen. The
hazard ratio (HR) for disease-free survival (DFS) was 0.58 (0.450.76,
p = 0.00004) after a median follow-up of 30 months. The trial was
unblinded in October 2003 after the first interim analysis. Women
randomized to PLAC were offered LET at the time of unblinding. We
present a comparison of efficacy endpoints in the following three
groups: randomized originally to LET (LET), to PLAC but crossed over
to LET (PLAC-LET), or stayed on PLAC (PLAC).

Design and Methods: LET and PLAC-LET
have been compared to PLAC, based on the hazard ratio and adjusting
for baseline patient and disease variables including, among others,
tumor size, nodal status and prior adjuvant chemotherapy.

Results: Information about their
follow-up treatment after unblinding was available on 2247 women
originally assigned to PLAC and who were free of recurrence and alive
at the time of unblinding. Among them, 1601 crossed over from PLAC to
LET. Age, nodal status, endocrine symptomatology and being in the USA
as compared to Canada predicted for switching to LET (Luk C et al.,
ASCO 2005). The total number of breast cancer events in the three
groups since the original randomization is at present 342 with 211
deaths and median follow-up of 49 months. The adjusted HR of DFS
between LET and PLAC as well as PLAC - LET vs PLAC will be presented
together with updated analyses of toxicities, new diagnoses of
osteoporosis and clinical fractures, and cardiac events.

Conclusion: MA.17 was unblinded at
the first preplanned interim analysis because of a strong treatment
effect of LET. Among the clinical questions left unanswered is the
optimal duration of LET, long term toxicities and whether starting LET
after a prolonged period off tamoxifen is of benefit. This analysis
will address these questions. To further answer the question of
duration we have also begun enrolling on MA17R, a re-randomization of
all participants completing LET on MA.17 to a further 5 years of
treatment.

## 17

## Analysis of duration of letrozole extended adjuvant therapy as
measured by hazard ratios of disease recurrence over time for patients on
NCIC CTG MA.17.

## Ingle JN, Goss PE, Tu D. Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN;
Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA; Cancer
Research Institute, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada

Background: MA.17 randomized 5187
postmenopausal women with early stage breast cancer after 5 years of
tamoxifen to 5 years of letrozole (L) or placebo (P). After 30 months
median follow-up (range 1.5–61.4 months), disease-free survival (DFS)
was superior in the overall study population for L (HR 0.58 with 95%
CI 0.45 . 0.76; p =  0.00004). The following analysis was conducted to
examine the relationship in the extended adjuvant setting between
duration of letrozole therapy and hazard for recurrence.

Materials and Methods: A
nonparametric kernel method was used to estimate the hazard rates and
hazard ratio, as a measure of treatment effect, at various time
points. A Cox model with a timedependent covariate was used to test
the trend of the hazard ratio over time. 

Results: For placebo patients, there
was an increasing risk of disease recurrence over time after
discontinuing prior tamoxifen. For letrozole patients, the risk of
recurrence appeared to peak at around two years of treatment and
decrease thereafter. The hazard ratio (letrozole/placebo) for
recurrence showed a statistically significant (p = 0.02) trend to a
decrease over time indicating a greater benefit of letrozole over
time.

Conclusions: This analysis of the
hazard ratios for disease recurrence over time between the letrozole
and placebo arms of MA.17 indicates that, at least out to 4 years, the
longer patients are exposed to letrozole, the greater the benefit. The
increasing HR in the placebo group is of note and emphasizes the
residual risk of recurrence that exists in women completing 5 years of
tamoxifen. To further address the issue of duration of letrozole
therapy, a rerandomization of all participants completing letrozole on
MA.17 to a further 5 years of treatment is underway.

## 18

## Switching from adjuvant tamoxifen to anastrozole in postmenopausal
women with hormone-responsive early breast cancer: a meta-analysis of the
ARNO 95 Trial, ABCSG Trial 8, and the ITA Trial.

## Jonat W, Gnant M, Boccardo F, Kaufmann M, Rubagotti A, Jakesz R.
University of Frankfurt, Germany; Vienna Medical School, Austria;
National Cancer Research Institute & University of Genoa,
Italy

Background: The results of the
combined analysis of ABCSG Trial 8 and the ARNO 95 trial have shown
that switching postmenopausal patients with hormone-sensitive early
breast cancer from tamoxifen to anastrozole after 2 years’ adjuvant
therapy results in a significant improvement in event-free survival
compared with continuing therapy with tamoxifen. Results from the
original and recently updated analyses of the ITA trial, in
node-positive women only, also demonstrated the significant clinical
benefits of switching to anastrozole after 2–3 years of adjuvant
tamoxifen. We intend to report a meta-analysis of the latest data from
these three trials. The purpose of the meta-analysis is to investigate
whether the benefits in event-free survival seen in the individual
trials translate into benefits in long-term outcomes, including
improved overall survival, and thereby gain further insight into the
value of the switching approach.

Methods: ABCSG Trial 8, the ARNO 95
trial and the ITA trial all investigate whether switching
postmenopausal women with hormone-sensitive early breast cancer to
anastrozole after 2–3 years of tamoxifen treatment is more effective
than continuing on tamoxifen. The designs of the three trials are
broadly similar, allowing a meta-analysis of the trials to be
performed.For each therapy arm, the distribution of the event-free
survival and overall survival times will be estimated using the
Kaplan-Meier method, and Kaplan-Meier curves will be prepare.D

Results: Over 3500 eligible patients
across the three trials will be included in the meta-analysis, 2262
from ABCSG Trial 8, 962 from ARNO 95 and 448 from ITA. The data for
the efficacy endpoints will be presented, with a focus on the
long-term endpoints, particularly overall survival.

Conclusions: We expect the results of
the meta-analysis to demonstrate that the benefits in event-free
survival seen in the switching arms of the individual trials translate
into overall benefits in long-term endpoints, and thereby confirm that
postmenopausal women currently receiving adjuvant tamoxifen should be
switched to anastrozole upon completion of 2–3 years’
treatment.

## 19

## The influence of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) on tamoxifen
induced vasomotor symptoms.

## Sestak I, Kealy R, Edwards R, Cuzick J. Centre for Epidemiology,
Mathematics & Statistics, London, United Kingdom

Background: Tamoxifen is an effective
drug, both for preventing and treating breast cancer, but its role in
prevention is limited by its side effect profile, particularly related
to endometrial problems and thrombotic events. Non-life threatening
side effects such as vasomotor symptoms also have an important
influence in its use for prevention. In the IBIS-I study, 7,154 women
at increased risk of breast cancer were either randomised to tamoxifen
20mg/day or placebo for 5 years.

Methods: Women in the IBIS-I study
gave detailed information of any vasomotor symptoms at each 6 monthly
follow-up visit. Vasomotor symptoms were evaluated according to
follow-up time, severity and use of hormone replacement
therapy.

Results: After a median follow-up of
84 months, 2,537 (70.9%) women in the tamoxifen group and 2,041
(57.1%) in the placebo group reported hot flushes of any severity
(OR = 1.80, 95% CI 1.63–1.99). The majority of newly developed hot
flushes were reported in the first two follow-up months, indicating
that vasomotor symptoms are early side effects of tamoxifen. Women in
both treatment arms reported mainly mild to moderate hot flushes,
whereas the rate of severe hot flushes was smaller, but more related
to tamoxifen usage (12.2% vs. 6.6%, OR = 1.97, 95% CI 1.66–2.33). The
risk of having hot flushes was lower in women over 55 (OR = 0.62, 95%
CI 0.41–0.94) and in women with a greater time of menopause
(OR = 0.52, 95% CI 0.31–0.88). For women on tamoxifen, the risk of
having hot flushes was associated with the use of HRT at entry (75.4%
baseline HRT vs. 68.7% never HRT, OR = 1.39, 95% CI 1.16–1.66).
Baseline HRT use did not have a significant effect on the occurrence
of hot flushes within the first 6 follow-up months for tamoxifen
patients (60.8% HRT vs. 49.2% no HRT, p = 0.1, table 1) whereas for
placebo patients a difference was seen (22.9% HRT vs. 34.3% no HRT,
p = 0.03). For those who were still reporting hot flushes on tamoxifen
at month 12, use of HRT didn’t show an effect in reducing their
incidence, whereas in the placebo group HRT use did lead to
significantly fewer hot flushes (20.4% HRT vs. 39.0% no HRT,
p = 0.0003).

Conclusions: Overall, HRT use at
entry and HRT use during the trial only prevented women in the placebo
group from developing hot flushes. Commencing the use of HRT to reduce
vasomotor symptoms did not lead to a reduction in hot flushes for
women taking tamoxifen. Other ways need to be found to reduce
tamoxifen induced vasomotor symptoms 

## 20

## Continued technical results of NSABP B-32: Does a positive sentinel
node biopsy require an axillary dissection?

## Julian TB, Anderson S, Brown A, Krag D, Harlow S, Bear H,
Ashikaga T, Weaver D, Miller B, Jalovec L, Frazier T, Noyes RD,
Robidoux A, Scarth H, Mammolito D, McCready D, Mamounas E, Costantino
J, Wolmark N. NSABP Investigators & NSABP Operations &
Biostatistical Center, Pittsburgh, PA; University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT

Background: The standard approach
following a positive sentinel node (SN) biopsy is to perform an
axillary dissection (AD). However a majority of clinically node
negative patients are at low risk for positive non-sentinel axillary
nodes. Factors affecting the need for an axillary dissection following
a positive SN biopsy are evaluated in NSABP B-32.

Materials and Methods: After
stratification, women with operable invasive breast cancer and
clinically negative nodes were randomized to Sentinel Node Resection
(SNR) with immediate conventional Axillary Disection (AD) [Group 1] or
to SNR without AD [Group 2]. Group 2 patients with positive SNs
underwent AD. A multivariate analysis of SN positive patients for whom
both a SNR and an AD had been performed was used to assess the need
for axillary dissection following sentinel node biopsy. Their nodes
were classified as either SNs or non-sentinel nodes (NSNs), defined as
all axillary dissection nodes plus any intramammary or other nodes
that were not resected as SNs.

Results: Between May 1999 and
February 2004, 5,611 patients were entered into NSABP Protocol B-32.
2,807 were assigned to Group 1 and 2,804 were assigned to Group 2.
There was a combined total of 1,361 SN positive patients with AD from
Group 1 and 2. Data from 1,355 patients were available for
multivariate analysis. The percentage of patients with at least one
positive NSN was found to be significantly higher in Group 2 than
Group 1 (41.9% vs. 35.5%, respectively, p = 0.0081). The percentage of
patients with at least one positive NSN was significantly increased
with an increase in clinical tumor size (p = 0.0004), with an increase
in the number of positive SNs (p<0.001), and with an increase in
the number of total NSNs removed (p<0.0001). The percentage of
patients with at least one positive NSN significantly decreased when
the tumor was not in the upper outer quadrant (p = 0.02), as the
number of hot spots identified increased (p = 0.0024), and as the
number of SNs removed increased (p<0.000l). Age at study entry,
type of biopsy performed, histologic grade and ER and PR status were
not significant multivariate predictors of patients with positive
NSNs.
A predictive model for the probability of having at least one
positive NSN following positive SN biopsy will be presente.D

Discussion: These results support the
need for an axillary dissection in most patients following the
identification of positive sentinel nodes to assess staging and
prognosis and aid in treatment planning.

## 21

## Significance of sentinel lymph node micrometastasis on survival for
patients with invasive breast cancer.

## Cox C, Vrcel V, Riker A, White L, Allred N, Ramos D, Myers M,
Dupont E, King J, Cantor A, Diaz N. H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center,
Tampa, FL

OBJECTIVE: The overall objective of
this study was to test the impact of micrometastatic carcinoma
detected by sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy on survival in invasive
breast cancer patients. To do so, we compared survival outcomes in
such patients with a negative SLN biopsy and the outcomes of those
with micrometastatic disease in a SLN.

METHODS: The charts of 2145 invasive
breast cancer patients with pathology reports of SLN with either
micrometastatic or no metastatic disease were reviewed. The SLN
H&E and immunostained (cytokeratin) slides of patients with the
diagnosis of micrometastatic carcinoma were analyzed and reclassified
according to the 6th edition of the AJCC
Cancer Staging Manual. Tumor deposits >0.2 mm but not >2 mm were
classified as N1mi. Patients with SLNs with isolated tumor cells not
>0.2 mm were classified as N0(i+). SLNs with no epithelial cells on
either H&E or immunostaining were classified as N0(i-). Kaplan
Meier graphs of overall survival (OS) and disease free survival (DFS)
were done.

RESULTS: Of the 2145 patients
reviewed, 1854 (87%) were N0(i-). 291(13%) of our patients had single
cells and/or small cell clusters or micrometastatic disease. 138 (6%)
were reclassified as N1mi and 153 (7%) as N0(i+). OS and DFS of the
patients with N1mi SLN differed significantly from patients with
N0(i-) SLN (p = 0.005 and 0.016 respectively; Figures 1 and 2).

CONCLUSIONS: The detection of
micrometastatic carcinoma in the SLNs of invasive breast cancer
patients, as presently defined by the AJCC, is a significant indicator
of survival. Subset analysis of N0(i+) patients will be presented.
Results of the ACOSOG Z0010 trial may validate the latter results and
clarify the clinical significance of N0(i+) detected by SLN
biopsy. 

## 22

## Prospective study of axillary radiation without axillary dissection
for breast cancer patients with a positive sentinel node.

## Gadd M, Harris J, Taghian A, Hughes K, O’Neill A, Powell S,
Christian R, Lesnikoski B, Kaelin C, Rhei E, Iglehart J, Habin K,
Oberg J, Younger J, Winer E, Smith B. Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA; Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA; Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA

Background: Sentinel node biopsy
(SNB) provides reliable pathologic staging of the axilla. A negative
SNB now requires no further axillary treatment, but completion
dissection is standard for SNB+ patients. Approximately 50% of
patients will have no additional positive nodes at axillary
dissection, but will have a 15–25% risk of lymphedema or chronic pain
as a result of more extensive axillary surgery. Earlier series of
clinically node negative breast cancer patients have shown axillary
radiation (RT) as effective as dissection in preventing recurrence,
but with lower rates of lymphedema and other complications. As
systemic therapy decisions are now less dependant on the number of
positive axillary nodes, we proposed axillary RT instead of dissection
in SNB+ patients as an approach to lower morbidity but maintain good
local control.

Materials and Methods: 560 clinical
T1-2, N0 patients, planned for breast-conservation prospectively
underwent SNB from 1/00–2/04. They received axillary RT without
dissection if SNB+. RT was delivered as a
3rd field (49 Gy in 27 fractions). SNB+
was defined as any metastatic deposit by H&E. At 6 month
intervals, arm circumference and grip strength were measured, and
quality of life questionnaires were complete.D

Results: 73 patients underwent breast
conservation and received axillary RT with median follow-up of
32 months. All patients received systemic therapy. One axillary
recurrence (1/73) was noted 17 months after RT and the patient remains
NED 2.5 years after salvage dissection. One patient reported transient
arm edema at 6 months but remains free of arm edema at 4 years.
Additional benefits included minimal arm pain or numbness, better
range of motion, and less time out of work.

Conclusion: Early follow-up
demonstrates extremely low rates of arm symptoms after SNB plus
axillary RT and a low rate of early axillary failure. These early data
support further study of axillary RT instead of dissection in SNB+
breast cancer patients.

## 23

## The incidence of venous thromboembolism in breast cancer
patients.

## Chew HK, Wun T, Harvey D, Zhou H, White RH. University of
California Davis, Sacramento, CA; University of California Davis,
Davis, CA

Background: Among patients with newly
diagnosed breast cancer, the incidence of venous thromboembolism (VTE)
and risk factors associated with VTE have not been described in
detail.

Objectives: To determine the
incidence of VTE, risk factors associated with VTE and the effect of
VTE on death among breast cancer patients.

Methods: The California Cancer
Registry was merged with the California Patient Discharge Data Set,
and the number of VTE events determined among cases diagnosed between
1993–95 and 1997–1999 with at least 2 years follow up.

Results: Among 108,255 cases (99%
women, mean age 62±16 years), 61% (66,475) were diagnosed with
localized disease, 31% (32,990) with regional disease, 4% (4499) with
metastatic disease, and 4% (4291) with unknown stage. Histological
subtypes included adenocarcinoma (82%), lobular (8%), carcinoma not
otherwise specified (4%), mucinous (3%), tubular (1.5%), medullary
(1%), and papillary (<1%). The cumulative incidence of VTE was 975
cases (0.9%) after 1 year, and 1,306 cases (1.2%) after 2 years.
Expressed as events /100 patient-years, the incidence rate was 0.9 and
0.7 during year-1 and year-2, respectively. The cumulative incidence
of upper extremity VTE was <0.5% at 3, 6, and 12 months after
breast cancer diagnosis. In a multivariate model, significant
predictors of VTE in year 1 were: Asian race (HR = 0.3, CI:0.2–0.5),
advancing age (HR = 1.9 if >75 years versus <45 years, CI;
1.9–4.8), stage (HR = 2.2, CI:1.9–2.5 for regional and HR = 6.5,
CI:5.3–7.9 for metastatic, versus localized disease), and
breast-related surgery within 61 days of diagnosis (HR = 0.6, CI:
0.5–0.7). Histological subtype was not a significant predictor of VTE.
In risk-adjusted Cox models stratified by SEER stage, VTE was a strong
predictor for death within 1 year for all stages: HR = 6.0 (CI:3.4–10)
for localized, HR = 2.1 (CI:1.3–3.9) for regional, and HR = 1.5
(CI:1.3–1.8) for metastatic disease.

Discussion: In this large
population-based study, approximately 1% of patients with breast
cancer developed VTE within 1 year. Metastatic disease was the
strongest predictor of VTE. Interestingly, cases undergoing breast
cancer-related surgery had a significantly lower risk of VTE. For all
cancer stages, diagnosis of VTE was associated with a higher risk of
death within 1 year.

## 44

## Central review of ER, PgR and HER-2 in BIG 1–98 evaluating
letrozole vs. tamoxifen as adjuvant endocrine therapy for postmenopausal
women with receptor-positive breast cancer.

## Viale G, Regan M, Dell’Orto P, Del Curto B, Braye S, Orosz Z,
Brown R, Olszewski WP, Knox F, Oehlschlegel C, Thürlimann B. The BIG
1–98 Collaborative International Breast Cancer Study Group, Bern,
Switzerland

Background: The BIG 1–98 trial, a
large international Phase III study, evaluated letrozole (n = 4003)
vs. tamoxifen (n = 4007) as initial adjuvant endocrine therapy for
postmenopausal women with receptor-positive breast cancer. Results of
the primary core analysis were presented in St. Gallen and ASCO in
2005 and showed that letrozole significantly improved DFS as compared
with tamoxifen (HR = 0.81, 95% CI 0.71–0.93). In subgroup analysis of
the BIG 1–98 trial according to locally-assessed progesterone-receptor
(PgR) status, the magnitude of benefit of letrozole vs. tamoxifen on
disease-free survival (DFS) did not vary. This contrasts to the ATAC
trial where the magnitude of the effect of anastrozole vs. tamoxifen
was greater in estrogen-receptor-positive/
progesterone-receptor-negative (ER+/PgR-) tumors than in ER+/PgR+
tumors. A central review of tumor tissue is being performed for BIG
1–98.

Methods: As of May 2005, over 3000
tumor blocks have been collected for the 8010 patients in this
analysis. The IBCSG Central Pathology Laboratory is evaluating the
tumors for ER and PgR content by immunohistochemistry (IHC), and for
HER-2 immunoreactivity by IHC and by FISH for IHC 1+ or 2+
tumors.

Results: In the original study, local
assessment showed that 97.9% of the 8010 patients had ER+ tumors, and
63.1%, 20.4%, 14.4%, and 1.8% were classified ER+/PgR+, ER+/PgR-,
ER+/PgR? (PgR? = PgR unknown), and ER-/PgR+ respectively. DFS was
improved with letrozole among ER+/PgR+ (HR = 0.84, 95% CI 0.69–1.03),
among ER+/PgR- (HR = 0.83, 95% CI 0.62–1.10) and among ER+/ PgR?
(HR = 0.72, 95% CI 0.53–0.98) cohorts. DFS will be reanalyzed
according to centrally-assessed ER and PgR status, and explored
according to quantitative values of receptor levels (% staining cells)
using subpopulation treatment effect pattern plot (STEPP) methodology.
The role of HER-2 overexpression will also be evaluate.D

Discussion: The availability of
centrally-assessed ER, PgR and HER-2 by IHC in this large population
of postmenopausal women with ER+ breast cancer will provide a reliable
evaluation of the role of PgR and HER-2 as predictive factors of
response to letrozole vs. tamoxifen as initial adjuvant endocrine
therapy.

## 24

## Genetic alterations associated with early hyperplastic precursors
of breast cancer.

## Lee S, Tsimelzon A, Wu Y, Mao S, Mohsin SK, Medina D, Allred DC.
Baylor College of Medicine/The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX; Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX

Background/Purpose: Enlargement of
normal terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs) by hyperplastic columnar
epithelial cells is a very common alteration in the adult female human
breast. These hyperplastic enlarged lobular units (HELUs), known by
many synonyms (e.g. columnar alteration of lobules), may further
progress into several types of benign and premalignant lesions,
including atypical ductal hyperplasia. In this sense, HELUs can be
viewed as the earliest histologically identifiable potential precursor
of breast cancer and the biological alterations responsible for their
development are reasonable targets for efficient prevention therapy.
The purpose of this study was to evaluate and compare gene expression
profiles between TDLUs and HELUs to gain insight into the causes of
very early multi-potential hyperplasia.

Design/Methods: RNA was extracted
(Ambion Optimum) from epithelial cells harvested by laser-capture
microdissection from histological slides containing matched pairs of
adjacent TDLUs and HELUs prepared from 7 formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded clinical samples of breast tissue (n = 14 total
samples). The RNA was amplified two rounds (Arcturus Paradise) and
evaluated for the expression of essentially the entire human genome
(Affymetrix U133-Human X3P microarrays). Results were evaluated with
dChip, BRB-ArrayTools, and Array Analyzer software.

Results: In preliminary supervised
comparisons, 218 genes showed >3-fold differences in expression in
HELUs compared to TDLUs (range 3-to-21 fold; average 4.6 fold;
p<.01), including prominent relative increases in AREG, EREG, ESR1,
PTHLH, RBP1, and IGF1R, and prominent relative decreases in EGF, EGFR,
PDGFC, and IGF1. Other preliminary analyses showed highly significant
(p<.005) differential activation of at least 16 intersecting
biological pathways, including signal transduction through EGFR and
HER2, anti-apoptosis through IGF-1R signaling, cell migration/adhesion
through thrombin and PI3K activation, and increased MTA3 signaling
through ER. Plans are to extend the study to 10 matched pairs of TDLUs
and HELUs and to validate some of the most interesting genes by
qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry in the arrayed samples as well as in
a larger set of independent samples.

Conclusions: HELUs are a very common
alteration of normal TDLUs and the earliest histologically
identifiable potential precursor of breast cancer. They show highly
significant differences in the expression of many genes which may be
involved in their development, especially involving the HER family of
surface membrane receptors and their ligands and, thus, may be
amenable to prevention strategies targeting these and other
molecules.

## 25

## Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
mammosphere formation; effect of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and notch
signalling pathways on self renewal capacity.

## Farnie G, Brennan K, Clarke RB, Bundred NJ. University of
Manchester; University Hospital of South Manchester
The cancer stem cell hypothesis suggests that targeting stem cells
in cancer will improve current therapeutic strategies. In vitro culture of mammospheres (MS),
analogous to neurospheres which enrich for brain stem cells, has been
used to study the factors that affect stem cell self-renewal in DCIS.
Patients (n = 19) undergoing mastectomy for DCIS provided written
informed consent to sample DCIS tissue.
Single cell suspensions of enzymatically digested DCIS samples were
seeded at 10,000 cells/ml either in non-adherent plates or matrigel.
DCIS MS formation was assessed by counting the number of mammospheres
formed (>60mm) after 3 days in non-adherent suspension culture
(n = 15).
DCIS MS in non-adherent suspension culture contained both myo
(cytokeratin 14) and luminal (cytokeratin 18) epithelial cells,
expressed ErbB2 (similar to the original DCIS) and Ki67, a
proliferation marker. Dissociated DCIS MS recapitulated DCIS in
matrigel forming solid ductal structures expressing both luminal and
myo-epithelial cells. High Grade (85% estrogen receptor positive, 100%
erbB2 positive) MS forming ability was significantly greater than low
grade (100% estrogen receptor positive, 60% erbB2 positive) MS
(p = 0.02). Low grade MS formation significantly increased after
addition of EGF (p = 0.002) and although both low and high grade DCIS
MS formation were decreased after gefitinib in the presence of EGF
(p<0.01), only high grade MS formation decreased in the presence of
gefitinib when no EGF was present in the media (p = 0.001, see table).
Therefore suggesting that high grade DCIS MS have an autocrine feed
back loop which is signalling via the EGF receptor. 

Activated Notch Intra-Cellular Domain (NICD) was increased in 11
DCIS samples (but not normal breast) when measured by Western
blotting, DCIS MS also expressed NICD and BMI-1 (a downstream target
of Notch). Notch inhibition using both -secretase inhibitor (10 M) and a Notch 4 receptor blocking antibody reduced
DCIS MS formation (0.18±0.02, p<0.0005).
These data indicate that the Notch and EGFR signalling pathways are
critical to DCIS mammosphere growth. Combinations of inhibitors of
these pathways are likely to have therapeutic value in DCIS as
adjuvant therapy.
Funded by the Breast Cancer Campaign, grant number 2001:201.

## 26

## Cell of origin determines histological type, tumorigenicity and
metastatic behavior of breast tumors.

## Ince TA, Weinberg RA. Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research; Harvard Medical School; Brigham & Women’s Hospital,
Boston, MA
Background: The multi-step genetic progression model of cancer
postulates that mutations that accumulate in a tumor account for its
biology. This “mutation-centric” view does not fully take into account
the contribution of traits tumors inherit from their “cell of origin”
(normal cells without any genetic alterations). We investigated the
contribution of cell-of-origin to tumor phenotype by comparing tumors
derived from two different normal human breast epithelial cell
populations.
Materials and Methods: Breast epithelial cells were grown in two
different media; the conventional medium MEGM, and a novel defined
medium (WIT) that we have developed. MEGM and WIT select for and
maintain mutually exclusive populations of primary breast epithelial
cell types that were transformed in parallel by introduction of hTERT,
SV40 ER and H-Ras in retroviral expression vectors.
Results: the tumorigenic derivatives of the two different breast
epithelial cells (HMLER and BPLER) were injected into mice for
comparison of tumor type and behavior. While HMLER cells formed
keratinizing squamous cell carcinomas, BPLER cells formed
adenocarcinomas. Suprisingly, there was orders of magnitude difference
in tumorigenicity e.g.; while injection of only 102 BPLER cells was
adequate for tumor formation, HMLER cells required injection of at
least 106 cells. Moreover, HMLER tumors were non-metastatic; in
contrast, 80% of BPLER tumors metastasized to lungs.
Discussion: Since HMLER and BPLER tumors are identical with respect
to the genes driving the neoplastic process, we conclude that the
observed differences in tumor morphology, tumorigenicity and
metastatic behavior must arise from differences that were inherent to
the normal cells-of-origin of these tumors. If further experiments
confirm these results it would dramatically alter our view of tumor
progression and establish tumor cell-of-origin as a central prognostic
and therapeutic factor in management of cancer.

## 27

## Magnitude and laterality of breast cancer risk according to
histologic type of atypical hyperplasia: results from the Nurses’ Health
study.

## Collins LC, Baer HJ, Tamimi RM, Connolly JL, Colditz GA, Schnitt
SJ. Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School;
Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Harvard School of Public Health; Harvard
Center for Cancer Prevention, Boston, MA

Background: Prior clinical and
epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that women with a benign
breast biopsy showing atypical hyperplasia (AH) are at increased risk
for the development of breast cancer. However, the details of the
relationship between histologic type of AH (i.e., atypical ductal
hyperplasia [ADH] vs atypical lobular hyperplasia [ALH]) and the
magnitude and laterality of breast cancer risk are less
well-define.D

Methods: We conducted a case-control
study of benign breast disease (BBD) and breast cancer risk nested
within the Nurses’ Health Study. Cases were women with
biopsy-confirmed BBD who subsequently developed breast cancer.
Controls were women with biopsy-confirmed BBD who were free from
breast cancer; they were matched to cases on year of birth and year of
benign biopsy. Slides from 1848 breast biopsies originally diagnosed
as benign (353 cases; 1495 controls) were reviewed and categorized as
showing either non-proliferative lesions, proliferative lesions
without atypia, or AH. Those showing AH were further categorized as
ADH or ALH using the criteria of Page, et al. Unconditional logistic
regression models were used to estimate odds ratios (ORs) and 95%
confidence intervals (CIs) for breast cancer risk according to
histologic subtype of BB.D

Results: Compared with women with
non-proliferative lesions, the OR for breast cancer among all women
with AH was 4.30 (95% CI, 2.96–6.23). However, the magnitude of the
breast cancer risk differed according to histologic type of AH. The OR
for the subsequent development of breast cancer among women with ALH
(33 cases; 38 controls) was 6.03 (95% CI 3.50–10.41) whereas the OR
for those with ADH (42 cases; 99 controls) was 3.24 (95% CI
2.07–5.08), and this difference approached statistical significance
(p = 0.08). Among the small subset of women whose benign biopsies
showed both ADH and ALH, the OR for breast cancer was 6.96 (95% CI
2.98–16.27). Overall, 60.6% of the breast cancers that developed in
women with AH were in the ipsilateral breast. While the risk of
ipsilateral breast cancer was higher among women with ALH than those
with ADH (64.3% vs 53.1%), this difference was not statistically
significant (p = 0.38).

Conclusions: All women with AH in a
benign breast biopsy are at a substantially increased risk for the
development of breast cancer, but the risk appears to be greater among
those with ALH than among those with ADH. Although the risk of cancer
in the ipsilateral breast was slightly higher among women with ALH
than ADH, this difference was not significant. Therefore, for the
purposes of clinical managment both ALH and ADH are best regarded as
markers of a generalized (bilateral) increase in breast cancer
risk.

## 28

## Multi-center validation of the 76-gene prognostic signature in
lymph node negative (LNN) primary breast cancer.

## Foekens JA, Atkins D, Sweep CGJ, Harbeck N, Paradiso A, Cufer T,
Eppenberger S, Daxenbichler G, Kotzsch M, Sieuwerts AM, Talantov D,
Timmermans M, Span PN, Tjan-Heijnen VCG, Specht K, Mangia A, Wight E,
Angerer J, Zito AF, Hoefler H, Berns EMJ, Golouh R, Barreton G,
Schittulli F, Schmitt M, Beex LVA, Klijn JGM, Wang Y. Erasmus MC,
Rotterdam, Netherlands; Veridex LLC, a Johnson & Johnson Company,
San Diego, CA; Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
Netherlands; Frauenklinik und Institut für Allgemeine Pathologie und
Pathologische Anatomie, Technische Universität, München, Germany;
National Cancer Institut, Bari, Italy; Institute of Oncology,
Ljubljana, Slovenia; Universitätshospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland;
Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria; Institut für Pathologie,
Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany

Background: In our earlier
genome-wide measurements of gene expression we have identified by a
single-center study a 76-gene signature that sub-classifies tumors and
may provide better means of risk assessment on an individual basis for
lymph node-negative (LNN) breast cancer patients (The Lancet
365:671–679, 2005). The aim of the present study was to validate this
gene signature in independent and more diverse populations of LNN
patients obtained from multiple institutions.

Material and Methods: Using
custom-designed Affymetrix VDX2 GeneChips we analyzed the expression
of the previously identified 76 genes by assessment of total RNA of
frozen tumour tissue specimens obtained from 180 LNN patients who had
not received any adjuvant systemic treatment and from 55 ER+, LNN
patients who had received tamoxifen. As clinical endpoints for
prognostic value, distant metastasis-free survival (DMFS) was
use.D

Results: In both of these completely
independent validation sets, the 76-gene signature proved to be highly
informative in identifying patients who eventually will develop
distant metastasis within 5 years. In the 180 untreated patients from
4 institutions, the 76-gene signature gave a hazard ratio of 7.41 [95%
CI 2.63–20.9], even when corrected for traditional prognostic factors
in multivariate analysis (11.36 [2.67–48.4]). The sensitivity for DMFS
was 90% and the specificity 50%. In the 55 ER+, tamoxifen-treated
patients from 7 institutions, a subset of a larger ongoing study, the
76-gene signature gave a hazard ratio of 6.15 [95% CI 0.78–48.7], when
corrected for traditional prognostic factors in multivariate analysis
(6.31 [0.77–51.7]). The sensitivity for DMFS was 86% and the
specificity 40%.

Discussion: Our data provide a strong
methodological and clinical multi-center validation of the pre-defined
prognostic 76-gene signature in both untreated and tamoxifen-treated
LNN breast cancer patients with similar prognostic power as in our
original single-center study.

## 29

## Association between the 21-gene recurrence score assay (RS) and
risk of locoregional failure in node-negative, ER-positive breast cancer:
results from NSABP B-14 and NSABP B-20.

## Mamounas E, Tang G, Bryant J, Paik S, Shak S, Costantino J,
Watson D, Wickerham DL, Wolmark N. NSABP, Pittsburgh, PA; Aultman
Health Foundation, Canton, OH; Genomic Health, Inc., Redwood City, CA;
Allegheny General Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA

Background: RS has been validated to
quantify risk of distant recurrence in tamoxifen-treated patients with
N-, ER+ breast cancer. In this report we investigate the association
between RS and risk for loco-regional recurrence in N-, ER+ breast
cancer patients treated in two NSABP protocols (NSABP B-14 and NSABP
B-20).

Subjects and Methods: Details on
patient eligibility, methods of RNA extraction, the RT-PCR methodology
used and the genes included in the RS have been previously published
in detail (Paik, NEJM 2004). The primary endpoint for this analysis
was time to first local or regional recurrence (LRR). Occurrence of
distant metastasis, 2nd primary cancer and death before LRR were
censored in the analysis. For the correlation between RS and LRR in
tamoxifen-treated patients, such patients from B-14 and B-20 were
combined in one group. The correlation between RS and LRR was also
evaluated in the placebo-treated patients from NSABP B-14 and in the
tamoxifen plus chemotherapy treated patients from NSABP B-20.

Results: The present analyses include
a total of 895 tamoxifen-treated patients (668 from B-14 and 227 from
B-20), 355 placebo-treated patients (from B-14) and 424 chemotherapy
and tamoxifen-treated patients (from B-20). LRR in tamoxifen-treated
patients was significantly associated with RS (see Table,
p<0.00001). There were also similar associations in placebo-treated
patients from B-14 (p = 0.022) and in tamoxifen plus
chemotherapy-treated patients from B-20 (p = 0.028). 

In multivariate analysis, RS was a significant predictor of LRR in
tamoxifen-treated patients independent of age, clinical tumor size and
tumor grade.

Conclusion: Similar to the
association between RS and risk for distant recurrence, the present
analyses demonstrate that such an association also exists between RS
and risk for LRR. This information may have clinical implications
relative to locoregional therapy decisions and follow up requirements
for patients with node-negative, ER-positive breast cancer.

## 30

## A functional luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor polymorphism
predicts adverse outcome in premenopausal breast cancer
patients.

## Piersma D, Themmen APN, Verhoef-Post M, Look MP, Klijn JGM,
Foekens JA, Uitterlinden AG, Pols HAP, Berns EMJJ. Erasmus MC-Daniel
den Hoed Cancer Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Erasmus MC, Rotterdam,
Netherlands

Background: In addition to indirect
epidemiological evidence, multiple studies in animals indicate a
carcinogenic role of estrogens in breast cancer. The pituitary
gonadotropins Luteinizing Hormone (LH) and Follicle Stimulating
Hormone are important regulators of estrogen production in
premenopausal women. Considering the role of LH in estrogen production
and potential effect of estrogens on mammary cells, LH-RH, LH and LH
Receptor (LHR) gene variants may have functional consequences in
breast cancer development and/or its progression. We report the impact
of polymorphisms in these genes on function and on disease outcome in
breast cancer patients.

Methods: The associations between a
LH-RH gene polymorphism and the polymorphic Leu-Gln insertion (insLQ)
in the signal peptide encoded by exon 1 of the LHR gene with
clinico-pathological features and (disease free) survival was studied
in a large cohort of 751 breast cancer patients with complete
follow-up. Functional analyses were carried out using transfection
studies. All statistical tests were two-side.D

Results: The mechanism of the effect
of insLQ on LHR function involves increased receptor sensitivity and
higher plasma membrane expression (insLQ-LHR has 1.4 higher Bmax;
p = 0.0006), rendering the insLQ-LHR allele more active.
The frequency of the insLQ-LHR allele in breast cancer patients
(0.28) was not different from non-patient cohorts (0.29, n = 5399
controls). Hetero- or homozygous presence of the insLQ allele in the
LHR was identified as an independent adverse prognostic factor for
relapse, especially in premenopausal and obese women. This was not
significant in postmenopausal patients.
We found an association between the insLQ-LHR and tumor size and
shorter overall survival and disease-free survival (DFS). The
prognostic value of the insLQ allele was tested in the multivariate
model for DFS, including classical prognostic factors: age, menopausal
status, nodal stuatus, tumor size, differentiation grade and receptor
status. Although larger tumors were significantly more often observed
in the insLQ carriers versus the non-carriers, the presence of insLQ
independently predicts DFS (p = 0.003) in a multivariate
analysis.
The adverse effect on DFS was particularly observed in
premenopausal women (HR 1.52; 1.11–2.08: p = 0.009) and especially in
obese premenopausal women (HR 2.56; CI 1.03–6.37; p = 0.04).
Interestingly, when insLQ-LHR was combined with the LH-RH gene status,
the DFS of premenopausal women was reduced by another 50%.

Conclusion: The insLQ polymorphism
increases LHR activity, thereby shortening breast cancer disease-free
survival, probably by increasing estrogen exposure in female carriers.
Prospective studies will reveal the value of different genotypic
subgroups as a determinant for patient-tailored treatment with drugs
that interfere with the LH-LHR system.

## 31

## Phenotypes for endocrine resistance can be identified by RNA
microarray of sequential biopsies and are more variable than those
predicting for tumour response.

## Miller WR, Krause A, Evans DB, Renshaw L, Murray J, Larionov A,
Anderson TJ, White S, Hampton G, Walker JR, Ho S, Dixon MJ. University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom; Novartis Pharma AG,
Basel, Switzerland; Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research,
Basel, Switzerland; Novartis Genomic Institute, San Diego

Background: Optimal management of
breast cancer by endocrine therapy requires identification of markers
predicting for response/resistance so that treatment may target
responsive tumours. This study uses RNA microarrays combined with
neoadjuvant treatment to identify molecular phenotypes predicting for
tumour hormone sensitivity and resistance.

Materials and Methods: 52
postmenopausal women with large primary ER-rich breast cancers were
treated neoadjuvantly with letrozole (2.5 mg daily) for 3 months;
clinical response was determined by serial ultrasound measurements of
the primary tumour. RNA from tumour biopsies taken before and after
14 days treatment was hybridized on Affymetrix U133A chips.
Informative probe sets were categorized according to response by
logistic regression and Wilcoxon test followed by Random Forests
analyses.

Results: 37 (71%) tumours were
classified as clinical responders (>50% reduction in volume at
3 months). Microarray analysis of pre- and 14-day biopsies identified
291 covariates (84 baseline, 72 14-day and 135 change) that were
highly predictive of response status. Probe set ontology related to
genes involved in protein synthesis/degradation, transcription, signal
transduction and cell proliferation/apoptosis. Blinded hierarchical
clustering separated responding and non-responding tumours entirely,
apart from a single case. A dissimilarity matrix demonstrated
responding tumours formed a homogeneous group whereas non-responding
tumours showed heterogeneous profiles which were distinct from
responding tumours.

Discussion: Molecular profiling of
baseline and early changes with treatment predict for subsequent
clinical response to endocrine treatment. Signatures for response
offer reassurance of successful therapy, whereas those for resistance
are indicative of the need for other therapy. The diverse phenotypes
associated with resistance suggest the presence of multiple pathways
capable of bypassing therapeutic restraints.

## 32

## A reliable new model of estrogen dependent human breast cancer
lymph node metastasis.

## Harrell JC, Sartorius CA, Horwitz KB. University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO

Background: Breast cancer metastases
kill 40,000 American women yearly. The principal sites to which breast
cancers first spread are the axillary lymph nodes (LN). Importantly,
70–80% of primary breast cancers are estrogen (ER) and progesterone
(PR) receptor positive and more than 80% of these LN metastases retain
ER or PR. To date, no reliable models exist to study spread of ER+
breast cancers into LN and the influence of hormones on this
process.

Methods: ER+/PR+ MCF7 cells, and ER+,
PR− or PR+ T47D cells were tagged with new, ultra bright
fluors—ZsGreen or DsRedexpress—by retroviral transduction, then flow
sorted for the brightest 10% of the population and expanded in
culture. Ovariectomized nude mice were injected into the abdominal
(#4) mammary glands with one-million fluorescent human breast cancer
cells in 100% matrigel. Mice were untreated (-E) or estradiol
supplemented (+E). Tumor growth was monitored weekly for 12 weeks and
tumor cell dissemination was monitored by whole body fluorescent
imaging, and by microscopy at necropsy. PR and ER were measured in
primary and disseminated tumors by immunohistochemistry.

Results: Tumor growth of all cell
lines is absolutely E dependent. Tumor fluorescence is stable and
superficial LN metastases can be monitored in living mice without use
of anesthetics. At necropsy, stably fluorescent metastatic cells can
be seen microscopically in LN and occasionally in distant organs.
Metastases are ER+. They are also PR+ if the primary tumor was PR+. LN
dissemination rates correlate with primary tumor size; ~70% of tumors
>50 mm2 in size spread to LN.
Fluorescent tumor cell boluses are observed in lymphatics, often
accompanied by extensive lymphangiogenesis.

Discussion: We have developed a
reliable model of ER+/PR+ breast cancer LN metastasis that allows
study of hormone regulation of this process within the tumor, the
lymphatics and LN. The model also allows direct monitoring of
treatments aimed at blocking tumor LN metastases.

## 33

## Estrogen receptor alpha antagonizes p53 function by direct
interaction—a novel cellular mechanism with a clinical
correlate.

## Das GM, Liu W, Konduri SD, Nayak BK, Bansal S, Rajasekaran SA,
Abraham BK, Brauch H, Fritz P, Srivastava P, Rajasekaran AK. Roswell
Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY; University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX; University of California at
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA; Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of
Clinical Pharmacology, Auerbachstr 112, Stuttgart, Germany
Background: Estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) promotes cell
proliferation in breast tumors whereas tumor suppressor protein p53
impedes cell cycle progression. Whether there is a direct link between
these two opposing pathways has remained unclear. Here we report that
in human breast cancer cells, ERalpha binds directly to p53 and
negatively regulates its function.
Material and Methods: Multiple experimental methods such as
electophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), immunoprecipitation, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay were used to demonstrate
that p53 and ERalpha co-exist in a complex in vitro and in vivo in
MCF-7 cells. Further, GST pull-down assays were used to analyze direct
binding of ERalpha with p53. Immunoflourescence followed by confocal
microscopy was used tom show nuclear colocalization of these two
proteins. We used quantitative real-time PCR assays on endogenous
transcripts and protein to show that ERalpha knock down enhances
p53-dependent p21 (CDKN1A) expression. Effect of ERalpha on
p53-mediated transcription was analyzed by Luciferase-based
transfection assays. Flow cytometric analysis and BrdU incorporation
assays revealed that knocking down ERalpha and p53 elicits opposite
effects on cell cycle progression of breast cancer cells. ER and p53
expression in patient samples were analyzed by
immunohystochemistry.
Results: ERalpha binds directly to p53 and negatively regulates its
function. Knocking down ERalpha and p53 elicits opposite effects on
p53-dependent gene expression and cell cycle progression. Genomic
damage by ionizing radiation and antiestrogens disrupted the ERa-p53
interaction, whereas 17b-estradiol (E2) increased it. Consistent with
these cellular and molecular observations, our retrospective study on
patients with a clinical follow-up of up to 176 months shows that
presence of wild type p53 in ER-positive breast tumors is associated
with better response to tamoxifen therapy.
Discussion: The results demonstrate a new role for ERalpha in
breast oncogenesis and suggest that suppressing p53 function is an
important component in the pro-proliferative role of ERa. Our study
revealing a novel mechanism by which ERalpha inactivates a major tumor
suppressor pathway has significant clinical implications and
translational potential.

## 34

## An estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer subset with over
expression of hormone responsive genes.

## Doane AS, Danso MA, Lal P, Donaton M, Zhang L, Hudis C, Gerald
WL. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
Background: Little is known of the underlying biology of
ER(-)/PR(-) breast cancer (BC) and few targeted therapies are
available. Clinical heterogeneity of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors suggests that
genomewide molecular characterization may provide insight into their
biology, reveal distinct subsets and identify new therapeutic
targets.
Methods: We performed genome-wide expression analysis of 99 primary
BC samples and 8 BC cell lines using Affymetrix HGU133 oligonucleotide
microarrays. Unsupervised and supervised analyses were used to
investigate gene expression profiles. Predictive models were developed
using a supervised k-nearest neighbor technique. Findings were further
evaluated by immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and in vitro
cell line experiments.
Results: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering revealed distinct
subtypes of primary BC largely correlated with ER status. However, a
subset of samples negative for ER clustered with the ER positive
tumors. Analysis of this subset of ER(-)/PR(-) tumors revealed over
expression of genes known to be either direct targets of ER,
responsive to estrogen, or differentially expressed in ER(+) BC.
Differentially expressed genes included PDEF, FOXA1, XBP1, CYB5, TFF3,
NAT1, APOD, ALCAM and AR (p<0.0001), and suggested ER-independent
mechanisms for activation of steroid hormone responsive genes. An
expression signature of 179 genes for this group of ER(-)/PR(-) BC
with hormone responsive features was used to build a classification
model that performed well in leave-one-out cross-validation. The
predictor was applied to an independent set of 77 ER(-)/PR(-) primary
tumors, and identified subsets in similar proportion as the original
analysis. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of the validation set
yielded groups of samples corresponding to our class prediction
assignments. The classification system also identified the cell line
MB-453 as an in vitro model for this subtype of ER (-) BC. This cell
line was not estrogen dependent but had a proliferative response to
androgen in an AR dependent manner. Expression profiles for MB-453
generated after administration of androgens or AR antagonists were
distinguished by marked changes involving the 179-gene expression
signature suggesting androgen and AR regulation. IHC and ISH were used
to validate RNA analysis, and to provide a means for clinical
identification of this subgroup.
Conclusion: A subset of ER(-)/PR(-) BC has a molecular signature
that suggests a functional or persistent hormonal response pathway.
Examination of an in vitro model for this subtype suggests AR
dependent mechanisms of pathway activation. Clinical investigation of
antiandrogen therapy to target this subset of BC may be
warrante.D

## 35

## Estrogen receptor-beta has favorable independent prognostic value
for estrogen receptor-alpha negative breast cancer patients receiving
adjuvant tamoxifen.

## Gruvberger-Saal SK, Bendahl P-O, Saal LH, Laakso M, Eden P,
Peterson C, Malmstrom P, Isola J, Borg A, Ferno M. Lund University,
Lund, Sweden; Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New
York, NY; Institute of Medical Technology, University of Tampere,
Tampere, Finland

## BACKGROUND
While estrogen receptor (ER) is important for breast cancer initiation and
progression, and is a marker used to direct endocrine therapy, ER
 biology and its relation to endocrine therapy
response is not clear.

## METHODS
ER was semi-quantified by immunohistochemistry in
353 stage II primary breast tumors from patients treated with two
years adjuvant tamoxifen with a median clinical follow-up of
5.7 years for non-recurring patients. Gene expression profiles of a
representative subset of 88 of these breast tumors were generated
using 27,648-element cDNA microarrays.

## RESULTS
Seventy-four percent of tumors were positive for ER
 ; 20% were strongly positive (ER ++). In contrast to ER , the level of ER protein did not correlate to any other
clinicopathological variables. ER expression was significantly associated with
increased distant disease-free survival among all cases (P=0.01), and in particular within ER
 negative patients (P=0.003), but not in the ER positive subgroup (P=0.49); this differential effect was significant
(P=0.04, interaction in Cox
regression analysis). ER was significantly associated with increased
overall survival in the ER negative group (P=0.04). Lack of ER was a strong marker for poor prognosis (HR 14,
95% CI 1.8–106, P=0.01) compared
to ER ++ within the ER negative subgroup even after adjustment for other
markers (menopausal status, tumor size, node status, ER
 status, ERBB2
amplification). An ER gene expression profile was identified only
within ER negative tumors and was markedly different from
the ER gene expression signature.

## CONCLUSIONS
ER is an independent marker for favorable prognosis
after adjuvant tamoxifen treatment in ER negative breast cancer patients and motivates
investigating the use of tamoxifen to treat ER negative ER positive patients. This may be highly clinically
significant, as it can be estimated from our data that in the
United States alone, approximately 10,000 patients will be
diagnosed in 2005 with ER negative ER positive breast carcinoma.

## 36

## Statin-using breast cancer patients are less likely to have
ER-negative tumors

## Kumar AS, Minami CA, Shim V, Moore DH, O’Neal KC, Esserman LJ.
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Kaiser
Permanente - Oakland Medical Center, Oakland, CA

Background: HMG CoA reductase
inhibitors (statins), drugs used to reduce cholesterol, have emerged
as agents capable of affecting potentially critical breast cancer
pathways: cell proliferation and estrogen synthesis. Statins,
particularly lipophilic statins, are shown in
vitro to inhibit proliferation of estrogen receptor
negative (ER-) breast cancer cells more effectively than ER-positive
breast cancer cells and in a dose-dependent manner. There is
increasing epidemiologic evidence to suggest overall breast cancer
risk reduction among statin users. To date, no clinical study has
investigated the relationship of breast cancer ER status and statin
use.

Materials and Methods: To test
whether prior use of statins among female breast cancer patients
resulted in a reduced number of ER-negative tumors compared to statin
non-users, we performed a retrospective cohort analysis of 2141
patients in the Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC) Cancer
Registry who were listed as incident cases of breast malignancy (DCIS
or primary breast cancer) in 2003, whose ER status was known and who
had been KPNC members prior to June 2001. Prior use of lipophilic
statin (lovastatin, simvastatin, atorvastatin) and exogenous hormone
(E, P or E+P) replacement were determined by listings in the Kaiser
electronic pharmacy records since 1993.

Results: Ages ranged from 15 to 96
(mean 62 years). Statin users (n = 387, 18%) median age was 69 (range
40 to 93). 1164 (54%) had exogenous hormone exposure prior to
diagnosis; median age was 61 (range 28 to 92). 206 (9.6%) patients
used both statins and hormones. Contrary to studies showing higher
association of ER-positive tumors with exogenous hormone use, this
study showed no significant relationship. Of breast cancer patients
who used statins prior to their diagnosis, the chance of having an
ER-negative breast cancer was 35% less for statin-users, compared to
non-users (p = 0.008), 25% less after adjusting for age (p = 0.09).
Statin use >1 year significantly reduced age-adjusted proportion of
ER- tumors by 36% (p = 0.02) compared to statin non-use or use for
<1 year. 

Discussion: The relationship between
lipophilic statin use and reduced risk for developing ER-negative
breast cancer is consistent with preclinical data and warrants further
clinical investigation. Our analysis did not address whether overall
cancers were reduced by statin use, though other studies have. Statin
use may confound analyses of breast cancer risk assessment from
hormone replacement therapy, and this interaction deserves further
study. Given that we have effective chemoprevention agents targeting
ER-positive breast cancer (tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors), statins
may represent a promising approach for prevention of ER-negative
breast cancer.

## 37

## Better characterization of estrogen receptor (ER) positive luminal
subtypes using genomic grade.

## Sotiriou C, Wirapati P, Loi S, Desmedt C, Durbecq V, Harris A,
Bergh J, Smeds J, Haibe-Kains B, Larsimont D, Cardoso F, Buyse M,
Delorenzi M, Piccart M. Jules Bordet Institute, Free University of
Brussels, Brussels, Belgium; Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Swiss
Institute of Experimental Cancer Research, Epalinges, Switzerland; The
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom; Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden;
International Drug Development Institute, Brussels, Belgium

Background: Several microarray
studies have shown that breast tumours can be grouped in at least 4 to
5 individual subtypes namely basal-like, erbB2-like and luminal-like
A, B, C or 1, 2, 3.However, although the basal and the erbB2 subtypes
are repeatedly recognized as distinct entities, the definition of
luminal subtypes has been far from consistent between published
series. Refinement of their molecular definition is therefore needed.
In this study we sought to better characterize luminal subtypes by
applying gene expression grade index (GGI) as previously defined by
our group (Sotiriou et al. Proc Am
Soc Clin Oncol, 2005), and to correlate them with clinical
outcome.Material and Methods: GGI
was defined based on the 128 most significant genes identified by gene
expression profiling (GEP) in our training set of 64 ER-positive
histological grade (HG) 1 or 3 breast tumours. ER-positive tumours
were then classified as genomic grade (GG) 1 (GG1, low grade) or GG3
(high grade) based on their GGI values in our unpublished dataset
including a series of 154 untreated and 175 tamoxifen-treated breast
cancer patients. We also used as external validation sets several
previously published datasets from Sorlie et
al. 2001, van de Vijver, M. J. et al. 2002, Sotiriou et
al. 2003, and Wang et
al. 2005. Results:
Almost all ER-positive tumours previously defined as luminal-like A or
1 subtype, which had the best clinical outcome, showed low GGI values
(low grade). In contrast, luminal B/C or 2/3 ER-positive tumours
showed high GGI values (high grade) similar to those of basal-like and
erbB2- like subtypes which are predominantly ER-negative. In other
words, GGI divided ER-positive tumours into two distinct subgroups
namely GG1 and GG3 having statistically distinct clinical outcome in
either untreated (HR: 3.93, 95% CI 2.28–6.76, p<0.0001) or
tamoxifen-treated (HR: 3.1, 95% CI 1.64–5.52, p = 0.0002) populations.
Consistent results were found in each external validation dataset that
we have analysed despite differences in clinical populations and
microarray platforms. Conclusion: GG
better identifies luminal subtypes in a highly reproducible manner and
the GG-defined subtypes show a statistically distinct clinical
outcome. We believe that a better characterization of the ER-positive
luminal subtypes has the potential to improve tailoring of breast
cancer management.

## 38

## Comparison of docetaxel/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (TAC) versus
vinorelbine/capecitabine (NX) in patients non-responding to 2 cycles of
neoadjuvant TAC chemotherapy – first results of the phase III
GEPARTRIO-Study by the German Breast Group.

## von Minckwitz G, Blohmer JU, Loehr A, Raab G, Eidtmann H,
Hilfrich J, Gerber B, Huober J, Costa SD, Jackisch C, Loibl S,
Schickling O, Zuna I, Kaufmann M. German Breast Group, Neu-Isenburg;
St. Gertrauden Hosp., Berlin; HSK, Wiesbaden; Marien Hosp., Stuttgart;
Univ. Hosp., Kiel; Henrietten Stift, Hannover; Univ. Hosp., Rostock;
Univ. Hosp., Tuebingen; Univ. Hosp., Magdeburg; Univ. Hosp., Marburg;
SKM, Wiesbaden, Germany; Univ. Hosp., Frankfurt, Germany
Background: Primary breast cancer patients (P) with no response to
2 cycles of neoadjuvant TAC (75 mg/m / 50 mg/m / 500 mg/m2 day 1, q21,
supported with primary prophylaxis with (pegylated) G-CSF and
secondary prophylaxis with epoetin) experience a low pathologic
complete remission (pCR) rate after further 4 cycles TAC (von
Minckwitz et al, Ann Oncol 2005). We compared continuation of TAC with
a non-cross resistant combination of Vinorelbine
25 mg/m2 day 1 + 8 plus Capecitabine
2000 mg/m2 day 1 14, q21(NX).
Patients and Methods: P with operable (T>=2 cm by palpation) or
locally advanced (T4 or N3, M0) breast cancer were treated with 2
cycles TAC. If tumor reduction was <50% according to breast
ultrasound, P were randomized to receive either 4 additional TAC or 4
NX cylces. Endpoints were sonographic response before surgery
(primary), pCR-rate (no invasive and no non-invasive residuals),
breast conservation rate, safety and compliance.
Results: More than 2050 P with a median clinical tumor size was 4.0
(1.0 to 30.0) cm were recruited into the GEPARTRIO trial between 07/02
and June 15th 05 and approx. 620 non-responding patients were
randomized. Safety and blinded efficacy interim analysis was performed
on 300 patients (154 TAC, 146 NX, operable 82.2%, locally advanced
17.8%). Sonographic partial or complete response before surgery was
67.7%; breast conservation in 59.2% and pCR in 5.2%. Main toxicities
(grade I–IV %TAC vs %NX) were: anemia (92 vs 86), thrombopenia (37 vs
29), neutropenia (72 vs 81), febrile neutropenia (10 vs 6), infection
(30 vs 23), vomiting (40 vs 23), diarrhea (44 vs 32), stomatitis (67
vs 45), edema (42 vs 37), asthenia (89 vs 85), hand-footsyndrome (23
vs 46), allergic (18 vs 21), nail (42 vs 25), dyspnea (35 vs 28),
sensory neuropathy (49 vs 57). Treatment was discontinued in 28 P
(9.3%) due to toxicity (11 P, 4 vs 7), on patients/investigators
request (12 P, 4 vs 8) and tumor progression (5 P, 4 vs 1).
CONCLUSIONS: Both chemotherapy regimens were well tolerated; NX
(without G-CSF) is associated with a better toxicity profile as
compared to TAC (with G-CSF). Continuation of treatment in patients
without early response to TAC can achieve sonographic responses in
2/3rd of these patients with a clinically relevant chance for breast
conservation. Results on the efficacy endpoints will be
presente.D

## 39

## Multicenter, randomized phase III study of adjuvant chemotherapy
for node positive breast cancer comparing 6 cycles of
FE90C versus 4 cycles of
FE90C followed by 8 weekly paclitaxel
administrations: interim efficacy analysis of GEICAM 9906
Trial.

## Martín M, Rodríguez-Lescure A, Ruiz A, Alba E, Calvo L, Ruiz-
Borrego M, Munárriz B, López-Vega JM, Rodríguez CA, Crespo C. On
Behalf of the Spanish Breast Cancer Research Group (GEICAM), San
Sebastián de los Reyes, Madrid, Spain

Objective: to evaluate efficacy and
toxicity of sequential administration of FE90C
followed by weekly paclitaxel (T) as adjuvant chemotherapy (CT) of
node positive, operable breast cancer patients (pt). Methods: pt aged 18–70, presenting Karnofsky
≥ 90, adequate bone marrow, renal and hepatic function, were
stratified [menopausal status, affected lymph nodes (1–3 vs.≥ 4)], and
randomized to 6 FE90C cycles (cy)
(Fluorouracil/Epirubicin/Cyclophosphamide
600/90/600 mg/m2 day 1 every 3 weeks)
(control group, Arm A) or 4 cy of the same schedule followed by
8 weekly doses of T 100 mg/m2 (experimental
group, Arm B). Radiotherapy was mandatory after conservative surgery,
and recommended in pt with >4 axillary lymph nodes and tumors
>5 cm. Tamoxifen was given for 5 years to all hormone receptor (HR)
positive pt. Intention to treat interim efficacy analysis was planned
at 202 events, and performed at a median follow-up of 47 months.
Analysis was conducted using a log-rank test, stratified by menopausal
and nodal status. Study complied with GCP/ICH with 100% source data
verification. Results: 1.248 pt were
recruited; 634 pt in arm A and 614 in arm B. Main pt characteristics
were well balanced between arms: median age 50 years, conservative
surgery 40%, both HR negative 17%, HR positive-either ER or PgR- 77%,
grade III 34%, 1–3 involved nodes 62%. Median number of
FE90C cy (A vs B) were 6 (range 1–6) vs 4
(range 1–4). Median number of T administrations in arm B were 8 (range
1–8). Relative dose-intensities (RDI) of F (99.0 vs 99.1%), E (98.8 vs
98.8%) and C (99.1 vs 99.1%) were similar in both arms during the
first 4 cycles. Median RDI of T was 99.5%. Toxicity (data presented at ASCO 2004; abstract #596):
FE90C administration: febrile neutropenia
(FN) rate was statistically higher in arm A (9.3 vs 5.1% pt;
p = 0.004). Statistical differences were observed in (% pt, Arm A vs
Arm B): G3/4 neutropenia (30 vs 20.5%), G3 leukopenia (10.6 vs 7.4%)
and G3 mucositis (5.4 vs 3%). T administration: G3/4
neutropenia/leukopenia occurred in 12.1% of pt. G2 neuropathy
(sensory) and asthenia were present in 21.3% and 23.4% of pt,
respectively. Efficacy: as of 12 May
2005, 229 pt have experienced at least 1 event. There is a significant
improvement in DFS for arm B (86,9%) vs. A (79,2%) (36% risk reduction
of recurrence; p =  0.0009). No statistical differences between arms
in overall survival have been reached yet (94.5 vs.91.8%, arms B and A
respectively, p = 0.1375; 26% risk reduction of death). Conclusion: 4 cy of
FE90C followed by 8 weekly T100
administrations improves DFS of node positive operable breast cancer
pt. compared to 6 cy of FE90C. Main toxicities
reported with this scheme are moderate neuropathy and mild
asthenia.

## 40

## Final analysis: TC (docetaxel/cyclophosphamide, 4 cycles) has a
superior disease-free survival compared to standard AC
(doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide) in 1016 women with early stage breast
cancer.

## Jones SE, Savin MA, Holmes FA, O’Shaughnessy JA, Blum JL,
Vukelja SJ, George TK, McIntyre KJ, Pippen JE, Sandbach J, Kirby RL,
Bordelon JH, Hyman WJ, Negron AG, Khandelwal P, Richards DA, Anthony
S, Nugent JE, Mennel RG, Banerji M, Edelman G, Ruxer RL, Amare M,
Kampe CE, Koutrelakos N, Meyer WG, Asmar L. US Oncology Research,
Inc., Houston, TX

Introduction: Studies of combined
docetaxel and cyclophosphamide (TC) showed promise in metastatic
breast cancer without cardiac toxicity. Accordingly, in 1997, we
designed a trial to test the efficacy of the nonanthracycline-based
regimen of TC compared to standard AC in the adjuvant setting.
Patients were eligible if they had Stage I, II, or operable Stage III
invasive breast cancer; had complete surgical excision of the primary
tumor; were >18 years old; had adequate renal, hepatic, and
hematologic functions; and had Karnofsky PS ≥80%. Exclusion criteria
included other significant malignancies or illness or neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

Patients and Methods: Between June
1997 and December 1999, 1016 patients were randomized to 4 cycles of
either standard-dose AC (60/600 mg/m2)
[n = 510], or TC (75/600 mg/m2) [n = 506],
administered intravenously every 3 weeks as adjuvant treatment. All
chemotherapy was administered before radiation therapy (XRT), if XRT
was indicated. Tamoxifen was administered to all patients with hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer after chemotherapy.

Results: 85% of patients were
Caucasian, and both treatment groups (TC and AC) were well-balanced
with respect to major prognostic features. Overall, 71% of cancers
were hormone receptor-positive. Nodal status included: negative (48%),
1–3 positive (41%), and 4 or more positive (11%). Patients were
followed through April 2005, and 165 events occurred, which prompted
this statistical analysis. At 5 years, the DFS is significantly better
for TC compared to AC (see Table). 

Overall survival (OS) between treatments is not yet statistically
significant, but there is a trend in favor of TC. Toxicity has been
previously reported (Proc ASCO 2001, abstract #128), and in general,
TC was a more tolerable regimen.

Conclusions: TC is a better-tolerated
adjuvant regimen, which produced a longer DFS compared to standard AC
for lower-risk early breast cancer.
Supported by Sanofi-Aventis, Inc. New York, NY

## 41

## Five year follow-up of INT C9741: dose-dense (DD) chemotherapy
(CRx) is safe and effective.

## Hudis C, Citron M, Berry D, Cirrincione C, Gradishar W, Davidson
N, Martino S, Livingston R, Ingle J, Perez E, Abrams J, Schilsky R,
Ellis M, Muss H, Norton L, Winer E. MSKCC, NY, NY; ProHealth Care
Assoc, Lake Success, NY; MD Anderson, Houston, TX; CALGB Stat Office
& Data Ops, Durham, NC; Northwestern U, Chicago, IL; Kimmel Comp
Ca Ctr at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD; JWCI, Santa Monica, CA; U of
Wash, Seattle, WA; Mayo, Rochester, MN; Mayo, Jacksonville, FL; NCI,
Bethesda, MD; CALGB Central Office, Chicago, IL; Wash U., St. Louis,
MO; U of Vt, Burlington, VT; DFCI, Boston, MA
Based on INT-0148/C9344 and the Norton-Simon hypothesis, we
compared efficacy and safety for DD(q 2 wk) CRx with doxorubicin (A),
paclitaxel (P), and cyclophosphamide © to standard (q 3 wk) therapy
and, via factorial design, concurrent (conc) with sequential (seq) AC.
Doses were the same on all arms: A = 60, P = 175, C = 600 all
mg/m2× 4. 2005 pts enrolled and 1972
were treated and evaluable. At the only protocol-stipulated analysis,
the med follow up (f/u) was 36 mos (range 0.2–60) DD CRx improved the
primary endpoint of DFS (RR 0.74, p = 0.01) and secondary endpoint of
OS (RR 0.69, p = 0.013). There were no differences between conc or seq
CRx. A subsequent unplanned subset analysis demonstrated greatest
benefit among pts with hormone receptor (ER) negative (-) disease.
(Berry et al, SABCS 2004). This report is a formal update at a med f/u
= 69 mos (range 0.2–87). Q2 wk CRx significantly improved DFS with a
similar trend for OS. The benefits of q2 wk CRx, as demonstrated by
reduced hazards of recurrence, remain most striking in the first
3 years of f/u, and in the ER (-) subset. Benefits cannot be excluded
in later years of f/u nor in ER (+) disease in part because tamoxifen
extended to 5 years beyond CRx. Long-term toxicity is essentially
unchanged with 7 cases (0.7%) of AML/MDS in each of the q 3 and q 2 wk
groups and 1–3% delayed cardiac toxicity among all 4 regimens
combined. Conclusion: DD CRx with A, P, and C is more effective than q
3 wk CRx with no increased risk of long-term toxicities 
 

## 42

## IL-8 is involved in the development and growth of osteolytic bone
lesions.

## Margulies AG, Akel NS, Perrin D, Carver A, Bendre MS, Gaddy D,
Suva LJ. University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock,
AR

Background: Bone is one of the most
common sites for breast cancer metastasis. Skeletal metastases
indicate a dramatic change in the prognosis for the patient and
significantly increase the morbidity associated with breast cancer.
Still, relatively little is known about the molecular mechanisms that
control bone metastasis We have shown that elevated levels of the
chemokine IL-8 correlate with increased bone metastasis and that IL-8
is able to directly stimulate osteoclast formation in vitro, suggesting a role for IL-8 in
tumor osteolysis. Thus, we hypothesized that the chemokine IL-8 may be
involved in the induction of osteolysis by breast cancer cells
resident in bone.

Materials and Methods: Human breast
cancer cells were injected in the tibia of nude mice. The mice were
treated with either a monoclonal antibody directed against IL-8 or no
treatment every alternate day for 28 days following tumor cell
inoculation. Mice were sacrificed and the injected and contralateral
tibiae evaluate.D

Results: All injected mice receiving
no treatment developed bone tumors (12/12). In the IL-8 antibody
treated group (3/12) demonstrated tumor. Small tumor foci with no
demonstrable osteolysis were observed in (2/12) mice and an additional
(1/12) mouse developed osteolytic tumor. The total area of osteolytic
lesions and tumor burden was significantly lower in mice treated with
IL-8 antibody compared with mice receiving no treatment.
Interestingly, in those untreated animals with small tumors,
circulating levels of IL-8 and TRAP5b were not elevated, suggesting
that the osteolysis in these animals was indeed local, possibly
reflecting the early stage of tumor development. Immunohistochemical
evaluation of the tumors growing in bone is ongoing to determine the
expression of IL-8 by the tumors in
vivo.

Discussion: These data suggest that
IL-8 has a role in the initiation and growth of osteolytic bone
lesions. The efficacy of anti IL-8 antibody provides a strong
rationale for the utility of anti-IL-8 therapy in the inhibition of
tumor growth in bone, and suggests a novel therapeutic opportunity for
the treatment, and perhaps prevention of bone metastasis.

## 43

## Effects of oral clodronate (BONEFOS®) therapy on bone turnover and
skeletal metastases in women with primary breast cancer.

## McCloskey EV, Paterson AHG, Powles TJ. Northern General
Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom; Tom Baker Cancer Centre, Calgary,
AB, Canada; Parkside Hospital, Wimbledon, United Kingdom

Background: Breast cancer treatments
that suppress ovarian function, such as hormone therapy and
chemotherapy, accelerate bone turnover and the loss of bone
mass.

METHODS: In a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 2 years of oral clodronate (a
bisphosphonate) therapy significantly reduced the occurrence of bone
metastases within the first 5 years and improved overall survival in
women with operable primary breast cancer. In a predefined sub-group
of 555 patients, we have examined the relationship between bone
turnover response and incident bone metastases.

Results: At entry to the study, serum
PINP (amino-terminal propeptide of type I collagen, a marker of bone
turnover) was identical in both treatment groups. Median values were
slightly, but not statistically significantly, higher in
postmenopausal women than in premenopausal women (37.0 vs 34.5 mg/L,
P=0.07). During 2 years of
therapy with clodronate, serum PINP values showed a median decrease of
26% while in the placebo group there was a median increase of 5%
(P<0.0001 between groups).
PINP levels in the clodronate group returned to baseline within one
year of stopping therapy. Using percentage changes between baseline
and 1 year, women were classified into responsive (>20% decrease in
PINP), unchanged, or progressive (>20% increase in PINP) bone
turnover groups. The percentage of women showing a response was
significantly higher (55% vs 31%) during clodronate therapy, while the
number showing progression was significantly lower (23% vs
41%)(P<0.0001 both
comparisons). Within the clodronate group, the incidence of bone
metastases was significantly lower in women with a response to therapy
(4.8%) than in those with progressive bone turnover (17%, P=0.016).
Median baseline PINP values were identical in women who
subsequently developed incident bone metastases (n = 56) and those who
remained bone metastasis-free (n = 499) (35.0 mg/L both groups). At
1 year, however, serum PINP values were significantly higher in women
who subsequently developed bone metastases than in those remaining
metastasis-free (median 40.0 vs. 30.0 mg/ L P=0.003). Similar results were obtained if the analysis
was based on percentage changes from baseline at 1 year (median PINP %
change +16.2% vs. −12.0%, P=0.013)
or if women with known incident bone metastases at 1 year were
excluded (P=0.024).

CONCLUSIONS: Adding clodronate to
standard adjuvant therapy in primary breast cancer is associated with
reduced bone turnover and protection of the skeleton from metastases.
Serum PINP holds potential as a marker of response to therapy and
possibly early detection of skeletal metastases. The time course of
metastases reduction mirrors that observed for effects on bone
turnover so that the optimum duration of treatment with clodronate
remains to be determine.D

## 101

## Clinicopathological characteristics of young onset breast cancer:
initial results from a prospective cohort study.

## Simmonds PD, Eccles DM, Gerty S. Southampton General Hospital,
Southampton, United Kingdom
The POSH study is a prospective cohort study that will recruit 2000
women aged 40 years or younger in the UK with newly diagnosed breast
cancer. The aim of the study is to prospectively examine the influence
of genotype on outcomes in this patient group. Information regarding
clinical presentation, family history, pathological tumour
characteristics, treatment and annual clinical follow up data are
being collected from each patient. DNA, PBLs and serum samples are
also being stored. Over 1200 patients have been recruited and this is
an initial analysis of the clinicopathological characteristics of the
patients for whom data is currently available.
The median age at diagnosis is 36 years (range 22–40). The majority
presented with symptomatic breast disease, however in 1.4% (10/736) an
abnormality was detected by some form of screening and 3.3% (26/792)
presented with metastatic disease. 35% of patients have a family
history that meets the current UK guideline threshold for BRCA1/2
testing via clinical genetics services (10% definitely carry or are
highly likely to carry BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations).
The pathological characteristics of the tumours from the first 750
patients recruited are tabulated below: 

For patients who presented with early stage disease nearly half
[48.7%, (380/781)]underwent mastectomy, 2.6% (20/781) have had no
surgery and the remainder underwent breast conserving surgery [48.2%,
(381/781)]. Most patients received adjuvant [79.5% (511/643)] or
neoadjuvant [12.9% (83/643)] chemotherapy. Tamoxifen was the most
common adjuvant hormonal therapy [61.9%, (398/643)], but 17% (109/643)
received an LHRH agonist, 3.6% (23/643) underwent adjuvant
oophorectomy and 1.6% (10/643) received an aromatase inhibitor in
conjunction with ovarian suppression. Adjuvant radiotherapy was
administered to 82.7% (527/637) of patients.
Of the 26 patients presenting with metastatic disease 5 have died
(12–23 months post diagnosis) and 21 remain alive with a median follow
up of 13 months (2–59 months).
More complete data from the first 1000 patients recruited should be
available for the conference. The longer term aim is to undertake
central pathological review as well as to perform genotyping and
construct tissue microarrays to explore differences between hereditary
and sporadic breast cancer.

## 102

## Variants of undetermined significance in BRCA2: protein modeling,
loss of heterozygosity, ethnicity, and clinical correlations.

## Karchin R, Beattie M, McLennen J, Toland A, Sali A. University
of California, San Francisco, CA

Background: In the US, approximately
5% of Caucasians, and 20%-30% of non-Caucasians undergoing genetic
testing for BRCA1/ 2 receive the
ambiguous test result, “Variant of Undetermined Significance” (VUS).
In UCSF’s Cancer Risk Program (CRP), the majority of VUS results occur
in BRCA2. To better identify these VUS as neutral/low clinical
significance or pathogenic/high clinical significance, we propose
combining clinical and molecular data, including a novel protein model
of BRCA2

Methods: The C-terminal domain of
human BRCA2 protein was modeled, based on x-ray crystal structures
from mouse and rat. We evaluated evolutionary conservation in this
area using a new sequence alignment of 18 BRCA2 orthologs. We next
identified patients with missense VUS in this region and analyzed
their clinical data, including ethnicity and pedigree data. For
patients with available tumors, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) studies
were performed. Each VUS was classified as neutral or pathogenic,
according to 13 features of protein sequence, structure, and
conservation, with a supervised machine learning method (support vector machine or SVM). The SVM was trained on 1457
disease-associated missense mutations (OMIM) and 2504 polymorphisms
(dbSNP), covering 1842 proteins. The SVM classifications are 80%
accurate on the training set when tested with a three-fold
cross-validation protocol.

Results: 87 VUS were identified in
UCSF’s CRP, 28 in BRCA1 and 59 in
BRCA2. 9 of these VUS found in
the C-terminal domain of BRCA2 were studied in more detail. 

Discussion: As genetic testing
becomes more available and accepted in diverse populations, VUS
results will become more common. Protein modeling, when combined with
clinical and other molecular studies, provides a novel way to better
classify VUS as neutral or pathogenic.

## 103

## Radiation exposure and breast cancer risk for BRCA mutation
carriers.

## Goldfrank DJ, Chuai S, Ramon y Cajal T, Lee JB, Alonso MC, Diez
O, Baiget M, Kauff ND, Offit K, Bernstein JL, Robson ME. Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; Hospital Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain

Background: Women who carry BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutations are at significantly increased risk for breast cancer.
Carriers are counseled to undergo careful breast surveillance
including annual mammograms starting by age 25. One important
environmental cause of DNA damage is exposure to ionizing radiation.
The molecular functions of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are not fully
understood, but their protein products function in common biochemical
pathways involved in signaling the presence of and/or repairing of
certain forms of DNA damage. This raises a concern that women who are
either BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers may be predisposed to
radiation-induced breast carcinogenesis due to deficient repair
capacity. To evaluate this possibility, we analyzed the association
between early mammogram exposure and breast cancer risk in women with
mutations.

Materials and methods: The subjects
of this study were 121 BRCA1 and 92 BRCA2 mutation carriers
participating in IRB-approved studies of hereditary breast cancer
predisposition at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) and
Hospital Sant Pau (HSP) in Barcelona, Spain between 1995 and 2005. At
the time of enrollment on study, subjects completed baseline
questionnaires describing history of mammogram exposure and other
radiation exposure. Subjects were classified as being affected or
unaffected by breast cancer at the time of questionnaire completion,
and associations between mammogram exposure and cancer status were
assessed using multivariable unconditional logistic regression.

Results: Of the 213 mutation
carriers, 85 women were affected and 128 unaffected. On average,
affected women reported a slightly greater total lifetime number of
mammograms (mean 9.97 vs. 9.87, P = NS), but unaffected women reported
more mammograms before questionnaire than affected women did before
cancer diagnosis (mean 8.56 vs. 5.85, P = 0.01). In unadjusted
analyses, total reported number of mammograms did not differ
significantly between affected and unaffected women either as a whole
(OR 1.06, 95% C.I. 0.87–1.31), or when stratified by gene (BRCA1: OR
1.16, 95% C.I. 0.89–1.51; BRCA2: OR 0.95, 95% C.I. 0.68– 1.30).

Discussion: The present study does
not support the hypothesis that exposure to low level radiation from
mammograms is associated with an increased breast cancer risk among
women with BRCA mutations, and it does not support the removal of
mammography from surveillance programs for women at hereditary
risk.

## 104

## Prevalence, spectra and founder effects of BRCA1 and BRCA2
germline mutations in Pakistani breast and/or ovarian cancer
families.

## Rashid MU, Zaidi A, Torres D, Sultan F, Naqvi B, Shakoori AR,
Farooq H, Amin A, Hamann U. German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany; Shaukat Khanum Memorial Cancer Hospital and Research Center,
Lahore, Pakistan; University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan; Lombardi
Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Washington, DC

Introduction: Germline mutations in
the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are responsible for different
proportions of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer. The spectrum
of mutations within these genes shows considerable ethnic and
geographic variation. Pakistan has the highest rate of breast cancer
(excluding Jews in Israel) and ovarian cancer in Asia. Little
information exists about the significance of BRCA1/2 mutations in hereditary breast and/or ovarian
cancer in this region. This is the first familial study that aims to
identify the impact of these mutations in the Pakistani
population.

Material and Methods: From June 2001
to November 2004, 176 families deemed to have high risk based on
presentation of breast cancer at ≤30 years or ovarian cancer ≤45 years
of age or breast/ovarian cancer in ≥2 relatives, at least one
diagnosed ≤50 years of age were identified at the SKMCH & RC.
Comprehensive mutation screening of the BRCA1/2 genes was performed using protein-truncation
test, single-strand conformational polymorphism analysis, and
denaturing high-pressure liquid chromatography analysis followed by
DNA sequencing of detected variants.

Results: Thirty deleterious germline
mutations were identified in the 176 (30/176, 17.0%) families
evaluated: 23 in BRCA1 (23/30,
76.7%) and 7 in BRCA2 (7/30,
23.3%). Twenty-two mutations were distinct including 12 frame shift
mutations, 8 nonsense mutations, 2 splice-site mutations and 1
missense mutation. Eleven mutations (11/30, 36.7%) were unique to the
Pakistani population; six in BRCA1
(6/15, 40.0%) and five in BRCA2
(5/7, 71.4%). These novel mutations were not found in 50 healthy
controls suggesting a causative role. Four distinct BRCA1 mutations were identified in
multiple unrelated patients. Haplotype analysis of all mutation
carriers using 3 intragenic BRCA1
markers suggested founder effects. Among the families with ≥3 female
breast cancer, or two ovarian cancer, or breast and ovarian cancer
diagnoses the mutation frequency for BRCA1 was 28.6%, 33.3% and 42.9%, respectively. For
BRCA2, the highest mutation
frequency of 14.2% was found in families with ≥3 female breast cancer
cases. Lower frequency was found in families with one female breast
cancer diagnosed ≤30 years of age; 8.3% for BRCA1 and 3.6% for BRCA2. BRCA1
mutation frequency of 9.0% was found in families with one case of
ovarian cancer diagnosed ≤45 years of age.

Conclusion:
BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations may have significant impact on
hereditary breast/ovarian cancer risk in the Pakistani population. The
identification of unique founder mutations may facilitate carrier
detection in Pakistani breast and/ or ovarian cancer families.

## 105

## Screening for BRCA genomic
rearrangements in Singapore patients with young onset or familial history
of breast or ovarian cancer: identification and characterization of a
novel 10.1 kbp deletion.

## Lim YK, Ali AB, Iau PT, Sng JH. Faculty of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore; National University Hospital,
Singapore

Background: Large genomic
rearrangements account for about 10% to 15% of BRCA1 gene mutations. Up to 40 BRCA rearrangements have been described to date, all of
which have been reported in Caucasian populations of predominantly
Western European descent. Most of these rearrangements have been
characterized and found to include either deletions or duplications of
one or more exons in BRCA1. At
present, no data exists on the presence of BRCA genomic rearrangement in any Asian population.
This study aims to investigate the presence of BRCA rearrangements among Singapore patients with early
onset or familial history of breast or ovarian cancer.

Methods: Multiplex ligation-dependent
probe amplification (MLPA) was used to screen patients presenting with
early onset or familial breast/ovarian cancer for BRCA genomic rearrangements.

Results: Using MLPA, we have screened
100 Singapore patients previously tested negative for deleterious
BRCA mutations by the
conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based mutation detection
methods, single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and protein
truncation test (PTT). The data from our analyses will be presented,
including the detection of a novel BRCA1 rearrangement in a large breast and ovarian
cancer family. Characterization of this rearrangement by long range
PCR and direct sequencing showed an exon 13–15 deletion (10.1 kbp in
size), presumed to be the result of an Alu-mediated recombination event.

Conclusion: This study presents the
first genomic rearrangement to be described in an Asian population.
Given the increasing number of rearrangements reported in recent years
and their contribution to the BRCA
mutation spectrum, the suitability of including rearrangement analysis
within the BRCA1 mutation screening
protocols in Asian populations will be discusse.D

## 106

## Incidence and histology of ductal carcinoma in situ in BRCA1/2
mutation carriers.

## Kankipati S, Clark D, Shum M, El-Khoury M, Grana G. The Cancer
Institute of New Jersey at Cooper University Hospital, Camden,
NJ
Background: It is well known that about 10% of all cases of
invasive breast cancer are hereditary and the majority of these are
due to mutations in the BRCA1/2 genes, however it is unclear if ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a part of the hereditary spectrum. It has
been postulated that BRCA mutation carriers may lack a preinvasive
phase and instead present as invasive disease. Demonstration of the
existence of a preinvasive phase in carriers is of considerable
practical importance to women with these mutations and to their
families. We pursued this study in order to determine the prevalence
of DCIS in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers and to examine the pathobiology
of these tumors.
Methods: We did a retrospective chart review of patients who tested
positive for a BRCA1/2 mutation at Cooper University Hospital. We then
reviewed their pathology looking for a diagnosis of DCIS alone or in
combination with invasive breast cancer.
Results: Out of the 38 mutation carriers identified through the
study, 45 breast cancers were found. Six women had bilateral cancers
and one had a late reoccurrence in the same breast. Out of 45 cancers,
11 (24%) had pure DCIS (100%) with no invasive component. Another 8
cancers (17%) had a component of DCIS ranging from 10–90% of the
tumor, while the rest of the cancers were invasive disease. Nearly all
DCIS (18/19) had comedo necrosis, and a majority were high grade.
Comedocarcinoma is often more aggressive and is associated with a
higher probability of microinvasion.
Conclusion: It appears that DCIS is prevalent in patients carrying
BRCA mutations. In our sample population, 42% of cancers had at least
some component of DCIS. Nearly all patients with DCIS had high grade
histology with comedo necrosis. This supports the hypothesis that BRCA
mutation carriers have aggressive phases in both initiation and
promotion of breast cancer, and that preinvasive breast cancer should
be a factor when assessing patients for hereditary risk. Our findings
suggest that DCIS, especially when coupled with high-grade features,
should be included in BRCA risk assessment models, and that these
women are appropriate candidates for genetic counseling and
testing.

## 107

## Long-term survival (OS) and prognostic factors of BRCA1- associated
versus sporadic breast cancer (BC), results of an extended
series.

## Brekelmans CTM, Seynaeve C, Menke-Pluymers M, Tilanus- Linthorst
MMA, Bartels CCM, Crepin CMG, Blom JC, Van den Ouweland AMW,
Meijers-Heijboer H, Klijn JGM. Erasmus MC - Daniel den Hoed Cancer
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Eramus MC, Rotterdam,
Netherlands

## Background
Data on OS in BRCA1-associated as compared to sporadic BC are
inconsistent, partly because mostly small sample sizes and
heterogeneous patient populations have been studied. The impact of
the classical tumor and treatment features on prognosis has
previously not been addressed in BRCA1-associated BC
separately.

## Methods
From the Rotterdam Family Cancer Clinic registration, we
selected 223 patients (pts) with primary, invasive BC diagnosed
between 1980 and December 2001 from families with an identified
BRCA1- mutation. To correct for ascertainment bias, we considered
BRCA1- associated patients in 1) index pts with a BC diagnosis more
than 2 yrs before the DNA diagnosis (n = 53), and 2) other
BRCA1-pts (n = 170). The index patients were excluded from the
multivariate analyses. All BRCA1-associated pts were matched for
age at and year of diagnosis to sporadic BC pts, in a 2:1 ratio.
The occurrence of ipsi- (IBTR) and contralateral BC (CBC), distant
disease-free (DDFS), BC-specific and OS were compared between
BRCA1- associated and sporadic BC. By Cox proportional regression
modelling, the prognostic impact of tumor and treatment factors,
including a bilateral (salpingo-)oophorectomy (B(S)O), was
investigated separately in BRCA1-associated and sporadic BC.

## Results
Median follow-up was 5.1 yrs, median age at diagnosis 39 yrs.
BRCA1-associated BCs were significantly more frequently
differentiation-grade 3, negative regarding ER- and PR-status,
node-negative, and of a non-ductal (mainly medullary) celltype. The
5-yr incidence of CBC was increased (0.18% vs. 0.04%; p = 0.001),
but not of IBTR (0.16% vs. 0.12%; p = 0.24). DDFS and BC specific
survival were not significantly different
(HRmult 0.88, p = 0.54; and
HRmult 1.24, p = 0.26, respectively).
After exclusion of non-ductal BCs, a trend towards a worse survival
was found for BRCA1-associated BC (HRmult
1.50, p = 0.07). Significant prognostic factors for
BRCA1-associated survival were tumour size and nodal status (≥4
pos. lymph nodes). Further, survival was nonsignificantly improved
by systemic treatment: HR for hormonal treatment 0.19 (p = 0.17),
for chemotherapy 0.39 (p = 0.12); and after a BSO (HR 0.41,
p = 0.23).

## Conclusions
BRCA1-associated BC is characterized by specific tumor features
and an increased incidence of CBC. However, BC-specific survival
was not significantly different between BRCA1- and sporadic BC,
despite more node-negative disease. The prognostic impact of tumour
size and nodal status (≥4+) on the outcome in BRCA1- associated BC
implicates that the use of these factors as a proxy for ultimate
mortality, and therefore in the consideration of possible
additional preventive mastectomy, appears to be vali.D

## 108

## BRCA genetic testing and race: the UNC experience.

## Susswein LR, Skrzynia C, Lewis CL, Graham II ML, Evans JP.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; Waverly
Hematology Oncology, Cary, NC

Background: Many studies suggest that
African-Americans (AAs) are less likely than Whites to pursue BRCA
genetic testing. Researchers have hypothesized that this decreased
interest among AA is related to an unfamiliarity with breast cancer
genetics, greater worry related to historic medical abuses, spiritual
and religious differences, greater guilt about at-risk relatives, or
an inability to pay for testing.
One potential flaw in studies of race and genetic testing is the
possibility of ascertainment bias. AAs are less likely to be referred
for genetic counseling. In addition, the cost of BRCA testing can be
prohibitive to patients of lower socio-economic status. Furthermore,
clinicians may be less likely to offer testing to AAs if they feel the
patients will decline testing.
The UNC Cancer Genetics Clinic is in a unique position to approach
and offer BRCA testing to patients without the confounding issue of
ascertainment bias. First, the UNC cancer genetics team evaluates
every newly diagnosed patient in the Multidisciplinary Breast Cancer
Clinic. Thus, any patient with potential genetic issues is ascertained
by genetics team regardless of race or SES. Second, we at UNC are able
to offer BRCA1/2 genetic testing at no charge to patients who cannot
obtain insurance coverage. Thus, cost does not play a factor in a
patient’s decision regarding BRCA testing.

Objective: We sought to quantify the
UNC experience and compare the uptake of BRCA testing by the
African-American vs. White patients.

Results: Since 1998, we have offered
BRCA testing to 810 patients. Of this group, slightly fewer AAs (43%)
chose to pursue testing compared with 58% of Whites (p = .0041).
However, when we isolate the 439 women with a recent breast cancer
diagnosis, there is no statistically significant difference (p = 0.08)
in uptake between AAs (50%) and Whites (61%).

Conclusions: For our entire patient
population, our clinic’s experience is similar to much of the
literature: AAs are less likely to pursue BRCA genetic testing when
offered. However, among our newly-diagnosed population, our data
reveal no significant difference between AAs’ and Whites’ uptake.
Since we see a higher uptake among AAs in the acute vs. non-acute
setting, it may be that when AAs see testing as integral to their own
immediate health, they are more apt to pursue it. In spite of a lower
uptake, substantial numbers of AAs are still interested in testing. AA
individuals at risk for carrying a BRCA mutation should be approached
about their genetic risk as often as Whites.

## 109

## A screening approach to detect hereditary cancer risk in
under-served women.

## Lee R, Crawford B, Beattie MS, Komoromy M, McLennan J, Luce J,
Strachowski L, Ziegler J. University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA; San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco,
CA
Genetic counselling and testing for BRCA1/2 mutations is largely unavailable to underserved
women in the USA. In 2002, the UCSF Cancer Risk Program (CRP) began an
outreach program at San Francisco General Hospital (SFGH) to provide
these services, free of charge, to patients. Follow-up preventive
services are also available to patients who test positive at SFGH free
of charge. Several methods were used to recruit women into this
program, one of which was a one-page questionnaire to assess familial
risk of breast cancer. This report analyzes the results from our use
of this questionnaire.

Methods: Over the last 3 years, women
receiving mammography at SFGH are invited to fill out a one page
questionnaire regarding their family history. This questionnaire is
available in 4 languages (English, Chinese, Spanish, and Russian). The
questionnaire queries both maternal and paternal family history of
breast, ovarian, or other cancers in first and second-degree relatives
as well as age of cancer onset. The questionnaires were evaluated by
genetic counsellors and divided into low and high risk groups based on
published criteria. Primary care physicians of women with high
heritable risk were contacted and offered a referral to the SFGH
program.

Results: 7290 questionnaires were
evaluated, 46% of which were in English. 447 patients (6%) were judged
to represent a high risk of heritable cancer (at least 10% prior
probability of carrying a BRCA
mutation). Of this high risk group, primary care providers were
contacted 192 times to convey this risk and to offer referral to the
SFGH program. 103 patient referrals resulted from this. An additional
27 patients who consented to direct contact without PCP involvement
were also referred. If family history had only included maternal first
degree relatives with breast cancer, 247 patients would have been
designated as high risk. So, the remaining 200 high risk patients were
determined by paternal and second degree relatives. Of the 19 patients
who have tested positive for BRCA1/2 mutations at SFGH, 6 (32%) were
detected only by this screening questionnaire administered during
mammography.

Discussion: Family history
questionnaire administration during mammography is a feasible way to
identify women at high risk of hereditary cancer in an underserved
population. The percentage of “high risk” patients (6%) is similar to
studies in populations of higher socio-economic status. Family history
that does not include paternal history or second degree relatives
misses a significant number of “high risk” patients. This screening
questionnaire identified a substantial proportion (nearly 1/3) of
BRCA carriers that would not
have otherwise been referred to the program.

## 110

## Risk reduction choices of women with deleterious BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutations at a single institution.

## Uyei A, Erlichman J, Lu K, Meric-Bernstam F, Strong L, Arun B.
UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; UTMADCC; UTMDACC

Background: 5–10% of all breast
cancers are inherited. Since genetic testing for the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes became available, many individuals
underwent testing to identify genetic susceptibility to breast (BrCa)
and ovarian cancer (OvCa). Identification of these individuals sets a
platform to discuss risk reduction options There are several factors
that influence risk reductive decisions in individuals. The aim of
this study is to characterize women with BRCA 1/2 mutations and review
their risk-reductive choices.

Methods: The U. T. MD Anderson
Clinical Cancer Genetics database was reviewed for women who underwent
genetic testing and tested positive for a deleterious mutation from
1996-present. Information regarding the number of women who underwent
BRCA1/2 genetic testing, results and choices individuals made for risk
reduction were collecte.D

Results: Since 1996, 513 women have
been tested for the BRCA1/2 mutations. 112 women (22%) were found to
carry either a BRCA1 (n = 63) or BRCA2 (n = 49) mutation. Factors used
in deciding who would be eligible for genetic testing included: Known
mutation in the family, strong family history of breast and/or ovarian
cancer, personal history of BrCa at a young age (under 40), and a
personal history of OvCa. In the BRCA1 mutation carrier population, 19
women had 1 primary BrCa, 6 had 2 primary BrCas, and 5 had BrCa and
OvCa. 11 women had OvCa without a history of BrCa. 15 women had no
personal history of BrCa. In the BRCA2 mutation carriers, 23 women had
1 primary BrCa, 4 had 2 primary BrCa, and 1 patient had BrCa and OvCa.
6 women had OvCa and 14 women have no personal history of BrCa.
After discussion of risk reduction options, of the 29 BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutation carriers without a personal history of cancer, 5 (17%)
chose to have prophylactic bilateral mastectomies, 7 (24%) bilateral
prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy, and only 2 (7%) chose to take
tamoxifen. In contrast, of the 42 women who were diagnosed with 1
primary BrCa, 22 (52%) underwent bilateral mastectomies and 23 (52%)
prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy. Of the 10 women who were
diagnosed with 2 primary BrCas, 8 (80%) underwent bilateral
mastectomies and bilateral oophorectomy.

Conclustion: 22% of the women who
were tested for BRCA1/2 mutations were found to be mutation carriers.
Among these individuals with a mutation, the acceptance for tamoxifen
as prevention was low. More women tend to opt for surgical risk
reductive management options. This trend was especially observed in
women with a prior diagnosis of cancer. There are several factors,
which influence the choice of risk reduction options in women with
known BRCA1 and BRCA 2 mutations. Identification of these factors in
prospective studies will certainly aid in risk management discussions
among high risk individuals and health care providers.

## 201

## A single mammary stem cell can reconstitute a functional mammary
glan.D

## Shackleton M, Vaillant F, Simpson KJ, Singl J, Smyth GK, Wu L,
Visvader JE, Lindeman GJ. The Walter & Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, VIC, Australia; British Columbia Cancer
Agency, Vancouver, Canada

Background: The mammary gland can be
functionally regenerated in mice by serial transplantation of
epithelial fragments, providing evidence for the existence of
self-renewing, multipotential mammary stem cells (MaSCs). Recently the
concept has emerged that MaSCs play a central role in breast
tumorigenesis. However, the identity and purification of MaSC has
proved elusive due to the lack of defined markers.

Methods and Results: Using specific
cell surface markers and flow cytometry, we have identified a distinct
subpopulation that is enriched for MaSCs, demonstrated by
transplantation into cleared mammary fat pads at limiting dilution.
Remarkably, a single mammary epithelial cell from this population,
carrying the lacZ transgene, was
found to generate a complete mammary gland in vivo. These cells contributed to both the luminal and
myoepithelial lineages in transplanted virgin mammary glands, and
extensive lobuloalveolar units were generated during pregnancy. Serial
transplantation of the clonal outgrowths also yielded complete mammary
glands, confirming that the cells were capable of self-renewal.

Discussion: These data establish that
single cells from the enriched population have multipotential and
self-renewing capacity, a hallmark of stem cells. It will be of
interest to determine whether the stem cell/progenitor population is a
target for transformation in mammary tumorigenesis models, in support
of a potential role for breast stem cells in human breast
cancer.

## 202

## Identification of multipotent breast stem/progenitor cells in
mammospheres derived from human normal breast parenchyma and breast
cancer tissue.

## Lee JE, Kim JB, Han W, Hwang SE, Lee KM, Bae JY, Shin HJ, Kim S,
Kim SW, Kim SW, Noh DY. Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Clinical Research Institute, Seoul
National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea
There have been several reports of identification of multipotent
stem/progenitor cells in various types of somatic stem cells such as
neural, hematopoietic and skin stem cells. However there has been no
published report about multipotent human breast stem cells yet. We
cultured human breast stem cells using mammospheres obtained from the
human normal breast parenchyma and breast cancer tissue. Mammospheres
were cultured and passaged in floating condition under the medium
consist of DMEM:F12 = 3:1, supplemented with B27, basic fibroblast
growth factor, human recombinant epidermal growth factor and leukemia
inhibitory factor at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% of
CO2. The number of live cells was counted in
Neubauer counting chamber with 0.4% trypan blue dye in every passage.
After the seventh passage, the number of viable cells was maintained
almost constantly as 1% relative to the total number of the initial
live cells from tissue. After the tenth passage, we harvested and the
mammospheres and cultured them onto cover slips coated with type IV
collagen in medium composed of DMEM:F12 = 1:1, EGF, insulin,
hydrocortison, transferrin, 17- estradiol with 5% FBS for 3 days. We could identify
the cytokeratin 14 and 18 coexpressing cells with immunocytochemistry
under confocal microscope. When we cultured these mammospheres in the
3D culture in collagen mixture, they also formed mammary epithelial
branching morphogenesis. Then we tested if human breast stem cells in
mammospheres have the ability to differentiation neuronal and
mesenchymal cells. When we cultured the tenth passaged mammospheres on
cover slips coated with type IV collagen in medium with 3% FBS without
growth factor/cytokine for three days, we found nestin and fibronectin
expressing cells under confocal microscope. A small number of nestin
and glial fibrillary acidic protein co-expressing cells were also
found. These results suggest that human mammary stem cells may
generate both neuronal and mesodermal differentiated cells.

## 203

## In vitro propagation and characterization of tumorigenic breast
cancer cells with stem/progenitor cell properties.

## Daidone MG, Ponti D, Sozzi G, Capelli C, Gariboldi M, Reid JF,
Pierotti MA. Istituto Nazionale Tumori, Milan, Italy; IFOM Foundation,
Milan, Italy

Background: Breast cancer-initiating
cells (BC-Ics) have been prospectively identified in breast carcinoma
as
CD44+/CD24−/low
stem-like cells, which exclusively retain tumorigenic activity (AlHajj
M. et al., PNAS 2003;100:3983–8). We recently provided evidence that
cells isolated from human breast cancers and propagated in vitro as
non-adherent mammospheres (according to Dontu G. et al., Genes and Dev
2003;17:1253–70) display stem/ progenitor cell properties (Ponti .D et
al., Cancer Res, July 2005, in press). Mammosphere cultures
encompassed undifferentiated, self-renewing
CD44+/CD24−
cells capable to differentiate along distinct mammary epithelial
lineages, tumorigenic in mice when injected at low concentration
(103 cells), and overexpressing
neoangiogenic (Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A [secreted isoform
165] and C) and cytoprotective factors such as survivin. In addition,
cells isolated from mammospheres expressed the putative stem cell
marker Oct-4 and exhibited telomerase activity.

Methods: To investigate whether a
gene expression pattern could be recognized in BC-Ics, we compared the
gene expression profiles of breast cancer cells isolated from
nonadherent mammospheres obtained from 3 breast cancer lesions (B3R,
B16 and BP1) and from the established breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7
(MCF-S) with the gene expression profile of the MCF-7 parental cell
line using Affymetrix technology. In addition, cytogenetic analysis
was performed on MCF-S and MCF-7 cell lines: spectral karyotyping was
performed on metaphase cells and karyotypes were described in
accordance with ISCN guidelines.

Results: Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering grouped BC-Ics according to the sphere forming efficiency.
Triplicate samples of each individual BC-IC line clustered together.
On the other hand, the MCF-7 cell line replicates clustered separately
with respect to BC-Ics. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a more complex
and heterogeneous pattern of chromosome aberrations in the MCF-7
parental cell line compared to the MCF-S cell line with
stem/progenitor cell properties. However, MCF-S and MCF-7 cells shared
similar alterations in chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 19 and 20.

Conclusion: In this study we
demonstrated that breast tumorigenic cells with stem/progenitor cell
properties propagated in vitro as
non-adherent tumor spheres showed overlapping transcriptional profiles
which, in the case of BC-Ics derived from an established breast
carcinoma cell line, are distinct from those exhibited by the parental
cell line. Conversely, the lower number of structural chromosomal
aberrations detected in MCF-S than in MCF-7 cells is in keeping with
the hypothesis of a protective mechanism favoring the survival of
cells with self-renewal properties. Long-term cultures of BC-ICs
represent a suitable in vitro model to develop novel diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches.

## 204

## Identification of cell-of-origin breast tumour subtypes in
inflammatory breast cancer by gene expression profiling.

## Van Laere SJ, Van der Auwera I, Van den Eynden GG, Vandenberghe
M, Benoy IH, Elst HJ, Van Dam P, Van Marck EA, Dirix LY, Vermeulen PB.
Lab Pathology University of Antwerp and Oncology Center, General
Hospital Sint-Augustinus, Wilrijk, Antwerp, Belgium
Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is an aggressive form of locally
advanced breast cancer. Most patients have lymph node involvement at
the time of diagnosis and 1/3 of the patients have distant metastases.
In a previous study, we demonstrated that IBC is a distinct form of
breast cancer in comparison with non-IBC (Van Laere et al, Breast
Cancer Res Treat, 2005). The aim of this study was to investigate the
presence of the different cell-of-origin subtypes in our data set of
16 IBC and 18 non-IBC specimen. Therefore, we selected an “intrinsic
gene set” of 144 genes, present on our cDNA chips and common to the
“intrinsic gene set” defined by Sorlie et al (PNAS, 2003). This set of
genes was tested for performance in the Norway/Stanford data set by
unsupervised hierarchical clustering. 84% Of the samples belonging to
this set clustered in the same manner as described in the original
manuscript. Expression centroids were then calculated for the core
members of each of the 5 subclasses in the Norway/Stanford data set
and used to classify our own specimens. We found a higher amount of
basal-like and ErbB2-overexpressing tumours and a lower amount of
luminal A, luminal B or normal-like tumours in IBC as compared to
non-IBC (ErbB2+/Basal: IB:C8, non-IB:C3; LumA/LumB/Norm: IB:C8,
non-IB:C15; Pearson Chi-Square, p = 0.036). Our findings were in good
agreement with protein expression data for Estrogen Receptor (ER+;
ErbB2+/Basal: 2/11, LumA/LumB/Norm: 12/23, p = 0.063) and Cytokeratin
5/6 (CK5/6+; basal: 6/7, non-basal: 4/13, p = 0.057). The
classification was confirmed by using an alternative unsupervised
hierarchical clustering method. The robustness of this classification
was confirmed by unsupervised hierarchical clustering using an
alternative gene set of 141 genes related to the cell-of-origin
subtypes. Compared to the data published by Bertucci et al (Cancer
Research, 2005), we found a higher amount of basal and Her2
overexpressing tumours and a lower amount of luminal A, luminal B or
normal-like tumours in IBC as compared to non-IBC (Her2/Basal: IB:C8,
non-IB:C3; LumA/LumB/Norm: IB:C8, non-IB:C15; Pearson Chi-Square,
p = 0.036). Furthermore, we found a significant difference in the
amount of ER+ IBC specimen in the combined LumA/LumB/Norm cluster as
compared to the corresponding cluster reported by Bertucci et al
(respectively 4/8, 19/19, Fisher’s Exact Test; p = 0.004). The
presence of the same molecular cell-of-origin subtypes in IBC as in
non-IBC does not exclude the specific molecular nature of IBC. The
molecular mechanisms involved in the biology of IBC are translated in
gene sets, different from the ones used to define cell-of-origin
subtypes. Therefore we suggest that IBC and non-IBC have to be
regarded as separate entities with important diagnostic and
therapeutic consequences.

## 205

## Integrated molecular profiling of human breast cell types and
breast cancer cell lines using expression microarrays and array
CGH.

## Iravani M, Fenwick K, Grigoriadis A, Reis-Filho J, Valgeirsson
H, Dexter T, Gahir J, Weber B, O’Hare M, Ashworth A, Mackay A. The
Breakthrough Toby Robins Breast Cancer Research Centre, London, United
Kingdom; Ludwig Insitute for Cancer Research, London, United
Kingdom
AIM: To identify changes which drive tumorigenesis and phenotypic
differentiation by integrating expression profiling and array CGH in a
wide panel of cell lines representing different breast cancer
phenotypes.
METHODS: We have profiled a panel of 26 sporadic breast cancer cell
lines, purified primary populations of normal breast luminal
epithelial cells, myoepithelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts
and their immortalized counterparts. Expression microarrays were
performed on 17 K Breakthrough arrays and array CGH was performed on
1 MB-spaced BAC arrays and using tiling path CGH arrays constructed
from the 32 K BAC re-array collection.
RESULTS: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering of expression
microarray results clearly separated ER positive cell lines from
normal breast epithelial cells (luminal and myoepithelial),
mesenchymal cells (endothelial and fibroblast) and a number of cell
lines with a more normal epithelial phenotype.
Clustering of breast cancer cell lines based solely upon array CGH
produced a completely different unsupervised classification based upon
the major amplifications/deletions. Tiling path array CGH was able to
finely map the major amplicons in a number of lines including separate
focused amplification of CCND1 and PAK1 on chr 11q13 in and differing
losses on chr16q (CDH1).
Chromosomal amplifications and deletions were confirmed by
fluorescent in situ hybridization including 3p14 gain in MCF-7 and
734b and 7q11(EGFR) in MDA-MB-468 cells. Differential expression of a
number of luminal and basal markers were confirmed by RT-PCR and by
fluorescent immunocytochemistry.
The overlay of expression microarray and array CGH identified a
number of important amplicon drivers including amongst others;
erbB2/17q12, FGFR1/8q11.2 and STK6/20q13.
Expression profiling identified MCF-7, T47D and 734b as lines best
representing an ER positive luminal phenotype (although clearly
different and distinct from normal luminal epithelial cells) based
largely on the expression of genes in the ER cluster (GATA3, PDZK1,
TFF1 and ARHGEF17). ER negative lines most closely resembling the
phenotype of basal-like breast cancers were identified as HMT3552,
MDA-MB157 and MDA-MB468 based on the expression of a small number of
basal genes (KRT5/14/17, S100A2, TRIM29).
Functional analyses of a small number of luminal and basal genes
(including LCN2 and S100A7) was performed by combining RNAi
trasnfection and microarray profiling in different cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of purified normal cells and sporadic
breast cancer cell lines with this type of molecular profiling helps
to define model cell systems, events which drive tumorigenesis and
targets for therapeutic intervention in different sub types of breast
cancer.

## 206

## Inhibitors of Hsp90 induce the degradation of HER2 and inhibit the
growth of HER2-dependent breast tumors.

## Solit DB, Basso A, Smith-Jones P, Modi S, Norton L, Larson S,
Neckers L, Scher H, Hudis C, Rosen N. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY; National Cancer Institute, Rockville,
MD
Activation of HER2 by gene amplification occurs in 20–30% of human
breast cancers. The anti-HER2 antibody Herceptin has antitumor
activity in these patients when administered as a single agent and
sensitizes tumors to taxanes and other cytotoxics. Although Herceptin
is quite useful clinically, all patients with Stage 4 disease
eventually develop resistance. It is not clear whether these tumors
are still driven by HER2, but if so, alternative strategies for HER2
inhibition may be useful. The Hsp90 chaperone protein is required for
the conformational maturation of “client” proteins many of which
contribute to tumor initiation and progression. A family of natural
products, including geldanamycin, bind to the ATP/ADP site in Hsp90
and inhibit its function. This causes the proteasomal degradation of
its client proteins including HER2. Exposure of cells to low nM
concentrations of 17-AAG, a geldanamycin derivative now being tested
in the clinic, causes the rapid degradation of HER2, loss of
phosphorylation of HER3, inhibition of PI3Kinase/AKT kinase signaling
and concomitant loss in D-cyclin expression. This leads to growth
arrest and sensitization of the cell to proapoptotic stimuli. 17-AAG
potently degrades HER2 in tumors in
vivo at non-toxic doses and the pharmacodynamics of the
drug can be assessed by dynamic PET-imaging of loss of HER2
expression. 17-AAG has significant antitumor activity in HER2-driven
xenograft and transgenic models and sensitizes these tumors to taxanes
and enhances the activity of Herceptin. Thus, Hsp90 function can be
inhibited in vivo by 17-AAG, with
selective toxicity to tumor cells. These data form the basis for a
clinical trial of this agent in advanced carcinoma of the
breast.

## 207

## Real-time dual-color imaging of trafficking, cellular dynamics, and
viability of breast cancer cells in the portal vein.

## Tsuji K, Yamauchi K, Yang M, Jiang P, Bouvet M, Al-Zaid M, Endo
H, Kanai Y, Yamashita K, Moossa AR, Hoffman RM. AntiCancer, Inc., San
Diego, CA; University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA; Kyorin
University, Tokyo, Japan
In the present study, we imaged trafficking, cellular dynamics, and
viability of cancer cells after their injection into the portal vein
(PV) of mice. We have genetically engineered dual-color fluorescent
cells that express green fluorescent protein (GFP) linked to histone
H2B in the nucleus and retroviral red fluorescent protein (RFP) in the
cytoplasm. These dual-color fluorescent cells enable the visualization
of cellular dynamics in vitro as
well as in vivo. We observed cell
trafficking in the PV in real time. Mouse mammary tumor MMT cells and
HCT-116 human colon cancer cells labeled with GFP in the nucleus and
RFP in the cytoplasm were injected in the PV of nude mice. The cells
were continuously observed intravitally in the liver at the
single-cell level in real time, using the Olympus OV100 Whole Mouse
Imaging System. HCT-116 cells arrived at the peripheral glisson and
impacted into sinusoids rapidly after injection. Most injected cells
remained in sinusoids near peripheral portal veins. Only a small
fraction of the cancer cells invaded the lobular area. Clasmocytosis
(destruction of the cytoplasm) of the cancer cells occurred within
6 hours. The number of apoptotic cells rapidly increased within the
portal vein within 12 hours of injection. Apoptosis was readily
visualized in the dualcolor cells by their altered nuclear morphology.
The data suggest frequent death of single HCT-116 cells in the PV. In
contrast, dual-color MMT cells injected into the PV mostly survived in
the liver of nude mice after 24 hours after injection. Surviving MMT
cells showed invasive figures with cytoplasmic protrusions. The cells
grew aggressively and formed colonies in the liver. This model should
be useful for further understanding of the in
vivo cell biology of cancer cells trafficking in the PV,
a critical route for metastasis to the liver.

## 208

## Breast cancer stromal fibroblast cells: in vitro characterization
of activity, invasiveness and the effect of transforming growth factor
beta 1 (TGF-B1).

## Casey TM, Eneman J, Crocker A, White J, Tessitore J, Stanley M,
Harlow S, Bunn J, Weaver D, Muss H, Plaut K. University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT
Cancerous invasion is associated with a stromal reaction that
contains: activated fibroblasts (myofibroblasts), remodeled ECM and
angiogenesis. The clinical significance of these changes is not known.
However, we hypothesize that it facilitates tumor invasion by
providing scaffolding for tumor growth and invasion. Further, since
TGF-B1 activates breast fibroblasts into myofibroblasts in vitro and
induces a stromal reaction in mice, we hypothesize that TGF-B remodels
the ECM creating an environment that promotes breast cancer (BC)
invasion and metastasis. Our objective was to determine if fibroblasts
isolated from BC patients are different from fibroblasts from
reduction mammoplasty (RM) patients, and the differential effects of
TGF-B1 on these cultures.
Tissue obtained at surgery for invasive BC (n = 29) or RM (n = 10)
was used to isolate primary fibroblast cells by differential
centrifugation. Experiments were performed between passages 3–10 and
TGF-B1 concentration was 0 or 2.5 ng/ml. Cells were phenotypically
characterized with positive vimentin and negative cytokeratin
immunostaining. Myofibroblast activation was measured by counting
cells immunostained for smooth muscle (sm)- -actin in cultures +/− TGF-B1. For RNA isolation,
cultures were grown to confluence and media was changed to +/− TGF-B1.
After 24 h, conditioned media (CM) from cells was collected for
invasion assays and cells were homogenized in TRiZol for RNA
isolation. RT-Q-PCR was used to measure expression of c-myc,
fibronectin, laminin, collagen IV, uPA, MMP-3 and sm- -actin. Boyden invasion chambers were plated with
MDA-MB-231 cells in 0.1% BSA (100,000 cells/insert), CM from cells
treated +/− TGF-B was added to bottom chamber, and incubated at 37C
for 24 h, The number of invaded cells were counte.D
A greater percent of myofibroblasts were activated in cultures from
BC patients and this effect was enhanced by TGF-B1 treatment. Invasion
rate of MDA-MB-231 cells was greater in chambers prepared with CM from
fibroblast cultures derived from BC patients than from RM patients.
Interestingly, although TGFB1 in control wells acted as a
chemoattractant, CM from primary stromal cells decreased invasion
relative to CM from non-TGF-B treated cultures. Thus, fibroblasts
isolated from patients with BC are measurably different from RM
patients indicating that the stroma may be an important player in
mediating the carcinogenic response.

## 209

## Spontaneous fusion of mouse stroma with transformed estrogen
receptor-positive epithelium in a solid tumor model of human breast
cancer.

## Jacobsen BM, Harrell JC, Borges V, Garcia MV, Horwitz KB.
Univiersity of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO

Background: Stromal influences on
breast epithelium are commonly described, but little is known about
the ability of tumor epithelium to modify the stroma that surrounds
it.

Materials and Methods: Metastatic
cells from the pleural effusion of a patient with ER+ breast cancer
were cultured for several weeks, then grown in
vivo into solid tumors in the mammary gland of
ovariectomized nude mice supplemented with estradiol for 8 weeks.
Tumors were isolated and paraffin embedded or returned to culture and
expanded into cell lines. One cell line (BJ3Z) was karyotyped. Solid
xenograft tumor sections, the BJ3Z cells, and a human tumor control
were assayed by dual-colored FISH using SpectrumRed human and
SpectrumGreen mouse Cot-1 DNA, and counterstained with DAPI.
Immunocytochemistry for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and human specific
CK7 was performed on the BJ3Z cells.

Results: Eighty-three (83) metaphase
spreads were scored in BJ3Z cells. Seventy percent (70%) had polyploid
(72–83; 4n) mouse karyotypes. However distinct human chromosomes (chr)
were detected among the mouse chr in 30% of cells. Human chr 3, 8,
der(?)t(11;14), 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, der(X)t(X;7) were found to be
recurrent abnormalities in the “hybrid” cells. Among these, 8% carried
mouse/human translocations. Two hundred (200) consecutive interphase
nuclei were scored in BJ3Z cells, which showed an even higher
proportion (64%) of hybrid cells. Sections of the solid tumor were
then analyzed by dual fluorescence microscopy and hybrid mouse/human
nuclei were detected. BJ3Z cells stained positive for SMA and negative
for human CK7 suggesting they are of mouse stromal origin.

Discussion: We conclude that
formation of the synkaryons occurred in the solid tumor in vivo prior to culture, as a result of
fusions between normal mouse mammary stromal cells and human malignant
epithelial cells. While most studies have demonstrated stromal effects
on the epithelium, we show here that epithelium can modify stroma.
This has interesting implications for breast cancer biology.

## 210

## Genetically modified HER2-specific T cells recognize low and high
HER2 expressing breast cancer cell lines.

## Ahmed N, Ratnayake M, Pule M, Rooney CM, Heslop HE, Gottschalk
S. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX

Background: Only patients with breast
cancers expressing high levels of HER2 benefit from anti-HER2
monoclonal antibodies such as trastuzumab. In the present study we
investigated in vitro, if chimeric
T-cell receptors (TCR), which combine the antigen specificity of
monoclonal antibodies with the effector function of T cells can
overcome this limitation.

Material and Methods: T cells from
healthy donors were transduced with retroviral vectors containing the
HER2-specific chimeric TCR gene with a CD28-[zeta] signaling domain
(HCD28-[zeta]). The specificity of the genetically modified T cells
was determined by their ability 1) to kill breast cancer cell lines in
cytoxicity assays, and 2) to proliferate and secrete cytokines (IFN-
 and IL-2) after stimulation with breast cancer cell
lines. The following panel of cell lines was used: autologous PHA
blasts, MDA-MB-468 (both HER2 negative), MCF-7 (HER2 low), Her218 and
SKBR-3 (both HER2 high).

Results: H-CD28-[zeta] expressing T
cells killed low and high HER2 positive breast cancer cell lines in
cytotoxicity assays, where as HER2 negative T cells were not killed.
Stimulation of T cells with low and high positive HER2 positive breast
cancer cell lines resulted in T-cell proliferation and secretion of
IFN- and IL-2 in a HER2 dependent manner.

Discussion: We demonstrate that MCF-7
cells activate H-CD28-[zeta] expressing T cells, induce T-cell
proliferation, and the production of IL-2, an important T-cell growth
factor. These results indicate that T cells expressing chimeric TCRs
might extend the application of HER2 targeted therapies to HER2 low
expressing malignancies.

## 211

## Resistance to erbB targeted therapy in breast cancer.

## Bacus S, Hortobagyi G, Spector N. Molecular Diagnostics,
Westmont, IL; MD Anderson Cancer Center and GlaxoWellcome, Research
Triangle Park, NC

## Background:
ErbB receptors are associated with aggressive cancers and are
therapeutic targets for drugs, such as antibodies or small
molecules that block receptor activity and downstream pathways.
Nuclear receptors, such as estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone
receptor (PR), are also targeted for anti-hormone therapies. There
is an inverse correlation between ErbB receptors expression and ER
and PR. Patients with increased expression levels of ErbB1 and
ErbB2 anti-hormone therapies are less effective. The estrogen
receptors pathway also upregulates the anti-apoptotic factor Bcl-
2. This study was directed at understanding the transregulation of
these pathways and their association to resistance to erbB targeted
therapy.

## Methods:
cDNA was extracted and studied for gene expression from cells
treated with a dual inhibitor to ErbB1and ErbB2. The breast cancer
cell line that overexpresses ErbB2 was transfected with either ER
or Bcl-2 cDNAs. The cells were treated with Herceptin or a dual
EGFR/ErbB2 inhibitor. Cells were analyzed by microarray Western
Blot analysis or by immunohistochemistry before and after treatment
for markers such as EGFR, ErbB2, IGF-1R, TGF , Bcl-2, ER, PR, Cyclin D1, Survivin, FOXO 3, as
well as phosphorylated forms of Erk, Akt and S6. In addition,
breast cancer biopsies from patients treated with small molecule
inhibitors to erbB receptors or antibodies were analyzed before and
after treatments for the same markers.

## Results:
Expression of ER, PR and Bcl-2 were associated with resistance
to ErbB targeted therapies in cells and in patients. Anti-hormone
therapies overcame this resistance. The effect of inhibition on
ErbB receptors activity was associated with changes in calcium
channels that resulted in upregulating the estrogen and Bcl-2
pathways.

## Conclusions:
The nuclear hormone receptor pathway and the ErbB oncogenic
receptor pathway interact with each other to affect the response to
ErbB targeted therapies. This study elucidates the patients’
optimal sub-population, most likely to respond to ErbB targeted
therapy as a single agent. In addition, strategies combining the
selectivity of inhibitors to ErbB receptors together with
antihormone therapies, hold promise in treating breast
cancers.

## 212

## Mammary cancers in mice expressing mutated Rad51.

## Shulemovich E, Tornos C, Jasin M, Moynahan ME. Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
The BRCA1 and BRCA2 hereditary breast cancer genes are involved in
the repair of DNA double strand breaks by homology-directed repair
(HDR). Although loss of BRCA1 and BRCA2 predispose to breast cancer,
the breast tumors that arise from deficiencies in these proteins are
separable by molecular analysis of gene expression patterns and
genomic imbalances strongly suggesting different pathways to
tumorigenesis. To further examine the role of defective HDR in mammary
tumorigenesis we have mutated Rad51, the central repair protein in the
HDR pathway. Rad51 forms a nucleoprotein filament with DNA at the site
of the DNA double strand break, directs the homology search and
promotes ATP-dependent strand exchange activities. Although coding
region mutations in Rad51 are not observed in human tumors, aberrant
expression and defective repair have been observed in tumor specimens
and tumor derived cell lines. Like Brca1 and Brca2, knock out mouse
models for Rad51 die early in embryogenesis. Expression of Rad51
mutant transgenes that disrupt ATP binding (Rad51 K133A) or ATP
hydrolysis (Rad51K133R) were previously shown to reduce HDR in
cultured mammalian cells. To examine the effect of defective
Rad51-mediated HDR on mammary tumorigenesis, mice that harbor the
mutant Rad51 transgene were mated to doxycycline-regulatable MMTV-rtTA
mice (Gunther et al., gift of L. Chodosh) to direct expression in
mammary epithelial tissue following doxycycline administration.
Incorporation of a luciferase reporter gene within the transgene
construct allows imaging of the animals to assess for transgene
expression, primary tumors and metastases. Development of the mammary
gland is grossly intact and the bitransgenic animals successfully
nurse their pups. Female mice were followed for tumor incidence. In a
small cohort of doxycycline fed parous bi-transgenic mice mammary
tumors occurred with complete penetrance, no mammary tumors occurred
in the control single transgenic littermates. The mammary tumors that
developed in the parous mice were of varied histology – including
adenocarcinoma with secretory and squamous features and sarcoma. There
was invasion into the surrounding chest wall muscles and soft tissue.
Multifocal abnormalities of other mammary glands were also observed.
Cohorts of virgin mice are being followed for mammary cancer
incidence, but thus far the incidence is low in virgin animals with
occasional tumors observed at long latency. Given that spontaneous
chromosome abnormalities are a hallmark of cells defective for
homology-directed repair, karyotypic analysis of tumor derived cells
and array CGH are ongoing to assess for genomic instability.

## 301

## Multi-centre independent validation of a gene prognostic signature
for patients with node-negative breast cancer (BC) – final
results.

## Cardoso F, Piccart MJ, Viale G, Van’t Veer L,
Saghatchiand’Assignies M, Glas A, Ellis P, Harris A, Bergh J, Lidereau
R, Rutgers E, Delorenzi M, Bogaerts J, Therasse P, Lazar V, Amakrane
M, Sotiriou C, Loi S, Buyse M. On Behalf of the TRANSBIG
Consortium

Background: MINDACT will be the first
clinical trial to prospectively evaluate the role of a genomic tool,
the Amsterdam 70-gene prognostic signature, in BC management. Before
its launch we ran an external independent validation of the signature.
This was done on frozen archival tumour material from node negative
(N-) pts aged <61, diagnosed ≤1998 and receiving only locoregional
therapy at 5 non-Dutch cancer centres. After initial results presented
at SABCS 2004 (Piccart et al), final results with independent audit
and central pathology review are given.

Materials & methods: Hazard
ratios (HRs) were calculated to compare event rates in high vs low
risk groups [events: time to distant metastases (TTDM), disease-free
survival (DFS), overall survival (OS)]. Clinical risk groups were
defined according to St- Gallen criteria (StG), Nottingham Prognostic
Index (NPI), and Adjuvant! Online (AO) and determined by an
independent statistician. Gene profiling (Agilent) was done at NKI
“blinded” to clinical data. The microarray risk classification was
reproduced in Lausanne, and central pathology review, for ER (N = 218)
and grade (N = 237), was done in Milan. Centres were visited by two
auditors for source data verification. Genomic low risk (GLR) group
defined as 5 year distant metastasis free survival (DDFS) >90%.
Clinical low risk (CLR) group defined as pts with 10-year survival
probability >88% if ER+, and >92% if ER-. Results: This analysis refers to 302 validation pts (24
excluded by auditors). Median FU was 13.6 years, and 92 events
occurred. The gene signature outperformed the three clinical tools in
predicting a) TTDM: HR 2.32 (95% CI
1.35–4.00) without adjustment for clinical risk, and to 2.15 (95% CI
1.25–3.71), 2.32 (95% CI 1.29–3.82) and 2.13 (95% CI 1.19–3.82) when
adjusted for StG, NPI and AO; b) OS: HR 2.79 (95% CI 1.60–4.87) without adjustment, and
2.69 (95% CI 1.57–4.99), 3.03 (95% CI 1.65–5.59) and 2.66 (95% CI
1.46–4.84) when adjusted; and c) DFS:
HR 1.50 (95% CI 1.04–2.16) without adjustment, and 1.41 (95% CI
0.97–2.06), 1.42 (95% CI 0.97–2.08) and 1.36 (95% CI 0.91–2.03) when
adjusted. For pts with genomic high risk (GHR) the 10-year survival
was 0.69 in both CLR and clinical high risk (CHR), while for pts at
GLR the 10-year survival was 0.89 and 0.88, respectively. Conclusions: 1) The 70-gene signature is a
strong prognostic factor for TTDM, DFS and OS in untreated N- BC pts
2) The signature remains significant for TTDM and OS after adjustment
for all known clinico-pathological prognostic factors. 3) Its
prognostic value is almost completely independent from the definition
of clinical risk. 4) Results provide level-3 evidence for clinical
value of this new genomic tool. 5) Level-1 evidence will be provided
by the MINDACT that will start in the fall of 2005.

## 302

## Breast tumours with intermediate histological grade can be
reclassified into prognostically distinct groups by gene expression
profiling.

## Sotiriou C, Wirapati P, Loi S, Viale G, Harris A, Bergh J, Smeds
J, Farmer P, Praz V, Haibe-Kains B, Lallemand F, Desmedt C, Durbecq V,
Larsimont D, Cardoso F, Buyse M, Delorenzi M, Piccart M. Jules Bordet
Institute, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium; Swiss
Institute of Experimental Cancer Research, Epalinges, Switzerland; The
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom; Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden;
International Drug Development Institute, Brussels, Belgium; European
Institute of Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy

Background: Histological grade (HG)
in breast cancer provides important prognostic information. Low and
high grade (HG1 and HG3, respectively) tumours are known to have good
and poor prognosis. However, intermediate grade (HG2) tumours present
a difficulty in clinical decision making, because their survival
profile is not different from that of the total (non-graded)
population and their proportion is large (40%–50%). The aim of this
study was to determine whether the prognostic value of grade could be
refined by using gene expression profiling. Methods: Gene expression profiles (GEP) from Affymetrix
U133A Genechips were contrasted between HG 1 (low grade) and 3 (high
grade) tumours using a training set of 64 estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer samples. A score called the
“gene-expression grade index” (GGI) based on the 128 most significant
genes was defined and tested on a independent validation dataset of
129 tumour samples. A multiple independent external validation was
also performed using three publicly available datasets from van de
Vijver, M. J. et al. 2002, Sorlie
et al. 2001 and Sotiriou
et al. 2003 using different
populations and microarray platforms (total = 474 tumour samples).
Results: HG 1 and 3 tumours were
associated with distinct GEP and GGI values. The GGI clearly splits HG
2 (intermediate grade) tumours into high-risk (gene-expression grade
GG 3) and low-risk (GG 1) groups with significantly different clinical
outcomes (HR: 3.49, 95% CI 2.14–5.69, p<0.0001), similar to that of
HG 3 and 1, respectively (HR: 3.48, 95% CI 2.26–5.36, p<0.0001).
Replacing HG with genomic grade (GG) in the Nottingham Prognostic
Index significantly improved prognostic classification. Similar
results were found when we applied GG to the 3 external independent
datasets. We are currently validating our findings in the TransBig
series of 302 tumour samples from 5 different European institutions
from which grading was determined based on central pathology review in
Milan. Conclusions:
Gene-expression-based grading can significantly improve current
grading systems for the prognostic assessment of breast cancer.
Reproduction of these findings across multiple independent datasets
and across different platforms suggests our findings are robust.
Refined grading based on gene expression measurements can have
important clinical implications for breast cancer management in the
near future.

## 303

## A miniPathway for tamoxifen therapy resistance.

## Jansen M, Foekens J, Ritstier K, van Staveren I, Meijer-van
Gelder M, Sieuwerts A, Portengen H, Dorssers L, Klijn J, Berns E.
Erasmus MC - Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands;
Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Background: Our previously performed
microarray analysis on primary breast cancer specimens identified
Seven in Absentia Homolog 2 ( = SIAH2) and Enhancer of Zeste Homolog 1
( = EZH1) to be differentially expressed in patients with advanced
disease with a favourable and poor disease outcome, respectively,
after first-line tamoxifen therapy. Interestingly EZH2, a homolog of
EZH1, was shown to be a prognostic marker in breast and prostate
cancer. Like SIAH2, EZH2 has been reported to bind to the
proto-oncogene VAV1.

Patients and Methods: EZH1, SIAH2 and
VAV1 and their homologs EZH2, SIAH1 and VAV3 were analysed with a
quantitative RT-PCR assay in 253 estrogen receptor ( = ER) positive
primary breast carcinomas from patients with recurrent disease treated
with first-line tamoxifen. Frozen primary tumor specimens were
obtained from 54 patients with an objective response, 110 patients
with stable disease and 99 patients with progressive disease after
therapy. Expression levels of the genes were compared with housekeeper
genes and correlated as continuous parameters with type of response
and progression-free-survival using logistic and Cox regression
analyses. In multivariable analysis, each gene was compared with the
basic model of traditional predictive factors (i.e. menopausal status,
disease-free interval, dominant site of relapse, log ER and log PR).
All statistical tests were two-side.D

Results: In uni- and multivariable
analysis only EZH2, SIAH2 and VAV3 expression levels correlated
significantly with antihormone therapy failure both in type of
response and progression-free-survival. When analysed in multivariable
analyses, odds ratios for response are 0.65 (P = 0.014), 1.69
(P = 0.003) and 1.41 (P = 0.029), for EZH2, SIAH2, and VAV3
respectively. With respect to progression-free-survival, hazard ratios
are 1.25 (P = 0.008), 0.75 (P<0.001), and 0.86 (P = 0.044),
respectively. Furthermore, SIAH2 and VAV3 expression levels correlated
with each other and with ER level; EZH2 expression only anticorrelated
with ER level. A stepdown multivariable regression analysis showed the
EZH2:SIAH2 expression ratio to be superior to the basic model in
predicting type of response (odds ratio = 0.56 (P<0.001)) and
progression-free-survival (hazard ratio = 1.35 (P<0.001)). We
propose a functional link between EZH2 and SIAH2 via VAV3 and ongoing
studies, including RNA interference and expression vectors, are
evaluating this “miniPathway” in relation with hormone therapy
resistance in a panel of human breast cancer cell lines.

Conclusions: Upregulation of EZH2 and
downregulation of VAV3 and SIAH2 correlate with tamoxifen therapy
resistance. Data indicate that EZH2, SIAH2, and VAV3 may interact.
Finally, EZH2 and SIAH2 seem to be involved in therapy resistance via
different mechanisms, i.e. via an estrogen receptor dependent (SIAH2)
and independent pathway (EZH2).

## 304

## Gene expression profiles as predictors of response to neoadjuvant
taxotere and adriamycin/cytoxan: a prospective randomized multicenter
trial in breast cancer.

## Chang JC, Hilsenbeck SG, Yee D, Ostler P, Tsimelzon A, Harrison
M, Gutierrez MC, Elledge RM, O’Connell P, Osborne CK, Makris A. Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX; University of Minnesota; Mount
Vernon Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Virginia Commonwealth
University

Introduction: Previously, we had
identified a 92-gene expression pattern that predicted response to
neoadjuvant Taxotere in primary breast cancers. In this prospective,
randomized, multicenter trial we set out to validate this profile, and
to compare it with the molecular patterns for response to AC. We
report here the clinical and early gene expression validation results
of this study.

Methods: Patients were randomized to
either 4 cycles of Taxotere 100 mg/m2 (T),
or 4 cycles of Adriamycin 60 mg/m2 plus
Cytoxan 600 mg/m2 (AC), prior to surgery
and clinical responses to these agents recorded. Core biopsies were
obtained before chemotherapy and stored at −80°C for subsequent gene
expression array analysis. Double-stranded cDNA was synthesized using
an oligo-dT primer containing a T7 RNA polymerase promoter, followed
by in vitro transcription with
biotinylated ribonucleotides. The labeled cRNA was hybridized to
Affymetrix U133A chips, which comprise 22,200 genes, to determine gene
expression patterns.

Results: We have completed
recruitment of 120 patients. Of these, 113 have completed the
neoadjuvant phase and 105 have had surgery. Results on the 113 women
(57 T-treated, 56 AC-treated), with median age of 48 yrs (range 30–72)
are presented below. The pathological complete response was 9.4% vs.
7.7% in T and AC, respectively. Clinical response rates (CR + PR) were
also similar in both arms, 65% vs. 57% respectively. Higher grade 3
and 4 toxicities were observed with T, febrile neutropenia (23% vs.
12%) and GI toxicity (13% vs. 5%), but these were not statistically
significant. Gene expression results of the first 12 patients on T
have been analyzed, and the 92-gene expression pattern correctly
classified 7/8 clinically resistant cancers, and 2/4 sensitive
cancers.

Conclusions: In this randomized
prospective study, response rates to neoadjuvant T and AC were
similar, with acceptable toxicity in both arms. We will present the
validation results of gene expression patterns for T, as well as the
AC response patterns of all the patients enrolled in this multicenter
prospective study. Gene expression array analysis of pretreatment
biopsy specimens may allow selection of the most effective treatments
for individual patients.

## 305

## Predicting response to ixabepilone: genomics study in patients
receiving single agent ixabepilone as neoadjuvant treatment for breast
cancer (BC).

## Baselga J, Gianni L, Llombart A, Manikhas G, Kubista E, Steger
G, Lee H, Ronczka A, Xu L, Clark E, Galbraith S. Vall d’Hebron,
Barcelona, Spain; Istituto Nazionale Per Lo Studio E La Cura Dei
Tumori, Milan, Italy; Instituto Valenciano De Oncologia, Valencia,
Spain; Municipal Oncology Outpatient Clinic, St Petersburg, Russian
Federation; Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Bristol-Myers
Squibb Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Princeton, NJ
Ixabepilone is a semi-synthetic analog of epothilone in Phase III
trials in metastatic BC. This study was designed to discover candidate
gene expression profiles to predict complete pathological response
(pCR) to ixabepilone as neoadjuvant therapy for BC.

Methods: Women with invasive stage
IIA-IIIB BC with tumors ≥3 cm received
40 mg/m2 ixabepilone over 3-hours on Day
1 for up to four 21-day cycles, followed by surgery. Pathological
response was assessed using the Sataloff criteria. Core needle
biopsies were obtained pre-therapy for analysis of mRNA expression
using Affymetrix HG-U133 2.0 arrays. Adjuvant chemotherapy with an
anthracycline combination regimen, radiotherapy and tamoxifen were
administered as indicated. 56 patients were randomly divided into a
training (n = 34) and a validation set (n = 22). Penalized logistic
regression with recursive feature elimination was used to select and
to train the model to predict pCR. The model with the least
cross-validation error and the fewest number of genes based on the
training set was chosen to test on the validation set.

Results: A total of 164 patients were
enrolled. Gene expression and clinical data are currently available
for 56 and 96 patients respectively and will be updated on all 164
patients at the meeting. Median age was 56 yrs (range 27–79), 99% were
ECOG 0. TNM status T2/T3/T4 was 57%/23%/16%, Grade 1/2/3/unk was 11%/
40%/24%/25% and ER status of +/−/unk was 51%/46%/3%. Grade 3/4
neutropenia occurred in 14%/5%. Grade 2 toxicities for
arthralgia/myalgia, neuropathy and mucositis were 23%, 12% and 4%,
grade 3 toxicities were 2%, 1% and 3% respectively.The pCR rate in the
breast was 19%. In the 56 patients with gene expression data available
the pCR rate was 20% (21% in the training set and 18% in the
validation set).
A six gene model was selected using the training set. The
prediction error for pCR in the validation set was 28%, sensitivity
50%, specificity 94%, positive predictive value (PPV) 66% and negative
predictive value (NPV) 89%.

Conclusion: Based on this early
analysis, ixabepilone has manageable toxicity, and a pCR rate which
compares favorably to reported studies of single agent chemotherapy.
Using a 6 gene predictive model, a PPV of 66% and NPV of 89% for pCR
was obtained (i.e. of those who were marker positive vs negative the
pCR rate was 66% vs 11% respectively). Such a predictive model could
be used in future trials to select those patients likely to benefit
from ixabepilone, and exclude those who are unlikely to respond to
ixabepilone.

## 306

## Affymetrix gene chip profile predicts pathologic complete response
to preoperative paclitaxel/FAC chemotherapy in breast cancer.

## Pusztai L, Hess KR, Gold DL, Anderson K, Ross JS, Valero V,
Hortobagyi GN, Symmans WF. U.T. M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX; Albany Medical Center, Albany, NY
Purpose: Our goal was to develop gene expression based predictors
of pathologic complete response (pCR) to preoperative chemotherapy
using Affymetrix Gene Chips and define an optimal predictor for
prospective validation. Patients: Eighty-two patients with stage I-III
breast cancer were included. Fine needle aspirations were collected
before starting chemotherapy with sequential paclitaxel and
5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide. Gene expression
profiling was performed with Affymetrix U133 A chips. We developed
multi-gene predictors of pCR using supervised learning algorithms and
used complete cross-validation to estimate how well the classifiers
would perform on independent cases.
Results: The overall pCR rate was 26%. We identified 56
differentially expressed probe sets (49 genes) between cases with pCR
versus residual disease at a false discovery rate of 1%. We examined
the performance of 546 distinct classifiers (set of genes + prediction
algorithm). The vast majority of these classifiers yielded fully
cross-validated performance estimates that were within 2 standard
deviations of each other. We selected a 30-probe set (26-gene) DLDA
classifier for independent validation in an ongoing randomized trial.
This classifier yielded cross-validated estimates of 81% ± 5% (SD) for
overall accuracy and 92% ± 3% for area under the ROC curve (73% and
78%, respectively when adjusted for gene selection). Conclusion:
Multiple overlapping gene sets and several different prediction
algorithms can yield predictors that show similar performance in full
cross validation. The estimated predictive accuracy of these tests is
within a clinically useful range.

## 307

## Transcriptional profiling can predict the achievement of a
pathologic complete response (pCR) after preoperative chemotherapy (PST)
with gemcitabine (G), epirubicin (E) and docetaxel (Doc) in primary
breast cancer (PBC) with high accuracy.

## Schneeweiss A, Thuerigen O, Toedt G, Warnat P, Hahn M, Schuetz
F, Lauschner I, Benner A, Brors B, Sinn H-P, Sohn C, Lichter P.
University, Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany

Objectives: To evaluate the utility
of a multigene predictor of pCR to PST for PBC, and to identify and
validate a gene expression signature predicting pCR to PST with G, E
and Doc administered either as triple therapy (6×GEDoc
800 mg/m2 day (d)
1+8/90 mg/m2
d1/75 mg/m2 d1 q d21) or sequentially
(5×GE 1250 mg/m2
d1/100 mg/m2 d1 q d14→ 4×Doc
80 mg/m2 d1 q d14).

Patients and Methods: 98 patients
(pts) with T2-4 N0-2 M0 PBC underwent pretreatment core needle biopsy
to collect snap frozen tissue for microarray analysis. Small amounts
of breast tumor RNA were amplified with a newly developed
amplification protocol. Comprehensive RNA expression profiles were
generated using DNA microarrays carrying 21.329 unique gene specific
70mer oligonucleotide probes. Analysis was started with a training
data set of 50 pts who received 5×GE→4×Doc (pCR n = 15; non-pCR
n = 35). Results were validated on an independent data set of 48 pts
who received 6xGEDoc (pCR n = 9; non-pCR n = 39).

Results: The Support Vector Machine
algorithm was applied in combination with a recursive feature
elimination approach for building a predictive model based on the
training data set. Cross validation of predictive models based on
differently sized sets of genes was performed showing that the number
of genes can be reduced to 512 without decreasing the performance of
the model. The most significant pathways included in the final set of
512 genes were regulators of BRCA1 and Ras signaling. By applying this
classifier to the independent test set of 48 pts prediction of pCR was
achieved with a sensitivity of 78% and a specificity of 90% for an
overall accuracy of 88% (95% confidence interval, 75–95). The positive
and negative predictive value was 64% and 95%, respectively. Overall
accuracy and predictive value of the signature in predicting a pCR was
superior to those data of the conventional parameters ductal invasive
histology, tumor grade 3, achievement of a partial remission after
6 weeks of PST or absence of hormone receptors. A multivariate
logistic regression analysis showed that only gene expression
signature and her2 overexpression (3+ by
HercepTestTM) were independent
predictors for the achievement of a pCR.

Conclusions: Our results show that
transcriptional profiling can identify a gene expression signature in
T2-4 N0-2 M0 PBC that may serve as a clinically useful independent
predictor of pCR to PST containing G, E and Doc. Thus, a highly
efficient selection of pts benefiting from these drugs could be
achieve.D

## 308

## Measurements of estrogen receptor and reporter genes from
microarrays determine receptor status and time to recurrence following
adjuvant tamoxifen therapy.

## Symmans WF, Sotiriou C, Anderson SK, Hatzis C, Valero V, Booser
DJ, Larsimont D, Desmedt C, Gold DL, Sneige N, Cristofanilli M, Arun
B, Gong Y, Ross JS, Hess K, Piccart MJ, Harris AL, Hortobagyi GN,
Pusztai L. M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Institut Jules
Bordet, Brussels, Belgium; Nuvera Biosciences, Inc., Woburn, MA;
Albany Medical College, Albany, NY; Oxford University, Oxford, United
Kingdom
Purpose: To determine the accuracy and clinical relevance of gene
expression levels for estrogen receptor (ER) and co-expressed ER
reporter genes in breast cancer.
Materials and Methods: Gene expression profiles of newly diagnosed
breast cancer were obtained from 82 fine needle aspiration (FNA)
samples and 136 frozen tissue samples in two different laboratories
using Affymetrix U133A GeneChip technology. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)
and/or enzyme immunoassay (EIA) were used to define ER status. All
expression data were normalized using a single digital standard (dCHIP
software). ER gene expression (ER mRNA), EIA, a 200-gene ER reporter
index (defined from an independent public dataset), and the product of
ER mRNA and reporter index (RI) were all dichotomized at their median,
and IHC by Allred score (<=6 vs >=7). These were each included
in Cox proportional hazards models with tumor size (T1 vs > = T2),
nodal status, grade, and age (dichotomized at median) to evaluate
distant relapse-free survival (DRFS) in 96 of the patients with
ER-positive breast cancer who received only adjuvant tamoxifen
therapy.
Results: ER mRNA level (probe ESR1 205225_) > = 500 (arbitrary
units) defined ER-positive status (IHC > = 10%) in FNAs and tissues
(overall accuracy 96%, 95%). ER mRNA correlated with IHC (Allred
score) and EIA (R = 0.85, 0.58). Lower ER mRNA predicted worse DRFS
(HR 2.00, p = 0.02), especially when combined with RI (HR 2.30,
p = 0.006), but EIA and IHC were not significant. Tumor size was also
independently significant (HR 2.78, p = 0.002). In tumors >2 cm,
higher ER mRNA with higher RI predicted 100% DRFS at 5 years, higher
ER mRNA with lower RI predicted 80% DRFS, and lower ER mRNA predicted
50–60% DRFS.
Discussion: Expression values of ER mRNA and an ER reporter index
from Affymetrix GeneChips accurately determine ER status, are
comparable in FNA and tissue samples from two independent
laboratories, and predict DRFS in women who receive adjuvant
tamoxifen.

## 309

## Feasibility of gene expression profiling in community hospitals;
preliminary results of a pilot study in N0 breast
cancer patients.

## Bueno de Mesquita JM, Van De Vijver MJ, Peterse JL, Rutgers
EJTh, Van’t Veer LJ, Van Harten WH, Van Dam FSAM, Karsenberg KF, Douma
K, Van Tinteren H, Floore AN, Glas AM, Rodenhuis S, Linn SC. The
Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital,
Amsterdam, Netherlands; Agendia, Amsterdam, Netherlands

Background: Recently we have
identified a gene expression profile of 70 genes using microarray
analysis (70-gene MA test), which was a more powerful prognostic
factor for freedom of distant metastases than current
clinicopathological features in node negative breast cancer patients
up to 55 years of age (van’t Veer et
al., Nature 2002; Van de Vijver et al., New Engl J Med 2002). To assess whether this
70-gene MA test can be implemented in daily clinical practice we aimed
to answer the following three questions: I. Is it feasible to collect
fresh tumor samples in order to make this test available in
pN0 breast cancer patients in community
hospitals? II. What is the proportion of a “poor prognosis” versus a
“good prognosis” in current node negative patients? III. What is the
concordance between the 70-gene MA risk profile and the metastasis
risk as assessed with current Dutch guidelines based on
clinicopathological factors (such as age, pT, tumor grade, hormonal
receptor-status)?

Patients & Methods: Women younger
than 61 years presenting with cT1-2N0M0 unifocal breast cancer were
eligible to participate and entered onto this prospective study after
informed consent. Fresh tumor tissue samples were collected within one
hour after surgery and sent in RNAlater® to our hospital. A 70-gene MA
test was performed in node negative patients with a representative
tumor tissue sample; pN+ patients were excluded. According to current
Dutch guidelines (used for guiding adjuvant systemic treatment) for
node negative patients, high risk is defined as age ≤35 years, pT any
size and grade 2–3 or pT >1 cm and grade 1, or age >35 years,
pT1–2 cm and grade 3, pT2–3 cm and grade 2–3 or pT>3 cm and any
grade; all others are defined as low risk.

Results: Thus far, 214 patients were
included (average age 50 years) and 116 70-gene MA tests were
performed. Ninety-eight (46%) patients were excluded postoperatively
because of pN+ (51/214; 24%) or inadequate tumor samples (47/214;
22%). For 54 (47%) patients a poor prognosis 70-gene MA-risk profile
was found; for 62 (53%) a good prognosis profile. In 37% (43/116) of
the patients the 70-gene risk profile was discordant with risk
assessment based on clinicopathological factors according to the Dutch
guidelines.

Conclusion: These first results show
that the implementation of the 70-gene MA test in community hospitals
is feasible. Furthermore, the 70-gene MA risk profile is discordant in
a substantial proportion of lymph node negative breast cancer patients
compared with metastasis risk assessed with conventional
clinicopathological factors according to Dutch guidelines.

## 310

## Measurement of gene expression using tissue microarray cores of
paraffin embedded breast cancer tissue.

## Baker J, Salter J, Liu M-L, Hackett JR, Cronin M, Shak S,
Dowsett M. Genomic Health, Inc., Redwood City, CA; Royal Marsden
Hospital, London, United Kingdom
Introduction. High throughput RT-PCR technology can be used to
profile gene expression in fixed paraffin-embedded (FPE) tumor
specimens and predict distant recurrence (Paik et al. NEJM [2004]).
However, in many studies, limited amounts of FPE tissue are available,
for example as m cores in the form of tissue microarrays (TMA). We
conducted a feasibility study to determine first, whether the standard
21 gene Oncotype DX assay can be obtained with such limited FPE
tissue, and second, whether RNA amplification prior to RT-PCR can be
successfully performed to maximize the number of additional genes that
can be correlated with prognosis and treatment benefit.
Methods. Single cores ( m diameter, 0.2 mm long) were taken from 8 tumor
blocks prepared from excisions of invasive breast cancer from patients
in the IMPACT trial. RNA was extracted and total RNA content was
determined using the RiboGreen fluorescence method. The standard
Oncotype DX 21 gene assay was performed on 375 ng of unamplified RNA.
In addition, 50 ng of RNA was amplified, and then analyzed by the
Oncotype DX assay. The RT-PCR results using unamplified and amplified
RNA were compare.D
Results. Sufficient total RNA (>375 ng) was obtained in all 8
specimens (mean RNA yield 1066 ng, range 510–3276 ng) to run the
standard Oncotype DX assay without pre-amplifying RNA. Gene expression
profiles in all 8 specimens for the 21 gene Oncotype DX assay on
unamplified RNA had strong signals and met all criteria for successful
RT-PCR. As has been observed in all other breast cancer studies, the
range of expression of genes is very large (e.g., 1000-fold range in
quantitative expression of ER). Profiles for 3 of the samples were
typical of ER negative tumors and profiles for 5 of the samples were
typical of ER positive tumors. RNA amplification yielded a 100–200
fold increase in total RNA. Overall, profiles and Recurrence Scores
obtained using amplified RNA were similar to those obtained with
unamplified RNA. Amplified RNA can be used for screening studies, but
further work will be required to provide high fidelity. We are
currently assessing the phenotype of these samples by conventional
means to correlate with the quantitative RT-PCR expression
results.
Conclusion: Gene expression profiling from very small FPE specimens
taken for TMA construction is feasible using RT-PCR.

## 311

## Validation of HOXB13, IL17BR and CHDH as predictors of clinical
outcome of adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy in breast cancer.

## Erlander MG, Ma XJ, Hilsenbeck SG, Sgroi DC, Osborne CK, Allred
DC. Arcturus Bioscience, Inc., Mountain View, CA; The Breast Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA

Background: We previously showed that
microarray-based expression levels of HOXB13, IL17BR, and CHDH, and
the HOXB13:IL17BR composite index, in particular, strongly predicted
clinical outcome in a case-controlled, retrospective 60-patient cohort
of breast cancer patients, all treated with tamoxifen monotherapy (Ma
XJ et al. Cancer Cell, 2004). The predictive utility of the
HOXB13:IL17BR index was initially confirmed in an independent cohort
of 20 patients. These three genes have not been previously associated
with breast cancer and estrogen signaling. Further validation of these
potential new biomarkers in larger clinical cohorts is therefore
neede.D

Materials and Methods: Expression of
HOXB13, IL17BR, CHDH, ERa and PR and 4 reference genes (ACTB, HMBS,
SDHA, UBC) were analyzed by TaqMan real-time PCR in tissue sections of
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast cancer biopsies from 1002
breast cancer patients. PCR data and clinical variables (tamoxifen
therapy, nodal status, ER/PR status, tumor size, S-phase fraction)
were analyzed for association with disease-free survival (DFS) in both
univariate and multivariate Cox regression models.

Results: PCR data from 852 (85%)
patients were obtaine.D Higher levels of HOXB13 and lower levels of
IL17BR and CHDH expression correlated significantly with shorter DFS
(p<0.01) in the entire
cohort. In particular, the HOXB13:IL17BR index (computed as a
difference of standardized log transformed values) was significantly
associated with DFS in node-negative patients but not in node-positive
patients. In addition, breast cancer from node-positive patients had
significantly higher HOXB13:IL17BR index values than that from
node-negative patients. Finally, in multivariate analysis including
age, PR, tumor size, S-phase fraction and aneuploidy, HOXB13:IL17BR
index remained a significant predictor (p<0.001) in ER-positive, node-negative
patients.

Conclusion: This retrospective tumor
bank study demonstrated that the HOXB13:IL17BR index is a strong
independent prognostic factor in breast cancer in both untreated and
tamoxifen-treated patients. In addition, HOXB13:IL17BR index
significantly correlated with nodal status, suggesting that HOXB13 and
IL17BR might be associated with metastasis potential in breast cancer.
This and earlier studies together demonstrate potential clinical
utility of these novel biomarkers in predicting clinical outcome for
patients with ER-positive, node-negative breast cancer
patients.

## 312

## A two-gene expression ratio of HOXB13 and IL-17BR for prediction of
recurrence and survival in women receiving adjuvant tamoxifen.

## Goetz MP, Suman VJ, Ingle JN, Nibbe AM, Visscher DW, Reynolds C,
Lingle WL, Erlander MG, Ma XJ, Sgroi DC, Perez EA, Couch FJ. Mayo
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN; Arcturus Bioscience,
Mountain View, CA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA; Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Jacksonville, FL

Background: The homeobox 13 (HOXB13)
gene is a marker of invasion and metastasis. The HOXB13 to
interleukin-17 B receptor (IL-17BR) expression ratio was recently
discovered to predict relapse and survival in patients (pts) treated
with tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy for estrogen receptor (ER) positive
breast cancer (Ma XJ, et al. 2004; Cancer
Cell).

Methods: We sought to validate these
findings by determining whether the HOXB13 to IL-17BR ratio was
predictive of relapse and survival in a cohort of women with early
stage ER positive breast cancer enrolled onto a North Central Cancer
Treatment Group adjuvant trial (NCCTG 89-30-52) in which pts received
5 years of adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy.

Results: Tumor blocks were obtained
from 211 of 256 eligible pts and quantitative RT-PCR profiles for
HOXB13 and IL-17BR were obtained from 206 (98%). The median length of
follow-up was 11.0 years (range: 5.7–13.6 yrs). The optimal cut-point
for the two gene log2(expression ratio) that
best discriminated clinical outcome (recurrence and survival) was at
the 58th percentile of the observed HOXB13
to IL-17BR expression ratio distribution (−1.85), but differed as a
function of nodal status [lymph node (LN) negative tumors
(59th percentile; −1.34) versus LN
positive (90th percentile; 4.4)]. Overall,
pts with a HOXB13 to IL-17BR ratio > −1.849 (n = 84) had
significantly worse relapse free survival (RFS), disease free survival
(DFS), and overall survival (OS), independent of standard prognostic
markers [ER, PR, HER-2, tumor grade, tumor size and LN status], than
pts with ratios < −1.849 (n = 122). However, the HOXB13 to IL-17BR
ratio performed best in the node negative cohort (n = 130) and
consistently predicted survival in the univariate (p<0.0001),
multivariate (HR 2.4, 95% CI 1.19–4.84, p = .014), and multivariate
cross validation analyses (HR 2.01; 95% CI 1.02–3.99; p = 0.045).
There were no events (recurrence or death) observed in the LN negative
pts with a HOXB13 to IL-17BR ratio < −1.34 during the first 2 years
of follow-up.

Conclusion: The HOXB13 to IL-17BR
ratio is predictive of relapse and death in node negative, ER positive
tamoxifen treated breast cancer and may account for the early peak in
the hazard rate for relapse seen following the initiation of adjuvant
tamoxifen. Women identified to be at high risk of recurrence by means
of this marker may benefit from upfront aromatase inhibitors and/or
chemotherapy.

## 401

## Axillary recurrence after negative SLN biopsy.

## Ly QP, White L, Dupont E, Cox C, Reintgen D, Dessureault S.
Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL

Background: Lymphatic mapping
and sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy have replaced axillary lymph node
dissection (ALND) as the definitive nodal staging procedure for breast
cancer because SLN biopsy has been proven to cause less morbidity and
be more cost effective than complete ALND. Short-term follow-up has
shown that lymphatic mapping and SLN have a low false negative, but
there is not yet any published data showing long-term outcome with
large sample size.

Materials & Methods: This
is a retrospective review of a prospective database on 1680 breast
cancer patients who were treated at Moffitt Cancer Center with
complete ALND (before SLN), both SLN and ALND (during the SLN trial in
1994), and SLN alone.
Prior to April 1994, 607 breast cancer patients were treated with
ALND and were found to have negative nodes (first control group).
Between April 1994 and August 2000, 1702 consecutive patients with
clinically node-negative breast cancer were mapped at the MCC.
Lymphatic mapping was successful in identifying the SLN in 1638
patients (96.2%). 551 patients (33.7%) were found to have metastatic
disease either by hematoxylin and eosin stains or by cytokeratin
immunohistochemistry. 1086 patients (66.3%) had negative sentinel
lymph node biopsies. The first 120 patients in this group all
underwent ALND (second control group). Two patients in this group were
found to have metastatic disease in the nodal basin (False Negative
Rate = 2 %).
The subsequent 965 patients who had a negative SLN without further
nodal dissection have been observed (study group). All patients were
followed either at MCC or by their local physicians who correspond
with MCC with updates on the patients’ disease status.
Lymphatic mapping was performed using
Tc99m-labelled sulfur colloid and
isosulfan blue dye. A SLN was defined as any blue node and/or any hot
node with ex vivo radioactivity
counts >10 times an excised non-SLN or in
situ radioactivity count >3 times the background
counts.

Results: Mean follow-up is
63.3 months; median follow-up is 68.1 months (range: 0.3 –
101 months). Over 8 years of follow-up, there have been 74 deaths, 55
total recurrences, 23 ipsilateral breast recurrences, 2 contralateral
breast cancers, 28 distant metastases, and 2 ipsilateral axillary
recurrences in our study group (n = 965). In the control group
(n = 727), over 18 years of followup (mean: 7 years), there were 126
deaths, 80 total recurrences, 52 ipsilateral breast recurrences, 2
contralateral breast cancers, 20 distant metastases, and 2 ipsilateral
axillary recurrences. The recurrence rate and overall survival are not
different than that of historical controls who had a complete ALND and
a negative node status.

Conclusion: Our data confirm
that SLN biopsy is an effective and safe alternative to ALND for the
detection of nodal metastases in patients with invasive breast cancer
and should be used as the standard tool for nodal staging as well as
treatment for these patients.

## 402

## Low local-regional failure rates in selected breast cancer patients
with tumor-positive sentinel nodes who do not undergo completion axillary
dissection.

## Hwang RF, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Yi M, Buchholz TA, Meric- Bernstam
F, Ames FC, Kuerer HM, Ross MI, Singletary SE, Babiera GV, Feig BW,
Hunt KK. UT-M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
Background: Recently, clinicians have elected to avoid completion
axillary dissection in selected breast cancer patients with
tumorpositive sentinel lymph nodes (SLN). The purpose of the current
study was to examine the long-term safety of such an approach in this
selected group of patients.
Methods: The records of all patients with invasive breast cancer
who underwent SLN biopsy at our institution between 1993 and December
2004 were reviewed. 3366 patients underwent a SLN biopsy and 750 had a
positive SLN. 196 patients (195 female, 1 male) with a positive SLN
did not undergo completion axillary dissection (CLND) based on
clinician and patient preference. SLNs were considered positive if
tumor cells were identified by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining or by cytokeratin on immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Clinicopathologic variables, treatment patterns and long-term
local-regional, distant recurrence and survival were analyze.D
Results: The majority of the tumors were infiltrating ductal
carcinomas (74%), ER positive (82%), PR positive (69.9%), HER- 2/neu
negative (78.6%) and negative for lymphovascular invasion (58.7%).
Primary tumors were predominantly T1 or T2 (72.4% and 23.0%,
respectively) with the remainder T3 and T4 (3.6% and 1.0%,
respectively). The mean number of SLNs removed was 3.7 (range, 1–14),
and the mean number of positive SLNs was 1.2 (range, 1–6). The
majority of the SLNs were positive by H&E (64.3%), while 35.7% of
SLNs were positive by IHC only. Extracapsular extension was present in
6.6% of the positive SLNs. Most patients underwent breast conserving
surgery (54.6%) and radiation therapy was utilized in 61.7% of
patients. Chemotherapy was utilized in a neoadjuvant setting in 14.3%
and as adjuvant treatment in 55.6% of patients. Endocrine therapy was
the sole adjuvant treatment in 17.3% of patients. With a median
followup of 29.5 months (range, 1.3–62.3 months), two patients have
died of unrelated causes. Of the remaining 194 patients, none have
developed axillary recurrence, 1 patient has developed supraclavicular
nodal recurrence and three have developed metastatic disease to the
lung (2) or bone (1). The median time to recurrence was 27.0 months
(range, 11.4–40.1 months).
Conclusion: In selected patients with tumor-positive SLN, longterm
follow-up at our institution suggests that the local-regional failure
rate is low without CLND. Multi-center prospective studies will be
valuable to corroborate these results and to determine which patients
are at risk for nonsentinel lymph node involvement and higher rates of
axillary recurrence.

## 403

## Additional axillary metastases and stage migration in patients with
micrometastases or submicrometastases in sentinel lymph nodes.

## van Rijk MC, Peterse JL, Nieweg OE, Rutgers EJ, Oldenburg HS,
Kroon BB. The Netherlands Cancer Institute/ Antoni van Leeuwenhoek
Hospital, Amsterdam, Netherlands

Background: Axillary lymph node
dissection (ALND) is standard of care in breast cancer patients with a
tumor-positive sentinel node. Due to step-sectioning and
immunohistochemical staining, micrometastases (between 0.2 and 2 mm)
and submicrometastases (less than 0.2 mm, isolated tumor cells) are
increasingly found in sentinel nodes. The clinical relevance of these
metastases is still unknown and the need for ALDN in the patients
concerned is subject of debate. The aim of this study was to
investigate the incidence of micro- and submicrometastases in the
sentinel node, the incidence and size of additional metastasis in the
ALND specimen, and the implications for staging.

Patients and Methods: Between
1999–2004, 2150 breast cancer patients received treatment for breast
cancer at out institute and had undergone sentinel lymph node biopsy.
All sentinel nodes were formalin-fixated, bisected, paraffin-embedded
and cut at a minimum of three levels at 50 to 150- m intervals. Pathological evaluation included
haematoxylin-eosin and immunohistochemical staining.

Results: 650 patients (30%) had a
tumor-positive axillary sentinel node, 148 of them (23%) had
micrometastases and 106 (16%) had submicrometastases.
A total of 106 of the 148 patients with micrometastases underwent
ALND and additional metastases were found in 20 patients (19%).
Sixteen of these patients (15%) had macrometastases and were upstaged
from pN1mi to pN1a or pN2a. Four patients had additional
micrometastases.
Fifty-four of the 106 patients with submicrometastases underwent
lymph node dissection. Two (4%) had additional macrometastases and
were upstaged from pN0 to pN1a, and another two had additional
micrometastases.

Conclusion: In 39% of the patients
with a positive sentinel node the nodal involvement consisted of
micro- or submicrometastases. Additional metastases were found in 19%
and 7% respectively, and upstaging occurred in 15% and 4%
respectively. Based on these findings, we recommend additional
treatment of the axilla in patients with micrometastases but to
refrain from ALND in patients with submicrometastases in their
sentinel node. Pathological work-up should focus on the detection of
macro- and micrometastases, and not on the detection of
submicrometastases.

## 404

## Predicting negative axillary lymph node dissection in patients with
positive sentinel lymph node biopsy: can a subset of patients be spared
axillary dissection?

## Rescigno J, Taylor LA, Aziz MS, Axelrod DM, Bernik S, Vallejo
CE, Riegel AC, Troob SH, Klein P. St. Vincents Comprehensive Cancer
Center, New York, NY; New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY; New York
University, New York, NY

Background: Factors predictive of
absence of disease at axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) may allow
selected patients (pts) with positive sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy
to avoid ALND or axillary irradiation.

Patients and Methods: From 8/02 to
8/04, 77 pts (76 women and 1 man) at a single institution had positive
SLN biopsy and underwent ALND (6–35 non-SLN dissected—median 16). Four
pts with only clusters in SLN were excluded (all 4 had T1a/T1b tumors
and negative ALND). Clinicopathologic factors associated with non-SLN
involvement were determined by Pearson chi-square test and binary
logistic regression. Odds ratios (OR) were determined for significant
variables (p<0.05, two-sided) derived from univariate and
multivariate analyses.

Results: The mean number of SLN (+/−
95% CI) was 3.2 (2.8–3.7). The mean number of lymph nodes removed at
the time of SLN biopsy (SLN and palpable non-SLN) was 4.5 (3.8–5.2).
Non- SLN (palpable non-SLN and/or nodes from completion ALND) were
involved in 39% of patients, and completion ALND nodes were involved
in 31% of patients. In univariate analysis, the following factors were
significant for non-SLN involvement: proportion of SLN involved as a
continuous variable: OR = 1.2 per 10%, p = 0.02), SLN extracapsular
extension (ECE) (58% vs. 29%, OR = 3.3, p = 0.02), primary tumor
perineural invasion (PNI) (58% vs. 30%, OR = 3.2, p = 0.02); primary
tumor multicentricity (83% vs. 35%, OR = 9.2, p = 0.02); number of SLN
positive: 2+ vs. one (56% vs. 31%, OR = 2.9, p = 0.03), grade 2/3 vs.
grade 1 (43% vs. 0%, OR = 1.8, p = 0.03), and size of SLN involvement:
macro vs. micro (36% vs. 12%, OR = 4.2, p = 0.03). In multivariate
analysis, proportion of involved SLN (OR = 1.2 per 10%, p = 0.02), ECE
(OR = 3.1, p = 0.04), and PNI (OR = 3.1, p = 0.04) were independently
associated with non-SLN involvement. Based on this analysis, a
subgroup of pts with a low risk of completion ALND involvement was
defined: pts with involvement of fewer than half of nodes retrieved at
the time of SLN biopsy, without PNI, and without SLN ECE accounted for
29% of pts in this series. These pts had a 4.5% risk of ALND
involvement, in contrast to pts with one or more of these adverse
factors, who had a 42% risk of ALND involvement.

Conclusion: A subgroup of pts could
be identified that had less than 5% risk of completion ALND
involvement, potentially sparing nearly one-third of women with
positive SLN the morbidity of ALND or axillary radiotherapy.
Independent validation of this model is required prior to clinical
implementation.

## 405

## A prospective evaluation of a new technique using aponeurosis
padding without vacuum drainage to reduce morbidity in patients
undergoing axillary node dissection for localized breast cancer
(LBC).

## Garbay J-R, Thoury A, Moinon E, Picone O, Rey A, Di Palma M.
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, Paris, France; Hopital Bichat,
Paris, France

## Objective:
Despite the use of sentinel node biopsy, many patients with LBC
require axillary lymphadenectomy. Axillary aponeurosis padding
appeared to be a valuable alternative technique as it avoids vacuum
drainage and its risks. After reporting our first experience with
muscular padding (1), we report here the results with axillary
aponeurosis padding.

## Patients and Methods:
Aponeurosis padding was prospectively performed in patients with
LBC. Level I and II axillary lymphadenectomy was performed through
a horizontal skin incision close to the hairline. The aponeurosis
was incised at the same level and dissection started underneath.
Padding consisted of suturing the edges of the axillary aponeurosis
to the underlying muscle with 3 separate stitches, without
drainage. A surgeon, a pain clinician and a physiotherapist,
respectively evaluated surgical complications (i.e. infection,
seroma,. .), pain after surgery and at 6 weeks, mobility of the
shoulder and arm.

## Results:
From 01/2004 to 03/2005, 114 patients were treated. The mean
number of excised nodes was 14 (5–36). The mean hospital stay was
2 days. There was no clinical seroma in 91% of the patients and
aspiration was required in only 4%. There was no pain at 6 weeks in
71% of the patients. This compares very favourably with a previous
cohort of patients operated on by the same team using vacuum
drainage: mean hospital stay was 4 days, incidence of seroma and
upper arm mobility were similar, and pain at 6 weeks was present
for almost 50% of the patients.

## Discussion and conclusion:
Aponeurosis padding without drainage is easy to learn and
effectively reduces morbidity after axillary node dissection in
patients with LBC. A longer follow-up is required but this new
technique appears to be very promising.
[1] Garbay JR, Picone O, Fourchotte V, Cavalcanti A, Thoury A.
Axillary lymphadenectomy with muscular padding, without drainage.
Gyn Obst Fertil 2004; 32: 1039–1046.

## 406

## Optimizing the total skin-sparing mastectomy.

## Kumar AS, Wijayanayagam A, Foster RD, Mathes S, Kind G,
Wolverton D, Au A, Esserman LJ. University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Background: Removal of the nipple
during mastectomy is the current standard of care. The concern of
occult tumor present in the nipple-areola complex (NAC) along with
maintence of NAC viability has deterred surgeons from leaving behind
the nipple-areolaskin. We report the outcomes of a variety of
techniques in performing the total skin-sparing (TSS) mastectomy in
which sub-nipple ductal tissue is dissected away, sparing the entire
skin-envelope of the breast.

Methods: Sixty-three mastectomies
with attempted preservation of the NAC were performed in 43 women from
October 2001 to May 2005. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) confirmed absence of disease within 2 cm of the nipple.
Pathologic evaluation was undertaken by serially sectioning the nipple
tissue from all 63 specimens. Preservation of the breast skin envelope
was attempted with free grafting of the nipple-areola skin, or TSS
mastectomy was performed using one of four types of incisions: nipple
crossing incision, inframmary incision, mastopexy incision or radial
incision. Immediate reconstruction was performed using implants with
or without tissue expanders, latissimus dorsi flap, TRAM flap or DIEP
flap.

Results: Of the 63 mastectomies
performed with preservation of the nipple-areola skin 29 (46%) were
performed for prophylaxis, 13 (21%) for DCIS and 21 (33%) for invasive
carcinoma. Two of 63 specimens were found to have DCIS in nipple
tissues, and the affected nipples were subsequently removed. Although
follow up is limited, no patients have exhibited cancer recurrence to
date. Of the many techniques used, radial incisions were the most
robust and resulted in 97% survival of nipple and areola skin (see
table).

Conclusion: Patients having
mastectomy for breast cancer prophylaxis, ductal carcinoma in situ or
invasive carcinoma may be offered total skin sparing mastectomy.
Pre-operative MRI can facilitate appropriate patient selection and is
used to ensure there is no evidence of carcinoma in the nipple-areola
complex. Serial sectioning of the nipple tissue as a separate specimen
further ensures there is no evidence of malignancy in the nipple
tissue. Total skin-sparing mastectomy is a technically challenging and
time-intensive procedure. It is, however, feasible yielding good
cosmesis. Particularly in the setting of prophylactic surgery for
mutation carriers, total skin-sparing mastectomy is an option that may
increase the willingness of women to consider this risk-reducing
intervention. 

## 407

## The effectiveness of per-operative use of human surgical sealant -
‘Quixil’ in reducing the post operative seroma formation in breast cancer
patients.

## Vijayaganesh T, Jones BG, Khaira H, Brown JH, Jewkes A. Good
Hope Hospital NHS Trust, Birmingham, West Midlands, United
Kingdom

Background: The Breast Unit at Good
Hope Hospital has conducted a Prospective Randomised Controlled Trial
to investigate the role of the first ever human fibrin glue ‘Quixil’
in reducing the incidence of seroma formation in post operative breast
cancer patients.

Material and Methods: 100 consecutive
patients, who consented to take part in the study, undergoing
mastectomy or wide local excision and axillary node clearance for
invasive breast cancer, were divided randomly into two groups. The one
group of 50 patients had ‘Quixil’ sprayed on their wound just before
closure. Patients in the other group did not receive the spray.
Patients were blinded in this study as were the Breast Care Nurses who
collected the data.
The following data was collected: the amount of seroma fluid
collected in the immediate post operative period, the amount of seroma
fluid collected in the out patient department when they presented with
symptomatic seroma, the number of days of post operative inpatient
stay and the number of outpatient clinic visits with symptomatic
seroma formation.

Results: Mann-Whitney U-test analysis
showed highly statistically significant differences between the two
groups (non-Quixil vs Quixil): In-patient seroma drainage (755 ml vs
200 ml: p<0.0000005) In-patient stay (5 days vs 4 days:
p<0.0005) Out-patient seroma aspirate (925 ml vs 195 ml:
p<0.00005) Out-patient visit with symptomatic seroma (5 visits vs 2
visits: p<0.000005)

Discussion: The results clearly show
the use of Quixil reduces post-operative seroma formation and
subsequent out-patient attendance with symptomatic seroma.

## 408

## Intraoperative digital specimen mammography: improving efficiency
without loss of accuracy.

## Kaufman CS, Bachman BA, Jacobson L, Kaufman BE. Bellingham
Breast Center, Bellingham, WA; University of Washington, Seattle,
WA

Introduction: Since the majority of
newly diagnosed breast cancers are non-palpable, image guided surgery
is a daily occurrence. A specimen mammogram of the targeted lesion is
obtained to confirm the lesion has been adequately removed and to
check for clear margins by imaging criteria. A major difficulty
experienced with standard specimen mammography is the delay in surgery
waiting for the specimen to travel from the operating room to the
radiology suite, followed by film processing and ending with a
communication from the radiologist to the surgeon. In many centers,
this process commonly takes 20–30 minutes. A new method to obtain
digital specimen mammograms in the operating room is available for
surgeons to obtain intraoperatively and expedite the process. To
compare these two methods, we obtained both intraoperative digital
specimen mammography as well as standard x-ray film specimen
mammography on 100 consecutive image guided lumpectomies.

Methods: A consecutive series of 100
image guided lumpectomies were performed, primarily for breast cancer.
Each patient had an immediate intraoperative digital specimen
mammogram (IDSM) obtained (Faxitron® MX-20 digital system). After this
set of films, the specimen was sent to the usual x-ray unit to obtain
standard specimen mammography films. Surgical decisions were based on
incorporating both types of imaging, although most decisions were made
immediately using the intraoperative device. Data accumulated included
1) the ability of either method of specimen imaging to identify the
target lesion, and 2) the time required for intraoperative versus
standard imaging. Patients were only charged for one set of
films.

Results: Intraoperative digital
specimen mammography (IDSM) was equally as accurate as standard x-ray
film specimen mammography. There was no significant difference between
1) the frequency of identification of the target lesion, 2) lack of
identification of any lesion, 3) frequency of involved margins using
imaging criteria. However, there was a marked difference in 1) the
speed at which the digital mammogram was ready to be read, 2) the
ability of the surgeon to obtain multiple views of the specimen to
identify close margins by imaging criteria, 3) time for surgical “open
to close” and overall operating room time.

Conclusions: Intraoperative digital
specimen mammography (IDSM) is equally as accurate as standard
specimen mammography obtained in the x-ray department. Use of
intraoperative digital specimen mammography (IDSM) saved significant
operative time over sending films to the x-ray department. Using this
new technology allows surgeons to obtain immediate feedback which
translates into shorter more efficient operations. 

## 409

## The impact of radiotherapy on capsule formation and aesthetic
outcome after immediate breast reconstruction using biodimensional
anatomic expander implants.

## Gui GPH, Behranwala K, Dua RS, Ward A, A’Hern R. Royal Marsden
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: Capsular contracture
occurs more frequently in association with radiation fields that may
affect surgical outcome after immediate breast reconstruction (IBR).
The aim of this study was to investigate the impact of radiotherapy
(RT) after IBR using a single implant type.

Methods: Data were collected
prospectively on 136 patients. 64 women had submuscular implant alone
and 72 had an implant assisted latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap
(n = 72) using a McGhan 150 biodimensional permanent expander
implant.

Results: The mean patient age was 45
(range 20–77) years and the median follow-up was 4 (range 1–5) years.
44 patients received RT, 15 at the time of initial cancer treatment
associated with breast conservation (mastectomy was performed at
recurrence) while 29 had post-mastectomy radiotherapy after IBR. On
univariate analysis, RT was the only variable related to capsule
formation (p<0.001). Capsule formation occurred in 13/92 (14.1%)
patients with no RT and in 17/44 (38.6%) patients with RT.
Multivariate analysis hazard ratios (95% confidence interval) of
pre-reconstruction RT and post-reconstruction RT were 1.54 (0.36–6.56)
and 4.81 (2.05–11.26) respectively, p<0.001. Significant
differences in geometric measurements of symmetry were identified in
patients with capsules. Photographic assessments were worse in the
capsule group: mean photo score 8 (95%CI 8, 8.5) compared to the no
capsule group 6.5 (95%CI 5, 7.5)), p<0.001.

Conclusion: Capsule formation is
three times more likely in association with RT. Despite this, patients
often accept the aesthetic outcome and IBR with a biodimensional
device is a viable option in selected cases.

## 410

## Early stage breast cancer in young women: does selection of
surgical treatment impact overall survival?

## de Silva SS, Wilson IB, Erban JK. Tufts-NEMC, Boston,
MA
Equivalent survival following either mastectomy or breast
conservation therapy (BCT) for early stage breast cancer has been
established in several randomized controlled trials done in women
between 40 to 60 years of age. Young age, defined as age 35 years or
less, is an adverse prognostic factor for breast cancer recurrence,
especially in those receiving BCT. Whether BCT is an equivalent
treatment option for young women with breast cancer remains to be
determined. In the present study, the California Cancer Registry (CCR)
and Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) data were
examined to determine if selection of surgical treatment, either BCT
or mastectomy, impacted overall survival in women 35 years of age or
less who were diagnosed with early stage breast cancer. In addition,
these young women were compared to older cohorts in terms of overall
survival.
Methods: Data collected between January 1, 1988 and December 31,
1998 identified 129,702 with stage I or II breast cancer; 3538 were
women age 35 and below. Women were divided into 5 age groups (≤35,
36–50, 51–65, 66–80 and >80 years). The demographic and tumor
characteristics of the study population were compared across age
groups using Chi-square analysis. Demographic and clinical covariates
found to be significant in univariate Cox proportional hazards
analyses (p<.05) were entered into a multivariate model which
predicted the treatment effect on survival controlling for these
covariates.
Results: Compared to older cohorts, women 35 years of age or less
were more likely to be non-White Hispanic or Black (23.2% or 10.1% vs.
9.9% or 4.7%, p<0.0001). They also presented at a later stage of
diagnosis (Stage II: 67.3% vs. 46.9%, p<0.0001), with larger tumors
(2–5 cm: 44.6% vs. 31.2%, p<0.0001), more lymph nodes positive
(42.6% vs. 26.8%, p<0.0001) and with hormone receptor negative
tumors (ER-/PR-: 39.3% vs. 17.9%, p<0.0001). In the covariate
adjusted model, for women age 35 years or less, receipt of mastectomy
predicted higher mortality than receipt of BCT (M: HR = 1.29, 95% CI
[1.13–1.48]). In addition, young women in either surgical category
fared worse than women age 36 to 50 (BCT: HR = 0.66 95% CI [0.58–0.75]
M: HR = 1.04 95%CI [1.02–1.28]).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, after adjustment for usual prognostic
factors, women age 35 years or less who were treated with mastectomy
had worse overall survival than those treated with BCT. Analysis of
factors that may have accounted for such a result, such as the role of
radiation therapy, will be explored in future analyses. Breast cancer
in young women does have some unique features, such as larger tumor
size, increased positive lymph node status and negative hormone
receptor status, than older cohorts, suggesting more aggressive
disease. However, these factors do not appear to explain the inferior
result following mastectomy. Prospective trials are needed in this age
group to determine how best to treat this special patient
population.

## 1001

## Novel molecular diagnostic method for rapid evaluation of lymph
node metastasis in breast cancer.

## Matsuura N, Tsujimoto M, Nakabayashi K, Daitho M, Ding J, Sonoda
R, Kajita M, Otomo Y. Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine and
Health Science, Suita, Osaka, Japan; Osaka Police Hospital, Osaka,
Japan; Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan

Background: Intraoperative accurate
evaluation of lymph node status is essential for appropriate lymph
node dissection for curative operation of breast cancer.
Histopathological diagnosis to frozen section is usually used for this
evaluation. However a number of shortcomings have been pointed out for
intraoperative histological examination, including lower sensitivity
and dependency on pathologists’ capabilities. The molecular analysis
using RT-PCR (reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction) has
higher sensitivity and more objectivity, but clinical application for
rapid examination during operation would be difficult since it needs
several hours.

Methods: To overcome these problems,
we develop a new intraoperative molecular diagnostic method, one-step
nucleic acid amplification (OSNA) to measure cytokeratin (CK) 19 mRNA
expressions quantitatively. This assay consists of the sample
preparation and rapid gene amplification by RT-LAMP
(reversetranscriptase loop-mediated isothermal amplification) and it
takes within 30 min for the whole process. In order to test
availability of OSNA for rapid diagnostic method to lymph node
metastasis, 2 studies were performed. Retrospective study; Frozen 106
LNs of 36 patients were analyzed for CK19 mRNA expression levels to
determine cutoff value. Prospective study; Fresh 120 LNs of 37
patients were analyzed to evaluate intraoperative performance of OSNA
assay in comparison with histopathological and immunohistochemical
studies.

Results: Retrospective study;
Histological negative LNs had less than 3 ×
102 copies of CK19 mRNA per reaction,
while histological positive LNs had over 1.0 ×
103 copies per reaction. From these
results, the cutoff value of CK19 mRNA copy number was determined as
500 copies per reaction in OSNA assay. By using this cutoff value,
OSNA assay had 98.1% (104/106) concordance with histopathological
evaluation for serial sections at 2.0 mm intervals; the sensitivity
was 100% (22/22), and the specificity was 97.6% (82/84). Prospective
study; there was 96.6% (112/ 116) concordance between the results of
OSNA assay and intraoperative histopathological analysis evaluated at
2.0 mm intervals; the sensitivity was 92.3% (24/26), and the
specificity was 97.8% (88/90). Two false negative LNs contained
micrometastasis.

Conclusions: CK19 was an excellent
molecular marker for evaluation of LN metastasis. In addition, since
CK19 mRNA expression levels by OSNA assay were highly correlated with
histopathological analysis for many sections, examination of CK19 mRNA
by OSNA assay will be useful diagnostic tool for rapid analysis of LN
metastasis in breast cancer.

## 1002

## The combination of frozen section and enhanced polymer one-step
staining immunohistochemistry for the intraoprative diagnosis of sentinel
nodes of breast cancer.

## Wang YS, Yu JM, Liu YB, Wang L,Zhao T, Li JY. Shandong Cancer
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China

Background: Though sentinel nodes
(SN) biopsy has been accepted as a standard treatment for patients
with node negative breat cancer, the application of frozen section
method (FS) to evaluate SN intraoperatively is still debated for its
accuracy. With increasing interest in reducing patient morbidity and
controlling overall cost, it is apparent that FS and other rapid,
accurate methods should be used to spare patients added morbidity from
a second procedure and help control cost. Enhanced Polymer One-step
Staining immunohistochemistry (EPOS) is a rapid, accurate method for
the detection of metastatic breast cancer in frozen sections of lymph
nodes. The accuracy of intraoperative diagnosis of SN might be
improved with the combination of FS and EPOS.

Materials and Methods: 926 SNs from
243 consecutive patients undergoing SN biopsy were evaluated by FS
intraoperatively. Among them, 461 SNs from 125 cases were evaluated
with the combination of FS and EPOS. Monoclonal anti-cytokeratin
MNF116 (code No.U7022) was used for EPOS. The average time for EPOS in
our study is 24 minutes. All SNs were additionally studid with
Hematoxylin & Eosin (HE) stains on the paraffin sections and
served as gold standard of diagnosis.

Results: Diagnositic results of FS
are shown in Table 1. The diagnostic accuracy of FS for SNs as
calculated with SNs number is as following: sensitivity 93.9%,
specificity 100%, false negative rate 6.1%, false positive rate 0,
accurate rate 99.1%. The diagnostic accuracy of FS as calculated with
patients number is as following: sensitivity 94.9%, specificity 100%,
false negative rate 5.1%, false positive rate 0, accurate rate 99.2%
 

Diagnostic results of FS combined with EPOS are shown in Table 2.
The diagnostic accuracy of FS plus EPOS for SNs as calculated with SNs
number is as following: sensitivity 98.4%, specificity 100%, false
negative rate 1.6%, false positive rate 0, accurate rate 99.8%. The
diagnostic accuracy of FS plus EPOS as calculated with patients number
is as following: sensitivity 97.7%, specificity 100%, false negative
rate 2.3%, false positive rate 0, accurate rate 99.2% 

Conclusion: The FS is an accurate and
cost effective method for SN evaluation with a short learning curve.
With the combination of EPOS, it could decrease the false negative
rate to a very low level, and satisfy the clinical demand for
intraoperative diagnosis of SNs. Patients could be spared potential
morbidity from a second procedure and result in significant cost
savings to the individual patient and lower average overall cost for
all patients undergoing this procedure.

## 1003

## Comparative study of lymphedema with axillary node dissection and
axillary sampling with radiotherapy in women undergoing breast
conservation surgery for breast cancer.

## Mathew J, Barthelmes L, Neminathan S, Crawford D. Ysbyty
Gwynedd, Bangor, Gwynedd, United Kingdom

## Introduction
It has been suggested that combining axillary surgery and
radiotherapy could increase the incidence and severity of
lymphedema. The aim of our study was to assess and compare the
incidence of lymphedema in two groups of patients undergoing breast
conservation surgery; one undergoing axillary sampling, and
radiotherapy to patients with positive axillary nodes and the other
undergoing axillary clearance.

## Methods
It is a retrospective review of records of two groups of
patients who had breast conservation therapy; one with axillary
sampling between Jan 1994 and Dec 1998 (Group 1) and the other
having axillary clearance between Jan 2000 and Dec 2002 (Group 2).
Group 1 patients with positive nodes went on to receive
radiotherapy. The diagnosis of lymphedema was based on a difference
of 2 cm or more in arm circumference at a corresponding point
between affected and non effected limbs. Minimum period of 2 years
follow-up were there for both groups.

## Results
312 patients were included in group 1 and 194 in group 2. There
were no significant differences between the clinicopathological
features between the two groups (Mean age- Group1 (59 years) and
group 2 (58 years), Screen detected cancers- Group 1 (36.2%) and
Group 2 (30.4%), Tumours less than 3 cm- Group 1 (97.1%) and Group
2 (96.9%)). 26% of the patients in group 1 had lymph node
metastasis compared to 20% in group 2.
Only 2.2% of the patients in group 1 developed lymphedema
compared to 12.3% in group 2 with a significant statistical
difference between the two groups with a P value of <0.001. In
the node positive patients in group 1 who had sampling and
radiotherapy, the incidence of lymphedema was 6.2% and it was lower
than the node positive patients in group 2 who had axillary
clearance, although the differences were not statistically
significant with a P value of <0.17.

## Conclusion
The incidence of lymphedema in node positive patients receiving
radiotherapy in axillary sampling groups were low compared to node
positive patients undergoing axillary clearance. With the increased
acceptance of sentinel node biopsy as a staging procedure, the
effectiveness of radiotherapy as an alternative to full axillary
dissection in patients with positive nodes remains to be
investigated in randomised clinical trials.

## 1004

## Timing of sentinel node biopsy for patients undergoing mastectomy
with immediate reconstruction.

## McGuire KP, Rosenberg A, Copit S. Thomas Jefferson University,
Philidelphia, PA

Background: Sentinel lymph node
biopsy(SLNB) is a common procedure intrinsic to staging early breast
cancer and rapidly replacing axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) as
standard of care. Although many patients will have negative SLNB,
reoperation after reconstruction for ALND for patients with positive
nodes is associated with increased risk of complications. Thus, SLNB
should be a separate procedure prior to mastectomy. The purpose of
this study was to evaluate the results of patients undergoing SLNB and
mastectomy with various types of immediate reconstruction to assess
the need for a delay between SLNB and reconstruction based upon the
type of reconstruction performe.D

Methods: Records of all patients at
one institution undergoing SLN and mastectomy with immediate
reconstruction between 1999 and 2004 were reviewed. These were
evaluated for tumor type, stage, age, node status and reconstruction
type.

Results: From 1999–2004, 3865
patients with breast cancer were seen at TJUH. 1076 patients underwent
mastectomy, of those 505(46.9%) underwent immediate reconstruction,
147(29.1%) latissimus flaps, 160(31.7%) TRAM flaps, and 198(39.2%)
tissue expanders. 207 (41%) received SLN prior to definitive surgery,
298(59%) received SLNB at the time of surgery. Of those, 122(24.2%)
had a positive SLN and underwent ALND (with or without radiation),
whereas 383(75.8%) had a negative SLNB and received no further
axillary surgery.

Conclusions: We believe that only
patients undergoing latissimus flap reconstruction need a delay
between SLNB and their definitive procedure as this is the only
reconstruction that rearranges the anatomy of the axilla, so that
subsequent completion dissection would jeopardize the
reconstruction/flap. Reconstructions using a tissue expander or
implant only, or a pedicled TRAM flap can be done at the same time as
the SLNB as they do not disrupt the axilla.

## 1005

## Does a negative lymphoscintigram predict for sentinel lymph node
positivity.

## Soran A, Balkan M, Falk J, Keenan D, Bonaventura M, Johnson R.
Magee-Womens Hospital of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA

Background: Sentinel lymph node
mapping (SLNM) has become standard of care in most large breast
centers and dual tracer (blue dye + TC-99 m labeled filtered sulfur
colloid) mapping has been reported to improve both detection and false
negative rates. Lymphoscintigraphy (LSG) pre-operatively has been
abandoned in many centers because of the high sensitivity of intra-op
detection by hand-held gamma probes, making a positive LSG
unnecessary. We wanted to investigate the hypothesis that
non-visualization on LSG predicts a subset of patients at higher risk
of being node positive.

Methods: We retrospectively reviewed
the records of 1500 patients (mean age=55; range, 28–88 years) who
underwent dual tracer SLNM for breast cancer at MWH between 1999 and
2004. LSG were reported as negative (no uptake in ipsilateral axilla)
or positive. SLNB was followed by ALND only in node positive patients.
Average tumor size was 1.9±0.6 cm. Multicentricity was reported 10.4%
of the pathologic specimens. Tumor location was recorded as upper
outer quadrant in 31% of cases and 33.2% location were recorded as
overlapping. Average BMI was 26.8 (range; 15–60) kg/m2 in LSG positive
group, and it was 29.1 (range; 17–41) kg/m2 in LSG negative group
(P<0.00001)

Results: 1366 of 1500 patients (91%)
had axillary SLN(s) identified on LSG imaging. In 133/134 (99.3%)
patients with a negative LSG an SLN(s) was identified
intra-operatively either by blue dye or hand-held gamma detection. The
SLN was positive in 38 patients (28.4%) of 134 patients who had
negative preoperative LSG image. One patient had positive final
axillary LN pathology who had both negative LSG and negative SLNM
reports (False negative rate for both technique together is
1/38=2.6%).

Conclusion: Dual tracer SLN mapping
is technically successful in a high percentage of cases. Failure to
demonstrate axillary uptake of tracer appears to be related technical
factors and patient related factors (BMI). The equivalent rate of SLN
positivity in patients with positive or negative LSG would appear to
reject the hypothesis that failure to visualize a node on LSG is due
to tumor related factors. 

## 1006

## Sonographic evaluation of axillary lymph nodes using realtime
sonoelastography.

## Wojcinski S, Maltaris T, Dupont J, Ertan AK, Schmidt W.
University of Saarland, Homburg/Saar, Germany

Background: The purpose of this study
was to determine the utility of realtime sonoelastography in the
evaluation of axillary lymph nodes (LNs). Realtime elasticity imaging
is a new technique that enables a highly accurate estimation of the
tissue elasticity distribution. Like colour Doppler examinations,
sonoelastography can be performed with conventional ultrasound probes.
The examination results are represented in colour over the
conventional B-mode image.

Materials and Methods: Axillary
sonography was performed on 156 patients (age 22 – 85, median 51) with
a total of 202 LNs examined (max 2 per patient). After routine
diagnosis including history taking, clinical examination, conventional
sonography and mammography, eligible patients were recruited and
B-mode sonography and realtime sonoelastography of axillary LNs were
performed using the sonoelastography module that can be integrated
into the platform of the HITACHI EUB-8500 system. Each image was
acquired using the HITACHI EUP-L54M probe (50 mm, 13 MHz). 27 patients
had suspicious breast lesions that were identified as invasive
carcinomas on biopsy, and underwent axillary dissection. 15 of these
patients had a metastases in the previously examined LN and formed
study group 1. The 12 patients without metastases formed group 2. 129
patients were found healthy and formed group 3. In each patient the
elasticity of LN cortex and medulla were analyzed and correlated with
B-mode features and histopathological findings.

Results: Regarding B-mode sonography
6 LNs were found suspicious preoperatively in group 1. The 9 LNs not
suspicious showed only focal micrometastases in the cortex. In group 2
there was only one case of a false positive result. The most sensitive
feature to predict metastases was cortical thickening with an average
cortex of 3.2 mm in positive LNs (group 1) and 1.6 mm in negative LNs
(groups 2 and 3) respectively (p = 0.003). Regarding sonoelastography,
LNs generally displayed a relatively soft medulla and a harder cortex.
There was no difference in the elasticity of the medulla comparing
positive (group 1) and negative LNs (groups 2 and 3), but the
metastatic LNs presented a significantly harder cortex (p = 0.015).
This relatively hard cortex could also be demonstrated in the subgroup
of LNs with micrometastases which were not suspicious in B-mode
sonography, although this difference was statistically not
significant.

Discussion: Ultrasound is known to be
an accurate imaging method for the diagnosis of axillary LN
metastases, although micrometastases are so far not detectable.
Realtime sonoelastography is a promising technique that also permits
the evaluation of axillary LNs. Normal LNs show a repeating pattern of
elasticity distribution regarding the cortex and the medulla.
Metastatic LNs, even if only micrometastases are present, display a
harder cortex in sonoelastography. Therefore the complementary use of
realtime sonoelastography in combination with B-mode sonography might
improve the accuracy of preoperative assessment of axillary LN
status.

## 1007

## Analysis of sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast cancer patients
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

## Jinno H, Ikeda T, Kitajima M, Fujii H, Mukai M. Keio University
School of Medicine, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan
Background: Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a potential
alternative procedure to conventional axillary lymph node dissection
(ALND) in clinically node-negative breast cancer patients. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (NAC) is a standard of care for patients with locally
advanced breast cancer and indications of NAC have been widespread to
operable breast cancer patients to facilitate breast conserving
surgery. However, the feasibility and accuracy of SLNB in breast
cancer patients who received NAC is still controversial.
Patients and Methods: Thirty-four patients with stage II or III
breast cancer who were treated with NAC from January 2002 to December
2004 were included in the study. Consecutive 122 patients who had SLNB
without NAC during the same period were used as a control group. All
patients underwent SLNB followed by completion ALND. Sentinel lymph
node was detected using a combined method of injecting isosulfun blue
dye and small-sized technetium-99 m-labeled tin colloid (particle
size: 200–400 nm in diameter) peritumorally and subcutaneously. All
dissected lymph nodes were evaluated by means of H&E and
immunohistochemical staining.
Results: Sentinel lymph nodes were successfully identified in 31/34
patients (91.2%) treated with NAC and 112/113 patients (99.1%) without
NAC (p = 0.01). Metastases in the sentinel lymph nodes were found in
10/31 patients (32.3%) with NAC and 32/112 patients (28.6%) without
NAC. There were 5 false negative cases (false negative rate: 33.3%) in
the NAC group and 2 false negative cases (false negative rate: 5.9%)
in the control group (p=0.01). Accuracy of SLNB in the NAC group was
also significantly inferior to the control group (83.9% vs. 98.2%,
p<0.01). The presence of clinically positive axillary lymph nodes
before chemotherapy did not predict false negative SLNB.
Conclusion: These data suggest that NAC might be considered a
contraindication to SLNB even in patients with clinically negative
axillary lymph nodes before NAC.

## 1008

## Sentinel lymph node biopsy for breast cancer patients with
clinically negative axillary lymph nodes after neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

## Kinoshita T, Fukutomi T, Akashi-Tanaka S, Terada K, Takasugi M,
Shimizu C, Ando M, Katsumata N, Fujiwara Y. National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan

Background: Within this study, the
feasibility and accuracy of sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy for
breast cancer patients with clinically negative axilary lymph nodes
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) has been investigated under the
administration of a radiocolloid imaging agent injected intradermally
over a tumor. Also, conditions which may affect SLN biopsy detection
and false-negative rates with respect to clinical tumor response and
clinical nodal status before NAC were also analyzed. Limited studies
with smaller number of patients exist in the use of SLN biopsy after
NAC. We assesed the feasibility of SLN biopsy after NAC.

Methods: Seventy-seven patients with
Stage II and III breast cancer previously treated with NAC were
enrolled in this study. All patients were with clinically node
negative after NAC. The patients then underwent SLN biopsy, which
involved a combination of intradermal radiocolloid injection over the
tumor of radiocolloid and a subareolar injection of blue dye. This was
followed by standard level I/II axillary lymph node dissection(ALND).
The histopathologic examination of SLNs and dissected axillary lymph
nodes were performed and nodal status was compare.D

Results: The SLN could be identified
in 72/77 patients (identification rate 93.5%). In 69/72 patients
(95.8%) the SLN accurately predicted the axillary status. Three
patients had a false-negative SLN biopsy, resulting in a
false-negative rate of 11.1 %(3/27). The SLN identification rate
tended to be higher, although not statistically significant, among
patients who had clinically negative axillary lymph nodes before NAC
(97.6%; 41 of 42), in comparison to patients who had a positive
axillary lymph nodes before NAC (88.6%; 31 of 35).

Conclusion: SLN identification rate
and false-negative rate were similar to those in non-neoadjuvant
studies. The SLN accurately predicted metastatic disease in the axilla
of patients with any tumor response after NAC and any clinical nodal
status before NAC. The diagnostic technique of subdural injection of
radiocolloid may provide treatment guidance for patients after
NAC.

## 1009

## The incidence of axillary nodal metastases in older women with
small non-high grade breast tumours.

## Querci della Rovere G, Bonomi R, Ashley S, Benson JR. The Royal
Marsden Hospital, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom; Addenbrookes
Hospital, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom

Background: With an increasing
proportion of node negative patients, a selective policy for managing
the axilla may be more appropriate. Axillary sampling and sentinel
node biopsy are alternative methods for staging the axilla, but
observation alone may be an acceptable approach for a selected
subgroup of patients with small tumours of favourable histological
grade and a low probability of nodal involvement (5–10%).

Material and Methods: A retrospective
analysis was undertaken examining the incidence of nodal metastases
(H&E staining) in a group of 355 consecutive patients who
underwent mastectomy or breast conserving surgery for early breast
cancer. All patients had either grade I (<20 mm) or grade II
(<20 mm) oestrogen receptor positive tumours without lymphovascular
invasion.

Results: The overall incidence of
positive nodes in this good prognostic group of patients was very low
(13% – 95% CI 9.5 – 16.5). Furthermore, when nodal involvement
occurred the total number of positive nodes was 3 or fewer and most
commonly only a single node was positive. When the analysis was
confined to grade I tumours (<20 mm) and grade II tumours (≤10 mm)
the overall incidence of nodal metastases was 10% (25/251). Only 2.7%
of grade I tumours (≤10 mm) had nodal involvement compared with 11.6%
of grade II tumours of similar size.

Discussion: These results support the
conclusion that axillary surgery (staging/therapeutic) can be safely
omitted in a selected subgroup of patients for whom the probability of
nodal metastases is of similar magnitude to the false negative rates
reported for the sentinel node biopsy technique (5–10%). Furthermore,
the majority of this subgroup will have micrometastases confined to
the sentinel node which are of uncertain clinical significance and may
not mandate completion axillary dissection nor be an indication for
systemic therapy 

## 1010

## A standardized surgical technique for mastoscopic axillary lymph
node dissection.

## Chengyu L, Yongqiao Z, Hua L, Xiaoxin J, Chen G, Jing L, Jian Z.
Affiliated Beijing Fuxing Hospital, Capital University of Medical
Science, Beijing, China

Objective: To standardize the
surgical technique on mastoscopic axillary lymph node
dissection(MALND).

Methods: Mastoscopic lymph node
dissection was performed consistently by a group of surgeon in 316
cases of breast cancer.

Result: The mean operation time was
46.7 minutes with minimal bleeding, and the median lymph nodes
dissected from each operation were 17.0. There was neither operative
complication in any case nor trocar implantation or tumor diffusion
occurring during the mean follow-up time of 15.1 months.

Conclusion: Mastoscopic lymph node
dissection is distinctive and practicable in operative anatomy, and it
is safe and convenient. The location of critical anatomy such as
interocostobrachial nerve, lateral thoracic artery, medial thoracic
nerve and thoracicoepigastric vein should be clearly identified to
avoid damage to them, so that the great advantage of mastoscopic lymph
node dissection can be achieve.D

[Key words] Breast neoplasm Axillary
lymph node dissection Endoscopy

## 1011

## Intra-operative sentinel lymh node assessment of 193 patients with
invasive breast carcinoma: does sentinel lymph node intraoperative
examination reduce the complementary axillary lymph node
dissection?

## Loussouarn D, Dupre PF, Sagan C, Dravet F, Toquet C, Pioud R,
Francois T, Curtet C, Classe JM. CHU Laennec, Nantes Saint Herblain,
France; CRLCC R Gauducheau, Nantes Saint Herblain, France

Background: Guidelines usually advise
to complete axillary lymph node dissection when sentinel lymph node
(SLN) is involve.D The intra-operative assessment of axillary sentinel
lymph node allows a one-step procedure for patients who present
sentinel lymph node involvement. The aim of this study is to determine
the sensitivity of the SLN intra-operative imprint cytology
procedure.

Method: 193 patients with invasive
breast cancer who underwent sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) on a
40 months period were included. Each sentinel lymph node (SLN) was
examined intraoperatively: each SLN was perpendicularly sectioned
along the long axis at 2 mm intervals. Cytological imprint was
effectued on each cut surface. In case of SLN involvement a
complementary axillary lymph node dissection was provide in a one
step. SLN was entirely submitted in blocks. Each blocks was sectioned
at 6 levels (4 m serial sections at m intervals). Slices were then analysed by
Hematoxylin-eosin-safron (HES) and cytokeratin 7 immunohistochemistery
(IHC) when the SLN is negative.

Results: Medium age was 57 (37–84),
60 patients were T0(31%), 106 patients were T1 (55%), 27 patients were
T2 (14%).The medium size of invasive breast cancer was 14.6 mm.
Histological sub type: 158 ductal carcinoma (82%), 20 lobular
carcinoma (10%). The histological grade was grade I for 64 patients
(33%), grade II for 103 patients (53.5%), grade III for 26 patients
(13.5%). 178 patients expressed oestrogen receptor (92%) and 154
patients expressed progesterone receptor (78%).
The detection rate was 100% using blue patent® and radiocolloide.
The average number of SLN detected was 2.8. Cytological imprint was
examined for each SLN.
30 patients (15%) had SLN involvement and underwent immediate
axillary lymph node dissection. For 163 patients (85%), the
intraoperative SLN examination was negative. Among these patients, 46
(28%) had secondary axillary lymph node dissection: effectively, after
SLN definitive histopathological procedure, 17 of 46 patients (10%)
had macrometastasis ; 24 of 46 patients (15%) had micrometastatis. 5
patients had secondary surgical intervention despite non metastatic
SLN: 4 patients presented a multifocal invasive carcinoma and 1
patient presented a positive non SLN. Global sensitivity for our
intra-operative SLN assessment was 42% and the negative predictive
value 75%.For macrometastasis, the sensitivity increased up to 64% and
the negative predictive value was 89%.

Conclusion: SLN intra operative
examination is feasible and effective for macrometastasis diagnostic.
SLN intra-operative examination allows a one step surgical procedure
for 15% of our patients.

## 1012

## Optical assessment of axillary lymph nodes in breast
carcinoma.

## Smith J, Kendall C, Christie-Brown J, Sammon A, Barr H, Stone N.
Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Trust, Gloucester, Gloucestershire,
United Kingdom

Objective: Raman spectroscopy is an
optical technique with a track record in the assessment of human
pathology including breast carcinoma. The technique has the ability to
compare and quantify aspects of tissue biochemistry without tissue
processing. The objective of this study is to apply laboratory-based
Raman spectroscopy in the optical biopsy of axillary lymph nodes which
are positive and negative for metastatic breast carcinoma.

Method:
 m sections of snap-frozen fresh axillary lymph node
were assessed using a bench-top Raman spectrometer. Haematoxylin and
eosin slides were produced from the adjacent parallel lymph node
section for pathology reporting. Colour-weighted principal component
analysis was used to construct images of each lymph node section.
Guided by images, spectra from areas of homogeneous positive and
negative lymph node from 43 patients were included in a diagnostic
model. Principal component analysis and linear discriminant analysis
were applied in model processing. Preliminary “leave one spectrum out”
cross-validation allowed correction of coding errors.

Results: In this corrected model,
Raman spectroscopy is 90% sensitive and 92% specific for the correct
classification of spectra from metastasis positive lymph nodes. More
than 50% of spectra were correctly predicted for 42 out of 43 lymph
nodes, with an average of 93% correctly predicted (range 45% to
100%).
Mean spectra from positive and negative groups in the model show
that areas of homogeneous metastatic breast carcinoma have increased
DNA and tyrosine contributions, and reduced collagen contributions
when compared to regions of homogeneous negative lymph node. Lipid
contributions are present in both positive and negative lymph nodes.
In addition, there is some evidence that carotenoid contributions are
increased in regions of homogeneous negative lymph node.

Conclusions: Laboratory-based Raman
spectroscopy may be effectively applied in the biochemical assessment
of axillary lymph nodes. The technique has potential as an optical
biopsy tool in the diagnosis of lymph node metastases in breast
carcinoma.

## 1013

## Clip migration after 11G vacuum-assisted breast biopsy:
retrospective review of 447 clips and implication in breast
surgery.

## Chaveron C, Bachelle F, Ceugnart J, Giard S, Baranzelli MC,
Belkaccmi Y, Bonneterre J. Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille,
France

Purpose: To assess clip migration
after vacuum-assisted biopsy with lateral approach and explain
mechanisms of migration. We suggest options to localize biopsy site if
surgery is require.D

Material and Methods: We performed a
retrospective review of 601 consecutive vacuum breast biopsies with
11gauge. 447 clips (Micromark II Ethicon) have been deployed when
complete removal of the lesion was suggested on stereotactic control.
Postbiopsy mammograms in two orthogonal planes were performed to
determine the adequacy of clip placement and the location of the clip.
We compared pre and postbiopsy mammograms and measured the distance
between clip an biopsy site with a direct method of
measurement.

Results: The distance from clip to
lesion site was more than 20 mm on at least one post-biopsy mammogram
in 60(13.4%) of 447 lesions that underwent clip placement. Clip
migrations are mainly attributed to an accordion effect along the axis
of compression; in theory, this effect decreases with lateral approach
of probe. Other mechanisms can explain: delayed accordion effect,
bleeding during or after procedure, breast movement. A few options are
suggested: sonographically research of postbiopsy scar,
sonographically clip placement a few days after biopsy.

Conclusion: Clip migration after
vacuum-assisted breast biopsy does exist and is a practical concern.
It can affect localization for future surgery when it is over than
20 mm. For surgical cases, repeat craniocaudal and
90° mediolateral mammograms should be
obtained routinely on the day of pre-operative localization. We try to
identify the percutaneous biopsy site in the excised specimen and to
correlate histologic findings in the surgical specimen with those at
vacuum-assisted biopsy to determine if the correct tissue was removed
at surgery.

## 1014

## Optical biopsy: breast cancer diagnoses at the speed of
light.

## Chicken DW, Clarke BR, Johnson KS, Lee AC, Briggs G, Pickard
CDO, Falzon M, Novelli M, Bigio IJ, Bown SG, Keshtgar MRS. University
College London, London, United Kingdom; Boston University, Boston,
MA

Background: Elastic scattering
spectroscopy (ESS) is an optical technique which utilizes the
difference in light scattering properties between benign and malignant
tissue to make diagnoses. The development of computer algorithms for
analysis of the spectra allows near instantaneous diagnoses, using
portable inexpensive hardware. We are conducting an ongoing
translational research programme developing roles for ESS in breast
cancer diagnosis and treatment. To date we have applied the optical
biopsy system (OBS) to in-vivo diagnosis of breast cancer at the time
of core biopsy, resection margin assessment after wide local excision
and the intraoperative detection of sentinel node metastases. Current
work is on the development of a scanning device for intensive ESS
sampling of tissue and consequent image generation, the diagnosis of
pathology at ductoscopy and the detection of ploidy as a prognostic
marker, and we will be presenting early results of this work in
progress at the congress.

Methods: The ESS optical biopsy
system consists of a laptop computer which activates a xenon lamp to
fire pulses of white light through an optical fibre in contact with
the tissue under examination. After calibration with
Spectralon®, elastically scattered light
is detected by a second optical fibre, which transmits the scattered
light to a spectrometer and outputs measurements back to the computer.
Spectral analysis is performed by a process of normalization,
principle component analysis and linear discriminant analysis.
Diagnoses are made by applying the discriminant algorithm developed on
a training set of spectra with matched histopathology to independent
test spectra. Accuracy of diagnosis is calculated using standard
statistical formulae.

Results: Differentiate tumour from
surrounding tissue: Sensitivity 96% specificity 98%
Differentiate benign from malignant at core biopsy: Sensitivity 69%
Specificity 84%
Detection of sentinel node metastases: Sensitivity 60% specificity
94%
Detection of sentinel node total metastases: Sensitivity 85%
specificity 87%

Conclusions & Current Work: The
OBS using ESS is able to differentiate benign from malignant tissue
with a high degree of accuracy. Multiple potential applications for
this technology exist in breast cancer diagnosis and treatment.
Further work enhancing optical sampling of tissue is likely to improve
diagnostic accuracy. The major advantages are the potential for
instant diagnoses without the need for interpretation and using
affordable and portable equipment.

Acknowledgement: Research funding
from the US Department of Defence Breast Cancer Imaging Research
Programme

## 1015

## Serum EGFR and HER-2 expression in primary and metastatic breast
cancer patients.

## Asgeirsson KS, Allen C, Hitch A, Chapman C, Cheung KL, Robertson
JFR. University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom

Background: Breast tissue expression
of the ERBB protooncogene family has been extensively studied.
Recently, it has been shown that the expression of EGFR (c-erbB-1) and
HER-2 (c-erbB-2) can be detected in the serum of breast cancer
patients. The clinical relevance of EGFR especially is not clear.
Materials and Methods: Analysing
our departments database, patients with paired serum samples (at time
of primary and metastatic diagnosis) were identified. EGFR and HER-2
microtiter immunoassays (kindly provided by Bayer Healthcare) were
performed on 57 patients with paired serum samples, in 100 consecutive
unselected primary breast cancer patients and 49 normal individuals.
Results: EGFR serum levels (normal range 45–78 ng/mL) were
significantly higher in normal individuals (mean 75.9, range
43.2–114.2) compared to primary breast cancer patients (mean 60.7,
range 21.3–94.1) (P<0.001). In the paired serum samples, EGFR
levels decreased significantly between the time of primary (mean 66.0,
range 29.1–142.7) and metastatic diagnosis (mean 47.6, range
10.9–194.2) (P<0.001). When serum levels were compiled into normal
vs. overexpression groups according to reference ranges, EGFR
overexpression was seen in 18/57 (31.6%) at diagnosis of primary
breast cancer and in 12/57 (21%) at metastasis. In 6 patients (11%), a
change therefore occurred from overexpression to normal expression. In
contrast, no significant difference was seen in HER- 2 serum levels
(normal range <15 ng/mL) in normal individuals (mean 12.5, range
7.8–20.9) and primary breast cancer patients (mean 14.0, range
6.9–122.2) (P = 0.398). However, in the paired serum samples, HER-2
levels increased significantly between the time of primary (mean 15.9,
median 12.2, range 5.7–85.0) and metastasis (mean 145.3, median 17.7,
range 6.3–3337.4)(P = 0.041). HER-2 overexpression was seen in 16/57
(28%) at primary breast cancer diagnosis and in 31/57 (54%) at
metastasis. In 18 patients (32%), HER-2 expression changed from normal
to overexpression. Despite these changes, the majority of patients
remained in the same group expression (i.e. normal or overexpression)
at primary and at metastasis, for both EGFR and HER-2 (p<0.001 and
p=0.017 respectively).

Discussion: Both EGFR and HER-2 serum
expression levels change significantly between time of primary
diagnosis and metastasis, albeit in converse directions. We have
demonstrated a significant decrease in EGFR serum expression in the
same patients between diagnosis of primary disease and metastasis.
Furthermore, normal individuals have significantly higher levels than
primary breast cancer patients. In contrast, HER-2 serum expression
increased in patients with distant metastases. These results suggest
that relying on protooncogene expression in the primary tumour may not
be truly reflective of their expression at time of metastatic
diagnosis.

## 1016

## Persistence of isolated tumor cells (ITC) in bone marrow (BM) of
breast cancer patients predicts increased risk for relapse – results of
pooled European data.

## Janni W, Wiedswang G, Borgen E, Braun S, Rack B, Schindlbeck C,
Sommer H, Pantel K, Heinrigs M, Gerber B, Nesland JM, Scholz C, Friese
K, Jeschke U, Naume B. LMU, Munich, Germany; Medizinische
Universtitaet, Innsbruck, Austria; Insitut fuer Tumorbiologie, UKE,
Hamburg, Germany; Radium Hospitalet, Oslo, Norway; University of
Rostock, Rostock, Germany; Ullevaal University Hospital, Oslo,
Norway

## Background
The prognostic significance of DTC in the BM of breast cancer
patients at the time of primary diagnosis has recently been
confirmed by a large pooled analysis (Braun S, NEJM, in print). If
the persistence of DTC after adjuvant therapy confers a similar
risk for relapse, there might be an indication for secondary
adjuvant treatment.

## Methods
We analyzed BM aspirates of 584 patients from academic breast
cancer units in Oslo (n = 356) and Munich (n=228) during
recurrence-free follow-up at a median interval of 38.6 months
(standard deviation [std] 18.9 mon) after primary diagnosis of
breast cancer pT1-4, pN0-3 pM0. Carcinoma cells were detected using
a standardized immunoassay with the monoclonal antibodies A45-B/B3
(Munich) or AE1 and AE3 (Oslo), directed against cytokeratin (CK).
Patients were followed for a median of 62.7 months (std 23.1 mon)
after primary diagnosis.

## Results
Persistent DTC in the BM were detected in 14.0% of the patients
(n = 82). The Kaplan-Meier estimate for mean relapse-free survival
was 159.0 mon (153.2–164.7 95%CI) in patients with negative and
91.5 mon (74.4–108.6, 95% CI, p<.0001, log rank test) in
patients with positive BM status. Patients without evidence of
persistent DTC had a significantly longer overall survival (165.5
[156.7–174.4]), than patients with positive BM status (104.0 mon
[91.5–116.5], p <.0001). In multivariate Cox regression
analysis, allowing for bone marrow status, tumor size and nodal
status, DTC was an independent significant predictor for reduced
breast cancer specific survival (RR 5.1, p <.0001).

## Conclusion
Evidence of persistent DTC in breast cancer patients indicates
an increased risk for subsequent relapse, and may serve for
monitoring in future clinical trials. Such trials might investigate
the benefit of individualized secondary adjuvant treatment or
extended adjuvant therapy of patients with DTC. 

## 1017

## Molecular profiling of disseminated tumor cells in peripheral blood
of breast cancer patients.

## Kaul S, Fersis N, Rom J, Zieglschmid V, Hollmann C, Boecher O,
Schneeweiss A, Sohn C. University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Baden-Wuerttemberg, Germany; AdnaGen AG, Hannover- Langenhagen,
Niedersachsen, Germany

Backgroud: The purpose of this study
was the detection and analysis of disseminated tumor cells (DTC) in
blood of breast cancer patients by expression profiling using a DTC
detection assay.

Materials and Methods: Patients with
primary breast cancer (n = 89) and patients with metastatic breast
cancer (n = 156) were enrolled in a multicenter clinical performance
study. 5 ml blood were used for DTC analysis. The DTC assay consists
of immunomagnetic tumor cell selection targeting EpCAM and MUC- 1.
Isolated tumor cells were lysed and mRNA was isolated using
oligo-dT-magnetic beads. Breast carcinoma-associated transcripts
GA733-2 (EpCAM), MUC-1 and HER-2 were analysed by multiplex RT-PCR.
Claudin7, cytokeratin 19 (CK19), mammaglobin 1 (MBGB1) and survivin
(BIRK5) were analysed by nested RT-PCR. All PCR products were analysed
by capillary electrophoresis with the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100.
Specificity of the RT-PCR was confirmed by examination of blood of
healthy donors.

Results: Sensitivity for every single
transcript was assessed to be 2 tumor cells per 5 ml blood. In
patients with primary breast cancer (n=89) we achieved an overall
detection rate of 20%. In patients suffering from metastatic disease
(n=156) 59% were positive. Tumor-associated transcripts were
heterogeneously expressed. Expression rates for MUC-1, GA733-2, and
HER-2 analysed by multiplex RT-PCR were 73%, 49% and 45%,
respectively. Claudin 7, MGB1 and survivin were detected by nested
RT-PCR at a frequency of 62%, 21% and 23%, respectively. The
specificity of the DTC detection assay was >97% (n=223).

Discussion: We have established a
cDNA collection of peripheral blood samples from patients with breast
cancer using a new immunomagnetic tumor cell enrichment method.
Recently microarray strategies confirmed established and identified
new informative molecular markers for the detection of DTC. We
describe the application of a panel of 7 genes highly overexpressed in
metastatic breast cancer for the identification of tumor cells in
peripheral blood. Survivin as a unique member of the inhibitor of the
apotosis protein family as well as HER-2 and MGB1 identified in
disseminated breast cancer cells may serve as a prognostic indicator
of tumor progression and could represent valid targets for new
therapeutic interventions.

## 1018

## Monitoring circulating breast cancer cells by quantitative real
time RT-PCR.

## Palomares MR, Schuster GT, Thomas A, Koehler KM, Gralow JR,
Sabath DE. City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA; Seattle
Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA; University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, WA

Background: Development of a highly
sensitive quantitative method to detect circulating breast cancer
cells allows noninvasive monitoring of breast cancer response to
treatment and early detection of recurrence. PCR methods are generally
more sensitive than microscopic methods and have the additional
advantage of high-throughput technology. We designed a quantitative
real-time RT-PCR (qPCR) assay using cytokeratin-19 (K19) mRNA as a
marker for breast cancer cells, and have tested the assay on serial
blood collections in 70 patients followed over a median of
6.6 months.

Methods: Seventy female breast cancer
patients seen at the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance (SCCA) consented to
participation in a serial blood collection protocol. K19 mRNA was
quantified using a 5′ to 3′ exonuclease (Taqman) qPCR assay. Synthetic
K19 standard mRNA was prepared by cloning the K19 gene into
pBlueScript plasmid vector and expressing RNA using T3 polymerase. The
dynamic range of the assay was determined to be 0.01 to 1000 fg of K19
mRNA. High and low controls were included with each assay to assess
inter-assay reliability, and reverse transcriptase free controls were
used to exclude nonspecific genomic DNA amplification. - microglobulin was used to verify RNA
integrity.

Results: Baseline K19 mRNA levels
were detectable in 10 of 18 (55.6%) patients with metastatic breast
cancer and 3 of 52 (5.8%) patients with stage I–III breast cancer (p
<0.001, χ2 test). Furthermore, mean
baseline K19 mRNA levels were significantly higher in the metastatic
patients than the patients without metastases: 0.4 vs 0.0058 fg,
respectively (p<0.01, two-sided t-test). Upon follow-up, K19 mRNA
trends were noted to correlate with tumor burden in the metastatic
patients (n = 62 evaluable time points in 18 subjects, p = 0.001,
χ2 for trend). A rising K19 mRNA level
was associated with an 8-fold increased likelihood of tumor
progression, which was statistically significant (OR 8.23, 95% CI
2.5–27.1, p = 0.001). All 3 of the nonmetastatic patients with
detectable K19 mRNA at baseline had undetectable levels 6 months
later, and they all remain without clinical evidence of
disease.

Conclusion: Preliminary results
suggest clinical correlation between serial K19 mRNA levels determined
by qPCR and disease course in metastatic breast cancer patients.
Analysis of more subjects with longer follow-up is needed to determine
its clinical utility; however, initial results appear promising.
Follow-up is ongoing at SCCA, and accrual will start soon at the City
of Hope National Medical Center.

## 1019

## Peri-operative assessment of circulating tumor cells in blood,
disseminated tumor cells in bone marrow, and tissue gene signatures in
patients with primary breast cancer.

## Frazier TG, Flynn M, Sieling BA, Herman M, Rao CS, Gross S,
Miller MC, Doyle GV, Terstappen LW. Bryn Mawr Hospital, Bryn Mawr, PA;
Immunicon, Huntingdon Valley, PA

Background: 30% of the 200,000 women
diagnosed annually with breast cancer will recur. Without a validated
assay to identify these patients, all become candidates for adjuvant
therapy. Both Real-time RT-PCR analysis of primary tissue and
detection of disseminated tumor cells (DTC) in bone marrow by
immunohistochemistry (IHC) purportedly aid in identifying these
patients. The primary objective of this study was to demonstrate that
the automated CellSearchTM system used to
detect ‘circulating’ tumor cells (CTC) in blood could also be used to
quantify DTCs in marrow. Incidence of CTCs, DTCs and gene signatures
in matched specimens were also compared. Methods: 30 ml blood and 3 ml bone marrow specimens
were collected in CellSave preservative peri-operatively from 33
consented primary breast cancer patients stage 0-III. 31 healthy
donors were used to determine CTC background in blood while a separate
51 healthy marrow donors served as DTC controls. Both blood and marrow
specimens were prepared on the CellTracks Autoprep system. Using the
CellSpotter Analyzer, cells expressing EpCAM were enriched and were
counted as tumor cells if they were also nucleated, expressed
Cytokeratin and lacked CD45. The OncoType Dx Multi-gene RT-PCR assay
was used to analyze paraffin treated tissue. Results: 0/31 control blood donors had CTCs while 6/33
(18%) patients had ≥ 2 CTC/30 ml blood (Range 2–8, mean 3.2/30 ml,
2.4SD) [Fisher’s exact p-value = 0.025]. 4/51 (8%) control marrow
donors had ≥1 DTC/ 3 ml marrow (range 1–6, mean 4DTC/3ml, SD2.4) while
9/33 (27%) patients had ≥ 1 DTC/ 3ml (range 1–29, mean 8DTC/3 ml,
SD11) [Fisher’s exact p-value = 0.028]. 2 patients (1 DCIS, 1 Stage I)
had positive CTC and DTC counts. 2 patients still had DTCs (26,
29/3 ml) after neoadjuvant therapy. Patients with OncoType Dx
recurrence scores 6–15 (low risk) also had no detectable CTCs and/or
DTCs. Discussion: The CellSearch
system can be used to quantify DTCs. CTCs and DTCs may provide
prognostic information complementary to gene expression profiling
possibly increasing the accuracy of assessment of risk of recurrence
in patients with primary breast cancer. The DTC method is being
further validated by comparison to a ‘gold standard’ IHC bone marrow
assay in a multi center international study.

## 1020

## Detection of circulating tumor cells in peripheral blood and bone
marrow by quantitative RT-PCR assay for cytokeratin-7 mRNA in breast
cancer patients.

## Kataoka A, Masuda T, Ohno S, Inoue H, Yamaguchi H, Uchida Y,
Mimori K, Mori M. National Kyushu Cancer Center, Fukuoka, Japan;
Saiseikai Yahata General Hospital, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan; Medical
Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Beppu, Oita,
Japan
The clinical significance of circulating tumor cells (CTC) remains
unknown. We investigated it in peripheral blood (PB) and bone marrow
(BM) in operable breast cancer patients. First, we investigated the
expression levels of mRNA of 7 representative molecular markers (CEA,
cytokeratin-7, cytokeratin-18, cytokeratin-19, cytokeratin-20,
mammaglobin and MUC-1) for detecting CTC in 27 cancer and 8
non-epithelial cell lines using quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR) with
LightCycler (Roche Diagnostics), and showed that the expression level
of cytokeratin- 7(CK7) was higher in every cancer cell line than in
the nonepithelial cell lines. Next, we studied the clinical
significance of CTC in PB and BM by QRT-PCR for CK7 mRNA in 246
operable breast cancer patients (stage I–III, T1–3, N0–1, M0). Paired
1 ml of PB and BM samples were obtained from the patients with written
informed consent at the surgery. Based on comparison with 17
non-cancer controls, 42 (17.1%) and 120 (48.8%) of the 246 patients
were positive for CK7 in PB and BM, respectively. For both PB and BM,
no significant differences in clinicopathological factors such as age,
menopausal status, tumor size, lymph node metastasis, lymphatic or
vascular involvement, histological grade, ER, and PgR were found
between the CK7- positive and CK7-negative groups. In 186 cases
observed over 36 months after curative surgery, the CK7-positive group
in PB had poorer distant disease-free survival (dDFS) than the
negative group (p<0.01). The CK7-positive group in PB showed poorer
dDFS than the negative group in 132 lymph node-negative cases (p =
0.01), and moreover, in 92 lymph node-negative cases observed over
36 months after surgery, the CK7-positive group in PB showed poorer
dDFS than the negative group (p<0.0001). Multivariate analysis
demonstrated that the positive CK7 mRNA in PB was an independent
prognostic factor in lymph node-negative cases. In BM, no significant
difference in dDFS was found between the CK7-positive and CK7-negative
groups. QRT-PCR for CK7 mRNA could be a useful and universal method
for detecting CTC, and the quantitative detection of CK7 in PB would
have a prognostic value as a marker of early recurrence in breast
cancer patients with surgery. This strategy for detection of CTC would
help in the design and monitoring of new therapeutic strategies for
prevention of recurrent disease as well as the selection of low-risk
breast cancer patients who do not need systemic therapy. Further study
in a larger series with a longer follow-up period is needed to
conclude the clinical significance of CTC in PB.

## 1021

## Detection and monitoring of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) by CK-19
mRNA in breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy: a
marker of early recurrence.

## Harris LN, Solomon N, Roberts L, Ngo T, Abi Raad R, Gioioso C,
Kuter I, Smith B, Iglehart JD, Friedman P, Taghian A. Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL;
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA

Purpose: To evaluate the feasibility
of detecting CTCs by CK19 mRNA in breast cancer patients and determine
the ability of this marker to predict response to therapy and
recurrence.

Patients and methods: Blood samples
from Stage II–III patients enrolled on a prospective phase II,
randomized trial of neoadjuvant, sequential doxorubicin (4 cycles of
60 mg/m2 q 2 weeks) >paclitaxel (9 cycles of weekly 80 mg/m2) vs
paclitaxel >doxorubicin were taken pre-, during and
post-chemotherapy and at 6 month intervals during follow-up.
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated and enriched for
epithelial cells by immunomagnetic selection (DynabeadsÒ). The
presence of CK19 gene mRNA was determined by quantitative real-time
RTPCR using a Beacon’s Assay.

Results: A total of 56 patients
enrolled and completed the study. CK19 mRNA was undetectable in 29/30
healthy controls. Of patients who have completed neoadjuvant
chemotherapy to date, 16/56 (29%) were positive for CK19 expression at
baseline. Of the 9 patients who developed recurrence during 6 monthly
followup, 7 had had detectable levels of CTCs (78%) whereas only 7/44
patients developed CTCs without evidence of recurrence (p = 0.009). Of
note, in patients with recurrent disease, CTCs appeared in the
peripheral blood from 6 months to 1 year prior to diagnosis of
clinically apparent metastases.

Conclusions: Results of this study
suggest that CTCs measured by quantitative RT-PCR for cytokeratin 19
are detectable in a significant proportion of Stage II–III breast
cancer patients. Appearance of CTCs in followup appears to be a marker
of early recurrence.

## 1022

## Isolation and gene expression profiling of bone marrow disseminated
tumor cells from women with locally advanced breast cancer.

## Aft RL, Ylagan L, Fleming T, Weilbaecher K, Naughton M, Watson
M. Washington University, St. Louis, MO

Background: The presence of bone
marrow disseminated tumor cells (BM-DTCs) is an important prognostic
biomarker in breast cancer. We have investigated the feasibility of
performing immunoselection of BM-DTCs followed by gene expression
profiling as a more accurate means of ascertaining the prognostic
significance of bone marrow micrometasases.

Patients and Methods: In the context
of a neoadjuvant trial of Epirubicin and Taxotere for locally advanced
breast cancer, pre and post-therapy bone marrow aspirates were
collected and subjected to Ficoll density gradient centrifugation to
enrich for mononuclear cells. Approximately 2 ×
106 cells were analyzed using
cytokeratin immunocytochemistry to score for the presence of BM-DTCs.
In parallel, for thirteen samples, approximately 1–10×
107 nucleated bone marrow cells were
incubated with magnetic beads (Dynal Biotech) coated with antibody to
the cell surface antigen, EpCAM (TACSTD1). Total RNA was isolated from
the EpCAM-enriched cell population, amplified, and used for cRNA
target generation and hybridization to
GeneChip® microarrays.

Results: Unsupervised cluster
analysis of EpCAM captured BMDTCs produced two distinct classes based
upon gene expression. EpCAM transcript expression was detected in all
samples. In one expression cluster, 5 of 6 samples corresponded to
those that contained 1–7 cytokeratin positive cells per field by
immunocytochemical analysis. This included both pre- and posttreatment
bone marrow biopsies. In the second expression cluster, 6 of 7 samples
corresponded to bone marrow samples without detectable cytokeratin
positive cells. In two cases where patientmatched immunoselected
BM-DTCs and primary tumors were compared, gene expression patterns
were remarkably disparate.

Conclusions: This study demonstrates
the feasibility of performing gene expression profiling on
immunoselected BMDTCs. A signature has been identified that
discriminates between cytokeratin positive and negative bone marrow.
Current work is addressing the effect of using different target
antigens for the immunoselection process, which will ultimately define
a combined method and gene expression signature to molecularly
stratify BMDTCs and better predict their clinical significance in
individual breast cancer patients.

## 1023

## Prospective central assessment of HER-2 status by FISH is not a
predictive factor for pathologic complete response (pCR) in 648 breast
cancer patients treated preoperatively with an anthracycline/taxane based
regimen in the multicenter GeparTrio Trial.

## Loibl S, Blohmer JU, Raab G, Steffen J, Kaufmann M, Löhr A,
Gerber B, Heinrich G, Eidtmann H, Hilfrich J, Jackisch C, Costa SD,
Huober J, Bühler H, von Minckwitz G. J.W.Goethe-University, Frankfurt,
Germany; St. Gertrauden Hospital, Berlin, Germany; Marienhospital,
Stuttgart, Germany; German Breast Group, Neu- Isenburg, Germany;
Horst-Schmidt Kliniken, Wiesbaden, Germany; University Womens
Hopsital, Rostock, Germany; Gynäkologische Schwerpunktpraxis,
Fürstenwalde, Germany; University Womens Hopsital, Kiel, Germany;
Henriettenstift, Hannover, Germany; University Hospital, Marburg,
Germany; University Womens Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany; University
Womens Hopsital, Tübingen, Germany; Ruhr-University, Bochum,
Germany

Objective: The predictive value of
HER2 for anthracycline/taxane based treatments in breast cancer is
still controversial. Reports about Her-2 being a predictive factor
refer mostly to retrospective analysis, derived from metastatic breast
cancer patients, or include only a small number of patients
(pt).

Methods: More than 2050 participants
of the GeparTrio trial with a clinical tumor size of median 4
(1–30) cm were treated preoperatively with 2 cycles of Docetaxel,
Doxorubicin and Cyclophosphamide (TAC) and were then randomized
according to their response to further 4 vs. 6 cycles of TAC (response
>=50%) or 4 cycles of TAC vs. 4 cycles of Vinorelbine/Capecitabine
(NX) (response <50%). All pt were operated thereafter. The primary
endpoint was pCR rate. One secondary endpoint was to assess the value
of the Her-2 to predict pCR. The amplification (>5 gene copies) of
the HER-2 gene was centrally assessed by FISH on core biopsies on the
first 648 pt in the trial.

Results:464 (71.6%) tumors showed no
gene amplification for Her-2, whereas in 184 (28.4%) a HER-2 gene
amplification could be detected. More than 10 gene copies were
detectable in 93 (14.4%) and >20 gene copies in 38 (5.9%) of these
tumors. pCR rate was 19.2% in the Her-2 negative and 24.5% in Her-2
positive pt (p=0.17). No correlation was found for the number of gene
copies and pCR rate (5–10: 24.4%, 11–20: 22.9%, 20+: 27.3%). In the
multivariate analysis grading (p <0.001), estrogen receptor status
(ER) (p <0.001), progesterone receptor status (PR) (p <0.001)
and response after 2 cycles of TAC (p <0.001) were significant
predictive factors for pCR, but not HER-2 status.

Discussion: In this first prospective
analysis of a multicenter, neoadjuvant breast cancer trial HER-2
centrally assessed by FISH was not predictive for the pathologic
response to TAC/NX. Response after 2 cycles of TAC, grade, ER, and PR,
but not HER- 2 were significant predictors in a univariate and
multivariate model. Central FISH examination was therefore abandoned
for further study participants.

## 1024

## Estrogen receptor genotypes predict the response of serum
cholesterol to tamoxifen treatment.

## Ntukidem NI, Schott A, Skaar T, Jin Y, Li L, Lemler S, Nguyen A,
Hayden J, Desta Z, Flockhart DA, Hayes DF. Indiana University,
Indianapolis, IN; University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
Background and Aim: Breast cancer responses and non-tumoral effects
during tamoxifen treatment are variable. Some of this variability may
be caused by inherited germ line single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs)
in candidate genes, including estrogen receptor alpha (ER-
 ) and beta (ER- ). We tested the hypothesis that different serum
lipid profile changes among breast cancer patients treated with
adjuvant tamoxifen are associated with candidate SNPs in ER-
 and ER- genes.
Methods: ER- and ER- genotypes were correlated with fasting serum lipid
profile in 185 breast cancer patients who were prospectively followed
before and after four months of adjuvant tamoxifen (20 mg/day). Serum
lipid analysis was performed in standard clinical laboratories using
validated methods and LDL cholesterol was calculated using the
Friedwald Equation. Standard Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
methods were used to identify the IVS1-401 (PvuII) and IVS1-354 (XbaI)
polymorphisms in ER- , while TaqMan(r) assays were used to genotype ER-
 for single nucleotide polymorphisms IDs rs1256049
(ESR2-01) and rs4134646 (ESR2-02).
Results: Tamoxifen therapy significantly lowered total cholesterol
(−14.1 vs. −24.2 mg/dl) and LDL cholesterol (−20.5 vs. −26.9 mg/dl)
compared to baseline in both pre- and postmenopausal women. A
non-significant trend in cholesterol lowering was observed for
postmenopausal compared to pre- and perimenopausal women (P = 0.06 for
postmenopausal vs. premenopausal). Women who carry the ER-
 PvuII CC allele had a 2-fold greater decrease in
total cholesterol when compared to women with CT/TT alleles (P =
0.01). No association between LDL cholesterol changes and ER-
 genotype was observed. In multivariate analysis,
grouping the subjects according to their combined ER- and ER- genotypes, we found that the subgroup with ER-
 PvuII CC and any ESR2-02 allele combination had the
greatest reduction in total cholesterol concentration when compared to
ER- CT/TT and any ESR2-02 (P = 0.0032). No statistically
significant association was observed between any genotype and LDL, HDL
or triglyceride levels.
Conclusion: ER- genotype may predict the response of serum total
cholesterol to tamoxifen treatment in breast cancer patients. If
validated, genotypic analysis could be used to select women who would
not benefit from the favorable lipid lowering effects of
tamoxifen.

## 1025

## Withdrawn by Author

## 1026

## Withdrawn by Author

## 1027

## Inhibin A and B as predictive markers for chemotherapy induced
premature ovarian failure (POF) among premenopausal women with early
stage breast cancer (ESBC).

## Anders CK, Snyder SA, Barrier RC, Demark-Wahnefried W, Welch RA,
Marcom PK, Shaw HS, Chui SY, Blackwell KL. Duke University, Durham,
NC

Background: Inhibin, a dimer composed
of alpha (A) and beta (B) subunits, is a product of female ovarian
granulosa cells. Expression correlates with ovarian cell activity and
levels decrease in women approaching menopause. This study looks at
Inhibin A and B, estradiol, LH, and FSH pre- and post-chemo in women
receiving adjuvant chemo and correlates them with POF.

Material and Methods: Pre-, immediate
post- and 6 months post-anthracycline/taxane-based chemo, serum is
being collected from premenopausal women as part of an ongoing study
to examine Inhibin levels (INHIBIN; Anders, PI). In addition, serum
was collected pre- and 6 months post-chemo from premenopausal women
with ESBC who had completed anthracycline-based adjuvant chemo and an
exercise intervention (STRENGTH; Demark-Wahnefried, PI). Menstrual
histories and QoL questionnaires were collected from both groups.
Serum was analyzed using ELISA in duplicate for the following: Inhibin
A, Inhibin B, FSH, LH, and estradiol. POF was defined as failure to
resume menses by 6 months post-chemo.

Results: 45 patients from the
STRENGTH study (mean age = 42.6, range 31–51) and 18 patients from the
INHIBIN study (mean age = 41.3, range 26–51) had sequential serum
samples analyze.D Post-chemo, 28/63 (44.4%) had not resumed menses.
There was no difference in age among those with or without POF. Among
all 45 patients from the STRENGTH study, there was a significant
decrease in median Inhibin A (p<.0001) from pre- to post-chemo.
This trend was also observed in INHIBIN patients. There was a
significant correlation between Inhibin A and LH
(r2=.28, p = .05) and Inhibin A and
estradiol (r2=.43, p =.01). Among patients
with amenorrhea, the median decrease in Inhibin A from pre- to
6 months post-chemo was 22.32 pg/mL (IQR = 10.54–36.20) in the
STRENGTH study; 39.80 pg/mL (IQR = 27.37–54.70) from preto post-chemo
in the INHIBIN study. This compares to median decrease of 17.57 pg/mL
(IQR = 0–29.16) and 10.33 pg/mL (IQR = −4.85–65.18) respectively for
patients who resumed menses. In the INHIBIN study, pre-chemo Inhibin A
was lower for patients with amenorrhea (median = 62.0 pg/mL; IQR =
36.43–75.8) compared to those who resumed menses (median = 83.4 pg/mL;
IQR = 56.2–97.7). No such difference in Inhibin B was observed between
groups.

Discussion: Predictive markers of POF
will be invaluable to premenopausal women and their clinicians as they
face therapy for ESBC. These data will be expanded and updated, along
with QoL parameters, as part of an ongoing study to determine markers
of POF. Thus far, our results indicate that changes in serum markers,
in particular Inhibin A, from pre- to post-chemo could serve as very
important predictors for POF.

## 1028

## TWIST2 gene expression predicts for chemo-sensitivity in patients
from two randomized trials of adjuvant FAC/ FEC.

## Tomasic G, Scott V, Conforti R, Michiels S, Andre F, Ahomadegbe
JC, Koscielny S, Spielmann M, Saghatchian d’Assignies M, Garbay JR,
Feunteun J, Lazar V, Vassal G, Tursz T, Arriagada R, Delaloge S.
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France

Background: Adjuvant FAC/FEC for
breast cancer (BC) patients has long demonstrated its ability to avoid
relapses and BC-related deaths. Factors that may influence the
sensitivity/resistance to this regimen in the adjuvant setting, and
therefore potentially guide therapeutic decision, remain though to be
determined. In the late eighties, we conducted two large adjuvant
randomized trials, which compared the administration of six cycles of
adjuvant FAC/FEC to observation (premenopausal study, N = 311) or the
same adjuvant CT followed by tamoxifen to tamoxifen alone
(postmenopausal study, N = 835). These trials demonstrated a DFS
benefit favoring the CT arm (Arriagada et al., Acta Oncologica 2005).
We examined frozen tumor samples from patients included in these
studies with the aim to investigate the predictive effect of a set of
candidate genes on the impact of chemotherapy on disease-free
survival.

Materials and Methods: A case-control
method was applied among patients from the two pooled trials. Cases
were defined by the occurrence of either local or distant relapse.
Controls were defined as patients without any events, and matched to
cases according to: CT (yes/no), tamoxifen (yes/no), HR status, Tumor
grade (1/2/3) and tumor size (<3/>3 cm). A set of 40 candidate
genes were selected from the very recent literature on BC prediction
profiles (including the NSABP 21-gene set) and on sensitivity to the
drugs used. mRNA were extracted from frozen samples and gene
quantification was assessed using a real time quantitative RT PCR
method. Normalization of gene expression levels was performed using
the average level of four reference RNAs: 18S, RPLO, 28S and PPIA. For
each gene, a conditional logistic regression was applied to test for
interaction between its expression and response to chemotherapy. A
two-sided exact test was applie.D

Results: 46 matched case-control
pairs were selected (of whom 22 had received and 24 not received CT).
Median follow-up was 9 years (7–14). Cases and controls were well
matched for the target characteristics. A sole gene differentially
predicted for sensitivity to adjuvant FAC, TWIST2 (P = 0.01). TWIST2
is a transcription factor implicated in p53-mediated response to
genotoxic damages. A large tissue array has been built which includes
the tumor samples of all patients (N = 820) from our institution who
entered both randomized trials. Immunohistochemistry confirmation of
the gene expression data is ongoing on this tissue array and will be
presented at the meeting.

Discussion: TWIST2 appears as a new
potentially useful candidate gene for independent prediction of tumor
sensitivity to adjuvant FAC/FEC. This hypothesis deserves ongoing
confirmation in larger sample.

## 1029

## Molecular determinants of aromatase inhibitor sensitivity in
primary breast cancer.

## Mackay A, Dixon JM, Urruticoechea A, Dexter T, Iravani M,
Fenwick K, Young O, White S, Miller WR, Evans DB, Ashworth A, Dowsett
M. The Breakthrough Toby Robins Breast Cancer Research Centre, London,
UK; Edinburgh Breast Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK;
Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK; Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Switzerland

Aim: To identify the determinants of
biological response of breast tumors to the aromatase inhibitors,
letrozole and anastrozole.

Methods: 34 postmenopausal patients
with primary breast cancer (ER Allred score 2–8) were randomized to
presurgical treatment for 2 weeks with letrozole (n = 16) or
anastrozole (n = 18). Biopsies were taken before treatment and at
surgery. RNA from each biopsy was subjected to microarray gene
expression profiling on Breakthrough 17K cDNA microarrays. Changes in
proliferation were assessed by Ki67 immunohistochemistry.

Results: Unsupervised clustering
resulted in pretreatment and posttreatment biopsies clustering
together in 18 out of 34 cases indicative of significant change with
treatment in the expression of a large number of genes in the
remainder. Paired SAM statistical analysis identified 1484 genes
up-regulated and 1310 genes down-regulated by AI treatment below a
local false discovery rate of 1%. The most consistently down-regulated
genes included PDZK1, CCND1 and TFF1. The most consistently
up-regulated genes included STARD10, FAS and MAN1A1.
A global index of estrogen sensitivity was defined by the number of
genes changing by at least 2-fold between each pair of biopsies. This
index positively correlated with expression levels of ER, TFF1 and
change in the proliferation marker Ki67 and inversely with high level
overexpression of HER2.
In a supervised clustering analysis genes chosen by a weighted
Kolmogorov Smirnov test separated the biopsies into pre- and
post-treatment arms, both correctly classifying 29 out of 34 cases.
This analysis identified a cluster of genes containing cyclin D1, TFF3
and other classically E-regulated genes as being clearly
down-regulated in all tumors treated with AIs. Another cluster of
genes associated with cell cycle progression was identified which were
dramatically changed only in the tumors showing a clear biological
response to estrogen withdrawal. Preliminary analysis identified
tumors showing a poor biological response with a cross validated
overall error rate of 14% using only 18 pretreatment genes.

Conclusions: This is a novel approach
for determining in vivo estrogen-responsive genes, which may
eventually be used in guiding the therapeutic use of aromatase
inhibitors in breast cancer. The gene clusters separating pre- and
post-treatment biopsies identify better indices of biological response
than the commonly used Ki67. The predictor of biological response
needs full validation but appears to identify major index genes of
estrogen dependence.

## 1030

## Simultaneous and quantitative detection of multiple biomarkers in
human breast cancers using semiconductor multicolor quantum
dots.

## Yezhelyev M, Morris C, Gao X, Marcus A, O’Regan RM. Winship
Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA; Emory University,
Atlanta, GA
The benefit of targeted therapies, such as endocrine agents and
trastuzumab, depends not only on the presence of, but the quantity of
targeted protein present. Conventional methods do not allow for
simultaneous detection and quantification of cellular proteins on
single tissue specimens. Fluorescent nanoparticles, such as
semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) exhibit novel optical and electronic
properties, and can be engineered to emit over a wide spectrum. These
QDs can be conjugated to antibodies, and together with
wavelength-resolved spectroscopy can be used to detect and quantify
cellular proteins. Methods: We
directly conjugated QDs, emitting at 3 separate wavelengths, to
primary antibodies for ER, PR and HER2/neu. These conjugated QDs were
used to detect and quantify the 3 receptors in breast cancer cell
lines and frozen breast tumors, and results were compared to
conventional methods.

Results: Multicolored QDs conjugated
directly to primary antibodies simultaneously detected and quantified
the expression of ER, PR and HER2/neu in single specimens of cancer
cell lines and human tissue clinical specimens. There was good
agreement between the expression of the proteins using conjugated QDs
and conventional methods (immunohistochemical staining and immuno
blotting). Coupled with hyper-spectral imaging and wavelength-resolved
spectroscopy, multiplexed QD probes were used to quantify a panel of
up to 8 different colors at the single-cell level.

Conclusions: The use of conjugated
QDs offers the possibility of detecting and accurately quantifying
multiple cellular proteins simultaneously on single tissue specimens,
allowing correlation of traditional histopathology and molecular
signatures for intact cancer cells and tissue specimens. These results
raise new possibilities for nanotechnology applications in molecular
pathology and clinical oncology, particularly in linking multiplexed
cancer biomarkers with clinical outcome, and allowing the possibility
of individualized therapy.

## 1031

## Role of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 in predicting treatment efficacy
in primary chemo-endocrine therapy in human breast cancer.

## Fox SB, Bottini A, Generali D, Bonardi S, Wigfield S, Brizzi MP,
Campo L, Milani M, Allevi G, Berruti A, Dogliotti L, Harris AL.
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, UK; Azienda Istituti Ospitalieri, Cremona, Italy;
University of Turin, Orbassano, Torino, Italy

Purpose: Hypoxia-induced factor (HIF)
family includes a number of the key mediators in response to cellular
oxygen deprivation. These factors are able to enhance mechanisms that
are important in conferring an aggressive phenotype such as cancer
cells ability to migrate and survive in distant organs. HIF1
activation results in activation of many genes regulating tumour
processes that contribute to resistance to radiotherapy and cytotoxic
therapy. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the role of
hypoxia inducible factor 1 (HIF1 ) expression in predicting the response to
chemo-endocrine therapy and disease free survival (DFS) in breast
cancer patients enrolled in a single institution trial of primary
anthracycline and tamoxifen therapy. We also evaluated the correlation
between HIF1 expression and common patho-biological markers

Patients and Methods: HIF1
 expression was assessed in 187 patients with T2–4
N0–1 breast cancer enrolled in a randomized trial comparing single
agent epirubicin (i.v. 60 mg/m2, 1–2–21 for 4 cycles) versus
epirubicin + tamoxifen (30 mg) as primary systemic treatment. All
patients received post-operatively 4 cycles CMF regimen
(600-40-600 mg/m2, 1-8-28). ER+ve patients had 5 years of tamoxifen
(20mg).

Results: HIF1 expression at baseline conditions showed an inverse
relationship with bcl2 (P = .05) and a positive association with
c-erb2 (P = .005). According to the HIF1 expression, overall response progressively decreased
with the increase of HIF1 expression score (p<0.04). HIF1 expression was associated with a poor DFS (p = 0.02)
while overall survival was not affected. Stratifying patients
according to ER status, HIF1a was a significant predictor of poor DFS
in ER+ve patients but not in ER-ve ones.

Conclusions: HIF1a confirms to be a
marker of aggressiveness in breast cancer patients and it is a
predictive marker of chemotherapy failure particularly in patients
with ER+ tumor. These results indicate that HIF1a can be used to
discriminate patients who are more likely to be resistant to endocrine
therapy. HIF1a positive tumors can achieve advantages by the
association of conventional chemotherapy with treatments able to
increase oxygen delivery to the tumor be.D
Supported in part by the “Associazione Patologia Oncologica
Mammaria (APOM)”, by a grant from the Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche (CNR) Rome, Italy, by Cancer Research UK (CRUK).

## 1032

## Elevated plasma TIMP-1 level predicts decreased response and
survival in metastatic breast cancer.

## Lipton A, Ali SM, Leitzel K, Demers L, Evans DB, Hamer P,
Brown-Shimer S, Pierce K, Carney W. Penn State/Hershey Medical Center,
Hershey, PA; Lebanon VA Medical Center, Lebanon, PA; Novartis Pharma
AG, Basel, Switzerland; Oncogene Science/Bayer HealthCare, Cambridge,
MA

Background: Tissue inhibitors of
metalloproteinase (TIMPs) are known to have at least two different
functions. They inhibit the catalytic activity of MMPs and they are
also able to act as growth factors. Increased TIMP-1 has been
associated with an unfavorable prognosis in some tumor types, such as
lymphomas, colorectal, gastric, head and neck, and lung cancer.

Materials and Methods: Pretreatment
EDTA plasma TIMP-1 was assayed from 251 patients enrolled in a phase
III 2nd-line hormone therapy trial and 50
post-menopausal control females using the TIMP-1 ELISA from Oncogene
Science/Bayer HealthCare, Cambridge, MA.

Results: The plasma TIMP-1 levels
from the post-menopausal control group (n = 50) had a mean ± standard
deviation of 201±86 ng/ml (range 49–455 ng/ml). The upper limit of
normal was defined at the mean + 2 SD of the control group
(373 ng/ml). Patient pretreatment plasma TIMP-1 ranged from 70 –
982 ng/ml. Plasma TIMP-1 was elevated above the mean + 2 SD of the
control group (373 ng/ml) in 19 patients (7.6 %). In univariate
analysis, patients with elevated vs. normal plasma TIMP-1 had a
reduced clinical benefit rate (CBR) (16% vs. 42%, p = 0.03). Time to
progression (TTP) (HR 3.0, p <0.0001) and overall survival (HR 4.5,
p = 0.0001) were also significantly shorter in patients with elevated
TIMP-1 levels. TTP and overall survival were also significantly
shorter in patients with higher TIMP-1 plasma levels when analyzed as
a continuous variable. Patients with elevated vs. normal serum
HER-2/neu levels had higher plasma TIMP-1 levels (mean- 306 vs.
187 ng/ml, p <0.0001). In multivariate analysis, elevated plasma
TIMP-1 level remained a prognostic factor for reduced overall survival
(p <0.0001), as did elevated serum HER-2/neu (p <0.0001) and
visceral metastases (p = 0.003).

Conclusion: Elevated pretreatment
plasma TIMP-1 levels predicted decreased response to
2nd-line hormone therapy and reduced
survival.

## 1033

## High tumor tissue levels of tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases-1 are associated with resistance to chemotherapy in
patients with metastatic breast cancer.

## Wurtz SO, Schrohl AS, Meijer-van Gelder ME, Romer MU, Sorensen
NM, Holten-Andersen MN, Christensen IJ, Look MP, Mouridsen HT,
Lademann U, Brunner N, Foekens JA. The Royal Veterinary and
Agricultural University, Frederiksberg C, Denmark; Josephine Nefkens
Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Hvidovre Hospital,
Hvidovre, Denmark; Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark

Background: Only about 50 % of
patients receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy for metastatic breast cancer
do benefit from the treatment. Today, no validated markers exist for
the prediction of chemotherapy sensitivity/resistance in this patient
group. Tissue Inhibitor of Metalloproteinases 1 (TIMP-1) has been
shown to protect against apoptosis, including chemotherapy-induced
apoptotic cell death and may as such represent a marker of
chemoresistance.

Aim: The purpose of the present study
was to test the hypothesis that tumors expressing high levels of
TIMP-1 are protected against apoptosis-inducing agents and thus less
sensitive to chemotherapeutic drugs that work through induction of
apoptosis.

Materials and Methods: To test this
hypothesis, we have established fibrosarcoma cell lines from wild-type
and TIMP-1 gene-deficient mice and exposed these cell lines to
chemotherapy. In addition, we investigated the association between
primary tumour expression levels of TIMP-1 protein (ELISA) and
objective response to apoptosis-inducing chemotherapy in 174 patients
with metastatic breast cancer.

Results: Fibrosarcoma cell lines
devoid of TIMP-1 expression were significantly more sensitive to
chemotherapy. When primary tumor tissue levels of TIMP-1 were analysed
as a continuous logtransformed variable, increasing tumour tissue
TIMP-1 levels were significantly associated with a poor response to
CMF and anthracycline-based chemotherapy (OR = 0.54, CI 0.33–0.87, p =
0.01). In a multivariate model TIMP-1 was significantly associated
with response to treatment [OR = 0.57, CI = 0.33–0.95, p = 0.03),
while none of the other included classical patient parameters were
significantly associated with response to treatment.

Conclusion: Our in vitro experimental
studies suggest that TIMP-1 protects against chemotherapy-induced
apoptosis. This is supported by the clinical studies in which we
demonstrated a significant association between tumor tissue levels of
TIMP-1 and response to the most frequently used chemotherapeutic
drugs, namely CMF and anthracyclines for patients with metastatic
breast cancer. Together, this suggests that TIMP-1 could be useful as
a predictive marker in breast cancer.

## 1034

## Can diffuse optical spectroscopy predict the final pathological
response of neoadjuvant chemotherapy?: a retrospective pilot
study.

## Cerussi AE, Shah N, Hsiang D, Mehta RS, Tromberg BJ. Beckman
Laser Institute, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA;
University of California Medical Center, Orange, CA

Background: Diffuse Optical
Spectroscopy (DOS) is a noninvasive technique that employs harmless
levels of non-ionizing near-infrared light to measure absolute
concentrations of tissue deoxy-hemoglobin, oxy-hemoglobin, water, and
lipids. These concentrations are related to tissue perfusion,
angiogenesis, and cellularity. Previously we have demonstrated that
DOS has high sensitivity to these functional components in tumor
tissue and in tumor tissue undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC).
There is a growing clinical need for a reliable and inexpensive method
for measuring tumor response to NAC in order to delineate responders
from non-responders. Since the NSABP-18 and −27 trials have indicated
the importance of obtaining final pathological response, in this pilot
study we tested the hypothesis: Can changes in functional DOS
parameters be predictive of the final pathological response to
NAC?

Materials and Methods: A DOS
instrument non-invasively measured scattering and absorption spectra
from 650–1000 nm in the breast tissue of 11 women undergoing a
standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy
regiment(doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide, 3–4 cycles of 3 weeks each).
Measurements taken within one week prior to the initial treatment and
within one week post treatment were compare.D The pre- and
posr-treatement relative changes in DOS-measured parameters were
compared with final surgical pathology to assess the predictive value
of DOS for pathological outcome. Patients were stratified into
responder and non-responder categories based upon changes (> or
<50%) in the maximum tumor axis.

Results: The degree of change in
several DOS parameters, namely deoxy-hemoglobin and water, correlated
significantly with the degree of pathological response. Tumor
deoxy-hemoglobin changed only 4(3)% in the non responder group (N = 4)
and changed 26(16)% in the responder group (N = 7). Differences
between tumor water changes were also were evident (3(1)% versus
16(14)%).

Discussion: DOS measurements in less
than one week after initial therapy separated responder from
non-responder. The early dynamics of DOS-measured physiology may
provide important insight into the progression of therapy. We note
that two potential markers for tumor cell death, cellularity (through
water) and angiogenesis (through deoxy-hemoglobin) are the best
predictors of final pathological response. Future work will focus on
the separation of partial from compete responders, as well as
investigate other therapy regiments.

## 1035

## HIGH expression of the microtubule-associated protein, tau,
strongly predicts improved progression free and overall survival in
patients with metastatic HER-2-negative breast cancers treated with
docetaxel and vinorelbine plus filgrastim.

## Gown AM, Treaba DO, Goldstein LC, Porter PL, Gralow JR,
Livingston RB, Tam S, Yeh I-T, Hayes DF, Barlow W, Lew D. PhenoPath
Laboratories and IMPRIS, Seattle, WA; Seattle Cancer Care Alliance,
Seattle, WA; University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio,
TX; University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Cancer Research and
Biostatistics, Seattle, WA; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA

Background: Taxanes such as docetaxel
are presumed to target microtubules in tumor cells, and there is
preliminary published evidence that tau, a tubulin-associated protein,
can stabilize tubulin and alter its sensitivity to taxane-based
agents. We tested the hypothesis that the levels of tau expression in
breast cancer could predict response to taxane-based chemotherapy
regimens, using tissues obtained from the the SWOG S0102 trial, in
which patients with HER-2-negative metastatic breast cancer were
treated with docetaxel and vinorelbine plus filgrastim. In this
regimen, the taxane was given on day one, but the vinca was given on
days 8 and 15 of a 21-day schedule.

Materials and Methods: Blocks from 51
patients in S0102 could be retrieved for this analysis; of the 51,
only 37 had tissue sufficient for evaluation. Immunohistochemistry
(IHC) using antibodies to tau was performed on a tissue microarray
constructed from the S0102 paraffin blocks. IHC signal was evaluated
in a semiquantitative method: 0 (negative), 1, 2 or 3, based on the
intensity of cytoplasmic immunostaining in the tumor cell cytoplasm.
The maximum tau score for the 3 representative cores of each tissue
block was employed in the analysis. Progression free survival (PFS)
and overall survival (OS) were evaluated using long-rank tests and Cox
regression models.

Results: When scored dichotomously (3
vs. 0,1, or 2), patients with scores of 3, corresponding to high level
tau expression, had significantly longer PFS (HR = 0.301, log-rank
p-value 0.0059), and significantly longer OS (HR = 0.242; log-rank
p-value = 0.016) compared with patients with tau scores of 0, 1 or
2.

Conclusions: Immunohistochemical
identification of breast cancer specimens showing high expression
levels of tau strongly predicts improved PFS and OS in patients with
metastatic HER-2- negative breast cancers treated with docetaxel and
vinorelbine plus filgrastim. These results are seemingly in conflict
with the recently reported finding of low tau expression predicting
increased sensitivity to taxanes in breast cancer (Rouzier R et al.,
PNAS, 2005). Our results regarding the predictive power of tau may
relate to the incorporation of vinorelbine in this regimen, an agent
with opposing effects on microtubule formation to those of
taxanes.

## 1036

## Immunohistochemical detection of ER in breast cancer using the new
rabbit monoclonal anti-ER antibody SP1 better predicts survival and
response to tamoxifen than the mouse monoclonal antibody 1D5: a tissue
microarray study of 4620 cases.

## Treaba DO, Gown AM, Goldstein LC, Nielsen TO, Cheang MCU.
PhenoPath Laboratories and IMPRIS, Seattle, WA; University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Background: Estrogen receptor (ER)
expression predicts improved disease-free survival and is widely
targeted in breast cancer therapy. In a recent study, we reported the
increased sensitivity of the new rabbit monoclonal antibody (SP1) when
compared with the anti-ER mouse antibody (1D5), the latter in widest
use in the United States. With long-term clinical follow-up and
laboratory data available, this study integrates the comparative
performance of these two anti-ER antibodies with survival and
therapeutic response data.

Design: Tissue microarrays were
obtained from a series of 4620 patients (median age 60 years)
diagnosed with breast cancer and referred to the British Columbia
Cancer Agency between 1986 and 1992. Median clinical follow-up was
12.4 years. The 0.6mm cores on tissue microarrays were tested by IHC
using SP1 (Neomarkers) and 1D5 (DakoCytomation) antibodies, and
manually scored for semiquantitative percentage of tumor cell
positivity according to the following: Negative (<1%), 1+ (1–25%),
2+ (25–75%), 3+ (>75%).

Results: In this population-based TMA
study, the positivity for the rabbit monoclonal anti-ER antibody (SP1)
was 69.8% while the positivity for 1D5 was 63.2%. Both monoclonal
antibodies were good prognostic indicators of longer breast cancer
specific survival. In the discordant cases, the SP1+/1D5−
immunophenotype was associated with better survival than the SP1−/1D5+
immunophenotype (p = 0.029). The Cox regression model, including tumor
size, nodal status, age at diagnosis, and tumor grade, identified SP1
as a superior independent prognostic factor. Furthermore, in the
subgroup of patients treated with only hormonal therapy (32.6%) the
ER+ patients identified by SP1 had better survival than the ER+
patients identified by 1D5.

Conclusions: The rabbit monoclonal
anti-ER antibody SP1 is significantly more sensitive than the mouse
monoclonal antibody 1D5. In long term clinical follow-up, SP1 is a
better independent prognostic factor and more accurately identifies
the group of ER+ patients who will have a better survival with
hormonal therapy.

## 1037

## INFLUENCE of hormone receptor status on axillary lymph node (ALN)
pathologic complete response (pCR) rates in patients with cytologically
confirmed ALN metastases prior to primary chemotherapy for breast
cancer.

## Hennessy BT, Kau SW, Sahin A, Broglio K, Hortobagyi GN, Valero
V. MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

## INTRODUCTION
Following primary chemotherapy for cytologically confirmed
ALN-positive breast cancer, patients who have subsequent negative
ALNs (i.e. ALN pCR) have an excellent prognosis regardless of the
presence of a residual primary tumor. Hormone receptor-negative
breast tumors are known to have significantly higher pCR rates in
keeping with greater chemosensitivity. However, the influence of
progesterone receptor (PR) status alone on chemosensitivity has not
been as well documented, nor has that of hormone receptor status on
outcome after primary chemotherapy.

## METHODS
Patients with cytologically documented ALN metastases at
diagnosis treated in 1 of 5 prospective trials of doxorubicin- or
taxane-based primary chemotherapy prior to definitive surgery at
The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center were analyzed,
according to the presence or absence of residual carcinoma in ALNs,
and according to the hormone receptor status of the tumor. We used
the chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test, as appropriate to test
for associations between hormone receptor status and ALN pCR.
Survival was estimated by the Kaplan Meier metho.D

## RESULTS
Of 925 patients treated in these 5 trials, 403 patients had
cytologically confirmed ALN metastases. 89 patients (22%) had ALN
pCR following primary chemotherapy. 31% of those with an estrogen
receptor (ER)-negative tumor (28% in <50 years and 35% in older
patients) and 12% (11% in those <50 years and 12% in older
patients) of those with an ER-positive tumor achieved an ALN pCR (p
<0.001). In those achieving ALN pCR, ER status was not
associated with a statistically significant survival difference.
However, in patients with residual ALN carcinoma, those with
ER-positive tumors had significantly better overall survival (84%
vs. 53% at 5 years (p <0.001)) and relapse-free survival (68%
vs. 46% at 5 years (p <0.001)). ALN pCR rates were: ER-/PR- 30%
vs. ER-PR+ 32% vs. ER+PR- 20% vs. ER+PR+ 8% (p <0.0001). The ALN
pCR rate was 28% among patients with PR- tumors and 13% among
patients with PR+ tumors (p = 0.001). Among patients with ER+
tumors, PR status was significantly associated with ALN pCR (p =
0.01). Among those with ER- disease, PR status was not
significantly associated with ALN pCR rates (30% PR− vs. 32%
PR+).

## CONCLUSION
Patients with complete histologic eradication of axillary
disease by primary chemotherapy have an excellent prognosis
irrespective of hormone receptor status. ER-negative tumors are
significantly more chemosensitive. ALN pCR rates are similar with
one or both hormone receptors negative but are significantly lower
in those patients with positive ER and PR. The very low ALN pCR
rate in ER+PR+ breast cancers may mean that chemoresistance caused
by ER-positivity is closely related to the ER’s mechanism of PR
control in these tumors.

## 1038

## MR spectroscopy of breast cancer tissue used for tumor
classification and lymph node prediction.

## Lundgren S, Sitter B, Bathen T, Jensen LR, Axelson D, Halgunset
J, Fjøsne HE, Gribbestad IS. St. Olavs University Hospital, Trondheim,
Norway; NTNU, Trondheim, Norway; MRI Consulting, Kingston, ON,
Canada

Background: Axillary lymph node (pN)
status is an important prognostic factor for breast cancer (BC)
patients. About 25% of pN-(negative) patients experience recurrence or
metastasis. Additional methods might be important for better treatment
strategies. Malignant cells have altered metabolism, and metabolic
mapping of tissue biopsies using high-resolution magic angle spinning
(HR MAS) MR spectroscopy can give detailed information on the
metabolic composition. The aim of this study was to compare MR
spectroscopic findings from BC tissue to histological grading of tumor
and patient pN status.

Methods: BC and non-involved adjacent
tissue were excised from patients with infiltrating ductal carcinoma
(IDC). Intact specimens were analyzed in a L MAS rotor. HR MAS spectra were recorded on a Bruker
Avance DRX600 spectrometer at 4°C. Proton
MR spin echo spectra were acquired (total echo time 285 ms, 5kHz
spinning rate, and water suppression). A pathologist scored the
relative areas of normal and neoplastic elements visually after MR
analysis, excluding samples with less than 5% tumorcontent. The final
database consist of 115 samples: 48 noninvolved tissue and 69 IDCs
(histological grade I (4), II (33) and III (32)). The 69 tumor samples
consisted of 37 pN− and 32 pN+ patients. The spectral region 2.9 –
4.8 ppm was selected for principal component analysis (PCA). Two
sample sets were used as PCA input: all samples (115) and tumor
samples (69). Classification histological grade (I, II and III) and
lymphatic spread was performed by a probabilistic neural network (PNN)
strategy. The 25 first principal component (PC) scores from PCA of
tumor samples were used as input in PNN. Both PCA and PNN were
performed with full cross-validation.

Results: The 2D score plot of PC2 and
PC3 from the PCA of all samples show a clear separation of
non-involved tissue and tumor samples, but no possibility to
differentiate among the three types of grading, and PNN of spectra
from tumor samples resulted in true classification of 56 of the 69
samples with respect to grading, whereas two samples were not
classified (specificity and sensitivity exceeded 80%). A PCA score
plot of PC2 and PC3 for tumor samples shows a trend of clustering with
respect to pN status. PNN gave a true classification of 65 of the 69
samples. 

Conclusion: Metabolic patterns in
primary breast tumours differ from pN+ and pN− patients. HR MAS of BC
biopsies has the potential to predict the axillary lymph node
status.

## 1039

## Incidence of monosomy of chromsome 17: a potential pitfall in
assessing HER-2 gene amplifiaction.

## Bloom KJ. CLARiENT Inc and University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA
The assessment of HER-2 gene amplifcation by fluorescence insitu
hybridization is typically performed by determining the ratio of the
mean number of HER-2 gene copy signals to the mean number of
chromosome 17 centromere (CEP-17) signals. The intent of calculating a
ratio is to identify those tumors in which an elevated mean number of
HER-2 signals is due to polysomy of chromosome 17 rather than true
HER-2 gene amplification. Over the last few years, we have noticed a
number of tumors in which the HER-2:CEP-17 ratio was ≥ 2.0 but the
mean HER-2 count was less than 4. Based on the FDA approved guidelines
for scoring the PathVysion assay, these tumors would be scored as
positive for HER2 gene amplification since the assessment is based on
ratio rather than the number of HER-2 genes. The aim of this study was
to assess the frequency of reduced CEP-17 signals and the relationship
to HER-2:CEP-17 ratios.

Material and Methods: 10280
consecutive breast cancers assessed for HER-2 gene amplification by
FISH were reviewed. FISH was performed utilizing the PathVysion kit
(Vysis, Downers Grove, IL). Twenty cells were assessed and the number
of HER-2 and CEP-17 signals were counted in each cell, up to twenty
signals each. The HER-2:CEP17 ratio was calculated by dividing the
mean number of HER-2 signals by the mean number of CEP-17
signals.

Results: One hundred and fifty-six
(1.5%) of the 10280 breast cancers assessed demonstrated a
HER-2:CEP-17 ratio of ≥ 2.0 and a mean HER-2 count of less than 4. In
56 tumors, the maximum number of CEP-17 signals counted in each cell
did not exceed one, thus the mean CEP-17 count was 1. In another 607
tumors, the mean CEP-17 count was less than 1.5.

Discussion: Based on these findings,
approximately 1.5% of breast cancers assessed as demonstrating HER-2
gene amplification using the PathVysion kit and the FDA approved
scoring criteria do not demonstrate an increased number of HER-2 genes
and thus are not truely amplified. Based on prior studies, tumors with
mean HER-2 counts less than 4 do not show significant over-expression
of HER-2 protein and thus these patients would be considered to have
an IHC- FISH discrepancy.

## 1040

## Is there a regimen-specific gene signature predicting for
pathological complete response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in
hormone-negative breast cancer patients? A microarray substudy of 101
patients included in EORTC 10994/BIG 00–01 Trial.

## Bonnefoi H, Farmer P, Delorenzi M, Becette V, Piccart M, Campone
M, Tubiana-Hulin M, Mauriac L, Jassem J, Petit T, Rouanet P, Blot E,
Bergh J, Cameron D, Bogaerts J, Iggo R. European Organization on
Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC); Swiss Institute for
Bioinformatics (SIB); Swedish Breast Cancer Group (SweBCG);
Anglo-Celtic Cooperative Oncology Group (ACCOG); Swiss Group for
Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK); Swiss Institute for Experimental
Cancer Research (ISREC)

Background: The goal of this study
was to investigate the presence of a regimen-specific gene signature
predicting for a complete pathological response (pCR) following
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. Since hormone-receptor negative (HR-)
tumours are more sensitive to chemotherapy, therefore our strategy is
to first focus in analysing gene expression data from this subset of
patients included in an ongoing large randomized trial (EORTC
10994/BIG 00–01). This trial compares a non-taxane regimen
(fluorouracil + epirubicin + cyclophosphamide × 6; arm A) with a
taxane regimen (docetaxel × 3 and epirubicin + docetaxel × 3; arm B)
in patients with large operable or locally advanced/inflammatory
breast cancer and with any hormone-receptor status.

Methods: With the cut-off date of
April 1st, 2005, this study was restricted to cases meeting the
following criteria: (1) non T4 tumours, (2) HR- tumours, (3) more than
20% tumour cells on the frozen sample, (4) good quality and yield (at
least 200 ng) of RNA extracted from the frozen sample. Frozen samples
were analysed centrally. After T7 amplification, samples were labelled
by Enzo kit and hybridized to X3P Affymetrix arrays (61927 probesets).
We reported recently the feasibility of microarray analysis in the
context of this EORTC 10994 trial (Oncogene 2005). A total of 101
samples were selected for this study: 51 in arm A with 29 (of which 14
pCR) and 22 for the learning and the validation sets respectively, and
50 in arm B.

Results: In patients assigned to arm
A, we have built a 65 genes signature predicting for pCR to
anthracyclines. This model is currently being tested on the validation
set to define its accuracy. The same analysis will be performed on
samples from patients assigned to arm B. Results will be presented at
the meeting. The comparison of the two gene signatures may allow
identifying which genes are purely predictive of response to either
treatment A or B.

Discussion: Identifying
regimen-specific gene signatures is very attractive and may have
essential clinical applications. However it requires solid and
repeated confirmations in independent data sets or in prospective
trial. Should gene signature fail to show predictive relevance, we
will use other genomics or non-genomics methods in an attempt to
determine predictive factors of response to chemotherapy.

## 1041

## Identification pharmacogenomic markers for predicting
paclitaxel-related toxicity in breast cancer patients treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

## Fujiwara Y, Shimizu C, Shimoyama T, Takeda M, Nishio K, Ando M,
Katsumata N, Kouno T. National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan;
National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan

Background: Palitaxel (TAX) shows
efficacy in advanced breast cancer.However, TAX-related toxicity
including peripheral neuropathy (PN) limits its therapeutic benefit.
Molecular markers estimative and predictive of severe PN may assist
clinical management by identifying patients likely to derive harm from
TAX.

Methods: We designed a custom cDNA
array containing preclinically-selected 1084 genes that related with
cellular response to taxane and that are expressed in lymphoid cells.
To identify the gene expression change during TAX treatment, we
monitored gene expression profiles of 72 peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) before and after treatment from breast cancer patients
who received TAX as neoadjuvant therapy. PN was evaluated throughout
the chemotherapy according to NCI-CTC ver.2.

Results: We identified the
TAX-relative genes discriminating pretreatment and post-treatment PBMC
samples using an odds ratio (OR) and paired t-test (P<0.01 and OR
>2). Separately, we also identified the PN-related genes correlated
with PN grading score using chi-square test. Finally we selected
overlapping candidate genes for prediction maker for PN. Using a
machine-learning classification algorithm based on these candidate
genes set, we have built a multi-gene classifier for predicting PN
grading score with 85% accuracy and identified biomarker genes
including synapse-associated genes. The regression model using the
expression profiles of these synapse-associated genes accurately
predicted the degree of neuropathy.

Conclusion: This work represents a
novel exploratory approach to define molecular marker estimating TAX
toxicity in surrogate tissue.
This study is supported by Health and Labour Science Research
Grants, Research on Advanced Medical Technology, H14-Toxico-
007.

## 1042

## Predictors of early ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence following
breast conservation therapy.

## Gendler LS, Azarbayejani A, Klein LA, Horowitz E, Jin Z, Joseph
KA, El-Tamer MB, Schnabel FR. Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, NY; Columbia University-Mailman School of Public Health, New
York, NY

Introduction: The overall risk of
ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence (IBTR) after breast conservation
therapy (BCT) is well established in the medical literature. However,
early IBTR presents a special concern, possibly reflecting improper
patient selection, residual or persistent disease, or aggressive tumor
biology. The purpose of this study was to attempt to identify factors
predicting an increased risk of early IBTR for patients treated with
BCT for invasive breast cancer.

Methods: A retrospective review was
conducted of 2260 patients who underwent BCT for Stage I-III breast
cancer between 1990 and 2003 at Columbia University Medical Center.
Data was obtained from the institutional Tumor Registry, and patients
with exclusively in situ disease
were excluded from this study. The study population consisted of a
total of 107 patients who developed IBTR. Cases were evaluated for
details of their surgical procedure, tumor biology, medical therapy,
and radiation therapy. Clinicopathologic factors were studied by
univariate and multivariate analyses to analyze for factors predictive
of early IBTR.

Results: A total of 47 patients
developed IBTR within 2 years of breast cancer diagnosis, and 60
patients were diagnosed with IBTR more than 2 years after diagnosis. A
Kaplan-Meier curve demonstrated that the rate of IBTR within 2 years
was 2.4% (95% Confidence interval [CI]; 1.7%–3.1%) and the rate of
IBTR within 5 years was 6.4% (95%CI; 5%–7.8%). Both univariate and
multivariate analyses were performed comparing early (<2 years)
IBTR versus late (>2 years) IBTR populations. In a univariate
analysis, factors predictive for IBTR within 2 years were ER
negativity (odds ratio [OR] 2.41, 95% CI 1.03–5.68), lack or delay of
radiation therapy (OR 8.19, 95% CI 3.27–20.51) and tumor size >2cm
(OR 1.42, 95% CI 1.01–2.00). The multivariate analysis showed similar
trends after controlling for other confounding factors. There were 14
patients diagnosed with early IBTR after completing chemotherapy and
prior to commencing radiation therapy. Age, tumor type, surgical
margins, re-excision rate, lymph node involvement, LVI, PR, extent of
intraductal component, and differentiation were not predictive of
early (<2 years) versus late (>2 years) IBTR.

Conclusion: Patients with IBTR are a
heterogeneous population, however, ER negativity, lack or delay of
radiation therapy, and tumor size >2cm significantly predict an
early IBTR within 2 years. This may have an important implication for
selection of patients for breast conservation therapy in the future.
Thirteen percent of all IBTR in our study were identified after
completing chemotherapy and prior to commencing radiation therapy.
This emphasizes the need for pre-radiation therapy breast imaging to
exclude the possibility of residual or persistent disease prior to
radiation.

## 1043

## Analysis of thymidylate synthase, methylenetetrahydrofolate
reductase and IVS14+1 dihydropyrimidine deshydrogenase gene polymorphisms
in advanced breast cancer patients receiving capecitabine as
monotherapy.

## Largillier R, Formento JL, Nebbia JF, Etienne-Grimaldi MC, Ginot
A, Francoual M, Renee N, Ferrero JM, Foa C, Namer M, Milano G. Centre
Antoine Lacassagne, Nice, France

Background: Pharmacodynamics of
fluoropyrimidines may be influenced by thymidylate synthase (TYMS), dihydropyrimidine deshydrogenase
(DPYD) and reduced folate
levels. The aim of this prospective study was to analyze the impact of
constitutional polymorphisms in the TYMS, DPYD and
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) genes, on toxicity and clinical response in
advanced breast cancer patients treated with capecitabine. Material and Methods: Polymorphisms were
analyzed in 105 patients (mean age 61, 33–84) with advanced breast
cancer treated with capecitabine as monotherapy (28%
1st line, 41%
2nd line). The mean initial dose was
2020 mg/m2/d (d1–14 every 3 weeks,
median number of cycles = 7). TYMS
polymorphisms (6 bp deletion in 3′ + 28 bp repeats including the
G>C SNP in 5′) and IVS14+1G>A DPYD mutation were analyzed by PCR-RFLP. 677C>T and
1298A>C MTHFR polymorphisms were
determined by melting curve analyses. Results: Grade 2-3-4 toxicity (WHO criteria, 1st cycle)
was 14.4% nausea-vomiting, 13.4% hematotoxicity, 9.3% hand-foot
syndrome, 9.3 % diarrhea, 8.2% mucositis. 3′TYMS genotype (46% wt/wt, 45% del/wt, 9% del/del),
5′TYMS genotype (9% 3RG/3RG, 35%
2R/3RG or 3RC/ 3RG, 56% 2R/2R or 2R/3RC or 3RC/3RC), 677C>T
MTHFR genotype (38% C/C, 42%
C/T, 20% T/T), 1298A>C MTHFR
genotype (56% A/A, 34% A/C, 10% C/C) and the IVS14+1 DPYD genotype (one mut/wt patient) were
not correlated to any type of capecitabine-related toxicities. 76
patients progressed under treatment. The median response duration was
5.8 months. Response duration was significantly related to the
5′TYMS genotype, with 3RG/3RG
patients exhibiting the shorter response duration (Logrank: p =
0.037). Other polymorphisms were not related to response duration.
Discussion: The 5′TYMS genotype that is theoretically
associated with the highest TYMS
gene transcription (3RG/3RG) is a promising predicive factor
influencing capecitabine pharmacodynamics.

## 1044

## Src as a novel molecular biomarker for response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy with sequential doxorubicin and docetaxel in high-risk
breast cancer.

## Minton SE, Munster PN, Cox C, Lacevic M, Lee J-H, Beam CA,
Muro-Cacho CA, Diaz N, Jove R. University of South Florida College of
Medicine, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute,
Tampa, FL

Background: Src is a novel protein
shown to be important in the oncogenesis of several different cancers.
Several breast cancer cell lines possess activated Src tyrosine
kinases and activated Stat3. Inhibition of Src leads to suppression of
constitutively-active Stat3 and demonstrated subsequent growth
inhibition and apoptosis in breast cancer cell lines. We have
previously reported on Stat3 as a predictor of response to therapy.
With the early development of Src inhibitors we sought to study the
role of Src as a predictor of response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

Methods: Women with stage III breast
cancer (N = 45) having at least a 5 cm palpable breast mass were
eligible for the neoadjuvant treatment. Treatment consisted of 3
cycles of doxorubicin at 80 mg/m2 IV given
every 2 weeks in a dose dense fashion followed sequentially by 3
cycles of docetaxel at 100 mg/m2 IV given
every 2 weeks. G-CSF was given from days 3 through 10 to maintain the
dose density of the chemotherapy. Response to the chemotherapy was
measured bidimentionally prior to each chemotherapy treatment and upon
completion of treatment just prior to definitive surgery. Levels of
phospho-Src and phospho-Stat3 were quantified by
immunohistochemistry.

Results: The complete (27%) and
partial clinical response (67%) was 94%. The complete pathologic
response in the breast was 27%. Phosph-Src correlated with complete
clinical response to the neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Higher levels of
phospho-Src were associated with a higher likelihood of complete
clinical response (p = 0.01). There was a numerical trend in
correlation between phospho-Src and pathologic complete response (p =
0.08).

Discussion: Phospho-Src may be an
important molecular biomarker of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
with doxorubicin and docetaxel in high-risk breast cancer.
Furthermore, as a potential new target for therapy, Src inhibitors in
combination with chemotherapy should be investigated in the treatment
of breast cancer.

## 1045

## Topoisomerase II-alpha gene amplification as a predictor of
responsiveness to anthracycline-containing chemotherapy in the Cancer
International Research Group 006 clinical trial of trastuzumab
(herceptin) in the adjuvant setting.

## Press MF, Bernstein L, Sauter G, Zhou JY, Eiermann W, Pienkowski
T, Crown J, Robert N, Bee V, Taupin H, Villalobos I, Seelig S, Pegram
M, Slamon DJ. University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA;
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; GBG,
Munchen, Germany; Maria Sklodowska-Curie (MSC) Centre, Warsaw, Poland;
ICORG, Dublin, Ireland; US Oncology, Dallas, TX; CIRG, Paris, France;
Abbott- Vysis, Inc., Downers Grove, IL; U.C.L.A., Los Angeles,
CA

Background: Topoisomerase II-alpha
(TOP2A) gene amplification, not HER2 amplification, may be the
predictive marker for responsiveness to anthracycline-based
chemotherapy since approximately 40% of HER2 amplified breast cancers
are also amplified for TOP2A, a known target for anthracyclines. In
this study we test this by evaluating TOP2A gene amplification in
breast cancer tissue from women entered in randomized clinical trials
of trastuzumab (Herceptin® in studies combined with
anthracycline-based chemotherapy. The control arm for these studies
received anthracycline-based therapy alone.

Methods and Results: We evaluated
TOP2A amplification by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in
breast cancer tissue from women entered in the Breast Cancer
International Research Group (BCIRG) 006 randomized clinical trial of
trastuzumab in the adjuvant setting. The HER2 gene amplification
status was prospectively determined by FISH in one of two centralized
laboratories prior to patient randomization. Two of the BCIRG 006
treatment arms were anthracycline containing (AC ->T and AC ->
TH) and accrued 1074 patients in each treatment arm. We assessed the
cumulative survival among the subgroups of patients defined by
treatment with or without trastuzumab and correlate this with TOP2A
status.

Conclusions: TOP2A gene amplification
in breast tumors of women with HER2 amplified breast cancer have been
reported to respond better to anthracycline-based chemotherapy. Since
the loci for TOP2A and HER2 are in close proximity, this could explain
and improve outcome (should it exist) in HER2 positive breast cancer
patients treated with anthracycline-based regimens.

## 1046

## Evaluation of thymidine phosphorylase (TP) in primary breast cancer
treated with docetaxel (D) and capecitabine (C).

## Schott AF, Thomas DG, Griffith KA, Smerage JB, Hayes DF.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
We performed a unique clinical trial to delineate drug metabolism
in breast tumors in patients, in order to 1) evaluate a hypothesized
mechanism of synergy between chemotherapy agents during neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer, and 2) explore whether induction of
drug metabolism is predictive of response to treatment. These goals
were accomplished by performing quantitative evaluation of TP in the
tumors of breast cancer patients receiving combination chemotherapy
with DC. TP is an enzyme that is required to convert C into
5-fluorouracil. TP induction by D is a proposed mechanism for the
observed preclinical synergy of DC combination therapy. Although the
DC regimen has shown promising efficacy in breast cancer, evaluation
of TP in the breast tumors of patients during treatment with this
combination has not been reported. The specific aims were to: 1)
Evaluate the technical barriers to TP analysis by quantitative
immunofluorescence (QIF) on research core biopsies done at baseline
and on day 5 of cycle 1; 2) Evaluate whether D increases TP protein
expression, as measured by QIF; and 3) Provide preliminary evidence of
whether induction of TP expression correlates with pathologic complete
response (pCR) to DC chemotherapy.

Methods: Eligible patients had Stage
I–III breast cancer and a measurable breast mass. Biopsies of the
breast tumor were performed using ultrasound guidance at baseline and
5 days after the first dose of D. Chemotherapy consisted of D
36 mg/m2 days 1, 8, 15 and capecitabine 2500 mg/day (later reduced to
2000 mg/day)days 5–21 of a 28d cycle, × 4 cycles. At the end of
chemotherapy patients had a core biopsy to evaluate for residual
disease, and if residual disease was present went on to receive AC × 4
cycles q 2 wks.

Results: 26 patients were enrolled
over 15 months. Grade 3 toxicities included hand-foot syndrome,
diarrhea, cellulitis, angina, hyperbilirubinemia, and cytokine release
syndrome. Eye tearing and nail changes were clinically significant but
did not reach grade 3. Three patients had to stop treatment due to
toxicity. Clinical response to DC was 15/20 (75%); pCR was seen in
2/20 (10%). Core biopsy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy was accurate in
determining pathologic CR in 21/22 (95%), with one false negative.
Serial biopsies were obtained on 25/26 patients, and QIF for TP was
evaluated in all specimens (96%). TP upregulation did not occur on day
5 after D administration, as measured by either IHC or QIF. TP
expression had no apparent relationship with pCR.

Conclusions: DC chemotherapy
exhibited increased toxicity compared to standard taxane regimens,
with a similar pCR rate. The study design was successful in that we
were able to perform and analyze 96% of patients’ serial biopsies for
the enzyme of interest. Core biopsy after neoadjuvant chemotherapy is
highly accurate in predicting pCR and will be used in subsequent
neoadjuvant study designs to evaluate pCR rate to experimental
therapies prior to standard chemotherapy.

## 1047

## Methods to optimize tissue collection and assay performance from
16-gauge core biopsies in the I-SPY Trial.

## Buxton MB, Bondi SM, Au A, Crothers J, Carey LA, DeMichele A,
Dorsey KC, Dressler L, Harden AT, Gray JW, Haqq CM, Madhavan S, Perou
C, Petricoin EF, I-SPY Clinical Investigators, Hylton NM, Esserman LJ.
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC;
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; National Cancer
Institute, Rockville, MD; US Food and Drug Administration, Rockville,
MD

Background: A multi-center trial (The
I-SPY TRIAL) of serial imaging and biopsies for women with ≥ 3 cm
tumors receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy is ongoing. The primary
objective is to identify surrogate markers of response that are
predictive of pathologic complete response and survival in Stage III
breast cancer. A central component is continual quality control and
improvement. We present our efforts to develop a system for
prospectively capturing and analyzing sample quality and optimize the
quantity and diversity of assays with 16-gauge core biopsies.

Methods: Four tissue samples (2
frozen and 2 paraffin) are collected at 3–4 time points [baseline
(T1), 24–96 hours after chemotherapy initiation (T2), inter-regimen,
if applicable (T3), and surgery (TS)] by a dedicated team of
clinicians at each institution. Frozen cores are cut and distributed
to 5 laboratories across the country for CGH, gene chip, gene
expression, and proteomic analysis. The paraffin cores are utilized
for IHC/FISH assays at 2 institutions. The NCI Center for
Bioinformatics has developed a Quality Indicator (QI) portal to assist
in monitoring the workflow process along with tissue sufficiency, RNA
and DNA quantity, and RNA, DNA, IHC/FISH, and tissue lysate array
quality.

Results: As of May 2005, 177/244
patients have been accrued, and 920 frozen and 920 paraffin cores
collected. We have processed 115 frozen samples from 48 patients (T1 =
48 samples, T2 = 48 TS = 19), and 363 paraffin samples from 121
patients (T1 = 121 samples, T2 = 115, T3 = 73, TS = 54). Invasive
cancer is present in 80% (38/38), 85% (41/48), and 58% (11/19) of the
frozen samples at T1, T2, and TS, respectively. For the paraffin
samples, invasive cancer is present in 84% (101/120) of the T1 samples
and 82% (94/115) of the T2 samples. For the expression arrays, 85%
(11/13) had acceptable quality array results. There is sufficient
tissue to conduct other analyses in 80–85% of the samples.

Conclusion: Systematic collection and
processing of the samples and monitoring and maintaining quality
control are critical for a complex biomarker study. Results indicate
that the quality of the tissue samples is high (≥ 80%). The QI portal,
although designed specifically for this trial, it is a model for
prospective sample quality assessment and clearly has future
applications for studies collecting biologic materials.

## 1048

## Predictive markers for 5-FU resistance in metastatic breast
cancer.

## Christensen AJ, Jensen LB, Balslev E, Nielsen KV, Poulsen TS,
Nielsen DL, Moller S, Mouridsen H, Ejlertsen B. Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark; DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark

Background: A clinically utilizable
predictive marker for the outcome with 5-FU containing treatment has
not been developed. The efficacy of 5-FU is mediated through a
functioning thymidylate synthase pathway and ought to be blocked by
absence or reduced function of key enzymes in the pathway. We used
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to identify copy number
changes in three candidate genes from the thymidylate cycle.

Material and Methods: Two groups of
patients were selected from a series of breast cancer patients treated
with capecitabine for metastatic disease: one group without clinical
benefit (disease progression in less than 3 months) and a second group
with clinical benefit (time to progression greater than 6 months).
Archival tissue from the primary tumor of 29 patients was collected
and analyzed for gene copy number (GCN) changes by FISH technique in
the 3 genes (TYMS, DHFR and ECGF1) involved in the primary
incorporation of 5-FU into DNA.

Results: The FISH analysis was
technically successful for 24 of the 29 tissue samples. All 15
patients with a clinical benefit (TTP>6 months) of capecitabine had
a normal copy number of the 3 genes in the tumor tissue. Nine patients
had no clinical benefit (TTP<3 months), and 7 of these 9 patients
had deletion of at least one of the 3 genes in the tumor tissue. This
distribution is highly significant (p <0.002) 

Nine of the patients analyzed previously received 5-FU containing
adjuvant treatment. Five of these had a TTP longer than 6 months and a
normal GCN.

Discussion: These preliminary data
suggests that a 3 gene FISH assay may predict resistance to 5-FU
treatment. The resistant genotype was identified in the primary tumor
and resistance to 5-FU therapy seems to be highly preserve.D

## 1049

## Clinical characteristics and molecular markers predicting the
development and outcome of breast cancer brain metastases.

## Melisko ME, Chew K, Baehner F, Moore D, Sneed PK, Rugo HS.
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Background: Brain metastases (BM) are
an increasingly important problem as patients live longer with
metastatic breast cancer. Data suggests that patients with hormone
receptor (HR) negative or HER2/neu overexpressing cancers are more
likely to develop BM, but other molecular characteristics that are
associated with BM are not well understood. Since treatment options
are limited, identifying patients at greatest risk of developing BM
might allow for better prevention strategies. Understanding molecular
markers associated with BM may also offer insight into prognosis and
facilitate the development of targeted treatments.

Methods: We reviewed the treatment
and clinical outcomes of 74 patients with BM who received oncology
care at our institution between 1997 and 2005. We retrieved archival
tissue from 8 resected BM, from the primary breast tumors of
approximately 50 patients who developed BM, and from 50 control
patients with metastatic disease who were matched for age and HR
status but did not develop BM. Immunohistochemical staining for
HER2/neu, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), EGFRvIII, pAKT,
cyclin D1, and platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) was performed to
determine if these molecular markers differ between resected BM and
the primary tumors of patients with or without BM.

Results: The median length of
follow-up from initial diagnosis of breast cancer was 74 months. At
last follow-up, 19 patients were alive with median time of 24.8 months
(range 4.6 to 76.4 months) since the diagnosis of BM. The median
survival for the entire group after the diagnosis of BM was 12 months.
58% of patients had tumors that overexpressed HER-2/neu, and 53% were
HR negative. There was a trend towards shorter time to development of
BM for patients with HER-2 positive vs. HER-2 negative disease (mean
41.1 ± 5.4 vs. 60.9 ± 9.7 months, p=0.06). There was no difference in
survival after the diagnosis of BM for patients with HER-2 positive
vs. HER-2 negative disease (23.6 ± 3.5 vs. 14.2 ± 2.0 months, p=0.41,
log rank) or for patients with HR positive vs. HR negative cancers
(22.2 ± 2.6 months vs. 10.3 ± 2.5 months, p=0.27, log rank). Median
survival was prolonged in patients who were treated with stereotactic
radiosurgery (SRS) at any time compared to patients who did not
undergo SRS (22.2 ± 3.2 vs. 11±2.7 months, p=0.025, log rank).
Correlation between molecular markers, development of BM, and clinical
outcomes is under analysis.

Conclusion: In this series, HER2/neu
overexpression did not shorten survival after brain metastases, and
treatment with SRS at any time was associated with improved survival.
New determinants of risk and prognosis are needed. Results of
immunohistochemical studies and correlation with clinical data will be
presente.D

## 1050

## Recurrence in ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) after complete microsurgical local excision is
predicted by a high proliferation index and HER2/c-erbB2
status.

## Wilson GR, Rimouche S, Barnes N, Knox F, Swindell R, Bundred NJ.
South Manchester Acute Hospitals Trust, Manchester, United
Kingdom

Background: Factors predicting
recurrence following breast conserving surgery (BCS) with clear
margins for Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) are largely
unknown.

Aim: To determine recurrence rates
and predictors of recurrence risk in patients who underwent BCS with
clear margins (>1mm) for pure DCIS.

Method: We reviewed all patients who
underwent BCS (n=305) for pure DCIS and then identified 232 patients
with clear margins to examine factors predicting recurrence. Estrogen
receptor status (ER), HER2, HER4 expression and Ki67 levels were
measured by immunohistochemistry. A HER2/HER4 score ≥ 2 was considered
positive.

Results: In the group overall (n=305)
margin status was a highly significant recurrence predictor
(p=<0.0001). Overall recurrence was 10.7% (25/232) in DCIS with
clear margins (median recurrence time 29.5 months) at 5 years compared
to 49% (24/49) DCIS with involved margins (median recurrence time
22.5 months). Tumour grade, ER status, tumour size and age at
diagnosis did not predict recurrence.
Using log rank analysis in the group of women with clear margins
after BCS (n=232), high epithelial proliferation (measured by Ki67,
p=0.0057) and HER2 positivity (p=0.036) were associated with increased
recurrence. There was a trend towards recurrence in HER4 negative DCIS
(p=0.074). In the ER positive DCIS group, treatment with Tamoxifen had
a 24.5% lower recurrence rate at 5 years (p=0.048) compared to no
adjuvant treatment 

Conclusion: HER2 positivity and high
proliferation predicts recurrence in DCIS after BCS with clear
margins. Small molecular inhibitors targeting HER2 may be beneficial
in reducing recurrence.

## 1051

## Identification and multicentric validation of a metagenebased
molecular predictor.

## Bertucci F, Borie N, Treilleux I, Deraco S, Martinec A, Debono
S, Jacquemier J, Fert V, Maraninchi D, Geneve J, Hermitte F, Bachelot
T, Viens P, Birnbaum D. Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France;
IPSOGEN, Marseille, France; Centre Leon Berard, Lyon, France;
Federation Francaise des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer, Paris,
France

Background: The significant genetic
heterogeneity among breast cancer patients is a primary obstacle to
effective clinical diagnosis and management. Emerging technologies
based on gene expression profiling (GEP) may provide clinically useful
information to improve the management of breast cancer. GEP has been
used to refine classification of previously undistinguishable tumor
subgroups, and predict prognosis and response to anticancer agents.
Here we report a multicentric GEP study to identify and validate a
metagene-based molecularpredictor in order to improve tumor
classification and predict patients most likely to respond to standard
chemotherapy.

Material and Methods: 451 patients
with early breast cancer treated with adjuvant anthracycline-based
chemotherapy were selected from Institut Paoli-Calmettes (IPC),
Marseille, Centre Leon Berard (CLB), Lyon and PACS01 clinical trial
from Federation Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer
(FNCLCC), Paris. RNAs were analyzed on 10K nylon cDNA microarrays.
Several metagenes for tumor classification were identified based on
adjusted t-test analysis and hierarchical clustering on an
identification set. A Cox-based method was used to find predictors
able to discriminate patients with favorable outcome (no metastasis)
after chemotherapy, by combining validated metagenes with clinical
factors on an identification set of 159 patients treated with
anthracyclines (IPCa). The stability and robustness of these
predictors were assessed on three different and independent validation
sets (IPCb n=54, CLB n=110, FNCLCC n=128). The best predictor was
compared with the Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI).

Results: A predictor was identified
on patients treated with chemotherapy (anthracyclines). This predictor
was based on a linear combination involving metagenes and clinical
factors, i.e. A*(metagene 1) + B*(metagene 2) + C*(clinical factors).
It classified patients in two groups with different outcome. The
robustness of this predictor was then confirmed on the three
validation sets of patients. Our predictor compared favorably with the
NPI, improving the classification of the low-risk patients.

Discussion: Our metagene-based
molecular predictor is highly efficient to discriminate patients with
favorable outcome under adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy. It
uses a validated combination of genes known for their biological
relevance, and is valid irrespective of the clinical centre.
Additional clinical studies and technical developments are ongoing to
translate this new tool into a test designed for routine clinical
practice.

## 1052

## Predictivity of serum HER-2/NEU and EGFR concentrations for
clinical outcome to the monocloncal anti-HER/2-neu antibody trastuzumab
plus combination chemotherapy in metastatic breast cancer.

## Lueftner DI, Henschke P, Amin R, Geppert R, Wernecke KD,
Possinger K. Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany; Institut für
Medizinische Biometrie, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin,
Germany

Introduction: The role of the shed
antigen of HER-2/neu in serum (sHER-2/neu) as prediction and
monitoring parameter for the management of trastuzumab therapy was
clarified in the last years. The impact of EGFR, an important receptor
dimerization partner of HER-2/neu, and its serum antigen (sEGFR)
remains unclear. We evaluated sHER-2/neu and sEGFR in metastatic
breast cancer patients on trastuzumab plus combination chemotherapies
and correlated the baseline- and longitudinal results to clinical
outcome.

Patients and methods: sHER-2/neu and
sEGFR levels were measured in serial samples from 53 patients with
metastatic breast cancer with complete outcome assessment. The initial
serum sample was obtained prior to initiation of trastuzumab therapy,
followed by at least 3 serial samples. sHER-2/neu levels were measured
using the Bayer Immuno 1TM HER-2/neu assay
with an upper limit of normal of 15 ng/mL. sEGFR was measured using
standardized enzyme-linked immunoassays with a cut-off of
62 ng/ml.

Results: 24.5% (13/53) of the
patients had an objective response (CR/PR) to trastuzumab plus
combination chemotherapy, clinical benefit (CR/PR/SD) could be
obtained in 75.5% (40/53) of the patients. Type of chemotherapy and
demographic data had no influence on clinical outcome. We found that
69.8% of the patients had elevated levels of sHER-2/neu at baseline.
21.6% of the women had increased sEGFR levels. There was a strong
correlation between sHER-2/neu positivity and dominant site of
involved organ systems. Patients with visceral metastatatic disease
(especially with liver metastases) had statistically significant
higher sHER-2/neu levels (p = 0.003) but had similar clinical outcome
as compared to patients without visceral metastases. There was no
difference in the response rate (RR) between sHER-2/neu-negative
patients (20.0%) and sHER-2/neu-positive patients (26.3%; p = 0.78).
However, the progression-free interval (PFI) and the duration of
response (DR) were longer for sHER-2/neu-positive patients (mean 35
and 11 weeks, resp.) in comparison to sHER-2/neu-negative patients
(mean 29 and 5 weeks, p = 0.1 and 0.4, resp). RR of sEGFR subgroups
were not different (p = 0.37), also PFI was equal in both subgroups.
92.3% of the patients with clinical response to Herceptin had sEGFR
levels <62 ng/ml. Further subgrouping according to sHER- 2/neu and
EGFR levels did not reveal any benefit for any subset of
patients.

Conclusions: Our data confirm that
sHER-2/neu-positive patients show pronounced benefit from
Herceptin-based therapy, especially in patients with visceral disease.
SEGFR baseline concentrations don’t help to further subspecify
metastatic breast cancer patients who might benefit from trastuzumab
therapy. This fits into data from other solid tumors showing that EGFR
determination is not essential even for EGFR-targeted
therapies.

## 1053

## Validity of DNA-methylation marker PITX2 to predict risk of
recurrence in lymph node-negative hormone receptor-positive breast cancer
patients: a transfer study.

## Markert-Hahn C, Jaeger S, Dessauer A, Gehrke R, Krause F,
Vogel-Ziebolz S, Schwope I, Hartmann O, Lesche R, Nimmrich I, Maier S,
Harbeck N, Mueller V, Ross JS, Gruetzmann R, Kristiansen G, Margossian
A, Hartmann A, Golouh R, Paradiso A. Oncology, Penzberg, Germany;
Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany; Epigenomics AG, Berlin,
Germany; Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; University
Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; Albany Medical College,
Albany; Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany; Charité,
Berlin, Germany; Halitus Instituto Médico, Buenos Aires, Argentina;
University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany; Institute of
Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia; National Cancer Institute, Bari,
Italy
We have recently shown that DNA-hypermethylation of PITX2 predicts
outcome in steroid receptor positive breast cancer patients treated
with adjuvant tamoxifen monotherapy. The marker was identified in two
studies using a methylation microarray and fresh frozen samples, and
afterwards, confirmed on paraffin-embedded tissues (PET) using
quantitative methylation PCR (QM-PCR).
For the development of an assay system, reproducibility among
different laboratories and different operators is highly important. To
assess the robustness of PITX2 as breast cancer risk prediction
marker, a transfer study was conducted where the complete assay
workflow was transferred from Epigenomics’ laboratory to a Roche
Molecular Diagnostics’ laboratory. Methods for DNA isolation from PET
as well as bisulfite treatment were applied without significant
changes. QM-PCR was kept constant regarding the CpG sites covered by
the detection probes but the instrument platform was switched from an
ABI 7700 instrument to the Roche COBAS TaqMan 48 platform. Experiments
were performed in parallel at Roche and Epigenomics.
The transfer study was performed in three parts to separate
technical from clinical issues.
During the first two parts PCR (using clean target DNA mixtures)
and workflow efficiency (using breast cancer PET samples without
follow up data) were examined. The concordance of methylation ratios
between both laboratories was very good (correlation coefficient was
0.92).
In the third part of the study we assessed a clinical cohort with
follow- up data. 447 samples of patients with breast cancer that were
hormone receptor positive, lymph node-negative and Tamoxifen treated
were examined using the transferred workflow at Roche laboratory. The
same samples had been previously analyzed at Epigenomics’ laboratory.
The methylation values again correlated well between the two
laboratories (correlation coefficient was 0.9). Detailed statistical
analysis of the results will be presented at the meeting.
This study – conducted by an independent laboratory - further
supports that PITX2 is a highly robust and reproducible marker for
outcome prediction in breast cancer.

## 1054

## Effect of systemic therapy following surgery on outcome in patients
diagnosed with an ipsilateral breast tumor recurrence.

## Naik R, Gold E, Chuang E, Moore A, Osborne M, Simmons R, Swistel
A, Tousimis E, Mazumdar M, Bryant K, Vahdat L. Weill Medical College
(WMC) of Cornell University, New York, NY

Background: Ipsilateral breast tumor
recurrence (IBTR) after breast conservation surgery is associated with
high rates of local recurrence and systemic metastases. The effect of
systemic therapy after surgical salvage therapy for IBTR is
unknown.

Methods: A retrospective chart review
was performed at WMC. Information on original tumor diagnosis of
breast cancer and invasive IBTR was obtained. Tumor size, nodal
status, ER/PR and HER-2/neu of each original and recurrent tumor were
recorde.D Systemic therapy data were collected including type of
chemotherapy regimen (non-anthracycline, anthracycline-containing,
taxane-containing or both) and hormonal therapy (SERM or aromatase
inhibitor). Disease-free (DFS) and overall survival (OS) estimates
were calculated using Kaplan-Meier methodology, and pair-wise
comparisons on therapies were made using log-rank test for categorical
variables.

Results: Three-thousand eighty charts
of women diagnosed with breast cancer were reviewed, and 129 (4%)
IBTRs were identifie.D Median time from original diagnosis to IBTR was
5.4 years (yrs) (range 0.5 to 21.1 yrs). Salvage mastectomy was
performed in 83% and reconservation with lumpectomy in 17%. Median
followup was 3.3 yrs 

Trends for improvement in DFS were observed with chemotherapy
regimens containing an anthracycline +/− taxane. There was no apparent
added benefit of hormonal therapy; however, the numbers analyzed are
small.

Conclusion: The DFS/OS observed at a
median follow-up of 3.3 years is below that of recent Intergroup
trials. Aggressive multiagent systemic therapy may be needed to
improve outcome for some patients with an invasive IBTR. However,
long-term followup is necessary to determine the optimal systemic
therapy for these patients.

## 1055

## Identification of prediction marker for drug response in gene
expression analysis combined with the pharmacodynamic profile in breast
cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

## Shimizu C, Shimoyama T, Takeda M, Nishio K, Hasegawa T, Ando M,
Katsumata N, Fujiwara Y. National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Marshall Islands; National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan;
National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan

Background: Anthracyclines and
taxanes are the key drugs in the treatment of breast cancer.
Prediction of sensitivity and toxicities of these drugs remains
investigating. We monitored gene expressions in tumor tissue and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of breast cancer patients
who received neoadjuvant 5FU/epirubicin/ cyclophosphamide followed by
weekly paclitaxel (FEC+T) to analyze the pharmacodynamic
activity.

Methods: Preclinically, 1084 genes
that have known or suspected roles in breast tumorgenesis or
pharmacodynamics of these drugs and that are expressed in lymphoid
cells were selected. To identify the moleculer profile of tumor tissue
and PBMC and their specific changes associated with FEC+T treatment,
we compared the gene expression profiles of total 178 samples obtained
from breast cancer patients before and after treatment. (49:
pretreatment tumor biopsy, 18: excised tumor after chemotherapy, 57:
pretreatment PBMC, 54: treated PBMC) and generated the expression
profiles related to drug sensitivity.

Results: Using an odds ratio (OR) and
paired t-test (OR>2 and P<0.01), we selected 31 significant
genes that correlated with the pathological response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy from 35 pre-treatment tumor biopsy samples as a
training-set. This process was validated by bootstrap Q–Q plotting
method as ultimate cross-validation test. Alternatively, we identified
the drug-modulated genes of tumor and PBMC as pharmacodynamic markers
that significantly changed in expression level after the
administration of chemotherapy. We compared pharmacodynamic gene
profiles of tumors that showed a partial remission and tumors that did
not respond to chemotherapy. In further analysis, we tried to
represent the change in the expression profile of the tumor by
pharmacodynamic profiles of PBMC and combined the data with 31
significant genes profiles of tumor for the prediction of drug
sensitivity. Tumor sampling as test set is on going.Conclusion This study has identified
pharmacogenomic surrogate marker of PBMC that may predict tumor
response to FEC+T. These markers may increase the accuracy of response
prediction by applying to the gene expression profiles of tumor
samples.
This study is supported by Health and Labour Science Research
Grants, Research on Advanced Medical Technology
(H14-Toxico-007).

## 1056

## Association of MRI morphological phenotype with early and final
responses in AC followed by taxane + carboplatin +/− trastuzumab
regimen.

## Su MY, Yu H, Mehta RS, Schubbert T, Hsiang D, Carpenter PM,
Nalcioglu O. UC, Irvine, CA; UCIMC, Orange, CA
Introduction: It has been shown that different MRI phenotype in
breast cancer may show different response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
with the AC regimen. We investigated whether the morphological pattern
is associated with response to dose-dense AC (given every 2 weeks with
growth factor support), followed by Taxane + Carboplatin ± Trastuzumab
regimen (TCa ± H). Based on the 3D morphological pattern of the
lesions, they were classified into four types: I- circumscribed mass;
II- nodular pattern; IIIdiffuse pattern, and IV- septal pattern. The
relationship between the response to AC and to TCa ± H was also
investigated, and the benefit with addition of Herceptin was
determine.D
Materials and Methods: Forty-one patients (31 to 75 years old) who
elected to receive neoadjuvant chemotherapy were include.D Each
patient received a baseline MRI before treatment, then several
follow-ups during the course of treatment, and a final MRI before
surgery. The response was assessed based on the RECIST criteria, using
the longest dimension determined on the maximum intensity projections
(MIPs) generated from subtraction MR images.
Results: The morphological phenotype was not correlated with
response to dose-dense AC. The response rates were similar in all 4
types, 14/22 (64%) for type-I (mass), 7/11 (64%) for type-II
(nodular), 2/3 (67%) for type-III (diffuse), and 2/4 (50%) for type-IV
(septal). All patients showing greater than 15% reduction after 1 or 2
cycles AC were responders after 4 cycles. Following AC, 14 patients
completed TCa treatment and 8/14 were complete responders on final MRI
(7 were AC responders, the other unknown). Nine patients completed TCa
+ H treatment after AC, and 8/9 were complete responders on MRI (3
were non-responders to AC).
Discussion: We did not find association between morphological
phenotype with response, possibly due to the more aggressive
dose-dense setting thus more effective. The early response after 1–2
cycles AC predicts the response after 4 cycles AC. The response to AC
was not associated with response to TCa + H. Patients who were
non-responder to AC could still achieve a complete response to TCa + H
on MRI. On the contrary, the response to AC might enhance the response
to TCa without H. The addition of Herceptin in Her-2/neu positive
patients enhanced the treatment outcome 

## 1057

## Elevated serum MCP-1 level is associated with favorable clinical
prognostic factors and immune response and can be induced by a HER2/neu
(E75) vaccine in breast cancer patients.

## Dehqanzada ZA, Storrer CE, Foley RJ, Harris KA, Jama YH, Shriver
CD, Ponniah S, Peoples GE. Walter Reed Army Medical Center,
Washington, DC; USUHS, Bethesda, MD
INTRODUCTION: The role of monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) in
breast cancer (BCa) is unclear given its potential to originate from
the tumor or immune cells. We have shown that serum MCP-1 levels are
increased in BCa patients compared to controls [131.6 pg/ml vs.
50.3 pg/ml, respectively (P=0.001)] and in vaccinated patients
compared to their pre-vaccination sera [217.0 pg/ml vs. 145.8 pg/ml,
respectively (P=0.003)]. To further elucidate the role of MCP-1 in
BCa, we investigated serum MCP- 1 amounts in BCa patients and
correlated them with clinicopathologic parameters and immune response
to the E75 vaccine.
METHODS: The LUMINEX multiplex platform was used to measure the
serum MCP-1 levels of 34 BCa patients, pre- and post-vaccination with
a HER2/neu (E75) vaccine and
GM-CSF. Clinical prognostic variables were collected. Vaccine-specific
immunologic responses were monitored using HLA-A2:Ig dimer assays
measuring %E75-specific CD8+T-cells. Pre-existing antitumor immunity
was defined as >0.3%.
RESULTS: Serum MCP-1 levels >250pg/mL (MCP-High) correlated with
favorable prognostic variables. MCP-High patients, compared to MCP-Low
(<250pg/ml) patients, demonstrated later onset of disease (63.9 vs.
53.8 years, p= 0.01), lower incidence of stage 2 or above disease (0%
vs. 55%, p= 0.03), fewer nodal metastasis (0% vs. 45%, p= 0.01) and
therefore, less chemotherapy (10% vs. 76%, p= 0.002). MCP-High
patients had increased levels of E75-specific T-cell immunity when
compared to the MCPLow group (69% vs. 21%, p= 0.02). Interestingly,
MCP-Low patients, as compared to the MCP-High group, demonstrated
higher inducible levels of MCP-1 (41% vs. 0%, p= 0.001)
postvaccination. MCP-Low patients with >50% post-vaccination serum
MCP-1 increase (Response-High) had the worst clinical prognostic
variables as compared to Response-Low group (<50% increase in serum
MCP-1 level post-vaccination). Response-High patients also had more
poorly differentiated tumors (86% vs. 33%, p= 0.03), higher stage 2 or
above disease (86% vs. 40%, p= 0.04) and higher percentage of tumors
larger than 2 centimeters (71% vs. 7%, p= 0.01). Additionally, MCP-Low
patients with >30% post-vaccination MCP-1 increase also
demonstrated significant increases in E75-specific CD8+T-cells (0 vs.
0.32%, p=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: We have linked high serum MCP-1 levels in BCa with
favorable prognostic variables and increased E75-specific Tcell
immunity. Our results suggest an immune origin for MCP-1 in BCa that
may reflect endogenous anti-tumor reactivity. Most importantly, E75
vaccination induces the largest MCP-1 response in the cohort with
unfavorable clinico-pathologic variables. Therefore, low serum MCP-1
levels may help identify patients with worse prognosis and those most
likely to benefit from this vaccination strategy.

## 1058

## The role of the angiogenic marker, endoglin, as a predictor of
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast cancer.

## Beresford MJ, Ah-See M, Daley F, Richman P, Harris A, Makris A.
Mount Vernon Cancer Centre, Northwood, Middlesex, United Kingdom;
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom

Background: Endoglin (CD105) is a
cell membrane gycoprotein which is over-expressed in endothelial cells
of tissues undergoing neovascularisation and has been shown to play a
role in promoting angiogenesis in breast cancer. Previous studies have
shown that although microvessel density as measured by CD34 monoclonal
antibodies is reduced after chemotherapy, neither baseline CD34 nor
alpha-smooth muscle actin (a marker of mature blood vessels) can
predict for response to chemotherapy. This study examines whether a
marker of new vessel formation may be of predictive value.

Material and Methods: 32 women
(median age 50, range 29–70) received 6 cycles of 3-weekly neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (5- fluorouracil, epirubicin and cyclophosphamide) for
operable breast cancer. Immunohistochemical staining using CD105 was
performed on pre-treatment biopsies and post-treatment surgical
specimens. Individual CD105 positive microvessels were counted on 10
random fields at x200 magnification (or in the case of small biopsies
for all fields; range of fields = 4–10; median 10). Median counts were
correlated with clinical and pathological response using the Mann-
Whitney U-test.

Results: 23 of 32 patients (72%) had
a clinical response, 13 (41%) had a pathological response. On
pre-treatment biopsies, median CD105-positive vessel counts were 4.5
and 5 per field for clinical responders and non-responders
respectively (range 0–18.5) showing no correlation with clinical
response (p = 0.44). For pathological response assessment there was a
significant correlation with non-response, with a median CD105 count
of 4 per field for responders and 6 for non-responders (range 0–18.5,
p = 0.04). Post-chemotherapy counts were lower in all groups: clinical
responders = 2.5, clinical non-responders = 2.25 (p = 0.63),
pathological responders = 0, pathological non-responders = 4.5 (p =
0.04).

Discussion: Breast tumour
neovascularisation measured by CD105 staining is reduced after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Assessment of CD105 staining on
pre-treatment biopsies can predict for eventual pathologic response
with a lower count being more favourable.

## 1059

## Early predictive value of positron emission tomography with
[18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose for the pathologic complete response of primary
tumor in breast cancer patients treated by neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

## Berriolo-Riedinger A, Coudert B, Riedinger JM, Touzery C,
Toubeau M, Arnould L, Boichot C, Causeret S, Brunotte F, Fumoleau P.
Centre G.F.Leclerc, Dijon, France, Metropolitan

Background: To determine the
predictive value of early [18F]- fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron
emission tomography (PET) for the pathologic complete response (pCR)
in breast cancer patients treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

Patients and Methods: FDG uptake of
breast lesions, evaluated by maximal Standard Uptake Value (SUVmax)
corrected by body surface area and glycemia, measured after the first
course of chemotherapy was compared with the baseline in 19 patients
(50±9 years) with non inflammatory, non metastatic and locally
advanced breast cancer. Histopathologic response was determined after
completion of chemotherapy (4 or 6 courses) on surgical resection
specimens according to the Sataloff classification. Patients were
classified in two groups: pCR (N = 5) and non complete response (pNCR)
(N = 14).

Results: None of the clinical,
pathologic or biologic prognostic factors were predictive of the
response (age, T, N, histological grade, ER, PR and HER2). No
significant difference of the baseline SUVmax was found between the
pCR and pNCR patients (mean = 0.49 vs
0.65 mM.m2.kg−1.L−1).
On the contrary, the SUVmax decrease was significantly greater in the
pCR group (−82.1% vs . 14.2%; p = 0.006). A SUVmax decrease below 50%
of the baseline (threshold calculated by ROC analysis) identified the
pCR patients with a sensitivity of 80%, a specificity of 93%, an
accuracy of 84%, a Positive Predictive Value of 80% and a Negative
Predictive Value of 93%.

Conclusion: These preliminary results
suggest that in breast cancer patients the FDG-PET uptake decrease
after the first course of neoadjuvant chemotherapy is an early
predictor of the pathologic complete response. Updated results with
more patients will be presented at the meeting.

## 1060

## Predicting distant metastasis after local recurrence (failure) in
women treated by breast conserving treatment.

## Tchou J, Greshock J, Rebbeck T, Weber BL, Solin L. Abramson
Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA

Background: Most local recurrences
after breast conserving treatment (BCT) are treated by salvage
mastectomy. Local recurrence may be a marker for distant metastasis or
a source for secondary dissemination.

Materials and Methods: The charts of
1,687 women with Stage I or II invasive breast cancer treated by BCT
between 1977 and 2002 were reviewed. A matched case-control selection
was done where cases were defined as women with local recurrence as
first event. Controls were women without local recurrence matched to
within one year of the initial case diagnosis and matched for at least
the same length of follow up. Of the 149 women with local recurrence,
49 also had distant metastasis. Univariate analysis was
performe.D

Results: Univariate analysis showed
the following variables significant in predicting local recurrence:
positive margins on primary excision (p = 0.0407), history of prior
malignancy (p = 0.0164), tumors detected on physical examination only
(p = 0.0115), and younger age (p = 0.0002). Other variables examined
including tumor size, histologic grade, nodal status, and hormone
receptor status were not statistically significant (p>0.05).
Distant metastasis was associated with local recurrence (p<0.0001).
The strongest predictors of distant metastasis in women with a local
recurrence were those with primary tumors detected on physical
examination only (p = 0.0029) and positive margins on primary excision
(p = 0.0478).

Discussion: In addition to confirming
that young age and positive margins of resection as significant
factors predicting local recurrence, we have also shown a significant
correlation of local recurrence with distant metastasis in this
case-control analysis. Interestingly, women with local recurrence who
had primary tumors detected on physical examination only are also more
likely to have distant metastasis.

## 1061

## Gene expression profiles in white blood cells of patients with
breast cancer - correlation with detectability of tumor by mammographic
screening.

## Yang Y, Heckman C, Shriver CD, Becker T, Liebman MN, Brzeski H.
Windber Research Institute, Windber, PA; Walter Reed Army Medical
Center, Washington, DC

Introduction: Mammography screening
is one of the most effective tools for the early detection of breast
cancer. Joensuu et al published results (JAMA Sep 2004) indicating
that patients had an improved 10-year disease-free survival if their
cancerous tumors were first detected by mammography screening versus
clinical- or breast-self exam. We compared gene expression profiles in
peripheral blood leukocytes of patients with mammographically versus
non-mammographically detected breast cancers, in an attempt to
identify if any molecular differences might be detected to account for
the Joensuu findings.

Material and Methods: All CBCP
patients with a diagnosis of breast disease have blood samples drawn
into PAXGene (RNA stabilization) tubes. At WRI, RNA from white blood
cells was isolated and used for microarray analysis using CodeLink
UniSet Human 20K I chips. The clinical diagnoses were examined
retrospectively and 23 patients with tumors which fit the criteria
used by Joensuu et al (namely, unilateral invasive breast carcinoma,
greater than 1 cm in size and node-negative) were identifie.D
Retrospective examination of mammograms from these patients indicated
that 6 had tumors that were detectable by mammography screening (MMG)
while 17 were not detectable by this method (NONMMG). The raw signal
intensities from the chips were imported into GeneSpring microarray
data analysis software (Agilent Technologies) and normalized using
global normalization. Differentially expressed genes were identified
based on a t-test and used for hierarchical clustering.

Results: We identified 40 genes that
showed differential expression (p<0.01) between MMG and NONMMG
samples. Using these 40 genes, we were able to separate all 23 samples
into two cluster groups. One cluster was composed of 15 NONMMG samples
(88% of all NONMMG samples used in the analysis) while the other group
contained all 6 MMG samples and 2 NONMMG samples (12% of all NONMMG
samples used in the analysis).

Discussion: Microarray results
relating to expression of 19982 genes in white blood cells from cancer
patients enable us to identify genes that were differentially
expressed between MMG and NONMMG groups. Hierarchical clustering using
these genes was able to separate the samples into two groups with a
high degree of accuracy (91%). The results point to the potential use
of microarrays as a diagnostic tool. We are expanding the sample size
for further investigation.

## 1062

## Expression levels of estrogen receptor (ER) gene and three
ER-related genes in metastatic ER-positive breast cancer compared with
response to endocrine therapy.

## Lai S, Valero V, Booster D, Fiterman DJ, Pusztai L, Symmans WF.
UT M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background: For stage IV breast
cancer, the efficacy of hormonal treatment varies among individuals
whose breast cancer cells express estrogen receptor by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Expression of ER gene and ER-related genes
may reflect endocrine sensitivity of metastatic disease.

Material and Methods: Frozen tissue
was obtained from twenty ER-positive surgically resected metastases.
Sixteen patients had received prior endocrine therapy and 15 had
received chemotherapy. Gene expression (mRNA) levels of estrogen
receptor-alpha (ESR1), GATA3, carbonic anhydrase XII (CA12), and Bcl-2
were measured using real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction. Expression levels were dichotomized about the median as high
or low. Fourteen patients were subsequently treated with endocrine
therapy alone, and followed to disease progression.

Results: High Bcl-2 gene expression
predicted a significantly improved progression-free survival (Wilcoxon
test, p=0.01). High expression levels of ESR1, GATA3, and CA12 were
not significantly associated with progression-free survival.

Discussion: High Bcl-2 gene
expression in ER-positive metastatic breast cancer is associated with
longer time to progression during endocrine treatment.

## 1063

## E7389, A Novel Anti-Tubulin, is Safe and Effective in Patients with
Refractory Breast Cancer.

## Silberman SL, O’Shaughnessy J, Vahdat L, Fabian C, Forero L,
Rivera R, Chandrawansa K, Heiskala M, Shapiro G, Meneses N, Fields SZ.
Eisai Medical Research, Inc, Ridgefield Park, NJ; Baylor Sammons
Cancer Ctr, Dallas, TX; Weill Cornell Breast Ctr, New York, NY; Univ
Kansas Cancer Ctr, Kansas City, KS; Harrington Cancer Ctr, Amarillo,
TX; US Oncology, Dallas, TX

Introduction: E7389 is a structurally
simplified synthetic analog of Halichondrin B with a novel
anti-tubulin activity characterized by sequestration of tubulin into
aggregates and prevention of microtubule growth.

Methods: E7389 was evaluated in a
Phase II trial as monotherapy for patients with refractory breast
cancer (≥2 prior chemotherapy regimens, prior anthracycline + taxane,
progression within 6 months) as an IV bolus dose of
1.4 mg/m2 on Days 1, 8, 15 of a 28- Day
cycle as determined in Phase I (Synold, et al Proc ASCO 2005). No
premedication was required. The primary endpoint was response rate.
Since -tubulin isotypes were shown to predict sensitivity
of breast cancer cell lines to E7389 (Agoulnik, et al, Proc ASCO
2005), a secondary objective was to explore the relationship of
 -tubulin isotypes and related proteins (e.g.
stathmin, microtubule-associated protein 4).

Results: By June 30, 2005, 30
patients were enrolled, and 29 had received treatment, and had
completed their 2nd cycle of treatment for
which their end of 2nd cycle tumor
assessment was available. Median age was 54 yrs (range 36–73), ECOG
performance status 0–1, ER+ and/or PR+ (18 patients), HER2/neu 3+ (3
patients). All patients had prior anthracycline and taxane therapy,
and a median of 4 prior chemotherapies (range 2–12). Prior hormonal
therapy and experimental/biologic compounds were reported for 91% and
27% of patients, respectively. Safety: The major toxicity related to study drug was
myelosuppression: 1 patient had grade 3 febrile neutropenia, and 17
had grade 3 or 4 neutropenia. The other grade 3 toxicities included
nausea (1), fatigue (1), dehydration (1), arthralgias (2), dyspnea (2)
and peripheral neuropathy (1), this last in a patient who had a
pre-existing drug-related neuropathy.

Efficacy: There were eight partial
responses (PR) using RECIST criteria out of 29 evaluable patients,
with six currently confirmed at cycle 4. For three patients the best
response has been stable disease (range 4–7 cycles). Based on
disruption of dosing at day 15 for many patients, a Day 1,8 q21 day
schedule is currently being evaluated. An update on efficacy, safety
and new dosing schedule will be provided, as well as an evaluation of
 -tubulin isotypes as a possible biomarker for
sensitivity to E7389.

Conclusions: Based on the safety and
efficacy shown to date in this refractory breast cancer population,
E7389 may be a useful treatment option for breast cancer patients
after multiple prior therapies.

## 1064

## A multicenter phase II study of preoperative epirubicin,
cyclophosphamide (EC) followed by paclitaxel (P) plus trastuzumab (T) in
Her2 positive primary breast cancer.

## Untch M, Stoeckl D, Konecny G, Kreienberg R, Thommsen C, Camara
O, Moebus V, Kuehn T, DuBois A, Lueck HJ, Gitsch G, Fasching P.
Klinikum Grosshadern, University of Munich, Munich, Germany;
University of California, Los Angeles, CA; University Hospital, Ulm,
Germany; University Hospital Halle - Wittenberg, Halle, Germany;
University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany; Staedtische Kliniken
Frankfurt Hoechst, Frankfurt, Germany; Kreiskrankenhaus Gifhorn,
Gifhorn, Germany; Horst - Schmidt - Kliniken, Wiesbaden, Germany;
University Hospital, Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany; University Hospital
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen,
Germany

Background: Trastuzumab in
combination with chemotherapy offers clinical benefit to women with
HER2 positive metastatic breast cancer (MBC). We conducted a
multicenter phase II study of preoperative EC followed by P plus
trastuzumab (T) in HER2 positive patients. The primary clinical
endpoints of the analysis were histopathological response (breast and
axilla), overall cardiac toxicity, NYHA III / IV events, death caused
by a cardiac event. Secondary endpoints are disease. free survival,
overall survival, rate of breast conservation, quality of life.

Methods: Two hundred and thirty
patients (age 18–65) with breast cancer >2 cm or inflammatory
disease, HER2 positive (IHC 3+ or FISH positive confirmed by central
pathology), received 4 x EC 90/600 mg/m2
q3w followed by 4 X P 175 mg/ m2 q3w with T
loading dose 8 mg/kg followed by 6 mg/kg q3 weeks, followed by surgery
and postoperative T q3w 6 mg/kg for 9 months. Radiotherapy and
endocrine therapy were applied according to standard
recommendations.

Results: Analysis of the primary
endpoints is carried out for 119 patients: The histopathological
complete response is: 37% (y T0/ is, ypNx). Twenty/ 119 patients (17%)
had only residual DCIS in the breast. Eighty/ 119 patients (73%) had
histologically negative axillary nodes at surgery. For the final
presentation in December 2005 histopathological response, cardiac
safety and toxicity data will be available for all 230 study
patients.

## 1065

## Efficacy and tolerability of gefitinib in oestrogen receptor
negative and tamoxifen resistant oestrogen receptor positive locally
advanced or metastatic breast cancer.

## Agrawal A, Gutteridge E, Cheung KL, Hyman-Taylor P, Robertson
JFR. City Hospital, Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, United Kingdom;
Astra-Zeneca, Macclesfield, United Kingdom

Background: Gefitinib
(IressaTM) was developed as an EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor to block signalling through the EGFR
pathway, which becomes dysregulated in many types of cancer. EGFR is
highly expressed in many oestrogen receptor (ER) negative breast
cancers. The possibility that gefitinib may also have efficacy in some
ER positive hormone responsive phenotypes was raised by in-vitro and
in-vivo data showing that there is a significant increase in EGFR
expression and cross-talk between EGFR and the ER pathways in tumours
which have developed acquired tamoxifen resistance.

Materials and Methods: The study
required recruitment of 54 patients stratified into two arms: 27
patients have been recruited to the ER negative arm and 26 thus far to
the ER positive tamoxifen resistant arm. To date 4/53 remain on trial,
all of whom are ER positive. Gefitinib was orally administered at a
dose of 500 mg/day with an option of dose reduction to 250 mg if
patients had severe side effects.

Results: WHO status was 0 (n = 27), 1
(n = 23) or 2 (n = 3). The cancers were grade 2 (n = 15), grade 3 (n =
29) or grade unknown (n = 9). Sites of initial disease were
loco-regional disease (n = 21), bone metastasis (n = 17), liver
metastasis (n = 9), lung or pleural metastasis (n = 6).
Out of the 53 patients, 6 were withdrawn at an early stage; 4
because of side effects and 2 due to patient request. 1 patient died
of bronchopneumonia while on treatment. The clinical efficacy is
demonstrated in the table below 

The predominant side effects were skin dryness, skin rash,
diarrhoea, nausea/vomiting, lethargy and alopecia in that order;
majority being CTC Grades I and II. As a result of these side effects,
17 patients had a dose reduction to 250 mg. At the time of the
analysis, 4 patients had been withdrawn due to side effects including
3 who did not benefit from dose reduction.

Conclusions: Gefitinib has
significant activity in tamoxifen resistant ER positive breast cancer
- supporting previous in-vitro and in-vivo data. Clinical benefit in
ER negative disease was lower. a result which neither confirms nor
excludes that gefitinib may have significant activity in this
population of patients. The majority of patients experienced
side-effects at 500 mg which decreased when patients had dose
reduction to 250 mg.

## 1066

## Phase II study of SU11248, a multitargeted tyrosine kinase
inhibitor (TKI) in patients (pts) with previously treated metastatic
breast cancer (MBC).

## Miller KD, Burstein HJ, Elias AD, Rugo HS, Cobleigh MA, Wolff
AC, Eisenberg PD, Collier M, Adams BJ, Baum CM. Indiana University
Cancer Center; Dana Farber Cancer Institute; University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center; University of California San Francisco; Rush
University Medical Center; Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins University; California Cancer Care, Inc; Pfizer, Inc

Background: Autocrine and paracrine
signaling involving VEGFR and PDGFR stimulate angiogenesis and
proliferation of BC. SU11248 is an oral multitargeted TKI with
antitumor and antiangiogenic activity, inhibiting VEGFR, PDGFR, KIT,
and FLT3 TKs. This study investigated the efficacy and safety of
SU11248 monotherapy in pts with previously treated MBC. Methods: Eligible pts had received prior
anthracycline (A) and taxane (T) therapy and had resistant disease,
defined as progression while on or within 12 months of last A or T
treatment as adjuvant and/or MBC therapy; measurable disease was
required. Pts were treated with SU11248, 50 mg daily x 28 days
followed by a 14-day break; 6 weeks defined one cycle. The primary
endpoint was ORR defined by RECIST; disease status was assessed every
two cycles. A total sample size of 63 was required to identify a
clinically meaningful ORR ≥15% based on Simon’s Minimax two-stage
design. Results: 64 pts were
enrolled. Median age was 51 (36–71). 56% of pts were ER+; 16% were
HER2+. The majority of pts (82%) had visceral disease. 52 pts had
prior adjuvant chemotherapy (A: 90%, T: 56%); 62 pts were previously
treated for MBC (A: 26%, T: 69%). In addition, most pts had received
other chemotherapies in the MBC setting (66% capecitabine, 23%
vinorelbine, 16% platinum, 15% gemcitabine). Detailed toxicity data
are available for 41 pts. No grade 4 toxicities have been reported.
The most frequently reported grade 2/3 non-hematologic toxicities were
fatigue (G2: 32%, G3: 5%), diarrhea (G2: 20%, G3: 7%), anorexia (G2:
17%), hypertension (G2: 10%, G3: 5%), mouth pain (G2: 12%), and
hand–foot syndrome (G2: 5%, G3: 7%). Grade 3 neutropenia was reported
by 39% of pts, but there were no neutropenic fevers. Grade 3
thrombocytopenia and anemia were less common (15% and 2%,
respectively). 7/41 (17%) pts required dose-reduction for toxicity; an
additional 13/41 (31%) required dose-interruption. Preliminary
efficacy data are available for 51 pts. 7 (14%) pts have had a PR; 1
pt had prolonged (≥6-month) SD for 11 months. Conclusion: SU11248 has significant single-agent
activity in pts with refractory MBC. Toxicity, albeit manageable,
frequently necessitated dose adjustment. Updated clinical results and
correlative studies will be presented. Future studies should focus on
less heavily pretreated pts as well as exploring alternate dosing
schedules and combination regimens.

## 1067

## A phase I/II study of AG-013736, an oral anti-angiogenesis agent,
in combination with docetaxel in patients (pts) with metastatic breast
cancer (MBC).

## Rugo HS, Stopeck A, Badorf A, Pithavala YK, Steinfeldt HM.
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; University
of Arizona, Tucson, Tucson, AZ; Pfizer Inc, La Jolla, CA

Background: AG-013736 is an oral
small molecule with potent inhibitory effects against the VEGF and
PDGF receptor tyrosine kinases with broad preclinical activity in
xenograft models of solid tumors. A phase I study in solid tumors
identified 5 mg BID as the therapeutic dose; a phase II study in renal
cell cancer showed significant efficacy from single agent therapy with
a response rate (RR) of 46% (Rini et al, ASCO 2005). We studied the
safety, PK and preliminary efficacy of AG-013736 (AG) in combination
with docetaxel (DOC) as first-line therapy for MBC.

Methods: A randomized, placebo
controlled, phase II study was preceded by a phase I component. All
pts received DOC IV q 3 wks at 80 mg/m2. In
the phase I study, AG PO 5 mg BID was given beginning C1D3. Pts with
PR or SD had the opportunity to continue single agent AG after
stopping DOC. Eligible pts have measurable disease, no prior chemo for
MBC, ECOG 0–2, no uncontrolled brain mets. Full PK profiles were
collected on C1D1 (DOC alone), C1D21 (steady state, AG alone), and
C2D1 (DOC + AG). In the phase II trial, pts are randomized to AG or
placebo plus DOC beginning C1D1.

Results: 6 pts were treated (rx) on
the phase I portion of this trial. PK: Plasma profiles and PK
parameters (n = 4) of DOC were similar in the presence and absence of
AG-013736 (mean AUC∞ 4829 and 5089 ng.h/mL
respectively). The PK of AG in plasma were likewise similar in the
presence and absence of DOC (mean AUC∞ 823 and
786 ng.h/mL respectively). Toxicity: The primary toxicity was hematologic with gr
3/4 NTP in 3 pts, FN in 1 pt, and gr 3/4 anemia in 3 pts. Gr 2 HTN was
observed in 4 pts, 1 pt stopped rx due to gr 3 stomatitis. Efficacy: 2 pts had PR, 3 SD and 1 PD
by RECIST criteria. Pts with PR or SD received a median of 6 cycles of
DOC, and 14 wks of single agent AG post DOC (2–36). Duration of single
agent AG post DOC with SD was 21 and 36 wks, and with PR 6 and 14 wks.
Median time on study was 9 mos (4–16).

Conclusion: This combination is safe
and appears to be effective treatment for MBC, with prolonged SD/PR on
AG alone post DOC/AG. The phase II randomized trial is ongoing and has
currently enrolled 57 pts. Preliminary efficacy and toxicity data will
be presente.D

## 1068

## Treatment of postmenopausal women with locally advanced or
metastatic breast cancer with letrozole alone or in combination with
temsirolimus: a randomized, 3-arm, phase 2 study.

## Baselga J, Roché H, Fumoleau P, Campone M, Colomer R, Cortes-
Funes H, Gil M, Chan S, Boni J, Kong S, Cincotta M, Moore L. Hospital
Vall D’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain; Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse,
France; Centre René Gauducheau, Saint Herblain, France; Institut
Catala D’ Oncologia, Girona, Spain; Hospital Universitario 12 de
Octubre, Madrid, Spain; Institut Catala D’ Oncologia, Barcelona,
Spain; Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom; Wyeth
Research, Collegeville, PA; Wyeth Research, Cambridge, MA

Background: Temsirolimus (TEMSR) is a
specific inhibitor of mTOR, a protein critical for tumor growth and
cell survival. We update previously reported results for patients
(pts) with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer on treatment
with letrozole (LET) alone or in combination with oral TEMSR
(Carpenter et al. Proc ASCO 23:19S, 2005). Methods: Pts were randomized 1:1:1 into 1 of 3 cohorts
(all pts received 2.5 mg LET daily): 1) TEMSR 10 mg daily schedule, 2)
TEMSR 30 mg intermittent schedule (daily for 5 days every 2 weeks), or
3) LET alone. Each cycle was approximately 2 weeks. Results: Preliminary data as of 7 April 2005
are presented for the 92 pts enrolled (daily: 33; intermittent: 30;
LET alone: 29). The 3 most frequently occurring grade 1–4 toxicities,
regardless of causality, were 1) 10 mg daily: peripheral edema (46%
pts), asthenia (42%), and diarrhea (36%); 2) 30 mg intermittent:
asthenia (60%), diarrhea (43%), and mucositis (43%); 3) LET alone:
asthenia (55%), arthralgia (31%), and nausea (31%). Grade 3–4
toxicities, regardless of causality, that occurred in >2 pts were
1) 10 mg daily: hyperglycemia (4 pts); 2) 30 mg intermittent:
hyperglycemia (6 pts) and asthenia (3 pts); 3) LET alone: none.
Patients in the 3 cohorts were evaluated for tumor response and
progression-free survival (PFS, Table). Patients in the 30-mg
intermittent cohort had a longer median PFS, a higher estimated rate
of PFS at 16 mos, and less disease progression and death than patients
in the other 2 cohorts. After cycles 1, 3, 5, and 7, estradiol
concentrations in the blood of patients in the 3 cohorts were similar.
Discussion: Preliminary data
suggest that theTEMSR + LET schedules were tolerable and that PFS may
be longer for pts treated with 30 mg TEMSR intermittent +2.5 mg LET
daily than for those treated with LET alone. A phase 3, randomized,
double-blind study is ongoing to evaluate 2 cohorts, 30 mg TEMSR daily
for 5 days every 2 weeks + 2.5 mg LET daily vs. placebo daily for
5 days every 2 weeks + 2.5 mg LET daily 

## 1069

## Phase III randomized trial comparing docetaxel in combination with
doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (TAC) versus doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel (AC®T) in Her-2/neu negative early
breast cancer patients with positive axillary lymph nodes: Interim
analysis of the BCIRG 005 study.

## Eiermann W, Pienkowski T, Crown J, Chap L, Pawlicki M, Martin M,
Chan A, Saleh M, Sehdev S, Provencher L, Von Minckwitz G, Semiglazov
V, Slamon D, Tabah-Fisch I, Buyse M, Riva A, Taupin H, Sauter G,
Mackey J, on behalf of the BCIRG 005 Investigators. GBG, Munchen and
Frankfurt, Germany; Maria Sklodowska- Curie (MSC) centre, Warsaw,
Poland; ICORG, Dublin, Ireland; UCLA, Los Angeles, CA; MSC Institute,
Krakow, Poland; GEICAM, Madrid, Spain; Mount Hospital, Perth
Australia; Georgia Cancer Specialists, Atlanta, GA; William Osler
Health Centre, Brampton, Canada; CHA-Hopital Du Saint Sacrement,
Quebec, Canada; N.N. Petrov Research Institute, St. Petersburg,
Russia; Sanofi- Aventis, Paris, France; IDDI, Brussels, Belgium; CIRG,
Paris, France; University Medical Center, Hamburg, Germany; Cross
Cancer Institute, Edmonton, Canada.

Background: The relative benefits of
adjuvant breast cancer chemotherapy with docetaxel in combination with
anthracycline, or given sequentially after an anthracycline-based
regimen, are unknown.

Material and Methods: We randomized
patients (pts) with axillary lymph node positive, HER-2 negative
breast cancer to either TAC
(75/50/500 mg/m2 q3wk × 6 cycles) or AC
(60/600 mg/m2 q3wk × 4 cycles) followed
by T (100 mg/m2 q3wk × 4 cycles). Pts were
prospectively stratified by number of positive nodes (1–3 vs. 4+) and
hormone receptor status. Pts with ER and/ or PR positive (HR+) tumors
received hormonal therapy for 5 yrs after chemotherapy. The primary
endpoint was disease-free survival (DFS) with 80% power (0.05
significance level) to detect an absolute difference of 5%. Secondary
endpoints included overall survival and safety.

Results: A total of 3298 pts (1649
per arm) were recruited between Aug. 2000 and Feb. 2003. Baseline
characteristics were well balanced: age<50 yrs 47%, 1–3 nodes 61%,
HR+ 82%, T >2 cm 58%. The planned 6 cycles of TAC were given to
93.5% of pts and 8 cycles of AC-T to 90.5%. Febrile neutropenia (17.9%
vs. 8.5%) was more frequent with TAC, while grade 3/4 neutropenic
infections were equivalent (8.7% with TAC vs. 8.0%). Primary
prophylaxis with G-CSF was given beginning cycle 1 in 16.4% of pts
receiving TAC and 3.5% of pts on AC-T. One septic death occurred in
the TAC arm. Grade 3/4 non-hematological toxicity rates were fatigue
(5.2% vs. 6.3%), nausea (4.5% vs. 4.1%), vomiting (4.2% vs. 4.1%),
diarrhea (2.9% vs. 3.1%), stomatitis (2.6% vs. 3.0%), peripheral edema
(1.3% vs. 2.6%), sensoryneuropathy (0.6% vs. 2.0%) and CHF (0.1% vs.
0.4%) in the TAC and AC-T arms, respectively. Other grade 3/4
docetaxel-specific toxicities (nail and skin) were observed in less
than 0.5% in both arms. At the protocol-specified event-driven interim
analysis, median follow-up was 30 months and 392 DFS events were
observed. However, the IDMC has chosen not to release efficacy data at
this time.

Discussion: The safety profile of the
two common docetaxelbased adjuvant chemotherapy regimens is comparable
with the exception of a higher incidence of febrile neutropenia with
TAC. Additional follow-up is required to evaluate the relative
efficacy of combination vs. sequential docetaxel-containing
chemotherapy in the adjuvant treatment of women with node positive,
HER-2- breast cancer.

## 1070

## A phase 2b multicenter evaluation of the safety and efficacy of
TOCOSOL® paclitaxel (TOC- P) as initial treatment of patients with
metastatic breast cancer (MBC).

## Bogdanova N, Tjulandin S, Ognerubov N, Semiglazov V, Afanasjev
B, Makhson A, Krasnozhon D, Manikhas G, Vtoraya O, Mitashok I,
Astakhov V, Byakhov M, Luciano G, Moore E, Pratt J, Bolton MG. The
1074 TOCOSOL Paclitaxel Working Group, Russian Federation; Sonus
Pharmaceuticals, Bothell, WA
TOC-P is a novel Cremophor®-free vitamin
E-based paclitaxel formulation that does not need reconstitution or
dilution, is given over 15 minutes i.v. push, may result in reduced
incidence and severity of infusion reactions and better patient
tolerance (in particular, less neuropathy), thus enabling higher
single doses and/ or a higher cumulative paclitaxel dose, and,
potentially, improved anti-tumor efficacy. Pre-medication with
steroids is not required. 47 patients (pts) with previously untreated
MBC were assigned to receive weekly TOC-P
120 mg/m2 until PD or intolerable
toxicity. Median age: 57 (21–74). ECOG PS 0=26 pts, PS 1=21 pts.
Chemotherapy naiïe: 19 pts; prior adjuvant chemotherapy: 28 pts; prior
anthracycline: 18 pts. ER+: 12 pts, ER-: 4 pts, ER status ND: 31 pts.
Prior hormone therapy: 14 pts. Pts were required to have measurable
disease by RECIST, thus defining a population with a high tumor
burden; visceral metastases: 43 pts, ≥3 sites of disease: 21 pts. One
pt was ineligible and is not included in the efficacy analysis. Safety
and Efficacy data for the first 16 weeks of treatment are available
for 47 and 44 pts respectively. The mean dose delivered was
95 mg/m2/week. 27 pts remain on therapy
after an average 17 weeks; 20 pts have discontinued: PD=11, toxicity
=7, withdrawal not due to toxicity =2. Investigator reported RR:
22 pts (48%) confirmed PR (confirmatory CT 4 weeks after OR
determination); an additional 4 pts (9%) have unconfirmed PR; 8 pts
have SD at 16 wks; 9 have PD. The median TTP has not yet been reached.
The most frequent toxicity reported was neutropenia (87%). Grade 3/4
neutropenia: 66% of pts, 60% of pts required a dose reduction by wk 4.
Dose re-escalation was permitted. The time to return to full dose was
1 wk in >70% of pts. Grade 3 neuropathy: 11% (no grade 4).
Arthralgias and myalgias: 34% (2% grade 3, no grade 4). 24 pts (51%)
had an adverse event related to infusion (event occurred within
30 minutes of end of dose). One grade 4 event (sacral pain) was
reported and resulted in discontinuation of study drug after 3
occurrences. In all other pts, infusion reactions were easily managed
and did not result in discontinuation of therapy. Final data will be
presented. TOCOSOL paclitaxel is an active agent in the treatment of
MBC. The recommended dose for Phase 3 study is
100 mg/m2 weekly.

## 1071

## Biomarker results from a phase II randomized study of lapatinib
(GW572016) as first-line treatment for patients with ErbB2 FISH-amplified
advanced or metastatic breast cancer.

## Gomez HL, Chavez MA, Doval DC, Nag S, Chow LW, Ang PC, Ahmad NM,
Berger M, Newstat B, Stein S, Sledge GW. Instituto Especializado de
Enfermedades Neoplasica, Lima, Peru; Hospital Alberto Sabogal, Lima,
Peru; Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi,
India; Jehangir Hospital and Medica Centre, Pune, India; Queen Mary
Hospital, Hong Kong; National Cancer Centre, Singapore; Hospital
University, Bharu, Kalatan, Malaysia; GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville,
PA; Indiana University, Indianapolis

Background: Lapatinib is a selective,
reversible, oral small molecule inhibitor of both ErbB1 (EGFR) and
ErbB2 (HER-2/ neu) kinase activity. The primary objective of this
study was to evaluate the response rate of two lapatinib dosing
regimens as first-line treatment for patients (pts) with metastatic
breast cancer (MBC) and documented ErbB2 amplification by FISH.
Several studies have concluded that elevated pretreatment serum
HER-2/neu levels are associated with favorable response to
Herceptinbased therapies and that pts who respond to treatment have
declines in extracellular domain (ECD). We report the results of the
analysis of ECD ErbB1 and ErbB2 and its correlation with response to
lapatinib. Material and methods:
Eligible pts had advanced or MBC that amplified the ErbB2 gene and
measurable disease (RECIST). Pts were randomized (1:1, open label) to
lapatinib 1500 mg as a single daily dose (QD) or lapatinib 500 mg
twice daily (BID). Response was defined by RECIST criteria. Final
enrollment of 130 pts is planned; an interim analysis was performed
after 40 pts reached 12 weeks of treatment. Tumor tissues were
obtained from each pt at the time of most recent biopsy. Sequential
quantitation of ECD for both ErbB1 and ErbB2 were obtained at
baseline, every 4 weeks and at the time pt stopped therapy. Results: An interim analysis was performed
on the first 40 pts randomized to treatment (n = 19 on 500 mg BID and
n = 21 on 1500 mg QD). No unexpected toxicity was reported, and there
were no grade 3/4 treatment-related adverse events. Efficacy by dose
schedule appeared comparable. By investigator review, confirmed PR was
demonstrated in 12 pts (30%) pts and by independent review, 14 pts
(35%): stable disease for at least 8 weeks, was 13 pts (32.5%) by
investigator and 14 (35%) by independent review. For the initial 40
pts, baseline ErbB1 or ErbB2 ECD levels were not significantly
different between responders (PR) and non-responders (SD+PD). However,
22% (6/27) of non-responders had ErbB2 ECD levels >100 ng/ml
compared to 36% (4/11) of responders. An analysis of sequential ECD
levels will be performed. Conclusion:
Lapatinib appears well tolerated and shows evidence of activity as
first-line treatment for women with ErbB2-amplified advanced breast
cancer. Analysis of serum biomarkers ErbB1/ErbB2 ECD and further
analysis of molecular phenotypes in tumor tissue is being performed to
identify factors predictive of response to lapatinib.

## 1072

## ZK-EPO, a novel synthetic epothilone B analog, significantly
inhibits tumor growth in both non-resistant and resistant breast cancer
models.

## Klar U, Buchmann B, Schwede W, Skuballa W, Lichtner RB, Hoffman
J. Schering AG, Berlin, Germany

Background: ZK-EPO, the first fully
synthetic third-generation compound in clinical trials of a novel
class of natural products, the epothilones, exhibits marked
preclinical antiproliferative effects. Preclinical data indicate that
ZK-EPO has higher efficacy compared with taxanes in a number of
in vitro and in vivo non-resistant and resistant tumor
models. ZK-EPO is not recognized by efflux pumps and so possesses the
potential to overcome resistance.

Methods:
In vitro, human breast tumor cell
lines (non-resistant: MCF7 and MaTu; resistant: MCF7/ADR, NCI/ADR, and
MaTu/ ADR) were treated with ZK-EPO, paclitaxel or other
tubulinbinding drugs to determine their respective
IC50 values, cellular uptake and
distribution. In vivo, effects of
ZK-EPO at different concentrations were compared with paclitaxel in
non-resistant (MaTu and MX-1) and resistant (MaTu/ADR and NCI/ADR)
human breast tumor models. Efficacy was assessed by measuring the
tumor area during treatment and calculating the treated/control ratios
(T/C).

Results:
In vitro, ZK-EPO was significantly
more active in all human breast tumor cell lines examined compared
with paclitaxel. Short-term (4 hours) exposure to ZK-EPO produced a
significant inhibition of proliferation in NCI/ADR cells that
overexpressed P-glycoprotein, a finding not observed after treatment
with paclitaxel or the epothilone BMS-247550. Exposure (3 days) with
ZK-EPO inhibited proliferation of the resistant NCI/ADR breast tumor
cells more effectively than paclitaxel and other first- or
second-generation epothilones, including epothilone D, BMS-247550 and
BMS-310705. Radiolabelling studies indicated that unlike paclitaxel,
ZK-EPO preferentially localized to the nuclei of cells, with 71% of
ZK-EPO vs 34% of paclitaxel being found in the nuclei of MaTu/ADR
cells. In vivo, ZK-EPO exhibited
favorable tolerability and was highly effective, producing markedly
superior inhibition of tumor growth compared with paclitaxel
especially in human breast tumor xenograft models expressing
resistancies (MaTu/ADR, NCI/ADR).

Conclusions: ZK-EPO exhibited
significant in vitro and in vivo activity in all of the human
breast tumor models examined. ZKEPO also showed significant in vitro activity when compared with
paclitaxel and other epothilones (epothilone D, BMS-247550, and
BMS-310705) and demonstrated excellent activity in nonresistant and
resistant human breast tumor models. In addition, because ZK-EPO is
not recognized by cellular efflux pumps, early use of this agent may
delay or prevent the development of resistance.

## 1073

## A phase I, open-label study of the safety, tolerability and
pharmacokinetics of lapatinib (GW572016) in combination with
trastuzumab.

## Storniolo AM, Burris III HA, Overmoyer B, Silverman P, Pegram
MD, Jones SF, Peacock NW, Loftiss J, Koch KM, Paul E, Ho PTC. Indiana
University Cancer Center, Indianpolis, IN; Sarah Cannon Cancer Center,
Nashville, TN; Ireland Cancer Center, Cleveland, OH; UCLA Center for
the Health Sciences, Los Angeles, CA; GSK, RTP, NC
ErbB1 and ErbB2 receptor expression in tumors predicts a poor
outcome. Lapatinib is a potent oral ErbB1/ErbB2 receptor tyrosine
kinase inhibitor. A novel approach to the treatment of breast cancer
is the combination of trastuzumab and lapatinib, which may enhance
cytostatic action by inactivation of ErbB2 through two different
molecular mechanisms. In vitro data indicate synergistic activity of
lapatinib in combination with trastuzumab in ErbB2 positive breast
cancer cells.
Patients (pts) with advanced or metastatic breast cancer that
overexpressed the ErbB2 protein 2+ or 3+, confirmed by either IHC
and/or FISH were enrolled. Escalating dose levels of lapatinib
(750–1500 mg/d) were administered once daily in combination with
weekly, standard dose of trastuzumab (4 mg/kg loading dose followed by
weekly 2 mg/kg infusions). Three pts were treated at each dose level,
with expansion to 6 in the event of dose-limiting toxicity. Limited
and full pharmacokinetic samples were obtained. Assessments of
clinical response per RECIST criteria were performed at week 8 and
then every 8 weeks. Cardiac safety assessments include collecting left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) by MUGA or ECHO, and 12-lead ECG
at week 4, 8 and then every 8 weeks.
54 pts were treated, 27 in the dose escalation phase (cohort 750–3;
cohort 1000–11; cohort 1250 10, cohort 1500–3) and 27 in the PK phase
(cohort 1000). Median age was 53 years (range 30–80). A median of 4
treatment periods (1 treatment period = 4 weeks) were administered
(range 1–15). G1–2 diarrhea, anorexia, fatigue and rash were the
common toxicities. One incidence each of dose-limiting G3 fatigue and
G3 nausea was reported separately at the 1500 mg/d dose level. No
symptomatic declines in LVEF were reported at any dose level. In the
dose escalation phase there was 1 CR, 5 PRs and 4 SDs >6 months. In
the PK phase there were 2 PRs and 4 SD >6 months. The median number
of prior chemotherapy regimens, in the responding pts, was 3 (range
1–4) and prior trastuzumab (monotherapy or in combination) was 4
(range 1–7).
The combination of lapatinib and trastuzumab showed significant
clinical activity in this heavily pretreated population. The proposed
phase II/III dose for this combination is 1000 mg lapatinib and
standard doses of weekly trastuzumab. The clinical data support the
synergism of lapatinib and trastuzumab noted in preclinical studies
with ErbB2 overexpressing breast cancer cells. Additional randomized
studies are planned with lapatinib and trastuzumab.

## 1074

## Long term survival with no apparent toxicity observed with a novel
cisplatin-incorporated polymeric micelle, NC-6004, in the MCF-7 breast
cancer model.

## Alami N, Banerjee K, Page V, Hayashi T, Igarashi E, Leyland-
Jones B. McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; NanoCarrier Co.,
Ltd., Chiba, Japan

Background:
Cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum (II) (cisplatin) is among the most
effective and widely used anti-neoplastic agents. However, its
clinical use is restricted due to severe side effects such as acute
nephrotoxicity. A new class of polymeric micelles incorporating
cisplatin, NC-6004, via the polymer-metal complex formation between
cisplatin and poly-(ethylene glycol)-poly (glutamic acid) block
copolymers has been originated by Kataoka et al. (1). NC-6004 had a
size of 30 nm with remarkably narrow distribution,a key factor to
achieve homogeneous delivery.Previous pre-clinical studies showed that
NC-6004 specifically accumulated in solid tumours and induced
significant anti-tumor activity without significant body weight loss
in C-26 colon tumour model. This study was designed to evaluate the
antitumor activity of NC- 6004 against the MCF-7 breast cancer
xenograft model and compare this against cisplatin, carboplatin,
oxaliplatin and JM216.

Material and Methods: CD-1 nude mice
bearing subcutaneous MCF-7 tumors were treated with NC-6004 (2 &
4 mg/kg, i.v., q2dx5), cisplatin (4 mg/kg, i.v., q2d×5), carboplatin
(120 mg/kg, i.p. bolus on day 1), oxaliplatin (10 mg/kg, i.p. bolus on
day 1) and JM216 (40 mg/kg, p.o. daily × 5).

Results: NC-6004 showed significant
antitumor activity at both 2 & 4 mg/kg, compared with control (P
< 0.01), and induced a tumor growth inhibition (TGI) of 85 and 81%
at day 42, respectively. NC-6004 at 2 & 4 mg/kg caused 3/15 and
5/15 tumor regression, respectively and 1/15 and 2/15 complete tumor
suppression, respectively, with no body weight loss or death for the
entire duration of the study (day 49). Moreover, NC-6004 caused no
increase of blood urea nitrogen (BUN) at both 2 and 4 mg/kg.
Carboplatin induced a TGI of 70% on day 36, but no tumor suppression
or regression. Oxaliplatin caused a TGI of 60% (day 28), with 2/16
tumor regressions. 4/7 toxicity-related deaths were observed in the
carboplatin- and oxaliplatin-treated mice.Cisplatin induced a TGI of
55% on day 21 (P <0.05), resulted in 1/15 complete tumor
suppression and 2/15 tumor regressions and induced 4/8
toxicity-related deaths. JM216 induced a TGI of 55% (day 21) and high
toxicity (8/8) as also demonstrated by body weight loss (15%) and 27%
increase of BUN, as compared with day 0. Cisplatin also induced a 25%
increase of BUN at the end of the treatment, whereas carboplatin and
oxaliplatin showed no increase of these levels.

Discussion: In reviewing the
literature to date, we have not observed an agent achieving this long
term survival in the MCF-7 model. While all the agents exhibited
comparable TGI at day 21 (49–55%), NC-6004 treatment (both at 2 &
4 mg/kg) was the only agent which produced long term survival (TGI of
85 & 81 %, respectively, at day 42) without any apparent toxicity.
These preclinical data strongly support the clinical development of
NC- 6004 for the treatment of breast cancer.

## 1075

## Combination of a prenylation inhibitor and either classical
chemotherapy or a M-TOR inhibitor: potential clinical
implications.

## Budman DR, Calabro A. North Shore University Hospital, New York
University, Manhasset, NY

Background: Targeted therapies
against RAS with the use of farnesyl transferase inhibitors are being
clinically tested and are expected to have potential synergism when
used with traditional agents. Statins inhibit both farnesylation and
geranylgeranylation leading to inhibition both pathways of mevalonate
metabolism. There is also cross talk between the MAP kinase pathway
and the AKT pathway which might be amenable to inhibition. Inhibitors
of AKT through M-TOR inhibition have shown clinical activity. We have
used median effect isobologram analysis with defined cell lines to
search for rational synergistic combinations of agents. The current
study evaluated fluvastatin to block prenylation, zolderonic acid
which also blocks prenylation and classical cytotoxics.

Material and Methods: MCF7 (wild
type), MCF7/adr (a multiply resistant line), SK-BR-3 (Her2/neu over
expression) and BT 474 (p53 mutant) cell lines were used. Carboplatin,
5’DFUR, epirubicin, and rapamycin were obtained from Sigma Aldrich;
Herceptin from commercial stock, gemcitabine from Eli Lilly Company,
docetaxel from Aventis, vinorelbine from Glaxo SmithKline, fluvastatin
and zoledronic acid from Novartis Pharma AG. Previous procedures
(Breast Cancer Res Treat 74: 41–46, 2002) were used. Fluvastatin was
studied at clinically achievable concentrations. All studies were done
in duplicate with 4 wells per point. CI values within one standard
deviation of 1 were considered additive.

Results: Fluvastatin displayed global
synergy with zoledronic acid. Fluvastatin displayed synergism with
epirubicin in 3 of 4 cell lines. Fluvastatin and rapamycin (M-TOR
inhibitor) exhibited profound synergy (CI <0.3).

Discussion: Statins have not been
clinically tested in breast cancer patients in combination with either
classical cytotoxic agents or inhibitors (M-TOR inhibitor) of the AKT
pathway. Their effect with zoledronic acid has not been previously
noted. The present study suggests innovative combinations which may be
advanced to clinical trials.

## 1076

## Effects of the potent telomerase template antagonist GRN163L in
breast cancer.

## Herbert B, Hochreiter A, Pongracz K, Gryaznov SM. Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN; Indiana University
Cancer Center, Indianapolis, IN; Geron Corporation, Menlo Park,
CA

Background: Telomerase has been
detected in the vast majority of cancer cells, making the enzyme an
attractive target for anticancer therapies. GRN163L is a novel lipid
modified N3’→5’ thio-phosphoramidate (NPS) oligonucleotide with a sequence
complementary to the RNA template region of human telomerase (hTR).
GRN163L, like other NPS oligonucleotides complementary to template
region to hTR, blocks the binding of telomerase to telomeres. The
earlier generation NPS oligonucleotides have been shown to be
effective inhibitors of telomerase and subsequently, the cancer cell
growth in vitro and in vivo. The purpose of our study was to
evaluate the effects of GRN163L treatment on a variety of breast
cancer cells representing different tumor subtypes and genetic
backgrounds.

Materials and Methods: Here we used
MDA-MB-231, MDAMB- 435, MCF-7, SK-BR-3, 21NT, HCC1937,
HCC1937+wtBRCA1, and tumorigenic human mammary epithelial (HME) cells
as our panel of breast cancer cell lines. Cells were treated every
three days with 1–2.5  M GRN163L during the course of the long-term
experiment in which telomerase activity was inhibited 95–100%. A
mismatch control oligo showed no effect on telomerase activity. Cells
were monitored every other day for gross toxicity or changes in
morphology. With each passage, cell growth was documented and measured
as cumulative population doublings. At the same time, aliquots were
collected for telomere length analyses, telomerase activity assays,
clonal analyses, and anchorage independence/ colony formation
assays.

Results: GRN163L was effective in
inhibiting telomerase activity in a dose-dependent fashion in all
breast cancer cell lines. Telomerase inhibition by GRN163L induced
rapid telomere shortening. Interestingly, the optimal endpoints of
cell growth inhibition and apoptosis did not correlate with the
predicted time based on initial telomere length. Cells that exhibited
telomerase inhibition yet continued cell growth also exhibited reduced
tumorigenicity.

Conclusions: These results show the
cell-type differences in response to the telomerase inhibitor GRN163L
in breast tumor cell lines as well as the potential of GRN163L to be
an effective novel anti-tumor agent.

## 1077

## Anticancer influence of a methioninase containing fusion protein
targeted to the urokinase receptor on breast cancer cells.

## Pento JT, Zang XP, Palwai NR, Harrison RH. University of
Oklahoma HSC, Oklahoma City, OK; University of Oklahoma, Norman,
OK

Background: It has been shown that
methionine depletion inhibits cancer cell growth and survival. The
present study developed a novel fusion protein targeted specifically
to breast cancer cells. The fusion protein contains two components:
the amino terminal fragment of human urokinase (amino acids 1–49) that
binds to the urokinase receptor protein which is over-expressed on the
surface of invasive cancer cells, and L-methioninase (398 amino acids)
which depletes methionine and arrests the growth of
methioninedependent cancers. The present study examined influence of
the fusion protein on the proliferation and motility of MCF-7 cancer
cells in a culture wounding assay and the growth and metastatic
development of these cells in a mouse xenograft model.

Materials and Methods: The fusion
proteins were produced by recombinant methods in E. coli and purified by chromatography. In
the mutated fusion protein the gene for L-methioninase was mutated by
changing the Tyr at position 114 to Phe. It was determined that the
mutated fusion protein lacked methioninase activity. The culture
wounding assay measured proliferation and motility of MCF-7 cells. The
xenograft experiments were conducted with MCF-7 cells transfected with
a Beta-galactosidase reporter to quantify the density and distribution
of cancer cells in tumor, lung and liver samples.

Results: It was determined that that
treatment with fusion protein over a concentration range of
10−8 to
10−6 M produced a dosedependent inhibition
of both the migration and proliferation of MCF-7 cells in the culture.
Treatment with L-methioninase alone produced a much smaller but
significant inhibitory response, while the methioninase-mutated fusion
protein produced no inhibitory effect. The fusion protein was found to
be non-cytotoxic to the mice in the xenograft experiments. In the
xenograft tumors the total number of cancer cells/gram of tissue was
reduced by fusion protein treatment. Further, it was observed that
fusion protein treatment eliminated lung micro-metastases in these
experiments.

Discussion: These results demonstrate
that specific targeting of a methioninase containing fusion protein to
urokinase receptors on breast cancer cells reduces the proliferation
and motility of the breast cancer cells in culture. Further, the
results of the mouse xenograft experiments indicate that fusion
protein treatment reduces the growth and metastasis of these cancer
cells in vivo. In conclusion, specific targeting of methioninase
containing fusion proteins to cancer cells may provide a new and
effective therapeutic approach for the treatment and/or prevention of
breast cancer growth and metastatic progression.

Acknowledgement: This study was
supported in part by grants from the Oklahoma Center for the
Advancement of Science and Technology (OCAST) and from the
Presbyterian Health Foundation.

## 1078

## The use of p53-mediated alteration of microtubule dynamics to
sensitize breast cancer to vinca alkaloids.

## Toppmeyer DL, Nayak M, Chang J-M, Huzzy L, Shah N, Hait WN. The
Cancer Institute of New Jersey, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, New Brunswick, NJ

Background: Molecular determinants of
drug sensitivity promise more precise selection of patients (pts) for
treatment. p53 transcriptionally represses MAP4, a
microtubule-associated protein that promotes micrtotubule
polymerization and influences sensitivity to microtubule binding
drugs. In preclinical studies, the induction of wild-type p53 by
DNA-damaging agents, such as doxorubicin, repressed MAP4, decreased
microtubule polymerization, and increased binding of and sensitivity
to vinca alkaloids. A Phase I pilot demonstrated the clinical safety
and feasibility of this approch. Therefore, we conducted a Phase II
study of sequential epirubicin (EPI) and vinorelbine (V) in previously
untreated pts with stage IIIB or IV breast cancer to test if DNA
damage by EPI represses MAP4 and if V effectiveness can be
improve.D

Methods: Patients with Stage III and
/or IV breast cancer received EPI
(100 mg/m2) D1 followed by V (25 mg/m2)
D3 and D10. Pts with Stage III disease received a maximum of 5 cycles
of therapy. To measure the biological response to EPI and V, pts
underwent sequential biopsies and peripheral blood sampling on D1 and
D3 immediately prior to receiving EPI and V, respectively.

Results: Fourteen pts (4
metastatic/10 locally advanced) received 58 treatment cycles (range
2–5). Six patients with stage IIIB or IIIC disease completed the
planned five cycles of EPI/V; five of six patients had cCRs and 1/6
had a pCR. An additional five patients (4/Stage III; 1/Stage IV) had a
cPR (3 are still receiving treatment), while three patients (stage IV)
who have completed the study had SD 

Grade 3 and 4 toxicities were primarily hematologic. Toxicities
included 9 and 16 episodes of Grade 3 and Grade 4 neutropenia,
respectively; 3 episodes of Grade 3 anemia; and 4 episodes of Grade 3
thrombocytopenia. Non-hematologic Grade 3 toxicities included 3
episodes mucositis and 3 episodes of fatigue. To measure the
biological response to EPI and V, we analyzed p53 induction and MAP4
repression in 13/14 pts who underwent sequential biopsies and
peripheral blood sampling. 48 hours following treatment with EPI,
MAP-4 was downregulated in PBMNCs from 11/13 patients. p53 expression
in PBMNCs was increased in 7/ 13, unchanged in 1/13, and decreased in
5/13. Protein expression was determined in 12 sets of paired tumor
biopsies (D1 and D3). MAP4 and p53 protein expression was detected in
all samples. MAP4 expression was decreased in 10/12 samples. 7/10
samples had decreased MAP4 and increased p53 while 3/10 demonstrated
decreased p53. MAP4 was increased in 1/12 samples and unchanged in
1/12 samples. p21 expression, a transactivation target for wtp53, in
9/9 samples assessed, correlated with p53 expression.

Discussion: Accrual to the study is
ongoing as the response rate is encouraging and the toxicity profile
acceptable with minimal protocol modifications.

## 1079

## A phase I trial of scutellaria barbata (BZL101) for metastatic
breast cancer.

## Tagliaferri M, Cohen I, Vogel C, Perez A, Tan-Chiu E, Franco S,
Melisko M, Campbell M, Rugo H, Tripathy D. Bionovo, Inc., Emeryville,
CA; Cancer Research Network, Plantation, FL; University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Memorial Cancer Institute,
Hollywood, FL; University of Texas, Southwestern, Dallas, TX

Background: BZL101 is an aqueous
extract from herba Scutellaria Barbata D. Don of the Lamiaceae family.
The extract demonstrates in vitro growth inhibitory effects on four
human breast cancer cell lines (SKBR3, MCF7, MDA-MB231, and BT474) and
one murine breast cancer cell line (MCNeuA) using the
anti-proliferative crystal violet, sulforhodamine or CyQuant assays.
ID50 values ranging from <10 g/ml to >1.5 mg/ml. BZL101 does not inhibit the
growth of normal human mammary epithelium (HuMEC) and is a mitogen to
normal human lymphocytes. In a murine xenograft model, oral and
intraperitoneal administration of BZL101 inhibited tumor formation
without any observed toxicity. BZL101 arrests breast cancer cells in
the G1 phase of the cell cycle and induces apoptosis as measured by a
sub-G1 population of cells by flow cytometry. By attenuating
mitochondrial membrane potential, BZL101 causes cytochrome C and
apoptosis inducing factor (AIF2) release, inducing caspase-independent
DNA cleavage and high molecular grade DNA fragmentation. We therefore
conducted an open-label, phase I study of BZL101 for metastatic breast
cancer. Methods: Eligible patients
had histologically confirmed metastatic breast cancer and measurable
disease. Patients could not receive any other chemotherapy, hormone
therapy or herbal medicine. Patients received 350 ml (6 gm dry
solubles) per day of BZL101 extract until disease progression,
toxicity or personal preference to discontinue. The primary endpoints
were safety, toxicity and tumor response defined by RECIST. Results: 21 patients were treated. Mean age
was 54 years (30–77) and mean number of prior treatments was 3.6
(0–10). There were no hematologic or grade III or IV non-hematologic
adverse events (AEs). The most frequently reported BZL101-related
grade I and II AEs included: nausea (43%), diarrhea (20%), headache
(20%) flatulence (14%), vomiting (10%), constipation (10%), and
fatigue (10%). Sixteen patients were evaluable for response. Four of
the 16 patients had stable disease (SD) for >90 days (25%) and 3/16
had SD for >180 days (19%). Three patients had objective tumor
regression, one of which was 1 mm short of a PR based on RECIST
criteria. Conclusions: BZL 101 has a
favorable tolerability profile and demonstrates encouraging clinical
activity in this heavily pretreated population.

## 1080

## Unexpected hepatic toxicity after primary treatment with gefitinib
and docetaxel in patients with locally advanced breast cancer.

## Bines J, Branco LGP, Gomes CA, Costa F, Barrios CH, Martins RG.
Instituto Nacional de Cancer, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil; PUC, Porto
Alegre, RGS, Brazil; Washington University, Seattle, WA

Introduction: Locally advanced breast
cancer is a public health problem in Brazil. More than 50% of
Brazilian women present with stage III/IV disease. Besides improvement
in earlier detection, we need better treatment strategies. Preclinical
studies suggest synergism between gefitinib (Iressa) and docetaxel
(Taxotere) in breast cancer cell lines (Ciardello F. Int J Cancer
2002). We performed a multicenter phase II trial of primary treatment
with weekly docetaxel and daily gefitinib in patients with locally
advanced breast cancer.

Objectives: (1) Objective clinical
response rate (ORR), (2) Pathological response, and (3) Safety
profile.

Patients and Methods: Patients with
locally advanced breast cancer were eligible. Exclusion criteria
included inflammatory breast cancer and positive supraclavicular lymph
nodes. Primary treatment for 2 cycles: docetaxel at
36 mg/m2 IV weekly × 6 out of 8 weeks.
Gefitinib was given at 250 mg PO daily concurrently with chemotherapy
until surgery. Pre-medication: dexamethasone (8 mg) 12 hours and 1
hour prior to docetaxel. Post-medication at the investigator’s
discretion.

Results: Thirteen patients were
enrolled into the study. Eight patients were withdrawn due to
transaminases elevations and the trial has therefore been stopped.
Median age 48 (23–59), PS = 0. Median tumor size 7 cm (4–20); stage:
IIB (1), IIIA (3), IIIB (9); HR + (8) and HR − (5).
There has been no grade 3–4 hematologic toxicity. Eleven patients
developed an acneiform rash, all grade I and II. Eleven patients had
diarrhea, with grade 3 in only 2 of them. Hepatic toxicity was
characterized by grade 2, 3 and 4 serum glutamic oxaloacetic
transaminase (SGOT)/ serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT)
elevations in 1, 5 and 2 patients, respectively. Transaminases levels
returned to normal values within a few weeks of stopping treatment.
There were no abnormalities in serum bilirubin and no symptoms
associated with these lab changes, except in 1 patient who developed
grade 2 asthenia. There was no previous history of excessive alcohol
intake, hepatotoxic medications or viral hepatitis.

Conclusion: This is the first report
of the combination of weekly docetaxel and daily gefitinib as primary
treatment in patients with locally advanced breast cancer. We found a
high frequency of hepatic toxicity. This finding led to trial closure.
Previous reports of weekly docetaxel alone (Bines J. Proc Am Soc Clin
Oncol 2001) and gefitinib and docetaxel every 3 weeks (Ciardello F.
Proc Am Soc Clin Oncol 2005) showed no such adverse event. Combination
of chemotherapy and biological agents is a growing treatment strategy
in cancer. Close monitoring is an essential part of these trials in
order to detect unexpected and potentially life threatening side
effects. Support from Astra Zeneca and Sanofi Aventis - Brazil.

## 1081

## A phase I/II study of capecitabine (X) combined with oral
vinorelbine (N) as first- or second-line chemotherapy in patients (pts)
with locally advanced breast cancer (MBC).

## Delcambre C, Veyret C, Levy C, Switsers O, Allouache D, Raban N,
Grellard JM, Leconte A, Delozier T. Centre Francois Baclesse, Caen,
France; Centre Henri Becquerel, Rouen, France; Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire, Poitiers, France

Background: The oral fluoropyrimidine
X is highly effective and well tolerated in pts with MBC. Adding X to
docetaxel improves survival, time to disease progression and response
compared with docetaxel alone. When administered intravenously (i.v.)
N is also an effective agent in MBC. The combination of X and i.v. N
has been shown to be effective in phase I/II studies with response
rates of 48–61% and a good safety profile. The few overlapping
toxicities between X and oral N make this an attractive new
combination. Materials and Methods:
To evaluate this all-oral combination, we conducted a multicentre
phase I/II study of X plus oral N in pts with MBC to determine the
maximum tolerated doses (MTD), recommended doses, safety profile and
efficacy. Eligibility criteria were stage III/IV BC, age >18 years,
ECOG PS <2, ≥12 months since the end of adjuvant or neoadjuvant
chemotherapy, HER2 negative or unknown and adequate major organ
function. Results: We enrolled 61
pts: 75% received firstline XN and 25% received XN as second-line
therapy. Baseline characteristics were: median age 57.2 years (range
39–81); stage III/IV disease (0/100%); sites of metastases: liver
(n=31), lung (n=24), lymph nodes (n=24), bone (n=23), breast (n=8),
skin (n=4), pleural effusion (n=7). 15 pts had >2 metastatic sites.
DLTs determining the MTD were Febrile Neutropenia and grade 3 Mucitis.
The recommended doses are: X 1250 mg/m2
twice daily and N 60 mg/m2. 33 pts received
the treatment at the recommended dose. Efficacy findings were: 1
complete response (CR, 2%), 20 partial responses (PR, 43%), 16 pts
with stable disease (ST, 35%), 9 pts with progressive disease (PD,
20%) and 15 not known. Most common adverse events were grade 3/4
neutropenia (11%) and grade 2/3 hand-foot syndrome (8%). Mature
results will be presented during the meeting. Conclusion: the all-oral combination of X and N is
feasible and well tolerated. The recommended doses from this study
are: X 1250 mg/m2 bid d1-d14 and N
60 mg/m2 d1 and d8 q3w. This combination
appears highly active and enrolment continues to confirm the response
rate and to evaluate disease-free survival.

## 1082

## Selective inhibition of ADAM
metalloproteases as a novel approach for modulation ErbB pathways in
cancer.

## Douglass EC, Liu X, Caulder E, Liu C, Hansbury M, Zhou BB, Yao
W, Li Y, Vaddi K, Newton R, Scherle P, Friedman S, Fridman J. Incyte
Corporation, Wilmington, DE
The ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases and the ligands that
bind to them are important regulators of cell proliferation,
differentiation and survival. Dysregulation of this pathway, through
[epi]genetic alterations, results in enhanced signal transduction and
has been observed in numerous cancers. As such, the ErbB pathways
represent targets for therapeutic intervention and have resulted in
the development of a number of agents that are currently used in the
clinic. These include antibodies directed against ErbB1/ EGFR
(Erbitux®) and ErbB-2/Her-2 (Herceptin®), as well as small molecule
inhibitors of the ErbB1 tyrosine kinase (Iressa®, Tarceva®). An
alternative approach to reduce the mitogenic and survival signals from
the ErbB pathways is to identify inhibitors of the proteases
responsible for the cleavage and activation of the ligands that bind
to and activate the ErbB receptors. This proteolytic processing,
termed ectodomain shedding, has emerged as a critical step for the
functional activation of ErbB ligands and is mediated by members of
the ADAM family of zinc-dependent metalloproteases. Toward this end,
we have identified selective, orally bioavailable small molecule
inhibitors of ADAM proteases that block shedding of a number of ErbB
ligands (e.g. TGF-a, HBEGF, and heregulin) resulting in inhibition of
multiple ErbB pathways. The selective ADAM inhibitors INCB7839 and
INCB3619, block ErbB ligand shedding with potencies in the nanomolar
range in vitro and significantly inhibit tumor growth in vivo, with
efficacy equivalent to that achieved with the EGFR kinase inhibitor,
gefitinib (Iressa®). Tumor specimens from compound treated animals had
reduced Ki67 staining, a marker of proliferation, and decreased AKT
activity, similar to what was observed following treatment with agents
that directly target growth factor receptors. These ADAM inhibitors
also improve therapeutic responses to both cytotoxic agents (e.g.
paclitaxel) and targeted agents (e.g. trastuzumab or the anti-estrogen
fulvestrant). Importantly, the compounds showed no toxicities in a
two-week rodent safety study nor was there evidence of fibroplasia or
tendonitis, the dose-limiting toxicities associated with broadspectrum
matrix metalloprotease inhibitors (e.g. Marimastat). Thus, inhibition
of proteases responsible for activating ErbB pathways, through ligand
and/or receptor cleavage, may offer a potentially novel and well
tolerated therapeutic strategy for the treatment of human cancers.
Toward testing this therapeutic hypothesis, INCB7839 is currently in
clinical trials.

## 1083

## Phase I/II trial and pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic analysis
exploring a synergistic interaction between the histone deacetylase
inhibitor, valproic acid and the anthracycline, epirubicin.

## Munster PN, Minton SE, Marchion DC, Carter WB, Bicaku E, Lush
III R, Sullivan DM, Daud AI. H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa,
FL

Background:
In vivo and in vitro studies in breast cancer models show that
histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) potentiate
anthracycline-induced DNA damage without increasing toxicity.
Pre-exposure to an HDACi results in histone acetylation and chromatin
decondensation, thereby facilitating the access of anthracyclines to
the DNA substrate. Valproic acid (VPA) is a well-known anti-convulsant
that also inhibits HDACs. Epirubicin is a widely used
anthracycline.

Methods: The toxicity, efficacy,
pharmacokinetics (PK) and pharmacodynamics (PD) of a sequence-specific
administration of VPA and epirubicin were explored in a Phase I dose
escalation study with a dose expansion in breast cancer at the
maximally tolerated dose. An intravenous loading dose of VPA was
followed by 6 oral doses of VPA given twice daily. Epirubicin was
administered on day 3. Cycles were repeated every 21 days. Histone
acetylation, chromatin structural proteins and topoisomerase II levels
were evaluated in pre-(d1) and post- (day3) treatment tumor samples
and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Dose limiting toxicities were
assessed in cycle 1. Tumor progression and cardiac functions were
monitored every 6 weeks.

Results: To date, 25 patients [median
age 53 (43–78)] have been treated at six dose levels: VPA
(mg/kg/d)/epirubicin (mg/m2): 15/75, 30/75,
45/75, 60/75, 75/75 and 75/100. Tumor types included: breast (7),
melanoma (9), lung (3), cervical (1) and others (5). While VPA was
associated with dose-dependent somnolence, ataxia and confusion, it
did not exacerbate epirubicin-related myelosuppression,
nausea/vomiting or cardiac dysfunction. Despite a median number of 3
prior regimens, a pre-exposure to VPA prior to epirubicin was highly
active across different tumor types, including patients with prior
anthracycline exposure or in anthracycline-resistant tumors such as
melanoma and cervical cancer. Responses evaluable in 23 patients were
as follows:(complete/partial response 4/23 (17%); stable disease
≥12weeks 11/23 (48%); progression 8/23 (35%). A median number of 4
(1–8) treatment cycles were administered. In patients with breast
cancer, 2/7 had a confirmed partial response and 3/7 patients had
stable disease for ≥12 weeks. VPA PK and histone acetylation showed a
linear increase with dose.

Discussion: A sequence-specific
combination of VPA and epirubicin appears highly active without
exacerbation of epirubicin toxicity. VPA plasma levels exceeded
concentrations needed for in-vitro synergy. The noteworthy anti-tumor
activity seen in this heavily pretreated patient population should
warrant further exploration in patients with breast cancer.

## 1084

## Multicenter phase 2 study of XRP6258 in taxane-resistant metastatic
breast cancer (MBC) patients (pts).

## Pivot X, Koralewski P, Hidalgo JL, Chan A, Viens P, Schwartsmann
G, Brunel E, Ramazeilles C, Assadourian S, Lotz JP. CHU Jean- Minjoz,
Besancon, France; Oddzial Chemioterapii, Krakow, Poland; C.O.I.R,
Mendoza, Argentina; Mount Medical Centre, Perth, Australia; Institut
Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, France; Federal Univ, Porto Alegre,
Brazil; Sanofi Aventis, Antony, France; Hopital Tenon, Paris,
France

Background: XRP6258 is a new
semisynthetic taxane with a demonstrated broad spectrum of activity in
in vivo tumor models, particularly in taxane-resistant models.

Methods: Eligible pts have
histologically confirmed MBC resistant to prior taxane containing
therapy, measurable disease as per RECIST, and are aged 18–75 years,
ECOG PS 0–2. Taxane resistance is defined as progression within
12 months of adjuvant treatment or progression within 4 months of
first/second line treatment of metastatic disease or lack of response
after more than 3 months of treatment for MBC. XRP6258 was
administered as 1-hour intravenous infusion every 3 weeks at
20 mg/m2; in absence of any toxicity
> grade (gr) 2 during first cycle (cy), dose could be increased to
25 mg/m2 in subsequent cy. Premedication
prior to infusion included single intravenous administration of
antihistaminic anti- H1. Treatment was administered up to progression,
unacceptable toxicities or consent withdrawal. Primary endpoint was
overall response rate (ORR).

Results: 71 pts were enrolled and all
were treated. Median (range) age: 53 years (35–77), median (range) PS:
1 (0–2). 74.6% pts had visceral involvement. A total of 345 cy were
administered: median 4 (1–25), median relative dose intensity: 0.99.
The most common adverse events per pt were any gr/gr 3–4: fatigue
50.7%/8.5%, nausea 43.7%/1.4%, diarrhea 39.4%/2.8%, anorexia
25.4%/1.4%, myalgia 25.4%/0%, vomiting 23.9%/1.4%, infection without
neutropenia 18.3%/2.8%, neurosensory 16.9%/0%. Among these events, no
gr 4 was observed except for fatigue (1.4%). Hematological toxicities
per pt were: gr 3–4 neutropenia 73.2%, neutropenia gr4>5days 26.8%,
gr 3–4 thrombocytopenia 4.2%, neutropenic infection 4.2%, febrile
neutropenia 2.8%. One toxic death was reported on day 10 of Cy 1 and 1
death from unknown origin on day 22 of Cy 1. All pts were assessed for
efficacy: there were 2 CR, 8 PR, 27 SD, 29 PD, and 5 NE as per
investigator, giving an ORR of 14.1% (95%CI: 7.0–24.4). The median TTP
was 2.7 months (95%CI: 1.45–4.07), and the median OS was 12.3 months
(95%CI: 9.49–15.05).

Conclusions: XRP6258 at the dose of
20 mg/m2 is active and well tolerated in
MBC pts resistant to prior taxane containing therapy. These results
support further development.

## 1085

## Bortezomib and capecitabine in patients with metastatic breast
cancer previously treated with taxanes and/or anthracyclines.

## Schmid P, Schippinger W, Kiewe P, Lange W, Preiss J, Niederle N,
Brossart P, Freier W, Van de Velde H, Possinger K. Charite Campus
Mitte, Berlin, Germany; Universitaetsklinikum, Graz, Austria; Charite
Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany; Johanniter- Krankenhaus
Rheinhausen, Duisburg, Germany; Caritasklinik St. Theresia,
Saarbrücken, Germany; Klinikum Leverkusen, Leverkusen, Germany;
Universitaetsklinikum, Tuebingen, Germany; Practice for Oncology and
Hematology, Hildesheim, Germany; Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical
Research & Development, Beerse, Belgium

Background: The
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway plays an essential role in intracellular
degradation of key regulatory proteins that can affect cell cycle,
angiogenesis, adhesion and apoptosis. Bortezomib (VELCADE, PS-341) is
a first-in class selective inhibitor of the 26S proteasome. The oral
fluoropyrimidine capecitabine (Xeloda) has shown substantial activity
in taxane and/or anthracycline pretreated patients with metastatic
breast cancer. This phase I trial was initiated to determine the
maximum tolerated doses (MTD), efficacy and tolerability of combined
treatment with capecitabine and bortezomib in patients with metastatic
breast cancer previously treated with taxanes and/or
anthracyclines.

Patients and Methods: A total of
19 patients were treated with bortezomib
(1.0–1.3 mg/m2; days 1, 4, 8 & 15)
and capecitabine (1500–2500 mg/m2, days
1–14) in 3-weeks intervals. Dose limiting toxicity (DLT) was defined
as grade (G) 4 platelets, any G platelets with bleeding, G4 ANC
>4 days, febrile neutropenia, any >G2 nonhematologic toxicity
except alopecia, nausea or emesis, or any ≥G2 toxicity persisting over
day 35.

Results: The MTD were bortezomib
1.3 mg/m2 and capecitabine 2500 mg/m2.
Two DLTs were seen: G3 stomatitis in 1 out of 6 patients at 1.0/2000
and G3 diarrhea in 1 out of 6 patients at 1.3/2500. Hematologic and
non-hematological toxicities were generally mild to moderate with no
G4 toxicities being observed. G3 toxicities were reported for
platelets in 5 patients, elevation of transaminases in 2 patients and
stomatitis, diarrhea, nausea, asthenia, infection and peripheral
neuropathy in 1 patient each. Most common side effects were
thrombocytopenia (G1/2 29% of cycles, G3 12%), neutropenia (G1/2 28%),
nausea (G1/2 29%, G3 2%), diarrhea (G1/2 24%, G3 2%), hand-foot
syndrome (G1/2 30%), peripheral neuropathy (G1/2 26%, G3 2%), and
asthenia (G1/2 50%, G3 2%). To date 17 patients are assessable for
response. Two patients achieved a partial response (12%). Disease
stabilization was observed in 5 patients (29%).

Conclusion: The recommended
phase II doses are bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 and
capecitabine 2500 mg/m2 with stomatitis and
diarrhea being DLTs. Data suggest good tolerability and moderate
antitumor activity in anthracycline and taxane pretreated patients. A
phase II study has been initiate.D

## 1086

## High efficacy of the sigma antagonist rimcazole against an
endocrine insensitive, p53 mutant MDA-MB-231 xenograft preclinical
model.

## Appleyard MV, O’Neill MA, Murray KE, Spruce BA, Thompson AM.
University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom

Background: Breast cancers which are
endocrine insensitive and harbour inactive p53 are often also
resistant to chemotherapeutic agents. Sigma receptors, members of the
opioid family, present a novel therapeutic target in breast cancer.
The sigma receptor antagonist rimcazole, which has previously
progressed to phase 3 trials as an antipsychotic drug, inhibits the
growth of a wide range of tumour cell lines in vitro. We investigated
the efficacy of rimcazole against the hormone insensitive breast
cancer cell line MDA-MB-231 (which expresses sigma receptors but
contains nonfunctional p53) in a mouse xenograft model.

Methods: Nude mice were injected
subcutaneously with MDAMB- 231 cells. When tumours were in the range
10–20 mm3 mice were divided into 3
groups: 1 vehicle control (mice were injected with l H2O daily by the
intraperitoneal route); 2 rimcazole at the concentration of 10 mg/kg
(given by the intraperitoneal route daily); 3 rimcazole at the
concentration of 40 mg/kg (given by the intraperitoneal daily).
Rimcazole was freshly prepared daily and administered for upto
14 days. Animals were inspected daily, sacrificed at predetermined
timepoints and material harvested from the xenograft tumours.

Results: Signs of drug toxicity were
minimal with no weight-loss in the treated groups. Eleven days after
treatment, statistically significant reductions in growth rate
compared with the control groups were found: 85% for rimcazole at
10 mg/kg and over 100% for rimcazole at 40 mg/kg (Student’s t-test
p <0.05, n = 8). The tumour doubling time was 3.85 days in the
control group, 27 days in the group treated with rimcazole 10 mg/kg
and tumours treated with rimcazole at 40 mg/kg had regressed at this
time point. This pattern of regression was maintained at least until
the end of the experiment, 14 days after treatment.

Discussion: These preclinical data
demonstrate the activity of rimcazole against MDA-MB-231 xenograft
tumours at doses suitable for clinical use and show potential to
provide a rational basis for novel biological therapy in a clinically
challenging setting.

## 1087

## A phase II study of KOS-862 (epothilone D) in anthracycline and
taxane pretreated metastatic breast cancer: updated results.

## Buzdar A, Silverman P, Kaufman PA, Waintraub S, Doyle T, Kroener
J, Robinson P, Perez E, Zhang X, DeMario M. MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX; Univ. Hosp. Cleveland, Ireland Cancer Ctr, Cleveland, OH;
Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Ctr, Lebanon, NH; Hackensack Univ Medical
Ctr, Hackensack, NJ; Henry Ford Health Systems, Detroit, MI; Scripps
Clinic, La Jolla, CA; Fox Chase Cancer Ctr, Philadelphia, PA;
Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., Nutley, NJ

Background: KOS-862 (K) is Epothilone
D produced by recombinant DNA technology. K has demonstrated activity
in multiple breast cancer models, including taxane-resistant cell
lines. This phase II trial examines K efficacy and safety in women
with metastatic breast cancer (MBC) previously treated with
anthracycline (A) + taxane (T) chemotherapy.

Methods: Eligible patients are: MBC
and A + T treatment failure (defined as disease progression after both
A +T (adjuvant or metastatic) or inability to tolerate A or T due to
toxicity). Additional entry criteria: ECOG 0–1, baseline neuropathy ≤
grade 1, and no CNS metastases. K given as
100 mg/m2 90 min iv infusion wkly x 3
Q4 wks. H1/H2 antagonists + corticosteroids given 30–60 min prior to K
as infusion reaction prophylaxis. Blood samples for PK of K + its
major seco-metabolite are taken after 1st,
3rd+4th drug
administration.

Results:
Demographics:37 women (29
evaluable) received K from 2/04 to 4/05. Mean age 52.7 (29–87) yrs.
Mean treatment cycles 2.4 (1.6); 7 pts had ≥4 cycles, 3 pts had 6
cycles. Efficacy: 4 pts have had
confirmed PR (14% of evaluable pts), including 2 pts with hepatic
metastases who had >50% tumor reduction by RECIST. One additional
pt with cutaneous-based metastatic disease has had unconfirmed PR. All
confirmed PR pts had adjuvant taxane therapy; 3 of 4 also had taxane
therapy for metastatic disease. Safety: Data available for 27 pts. Peripheral sensory
neuropathy was observed in 21 of 27 pts (3 of these grade 3). Other
grade 3 neurologic toxicities are ataxia and dizziness. Overall, 18.5%
of pts report any grade 3 neurotoxicity. Neurologic toxicities limited
to grade 1/2 severity include cognitive
disorder/confusion/disorientation, memory impairment/amnesia,
insomnia, hallucinations, and visual changes. Principal non neurologic
toxicities are fatigue (including 1 grade 3), nausea (including 1
grade 3), diarrhea, flushing, and anorexia. PK (n = 21): KOS-862 Cmax
3.95±1.41 ug/mL, AUCinf 19.8±12.3 h·ug/mL, CL
13.7±10.3 L/hr, Vz 203±135 L and T1/2
11.4±5.7 hr. Seco-metabolite is 43±19% of KOS-862.

Conclusions: Encouraging antitumor
activity has been demonstrated for K (4 confirmed partial responses
(RECIST)) in women with A +T pretreated MBC. PK data are similar to
the phase I trials and suggest moderate interpatient variability.
Neurotoxicities are the most common safety-related events, but these
have rarely resulted in discontinuation of K treatments. Accrual
continues in the 2nd Simon stage of this trial (53 evaluable pts
total) in order to determine K activity in this refractory
population.

## 1088

## A phase I/II study of oral capecitabine (X) and vinorelbine (V) as
second- or -third line chemotherapy in anthracycline/ taxane pretreated
patients (pts) with metastatic breast cancer (MBC).

## Kellokumpu-Lehtinen P, Sjöström J, Sunela K, Lehtinen I, Joensuu
H. Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland; Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland

Background: Approximatelyhalf of
patients (pts) have responded to the combination of X and intravenous
V in phase I-II studies with a good safety profile. Few overlapping
toxicities and oral formulations make X plus oral V (X+V) an
attractive new combination for treating anthracycline or/and taxane
pretreated pts. Methods: To evaluate
this all-oral combination, we conducted a phase I/II in pts with MBC
keeping X dose standard (1000 mg/m2 twice
daily on days 2–6 and 8–14) and increasing the dose of V from
40 mg/m2 to
80 mg/m2 on days 1 and 7 to determine
the recommended dose of V, as well as the safety profile and the
efficacy of the combination. The eligibility criteria included MBC,
age >18, ECOG PS ≤2, a prior anthracyline and/or taxane combination
for the treatment of MBC and adequate major organ function. The V dose
escalation was performed between 3 pts cohorts, but the dose of V
could also been increased to next level in the same patient after
three cycles if there were no dose limiting toxicities at the used
dose level.

Results: 21 pts were enrolled. The
median age was 52 years (range 32–70); sites involved: bone 18 (86%)
liver 10 (48%), lung/pleura 5 (24%), lymph nodes/soft tissue 2 (1%)
and 13 pts (62%) had ≥2 metastatic sites. The median number of cycles
was 8 (range 1–21) and altogether 173 cycles were delivered. The
treatment was well tolerated. Grade 1–2 toxicities were recorded in 28
(85%) of the 35 cycles at V dose 40 mg/m2,
in 27 (84%) of the 32 cycles at V dose
50 mg/m2, in 48 (83%) of the 58 cycles
at V dose 60 mg/m2, in 30 (91%) of the 33
cycles at V dose 70 mg/m2 and in 13 of the
13 cycles (100%) at the V dose level
80 mg/m2 The respective figures for
Grade 3–4 toxicities were 3 (9%), 1 (3%), 4 (7%), 3 (9%) and 1(8%).
The maximum tolerated V dose could not be determined. However, the
most common well-tolerated V dose in these quite heavily pretreated
patients was 60 mg/m2. In one patient the
dose was reduced to 30 mg/m2 and in only 2
patients the dose could be escalated up to
80 mg/m2. We observed 2 partial
responses (5 and 16+ mo months), 8 stable disease (SD) (SD lasting
over 6 months in 5 pts), 9 progressive disease and 2 pts were non
evaluable Thus the clinical benefit was in 7/19 evaluable pts (37
%)

Conclusion: Oral combination of X and
V is feasible and well tolerated at the V doses ranging from
40–80 mg/m2 and the combination is
active in anthracycline/taxane pretreated pts.

## 1089

## Phase II, open label study of SB-715992 (Ispinesib) in subjects
with advanced or metastatic breast cancer.

## Miller K, Ng C, Ang P, Brufsky AM, Lee SC, Dees EC, Piccart M,
Verrill M, Wardley A, Loftiss J, Bal J, Yeoh S, Hodge J, Williams D,
Dar M, Ho PTC. IU Cancer Ctr, Indianpolis, IN; Univ Malaya Medical
Ctr, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; National Cancer Ctr, Singapore; UPMC,
Pittsburgh, PA; Nat Univ Hosp, Singapore; UNC, Chapel Hill, NC;
Institut Jules Bordet, Brussels, Belgium; Newcastle General Hosp,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom; Christie Hosp, Manchester, United
Kingdom; GSK, RTP, NC, with Cytokinetics Inc., S San Francisco,
CA
Kinesin spindle protein (KSP), a novel molecular target for
anticancer therapy, is expressed only in dividing cells and is
required early in mitosis for establishment of mitotic spindle
bipolarity and for cell cycle progression through mitosis. KSP is
abundantly expressed in breast cancer tissue relative to normal breast
tissue. Ispinesib, a selective inhibitor of KSP, can suppress growth
of MX-1, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 breast tumor cell lines in vitro, with IC50s ranging from 1 to
10 nM. A Ph I study was conducted evaluating dosing once every
21 days. The most common adverse events (AEs) included grade (G) 1–4
neutropenia (nadir Day 8 with resolution within 2–4 days), G1-3
diarrhea, and G1–3 fatigue. A Ph II dose of
18 mg/m2 was selected based on prolonged
(≥5 days) G4 neutropenia observed as the dose-limiting
toxicity.
This two stage study was conducted to assess overall response rate
of ispinesib following IV administration of
18 mg/m2 over 1 hr once every 21 days.
Thirty evaluable patients (pts) were required to complete Stage 1. pts
with advanced breast cancer, either refractory or relapsed after
treatment with both an anthracycline and taxane-based chemotherapy
regimen, who had received ≤2 prior chemotherapy regimens were
eligible. An evaluable pt was defined as one who met entry criteria,
completed at least 2 cycles or withdrew prior to the completion of
cycle (C) 2 due to progressive disease (PD). If ≥3 pts achieved a PR
or CR, 25 additional pts were to be enrolled in Stage 2. Disease
assessments were performed every 2 cycles per RECIST. An independent,
blinded reviewer (IBR) verified all baseline and subsequent scans for
evidence of measurable disease and response.
Thirty-four pts (34 F, median age 49 yrs) were enrolled. A median
of 2 and a total of 77 C (3 wks = 1 C) were completed. Four pts were
dose reduced to 15 mg/m2, all at C2, due to
neutropenia. The most common AEs were G4 neutropenia (15 events), G1
infusion site pain (13 events), G1 fatigue (7 events) and G1 anorexia
(5 events). Twenty-two pts had PD at the end of C2. Stable disease
(SD) (3–6 cycles) was the best response in 7 pts, whereas 1 pt
achieved a PR (IBR confirmed from C2 to C6). Two pts remained on study
through C6. At present, 4 pts continue on study. Data from Stage 1 is
currently being analyze.D
At the dose and schedule evaluated, ispinesib had a manageable
tolerability profile in this pt population. SD with a single PR was
the best response observed in this preliminary data set.

## 1090

## Phase I study of irinotecan followed by capecitabine in patients
with advanced breast carcinoma.

## O’Connor T, Rustum Y, Levine E, Kepner J, Creaven P. Roswell
Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY

Background: Data from
preclinical and pilot studies performed at Roswell Park Cancer
Institute suggested that when irinotecan is given with 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU), efficacy is affected by the sequence of drug administration.
Pre-treatment with irinotecan 24 hrs before 5-FU increases the number
of tumor cells in S-phase and antitumor activity in a preclinical
system. These data provided the rationale for the evaluation of
irinotecan and capecitabine, a 5- FU prodrug, sequentially
administered in patients with advanced breast cancer.
The main objective of this
study was to determine the MTD and identify dose-limiting toxicities
of capecitabine and irinotecan. Additionally, the degree of
accumulation of cells in S-phase in tumor biopsies obtained at 24 hrs
after the first dose of irinotecan was assayed in consenting patients.
The MTD of irinotecan was defined as the dose that results in >50%
increase in recruitment of cells into S-phase in 2/3 patient tumors,
quantitated by immunohistochemistry using cyclin A antibody and
whenever possible confirmed by Flow Cytometry. The starting dose of
irinotecan was 80 mg/m2 given over 90 min
on d 1,8,22,29 and capecitabine
1500 mg/m2/d 2–15 and d 23–36.

Patients: Eligible patients had
metastatic breast cancer with progression on at least 1 prior
chemotherapy regimen in the metastatic setting with an expected
survival of at least 3 mos and ECOG 0–2. Patients treated with prior
capecitabine or irinotecan were eligible. Twelve patients were
enrolled and treated; one continues on cycle 3. The median number of
prior chemotherapy regimens was 3 (range 1–7). Sequential tumor
biopsies were performed on five patients. Patients continued on study
drug until disease progression or significant toxicity. Evaluation for
response was performed after one cycle.

Results: The first three
patients treated exhibited modulation in cyclin A index on tumor
biopsy as defined by the study, establishing the modulatory dose of
irinotecan as 80 mg/m2. Overall, 4/5
biopsies showed modulation. DLTs were assessed during the first cycle
of therapy. Two DLTs (grade 3 nausea, vomiting, and dehydration; grade
3 pneumonia, hypoxia, hypotension) were seen at dose level 2 of
capecitabine (2000 mg/m2/day) and the first
cohort was expanded. There were no DLTs for patients treated at DL 1.
No grade 3–4 toxicities occurred at DL 1. Seven patients were
evaluable for response following one cycle of treatment (partial
response 1, stable disease 4, progressive disease 2). Of the five
inevaluable patients, two experienced DLT, one received 50% of the
planned capecitabine dose, one progressed prior to evaluation, and one
withdrew consent.

Conclusions: Irinotecan
80 mg/m2 d 1,8,22,29 in combination with
capecitabine 1500 mg/m2/d in divided dose d
2–15 and d 23–36 has an acceptable toxicity profile and resulted in
modulation of S-phase in 4/5 specimens examined. Further studies of
the modulatory effect of irinotecan are planne.D

## 1091

## Plasma kinetics and uptake of a cholesterol-rich microemulsion
(LDE) associated to a derivative paclitaxel by neoplastic breast
tissue.

## Rodrigues DG, Pires LA, Hegg R, Graziani SR, Maranhao RC. Heart
Institute - USP, SP, São Paulo, Brazil; USP, SP, Sao Paulo,
Brazil

Background: Previously we described
the association of paclitaxel to a cholesterol-rich nanoemulsion (LDE)
that binds to low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors and concentrates
in neoplastic tissues. The association of the drug is stable,
preserves the anti-proliferative activity of the drug and reduces the
toxicity to animals. The present study was designed to determine the
plasma kinetics of the association LDE:paclitaxel oleate and to verify
whether the complex has the ability to concentrate in malignant breast
cancer.

Material and Methods: To facilitate
the association to LDE, paclitaxel is derivatized with oleic acid.
[3H]paclitaxel oleate associated to LDE
labeled with [14C]-Cholesteryl oleate was
intravenously injected into 3 patients with breast cancer (60±7 yr.)
24 h before surgery. Blood samples were collected over the 24 h period
to determine the plasma decay curves of the radioactive labels.
Radioactivity present in plasma aliquots was quantified in a
scintillation solution and the pharmacokinetic parameters were
calculated by compartmental analysis. Specimens of tumors and normal
breast excised during the surgery were collected for lipid extraction,
separation by thin layer chromatography and radioactive counting. The
experimental protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of the
hospital and an informed consent was obtained from each
participant.

Results: Fractional clearance rate
(FCR) of LDE and of the drug were similar (0.030±0.026 e 0.018±0.018,
respectively, P = 0.5742). The uptake of both
[14C]-LDE and
[3H]-paclitaxel oleate by breast
malignant tissue was two and three fold greater than that of the
normal breast tissue, respectively (LDE uptake = 680±481 and 290±247
and paclitaxel oleate uptake = 1134±1549 c.p.m./g and 469±695,
respectively). Paclitaxel oleate has a T1/2 = 19 h, AUC =1.4mg/h/L,
VSS = 41.8 L and CL = 1.5 L/h.

Discussion: Our results indicate that
most of the drug is retained in the microemulsion particles until its
removal from the circulation and internalization by the cells. In
addition, we showed that when paclitaxel is associated with LDE, the
drug can be concentrated in malignant breast tissues while deviating
from the normal tissue. Therefore, LDE can be used to target
paclitaxel against malignant breast cells.

## 1092

## Preliminary results of phase I trial of carboplatin (CP) in
combination with ABI-007 administered weekly or every 3 weeks in patients
(pts) with solid tumors.

## Stinchcombe TE, Dees EC, Walko CM, Lindley C, Collichio FA,
Carey LA, Turner JE, Mu H, Socinski MA. University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC; Abraxis Oncology, Los Angeles, CA

Background: CP in combination with
paclitaxel produced objective responses in 62% of 95 women with
advanced breast cancer (Loesch et al, JCO 20:3857, 2002). ABI-007
(AbraxaneTM) is an albumin-bound
particle form of paclitaxel that has recently been shown to increase
the response rate and time tumor progression to paclitaxel (Gradishar
et al, JCO 2005, in press).

Methods: We are currently conducting
a Phase I study to determine the recommended Phase II dose (RP2D) of
ABI-007 administered either weekly (d1, 8, 15 q 28 days) or on day 1
every 3 weeks in combination with carboplatin AUC 6 on day 1. On the
days both drugs were administered, ABI-007 preceded CP except in cycle
2. Pharmacokinetics (PK) were performed during cycles 1 and 2 to
determine if there was a sequence-dependent interaction between the
two drugs. To date 15 pts (4 NSCLC, 4 melanoma, 2 breast, 5 other)
have been treated: ABI-007 weekly 6 pts (4 and 2 @ 100 and
125 mg/m2, respectively) and q3w (3 each
at 220, 260, and 300 mg/m2).

Results: Toxicities by maximum grade
have included Gr 4 neutropenia, Gr 4 thrombocytopenia, Gr 3 febrile
neutropenia Gr 3 anemia, Gr 2 nausea and constipation and Gr 1
neuropathy. The maximum tolerated dose has not yet been determined for
either regimen. 4 PRs have occurred in pts with melanoma, SCLC and
NSCLC and 1 CR has occurred in a pt with NSCLC.

Conclusion: Trial is currently
ongoing. Based on preliminary data the combination appears to be well
tolerated and has demostrated activity. PK, toxicity, and response
data will be presente.D

## 1093

## The conjugation of doxaliform to alpha(v) beta3 ( )- targeting peptides provides a potential therapeutic
alternative for the management of -overexpressing breast carcinomas.

## Vellon L, Menendez JA, Burkhart DJ, Kalet BT, Koch TH, Lupu R.
Evanston Northwestern Healthcare Research Institute, Evanston, IL;
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL;
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO

Background: Significant limitations
for doxorubicin treatment of cancer are drug resistance and chronic
cardiotoxicity. One of the alternatives to reduce the side effects of
chemotherapeutics like doxorubicin is the selective delivery to cancer
cells and/or associated vasculature. Considering its important role in
tumor metastasis and angiogenesis, may offer a good molecular target for drug delivery.
Here, we have analyzed the effects of a novel conjugate of the prodrug
doxaliform, to a cyclic -targeting peptide (RGD-fK-d-DOXSF) in highly
invasive breast cancer models overexpressing (MDA-MB-231 and Hs578T).

Materials and Methods: Breast cancer
cell models were maintained in IMEM medium supplemented with 5% FBS.
Cell viability in response to the conjugate RGD-fK-d-DOXSF or
doxorubicin was assessed by the MTT assay. DNA content and drug uptake
was assessed by flow cytometry.

Results: Interestingly, the conjugate
RGD-fKd- DOXSF dramatically decreases cell viability of MDA-MB-231 and
Hs578T cells. Moreover, flow cytometric analysis showed that
RGD-fK-d-DOXSF exerted dramatically altered cell cycle progression of
MDA-MB-231 and Hs578T breast cancer cells, inducing G2/M arrest and
apoptosis. Of note, the extent of the effects of RGD-fK-d-DOXSF was
related to the levels of expression in the cells (Hs578T>>MDA-MB-231),
thus proving the specificity of target ( ). To additionally control the specificity of the
conjugate RGD-fK-d-DOXSF for its integrin target, we pretreated
MDA-MB-231 as well as Hs578T cells with small peptidomimetic
antagonists of in the presence or the absence of rising
concentrations of RGD-fK-d-DOXSF or doxorubicin. Interestingly,
functional blockade of strongly antagonized the effects of the conjugate
RGD-fK-d-DOXSF, indicating that blockade of the RGD-binding site of
 impaired the effects of RGD-fK-d-DOXSF. Flow
cytometric analysis showed that the cellular uptake of the conjugate
is lower than that of doxorubicin in -overexpressing breast cancer models; however, the
uptake of RGD-fK-d-DOXSF is not significant in the - negative MCF-7 cells.

Discussion: Collectively, the present
data suggest that the conjugate RGD-fK-d-DOXSF is as effective as
doxorubicin but would bind the cells at those sites on the membrane
where is present, thus being delivered primarily to
 - overexpressing cells. Therefore, the conjugation of
doxaliform to -targeting peptides would reduce doxorubicin side
effects while serving to the purpose of specifically hit both, tumor
cells as well as supporting vasculature in -overexpressing breast carcinomas.

## 1094

## Rifampin reduces exposure to sunitinib malate (SU11248) in
Caucasian and Japanese populations.

## Bello CL, Houk B, Sarapa N, Smeraglia J, Huang X, Klamerus KJ.
Pfizer Global R&D, La Jolla, CA

## Background
Sunitinib malate is an oral multitargeted tyrosine kinase
inhibitor that specifically inhibits VEGFR, PDGFR, KIT, RET and
FLT3. It has demonstrated single-agent antiangiogenic and antitumor
activities in clinical trials in a variety of advanced solid
tumors, including gastrointestinal stromal tumor, metastatic renal
cell carcinoma and metastatic breast cancer. Sunitinib is
metabolized to SU12662, its equipotent metabolite, in a reaction
catalyzed by cytochrome P450 (CYP) 3A4. CYP34A also metabolizes
SU12662. This suggests that exposure to sunitinib may be reduced
when sunitinib is used concomitantly with drugs that induce
CYP3A4.

## Materials and methods
In this open-label, two-way crossover drug-interaction study,
sunitinib was coadministered with rifampin, a potent inducer of
CYP3A4, in healthy male volunteers. Volunteers were randomized to
receive initial treatment with either sunitinib alone (Treatment A)
or rifampin and sunitinib together (Treatment B), and then crossed
over to the other treatment after a 2-week washout period.
Treatment A consisted of a single 50-mg oral dose of sunitinib on
day 1. Treatment B consisted of rifampin 600 mg/day orally for
17 days combined with a single 50-mg oral dose of sunitinib on day
8. Blood samples were collected pre-sunitinib dosing and for
17 days following sunitinib administration in both Treatments A and
B for determination of sunitinib and SU12662 concentrations. In
both treatment arms, doses of sunitinib were administered in the
morning after an overnight fast of at least 8 hours. In order to
derive preliminary data on inter-ethnic pharmacokinetics, sunitinib
was administered to Caucasian (n = 13) or Japanese (n = 15) males,
with and without CYP3A4 induction by rifampin.

## Results
Coadministration of sunitinib and rifampin was associated with
4.8- and 4.7-fold reductions in sunitinib
AUClast (267 vs. 1285 h·ng/mL) and
AUC0-∞ (278 vs. 1294 h·ng/mL) compared
with administration of sunitinib alone. Coadministration was also
associated with a 2.3-fold reduction in sunitinib
Cmax (13.0 vs. 29.5 ng/mL). In terms of
the active metabolite SU12662, coadministration of sunitinib and
rifampin was associated with a 1.3-fold increase in AUC and a
2.4-fold increase in Cmax. The PK results
with and without coadministration of rifampin were similar in both
ethnic groups.

## Conclusions
Coadministration of sunitinib with drugs that induce CYP3A4
reduces exposure to sunitinib and should be avoided when possible
or consideration given to a dose adjustment. The lack of ethnic
differences supports the use of a common sunitinib starting dose
and schedule in Caucasian and Japanese populations.

## 1095

## Trastuzumab (T) and KOS-953 (17-AAG) is feasible and active in
patients (pts) with metastatic breast cancer: preliminary results of a
phase 1/2 study.

## Modi S, Stopeck A, Gordon MS, Solit D, Bagatelle R, Flores S,
Cohen J, Block H, Cropp GF, Rosen N, Johnson RG, Hannah AL, Hudis C.
Cancer Center, New York, NY; Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson/Scottsdale,
AZ; Kosan Biosciences Inc., Hayward, CA

Background: KOS-953 (17-AAG in a
novel cremophor-based formulation) binds to and inhibits the activity
of Hsp90, resulting in degradation of client proteins. One of the most
sensitive client proteins is the HER2 receptor. In vivo, 17-AAG induces rapid degradation
of HER2 in a HER2-expressing breast cancer cell line with loss of AKT
phosphorylation, cyclin D2 and tumor growth inhibition.

Objectives: Ph 1: define the
recommended dose (RP2D) and toxicity of KOS-953 in combination with
standard doses of T in pts with solid tumors. Ph 2: determine the
objective response rate in pts with HER2+ metastatic breast cancer
(MBC) with progression following treatment with T. PK are performed on
KOS-953, its active metabolite and T. Leucocytes are purified to
investigate changes in intracellular signaling proteins by
immunoblot.

Methods:Eligible pts for the Ph 1
portion had advanced solid tumors; for Ph 2: HER2 (+) disease with
progression on T with 1 chemotherapy was required. In Ph 1,pts receive
standard weekly doses of T followed by KOS-953 in escalating doses via
weekly IV infusions over 2 hrs. Dose escalation follows 3+3 rules; the
RP2D will produce DLT in no more than 1/6 evaluable pts.

Results: As of 25May05, 16 pts (13
female; 11 with MBC; median age 68 yrs, range 33–87; median KPS 90;
prior regimens for metastatic disease 2, range 0–7 were enrolled in 4
dose levels (225, 300, 375 and 450 mg/m2
with 4, 3, 8 and 1 pt treated per dose level, respectively). DLT was
first observed at 375 mg/m2 in 1 out of
8 pts treated, consisting of 2-week dose delay to allow recovery from
toxicities of Gr 4 fatigue, Gr 2 nausea and anorexia, and Gr 1
abdominal pain. One other pt was dose reduced at this level due to Gr
1–2 elevations in AST/ALT. Drug-related Gr 3 toxicity was limited to 1
episode of emesis and hypersensitivity. Other Gr 1–2 drug-related
toxicity: nausea (n = 8), diarrhea (n = 8), fatigue (n = 7), anorexia
(n = 5), emesis (n = 4), headache (n = 4) and maculopapular rash
(n = 4). PK of parent drug (225 and
300 mg/m2 only):
t1/22.8±1.6 h; clearance 42.9±10.9 L/hr;
Vz 159±72.3 L. Cmax and AUCtot (300 mg/m2):
4260 ng/mL and 15263 ng/ mL*h. Metabolite reached Tmax 30 min after
end-of-infusion with similar AUC and longer
t1/2 of 5.6 hr. Tumor responses by CT
and PET-CT were seen in 3 pts. PD testing shows that AKT and CD4 in
leucocytes is decreased, together with reactive induction of
Hsp70/72.

Conclusions: Definition of RP2D dose
is pending, with escalation to 450 mg/m2 in
progress. PK parameters for 17-AAG in this formulation at this dose
range are similar to KOS-953 monotherapy and previous formulation.
Preliminary signs of activity in pts with MBC, previously treated with
T, have been observe.D Updated data will be available at the time of
the presentation.

## 1096

## c-jun activation is associated with angiogenesis in invasive breast
cancer.

## Vleugel MM, Greijer AE, Bos R, van der Wall E, van Diest PJ.
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands; VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands
c-Jun is a component of the transcription factor AP-I, which binds
and activates transcription at TRE/AP-I elements. The transcriptional
activity of c-Jun is regulated by phosphorylation of c-Jun at
Ser63/73. Extracellular signals, including growth factors,
transforming oncoproteins and UV irradiation stimulate
phosphorlylation of c-Jun at Ser 63/73 and activate c-Jun dependent
transcription. Thereby, activated c-Jun potentially plays an important
role in carcinogenesis and cancer progression. Indeed, c-Jun has
recently been implicated in angiogenesis. However, most knowledge on
c-Jun has been gathered in model systems and little translational work
has been performed. The aim of this study was to evaluate expression
patterns of activated c-Jun in breast cancer, in relation to various
other important biomarkers and clinicopathological data.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on 103 cases of invasive breast
cancer with an antibody recognizing phosphorylated c-Jun at Serine
73.
Activated c-Jun showed a predominantly nuclear expression at the
invasive front in 38% of invasive breast cancer cases in varying
percentages (1–20% of nuclei, mean 4%). Furthermore, expression of
activated c-Jun was seen in the invasive front in mitotic cells of 40%
of cases, sometimes however also centrally in the tumours.
Accompanying DCIS showed similar expression patterns. Occasionally,
fibroblasts, endothelial and benign breast cells showed nuclear
expression. Activated nuclear c-Jun expression showed positive
correlations with expression of hyperphosphorylated pRb, VEGF and with
microvessel density. Mitotic c-Jun expression showed positive
relations with pRb, and microvessel density. Stromal c-Jun expression
showed positive relations with microvessel density. In survival
analysis, no significant relation was found with activated c-Jun
expression and survival although a trend with poor survival was found
for mitotic cells overexpressing activated c- Jun (p = 0.09).
In conclusion, activated c-Jun is mainly expressed at the invasive
front in invasive breast cancer where most proliferation and
angiogenesis takes place. Indeed, it is often expressed in mitotic
cells, and associated with angiogenesis. As earlier studies have
established a functional link between activated c-Jun and
angiogenesis, c-Jun/AP-1 targeting may provide new ways to block
tumour angiogenesis.

## 1097

## Lymphangiogenesis and human breast cancer.

## Cunnick GH, Jiang WG, Douglas-Jones A, Watkins G, Gomez KF,
Mokbel K, Mansel RE. University of Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff,
Wales, United Kingdom; St. George’s Hospital, Tooting, London, United
Kingdom

Aims: To determine whether
lymphangiogenesis and lymphatic density correlated with nodal
metastasis. Using all known lymphatic markers (LYVE-1, Prox1,
Podoplanin, 5-nucleotidase and VEGFR- 3), lymphangiogenesis was
indirectly quantified by measuring mRNA expression of the markers,
using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (QPCR) methods. Lymphatic
density was semiquantified in tissues using immunohistochemistry
(IHC).

Methods: 120 invasive breast cancers
and 33 normal breast samples were studied. Tumour details were blinded
until the end of the study. The following cell lines were also used:
MCF7 and MDMBA- 231 (breast cancers), MRC-5 (fibroblasts) and human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Conventional PCR and
Real-time QPCR was performed on cDNAs from breast samples and cell
lines, using primers specific for each marker - lymphatic markers:
LYVE-1, Prox1, Podoplanin, 5-nucleotidase and VEGFR- 3, and
lympangiogenic factors: VEGF-C and VEGF-D. Expression levels were
compared between the different lymph node groups and different
prognostic categories. IHC was used to identify lymphatics and
lymphangiogenic factors, using, anti-LYVE-1, antipodoplanin, VEGFR-2,
VEGFR-3, VEGF-C and VEGF-D antibodies, respectively

Results: The six endothelial markers
were expressed in HUVECs. VEGF-C and VEGF-D were expressed in the
aggressive breast cancer cells, MD-MBA-231. Expression of all
lymphatic endothelial markers and growth factors was significantly
higher in breast cancer than normal breast tissue (table 1).
Expression was higher in tumours which had metastasised to regional
lymph nodes than those which had not, although these differences were
not significant. Expression in poor prognosis tumours (Nottingham
Prognostic Index) was higher than good prognosis tumours. LYVE- 1,
VEGF-R2 and VEGF-R3 proteins stained strongly in breast tissues. In
breast cancer, there was stronger lymphatic staining in peritumour
tissues and to a limited degree, intra-tumour lymphatics. Both breast
cancer cells and stromal cells stained with VEGF-D and VEGF-C,
although much stronger in the latter.

Conclusions: Lymphangiogenesis was
higher in cancer compared to normal breast tissue and
non-significantly higher in node positive tumours than node negative.
Lymphatic density appeared higher in and around tumours than in normal
breast tissue. Expression of Markers in Tumour & Normal Breast.
[Mean±s.d.(n)] 

## 1098

## A histomorphological study of tumor lymphangiogenesis in
inflammatory and non-inflammatory breast cancer.

## Van der Auwera I, Van den Eynden GG, Van Laere SJ, Colpaert CG,
van Dam P, Van Marck EA, Vermeulen PB, Dirix LY. Laboratory of
Pathology University of Antwerp/University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem;
Oncology Centre, General Hospital St-Augustinus, Wilrijk, Antwerp,
Belgium
At the time of diagnosis, metastatic dissemination of tumor cells
via the lymphatic system has occurred in most patients with
inflammatory breast cancer (IBC). High mRNA levels of lymphangiogenic
factors are found in IBC1. Whether the lymphatic spread of breast
cancer is dependent on lymphangiogenesis and/or invasion of
pre-existing lymph vessels (LVs) remains unclear. Quantification
methods of lymphangiogenesis need further optimization and
standardization to resolve current controversy. We aimed to identify
the most suitable marker to visualize LVs in breast cancer and to
obtain quantitative morphological data on lymphangiogenesis in
(non-)IBC.
Immunohistochemical staining patterns of podoplanin, LYVE-1,
prox-1, D2-40, CD31, CD34 and FVIII were compared in 20 serial
sections of (non-)IBC. Relative LV area (LVA), LV perimeters (LVP),
counts (LVN) and lymphatic endothelial cell proliferation (LECP) were
measured in D2-40/Ki-67-stained sections of 10 normal breast tissues,
29 IBCs and 56 non-IBCs. All parameters were assessed in 3 hotspots,
both in the tumor parenchyma and at the tumor margin. D2-40 was the
most suitable antibody for staining peri- and intratumoral LVs.
Respectively 50.5% and 35.1% of D2-40 stained LVs were also positive
for podoplanin and prox- 1. Despite its strong expression on
peritumoral LVs, LYVE-1 showed weak or no immunoreactivity on
intratumoral LVs. D2- 40 and FVIII showed a mutually exclusive
vascular expression pattern. D2-40-stained intratumoral LVs were
present in 80% of non-IBCs and 82.8% of IBCs. In non-IBC, LVs located
in the tumor parenchyma were smaller and less numerous than at the
tumor margin (P<0.0001), while in IBC, intra- and peritumoral
parameters were not different. None of the peritumoral parameters was
different in IBC and non-IBC. LVs located in the tumor parenchyma of
IBC covered a larger tumor area and were larger and more numerous than
LVs located in the tumor parenchyma of non-IB:C median relative
LVAmean was 0.84% in IBC and 0.33% in non-IBC (P = 0.01); median
LVPmax was 432.64 m in IBC and 3 44.52 m in non-IBC (P = 0.04); median LVNmax was 9 in IBC
and 6 in non-IBC (P = 0.05). LECP at the tumor margin was higher in
IBC than in non-IB:C median LECP was 5.74% in IBC and 1.83% in non-IBC
(P = 0.005).
The presence of dividing lymphatic endothelial cells suggests that
there is lymphangiogenesis in breast cancer. In addition to
lymphangiogenesis, pre-existing LVs are being incorporated in IBC. We
propose D2-40/Ki-67 immunohistochemistry to quantify LECP as a
standard technique for assessing lymphangiogenesis in breast
cancer.

1Van der Auwera I et al. Increased
angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in inflammatory versus
non-inflammatory breast cancer by real-time RT-PCR gene expression
quantification. Clin Cancer Res 10(23):7965–71 (2004)

## 1099

## Vascular endothelial growth inhibitor (VEGI), an antiangiogenic
factor, in human breast cancer.

## Parr C, Gan C, Harrison G, Jiang WG. Wales College of Medicine,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom

Background: Vascular Endothelial
Growth Inhibitor (VEGI) is a new anti-angiogenic cytokine that belongs
to the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) family. Very little is known about
the significance of VEGI in human cancer. This study examined the
function of VEGI and analysed VEGI levels in human breast cancer in
relation to clinical parameters.

Material and Methods: VEGI expression
and distribution was examined using RT-PCR and Western Blotting (on a
range of 24 normal and cancer cell lines), immuno-histochemically
(patient samples of both normal and breast cancer tissue), and
quantitatively using real-time quantitative PCR on a cohort of human
breast cancer tissue (n = 95) and background breast tissue (n = 34).
To assess the biological function of VEGI we also employed a ribozyme
transgene system to knockout the expression of VEGI in a human breast
cancer cell line (MDA-MB-231). The effect of VEGI elimination was
assessed through a series of in
vitro studies.

Results: RT-PCR and IHC staining
revealed that VEGI expression was dramatically reduced in the breast
cancer tissues compared to the normal breast tissues. In addition,
endothelial cells and breast cancer cells of low invasive nature
demonstrated the highest levels VEGI expression. Quantitative PCR
demonstrated that VEGI expression was significantly decreased
(p = 0.048) in patients with an overall poor prognosis (69.5±21
copies/ml), compared to those with a good prognosis (102±14
copies/ml). However, no significant correlations were observed in
comparison of tumour grade, nodal involvement, and tumour node
metastasis Q-PCR values. Importantly, knockout of VEGI expression
resulted in a significant increase (p = 0.008) in vessel formation in
a breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) and endothelial cell (HECV) co-culture
system.

Discussion: This is the first study
to examine VEGI in breast cancer. We report that VEGI is an
anti-angiogenic factor that may display prognostic value in breast
cancer patients, as reduced levels of VEGI correlated with an overall
poor prognosis for breast cancer patients.

## 1100

## Tamoxifen increases matrix metalloproteinase 2 and 9 activities and
endostatin levels in breast cancer tumors in vivo.

## Nilsson UW, Dabrosin C. University Hospital, Linköping,
Sweden
The extracellular microenvironment of the local host tissue is of
utmost importance throughout cancer progression. Matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are a family of endopeptidases involved in
the degradation and remodeling of the extracellular matrix. These
proteases seem to have dual functions in cancer. In addition to
degrading basement membrane and thereby enabling invasion and
angiogenesis, MMPs also form anti-angiogenic fragments such as
endostatin. Sex steroids play a dominant role in breast carcinogenesis
and tumor growth but the mechanisms are not fully explored. In this
study we show that estrogen and the anti-estrogen tamoxifen affect MMP
activities in breast cancer cells (MCF-7) in vitro. However, in vivo,
the activation of MMPs occurs mainly in the extracellular environment
under the influence of all cell types present in the tissue.
Endostatin is also generated by cleavage of collagen in the
extracellular matrix. Hence, a direct measurement of MMP activity, and
endostatin direct in tumor tissue in vivo is necessary. Therefore, we
used microdialysis to measure the extracellular activity of MMP-2 and
MMP-9 in solid MCF-7 tumors in nude mice after treatment with estrogen
and tamoxifen. The microdialysis catheter was perfused with an MMP-
2/9 specific fluorogenic substrate and the fluorescence in the
outgoing dialysate was measured. With this approach we could directly
quantify the intratumoral MMP activity in vivo. The microdialysate was
also analyzed for extracellular tumor levels of endostatin in situ. We
found that the MMP-2/9 activity increased significantly after
tamoxifen treatment and that this increase was accompanied by
significantly increased levels of endostatin. We conclude that
microdialysis used for direct measurements of MMP activities in vivo
provides valuable insights into the modulation of the proteolytic
environment in situ. Moreover, we suggest that the anti-angiogenic
effects of tamoxifen in breast cancer may in part be explained by
increased endostatin generation by a sex steroid dependent modulation
of MMP2/9 activities.

## 1101

## Lack of correlation between microvessel density & pericyte
coverage index within breast cancer biopsies & functional dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI-derived vascular parameters.

## Ah-See MW, Padhani AR, Taylor NJ, Harris AL, Burcombe RJ, Fox
SB, Richman PI, Daley FM, Stirling JJ, Leach MO, Bentzen SM, Makris A.
Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood, Middlesex, United Kingdom; John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, Headington, United Kingdom; Royal Marsden
Hospital, Sutton, Surrey, United Kingdom

## Background:
Functional dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) provides a
method for assessing & characterising tumour microvasculature.
In primary breast cancer (PBC), the relationship between DCEMRI
vascular parameters & immunohistochemically-derived measures of
tumour angiogenic status remain unclear. Here we assess the
relationship between tumour microvessel density (MVD) &
pericyte coverage index (PCI) & DCE-MRI derived vascular
parameters in PBC.

## Methods:
39 patients with biopsy-proven PBC (median age 47 years, range
29–70) were imaged prior to treatment. DCE-MRI was performed using
Gd-DTPA contrast & parametric images were calculated reflecting
microvessel permeability (transfer constant
[Ktrans], leakage space
[ve], rate constant
[kep], maximum contrast medium uptake
[MaxGd]) & perfusion (relative blood volume [rBV], relative
blood flow [rBF], mean transit time [MTT]). Median values for each
kinetic parameter were derived from whole tumour regions of
interest. MVD & PCI were quantified by immunohistochemistry
using the panendothelial marker, CD34, & alpha-smooth muscle
actin ( -SMA) in diagnostic biopsy specimens. MVD &
PCI were scored from random fields (median 10; range 4–25) at x200
magnification or, in the case of small samples (n = 8), from all
fields (median 6; range 1–14). The association between two
parameters was quantified by Spearman’s rank correlation.

## Results:
The median (interquartile range) MVD & PCI values were 75.9/
mm2 (45.8 –
101.1 /mm2) & 12.5% (5.5 – 29.5%)
respectively. No correlation was found between the pre-treatment
vascular parameter median values as assessed by DCE-MRI &
either tumour MVD (for Ktrans
rs = 0.11, p = 0.5;
ve rs=−0.08,
p = 0.6; kep rs=0.03,
p = 0.9; MaxGad rs=−0.17, p = 0.3; rBV
rs=−0.21, p = 0.2; rBF
rs=− 0.25, p = 0.1; MTT
rs=−0.15, p = 0.4) or PCI (for
Ktrans
rs=0.08, p = 0.6; ve
rs=0.24, p = 0.2;
kep rs=−0.01,
p = 0.9; MaxGad rs=0.22, p = 0.2; rBV
rs=−0.10, p = 0.5; rBF
rs=−0.06, p = 0.8; MTT
rs=−0.04, p = 0.4).

## Conclusion:
No significant correlation was seen between tumour MVD or PCI in
the pre-treatment breast cancer biopsy specimens & the median
values of the DCE-MRI-derived vascular parameters. Failure to
demonstrate a correlation may be due to the small patient number
within the study or due to a disparity between
immunohistochemically-defined visible microvasculature &
“realtime” vascular function.

## 1102

## Role and prognostic relevance of hypoxia inducible factor
 and its downstream targets in fibroepithelial tumours
of the breast.

## Kuijper A, van der Groep P, van der Wall E, van Diest PJ.
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands
Hypoxia inducible factor (HIF- ) and its downstream targets CAIX and VEGF are key
factors in the survival of proliferating tumour cells in a hypoxic
microenvironment. The relevance of these factors has been established
in several types of cancers. We studied the role and prognostic
relevance of HIF-1 and its downstream targets CAIX and VEGF in
phyllodes tumours and fibroadenomas of the breast.
To determine expression levels of HIF- , CAIX, VEGF and p53, immunohistochemistry was
performed on a group of 37 primary phyllodes tumours and 16
fibroadenomas with known clinical follow-up. Tumour microvasculature
was visualised by immunohistochemistry for CD31. Proliferation was
assessed by Ki67 immunostaining and mitotic counts.
Immunoquantification was performed in stroma and epithelium.
Only one fibroadenoma displayed low-level stromal HIF-
 reactivity in the absence of CAIX expression.
Stromal HIF- expression in phyllodes tumours was positively
correlated with grade (p = 0.001), proliferation as measured by Ki67
expression (p<0.001) and mitoses counts (p<0.001), p53
accumulation (p = 0.009), and global (p = 0.003) and hot-spot
(p = 0.041) microvessel counts, but not to CAIX expression.
Interestingly, CAIX and HIF- expression were both frequently found in
morphologically normal epithelium of phyllodes tumours. High
expression of VEGF was regularly found in both fibroadenomas and
phyllodes tumours, with only a positive relation between stromal VEGF
and grade in phyllodes tumours (p = 0.016). The distance from the
epithelium to the nearest microvessels was higher in phyllodes tumours
as compared to fibroadenomas, but microvessel counts as such did not
differ between fibroadenomas and phyllodes tumours. In survival
analysis, stromal HIF- overexpression (p = 0.032) in phyllodes tumours was
predictive of disease free survival, but this was not independent from
stromal p53 overexpression (p<0.001).
In conclusion, these results indicate that HIF- may play an important role in the stromal
progression of phyllodes tumours and predicts prognosis. In view of
the absence of stromal CAIX expression, stromal upregulation of HIF-
 in phyllodes tumours is most likely caused by
hypoxia independent pathways, with p53 inactivation as one of possible
causes. In contrast, coexpression of HIF- and CAIX in the epithelium in phyllodes tumours
points to epithelial hypoxia, most likely caused by relatively distant
blood vessels.
Supported by an unrestricted grant from Aegon Inc.

## 1103

## Analysis of angiogenesis genes from paraffin-embedded breast tumor
and lymph nodes.

## Schneider BP, Skaar TC, Badve S, Sledge GW, Li L, Flockhart DA.
Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN

Background: Angiogenesis is important
in tumor growth and metastasis. Germ-line polymorphisms critical to
the angiogenesis pathway have been shown to confer prognostic
information in multiple tumor types. These genes include vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase
(eNOS).

Methods: We extracted DNA from 53
specimens obtained from 21 patients including a primary breast tumor,
and/or a histologically involved lymph node, and/or a histologically
normal lymph node. We subsequently genotyped all specimens to evaluate
two polymorphisms in the eNOS gene and one polymorphism in the VEGF
gene. DNA samples were assayed for genetic polymorphisms using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) assays. After digestion with the appropriate
restriction endonuclease, the resulting fragments were analyzed via
generation of chromatographs using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with
the DNA 500 chip.

Results: PCR amplifications were
considered sucessful if interpretable chromatographs were generated on
the Bioanalyzer following the PCR and restriction digestion.
Chromatographs were generated in 145/159 (91%) samples. When assessing
all polymorphisms by site, chromatographs were generated in 42/51
(82%, 95% CI, 64.3% to 89.7%) samples obtained from the primary tumor
and 103/108 (95%, 95% CI, 89% to 98.4%) from lymph nodes.
Chromatographs were generated in 46/53 (87%) samples from the
T−786C polymorphism in the 5’-flanking
region in the eNOS gene, 49/53 (92%) when assessing the
Glu298Asp polymorphism in exon 7 in the
eNOS gene and 50/53 samples (94%) for the
C936T polymorphism in the VEGF gene. In
total, there was 100% concordance between analyses from the primary
tumor, uninvolved lymph node, and involved lymph node from the same
case (95% CI, 0.97 to 1.00). Also, the likelihood of successfully
genotyping from a lymph node source was significantly higher than
genotyping from the primary tumor (p = 0.016).

Discussion: We successfully extracted
DNA and genotyped several polymorphisms in two genes important in
angiogenesis. These genotypes were determined in breast tumors, but
also in involved and uninvolved lymph nodes. There was 100%
concordance between the genotypes of germline DNA obtained from
uninvolved lymph nodes and those determined in tumor samples, implying
that the tumor angiogenic genotype reflects the host genotype.

## 1104

## MEK5-ERK5 signaling promotes estrogen-independent tumorigenesis of
breast carcinoma cells.

## Xiong W. Tulane University, New Orleans, LA

Background: Expression and activation
of the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase family have been
described to function in the progression of breast and prostate
carcinoma to a hormoneindependent and endocrine therapy resistant
phenotype. Using gene expression profiling of human breast carcinoma
cells, we have identified a member of the MAPK family . MEK5, whose
expression is increased in drug-resistant breast carcinoma
cells.

Materials and Methods: To test the
role of MEK5-ERK5 pathway in tumorigenesis, we established stably
expressing constitutively active (CA)-MEK5 mCF-7 human breast
carcinoma cell lines. Using an ERK5 targeting pSUPER-GFP RNA
interference (RNAi) system, we developed stable ERK5-RNAi or
vector-RNAi expression MCF7-MEK5 cells. Expression levels of estrogen
responsive genes were obtained by RT-PCR and Western blot analysis.
For the in vivo tumorigenesis
assay, MCF-7, MCF7- MEK5 and its ERK5-RNAi cells were transplanted
into mammary fat pads of immunocompromised athymic female nude mice
(nu/ nu) and monitored for the development of tumors.

Results: We found that MCF7-MEK5
cells exhibited greater proliferation, clonogenic survival and
apoptotic resistance in vitro. MEK5
expressing breast carcinoma cells possessed an earlier tumor onset and
greater tumor growth than vector cells. Of significant interest was
the observation that MEK5 cells were capable of tumor formation in the
absence of exogenous estrogen, while the ER-positive MCF7-Vec cells
were unable to form tumors without E2
stimulation, demonstrating the MEK5’s role in progression to a more
malignant hormone-independent phenotype. Inhibition of ERK5 expression
delayed MCF7-MEK5 tumor onset and suppressed tumor growth in mice.
Expression of cyclin A1,
D1, and E2 were
responsive to estrogen in MCF-7 and ERK5-RNAi stable cells, whereas in
MCF7-MEK5 cells, there was a constitutive overexpression of these
cyclins that was independent of estrogen stimulation. Ongoing research
involves studying protein interactions with C-terminal domain of ERK5
through a yeast two-hybrid system.

Discussion: These results demonstrate
that activation/ overexpression of the MEK5-ERK5 pathway converts
breast carcinoma cells to a more aggressive and hormone-independent
phenotype. Our results with RNAi-mediated suppression of ERK5 and
recent evidence demonstrating increased expression and activation of
the MEK5-ERK5 pathway in breast and prostate carcinoma cells suggests
that this pathway may represent a useful marker whose levels could be
utilized as a prognostic indicator of therapeutic response and as a
prospective target for therapeutic intervention.

## 1105

## The most common integrin ITGA2 haplotype (807C_1648G, “wildtype”)
is associated with decreased breast cancer risk.

## Langsenlehner U, Eder T, Weitzer W, Samonigg H, Krippl P.
Medical University Graz, Graz, Styria, Austria

Background: Integrins are cell
surface receptors which mediate cell-to-cell and cell-to-extracellular
matrix adhesion. Some of them, e.g. and , have been suggested as key players for cancer
development and tumor metastasis. Two polymorphisms in the gene for
the component, ITGA2 807C>T and 1648G>A, have been
associated with the cell-surface density of integrin . The 176T>C polymorphism in the ITGB3 gene,
encoding the subunit of integrins and , modifies a variety of traits of expressing cells.

Patients and methods: To analyze
the role of ITGA2 and ITGB3 polymorphisms for breast cancer risk and
prognosis, we performed a case-control study including 500 female
breast cancer patients and 500 healthy female age-matched control
subjects. All study participants were of Caucasian origin (Austria,
Middle-Europe). Genotypes were determined by 5′-nuclease assays
(Applera, Austria). Primer and probe sets were designed and
manufactured using Applera’s ‘Assay-by-Design’ custom service. The PCR
reaction was performed in a Primus 96 plus thermal cycler (MWG Biotech
AG, Germany) using a total volume of l containing l SuperHot-Master-Mix (Bioron GmbH, Germany),

Results: The ITGA2 1648_AA
genotype was significantly associated with breast cancer (odds ratio
3.12; 95% confidence interval 1.11 – 8.77). Carriers of the most
common ITGA2 haplotype (807C_1648G, “wildtype”) were at decreased risk
for breast cancer (odds ratio 0.72; 95% confidence interval 0.53 –
0.98). A histological grade of 3 or 4 was found more often in ITGA2
807TT subjects (p = 0.039 compared to CC+CT genotypes) and carriers of
an ITGA2 1648A allele (p = 0.017 compared to GG genotype). Carriers of
the ITGA2 807C_1648G haplotype were less likely to have a histological
grade 3 or 4 compared to non-carriers (p = 0.003). The ITGB3 176T>C
polymorphisms was not associated with breast cancer susceptibility. In
a Cox-regression analysis, carriers of the homozygous ITGB3 176-CC
genotype had a higher risk for metastasis (relative risk 2.2; 95% CI
1.2 – 4.0; p = 0.015).

Conclusion: We conclude that
functional polymorphisms in integrin genes ITGA2 and ITGB3 influence
the development and progression of breast cancer, respectively. The
precise mechanism remains to be determined, but likely involves
dysregulated signaling pathways.

## 1106

## Invasive lobular carcinoma and the high grade variant pleomorphic
lobular carcinoma: molecular characterization.

## Simpson P, Reis-Filho J, Mackay A, Jones C, Dexter T, Hardisson
D, Sarrio D, Weber B, Ashworth A, Schmitt F, Palacios J, Lakhani S.
University of Queensland, QIMR, RB&W’s Hospital, Brisbane,
Australia; ICR, London, United Kingdom; IPATIMUP, Oporto, Portugal;
CNIO/La Paz Hospital, Madrid, Spain; University of
Pennsylvania

Background: Immunohistochemical
analysis of E-cadherin has changed the way lobular neoplasia is
perceived. It has helped to classify difficult cases of carcinoma
in situ with indeterminate
features and led to the identification of new variants of lobular
carcinoma (LC), including pleomorphic lobular carcinoma (PLC) and
pleomorphic lobular carcinoma in
situ (PLCIS) which are reported to be associated with a
more aggressive clinical behaviour. Although PLC/PLCIS show
morphological features of classic lobular neoplasia and lack
E-cadherin expression, it is unclear whether these lesions evolve
through the same genetic pathway as LC or are high grade ductal
neoplasms that have lost E-cadherin. Methods: We have analysed a series of 16 LC and 15 PLC,
including a case containing extensive PLCIS. All cases were reviewed
by three of the authors and subjected to immunohistochemistry for
E-cadherin, oestrogen and progesterone receptors, p53 and HER2/neu.
Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was performed
using the Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre aCGH platform
containing 5620 bacterial artificial chromosome clones arranged at 1Mb
intervals throughout the genome. Normalized data were smoothed using
local polynomial adaptive weights smoothing and the statistical
significance for difference in copy number changes between LC and PLC
calculated by Fisher’s exact test. Confirmation of genetic alterations
was by High Resolution CGH and chromogenic in
situ hybridization (CISH).

Results: All carcinomas showed
typical architectural features of LC and were negative for E-cadherin.
By aCGH, both LC and PLC had more gains than losses and PLC had a
greater proportion of the genome altered than LC. Recurrent copy
number alterations (in>50% of cases) included gain at 1q21-q25,
1q32-q44, 5q35, 7q22, 11q13, 12q13, 16p13-p12, 17q24-q25, 19p13, 20q13
and loss at 11q21-q22, 13q21, 16q11-q23, 18q12 and Xq21. Genomic
alterations more frequently identified (Fisher’s exact, p<0.05) in
PLC included gain of 8q24, 9q22, 17q11 and 17q24-q25 and loss of 9p21,
13q21-22 and Xq13-q21. Gain of 9q34 was significantly more common in
LC. Amplification of c-myc (8q24) and ERBB2 (17q12) were confirmed in
PLC and PLCIS by CISH.

Discussion: The similarity in
morphology, immunohistochemistry and molecular profiles between LC and
PLC provides evidence for a conserved evolutionary relationship. Both
entities appear reliant upon early genetic hits at 1q, 16q and loss of
E-cadherin. Additional genetic alterations involving known oncogenes
(eg c-myc, HER2/neu) and as yet unconfirmed genes at other designated
chromosomal loci are likely to contribute to the higher grade and more
aggressive nature of PLC.

## 1107

## Classic lobular breast carcinoma: comprehensive molecular genetic
analysis.

## Reis-Filho JS, Simpson PT, Lambros M, Jones C, Sarrio D, Savage
K, Dexter T, Mackay A, Iravani M, Fenwick K, Weber B, Hardisson D,
Schmitt F, Palacios J, Ashworth A, Lakhani SR. ICR, London, United
Kingdom; IPATIMUP, Oporto, Portugal; University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia; ICR, Sutton, United Kingdom; CNIO and La Paz
Hospital, Madrid, Spain; University of Pennsylvania

Background: Classic lobular
carcinomas (CLCs) account for 15% of all breast cancers and are
morphologically characterised by monomorphic, discohesive cells with
mild nuclear atypia that infiltrate the stroma as single cells or
single cell files. At the genetic level, CLCs almost invariably show
recurrent gain of 1q and physical loss of 16q, coupled with lack of
E-cadherin (CDH1) expression. However little is known on the role of
putative oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes (TSGs) in the biology
of these lesions.

Material and Methods: Thirteen cases
were subjected to a comprehensive molecular genetic analysis including
i) immunohistochemistry for E-cadherin, oestrogen (ER) and
progesterone (PgR) receptors, HER2/neu and p53; ii) LOH analysis on
16q21-q22 and 5q21; iii) CDH1 gene mutations; iv) CDH1 gene promoter
methylation; v) chromogenic in situ
hybridisation (CISH) for cyclin D1 (CCND1); vi) high resolution
comparative genomic hybridisation (HR-CGH); and vii) microarray based
comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) using the Breakthrough Breast
Cancer Research Centre aCGH platform, containing 5620 bacterial
artificial chromosome clones arranged at<1MB intervals throughout
the genome.

Results: All cases lacked expression
of E-cadherin, p53 and HER2. ER and PgR were positive in 11/13 and
7/13 cases, respectively. CDH1 gene mutation, LOH and methylation were
observed in 2/ 13, 8/11 and 6/13 cases, respectively. HR-CGH revealed
a mean of 8 chromosomal arms affected per case, with similar
frequencies of gains and losses (4 and 3.9/ per case, respectively).
The most frequent recurrent changes comprised gains on 1q (85%), 8q
(46%), 8p and 19p (both, 23%) and recurrent losses on 16q (85%), 11q,
13q, 17q and 18p (all, 31%). The agreement between aCGH and HR-CGH
ranged from 47% to 100% (median = 88%). In addition to the chromosomal
changes identified with HR-CGH, aCGH revealed recurrent gains of 16p
(61.5%), small amplicons (in >30% of the cases) mapping to 3q27.1,
6p21.33-p21.1, 7q11.23, 7q22.1, 8p11.2-p12, 9q34.12-q34.3,
11q13.1-q13.3, 12q13.12- q14.1, 14q22.2-q22.3 and 17q24.3-q25.1 and
small deletions (in >30% of the cases) mapping to 8p23.2-p23.1,
10q21.1-q21.2, 15q14, 15q21.3 and 15q25.1-q25.2. Increased CCND1
(11q13.3) gene copy numbers were confirmed by CISH in all cases
harbouring CCND1 gains as defined by aCGH.

Conclusion: CLCs are characterised by
lack of E-cadherin, p53 and HER2, recurrent physical loss of 16q and
gain of 1q, CCND1 amplification and a higher genomic complexity than
previously appreciated with other methods. Further analysis may allow
the identification of new amplicon drivers and TSGs.

## 1108

## Is aberrant hypermethylation an early event in breast
cancer?

## Sullivan RF, Kim SJ, Zapparoli GV, Kachel CA, Chiriboga L,
Skinner KA. New York University Cancer Institute, New York,
NY

Introduction: Tumor suppressor gene
(TSG) silencing by DNA methylation is common in cancers. Previous work
identified eight TSG promoters that were frequently hypermethylated in
invasive breast cancer (IBC): APC, CALCA, cyclinD2, GSTP1, HPP1,
MYOD1, RAR 2, RASSF1. Abnormal TSG methylation has been
demonstrated to be an early event in many cancers. We studied the
patterns of methylation of these eight TSGs in ductal carcinoma in
situ of the breast (DCIS) to determine if DNA hypermethylation was an
early event in breast cancer

Methods: DNA was extracted from
archival paraffin embedded blocks containing DCIS from 23 patients.
The DNA was bisulfite converted and assayed by the MethyLight
technique targeting the eight aforementioned TSGs.

Results: All eight genes were
methylated with high frequency in DCIS (Table 1). TSG methylation was
significantly more frequent in DCIS than in IBC in three of the eight
genes studied (MyoD1, RAR 2, and RASSF1). In the remaining genes, the frequency
of methylation was statistically equivalent but slightly higher in
DCIS for APC, CALCA, cyclinD2, GSTP1, and slightly lower in DCIS for
HPP1. At least 1 of the 8 genes was methylated in 96% of DCIS samples
compared to 86% of IBC samples, and multiple genes were methylated in
87% of DCIS samples compared to 74% of IBC samples. The average number
of methylated genes was 4.4 in DCIS samples compared to 3.0 in IBC
samples 

Conclusion: TSG methylation is a
frequent event in DCIS, demonstrating that DNA hypermethylation is an
early event in breast cancer. The finding of higher frequencies of
hypermethylation in DCIS than in IBC suggests that this mechanism of
TSG silencing may play a more important role in the early phases of
malignant transformation than in the later phases of invasion and
metastasis. This phenomenon might be exploited for molecular screening
for breast cancer or for targeted therapeutics for DCIS.

## 1109

## SNP microarray analysis of genomic alterations in infiltrating
ductal carcinoma and infiltrating lobular carcinoma.

## Ton CC, Loo LW, Grove DI, Neal CL, Hsu L, Porter PL. Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA
Background: Approximately 75 – 80% of invasive cancers are ductal
in origin while 10–15% are of the invasive lobular type.
Significantly, it has been observed that the incidence of ILC has been
increasing among post-menopausal women in parts of the U.S.
Specifically, post-menopausal women who take combined hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) appear to be at an elevated risk of ILC, but
not of IDC. It is therefore important to understand the genomic
changes (e.g. aneuploidy) which underlie the development of IDC and
ILC.
Materials and Methods: DNA from 42 primary archival breast tumors
(14 ILC and 28 IDC) were analyzed using the Affymetrix 10K SNP array.
This method permitted the assessment of both copy number gain/loss and
the mapping of areas of allelic imbalance that arose in the
development of the individual tumors. Tumors were classified by
histologic sub-type, expression of known prognostic tumor proteins,
and ploidy. To enrich for the neoplastic cell fraction, tumor samples
were stained for cytokeratin and sorted by flow cytometry. DNA from
sorted tumor cells and normal blood (normal controls) was extracted,
labelled according to manufacturer’s instructions and hybridzed to the
MAP10K SNP array. The copy number changes between ILC and IDC subtypes
were assessed by Student’s t-test, and those SNPs for which p<0.05
were grouped for further hierarchical cluster analysis. In addition,
regions of loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) were identified with the
Affymetrix GDAS 2.0 software, using patient-matched DNA from blood
lymphocytes as constitutive normal reference. As a preliminary
analysis, the LOH fraction (%LOH/informative) were computed for each
chromosomal arm, and used in k-Means analysis. Results and Discussion:
The copy number analysis identified 583 SNPs at the p<0.05
threshold, where ILC and IDC mean copy number were significantly
different. Cluster analysis of tumors on this subset of SNPs yielded
5 major clusters: one of “pure” ILC and two of IDC, and two
intermediate clusters containing both tumor subtypes. This outcome
remained robust even when other metrics and modes of linkage were
employed. Clustering of the SNPs yielded 11 major groupings.
Recognizable within these clusters were SNPs located in proximity to
genes mediating, for example, key processes of hormone response,
antiestrogen resistance, genome integrity, tumor suppression, cell
adhesion and matrix remodeling. K-Means analysis of LOH resolved the
ILC/IDC tumor set into 5 distinct groupings as well, in good
concordance with the copy number analysis. LOH subgroups were
characterized by specific patterns of allelic loss. In one subset of
IDC, for example, coordinate 8p, 6q LOH was evident; whereas in
another group, co-occurrence of 6q, 11q,13 and 22 was found. These
early results indicate that the microarray approach can be
successfully used to identify the patterns of genomic lesions which
distinguish the IDC/ILC tumor subtypes.

## 1110

## Comparison between matched pairs of primary breast cancer and
distant metastasis using array CGH.

## Gahir J, Reis-Filho JS, Iravani M, Dexter T, Fenwick K, Davidson
B, Mackay A, Ebbs S, Ashworth A. ICR, London, United Kingdom; Mayday
Hospital, Croydon, United Kingdom; Norwegian Radium Hospital,
Montebello, Norway

Background: Twenty five percent of
women with breast cancer die as a result of the disease spreading to
distant organs. The process of cancer metastasis consists of a long
series of sequential interrelated steps that are believed to be
associated with complex stochastic genetic changes.

Aim: The aim of this project is to
identify molecular genetic changes that are i) present in primary
tumours (PTs) and their paired nodal and distant metastases (MTs) and
ii) specific to neoplastic cells in the metastatic deposits. Patients and Method: 22 patients with known
primary breast cancers and who later developed distant and nodal
metastases were graded (Bloom-Richardson-Scarff system) and
immunohistochemically analysed with antibodies for oestrogen receptor
(ER), HER2, epidermal growth factor receptor and cytokeratin 5/6.
Tumour samples were microdissected to ensure a purity of >70% of
neoplastic cells. DNA was extracted, labelled and hybridised to the
5.8 K Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre array comparative
genomic hybridisation (aCGH) platform, which contains 5620 bacterial
artificial clones arranged throughout the genome at <1Mb intervals.
All experiments were carried out in duplicate (‘dye-swaps’). After
data acquisition, normalisation and ‘dye-swap’ collation, a running
median smoothing was applied to all samples. A categorical analysis
was applied to the smoothed ratios after classifying them as gains,
losses or no-change.

Results: Of the 22 pts, 13% were
grade I, 40% grade II and 47% grade III. In 80% of the cases, nuclear
grade was identical in paired PTs and MTs. No dedifferentiation from
grade I to grade III was observed. The immunohistochemical profile
of pts and MTs was similar in all but one case, where the PT was ER+
whilst the MT was negative. The concordance between the molecular
genetic changes identified in pts and MTs ranged from 0 to 0.91
(mean = 0.51, median = 0.58). When comparing paired pts with MTs,
medians of 32.0% (range, 0–53.8%), 30.1% (range, 0–82.3%) and 40.8%
(range, 0–83%) of all events were observed in pts only, MTs only and
concurrently in both, respectively. Recurrent gains in the PTs
comprised 1q, 3q, 4p, 11p, 16p, 20p and 22, whilst 1q, 11p, 20 and 22
were the most frequently observed in the MTs. Recurrent losses
included 1p, 11q, 19q, Xp and Xq in the PTs and 13, Xp and Xq in the
MTs. Interestingly, when paired cases where analysed, gains on 1q, 11,
16q, 17p, 19, 21 and losses on 4q, 9p,13p, 16q and 17p were more
frequently observed in MTs only.

Conclusion: Based upon histological,
immunohistochemical and molecular genetic features, primary tumours
and metastasis are remarkably similar. However, the presence of
molecular genetic changes observed only in metastatic deposits suggest
the existence of genomic regions specifically associated with the
process of metastasis.

## 1111

## C-MYC expression correlates with atypia and malignancy in early
breast lesions associated with microcalcifications detected by routine
mammography.

## Mazzini RC, Kemp C, Logullo AF, Elias S, Oshima CT, Takano DM,
Dobo C, Junior JA. Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP,
Brazil
Introduction: c-myc is a
proto-oncogene associated to cell cycle control. Amplification and
super-expression of c-myc is
involved in early stage of many human malignant tumors. Recently a
possible role of c-myc in breast
carcinogenesis has been hypothesized in literature.
Objective: To evaluate c-myc
expression in biopsies from early detected breast lesions by
mammography. To compare c-myc
expression to histopathological and clinical variables.
Methods: in a retrospective analysis 98 lesions from 79 female
patients diagnosed and treated at Universidade Federal de São Paulo
from 1998 to 2004 were elected. All cases were submitted to
percutaneous biopsy of breast lesions containing microcalcifications
classified as BI-RADS 4 and 5 in routine mammography. Morphology and
immunohistochemistry were analyzed by two independent observers. Final
diagnosis sub-divided the cases in two groups, non-malignant lesions
and malignant lesions. Non-malignant cases were classified as with and
without atypia. C-myc expression
was evaluated with standard ABC immunohistochemical essay considering
nuclear staining as positive. More than 10 % of positive cells were
considered as positive.
Results: average age was 52,9 years. From 98 lesions, 29 were
malignant (29,6%), including infiltrative and in situ ductal
carcinoma, and 11 cases atypical ductal hyperplasia (11,2%) and
remaining 58 cases (59,2%) were non-malignant (fibrocystic changes and
typical ductal hyperplasia). C-myc
was positive in 40 (40,8%) lesions and negative in 58 (59,2%). Among
the malignant cases, 14 (48,3%) were c-myc negative and 15 (51,7%) positive, whereas between
the 11 hyperplasia 4 were negative (36,4) and 7 positive (63,6 %).
From 58 non-malignant lesions, 18 (31%) exhibited c-myc expression and 40 (69%) were negative.
We found a close trend to positive association between malignant
lesions versus benign lesions without atypia (p=0,060) and a positive
association between atypical versus benign without atypia lesions
(p=0,039). However, clinical variables (age, menopause and use of
hormone therapy) did not correlate to c-myc expression in both groups.
Conclusion: c-myc protein
identification was more frequent in malignant than non-malignant early
detected breast lesions and is associated to presence of atypia
suggesting that alterations in c-myc expression is not an early event in breast
carcinogenesis. The role of c-myc
expression on detecting potential malignant lesions must be further
addresse.D

## 1112

## Breast cancer metastasis-free survival and its association to a
common hereditary gene polymorphism of cyclin D1.

## Hofmann G, Langsenlehner U, Renner W, Greimel A, Samonigg H,
Krippl P. Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria; Clinical
Institute of Medical and Laboratory Diagnostics, Medical University of
Graz, Graz, Austria

Background: Cyclin D1 (CCND1) is a
key regulator of the G1 phase of the cell cycle. CCND1 plays an
important role in tumor development and progression, as well. A common
870G > A polymorphism in the gene for CCND1 has been linked to
alternative splicing and cancer susceptibility. Aim of the present
study was to evaluate the role of this polymorphism for breast cancer
metastazing.

Methods and Patients: A retrospective
study was performed including 500 female breast cancer patients. A Cox
regression model including CCND1 870A carriage, age at diagnosis,
primary presence of regional lymph node metastasis, primary tumor size
larger than 2 cm, and estrogen and/or progesteron receptor negativity
in the primary tumor, was used to estimate the effect of the CCND1
genotype on metastasis-free survival time.

Results: At the time of diagnosis,
the patients were between 28 and 84 years of age, with a mean age of
57±11 years. Median metastasis-free survival time was 120 months (95%
CI: 106 – 134). In the subgroup of 302 patients with stage III - IV
breast cancer, 250 (82.8%) patients developed metastases in the time
between diagnosis and study entry, whereas 52 (17.2%) patients
remained free of metastases. The CCND1 870_AA genotype was found more
frequently among subjects without metastases (44.2%) than among those
with metastases (24.8%; chi2 test, p =
0.005). In a logistic regression model including age at diagnosis and
estrogen and/or progesterone receptor negativity in the primary tumor
as potential confounders, the 870_AA genotype was still significantly
associated with metastasis risk (odds ratio 0.43, 95% CI 0.23 – 0.83;
p = 0.010).

Conclusion: Our data support the
hypothesis that the Cyclin D1 870G > A polymorphism is associated
with metastasis-free survival time in female patients with breast
cancer.

## 1113

## Apocrine metaplasia and the development of ER-negative breast
cancer.

## Lee S, Weiss H, Tsimelzon A, Mao S, Wu Y, Mohsin SK, Medina D,
Haagensen DE, Allred DC. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX;
Traditional Practice Alliance, Sacramento, CA
Normal/benign breast epithelium commonly transforms into cells
resembling those in apocrine sweat glands. This transformation,
referred to as “apocrine metaplasia” (APOM), is associated with a
near-total loss of estrogen receptor (ER) expression. The first
substantial loss of ER during breast cancer evolution does not occur
until the late stage of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), and it is
likely that progression of a subset of ER-negative DCIS accounts for
the majority of ER-negative invasive breast cancer. We have noted a
continuum of apocrine histological features in DCIS and hypothesized
that, similar to normal/benign epithelium, some DCIS may undergo APOM
and become ER-negative in the process.

Design/Results: In preliminary
studies, we performed a blinded assessment of apocrine histological
features (scale: 0 = none; 1 = mild; 2 = moderate; 3 = extensive),
histological grade, and ER expression in a series of 200 consecutive
DCIS, and looked for correlations between them. As apocrine features
increased, there was a corresponding increase in histological grade (p
= 0.002), and a corresponding decrease in ER expression (p = 0.001).
Among the ER negative cases (31% of the total), 38% showed mild (score
= 1) and 15% showed moderate-to-extensive (scores = 2/3) apocrine
features. To identify the genetic changes associated with APOM, we
evaluated and compared the expression of 47,000 genes (Affymetrix U133
Human X3P microarrays) using RNA from seven paired samples of benign
and apocrine epithelium harvested by laser-capture microdissection
from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded breast tissue (14 total
samples). The results were evaluated with dChip, BRB-ArrayTools, and
Array Analyzer software.In preliminary supervised comparisons, nearly
1,500 genes showed >3-fold differences in expression (range
3-to-340 fold; average 10.5 fold; p<.01), including an especially
large number involved in steroid (androgen/estrogen), prostaglandin,
fatty acid, glutathione, and carbohydrate metabolism. Other prominent
changes associated with APOM occurred in genes involved in cellular
growth/differentiation (e.g. down-regulation of PROM11, AREG, WIF1,
IRS2, and EGR1); intercellular attachment/ communication (e.g.
increases in CLDN1 and LIMS1 and decreases in TNC and LAM5); and other
miscellaneous interesting pathways (e.g. a 30-fold decrease in KIT).
Conclusions/Goals: There are
extraordinary differences in gene expression between normal/benign and
apocrine breast epithelium. The goal of future studies will be to
determine the prevalence of these genes in breast cancer, their
correlation with ER-status and, most importantly, identify those which
are down-regulating ER. The latter could be potentially targeted to
allow re-expression of ER and treatment with available hormonal
therapies.

## 1114

## Molecular alterations in columnar cell lesions of the
breast.

## Dabbs DJ, Peng Y, Carter G, Swalsky P, Finkelstein S. Magee-
Womens Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA

Background: Columnar cell lesions of
the breast (CCL) include a morphologic spectrum of simple columnar
cell change (CCC), columnar cell hyperplasia (CCH), columnar cell
hyperplasia with atypia (ACCH) and DCIS of micropapillary/cribriform
type. Invasive carcinomas of low grade type are often seen in
association with this spectrum. The biologic significance of these
lesions that are commonly found on breast biopsies is unknown. We have
previously demonstrated that CCL are almost always positive for
estrogen receptor and show increasing proliferation markers with
increasing levels of atypia.

Design: Four cases of formalin fixed,
paraffin embedded breast tissues, each displaying the entire spectrum
of CCC through DCIS and including foci of invasive carcinoma were
microdissected at multiple sites to evaluate neoplasia progression.
Minute tissue targets were microdissected (4–8/case) from unstained 4
micron thick recut paraffin sections and included non-neoplastic
breast and sites of CCC, CCH, ACCH, DCIS and invasive carcinoma.
Allelic imbalance for a broad panel of microsatellite markers in
proximity to known tumor suppressor genes was quantitated using
automated PCR/gel electrophoresis. Genomic loci evaluated 1p, 3p, 5q,
9p, 9q, 10q, 17p, 17q, 19q, 22q. The presence, topographic
relationship and time course of mutational damage was correlated with
columnar morphologic features.

Results: Detailed allelic imbalance
information was obtained from each microdissection tissue target
producing a detailed fingerprint of mutational damage in each case.
The overall results are as follows 

Conclusions (1) Low level of allelic
imbalance was demonstrable in columnar cell lesions by the
microdissection approach. A gradient of progressive mutational change
could be delineated in each case manifesting allelic loss damage.
(2)Allelic loss damage appeared to preferentially target loci at 9q,
10q, 17p and 17q. (3) The frequent findings of CCL in breast biopsies,
coupled with the low level of mutational damage, suggests that CCL are
not obligate precursors to carcinoma.

## 1115

## The evaluation of the breast imaging in clinical complete response
patients after primary chemotherapy.

## Sakemura N, Akashi-Tanaka S, Eriko I, Takasugi M, Terada K,
Shien T, Kinoshita T, Miyakawa K, Kohno T, Shimizu C, Ando M,
Katsumata N, Fujiwara Y, Fukutomi T. Department of Breast Surgery,
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Department of Breast and Medical
Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Background: Recently, primary
chemotherapy has been used not only for locally advanced breast cancer
but also for breast conserving treatment for patients with early stage
of breast cancer. The achievement of pathological complete response
(pCR) is associated with a survival advantage. We sought to
investigate whether contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CE-CT) and
ultrasonography (US) could be used to predict histopathological
response in cases which achieved clinical complete response (cCR)
after primary chemotherapy for breast cancer.

Material and Methods: Between 1999
and December 2004, 279 patients with breast cancer of at least 2 cm in
diameter who were treated with anthracycline and taxane based primary
chemotherapy underwent surgery at National Cancer Center Hospital. 61
patients obtained cCR. CE-CT and US were performed at the baseline and
before surgery. Lesions were classified into 5 types by early and
delay phase enhancement pattern and morphology of tumor; type 1 and 2
were diagnosed as pCR, type 3 to 5 were diagnosed as noninvasive or
invasive tumor.

Results: Histopathological diagnosis
among the 61 patients, 13 (21.3%) achieved pCR, 13 (21.3%) obtained
residual noninvasive tumor, while 35 (57.4%) showed residual invasive
tumor. Positive predictive value of residual tumor (PPV) in CE-CT
diagnosis was 83.6%, and in US was 82.4%, while negative predictive
value of residual tumor (NPV) in CE-CT was 66.7% compared to 40% in
US. Sensitivity of residual tumor in CE-CT diagnosis was 95.8% and in
US was 87.5%; on the other hand, specificity of residual tumor in
CE-CT and US were equally 30.8%.

Discussion: CE-CT and US may effort
diagnosis of the residual lesions after primary chemotherapy in cases
of cCR, however both modalities were not satisfactory for accurate
diagnosis of pCR. Further study is necessary for strategy of cCR cases
after primary chemotherapy for breast cancer.

## 1116

## An electronic data registry for evaluating fulvestrant treatment in
patients with advanced breast cancer.

## Wade JL, Esparaz, BT, Lower EE. Decatur Memorial Hospital,
Decatur, IL; University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH

Background: Fulvestrant represents an
important treatment option for postmenopausal women with
hormone-receptor positive advanced breast cancer. Whereas the
registration trials focused on women with metastatic breast cancer
following antiestrogen therapy, it is unclear how this agent is
currently being used in clinical practice. To address this issue, an
electronic data registry was developed to provide insight into current
fulvestrant usage and to collect clinical outcomes data of patients
treated with fulvestrant.

Methods: To conduct this
observational study, data entry was implemented via MedNet Solutions
electronic registry. Participating practices entered data via a secure
Web site including baseline patient characteristics, patient follow
up, closure of treatment, and efficacy parameters.

Results: Among the 213 patients
enrolled from 34 physician practice sites, 189 patients completed
fulvestrant treatment and 24 patients remain on treatment. Ninety-four
percent of patients (200/213) received previous endocrine therapy that
included tamoxifen, anastrozole, exemestane, letrozole, toremifene, or
megestrol. 164 patients (77%) had prior exposure to tamoxifen, and of
these, 51 (24%) had metastatic disease which had progressed on
tamoxifen before receiving fulvestrant. In spite of the extensive
prior hormonal therapy, of the 213 enrolled patients, 47.9% of
patients (102/213) demonstrated clinical benefit (as defined by CR +
PR + SD 324 weeks).

Discussion: This electronic registry
is a useful tool to monitor usage of fulvestrant and obtain valuable
outcomes data in clinical practice. While there are limitations to any
observational study, it is interesting to note that the clinical
benefit observed in this setting is in alignment with the 43.5%
clinical benefit reported in the two Phase III studies. Importantly,
considering the majority of patients treated with prior endocrine
therapies, these data lend further support to the impressive lack of
cross resistance of fulvestrant and underscore its role as an
important treatment option in the setting of advanced breast
cancer.

## 1117

## A phase II and biologic correlative study investigating anastrozole
(A) in combination with geftinib (G) in post menopausal patients with
estrogen receptor positive (ER) metastatic breast carcinoma (MBC) who
have previously failed hormonal therapy.

## Mita M, de Bono JS, Mita A, Patnaik A, Ricart A, Berg K,
Takimoto C, Rowinsky EK, Tolcher A, Beeram M. Institute for Drug
Development, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio,
TX

Background: Overactive epidermall
growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling may contribute to resistance
to hormone therapy in breast cancer. Blockade of EGFR signaling in
combination with continued estrogen suppression by aromatase
inhibition may result in increased therapeutic potential.

Material and Method: The objectives
of this phase II study were to determine the antitumor activity and
the safety of the combination and to identify potential
pharmacokinetic (PK) interactions and pharmacodynamic (PD) markers.
Patients with ER positive MBC who progressed following therapy with an
aromatase inhibitor received G 250 mg orally (po) daily in combination
with A 1 mg po daily on a 28 day cycle. A was started 2 weeks before G
to allow PK assessments of G at a steady state plasma concentration of
A. If 0 out of the first 18 patients experienced clinical benefit
[complete response (CR), partial response (PR) or stable disease (SD)
more than 6 months], the enrollment was to be terminate.D

Results: Fifteen patients were
enrolled to date, median age 63 (range 47–74), and received a total of
40 courses (median 2). Thirteen patients (86%) had a performance
status (PS) 0–1, 2 patients had PS 2. The tolerability was
satisfactory: no grade 3–4 events were recorded. Grade 1–2 fatigue,
acneiform rash, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting were the most common
side-effects. No patient experienced clinical benefit as defined by
protocol criteria. Three patients had SD for 4–6 months. PK and PD
data are currently being analyze.D

Discussion: The study showed the
safety and tolerability of the combination of G and A. Enrollment is
continuing, however the lack of robust anti-tumor activity will likely
result in study termination after the first stage of accrual.

## 1118

## Oncologist-patient discussion of adjuvant hormonal therapy: results
of a linguistic study focusing on patient
adherence/persistence.

## Davidson B, Vogel V, Wickerham L. MBS/Vox, Wayne, NJ; University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA; NSABP, Pittsburgh,
PA

Background: While studies have proven
the benefit of 5+ years of adjuvant hormonal breast cancer therapy,
data shows that longterm adherence/ persistence on this therapy is
sub-optimal. An observational linguistic study analyzed communication
between patients and their oncologists, to determine what areas of
communication influenced adherence/persistence.

Methods: Invitation letters were
mailed to 800+ oncologists; 14 met the screening criteria and agreed
to participate in this study. A researcher was sent to record
patient-oncologist interactions and separate post-visit interviews.
Twenty-eight postmenopausal, early-stage breast cancer patients on or
initiating hormonal therapy were recorded during their scheduled
visits. Time on therapy ranged from initiation discussion to
59 months.

Results: 1. Oncologist-patient
discussions on hormonal therapy were good in general, but did not
address adherence at all, even for patients initiating therapy.
Persistence was discussed, but often in terms of a variable number of
likely years on therapy; these discussions of persistence were almost
always monologues, and framed in terms of an “emerging study data”. 2.
Discussions bore a resemblance to discussions of chronic management in
preventive medicine (e.g., dyslipidemia and hypertension); because of
the “routine” nature of these visits, much emotional intensity and
urgency to treat were lacking compared to chemotherapy visits. 3.
Minimal nurse interactions were observed, which differs from other
oncology categories.

Discussion: The lack of discussion of
benefits of adherence/ persistence, lack of emotional engagement, and
the variable “framing” of time on therapy are seen as potential
influences on persistence/adherence on hormonal therapy. Regardless of
the causal role of these discussions in poor adherence, it is
recommended that oncologists leverage the existing good communication
with these patients by increasing the amount and quality of
discussions around this topic to increase
adherence/persistence.

## 1119

## Novel DJ compounds cause reduction in human breast
tumors.

## Parker-Johnson KA, Anderson D, Knowles B, Minnard E, Johnson DE.
Dillard University, New Orleans, LA; West Jefferson Hospital, New
Orleans, LA

Background: Although there are
various FDA approved chemotherapeutic drugs used to treat metastatic
breast cancer, some breast cancer cells become refractory to these
agents and ultimately allow the heterogeneous tumor population to
continue to rapidly proliferate. Therefore, there is always a need to
develop novel antineoplastic agents that offer alternative mechanisms
that target different cellular pathways in order to treat metastatic
breast cancer. Previously, our laboratory synthesized a group of novel
isochalcones called DJ Compounds that demonstrated significant
in vitro antiproliferative
activity against human metastatic breast cancer cell line models:
Caucasian- MCF-7, T47D, and African American . HCC-70, HCC-1500, and
MDAMB468. These compounds demonstrated significant epidermal growth
factor receptor inhibitor (EGF-R) activity. Based on these results, we
decided to test selected DJ Compounds in a nude mice model implanted
with MCF-7 cells in order to evaluate whether these drugs possessed
any significant in vivo antitumor
activity.

Materials and Methods: The in vitro protocol involved the plating
of human metastatic breast cancer cell lines in a 96-well plate
(10,000). Cells were allowed to attach overnight. Cells were dosed for
48 hours at concentrations ranging from 1 micromolar to 1 nanomolar.
Alamar blue dye exclusion method was used to determine the
antiproliferative activity of DJ Compounds. Cell densities were
measured with a microplate reader. The in
vivo protocol involved the implantation of MCF-7 cells
(10,000,000) into the fat pad of athymic nude mice and tumors were
allowed to develop over a 14–21 day period. Nude mice were divided
into 4 groups: control, 10 mg/kg, 30 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg. All animals
were dosed IP daily with DJ56, DJ64, and DJ82. Tumors were measured
every seven days with a caliper over a forty-two day period. Tumor
volumes are represented by mm3.

Results: The in vitro data indicated that there was
a concentrationdependent decrease in the growth of human metastatic
breast cancer cell lines MCF-7, T47D, HCC-70, HCC-1500, and MDAMB-
468; however, there was no change in percent growth in MDA-MB-231 by
any of the tested compounds. In T47D cells, DJ52 was the most potent
agent, while DJ82 was the most potent against MCF-7 cells. DJ53 was
the most potent agent against HCC-1500, and both DJ52 and DJ53 were
equally as potent in HCC-70. The in
vivo results indicated that DJ56 (30mg/kg) was the most
potent agent against MCF-7 tumors by reducing tumor volumes by 80%
over a 42 day period. DJ56 and DJ82 did not prove to significantly
reduce tumor volumes over a 42 day perio.D

Discussion: Previously, our
laboratory used the in vitro
pharmacological screening process to identify potential in vivo drug candidates. The selected
DJ compounds show different affinities for various human breast cancer
cell lines. We decided to use the three drug candidates: DJ56, DJ64,
and DJ82 to test in an available nude mouse model that was implanted
with MCF-7 tumorgenic cells. We found that the parent compound, DJ56,
was least potent in the in
vitro model, however, was the most potent in the
in vivo model. DJ56, DJ64,
and DJ82 were lethal at 100 mg/kg. Therefore, we identified a group of
common derivatives that enabled us to identify a novel agent that
showed significant antitumor activity against an estrogen-dependent
human metastatic breast cancer model. However, it showed no
significant antitumor activity against estrogen-independent human
breast cancer cell model MDA-MB-231. These findings suggest that this
group of novel DJ compounds could be potential antineoplastic agents
for therapy against estrogen-dependent human metastatic breast
cancers.

## 1120

## Supraclavicular failure in patients with 1 to 3 positive axillary
lymph nodes treated with breast conserving surgery and breast
irradiation, with or without supraclavicular node irradiation.

## Kiel KD, Reddy SG. Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago,
IL

Background: Supraclavicular nodal
failure (SCF) after breast conserving treatment may be early evidence
of distant metastases (DM) or may eventually lead to distant DM, for
the 5-year survival rates in the salvage of these patients is poor. If
SCF leads to metastases with poor prognosis, prophylactic treatment in
this area may be important for patients at high risk for failure.
Although studies have shown a fewer regional node failures (RNFs) in
patients with3 4 positive axillary nodes
treated with regional node irradiation (RNI), RNI in patients with 1–3
positive nodes remains controversial. Various guidelines suggest that
RNI be considered for selected patients. RNI increases the complexity
of radiation treatment and may increase the risk of radiation
complications. This study evaluated the need for RNI in patients with
1–3 positive nodes by evaluating the incidence of SCF in patents
treated with breast conserving surgery and breast irradiation with or
without supraclavicular node fields.

Materials and Methods: 224 patients
with 1–3 positive axillary nodes, treated with breast conserving
surgery and breast irradiation between August 1985 and May 2002 were
identified. All patients underwent tumor excision and Level I/II
axillary dissection. The median number of dissected axillary nodes was
14 (range 1–42). The breast was treated to a median dose of 45 Gy and
in 91% a breast boost was delivered to a median of 16 Gy. 20 patients
(10%) received supraclavicular node fields to a median dose of 50 Gy:
Either chemotherapy, generally an adriamycin-contained regimen, or
hormonal therapy was delivered. The median followup was 57 months
(range 0–193). SCF was reported as a recurrence in the ipsilateral
supraclavicular lymph nodes with or without local recurrence and
distant metastases. Crude rates for SCF were calculate.D

Results: Four of 224 (1.8%) patients
failed in the ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph nodes. 0 of the 20
patients treated to the supraclavicular nodes failed and 4 of the 204
(1.96%) not treated to the supraclavicular nodes failed. All patients
with SCF had adequate axillary dissections. The median tumor size for
all patients was 1.9 cm and, for the 4 patients with SCF, all were
grade 3 with a median size of 3 cm. In one patient with SCF, there was
extensive mediastinal and contralateral node failure. All patients
developed DM concurrently or rapidly after SCF.

Discussion: The low risk of SCF in
patients with 1–3 positive nodes treated with breast radiation alone
after breast conserving surgery suggests that the addition of RNI is
unnecessary in this cohort. SCF appeared to be associated with
concurrent or rapid development of distant metastases, suggesting that
prophylactic treatment is futile in this low risk group. The
complexity of radiation treatment and an increased risk of possible
radiationrelated complications can be reduced without planned
RNI.

## 1121

## Cyclopamine inhibits breast cancer cell growth via hedgehog
network-dependent and independent mechanisms unrelated to cholesterol
trafficking.

## Zhang X, Harrington N, Moraes R, Lewis MT. Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX
The hedgehog signal transduction network is required for normal
development of many organs and structures including skin, limbs, lung,
eye, and nervous system, as well as the mammary gland. Altered
hedgehog signaling is now implicated in the development of
approximately 20–25% of all cancers, especially soft tissue cancers.
Genetic evidence in mice coupled with more recent immunolocalization
studies suggested that deregulated hedgehog signaling may contribute
significantly to neoplastic progression in human breast cancers. If
so, hedgehog signaling inhibitors may be useful for breast cancer
treatment or prevention. We now find that cyclopamine, a potent
inhibitor of hedgehog network signaling, inhibits anchorage-dependent
and anchorage-independent growth of two ER-positive tumorigenic cell
lines (MCF7 and BT474), and two ER-negative tumorigenic cell lines
(MDA-MB- 231, SK-BR-3), while growth of two non-tumorigenic cell
lines, MCF10A and MCF12A, was relatively unaffected. In
anchoragedependent growth assays, modest growth inhibition by
 M cyclopamine could be rescued by competition with
1ng/ml recombinant SHH-N ligand. However, strong growth inhibition at
 M cyclopamine could not be rescued by competition
with any concentration of SHH-N tested. Both cyclopamine and
tomatidine showed similar effects on cholesterol trafficking in both
tumorigenic and non-tumorigenic cells at dosages below those required
for strong growth inhibition, thereby excluding trafficking defects as
a possible alternative mechanism for growth inhibition at higher
doses. Our data suggest that cyclopamine does indeed inhibit hedgehog
signaling in breast cancer cell lines, but that significant growth
inhibition by cyclopamine may be largely independent of its effect on
hedgehog signaling or cholesterol trafficking, thus implicating a
possible “second target” for cyclopamine that is critical for
tumorigenic, but not nontumorigenic, breast epithelial cell
growth.

## 2001

## Urinary metalloproteinases: a novel non-invasive methodology for
breast cancer risk assessment.

## Pories SE, Lamb CC, Roy R, Lotz MM, Zurakowski D, Raza S, Wewer
U, Scheib RG, Schumer S, Exarhopoulos A, Isakovich N, Louis GW, Anand
A, Lenahan C, Kilroy S, Hirshfield-Bartek J, Borges V, Yee BH, Moses
MA. Harvard Medical School: Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Children’s Hospital, Mount Auburn Hospital, Brigham and Women’s
Hospital, Dana Farber Harvard Cancer Center, Boston, MA

Background: Matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) have been implicated in mechanisms of tumor growth, progression
and metastasis, in several experimental cancer models and in human
malignancies. We have previously reported that MMPs can be detected in
the urine of breast cancer patients and that their presence is an
independent predictor of disease status. We have also demonstrated
that urinary ADAM 12 (a
disintegrin and metalloprotease)
significantly increases with disease progression in breast cancer
patients. In the current study, we have addressed a key question: Can
urinary MMP and ADAM 12 analysis provide valuable clinical information
regarding the risk of developing breast cancer?

Material and Methods: To answer this
question, we have analyzed urine samples from women with biopsy-proven
marker lesions that indicate an increased risk of developing invasive
breast cancer. Urine samples were obtained from 151 women: 45 women
with Atypical Lobular Hyperplasia (ALH) or Atypical Ductal Hyperplasia
(ADH), 25 women with Lobular Carcinoma in Situ (LCIS) and 81
age-matched healthy controls. Thirty microliters of each urine sample
was analyzed by substrate gel electrophoresis (zymography) using
gelatin as the substrate. MMP identity and ADAM 12 expression was
verified by immunoblot analyses using monospecific antibodies. Band
intensities were analyzed with UNSCAN-
ITTM(Silk Scientific, Orem, UT) software
digitizer technology.

Results: We used logistic regression
to analyze the utility of ADAM 12 and MMPs for breast cancer risk
assessment. This revealed that MMP-9 and ADAM 12 were independent
predictors of both LCIS (both p<0.001) and ADH-ALH (MMP-9, p=0.004;
ADAM 12, p<0.001). Maximum likelihood estimation was used to obtain
probability of LCIS or ADH-ALH for the various possible test Results:
a positive urinary MMP-9 and ADAM 12 is associated with a probability
of LCIS or Atypia of 100%, negative for MMP-9 and positive for ADAM
12, a probability of LCIS or Atypia of 50%–67%, positive for MMP-9 and
negative for ADAM 12, a probability of LCIS or Atypia of 25–40%, and
negative for both MMP-9 and ADAM 12, a probability of LCIS or Atypia
of 0%.

Discussion: Our results suggest that
the detection of urinary MMP 9 and ADAM 12 provides useful clinical
information regarding breast cancer risk assessment. Analysis of
urinary MMP 9 and ADAM 12 may offer a novel non-invasive approach for
identifying women at increased risk of developing breast cancer.
(Supported by NIH PO1CA45548 to M.A.M., Harvard Center for Excellence
in Women’s Health, Global Medical Products, The Fortin Foundation, The
Advanced Medical Foundation and AstraZeneca.)

## 2002

## Circulating tumor marker discovery using proteolytic peptide
profiling and isotope-coded affinity tags.

## Esteva FJ, Zhang B, Hawke D, Zhao H, Baggerly K, Koomen J,
Hortobagyi GN, Kobayashi R. UT M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX; Proteomics Facility
Serum protein profiling using mass spectrometry is a promising
approach to identify novel circulating breast cancer markers. One of
the major problems to uncover lower abundance protein markers in the
serum is that they are frequently masked by large, abundant proteins
such as albumin and immunoglobulins among others.

Methods: Serum samples from healthy
women and breast cancer patients were enriched for potential
biomarkers using two different methods. First, immobilized lectins
Concanavalin A (Con A) and Wheat Germ Agglutinin (WGA) (Sigma) were
used to enrich for glycoproteins. Breast cancer and control pools were
derivatized with either heavy or light cleavable-ICAT reagent (Applied
Biosystems), combined and separated by SDS-PAGE. The entire gel was
excised, digested with trypsin, affinity purified, the handle cleaved
off and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS (LC-Packings nano- LC and Qstar).
Data was analyzed with Pro-ICAT (Applied Biosystems), iTRAQ (Applied
Biosystems) and other search tools such as Mascot. Second, we enriched
30 serum samples from healthy women and breast cancer patients using
antibody columns (Seppro and Agilent). Each depleted fraction was
digested with trypsin and subsequently analyzed by LC-MS. Rather than
using bioinformatic analysis as a pattern-matching technique, peptides
were targeted based on the disease to control peak intensity ratios
measured in the averages of all mass spectra in each group and t-tests
of the intensity of each individual peak. A series of preprocessing
steps were employed to produce an expansive list of peptides for
further investigation and sequencing.

Results: Using Con A selection
followed by ICAT analysis, 43 serum proteins with a variety of
functions were identified. Among those, 6 proteins appeared
differently expressed by >1 standard deviation of the median.
Haptoglobin was up-regulated in serum from breast cancer patients, as
previously reported using other methods. Con A and WGA showed
different binding specificity for glycoproteins. By applying Con A and
WGA sequentially, 71 proteins were identified. Comparison of ICAT with
iTRAQ data is ongoing. The Seppro and Agilent antibody columns removed
12 of the most abundant proteins in serum, including albumin, IgG,
Fibrinogen, Transferrin, IgA, IgM, a1-Antitrypsin, Haptoglobin,
a1-Acid Glycoprotein, a2-Macroglobulin and HDL (Apolipoproteins A-I
and A-II). Using LC-MS and bioinformatic analysis we found 12
differentially expressed peaks in the Cancer vs. Healthy groups.
Efforts are ongoing to identify targeted peptide ion signals using
tandem matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry
(MALDI-MS/MS).

Conclusions: Serum fractionation
using specific antibody columns followed by LC-MS and bioinformatic
analysis is a feasible approach to peptide profiling in healthy women
and breast cancer patients.

## 2003

## The relationship between circulating concentrations of Her-2,
C-reactive protein and survival in patients with primary operable breast
cancer.

## Henley NC, Macmillan DC, Doran C, Burns HJG, George WD, Bartlett
JM, Cooke TG. University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom; Greater
Glasgow NHS Board, Glasgow, United Kingdom

Background: Prediction of recurrence
and survival following potentially curative resection of primary
operable breast cancer remains problematic. Conventionally, prediction
of outcome has been based on pathological examination of the tumour.
Recently, a number of circulating factors have been suggested to
improve prediction of outcome. The aim of the present study was to
examine the prognostic value of serum concentrations of HER-2/neu and
C-reactive protein in patients with primary operable breast
cancer.

Patients and Methods: One hundred and
seventy nine patients presenting with invasive primary operable breast
cancer to two hospitals (Royal and Western Infirmaries, Glasgow) in
the West of Scotland between October 2000- January 2002 were included
in the study. Prior to surgery, a blood sample was obtained for the
measurement of HER-2/neu and C-reactive protein concentrations.
Clinical data including age, tumour size, histological grade,
oestrogen receptor status and lymph node status were recorde.D Grade,
tumour size and lymph node status were combined and expressed as the
Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI). Patients were followed-up until
31st December 2004.

Results: The median follow-up was
46 months. During this period, 25 patients died. On univariate
analysis, NPI (p<0.001), oestrogen receptor status (p=0.009),
HER-2/neu (p<0.001), C-reactive protein (p= 0.019) were predictors
of overall survival. On multivariate analysis, NPI coded (good/
intermediate/ poor, HR 7.07, 95%CI 3.21–15.56, p<0.001), HER-2/neu
(<13/ >13ug/l, HR 3.35, 95%CI 1.42–7.89, p=0.006) and C-reactive
protein (≤10/ >10mg/l, HR 5.67, 95%CI 2.03–15.79, p<0.001)
remained independent predictors of overall survival.

Discussion: The results of the
present study indicate that elevated serum HER-2/neu and C-reactive
protein concentrations, predict survival independent of the NPI.
Further evaluation of these parameters in the pre-operative assessment
of patients with primary operable breast cancer is warrante.D

## 2004

## Evaluation of immunoassay and RT-PCR methods for detection of the
NMP66 complex for diagnosis of breast cancer.

## Stoerker J, Lueftner D, Szaro R, Fagan G, Domurad M. Matritech,
Inc., Newton, MA; Charite Hospital, Berlin, Germany

Background: We investigated the
performance of two methods of detecting NMP66, a nuclear matrix
protein complex, in discriminating between serum from women with and
without breast cancer in a cohort of 298 prospectively collected,
blinded samples.

Materials and Methods: The NMP66
nuclear matrix protein complex has been demonstrated to be present in
the sera of breast cancer patients and absent from the sera of women
with no evidence of breast disease (Exp. Rev. Mol. Diag. 2:23, 2002).
A Signature protein of the complex was first isolated on a nickel
affinity surface and identified by time of flight mass spectrometry
using a SELDI-TOF instrument (Ciphergen Corp., Inc.). Subsequently, a
prototype two-site colorimetric sandwich immunoassay for the
identified protein was developed and a qualitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay was constructed
using probes specific for unique nucleic acid sequences found within
the NMP66 complex (Development of a blood based immunoassay to detect
the NMP66 breast cancer associated nuclear matrix protein, 4th
European Conference: Perspectives in Breast Cancer, Seville, Spain,
2004). The current investigation evaluated the performance of these
methods in discriminating between samples from patients with and
without breast cancer. Pre-biopsy blood samples were prospectively
collected from 208 women who had suspicious mammograms and/or palpable
breast lesions. Subsequent pathological examination determined that 55
had cancer (15 DCIS, 6 LCIS, 3 invasive lobular, 26 T1, 3 T2, 1T3, 1
T4) and 153 had benign breast conditions. Fifteen samples collected
from women with metastatic breast cancer and 75 from women who had no
evidence of breast disease on two sequential mammograms in two years
were added to the cohort. All samples (N=298) were blinded by a third
party and tested using both methods for detection of NMP66.

Results: The qualitative RT-PCR
correctly identified over 70% of the cancer samples, and the
colorimetric immunoassay demonstrated good differentiation of
noncancer samples, ruling out 80% of those from patients with benign
breast disease or no evidence of disease. There was a 67% greater
likelihood of cancer being present when the test was positive compared
to cancer being present when the test was negative among patients who
had clinical or biopsy confirmation of breast disease (RR 1.67). This
effect was even greater for postmenopausal women, among whom there was
a 75% greater likelihood of cancer being present upon pathological
confirmation when the immunoassay result was positive (RR
1.75).

Discussion: These preliminary results
suggest that measurement of the NMP66 protein and associated complexes
or products could provide utility in diagnosis of patients with a
cost-effective blood-based method. Additional investigations and data
are being compile.D

## 2005

## Increased levels of the circulating growth factor GP88 in the serum
of breast cancer patients.

## Serrero G, Tkaczuk KH, Golubeva O, Jones L, Tait N, Feldman FS,
Dai H. A&G Pharmaceutical Inc., Columbia, MD; University of
Maryland, Baltimore, MD
The identification of a measurable biomarker that is a therapeutic
target of malignant transformation or malignant progression of breast
carcinoma (BC) will provide new approaches for the development of
novel breast cancer therapies with their companion diagnostics. The
88 kDa autocrine growth factor named PC-Cell Derived Growth Factor
(PCDGF) or G88 plays a critical role in breast cancer and may have
such potential. GP88 is expressed in human BC tumors in a positive
correlation with their tumorigenicity. In estrogen receptor positive
(ER+) cells, PCDGF/ GP88 expression is
low and is stimulated by estradiol whereas in ER negative cells, it is
constitutively overexpressed. In ER+ cells,
GP88 mediates estrogen mitogenic activity and its overexpression
renders cells estrogen-independent and tamoxifen-resistant. Inhibition
of GP88 expression by antisense transfection leads to inhibition of
breast tumor incidence and growth in nude mice. GP88 is expressed in
80% of human invasive ductal carcinomas and correlates with expression
of markers of poor prognosis whereas normal tissues and benign breast
lesions are negative. The objective of the present pilot clinical
study was to investigate whether the level of GP88 was elevated in the
serum of breast cancer patients when compared to healthy volunteers.
For this purpose, a blood sampling study was conducted to measure the
GP88 serum level by quantitative enzyme immunoassay in healthy
volunteers (HV) and breast cancer patients (BC pts). One hundred
twenty three subjects including 16 HV and 107 BC pts were accrued. The
BC patient characteristics were the following: Race: Caucasian- 51,
African American-51, Asian-5, median age, 52.5 (range 29–84), stage I
– 25, II – 29, III – 12, IV – 41. Circulating GP88 was measurable in
the serum of HV and BC pts. Comparison between the two groups of
subjects indicated that GP88 level was significantly higher in the
sera of BC pts. Median level of baseline GP88 was 32.8 ng/ml (range
23.8–42.8) in HV and 44.4 ng/ml (range 23–158.4) in BC pts, (p- value
= 0.004). In addition, longitudinal study of stage IV patients
provided evidence of increased GP88 level in stage IV patients with a
progressive disease. Future studies will investigate the correlation
between GP88 level with BC prognostic factors such as stage, tumor
size, tumor grade, lymph node status, and expression of ER and HER-2
as well as survival of breast cancer patients.

## 2006

## Circulating tumor cells in adjuvant breast cancer
patients.

## Almokadem S, Leitzel K, Harvey HA, Bannon E, Ali SM, Miller MC,
Repollet M, Terstapenn LWWM, Doyle GV, Frazier T, Lipton A.
Pennsylvania State College of Medicine/ Hershey Medical Center,
Hershey, PA; Immunicon Corporation, Huntington Valley, PA; Bryn Mawr
Hospital, Bryn Mawr, PA

Background: One of the first steps in
metastasis is the ability of primary breast cancer cells to detach and
invade the circulation. The presence of ≥5 circulating tumor cells
(CTCs) in 7.5mL of blood from metastatic breast cancer patients
predicts shorter progression-free and overall survival (M
Christofanilli et al NEJM 351:781–791, 2004). The purpose of our study
was to determine if CTCs were present in the blood of patients who had
recently completed adjuvant chemotherapy.

Methods: 51 patients were accrued
within 12 months of completing adjuvant chemotherapy, none of whom had
evidence of recurrence by imaging. Patients characteristics: 17 (33%)
patients were stage I, 26 (51%) stage II, and 8 (16%) stage III. In
addition, 8 (16%) patients were Her2/neu 3+ by IHC. CTCs were
immunomagnetically separated and fluorescently stained using the
CellSearchTM Kit. Cells were classified
using the CellSpotter® Analyzer as CTCs if
they stained positive for DAPI (nuclear dye), and cytokeratin 8, 18
and/or 19, and if they stained negative for the leukocyte-specific
antibody CD45.

Results: In a control group of 145
healthy females, 8 (5.5%) had 1 CTC / 7.5mL blood. In 199 patients
with benign breast diseases, 14 (7.0 %) had 1 CTC/7.5mL, and only 1
(0.5%) had 3 CTCs/7.5 mL detected in their blood. 8 patients out of 51
patients in the study group (16%) had ≥1 CTC/7.5mL (five patients has
1 CTC in one tube, two patients had 2 CTC in one tube, and the eighth
patient had one CTC in three tubes). Of the 8 patients with CTCs, 2
were stage I (12%), 4 stage II (15%), and 2 stage III (25%).
Additionally, 2 (25%) were Her2/neu 3+ by IHC in the primary tumor. In
summary, CTC were detected in 8/51(16%) adjuvant breast cancer
patients, 8/145 (5.5%) healthy control, and 15/199 (7.5%) in benign
breast diseases patients. There were statistically significant
differences in the proportion of CTCs between these groups (Fisher’s
exact test p≥ 0.0346 breast cancer vs healthy control; p≥0.0993 breast
cancer vs benign diseases group; and p≥ 0.0404 breast cancer group vs
both control groups)

Conclusions: CTCs were detected in
16% of breast cancer patients who recently completed adjuvant
chemotherapy; this finding was statistically significant in comparison
with the healthy control group. Patient accrual and follow-up in this
study continues to determine if the presence of elevated CTCs is
associated with early recurrence of the disease.

## 2007

## Methylated genes in ductal lavage fluid from women with known
breast cancer undergoing mastectomy.

## Fackler MJ, Malone K, Schilling E, Swift-Scanlon T, Nayar R,
Sukumar S, Khan SA. Feinberg School of Medicien of Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL; Feinberg School of Medicine of Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL; Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD

Background: The imperfect performance
of screening mammography, particularly in young women, has led to a
new generation of tests. These include ductal lavage (DL), one of the
anticipated uses of which is the early detection of breast cancer by
cytological analysis of DL samples. We have recently shown that the
sensitivity of ductal lavage to detect malignancy in women with known
breast cancer undergoing mastectomy was 43% (Khan SA JNCI 2004). This
low sensitivity was partially explained by benign or mildly atypical
cytology from cancer containing ducts. We hypothesized that evaluation
of gene promoter hypermethylation markers in DL cells would provide
improved sensitivity and accuracy over cytology alone.

Methods: We used the quantitative
multiplex–MSP (QM-MSP) technique (Fackler MJ Cancer Res. 2004) to co-amplify 9 genes (RASSF1A,
Twist, Cyclin D2, HIN-1, Retinoic acid receptor-β (RARβ), APC1, BRCA1,
BRCA2 and p16) in 37 Papanicoloaou stained cytology samples from both
cancer (n=27) and non-cancer (n=3) containing breasts sent blinded to
the Johns Hopkins labs. We examined the association between cumulative
gene promoter methylation, duct histopathology and lavage cytology in
matched samples. Sixty samples derived from routine DL of apparently
normal high risk women (n = 34) were evaluated to establish baseline
levels of methyation for each gene in women without cancer.

Results: 37 ducts from 30 breasts
were evaluated (30 lavaged ducts with matching cytological,
histological and methylation data and 7 ducts with methylation and
cytology, but no histopathology data). We found significantly higher
levels of cumulative methylation in DL cells from women undergoing
mastectomy than for normal high risk women (mean 34.6 vs 0.9,
p=.0004). Based on 90th percentile of
control, an upper threshold for normal was established (<2.0
units). By this criterion, 51% (19 of 37) of the mastectomy group were
positive for methylation. All 8 of 8 of samples with malignant or
markedly atypical cytology were strongly positive for QM-MSP, (mean
116 units). Among histologically positive ducts QM-MSP identified 63%
(12 of 19) compared to 31.5 % (6 of 19) identified by cytological
evaluation alone (p=.0017). Successful cannulation of cancer bearing
ducts was achieved in 63% (17 of 27) breasts. Among these,
abnormalities were detected in 82% (14 of 17) of breasts by QM-MSP
versus 35% (6 of 17) by cytology only.

Conclusions: Compared to cytology,
QM-MSP more than doubled the rate of detection of malignancy in DL
samples from cancer-containing breasts, and is being tested in other
scenarios of breast cancer diagnosis and risk assessment.

## 2008

## Glycan array identifies specific signatures of anti-glycan
autoantibodies in sera of breast cancer patients: diagnostic, prognostic
and therapeutic opportunities.

## Huflejt ME, Blixt O, Vuskovic M, Xu H, Shaw LE, Reuben JM,
Kuerer HM, Cristofanilli M. Glycomedical Research Institute, La Jolla,
CA; The Scripps Research Institute, Consortium for Functional
Glycomics, La Jolla, CA; San Diego State University, San Diego, CA; UT
M.D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background: Malignant transformation
and tumor progression are associated with the specific changes in the
complex surface carbohydrates, known as Tumor-Associated Carbohydrate
Antigens (TACAs). However, very little is known about immune response
against these abnormal glycans. A robust glycan array containing many
known TACAs and related glycans has been recently developed and
validate.D We tested the hypothesis that this technology can identify
anti-glycan autoantibodies in sera of patients with metastatic (MBC)
and primary breast cancers (PBC) and we speculated that specific
autoantibody profiles may be associated with early disease status or
otherwise have prognostic implications.

Methods: A total of 57 serum samples
from MBC (48%), PBC (26%) and healthy donors (26%) were analyzed.
Glycan array slides were incubated with sera diluted with PBS/3% BSA,
then with biotinylated goat antibody against human IgG, IgM and IgA,
and with streptavidin-Alexa 488. The intensity of fluorescence in
spots corresponding to the antibodies bound to the individual glycans
was quantified with ImaGene image analysis software and data were
plotted using MS Excel software.

Computational data evaluation: The
univariate t-test and multivariate Hotelling’s test were used to
establish the significance in differences in anti-glycan autoantibody
levels between “healthy controls” and breast cancer serum samples. To
visualize data clustering, the Fisher-Rao projections, as well as
projections based on support vector machines (SVM) were use.D

Results and Discussion: Breast cancer
is associated with significantly higher levels of several
autoantibodies against glycans including N-acetyllactosamines
(LacNAc), fucosylated, and Core- 2 glycans. Autoantibodies against
6-sulfo lactose, sialylated poly LacNAcs and O-linked T-antigen show
most significantly increased levels in MBC as compared to PBC and
healthy individuals. Our studies demonstrate that the printed glycan
array is a sensitive and promising tool for the development of
clinical serum-based screening tests for early detection and
evaluation of malignancy status in breast cancer. The unique method
for defining clusters of circulating anti-glycan autoantibodies may
lead to identification of specific TACAs as potential targets for the
development of anti-cancer therapeutics.

## 2009

## Serum profiling predictive of invasive breast cancer.

## Mansfield BC, Shriver CD, Yip PF, Coleman TA, Hitt BA, Hooke JA,
Liebman M, Somiari S, Flynn J. Correlogic Systems Inc., Bethesda, MD;
Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, DC; Windber Research
Institute, Windber, PA; Landstuhl Regional Medical Center, Landstuhl,
Germany

Background: Serum profiling may
detect malignant disease, but no single circulating biomarker exists
for breast cancer. Our interest is the identification of multiple
markers that, taken together, indicate the presence of disease. Using
nanospray mass spectrometry we are analyzing the spectral profiles of
serum for coordinated changes that may be predictive of
disease.

Materials and Methods: We have
established an on-going multisite collection protocol for serum
collected from women attending the Clinical Breast Care Project. Sera
are collected prior to biopsy, processed promptly by a standard
protocol, and classified by retrospective tissue biopsy pathology. The
collection currently consists of 793 samples, 365 from women diagnosed
with cancer and 428 representing normal-benign breast tissue.
Conditions represented include: 97 in
situ, 268 invasive (stages 1–4), 31 no breast disease;
238 benign non-neoplastic; 130 benign neoplastic; and 29 atypical
ductal hyperplasia. Sera are analyzed on an ABI QSTAR time-of-flight
mass spectrometer equipped with an Advion
Nanomate® System. Spectra obtained are
used to build models using the Correlogic Systems Inc.
ProteomeQuest® software which combines
multi-dimensional lead cluster mapping with a genetic algorithm to
identify patterns predictive of disease status. In all experiments we
hold out an independent set of spectra files as a blinded validation
set, to emulate a clinical setting.

Results: Our initial focus is to
model invasive serum profiles against normal-benign conditions. To
date we have acquired spectra on 371 invasive and 234 normal-benign
sera. A number of multifeature models have been created which
demonstrate sensitivities and specificities in the range of 80 – 90%
on the blinded validation set. One region of the spectrum, about m/z
537, appears particularly powerful in discriminating between invasive
cancer and nonmalignant conditions. However, alone, neither this, nor
any other region, is sufficiently informative. When the coordinated
changes in the relative levels of multiple features in the serum are
combined in models, the serum profiles are highly predictive of
disease. One model, combining 10 features yielded 98.5% specificity
and 90.3% sensitivity on a testing set of 196 non-malignant sera and
103 invasive sera, which dropped to 94.4% specificity (95% CI 83.7 –
98.6%) and 80.5% sensitivity (95% CI 64.6 – 90.6%) on a truly blinded
validation set of 54 non-malignant and 41 invasive sera.

Discussion: Profiling the changes in
the relative levels of multiple features in the serum, using this
technology and algorithm, is reasonably accurate in classifying women
with invasive breast cancer from normal and benign conditions prior to
undergoing biopsy.

## 2010

## Patient detected breast cancer not seen on mammography.

## Kaplan HG, Malmgren JA, Atwood MK. Swedish Cancer Institute,
Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA; HealthSTAT Consulting, Inc.,
Seattle, WA; University of Washington, Seattle, WA

Background: Most estimates of
mammography sensitivity are derived from screening studies using
interval cancers as the false negative portion of the equation. An
alternative method is to review charts of patient detected breast
cancer patients and calculate the number seen on mammography when
mammography is done at the time of diagnosis.

Materials and methods: We conducted a
cohort study of women age 21–94 diagnosed with primary invasive breast
cancer Stage IIV from 1989–1999 tracked by the institutions’ breast
cancer registry. Patient age, race, method of detection, tumor size,
histologic type, biopsy and mammography results at the time of
diagnosis were ascertained from chart review and included patient
(PtD), clinician or mammography detected method, and seen, not seen,
not done (2.6%) or unknown (8.4%) for mammography. All PtD tumors were
confirmed by biopsy (n=1291). The Swedish Two County Program tumor
size groupings were used to compare size by seen/not seen on
mammography.

Results: 88.9% of the PtD breast
cancer cases had mammograms done post presentation (n=1148). Of these
PtD cancers, 26% were 2.0–2.9 cm, 77% were ductal histologic type, 32%
were 40–49 years of age, 88% were white, and 34% were Stage I. 75%
were seen on mammography, and 25% were not. There was no difference by
age, race, or stage between cancers seen and not seen on mammography.
Tumor size of breast cancers not seen were more often less than
1.5 cm, 36% vs. 21%, and greater than 5 cm, 17% vs. 13% (Chi square =
35.56, p<.001) (table). By histological type, PtD breast cancer not
seen on mammography were more often lobular (16% vs. 9%) and less
often ductal (70% vs. 80%) (Chi square = 27.91, p = .03).

Discussion: Our finding of 75%
sensitivity for tumors visible on mammography in biopsy positive
patient detected breast cancer is similar to published estimates of
mammography sensitivity using interval cancers as false negatives. In
PtD breast cancer, younger and older women had the same percentage of
tumors not seen on mammography. While mammography is a useful
screening tool, it will not diagnose a significant percentage of
breast cancers, regardless of size and histologic type. From our
findings, complete reliance on mammography for breast cancer detection
is not warranted and manual methods should be retained as an integral
part of breast health programs 

## 2011

## Serum proteome of breast cancer: a group of proteins related to the
invasive stage.

## Ru Q, Zhu L, Silberman J, Jacobs N, Shriver D. Windber Research
Institute, Windber, PA; Breast Cancer Care Center, Walter Reed Army
Medical Center, Washington, DC

Background: Proteomic research and
technology has recently undergone dramatic improvements. More and more
physicians have realized that proteomics may revolutionize cancer
diagnostics and elucidate oncopathologies. The latest proteomic tool,
multidimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT), is an
effective alternative to two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-D gel)
because it provides high-throughput analyses, good reproducibility,
and effective characterization of small metabolic byproducts.

Methods: One hundred human serum
specimens from breast cancer patients (23 invasive, 14 atypical, and
41 benign) and normal control (22) were analyzed via an optimized
MudPIT method. Only 10 microliters of raw plasma were needed. Every
sample was run three times to test reproducibility and to maximize
identification. The Thermo Finnigan ProteomeX workstation was used for
MudPIT analyses, and the Thermo Finnigan Bioworks Browser 3.1 SR1 and
IPI human protein database version 06.23.04 were used to complete a
Turbo Sequest search. Protein data was analyzed with Microsoft
Excel.

Results: Five hundred twenty-six
proteins were identified from 100 human serum specimens. It was also
found that 24 proteins were identified in 78 breast cancer patients,
but not in 22 normal samples. This group includes a subset of four
proteins that is found in approximately 50% of invasive samples, but
in about 5% of benign samples. When the four proteins are combined as
one target, the detection frequency in invasive samples increases to
87%, while that of benign and normal samples is approximately 11%
(Table 1).

Discussion: Unlike traditional
protein chemistry, which investigates specific proteins, protoemics
may reveal groups of proteins related to cancer. Preliminary
investigations identified a group of four proteins that is highly
related to invasive stage breast cancer, and that is not detected in
control samples. Results of a large-scale validation will be reported.
 

## 2012

## Ductal epithelial impedance spectroscopy; a new approach to breast
cancer diagnosis.

## Davies RJ, Davisson TH. Hackensack Univ. Medical Center,
Hackensack, NJ

Background: Breast cancer develops
within the ductal or lobular epithelium of the breast. Functional
changes occur in transgenic models of breast cancer, and we have
previously demonstrated that a down-regulation of specific ionic
conductances occurs in human breast epithelia during breast cancer
development. Although electrical
impedance scanning, or tomography,
have been used to image mass lesions within the breast, epithelial impedance spectroscopy has not been utilized to
diagnose cancer in the epithelium, where breast cancer originates. We
have therefore developed an “Electronic Biopsy” to non-invasively
identify breast cancer in the epithelium.

Patients and Methods: With IRB and
patient consent, electrical contact with ductal epithelium was
established non-invasively, using a specially designed nipple sensor
in 26 women scheduled for breast biopsy. Transepithelial impedance
measurements were obtained over a frequency range of 0.1–60K Hz and
processed using a frequency response analyzer and sine-wave
correlation technique. Data were analyzed using a t-test, Mann-Whitney
test, or ANOVA as appropriate.

Results: In patients with malignant
or pre-malignant lesions (MAL, n=10), on subsequent biopsy, the
transepithelial resistance of the ductal system was 78.4±38.3 KW (mean
±SEM) compared with 25.1±5.3 KW in benign lesions (BEN, n=16), (p =
ns) at higher frequencies. At lower frequencies the transepithelial
resistance progressively increases to 442.4±225.5 KW in the MAL group
compared with 157.1±37.1 KW (p = 0.037) in the BEN group. In the 6
patients in the BEN group with ADH or hyperplasia the change in
epithelial resistance at low frequencies was intermediate between true
benign lesions (n=10) and malignant ones (p=0.045).

Discussion: This preliminary study
demonstrates that changes in ductal epithelial impedance identifies
patients with proliferative or malignant breast disease. Although
malignant tumors have been reported to have lower impedances than
benign ones, the ductal epithelial elements have a higher impedance,
which may be related to alterations in secretory or absorptive
function of the epithelium during carcinogenesis.

## 2013

## New biomarkers in the detection of breast cancer in nipple aspirate
flui (NAF), using surface enhanced laser/ desorption ionisation coupled
with time-of-flight mass spectrometry (SELDI-TOF/ MS) in combination with
artificial intelligence methods.

## Dua RS, Noble JL, Locke I, Coulton GR, Eeles R, Isacke CM, Gui
GPH. Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Breakthrough
Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom; St George’s University of London, London, United
Kingdom

Background: The proteomic analysis of
nipple aspirate fluid holds great promise in early cancer detection.
In order to evaluate the feasibility of this technique, we collected
paired samples from women undergoing surgery at the Royal Marsden
Hospital, London. SELDI-TOF/MS was used to evaluate the following: (1)
the consistency and reproducibility of proteomic data, (2) to define
specific phenotypic subgroups within the sample population. Pathologic
variables studied included axillary node nodal status, pathologic
primary tumour grade, the extent of association with pre-invasive
disease, tumour size and hormonal receptor status.

Methods: An ethics protocol was
approved by the Royal Marsden Hospital Ethics committee, and all
patients undergoing surgery for unilateral breast cancer were
recruited, subject to inclusion criteria. Nipple aspiration was
performed on both breasts, prior to surgery, using the healthy
contralteral breast as an internal control. A pilot study of 50
subjects was performed to evaluate cytologic analysis from the cancer
bearing breast, followed by a proteomic comparison of cancer-bearing
versus healthy control NAF employing surface enhanced laser desorption
coupled with timeof- flight mass spectrometry (SELDI-TOF). Following
normalisation of protein concentration and denaturation, samples were
applied in duplicate to two different surfaces: a weak cation exchange
(CM10) and an immoboilised metal chromatography (IMAC30)
surface.

Results: The resulting spectra were
normalised, and based on the normalisation co-efficient, outliers
excluded. Non-parametric univariate analysis uncovered 5 proteins that
successfully discriminated cancer-associated NAF from the healthy
controls (7312 Da, 19943 Da, 3103 Da, 4115 Da, 4237 Da); p < 0.05.
peaks of interest were subjected to further analysis using
multivariate analyses incorporating (i) decision trees, (ii)
artificial neural networks and (iii) genetic algorithms to investigate
whether a cancer protein pattern could be derived from these
individual components. In the second part of the study, looking at
standard pathological variables, a protein at 11,210 daltons
discriminated between cancer-associated NAF and pathological nipple
discharge (p= 0.00009), and a protein at 7,312 Da was expressed at
significantly higher levels in node-positive patients (p=
0.0028)

Conclusion: Using SELDI-TOF/ MS in
combination with sophisticated artificial intelligence, we have
discovered new biomarkers that may hold promise in the diagnosis of
breast cancer.

## 2014

## Concurrence of contralateral breast cancers for estrogen and
progesterone receptor status and mode of detection.

## Martin CV, Sahasrabudhe N, Bundred NJ, Barr L, Byrne G, Baildam
A.D South Manchester University Hospital, Manchester, United
Kingdom

Background: Mammographic surveillance
is performed routinely in the follow-up of primary breast cancer and
contralateral tumours are not uncommon, affecting between 5–10% of
patients with breast cancer. The aim of this study was to determine if
the mode of detection of the first cancer (screen detected SDBC vs
symptomatic) predicted the presentation of the contralateral tumour
and if there was correlation of prognostic factors between the two
cancers.

Materials and Methods: We studied 249
patients diagnosed with contralateral breast cancer between 1975 and
2004 in a single breast unit, for whom reliable data was available.
Data was extracted from case notes, supplemented by review of
pathological specimens where necessary. Variables compared included
mode of presentation of tumour, pathological size, histological type,
grade, estrogen/ progesterone receptor status, lymph node status and
interval of time between cancers.

Results: The median age of diagnosis
of the first cancer was 55 for SDBC and 56 for symptomatic. 1/3 of
these were detected by mammographic screening and 2/3 by symptomatic
presentation. First tumours detected on mammogram were highly likely
to have a screen detected contralateral breast cancer (p=0.001). ER
and PR status between first and second tumours correlated regardless
of mode of detection (p=0.01). Grade and Histological type did not
correlate. However, 3/4 of Grade 1 CBCs were screen detected and 3/4
of Grade 3 CBC were symptomatic. Screen detected CBC tended to be
smaller, with 76% measuring less than 20mm whereas only 43% of
symptomatic cancers were <20mm. SDCBCS were mainly lymph node
negative (81%). The interval between cancers did not differ
significantly for SD or symptomatic CBC.

Conclusion: Screen detected primary
tumours are likely to have Mammographically detected contralateral
breast cancer. SDCBCs are smaller, lower grade and more likely to be
lymph node negative than symptomatic CBC. The present study supports
the value of repeated mammographic surveillance.

## 2015

## Variation in protein expression patterns of nipple aspirate fluid
comparing women with breast cancer and healthy women using time-of-flight
mass spectrometry.

## Noble JL, Dua RS, Locke I, Coulton GR, Eeles R, Isacke CM, Gui
GPH. Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Breakthrough
Breast Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom; St George’s University of London, London, United
Kingdom

Background: The emerging field of
proteomics provides a promising approach to biomarker discovery in a
variety of cancers. Combined with the intraductal approach, comprising
nipple aspiration, ductal lavage and ductoscopy it may prove useful in
the early detection, diagnosis and screening of breast cancer. This
study examines the feasibility of nipple aspiration to distinguish
women with breast cancer from healthy women using surface-enhanced
laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(SELDI-TOF/MS).

Materials and Methods: In this pilot
study, nipple aspiration fluid was collected from each breast in 10
women newly diagnosed with unilateral breast cancer and 10 healthy
women. The fluid was diluted to 1 mg/ml and applied to two protein
arrays (CM10 and IMAC-30). Each array was processed using the
Ciphergen SELDI-TOF/MS system.

Results: 142 distinct peaks were
identified. Protein expression from the cancer-bearing breast and the
contralateral healthy breast were compared. No difference was found
using the CM10 chip and only 4 proteins were overexpressed in the
cancer-bearing breast compared to the contralateral breast using the
IMAC-30. In contrast, the cancer-bearing breast compared to healthy
women revealed 52 peaks which were statistically significantly
different between the two groups (p<0.05). Finally comparing the
contralateral healthy breast to healthy women found 36 statistically
significant peaks which were overexpressed.

Conclusions: Differences between
women with breast cancer and healthy women can be demonstrated using a
proteomic approach to nipple aspiration fluid. We are currently
recruiting more women to validate our findings in a larger
study.

## 2016

## Comparison of FLT-(18F) and FDG-(18F) to visualize cancer spread
while staging locally advanced breast cancer with PET/CT: preliminary
data.

## Grahek D, Gligorov J, Beerblock K, Selle F, Segura C, Chopier J,
Salem C, Antoine M, Barranger E, Montravers F, Gutman F, Kerrou K, De
Beco V, Marsault C, Lotz JP, Uzan S, Talbot JN. Hôpital Tenon; Hôpital
Tenon, Paris, France

Objectives: Fluorothymidine-(18) or
FLT is a new radioactive tracer, the uptake of which is related to the
proliferation of cells. This study, including patients with locally
advanced breast cancer (LABC), aimed to evaluate the visualization of
the malignant lesions with FLT positron emission tomography (FLT-PET),
in comparison with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET, the reference PET
tracer in oncology.

Methods: FDG-PET/CT and FLT-PET/CT
were performed in 11 patients with LABC before chemotherapy. The
tumors were not inflammatory and corresponded to 8 ductal carcinomas
and 3 lobular carcinomas. The Ki-67 proliferation marker ranged
between 10 and 50%. Axillary lymph nodes were palpable in 4 pts. PET/
CT acquisitions were performed in prone position 1 hour after
injection of FLT-(18F) and 2 hours after injection of FDG-(18F) on a
different day. The interpretation was visual and tumor/ background
ratio (T/B) and standard uptake value were also calculate.D

Results: Mammary tumors were
visualized in all patients with both tracers ; the average SUV value
was 5 (range: 3–8.2) for FDG and 3.1 (range: 1.5–4.8) for FLT. Fifteen
abnormal axillary foci were visualized in 8 patients with both
tracers. Regarding axillary foci, the average SUV were respectively
1.8 (range: 0.7–3.6) and 1.7 (range: 0.6–2.6) for FDG and FLT. The
average T/B values were respectively 2.8 (range: 1.2–5.5) and 2.2
(range 1.1–3.5) for FDG and FLT. When the T/B value was less than 1.5
(3 cases with FDG and 1 case with FLT) the abnormal axillary foci were
hardly visible, and of small size at CT. Such a discrepancy occurred
in 4 patients: in 3 patients, clearly visible axillary foci with FLT
were not at all obvious with FDG and reverse in 1 patient. A bone
focus was only visualized with FDG that corresponded to an osteolytic
metastasis.

Conclusion: Even though the uptake of
FLT in the malignant lesions was less than the uptake of FDG, all
primary lesions was imaged with FLT. All but one abnormal axillary
foci seen at FDGPET/ CT were also visualized at FLT-PET/CT that also
revealed 3 foci not visible with FDG. The lack of FLT uptake in brown
fat and muscles could facilitate the visualization of small axillary
lesions. Conversely, the high FLT uptake by bone marrow prevented the
identification of one bone metastasis. An initial FLT PET/CT
examination could be worthwhile not only as a reference for early
assessment of response to chemotherapy but also for a better
evaluation of the nodal invasion.

## 2017

## Combined mammography and breast ultrasound are required for a good
accuracy of BI-RADS 4/5 results - findings of a breast imaging reference
center.

## Fasching PA, Wenkel E, Bani MR, Bautz W, Papadopoulos T,
Beckmann MW, Schulz-Wendtland R. University Hospital Erlangen,
Erlangen, Bavaria, Germany; Institute of Diagnostic Radiology,
University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Bavaria, Germany; Institute of
Pathology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Bavaria,
Germany

Background: The Breast Imaging
Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) of the American College of
Radiology (ACR) is a diagnostic tool to estimate the risk for the
malignancy of breast lesions. The systematic categorisation of
morphological findings and malignant risk are thought to minimize
inconsistencies of inter- and intraindividual estimations of breast
imaging. Aim of our analysis was the evaluation of the accuracy of
BI-RADS 4/5 results in a large collective.

Methods: From 1999 to 2003 all
consecutive patients with BI-RADS 4/5 results were prospectively
documented in a central database. All patients underwent biopsy by an
appropriate method. 5636 biopsies were performed due to a BI-RADS 4 or
5 result. Positive predictive values (PPV) were calculated and
adjusted for method of biopsy, morphological findings, and diagnostic
method (mammography vs. ultrasound).

Results: Patients with a BI-RADS 4
result (n=3966) showed a malignant histology in 15,7% of cases
(n=623). A BI-RADS 5 result showed a malignant histology in 86,6%
(1447 out of 1670 results). Mammography alone would prove 299 (14,4%)
carcinomas wrongly negative, ultrasound alone 367 (17,7%) wrongly
negative. Best discrimination of BI-RADS 4 vs. BI-RADS 5 results was
seen in the group of patients with solid masses (10% vs. 92,9%) and
sonografic guided biopsy (8,9 % vs. 91,6%). Findings with either
architectural distortion or calcification resulted in over 20% in
malignant histologies in BI-RADS 4 diagnoses.

Conclusion: BI-RADS categorisation is
helpful to evaluate the accuracy of breast imaging results. The
ACR-proposed probability of malignancy could not be achieved.
Concerning subgroups of morphological findings the PPV of BI-RADS 4
results was much higher than the recommended threshold. The
complementary application of mammography and ultrasound seems to be
mandatory. For the prevention of pitfalls special constellations of
covariates have to be respected carefully.

## 2018

## Improving the Case Definition of Inflammatory Breast
Cancer

## Levine PH, Cartin BJ, Lowe JA, Siegel DA, Young HA.

Background: Although inflammatory
breast cancer (IBC) is recognized as an aggressive form of breast
cancer, controversy surrounding diagnostic criteria for IBC has
limited our understanding of its etiology and clinical behavior. The
IBC Registry was established to collect standardized information and
specimens from IBC patients residing in the US and Canada, with the
goal of clarifying the etiology and biology of these tumors. The
information that has been gathered on the 163 patients currently in
the Registry has now documented the importance of revising the current
case definitions and the need to better understand some of the
problems associated with epidemiologic studies in the
literature.

Material and Methods: Of the 163
patients enrolled in the Registry, most (120) were self-referred
through the Internet.

Results: Just over 35% of the
patients were initially diagnosed as having an infection and received
antibiotics for up to ten months before the diagnosis of IBC was made.
Of 121 patients with mammogram records, 22 had no definitive findings
such as a mass or skin thickening, and the tumor was often attributed
to dense breasts. Receptor status was variable, with approximately 50%
of cases classified as ER positive, 35% PR positive, and 35% HER2/ neu
positive. The clinical presentation was wide-ranging; cases were
categorized according to the extent of clinical findings and the
presence or absence of documented dermal lymphatic invasion. The
median disease free interval (DFI) in weeks for all analyzable
patients in the Registry who were initially diagnosed after 1998
(n=96) was 60.5 weeks. For those with IBC meeting the American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC) criteria for IBC the median DFI was
42.5 weeks (n=46) and for those that did not, the median DFI was
72.0 weeks (n=40). DFI was not recorded for patients with secondary
IBC.
Approximately 89% (n=105) of patients received neoadjuvant
chemotherapy, usually including Adriamycin and Cyclophosphamide and
usually followed by mastectomy, the timing of the mastectomy depending
on the chemotherapy response. Ninety-four patients (approximately 80%)
received radiation therapy post-mastectomy. Fifty of the patients
reported an excellent initial response to chemotherapy.

Discussion: The 72 week DFI in
patients who did not meet the case definition of the AJCC for IBC,
while not as short as those meeting the case definition, still
indicates the importance of broadening the case definition. The poor
survival in patients in SEER and in our Registry with no clinical
signs of IBC but only pathological features emphasizes this
point.

## 2019

## Concordance of HER2 and hormone receptor expression in primary and
recurrent breast cancer.

## Wirk B, Geiger X, Hillman D, Perez EA. Mayo Clinic,
Jacksonville, FL

Background: Determination of accurate
HER2 and hormone receptor status is of primary importance in breast
cancer treatment. Concordance of expression of these 2 prognostic and
predictive factors between primary and recurrent tumors provide
guidance related to the potential need to re-biopsy patients at the
time of recurrence, or managing them based on the characteristics of
the original tumor.

Methods: Retrospective review of all
medical records available of patients (pts) with recurrent breast
cancer between 1997 and 2003 (160 cases total) at a single institution
as to whether expression levels of HER2 by immunohistochemistry (IHC)
using HercepTestTM or fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) using PathvysionTM as
well as ER (estrogen receptor) and PR (progesterone receptor) by
nuclear staining differ in the primary tumor and the asynchronous
recurrent lesions.

Results: Out of 160 cases, 39 pts
(ages 41–85 years) had HER2 status available on the primary breast
cancer and biopsies of the asynchronous recurrent breast cancer
lesions. 8 (20.5%; 95% CI 7.8–33.2%) pts had HER2 status conversion
(table 1). 7 pts with HER2 status conversion had HER2 status
determination by HercepTest and 1 patient had FISH. All pts with HER2
concordance had HercepTests. 14 (35.9%; 95% CI:20.8–51%) pts had ER/
PR status conversion from the primary breast cancer to the recurrent
breast cancer (table 2). Of those pts with HER2 status conversion, the
disease free interval (DFI) was 10 to 45 months. Of those with HER2
status concordance, the DFI was 9 months to 12 years. 7 of the 8 pts
with HER2 status conversion had locoregional recurrence (with biopsies
of the breast [4 pts], axillary lymph node [2 pts], chest wall [1 pt])
and 1 had distant recurrence (biopsy of the bone). 3 of 8 pts with
HER2 status conversion had ER and PR status conversion (ie ER+ or PR+
status of the primary breast cancer and ER- PR- status of the
asynchronous recurrent breast cancer). 4 of the 8 pts with HER2 status
conversions received anthracycline based chemotherapy and tamoxifen; 1
of the 8 pts received tamoxifen alone; 3 of the 8 pts received
chemotherapy alone and 6 of the 8 pts received radiation for their
primary breast cancer.

Conclusions: Changes in HER2 (20.5%)
and hormone receptor expression (35.9%) were found between the primary
and asynchronous recurrent breast cancer. Pts with recurrent breast
cancer should have new biopsies performed to best determine whether
therapy with trastuzumab and/or antiestrogen therapy is indicated.
Only 39 of 160 recurrent breast cancers examined between 1997–2003 had
biopsies of the recurrent lesions and data regarding the 2004
metastatic breast cancer cases are forthcoming 
 

## 2020

## Proliferating macrophages appear to be uniquely associated with
large, palpable DCIS and high grade invasive cancers.

## Esserman LJ, Kumar AS, Au A, Baehner F, Chen D, Chen Y, Chan L,
Chew K, McGrath M. UCSF, San Francisco, CA

Background: The clinical and
pathologic presentation of DCIS is highly variable. Large palpable
DCIS, is uncommon but distinct. Clinically, it arises rapidly, and
disproportionately, represents a subset of patients with poor
outcomes: approximately 3% of all DCIS cases, but associated with a 3%
mortality rate. These large, high grade lesions may have a different
etiology than other DCIS. They represent. In a previous study of DCIS
lesions characterized by MRI and immunohistochemistry, we observed
that palpable lesions have a distinct MRI appearance, and a high
proportion of macrophages. Due to the nature of their rapid
progression, we hypothesized that these lesions have a high pathologic
inflammatory component. Previous studies of lymphoma identified the
presence of a novel macrophage population expressing both macrophages
(CD68) and proliferation (PCNA) markers in the most aggressive subset.
These macrophages have been termed promacs and in animal model studies were capable of
inducing lymphoma. We hypothesized that this aggressive subset of DCIS
would contain promacs.

Methods: From a study of 49
prospective cases of DCIS with complete MRI and pathology (IHC) data,
we compared high grade lesions to all large palpable DCIS lesions from
1997 to 2005. Cases were double stained for CD68, a cytoplasmic stain
and PCNA, a nuclear stain. CD68/PCNA positive cells were counted in 3
high powered fields and the mean recorded. Two pathologists
independently evaluated the CD68 /PCNA double stains, without
knowledge of lesion palpability. Sixty invasive cancer cases of
varying grades were also evaluated. A single, blinded clinician
reviewed the case records to determine which patients had palpable
lesions.

Results: Eleven large palpable cases
were (10/11 were high grade) compared to 15 high grade non-palpable
DCIS lesions from the same study. All palpable lesions had a
homogenous enhancement pattern on MRI. The total number of macrophages
were significantly higher in the palpable lesions, compared to
nonpalpable high grade DCIS, mean 44.3 (SD 42.3) vs. 12.7 (SD 13),
p<0.05. Only the palpable DCIS had CD68/PCNA double stained
macrophages (range 2–27): 11/11 vs. 0/15 in palpable vs. nonpalpable
cases, respectively (p<0.005). Of the 11 patients with palpable
DCIS, one was a 35 year-old mutation carrier with positive nodes and
two died of metastatic disease shortly after DCIS diagnoses at ages 39
and 48. Promacs were also found in
invasive cancer cases at incidences of 20%, 26% and 75%, for grade I,
II, and III tumors, respectively, with a significant relationship of
promacs and high grade invasive
cancers (p<0.005).

Conclusion: Pathologic macrophages or
promacs have been identified as
a unique feature in large palpable DCIS, a distinct but rare
population and the most aggressive form of DCIS, as well as a common
feature of high grade invasive cancer. They may represent an important
clue to the etiology of these types of lesions.

## 2021

## Mammaglobin identification by immunohistochemistry and reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction to increase detection of breast
cancer metastases.

## Ferguson DJ, Thorne A, Jeffrey M, Yiangou C, Perry PM.
Portsmouth Hospitals NHS Trust, Portsmouth, Hampshire, United Kingdom;
Institute of Biomedical and Biomolecular Sciences, University of
Portsmouth, Portsmouth, Hampshire, United Kingdom

Background: Lymph nodes status is the
most important prognostic factor in breast cancer. However,
1/3rd of node negative women show poor
survival. These patients may have occult nodal disease, undetected due
to insensitivity of the markers used to identify metastases.
Mammaglobin (MG) is recognised by Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase
Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) and Immunohistochemistry (IHC) as a breast
specific tumour marker. Cytokeratin markers are used to aid detection
of breast cancer nodal metastases but are not breast specific and may
falsely stain normal lymph nodes. The aim of this study was to develop
a novel anti-mammaglobin antibody for use in IHC metastasis detection
and compare it with standard H&E and cytokeratin lymph node
staining (CAM 5.2 (Becton-Dickinson)) along with MG RT-PCR and in the
same patients.

Methods: The MG antibody was induced
in a host (rabbit) by a novel conjugated mammaglobin peptide (MG-KLH).
The sequence of the peptide chosen (identical to that used for RT-PCR)
was the most accessible and variable sequence (residues 51–65). ELISA
and Western blotting assessed the antibody’s sensitivity and
specificity, against recombinant MG protein, MG-KLH and an acid
protein extract from a MG expressing patient. MG antibody was compared
clinically to H&E histology, CAM 5.2 IHC and nested RT-PCR (30
amplifications giving approximately 228
copies of the target DNA sequence) for its sensitivity to detect nodal
metastases in 210 lymph nodes sections from 104 patients.

Results: The results show that whole
and recombinant MG protein, along with conjugated MG peptide, were
specifically detected by the MG antibody (demonstrated by both ELISA
and Western blotting). Histologically, MG IHC was positive on all bar
one of the node positive cases identified by CAM 5.2, but detected a
metastasis in one patient missed by H&E. 68% of lymph nodes were
MG positive by RT-PCR, 22.8% more than detected by standard histology
(p= 0.0001). 

Discussion: In conclusion, IHC with a
novel anti-MG antibody was able to specifically identify lymph nodal
metastases with a sensitivity very close to that of CAM 5.2. IHC with
this antibody could increase the specificity and sensitivity of
detection of nodal metastases in breast cancer patients since it is
known to have greater specificity than currently used cytokeratin
IHC.MG RTPCR detects a significantly greater number of patients with
lymph nodal metastases than H&E and IHC but the prognostic value
of RT-PCR, unlike that of IHC remains unproven.

## 2022

## Reliability of core biopsy in pre-operative diagnosis of papillary
lesions of the breast.

## Swamy R, Loane J, Thomas JS. Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom

Background: Current UK NHS Breast
Screening Programme (NHSBSP)screening guidelines recommend that the
overwhelming majority of core biopsy-confirmed papillary breast
lesions be excised because of concerns about adequacy of sampling
these lesions which may be heterogeneous. In contrast, recent
literature has promoted the idea that core biopsy is an accurate
predictor of subsequent benign excision histology and that
conservative management of benign papillary lesions through follow-up
alone can be based in part on core biopsy histology. We report our
experience of papillary lesions diagnosed on core biopsy from a large
breast-screening unit serving SE Scotlan.D

Materials and Methods: We identified
from our archives 43 papillary lesions diagnosed on core biopsy with
subsequent excision follow up over a four-year period (2001–2004).
H&E sections were examined at 3 levels. Immunohistochemistry for
myoepithelial markers (CK5/6 and P63) was supplemented to assist
diagnosis if require.D Each of three observers examined independently
the core biopsies blinded to the results of the excision biopsies
which were later reviewed. Consensus diagnosis was thereafter agreed
in cases in which independent opinions differed. The recommendations
of the NHSBSP guidelines were used for categorisation of core biopsies
and were then correlated with their paired excision biopsy
sections.

Results: On excision there were 26
papillomas and 17 papillary malignancies. Of the 26 benign lesions
core biopsy showed: benign papilloma (12); benign papilloma with usual
type hyperplasia (7); and benign papilloma with atypical changes (7).
Of the latter 7 cases atypia was focal in the excisions. Two of the
benign papillary excision biopsies were associated with an unexpected
radial scar in the adjacent tissue not predicted in the preceding core
biopsies. Papillary malignancy was identified correctly on core biopsy
in every case. A benign core biopsy had been obtained two years
previously from the site of a subsequent papillary carcinoma in one
case.

Discussion: Our results are similar
to those reported by others but in all recent reports numbers are
comparatively small. Our findings confirm the focal nature of atypia
in some papillary lesions. Although we identified correctly the
excision biopsy diagnosis on core biopsy in every case we believe that
it is premature to depart from NHSBSP guidelines for the management of
papillary lesions. The infrequency of finding benign foci in papillary
malignancies and neoplastic foci in otherwise benign papillomas is
noted. Entirely benign papillary lesions on core biopsy without
worrying radiological features may not need excision.

## 2023

## Are so-called “intracystic” papillary carcinomas of the breast in
situ or invasive lesions?

## Collins LC, Carlo VP, Hwang H, Barry TS, Yaziji H, Gown AM,
Schnitt SJ. Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA; Phenopath Laboratories, Seattle, WA

Background: “Intracystic” papillary
carcinomas (ICPC) of the breast have traditionally been considered to
be variants of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). However, it is not
clear if all lesions categorized histologically as ICPC are truly in
situ carcinomas, or if some such lesions might represent circumscribed
nodules of invasive carcinoma growing in an expansile pattern, with
secondary cystic degeneration. The demonstration of a myoepithelial
cell (MEC) layer around nests of carcinoma cells is a useful means to
distinguish in situ from invasive carcinomas of the breast in
problematic cases. Assessment of the presence or absence of a MEC
layer at the periphery of the nodules that comprise ICPC could help
resolve the issue of whether these lesions are in situ or invasive
carcinomas.

Design: We evaluated the presence and
distribution of MECs at the periphery of the nodules of 22 ICPC and,
for comparison, 15 benign intraductal papillomas (IP) using
immunostaining for 5 highly sensitive markers that recognize various
MEC components: smooth muscle myosin heavy chain, calponin, p63, CD10
and cytokeratin 5/6.

Results: All 22 ICPC studied showed
complete absence of MEC at the periphery of the nodules with all 5
markers. In contrast, a continuous layer of MEC was detected around
foci of conventional DCIS present adjacent to the nodules of ICPC.
Furthermore, all benign IP, including those of sizes comparable to
those of ICPC, showed a continuous MEC layer around virtually the
entire periphery of the lesion with all 5 MEC markers.

Conclusion: We could not detect a MEC
layer at the periphery of the nodules of any of 22 lesions categorized
histologically as “intracystic” papillary carcinoma. One possible
explanation for this observation is that these are in situ lesions in
which the delimiting MEC layer has become markedly attenuated or
altered with regard to expression of these antigens, perhaps due to
their compression by the expansile growth of these lesions within a
cystically dilated duct, though this seems unlikely given that the
same phenomenon is not observed in IPs of a similar size.
Alternatively, it may be that at least some lesions categorized as
“intracystic” papillary carcinomas using conventional histologic
criteria actually represent circumscribed nodules of invasive
papillary carcinoma rather than in situ lesions. Based on our
observations, use of the term “cystic” papillary carcinoma may be more
accurate than “intracystic” papillary carcinoma for circumscribed
nodules of papillary carcinoma in which a peripheral delimiting layer
of MEC is not demonstrable. Regardless of whether these lesions are in
situ or invasive carcinomas, available outcome data indicate that they
appear to have an excellent prognosis with adequate local
therapy.

## 2024

## A nomogram to predict for malignant diagnosis of solid lesions in a
one-stop breast unit.

## Delaloge S, Rouzier R, Balleyguier C, Andre F, Vanel D, Mathieu
MC, Garbay JR, Derneville AM, Marsiglia H, Spielmann M, Vielh P.
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Centre Hospitalier
Intercommunal de Creteil, Creteil, France

Background: In western countries, the
incidence of breast cancer has considerably increased within the past
20 years, partly due to large programs of mammogram breast screening.
Preoperative diagnosis is mandatory in order to avoid unnecessary
surgical biopsies. Diagnoses may be obtained either through breast
biopsies or breast cytology. Both methods have been associated with
variable rates of false negative results. The only strong repeatedly
demonstrated predictor of the rates of cancer diagnoses in this
setting is the the Birad ACR classification (Mammogram, ultrasound,
MRI). In the present study, we aimed at evaluating which additional
factors may guide the physician in the therapeutic/ investigational
decision.

Methods: Patients referred for newly
diagnosed breast abnormalities are seen in our one-stop diagnosis
unit. They undergo multiple medical consultations and complementary
investigations as necessary, with the aim to reach diagnosis as much
as possible within the same day and to propose treatment plan as
required. Solid lesions are first investigated by fine-needle
aspiration, which is completed by core biopsy as indicated. Fine
needle aspiration results are discussed to reach a consensus between
the diverse physicians present (surgeons, radiologist, pathologist,
oncologist). Data regarding patients and lesions characteristics, as
well as results of explorations performed have been prospectively
recorde.D A multivariate analysis of factors predicting for a cancer
diagnosis was performed and a nomogram was constructed using the R
statistical package. It was validated by bootstrapping.

Results: 697 fine-needle aspirations
were performed for suspect solid lesions within a 12 month period. Two
thirds of them were ultrasound-guided. Median age of the patients was
56 (16–92). Median tumour size was 15 mm (2–20). 56% of the lesions
appeared palpable at careful examination. Cytological diagnosis was
cancer in 369 (53%), suspect in 59 (8.4%), benign in 247 (35%), and
non significant in 22 (3%). Final diagnoses at 9 months median
followup are: 423 carcinomas (61%), 262 benign (38%), 7 atypical
hyperplasia (1.7%). 0% of 14 patients with Birad ACR2, 3.2% of 152
with ACR3, 43% of 171 with ACR4 and 97% of 353 with ACR5 lesions had
breast carcinoma.
In the multivariate analysis, ACR classification, age and
palpability were independently associated with diagnosis of
malignancy. The nomogram to predict malignancy based on ACR
classification, age and palpability had excellent discrimination and
calibration (area under the ROC curve = 0.95, p<0.001).

Conclusion: Our study provides an
original nomogram for prediction of the malignant nature of recently
discovered solid breast lesions. Further data including
epidemiological individual risk evaluation will be presented at the
meeting.

## 2025

## Genomic alterations as a pathological aid to classifying ductal
carcinoma in situ.

## Ellsworth RE, Ellsworth DL, Love B, Hoffman LR, Deyarmin B,
Hooke JA, Shriver CD. Windber Research Institute, Windber, PA; Walter
Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, DC

Background: Thanks to improved and
more prevalent mammographic screening of eligible populations of
women, the diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) has increased dramatically in recent years,
but.</DEL> treatment options can vary and include
margin-negative excision with or without radiation, adjuvant hormonal
therapy, and even total mastectomy. Difficulties in developing
standardized treatment regimens are attributable to histological
variability among lesions and the inability of pathological evidence
to accurately predict lesions prone to progression and/or recurrence.
To investigate the potential role of genomic profiling of DCIS, we
used patterns of allelic imbalance (AI) to develop molecular profiles
to supplement pathological information in the classification of
in situ ductal
carcinomas.

Methods: DNA was isolated from laser
microdissected pure DCIS (n=60) representing low (n=10), intermediate
(n=22), and highgrade (n=28) lesions. All samples were genotyped using
52 microsatellite markers representing 26 chromosomal regions commonly
deleted in breast cancer, previously developed, described, and
verified by our group. Conditional probability testing of the AI data
at each chromosomal region was then used to derive molecular
classifications for the in situ
carcinomas.

Results: Applying Bayes Rule to
calculate conditional probabilities, three chromosomal regions were
highly informative in differentiating high-grade from low-grade DCIS.
Chromosomes 6q25-q27, 17p13.3, and 18q21 showed significantly higher
levels of AI (P<0.05) in high-grade compared to low-grade DCIS.
Allelic imbalance at any one of these regions correctly classified
highgrade lesions 70% of the time, but AI at two or more of these
regions correctly distinguished high-grade from low-grade lesions
>90% of the time.

Conclusion: Allelic imbalance at
three chromosomal regions is useful in distinguishing high-grade from
low-grade DCIS. Alterations of genes located within these regions, in
particular IGF2R at 6q25- q27, HIC-1 at 17p13.3, and DCC at 18q21, may
provide new insights into the biology of progression to invasive
carcinoma, and allow for genomic classification of biologically
aggressive DCIS. Genomic instability in the three chromosomal regions
may provide useful supplemental information to improve the
pathological classification of in
situ ductal carcinomas and therefore optimize the
selection of appropriate treatments.

## 2026

## Peptide breast cancer biomarkers detectable through blood
tests.

## Zhu L, Ru Q, Silberman J, Jacobs N, Shriver CD. Windber Research
Institute, Windber, PA; Breast Cancer Care Center, Walter Reed Army
Medical Center, Washington, DC

Background: Proteomics researchers
may soon identify diagnostically useful cancer biomarkers. Tools used
to this end include two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled with
tandem mass spectrometry (2-D LC-MS/MS), two-dimensional gel
electrophoresis coupled with mass spectrometry (2-D gel/MS), and
protein chip with surface-enhanced laser desorption and ionization
(SELDI) mass spectrometry. 2-D LC-MS/MS techniques have recently been
improved such that they provide better reproducibility, higher
throughput, and greater mass spectrometry capabilities than 2-D gel/MS
or SELDI.

Method: Seventy digested human sera
from breast cancer patients (13 atypical, 20 invasive, 22 benign
non-neoplastic, and 15 benign neoplastic), and 19 digested human sera
from a healthy control group, were separated via 2-D LC and detected
via ion-trap tandem mass spectrometry. All experiments were completed
using the ProteomeX Workstation (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA), and
raw data was exported to text files using its bundled software.
SpotFireTM 8.0 was used to analyze
cluster statistics. An approach called the P-MTH Statistical Method
was also developed to identify peptides (P) based on their mass values
(M), retention times (T), and peak heights (H).

Results: P-MTH was used to identify
more than one thousand peptides. A group of 16 of these peptides was
found to be a potential breast cancer biomarker. Cluster results
showed significant differences between benign and invasive stages
(Figure 1).

Discussion: Identifying biomarkers
has hitherto been limited by mass spectrometry capabilities. Our
approach has allowed us to overcome some of these limitations.
Investigating peptide patterns instead of identifying proteins has
prevented the risk of search errors, increased the amount of data
generated, and improved throughput. 2-D LC-MS/MS yielded 1,026,000
survey scans per sample, a much greater number than is possible with
either 2-D gel/MS or SELDI. Generating a large amount of high-quality
data has, presumably, increased the likelihood of biomarker discovery.
Further validation will be completed on the 16 diagnostically
significant peptides. 

## 2027

## Intra-operative touch preparation cytology; does it have a role in
re-excision lumpectomy?

## Valdes EK, Boolbol SK, Cohen JM, Feldman SM. Beth Israel Medical
Center, New York, NY

Objective: Breast carcinoma is the
most frequently diagnosed malignancy in women of the North America.
The combination of breast conservation surgery and radiotherapy has
become a standard of treatment for the majority of breast cancers. It
is critical to obtain clear margins to minimize local recurrence,
however avoiding multiple re-excision helps optimize cosmetic results.
Intraoperative touch preparation cytology (IOTPC) may decrease the
need for multiple re-excisions and thereby improve cosmesis. The
literature suggests that IOTPC can be useful in evaluation of margins.
Klimberg et al. evaluated IOTPC prospectively in 428 patients
undergoing breast biopsy for undiagnosed breast masses. They reported
a diagnostic accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, and negative predictive value of 100% for IOTPC.
There is no published data in the literature on the role of IOTPC
for evaluation of margins in re-excision cases. This report describes
our experience with IOTPC for margin assessment for re-excision
partial mastectomy at Beth Israel Medical Center (BIMC). The purpose
of this study is to determine whether IOTPC is reliable for evaluating
margins in patients undergoing re-excision for involved or close
margins.

Methods: A prospective study of 28
patients who have undergone re-excision partial mastectomy after
breast conservation surgery with the use of IOTPC for margin
assessment at BIMC was performe.D The specimens were oriented
intra-operatively and were submitted fresh for cytologic assessment.
The technique consisted of touching the corresponding margin onto the
slide and the principle is that cancer cells will stick to the slide
while fat cells will not. A slide was prepared for each re-excision
specimen. Air-dried samples were stained using the Diff-Quik method
and examined by a cytopathologist.

Results: Twenty-eight patients
underwent re-excision lumpectomy for involved or close margins with
IOTPC for assessment of 63 margins. Twenty-four patients had invasive
ductal carcinoma (IDC) and/ or ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), 3
patients had invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) and the remaining 1
patient had a combination of invasive lobular and ductal carcinoma.
There was a correlation between touch preparation cytology and final
pathology in 51/63 margins, which accounts for 81 % of the cases
 

Conclusion: Intra-operative touch
preparation cytology for assessment of margins in patients undergoing
re-excision lumpectomy has a sensitivity of 75 %, specificity of 81.4
%, positive predictive value of 21.4 %, and negative predictive value
of 98 %. This high negative predictive value and a single false
negative case are quite significant. Therefore based on our experience
IOTPC can be a useful tool for intra-operative assessment of margins
for patients undergoing re-excision partial mastectomy.

## 2028

## Response in gene expression profile to bevacizumab treatment in
patients with inflammatory and locally advanced breast cancer.

## Yang SX, Simon RM, Wedam SB, Modrusan Z, Smith V, de Sauvage F,
Swain M. National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD; Genetech, Inc.,
South San Fancisco, CA

Background: Inflammatory breast
cancer (IBC) is an aggressive and highly angiogenic disease. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent angiogenic molecule that
mediates tumor angiogenesis. In a pilot study, bevacizumab, a
recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody to VEGF, was used to treat
previously untreated patients with IBC and locally advanced breast
cancer (LABC).

Material and Methods: Twenty patients
with IBC (19 patients) and LABC (1 patient) were treated with
bevacizumab at a dose of 15mg/kg for one cycle. Gene expression
profiles in tumor core biopsies pre- and post-bevacizumab were
measured with Agilent 60-mer oligo microarray. Tumor apoptosis and
tissue VEGF expression pre- and post-bevacizumab in paraffin-embedded
biopsy sections were examined by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferasemediated dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay and by
immunohistochemistry (IHC), respectively.

Results: A change signature which
include 92 genes was identified by supervised comparison analysis at
the individual level (p<0.001). Many of these encode proteins that
regulate or relate to angiogenesis. These included an increase in
nidogen 2, a basement membrane protein with diverse binding properties
and endothelial cell-specific molecule1. No significant change in VEGF
was foun.D Various factors involved in inflammation were among the
significantly changed genes such as chemokine ligand 2; interleukin 1
receptor, type II; chemokine receptor 1; and chemokine ligand 8. Tumor
protein p53 inducible protein 3 and tumor necrosis factor
alpha-induced protein 2 were increased by bevacizumab. Both are tumor
suppressor p53 induced genes which are involved in p53-mediated cell
death. A median increase of 128.9 % in tumor apoptosis by TUNEL
(p=0.0008) and a median decrease of 50% in tissue VEGF by IHC (p=0.35)
were found. Gene ontology (GO) groups represented by response to
wounding, inflammatory response and collagen were the significantly
changed GO categories identified by GO analysis (p<0.005;
permutation test). Among 103 pathways tested, a pathway in adhesion
and diapedesis of lymphocytes was significantly changed after
bevacizumab treatment (p=0.0047; permutation test).

Discussion: Our data demonstrate that
with bevacizumab treatment there is a significant change in gene
expression profile represented by angiogenic, inflammatory and
apoptotic genes in patients with IBC and LABC. Also, there is a
significant increase in tumor apoptosis. Further work will include
validation of the identified genes.

## 2029

## Cost-benefit estimates of adjuvant (Adj) trastuzumab (herceptin, H)
for early breast cancer (BrCa).

## Ragaz J, Spinelli JJ. McGill University Health Center, Montreal,
QC, Canada; British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada

Introduction. The 52% reduction of
BrCa recurrences, and 33% reduction of BrCa mortality due to adjuvant
H, as seen in NSABP B31-NCCTG N9831 analyses (with comparable results
in HERA trial), prompted a rapid guideline change, to include H in
Adj. setting. Dollar cost and logistics dominate the speed of this
decision worldwide. This analysis was done using a formula for
calculating the overall fiscal impact of new therapies affecting
cause-specific events (e.g. Br ca mortality), applicable to Adj. H
therapy (th):
Total Cost Impact = C
th adj - [C
th rec + C
th mets], where: C
th adj = Cost of Adj H (estimates: Can $50,000.00/1 pt/ year);
C
th rec = Saved cost, of no H th at recurrence if given in
adj. setting (estimates: 70% of all Her2+ve Br Ca cases); and
C
th mets = the cost of avoided metastases (estimates: Can
$70,000.00 / pt), projecting the “best” and the “worst” case scenario
(i.e. DFS improvement of 8% in HERA; or 18% in NSABP & NCCTG
trials.

Results 1. Cost of adj H: Can$12.5
mil. /1,000 new pts / year (50,000×(.25×1,000); 2. Cost of H at recurrence: Can $8.75 mil (0.7
[×50,000×(.25×1,000)]; 3. Cost of
avoided metastases, “best case scenario”: Can $3.15 mil
[70,000×(.18×250)]; and a “worse case” scenario: Can $1.4 mil
(70,000×(.08×250).

Total Cost Impact showed a total cost
(deficit) ranging from Can$ 0.6 mil - Can$2
mil/1,000 new BrCa cases / year, for the “best” versus
the “worst” case scenario.

## Conclusions:

These estimates, applicable to regional, national or
international budget projections, indicate that if adj
H is given to Her2/Neu +ve cases, the fiscal impact is
acceptable, despite a substantial upfront dollar cost.
This is in addition to a significant number of saved
lives.
These calculations are based on 1 year use of H, and
on a premise that administration of H in adj.setting
precludes its use in metastatic disease. If future
studies show that prolonged or repeated H are of
benefit, the figures will differ, but the concept
remains valid, and methodology can be applied for
different scenarios.
These estimates are important in costing
experimental therapies with curative intent such as
adjuvant H, and may substantially accelerate approvals
and logistics of their implementation.

## 2030

## A phase II trial of letrozole in combination with bevacizumab, an
anti-VEGF antibody, in patients with hormone receptor-positive metastatic
breast cancer.

## Traina TA, Dickler MN, Caravelli JF, Yeh BM, Brogi E, Panageas
K, Flores SA, Norton L, Park J, Hudis C, Rugo H. Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Background: Bevacizumab (B) added to
chemotherapy (chemoRx) prolongs PFS and OS in patients (pts) with
metastatic breast cancer (MBC) (Miller, ASCO 2005). In DMBA-induced
animal models of breast cancer, estrogen (E2) induces expression of
VEGF that is suppressed by aromatase inhibition (Nakamura, 1996).
Because it is possible that E2-induced VEGF
expression may promote breast cancer growth, combination therapy with
an aromatase inhibitor (AI) and an antibody to VEGF may be more
effective than either agent alone. Hence, we performed a feasibility
study testing B with letrozole (L) for the treatment of
hormonereceptor positive MBC.

Methods: Eligible pts have MBC and
are candidates for AI therapy. Prior non-steroidal AI use without
progression is permitted. Premenopausal pts are rendered menopausal
prior to start of treatment. Therapy consists of L (2.5 mg daily) and
B (15 mg/kg IV q3 weeks). The primary endpoint is toxicity. Secondary
endpoints include response rate, clinical benefit rate and time to
tumor progression. Using a two-stage design, 19 pts were accrued to
the first stage. If <3 pts experience Grade (Gr) 4 toxicity, then
23 additional pts would be enrolled. If <5 of the 42 pts have Gr 4
toxicity, the regimen will be considered feasible. Markers of the ER,
HER2 and VEGF pathways will be evaluated in archival tumor tissue.
Serial levels of circulating endothelial cells (CECs), epithelial
cells (CTCs), plasma VEGF and bFGF are measure.D

Results: Nineteen pts have enrolled,
completing accrual to the first stage. Data is available on 15 pts:
median age 50 yrs (36–67), median ECOG PS 0 (0–1), sites of MB:C bone
only 6/15, liver 4/ 15, chest wall/lymph nodes 6/15. None are HER2
positive. Prior therapy: adjuvant chemoRx 10; adjuvant tamoxifen 6.
Fourteen pts received L as first-line treatment of MBC, starting a
median of 25 wks (0–215) before B. One pt received first-line
tamoxifen; none had prior chemoRx for MBC. Grade 2 drug related
toxicity in pts after a median of 6 cycles (2–12): fatigue 2, joint
pain 2, headache 2, hypertension 1, proteinuria 1, epistaxis 1, hot
flashes 1. One patient withdrew due to Gr 3 headaches. There were no
other Gr 3–5 toxicities. Eleven pts are evaluable for response: 5 pts
have stable disease (SD) >6 mo; 4 pts have SD; 2 pts had
progression. CECs and CTCs are measurable in all pts.

Conclusions: Combination letrozole
and bevacizumab appears well tolerated. Additional safety and efficacy
data is anticipate.D Data on CECs and CTCs will be correlated with
response. Supported in part by Genentech and Novartis.

## 2031

## A phase II trial of trastuzumab (H) plus capecitabine (X) as
first-line treatment in patients (pts) with HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer (MBC).

## Xu L, Song S, Zhu J, Luo R, Li L, Jiao S, Pan H, Tao M, Su Y,
Liu .D Cancer Hospital Fudan University, Shanghai, China; PLA Hospital
307, Beijing, China; Ruijin Hospital Shanghai No.2 Medical University,
Shanghai, China; Nanfang Hospital First Military Medical University,
Guangzhou, China; Heilongjiang Provincial Cancer Hospital, Haerbin,
China; PLA Hospital 301, Beijing, China; Shao Yifu Hospital Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, China; No.1 Hospital Suzhou University, Suzhou,
China; Jiangsu Provincial People’s Hospital, Nanjing, China; General
Hospital Beijing Military Area, Beijing, China

Background: Breast cancer is one of
the most common malignancies in Chinese women. The mortality rate has
increased over the past 20 years: in the urban Zhejiang Province,
mortality increased from 6.56/100,000 in 1990–1992 to 8.01/100,000 in
2000–2002. In HER2-positive MBC, adding H to a taxane provides
significant clinical benefit, including prolonged survival. H adds
little to the toxicity profile of taxanes alone. X has consistently
high activity and a favorable safety profile. Adding X to docetaxel
extends survival in MBC. Preliminary data (Bangemann et al. 2000)
indicated that the combination of H and X is effective and well
tolerated for intensively pretreated HER2-positive MBC (ORR 47%). The
current study evaluated the combination of H plus X as first-line
therapy in HER2-positive MBC.

Materials and Methods: 48 pts were
enrolled between Mar 2003 and Oct 2004. All pts had measurable (WHO
criteria), HER2-positive (IHC 3+ or IHC 2+/FISH positive) MBC, KPS
≥60, and adequate bone marrow, renal and hepatic functions. No prior
chemotherapy for MBC was permitte.D Pts received H as a 4 mg/kg
loading dose followed by 2 mg/kg i.v. weekly (until disease
progression) and X 1250 mg/m2 twice daily
on d1.14 q3 wks (max 6 cycles).

Results: 43 pts received at least
9 wks, 38 pts at least 18 wks, 33 pts at least 26 wks, 11 pts at least
34 wks, and 3 pts at least 50 wks of treatment. Baseline
characteristics (n=43): median age 49 years (range 27–74), median KPS
90 (range 60–100). Principal tumor sites were lymph nodes (49%), lung
(33%), liver (28%), breast (14%), thoracic wall (9%), chest (9%),
other (5%). Prior treatment included surgery (74%), radiotherapy
(19%), and adjuvant chemotherapy (65%), including anthracycline (42%),
docetaxel (9%), and paclitaxel (7%). In the 43 pts evaluable for
safety, the most common grade 1/2 adverse events were HFS (23%),
leucopenia (9%), SGOT abnormality (9%), and SGPT abnormality (7%).
Grade 3 HFS occurred in 4 pts (9%) and grade 3 leucopenia in 1 pt
(2%); these events improved/resolved in all pts. In the 43 pts
evaluable for efficacy, the ORR is 63% (n=27), including 8 CRs (19%)
and 19 PRs (44%). 13 pts (30%) have stable disease. Median
progression-free and overall survival have not been reached.

Discussion: These results confirm
that the combination of H and X is highly active and well tolerated as
first-line treatment for HER2-positive MBC.

## 2032

## Weekly paclitaxel (PCT) ± trastuzumab (T) as first-line therapy of
patients (pts) with HER-2/NEU positive metastatic breast cancer (MBC):
final results of a multicenter randomized phase IIb trial.

## Gasparini G. San Filippo Neri Hospital, Rome, Italy
The aim of the study was to demonstrate whether weekly PCT-T is
superior to PCT alone in patients with HER-2/neu positive MBC. Primary
end-point was time to progression (TTP); secondary end-points were
safety, response rate (RR) and biological correlates (HercepTest (HT)
vs FISH and serum HER-2 assay). Inclusion criteria were: untreated MBC
with HER-2/neu overexpression (2+ or 3+ by IHC Herceptest, HT), age
≥18 and ≤70 years, adequate organ functions, ECOG PS scale ≤2. The
schedules of therapy were: weekly PCT 80 mg/m2 (arm A) and weekly
PCT+T (loading dose of 4 mg/kg, followed by weekly doses of 2 mg/kg)
(arm B). Overall, 124 pts have been enrolled and 123 are evaluable
(A=60; B=63). Pts characteristics are well balanced: median age 54 yrs
in arm A and 56 yrs in B; postmenopausal pts 68% in A and 66% in B; HT
3+ 73% in A and 63% in B; ER+ 55% in A and 41% in B; PR+ 47% in A and
41% in B, respectively. An identical percentage of pts (57%) treated
with adjuvant anthracyclines was enrolled in both arms. Tumor
involvement in >2 sites was seen in 66,7% (A) and 60% (B), visceral
disease in 71,7% (A) and 66,7% (B), respectively. Both the treatments
were well tolerated: grade 3 neuropathy was observed in 8,2% (A) and
4,8% (B); grade 3 neutropenia in 6,5% (A) and 12,7% (B), respectively;
no grade 4 toxicity occurred. Overall, 118 pts are evaluable for RR:
58 (A) and 60 (B). The overall RR (56,9% vs 75%) and time to
progression (234±22 vs 278±19 days) were better in arm B. In HT 3+,
TTP was 239±28 days (A) vs 284±19 days (B) (p=0.03), respectively; in
pts with visceral disease TTP was 188±18 days (A) vs 266±20 days (B)
(p=0.008). The analysis of biological correlations is ongoing. In
conclusion, PCT ± T is feasible and active and T significantly
enhances TTP and response rates in the pts with HER2/neu positive MBC
with visceral disease or HT 3+.

## 2033

## Capecitabine and trastuzumab: a phase II study in HER2-
overexpressing metastatic breast cancer (MBC) patients pretreated with
anthracyclines and/or taxanes.

## Schaller G, Bangemann N, Gonsch T, Weber J, Kleine-Tebbe A,
Conrad B, Klare P, Hindenburg HJ, Ruhmland B, Lakner V, Hinke A.
Breast Care Institute, Berlin, Germany; WiSP Research Institute,
Langenfeld, Germany; Participating Centers, Germany
Background: Systemic treatment in the palliative setting after
anthracycline and/or taxane pretreatment is often critical because of
reduced drug tolerance and low performance status. Trastuzumab
(Herceptin; H) and Capecitabine (Xeloda; X) in combination with
taxanes have proven significant clinical benefits. Both H + X have a
mild spectrum of side effects. In-vivo data show that both these
targeted drugs have at least additive activity. Therefore, we
investigated the combination of H + X in a clinical setting. Patients
and Methods: Pts received H 4 mg/kg loading dose followed by 2 mg/kg
weekly and X 1,250 mg/m2 bi-daily, on days 1–14 of a 21- day cycle,
given until disease progression. Eligible pts, aged 18–75 (mean 54),
had HER2 IHC 3+ or IHC2+/FISH+ disease. Results: 27 pts with
metastatic disease were enrolled in the study. Metastases were present
in visceral organs in 20 pts (73%), with liver metastasis in 13 (48%)
pts. Prior (neo)adjuvant chemotherapy was received by 24 (88%) pts.;
anthracyclines in 20 (74%) and taxanes in 11 (41%) of these cases.
10 pts. (37%) had received palliative chemotherapy. The ORR was 52%
(per protocol; 4 CR, 8 PR) and 44% (intent-to-treat). The median
progression-free survival was 29 weeks, and median overall survival
122 weeks to date. The combination was generally well tolerated. Grade
3/4 anaemia, leucopenia and thrombocytopenia were observed in only 8%,
4% and 4% of patients, respectively. Grade 3/4 non-haematological
toxicities most frequently observed were: general pain (28%), fatigue
(20%), hand-foot syndrome (16%), vomiting (12%) and nausea (12%).
CONCLUSIONS: These promising data illustrate the efficacy and high
tolerability of the combination of H and X in patients with
HER2-positive and intensively pretreated MBC, with a remarkably high
number of long-term survivors. Further investigation is warranted to
substantiate these findings.

## 2034

## Phase I and pharmacokinetics (PK) of combined erbB1 and erbB2
blockade with OSI-774 (Erlotinib; E) and trastuzumab (T) in combination
with weekly paclitaxel (P) in patients (pts) with advanced solid
tumors.

## Beeram M, De Bono JS, Patnaik A, Mita A, Chu SC, Mita MM,
O’Rourke P, Takimoto CH, Tolcher AW, Rowinsky EK. Univ of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX; Institute for Drug
Development/ CTRC, San Antonio, TX

Background: Co-expression of erbB1
and erbB2 receptors confers a growth advantage in erbB2 overexpressing
(+) cancers. Specifically, co-expression alters the normal rapid
internalization and inactivation of erbB1, slows dissociation of the
erbB1 ligandreceptor complex and degradation of the active receptor.
Cotargeting both receptors together may offer a therapeutic advantage
over targeting erbB2 alone, especially in T refractory solid tumors. A
phase I and PK study was launched to determine the toxicity and
recommended dose of continuous daily oral E in patients with erbB2 +
cancers along with weekly P and T, especially since T improves
survival in combination with chemotherapy.

Methods: Eligible pts were treated
with escalating doses of E and weekly T IV (2 mg/kg/wk) along with
weekly P (starting at 80 mg/m2). MUGA scans
were performed at baseline and every 2 cycles (8 weeks). Two
schedules- 3 out of 4 weeks and continuous weekly P and T were
explore.D

Results: To date, 16 pts [Breast
(14), Colon (1) and Ovary (1)] have received 54 courses [median 2;
range 1–13] in 4 cohorts, with E at doses of 50 (n=3), 100 (n=9) and
150 mg (n=4) PO daily for 28-days and P at doses of
80–90 mg/m2 weekly for 3 out of 4 weeks.
Pts were women with median age −54 yrs [range- 37–75] and PS 0 (4), PS
1 (11) and PS 2 (1). 9 pts received prior T therapy. Dose limiting
grade (gr) 3 diarrhea and gr 3 dermatitis was seen in 1 pt at 100 mg
of E and 80 mg/m2of P. Other toxicities
included gr 2 diarrhea, skin rash, fatigue, neutropenia and alopecia.
Significant asymptomatic drop in LVEF was noted in 1 pt after 3
courses, with rapid recovery upon stopping T. One complete, two
partial and 1 minor responses have been seen in pts with breast
cancers that have failed prior T therapy. Two breast cancer pts
experienced stable disease lasting 13 and 6 courses, respectively. PK
data does not suggest a clinically relevant interaction between the 3
agents. Plasma steady state concentratins of E were comparable to the
steady state concentrations of E observed in population
pharmacokinetics.

Conclusions: E combined with T and P
provides a well-tolerated, targeted therapy with impressive anti-tumor
activity in Trefractory breast carcinoma. Dose escalation continues on
the continuous dosing schedule.

## 2035

## A phase I-II study of trastuzumab, gefitinib, and docetaxel as
first line chemotherapy in patients with HER-2 overexpressing stage IV
breast carcinoma.

## Somlo G, Koczywas M, Luu T, McNamara M, Russell C, Morgan R,
Arnold K, Frankel P. City of Hope Cancer Center, Duarte, CA;
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA

Background: Combining docetaxel with
the HER-2 antibody trastuzumab yields superior outcome in comparison
to docetaxel alone in patients with HER-2 overexpressing breast
cancer. The outcome of experiments in HER-2 overexpressing breast
cancer cells suggests synergistic activity when trastuzumab is
combined with gefitinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor of EGFR.

Methods: Patients with HER-2
overexpressing breast cancer (defined by 3+ immunohistochemical
staining, or FISH positivity), with measurable, or evaluable disease
were enrolled. Prior hormonal therapy, or adjuvant taxane or
trastuzumab therapy were allowed if such therapy was prescribed
>6 months prior to enrollment. A left ventricular ejection fraction
of >45% and SGOT/SGPT <2.5 times the upper limit of normal, and
an ECOG performance status of ≤2 were required. Patients were to
receive docetaxel 75 m2, trastuzumab
8 mg/kg loading dose followed by 6 mg/kg every 3 weeks, and gefitinib
250 mg daily.

Results: The first two patients
treated at a docetaxel dose of 75 mg/m2
developed grade 4 febrile neutrophenia, hence, all subsequent patients
received treatment with docetaxel 60 mg/m2.
So far 9 patients have been accrued. Patients received a median of 6
courses of therapy (range, 1+ to 10); 2 of these patients just
finished their first cycle. Toxicities have been manageable. There
were 3 cases of febrile neutropenia (the first 2 after the first cycle
at the phase I dose of docetaxel). One patient required reduction of
docetaxel to 45 mg/m2 due to liver enzyme
abnormalities. Gefitinib was held temporarily in 2 patients due to
rash and in one patient due to diarrhea. No cardiac toxicities were
noted. There were 4 partial responses, 3 cases of stable disease as
best response, and 2 cases are too early to assess. The median time to
progression is 6+ months (1+ to 10+).

Conclusion: The combination of
docetaxel, trastuzumab, and gefitinib is feasible. Response rates are
encouraging. Due to recent data generated from studies in lung cancer
suggesting a possible interaction between chemotherapy and gefitinib
when given concurrently, and in order to further reduce toxicity, the
schedule of gefitinib has been modified starting with patient number
9, to 250 mg on days 2–14 of the 21  day cycle. Accrual is ongoing and
additional data will be presented. Supported by NCI CA33572 and by a
grant from AstraZeneca.

## 2036

## Effect of trastuzumab treatment as first-line on metastatic breast
cancer: final results of the French HERMINE cohort after 2-year follow-up
(n=221).

## Namer M, Antoine EC, Le Deley MC, Vincent Salomon A, Pau D,
Remblier C, Vasseur B, Extra JM. Centre Azureen de Cancerologie,
Nougins, France; Clinique Hartmann, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France;
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Institut Curie, Paris,
France; Roche, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France

Background: The efficacy and safety
of trastuzumab (T) are well documented in clinical trials in HER2+
metastatic breast cancer (MBC). In this presentation, we compared our
2-year follow-up data on overall survival (OS), time to progression
(TTP) and cardiac safety with M77001 (T+docetaxel arm) and H0648 g
(T+paclitaxel arm), two pivotal trials.

Methods: This longitudinal,
observational study assessed a 2-year follow-up of 623 MBC patients
(pts) treated with T and followed by 102 oncologists. Eligible pts
started T in 2002. Data were collected from patient files from Nov
2003 to March 2005 and reviewed by an independent scientific
committee.

Results: 221 MBC pts were given T as
first-line therapy. Pt characteristics included: median age 54 years,
median time from first diagnosis 3.5 years, median disease-free
interval 1.6 years, MBC at diagnosis 19%, ductal carcinoma 93%, HER2+
(IHC 3+) 96%, SBR grade III 65%, ER+ and/or PR+ 42%, ER+ and PR+ 23%,
ER- and PR- 59%, past cardiac history 24%. Prior disease management
included surgery (90%), radiotherapy (79%), chemotherapy (78%;
anthracyclines 86%) and hormonal therapy (34%). T treatment was used
in combination (98%) with paclitaxel (68%), vinorelbine (31%),
docetaxel (26%) or others. Median T treatment duration was
16.2 months. Comparison of 2-year data between the HERMINE, M77001
(n=92) and H0648g (n=68) trials, respectively, showed: median OS 30.4,
31.2 and 24.8; median TTP 10.3, 11.7 and 7.1; adverse events (heart
failure) 3%, 2% and 8.8%.

Conclusion: The final 2-year results
of this large cohort of MBC pts treated by T as first-line therapy and
in reallife conditions are consistent with the cardiac safety and
efficacy data from the M77001 and H0648 g, two randomized controlled
trials.

## 2037

## Improved breast cancer specific survival (BCSS): the impact of
adjuvant systemic therapy.

## Olivotto IA, Coldman AJ, Speers C, Phillips N, Goldrick A,
Gelmon KA. BC Cancer Agency, Victoria and Vancouver, BC,
Canada

Background: Both Adjuvant Systemic
therapy (AST) since 1976, and screening mammography (Scr Mam) since
the mid-1980’s, have contributed to improved BCSS and reduced breast
cancer mortality. The purpose of this study was to determine the
relative contributions of AST and Scr Mam to improved BCSS in British
Columbia (BC), Canada, since 1975.

Methods: All cases of female breast
cancer (invasive or in situ) diagnosed in BC in 1975 (prior to AST or
Scr Mam), 1985 (AST common, Scr Mam rare), 1995 (both AST and Scr Mam
common) and 2000 (extended indications for AST, Scr Mam common) were
identified from the BC Cancer registry. 10-year BCSS was determined
through linkage with the Provincial Vital Statistics database. To
determine population-based use of AST, a 50% random sample of all
women with a new diagnosis of breast cancer in BC in 1995, had
demographic, pathology, stage, treatment and survival data abstracted
from BC Cancer Agency (BCCA) records, or from primary physicians, if
not referred to the BCCA. To determine the effect on BCSS of AST use
in 1995, BCSS estimates with and without AST, as used in 1995, were
calculated based on the mortality benefits of chemotherapy and/or
tamoxifen from the 1998 Oxford Overview.

Results: 10-year BCSS improved
significantly from 60% in 1975 to 66% in 1985 (p <0.001) and 80%
projected for 1995 (p <0.001). 5-year BCSS was similar in 1995 and
2000; both 87% (see figure). 

Figure: Breast Cancer Specific Survival in
British Columbia, Canada

In BC in 1995, 13% of patients had in situ disease alone, 83% had
invasive, non-metastatic disease and 4% had metastatic disease with
10-year BCSS of 98%, 80% and 0%, respectively. 57% of patients with
invasive, non-metastatic disease received systemic therapy in 1995 as
hormonal therapy alone (33%), chemotherapy alone (14%) or both
hormonal and chemotherapy (10%). For the distribution of patients
presenting in 1995, if systemic therapy had not been used, the
estimated 10-year BCSS would have been 74.1% compared to 80.2%
observe.D

Conclusion: Absolute 10-year BCSS
improved by 20% for patients diagnosed in 1995 compared to 1975 and
has subsequently plateaued. AST contributed 6.1% of this gain (30%
relative). Increasing the proportion of low risk women using AST
between 1995 and 2000 has contributed little to short-term,
populationbased BCSS. New approaches are required to further improve
BCSS.

## 2038

## Exploratory analysis from NCCTG N9831: do clinical and laboratory
characteristics predict cardiac toxicity of trastuzumab when administered
as a component of adjuvant therapy?

## Perez EA, Suman VJ, Davidson NE, Kaufman PA, Martino S, Dakhil
SR, Ingle JN, Rodeheffer RJ, Gersh BJ, Jaffe AS. NCCTG, Rochester, MN;
ECOG, Philadelphia, PA; CALGB, Chicago, IL; SWOG, San Antonio,
TX

Background: The benefits of adding
trastuzumab (Herceptin, H) to adjuvant chemotherapy were demonstrated
in a joint analysis from Intergroup NCCTG N9831 and NSABP B-31 trials
(Romond 2005, Perez 2005). Significant improvements were observed in
disease-free survival and overall survival in women with operable HER2
positive breast cancer. Approximately 2–3% patients (pts) experienced
a clinically significant cardiac event during the course of H
treatment in the Intergroup NCCTG N9831 trial (Perez, 2005). This
abstract will detail the follow-up and analysis of clinical/
laboratory factors that may be predictive of cardiac toxicity.

Methods: Demographic data included in
this analysis are age, baseline left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF), history of hypertension, use of antihypertensive therapy,
therapeutic radiation exposure, site of radiation, and LVEF post
anthracycline exposure. A cardiac event was defined as CHF or probable
cardiac death. Pts underwent LVEF evaluations at 3 mos (after A:C
doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide), at 6 mos (after T or TH: paclitaxel
with or without trastuzumab), 9 and 18–21 mos after study entry.
Additional LVEF evaluations were performed if decreases met
protocol-specified criteria, for decisions related to use of
trastuzumab. A subset of 120 pts were enrolled in a sub-study to
evaluate circulating markers of cardiac injury after the
1st or 2nd
doses of AC, T or TH, or H. These markers included troponins, BNP, TNF
alpha, CD40, and others.

Results: Accrual to N9831 was
completed as of April 29, 2005, with 3505 pts. Analysis of pts who
developed a cardiac event, follow up of these pts in terms of symptoms
and LVEF, the relationship of demographic factors with significant
decreases in LVEF and/or cardiac events, as well as the percentage of
pts who had to discontinue H therapy due to symptomatic and
asymptomatic decreases in LVEF will be updated in the Fall of 2005 and
available for presentation. Data of relationship of cardiac events
with baseline and post AC LVEF are being analyzed, and are to be
updated this Fall. Data of the percentage of pts with LVEF below 50%
at the 18–21month follow up for Arms A, B, and C will also be
available, as well as data related to circulating cardiac
markers.

Conclusions: Adjuvant trastuzumab
after anthracycline based chemotherapy leads to a an approximate
2.3–3.3% rate of significant clinical cardiac events. Most, but not
all pts recover cardiac function following treatment for cardiac
dysfunction. Additional pt follow up, analysis of circulating markers
and SNP polymorphisms are under evaluation. The predictive value of
demographic and clinical factors with cardiac events will be
presente.D

## 2039

## Final analysis of a planned comparison of menopausal symptoms in
1618 patients receiving either exemestane (E) or tamoxifen (T) in a
blinded adjuvant hormonal study.

## Asmar L, Cantrell J, Vukelja SJ, Pippen J, O’Shaughnessy J, Blum
JL, Brooks R, Mull S, Ilegbodu D, Jones S. US Oncology Research, Inc.,
Houston, TX

Background: We assessed 10 menopausal
symptoms during the blinded first year of the randomized Phase III
TEAM trial in postmenopausal women with early-stage hormone
receptorpositive breast cancer treated for 5 years with exemestane (E)
or tamoxifen (T).

Methods: This analysis is based on a
review of 7287 validated Menopausal Symptoms Questionnaires. Each
patient assessed 10 symptoms at baseline and every 3 months as none,
mild, moderate, or severe. A “hot flash score” was added on as a
bivariate construct to quantify hot flash frequency per day and
average intensity. All menopausal symptoms were analyzed statistically
by repeated measures ANOVA. Each time period was repeatedly tested
against the baseline. Then, an overall p value was given for each time
period. Finally, the proportion of patients experiencing each side
effect at the quarterly follow-up was calculated and compared by
treatment arm.

Results: The median age of 1618
eligible patients was 64 years (range, 40–90). Completion of the
questionnaires ranged from 99% at baseline to 81% at 12 months. Most
menopausal symptoms were mild or moderate. Baseline symptom assessment
in both arms showed difficulty in sleeping and low energy among 60%
and 74% of patients, respectively. When comparing the proportion of
patients with mild to severe symptoms, there were no significant
differences between the 2 treatment arms with respect to vaginal
bleeding, mood alteration, or low energy. However, patients receiving
T had more vaginal discharge (p<0.0001), and the following symptoms
were more frequent among patients receiving E: vaginal dryness
(p=0.0004), impaired word finding (p=0.0057), bone/muscle aches
(p<0.0001), decreased libido (0.03), and difficulty sleeping
(p=0.03). In both groups, hot flashes peaked at 3 months and decreased
thereafter. At 12 months, patients receiving T had a higher mean hot
flash score (p=0.0253) with the number of hot flashes/day increasing
by 33% in the T group and by 7% in E. Additional results will be
presented on the differences at each time period and the proportion of
patients experiencing each symptom by intensity. 

Conclusion: Following 12 months of
therapy, E therapy was associated with significantly fewer hot flashes
but with more vaginal dryness, impaired word finding, and bone/muscle
aches. Supported by Pfizer, New York, NY

## 2040

## Impact of letrozole on quality of life in post-menopausal women
with early breast cancer: does age matter?

## Barghout V, Abetz L, Thomas S, Arbuckle R. Novartis
Pharmaceuticals, Florham Park, NJ; Mapi Values, Macclesfield,
Cheshire, United Kingdom

Introduction: MA-17 was a randomized
placebo-controlled trial that compared the efficacy and safety of
5 years of letrozole (Femara®) 2.5 mg/d
versus placebo and related QoL impact on postmenopausal women with
early breast cancer, after 5 years of tamoxifen. Due to significant
lowering in risk of disease recurrence and distant metastases observed
with letrozole, the trial was unblinded early after 2.4 years mean
follow-up. Evaluation of QoL impact may vary by age, thus the
objectives were to describe QoL scores by treatment group and age
(<65; >=65) for US and Canada in MA-17.

Methods: The generic validated QoL
scale (SF-36 Health Survey) and the validated menopause symptom scale
(MENQOL) were administered. The SF-36 yielded 2 summary scores
providing a global indicator of patients’ physical and mental QoL and
8 subscales. Symptom impact associated with estrogen suppression was
assessed using 4 domains of the MENQOL. Due to the early unblinding of
MA17, differences in SF-36 and MENQOL scores between treatment groups
are reported only for the first 3 years of the study (6, 12, 24,
36 months), using non-parametric testing.

Results: Across all time points and
both age groups (younger and older) for US and Canada, no significant
differences between letrozole and placebo were observed for SF-36
mental and physical QoL summary scores. In the younger age group, no
differences were observed all 8 sub domains of the SF-36 in the US and
for 6 out of 8 sub domains in Canada; significant differences in
favour of placebo were observed for bodily pain (month 6) and general
health (month 24) in Canada. In the older age group, no significant
differences were observed across all time points for all of the 8 sub
domains of the SF-36 in Canada and in 5 out of the 8 subscales in the
US; significant differences favouring placebo were observed for
physical functioning, vitality and social functioning (month 6).
Across all time points and both age groups for US and Canada, no
significant differences were observed for MENQOL psychosocial and
physical domains. Significant differences in MENQOL vasomotor symptoms
favouring placebo were observed in both countries in the younger age
group (Canada: months 12 and 24; USA: months 6 and 12) and for the
older age group in the USA (month 24). Significant differences
favouring letrozole were observed in the MENQOL sexual scale at months
12 and 24 in the younger group in Canada. All observed significant
differences were less than 5 points on a 100 point scale and were not
considered clinically relevant based on current methodology.

Conclusions: Extended adjuvant
treatment with letrozole after standard adjuvant tamoxifen in
postmenopausal women provides improved efficacy while not worsening
QoL relative to placebo, regardless of women’s age.

## 2041

## Preliminary cardiac safety results of dose-dense (DD) doxorubicin
and cyclophosphamide (AC) followed by paclitaxel (T) with trastuzumab (H)
in HER2/neu overexpressed/Amplified breast cancer (BCA).

## Dang C, Smith K, Lake D, Fornier M, D’ Andrea G, Seidman A,
Sklarin N, Troso-Sandoval T, Sugarman S, Gilewski T, Robson M,
Drullinsky P, Moynahan M, George R, VanPoznak C, Panageas K, Smith M,
Norton L, Hudis C. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY

Background: With the superiority of
DD q 2 weekly (w) AC → T over conventionally scheduled AC → T in CALGB
9741(Citron et al, J Clin Oncol 21: 1431–1439, 2003) and the known
cardiac safety data of adjuvant H in NSABP B-31 (Geyer C et al, SABCS
2003, Romond et al, ASCO 2005), NCCTC N9831 (Perez et al, ASCO 2005),
and HERA trial (Piccart-Gebhart et al, ASCO 2005), we are testing DD q
2 w AC → T + H x one year as adjuvant treatment (Rx) of patients (pts)
with HER2/neu-overexpressed/ amplified BCA to determine cardiac
safety. Based on the reported cardiac event (CE) rate of ≤ 4% in these
trials in pts who received conventionally scheduled chemotherapy + H,
we planned this trial evaluating DD q 2 w AC → T + H. The primary
endpoint is cardiac safety, defined as discontinuation of H due to 1)
cardiac death or 2) symptomatic congestive heart failure defined as
dyspnea with normal activity or at rest and absolute decline in left ventricular ejection
fraction (LVEF) by > 10% to < 55% or >5% below 55% by
multi-gated radionuclide angiography scan (MUGA).The secondary
endpoint is time to recurrence and overall survival. Although the
incidence of late cardiac toxicity was low with DD q 2 w AC → T in
CALGB 9741, LVEF was not monitored post-Rx. In this study, data will
be available on the cardiac effects of DD AC as well as that of H with
DD AC → T.

Methods: Pts with HER2/Neu IHC 3+ or
FISH-amplified BCA were enrolled, regardless of tumor size or nodal
status. Rx consisted of AC at 60/600 mg/m2
× 4 → T at 175 mg/m2 × 4 q 2 w with
pegfilgrastim 6 mg on day 2 + H x one year (H 4 mg/kg bolus and
2 mg/kg q w during T and 6 mg/kg q 3 w after all chemotherapy is
completed). MUGA is obtained at baseline and at months 2, 6, 9, and
18. Pts with baseline LVEF of ≥ 55% and without cardiac illnesses as
specified by the study are eligible. Pts with significant asymptomatic
LVEF decline after DD AC based on month 2 MUGA will not receive H, and
pts with significant asymptomatic LVEF decline during H may have H
held permanently, as per protocol. These pts will not be counted to
have suffered a true CE and will be followed long-term with more
cardiac monitoring.

Results: From January 4, 2005 to May
20, 2005, we enrolled 34 of 70 planned pts. Median age is 52 years
(range, 31–79). Median baseline LVEF is 70% (range, 55–79%). As of May
31, 2005, 22 pts have had month 2 MUGA after DD AC and there has been
no significant LVEF decline.

Discussion: This is the first report
of cardiac safety of DD AC → T + H. Updated results will be available.
If this Rx is feasible, it may change the standard of care in treating
HER2/neu overexpressed/amplified BCA pts.

## 2042

## NCIC CTG MA17: disease free survival according to estrogen receptor
and progesterone receptor status of the primary tumor.

## Goss PE, Ingle JN, Tu D. Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Boston, MA; Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Cancer Research
Institute, Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada

Background: Identifying biomarkers to
predict response to adjuvant aromatase inhibitor therapy is important.
In the ATAC trial (anastrozole vs tamoxifen) benefit of anastrozole
over tamoxifen appeared restricted to the ER + PgR − patients and not
in those with ER+ PgR+ tumors. In contrast in the BIG 1–98 trial LET
appeared equally superior to tamoxifen in both the ER + PgR + and
ER+PgR− subgroups. MA.17 randomized 5187 postmenopausal women disease
free after 5 years of tamoxifen to 5 years of letrozole or placebo.
Almost all patients (97.4%) had estrogen receptor (ER) and/or
progesterone receptor (PgR) positive primary tumors. We present here
on the outcome of women in MA.17 according to the receptor status of
their primary tumors.

Materials and Methods: The ER and PgR
values were both known in 4653 patients and retrospective exploratory
analyses were conducted to compare time to recurrence in the four
receptor sub-groups by ER (+/−) and PgR (+/−) status. ER and PgR
positivity was defined as ≥ 10 fmol/mg protein, or positive by ERICA
or PgRICA.

Results: The DFS events according to
treatment arm and receptor status are given in the table below. The
benefit of letrozole was clearly present in women with ER+PgR+ tumors
and apparently absent in women with ER + PgR − (p = 0.02 for the
comparison of HRs of treatment effect between these two groups).
Adjustment for nodal status and prior adjuvant chemotherapy did not
affect this result. 

Conclusions: InMA.17, the effect of
LET relative to placebo appears most pronounced in women with the most
hormone dependent, ER + PgR +, tumors. Its apparent lack of benefit in
patients with ER + PgR − suggests that a functional ER is necessary
for letrozole to have an effect following 5 years of tamoxifen. These
results should be interpreted with caution as this was an unplanned
analysis and the receptor levels were measured locally. We plan to
centrally measure standard ER and PgR levels and to compare them to
quantitative assessment by immunofluorescence.

## 2043

## Bone mineral density loss in premenopausal women given adjuvant
chemotherapy for early breast cancer is independant of effects on ovarian
function.

## Cameron DA, Douglas S, Creiger J, Anderson RA. Western General
Hospital, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom; University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom
Because the treatment of premenopausal breast cancer is known to
induce bone loss, and chemotherapy induces ovarian failure, it is
often assumed that estrogen deficiency is the main cause of bone
loss.
We now have data on the changes in bone mineral density, menstrual
diaries and serum estradiol and FSH levels in 56 prospectively
recruited pre-menopausal women for the first two years following
diagnosis of early breast cancer: median age 41 (range 28.5 to 53). 41
women received adjuvant chemotherapy, of which 33 went on to get
hormonal therapy on completion of the chemotherapy, with no patient
given hormonal therapy concomitantly with their chemotherapy. 14 women
received endocrine therapy alone, of which 9 had goserilin + tamoxifen
(8 cases) /goserilin+aromatase inhibitor (1 case) (ovarian suppression
group), and 5 who had tamoxifen alone. Baseline lumbar spine BMD was
significantly greater than the normal population (z score 0.28±0.14,
(mean±sem), p = 0.047), and had fallen from 1.06±0.02 to 1.01±0.02
(mean −3.6%, p<0.001) at 6 months in the 41 women receiving
chemotherapy, and from 1.04±0.03 to 0.99±0.03 in the ovarian
suppression group (p<0.01). Serum estradiol was unchanged in the
chemo group (298±24 to 353±59 pmol/l) but was appropriately reduced in
the ovarian suppression group (335±57 to 63±9). FSH was markedly
increased in the chemo group (10.4±1.4 to 42.1±4.3 IU/L) and fell in
the ovarian suppression group (6.2±0.5 to 1.9±0.5). Tamoxifen
treatment following chemotherapy resulted in continuing bone loss
(0.97±0.03 to 0.95±0.03 over 6 months, p = 0.002) irrespective of
estradiol concentrations. Tamoxifen therapy alone caused bone loss
that was significant after 12 months (0.97±0.02 to 0.94±0.02, p =
0.03).
There were no significant differences in the fall in BMD over the
first 6 months of treatment according to age, chemotherapy regimen, or
by oestrogen level or menstrual function.
During the second 6 months of treatment (ie following
chemotherapy), there was a much greater fall in BMD in those women who
were amenorrhoeic (7.0% vs 2.9%, p<0.001), who also had lower E2
than those maintaining ovarian function.

## Conclusion
These data strongly suggest that the administration of standard
adjuvant chemotherapy and/or supportive medication directly reduces
bone mineral density in premenopausal women independent of any
effects on ovarian function.
Furthermore, the mechanism of this change may be different from
that seen with endocrine therapy, as despite evidence of ovarian
damage in the chemo group (elevated FSH), estradiol production was
not suppressed. This may be a direct effect of the chemotherapeutic
drugs on bone turnover, but it is also possible that dexamethasone
given as an anti-emetic may contribute to this. 

## 2044

## Health-related quality-of-life and psychological distress of breast
cancer patients after surgery during phase III randomized trial comparing
further tamoxifen with switching to anastrozole after adjuvant tamoxifen
for 1 to 4 years: N-SAS BC 03.

## Ohsumi S, Shimozuma K, Ohashi Y, Nishiuchi H, Aihara T,
Takatsuka Y. National Hospital Organization Shikoku Cancer Center,
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan; University of Marketing and Distribution
Sciences, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan; University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan;
Kansai Rosai Hospital, Amagasaki, Hyogo, Japan
Backgroud: Although tamoxifen (TAM) has been a standard adjuvant
endocrine therapy for postmenopausal women with breast cancer for a
long time, aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are regarded as alternatives of
TAM now. The results of the randomized controlled trials comparing TAM
with AIs in the adjuvant setting have shown better disease free
survival in favor of AIs. However, very limited data have been
reported regarding heath-related quality of life (HRQOL) outcomes of
the patients who changed their adjuvant treatment from several years’
TAM to AI.
Patients and Methods: Recurrent-free breast cancer patients were
serially enrolled in a phase III randomized trial: National Surgical
Adjuvant Study of Breast Cancer (N-SAS BC) 03. Primary endpoints of
the N-SAS BC 03 trial were disease-free survival and adverse events.
HRQOL and psychological distress were included in secondary endpoints.
Eligible patients were postmenopausal women who had received
definitive surgery for primary breast cancer with positive hormone
receptor(s), and had been taking TAM for 1 to 4 years after the
surgery. They were randomly assigned to continue TAM or to switch from
TAM to anastrozole (ANA) after obtaining written informed consent.
They were asked to answer patient-administered instruments to assess
HRQOL (FACT-B [breast cancer scale] and FACT-ES [endocrine symptom
scale]) and psychological distress (CES-D: Center for Epidemiologic
Studies Depression scale) at the randomization (baseline), 3 months,
and 1 year after the randomization. HRQOL and psychological distress
scores during this period were compared using the general linear model
with correlated errors.
Results: There was no difference in demographic and medical
characteristics between the two treatment groups. The response rate of
the questionnaires was more than 90% at baseline. At baseline 555
patients (276 in TAM group and 279 in ANA group) answered them. The
scores of FACT-G, FACT-B, and FACT-ES were significantly better in TAM
group than in ANA group (p = 0.012, p = 0.010, and p = 0.015,
respectively). However, any significant differences were found between
the two treatment groups for the scores of CED-D, subscales of FACT-G,
FACT-B, and FACT-ES.
Conclusions: Further TAM treatment after adjuvant TAM for 1 to
4 years may provide breast cancer patients with better HRQOL comparing
with switching to ANA.

## 2045

## Leuprorelinacetate 3 month-depot versus CMF as adjuvant treatment
in receptor- and node-positive premenopausal patients with breast cancer:
long term results of the TABLE-Study.

## Schmid P, Possinger K, Kassjanenko I, Vassiljev L, Meurer J,
Tschaika M, Maubach L, Wallwiener D, Kahlert S, Untch M.
Universitaetsmedizin Ćharite Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany; Institute
for Experimental Oncology, Kiew, Ukraine; Institute for Medical
Radiology, Charkov, Ukraine; Omnicare CR, Cologne, Germany; Pharma
East, Berlin, Germany; Takeda Pharma, Aachen, Germany; University,
Tuebingen, Germany; University, Munich, Germany

## Background
Ovarian supression with LHRH-analogues (LHRHa) has been shown to
be an effective adjuvant treatment for premenopausal patients with
hormone receptor positive (HR+) breast cancer. We previously
reported results of a randomized phase III trial comparing the
efficacy and safety of a 2 year treatment with the 3 months-depot
LHRHa leuprorelinacetate (LAD 3M) and a 6 months CMFchemotherapy.
This paper provides updated results after a median follow-up of
5.8 years.

Patients and Methods: Pre- or
perimenopausal patients with HR+ (96.8%) or unknown, node-positive,
early breast cancer (pT1-3,
N+, M0) were
randomly assigned to receive 2 years treatment of LAD-3M (11.25 mg
as s.c. injection) or 6 courses of i.v. CMF (C
500 mg/m2, M
40 mg/m2, F
600 mg/m2, days 1&8 q4w). Primary
endpoint was 2-year progression free survival (2yPFS). Secondary
endpoints included 5-years PFS, overall survival (OS),
tolerability, estradiol (E2) serum levels and menstrual status.
Statistical analysis was designed to test for non-inferiority of
LAD 3M.

Results: 599 patients were
enrolled in the trial. There were no significant differences
between the two treatments in 2y PFS (LAD-3M 77.9%, CMF 71.2%) and
5y PFS (LAD-3M 53.4%, CMF 49.8%) according to ITT analysis. At a
median follow-up of 5.8 years 276 events (LAD-3M 127, CMF 149) have
been reported accounting for a mean PFS of 6.0 years for LAD-3M and
5.7 years for CMF, respectively (p = 0.24). To date, 197 patients
have died (LAD-3M 83, CMF 114; p < 0.01). During LAD-3M
treatment amenorrhea was observed in ≥ 95.7% of patients. After the
end of LAD-3M treatment the amenorrhea rate decreased to 66% within
6 months and remained between 55% an 60% for the following 3 years.
In contrast, the amenorrhea rate was 43.9% at 3 months in the
CMF-group but continuously increased to 72.7% after 5 years.

Conclusion: This up-date analysis
confirms that the 2 year hormonal treatment with the LAD-3M is an
effective adjuvant treatment in premenopausal HR+, N+ breast cancer
patients that is non inferior to CMF chemotherapy. As expected
there is a higher rate of menstrual recovery following LAD-3M. The
safety profile is in favour of LAD-3M.

## 2046

## The effects of atamestane and toremifene alone or combined on bone,
serum lipids and uterus, comparing them to letrozole in the
ovariectomized rat.

## Goss PE, Qi S, Hu H, Cheung AM, Lang W, Blanchett DG, Langecker
PJ. Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Boston, MA; Toronto
General Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; Intarcia Therapeutics, Inc.,
Emeryville, CA

Background: Aromatase inhibitors (AI)
and anti-estrogens combined may allow more complete blockade of
estrogenic signaling than either compound alone. In contrast to other
combinations, the steroidal AI atamestane (ATA) and the antiestrogen
toremifene (TOR) have shown no PK interaction. We evaluated the
effects of ATA and TOR alone or combined on bone, serum lipids and
uterus in ovariectomized (OVX) rats, and compared them to the
non-steroidal AI letrozole (LET).

Methods: ATA 15 mg/kg, b.i.d.; TOR
10 mg/kg, LET 1 mg/kg and Flutamide (FLT) 10 mg/kg, q.d. were given by
oral gavage to OVX rats for 16 weeks, after which uterine weight and
histology, lumbar vertebral and femoral bone mineral density (BMD),
mechanical testing, histomorphometry, serum cholesterol (CH),
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and triglycerides (TG) were
measure.D

Results: 1) lumbar spine BMDs were
10.4%, 7.3%, 14.6% and 16.8%, higher in OVX animals given ATA, ATA +
FLT, TOR, and TOR + ATA, respectively, than in OVX controls
(p<0.01). Similar effects were observed on femoral BMDs. 2) The OVX
animals given ATA, ATA + FLT, TOR, and TOR + ATA had a 14.8%, 13.1%,
18.3% and 23.4% increase, respectively, in three-point bone bending
strength compared to OVX controls (p< 0.01). Similar effects were
observed on compressive strength of the fifth lumbar vertebra. 3)
Trabecular bone volume was significantly higher, and osteoid
parameters showed a significant decrease in OVX rats treated with ATA,
ATA + FLT, TOR, and TOR + ATA than in OVX controls. 4) ATA had no
stimulatory effect on uterine weight compared to OVX controls while
OVX rats given TOR and TOR + ATA had an increase by 69% and 70% (p<
0.0001) in uterine weight. 5) OVX rats given TOR and TOR+ATA caused
58.8% and 56.4% decrease in serum CH, 83.5% and 80.2% decrease in
serum LDL, and 31.2% and 31.6% decrease in serum TG, respectively,
compared to OVX controls (p<0.01). 6) OVX rats given LET had BMD,
mechanical properties, morphometry, lipid levels and uterine weight
similar to OVX controls.

Conclusions: In OVX rats, ATA,
distinct from LET, significantly prevents osteoporosis but this effect
is not blocked by FLT and appears to be non-androgenic. ATA has no
stimulatory effect on uterine weight indicating an absence of an
intrinsic estrogenic signal. Thus ATA + TOR are being investigated
clinically as an alternative to anastrozole and tamoxifen (ATAC) as a
total estrogen blockade. Lower doses of TOR merit further testing in
this rat model of end-organ effects.

## 2047

## Letrozole did not worsen quality of life relative to placebo in
post-menopausal women with early breast cancer: results from the US
subjects of the MA-17 study.

## Abetz L, Barghout V, Thomas S, Arbuckle R. Mapi Values,
Bollington, Macclesfield, United Kingdom; Novartis Pharmaceuticals,
Florham Park, NJ

Introduction: MA-17 was a randomized
placebo-controlled trial that compared the efficacy and safety of
5 years of letrozole (Femara®) 2.5 mg/d versus placebo and related QoL
impact on postmenopausal women with early breast cancer, after 5 years
of tamoxifen. Due to significant lowering in risk of disease
recurrence and distant metastases observed with letrozole, the trial
was unblinded early after 2.4 years mean follow-up. Earlier studies
have reported that letrozole did not worsen patient’s QoL relative to
placebo in this population. Evaluation of QoL impact may vary by place
of residence, thus this analysis report the QoL results for the US
subjects in MA-17.

Methods: The generic validated QoL
scale (SF-36 Health Survey) and the validated menopause specific scale
(MENQOL) were administered. The SF-36 yielded 2 summary scores
providing a global indicator of patients’ physical and mental QoL and
8 subscales. Symptom impact associated with estrogen suppression was
assessed using 4 domains of the MENQOL. Due to the early unblinding of
MA17, differences in SF-36 and MENQOL change scores between treatment
groups are reported for the first 3 years of the study (6, 12, 24,
36 months), using non-parametric testing.

Results: Across all time points, no
significant differences were observed between letrozole and placebo in
the overall QoL summary scores (mental and physical) and 5 of 8
sub-domains of SF-36. Small but significant differences in favour of
placebo was observed on SF-36 rolephysical, role-emotional subscales
at month 12 and vitality subscale at month 12 and 24. Across all time
points, no significant differences were observed for MENQOL
psychosocial and physical domains. Small but significant differences
in favour of placebo were observed for the vasomotor scale at months
6, 12 and 24 and a significant difference in favour of letrozole, was
observed in the sexual scale at month 24. All observed significant
differences were less than 5 points on a 100 point scale and therefore
were not considered clinically relevant based on current
methodology.

Conclusions: In the US, extended
adjuvant treatment with letrozole after standard adjuvant tamoxifen in
postmenopausal women provides improved efficacy while not worsening
QoL relative to placebo.

## 2048

## Withdawn by Author

## 2049

## Impact of Oncotype DXTM on decision
making in breast cancer clinical practice.

## Oratz R, Paul D, Cohn A, Sedlacek S. NYU School of Medicine, New
York, NY; Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers, Denver, CO

Background: The Oncotype DX
Recurrence Score (RS) has been validated to predict the likelihood of
distant recurrence as well as response to hormonal therapy (HT) and
chemotherapy (CT). This study was designed to determine if the RS
influenced treatment decisions in a community based, oncology
practice.

Methods: The experience with the RS
in the community practice of four oncologists was reviewed. RS was
ordered on tumors from 74 patients (pts) with ER (+) stage I or II BC.
Demographic information and details of pathology were extracted from
medical records. 10-year relapse free survival was calculated using
Adjuvant Online. Physician (MD) treatment (Rx) recommendation prior to
knowledge of RS was compared to MD Rx recommendation after RS and the
Rx actually administere.D

Results: RS was obtained in 72/74 pts
(97%). 2 pts (3%) had insufficient tumor tissue. In 4 pts MD Rx
recommendation prior to RS and/or actual Rx received were unknown.
68/72 pts were evaluable: 67 female and 1 male. Median age was 54 yrs
(range 35–77) and mean tumor size was 1.2 cm (SD 0.6 cm). Tumor grade
was 44% grade 1, 35% grade 2, and 21% grade 3. The distribution of RS
was similar to that observed in previous studies. Mean RS was 22
(range 5–68); 32 pts (47%) were low risk (RS<18), 22 pts (32%) were
intermediate risk (RS 18–30), and 14 (21%) pts were high risk(RS≥31).
The correlations of RS with patient age
(R2=0.04) and tumor size
(R2=0.07) were low. The rank correlation
of RS with tumor grade (R2=0.34) was
modest. Although some correlation was seen between the likelihood of
distant recurrence based on the RS and the likelihood of relapse based
on Adjuvant Online (R2=0.43), there was a
highly significant difference (p<0.0001). Knowledge of the RS
altered MD Rx recommendation in 14/68 (21%) pts and altered actual Rx
administered in 17/68 (25%) pts. Prior to knowing RS, MD Rx
recommendation was HT in 51% and combined HT + CT in 49%. Post RS, MD
Rx recommendation was HT in 51%, CT alone in 6%, and HT + CT in 42%
pts. Actual Rx administered was HT in 68%; CT in 4% and HT + CT in
28%. Of the 14 pts in whom MD Rx recommendations changed, 7 went from
CT to HT and 7 went from HT to CT. The decision to switch from CT to
HT was generally associated with low RS, while the decision to switch
from HT to CT was generally associated with high RS. The odds of the
MD Rx recommendation changing from HT to CT was 111x higher if RS was
high versus low risk, and from CT to HT was 18x higher if RS was low
versus high risk.

Conclusion: TheOncotype DX Recurrence
Score assay changed systemic adjuvant therapy in 25% of pts with early
stage BC. It is likely that genomic information will play an
increasingly important role in clinical decision-making for individual
BC patients.

## 2050

## Economic evaluation of switching to exemestane at 2.5 years versus
continuing tamoxifen as adjuvant therapy in early breast cancer: a
Canadian perspective.

## Risebrough NA, Verma S, Trudeau M, Charbonneau C, Mittmann N.
Sunnybrook and Women’s College Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON,
Canada; Ottawa Regional Cancer Centre, Ottawa, ON, Canada; Toronto
Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada; Pfizer Canmada
Inc., Kirkland, PQ, Canada; University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada

Background/Objectives: The
superiority of switching to exemestane (E) at 2 to 3 yrs compared to
remaining on tamoxifen (T) for 5 yrs has been established by the
Intergroup Exemestane Study (IES) trial. E is considerably more
expensive than T. We determined the incremental cost per life-year
(LY) gained and cost per quality adjusted life-year (QALY) from a
Canadian (CDN) government payer perspective.

Methods: A Markov model with a 7.5 yr
time horizon was constructed. Event rates for T and relative risk
reduction of breast cancer recurrence with E in the first 2.5 yrs of
the model were determined from supplementary analysis of the IES
trial. Local, contralateral (CN) and distant recurrence rates 5 yrs
after the completion of T were extrapolated using constant hazard
ratios from Kaplan Meier curves. These transition states were modeled:
(1) survival; (2) breast cancer recurrence (local, CN and distant);
(3) other primary cancers; (4) discontinuation due to adverse events
and/or drug related adverse events requiring treatment (osteoporosis
and fractures). We assumed that all patients with a new osteoporosis
diagnosis while on adjuvant therapy continued bisphosphonates for the
5 yrs following adjuvant therapy. In the base case, the difference
between the recurrence rate for E and T 5 yrs after completing
adjuvant therapy was assumed to remain constant. This was conservative
as the IES trial suggested additional benefit for exemestane.
Probability of disease progression following breast cancer recurrence
came from published sources. Costs for drugs, inpatient and outpatient
treatment and follow-up were based on CDN government sources and
published literature and presented in 2004 CDN dollars. Costs and
outcomes accrued beyond 1 year were discounted at 5%.

Results: The total cost of the T
strategy was $18,991 compared to $20,810 with E. Life years and QALYs
increased from 6.37 and 5.64 with T to 6.43 and 5.73 respectively with
E. The incremental medical cost per QALY gained with E vs. T was
$19,124, while incremental cost gained per LY was $28,565. The
sensitivity analysis showed results were robust to reasonable changes
in probability and quality of life parameters, but were sensitive to
distant recurrence costs. If the actual cost of recurrence was twice
as high as in the base case analysis ($14,927 per 6 months), E became
a dominant therapy with better clinical outcomes and lower overall
treatment cost.

Conclusions: Treatments resulting
inincremental cost per QALY below $20,000 CDN are considered to be
cost-effective. In adjuvant breast cancer, treatment with 2.5 years of
E following 2.5 yrs of T falls within the parameters of cost-effective
strategies.

## 2051

## Menostasis subsequent to individually dose-tailored
fluorouracil-epirubicin-cyclophosfamide chemotherapy for early breast
cancer.

## Andersson M, Gunnarsdottir K, Møller S, Blomqvist C, Bergh J,
Edlund P, Ahlgren J, Mouridsen HT. Rigshospitalet University Hospital,
Copenhagen, Denmark; Danish Breast Cancer Cooperative Group,
Copenhagen, Denmark; Uppsala Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden; Karolinska
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

Background: The influence of age,
fluorouracil-epirubicin-cyclophosphamide (FEC) chemotherapy (CT) dose
and leukopenia on the risk of menostasis (M) is not fully
elucidate.D

Material and methods: In the SBG
2000–1 study, 1019 premenopausal node+ or high-risk node- early breast
cancer patients received one cycle of intravenous (IV) FEC (600, 60,
600 mg/m2 = standard dose, (SD)).
Patients with white blood cell (WBC) nadir grade 3 continued to
receive cycles 2–7 in SD (n= 279) IV q 3 weeks. Patients with WBC
nadir grade 0–2 were randomized to either SD (n= 374) or escalated
dose (WBC nadir 2: 600, 75, 900 mg/m2; WBC
nadir 0–1: 600, 90, 1200 mg/m2) (n=366) for
cycles 2–7. Patients reported after each CT cycle whether they had had
menstruation since last cycle.

Results: The percentage of patients
who reported having had menstruation after cycles 1 through 7,
respectively, was 61%, 60%, 45%, 31%, 19%, 13% and 9%. Among 556
patients with full information about menstruation, 424 (76.3%)
reported no menstruation after both 5., 6. and 7. cycle (which was
taken as a surrogate measure for menopause (SM)). SM in relation to a.
age: <35 years: 3/28 (11%), 35–39: 46/103 (45%), 40–44: 89/119
(75%), >44: 286/306 (94%) p(trend)<0.0001; b. maximal WBC nadir
during CT cycles 1–7: grade 0–1: 23/35 (6%), grade 2: 1116/160 (73%),
grade 3: 223/286 (78%), grade 4: 62/75 (83%) p(trend)=0.02; c. CT
dose: SD (non-randomized) 123/156 (79%), SD (randomized) 147/211) 70%
Level + 1: 88/109 (81%), Level 2 + 66/80 (83%) p(trend)=0.02
(non-randomized excluded from analysis). SD(non-randomized) vs
SD(randomized): p=0.06. Discussion:
This study presents M data only from during and immediately after
administration of CT. It is wellknown that CT-induced M is sometimes
reversible, but the picture is often obscured by treatment with
tamoxifen which the majority of the patients received subsequently to
CT. The study demonstrates that SM is highly dependent on age, only
11% of patients <35 yrs becoming SM. Further, SM is significantly
related to CT dose and to hematological toxicity even for patients on
the same dose level. This suggests that individual sensitivity to
CT-induced toxicity, including SM, is important.

## 2052

## Initial results from the LEAP Study: the first direct comparison of
safety parameters between aromatase inhibitors (AIs) in healthy
postmenopausal women.

## McCloskey E, Eastell R, Hannon RA, Lakner G, Miyamoto A, Clack
G. University of Sheffield, United Kingdom; MÁV Hospital, Hungary;
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals; AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, United
Kingdom

Background: When considering
long-term adjuvant drug use, safety is of prime importance. The
Letrozole, Exemestane, and Anastrozole Pharmacodynamics
(LEAP)trialassessed pharmacodynamic differences between anastrozole
(‘Arimidex’), letrozole (both non-steroidal, competitive AIs), and
exemestane (a steroidal, non-competitive AI), including differential
effects on markers of bone turnover and cardiovascular effects, that
may lead to differences in their safety profiles with long-term
use.1 LEAP is an open, randomized,
multicenter, Phase I pharmacodynamic study comparing the effects of
these three AIs on serum markers of bone formation and resorption,
lipid profiles, adrenal function, and safety in healthy postmenopausal
women.

Material and methods: Healthy
volunteersfrom the UK and Hungary were randomized to receive
anastrozole (1 mg/day), letrozole (2.5 mg/day), or exemestane
(25 mg/day) orally, once daily for 24 weeks. The primary objective of
the LEAP study was to assess changes in bone alkaline phosphatase
(ALP), a serum marker of bone formation. Secondary outcome variables
included other markers of bone formation and resorption, lipid
measurements, and measures of adrenal function (using the lowdose
short Synacthen test). Serum samples were taken at baseline and after
2, 12, 24, and 36 weeks (12 weeks post-dosing) for analysis of ALP. In
addition to bone ALP, markers analyzed included procollagen type-I
amino-terminal propeptide, -C-terminal crosslinking telopeptide of type-I
collagen, parathyroid hormone, total cholesterol, triglycerides,
high-density lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, cortisol,
aldosterone, adrenal androgens, and fasting glucose. Safety assessment
included analyses of clinical chemistry, hematology, urinalysis,
symptoms, blood pressure, electrocardiograms, pulse, and physical
examination.

Results: 102 healthy volunteers
(target 84 evaluable) have been recruited and, at the time of
writing,57 volunteers from 4 centers have completed dosing.

Discussion: Dosing is scheduled to be
completed in August 2005; first results will be presente.D

## Reference
1. Jackson J et al. Expert Opin Drug Saf 2003; 2: 73–86.
’Arimidex’ is a trademark of the AstraZeneca group of
companies

## 2053

## LH-RH analogues, tailored adjuvant chemotherapy and total
estrogenic block in patients with estrogen receptor positive (ER +)
tumors, preserve ovarian function and improve the clinical outcome of
young women with early breast cancer.

## Recchia F, Saggio G, Cesta A, Candeloro G, Amiconi G, Di Blasio
A, Rea S. Civilian Hospital, Avezzano, AQ, Italy; University of
L’Aquila, L’Aquila, AQ, Italy

Background and rationale: In a
previous study (Anticancer Drugs13:417–24, 2002) we have shown that
the addition of a LHRH analogue to adjuvant therapy of premenopausal
patients with early breast cancer protected long-term ovarian
function. In this study we observed that the majority of failures
occurred in the second year, predominantly in estrogen receptor
positive (ER +) patients. The protocol was emended, administration of
the analogue was prolonged for 2 years and ER + patients were treated
with an aromatase inhibitor (AI), after the completion of chemotherapy
during the treatment with the analogue. Objective of the present study
was the retrospective evaluation of 100 consecutive, high risk,
premenopausal early breast cancer patients, treated with the above
described therapy.

Patients and methods: Following
surgical treatment, patients received an LH-RH analogue and an
adjuvant chemotherapy, which was tailored to the peculiar biologic
features of each tumor. Patients characteristics: median age, 43 years
(range 27–50), 52 estrogen receptor positive (ER +) and 48 ER negative
(ER −), 64 stage II disease, and 36 stage III. All patients had their
serum estradiol suppressed to values < 40 pg/ml. Chemotherapy
administered: 26 cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil; 74
an anthracycline-based regimen and 9 of them, with more than 10
axillary nodes, high-dose chemotherapy with autologous peripheral
blood progenitor cell transplantation. CERB-2 positive patients
received also a taxane. Eighty patients were irradiated. An aromatase
inhibitor (AI) was given to ER+ patients, after chemotherapy, during
the therapy with the LH-RH analogue.

Results. After a median follow-up of
75 months, normal menses were resumed by all patients below 40 years
and by 56% of patients above 40 years of age. Three pregnancies were
observed: 2 at term and 1 voluntary abortion. Projected
recurrence-free survival rates at 5 and 10 years were 84% and 76%,
while projected overall survival rates at 5 and 10 years were 96% and
91%, respectively. None of 36 patients with ER + tumors, treated with
total estrogenic block recurre.D

Conclusion: These data show that in
premenopausal patients with early breast cancer, the addition of a
LH-RH analogue to adjuvant therapy and temporary total estrogen
suppression in ER+ patients, is well tolerated, protects long-term
ovarian function and seems to improve the expected clinical
outcome.

## 2054

## Cost-effectiveness of letrozole versus tamoxifen as initial
adjuvant therapy in hormone-receptor positive postmenopausal women with
early breast cancer from a US perspective.

## Delea TE, Karnon J, Thomas SK, Barghout V, Papo NL, Johnston
SR.D PAI, Brookline, MA; University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United
Kingdom; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., Florham Park, NJ; Novartis
Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd., Camberley, United Kingdom; Royal Marsden
Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Background: In the primary core
analysis of the BIG 1–98 study, the aromatase inhibitor letrozole
(LET) significantly improved disease free survival (DFS) by 19%
(HR=0.81, 95% CI 0.70–0.93, p=.003) and DFS excluding
2nd primary cancer and death without
recurrence by 28% (HR=0.72, 95% CI 0.61–0.86, p=.0002) compared with
tamoxifen (TAM) in postmenopausal women with hormone-receptor positive
(HR+) early breast cancer. The risk of distant metastases was
significantly reduced by 27% (HR 0.73, 95% CI 0.60–0.88; P=.001).
Patients receiving LET also experienced nonsignificant improvements in
overall survival (HR=0.86, 95% CI 0.70–1.06, p=.15) and risk of
invasive contralateral breast cancer (HR=0.61, 95% CI 0.35–1.08,
p=.09). LET patients had reduced risks of endometrial cancer and
thromboembolic events, but increased risks of hypercholesterolemia,
cardiac events, and fractures. This study evaluates the
cost-effectiveness of initial adjuvant therapy with LET vs TAM from a
US healthcare system perspective based on preliminary analyses of
published results of the BIG 1–98 trial.

Methods: A Markov model was used to
estimate the incremental cost per life-year (LY) and quality-adjusted
LY (QALY) saved with 5 years of initial adjuvant therapy with LET
versus TAM in postmenopausal women with HR+ early stage breast cancer.
Probabilities of recurrence (including contralateral tumor) and
treatment side effects (endometrial cancer, thromboembolic events, hip
and other fractures, hypercholesterolemia, and MI) for TAM were based
on preliminary published results of the BIG 1–98 trial and other
published population-based studies. Corresponding probabilities for
LET were calculated by multiplying probabilities for TAM by estimated
RRs for LET vs TAM from the BIG 1–98 study. Other probabilities, costs
of breast-cancer care and treatment of side effects (2004 US$), and
health-state utilities were obtained from published studies. Costs and
QALYs were estimated over the lifetime of a cohort of HR+
postmenopausal women with early breast cancer, aged 61 years at
initiation of adjuvant therapy, and discounted at 3% annually.

Results: Compared with TAM, LET
results in an additional 0.27 life years (13.89 vs 13.62) and 0.28
QALYs (13.10 vs 12.82). These benefits are obtained at an additional
costs of $9,026 ($63,990 vs $54,964). Cost effectiveness of LET vs TAM
is therefore $33,430 per LY saved and $32,236 per QALY save.D

Conclusion: Initial adjuvant
treatment with LET is cost-effective compared with TAM from the US
healthcare system perspective and should be considered in
postmenopausal women with HR+ early breast cancer.

## 2055

## Breast cancer navigator program: clinical trial access, recruitment
and enrollment at a large county hospital.

## Donnell SK, Leitch AM, Gray E, Aravind R, McKindles D, Tripathy
.D UT Southwstrn Med Ctr; UT Southwstrn Med Ctr, Dallas, TX
Expanding access to clinical trials among women of diverse
backgrounds has been a focus of national research policy. Currently,
the NIH requires that women and their associated sub-populations be
included in Phase III clinical trials to allow for valid analysis of
differences in intervention effects. Breast cancer research with a
broad representation of age, ethnicity, culture, socioeconomics and
geographical location contribute to understanding how these factors
impact diagnosis, treatment, disease state and outcomes among diverse
populations.

Method: A Navigator program was
designed to increase access and participation in breast cancer
clinical trials in a busy clinical setting with limited resources. The
pilot program was implemented at a large county hospital. The
hospital-based clinic serves minority women, mostly women of
African-American and Hispanic background. Clinical trial candidates
were identified at the time of initial diagnosis and new recurrence.
Demographic and clinical information was gathered and stored in an
institutional database. A systematic approach to screening new and
established patients based on criteria for eligible candidates was
applied. Clinical trials consisted of neo-adjuvant, adjuvant, and
palliative treatment protocols. Physicians and coordinators determined
final eligibility, approached candidates, and reported outcomes to the
Navigator.

Result: The program was implemented
in October 2003 with data generated through October 2004. A total of
375 breast cancer patients were screened for eligibility for at least
one clinical trial. Of the 375 candidates, 310 were eligible with 35
(11.3%) enrollments to treatment trials. Approximately 156 candidates
screened were eligible for three adjuvant trials and 12 patients
(7.7%) enrolled. Reasons for not enrolling included patient decline,
alternative treatment chosen and ineligibility due to co-morbidities,
non-English speaking status, and risk for non-compliance. Ethnic
distribution was: African-American 45.6%, Hispanic 27.5%, Caucasian
20% and Asian 4.3%. Median age was 53 with 42% under the age of 50 and
13% over the age of 65.

Conclusion: Integrating a Navigator
program results in early identification of clinical trial eligibility
among minority and underserved populations of women. The program
increases access to clinical trials among women of diverse ages,
ethnic and cultural backgrounds. Outcomes to enrollment aid in
identifying barriers to clinical trial participation and low
enrollment among patient groups. Additional research that incorporates
ethnic, cultural and socioeconomic factors into the design and
implementation of research protocols is neede.D

## 2056

## Gynecologic interventions during adjuvant therapy with anastrozole
or tamoxifen: results from the ATAC trial.

## Duffy SR, Distler W, on Behalf of the ATAC Trialists group. St
James’s University Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom;
Universitatsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany

Background: The estrogenic activity
of tamoxifen on the endometrium results in double the risk of
endometrial cancer after 1–2 years and quadruple the risk of
endometrial cancer after 5 years’ treatment. Anastrozole, a highly
selective third-generation aromatase inhibitor (AI), has efficacy
superior to that of tamoxifen in patients with early breast cancer and
is also associated with significantly fewer gynecologic adverse events
(AEs). Gynecologic AEs often require further investigation and
treatment, which, as well as being costly, are distressing for the
patient.

Material and Methods: We examined
retrospectively the incidence of gynecologic interventions conducted
in patients receiving anastrozole or tamoxifen in the main ‘Arimidex’,
Tamoxifen, Alone or in Combination (ATAC) trial database. No
statistical analysis of the gynecological interventions was
performe.D

Results: The incidence of gynecologic
AEs in the main ATAC trial was significantly lower for anastrozole
compared with tamoxifen (vaginal bleeding: 5.4% (167/3092) vs. 10.2%
(317/ 3094), p<0.0001; vaginal discharge: 3.5% (109/3092) vs. 13.2%
(408/3094), p<0.0001; endometrial cancer: 0.2% (5/2228*) vs. 0.8%
(17/2236*), p=0.02). Overall, patients receiving anastrozole
experienced fewer gynecologic interventions compared with those
receiving tamoxifen (Table). An almost four-fold reduction in the
incidence of both hysteroscopy and hysterectomy was observed in
patients receiving anastrozole; the incidence of most other
interventions was also lower in this group.

Discussion: The significant
difference in the incidence of gynecologic AEs previously reported for
anastrozole compared with tamoxifen in the ATAC trial appears to
translate to a requirement for fewer gynecologic interventions in
patients receiving the AI. Therefore, treatment with anastrozole
rather than tamoxifen may avoid the psychologic distress and the
associated costs of the investigation/treatment of gynecologic events
in many women. These findings offer further support to the use of
anastrozole as the preferred primary adjuvant treatment for
postmenopausal women with early breast cancer. 

## 2057

## Side effects in treatment with FEC (5-fluorouracil, epirubicin and
cyklophosphamide) in standard doses compared to tailored doses, based on
hematological toxicity, for primary breast cancer. Results from the
Scandinavian Breast Group 2000–1 Study.

## Edlund P, Gunnarsdottir K, Anderson H, Moller S, Andersson M,
Mouridsen H, Bergh J, Ahlgren J, Blomqvist C. Gavle County Hospital,
Gavle, Sweden; Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; Rigshospitalet,
Copenhagen, Denmark; DBCG-Secretariat, Copenhagen, Denmark; Karolinska
Inst.& Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden; Lund University, Lund,
Sweden

Background: The doses of chemotherapy
regimens are mostly based on patients’ body surface area. There are
large inter- individual differences in systemic exposure and tolerance
for cytostatics, likely due to pharmacokinetics. Retrospective studies
have demonstrated that patients with high-grade leucopenia during
adjuvant chemotherapy have a better outcome. The SBG 2000–1 trial will
prospectively investigate if patients who get individually dosed
adjuvant chemotherapy based on grade of leucopenia have a better
outcome than those who get standard doses based on body suface area
only. This report evaluates the dose-intensity and toxicity for the
included patients.

Patients and methods: 1535 lymph node
positve or high-risk node negative (T2 and/or ER/ PGR negative) women
were registered in the trial.7 FEC courses were given every 3 week to
all patients. The first course was given in standard doses to all
patients (5-FU 600 mg/m2, E
60 mg/m2, C
600 mg/m2). Leucocyte nadir values were
measured at day 10 12–13 and 15. Patients who achieved leukopenia
grade 0–2 were randomized to tailored FEC (T) according to a dose
escalation schedule (E 75–90 mg/m2, C
900-1200 mg/m2) in order to reach
leucopenia grade 3, or to continue treatment with standard doses (S).
Patients who had leucopenia grade 3–4 after the first course were not
randomized but received standard doses courses 2–7 (R). The non
hematological toxicity was registered according to the NCI/CTC
criteria by the patients themselves for each course. Following
inclusion, 68 patients withdrew consent and 14 were ineligible due to
missing nadir blood samples and 1 because of bilateral cancer. Data
for courses 2 and later have not been obtained for 2 patients. Thus
the number included in this analysis is 1450 (401 in R, 526 in S and
523 in T).

Results: 96,2% of all patients
completed 7 cycles. The median cumulative doses
(mg/m2) of C were 4181 for R, 4183 for S
and 6030 for T and for E, 418, 418 and 512 for R,S and T respectively.
The proportion of patients who achieved leucopenia grade 3–4 at any
time during courses 2–7 were 88% for R, 28% for S and 90% for T (S vs
T, p<0.0001). The proportion of the randomized patients who had
grade 3–4 nonhematological toxicity during courses 2–7 were higher in
T vs S for vomiting(19% vs 9.9%,p<0.01) and alopecia (97,5% vs
94.0%,p=0.01) but not for emesis, mucositis, diarrea and fatigue.
Conclusion: Leucopenia grade 3 was
achieved by dose adjustment based on leucocyte nadir after course one
without adding other severe toxicity. Outcome data will be presented
in 2007.

## 2058

## Cost-effectiveness analysis of letrozole versus tamoxifen as
initial adjuvant therapy in hormone-receptor positive postmenopausal
women with early breast cancer: the UK perspective.

## Karnon J, Delea TE, Barghout V, Thomas SK, Papo NL, Johnston
SR.D University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom; Policy
Analysis Inc., Brookline, MA; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., Florham
Park, NJ; Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd, Camberley, United Kingdom;
Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Background: In the primary core
analysis of the BIG 1–98 study, the aromatase inhibitor letrozole
(LET) significantly improved Disease-Free Survival (DFS) by 19% (HR
0.81; 95% CI 0.70, 0.93; P=0.003) and DFS excluding
2nd primary cancers and death without
recurrence by 28% (HR 0.72; 95% CI 0.61, 0.86; P=0.0002) compared with
tamoxifen (TAM) in postmenopausal women with hormone receptor positive
(HR +) early breast cancer. The risk of distant metastasis was
significantly reduced by 27% (HR 0.73; 95% CI 0.60, 0.88; P=0.001).
Patients receiving LET also experienced non-significant improvements
in overall survival (HR 0.86; 95% CI 0.70, 1.06; P=0.15) and risk of
invasive contralateral breast cancer (HR 0.61; 95% CI 0.35, 1.08;
P=0.09). LET patients had reduced risks of endometrial cancer and
thromboembolic events, but increased risks of hypercholesterolemia,
cardiac events and fractures. This study reports the
cost-effectiveness of initial adjuvant therapy with LET vs TAM from
the UK NHS perspective based on preliminary analyses of published
results of the BIG 1–98 trial.

Methods: A Markov model was used to
estimate the incremental cost per Life Year (LY) and per
quality-adjusted life year (QALY) saved with five years of initial
adjuvant therapy with LET versus TAM in postmenopausal women with HR+
early stage breast cancer. Probabilities of breast cancer events
(contralateral tumour; locoregional recurrence; soft tissue; bone; and
visceral metastases) and treatment side effects (endometrial cancer,
thromboembolic events, hip fractures, other fractures,
hypercholesterolemia and MI) for TAM were based on published results
of the BIG 1–98 trial and other published population-based studies.
Corresponding probabilities for LET were calculated by multiplying
probabilities for TAM by estimated RRs for LET vs TAM from the BIG
1–98 study. Other probabilities, costs of breast cancer care and
treatment of side effects (2004 UK£), and health-state utilities (QALY
weights) were obtained from published studies. Costs and QALYs were
estimated over the remaining lifetime of a cohort of HR+
postmenopausal women aged 61 years, discounted at 3.5%
annually.

Results: Compared with TAM, LET
results in an additional 0.292 LYs (13.337 vs 13.045), and 0.325 QALYs
(12.665 vs 12.340). These benefits are obtained at an additional cost
of £4,546 (£9,568 vs £5,022). The cost-effectiveness of LET vs TAM is
£15,549 per LY saved (95% CI £11,341–£29,406) and £14,001 per QALY
saved (95% CI £10,067–£26,068).

Conclusion: Adjuvant treatment with
LET is cost-effective from a UK NHS perspective compared with TAM and
should be considered as a treatment option in women diagnosed with HR+
early breast cancer.

## 2059

## Positive cooperative effects of gefitinib, chemotherapeutics and a
breast cancer resistant protein inhibitor on cell growth in a
fulvestrant-resistant estrogen receptor alpha negative MCF-7 cell
model.

## Liu H, Welchel AK, Cheng D, Osipo C, Jordan VC. Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL; Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
PA
To explore mechanisms and potential therapeutics for fulvestrant
resistant breast cancer, we have generated a unique
fulvestrantresistant (MCF-7/F) estrogen receptor alpha (ER) negative
human breast cancer cell model. MCF-7/F cells were derived from MCF-7
ER positive cells and irreversibly lost expression of ER (AACR 2004,
Abstract # 5600). In this study, we compared and contrasted gene
expression profiles in MCF-7 treated with ethanol, 1 nM estrogen or 1 
 M fulvestrant for 40 hours and MCF-7/F cells without
any treatment using a microarray chip assay with Human Genome U133
Plus 2.0 GeneChip (over 47,000 transcripts with around 53,000 probe
sets). In the four groups tested 13,941 probe sets reached
significance at level p < 0.05
by one-way ANOVA test. In MCF-7/F cells1685 probe sets were
differentially overexpressed or underexpressed. The changes in
expression of three genes, ER, epithelial growth factor receptor
(EGFR) and breast cancer resistant protein (BCRP/MXR/ABCG2), might
have effects on treatment of fulvestrant resistant breast cancer.
Expression of ER was dramatically decreased and expression of EGFR was
significantly upregulated. MCF-7/F cells had crossresistance to
4-hydroxytamoxifen and raloxifene. Gefitinib, an EGFR tyrosine kinase
inhibitor, inhibited cell growth in MCF-7/F cells in a concentration
dependent manner as shown previously (AACR 2004, Abstract # 5600).
Interestingly, BCRP was highly expressed in MCF-7/F cells.
Overexpression of BCRP was further validated with western blot
analysis. MCF-7/F cells became less sensitive to the inhibitory effect
of mitoxantrone. EC50 for mitoxantrone
increased 6.8 fold (p < 0.05) in
MCF-7/F cells (0.13  M) compared to MCF-7 cells (0.019  M). Moreover, inhibition of BCRP with a BCRP specific
inhibitor, fumitremorgin C (FTC), resensitized MCF-7/F cells to
mitoxantrone. More interestingly, gefitinib, a specific EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor, also increased sensitivity to mitoxantrone in
MCF-7/F cells. Thus, MCF-7/F cells become less chemosensitive due to
BCRP overexpression. The results indicate that fulvestrant resistant
breast tumors with overexpression of both EGFR and BCRP might benefit
from combination treatment with gefitinib, chemotherapeutic reagents
such as mitoxantrone and BCRP inhibitors. Supported by the SPORE CA89018-05

## 2060

## Upregulation of HER-2/neu is independent of the menopausal status
of primary breast cancer patients: plasma results from a prospectively
randomized trial comparing dose-intense chemotherapy with G-CSF support
to 3-weekly chemotherapy for adjuvant therapy of nodal-positive (1-3 LN)
breast cancer.

## Lueftner D, Schildhauer S, Eggemann H, Geppert R, Wernecke K,
Possinger K, Elling D. Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany;
Oskar-Ziethen-Krankenhaus, Berlin, Germany; Institut für Medizinische
Biometrie, Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany

Background: The ASG is completing
recruitment into an adjuvant trial in which breast cancer patients
(pts) either receive conventional ECP (Arm A; epirubicin (E):
90 mg/m2 + cyclophosphamide (C)
600 mg/m2× 4 q3w, followed by paclitaxel
(P) 175 mg/m2× 4 q3w) or dose-dense EP +
G-CSF on days 5–13 (Arm B; E: 120 mg/m2× 4
q2w, followed by P: 175 mg/m2 x4 q2w).
Plasma for circulating HER-2/neu, EGFR and CA 27.29 levels is
prospectively collected at baseline, at the end of chemotherapy and at
relapse.

Methods: Circulating HER-2/neu is
measured using a standardized ELISA assay (Bayer Diagnostics/Oncogene
Science, Cambridge, USA). The nonparametric analysis of variance for
repeated measurements is used to detect significant influences of
treatment arm, menopausal status and time effects, and to determine
interactions.

Results: Longitudinal plasma results
(baseline and end of chemotherapy) are available from 415 pts of which
53% are postmenopausal. HER-2/neu concentrations increased from
9.4/9.3 ng/mL (Arm A/B) at baseline to 11.2/11.0 ng/mL (Arm A/B) at
the end of chemotherapy for pre- and postmenopausal pts equally with a
significant time effect (p<0.00001). In contrast to circulating
HER-2/neu, CA 27.29 increased to a greater extent over time
(p<0.00001) in the dose-dense Arm B from 21.3 U/mL to 37.2 U/mL as
compared to Arm A from 20.5 U/mL to 25 U/mL. At the same time,
circulating EGFR levels decreased significantly over time (p=0.0012)
in the dose-dense Arm B only.

Conclusions: These are the first
results that show that HER-2/ neu levels increase significantly in
postmenopausal breast cancer pts. Identical results were published for
premenopausal pts only (Lüftner et al., Breast Cancer Res Treat 2003).
Circulating EGFR is known to be lower in postmenopausal pts than in
premenopausal pts, which could reflect the faster ovarian ablation in
the doseintense arm. The pronounced increase of CA 27.29 in Arm B may
be explained by cell death of minimal residual disease during
intensified chemotherapy

## 2061

## Predictors and temporal trends of adjuvant endocrine therapy use in
breast cancer.

## Svahn TH, Niland JC, Hughes ME, Ottesen RA, Theriault RL, Edge
SB, Schott AF, Bookman MA, Weeks JC, Carlson RW. Stanford University,
Stanford, CA; City of Hope, Duarte, CA; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, MA; M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY; University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA

Background: Endocrine therapy is one
of the most important aspects of adjuvant treatment for patients with
hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. Tamoxifen was the primary
adjuvant endocrine therapy until the first report of the Arimidex,
Tamoxifen Alone or in Combination (ATAC) trial in December of 2001. In
December 2001, the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Breast
Cancer Treatment Guidelines were modified to allow anastrozole as an
alternative to tamoxifen in the adjuvant treatment of postmenopausal
patients. This study examines the treatment patterns of adjuvant
endocrine therapy at NCCN institutions participating in the Breast
Cancer Outcomes Database, identifies temporal relationships in the use
of aromatase inhibitors (AI), and examines patient and tumor
characteristics associated with the choice of endocrine
therapy.

Methods: Data were available on 3,578
postmenopausal patients with hormone receptor-positive stages I, II
and III breast cancer treated from July 1997 to September 2004.
Analyses included patient and tumor characteristics, endocrine therapy
with time trend analysis, and univariate and multivariable logistic
regression models.

Results: Median age at diagnosis was
62 (33–94) years. 4% had pre-existing vascular disease. 63% of tumors
were low or intermediate grade, 67% lymph node-negative, and 9%
overexpressed HER2. 85% received adjuvant endocrine therapy: 81%
tamoxifen, 18% anastrozole, 1% letrozole or exemestane. Time trend
analysis demonstrated an increase in AI use with a concomitant
decrease in tamoxifen use following the release of ATAC results
(p<0.0001). In multivariable regression analysis, NCCN institution
(p<0.0001), age at diagnosis (p=0.0013), history of vascular
disease (p=0.0004), stage (p=0.0003) and HER2 status (p=0.02) were
independent predictors of AI use over tamoxifen. For the time period
2001–2004, individual NCCN institutional rates of AI use ranged from
15 to 66%.

Conclusions: The use of AI in place
of tamoxifen increased rapidly at NCCN institutions after the first
report of ATAC. Patients who were older, had a history of vascular
disease, whose tumors overexpressed HER2 or were more advanced stage
were more likely to be treated with AI. There was substantial
variation between institutions in the early adoption of AI.

## 2062

## Fatigue and metabolic changes in patients with early breast cancer
(EBC) receiving anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy, a longitudinal
prospective study.

## Meulemans A, Fontaine C, De Meirleir L, Torosian K, Gerlo E, Von
Kemp K, Goyens P, De Waele A, Kaufman L, De Greve J. AZVUB; ; AZ-Vrije
Universiteit Brussels, Jette, Brussels, Belgium

Background: Fatigue is a prevailing
distress affecting the quality of life of many cancer patients.
Treatment and disease factors contribute to the symptom and much of
the focus has been on anemia. Other metabolic factors have not been
studied adequately in humans. Limited data are available only in
patients with advanced cancer in whom it is difficult to discriminate
between treatmentor disease-related factors. We report on a
clinical-metabolic study of the effect of adjuvant chemotherapy on
fatigue, thereby excluding confounding disease-related factors.

Patients and Methods: After surgery
patients were treated with adjuvant CEF chemotherapy for 6 cycles and
locoregional radiotherapy. Consenting patients were prospectively and
comprehensively followed with the FACT-F subscale; a standardized
aerobic forearm exercise test with measurement of venous blood levels
of lactate, pyruvate, pH, free carnitine and acylcarnitines,
pO2, pCO2, urinary
organic acids and brachial arterial flow (ABF). All measurements were
performed at baseline, after 3 and 6  cycles of chemotherapy, and 3
and 6 months of follow-up. The variables were determined at rest,
during exercise and in the recovery phase.

Results: Twenty seven patients (stage
I-III) were included in the study, 16 and 12 patients are currently
evaluable after 3 and 6 cycles of chemotherapy respectively. Mean age
was 45,5 years (27–67 years). Eight of 16 pts had HR-positive cancer
and 4/16 had Her2 amplification. The FACT-F subscale was less than 32
in 2/16 patients at baseline and 4/16 after 3 cycles. The baseline
FACT-F was 38,8, decreased to a mean of 33,9 after 3 cycles (p=0.012)
and stabilized to 32.1 after 6 cycles. Variables that were
significantly altered by chemotherapy in the overall population were:
decreased Hb levels (p=0.004), decreased Hbsat at rest (p=0.031),
decreased free carnitine (p=0.007) and increased ABF (p=0.017). A
non-parametric correlation (Spearman test) found a significant
correlation of FACT-F only with pO2 (p=0.017) and Hbsat (p=0.004). One
patient had a baseline pO2 extraction deficit and 1/16 patient
acquired a pO2 extraction deficit, indicating mitochondrial
dysfunction. In individual patients development of fatigue could be
correlated to one or more of the variables teste.D

Discussion: This is the first
prospective study to demonstrate a clinically significant decline in
the fatigue subscale under adjuvant anthracycline-based chemotherapy
in EBC. Chemotherapy not only induces anemia, but also decreases
Hbsat, increases ABF and decreases free carnitine levels. In
individual patients, several factors including anemia, carnitine
depletion and mitochondrial dysfunction contribute to chemotherapy
induced fatigue.

## 2063

## Chemotherapy-induced amenorrhea (CIA) in patients treated with
adjuvant CEF/CMF or EC/docetaxel: analysis from a phase III randomized
EC/Doc Trial.

## Samuelkutty S, Gluz O, Mohrmann S, Hille S, Zwiefel K, Schuett
G, Nitz U. University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany
Background: About 25% – 30% of breast cancers occur in
premenopausal women. Amenorrhea and infertility correlate with therapy
duration and use of specific compounds. For the very young patient
they may represent an important factor for selection of a specific
chemotherapy regimen. We compared the effect of a sequential taxane
based regimen to standard 6 cycles of CEF/CMF on menstrual
function.
Methods: We retrospectively sent questionnaires to premenopausal
women randomised from 3/2000 to 7/2003 to a phase III trial comparing
6 cycles of
C500E100F500
q3w or
C600M40F600
d 1 and 8 q4w versus 4 cycles
E90C600 q3w followed
by 4 cycles of Docetaxel100 q3w. A minimum
follow-up of 18 months was required. CIA was defined as permanent
cessation of menses during and/or after chemotherapy. Baseline and
treatment relevant data were available for all patients.
Results: 209 from 340 eligible patients completed the survey. In
our analysis 106 patients received EC/Doc, 103 received CEF/ CMF (only
a minority of centres choose the CMF regime). Rates of permanent CIA
were 64% in the EC/Doc arm and 61% in CEF/ CMF arm (p=0,316).38
patients in the taxane containing arm and 36 patients in the CEF/CMF
arm were younger than 40 years. In this subgroup 5 (5/38) patients in
EC/Doc arm and 21/36 patients in the standard arm had no CIA
(p<0,001) directly after completion of chemotherapy. 3 patients who
received EC/Doc and 10 patients who received CEF without CIA
subsequently got GnRH analogues. Altogether in this subgroup 17
patients in the EC/Doc arm (45%) and 8 patients in the CEF/CMF arm
(22%) had permanent CIA (p=0,051). Women older than 40 years (135
patients) had a high likelihood of experiencing permanent CIA with
both ECDoc (81%) and with the CEF/CMF (82%).
Conclusions: Sequential docetaxel after 4 x EC seems to increase
the risk of CIA in patients <40 compared to a standard regimen like
CEF. This should be carefully considered for family planning, planning
of endocrine oncologic therapy and contraception in this age group.
The potential survival benefit should be carefully outweighted versus
the toxicity profile individually. Impact of dose-intesity will be
furtherly evaluated in larger sample sizes.

## 2064

## The development of a prediction tool for chemotherapyinduced anemia
in breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy.

## Dranitsaris G, Clemons M, Verma S, Vincent M. Toronto Sunnybrook
Regional Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada; London Regional Cancer
Centre, London, ON, Canada

Background: Anemia remains a common
complication in breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant
chemotherapy. Many oncologists acknowledge that anemia is
unpredictable and usually act on a low hemoglobin value once the
patient is clinically anemic (i.e. reactively). It is possible that
patient care could substantially be improved if the occurrence of
severe anemia could be accurately predicted through the use of
validated mathematical models. In this study, the development and
validation of a prediction model for grade III/IV anemia is
describe.D

Methods: The medical records of 331
patients who had received adjuvant breast cancer chemotherapy were
reviewed. Clinical and biochemistry data that could potentially be
associated with anemia were collected. The patient sample was then
randomly divided into a 2/3 model derivation and 1/3 validation
sample. Multivariable logistic regression techniques were applied to
develop the initial model. A risk scoring system based on the
regression parameters was then created ranging from 0 to 50. As a
final step, a operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis was
undertaken to measure the predictive accuracy of the scoring system
when applied to the validation sample.

Results: Precycle hemoglobin,
platelets ≤ 200 (103/mm), cycle number,
patient age, type of adjuvant chemotherapy and the use of prophylactic
antibiotics were identified as being important predictors for grade
III/IV anemia. The ROC analysis on the validation dataset had an area
under the curve of 0.88 (95%CI: 0.86 – 0.91). An overall risk score of
≥ 24 for a given patient was identified as being the optimal cut off
to maximize both the sensitivity (83.5%) and specificity (92.3%) of
the prediction tool. Patients with a score of ≥ 24 would be considered
at high risk for developing grade III/IV anemia following a particular
cycle of chemotherapy.

Discussion: This study outlines the
development of an accurate anemia prediction tool for breast cancer
patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy. The application and the
planned continued refinement of this prediction tool will be an
important source of patient specific risk information for the
practicing oncologist and can enhance patient care by utilizing anemia
therapies earlier in a proactive manner.

## 2065

## Long-term follow-up of sequential dose-dense chemotherapy with
epirubicin (E), paclitaxel (T) and cyclophosphamide (C) (ETC) in breast
cancer patients with 4–9 positive nodes: final results of a phase I/II
study.

## Moebus V, Hauser N, Kurbacher C, Lueck HJ, Thomssen C, Nitz U,
Kreienberg R, Untch M. Staedtisches Klinikum, Frankfurt/M., Germany;
University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany; Onkologische Praxis, Koeln, Germany;
Medizinische Hochschule, Hannover, Germany; University of Halle,
Halle, Germany; University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany;
University of Grosshadern, Muenchen, Germany

Background: Dose-dense chemotherapy
has become a new treatment option in breast cancer patients (pts) (INT
C9741, ETC-trial). Long-term survival and toxicity data of the two
phase- III trials are pending. We report the final results of the
foregoing ETC phase I/II study with a median follow-up of 6,5 
years.

Methods: A multicenter phase I/II
pilot study was conducted in Germany between 12/96 and 12/98. 102 pts
with 4–9 positive lymph nodes were recruited, median age was 50 years.
Pts received three courses each of epirubicin (120–150 mg/m2),
paclitaxel (200-250 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (2.000–3.000 mg/m2) at
seven different dose levels. Cycles were given at 2 weeks interval
with G-CSF support (5 microgram/kg/SC day 3–10).

Results: The median number of
positive nodes was 6. 90% of pts received all nine cycles. No cardiac
toxicity was reporte.D Hematological toxicity was highest during
treatment with cyclophosphamide and modest during treatment with
paclitaxel. Grade III/IV neutropenia occured in 22,6% of epirubicin
cycles, only in 1,7% of paclitaxel cycles and in 51,8% of
cyclophosphamide cycles. 16 cases (16,7%) of febrile neutropenia were
reported. Only one patient required platelets transfusion, but 26,4%
of pts required RBC’s. Dose-limiting non-hematological toxicity (grade
III neurotoxicity) was observed with paclitaxel (250 mg/m2) in 7/27
evaluable pts (25,9%). One patient experienced acute myelogenous
leukemia. With a median followup of 6,5 years, disease-free survival
is 73% and overall survival is 79%.

Conclusions: The final results of the
ETC phase I/II trial confirm the acceptable long-term toxicity of this
regimen. DFS and OS show very promising data in this high-risk group
of pts. The results of the long-term follow-up (6,5 yrs) correspond
with the preliminary results of the ETC phase-III trial which was
reported 2004.

## 2066

## A feasibility study of docetaxel in combination with anthracycline
and cyclophosphamide or docetaxel followed by anthracycline plus
cyclophosphamide in adjuvant therapy for operable breast cancer with
positive axillary lymph nodes: CHN TAX 619.

## Shen ZZ, Liu GY, Shao ZM, Wang SM, Zhang B, Jiang ZF, He PQ.
Cancer Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; No.2 Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen Medical Univesity, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
China; Liaoning Province Cancer Hospital, Shenyang, Liaoning, China;
Beijing 307 Hospital, Beijing, China; Shanghai No.6 Hospital,
Shanghai, China

Background: Anthracycline based
regimens followed by a taxane (CALGB-9344 trial and NSABP-B28) or
reversed (MD Anderson Adjuvant Trial) has already accepted as adjuvant
therapy for node positive breast cancer. Also in this group of
patients, data from BCIRG-001 trial had shown that 6 cycles of
adjuvant TAC (docetaxel, doxorubicin and cylophosphamide) is superior
to standard FAC (5-FU, doxorubicin and cylophosphamide) in terms of
both disease free and overall survival, while associated with a higher
rate of febrile neutropenia. Then question arose whether it is better
to use docetaxel and anthracycline in combination or sequence.

Material and Methods:In this
national wide study, 860 women with node positive operable breast
cancer from 34 centers were designed to randomize to 6 cycles of
adjuvant TAC (Taxotere®
75mg/m2, doxorubicin
50 mg/m2 or epirubicin
60 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide
500 mg/m2), and 4 cycles of
T(100 mg/m2), followed by 4 cycles of
AC(doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 or epirubicin
75 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide
600 mg/m2). Prophylaxis with GCSF was
allowed when febrile neutropenia occurred in the first cycle of the
study treatment. The second endpoint of this study is disease free
survival. The primary objective is to compare the safety profiles of
the two arms. The study started in July 2003 and patient recruitment
is still ongoing.

Results: Up to May 2005, 470
eligible patients were enrolled in the study. 124 women in TAC arm and
107 in T to AC arm completed there study treatment and were optimal
for safety analysis. As was expected, the incidence of febrile
neutropenia, on a per-patient basis was 15.6%, and was not different
between two arms (16.1% in TAC and 15.0% in T to AC). No significant
difference in other common toxicities was found between two groups
(see Table1).

Conclusions: Although the efficacy
data of this study is too immature to report, the safety profile
showed no difference between TAC and T to AC in designed dosages
 .

## 2067

## Does switching to letrozole improve hot flushes, mood and quality
of life in tamoxifen intolerant patients?

## Thomas RJ, Marshall CJ, Williams M, Walker LG. Bedford &
Addenbrookes Cambridge University NHS Trust, Bedford, United Kingdom;
University of Hull, Cranfield University, United Kingdom

Background: Over a third of patients
on adjuvant tamoxifen suffer distressing side effects, particularly
hot flushes. The IES, MA17 and ATAC studies showed no overall
difference in quality of life between tamoxifen (T) and aromatase
inhibitors (AI). However, a comparison of T and an AI in a tamoxifen
“intolerant” subgroup has not been reported previously.

Methods: 104 post-menopausal women
participated in a longitudinal, open-label, prospective, crossover
study. Eligible patients were taking T and were experiencing
significant hot flushes. A one-week hot flushes diary (HFD), The
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy (Breast with Endocrine Symptom
add-ons; FACT-es) and the Mood Rating Scale (MRS) were completed at
day 0, and again following six weeks of letrozole (L). The women were
then prescribed T or L based on these data and a patient preference
questionnaire (PPQ). The primary end point, hot flush score (HFS intensity × number as assessed by
the HFD) at 6 weeks, was powered to detect a difference of 12.5 (alpha
[2-tailed]=0.05). A likely 25% placebo effect was predetermined, based
on previous blinded placebo controlled trials. A further arthralgia
and PPQ were completed at 3 months.

Findings: The HFS decreased by 53.7%
from 97.0, following 6 wks letrozole, to 52.1 (p=0.001). This was even
lower in those who chose letrozole (p=0.0001). The mean MRS improved
from 47.7 to 52.8 cm (p=0.004). The total mean FACT-es score improved
from 132.7 to 142.1 (p=0.001), the endocrine subscale from 50.65 to
56.34 (p=0.01) with all other subscales also reaching statistical
significance. The arthralgia rate associated with the two treatments
at 3 months was mild (T 39%, L 24%), moderate (T15%, L34%) and severe
(T0%, L7%); arthralgia influenced a further 5 patients to go back to T
at 3 months. So far, 66% have preferred to remain on L, 24% preferred
to go back to T and 10% have stopped all therapy. All patients said
they appreciated the opportunity to experience both drugs and to
choose for themselves. Only 1 of 105 (1%) eligible patients declined
trial entry, ensuring this cohort reflected routine oncology practice.
33% of patients had read negative or positive media reports on AI’s
before or during the trial, and 8% (all in the group reporting minimal
differences between L & T) recorded that this could have
influenced their choice, but not their toxicity reporting.

Discussion: It is emphasized that
this trial cohort evaluated patients intolerant of adjuvant T. In this
group, switching to L was associated with a significant reduction in
hot flushes, an improvement in Qol and mood. Although the benefit in
hot flushes was over which could have been anticipated by placebo
within an open design, a causal effect needs to be confirmed by a
blinded, randomised trial of T and L. Furthermore, it would be
interesting to confirm this effect with other AI’s. Patients
appreciated the opportunity to make a trade off between hot flushes
and arthralgia.

## 2068

## Five years use of aromatase inhibitors (Ais) in the clinical
practice. Results from the NORA Study.

## Cazzaniga ME, Mustacchi G, Pronzato P, Di Costanzo F, De Matteis
A, Porcu L. Treviglio Hospital, Treviglio, BG, Italy; University of
Trieste, Trieste, TS, Italy; La Spezia Hospital, Le Spezia, SP, Italy;
Careggi Hospital, Firenze, FL, Italy; Pascale Institute, Napoli, NA,
Italy; Mario Negri Hospital, Milano, MI, Italy
NORA is an observational study aimed at investigating adjuvant
strategies in 3500 breast cancer (BC) patients (pts) radically treated
with surgery in 77 Oncological Centres.
We analysed the use of AIs during the last 5 years according to
tumour stage, age and with respect to the availability of first
results of the ATAC trial presented in St Gallen in 2003.
Considering the whole population, 80% pf the pts has received TAM,
both alone or in combination with chemotherapy (CHT). According to
ECOG stage, the use of AIs increases with the increase of the stage
starting from 6.5% and 8.1% in Stage I pts (HT and CHT+HT,
respectively), till to 40% in Stage IIIA pts. In advanced stages, AIs
are mainly chosen as HT alone instead of in combination with CHT
(21.6% vs 7.7% in Stage IIA and 21.4% vs 7.6% in Stage IIB). In pts
older than 65 years, AIs are mainly administered in combination with
CHT in those pts aged 66–75, whereas in pts older than 75 AIs are
mostly used as HT alone (18.9%).
According to the first results of the ATAC trial presented in St
Gallen in 2003, the use of AIs as HT alone changed from 9.4% in the
years 2000–2002 to 18.4% in the years 2003–2004, whereas the
administration of AIs did not significantly changed when used in
combination with CHT (9% vs 10.8%).
In conclusion, according to ECOG stage, the use of AIs increases
with the increase of the stage, but only when hormones are
administered alone. According to pts age, we observed an increase in
the use of AIs mainly in very old pts (> 75 years) and in
association with CHT. According to St Gallen 2003 guidelines, we
observed as well an increase in the use of AIs, mostly as HT
alone.

## 2069

## Prolonged dose-dense (DD) epirubicin and cyclophosphamide (EC)
followed by paclitaxel (T) in breast cancer (BCA) is feasible.

## Dang C, Smith K, Lake D, Fornier M, D’Andrea G, Seidman A,
Sklarin N, Troso-Sandoval T, Sugarman S, Gilewski T, Robson M,
Drullinsky P, Moynahan M, George R, VanPoznak C, Panageas K, Smith M,
Norton L, Hudis C. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY

Background: To develop a potentially
superior adjuvant chemotherapy regimen (Rx) using a prolonged
anthracycline → taxane, we conducted a pilot study of DD q 2 weekly
(w) EC × 6 → T × 6 with pegfilgrastim. A prior DD trial of a prolonged
anthracycline-taxane Rx using q 2 w FEC (5-fluorouracil + EC) with
filgrastim × 6 → q w T alternating with docetaxel × 18 was not
feasible because 9% patients (pts) experienced chemical pneumonitis
during the FEC phase and 12% developed grade (G) 3/4
pericardial/pleural effusions during the taxane phase (Dang et al,
Clin Cancer Res 10:5754–5761, 2004). The chemical pneumonitis was felt
to be attributable to an interaction of the FEC combination, q 2 w
dosing, and/or filgrastim. Furthermore, studies of DD q 2 w EC
(without the F) have not reported pneumonitis.DD T q 2 w is feasible
(Citron et al, J Clin Oncol 21: 1431–1439, 2003). Thus, in this study
we chose q 2 w EC × 6 → T × 6. The primary objective was to determine
feasibility of this Rx.

Methods: Pts withBCA were enrolled,
regardless of tumor size or nodal status, and received Rx adjuvantly
or neoadjuvantly. Rx consisted of q 2 w EC at
100/600 mg/m2× 6→ T at
175 mg/m2×6 with pegfilgrastim 6 mg on
day 2. If pts received Rx neoadjuvantly, all chemotherapy agents were
given before surgery.

Results: Between November 24, 2004
and May 9, 2005, 38 pts were enrolled. Median age was 46 years (range
30–72); 33 pts received Rx adjuvantly and 5 neoadjuvantly. Of these 33
pts, the median tumor size was 2.2 cm (range, 0.2–8.5 cm); 29/33 (88%)
were node (+) with the median number of + nodes of 6 (range, 1–46),
and 4/33 (12%) were node (−). As of May 31, 2005, 24/38 pts have
completed the EC phase. Of these 24 pts, one completed only EC x 5 due
to G 3 fatigue and proceeded to receive T, and one completed only EC ×
4 and withdrew consent for personal reasons. 8/38 pts have completed
the T phase; one completed only T × 4 due to G 3 nail changes and
withdrew consent. As of May 31, 2005, 4/38 (11%) pts experienced G 3
febrile neutropenia (FN); 3 of these pts had 2 episodes of FN each.
All FN events were during the EC phase resulting in
protocol-stipulated EC dose reductions in these 4 pts. Of the 24 pts
who completed the EC phase, other G 3/4 toxicities were leukopenia (4
pts), neutropenia (4 pts), anemia (1 pt), thrombocytopenia (1 pt),
fatigue (3 pts), and G 3 headache (1 pt). Of the 8 pts who have
completed the T phase, G 3/4 toxicities were nail changes (1 pt) and
sensory neuropathy (1 pt).

Conclusion: Updated assessments will
be reported. DD q 2 w EC × 6 → T × 6 with pegfilgrastim appears to be
feasible and should be compared to other standard Rxs.

## 2070

## Epirubicin, paclitaxel and CMF as adjuvant treatment in node
positive patients with operable breast cancer. Safety analysis of a
randomized phase III study comparing two dose-dense sequential
regimens.

## Fountzilas G, Gogas H, Papadimitriou CH, Kalofonos HP,
Tsavdaridis D, Christodoulou CH, Briasoulis E, Bafaloukos D, Karina M,
Markopoulos CH, Pectasides D, Karapanagiotis K, Papakostas P,
Aravantinos G, Kosmidis P, Stathopoulos GP, Dimopoulos AM. Data
Office, Athens, Greece

Background: Dose-dense sequential
adjuvant chemotherapy (CT) has been proven to be a very effective
treatment for high-risk patients with operable breast cancer. However,
the optimal doseschedule and sequence of the active drugs have not
been clearly defined. The primary endpoint of the present study was to
compare the disease-free survival of node-positive breast cancer
patients treated with two different dose-dense regimens. By study
design, duration of CT and cumulative doses of all drugs were
indentical in both groups, even though dose intensities (DIs) of
epirubicin (E) and paclitaxel (P) were double in group A.

Patients and Methods: From March 2000
until May 2005, 1059 eligible patients entered the study. Patients in
group A (N=538) were treated with 3 cycles of E
110 mg/m2, followed dy 3  cycles of P
250  mg/m2 over 3-hours, followed by
3 cycles of intensified CMF (840 mg/m2;
57 mg/m2;
840 mg/m2) (E-T-CMF). All cycles were
given every 2 weeks with G-CSF support. Patients randomized to group B
(N=521) were treated with 4  cycles of E
83 mg/m2 and P 187 
mg/m2 every 3 weeks, followed by
3 cycles of CMF every 2 weeks, (ET-CMF). Radiation therapy and
appropriate hormonal treatment were administered after the completion
of chemotherapy.

Results: As of May 2005, 978 (92%)
patients (497 in group A vs 481 in group B) had completed CT and 73
(7%) were still on treatment (38 vs 35). Eight patients (1%) had never
started chemotherapy (3 vs 5). A total of 7,473 (4,211 vs 3,262)
cycles were delivered. Median relative DI (RDI) of E was 0.98 in both
groups and that of P 0.97 and 0.98 in group A and B, respectively.
Median RDI of CMF was 0.97 in both groups. Most frequently seen grade
III-IV side effects included neutropenia (25% vs 23%, p=0.5),
leukopenia (12% in each group) and febrile neutropenia (4% vs 6%,
p=0.2). Severe hypersensitivity reactions (HSR) and peripheral
neuropathy were significantly more profound in group A, as expected,
due to the higher dose of P. There was one toxic death in group A.
Updated results on the safety of both treatments will be presented at
the meeting.

Conclusions: Safety analysis of the
present study demonstrated that both regimens were well tolerated and
planned DIs of all drugs were maintained at satisfactory levels.
Toxicity was manageable. Severe neutropenia, HSR and peripheral
neuropathy were the most frequently reported side effects.

## 2071

## Adjuvant dose-dense (3 FEC 100 followed by 3 docetaxel every
2 weeks) regimen is not feasible. Results of the FNCLCC-PACS 06
Study.

## Fumoleau P, Brain E, Delozier T, Asselain B, Serin D, Roché H,
Spielmann M, Genéve J, Jimenez M, Bonnetain F. Centre GF Leclerc,
Dijon, France; Centre R Huguenin, St-Cloud, France; Centre F Baclesse,
Caen, France; Inst. Curie, Paris, France; Inst. Ste-Catherine,
Avignon, France; Inst. C Régaud, Toulouse, France; Inst. G Roussy,
Villejuif, France; FNCLCC, Paris, France

Background: Administration of
cytotoxic courses every 2 weeks (q2w) so called dose-dense therapy
could be one of the ways to improve efficacy in node positive (N+)
breast cancer. In this setting, our group demonstrated the benefit of
3 FEC 100 followed by 3 docetaxel q3w (FNCLCC-PACS 01 results, SABCS
2004). Prior to initiating a large phase III study, we decided to
conduct a randomised phase II trial designed to assess the feasibility
of a sequential administration of FEC100 and docetaxel in a dosedense
regimen in N+ non metastatic breast cancer.

Methods: PACS 06 compares FEC 100
[5-FU 500 mg/m2, epirubicin
100 mg/m2, cyclophosphamide
500 mg/m2] × 3 cycles every 2 weeks
followed by docetaxel 100 mg/m2× 3 cycles
every 2 weeks, in association with G-CSF day 3–10, with a 2-week (arm
A) versus a 4-week (arm B) interval between FEC and docetaxel. The
primary endpoint was to define the rate of patients with any toxicity
(DLT) requiring dose reduction or treatment delay by more than one
week over the 6 courses. These toxicities were defined as 1/ on the
planned day of treatment administration: haematological /
non-haematological grade ≥ 2 (except nausea/ vomiting and alopecia),
2/ worst toxicity occurrence at any time: febrile neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia grade 4, nonhaematological grade ≥ 3 (except
nausea/vomiting and alopecia). An interim analysis was planned after
the enrolment of 30 patients in each arm. If 8 (27%) or more DLT’s as
defined above reported, the patient recruitment should be stopped in
this arm.

Results: As of May, 2005, 74 patients
were included (37 in each arm). In arm A, 14 DLT’s (38%) were
reported, skin / hand-foot syndrome grade 4: 2 pts, grade 3: 11 pts,
asthenia grade 3: 1 pt. The skin / hand-foot syndrome grade 3/4
toxicities were all seen during the q2w docetaxel part of this
sequential regimen. In arm B, 3 DLT’s (8%) were reported as skin /
hand-foot syndrome grade 3 seen during docetaxel treatment. Using
G-CSF, only 2 haematological toxicities, both grade 4, were reported
in arm B. 23 and 19 patients received at least one cycle of docetaxel
in arm A and B respectively. Due to the high incidence of severe skin
toxicities, the patient recruitment was stopped in the arm A.

Conclusion: FEC 100 × 3 cycles every
2 weeks followed by docetaxel 100 mg/m2×
3 cycles every 2 weeks, with a 2-week interval between FEC and
docetaxel is not feasible due to an excess of skin / hand-foot
syndrome severe toxicities. Updated results will be presente.D
This trial was supported by Sanofi-Aventis, Amgen and the National
League Against Cancer.

## 2072

## Benchmarking the quality of adjuvant systemic therapy for breast
cancer using multicenter data systems and practice guidelines: strengths
and limitations.

## James TA, Watroba N, Kulkarni S, Francavilla B, Edge SB.
RoswellPark Cancer Institute; University at Buffalo, Buffalo,
NY

Background: Improving the quality of
cancer care has become a national priority. Variation in the quality
of breast cancer (BC) care causes unnecessary suffering and death.
Measures of quality must be relevant, rigorous, fair, and reliable.
Practice guidelines may be a good source for quality measures. The
objective of this study was to determine the accuracy of practice
guideline quality measures in defining the quality of BC adjuvant
systemic therapy (AST) when applied in a rigorous multicenter outcomes
database.

Methods: All patients treated at
Roswell Park Cancer Institute have data entered into the BC Outcomes
Database of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN). The NCCN
performs central analysis of the care as recorded in the database
compared with the treatment recommended in the relevant NCCN
guideline. Care is reported for each patient as concordant or
non-concordant (NC). The medical records of patients with invasive
cancer > 1 cm for who AST was coded as NC were reviewed and each
instance of NC care classified as: Error in data entry or in coding the NCCN concordance
algorithm,
Patient declined concordant therapy,
Physician advised against concordant therapy, or
Major deviation from guidelines.

Results: There were 413 women with
tumors > 1 cm. The NCCN database algorithm identified care
concordant NCCN guidelines for AST in 85%. Among the 63 coded as NC,
the medical record review documented clear justification for NC care
in all but 1% of cases. A)Errors in data entry or coding the concordance
algorithm – 20 (5%). Care was concordant using the
corrected data. This left 43 (10%) cases with true NC
care.
B)Patients declined therapy – 22 (5%). 7 declined
tamoxifen and 15 declined chemotherapy (8 of these
received tamoxifen only and 7 no therapy).
C)Physician advised against the guideline concordant care
– 16 (4%). 12 / 16 women were over age 70 and the
physician documented co-existing illness that precluded
chemotherapy. 2 women under age 70 had serious
co-morbidity precluding chemotherapy, and 2 had
thromboembolic disease justifying omission of
tamoxifen.
D)Major guideline deviations – 5 (1%). 2 women with
receptor negative cancer did not receive chemotherapy and
were not referred to medical oncology. 2 women with
receptor positive cancer did not receive tamoxifen after
chemotherapy. One woman had surgery before AST instead of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy for Stage IIIB cancer.

Conclusions: Quality measures derived
from practice guidelines applied to a multicenter database are useful
for broad quality assessment and institutional quality improvement.
However, accounting for all factors that justify NC is difficult in
even the most rigorous data collection program. Therefore
benchmarkings and comparisons between physicians and institutions
based on concordance with guidelines using multi-center data systems
must be interpreted with caution.

## 2073

## Pilot study of dose dense doxorubicin + cyclophosphamide followed
by ABI-007 in patients with early stage breast cancer.

## Robert N, Ambro S, Krekow L, Stokoe C, Bhar P, Hawkins MJ,
O’Shaughnessy J. U.S. Oncology Research Network, Houston, TX; American
BioScience, Inc., Santa Monica, CA
ABI-007 (AbraxaneTM) is an albumin-bound
particle form of paclitaxel that has recently been shown to increase
the response rate and time to tumor progression in women with
metastatic breast cancer compared to Cremophor-based paclitaxel
(Gradishar, JCO 2005, in press). We are conducting a pilot study to
confirm the tolerability of dose dense AC q2wks × 4 cycles followed by
dose dense ABI-007 260 mg/m2 q2wks ×
4 cycles prior to conducting a definitive comparison of AC followed by
either ABI-007 or Cremophor-based paclitaxel as adjuvant therapy for
early stage breast cancer. Pegfilgastrim support was routinely used
during AC chemotherapy but was to be used with ABI-007 only if cycles
were delayed due to persistent neutropenia. From 3/10/05 to 5/05/05,
thirty patients with early stage (T1-3, N1-2, M0) breast cancer were
entered onto the study. The accrued patients are now completing
doxorubicin + cyclophosphamide (AC) chemotherapy and are starting
ABI-007. To date 3 of 4 patients have received their 2nd cycle of
ABI-007 without a treatment delay or pegfilgastrim support. Toxicity
data for all cycles of AC and ABI- 007 will be presented for all
patients.

## 2074

## Late adriamycin-related cardiotoxicity of dose-dense and - intense
sequential doxorubicin (A), paclitaxel (T) and cyclophosphamide (C) as
adjuvant therapy for high risk breast cancer.

## Abu-Khalaf M, Juneja V, Chung G, DiGiovanna M, Wackers F, Lee F,
Burtness B. Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT

Background: Anthracycline
cardiomyopathy has been reported to occur 5 or more years after
completion of therapy, even in patients who had no evidence of cardiac
dysfunction during therapy or the year thereafter. We wished to
evaluate the incidence of late doxorubicin-related cardiotoxicity
after dose-dense and -intense sequential doxorubicin (A), paclitaxel
(T) and cyclophosphamide (C) as adjuvant therapy for breast cancer
with = 4 involved axillary nodes.

Patients and Methods: Patients were
enrolled between March 1994 and April 2001 after definitive breast
cancer surgery if = 4 involved axillary nodes and if distant
metastases were not present on CT scan or bone scan. Planned treatment
was A 90 mg/m2 q 14d × 3, T
250 mg/m2 q 14 d × 3, C 3 gm/m2 q 14 d ×
3 with filgrastim (G) support. Left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) was monitored using equilibrium radionuclide angiography (ERNA)
at baseline before the initiation of chemotherapy, and after 3 cycles
of each chemotherapeutic agent. At this time, we are obtaining ERNA
scans on this group of patients to evaluate the long- term
cardiotoxicity of this regimen.

Results: Eighty five eligible
patients were enrolled, and the median delivered dose intensity was
> 94% for all 3 chemotherapeutic agents. Clinical heart failure
developed in one patient, and the median change in LVEF between pre-
and post-treatment ERNA scan was (− 3.5%); [range (−28) – (+14)].
Seven (8%) patients had LVEF < 50% at the end of therapy. One
patient required medical therapy for congestive heart failure, but no
cardiac-related deathswere noted. Fifteen (22%) of the 69 surviving
patients have consented to late cardiac imaging. At a median follow-up
of 7 years, the mean absolute change in LVEF from baseline was (−
5.8%); [range (−25) – (+8)], with a decrease of > 10% occurring in
6 (40%) of the 15 patients. The mean absolute change in LVEF from the
end of chemotherapy was (−0.8%); [range (− 17) – (+14)], with a
decrease >10% occurring in only one (7%) of the 15 patients. Only
one patient had a LVEF <50%, but without a history of cardiac
symptoms. This patient’s LVEF decreased 18% from baseline at the end
of chemotherapy, and an additional 7% (total 25%) since the completion
of chemotherapy at a 5.5 years follow-up.

Discussion: Significant decline in
cardiac function compared to the post-treatment evaluation is
uncommon. Enrollment of intensively treated patients continues.

## 2075

## A prospective assessment of variables contributing to reduced
relative dose intensity in patients with early-stage breast cancer
receiving adjuvant chemotherapy.

## Shayne M, Culakova E, Wolff D, Poniewierski M, Lyman GH, Dale
DC, Crawford J. University of Rochester, Rochester, NY; University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA; Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC

Background: Clinical outcomes in
early stage breast cancer are dependant, in part, on the dose
intensity of adjuvant chemotherapy. Retrospective studies have
demonstrated that upwards of 56% of patients receive RDI < 85%. We
present here recent results on women treated with adjuvant
chemotherapy for ESBC from a nationwide prospective registry
study.

Methods: A prospective study of 115
community oncology practices was undertaken between March 2002 and the
present. Data through August 2004 on 622 consecutive patients with
ESBC receiving the six most common chemotherapy regimens were
analyzed. The primary endpoint of the study was the delivered RDI
calculated for each drug and averaged for each regimen. Primary
prophylaxis with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) was
defined as administration prior to neutropenia in the first cycle of
chemotherapy. RDI comparisons between subgroups were based on the
Wilcoxon rank-sum test.

Results: The mean age of the study
population was 53 years, with 15% of patients ≥ 65 years old at
diagnosis. The average RDI for all regimens across the first four
cycles of treatment was 94.2%, with 14% of patients receiving < 85%
of standard dose intensity. Two thirds of the reduced RDI was planned
from the start of therapy and one third was unplanned. RDI < 85%
was more common in patients with multiple comorbidities (P trend =
.067) and with increasing age (P trend = .015) primarily due to the
greater planned dose reductions. Significant differences in delivered
RDI across chemotherapy regimens were observed (P=.0022). An RDI <
85% was most frequently observed with
docetaxel/doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (TAC) (27%), yet only 7% of
patients on this regimen received prophylactic G-CSF. Alternatively,
only 2% of patients on Q14 day doxorubicin/
cyclophosphamide/paciltaxel (ACT) with G-CSF support received RDI <
85%. While half of the patients received G-CSF at some point during
their therapy, only 9% received primary prophylaxis with G-CSF. The
average RDI was significantly higher in patients who received
prophylactic G-CSF starting in cycle 1 compared with those who did not
(P< 0.001). Discussion: Compared
with previous retrospective reports, this ongoing prospective registry
study demonstrates a lower frequency of planned and unplanned
reductions in RDI over the first four cycles. The average RDI was
significantly higher in patients who received prophylactic G-CSF.
Significant reductions in RDI were observed with multiple
comorbidities, increasing age and TAC chemotherapy. In addition to
supporting dose dense regimens, primary prophylaxis with a CSF may
improve the delivery of full dose intensity conventional chemotherapy
in women with ESBC.

## 2076

## Initial phase II results from 3 dose dense docetaxel pilots in
early stage breast cancer.

## Yardley DA, Spigel DR, Barton JH, Peacock NW, Shipley DL,
Raefsky E, Burris HA. Sarah Cannon Research Institute/Tennessee
Oncology, Nashville, TN

Background: Administration of q2 week
taxanes and anthracyclines/ cyclophosphamide has demonstrated
feasibility, curtailing the duration of adjuvant breast cancer
therapy. Three phase II pilots were performed to identify the optimal
dose dense docetaxel (D)→doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (AC) as a
planned arm for a phase III adjuvant trial. To avoid the skin toxicity
reported for D immediately following anthracyclines, this sequence was
chosen.

Material and Methods: From 3/4/04 to
5/4/05, 73 pts with high risk early stage or locally advanced breast
cancer were enrolled in 3 sequential dose dense pilot studies
evaluating q2 wk D followed by AC with pegfilgrastim (P) support.
Chemotherapy doses in pilot 1 (P1) and 2 (P2) were as follows: D
100 mg/m2× 4→AC
(60/600 mg/m2)× 4 cycles. In pilot 3
(P3), D was decreased to 75 mg/m2. In P1
only, P was administered the same day of chemotherapy. Based on
reports of increased myelosuppression with day 1 P, P was subsequently
administered on day 2 for P2 & P3. Given the G3 arthralgias as
well as the lack of myelosuppression noted with P during dose dense D
in P1, P was reduced to 3 mg only
with D in P2 & P3. Dexamethasone was begun the evening before D as
follows: P1: 8 mg po q12 × 5, P2: 4 mg po q12 × 3, and P3: 8 mg q12 ×
3 doses.

Results: 73 pts were enrolled: P1-33,
P2-20, & P3-20 pts. Median age 52 (range 30–78). Tumors: T1-24,
T2- 35, T3-11, T4-3 pts. 7 pts were treated neoadjuvantly. P1 & P2
toxicities are presented. Treatment was discontinued in 6 P1 pts
(intercurrent illness-2, poor compliance-2, toxicity-2 pts) and in 3
P2 pts due to toxicity. There were no toxic deaths & 8 pts
required D dose reductions. With q2 wk D, nonhematologic toxicities
were remarkable for G3 arthralgias (P1-7 pts) with none noted in P2
corresponding to changes in P dose and schedule. 4 P2 pts demonstrated
G3 cutaneous toxicity compared to 1 P1 pt, perhaps attributable to
reduced steroids in P2. G3/4 hyperlacrimation (P1-2, P2-2), G3 nail
changes (P1-2, P2-1) and G3 fatigue (P1-2, P2-1) did not differ
between P1 & P2. With AC, G3/4 fatigue was noted in 6 P1 and 1 P2
pts. AC associated G3/4 neutropenia was prominent in P1 with
G3-11/G4-18 pts however, day 2 P dosing in P2 resulted in a nearly 50%
reduction in G3/4 neutropenia (6/12 pts) yet the rate of FN did not
change (P1-3, P2-5pts). With D, only 1 P1 pt experienced
neutropenia.

Conclusion: In spite of the taxane
sequence with q2 week D 100 mg/m2→
AC in this pilot, cutaneous
toxicity was still evident and perhaps exacerbated by reduced steroids
in P2. Same day P was not associated with enhanced D mediated
myelosuppression however, prominent G3/4 marrow suppression
characterized day 1 P administration with AC. Despite improved counts
evident with day 2 P dosing with AC, this did not translate into a
lower incidence of FN. Reduced dose P is feasible with dose dense D,
resulting in continued amelioration of docetaxel’s myelosuppression as
well as G3 arthralgias.

## 2077

## Intra-operative tissue characterization probe as a potential tool
for surgical margin assessment.

## Karni T, El-Ram R, Pappo I, Sandbank J, Lavon O, Maklakovski M,
Evron E, Kent V, Konichezky M, Morgenstern S, Cohen G, Yarden O,
Lelcuk S. Breast Care Institute, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center,
Zerifin, Israel; Beilinson Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel; Dune
Medical Devices, Caesarea, Israel; Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel
Background: The surgical margin status after breast-conserving
surgery is considered the strongest predictor for local failure.
Therefore, a primary goal of breast surgeons is to obtain adequate
negative margins of excision. The capsule-probe study was designed as
a study of a novel electromagnetic tissue characterization modality
developed by Dune Medical Devices. The study assesses the technology’s
potential in providing the surgeon with realtime data on tissue status
at the surgical margins. The measurements were performed ex-vivo on
freshly excised breast tissue.
Methods: Tissue samples were obtained from excised lumpectomy and
mastectomy specimens. Each tissue sample was cylindrically shaped,
with a volume of 0.1 ml. Tissue segments were analyzed using the
capsule-probe, followed by a histological evaluation. Tissue samples
were categorized into well-defined groups of homogenous composition,
cancer and normal. As part of the classification process, tissue
samples were randomly divided into two sub-groups. 35% were used for
the learning group and the rest, 65%, were the classification
group.
Results: From 57 patients, a total of 231 tissue samples were
obtained. From these, 198 (86%) tissue samples qualified for analysis.
In all, 134 (67%) tissue samples contained (75% of a specific tissue
type. The breakdown of these tissue samples according to their
grouping was as follows: Malignant breast tissue 34 (25%), Normal
breast tissue 100 (75%). Classification performance of the capsule
probe was: sensitivity = 0.95 (95% CI: 0.77–0.99) and specificity =
0.94 (95% CI: 0.85–0.98). Classification ability of mixed content
tissue samples exists, however somewhat decreased as composition of
the tissue becomes less homogeneous.
Conclusions: Cancer tissue can be detected by the capsule-probe
with excellent sensitivity and specificity. The new modality has the
potential of providing the necessary accuracy for a real-time margin
assessment tool. The interaction volume in this configuration is a
crucial element of design and should be further optimized for enhanced
surface detection and small malignant cell cluster detection, which
are necessary for real-time intra-operative use.

## 2078

## A novel method for reconstruction of immediate partial mastectomy
defects.

## Spiegel AJ, Khan FN. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
TX

Background: Breast conservation
therapy (BCT) is a viable option for women presenting with early stage
breast cancer. Consisting of a lumpectomy, sentinel lymph node biopsy,
and radiation therapy, BCT offers comparable survival rates to those
obtained with a mastectomy. Unfortunately, although the purported
benefit of BCT is to maintain breast cosmesis, 20–50% of women have
significant residual deformity that worsens with time as radiation
therapy side effects influence the final shape. In a study of 35
patients, Clough et al. reported that 71% of patients undergoing BCT
requested reconstruction, with a mean interval of 27 months between
BCT and reconstructive surgery. Often, however, due to tumor size or
location, post-operative breast distortion can be predicted and
immediate partial reconstruction becomes an option. Immediate partial
reconstructions with the use of implants and flaps (including the
latissimus dorsi and TRAM) have been performed but these methods have
significant disadvantages, primarily due to the use of implants in an
irradiated field or muscle sacrifice. Newer methods of complete breast
reconstruction, including the deep inferior epigastric perforator
(DIEP) or superficial inferior epigastric artery (SIEA) flap,
eliminate the need for muscle sacrifice and offer superior cosmetic
results. This prospective study was undertaken to assess the
feasibility and examine the cosmetic outcome of the use of the DIEP
and SIEA flap for immediate partial breast reconstruction.

Material and Methods: Seven patients
over a 2-year period underwent “immediate” partial breast
reconstruction after negative margins were confirmed on final
pathology approximately 1 week status-post lumpectomy. Two of the
seven (29%) had DIEP flap reconstruction and the remaining five (71%)
underwent reconstruction with a SIEA flap. Mean follow-up was
12 months status-post completion of radiation therapy.

Results: All seven of the flaps were
soft and retained their shape, with no evidence of fat necrosis or
necrosis due to radiation therapy. Four flaps displayed some degree of
hyperpigmentation, with the more severe skin changes occuring in two
flaps that had each received one BOOST treatment.

Discussion: This study indicates that
superior cosmetic results are attainable with the use of the DIEP or
SIEA flap for immediate partial breast reconstruction. The flaps all
remained soft without any change in breast contour. This is in direct
contrast to the severe side effects that are often observed in
patients who undergo radiation therapy after a complete mastectomy and
immediate reconstruction with flap tissue. This is most likely due to
the different dosing of radiation that is applied for BCT versus
mastectomy patients. These findings suggest that this is a novel
reconstructive option for women undergoing BCT.

## 2079

## Measuring quality in breast reconstruction - Liverpool scoring
system.

## Sridharan U, Holcombe C. Linda McCartney Centre, Royal
Liverpool&Broadgreen University Hospital, Liverpool, Cheshire,
United Kingdom
Breast Reconstruction is becoming increasingly common after
mastectomy and is recognised as a mark of quality Oncological care. It
is vital that reconstruction performed is of good quality with minimal
complications. Currently there is no standard tool to evaluate the
quality of Breast reconstruction. We have developed a scoring system
to compare the quality of different reconstruction techniques,
different surgeons and centres.

Aim: The scoring system has been
designed to measure the quality of breast reconstruction by measuring
four independent quality domains – morbidity, economics, cosmesis and
patient satisfaction, which can be combined into a Global score of
quality.

Methods: We reviewed 100 patients who
had reconstruction done by five surgeons and applied the scoring
system. Morbidity score involves risk factors and
complications.
Economics – Measured in terms of operation time, hospital
stay & extra OPD visits
Cosmetic Score – Assessment of photographs by three
independent evaluators
Patient assessment by a simple questionnaire
Total score (Global score) combines all 4 scores.

 

Conclusion: Patient satisfaction does
not always correlate with cosmetic outcome.
Patients who had secondary reconstruction are more satisfied. TRAM
flap reconstruction is better cosmetically in this series. The scoring
system allows comparison between techniques and can be used as a
benchmark in the quality of breast reconstruction.

## 2080

## Withdrawn by Author.

## 2081

## Early results of nipple-areola-sparing subcutaneous mastectomy
(NASSM) with complete resection of the retroareolar ductal system
(RDS).

## Paepke S, Schmidt R, Paepke D, Euler U, Schwarz-Boeger U,
Plattner B, Niemeyer M, Humbert A, Schmalfeldt B, Kiechle M, Jacobs
VR. Technical University of Munich, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Germany

## Background
Skin-sparing or subcutaneous mastectomies (SCM) with immediate
reconstruction are being used more frequently to treat many cases
of breast cancer.
Skin-sparing tumor resection coupled with immediate
reconstruction can optimise cosmesis, but the longterm oncological
safety of these procedures is unclear. Nevertheless, little
consideration has been given to the feasibility of
nipple-areola-sparing SCM using intraoperative frozen-section
assessment of NAC and complete removal of the retroareolar ductal
system (RDS).

## Method and Material
We modified the technique of subcutaneous mastectomy to achieve
a complete resection of RDS.
During performing SCM, frozen section analysis of the tissue
beneath the
nipple-areola-complex was performed, and if there was evidence of
neoplastic involvement, the NAC was resected. In case of free
margins we remove additionally the retroareolar ductal system also
for fresh frozen section to proof the involvement with DCIS or
invasive carcinoma. Aim of the feasibility phase of the study was
to proof the concept, local recurrence rate (LCR) into the first
two years, side effects and cosmesis.
From 06/02 – 04/05 52 NASSM were performed in case of DCIS or
invasive breast cancer with immediate reconstruction as expander-,
implant-, flap or combining techniques.

## Results
A secondary NAC-resection was necessary after final histologic
report in 2/52 (3.8%) cases because of involved RDS. 4 cases had
involved margins beneath the NAC but free retroareolar ductal
system – reason to recommend radiation therapy of the NAC/ breast.
No central local recurrence in the NAC was observed. One patient
(1.9%) suffered a local recurrence in the lateral interquadrantal
area (9 mm, G3) 18 months after the primary local treatment
(without radiation).
Side effects: The complete removal of the RDS with impairment of
blood supply leeds to a partial necrosis of the NAC, but not more
than 20% of the NAS-area. Discomfort exist because of a prolonged
postoperative wound control phase, long duration of re-pigmentation
and re-sensibilisation up to 9 months and irreversible
depigmentation of the nipple and/or areolar complex, partial loss
of sensibility and hypaesthesia.

## Discussion
Our early experience suggests as any other results, that, using
frozen section analysis of NAC during operation, NASSM can be a
reasonable option for selected patients who want immediate
reconstruction of the breast. The additionally performed complete
resection of the RDS is a guarantee for lowering the central local
recurrence with only a low rate of side effects and
discomfort.
Further investigation is necessary for the long-term follow up
regarding the local recurrence rate and patient
satisfaction.

## 2082

## Optimal timing of surgical intervention for the primary tumor in
stage IV breast cancer patients improves outcome.

## Rao R, Feng L, Kuerer HM, Singletary SE, Hunt KK, Feig BW, Ross
MI, Ames FC, Babiera G. University of Texas-MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX

Background: Several recent studies
have demonstrated improved progression-free survival and improved
overall survival with extirpation of the primary tumor in breast
cancer patients who present with metastatic disease at initial
diagnosis. The subset of patients who would most benefit from surgical
intervention remains unclear. The current study evaluates the
pathological attributes and optimum timing for surgical intervention
in patients who presented with stage IV breast cancer and an intact
primary tumor.

Methods: A retrospective,
single-institution review of all breast cancer patients between
1997–2002 presenting with an intact primary breast cancer and
synchronous metastatic disease was undertaken. Baseline information
collected included: demographics, tumor characteristics (histology,
grade, ER/PR, HER-2), site(s) of metastases, type and timing of
surgery, use of radiation therapy, and systemic therapy received. All
patients initiated treatment within 3 months of their diagnosis of
cancer. The timing of surgical intervention was evaluated and patients
were divided into 4 groups based on three month intervals from date of
diagnosis to the date of surgery. Disease progression and vital status
at last follow-up were evaluated. Analysis of metastatic
progression-free survival (defined by progression of systemic disease)
benefit in relation to timing of surgical intervention was
performed.

Results: Multivariate analysis
revealed that patients having only one site of metastasis, negative
surgical margins, and Caucasian race had improved progression-free
survival. Further analysis revealed that non-Caucasian patients more
often underwent surgical intervention for palliation versus surgery
for curative intent, possibly explaining their overall worse outcome.
Patients who underwent surgery in the 6–9 month period after diagnosis
had superior progression-free survival.

Conclusions: Surgical extirpation of
the primary tumor in patients diagnosed with synchronous stage IV
disease is associated with improved progression-free survival when
performed at 6–9 months after diagnosis. Resection should be planned
with the intent of obtaining negative margins. 

## 2083

## A new latissimus dorsi muscle flap technique in oncoplastic surgery
–the Bayreuth modification

## Euler U, Tulusan AH, Paepke S, Plattner B, Jacobs VR, Kiechle M
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Women’s Hospital
Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany

Objective: Oncoplastic surgery
often requires special techniques in order to restitue the parenchymal
defects of the breast. One method is the latissimus dorsi muscle flap
to fill the defect after tumorectomy or mastectomy. We modified the
original latissimus dorsi flap technique in order to avoid the large
scar on the back and to reduce surgical complications

Method: 118 patients (pts) with
invasive breast cancer or DCIS and the demand for breast conservation,
but primarily not suitable for breast conserving therapy alone, were
additionally offered oncoplastic reconstruction with latissimus dorsi
flap sometimes combined with breast tissue expander in two German
centers. 45 pts presented with extended invasive breast cancer, 26 pts
with large DCIS, 12 pts with a local recurrence of the breast and 34
pts received primary systemic chemotherapy before surgery After
tumorectomy the latissimus dorsi flap was prepared by removing the
flap from the skin and the chest wall via the axillary cut According
to the size of defect the muscle was prepared and cut on its origin.
Only the thoracodorsal vascular bundle remained. The patient was lying
on the side, so no change of position of the patient and no additional
cut on the back was necessary during the operation. The muscle was
placed in the breast where soft tissue was needed to fill the defect
in the breast. In 8 cases the oncoplastic surgery was combined with an
tissue expander under the muscle

Results: The cosmetic results were
very good in 65%, good in 15% and acceptable in 7%. 4 necrosis of the
muscular flap required another operation. 2 cases of inflammation of
the breast were seen. None of the patient showed a reduced arm
motility. So far there were only 2 local recurrences within
2 years

Conclusion: The Bayreuth
modification of the latissimus dorsi muscle flap used in oncoplastic
surgery showes very good results without compromising a higher rate of
complications or of local recurrences. This new technique avoids a
scar on the back which is not only cosmetically highly acceptable but
also shortens the time of surgery enormously because no change of
position of the patient is necessary

## 2084

## Oncoplastic technics for breast conservative surgery with ablation
of nipple-areolar complex for central breast cancers

## Faure C, Escalon J, Meunier A, Perol D, Delay E. Centre Leon
Berard, Lyon, France

Background: Central breast cancer has
long been an indication for mastectomy. Plastic surgical technics
adapted to cancer (oncoplastic surgery) have made it possible to offer
breast cancer patients conservative surgery with resection of the
nipple-areolar complex (NAC). We evaluate carcinologic results and
cosmetic outcomes

Material and Methods: We performed a
retrospective study in all patients with retro- or para-areolar
(<2 cm from areola) central breast cancers undergoing
breast-conserving with NAC resection at Leon Berard Center, between
1995 and 2004. Carcinologic results were assessed by calculating local
and metastatic recurrences rates. Cosmetic results were evaluated on
four criteria: shape, symmetry, volume and deformation of the breast.
Each criteria was firstly assessed by the patient then by two surgeons
using the same 4-points rating scale, anchored from “excellent
results” to “bad results”

Results: 47 patients with central
breast cancer were eligible for carcinologic assessment. The mean age
of the patients was 59, 8 years (44–84 years). The mean tumour
diameter was 17.5 mm (6–39 mm), with negative resection margins in all
but one patient 70% of the patients had axillary lymph node
involvement. 60% of the patients underwent chemotherapy. Histological
involvement of the nipple is present in 53% of the cases. Nipple
involvement at clinical examination (53%) was confirmed by histology
in 64% of the cases. No local recurrence, neither death was observed
at 4, 5 years median follow-up. One patient had liver metastatic
recurrence at 83 months
Cosmetic results were assessed in 34 patients. NAC surgery was
performed using either short, transverse incision (38% of the cases),
periareolar incision with “round-block” mammaplasty (59%) or T plasty
(one patient). Cosmetically, 71% of the surgeons and 82% of the
patients considered the shape of the breast very good or satisfactory.
Breast deformity was found minor or moderate in 73% of the cases for
the patients and 79% for the surgeons. Symmetry was judged very good
or satisfactory by 50% of the surgeons and 53% of the patients, though
symetrisation was performed in only 11% (4 patients). Round-block
provided better aesthetic Results: the shape of the breast was
considered very good or satisfactory for 85% of the surgeons in
round-block technics and for 42% in transverse incision
(P=0.02)

Discussion: Breast-conserving surgery
is feasible in selected patients with T1 or T2 central breast cancers,
with no impact on the risk of local recurrence. NAC resection is
essential especially when the patients have clinical signs of nipple
involvement. It provides satisfactory cosmetic results, especially
with the roundblock technique, possibly associated with nipple
reconstruction using the “cat-design” technique developed by our
team

## 2085

## Evaluation of local recurrence following surgical treatment of
screen-detected breast cancer in Wales diagnosed between 1989 and
2003

## Monypenny IJ, Osborn G. Breast Test Wales, Cardiff, Wales,
United Kingdom

Background: Ascertainment of local
recurrence rates after surgical treatment of breast cancer in normal
multi-institutional practice is problematic, particularly since early
discharge from routine clinical follow up has been recommended by the
National Institute for Clinical Excellence in the UK. It remains
however one of the best markers of surgical quality assurance

Methods: Pathology records of all
surgical biopsies in Wales with a breast cancer diagnosis have been
collected on a database at Breast Test Wales (BTW) since the start of
population breast screening in 1989, as are treatment and death data
for all breast cancers diagnosed by BTW. Since virtually all local
recurrences (LR) will have histological or cytological confirmation,
LR rates have been determined from these sources for all cases
diagnosed by screening and receiving surgical treatment between 1989
and 2003, 97.7% of whom were treated between 15 surgeons. The LR rate
for the 17% of patients treated by one surgeon was crosschecked
against other data sources and 100% concordance found, validating the
methodology. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was carried out using
SPSS, censoring at 31/12/2004 where no recurrence or death event had
occurred. Actuarial 10 year local recurrence failure rates (ALR) are
reporteD

Results: 6228 patients were treated
(median follow up 70 months, range 1- 190), with 59% having breast
conserving surgery (BCS). Mastectomy LR events were 37/2019 (ALR 3.3%)
for invasive disease and 7/522 (ALR 2.5%) for ductal carcinoma insitu
(DCIS). BCS LR events were 65/2190 (ALR 4.8%) for invasive disease and
70/777 (ALR 17.0%) for DCIS, but the latter rose to 18/100 (ALR 31.0%)
with margin involvement and this was not improved by post-operative
radiotherapy. No significant differences were found for operating
surgeon or across the 3 screening centres in Wales

Conclusion: Concentrating treatment
of screen-detected breast cancer to a small number of high caseload
surgeons has resulted in low 10 year actuarial local recurrence rates
for invasive cancers Treatment of DCIS has changed during the period
under study with closer attention being paid to margin clearance and
greater use of radiotherapy after BCS

## 2086

## The use of intrapleural analgesia following mastectomy and
immediate lattisimus dorsi myocutaneous flap breast
reconstructions

## Chong YM, Long M, Shah D, Sharma AK. St George’s Hospital and
Medical School, London, United Kingdom

## Introduction
Latissimus-dorsi flap reconstruction following mastectomy can be
associated with considerable post-operative pain. We aimed to see
if intrapleural analgesia (IPA) was a useful adjunct to standard
post-op analgesia techniques

## Methods
Between December 2000 and October 2004, patients undergoing
Latissimus-dorsi flap reconstruction following mastectomy were
offered IPA. During flap mobilisation, a 16G epidural catheter was
inserted into the 5th intercostal space
posteriorly Intraoperatively, a bolus dose of Bupivocaine was
injected at different dosages (15 – 30 ml at 0.25 – 0.50%
concentration) for each patient. Postoperatively, a continuous
infusion of 0.10% Lignocaine was also commenced at different rates
(5 – 15 ml/hr) for each patient. Casenotes were reviewed for:
Objective Pain Scoring (OPS), duration of intrapleural catheter
infusion, whether breakthrough analgesia was required, time to
mobilization and discharge and complications eg pneumo/haemothorax.
OPS was based on: Score 0- no pain at rest/on movement, Score 1-
mild pain on movement, Score 2- moderate pain on movement, Score 3-
severe pain on movement, Score 4 -continuous pain at rest/severe
pain on movement

## Results
Twenty eight patients were consented to IPA of which 21 cases
had complete data. In the recovery room, the mean OPS was 0.8 with
70% of patients having an OPS of ≤1. During the infusion period,
80% had a mean OPS of ≤1 while 30% had an OPS of 0. 2 cases had
high OPS (mean of 1.67 and 1.71 respectively) due to blocked
catheter and suboptimal infusion rate. Infusion continued for a
mean period of 31.5 hours (7 – 70 hours) with 16 cases continuing
for 24–48 hours. Patients were given regular oral analgesia while
being weaned-off IPA. 10 patients required breakthrough analgesia
with highest frequency between 16th and
36th hours post-op. The mean period
to mobilisation and hospital discharge was 1.9 days (1 to 3) and
9.3 days (6 to 14) respectively. There were no reported
complications. Within this limited sample, no correlation could be
found between dosage of local anaesthetic and analgesia
achieveD

## Conclusion
IPA using bolus and infusion of local anesthetics appears to be
a safe, well-tolerated and effective adjunct to standard forms of
post-operative analgesia. Inadequate analgesia after
16th hour postoperatively may be due
to pleural absorption of local anaesthetic or suboptimal infusion
rates. Changes to infusion rate should be based on regular pain
assessment. The potential of IPA as postoperative analgesia for
this procedure should be further evaluated by prospective
studies 

## 2087

## Combination therapy of Ad-mda7 and herceptin synergistically
increases apoptosis in Her2/neu over expressing breast cancer
cells

## Bocangel D, Mhashilkar A, Zheng M, McKinsey T, Liu Y, Menander
K, Hunt K, Chada S. Introgen Therapeutics Inc., Houston, TX; UTMD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
The melanoma differentiation associated gene-7 (mda-7) is a member of the IL-10 cytokine
family and a novel tumor suppressor gene. Adenoviral-mediated
mda-7 (Ad-mda7) gene transfer
inhibits growth and induces apoptosis in a broad spectrum of cancer
cells, but not normal cells. In breast cancer cells,
adenoviral-induced mda-7 expression
triggers antiproliferative effects by regulating molecules from the
beta-catenin and PI3K pathways. The antihuman epidermal growth factor
receptor-2 (HER-2) monoclonal antibody, Trastuzumab (Herceptin),
increases the sensitivity of HER-2/neu overexpressing breast cancer
cells to chemotherapeutic agents and radiotherapy. We evaluated the
combination therapy of Ad-mda7 and Herceptin in a panel of HER-2/neu
overexpressing cell lines and in established tumors in nude mice The
combination of Ad-mda7 and Herceptin demonstrated enhanced anti-tumor
activity in HER-2/neu overexpressing tumor cell lines, increased cell
death, induced cell cycle block, and induced apoptosis. The
interaction was shown to be synergistic by isobologram analysis.
Ad-mda7 does not alter cell surface HER-2/neu levels, but decreases
expression of survival signals, such as bcl-2 and Akt
Combination Ad-mda7+Herceptin treatment results in increased
expression of cell surface E-cadherin with concomitant translocation
of beta-catenin from the nucleus to the cell membrane. In vivo, the combination of Ad-mda7 and
Herceptin showed significantly increased anti-tumor activity
(p<0.05) against HER-2/neu overexpressing tumors compared to either
Ad-mda7 or Herceptin alone This activity correlated with loss of Akt
and p-Akt in vivo in tumor
xenografts. Thus, Ad-mda7 synergistically enhances the activity of
Herceptin in HER-2/neu overexpressing breast cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo. These data suggest that the combination of Ad-mda7
with Herceptin may be an effective novel therapy for breast cancer
patients whose tumors overexpress HER-2/neu

## 2088

## Reverse phase protein array in breast cancer
classification

## Hennessy BT, Lu Y, Tibes R, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Hortobagyi GN,
Valero V, Mills GB. MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

## Introduction:
Reverse phase protein arrays (RPPA) are a new proteomic
technology that allow us to simultaneously, globally and
quantitatively study the heterogeneity of protein signaling in
breast cancer by quantitatively assaying not only total protein
levels but also the activation status of proteins (e.g.
phosphorylation)

## Methods
We applied RRPA to simultaneously study the activation status of
the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (PI3K) and mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathways and also the presence of other
important proteins (cyclins, ER, E cadherin, keratins) in 40 breast
cancer cell lines and 21 human breast tumors using validated
proteinand phospho-protein specific antibodies

## Results:
Breast cancer cell lines cluster into distinct molecular
subgroups using RPPA. Each molecular subgroup is associated with a
different pattern of protein signaling which likely reflects the
precursor cell, genetic aberrations or interactions between these
events. Cell lines clustered together according to the presence of
known molecular abnormalities such as mutations of PI3K. Despite
differences in the 2 technologies, clustering of cell lines using
RPPA recreates well the clusters determined by
transcriptional/messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) profiling. This
suggests that although breast tumor clusters determined by mRNA
profiling are conventionally thought to reflect the cell of origin
of the breast cancer (e.g. basal or luminal), these clusters may
also have relevance in terms of molecular pathogenesis and protein
signaling. Luminal cell lines have low levels of kinase activation
(‘luminal’ protein signature) while PI3K pathway activation is much
more prominent in other transcriptional breast cancer cell line
groups (e.g. basal, HER2/neu, together constituting the ‘kinase’
protein signature). PTEN loss is a feature of a subgroup of
basal/stromal breast cancer cell lines but not of luminal cell
lines. Clustering 21 fresh frozen breast tumors using RPPAs
generates preliminary evidence that protein signaling patterns may
also have prognostic/predictive information content

## Conclusion
RPPAs have the potential to explore the activation status of
important protein signaling pathways in breast cancer cells and to
cluster breast cancers according to similarity in protein signaling
Our data provides preliminary evidence that protein signaling
patterns differ between breast cancer cell lines with different
genomic abnormalities and contain prognostic and/or predictive
information content, and that mRNA profiling reflects not only the
cell of origin of the breast tumor but probably also distinct
underlying pathogenic abnormalities and protein signaling in breast
cancer cell lines

## 2089

## Ras-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of connexin43
expression: interplay between mRNA 3′ and 5′ untranslated
regions

## Kandouz M, Zhao J, Batist G. Lady Davis Institute - Jewish
General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada

Background: Gap junction
intercellular communication (GJIC) is involved in a multitude of
physiological functions including regulation of cell growth, cell
differentiation, and the maintenance of tissue homeostasis and is
mediated by structures made of connexin proteins. We documented that
Connexins are important tumor chemosensitivity modulators in
established tumors. Connexin43 (Cx43) is an important component of gap
junctions. We previously found a loss of Cx43 expression in human
breast tumor versus adjacent normal
tissue. We therefore hypothesize that restoration of Cx43 in cancer
cells, by virtue of its proven anti-proliferation and
differentiation-inducing effects, is a pertinent therapeutic approach.
We are exploring the mechanisms involved in loss of Cx43 expression in
breast cancer, with a particular focus on post-transcriptional gene
regulation processes. The 3′ Untranslated Region (3′ UTR) and 5′
Untranslated Region (5′ UTR) are the essential elements of
post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, being involved in
mRNA transport, stability or translation

Results: We analyzed the 3′ UTR and
5′ UTR-mediated regulation of Cx43 mRNA in normal versus breast cancer cell lines and
localized sequences that showed differential regulatory features. The
Ras signal transduction pathway plays a critical role in regulating
both mRNA translation and cell transformation, through its effect on
the initiation factor eIF4E, an essential element in the translational
machinery, also involved in tumorigenesis. We used a model of
H-Ras-induced transformation in NIH-3T3 and MCF-7 cells, to study the
cancer-related post-transcriptional regulation of Cx43. We found that
the Cx43 3′ UTR region presents a strong positive regulatory element
in the non-transformed NIH3T3neo cells that stimulate the expression
of Cx43. The overexpression of H-Ras not only blocked all 3′
UTR-mediated positive effects, but it even showed a negative effect
that was only brought to control levels by the presence of the Cx43 5′
UTR. We identified a short sequence with the strongest positive
regulatory function and it was still subjected to the H-Ras-driven
activation block. Acute (Tet On/Off inducible) versus chronic (stable transfection) effects of H-Ras
expression on Cx43 regulation are differentially analyzed.The
determinants of H-Ras-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of
connexin43 expression are being elucidatedand a mechanistic view is
proposed. We also present an evidence of an original and differential
interplay between 3′ UTR and 5′ UTR regions of the Cx43 mRNA, in
normal and transformed contexts

## 2090

## Constitutively active type I insulin-like growth factor receptor
signaling induces transformation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
mammary epithelial cells

## Kim HJ, Cui X, Britton O, Lee AV. Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX
Previous studies have shown that type I insulin-like growth factor
receptor (IGF-IR) mediates breast cancer invasion and metastasis
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this IGF-IR function
still remain to be identified. We have reported a novel animal model
that involves transgenic expression of a fusion receptor (CD8-IGF-IR)
of IGF-1R beta subunit with CD8alpha extracellular domain that is
constitutively activated by homodimerization Transgenic mice that
expressed the activated receptor developed rapid tumor formation as
early as 8 weeks of age and showed lung metastasis. To reveal the
molecular mechanism of tumor formation and metastasis in this animal
model, we stably overexpressed CD8-IGF-IR in MCF10A cells.
Overexpression of CD8-IGF-IR in MCF10A cells disrupted well-organized
acini formation in three dimensional culture and these CD8-IGF-IR
transfectants grew anchorage-independent in soft agar. Compared with
control MCF10A cells, these transformed cells displayed increased
motility and gained invasion ability in vitro. Interestingly, these
cells showed spindle-like morphology in contrast to the cuboidal shape
in control cells. Moreover, in these cells, epithelial markers such as
E-cadherin, beta-catenin and alphacatenin were dramatically reduced
wherease mesenchymal markers like fibronectin and a-smooth muscle
actin were increased. Snail transcription factor, a repressor of
E-cadherin, was highly induced in these CD8-IGF-1R overexpressing
cells. Collectively, these phenotypic and molecular changes suggest
that overexpression of CD8-IGF-IR induces epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) in MCF10A. Our studies indicate that aberrant IGF-1R
signaling plays an important role in breast cancer invasion and
metastasis

## 2091

## Involvement of NF-kappaB in inflammatory breast cancer through the
induction of epithelial to mesenchymal transition

## Van Laere SJ, Van der Auwera I, Van den Eynden GG, Benoy IH,
Elst H, Van Dam P, Van Marck EA, Dirix LY, Vermeulen PB. Lab Pathology
University of Antwerp and Oncology Center, General Hospital
Sint-Augustinus, Wilrijk, Antwerp, Belgium
Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) is an aggressive form of locally
advanced breast cancer. Most patients have lymph node involvement at
the time of diagnosis and 1/3 of the patients have distant metastases.
In a previous study, we demonstrated that IBC is a distinct form of
breast cancer in comparison with non-IBC (Van Laere et al, Breast
Cancer Res Treat, 2005). Unsupervised hierarchical clustering based on
the expression of 756 differentially expressed genes was able to
separate IBC from non-IBC. This suggested a distinct molecular
phenotype for IBC. Amongst the differentially expressed genes, there
was a high number of NFkB target genes and upstream activators of
NFkB. The aim of the present study was to further investigate the role
of NFkB transcription factors in the molecular pathogenesis of IBC.
Therefore, immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of 40 IBC and 54 non-IBC
tissue sections was performed for RelA, RelB and p50. In each tissue
section, hot spots with nuclear staining were searched for and within
these hot spots, a total number of 500 nuclei was counted. For p50, on
average 58% of the tumour cells in IBC stained positively, whereas
only 44% of the tumour cells in non-IBC showed nuclear staining
(p=0.0002). We also found significantly more positive nuclei in IBC
compared to non-IBC for RelB (31% and 20% respectively, p=0.05).
Moreover, there was a significant correlation between RelB IHC
staining and RelB gene expression data measured by cDNA microarray
analysis (r=0.375, p=0.034). For RelA nuclear staining, no difference
was found between IBC and non-IBC (16% and 14% respectively, p=0.47).
Huber et al (J Clin Invest, 2004) described the importance of NFkB in
the induction and maintenance of epithelial-tomesenchymal transition
(EMT) Jechlinger et al (Oncogene, 2003) performed expression profiling
of epithelial plasticity in tumour progression. The gene list with
differentially expressed genes after induction of EMT was analysed
using the expression data for the corresponding genes in our dataset.
Out of 144 genes, we found 57 genes to be present on our chip. 34/57
Genes were overexpressed in IBC relative to non-IBC, from which 24
genes were shown to be induced after EMT and 23/57 genes were
repressed in IBC, relative to non-IBC, from which 16 genes were shown
to be repressed after EMT (Pearson Chi-Square, p=0.003). These results
indicate that EMT is a process more active in IBC as compared to
non-IBC. Altogether, our data suggest an important role for NFkB in
IBC, possibly through the induction of EMT. This can explain how NFkB
contributes to the aggressive and invasive phenotype of IBC.
Therefore, IBC has to be regarded as a separate entity in comparison
with non-IBC. Confirmation of the NFkB signature by quantitative
real-time RT-PCR is ongoing

## 2092

## Transcriptional analysis of factors affecting estrogen regulation
in fine needle aspirates

## Schilling EM, Ivancic DZ, Bhandare DJ, Zaichuk T, Khan SA
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL

Background: Random fine needle
aspiration (rFNA) is a method of breast epithelial sampling that is
useful for risk assessment and biomarker studies, but the ability to
acquire sufficient cells for studies of gene expression is not well
established. We have assessed cell number, RNA yield, and the
expression of enzymes involved in estrogen metabolism in rFNA samples
from ex-vivo mastectomy specimens

Methods: Mastectomy specimens were
sampled using rFNA Aspirates were suspended in a light methanol
fixative solution, with 10% of each sample used to determine
morphology and overall cellularity. Remaining cells were pelleted,
dissolved with TRIzol, and stored at −80°C until RNA was isolated
using phenol-chloroform extraction and DNAse treatment. After
confirmation of integrity (Agilent bioanalyzer), RNA was reverse
transcribed using random primers. Samples with low RNA integrity were
amplified to the point at which they could be further assayed (Systems
Bioscience Inc.). Through Taqman Realtime PCR assay, we investigated
the following panel of estrogen-associated genes and steroidogenic
enzymes: ER- , ER- , Steroid Sulfatase, Aromatase, HSD-1, and 17 HSD-2. IGF-1 and TGF- 1 were also assessed, as they are known to have
direct influence on tumorigenesis and relate to this pathway. These
findings were then compared to pathology diagnoses. Results: rFNA from three cancer-bearing and
two non-cancer-bearing mastectomy samples resulted in average cell
counts of 2.63× 106 and 1.55×
105 cells respectively. Cytologically,
all samples contained a high proportion of epithelial cells, averaging
0.75 stromal fragments per 100 epithelial cells. TRIzol RNA extraction
yielded expected amounts of RNA (mean of 4.13 ng/100 cells). ER-
 transcripts were readily detected in ER+ tumor
samples (as assessed pathologically), but not in those designated ER−.
ER- followed a similar pattern to ER- . The relative expression of HSD-1 (catalyzing the reaction from E1 to E2) was
inversely related to that of its oxidative counterpart HSD-2. Although aromatase and sulfatase transcripts
were expressed in positive controls (both epithelial MCF-7 and
monocyte THP-1 cell lines), all samples showed very low levels, with a
slightly higher relative expression of aromatase. TGF- 1 expression was low overall, whereas IGF-1 was very
highly expressed in THP-1 cell line controls, and all samples. We will
continue to accrue these samples for further analysis. Conclusions: This initial experience is
encouraging with regard to the ability to obtain epithelium-enriched
cellular sample using rFNA, and its utility in the analysis of gene
expression in high-risk normal breasts, as well as in the
characterization of tumors
Supported by the Bluhm Family Program for Breast Cancer Early
Detection & Prevention and NIH/NCI P50
CA89018

## 2093

## Regulation of steroid sulfatase gene expression in breast
cancer

## Zaichuk T, Bhandare D, Ivancic D, Khan SA. Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL

Background: The importance of local
estrogen production in the development of breast cancer is
increasingly recognized. Estradiol (E2) is intratumorally synthesized
through the aromatase and sulfatase pathways. Aromatase inhibitors are
well established in breast cancer therapy, but sulfatase inhibitors
are just entering the clinical arena. Progress in this area requires a
better understanding of regulatory mechanisms responsible for local
sulfatase deregulation in breast cancer. The sulfatase enzyme STS (EC
3.1.6.2, aryl sulfatase C) is responsible for the hydrolysis of
steroid sulfates to their unconjugated forms which can be converted to
steroids with estrogenic properties to stimulate tumor growth

Results: We have conducted
experiments to investigate the molecular mechanism of STS gene
regulation. Our data confirm, as reported by others, that STS gene
expression is induced by estradiol (E2) and 4-hydroxytamoxifen
abolishes this upregulation. We also have evidence that the changes in
STS expression seen with E2 exposure are mediated through the estrogen
receptor (ER) Transcription start site(s) in hormone-dependent and
hormone-independent cells were identified by rapid amplification of
5′-cDNA end assay (RACE) to confirm the presence of alternative
promoters. In addition we have observed altered STS expression in
breast cell lines treated with demethylating agent 5-aza-2′
deoxycytidine (5-azaC) suggesting that epigenetic mechanisms might be
involved in the regulation of STS expression

Conclusions: Elucidation of the
interaction of the ER with STS regulation may provide opportunities
for the development of new combinatorial approaches to endocrine
therapy with ER modulating agents and STS inhibitors. The
demonstration that regulation of STS expression involves DNA
methylation will lead to the development of assays to predict
sensitivity to STS inhibitorbased therapy, which can be performed on
small, formalin-fixed clinical samples
Supported by the Bluhm Family Program for Breast Cancer Early
Detection & Prevention and NIH/NCI P50
CA89018

## 2094

## Regulation of bcl-2 by the BP1 homeotic protein in breast cancer
cells

## Stevenson H, Fu S, Berg PE. George Washington University Medical
Center, Washington, DC
The BP1 homeotic protein belongs to a family of transcription
factors with established roles in coordination of developmental
processes in many species, several of which have been described to
play a role in breast cancer. We have previously shown that BP1 mRNA
and protein are overexpressed in 80% of invasive ductal carcinomas
Recently, we demonstrated that MCF-7 cells generated to stably
overexpress BP1 protein showed enhanced viability when challenged with
TNF-alpha, an inducer of cell death. Overexpression of BP1 in these
cells also resulted in increased mRNA and protein levels of bcl-2, an
anti-apoptotic gene. These data implicate a role for BP1 as a
potential modulator of cell survival. The aim of this study was to
test the ability of BP1 to directly regulate transcription of bcl-2 in
breast cancer cells. BP1 protein binds in vitro to a DNA consensus
binding sequence located near the bcl-2 promoter region at −2539. To
test whether this binding has functional significance, transient
assays were performed. A construct containing a sequence spanning the
bcl-2 promoter linked to the luciferase reporter gene, LB170, was
transfected into MCF-7 cell lines either constitutively expressing BP1
or containing an empty vector. Three BP1 overexpressing cell lines
consistently exhibited a 4-10-fold activation of the bcl-2 promoter.
Using LB170 as template, site-directed mutagenesis was performed to
generate a construct lacking the BP1 binding site. Deletion of this
site decreased activation of the bcl-2 promoter to approximately 50%
of wild-type activity. Upon mutating a 7-nucleotide region of the BP1
binding site, we observed loss of binding of BP1 protein to its
binding site at −2539 as revealed by electrophoretic mobility shift
assays Introduction of this mutation into LB170 DNA resulted in a 40%
loss of bcl-2 activation. Thus, our results demonstrate that BP1
protein modulates upregulation of bcl-2 expression through binding to
the bcl-2 promoter. These data are consistent with the protective
effect of constitutive BP1 in MCF-7 cells challenged with TNF-alpha
Importantly, these findings demonstrate a link between BP1 and bcl-2
gene pathways that may impart a survival advantage to breast tumor
cells and lead to decreased responses to therapeutic agents in
patients

## 2095

## p53 codom 72 polymorphism and the correlation with breast
cancer

## Higo PES, Gebrim LH, Vieira JO, Silva IDCG. Federal University
of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

## p53 codom 72 polymorphism and the correlation with breast
cancer.
Higo PES, Vieira JO, Gebrim LH, Silva IDCG, Laboratory of Molecular
ginecology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil

Background: The p53 gene is polymorphic
at amino acid 72 of the protein that it encodes. It has reported that
patients with the arginine form have a higher risk of developing other
forms of cancer than those with proline form. The purpose of this study
was examine whether p53 Arg represent a risk factor for Brazilian woman
with breast cancer

Material and Methods: Extracting the DNA
and using allelespecific polymerase chain reaction to detected the p53
codon 72 polymorphism, we tested oral swab samples from 100 women
diagnosed and treated for invasive breast carcinoma and 100 healthy
individuals of similar age and from the same geographical region

Results: We found statistically
significant correlation between polymorphism and breast cancer. The
allele frequency of p53 Arg/Arg was much higher than that of the of the
normal samples(61% versus 22%)

Discussion This study suggested that p53
Arg homozygosis could represent a risk factor for the tumorigenesis of
the breast cancer

## 2096

## Occludin is aberrantly expressed in human breast cancer

## Martin TA, Jiang WG. Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff, United
Kingdom

Background: Occludin is an integral
membrane protein localised at tight junctions. It bears 4
transmembrane domains in its N-terminal, with both the N- and
C-termini located in the cytoplasm The C-terminal anchors the protein
to ZO-1. We have already shown that levels of occludin are reduced in
human breast cancer tissues, with reduced localisation at the cell
periphery. This study aimed to determine the changes responsible for
this loss of expression and re-distribution

Methods: 6 paired normal and breast
cancer tissues and 10 breast cancer cell lines were assessed using
RT-PCR and western blotting to determine aberrant forms of occludin.
Methylation status of the promotor was also investigated

Results: Tissues and breast cancer
cells lines were amplified for functional regions of occludin. 6/6
tumour tissues showed truncated and/or variant signals for N-terminal
and first trans-membrane loop of occludin; 4/6 tumour tissues did not
express the C-terminal region of Occludin. Paired background tissues
showed similar expression profiles. None of the breast tissues showed
methylation of the occludin promotor. Of the 10 human breast cancer
cells lines, 3 did not express the N-terminal, 6 expressed 2 or more
variants; 3 did expressed a truncated message for the first
transmembrane loop, 5 expressed the correct message, MDA-MB-231 cells
did not express this region; the C-terminal region was expressed
correctly in 3 cell lines, 4 expressed variants, and 4 were missing
this region. Overall, only 3/10 breast cancer cell lines expressed
full length occludin; interestingly, these were of the more invasive
phenotype. Methylation of the promotor was not observed. Western
blotting also demonstrated variants of occludin when probed with 3
antibodies specific for the N-terminus, first membrane loop and
C-terminus. These variants did not fit the expected occludin signals
for changes in phosphorylation status of the protein. Immuno-staining
showed similarly disparate levels of expression, with more invasive
cell lines showing reduced cell junction location

Conclusion: This study shows for the
first time that occludin is differentially expressed in breast tumour
tissues and in human breast cancer cell lines. The changes in occludin
message indicate that variants are expressed in tumour tissue. The
loss of/truncation of the N-terminus indicates reduced assembly of
tight junction structure and reduced maintenance of barrier function.
Loss of C-terminal expression suggests reduced intracellular
trafficking of occludin to the basolateral membrane and binding to
ZO-1, resulting in reduced tight junction anchoring, assembly and
cell-cell adhesion. This has clear repercussions as to the importance
of occludin in maintaining tight junction integrity in breast tissues
Such inappropriate expression may play a part in breast cancer
development

## 2097

## GRB-7 promotes HER-2/Neu mediated signaling and tumor formation in
breast cancer cells

## Luoh S-W, Bai T. Portland VA Medical Center, Portland, OR;
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR

Background: Amplification of a
chromosomal segment from 17q21 containing HER-2/Neu gene is present in
20–25% breast tumors HER-2/Neu amplification portends adverse
prognosis and predicts response to therapy. GRB-7, encoding a SH2
domain containing signal transduction molecule, is located in the
immediate vicinity of HER-2/Neu gene. GRB-7 is amplified and
over-expressed concurrently in most, if not all, of the breast tumors
with HER-2/Neu amplification. This study aimed to ascertain the
functional contribution of GRB-7 in HER-2/Neu mediated signal
transduction and tumor formation in breast cancer cells

Methods: MCF-7/HER-2 cells were
derived from MCF-7 cells and over-expressed HER-2/Neu. MCF-7/HER-2
cells that also stably over-expressed GRB-7 were obtained via
transfection. Knock down of GRB-7 expression in breast cancer cell
lines that carried naturally occurring HER-2/Neu amplification was
achieved with siRNA transfection. Immuno-precipitation was performed
to examine interaction between HER-2/Neu and GRB-7. The activation
status of various signaling transduction molecules was studied with
Western blotting with phospho-specific antibodies. The ability of
GRB-7 over-expression to promote tumor growth of xenografts was
measured in nude mice

Results: Immuno-precipitation
demonstrated interaction between GRB-7 and HER-2/Neu when GRB-7 was
stably over-expressed in MCF-7/HER-2 cells. GRB-7 over-expression lead
to increased tyrosine phoshporylation of the HER-2/Neu molecule. More
specifically, tyrosine phosphorylation at 1248, a major
autophosphorylation site for HER-2/Neu, was increased. GRB-7
overexpression also resulted in increased phosphorylation of PLC-
 -1. In support of the above findings, knockdown of
GRB-7 expression with siRNA transfection in SKBR-3 cells lead to
decreased phosphorylation for HER-2/Neu and PLC- -1. Phosphorylation of a major PKC substrate, MARCKS,
was increased, indicating activation of PKC pathways as a result of
GRB-7 over-expression in MCF-7/HER-2 cells When injected
subcutaneously into nude mice, MCF-7/HER-2 cells that over-expressed
GRB-7 induced tumor xenograft formation more readily than MCF-7/HER-2
cells that expressed GFP

Discussion: GRB-7 over-expression
activates HER-2/Neu and promotes HER-2/Neu mediated signal
transduction and tumor formation in breast cancer cells. Our results
suggest that GRB-7 may constitute a rational target for therapeutic
intervention for breast tumors with HER-2/Neu gene
amplification

## 2098

## Clinical and pathological characterization of basal-like breast
cancer

## Osborne CR, Kannan L, Ashfaq R, Ariyibi J, Frawley WH, Tripathy
D University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
TX

Background: Gene profiling studies
have revealed multiple subtypes of breast cancer with distinct
outcomes. The “basal” subtype is in part defined by hormone receptor
(HR) and HER2 negativity. Early stage basal cases are associated with
a worse outcome and targeted therapies are currently not available for
this group

Methods: Cases were identified from
surgical and biopsy specimens demonstrating HR and HER2 negativity.
Specimens were characterized by histology, grade, ploidy, and
proliferative index as measured by Ki-67 staining. Patient
information, including race, age at first diagnosis and dates of
recurrence and death were obtaineD

Results: From 1996–2004, 473 biopsies
were identified consistent with a basal-like phenotype, corresponding
to 366 patients; 156 (42.6%) were Caucasian, 132 (36%) Black, 57
(15.6%) Hispanic, and 21 (6%) other. The median age at first diagnosis
of the total cohort was 50 years of age, significantly lower than the
national (SEER) median age of 61 years (p<.0001). Additionally,
Hispanics presented at a younger median age (40 years) than did
Caucasians or Blacks (p<0.05). The majority (68%) presented with
stage I or II disease. 28% of women presented with or developed
metastatic disease. Visceral metastases predominated with 5 women
alone having bone-only disease. At a median follow up of 2.6 years, 76
(21%) of the women died due to breast cancer with a median age of
47 years at the time of death, markedly lower than the SEER median age
of death of 69 years. Of the women who died of breast cancer, 40%
presented with early stage disease. Histologic classifications were
invasive ductal (87%), high grade (77%), aneuploid (60%), diploid 13%
and 27% other ploidy status. A strikingly high median proliferative
index was observed with 51.4% Ki-67 staining. In comparison, 728
unselected breast biopsies had a median 23.0% Ki-67 staining
(p<.0001)

Discussion: This study shows that the
basal phenotype is associated with an early age of breast cancer
onset, high chance of presentation with metastases, high proliferative
index and confirms an aggressive course. Further protein and gene
characterization is in progress with the intent of identifying
potential therapeutic targets

## 2099

## Influence of pico-tesla range
electromagnetic fields on mammary carcinoma protein expression
profiles

## Coyne CP, Siyambalapitiyage Dona WSC, Hagood G, Bell E, Lawrence
M College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi State University,
Mississippi State, MS

Background: The potential effect of
electromagnetic (EM) fields on biological systems represents a
controversial and relatively under-investigated field of medical
research. A large proportion of the investigations cited in the
literature to date have been devoted to determining the effect of
chronic or intense exposure to 50–60-Hz frequency EM-fields with flux
densities in the milli-Tesla to
Tesla range. Relatively little is known about how pico-Tesla range electromagnetic fields
influence the viability of neoplastic populations or modify expression
profiles for mRNA sequences and cancer cell proteins

Materials and Methods: Human MCF-7
mammary carcinoma populations were exposed to pico-Tesla range electromagnetic fields (PTREMF) for
1 hour/day for 5 consecutive days. Alterations in cell viability were
recognized utilizing a MTT vitality staining methods. Alterations in
replicate mRNA expression profiles were delineated by genetic
micro-array analyses (96 genes/platform) Differential changes in
phosphoprotein and SyproRuby stained protein expression profiles in
aqueous and lipid soluble fractions were detected in replicate
populations by 2D-PAGE and identified using LC/MS-MS analysis

Results: Exposure to a PTREMF
schedule consistently compromised the in-vitro viability/proliferation of human MCF- 7
mammary carcinoma populations approximately 30% relative to negative
reference controls. Micro-array and LC/MS-MS analyses identified
specific mRNA sequences (n = 12), and proteins fractions (n = 15)
respectively that had their expression profiles modified in
PTREMF-exposed populations of mammary carcinoma

Discussion: Several neoplastic
disease biomarkers, phosphoproteins and participants in cellular
apoptosis phenomenon were identified that had their expression
modified in mammary carcinoma populations following PTREMF exposure.
Such findings have implications pertaining to the discovery of;
[i] mRNA sequences and proteins
that uniquely influence mammary carcinoma viability; [ii] PTREMF parameters that enhance
chemotherapeutic efficacy; and [iii] genetic and protein “targets” that can be applied as
templates for the molecular design of alternative chemotherapeutic
agents

## 2100

## Protein acetylation and hormone-independent breast cancer

## Cui Y, Parra I, Chen Y, Niu A, Fuqua SAW. Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX
When ER is bound to the antiestrogen tamoxifen, corepressors
and HDAC complexes are recruited to the promoter of
estrogen-responsive genes, and transcription is attenutated. It is
thought that acetylation, either at the promoter or of ER
 protein itself, is dictated by the balance of
coregulatory proteins present. We have recently discovered that
metastasis associated protein 2 (MTA2), which is present in distinct
HDAC complexes, acts as a repressor of ER action; MTA2 siRNA reverses transcriptional
repression. Levels of MTA2, as measured by immunoblot analysis, are
significantly higher in ERa-positive invasive breast tumors. MTA2
overexpression in T47D breast cancer cells renders them resistant to
estradiol, and the growth-inhibitory effects of tamoxifen; however
these cells remain sensitive to pure steroidal antiestrogens,
suggesting the continued involvement of ER in MTA2-induced hormone independence. MTA2 directly
participates in the deacetylation of ER protein through its associated HDAC1 activity. In
addition, we found that MTA2 overexpression dramatically upregulates
insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) protein expression. IRS-1 is a
major signaling effector of the insulin and insulin-like growth factor
I receptors. MTA2 binds to IRS-1 at its amino terminus (residues
20–115), a region which harbors the pleckstrin homology domain. We
also determined that IRS-1 is acetylated by p300/CBP at its
carboxy-terminus, and that proteasomal-dependent IRS-1 degradation is
induced by treatment with HDAC inhibitors. Therefore, the functions of
both ER and IRS-1 can be regulated via protein
deacetylation. In conclusion, MTA2 overexpression in ER
 -positive breast cancer cells initiates hormone
resistance via a novel mechanism of protein deacetylation and
turnover

## 2101

## Diet and global DNA methylation in breast cancer

## Germano PBMR, Silva AG, Madeira M, Correa IC, Pitas AMCS,
Bolsoni EMM, Reis LC, Souza FG, Andreoni S, Simony RF, D’Almeida V,
Gebrim LH, Correa M, Jasiulionis MG. Universidade Federal de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil

Background: Alterations in DNA
methylation profile, an important epigenetic mechanism regulating gene
expression, are associated with a variety of neoplasias, including
breast cancer Recent studies in humans have correlated folate,
vitamins B12 and B6 and
methionine deficiencies with higher risk of developing cancer. These
nutrients are involved in the methionine metabolic pathway, which has
an important role in DNA methylation Plasma homocysteine levels,
another component of the methionine cycle, may reflect a methylation
imbalance

Materials and Methods: Global DNA
methylation levels were determined by a methyl acceptance assay in
tumor biopsies samples from 30 breast cancer patients. Blood folate,
vitamin B6 and homocysteine levels were
determined by appropriate methods. Dietary information (folate,
vitamins B12 and B6 and
methionine) was obtained using a food frequency questionnaire and
relevant clinical data was obtained from patients charts. Pearson’s
correlation test and unimodal ANOVA were performed for statistical
analysis

Results: We observed an inverse
correlation between plasma homocysteine and tumor DNA methylation
(p<0,0001; r=0,777). Tumor DNA methylation was also inversely
correlated with age (p=0,006; r=0,538), tumor diameter (p=0,023;
r=0,453) and axillary status (p=0,009). No significant statistical
correlation was observed between tumor DNA methylation and nutritional
information or vitamin blood levels

Discussion: Tumor global DNA
hypomethylation is correlated with prognostic factors associated with
a poor outcome, such a positive axillary status and larger tumor
diameter, which was confirmed in our study. Interestingly,
homocysteine blood levels showed a strong inverse correlation with
tumor DNA methylation, suggesting that homocysteine levels may be used
as a surrogate marker for that epigenetic anomaly

## 2102

## Molecular pathogenesis of breast cancer in women of African
ancestry

## Ikpatt OF, Dignam J, Khramtsov A, Xu J, Dangou J, Perou C,
Ndoma-Egba R, Malami S, Adelusola O, Falusi A, Olopade OI University
of Chicago, Chicago, IL; Pasteur Institute, Dakar, Senegal; University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC; University of
Calabar, Calabar, CRS, Nigeria; Obafemi Awolowo University Hospital,
Ile Ife, Osun, Nigeria; Usman Danfodio Teaching Hospital, Sokoto,
Nigeria; Institute of Medical Research and Training, Ibadan, Oyo,
Nigeria

Purpose: Genomic analysis of breast
carcinomas distinguish molecular subsets of estrogen receptor
ER+/luminal A, ER+/HER2+luminal B, ER-HER2+, and basal-like groups
with clinical implications. Experimental
Design: Using a panel of antibodies against ER, PR,
HER1, HER2, and cytokeratin 5/6, we determine the relative frequency
of the molecular subtypes in a series of invasive breast tumors from
African women with early onset breast cancer. In addition, we
evaluated additional molecular markers including P53, VEGF, BCLX,
BCL2, Cyclin D, and Cyclin E to identify potential therapeutic
targets. Result: Of the 378 cases,
73% were under age 50 years with a mean age of 43.8±11.2 years; large
tumor size (mean 4.2±1.3 cm); 83% had histological grade 2 or 3 Among
the 378 invasive tumors of different histologic subtypes, 27% were
ER+/luminal A, 2%ER+/HER2+luminal B, 15% ER-HER2+, 27% basal-like and
of significance 29% were unclassifiable which suggest a distinct
molecular pathogenesis of these category of breast cancers (See Table
1) Conclusion: Our results suggest
that molecular portraits of breast tumors are broadly conserved
between women of African and European ancestry. However the relative
frequencies of the distinct subsets differ, with a majority of tumors
from African women lacking the expression of important therapeutic
targets like ER, HER2 and HER1 while demonstrating markers of
increased angiogenesis. These findings provide further evidence that
breast tumor subtypes with the worse clinical outcomes may be
overrepresented in young women of African ancestry and clinical trials
of novel therapeutic targets, including anti-angiogenic agents may be
warranted to reduced the disparities that exist in outcomes for these
patients 

## 2103

## Notch signaling is altered in breast cancer and is a potential
therapeutic target

## Rizzo P, Miao H, Siziopikou K, Song LL, Bashir A, Koenerner F,
Chaturvedi V, Chin JZ, Zhao H, Selvaggi S, Tonetti DA, Nickoloff JB,
Miele L. Oncology Institute, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, IL;
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL; Rush University
Chicago, Chicago, IL; University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI; Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA
Notch signaling is deregulated in several malignancies and
maintains the neoplastic phenotype in Ras-transformed human cell lines
in vitro and in vivo. While Notch-1 and Notch-4 have been implicated
in mammary carcinogenesis in mice, the role of Notch signaling in
human breast cancer remains unclear. We studied 77 archival cases
including normal breast, hyperplastic lesions, carcinomas in situ and
invasive ductal and lobular breast carcinomas for Notch receptor and
ligand expression. Infiltrating carcinomas co-express Notch-1 and −4,
while normal breast and hyperplastic lesions do not express Notch-4,
and in situ lesions do so inconsistently. All breast cancers we
studied express one or more Notch ligands. HRas induces Notch-1 and
−4. Notch-1 induce Notch-4 in breast cancer cells. RNAi silencing of
Notch-1 or Notch-4 in MDA-MB231 breast cancer cells significantly
inhibits matrix invasion and subsequently increases the fraction of
cells in G2/M, eventually inducing death Pharmacological interruption
of Notch signaling in MDA-MB231 cells via a gamma-secretase inhibitor
induces G2/M accumulation and death Treatment with estradiol increases
Notch-1 but not Notch-4 expression in estrogen receptor
 (ER )-positive T47D:A18 cells. Using reporter assays we
determined that in the same cell line estradiol inhibits Notch 1
trascriptional activity and antagonizes the effects of Ras on Notch-1
activity. Consistently with these data we observed that estrogen
receptor (ER )-negative cells T47D:C42 have higher Notch-1
activity than estrogen receptor (ER )-positive cells T47D:A18. Tamoxifen and other SERMS
tested do not inhibit Notch-1 dependent trascriptional activity, but
rather stimulate it. This indicates that activation of Notch-1
signaling may be an undesirable effect on some SERMS, and inhibition
of the Notch signaling pathway should make breast cancer ER
 -positive more responsive to treatment with SERMS.
Consistently with our hypotheses genetic or pharmacological
interruption of Notch signaling strikingly potentiated the effects of
tamoxifen in ER -positive cells and treatment of T47D:A18 xenografts
in mice with gamma-secretase inhibitors with sub-therapeutic doses of
tamoxifen strongly enhances the effect of tamoxifen. Additionally,
genetic or pharmacological interruption of Notch signaling strikingly
potentiated the effects of paclitaxel in both ER -positive and ER -negative cells. Our data suggest that inhibition of
the Notch signaling pathway with gamma-secretase inhibitors is an
attractive new strategy for the treatment of either ER -positive or ER - negative breast cancers in combination with different
agents

## 2104

## Activated c-Src in ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) correlates with high tumour grade, high
proliferation and HER2 expression

## Wilson GR, Barnes N, Knox F, Cramer A, Swindell R, Kawakatsu H,
Dive C, Bundred NJ. South Manchester Acute Hospitals Trust,
Manchester, United Kingdom; Paterson Institute for Cancer Research,
Chrisite Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom; University of
California, San Francisco, CA

Background: The non receptor tyrosine
kinase c-Src is downstream of HER2/c-erbB2 and activation of c-Src
influences response to Herceptin, tumour progression and
metastasis

Aim: To determine the expression of
activated c-Src in pure DCIS and determine if activated c-Src
correlates with HER2 expression and clinicopathological parameters in
DCIS

Method: Immunohistochemical
expression of activated c-Src using Clone 28, a monoclonal antibody,
was evaluated in 110 patients (median age 55 years, range 29–71 years)
with ‘pure’ DCIS and a median follow-up of 60 months (range
10–155 months). HER2, HER4, estrogen receptor (ER) and Ki67 levels
were evaluated by immuno-histochemistry. Activated c-Src staining was
evaluated as 1 (weak), 2 (intermediate) and 3 (strong). A HER2/ HER4
score ≥2 was considered positive

Results: Forty (out of 67) HER2
positive tumours over-expressed activated c-Src compared with seven
(out of 35) HER2 negative tumours (p<0.0005). Strong expression of
activated c-Src was also associated with high tumour grade
(p<0.0005) and epithelial proliferation (measured by Ki67, p=0.015)
but not tumour size, ER status and HER4 expression. HER2 positive DCIS
had a higher recurrence rate at 5 years (p=0.0076, log rank) 

Conclusion. Activation of c-Src is
seen in HER2 positive, high grade DCIS lesions with a higher
proliferation index.Interruption of c-Src signalling with small
molecule inhibitors may be therapeutically useful

## 2105

## The pure prolactin receptor (PrlR) antagonist 1–9 G129R-hPrl reduces breast cancer clonogenicity and
enhances doxorubicin cytotoxicity in vitro

## Howell SJ, Anderson E, Kalirai H, Clarke RB. University of
Manchester, Christie Hospital NHS Trust, Manchester, United
Kingdom

Background: Prolactin (Prl) is
mitogenic and anti-apoptotic in breast cancer cell lines, however,
breast cancer therapies targeting pituitary Prl have been ineffective.
Autocrine Prl production has been demonstrated in cell lines and
primary breast cancers. PrlR antagonism has the capacity to block the
effects of both endocrine and autocrine/paracrine Prl

Aim: To examine the effects of the
novel pure prolactin receptor (PrlR) antagonist 1–9 G129R-hPrl ( 1–9) in 5 breast cancer cell lines in vitro

Methods:
 1–9 was a gift from Dr V Goffin, Necker, Paris. The
Sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay was used to assess cell growth in
monolayer culture. Colony forming efficiency was assessed using the
soft agar assay (CFE-SA), by seeding cells at limiting density onto
tissue culture plastic (CFE-P) and in suspension culture (mammosphere
forming efficiency, MFE). RT-PCR was used to examine Prl mRNA
expression. Dual immunofluorescence was used to identify
subpopulations of cells expressing the PrlR and Prl proteins. All
statistical comparisons were by unpaired Student’s t-test

Results:
 1–9 alone had no effect on the growth in monolayer of
any of the cell lines, but significantly enhanced the effects of
doxorubicin (DOX) in 4/5 lines, reducing cell number by 5–15% over DOX
treatment alone after 10 days (p<0.05). DOX treatment increased Prl
mRNA expression in all 5 cell lines Pretreatment of MCF-7 cells for
2 hours with DOX 1  M + 1–9 50 nM reduced CFE-SA by 84%±4.0 (mean±SD,
p=0.003) compared to cells pretreated with DOX alone, whereas
 1–9 pretreatment alone had no effect. In contrast,
inclusion of 0.05–50 nM 1–9 G129RhPrl into the soft agar resulted in a dose
dependent inhibition of MCF-7 CFE-SA. All cell lines that grew as
colonies in soft agar showed dramatic reductions in CFE-SA over
control with 50 nM 1–9: MCF-7 93%±4.0 (mean±SD), T47D 89%±3.8 and
MDAMB-468 93%±7.0 (p<0.001 for all). 1–9 at 50 nM reduced MCF-7 CFE-P by 87–92%
(p<0.001) and MFE by 42% (p<0.01) Immunofluorescence analysis of
MCF-7, MDAMB453, MDAMB-468 and SKBR3 cell lines in monolayer showed
distinct patterns of PrlR and Prl expression in subpopulations of
cells

Conclusions: The autocrine prolactin
induced by DOX appears to be biologically active as antagonism of its
effects by 1–9 enhances DOX cytotoxicity. 1–9 is highly effective at inhibiting breast cancer
cell line colony formation as a single agent as assessed by three
independent assays. Prl responsiveness appears to be a crucial
regulator of a sub-population of highly clonogenic cells. Targeting
the PrlR to enhance the efficacy of cytotoxic therapy and to eradicate
clonogens that may be responsible for disease relapse after
conventional therapies holds promise in breast cancer therapy

## 2106

## The potential of MRI relaxation
times to predict biological aggressiveness of breast cancer

## Kimijima I, Yoshida S, Sato A, Tamura R. Kita-Fukushima Medical
Center, Date, Japan; Kita-Fukushima Medical Center, Date,
Kenya

Backgrounds: The use of magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) has been increasing in breast imaging, mainly
due to its high resolution and high imaging quality. However, some
parameters visible on MR images may contain information for
identifying the malignant potential of breast cancer. In experimental
studies using DMBA-induced rat breast cancer, we observed a positive
relationship between growth rate and T1 values of tumors. In the
present study, we compared longitudinal and transverse relaxation
times (T1 and T2, respectively) in MR images of invasive breast cancer
with several prognostic factors, and demonstrated their potential to
predict the malignant potential of breast cancer

Patients and Methods: The present
study investigated 60 cases of invasive breast cancer examined by MR
imaging before surgery Pathological findings of nodal state,
histological grade, ER, PR, and Her2/neu were obtained in all cases.
The MRI equipment used was a 1.5T superconducting MRI system. Using
AQnet software, relative values of T1 and T2 were measured as follows.
In T1 weighted images, ROIwas set for the tumor and pectoral major
muscle, then averaged figures from the muscle were divided by those
from the tumor. The values obtained were used as the “relative T1
value” (rT1) in the following investigation. Relative T2 values were
obtained by the same method as T2 weighted images. In order to test
the relationship between these figures and the state of prognostic
factors, Stat View software was useD

Results: Pathological diagnoses for
the 60 cases included 51 cases of invasive ductal cancer, 6 of
invasive lobular cancer, and 3 special types. After dividing the rT1
values into a group of values higher than the mean, and a group of
values lower than the mean, higher rT1 was found to be closely related
to higher grading (grade III) of tumors (p=0.039). However, no
relationship was observed between rT2 and tumor grading. Among the
other factors, a weak positive relationship was observed between lower
rT1 value and ER positivity (p=0.092). There was no relationship
between nodal status and rT1 or rT2

Conclusions: This study successfully
demonstrated the prognostic value of relative relaxation time,
specifically rT1 values, in predicting the biological aggressiveness
of breast cancer. This finding further enhances the potential of MRI
as a highly sensitive imaging tool to not only identify minor lesions
such as intraductal spreading, but also to identify prognostic
information. Furthermore, in consideration of its non-radioactivity,
MRI is an extremely important imaging method in breast cancer
practice

## 2107

## Withdrawn by author

## 2108

## Chinese herb lycium barbarum inhibits growth of hormone responsive
human breast cancer cells by down-regulating C16∞-hydroxylation pathway
of estradiol metabolism

## Telang NT, Li G, Sepkovic DW, Bradlow HL, Wong GYC. Strang
Cancer Research Laboratory, New York, NY; Hackensack University MeD
Center, UMDNJ, Hackensack, NJ

Background: Chinese herbs containing
phytoestrogens have received increasing attention in the management of
estrogen related health issues. The safety and relevance of such herbs
for breast cancer, however, remains to be rigorously evaluated. The
present study was designed to identify mechanistic leads for the
efficacy of nontoxic dose of the Chinese herb Lycium barbarum (LB) on
a cell culture model of hormone responsive breast cancer

Material and Methods: The
ER+ MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cells
maintained in serum depleted medium (0.7% serum, <1 nM estradiol
(E2)) represented the model system. Growth
modulation by physiological levels of E2 and
cellular metabolism of E2 represented the
endpoints for E2 responsiveness. Dose dependent growth inhibition by
an aqueous extract of LB and its effect on E2
metabolism by GC-MS analysis represented the endpoints for
efficacy

Results: A 7 day treatment of MCF-7
cells with 1,5 and 10 nM E2 produced a dose dependent increase in cell
number. A 48 hr treatment with 20 nM E2 induced
a 6.3 fold, 42.8% and 15.4% increase in formation of estrone,
2-hydroxyestrone, and 16∞- hydroxyestrone, respectively. A 7 day
treatment with LB produced a dose dependent growth inhibition. LB at
0.5%(IC53) increased the metabolism of E2 by
predominantly down-regulating the C16∞- hydroxylation pathway.
Specifically, LB treatment resulted in a 13 fold increase in the level
of nonmitogenic proximate metabolite estriol
(E3)

Discussion: The unique activity of LB
via preferential increase in nonmitogenic E3
identifies a novel mechanistic leaD Overall, these data validate an
efficient, mechanism-based approach to screen chinese herbs for breast
cancer. [Support: Daniel and Katherine Mezzalingua, William Randolph
Hearst Foundation, and Horst M. Rechelbacher Foundation]

## 2109

## Haemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in the primary tumor and in
lymph node metastases of breast cancer: a comparative histomorphometrical
study

## Van den Eynden GG, Van der Auwera I, Dirix LY, Vermeulen PB, Van
Marck EA. Lab Pathology University of Antwerp/University Hospital
Antwerp, Edegem; Oncology Center, General Hospital St-Augustinus,
Wilrijk, Wilrijk, Antwerp, Belgium

Introduction: Breast cancer
(BC) often spreads from the primary tumor (PT) to regional lymph nodes
(LNs). Tumor cells in LN metastases (LNMs) may then provide a
reservoir of cells leading to distant, lethal metastases.
Nevertheless, recent models of BC metastasis include dissemination to
distant organs both via the LNs and directly through the blood stream.
Although the role of haemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in the PT
growth and dissemination has extensively been studied, only few data
are available on their role in the growth and progression of LNMs of
BC The aim of this study was to obtain histological data on hypoxia
response, haemangiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis in BC LNMs and to
compare these processes in the LNMs and PT

Materials and Methods: One
representative tissue block was selected of both the PT and a LNM of
55 BC patients Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was performed for
Carbonic Anhydrase 9 (CA9), Hypoxia Inducible Factor-1 (HIF-1 ) and DEC-1. To visualize proliferating blood and
lymphatic endothelial cells an IHC doublestaining for respectively
CD34/Ki-67 and for D2-40/Ki-67 was done. Blood vessel endothelial cell
proliferation fraction (BVECP) (%), lymphatic vessel endothelial cell
proliferation fraction (LVECP) (%) and tumor cell proliferation
fraction (TCP) (%) of the PT and of the LN metastases were assessed at
the tumor/normal tissue interface. CA9, DEC-1 and Hif-1
 expression in the PT and in the LN metastases were
assesseD

Results: Mean BVECP and TCP in
the LNMs were 6.56% and 26.64%, respectively. BVECP and TCP strongly
correlated in LNMs (r = 0.802, p < 0.001). Comparable results were
found in the PTs BVECP and TCP of PTs and corresponding LNMs strongly
correlated (BVECP r = 0.537, p < 0.001; TCP r = 0.702, p <
0.001). CA9 was expressed in 18.0% and 43.4% of LNMs and PTs,
respectively Hif-1 was expressed in 30.9% and 50.9% of LNMs and PTs.
CA9 and Hif-1 expression strongly correlated (LNMs p < 0.001;
PTs p < 0.005). Mean BVECP was higher in LNMs and PTs with hypoxia
(p < 0.002). CA9 and Hif-1 expression in the PT and LNMs were correlated (CA9 p
< 0.001, Hif-1 p = 0.08). Lymphangiogenesis assesment (LVECP) is
ongoing

Conclusions: Our data
demonstrate that the growth of BC LNMs is haemangiogenesis dependent.
Newly formed blood vessels in BC LNMs might be one of the routes by
which haematogenous dissemination of tumor cells in BC occurs.
Furthermore, the hypoxia response and angiogenesis in the PT predict
the hypoxia response and angiogenesis in the LNMs. This is in contrast
with our observations in liver metastases of BC of which 90% grow
according to a non-angiogenic ‘replacement’ growth pattern. Hypoxia
response and angiogenesis in BC metastases, and therefore the success
of anti-angiogenic therapy, might therefore be sitedependent

## 2110

## Phenotypic characterization of inflammatory breast cancers on
tissue microarrays: a study of 109 cases with 25 proteins

## Charafe-Jauffret E, Tarpin C, Esterni B, Bertucci F, Xerri L,
Birnbaum D, Jacquemier J, Viens P. Institut Paoli Calmettes,
Marseille, France

Background: Inflammatory breast
carcinomas (IBC) are defined clinically and/or pathologically but less
is known on their molecular characterization. We proposed here an
immunophenotypic definition of IBC from a study of 109 IBC with 25
proteins, This larger study will test candidate markers from two
previous smaller studies

Material and Methods: A tissue
microarrays (TMA) was constructed from paraffin-embedded samples of a
series of 109 IBC and 74 locally advanced breast cancers (LABC) used
as controls. The expression of 25 proteins were tested by
immunohistochemistry. Seven proteins were obtained from an
“inflammatory signature “previously defined by cDNA analysis, five
were from an immunophenotypic characterization (Estrogen receptor ER,
E-Cadherin, ERBB2, proliferation index Mib1, sialomucin MUC1)
established from a previous study, three were angiogenic factors, five
were basal and luminal differentiation molecules, two were protein
possibly involved in specific response to chemotherapy, and three were
other “classical” proteins in breast cancers (anti-apoptotic Bcl2,
progesterone receptor PR, p53). The expression was compared between
IBC and LABC, and in IBC group between those who presented dermal
lymphatic emboli or no. Main features were noteD

Results: IBC patients are younger
(p=0.01), higher grade tumors (p=10−10),
with more metastatic lymph nodes (p=10−7),
more peritumoral vascular emboli (p=10−8)
compared with LABC. We defined phenotypic differences between IBC and
LABC. We confirmed the previous phenotypic characterization of IBC
with ER, E-Cadherin, ERBB2, Mib1 and MUC1 but we did not confirm at
the protein level the transcriptional signature of IBC. There was no
phenotypic difference between IBC with or without dermal lymphatic
emboli

Discussion: This phenotypic
characterization of 109 IBC with 25 proteins may be helpful to better
define this entity. We confirmed a previous immunophenotypic
signature, we did not validate at the protein level our
transcriptional signature of IBC. Some of the proteins differentially
expressed in IBC may be of special interest as prognostic factors or
specific therapeutic targets, but still need further
investigations

## 2111

## PIK3CA mutations in breast cancer: an attractive target for small
molecule inhibitors and a potential biomarker for
chemoresistance

## Margeli M, Ramirez J, Taron M, Rosell R, Cirauqui B, Mendez P,
Castella E, Barnadas A, Sanchez-Ronco M, Santarpia M. Catalan Inst of
Oncol, H Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain; H de Sant
Pau, Barcelona, Spain; A University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain; H
Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain

## Background:
Genetic alterations of PIK3CA consist exclusively of somatic
missense mutations and are clustered to specific sites in the
coding sequence (exons 9 and 20). Two of the most frequently
altered residues, E542 and E545, are located within the helical
domain (exon 9) of p110a. These residues are often substituted with
lysine in tumors of colon and brain. Another targeted residue,
H1047, resides in the kinase domain (exon 20) and is frequently
substituted with an arginine in tumors of the breast, colon and
brain. These PI3-kinase mutations – E542K, E545K and H1047R –
correlate with elevated catalytic activity in in vitro kinase assays. The
mutant-transformed cells show constitutive phosphorylation of Akt,
of p70 S6 kinase and of 4E-binding protein 1

## Materials and Methods:
We have analyzed 35 surgically resected stage I-III sporadic
primary breast tumor biopsies with a median follow-up of 33 months.
The presence of the PI3-kinase mutations E542K, E545K and H1047R
was assessed in extracted DNA by the 5-nuclease assay (Taqman)
using the ABI Prism 7900HT Sequence Detection System (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA)

## Results:
Mutations were found in 9/35 patients (25.7%): 5 H1047R; 2
E542K, and 2 E545K. There was no correlation between mutations and
expression of estrogen and progesterone receptors, lymph node
metastases or ERBB2 expression, confirming three previous reports
(Campbell, Bachman, Levine) and in contrast with a fourth report
(Saal). A significant association between PIK3CA mutations and
older age was observed (Table 1)

## Conclusion:
We have observed PIK3CA mutations in a large number of patients,
and for the first time, have found an association with older age.
No correlation was observed with pathological characteristics. The
median follow-up is not long enough to determine prognostic
involvement. A kinase with a cancer-specific somatic mutation is an
ideal target for a small molecule inhibitor that could be developed
into an effective anticancer drug. Data on more patients will be
presented 

## 2112

## Nectin-3: a putative tumour suppressor in human breast
cancer

## Martin TA, Harrison GM, Watkins G, Lane J, Jiang WG. Wales
College of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom

Background: The Nectin family of
integral molecules are involved in formation & functioning of
Adherens & Tight Junctions Aberrant expression is thought to be
associated with cancer. This study aimed to ascertain the distribution
and role of Nectin-3 in human breast cancer

Methods: Breast cancer primary
tumours and matched background tissue were processed for frozen
sections & RNA extraction Nectin-3 was analysed at mRNA &
protein levels using IHC & Q-PCR 40 human cancer cell lines were
screened for expression of Nectin-3 An invasive breast cell line,
MDA-MB-231 (MDAWT) exhibiting aberrant
Nectin-3 expression was chosen for introduction of the Nectin-3 gene
(MDAN3) via amplification from normal
breast cDNA & cloning into a pEF6/V5-His TOPO plasmid before
electroporation. Successful expression was confirmed by RT-PCR,
Western blotting & fluorescent microscopy. Functional testing was
carried out using cell invasion & motility assays with changes in
tight junction function by trans-epithelial resistance (TER). A
hammerhead ribozyme transgene was generated (MDAΔ
N3) to knockout aberrant Nectin-3 expression

Results: IHC revealed that Nectin-3
expression showed clear changes in distribution between normal and
cancerous cells. However, there was little difference in overall
expression when analysed by Q-PCR. All the cancer cell lines screened
showed aberrant expression for Nectin-3. Nectin-3 transformed cells
(MDAN3) showed retarded invasion, even
when treated with HGF (40 ng/ml) compared to
MDAWT cells
(MDAN3 untreated 16.8±4.96 cells, HGF
treated 22.6±4.33; MDAWT untreated
65.6±4.93, HGF treated 93.1±6.12). Invasion was significantly
different between MDAN3 and
MDAWT cells (p<0.001) and when
treated with HGF (p<0.02). MDAN3 cells
were significantly less motile than MDAWT
cells, irrespective of treatment with HGF (number of cells:
MDAN3 4.8±1.5 versus
MDAWT 21.8±2.6, p<0.001; HGF treated
MDAN3 9.6±1.9 versus HGF treated
MDAWT 38.4±3.8, p<0.001). Changes in
TER were measured over 2 h for the MDAN3
and MDAWT cells, with the
MDAN3 cells showing less change in
resistance after treatment with HGF (Change in resistance after 2 h:
MDAN3 57±2.5 vs
MDAWT −98±3, p<0.001). As
anticipated, MDA cells showed both increased invasiveness &
motility when compared to MDAWT cells
(invasion: MDA , p<0.001; motility: MDA , p<0.001)

Conclusion: The staining pattern in
human breast cancer tissues indicated that the distribution of the
molecule is more crucial than the level of expression. The
introduction of Nectin-3 into human breast cancer cells results in
breast cancer cells with reduced invasive phenotype and increased
tight junction function; conversely, breast cancer cells with Nectin-3
knock-out showed increased invasion and motility. This, together with
the reported aberrant expression of other Nectins in human cancer,
indicates that Nectin-3 may be a key component in the formation of
cell-cell junctions and be a putative suppressor molecule to the
invasion of breast cancer cells

## 2113

## Microarray analysis of breast tumor tissue from African American
and Ugandan women show that high risk biological features are
similar

## Bhatia V, Wabinga H, Baehner F, Mbidde EK, Luce JL. UCSF, San
Francisco, CA; Uganda Cancer Institute, Makerere University, Kampala,
Uganda

Background: We have previously shown
that differences in overall survival for African American women at San
Francisco General Hospital (SFGH) cannot be fully explained by
differences in socioeconomic status or delivery of care. Among hormone
receptor negative patients, we found that the phenotype ER-/PR-/Her2-
is more frequent in young African American women and contributes to
their poor survival. Furthermore, the survival advantage of hormone
positivity is smaller for African American women than for all other
ethnic groups. Survival for Ugandan women with breast cancer is
reportedly very poor, counfounded by late stage presentation and lack
of access to therapy. IHC testing is not routinely done in Uganda;
therefore, it is not known what the prevalence of the ER-/PR-/Her2-
phenotype is in Uganda. The distribution and interaction of ER and PR,
as well as their isoforms, ER , ER cx, and PRB, are not well characterized in
non-Caucasian women, and may reveal other unique high risk biological
features for both African and African American women. Methods: We have created a tissue bank of
breast cancer tumor paraffin blocks from 109 patients of African
American descent identified in the SFGH tumor registry and 50 Ugandan
patients identified in the Kampala Cancer Registry. A tumor tissue
microarray analysis of all patients is being performed, utilizing IHC
for the primary markers ER , ER , and HER-2 Neu, as well as secondary markers PRA and
B, ER cx, and AKT.

Results: pending

Conclusions: The biological features
of breast tumor tissue from African American and Ugandan women are
similar. The high prevalence of ER-/PR-/Her2- tumors may contribute to
the comparable poor survival in these groups, and is a subject for
future analysis

## 3001

## Risk of early relapse in post-menopausal women with early stage,
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) breast cancer on tamoxifen.

## McArthur HL, Olivotto I, Gelmon KA, Speers CH, Chia S, Ellard S,
Kennecke HF. British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver/
Victoria/Kelowna, BC, Canada

Background: Postmenopausal women with
ER+ breast cancer benefit from an aromatase inhibitor (AI) after 2 to
3 years of tamoxifen. Upfront AI therapy, however, may be suitable for
patients at risk of early relapse. The purpose of this study was to
identify predictors of early relapse among postmenopausal women with
ER+ breast cancer on adjuvant tamoxifen.

Methods: The British Columbia Breast
Cancer Outcomes Database was used to identify 4159 women aged 50 or
older, diagnosed between 1986 and 1999 with stage I-III, ER+ breast
cancer who were treated with tamoxifen after adequate locoregional
therapy +/− chemotherapy. A relapse was any local, regional or distant
recurrence or death from breast cancer without a recorded metastasis.
Kaplan-Meier estimates of relapse rates during the first 2.5 years
after diagnosis were determined. The effect of prognostic variables on
time to recurrence was examined by assessing the distribution of
variables within three relapse categories: early (within 2.5 years of
diagnosis), delayed (more than 2.5 years after diagnosis) and no
documented relapse.

Results: Median age at diagnosis was
65. Median follow-up was 7.4 years. 15% of patients received adjuvant
chemotherapy. Relapse rates were 7.4%, 14.5% and 25.9% within 2.5, 5.0
and 10.0 years after diagnosis, respectively. Predictors of early
relapse were Grade III pathology, low-positive ER status and
increasing lymph node involvement (Table 1). In the analysis of
prognostic variables among relapse groups, neither lymphovascular
invasion, age, tumor size nor administration of chemotherapy
identified early vs. delayed relapses. Her2neu and progesterone
receptor (PR) status will be determined for a subgroup of this
population. 

Conclusion: Postmenopausal women with
ER+ breast cancer who are at high risk of early relapse while on
tamoxifen can potentially be identified. Grade III pathology, positive
nodal status and low ER positivity can identify patients at a higher
and earlier risk of relapse. Such patients may be optimal candidates
for upfront AI therapy. Conversely, sequential tamoxifen-AI therapy
may be most appropriate in the absence of these higher risk
factors.

## 3002

## Outcome and prognostic factors among patients with node-negative
invasive breast carcinoma that is one centimeter or less in size (stage
1; T1a,b N0 M0): the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center
experience.

## Hanrahan EO, Gonzalez-Angulo AM, Broglio K, Meric-Bernstam F,
Cristofanilli M, Buccholz TA, Hortobagyi GN, Valero V. M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background: The diagnosis of stage
T1a,b N0 M0 breast cancer (BC) is increasing due to mammographic
screening. Controversy surrounds the prognosis of these patients
following locoregional therapy and the need for adjuvant systemic
therapy. A number of retrospective reviews of outcome have been
reported, but most have small patient numbers and/or short follow-up.
The purpose of this study was to perform a retrospective analysis of
outcome and prognostic factors for patients with stage T1a,b N0 M0 BC
seen at M. D. Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC).

Methods: All cases of stage T1a,b N0
M0 BC seen at MDACC from 1980 through 1999 were identified in the
Tumor Registry database. A retrospective chart review was performed.
Patients with prior diagnosis of invasive BC were excluded. Patient,
tumor and treatment characteristics were tabulated. Survival
distributions were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. Groups were
compared by the log-rank test. Available histology is currently being
reviewed and more detailed information on histopathologic prognostic
factors is being collected. A multivariate analysis of prognostic
factors will then be performe.D

Results: 517 cases of T1a,b N0 M0 BC
were identified. Median age was 56 years (yrs). Most patients had T1b
primaries [5.1–10 mm] (76%) and invasive ductal carcinoma (77%), and
24% of patients had received adjuvant systemic therapy. Of those with
currently available parameters, most had no lymphovascular invasion
[LVI] (n=253 of 290), nuclear grade 2 (n=276 of 446), and estrogen
receptor positive disease (n=280 of 363). Median follow-up was 9 yrs
(range 1.8–24 yrs) for those alive at last follow-up. Estimated
relapse free survival (RFS) and breast cancer specific survival (BCSS)
rates respectively were: 90% and 94% at 10 yrs; 87% and 91% at 20 yrs.
The only factors significantly associated with inferior RFS on
univariate analysis were age <50 yrs at diagnosis (10-yr RFS 83%
for age <50 yrs vs. 93% for age >50 yrs, p = 0.0001) and LVI
(10-yr RFS 80% with LVI vs. 92% without LVI, p = 0.01). There was a
trend towards worse outcome for T1b versus T1a primaries (10-yr RFS
87% vs. 94%, p = 0.18). LVI was the only factor significantly
associated with inferior BCSS (80% vs. 95% at 10 yrs, p = 0.01)

Conclusions: Outcome for patients
with stage T1a,b N0 M0 BC managed at MDACC was very good. Patients
with age <50 yrs at diagnosis or with LVI had significantly
inferior RFS. A comprehensive analysis of prognostic factors will be
available at the meeting. This may better characterize patients with
stage T1a,b N0 M0 BC who are at higher risk of relapse and might
benefit from systemic therapy.

## 3003

## A novel prognostic immunohistochemical biomarker panel for estrogen
receptor expressing breast cancer.

## Ross DT, Ring BZ, Seitz RS, Beck R, Shasteen WJ, Tarr SM, Cheang
MC, Yoder BJ, Budd GT, Nielsen TO, Hicks DG, Estopinal NC. Applied
Genomics Inc., Sunnyvale, CA; Applied Genomics Inc., Huntsville, AL;
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH; University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Huntsville, Huntsville, AL

Background: Gene expression
signatures have been identified that distinguish biologically and
clinically significant breast tumor diversity. We have used gene
expression data to target the production of hundreds of novel antibody
reagents to explore whether a panel of targeted immunohistochemistry
reagents can distinguish similar tumor diversity and identify patients
at increased risk of poor outcome.

Methods: Eighty novel and seven
commercially available antisera were used to stain tissue arrays
containing a retrospective breast cancer cohort from the Comprehensive
Cancer Center of Huntsville (550 patients). Cox proportional hazard
analysis was used to identify a recurrence score algorithm that uses
only five antisera to predict risk of recurrence in estrogen
receptor-positive, lymph node-negative patients. To validate this
model and antibody panel, we then tested the prognostic association of
this prospectively defined algorithm by staining two independent
tissue array cohorts, with linked clinical follow-up data.

Results: In both validation cohorts,
the Kaplan-Meier estimates of recurrence confirmed that the Cox model
distinguished estrogen receptor-positive patients with poor outcomes.
In a cohort assembled at the British Columbia Cancer Agency (440
patients total) the five antisera algorithm identified ER+ patients
with a high risk of recurrence that showed an overall 5 year survival
rate of 56% compared to 74% for moderate and 89% for good (p = 0.003).
In the Cleveland Clinic Foundation Cohort (292 patients total), the
Cox model identified ER+ ‘bad’ patients with a five year recurrence
rate of 51% compared to about 84% for patients classified as either
moderate or good (p=0.0022). Although both cohorts were underpowered
to test the association of the prognosticator with ER+ lymph node
negative patients, using multivariable analysis the calculated risk of
recurrence was independent of stage, grade and lymph node
status.

Conclusion: A panel of five
antibodies can significantly improve upon traditional prognosticators
in predicting outcome for estrogen receptor positive breast cancer
patients. Additional retrospective and prospective studies focused on
early stage patients are indicated for further validation.

## 3004

## Statistical and pathway analysis of multiple prognostic gene
signatures in lymph node negative (LNN) primary breast cancer.

## Wang Y, Klijn J, Yu J, Zhang Y, Sieuwerts A, Berns E, Atkins D,
Foekens J. A Johnson & Johnson Company, San Diego, CA; Erasmus MC
/ Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, 3000 DR, Rotterdam,
Netherlands

Background: In our earlier
genome-wide measurements of gene expression we have identified a
76-gene signature that predicts distant metastasis for lymph
node-negative (LNN) breast cancer patients (The Lancet 365:671–679, 2005). Like previously
published gene signatures, the 76-gene prognostic signature virtually
lacks overlap to other signatures’ gene lists. The aim of this study
was to evaluate multiple gene signatures for the same questions and
understand why multiple signatures differ in gene content.

Material and Methods: In order to
evaluate alternative gene signatures, we repeated the gene selection
and signature construction procedures used for discovery of the
76-gene signature using multiple training sets of the patients.
Five-hundred training sets of 80 ER+ patients each were randomly
selected from the total of 209 ER+ patients. The remaining 129 ER+
patients were served as the testing set. A signature was built from
each of the training sets using Cox proportional-hazards regression.
The signature was validated in the corresponding testing set. Overlaps
in the gene lists of the 500 signatures were determined and compared
to 500 randomly selected gene lists. Correlation of the expression
patterns was evaluated between different gene signatures. Furthermore,
the genes in each signature were assigned to functional classes using
pathway analysis tools. Pathways that cover significant numbers of
genes were selected (p-value <0.01). Common pathways from the
prognostic signatures were identified. The same analysis was carried
out in 136 ER- patients.

Results: We produced the ROC curve on
the testing set and used AUC to assess performance. The average AUC
for the 500 signatures for ER+ patients is 0.66 (standard deviation:
0.05). This result indicates that the performance of the selected
signature is highly stable with different sample selections. The
overlap of the 500 gene signatures for ER+ patients was 2.5-fold
higher than the 500 random gene lists and 7 genes appeared in more
than 200 of the signatures. Several pathways were significantly
over-represented in these prognostic signatures, suggesting that
common pathways might be involved in tumor recurrence. Immune response
was found in both the ER+ and ER- signatures while cell cycle, DNA
replication, and DNA repair were dominantly associated with the ER+
signatures.

Discussion: Our result suggests that
alternative gene signatures with similar prognostic value can be
produced because many genes are significantly correlated to distant
metastasis-free survival. Genes that belong to a particular signature
could be substituted with other genes of similar expression patterns.
Although the prognostic signatures differ in their gene lists, each
and every gene signature represents several common pathways that
highlight the underlying mechanisms of disease progression.

## 3005

## Basal-like breast carcinomas: clinical outcome with
chemotherapy.

## Banerjee SN, Reis-Filho JS, Ashley S, Steele D, Ashworth A,
Lakhani S, Smith IE. Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom;
Institute of Cancer Research, London, United Kingdom; Life and Health
Sciences Research Institute, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal;
School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Mayne Medical
School, Herston, Queensland, Australia

Background: Grade III invasive ductal
carcinomas of no special type (IDC-NST) constitute a heterogeneous
group of tumours with different clinical behaviour and response to
chemotherapy. It has been demonstrated that up to 25% of all grade III
IDC-NST harbour a basal-like phenotype, as defined by gene expresssion
profiling or immunohistochemistry for basal cytokeratins.
Patients with basal-like breast carcinomas (BLBC) are reported to
have a shorter disease-free and overall survival.

Patients and methods: We performed a
retrospective analysis of 50 patients with BLBC (as defined by
expression of cytokeratins 5/6, 14 or 17) and 50 age-, nodal status-
and grade-matched controls. Histological features, immunohistochemical
findings for oestrogen (ER) and progesterone (PgR) receptors and HER2,
clinical outcome and survival after adjuvant chemotherapy were
compared between the two groups.

Results: BLBCs were more likely to be
negative for ER (p<0.001), PgR (p<0.001) and HER2 (p=0.005) than
controls. Patients with BLBCs had a significantly higher recurrence
rate (p<0.001) and were associated with a significantly shorter
disease-free and overall survival (p<0.001 and p=0.03,
respectively). In the group of patients that received
anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy (BLBC n=48, control n=50),
the disease free survival was significantly shorter in the BLBC group
(p=0.01). Multivariate analysis demonstrated that the basal-like
status was the only independent prognostic factor for disease free
survival (p=0.0125).

Discussion: BLBCs are a distinct
clinical and pathological entity, characterised by high nuclear grade,
lack of hormone receptors and HER2 expression and a more aggressive
clinical course. Standard adjuvant chemotherapy appears less effective
in these tumours. New therapeutic approaches are indicate. 

## 3006

## A prospective risk model for neutropenic complications in
early-stage breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant
chemotherapy.

## Lyman GH, Kuderer NM, Shayne M, Dale DC, Wolff D, Culakova E,
Poniewierski MS, Crawford J, for the ANC Study Group. University of
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY; University
of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA; Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC

Introduction: Myelosuppression
including severe and febrile neutropenia (SFN) remains the major
dose-limiting toxicity of cancer chemotherapy. Previous studies have
demonstrated that the risk of neutropenic complications is greatest
during the first cycle of chemotherapy. A prospective, nationwide
study was undertaken to develop and validate risk models for SFN in
patients receiving cancer chemotherapy.

Methods: Between March, 2002 and the
present, more than 1,200 consecutive patients with breast cancer
initiating a new chemotherapy regimen have been prospectively
registered at 115 randomly selected practice sites from throughout the
U.S. Data on 974 early-stage patients completing at least one cycle of
a standard adjuvant regimen are available. Multivariate logistic
regression models for SFN were developed based on a priori defined
patient-, disease- and treatment-related variables. Model predictive
test performance characteristics were estimate.D

Results: Of 438 patients (45%)
experiencing one or more SFN events, 318 (73%) did so in cycle 1.
Independent predictors of first cycle SFN include: CAF
(OR=3.0,P=.067); CEF (OR=2.9,P=.075), TAC (OR=5.5,P=.007), docetaxel
(OR=6.1, P=.035), anthracycline-based chemotherapy (OR=4.09,P=.023),
diabetes (OR=1.7, P=.002), planned RDI >85% (OR=3.5,P<.001).
Factors associated with a decreased risk of SFN in the model included
a Q14 day schedule (P=.004), glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
(P<.001), baseline neutrophil count (P=.03) and prophylactic
colony-stimulating factor (OR=0.37, P=.044). Model Goodness of fit was
excellent (P<.001) with R2=0.321 and
c-statistic = 0.753 [95% CI, 0.72–0.79]. Model discrimination was
optimized for a SFN threshold of 20% with the following performance
characteristics [±95%CL]: sensitivity=91% [87%–93%]; specificity= 40%
[36%–44%]; diagnostic odds ratio=6.4 [4.1–9.8]; predictive value (PV)
+ = 42% [38%–46%], PV− = 90 [86%–93%]. The 70% of patients with a
predicted risk of SFN >20% experience an average risk of 42% while
the 30% with a predicted risk <20% have an average risk of 10%. A
weighted risk score [0–100] based on the logistic regression
coefficients has been developed to aid supportive care decision
making.

Discussion: A risk model for early
neutropenic complications in patients with ESBC receiving adjuvant
chemotherapy has been developed. This model will be validated in a
separate group of patients in phase II of this ongoing prospective
registry study. Once validated, this model should aid the
identification of high risk patients who are candidates for targeted
prophylaxis with a myeloid growth factor.

## 3007

## The percentage of positive/dissected nodes is a useful prognostic
indicator of postmastectomy recurrence and mortality.

## Truong PT, Olivotto IA, Lee JC, Kader HA, Speers CH, Berthelet
E. Vancouver Island Centre, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria,
BC, Canada

Objective: The AJCC staging system
for breast cancer classifies nodal involvement by number (#) of
positive nodes (N+) but not # of dissected nodes. This study evaluates
the prognostic impact of the percentage (%) of positive/dissected
nodes in breast cancer relapse and survival.

Methods: Data were analyzed for 2713
women with pT1-4, N0-3, M0 breast cancer treated with mastectomy.
Ten-yr Kaplan-Meier locoregional relapse (LRR), distant relapse (DR),
and overall survival (OS) stratified by # N+, # dissected nodes, and %
positive/ dissected nodes were examined. Cox regression analyses were
performed with and without % positive nodes in the model.

Results: Median follow-up was
7.6 yrs. 1310 patients had N0, 901 had 1–3 N+, and 502 had ≥4 N+. LRR,
DR, and OS correlated significantly with # N+ and % N+ but not with #
dissected nodes. LRR were 8.7%, 15.8%, and 19.8% in patients with 0,
1–3, and ≥4 N+ respectively, (p<0.0001). LRR were 13.4% and 12.3%
in patients with ≤10 vs. >10 dissected nodes (p=0.27). The cutoff
at which the most significant differences in LRR and DR were observed
was 25%. On multivariate analysis, the % N+ was the most significant
factor for all three outcomes. Compared to N0 disease, the presence of
25–40% N+ was associated with hazard ratios (HR) of 2.18 (95%
confidence interval CI 1.24–3.86) for LRR, 3.42 (95% CI 2.44–4.81) for
DR, and 2.22 (95% CI 1.64–3.01) for OS, all p values <0.001.
Corresponding HRs with >40% N+ were 3.16 (95% CI 2.01–4.95), 4.63
(95% CI 3.53–6.08), and 2.90 (95% CI 2.30–3.66).

Conclusion: The percentage of
positive nodes is a highly significant prognostic factor for
locoregional recurrence, distant recurrence, and survival and should
be considered in staging and therapeutic decisions for women with
breast cancer. 
 

## 3008

## The prognostic impact of the axillary lymph node ratio in patients
with micrometastatic node-positive breast cancer.

## Truong PT, Cserni G, Woodward W, Janni W, Tai P, Vlastos G,
Vinh- Hung V, the International Nodal Ratio Working Group. British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver Island Centre, Victoria, BC, Canada;
Bács-Kiskun County Hospital, Kecskemét, Hungary; University of Texas,
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX;
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitát, München, Germany; University of
Saskatchewan, Regina, SK, Canada; Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva,
Switzerland; AZ-VUB, Jette, Belgium

Purpose: To evaluate survival
outcomes among patients with micrometastatic nodal involvement, and
compare lymph node ratio (LNR)-based classification versus pN-derived
classification.

Methods: Data were analyzed for 2071
women identified by the SEER database with primary invasive carcinoma
diagnosed between 1988–97 with pT1-2 breast cancer and micrometastatic
involvement of the axillary nodes (largest nodal metastasis <=2 mm,
i.e. pN1a according to the former AJCC Cancer Staging). Primary
end-points were overall survival (OS) and breast cancer-specific
survival (BCSS), calculated with Kaplan-Meier product limit methods,
and compared using log-rank chi-square tests. Categories of pN-derived
classification were <=3 and >3 involved nodes. Categories of
LNR-based classification were <=0.25 and LNR >0.25.

Results: Median follow up time was
7 years. Median age was 56 years (range 24–97), T size 18 mm (0–50),
number of positive nodes 1 (1–36), number nodes examined 15 (1–46).
Survival differences are summarized in the Table and Figures below.
 

Conclusion: The absolute number of
positive nodes and the ratio of positive:examined nodes are both
strong prognostic factors for survival in women with micrometastic
nodal involvement. Compared to absolute numbers of positive nodes, the
LNR provided a wider distinction between prognostic subgroups and
should be considered in adjuvant therapy decisions. 

## 3009

## Ki-67/MIB-1 as prognostic marker in women with early breast cancer:
a meta-analysis of published studies involving 10.958 patients.

## Azambuja E, Cardoso F, Castro Jr G, Colozza M, Larsimont D,
Sotiriou C, Piccart MJ, Paesmans M. Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels,
Belgium; Azienda Ospedaliera San Sisto, Perugia, Italy

Background: Ki-67 or MIB-1 antibodies
can evaluate the proliferative activity of breast cancer, although
their use as a prognostic marker in early breast cancer is not
standard in treatment decision-making.

Methods: In order to better define
Ki-67/MIB-1 prognostic value, we performed a systematic review of
studies published in English, through Medline, that evaluated the
impact of these markers by immunohistochemistry on disease free
survival (DFS) in early breast cancer. Two independent reviewers
extracted the data. Harzard ratio (HR) for DFS or event-free (EFS) was
derived and fixed-effects or random-effects models were used for
meta-analysis.

Results: Sixty-four studies were
identified (published between 1989 and 2004) and 37 were evaluable for
the meta-analysis, including 10.958 pts. Reasons for exclusion were
missing data that permitted the HR calculation or no information about
the DFS. In total, 42.0% of pts were considered as having tumor
positive for the expression of Ki-67/MIB-1 according to the cut-offs
defined by the authors. Data show that Ki-67/MIB-1 positivity is
associated with higher probability of relapse, with an overall HR=1.93
(95%CI 1.75–2.13; p value for heterogeneity 0.02). In the subgroup of
node-negative pts (3423), the combined HR for relapse was 2.20 (95%CI
1.78–2.72), with a borderline heterogeneity (p=0.08). For
node-positive pts (1430), only the fixed-effects model could be used,
leading to an estimated of HR=1.60 (95%CI 1.36–1.88; p value for
heterogeneity p=0.68).

Conclusion: Our meta-analysis
suggests that Ki-67/MIB-1 positivity confers a higher risk of relapse
in pts with early breast cancer. However, since this meta-analysis was
not based on individual patient data, further confirmation of the
independent value of Ki-67/MIB-1 is neede.D

## 3010

## Clinicopathologic significance of the basal-like subtype in breast
cancer: comparison with hormone receptor and Her2/neu expressing
phenotypes.

## Kim MJ, Ro JY, Gong GY. Asan Medical Center; Cornell University,
Methodist Hospital

Background: DNA microarray profiling
studies on invasive breast carcinomas (ca) have identified distinct
subtypes of tumors showing different clinical outcomes. These include
luminal/ER+, normal breast-like,
Her2/neu+, and basal-like types. Among of these subtypes, basal-like
ca is characterized by the expression of basal markers without
expression of ER or Her2/neu and known to be associated with a poor
prognosis in Western countries. However, the clinicopathologic
characteristics of the basal-like ca in Korean population have not
been describe.D

Design: We have examined the
expression of basal (CK5 and 14) and luminal (CK8/18) cytokeratin,
EGFR, c-kit, hormone receptors (HR), p53, and Her2/ neu in 776
invasive breast ca from 1993 to 1998, using tissue microarray
technique, and categorized them into five subgroups (basal-like,
HR+,
Her2/neu+, both HR and
Her2/neu+, and null subtype) based on
the immunohistochemical (IHC) results. Basal-like phenotype was
defined as tumors expressing one or more of the basal markers without
HR and Her2/neu positivity. Cases with ER and/or PR expression without
Her2/neu positivity were designated as
HR+phenotype. Cases with both HR and
Her2/neu positivity were regarded as both HR and
Her2/neu+subtype. Her2/neu positivity
was defined as tumors with IHC score 3+.
Null phenotype was regarded as tumors all negative for HR and Her2/
neu as well as basal markers.

Results: Of the 776 invasive breast
ca, 98 (12.6%) basal-like, 345 (44.5%) HR+,
133 (17.1%) Her2/ neu+, 61 (7.9%) both HR
and Her2/neu+, and 139 (17.9%) null
subtypes were included. Basal-like ca frequently coexpressed
p53(59/98, 60.2%). Histologically, most of the basal-like ca were
invasive ductal ca, NOS (86/98, 87.8%) with higher nuclear and/or
histologic grades, and most of metaplastic ca (6/8, 75.0%) were
basal-like ca. Basal-like ca were associated with larger tumor size
(3.4 cm) than HR+ group (2.8 cm) (p=0.018).
Nodal stage was significantly higher in
Her2/neu+ group than basal-like subtype
(p=0.010).
Her2/neu+ group showed higher tumor
stage than basallike subtype (p=0.045). Distant metastasis was most frequent in
Her2/neu+ subtype (33.8%). Basal-like
subtype displayed poorer prognosis than HR+
subtype (p=0.076), however,
Her2/neu+ subtype showed the worst
survival rate (p=0.048).

Conclusion: Basal-like breast ca
appeared to be an aggressive phenotype of breast ca based on the
higher histologic and/or nuclear grades as well as frequent p53
expression and tended to show worse clinical outcome compared with
HR+ subtype, however, this difference
was not statistically significant. Instead,
Her2/neu+ subtype was the worst subgroup
of breast ca with poorer prognosis than basal-like subtype (p=0.048). Her2/neu status appeared to be
one of the most important prognostic factors of breast ca in our
study, and therefore knowledge of the Her2/neu status is required in
all breast ca patients irrespective of other clinicopathologic
parameters.

## 3011

## Prognostic value of pathologic complete response after primary
chemotherapy in patients with hormone receptor-positive breast
cancer.

## Guarneri V, Broglio KR, Kau S, Cristofanilli M, Buzdar AU,
Valero V, Buchholz TA, Meric F, Middleton L, Hortobagyi GN, Gonzalez-
Angulo AM. The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX

Rationale The achievement of
pathologic complete response (pCR) in breast cancer (BC) patients
treated with primary chemotherapy (PC) is the most reliable predictor
of survival. Patients with hormonal receptor (HR) positive tumors are
less likely to achieve a pCR; however, the prognostic value of pCR in
these patients is not well characterized. The aim of our analysis was
to evaluate whether HR-status can influence the prognostic
significance of pCR.

Patient and Methods This
retrospective analysis included 1731 patients with stage I-III
non-inflammatory breast cancer (BC) treated between 1988 and 2005 with
primary chemotherapy (PC). Ninety-one percent of patients received
anthracycline-based PC and 66% received additional taxane. pCR was
defined as no evidence of invasive tumor in the breast and axillary lymph nodes.

Results Median age was 49 years,
(range 19–83 years). Sixty-seven percent (n=1163) had HR-positive
tumors. pCR was observed in 225 (13%) of patients, 91 of them had
HR-positive tumors. A significant survival benefit for patients who
achieve pCR compared with no pCR was observed regardless or HR status:
the 5-year overall survival (OS) rates in the HR-positive group were
96.4% vs 84.5%, respectively, p=0.04, while the 5-year
progression-free survival (PFS) rates were 91.1% vs 65.3%,
respectively (p<0.0001). For the HR-negative group, the five-year
OS rates were 83.9% vs 67.4%, for pCR and non-pCR, respectively
(p=0.003), and the 5- year PFS rates were 83.4% vs 50.0%, respectively
(p<0.0001). After adjustment for HR status, clinical stage, and
nuclear grade, patients who did not achieve a pCR had 1.68 times
increased risk of death.

Conclusion pCR is associated with
better outcome regardless of HR status in BC patients who receive
PC.

## 3012

## Breast cancer characteristics and 10 year survival in young
women.

## Kaplan HG, Malmgren JA, Atwood MK. Swedish Cancer Institute,
Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, WA; HealthSTAT Consulting, Inc.,
Seattle, WA; University of Washington, Seattle, WA

Background: Previous studies have
compared prognostic factors and mortality in young women to older
women who are often mammography detected (MGD) whereas young women
rarely are. Given mammography screening is not recommended for women
<age 40, older women with patient detected (PtD) breast cancer are
the more appropriate comparison group to assess differential mortality
risk.

Materials and methods: We conducted a
cohort study of women diagnosed with primary invasive breast cancer
Stage I–IV from 1989–1999 followed by the institutions’ breast cancer
registry. Method of detection was ascertained from chart review at the
time of diagnosis. We compared PtD women aged 21–39 to PtD 40–94 year
olds by prognostic factors and to PtD and MGD 40–94 year old women for
disease specific survival (DSS) (n=2502).

Results: 90% of women 21–39 were PtD
(n=225) (figure 1). Compared to PtD women age >=40 (n=1066), women
age 21–39 were significantly more likely to have greater than TNM
stage I, high histologic and nuclear grade, and ER negative tumors.
Compared to PtD and MGD women >=40, women 21–39 had significantly
worse DSS at both 5 and 10 years (5 year: PtD 21–39 = 81%, PtD 40–94 =
90%, MGD 40–94 = 97%; 10 year: PtD 21–39 = 75%, PtD 40–94 = 82%, MGD
40–94 = 93%; PtD 21–39 to PtD 40–94, log rank test = 7.94, p = .005;
PtD 21–39 to MGD 40–94, log rank test = 76.01, p<.001) (figure
2).

Discussion: Young women have worse
prognostic factors and are at increased risk of death from breast
cancer when compared to PtD older women. These results indicate breast
cancer in young women is often a more virulent form of breast cancer
but the differential risk of death is not as great as previous reports
when mammography detected women were included in the comparison
group.

Supported by the Kaplan Cancer Research
Fund

 

## 3013

## Prognostic significance of CDKs profiling in breast
cancer.

## Kim SJ, Nakayama S, Miyoshi Y, Taguchi T, Tamaki Y, Matsushima
T, Torikoshi Y, Tanaka S, Yoshida T, Ishihara H, Noguchi S. Graduate
School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan; Sysmex
Corporation, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan

Background: Cyclin-dependent kinases
(CDKs), catalytic partners of cyclins, play a key role in cell
proliferation. Recently, we have established the assay system for
specific activity (SA = activity/expression) of CDK1, 2, 4, and 6
using a very small tumor sample (>8 mm3). The aim of the present
study is to evaluate the correlation of CDKs SA with tumor cell growth
speed in vitro, and to assess the clinical significance of CDKs SA as
a prognostic indicator.

Material and Methods: A CDK profiling
system is composed of two parts; (1) analysis of CDK expression based
on a modified dot blot method and (2) analysis of CDK activity based
on a non-radioisotopic kinase method (Ishihara, et al: Biochim Biophys
Acta, inpress). CDK1, 2, 4, and 6 SA in human breast cancer cell lines
(MCF-7, SKBR3, and MDA-MB231) and breast cancer tissues were
determined by our method. Correlation between CDKs SA and growth speed
was evaluated in MCF-7 cells in vitro and in SKBR3 and MDA-MB231
xenografts in nude mice. Then, prognostic significance of CDKs SA as
well as expression of p21, p27, and Ki-67 was studied in 126 primary
breast cancer patients (median follow up: 45.5 months).

Results: CDK1 SA was negatively and
CDK2 SA was positively associated with growth speed of MCF-7 cells in
vitro and the CDK2/CDK1 ratio was found to be more accurately
representative of the growth speed than S-phase fraction
(flow-cytometry). This ratio was also representative of the growth
speed in the xenograft models, i.e., SKBR3 tumors with a low CDK2/CDK1
ratio showed a low growth speed and MDA-MB231 with a high CDK2/CDK1
ratio showed a high growth speed. In 126 breast cancer patients, p21,
p27, and Ki-67 expression levels had no significant correlation with
5-year DFS, whereas patients with a high CDK2/CDK1 ratio showed a
significantly lower 5-year DFS than those with a low CDK2/CDK1 ratio
(35.4% vs. 88.4%, p < 0.0001). Especially in the node-negative
subset, the difference in DFS between patients with high and low
CDK2/CDK1 ratios was prominent (41.0% vs. 97.6%, p < 0.0001).
Multivariate analyses have revealed that a high CDK2/CDK1 ratio is a
significant and independent prognostic factor in all patients (Hazard
ratio (HR): 4.27, 95% CI: 1.79. 10.20) and in the node-negative subset
(HR: 24.28, 95% CI: 3.13. 188.28).

Discussion: The present study has
demonstrated that the CDK2/ CDK1 ratio represents the cell growth
speed very accurately, and this ratio is strongly associated with
patient prognosis especially in node-negative patients. The CDK2/CDK1
ratio seems to have a potential to be used as a new prognostic factor
being independent of the conventional risk factors.

## 3014

## The survival analysis of immunohistochemically defined basal and
luminal subtype of breast cancer.

## Lee JB, Kim AR, Son GS, Bae JW, Koo BH. Korea University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea

Background and purpose DNA microarray
studies of breast cancer have identified distinct subtypes showing
different survivals. The results of DNA microarray revealed the HER2
negative and estrogen receptor(ER) negative subtype, which was
designated as basal or basal-like subtype. The basal subtype can’t be
manipulated by HER2 monoclonal antibody and selective estrogen
receptor modulator (SERM) but DNA microarray is not an easy task for
the usual clinical practice. We tried to identify the new subtype by
commercially available antibodies for cytokeratins (CK) and
characterize the clinical outcomes statistically.

Materials and Methods A retrospective
analysis was conducted using medical records of 295 patients diagnosed
with infiltrating ductal carcinoma of breast who underwent mastectomy
at the department of surgery, Korea University Medical Center between
January 1992 and September 2004. Tissue array was constructed and
stained immunohistochemically by antibodies for HER2, ER, HER1, c-kit
and CK5/6 according to usual methods. The basal subtype was
characterized by HER2 negative, ER negative and positive for one of
HER1, c-kit or CK5/6. Only ER positive subtype was also designated as
luminal subtype of breast cancer. The mean period of follow up was
5.71 years and the survival rates were calculated by Kaplan Meier
methods.

Results The percentages of each
subtype of breast cancer were HER2 positive 20.7%, luminal 39.7% and
basal 23.7%. The 5 year survival rates were HER2 positive 80.4%,
luminal 86.8% and basal 73.8% but there were no statistical
differences (p=0.1274). The frequencies of basal and luminal subtypes
were not different in the comparison of age distribution, presence of
menopause, size of tumor, lymph nodes metastases and proliferation
index but the basal subtype was dominant among the patients of low
grade (p=0.000). The 5 year overall survival of basal subtype was
significantly lower than luminal subtype (p=0.049) and the poor
prognosis of basal subtype was definite in the patients of age less
than 35 years old, premenopause and lymph node metastasis.

Conclusions The basal subtype of
breast cancer showed significantly poor prognosis and affected greatly
the patients of age less than 35, premenopause and node metastasis.
The immunohistochemical assay for basal subtype was helpful for
detection of poor prognostic patients of breast cancer.

## 3015

## Normalization of urinary N-telopeptide levels by zoledronic acid
correlates with improved survival in patients with bone metastases from
breast cancer.

## Lipton A, Hei YJ, Coleman RE, Major P, Smith M, Cook RJ. Milton
S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA; Novartis Oncology, East
Hanover, NJ; University of Sheffield, Sheffield, England, United
Kingdom; Hamilton Regional Cancer Centre, Hamilton, ON, Canada;
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, ON, Canada

Background: The bone resorption
marker N-telopeptide (NTX) provides valuable prognostic information in
patients with bone metastases. Elevated baseline NTX increases the
relative risk of skeletal-related events, disease progression, and
death across all tumor types (Brown JE, et al. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005;97:59–69).

Material and Methods: Urinary NTX was
measured at baseline and at month 3 in 328 breast cancer patients with
bone metastases treated with monthly zoledronic acid 4 or 8/4 mg for
up to 25 months.

Results: At baseline, 132 patients
had a normal urinary NTX value of ≤64 nmol/mmol creatinine (upper
limit of normal for premenopausal women) and 196 had elevated baseline
NTX (>64 nmol/mmol creatinine). At month 3, only 1/132 (0.8%)
patient with normal baseline NTX developed elevated NTX, 124/132
(93.9%) patients still had a normal NTX (N-N group), and 7/132 (5.3%)
patients died. At month 3, 149/196 (76%) patients who began treatment
with elevated NTX had normal NTX (A-N group), 31/196 (15.8%) patients
had persistent elevation of NTX (A-A group), and 16/196 (8.2%)
patients died. The median survival was 901 days for N-N patients, 790
days for A-N patients and 446 days for A-A patients. The relative risk
for survival among A-N versus A-A patients was 0.454 (P=.0004). There was no statistically
significant difference in survival between N-N and A-N
patients.

Discussion: For patients with
elevated baseline bone markers, zoledronic acid therapy normalized
bone marker levels in the majority (76%) of these patients after
3 months of treatment. Persistent elevation of urinary NTX during
zoledronic acid treatment is associated with shorter survival.

## 3016

## Predicting relapse in estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancer
(luminal) subgroups treated with adjuvant tamoxifen.

## Loi SM, Desmedt C, Haibe-Kains B, Lallemand F, Gillett C, Tutt
A, Ryder K, Ellis P, Harris A, Smeds J, Bergh J, Cardoso F, Piccart
MJ, Sotiriou C. Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium; Guy’s
Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
United Kingdom; CCK Cancer Centrum Karolinska, Karolinska Institutet
and Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden

Background: ER-positive breast
cancers (BC) exhibit considerable clinical heterogeneity. Microarray
profiling has lead to the notion of distinct molecular subgroups
within ER-positive BC; these are often described as luminal subtypes
(Sorlie, Sotiriou et al). The
luminal subtypes seem to be directly associated with proliferative
genes, with the luminal A group correlated with low grade, and the B
and C groups with high grade. We sought to further define these
subtypes and identify genes associated with BC recurrence within the
subgroups of ER-positive BC.

Material and Methods: We determined
gene expression profiles from 168 tamoxifen-only treated ER positive
early stage BC samples (training set) using Affymetrix U133 2.0 Plus
Genechips. Median follow-up was 7.3 yrs. We divided these tumors into
2 groups according to their degree of proliferation. These groups,
which had distinct clinical outcomes (HR:4.1, 95%CI:2.0–8.5,
p<0.001), were named low and high grade ER-positive subtypes and
are molecularly consistent with the previously described luminal
subtypes of Sorlie and Sotiriou et
al. Genes associated with distant relapse within the
subtypes were identified using Cox proportional hazards model. The
independent validation set consisted of 86 ER-positive tamoxifen only
treated BC from a different institution.

Results: For the low grade subgroup
we identified 330 genes that were significantly associated with
distant relapse. Here, many genes were related to immune function. In
the high grade subgroup 195 genes were identified, including many that
were HER-2 and ER-related. The probability of selecting these genes by
chance was estimated to be p=0.01 and 0.04 after 1000 random
permutations respectively. There were only 7 genes in common. In the
independent validation set, these genes could identify distinct
prognostic groups within the low
(n=44) and high grade subtypes (n=42): low grade: HR: 3.9 (95%CI:
0.9–19.2), p=0.06; high grade HR: 2.7 (95%CI:1.1–7.1), p= 0.04. We are
currently validating this concept in a further 100 tumor
samples.

Discussion: ER-positive BC can be
divided into low grade or high grade subtypes. Furthermore, different
groups of genes can identify women at high risk of relapse on adjuvant
tamoxifen within these ER-positive subgroups for whom other therapies
could be targeted. Further investigation into the biology of these
diverse gene sets could substantially aid treatment tailoring for BC
patients.

## 3017

## Leptin receptor isoforms (OBR-L and OBR-S) expression in breast
cancer and relation with clinical outcome.

## Revillion F, Charlier M, Lhotellier V, Hornez L, Giard S,
Baranzelli MC, Djiane J, Peyrat JP. Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille,
France; Institut ational de la Recherche Agronomique, Jouy-en-Josas,
France

Background: The relationship between
leptin and obesity is clearly demonstrated, and it is well established
that overweight and obesity are associated with an increased risk of
developing breast cancer. The human leptin receptor (OBR) belongs to
the class I cytokine receptor family. Two main isoforms (OBR-L and
OBR-S) resulting from an alternative splicing have been described in
breast cancer (Laud et al, Mol Cell Endocr, 2002; 188:219–26). We
established the relationships between these two isoforms and the
clinical, pathological, and biological parameters as well as clinical
outcome in breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: The expression
of OBR-L and OBR-S was quantified by real time RTPCR, using TaqMan
fluorogenic probes, in 322 breast cancers operated on between May 1989
and December 1991 (Pawlowski et al, Clin Cancer Res, 2000; 6:4217–25).
The TATA box binding protein was used to normalize OBRs expression.
The human breast cancer cells SKBR3, expressing the two target genes,
were chosen as calibrator sample (i.e. target expression = 1).

Results: All the tumors tested
expressed OBR-L and OBR-S and the median value of expression was
respectively 6.57 (range 0.32 to 1408) and 2.58 (range 0.02 to 20.8).
There was a strong positive correlation between OBR-L and OBR-S
(r=0.504, P<0.001) (Spearman test). Both isoforms negatively
correlated to histoprognostic grading (HPG) (r=−0.159, P=0.007; and r=
−0.219, P<0.001 respectively) and OBR-L negatively correlated to
tumor size (r=−0.11, p=0.05). In contrast, a positive correlation was
observed between OBR-L and ER (r=0.128, P=0.022) and between OBR-S and
PR (r=0.126, p=0.024). Both isoforms correlated with HER3 (r= 0.117,
P=0.036 for OBR-L; r= 0.126, P=0.024 for OBR-S) and HER4 (r= 0.135,
P=0.015 for OBR-L; r= 0.229, P<0.001 for OBR-S). Longer
relapse-free survival was observed in patients with elevated OBR-S
expression (3 upper quartile) (P=0.008).
Cox univariate analyses demonstrated prognostic value of OBR-S
(P=0.009; risk ratio (RR), 0.5) besides node involvement (P=0.035; RR,
1.52) and tumor size (P=0.004; RR, 1.69). In multivariate analyses,
OBR-S maintained its prognostic value besides tumor size.

Conclusion: This study demonstrates
that OBR-L and OBR-S are associated with a more differentiated
phenotype in breast cancer. Furthermore, OBR-S is an independent
prognostic marker of better relapse-free survival. Supported by the
Association pour la Recherche sur le Cancer (Grant n° 3522, Villejuif,
France).

## 3018

## Using AQUATM and tissue microarrays for
discovery of a minimal set of multiplexed markers to subclassify breast
cancer.

## Dolled-Filhart MP, Cregger M, Camp RL, Rimm DL. Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
Expression profiling using nucleic acid technologies has led to
dozens of methods of subclassification of breast cancer. The ultimate
goal of these assays is to better predict outcome or response to
therapy. Quantitative analysis of protein expression on tissue
microarrays provides a similar but parallel approach with the
potential to define a smaller set of prognostic or predictive markers
that can be assessed on conventional diagnostic histopathology slides.
Toward that goal we have assessed 35 markers selected from expression
profiling studies focusing on estrogen status. The absolute level of
protein expression was assessed using the AQUA assay on a set of 250
cases of breast cancer with long term follow-up. Unsupervised
hierarchical clustering of these markers revealed two markers most
closely associated with estrogen receptor(ER). Univariate analysis of
5 year disease-specific survival of these two markers, GATA3 and NAT1,
shows significant association with good outcome (p=0.0011 and p=0.0200
respectively). These markers were combined with ER to form a three
marker multiplex test. This test was then re-evaluated on a cohort of
675 breast cancers. Clustering of this group subclassifies the cases
into three prognostically distinct groups including a GATA3 driven
subset with 5 year survival of 97%, an ER and NAT1 driven subset with
a 5 year survival of 83% and a triple negative driven group with a
5 year survival of 65% (p<0.0001). The multiplex assay divides the
pathologist-scored ER+ group into two groups with significantly unique
outcome. Tests for the predictive value of the assay in hormonal
therapy trials are underway.

## 3019

## Predicting prognosis in early stage primary breast cancer using a
five biomarker panel and image assisted immunohistochemistry (IHC)
scoring.

## Ross JS, Boguniewicz AB, Ross MS, Whitehead CM, Morel D, He Q,
Sheehan CE. Albany Medical College, Albany, NY; Tripath Oncology, Inc,
Durham, NC

## Background
Recent reports document a growing list of biomarkers that
demonstrate varying utility in the risk stratification of
earlystage breast cancer patients for disease recurrence and/or
death. In the following novel image assisted IHC study, we confirm
the ability of a panel of 5 biomarkers, measured individually and
in combinations, to risk-stratify node negative disease and predict
patient outcome.

## Materials and Methods
217 formalin fixed, paraffin embedded archival specimens of node
negative (T1N0, T2N0) invasive ductal breast cancer with a minimum
of five years of clinical follow-up were employed in this
retrospective study. Specimens were processed via standard IHC
protocols on a Dako Autostainer (Dakocytomation Inc.) using antigen
unmasking in a pressure cooker (Decloaker, Biocare Medical Inc) and
monoclonal primary antibodies (ProEx Br, TriPath Imaging Inc.). The
expression levels of the secretory leukocyte protease
inhibitorSLPI, the
transcription factor E2F1, the
oncogenes c-src and p21
ras and the immunoproteasome gene PSMB9 were assessed using an
Interactive Histology Imaging System (IHIS) (Tripath Imaging Inc.)
that quantifies subcellular staining intensity using brightfield
microscopy. The IHIS system determines both the staining intensity
within the appropriate subcellular compartment and the percentage
of labeled cells are utilized as thresholds to quantify
overexpression levels.

## Results
The performance of the biomarkers collectively and in
conjunction with standard clinico-pathologic parameters was
assessed by multivariate Cox proportional analysis (Table 1). 

The sensitivity of the biomarker panel increased with increasing
number of markers. Using Kaplan-Meier plots, the risk of recurrence
or death increased from 40% to 70% when any two or more of the 5
marker panel were scored as positive (p=0.0078).

Discussion This data supports the
potential utility of this image-assisted IHC assay of the SLPI,
E2F1, c-src, p21ras and PSMB9 biomarkers
to risk stratify node negative breast cancer patients. The IHIS
evaluation of this 5 biomarker panel achieved independent
prognostic utility in assessing disease recurrence and predicted a
significant reduction in survival rates when 2 or more of these 5
biomarkers were overexpressed. Further evaluation in larger trials
of this assay appears warrante.D

## 3020

## Breast cancer phenotype associated with a propensity for central
nervous system (CNS) metastases.

## Tham YL, Sexton K, Kramer R, Hilsenbeck S, Elledge R. Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX

Background: There is anecdotal
evidence that the incidence of CNS metastases has increased with the
advancement of systemic therapy, such as trastuzumab. However, it is
unclear whether either specific tumor biological properties or
systemic therapies influence the risk of CNS metastases. Furthermore,
the identification of a tumor phenotype with a propensity for CNS
metastases would be important for future screening or preventive
strategies.

Methods: Using a database of
10782 patients that were diagnosed and treated from 1970 to 1999, 2685
patients were identified who relapsed distantly. Clinical and
biological features of these patients were analyzed in two groups: 1)
Patients who ever had CNS metastases (14%, n=383) were compared with
those who never had CNS metastases (86%, n=2302) and 2) Patients who
had CNS metastases as the first site of relapse (39%, n=150) vs. those
who had other sites (61%, n=233). Survival after CNS metastasis was
calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method and this was correlated with
clinical and biological features of the patients.

Results: In the ever versus
never analysis, factors associated with CNS metastases were young age
(p<0.001), premenopausal status (p=0.008), ER and PR negative tumor
(p<0.001), high S-phase (p=0.002), aneuploidy (p=0.02), and altered
p53 (p=0.01). ILC was less likely to be associated with CNS metastases
(p=0.01). Tumor size and lymph node status were not associated with a
relative increase in risk of CNS metastases compared with other sites.
Adjuvant systemic therapy also did not alter the relative risk of CNS
vs. non-CNS metastases when compared with patients that did not
receive therapy. Her2 positivity was not associated with CNS
metastases in these patients, all of whom were treated prior to the
trastuzumab era (p=0.91), though Her2+ patients were more likely to
develop CNS metastases following non-CNS relapse (p=0.04). The
biomarker profile of CNS failure as first recurrence did not otherwise
differ from those with CNS metastases as subsequent recurrence. In a
multivariate analysis of the above factors, ER negativity (OR 2.8,
p<0.001), IDC histology (OR 2.5, p=0.02), and young age
(p<0.001) were independent factors associated with any CNS
metastases. The median survival after CNS metastases was 5.5 months,
with 25% of the patients alive at one year and 10% at 2 years. The
only factor that significantly influenced survival was Her2 status,
with Her2 positive patients having a shorter survival (p=0.02).

Conclusion: Younger patients
with hormone receptor negative tumors that are highly proliferative,
genomically unstable, and p53 altered are at increased relative risk
for CNS metastases. Her2 expression did not increase the relative risk
of CNS metastases in the absence of trastuzumab therapy. Adjuvant
therapies did not change the patterns of distant recurrence.

## 3021

## Lymph node ratio as a prognostic factor in metastatic breast
cancer.

## Ueno NT, Cserni G, Wallace AM, Janni W, Royce M, Nieto Y,
Vinh-hung V, International Nodal Ratio Working Group. INRWG, Houston,
TX; INRWG, Kecskemét, Hungary; INRWG, Albuquerque, NM; INRWG, München,
Germany; INRWG, Pamplona, Spain; INRWG, Brussels, Belgium

Background: The prognostic value of
pathologic lymph node status (pN) is unclear for patients presenting
with breast cancer and distant metastases at diagnosis. However, the
lymph node ratio (LNR; # of positive nodes # of nodes examined) can identify subgroups with
distinctly different prognoses in terms of 10-year breast
cancer-specific survival rate. We compared the prognostic value of the
2002 pN system vs. an LNR-based system in a retrospective sample of
patients presenting with distant metastases.

Methods: We used the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results database (9 registries, 2004) to
identify women diagnosed from 1988 to 1997 for whom pathologic nodal
status was available. 1,301 cases recorded as Stage IV, 1,144 were
metastatic; 66 patients with supraclavicular or internal mammary lymph
node involvement were excluded, leaving 1,078 cases for analysis.
Endpoints were overall survival and breast cancer-specific survival,
calculated with the Kaplan-Meier product limit method; differences
were evaluated with log-rank Chi2 tests.
Owing to the small number of cases, pN and LNR were each grouped in 2
subcategories (≤ or >3 involved nodes for pN and ≤ or >0.25 for
LNR).

Results: At median follow-up of
6.6 years (0.6–13.6 years), median primary tumor size recorded in 907
cases was 40 mm (6–190 mm) and 800 mm in 1 outlier, involved nodes was
6 (mean 7.95, range 1–55), and nodes examined was 12 (1–59). The type
of nodal involvement was micrometastatic (≤2 mm) in 33 cases, >2 mm
and/or extending beyond capsule in 391 cases (331 >20 mm and/or
extending beyond capsule and/or fixed/matted), unspecified in 654
cases. All lymph nodes were involved in 350 patients. Differences in
survival according to pN and LNR classifications are summarized
below. 

Conclusion: Despite the skewed
distribution and severe nodal involvement, the LNR clearly identified
different prognostic subgroups. Further investigations of the LNR as a
prognostic factor are warrante. 

## 3022

## Prognostic value of uPA and PAI-1 mRNA expression in primary breast
cancer.

## Verjat T, Lamy PJ, Grenier J, Servanton AC, Paye M, Krause A,
Bachelot T, Puisieux A, Mougin B, Leissner P. BioMerieux, Marcy l
Etoile, France; Centre Regional de Lutte Contre le Cancer Val d
Aurelle, Montpellier, France; Centre Leon Berard, Lyon,
France
Urokinase-type Plasminogen Activator (uPA) and its inhibitor,
Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) are the first novel
tumor biomarkers to be validated, by the EORTC, at the highest level
of evidence regarding their clinical utility in breast cancer.
Patients with high protein levels of uPA and/or PAI-1 in their tumors
have statistically significant shorter Metastasis-Free Survival (MFS)
and Overall Survival (OS) than patients with low protein levels.
However, the need of a minimum of 100–300 mg of frozen tissue for
ELISA is often stated to be an obstacle to use these prognostic
factors in routine. We therefore investigated the prognostic value of
uPA and PAI-1 at the mRNA level as measured by Nucleic Acid
Sequence-Based Amplification (NASBA) that needs as little as 50 ng of
total RNA thus allowing to analyse small early-stage tumors. First,
comparison of uPA and PAI-1 NASBA results with the corresponding
protein levels measured by ELISA (Femtelle kit, American Diagnostica,
USA) was performed on 77 primary tumor samples. We observed that uPA
and PAI-1 mRNA expression was significantly greater (p<0,0001) in
ELISA-positive samples than in negative-group confirming the good
correlation between mRNA and protein expression for both markers.
Secondly, the prognostic value of uPA and PAI-1 mRNA expression was
investigated in a retrospective series of 95 lymph-node- and hormone
receptor-positive breast cancer tumors by means of Affymetrix Human
U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChips. We demonstrated that PAI-1 mRNA expression
represented a strong prognostic factor for the development of
metastasis and for the overall survival in this population.
Furthermore, PAI-1 but also uPA mRNA were significant prognostic
factors for MFS and OS in the subgroup of the postmenopausal patients.
Taken together, these results indicate that uPA and PAI-1 mRNA
analysis give results as interesting as those obtained at the protein
level suggesting that NASBA could be proposed as an alternative to
ELISA method for the study of the uPA and PAI-1 system in human breast
cancer.

## 3023

## Breast cancer of the lower inner quadrant is associated with an
increased mortality risk among women with early stage disease.

## Sarp S, Fioretta G, Verkooijen HM, Wespi Y, Schubert H,
Bouchardy C, Vlastos G. Institute for Social and Preventive Medicine,
Geneva, Switzerland; Association of Physicians of the Canton of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland; Geneva University Hospital, Geneva,
Switzerland

Introduction: Stage I (T1, N0, M0)
breast cancer has an excellent prognosis, but some women still die of
this disease. This could partly be explained by understaging, due to
undetected lymph node involvement of the internal mammary chain. As
lymph node metastases of the internal mammary chain occur more
frequently among patients with cancer of the lower inner quadrant, we
designed a population-based study to evaluate the impact of tumour
location on breast cancer mortality risk.

Methods: We used information from the
Geneva Cancer Registry to identify all 1411 women, operated for stage
I breast cancer between 1986 and 2002. With multivariate Cox
regression analysis we compared breast cancer mortality risks
according to tumour location and adjusted for all other prognostic
factors.

Results: Sixty-five patients died of
breast cancer. The ten-year specific survival was 93% (95%CI: 91–95%).
Grade, oestrogen receptor status and treatment were associated with
mortality from breast cancer. After accounting for all these factors,
patients with breast cancer of the lower inner quadrant (n=103; 7.3%)
had a more than two-fold increased risk to die of breast cancer
compared to women with breast cancer of the upper outer quadrant
(multi-adjusted Hazard Ratio 2.5; 95%CI 1.1–5.9). Tumour location in
other quadrants was not associated with a significantly altered
mortality risk.

Conclusions: Patients with stage I
breast cancer of the lower inner quadrant have an increased risk to
die of their disease. These women might benefit from systematic
staging of the internal mammary chain, in order to prevent
undertreatment.

## 3024

## Risk factor analysis of early metastatic relapse for
post-menopausal patients treated with tamoxifen.

## Debled M, MacGrogan G, Brouste V, Mathoulin-Pélissier S, Durand
M, Mauriac L. Institut Bergonié, Regional Cancer Center, Bordeaux,
France
Results of ATAC and BIG 1-98 trials have showed a benefit of
5 years aromatase inhibitors over 5 years tamoxifen for
estrogen-receptor-positive post-menopausal women. Three other trials
have demonstrated a significant DFS benefit when switching tamoxifen
for aromatase inhibitors after two or three years. According to
indirect comparisons, a bigger reduction of relapse risk could be
obtained using a sequential strategy. However, anastrozole prevents
early relapses more efficiently than tamoxifen in the ATAC trial. The
aim of this retrospective study was to identify risk factors in
post-menopausal women, for relapse during the first three years of
adjuvant treatment with tamoxifen.

Materials and Methods: We identified
in our database post-menopausal women with an ER and/or PR positive
breast cancer treated by surgery and adjuvant tamoxifen without any
adjuvant chemotherapy. All the patients had at least three years
follow-up. Systemic relapses occurring during these three years were
considered as events. We analyzed age, histologic type, pathologic
size, tumor grade, mitotic count, necrosis, peritumoral vascular
emboli (PVE), ER and PR status and number of involved lymph nodes as
possible prognostic factors of relapse.

Results: 715 patients who were
registered between 1985 and 2000. Principal characteristics were:
median age 64 y (range: 43–88); mastectomy/lumpectomy: 28%/72%;
irradiation: 78%; ductal/ lobular: 92%/8%; pathologic size
<2 cm/≥2 cm: 68%/32%; SBR grading (ductal): I/II/III: 26%/52%/22%;
mitotic count 1/2/3: 38%/ 40%/22%; necrosis: no/yes: 83%/17%; PVE:
no/yes: 72%/28%; node −/+: 22%/78%; ER +/−: 98%/2%; PR +/−:
61%/39%.
Among this population, 38 systemic relapses occurred during the
first three years (systemic relapse risk at 3 years: 5.3%).
In an univariate analysis, significant prognostic factors were:
grading (p=1.10−5), N+
(p=2.10−3), necrosis
(p=3.10−3), mitotic count
(3.10−3), PVE (2.10–2), size ≥2 cm
(0.02). Negative progesterone receptor was not significant (0.07).
Because of a small number of ER- tumors (2%), this factor was not
analyze.D
As only one relapse was observed in 280 node negative and/or grade
I tumors (0.3%), multivariate analysis was restricted to node positive
grade II-III ductal carcinomas (378 patients): only SBR grading (III
vs II) was significant (HR 3.72 [1.79–7.73 ;
p<10−3]). Over-expression of
Her-2/neu was detected in 6 cases of relapses (16%). Analyses of other
potential biological factors including VEGF-R2, PTEN, AIB-1 are in
progress. Results will be available in December 2005.

Conclusion: Post-menopausal women
treated for node positive grade III tumors with adjuvant tamoxifen
without any chemotherapy have a high risk of early relapse. These
women may benefit from initial treatment with an aromatase
inhibitor.

## 3025

## Four genes by RT-PCR predicts distant relapse for women given
adjuvant tamoxifen.

## Desmedt C, Loi SM, Haibe-Kains B, Soree A, Lallemand F, Durbecq
V, Larsimont D, Tutt A, Ellis P, Gillett C, Ryder K, Harris A, Cardoso
F, Martiat PH, Piccart MJ, Sotiriou C. Jules Bordet Institute,
Brussels, Belgium; Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Weatherall
Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe
Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom

Background: There have been many gene
classifiers developed recently that claim to predict clinical outcome
better than currently used clinical factors. Whilst microarray
technology offers huge advantages in furthering our knowledge of
breast cancer biology, for present-day use, clinically applicable and
useful tools may need only the quantitative information that is
provided by genes that are already well known to convey
prognostic/predictive information in breast cancer.

Material and Methods: Our aim was to
assess if the results of a reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-
reaction (RT-PCR) assay for the genes ER, PgR, HER2/Neu and Ki67 in
frozen tissue could correlate with distant disease recurrence in 175
breast cancer patients from 2 institutions treated with adjuvant
tamoxifen only and followed for a median of 9.4 years. All RT-PCR
experiments were performed in duplicate.

Results: Adequate RT-PCR profiles
were obtained for 154 of 175 tumors. We constructed a score from a
linear combination of the coefficients from a multivariate Cox
analysis including the 4 genes (likelihood ratio test, overall
p-value<0.001) and the expression of those genes. When considering
the score as a binary variable with the median as cutoff, a hazard
ratio (HR) of 3.7 (95% CI: 1.8–7.6, p<0.001) was reached with 97%,
95% and 91% of the patients being distant metastasis free at 3, 5 and
10 years in the low risk group and 88%, 74% and 65% in the high risk
group respectively. In a Cox model that included the binary score and
traditional prognostic variables (tumor size, grade, age, nodal
status), the score was the only significant predictor of distant
metastasis at .05 level with a HR of 2.7 (95%CI: 1.2–6.2, p=0.019) and
tumor size was borderline significant (p=0.052). Similar HR were found
when considering the score as a continuous variable both in univariate
and multivariate analysis.

Discussion: We are currently
validating this score on a further 100 samples and comparing with
RT-PCR results on corresponding paraffin-embedded tumour tissue. A
comparison between RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry is also ongoing.
This simple test using the RT-PCR value of 4 genes could provide an
immediately applicable and cheap clinical tool that can assist
clinicians in discriminating high and low risk prognostic groups for
ER+ women treated with tamoxifen.

## 3026

## C-kit expression in high-risk breast cancer treated with high-dose
(HD) or conventional dose-dense chemotherapy: results of multivariate
analysis from the WSG-AM-01 phase III trial.

## Diallo R, Ting E, Gluz O, Mohrmann S, Schuett G, Rody A, Geddert
H, Schaefer KL, Gabbert HE, Nitz U, Poremba C. Institute of Pathology,
Heinrich-Heine-University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany;
University Hospital of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany; University
Hospital of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany
Prognostic and predictive factors identifying patient subgroups
with maximal benefit from high-dose chemotherapy with peripheral blood
stem cell transplantation (PBSCT) remain to be defined. The
proto-oncogene c-kit (CD 117) is known to be expressed in poorly
differentiated breast cancer. In this study, we analyzed the protein
expression of c-kit in a high risk subgroup of breast cancer patients
(>9 axillary node metastases) and correlated these findings with
various histopathological parameters and the expression of cytokeratin
(CK) 5, estrogen receptor alpha (ER), progesterone (PR) receptor,
Her-2/neu, p53 and MIB-1.
403 patients were randomly assigned to dose-dense conventional
chemotherapy (four cycles of EC, followed by three cycles of CMF q2w)
or to two courses of EC followed by two courses of HD chemotherapy
(EC-thiotepa) with PBSCT. Treatment arms were well balanced for age,
menopausal status, tumor size, grading, number of involved lymph
nodes, nodal ratio and ER/PR status. C-kit, CK5, ER, PR, Her-2/neu,
p53 and MIB-1 expression was evaluated immunohistochemically using
tissue microarrays containing breast cancer samples from 239 patients
(from whom paraffin tumor blocks were available).
Within the WSG AM01 trial, the average number of positive axillary
lymph nodes was 17.6±8.0 SD. At a median follow-up of 48.6 months,
there was a significant overall survival benefit for patients
receiving HD (p=0.00047). C-kit expression was found in 12% of all
breast cancers and correlated with a reduced time to relapse and a
poorer overall survival (OS) not only in univariate (p=0.00026) but
also in multivariate analysis (HR for OS =2.10 [CI 1.09–4.07],
p=0,028) independently of therapy, stage and nodal status.
Furthermore, c-kit correlated with high grade (p=0.024), CK5+
(p=0.0007) and PR− (p=0.0092).
These findings underline that c-kit represents an independent
prognostic marker in high risk breast cancer. Furthermore, correlation
with CK5+ and PR− suggests that c-kit positive carcinomas are at least
partly of basal-type. Further analysis by treatment arm will be
presente.D

## 3027

## Genomic alterations identified by array comparative genomic
hybridization as prognostic markers in tamoxifen treated estrogen
receptor positive breast cancer.

## Han W, Han MR, Kang JJ, Bae JY, Lee JE, Shin HJ, Hwang KT, Hwang
SE, Noh DY. Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Macrogen Inc., Seoul, Korea
Considerable proportion of estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast
cancer recurs in spite of tamoxifen treatment, which has been a
serious clinical problem commonly encountered in the patient
management. To find novel prognostic or predictive markers in this
subtype of breast cancer, we performed a high-resolution array
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) with an array of 1,440 human
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones to assess copy number
changes in 28 archival fresh frozen ER (+) breast cancer tissues. Nine
patients had distant recurrence within five years (Recur group) and 19
patients were alive without disease at least five years after
diagnosis (Non-recur group). All the patients received tamoxifen as an
adjuvant endocrine therapy for at least a year. The
clinicopathological characteristics, such as age, tumor size, lymph
node status, histologic grade, and progesterone receptor status, were
comparable between the two groups. In an unsupervised clustering
analysis, all samples from Recur group were clustered together with
only four samples from Non-recur group clustered with the Recur group
samples. We used CGH-Explorer (Lingjarde, et
al.) and Analysis of Copy Error (ACE) algorithm for
calling gain and loss of each BAC clone and chromosomal location. The
most common regions of gain in all samples were 1q32.1, 17q23.3,
8q24.11, 17q12-q21.1, and 8p11.21; and the most common regions of loss
were 6q14.1-q16.3, 11q21-q24.3 and 13q13.2-q14.3. The average
frequency of copy number changes was similar between the two groups.
We used two different kind of statistical methods to identify clones
with significantly different copy number change between the two
groups: chi-square test applied to 2×2 table and SAM analysis applied
to the sliding windows of three consecutive BAC clones. As a result,
the most significant chromosomal alterations found in common by the
two methods were loss of 11p15.5-p15.4, 1p36.33, 11q13.1, and 11p11.2
with adjusted p values <0.01. In
conclusion, our array CGH analysis with BAC clones could detect vaious
genomic alterations in ER positive breast cancers and the Recur group
showed significantly different pattern of chromosomal gain or loss
from Non-recur group. The interesting regions of copy loss and
candidate genes are now in the stage of verification with real-time
PCR and LOH analysis.

## 3028

## Prognostic value of Ki-67 in lymph node-negative breast cancer and
the usefulness of a combination of Ki-67 and the St. Gallen
classification.

## Jung SY, Han W, Park IA, Shin HJ, Lee JE, Hwang KT, Hwang SE,
Noh DY. Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea

Purpose: To evaluate the independent
prognostic value of Ki-67 in lymph node-negative breast cancer and the
usefulness of Ki-67 when it combined with St. Gallen classification as
guidance of adjuvant chemotherapy for node-negative cancer.

Methods: We retrospectively reviewed
the data of patients with lymph node-negative breast cancer who
underwent curative surgery between Jan 1998 and Dec 2001 at our
institution. We classified the patients as average or minimal risk
groups according to the St. Gallen classification, combined the groups
with Ki-67 expression, and compared the distant metastasis-free
survival (DFS) rates.

Results: A total of 543 patients were
analyzed. Median follow-up was 49 months. The overall 5-year DFS rate
was 91.8%. The 5-year DFS rates for patients with Ki-67-positive and
negative (cutoff value: ≥10%) tumors were 83.0% and 94.1%,
respectively (p=0.0007). The 5-year
DFS rates for patients with average and minimal risk group by St.
Gallen classification were 89.7% and 97.2%, respectively. In a Cox
regression model involving potential prognostic factors (young age
(<35), tumor size (>2 cm), histologic grade, estrogen receptor,
c-erbB2, chemotherapy, and hormone therapy), high Ki-67 expression
could independently predict the risk of distant recurrence (odds ratio
= 1.96 [95% confidence interval, 1.11–3.02]). The average risk group
by the St. Gallen classification was further divided into two
subgroups with significantly different prognosis according to the
Ki-67 expression (DFS rate: 82.7% vs. 91.9%; p=0.007).

Conclusion: Ki-67 was an independent
prognostic factor in lymph node-negative breast cancer and the
combination of Ki-67 expression and the St. Gallen classification
could provide a more useful therapeutic guideline for node-negative
patients.

## 3029

## Evaluation of TGF-α expression and prevalence of EGFR and HER2
kinase domain mutations in breast cancer.

## Konecny GE, Finn F, Seshagiri S, DeForge L, Untch M, Wang HJ,
Kahlert S, Slamon DJ, Pegram MD. UCLA, Los Angeles, CA; Genentech
Inc., South San Francisco; Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich,
Germany

Background: EGFR is commonly
expressed in breast cancer, but the therapeutic utility of targeting
this receptor for breast cancer treatment is unclear. Increased
expression of EGFR ligands such as TGF-α have been implicated in
autocrine activation loops which may promote independent tumor growth.
In addition, mutations in the gene encoding EGFR in non-small-cell
lung cancer have been identified. These mutations confer sensitivity
to EGFR inhibitors in vitro and may be associated with clinical
responses to these agents. In this study we (a) examine the expression
of TGF-α and its association with EGFR in a large clinical cohort of
primary breast cancer patients and (b) study the prevalence of
specific EGFR and HER2 mutations in breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: TGF-α and EGFR
expression were measured by ELISA in primary breast cancer tissue
extracts from 662 patients with long term clinical follow up (median
72 months). Furthermore, we sequenced the tyrosine kinase domain of
HER2 and exons 19–21 of EGFR in 100 unselected primary breast cancer
patients.

Results: TGF-α expression was
detectable in 52 (8%) of the 662 patients (range: 7–394 pg/mg
protein). EGFR expression was detectable in 531 (80%) of the 662
patients (range: 0.5–636 ng/mg protein). TGF-α expression was
significantly associated with EGFR expression (p<0.0001) and VEGF
expression (p=0.0069). TGF-α and EGFR expression were significantly
associated with a negative hormone receptor status (p<0.0001). EGFR
expression demonstrated prognostic significance for disease-free (DFS,
risk ratio (RR) 1.17, p =0.0190) and overall survival (OS, RR 1.16, p
=0.0419) only in univariate analysis. TGF-α expression similarly
demonstrated prognostic relevance for DFS and OS, although not
statistically significant (DFS, RR 1.47, p= 0.0705, OS RR 1.49, p
=0.0826. TGF-α had a discriminatory effect on patients with EGFR
expressing tumors. No specific EGFR or HER2 mutations were found in
the analyzed 100 breast cancer tissue lysates.

Conclusion: EGFR expression is
frequent in breast cancer however only in cox univariate analysis did
EGFR show prognostic significance. TGF-α expression is rare, but it
may define a distinct subgroup regarding EGFR signaling and
angiogenesis. Mutations in the kinase domains of HER2 or EGFR are
unlikely to play a significant role in the pathogenesis of breast
cancer.

## 3030

## Detection and prognostic significance of HER2 mRNA-positive cells
in the peripheral blood of patients with operable breast
cancer.

## Mavroudis D, Perraki M, Apostolaki S, Politaki E, Xenidis N,
Manousakis E, Georgoulias V. University General Hospital, Heraklion,
Crete, Greece; School of Medicine, University of Crete, Heraklion,
Crete, Greece

Background: We have previously
validated a nested RT-PCR assay for the detection of circulating
occult tumor cells in the blood and bone marrow of patients (pts) with
breast cancer (Proc ASCO 2005, abstr 668). Here we present the
clinical relevance of the detection of HER2 mRNA-positive cells in the
peripheral blood of pts with operable breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: 10 ml of blood
was obtained from 216 pts with stage I and II breast cancer after
completion of primary surgery and before the initiation of any
adjuvant systemic treatment. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were
isolated, RNA was extracted and subjected to nested RT-PCR for HER2
mRNA as previously described. Results of the detection were analyzed
in univariate and multivariate models with other known prognostic
factors in relation to disease-free interval (DFI) and overall
survival (OS).

Results: Patients’ median age was
55 years (range 28–79), 135 (62.5%) were postmenopausal, 67 (31%) had
stage I disease, 78 (36%) had 1–3 involved axillary lymph nodes (LN)
and 126 (58%) had estrogen receptor (ER)-positive tumors. HER2
mRNA-positive cells were detected in 76 (35%) of the 216 pts and
independently of known clinical and pathologic risk factors. After a
median follow up period of 57 months (range 4–108), 50 (23%) pts
developed distant metastases and 30 (14%) pts have died. Univariate
analysis showed that the detection of HER2-mRNApositive cells in the
blood was associated with decreased DFI (p<0.00005) and OS
(p=0.002). Multivariate analysis revealed the detection of
HER2-mRNA-positive cells to be an independent prognostic factor for
DFI (p<0.000001) and OS (p=0.0026).

Conclusions: The detection of HER2
mRNA in the blood of patients with operable breast cancer provides
important prognostic information and thus may serve as a new marker
for the presence of occult tumor cells.

## 3031

## HER-2/neu is associated with axillary nodal invasion in breast
cancers expressing both hormone receptors.

## Neven P, Huang HJ, Drijkoningen M, Amant F, Leunen K, Berteloot
P, Wildiers H, Van Limbergen E, Paridaens R, Christiaens MR, Vergote
I. UZ-Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

Background: In breast cancer,
overexpression of the HER2/neu receptor has been correlated with poor
prognosis. We explored whether the presence of HER-2/neu, together
with other biological features of the primary tumour, aids in
predicting axillary nodal metastasis in operable breast cancers
stratified by their steroid hormone receptor status.

Patients and Methods: 1362
consecutive patients who underwent primary breast surgery and complete
axillary clearance for an invasive breast carcinoma between Jan 2000
and Jun 2003 were examined. The study variables included the HER-2/neu
and steroid receptor status, mean maximal microscopic tumor size,
proportion of tumours being grade 3 and mean age at surgery. Steroid
hormone receptors and HER-2/neu were measured by immunohistochemistry
using respectively the H- and DAKO-score. A H-score of 50–300 and a
DAKO-score of 2+ and 3+ were considered positive.

Results: Compared with HER-2/neu
negative breast cancers, HER- 2/neu positive tumours were more likely
node-positive (41.1 vs 34.2%; P=0.042), grade 3 (63.9 vs 33.9%; P<0.001), not larger (27.2 vs 25.9 mm; P=0.351) and women were slightly younger
(55.8 vs 57.7 yrs; P=0.027). The
results by oestrogen receptor (ER) -status and for ER-positive cancers
by progesterone receptor (PR)-status are summarized in the table.
HER-2/neu overexpression affects the lymph node status of ER-positive
breast cancers only when PR is co-expressed. Again in this subgroup,
HER-2/neu positive tumours were not larger (28.4 vs 25.5 mm; P=0.181) and patients were slightly
younger (54.7 vs 57.5 yrs; P=0.029). These findings were confirmed when considering
only DAKO-score 3+ cases as HER-2/neu positive. 

Conclusion: We observed that only
breast cancers positive for ER and PR may carry an elevated risk of
nodal involvement if HER-2/neu is expressed. This finding suggests
that co-expression of both steroid hormone receptors and HER-2/neu
represents a more aggressive breast cancer subtype. Our hypothesis
that oestrogens more efficiently lead to regional tumour progression
if the progesterone receptor is coexpressed with HER-2/neu warrants
further research.

## 3032

## β1 integrin expression is prognostic for overall and disease-free
survival in breast cancer.

## Yao ES, Lee B, Chen YY, Moore DH, Chew K, Park CC. University of
California, San Francisco, CA

Background: Cell-extracellular matrix
(ECM) interactions are critical in maintaining normal tissue
architecture and function. β1 integrins are a major class of molecules
that mediate cell-ECM interactions, and are aberrantly expressed in
breast cancer.

Purpose: To investigate the role of
β1 integrin expression a nd its primary ligands in breast cancer
prognosis.

Methods: Tumor samples from the UCSF
Breast Oncology Program Ti ssue Bank were used to assemble Tissue
MicroArray (TMA) blocks by the UCSF Tissue Core. Cores 0.6 mm in
diameter are taken from representative tumor areas of donor paraffin
blocks and then inserted into the TMA block utilizing a Beecher
Instruments Tissue Arrayer. After obtaining approval from the UCSF
Committee on Human Research, three separate TMA blocks were used for
the present study. Clinical data was available for all 141 evaluable
samples used in this study, which comprised the study population. The
median age of the population was 57 years (28–86), and median
follow-up time was 8.4 years. Clinical characteristics evaluated
include stage, tumor size, nodes positive, grade, estrogen and
progesterone receptor status and treatment (chemotherapy,
radiotherapy, hormone therapy). β1 integrin expression was determined
by immunohistochemical staining. Intensity (scored 0–3) and percentage
of cells positive were scored for each. In addition, extracellular
fibronectin expression was detected by immunohistochemical staining.
Univariate and multivariate analysis for overall survival and
disease-free survival were analyzed for each variable.

Results: β1 integrin intensity was
significantly associated with decreased overall survival (p=0.03) and
with decreased disease-free survival (p=0.05). β1 integrin intensity
was significantly correlated with extracellular fibronectin expression
(Kendall’s tau b=0.19, p=0.03). In a multivariate Cox proportional
hazards model, age, number of positive nodes and β1 integrin intensity
score were significant predictors for overall survival (Table 1). β1
integrin was also a jointly significant predictor, with TNM stage, for
disease-free survival (Hazard Ratio for β1 intensity score 3 vs. lower
scores = 2.07, p = 0.008).

Conclusions: β1 integrin intensity
score was an independent, significant predictor of decreased overall
and disease-free survival in patients with breast cancer. β1 integrin
expression was correlated with fibronectin expression in a subset of
patients. 

## 3033

## CSF1 expression signature identifies a subset of breast carcinomas
and influences outcome.

## West RB, Horlings H, Nuyten DSA, Subramanian S, Zhu SX, Miller
M, Rubin BP, Nielsen TO, Gilks CB, Huntsman DG, Tibshirani R, van de
Vijver M, van de Rijn M. Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
CA; Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Vancouver
General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Background: We have previously shown
that two different types of soft tissue tumors, solitary fibrous
tumors (SFT) and desmoid type fibromatosis (DTF), are representative
of different populations of fibroblastic cells in normal connective
tissue and that expression of gene sets from such tumors can
distinguish stromal gene expression patterns in breast carcinomas that
correlate with a difference in clinical outcome (PLOS Biology, 2005).
We recently identified CSF1 as a fusion partner in the chromosomal
translocation found in many tenosynovial giant cell tumors
(TGCT).

Materials and Methods: We compared 4
cases each of TGCT, SFT, and DTF on 42000 spot cDNA arrays. The genes
specific for TGCT were used to analyze DNA microarray gene expression
data set of 295 breast carcinomas with a median follow-up of
7.8 years.

Results: We find that the TGCT/CSF1
expression pattern defines a group of breast carcinomas that is
distinct from the groups defined by SFT and DTF and that have a poor
clinical outcome.

Discussion: Our data show that gene
sets defined by different soft tissue tumors can be used as a
genome-wide search tool to obtain information about gene expression
patterns in the microenvironment of breast carcinoma, and that these
distinct patterns are associated with different clinical
behavior.

## 3034

## Confirmation of an ER negative PR positive phenotype by
quantitative PCR.

## Bloom KJ. CLARiENT Inc and University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA
The ER negative PR positive phenotype is unusual, occurring in less
than 5% of invasive breast carcinomas. The existence of the phenotype
has been questioned with the belief that it is due to a false negative
ER assay. It is generally believed that there are two estrogen
receptor pathways, one nuclear and one membranous and that when the
nuclear pathway is activated by estrogen, synthesis of the
progesterone receptor is induced. Tamoxifen is an antagonist to the
nuclear pathway and thus one would expect that it should have a
reduced benefit in the ER positive PR negative phenotype, in which the
nuclear pathway does not appear to be activated, based on the lack of
PR expression. This study was performed to assess the relationship
between ER mRNA and PR mRNA expression levels determined by
quantitative PCR to determine if the ER negative PR positive phenotype
exists at the mRNA level.

Material and Methods: Paraffin
embedded tissue blocks from 247 breast cancers were examined. A single
8uM section of the paraffin block was deparaffinized and the tumor
removed by macrodissection. RNA was extracted using a silica based
extraction method (Pico-pure, Arcturus CA), and a single round of
linear amplification performed (RiboAmp, Arcturus, CA). Relative
levels of RNA expression for ER and PR were obtained using
quantitative PCR, using B-actin as a reference.

Results: One hundred fourteen breast
cancers showed upregulation of PR, ninety-two of which were
significantly upregulated. No tumor showing significant upregulation
of PR showed significant downregulation of ER although five (5%)
tumors showed ER downregulation. Overall 9 of the 114 tumors (8%)
demonstrating some level of PR upregulation showed some level of ER
downregualtion. 

Conclusions: The ER negative PR
positive phenotype was identified in approximately 8% of the examined
breast cancers, based on mRNA expression levels. The significance of
this phenotype, with respect to response to therapy and prognosis
should be more thoroughly evaluate.

## 3035

## Disease free survival (DFS) of breast cancer patients with invasive
mucinous/tubular (M/T) carcinomas vs invasive ductal/lobular (D/L)
carcinomas relative to the grade of the tumor.

## Chalchal HI, Derakhshan M, Kazmi N, Cheshenckuk S, Tonita J,
Salim M. Allan Blair Cancer Centre, Regina, SK, Canada

Background: Several large studies
have shown that patients with invasive M/T carcinomas of the breast
have a good prognosis and higher DFS. However other investigators feel
that grade of the tumor could be more important. The objective of this
study was to compare the outcomes based on histology and grade of
tumor between the two groups.

Methodology: This is a retrospective
case-control study. A list was generated for all women with breast
cancer categorized by morphology from the provincial cancer registry.
Inclusion criteria were: diagnosis between 1980 and 2002; all patients
diagnosed with M/T (Group 1); and, a random selection of patients
diagnosed with D/L (Group 2). The random selection in Group 2 was to
have resulted in the same number of cases as in Group 1. Grade of the
tumor was identified from pathology reports based on
scarf-Bloom-Richardson (SBR) classification.In total, 443 charts were
reviewed: invasive M/T histology (N=241) and invasive D/L histology
(N=203). A univariate analysis was done to correlate prognostic
factors to the outcomes for each group and subsequent to that
Kaplan-Meier survival curves were calculated DFS was calculated from
time of diagnosis to date of relapse. Deaths were censored (removed
from follow up for recurrence after death) with the end date of
follow-up being December 31, 2003. The survival curves were in days
and the log rank test was used to calculate differences in survival
between groups.

Results: Both groups were similar in
terms of age, menopausal status, harmone receptor expression, size of
the tumor and lymph node status. In patients presenting with D/L
carcinomas, 44 (33.6%) had well differentiated histology (grade 1), 55
(42.0%) with moderate to poorly differentiated histology (grade 2 or
3) and 32 (24.4%) with unknown grades. Relapses were noted in 7.2% of
patients with M/T histology as compared with 25.3% of cases with D/L
histology. Relapse was less common in the M/T group than in the D/L
group (odds ratio=0.23; 95% confidence interval 0.12–0.43, p value
<0.0001). Six (2.4%) of the 241 patients diagnosed with M/T
carcinomas died from breast cancer, while 37 of 201 (18.4%) of
patients diagnosed with D/L carcinomas died from breast cancer.
Patients diagnosed with M/T carcinomas had a better disease-free
survival rate when compared to patients with well and moderately
differentiated D/L carcinomas. After 10-years of follow-up, 9.6% of
patients diagnosed with M/T carcinomas had relapsed as compared with
44.8% of patients with well differentiated D/L carcinomas. Patients
with moderately or poorly differentiated D/L carcinomas had a relapse
rate of 40.7% at 10-years as compared with patients diagnosed with M/T
carcinomas. These differences were highly significant (p
<0.0001).

Conclusions: This study suggests that
patients diagnosed with M/T carcinomas have a better DFS compared to
D/L histology and grade of the tumor has no impact on the
outcome.

## 3036

## Identifying univariable and multivariable correlates of HER2 amplification.

## Crowe JP, Rybicki LA, Patrick RJ, Budd GT, Tubbs R, Hicks .D
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH

Introduction: The purpose of this
study was to identify correlates of human epidermal growth factor
(HER2) amplification.

Methods: Data were collected
prospectively in our institutional review board approved patient
registry for patients diagnosed with infiltrating ductal carcinoma
(IDC). HER2 for all tumors was
measured using fluorescence in-situ
hybridization. Logistic regression analysis was used to identify
multivariable correlates of HER2
amplification. A stepwise selection procedure was used; P<0.10 was
required to allow variables into the model, while P<0.05 was
required to retain a variable in the final model. Odds-ratios were
adjusted for all other variables in the model. Variables analyzed
included race, age at diagnosis, hormone receptor status, TNM stage,
presence of angiolymphatic invasion, Scarff-Bloom-Richardson (SBR)
grade, type of associated ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS), if any, and percent DCIS.

Results: Data were available for 1083
patients. Univariable analysis of clinical correlates of HER2 amplification included decreasing age
at diagnosis, hormone receptor negative tumors, increasing TNM stage,
the presence of angiolymphatic invasion, increasing SBR, the presence
of DCIS (particularly comedo), and increasing percentage of DCIS.
However, the final multivariable correlates of HER2 amplification, based on 796 non-amplified tumors
and 192 amplified, included only age at diagnosis, SBR, and type of
DCIS 

Conclusion: Multivariable correlates
of HER2 amplification are: 1)
decreasing age at diagnosis; 2) increasing SBR grade; and 3) IDC with
comedo DCIS.

## 3037

## Hepsin expression is inversely correlated with patient prognosis in
human breast cancer.

## Parr C, Watkins G, Jiang WG. Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, United Kingdom

Background: Hepsin belongs to the
type II transmembrane serine protease (TTSP) family of proteolytic
enzymes. The importance of hepsin in
vivo is presently unclear; however, studies suggest that
this factor may play a role in cancer invasion and metastasis. Our
study examined the profile of hepsin in human breast cancer and
assessed hepsin expression in relation to patient clinical
parameters.

Material and Methods: Hepsin
expression and distribution was assessed qualitatively through RT-PCR
and Western Blotting (on a range of 25 normal and cancer cell lines);
immuno-histochemically (patient samples of both normal and breast
cancer tissue); and quantitatively using real-time quantitative PCR on
a cohort of human breast cancer tissue (n = 118) and background breast
tissue (n = 31).

Results: We demonstrate that hepsin
expression was dramatically reduced in the breast cancer tissues
compared to the normal breast tissues. Quantitative and IHC analysis
of paired patient samples (normal vs. tumour) revealed a significant
decrease (p=0.023) in hepsin expression in breast cancer tissues. In
addition, examination of cell line RT-PCR data showed that hepsin was
mainly expressed in the breast cancer cells of low invasive nature.
Importantly, upon assessment of patient survival status, quantitative
PCR demonstrated that hepsin expression was significantly decreased
(p=0.001) in patients with an overall poor prognosis
(309±78.7 copies/ml), compared to those with a good prognosis
(981±183 copies/ml). Upon Q-PCR analysis of tumour grade we reveal
that reduced levels of hepsin correlate with poorly differentiated
breast tumours (grade 1 vs. grade 2 tumours p= 0.015; grade 1 vs.
grade 3 tumours p= 0.018). Also, hepsin expression was dramatically
reduced (p=0.041) in patients within the TNM-3 classification group
(299±171 copies/ml), compared to the TNM-1 group
(815±165 copies/ml).

Discussion: This is the first study
to examine hepsin in human breast cancer. There are aberrant levels of
hepsin in breast cancer tissues, and we report that hepsin displays
prognostic value in breast cancer patients. Reduced expression levels
of hepsin correlated with an overall poor prognosis for breast cancer
patients.

## 3038

## The androgen receptor gene polymorphisms in human breast cancer:
short CAG repeats are associated with lymph node involvement.

## Betancor E, Rodriguez FG, Gonzalez A, Cabrera A, Sanchez M, Vega
V, Murias A, Bohn U, Limeres M, Pestano J, Diaz-Chico BN, Diaz-Chico
JC. ICIC - Instituto Canario de Investigacion del Cancer, Las Palmas
de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands, Spain; Hospital Materno-Insular and
Hospital Dr Negrin, Servicio Canario de Salud, Las Palmas de Gran
Canaria, Canary Islands, Spain; University of Las Palmas de GC, Las
Palmas de Gran Canaria, Canary Islands, Spain
The AR gene is located at the Xq11.1–12 locus, and encode for a
ligand-dependent transcription factor which is expressed in most of
breast cancers (BC). In vitro studies have suggested both inhibitor
and stimulator cell growth effects of androgen on BC cell lines, which
are mediated by the AR. The AR gene contains a CAG repeat
(polyglutamine) length polymorphism, that modulate the AR
transcriptional activity. Since there are few studies about the
possible role of the AR CAG repeat on BC progression, here we have
genotyped this repeat in the tumor tissue DNA obtained from 317
consecutive BC specimens, and compared the obtained data with the
clinical and pathological characteristics of tumors, and with the
clinical outcome of patients. As controls we used DNA from blood of
242 age-matched women enrolled in the CDC study of the Canary Islands
(>95% caucassians). The allele frequency of the CAG repeat in
controls was similar to other caucassian populations. No significant
differences in the allele frequencies were observed between the BC
cases and controls. The CAG repeat was dichotomyzed by using the
median of allele frequency, as follow: short (S) (<21 repeats) vs.
large (L) (>21 repeats). The SS-CAG genotype (both short alleles
were compared with SL- and LL-CAG genotypes, considered altogether)
did not associate with age at diagnosis, tumor size, stage or grade.
However, the frequency of the SS-CAG genotype showed a significant
trend to increase from negative lymph node (28%) to 1–3 affected nodes
(35%) to >3 affected nodes (44%) (P=0.03). This association was
stronger in the group of postmenopausal patients (P=0.003). Univariate
survival analysis revealed that the CAG polymorphism is not related
with disease-free survival or overall survival during a short
follow-up period (median: 51 months). In conclusion, our data suggest
that short CAG repeat size in the AR gene is associated with lymph
node involvement in human breast cancer.
Aknowledgements: This study was sponsored by the Fondo de
Investigaciones Sanitarias (FIS-ISCiii-RTICCC C03/10; Government of
Spain), and by the Fundacion Canaria de Investigacion y Salud (FUNCIS)
and the Direccion General de Universidades (Government of the Canary
Islands). Technical assistance of BP Diaz and JF Rivero is gratefully
acnowledged.

## 3039

## The distribution of EGFR mRNA expression in 247 breast carcinomas
and its relationship to ER mRNA expression.

## Bloom KJ. CLARiENT Inc and University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA
Expression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) has been
reported to be associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. Since
EGFR is expressed on virtually all epithelial cells, including breast
cancer cells, negative expression indicates that the number of
receptors present is below the sensitivity of the assay being used.
Most prior studies used immunohistochemistry and thus were limited by
pre-analytical variables as well as analytical variables such as the
antibody used, the detection system and the antigen retrieval method.
This study examined EGFR expression by quantitative PCR using
beta-actin as the reference gene.

Material and Methods: Paraffin
embedded tissue blocks from 247 breast cancers were examined. EGFR
mRNA expression was performed as follows. A single 8uM section of the
paraffin block was deparaffinized and the tumor removed by
macrodissection. RNA was extracted using a silica based extraction
method (Picopure, Arcturus CA), and a single round of linear
amplification performed (RiboAmp, Arcturus, CA). Relative levels of
RNA expression for EGFR and ER were obtained using quantitative PCR,
using B-actin as a reference.

Results: EGFR expression levels were
binned and the resulting histogram was plotted, (figure 1). The
distribution was bimodal with two miniminally over-lapped normally
distributed curves, one curve whose mean shows significant
over-expression of EGFR mRNA and one curve whose mean shows
under-expression of EGFR mRNA. Sixty of 62 tumors showing significant
upregulation of EGFR mRNA showed significant downregulation of ER
mRNA. However of the 42 tumors showing significant downregulation of
EGFR mRNA, 9 showed significant upregulation and 3 showed significant
downregulation of ER mRNA, with the remaining tumors tending toward
upregualtion of ER mRNA. Of the 97 tumors showing significant
downregulation of ER mRNA, 60 showed significant upregulation, 7
showed downlegulation and the remaining tumors tended toward
upregulation of EGFR mRNA.

Conclusions: With the advent of
anti-EGFR therapies a better S138 Abstracts . Poster Session III
understanding of EGFR expression and how it relates to hormonal
expression is essential. When EGFR mRNA is significantly upregulated,
ER mRNA is almost always significantly downregulated. Further studies
should be performed to clarify the interaction of these important
pathways. 

## 3040

## CX chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) membrane staining is an independent
prognostic factor in primary breast cancer.

## Blot E, Laberge-Le-Couteulx S, Jamali H, Guillemet C, Duval C,
Hellot MF, Pille JY, Picquenot JM, Veyret C. Centre Henri Becquerel,
Rouen, France; Faculte de Medecine-Pharmacie, Rouen, France

Background: Staining for CXCR4
was compared with usual clinically relevant prognostic factors for
10-year metastase-free survival.

Patients and Methods: CXCR4
membrane staining was studied by immunochemistry in 194 primary breast
cancer patients treated in 1991. Comparison was performed with age,
initial TNM stage, grade and estrogen and progesterone receptors
expression.

Results: Significant prognostic
factors for 10-year metastase-free survival were CXCR4 membrane
staining (p<0.0001), T stage (p<0.0001) and estrogen (p=0.03)
and progesterone (p<0.001) receptors expression. N stage (p=0.07)
and grade (p=0.052) did not reach statistical significance.
Relative-risk for metastasis was significant for CXCR4 staining, T
stage and estrogen and progesterone receptors expression. 

Multivariate Cox regression showed CXCR4 was a prognostic factor
independent of T stage (p=0.0004) and estrogen (p=0.03) and
progesterone (p=0.008) receptors expression.

Discussion: In this series,
CXCR4 membrane staining is a strong independent prognostic factor in
primary breast cancer patients. This result needs further confirmation
in other series. Comparison with other new prognosis factors (uPA,
PAI-1, microarrays) would be of interest.

## 3041

## Plakoglobin ( -catenin) is a prognostic marker in breast
cancer.

## Buehler H, Mahnke E, Duvnjak B, Schaller G. Medical Center
Marienhospital Herne, Ruhr-Universitaet, Bochum, Germany;
Martin-Luther Hospital, Berlin, Germany; Ruhr-Universitaet, Bochum,
Germany

Background: Plakoglobin =
 -catenin is an important protein of cellular adhesion
structures in epithelia. It is part of the desmosomal plaque as of the
adherens junctions as well. Together, both structures account for more
than 90% of total cellular adhesion. During the metastatic process
cell-cell adhesion has to be broken before tumor cells are able to
disseminate. Since plakoglobin is part of both important adhesive
structures it might be a central candidate for downregulation during
dedifferentiation and malignant transformation. In a retrospective
study we have determined the plakoglobin expression in breast
carcinomas and correlated it with the clinical outcome of the
patients. In addition, several human breast cancer cell lines were
tested for plakoglobin expression and for invasiveness in Boyden
chamber experiments

Material and Methods: 86 specimens
were tested for plakoglobin by means of immunohistochemistry and the
expression scored separately for membrane, cytosol, and nucleus. Mean
plakoglobin values were evaluated for the two groups of surviving and
deceased tumor patients. The plakoglobin expression of 6 human breast
cancer cell lines was determined by Western blotting and correlated
with invasiveness in matrigel coated filter inserts (Boyden
chambers).

Results: In a 15 years follow-up the
ratio surviving/deceased was 2.2 for membrane, 1.6 for nucleus, 1.2
for cytosol, and 1.4 for overall staining. All patients with an
intense staining of either membrane or nucleus are still alive, in
contrast to about 40% survival for low membrane or low nuclear
staining and 12% survival for low both. Similar results were obtained
in vitro: the higher the expression of plakoglobin the lower the
invasiveness of a cell line and vice versa.

Discussion: In conclusion, we found a
close correlation of conserved plakoglobin expression in the tumor
with survival over 15 years, in particular for membraneous and nuclear
staining. In the nucleus plakoglobin might compete with
 -catenin which acts as proliferative transcription
factor in some oncogenic pathways. In cultured cancer cells we found a
similar “benign” effect of plakoglobin on the aggressiveness of the
tumor cell. Transfection experiments with a low expressing invasive
cell line will proof the principle.

## 3042

## C-KIT expression in ductal carcinoma in situ of the breast:
co-expression with HER-2/neu.

## Diallo R, Rody A, Schaefer KL, Geddert H, Shroyer KR, Gabbert
HE, Kaufmann M, Jackisch C, Poremba C. Institute of Pathology,
University of Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany; University Hospital
of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany; University of Colorado at Denver and
Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO; University Hospital of Marburg,
Marburg, Germany
The proto-oncogene c-KIT (CD 117) is highly expressed in normal
breast epithelium and is decreased in invasive breast cancer. In this
study, we analyzed the protein expression and the mutational status of
c-KIT in ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) of the breast and correlated these findings with nuclear grade,
architectural pattern and with the expression of HER-2, estrogen
receptoralpha (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR).
C-KIT, HER-2, ER and PR expression were analyzed
immunohistochemically in 106 cases of paraffin-embedded DCIS (85 pure
DCIS and 21 DCIS with concurrent carcinoma). Direct sequencing of
exons 9 and 11 of the c-KIT gene was performed to analyze the hot spot
mutational regions in representative cases. C-KIT expression was found
in 55 (52.8%) of all DCIS, correlating with high nuclear grade
(p<0.0001), comedonecrosis (p<0.0001) and solid growth pattern
(p=0.001). Furthermore, c-KIT expression was strongly associated with
HER-2 positivity (p<0001) and was significantly lower in ER- or
PR-positive cases (p=0.001 and p=0.006, respectively). C-KIT
expression alone or coexpression with Her-2/neu in pure DCIS did not
differ significantly from DCIS with invasive component (p=0.09).
Mutational analysis in 6 c-KIT-positive DCIS revealed no activating
mutations in exons 9 or 11.
Our findings suggest that co-expression of c-KIT and HER-2/neu may
define a subgroup of poorly differentiated DCIS with decreased steroid
hormone receptor expression. The meaning of c-KIT- and HER-2/neu- co-
expression in this subgroup of DCIS and the potential relevance to
progression to invasive cancer should be evaluated further.

## 3043

## Sprouty 4 expression is decreased in node-negative breast cancer
and intimately related to expression of cell cycle proteins.

## Faratian D, Halliday G, Kerr GR, Thomas JS, Cameron DA, Harrison
DJ. University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom;
Weastern General Hospital, Edinburgh, Scotland, United
Kingdom

Background: Sprouty proteins are
endogenous inhibitors of Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase
(Ras/MAPK) signalling, deregulation of which may be expected to exert
profound effects on cell proliferation and cancer development. Using
in silico interrogation of
publicly available gene expression microarray data, we identified
Sprouty 4 as overexpressed in populations of ‘poor prognosis’ breast
cancers. The purpose of this study was to (i) verify the expression
and prognostic significance of Sprouty 4 and other putative prognostic
markers in a population of nodenegative patients with poor and good
outcomes, treated with local therapy alone and (ii) investigate the
association of Sprouty 4 expression with G1/S phase checkpoint
proteins.

Materials and Methods: 436 patients
with pathologically nodenegative breast cancer were treated in
Edinburgh between 1969–1978 without the use of adjuvant systemic
therapy. We identified 56 patients who died of their breast cancer
within 5 years of treatment (‘poor prognosis group’) and 119 who
survived more than 25 years (‘good prognosis group’). The
histopathology of the cases was reviewed by two pathologists (DF and
JST). Sprouty 4 (Ab7513, Abcam) expression was examined in full
sections of normal breast and breast carcinomas by
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Tissue microarrays were constructed using
triplicate cores from 96 available cases, and Sprouty 4, ER, cyclin D,
cyclin E, p21, p27, p53, HER2 and Ki67 status were assessed by
IHC.

Results: Sprouty 4 IHC showed strong
granular staining of luminal epithelial cells of normal breast ducts,
and variable intensity of staining in the epithelial component of
breast carcinomas. IHC was interpretable in 65/96 tissue microarray
cores. Sprouty 4 showed decreased expression (zero to moderate
staining) in 28/65 (43%) of cases. High cyclin E and Ki67 expression
were associated with poor prognosis by univariate analysis
(Chi-squared test, p<0.05), whilst only size and high cyclin E
expression were associated with poor prognosis in a multivariate
analysis (logistic regression, p<0.05). Low Sprouty 4 expression
was associated with low p21, low p27, high cyclin E and low cyclin D
expression (Chi-squared test, p<0.05). In addition, low Sprouty 4
expression was associated with negative/low ER status.

Discussion: Here we have shown, for
the first time, that Sprouty 4 is constitutively expressed in normal
breast ducts and, contrary to gene expression data, Sprouty 4 shows
decreased protein expression in a population of breast carcinomas.
Cyclin E is confirmed as an independent prognostic factor in breast
cancer. Decreased expression of Sprouty 4 is associated with a pattern
of expression of cell cycle proteins regulating S-phase entry and
progression, confirming a functional role in regulating cellular
proliferation in breast cancer.

## 3044

## p53 protein accumulation and presence of visceral metastasis are
independent prognostic factors for survival in patients with metastatic
inflammatory breast carcinoma.

## Sezgin C, Gokmen E. Ege University School of Medicine, Bornova,
Izmir, Turkey
Purpose: Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is known as the most
aggressive form of breast cancer. Majority of patients with
nonmetastatic IBC relapse despite therapy with a curative intent. It
is not entirely clear whether the established prognostic markers in
non-IBC have significance in IBC as well. The aim of this study was to
determine the markers of prognosis in metastatic IBC.
Methods: The prognostic significance of clinical characteristics
and molecular markers of the primary tumor was assessed in the 45
patients with IBC who had developed distant metastasis. ER, PR, HER2
neu, Ki67 and p53 expressions by immunohistochemistry, histological
and nuclear grade, number of axillary lymph nodes involved (<4 vs
≥4), setting of chemotherapy (neoadjuvant vs adjuvant), taxane use in
the adjuvant-neoadjuvant setting (taxane vs non taxane containing
regimes), site of recurrence (visceral vs non-visceral) and
performance status (0–1 vs 2–3) were correlated with the disease free
survival (DFS), and overall survival (OS).
Results: The median follow up duration from the time of primary
disease diagnosis is 78 months. The median OS measured from the
diagnosis of metastatic disease is 23 months. In the univariate
analysis, p53 accumulation, the presence of visceral metastasis and
low performance status were predictive of poor survival (p:0.01,
0.003, and 0.02, respectively). In the multivariate analysis,
accumulation of p53 protein and the presence of visceral metastasis
were found to correlate with OS. The median OS for the 22 patients who
had p53 negative tumors was 43 months. In contrast, the OS for the 23
patients with p53 positive disease was only 17 months (p:0.01). The OS
for patients with visceral disease was 17 months vs 43 months for
those without visceral organ involvement (p:0.003). None of the
parameters analyzed was predictive of DFS.
Conclusions: In metastatic IBC, accumulation of p53 protein and
presence of visceral metastasis are independent prognostic factors for
OS. Survival of patients with a negative p53 immunohistochemistry
stainingappears similar to those reported for non-IBC patients in the
literature. Other prognostic factors established in non-IBC did not
have independent significance in IBC in this study.

## 3045

## Comparison between the 5th and 6th American Joint Committee on
Cancer(AJCC) staging system in 1,275 breast cancer patients.

## Kang SH, Kim BS, Lee SJ, Kwun KB. Yeungnam University Medical
Center, Daegu, Korea

Purpose: Since the publication of the
5th edition of the AJCC cancer staging manual in 1997 (old stage),
significant developments have occurred in the field of breast cancer
diagnosis and management; therefore, it was revised at 2002 (new
stage). There are few reports comparing the changes in prognosis in
relation to the changes in the staging system. The aims of this study
were to evaluate the changes in patient distribution and prognosis
according to the changes in the staging system and to elucidate the
efficacy of new staging system.

Methods: The records of 1,275
patients who underwent an operation for breast cancer at Yeung-Nam
University Hospital between 1987 and 2003 were reviewed. The
pathological stage was assigned retrospectively according to the 5th
and the 6th AJCC staging criteria. The patient distributions by stage,
nodal status, 5-year relapse free survival (RFSR) and overall survival
rates (OSR) were retrospectively compared.

Results: Five hundred and five of 616
stage II patients according to the 1997 classification system were
also stage II according to the 6th AJCC staging system. The number of
patients with stages IIA and IIB decreased from 370 and 246 (old
stage) to 342 and 165 (new stage), respectively. Conversely, the
number of patients with stage III increased from 158 (old stage) to
271 (new stage). The five-year RFSR for patients with stage I, IIA,
IIB, and IIIA were 94.2, 87.1, 74.3, and 48.8% according to the old
stage (p<0.0001), and 95.2, 87.8, 81.7, and 66.8%, respectively,
according to the new stage (p<0.0001). The five-year OSR for
patients with stage I, IIA, IIB, and IIIA were 98.7, 94.3, 86.1, and
63.5% according to the old stage (p<0.0001), and 98.7, 95.7, 96.5,
and 72.9%, respectively, according to the new stage (p<0.0001). The
RFSR and OSR for stage IIIC were 42.0 and 59.5%, respectively. There
was significant difference in the five year OSR for stages IIB and
IIIA (p=0.0308 and p=0.0132, respectively).

Conclusions: In our study, the 6th
AJCC staging system shifted poorer prognostic cohort of each stage
toward a higher stage compared to the 1997 version. Therefore, the
survival rate for any one stage assigned by 2002 staging system was
also improved. In conclusion, it is imperative that careful attention
is devoted to this effect so that accurate conclusions regarding the
efficacy of new treatment can be drawn.

## 3046

## Pretreatment plasma leptin and leptin receptor levels in metastatic
breast cancer.

## Leitzel K, Demers L, Ali SM, Evans DB, Lipton A. Penn State/
Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, PA; Lebanon VA Medical Center,
Lebanon, PA; Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland

Background: Leptin is a 16 kD protein
produced by adipocytes, plays a key role in weight regulation, and
leptin plasma levels are increased with increasing weight. Recently
serum leptin has been implicated as a regulator of bone mass. The
leptin receptor (OBR) is a 150–190 kD protein that binds leptin and is
present in many cell types including brain, placenta, pancreas, liver,
lung, and heart. Over-expression of leptin and the leptin receptor by
IHC has been reported in primary breast cancer but not in normal
mammary epithelial cells.

Materials and Methods: Pretreatment
plasma leptin and leptin receptor were assayed in 136 patients with
metastatic breast cancer enrolled in a phase III
2nd-line hormone therapy trial using the
leptin and leptin receptor ELISAs from Diagnostic Systems
Laboratories, Webster TX. Leptin and leptin receptor plasma levels
were correlated with patient response to
2nd-line hormone therapy.

Results: Median plasma leptin levels
were 40 ng/ml (range 1.3–330 ng/ml), and median plasma leptin receptor
levels were 30.9 ng/ml (range 2.6–67.2 ng/ml). The median leptin and
leptin receptor levels were used as cutoff points for statistical
analysis. In univariate analysis using these cutoffs, pretreatment
plasma leptin levels did not significantly predict patient response to
2nd-line hormone therapy [Clinical
benefit rate (CBR) or time to progression (TTP)], or overall survival.
Patients with elevated plasma leptin receptor levels had lower CBR
(Odds ratio 0.4, pvalue= 0.012), but had no effect on TTP. Patients
with elevated plasma leptin receptor levels had a significantly
reduced survival (Hazard Ratio 1.9, p=.006). When examined in
reference to the presence of bone metastases, plasma leptin and leptin
receptor levels did not significantly differ between these subgroups.
Patients with elevated serum HER-2/neu levels had significantly higher
leptin receptor plasma levels (35.6 ng/ml vs. 29.2 ng/ml)(p=0.004),
whereas plasma leptin levels were not different in patients with
elevated vs. normal serum HER-2/neu levels. In multivariate analysis,
plasma leptin receptor level remained a significant prognostic factor
when serum HER-2/neu level was included in the analysis.Conclusion: Elevated pretreatment plasma
leptin receptor predicted decreased CBR and reduced overall survival.
Plasma leptin receptor levels deserve further study in metastatic
breast cancer.

## 3047

## Identification of a mechanistically-defined panel of mRNA markers
associated with long-term prognosis of nodenegative breast
cancer.

## Macina RA, Ghosh S, Doval DC, Patole K, Sridhar T, Saxena R,
Segal MR, McNeil M, Vartanian S. diaDexus, Inc, South San Francisco,
CA; Triesta Sciences, Bangalore, India; Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute
and Research Center, New Delhi, India; University of California, San
Francisco, CA

Background: Rational interrogation of
the primary tumor phenotype has the potential to provide clinically
useful information about its metastatic potential and the long-term
clinical outcome of primary breast cancer. Previous studies have
reported the utility of different RNA expression markers for this
purpose. Using comprehensive mining of cDNA databases and subsequent
microarray analysis, we identified a minimal subset of differentially
expressed genes coding for proteins involved in different biological
processes in breast cancer. To evaluate their prognostic value, we
selected genes involved in cell adhesion, cell proliferation,
metastasis, chemotaxis, DNA repair, immune response and
apoptosis.

Materials and Methods: We performed
quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (Q-PCR) on archived formalin
fixed paraffinembedded (FFPE) primary cancer tissues. We studied a
total of 37 breast cancer patients, who were lymph node (LN) negative
and estrogen receptor (ER) positive with a median follow up of
70 months. Thirty patients had not presented with any local recurrence
or distant metastasis (disease free group, DF), while 7 patients
presented with either local recurrence or distant metastasis
(progressive disease group, PD). Gene expression of 12 cancer genes
and 3 endogenous controls were performed by Q-PCR to identify which
genes were predictive of long-term outcome.

Results: The Q-PCR expression data
was analyzed by assessing differential expression (DE) between DF and
PD subjects, as well as associating expression with survival.
Calibration was based on the average of 3 endogenous control genes. DE
was measured using two-sample t-tests. In preliminary results
comparing the DF subjects to the PD subjects, significant differences
are obtained for the gene encoding the chemokine receptor CCR8 (p =
0.026) involved in chemotaxis and cell adhesion, and the gene encoding
CYR61 (p = 0.04) involved in cell growth, proliferation and adhesion,
with a borderline result for a gene involved in cell adhesion (p =
0.057).

Discussion: All 3 genes with
differential expression between the two cohorts are involved in the
process of metastasis and are good candidates to predict differential
outcomes. Higher levels of all three genes were found in the PD
cohort. We are currently extending this analysis including additional
cancer genes and endogenous controls, more patients with PD, and use
of discrimination and survival analysis.

## 3048

## Cyclin E2 mRNA expression and metastasis-free survival in untreated
node-negative breast cancer patients.

## Schmidt M, Glawatz C, Gehrmann MC, Puhl A, von Toerne C, Steiner
E, Boehm D, Koelbl H. University of Mainz, Medical School, Mainz,
Germany; Bayer HealthCare AG, Levekusen, Germany; Bayer Technology
Services, Leverkusen, Germany

Background: high levels of low
molecular cyclin E protein have been proposed as a prognostic factor
in early breast cancer. Furthermore, cyclin E2 RNA levels (CCNE2) were
part of two different gene expression signatures identifying
node-negative patients with low risk of recurrence. We tried to
corroborate the prognostic impact of CCNE2 in untreated node-negative
breast cancer.

Material and Methods: we analyzed 212
fresh-frozen breast tumors. The tumors had been removed from node
negative patients not treated with adjuvant systemic therapy. RNA was
extracted from the tissue, amplified, biotin labeled and hybridized to
HG U133A Affymetrix arrays. Signal intensities for CCNE2 mRNA were
computed by MAS 5.0 software. The association between CCNE2 mRNA and
development of metastasis was analyzed in the entire patient
population as well as in subgroups stratified according to the
estrogen receptor-a (ESR 1) status using univariate and multivariate
Cox regression analysis.

Results: univariate Cox regression
analysis showed that both CCNE2 and histological grade were
significantly associated with the development of distant metastasis (p
= 0.0078 and p = 3.3e- 05). However, in multivariate analysis only
histological grade remained significant (p = 0.0019). When tumors were
stratified according to estrogen receptor status, CCNE2 levels were
higher in ESR1 negative (n = 35) than in ESR1 positive (n = 177)
tumors (p <0.0001). However, CCNE2 (p = 0.0069) was significantly
associated with metastasis-free survival only in the ESR1 positive
subgroup. In multivariate analysis only histological grade was
independently associated with metastasis-free survival (p = 0.0037).
CCNE2 failed to show any prognostic impact in ESR1 negative
patients.

Discussion: expression of CCNE2
showed a significant association with metastasis-free survival only in
ESR1 positive node-negative breast cancer patients. However, in
multivariate analysis only histological grade remained an independent
predictor of metastasisfree survival. These results challenge earlier
reports of an independent association between Cyclin E and prognosis
in breast cancer.

## 3049

## Survivin is a predictor of poor outcome in breast cancer.

## Hinnis A, Walker RA. University of Leicester, Leicester, United
Kingdom

Background: There are well recognised
clinico-pathological factors that can determine outcome in breast
cancer but there is a therapeutic need for subdividing patients that
are within what appear to be good and poor prognostic groups. This
study examined the value of cell cycle and apoptotic regulatory
proteins in predicting behaviour in a poor prognostic group.

Materials and Methods: The study
group comprised 165 cases, all of whom had died of breast cancer, with
duration of survival from 12–127 months, median 38 months. 18 had
received neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 18 adjuvant chemotherapy, 70
adjuvant chemo- and hormonal therapy, and 59 adjuvant hormonal
therapy. 68% were T2, 5% T3, 745 were node positive, 75% grade 3 and
51% ER positive. Immunohistochemistry was performed for proliferation
(MIB1), apoptosis (M30), p53, phosphorylated p53, p21, chK2, bcl-2,
bax, Survivin and XIAP.

Results: High proliferation, presence
of phosphorylated p53, ChK2 and Survivin correlated with grade 3 and
lack of ER, whilst low proliferation, presence of p21 and bcl-2
related to better grade and presence of ER. Tumour grade correlated
significantly with duration of survival for all treatment groups.
Proliferation, phosphorylated p53, bcl-2, ER and Survivin were
significantly related to duration of survival. Analysis in a Cox
regression model showed grade (p=0.001) and Survivin (p=0.005) to be
independent prognostic factors. When considered in relation to
treatment received the presence of Survivin correlated with a
significantly shorter duration of survival for the neoadjuvant group
and the adjuvant chemo- and hormonal therapy group. ER related to
longer duration of survival for the group receiving adjuvant hormonal
treatment.

Discussion: Within a group of
patients who have all died from breast cancer better grade, lower
proliferation, presence of ER and bcl-2, and lack of Survivin all
related to longer duration of survival, and the value of determining
ER was demonstrated again. For those patients with shorter survival
duration high grade and high proliferation were features along with
phosphorylated p53 and Survivin.Of the various markers assessed the
apoptosis protein Survivin proved to be an independent predictor of
poor outcome, particularly for certain treatment groups, where its
role as an inhibitor of apoptosis may be important.

## 3050

## Prognostic value of p53 specific mutations in low-risk HER- 2/neu
negative primary breast cancers.

## Wu L, Robin HS, Gallarda JL, Eberhardt JS, Muller WD, Sadeghi S,
Clark RC. Roche Molecular Systems, Pleasanton, CA; Sharp Memorial
Hospital, San Diego, CA; DecisionQ, Washington, DC
Background: Prognostic factors are required for the evaluation of
patients with small tumors and node negative disease. These patients
have a good prognosis, although 30% will experience recurrent disease.
In breast cancers with HER-2/neu amplification, p53 mutations are
associated with poor survival. However, in the absence of HER-2 over
expression, such mutations were thought to be of limited prognostic
value. We examined the effect of specific p53 mutations on Stage I
breast cancers that were HER-2 negative.
Patients and methods: The analysis of the p53 gene was performed
using GeneChip technology. We examined 66 archival breast specimens
derived from formalin fixed paraffin embedded tissue from patients
with stage I tumors that were HER-2 negative by immunohistochemistry
and fluorescent in-situ hybridization. The median follow-up for
patients was 3.5 years. We used a Bayesian probabilistic model to
identify prognostic factors that contribute to overall
outcomes.
Results: Amplification and detection were achieved in 55 samples
and specific p53 point mutations were detected in 36.4% of these
samples. Using a Bayesian classifier, patient outcome was
conditionally dependent on Estrogen/Progesterone receptor status and
mutations on Exon 6. The model was validated using randomized
train-and-test cross validation, and had a mean area under the curve
for outcome of 63.2% and a median area under the curve of 63.5%. P53
gene mutation on Exon 6 was an independent prognostic marker of death.
In the overall population, a confirmed mutation increases the
probability of recurrence and death from 33.0% to 52.2%. Further, in a
population with negative Estrogen/ Progesterone Receptor status, the
presence of a mutation increases probability of death from 31.2% to
63.2%.
Conclusions: Mutations of the p53 gene are the most common genetic
alterations identified in breast cancers and these mutations are often
associated with poor prognosis and resistance to chemotherapy and
radiation. In our population, the presence of a p53 mutation in Exon 6
indicates a relative risk of death of 1.6 times the overall reference
population and 2.3 times the population with a confirmed wild type
Exon 6, known to be a critical site for p53 functionality. These
results are preliminary and based upon a small sample size, therefore
further research is necessary to determine the prognostic value of
specific P53 gene mutations in Stage I and HER-2 negative breast
cancer patients who may benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy.

## 3051

## Prognostic and predictive value of CK-19 mRNA-positive cells
detected by real time RT-PCR in the peripheral blood of patients with
axillary lymph node-negative breast cancer receiving adjuvant
chemotherapy.

## Xenidis N, Perraki M, Pallis A, Kalmanti L, Stathopoulou A,
Lianidou E, Mavroudis D, Georgoulias V. University General Hospital of
Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece; School of Medicine, University of Crete,
Heraklion, Greece; University of Athens, Athens, Greece

Purpose: To investigate the
predictive and prognostic value of occult CK-19 mRNA-positive cells in
the peripheral blood of axillary lymph node-negative breast cancer
patients. Patients and Methods:
Peripheral blood was obtained from 167 patients with stage I and II
(N0 by both histologic and immunohistochemical analysis) breast cancer
after primary surgery and before the initiation of any systemic
adjuvant therapy, and was analyzed for the presence of CK-19
mRNA-positive cells using a real time RTPCR assay. The association
with known prognostic factors and the effect of CK-19 mRNA-positive
cells on patients’ prognosis was investigated. Results: CK-19 mRNA-positive cells were detected in the
blood of 36 (21.6%) of the 167 patients who had no axillary lymph node
involvement by immunohistochemistry using anti-cytokeratin monoclonal
antibodies. There was no correlation between the detection of CK-19
mRNA-positive cells in the peripheral blood and the different known
pathologic and clinical prognostic factors; only overexpression of
HER2 receptor (score 2+/3+) on the tumor cells was associated with a
higher incidence of CK-19 mRNA-positive cell detection in the blood
(25% vs 12.8% for CK-19 mRNA-positive and CK-19 mRNAnegative,
respectively; p=0.033). Multivariate analysis revealed that the
detection of CK-19 mRNA-positive cells in the peripheral blood was an
independent predictive and prognostic factor for both DFI
(p<0.00001) and overall survival (p=0.008). In addition, adjuvant
chemotherapy combining sequential docetaxel followed by
epirubicin-cyclophosphamide was also an independent predictive factor
for DFI (p=0.03). Conclusion:
Detection of occult CK- 19 mRNA-positive tumor cells in the peripheral
blood is an independent predictive and prognostic factor in
node-negative breast cancer patients and may be used to select high
risk patients for adjuvant treatment.

## 3052

## Prognostic factors predicting survival of metastatic breast cancer
patients: analysis of 591 patients.

## Kim SI, Jung SY, Sohn JH, Keum KC, Park BW, Lee KS. Yonsei
University Medical College; Yonsei University Medical College, Seoul,
Korea

Background: To identify prognostic
factors for survival from first recurrence, we have analyzed
retrospectively 591 recurrent breast cancer patients.

Material and Methods: Between 1980
and 1999, 2629 patients were diagnosed of breast cancer and followed
at a single institution. During follow up, 591 patients experienced
distant recurrence of their disease and included in this study.
Variables at the time of diagnosis (age, tumor size, axillary lymph
node involvement, hormone receptor status in primary tumor) and
variables at the time of recurrence (disease free interval, dominant
site of metastasis, number of recurrence sites) were examined to
determined their relationship with overall survival from first
recurrence. Survival data were analyzed using Kaplan-Meier method and
Cox proportional hazards model to identify predictive
variables.

Results: The mean survival from first
recurrence was 26.9 months (median; 15.4 months). On the univariate
analysis, negative estrogen receptor status of primary tumor
(p<0.0001), visceral recurrence (p<0.0001), shorter disease free
interval (<2 yrs; p<0.0001), number of metastatic site (>2;
p<0.0001) were significantly associated with poor overall survival
from first recurrence. On the multivariate analysis, negative estrogen
receptor status of primary tumor (p<0.0001, RR;1.8615), visceral
recurrence (p=0.0046, RR;1.4401), and shorter disease free interval
(p=0.0001, RR;1.6057) remained independently associated with poor
overall survival.

Discussion: We confirm that the
negative estrogen receptor status of primary tumor, visceral
recurrence, and shorter length of disease free interval are
independent prognostic factors of survival after first recurrence. Our
retrospective review in a large series should help in designing
tailored therapeutic strategies for patients with recurrent breast
cancer.

## 3053

## Expression of leptin and leptin receptor in breast cancer are
associated with aggressive histology, distant recurrence and
survival.

## Kulkarni SA, Saxena S, Bundy R, Groth J, Watroba N, Edge SE,
Ambrosone CA, Geradts J. Roswell Park Cancer Institute/SUNY Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY

Background: Leptin (L) is a
cytokine-like hormone that was originally identified in adipocytes. At
physiologic concentrations, it controls adipocyte mass and energy
balance by binding to the leptin receptor (OB-R). At higher
concentrations, leptin can stimulate cellular proliferation, invasion
and angiogenesis. Recently, leptin and the long form of the leptin
receptor were identified in normal and neoplastic breast epithelium.
The clinical significance of aberrant leptin and leptin receptor in
patients diagnosed with breast cancer is unclear.

Methods: The anti-leptin rabbit
(A-20) and anti-leptin receptor (M-18) goat polyclonal antibodies from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology were applied in indirect immunohistochemical
assays. Following an antigen retrieval step, the antibodies were
reacted with 5 um paraffin sections of tissue microarrays (TMAs)
prepared at Roswell Park Cancer Institute. These TMAs included 1 mm
cores of 128 evaluable invasive breast carcinomas. For leptin
expression, nuclear (LN) and cytoplasmic (LC) staining was evaluated
separately. For leptin receptor (LR) expression, only one overall
qualitative score (0, 1+, 2+, 3+) was applied to each case. For
analysis, 0 and +1 were considered low expression and +2 and +3 were
considered high expression.The MCF-7 cell line was included as a
positive control. The expression levels were correlated with a large
number of clinico-pathologic, epidemiologic and biologic data.

Results: There was a positive
correlation between LC and OB-R expression. LC levels were
significantly higher in PR-negative tumors (p=0.01) and were also
correlated with both local and distant recurrence (p=0.003). It was
not associated with ER or HER2 status, lymphovascular invasion, tumor
grade, DNA ploidy or nodal status. LN and OB-R levels did not
correlate with any of the patho-biologic variables studied so
far.

Conclusions: Overall, our data
indicate that LN and LR may not be significantly associated with
common clinical and pathologic variables. However, LC may prove to be
an important new biomarker for breast cancer recurrence.

## 3054

## Comparison of outcomes of hormone receptor (HR) negative, and HER2
negative (triple negative, TN) to HER2+ breast cancer (BC) patients
(pts): impact of HER2 status.

## Man MC, Moore D, Chen YY, Rugo HS. University of California San
Francisco; University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA

Background: TN and HER2+ BCs
have an aggressive clinical course and poor prognosis. Evaluation of
cDNA expression patterns from breast tumor tissue demonstrated that
although each group has a distinct genetic profile, both groups had
decreased OS compared to pts with HR+, HER2- BCs. Trastuzumab therapy
has improved outcomes for pts with HER2+ BC. No studies to date have
directly compared characteristics and clinical outcomes between TN and
HER2neu positive pts.

Materials and Methods: A chart
review of 102 TN and 59 HER2+ pts treated at UCSF between 2000 to
present was performed. All patients had central pathology and receptor
status review. Patients with borderline staining for HER2 by IHC had
FISH performed for confirmation of HER2 status. Data were collected on
demographic and pathologic characteristics, course of treatment, and
outcomes including time to first recurrence (DFS), site of first
recurrence, and OS. Pts in this database had not received adjuvant
trastuzumab.

Results: Initial analysis of DFS
and OS was performed. Median follow up is 2.7 yrs (range 0.2–17). 14%
of TN vs 2% of HER2+ BC were African American. 64% of pts in both
groups had ≥ stage II disease at diagnosis (4% stage IV). 80% of pts
with TN and 63% of pts with HER2+ BC received adjuvant chemotherapy.
Pts with HER2+ BC had a significantly better DFS than pts with TN
disease (p=0.03). In addition, HER2 + disease was associated with a
significantly improved OS (p=0.001). This difference was seen in the
first 5 years following diagnosis.

Conclusion: HER2 modulates the
outcome of BC with a positive impact on DFS and OS compared to pts
with TN BC. Our analysis is ongoing, and data on an additional 100
HER2+ pts will be presented. Further subset analysis will be performed
to compare the characteristics and outcomes of HER2+ cancers based on
HR status in comparison to the TN population. New treatments are
needed for pts with TN BC.

## 3055

## Expression of estrogen receptor and Ki-67 as prognostic factors for
locoregional recurrence after breast conserving surgery.

## Shin HJ, Han W, Park IA, Hwang KT, Hwang SE, Lee JE, Noh DY.
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea

Purpose and Background: Breast
conserving surgery (BCS) is a standard operation for early breast
cancer if indicated. Although local-regional recurrence (LRR) was a
common serious problem after BCS, factors predicting LRR after BSC are
not established yet. A number of studies have reported potential
prognostic factors for LRR, such as estrogen receptor (ER),
progesterone receptor (PR), nuclear grade, histologic grade, lymph
node metastasis, tumor size, and young age with inconclusive result.
We tried to identify the value of Ki-67 as a new prognostic factor for
LRR after BCS.

Patients and Method: The study
population consisted of 361 patients who underwent BCS as primary
therapy in Seoul National University Hospital from Jan 1995 to Dec
2002. As an adjuvant therpy, radiation therapy was done in all
patients with or without systemic therapy. Clinicopathological data
were retrospectively reviewed.

Result: LRR was observed in fifteen
out of 361 patients (4.2%) during follow up period. In a univariate
analysis, ER (p=0.008), nuclear
grade (p=0.01) and Ki-67 (p=0.002) were significant factors for
predicting LRR. However, histologic grade, lymph node metastasis,
tumor size >2 cm, age>50, positive resection margin, and
extensive intraductal component (p>0.05) were not significant factors. In a multivariate
analysis, only high Ki-67 expression was significant for LRR after BCS
(HR=3.31; 95% CI: 1.06–10.34).

Conclusion: We suggested resection
with wider margins and careful follow up for the patients without ER
expression, especially with high Ki-67 expression when considering
BCS.

## 3056

## Clinicopathologic characteristics and prognostic factors in 420
metastatic breast cancer patients with central nervous system
metastases.

## Altundag K, Bondy ML, Kau SW, Broglio K, Rivera E. The
University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background:Breast cancer is the
second most common cause of central nervous system (CNS) metastases.
CNS metastases may appear either within the brain parenchyma or along
the leptomeninges. As systemic therapy of metastatic breast cancer
improves, management of CNS metastases becomes an increasing
challenge.

Material-Methods: We retrospectively
evaluated clinical datafrom 420 patients who had been diagnosed with
breast cancer and CNS metastasis between 1994 and 2004 at M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center. The purpose of this analysis is to describe
these patients’ clinicopathologic characteristics and overall
survival. Overall survival (OS) was measured from the date of CNS
metastasis to the date of death or last follow-up. OS was estimated by
the Kaplan-Meier method and the log rank statistic was used to compare
groups.

Results: The median age at a
diagnosis of breast primary was 45 (range 25 to 77). Pre- and
postmenopausal patients were equally distributed. Most patients had
invasive ductal histology (91.2%), were T2 (40.1%), N1 (59.7%), and
grade III (81.4%) at diagnosis. Forty percent of patients had
ER-positive disease, and 34% were PR-positive disease. HER-2 neu
status was recorded for only 248 patients, and among these patients,
39% had HER-2 neu positive disease. The most common sites of first
metastasis were liver, bone, and lung. CNS metastasis was the site of
first relapse in 53 patients (12%). 329 patients had received
neoadjuvant treatment (113 pts) and adjuvant chemotherapy (216
patients). Most of these patients (74.4%) had received
anthracycline-based regimens. 62.8% of patients had multiple
parenchymal metastases, and 111 (26.4%) had solitary metastasis. 374
patients (89%) had only parenchymal metastases (PM), 29 patients had
leptomeningeal metastases (LPM), and 17 patients had both PM and LPM.
Median time to developing of CNS metastases after primary diagnosis
was 31.4 months (range, 0–220 months). Median follow-up was 6 months
(range 0.7 months to 95.9 months). Three hundred fifty nine patients
died and the overall median survival was 6.8 months. Patients with
ER-positive disease tended to have longer overall survival compared to
patients with ER negative disease (p = 0.003). Patients under age
50 years tended to have longer overall survival compared to patients
over 50 years (p = 0.047). Patients with grade III tumors or with more
than 9 positive lymph nodes tended to have shorter median OS.

Conclusion: Prognosis for metastatic
breast cancer patients with CNS metastases is poor. More aggressive
treatment approach may be considered for patients with favorable
prognostic factors such as ER-positive tumors or younger age.

## 3057

## Patterns of care in patients included in the TEAM (tamoxifen and
exemestane adjuvant multicentre) trial. Differences among the
participating countries.

## van de Velde CJ, Jones SE, Seynaeve C, Namer M, Kieback DG, Rea
DW, Dirix D, Markopoulos C, Hozumi Y, van Nes JG, Klein Kranenburg WM,
Putter H. Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands; US
Oncology, Inc., Dallas, TX; Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
Netherlands; Centre Antoine Lacassagne, Nice, France; University
Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands; Institute of Cancer
Studies, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom; St
Augustinus Hospital, Wilrijk, Belgium; Euroclinic of Athens, Athens,
Greece; Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan

Introduction: The TEAM trial is
evaluating the efficacy and safety of exemestane, alone and in
sequence following tamoxifen, in the initial adjuvant treatment of
postmenopausal women with early hormone sensitive breast cancer (BC).
Within the TEAMpopulation, the patterns of care in the different
countries were compared.

Methods: Patients (pts) were enrolled
in Belgium, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Japan, Netherlands, UK
and the USA. Postmenopausal women with hormone sensitive early BC were
randomised to five years of exemestane alone or sequential therapy
with tamoxifen followed by exemestane. Minor differences do exist
among countries with regards to inclusion and exclusion criteria for
the TEAM trial.

Results: Among pts randomised between
2001 and 2004 (n = 7159), baseline-characteristics are: mean age:
64.5 years (SD 9.0); mean tumour size: 20.7 mm (SD 12,7); TNM stage:
62% T1, 34% T2; 3% T3; 1% T4; 56% N0, 41% N1, 2% N2, 1% N3. There were
large differences in the choice for mastectomy versus breast
conserving surgery (BCS): BCS was performed in 81% of the French pts
versus 39% of the Belgian pts. Generally, BCS was more often performed
in T1-tumours, but differences exist: in Greece 54% of T1 tumours were
treated by BCs versus up to 85% in the USA. Ninety-one percent of the
pts underwent an axillary dissection, ranging from 80% in the
Netherlands to 100% in Belgium and Germany. The mean number of
examined lymph nodes was 13 (SD 6.3), ranging from 11 in France to 17
in Greece. There are also differences with regards to the use of
adjuvant therapy prior to randomisation. Almost all pts (98%) in the
USA received chemotherapy compared to a small amount of the Dutch pts
(27%). Further analysis of these differences are ongoing.

Conclusion: Major differences exist
in the patterns of care of primary BC among the different
TEAM-countries reflecting large global differences in the usual
treatment of early hormone sensitive BC despite international
consensus guidelines (e.g. St Gallen). These differences warrant
careful further investigation, and should be taken into account
considering the results of international studies.

## 3058

## Benchmarking patterns of utilization among breast cancer
patients.

## Schafer JM, Lee M-P, Stout KL, Nydam JE, Swisher JM, Siambekos
MT, Suvari WC. Sg2, Evanston, IL
Background: Breast cancer patients utilized 17,919,088 outpatient
services nationally in 2002, with the highest volumes being for
chemotherapy and visits. Extreme variations in the number and types of
services breast cancer patients utilize make benchmarking extremely
difficult. Using a novel method of analysis to quantify patterns of
utilization, breast cancer patients can be segmented into 2 unique
groups: those that are actively receiving treatment (Active Phase) and
those that being monitored for recurrences (Surveillance Phase). These
2 patient groups exhibit very different patterns of utilization as
measured by types of services used and number of encounters with the
health care system.
Methods: Patient-level data representing utilization in physician
offices and hospital outpatient settings were compiled from a sampling
of US institutions (2003) and analyzed using Symmetry Health Data
Systems Episode Treatment Group (ETG) software. ICD-9 and CPT-4 codes
were used to group breast cancer patient encounters into 8,216
distinct treatment courses. The Symmetry software defines type of
cancer based on ICD-9 codes. CPT-4 codes were grouped into
higher-level categories such as chemotherapy, which includes both
infusions and injections.
Results: Of the total population of breast cancer patients, 77%
were classified to the surveillance phase, while 23% were classified
to the active phase of treatment in 2003. The average breast cancer
patient experiences 17.87±0.66 encounters/year and uses 46.74
services/year as an active patient, and 1.8±0.02 encounters/ year and
3.17 services/year as a surveillance patient. 

Breast cancer patients received a ratio of 2.74±0.384 chemotherapy
infusions or injections for every visit.
Conclusions: There are fewer breast cancer patients (23%) in active
phase of treatment and they are using a significantly greater number
of services/patient compared to the surveillance group which makes up
the majority of patients (77%). The types of services utilized are
also significantly different between the 2 groups. These data can be
used to provide benchmarking for physician offices or hospitals, and
can provide a framework with which to allocate health care
resources.

## 3059

## Comorbidity risk model for patients with breast cancer.

## Braithwaite D, Ozanne E, Moore D, Belkora J, Esserman L.
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Institute
for Technology Assessment, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA

Background: While we are improving
our ability to tailor estimates of disease risk, there are very few
tools that allow these risks to be put in a decision-ready context
where the impact of comorbidity is considered. Comorbid conditions are
an important context within which breast cancer risk and treatment
decisions should be examined. Several comorbidity scoring systems
exist including the widely used Charlson Comorbidity Scale [1], but
these provide a numerical score do not project 10 year survival and
are therefore difficult to interpret.

Methods: We translated the Charlson
comorbidity score into a 10 year survival prediction using a Cox
proportional hazards model based on a Northern California Cancer
Center database of 1200 breast cancer patients who were members of the
Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program [2]. We divided the database
into training and validation samples and used the validation sample to
measure the precision and accuracy of the predictions.

Results: We have created a breast
cancer specific algorithm for projecting individualized 10 year
estimates of survival as a function of comorbid conditions. On
average, the algorithm predicted survival within +/− 5%. For these
data, ten year survival decreased from 70% for women with the Charlson
score 0 to 65% for women with the score 1 to 41% with the score 2 and
30% with the score 3 or higher.

Conclusions: Our tool has potential
to standardize the assessment of comorbidities in breast cancer
patients. We are currently evaluating our prototype in a clinical
setting.
1. Charlson, M., et al., Validation of a
combined comorbidity index. J Clin Epidemiol, 1994.
47(11): p. 1245–51.
2. West, D.W., et al., Comorbidity and
breast cancer survival: a comparison between black and white
women. Ann Epidemiol, 1996. 6(5): p. 413–9.

## 3060

## Decreasing incidence of Paget’s disease of the breast among
American women.

## Chen C-Y, Sun L-M, Anderson BO. University of Washington,
Seattle, WA; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA

Background: Paget’s disease is an
uncommon form of breast cancer, reportedly constituting 1.1% of all
breast cancers in 1973–1987 from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results (SEER) Program of the National Cancer Institute, the
largest population-based cancer registry. Paget’s original 1874 report
describes nipple ulceration associated with an underlying breast
carcinoma mass. It is now recognized that Paget’s disease may 1) occur
in the nipple without frank underlying cancer in the breast, and 2) be
amenable to breast conserving surgery. The incidence may be changing
but not reported.

Material and Methods: The study is
based on 3942 cases of microscopically confirmed Paget’s disease of
breast reported by 1973–2002 SEER 9 Registries, Nov. 2004 with
SEER*Stat software 6.1.4. Incidence
rates were age-adjusted to the U.S. 2000 population. Because of small
case number (about 1%), male Paget’s disease was excluded in incidence
and survival statistics. Annual percent change (APC) was calculated by
using the weighted least squares method. The APC of the later
15 years, 1988–2002, were compared with that of the early 15 years,
1973–1987. While the beginning year of registries about surgical types
was 1983, the 5-year survival rates of different surgeries were
obtained by actuarial method from 1983 to 2002. The patients who
underwent partial mastectomy were compared with those who underwent
total mastectomy (including simple, modified radical and radical
mastectomy).

Results: The age-adjusted incidence
rate of female Paget’s disease is 0.809 per 100,000 population in 2002
and the case number constituted 0.49% of all breast cancers in that
year. The APC for 1988–2002 is −3.18 and was statistically significant
compared with 6.21 for 1973–1987 (p=0.000). Both white and black women
showed the same trends of decreasing in incidence. The median age of
diagnosis was 62 during 1973–1987 and 64 during 1988–2002. When cases
are stratified by underlying tumor, the group of Paget’s disease with
ductal carcinoma (invasive or in situ) showed stronger trend of
decreasing in incidence (APC for 1988–2002: −3.675). By comparison,
the APC of Paget’s disease without ductal carcinoma was −0.231, which
showed much slower trend of decreasing. The number of patients who
underwent partial mastectomy increased from 8.8% in 1983–1992 to 21.9%
in 1993–2002 with 5-year survival rates that were not worsened by the
breast conserving approach (93.4% vs. 89.4%, 81.1%, 52.2% with simple
mastectomy, modified radical mastectomy and radical mastectomy
respectively in 1993–2002).

Discussion: Paget’s disease with
underlying cancer is decreasing in incidence, while the incidence of
Paget’s disease without underlying cancer appears relatively stable.
More patients are undergoing breast conservation therapy instead of
mastectomy without worsening of outcome.

## 3061

## Breast cancer characteristics at diagnosis among Arab-American
women compared to European- and African-American women in the Detroit
SEER registry.

## Hensley Alford S, Schwartz K, Soliman A, Gruber S, Douglas JA,
Johnson CC, Merajver SD. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI;
Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI; Henry
Ford Health System, Detroit, MI

Background. Data from Arab world
studies suggest that Arab women may experience a more aggressive
breast cancer phenotype with an earlier age of onset than US women.
One of the largest settlements of Arabs outside the Middle East is
located in the Detroit metropolitan area. Detroit is a SEER reporting
site and has been capturing all diagnosed incident cancers since 1973,
including breast cancer.

Materials and Methods. Using the SEER
registry, we identified a population-based cohort of women diagnosed
with invasive primary breast cancer in Detroit between 1973 and 2003.
Using a previously validated name driven algorithm, women were
identified as being of Arab descent if they had an Arab first, last,
or maiden name. The race of non-Arab women was taken from physician
report. Women who were <18 at diagnosis or were not of European,
African, or Arab descent were excluded. We assessed differences in the
distribution of age, stage, and histology at diagnosis between
Arab-American, European-American, and African-American women using
c
2 and log-rank tests.

Results. A total of 80 316 breast
cancers were captured in the Detroit SEER from 1973–2003. We excluded
cases due to age (n = 9), ethnicity (n = 1095), and non-breast primary
histology (n = 91). We identified 1 652 women as being of Arab
descent, 13 855 women as African-American, and 63 615 women as being
European-American, which contributed 2%, 18%, and 80% of the analytic
sample, respectively. Analysis showed that 34% of Arab-American and
33% of African-American women were diagnosed before age 50 years
compared to 26% of European-American women. The log-rank test
comparing the relative proportions of women in each ethnic group
diagnosed by decade of life was statistically significant (p =
0.0001). Additionally, Arab-American and African-American women were
more likely to be diagnosed with regional (33% each) or distant
disease (6% and 8%, respectively) than European-American women
(c2 tests; p-values <0.05). However,
Arab-American women and European-American women had similar diagnosis
with typical invasive ductal/lobular carcinoma (91% and 92%,
respectively) as compared to African-American women (88%), who were
relatively more likely to be diagnosed with rare histologies
(p<0.0001).

Discussion. This cohort is being
further analyzed to determine whether a younger age of onset is
present in certain ethnic minority groups. Overall, Arab-American
women were more like European-American women with respect to histology
and more like African-American women with respect to stage at
diagnosis. We intend to assess differences in the extent of disease
and survival as well as include multivariate analysis to control for
potential confounders in this cohort.

## 3062

## Pregnancy after breast cancer in Western Australian
women.

## Ives AD, Saunders CM, Semmens JB. The Iniversity of Western
Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia; The University of
Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia

Objectives: To establish the
incidence and outcomes of pregnancy subsequent to a diagnosis of
breast cancer in women aged less than 45 years within the stable
population of Western Australia between 1982 and 2000.

Methods: A geographically defined
population-based descriptive study. Potential cases were identified
from the Western Australian Data Linkage System. Cases were validated
and supplementary data obtained from hospital and clinicians records.
The data were analysed to establish the pregnancy rate, management,
and outcome of the breast cancer and pregnancy.

Results: Ninety eight women became
pregnant at least once following a diagnosis of breast cancer. This is
only 4% of young women diagnosed with breast cancer in Western
Australia. More than half (52%) the tumours of these women were
greater than 20 mm but they were more likely to be lymph node negative
(69%). This suggests that women who go on to conceive have more
localised disease and better prognosis tumours which supports the
“healthy mother” effect bias. Chemotherapy was used as adjuvant
therapy in 40% of women but only 5% of women were given tamoxifen. Two
women received in vitro
fertilisation to conceive and both are alive and well without
recurrence. Median time from diagnosis to pregnancy was 18.5 months.
Nearly 60% of women who had a subsequent pregnancy conceived less than
two years after diagnosis. Proportionally more women had terminations
of pregnancy in the first six months after breast cancer was
diagnosed. As many live births occurred in women who became pregnant
within two years as delayed conception for two years post diagnosis.
Early conception, however, did not compromise survival. Overall
five-year survival for breast cancer survivors who conceived was
93%.

Conclusions: The high proportion of
terminations of pregnancy in the first six months post diagnosis
suggests there may be contraceptive issues for women newly diagnosed
with breast cancer. Women diagnosed with breast cancer who
subsequently conceived had a five-year survival of 93%. Their survival
was not affected by time from diagnosis to conception.

## 3063

## General population rates of selected conditions and events recorded
in breast cancer hormonal therapy trials.

## Kulig K, Erensen JG, Zhou Z. Pfizer Inc., New York, NY

Background: Several of the conditions
or events reported in clinical trials of hormonal therapy for
treatment of early breast cancer may largely overlap those expected
within an age-matched, postmenopausal population of women without
breast cancer. We sought to establish reference levels for these
conditions and events in a cancer-free population to estimate
background prevalence and shed perspective on the potentially
increased burden of these conditions or events that may be associated
with early breast cancer treatment.

Material and Methods: Using 2001–2002
NHANES, the nationally representative Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, we established a cohort of women aged 55 to 85 years who
reported going through menopause and being amenorrheic for ≥12 months.
Women were excluded if they reported a history of at least one cancer,
current use of hormone replacement therapy, or impaired kidney or
liver function. Conditions of interest were determined a priori and
prevalence for each was determined by self-report (“Has a doctor ever
told you....”) or lab measurement. Raw data were weighted to the
national population according to NHANES analytic guidelines.

Results: A total of 500 of 1,123
women in our age cohort met the study inclusion/exclusion criteria. In
our sample, weighted prevalences of immobility (difficulty walking
without equipment) and having 2 or more comorbid conditions were 8.4%
and 34.8%, respectively. The table below shows results of analyses by
age groups. 

Discussion: Differing methodologies
in characterizing and measuring conditions and events in our study
versus clinical trials precludes our ability to make direct
comparisons; however, study results highlight that certain conditions
and events investigated are not uncommon among postmenopausal women in
the general population and that rates of some conditions or events may
be higher than those reported in hormonal therapy trials for early
breast cancer. These data, along with ongoing analyses of other
population datasets, may provide useful context for conditions and
events reported in breast cancer clinical trials.

## 3064

## Comparing improvements in survival for older and younger breast
cancer patients.

## Bhatia P, Hilsenebeck SG, Dunn JK, Klos K, Chenault C, Morrison
A. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; University of Texas Health
Science Center, Houston, TX

Background: Over the last 20 years,
there have been substantial improvements in survival for breast cancer
patients, but many of the most effective diagnostic and therapeutic
tools have been aimed at or have the greatest impact in older women.
Most studies on breast cancer trends do not assess whether
improvements in survival rates accurately describe trends in younger
patients.

Materials and Methods: Using a
prospective cohort from the National Breast Cancer Tissue Resource
(NBCTR) at the Breast Center at Baylor College of Medicine, we
examined age group differences in survival trends over time. Diagnosis
age group (less than 50 years versus at least 50 years), diagnosis
period (1984–1990 versus 1991–1997), and their interaction term were
assessed with accelerated failure-time regression models. Both the
Weibull and the log-normal survival distributions were tried with
similar results and only the log-normal distribution results are
presented here as they fit the data better in each comparison. The
parametric models were used instead of Cox proportional hazards
regression because the proportional hazards assumption was violated in
the analysis. The analysis was also performed on a comparable
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program dataset to
assess the generalizability of the NBCTR results.

Results: The NBCTR data showed that
for overall breast cancer-specific survival and disease-free survival,
younger patients did worse than older patients (p < 0.05), but the
effect diminished after controlling for predictive and prognostic
factors. Patients diagnosed in the earlier period did worse than
patients diagnosed in the later period, even after controlling for
predictive and prognostic factors (p <0.05). The interaction terms
for overall breast cancer-specific survival and disease-free survival
were not significant. In the SEER data for overall breast
cancer-specific survival, younger patients did worse than older
patients (p < 0.05), but the effect reduced after controlling for
tumor size and any positive lymph nodes. Patients diagnosed in the
earlier period did worse than patients diagnosed in the later period,
even after controlling for predictive and prognostic factors (p <
0.05). The interaction term was significant, which showed that younger
patients did not improve in overall breast cancer-specific survival as
much as older patients over time (p < 0.05), and this effect
weakened after controlling for tumor size and any positive lymph
nodes.

Discussion: We found that diagnosis
time period had a stronger effect than age at diagnosis on overall
breast cancer-specific and disease-free survival after controlling for
a number of important predictive and prognostic factors in the main
analysis. While some of the results suggested that the improvements in
survival over time differed by age at diagnosis, this effect weakened
after accounting for tumor size and any positive lymph nodes. This
analysis has shown that improvements in survival over time may not
differ by diagnosis age after controlling for predictive and
prognostic factors, and it is important for researchers, clinicians,
and others involved in the advancement of new therapeutic and
screening interventions to continue to ensure that all persons are
considered in the development of these new tools.

## 3065

## Variation in breast disease co-occurrence frequencies between pre-
and post-menopausal women.

## Maskery S, Zhang Y, Hu H, Hooke J, Shriver CD, Liebman M.
Windber Research Institute, Windber, PA; Walter Reed Army Medical
Center, Washington, DC

OBJECTIVE: Menopausal status is known
to significantly influence a woman’s risk for developing breast
cancer. The Clinical Breast Care Project (CBCP) between Windber
Research Institute and Walter Reed Army Medical Center has generated a
vast knowledge base of breast disease and breast cancer data in the
form of a highly pathologically-annotated tissue and biospecimen
repository (>14,000 samples) and a database of life history data
(>450 data fields) for each CBCP patient. This unique data source
allows us to examine the clinical presentation of breast disease and
cancer in pre- and post-menopausal women.

DESIGN: Co-occurrence frequency is
assessed between clinically relevant combinations of columnar cell
hyperplasia (CCH), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), ductal carcinoma
in situ (DCIS), invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC), lobular carcinoma in
situ (LCIS), invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC), and nodal metastases
diagnoses. Consistent pathologic quality is maintained by having each
case reviewed and annotated by a single pathologist who records the
occurrence of any and all of 131 possible breast pathology and
lymphoid diagnoses that co-occur within each patient’s specimen(s).
Co-occurrence frequency of diagnosis i with diagnosis j, for a patient
population with diagnosis j, is defined as the number of patients with
diagnoses i and j divided by the number of patients with diagnosis j.
The Pearson Chi-Squared test statistic is used to assess the
significance of observed variation in diagnosis co-occurrence
frequency between pre-menopausal (N =452) and post-menopausal (N =420)
CBCP patients.

RESULTS: No significant variation
between pre- and post-menopausal women is seen in the frequency of
DCIS or IDC in women with ADH, the frequency of IDC in women with
DCIS, or the frequency of ILC in women with LCIS. However, nodal
metastases occur in pre-menopausal women with IDC more frequently than
in post-menopausal women with IDC (Table 1). Post-menopausal women
with CCH are significantly more likely to have ADH, DCIS, and IDC than
pre-menopausal women with CCH (Table 2). However, menopausal status
does not affect the frequency of ILC or LCIS in women with CCH. 
 

CONCLUSIONS: Co-occurrence analysis
of this well characterized, highly annotated, and standardized
pathologic set of breast diseases and cancers will lead to
identification of complex pathologic associations between patients
such that we may begin to identify differences in clinical
presentation of breast cancer between different patient
populations.

## 3066

## Distinct breast cancer incidence and survival patterns according to
histopathology: analysis of the NCI’s SEER database.

## Anderson WF, Jatoi I. National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD;
National Naval Medical Center and Uniformed Services University,
Bethesda, MD

Background: We recently demonstrated
that breast carcinoma overall was a mixture of early-onset and
late-onset cancer populations with distinct incidence and survival
patterns, according to age at onset. Briefly, early-onset tumors had a
sharp 2-year hazard peak for breast cancer death, whereas late-onset
lesions lacked this hazard peak.

Methods: To further explore the link
between breast cancer incidence and survival, we examined age
frequency distributions at diagnosis and annual hazard rates for
different histopathologic types.

Results: Duct, tubular and lobular
carcinomas were mixed with early-onset and late-onset breast cancer
populations, irrespective of estrogen receptor (ER) expression or
race. Medullary and inflammatory carcinomas demonstrated mostly early
ages at onset, irrespective of ER or race. Papillary and mucinous
carcinomas showed mostly late ages at onset, irrespective of ER or
race. Duct and lobular carcinomas had 2-year hazard peaks for ER
negative but not ER positive tumors. Approximately 4 to 6 years
following breast cancer diagnosis, ER negative and positive hazard
rates crossed over for duct and lobular carcinomas. Inflammatory
breast carcinomas had 2-year hazard peaks for both ER negative and
positive tumors with crossover at approximately 4 years. Tubular and
medullary breast carcinomas lacked an obvious 2-year hazard peak or
crossover. Papillary and mucinous tumors had 2-year hazard peaks for
ER negative tumors without a clear crossover.

Conclusion: We observed mixed
incidence and survival patterns for different histopathologic types of
breast carcinoma; possibly reflecting varying risk factor profiles,
carcinogenic exposures, stem cells of origin, or causal
pathways.

## 3067

## Incidence and risk factors for lymphedema after axillary
lymphadenectomy for breast cancer.

## Bergmann A, Mattos IE, Koifman RJ, Ribeiro MJP. National School
of Public Health, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; National Cancer Institute,
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Introduction: Breast cancer is an
important problem in public health due to the high incidence and
mortality. According to data gathered from cancer patients’ hospital
charts at the INCA [National Cancer Institute], between 2000 and 2001,
50% of breast cancer cases were diagnosed at stages III and IV. The
later the diagnosis, the greater the possible treatment sequelae,
among which lymphedema is the main one, constituting a primary focus
of concern in the public health system. Main
purpose: Determining the incidence and the factors
associated with the development of lymphedema in a cohort of women
subjected to lymphadenectomy for breast cancer. Method: Prospective cohort study of women surgically
treated for breast cancer from August 2001 to November 2002. The
follow-up prescribed a re-evaluation on the first day after surgery
and at the follow-up outpatient appointments scheduled for 30 days,
6 months, 12 months, 18 months, and 24 months. All evaluations were
standardized, with the use of instruments specifically created and
tested for this purpose. The criterion for lymphedema diagnosis was
based on Casley-Smith’s proposal: measurement of upper limb
circumference. Results: One thousand
and four women were studied, averaging 56 years of age and with an
average follow-up period of 19 months. The overall incidence of
lymphedema in the 24-month period was 17.5%. On the basis of Cox
multivariate analysis, the variables statistically associated with
lymphedema were: axillary radiotherapy (Harzard Ratio HR=3,10 IC
1,99–4,85), early edema (HR=2,86 IC 1,51–5,43), overweight or obesity
(HR=1,89 IC 1,19–3,01), seroma (HR = 1,75 IC 1,11–2,76), number of
chemotherapy cycles administered to the upper limb homolateral to the
breast cancer (HR =1,19 IC 1,08–1,32) and age (HR=1,02 IC 1,01–1,04).
Conclusion: The incidence of
lymphedema after two-years of follow-up was high, and axillary
radiotherapy was the variable wich more explained the development of
lymphedema. Obese women should be encouraged to reduce weight, and the
upper limb homolateral to the breast cancer should be avoided when
administering chemotherapy. Protocols for post-surgical rehabilitation
must be established, aiming at a better quality of life for women
treated for breast cancer.

## 3068

## Trends in breast cancer incidence in Scotland: the influence of
screening and deprivation.

## Brown SBF, Hole DJ, Cooke TG. Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow,
United Kingdom; University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United
Kingdom

## Background:
Examining trends in the incidence of breast cancer is of
critical importance, allowing planning of health services and
analysis of the influence of risk factors. Rising incidence could
be associated with a change in tumour biology, ie more women
getting tumours of better biological prognosis. Analysis of trends
in incidence in the UK became complex with the introduction of the
breast screening programme for women of 50–64 in 1988. We present
epidemiological data from Scotland; with a comprehensive cancer
registration programme and accurate socio-economic data Scotland is
well-suited to analysis of trends in breast cancer.

## Results:

Screening and breast cancer
incidence Our data demonstrates the expected sharp
rises in breast cancer incidence after the introduction of
screening. However, rates have continued to rise rather than level
off (as is expected once screening becomes established). Rises in
incidence were occurring before screening and are seen in age
groups above screening age, suggesting factors other than screening
may be contributing.

Deprivation and breast cancer
incidence Postmenopausal breast cancer is commoner in
the affluent. In the West of Scotland the gap in incidence between
the most deprived and the affluent is widening. In our data,
premenopausal breast cancer appears not to be influenced by
deprivation but marked differences are seen in the screened age groups. The proven
difference in screening uptake rates between socio-economic groups
is likely to be contributing, but a gap was developing before
screening was introduced. Many other factors could be contributing,
including differences in reproductive patterns. 

## Conclusions:
The incidence of breast cancer in Scotland continues to
increase. Whilst the introduction of screening produced the
expected increase in incidence, there is evidence that the
underlying trend has also increased, suggesting that other factors
are implicated. We intend to analyse the effects of changes in
uptake of screening, changes in screening methodology and changing
reproductive patterns.
The gap between the deprived and affluent in breast cancer
incidence is widening among post-menopausal but not premenopausal
women. Differences in screening uptake are likely to be
contributing but again other factors are implicated; we intend to
analyse further the reasons behind the widening gap.

## 3069

## registHER: treatments and clinical outcomes from a prospective
observational cohort study of patients with HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer.

## Brufsky A, Rugo H, Tripathy D, Kaufman P, Mayer M, Paik S,
Ulcickas-Yood M, Yardley D, Tan-Chiu E. University of Pittsburgh
Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA; UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, San
Francisco, CA; University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX; Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, NH; Patient
Advocate, New York, NY; National Surgical Adjuvant Breast Bowel
Project, Pittsburgh, PA; EpiSource, LLC and Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT; Sarah Cannon Cancer Center, Nashville, TN;
Cancer Research Network, Plantation, FL

Background: HER2 is
amplified/overexpressed in 25% of patients (pts) with breast cancer
and is a significant unfavorable prognostic factor for survival.
Randomized clinical trials of second-line chemotherapy with or without
trastuzumab, however, have been difficult to execute due to pt/MD
reluctance to randomize to chemotherapy-only treatment.

Methods: registHER is a prospective,
longitudinal cohort study of pts with newly diagnosed HER2-positive
metastatic breast cancer (MBC). The goal of this study is to describe
treatment outcomes following standard treatments in this population.
The objectives are to measure time to treatment failure, time to
progression, survival, and cardiac safety. Clinicopathologic and
treatment data are collected from the time of diagnosis of metastatic
disease through study discontinuation or death. Eligibility criteria
include: HER2-positive MBC and signed informed consent.

Results: From Dec 2003 – Mar 2005,
488 eligible pts were enrolled from 153 study sites. Baseline Characteristics (n = 488):
Median age 55 yrs (23–92); White race 82%; Female 99%; ECOG 0/1 90% (n
=322); median disease-free interval 17 months (mos) (n=485). Tumor Characteristics: Node+ 68%; Stage
IV at initial diagnosis 31%; ER+/PR+ in MBC 49%; sites of metastatic
disease (n =485)- CNS 4%, visceral 58%, bone 12%, other 26%. Prior Treatment: Neo-adjuvant 17%;
adjuvant 52%. Cardiac
dysfunction: 3 cases. The median follow-up is 6.5 mos;
15% (48/329) at 6 mos and 16% (53/329) at 12 mos experienced
recurrence or death from start of first MBC therapy. 

Conclusion: This study represents the
largest dataset of HER2- positive MBC pts. A large percentage of pts
had stage IV MBC at initial diagnosis. The majority of pts received a
trastuzumab-based regimen as first and second-line therapy. Currently
the median follow-up time is 6.5 mos from initiation of the first
metastatic treatment, with 16% having progressed at 12 mos. Updated
clinical outcomes will be presented at the meeting.

## 3070

## Do changes in ER status explain improvements in survival?

## Henley NC, Hole DJ, Leake RE, Cooke TC. University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, United Kingdom; University of Glasgow, United
Kingdom

## Aims
Incidence of breast cancer is increasing but mortality is
decreasing. We assessed whether the biology of breast cancer has
changed by assessing changes in hormonal sensitivity over
time.

## Methods
Oestrogen receptor (ER) status was determined on patients
diagnosed with primary operable breast cancer by ligand binding
assay (20 fmol/mg protein cut-off for ER positivity) between
1980–1988 and immunohistochemistry (10% positive staining cut-off
for ER positivity) between 1996–2001 in 5 specialist breast units.
Demographic details were collected including deprivation category
(using Carstairs scores).

## Results
2423 patients were diagnosed in 1980–1988, and 3291 in
1996–2001. 1188 (49.0%) patients in 1980–1988 had ER positive
tumours compared with 2473 (77.8%) in 1996–2001
(chi2 p <0.001).
On univariate analysis, older age (p < 0.001), affluence(p
<0.001), hospital of diagnosis (p =0.009) and screen-detected
tumours (p <0.001) were significantly predictive of having an ER
positive tumour. On multivariate analysis diagnosis between
1996–2001 remained significantly predictive of ER positivity (p
<0.001) independent of age, hospital, deprivation and method of
diagnosis. Older age(p <0.001), hospital of diagnosis (p
<0.001), and diagnosis at breast screening (p <0.001) were
also independently predictive of ER positivity, but deprivation was
not.

## Conclusion
Concordance between ligand binding assay and
immunohistochemistry is estimated to be around 80–90%. While part
of the increase in the proportion of ER positive breast cancer may
be attributed to differences in technique, part of it may be due to
change in aetiology or tumour biology. The prevalence of
aetiological factors for ER positive breast cancer has increased
over the past 20–30 years and may account the increase in ER
positive breast cancer. ER positive breast cancer has a lower
incidence of early recurrence than ER negative breast cancer. In
addition, ER positive tumours are sensitive to endocrine
manipulation, unlike ER negative tumours. Therefore, the increase
in ER positive breast cancer we have observed could account for
improved breast cancer survival.

## 3071

## The incidence and outcomes of gestational breast cancer in Western
Australian women.

## Ives AD, Saunders CM, Semmens JB. The University of Western
Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia; The Iniversity of
Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia

Objective: To determine the
incidence, and describe the management and outcomes for all women aged
less than 45 years diagnosed with gestational breast cancer (GBC) in
Western Australia between 1 January 1982 and 31 December 2000.

Design: A population-based study of
gestational breast cancer using data from the Western Australian Data
Linkage System validated and supplemented with information from
patient records.

Results: GBC accounted for 6.25% of
breast cancers in Western Australian women less than 45 years of age,
and was a complication in 23.6 per 100,000 pregnancies. Women
diagnosed with GBC ranged in age from 24 to 43 (median 34) years. The
median time from onset of symptoms to diagnosis was four weeks
(interquartile range 2,16). More women (72%) had mastectomy than
breast conserving surgery. Chemotherapy was administered to 68% of
women and hormone therapy was administered to 5%. Over half of the 49
women (55%) pregnant at diagnosis received chemotherapy; three women
received chemotherapy when pregnant, 10 choose to terminate their
pregnancy and 16 delayed chemotherapy until safe delivery of the
fetus. Five year survival was only 73% for women with GBC when
compared to other Western Australian women (between 75–85%) diagnosed
with breast cancer matched by age, year of diagnosis and disease
stage.

Conclusion: The incidence of
gestational breast cancer in the Western Australian population is
lower than anticipated. There were no deliberate delays in diagnosis.
Survival is worse than for other young women diagnosed with breast
cancer even when matched by disease stage. GBC appeared to be a more
aggressive disease.

## 3072

## A systematic review and descriptive analysis of inflammatory breast
cancer clinical trials.

## Kim TY, Lau J, Erban J. Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA; Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies,
Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston, MA
INTRODUCTION: Inflammatory Breast Cancer (IBC) comprises between
1–5% of all diagnosed breast cancers reported in the literature. IBC
is the most aggressive form of breast cancer with historically poor
5-year rates of Disease Free Survival (DFS) and Overall Survival (OS).
Prior to the use of systemic chemotherapy, the 5-year OS rate ranged
from 0–5%. No randomized controlled trial (RTC) with an IBC-only
cohort has been published to date. A systematic review of the
literature was conducted to assess the outcomes of various treatment
modalities.
METHOD: Inclusion criteria: Prospective IBC-only cohort studies
that utilize systemic chemotherapy, clear description of how the
diagnosis was made, a description of patient characteristics,
reporting of outcomes such as DFS, OS, Local Relapse (LR), and Distant
Relapse (DR). Exclusion criteria: Evidence of metastatic disease, or
prior treatment with chemotherapy. The following databases were
searched: Medline, Cochrane Library, and Best Evidence.
RESULTS: Between 1966 and November 2004, 1,452 potential abstracts
were identified, 82 of which were prospective clinical trials.
However, only 30 of these studies met our inclusion criteria. Forty
percent of the studies were done outside the United States. Patient
accrual for all studies occurred between the years 1972 and 1998. The
median age was 50 years (range: 25–83). Between 28–79% of patients
were pre-menopausal. The percentage of patients who presented with
clinical nodes ranged from 32–90%. An anthracycline-based induction
regimen (ABI) was used in 24 studies. Twenty-one of these studies were
followed by both surgery and radiation for local control. Only three
of these studies used radiation without surgery. Five studies used
greater than 150mg/m2 total dose of
induction anthracycline (HDA). Six studies involved high dose
chemotherapy with an autologous stem cell bone marrow rescue (HDC).
Outcomes are shown in the table.
CONCLUSION: The introduction of systemic chemotherapy has improved
the outcome for IBC patients in terms of OS. However, the response
rates vary widely across the studies. Within the literature, a large
degree of heterogeneity exists between patient populations, treatment
modalities, and treatment schedules. Additional analysis evaluating
the impact of this heterogeneity is planned. However, RCTs will be
needed to resolve the discrepancies of treatment responses. 

## 3073

## Breast cancer in young women age <36 years: a retrospective
analysis of prognostic factors in 908 patients in 8 french instituitions.
GETNA Group.

## Pouillart P, Gligorov J, Guilhaume M, Spielmann M, Luporsi E,
Rivera S, Penault-Llorca F, Aimard L, Savignoni A, Asselain B, Namer
M. Institut Curie, Paris, France; Tenon Hospital, Paris, France;
Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Alexis Vautrin, Nancy,
France; Geoges Francois LeClerc, Dijon, France; Jean Perrin, Clermont
Ferrand, France; Hospital Ambroise Pare, Marseille, France; Antoine
LaCassagne, Nice, France
Background: Age <35 years is considered as a bad prognostic
factor in women with breast cancer (BC).
Methods: Clinical and pathological data of 908 women <35 years
with invasive non metastatic BC, consecutively treated between 1990–99
in 8 french institutions were analysed. Clinical and pathological
size, node involvement, histological type, SBR histological grading,
hormone receptors (HR), and treatment characteristics were analysed
for all patients.
Distant Recurrence Free Survival (DRFS) and overall survival (OS)
were analysed using Kaplan Meier estimates and comparisons were made
using the logrank test. Multivariate analyses were carried out using
Cox hazards model.
Results: With a median FU of 87 months,239 deaths, 177 locoregional
and 323 distant recurrences were observed. Five and 10 years survival
rates were 82.2% and 66.5%. Five and 10 years DRFS rates were 67.2%
and 50.8%. No difference was observed according to age (<30 years
old, 31–33 and 34–35, p = 0.74) neither in DRFS nor in OS (p = 0.99
and p = 0.74).
Compared to T1, T2 was associated with a RR of 1.65 [1.23– 2.22],
and T3/T4 with a RR of 2.73 [1.92–3.88] for the OS (p < 10–4) and
T2 was associated with a RR of 1.57 [1.23–2.02], and T3/T4 with a RR
of 2.25 [1.65–3.07] for the DRFS (p < 10–4).
Compared to negative node involvement, pN1 status was associated
with a RR of 2.22 [1.60–3.09], and pN2 with a RR of 4.35 [3.14– 6.03]
in OS (p < 10–4) and pN1 nodes involved was associated with a RR of
2.64 [2.01–3.47], and 4 and more with a RR of 4.22 [3.17– 5.62] for
the DRFS (p < 10–4).
Compared to positive HR, negative HR were respectively associated
with a RR of 1.37 [1.05–1.82] (p = 0.019), and 1.49 [1.14–1.96]
(p < 10–2) in OS. But no difference was observed according to HR in
DRFS.
Compared to grade I in SBR, grade II and III were respectively
associated with a RR of 2.40 [1.35–4.27], and 2.61 [1.46–4.65] for the
OS (p < 10–3) and a RR of 1.86 [1.20–2.89], and 1.75 [1.12–2.72] in
DRFS (p < 10–3).
After multivariate analysis, statistically significant factors
influencing OS and DRFS were pTpN, SBR grade, HR status, proliferative
factors and pregnancy before cancer diagnosis.
Final analysis regarding the impact of treatment strategy
(neoadjuvant first or mastectomy), the impact of HR status on DRFS
after 5 years of treatment will be presented at the congress.
Conclusions: In these retrospective analyses, the most important
prognostic factor for YA with BC is tumour size followed by SBR GRADE,
pN and HR status, but we find that other factors like pregnancy before
cancer and tumor proliferation could impact on OS and DRFS.

## 3074

## A survey of breast cancer screening activity and beliefs among Arab
women in the Detroit metropolitan area.

## Schwartz KL, Shah B, Kakish M, Bartoces MG, Monsur J, Fakhouri
M. Wayne State University, Detroit, MI; Arab American and Chaldean
Council, Lathrup Village, MI

Background: The Detroit metropolitan
area has large populations of Arab and Chaldean immigrants and
descendants. Cancer statistics for this population group are not
available; however, we do know that the breast cancer rates in Arab
countries are as high as those of the U.S and that women in Arab
countries are often diagnosed at a more advanced stage of disease.
This study was conducted to determine breast screening activity and
perceptions among Arab and Chaldean women in the metropolitan Detroit
area, particularly perceived susceptibility to breast cancer, and
benefits and barriers to mammography, clinical breast examination, and
self breast-examination.

Materials and Methods: Using two
different population-based telephone lists of Arab surname households,
we conducted a telephone survey of women 40 years or older, who were
of Arab or Chaldean descent, living in the tri-county area of Detroit.
The validated questionnaire, an adapted Arabic version of the
Champion’s Revised Health Belief Scales, was delivered by trained
tri-lingual (English, Arabic, and Chaldean) speaking female
interviewers, and assessed women’s knowledge and perceptions about
breast cancer screening modalities: self-examination, clinical breast
examination, and mammography. Descriptive statistics compare women
with screening history and those without; multivariable analyses will
determine predictors of breast cancer screening.

Results: 399 of 755 (52.8%) eligible
women completed the survey. Mean age was 53.1 years (SD 10.7). All but
5 of the women were born in a country outside the U.S., with the
majority from either Iraq (50.9%) or Lebanon (28.6%). Sixty four
percent of women reported performing breast self-exam, 70% had had a
clinical breast exam, and 77% ever had a mammogram. Women that had
never had a mammogram or had not had one in over 5 years were
significantly less educated (p = 0.008), less likely to be married
(p = 0.002), and less likely to have medical insurance (p < 0.001)
than women who reported a mammogram in the past 5 years. Women that
had a mammogram in the past 5 years reported fear of breast cancer
more often than women without a mammogram in over 5 years, being
significantly more likely to agree with the statements “My chances of
getting breast cancer are great” and “I am afraid to think about
breast cancer”. Multivariable analyses will be presented.

Discussion: A large proportion of the
women who participated in the survey had received breast cancer
screening; a percentage similar to all Michigan women. The results of
this survey will increase our understanding of the knowledge and
attitude barriers and facilitators for breast cancer screening among
this immigrant group, in order that culturally sensitive interventions
can be designed to further increase the number of Arab-American women
who receive breast cancer screening and early detection.

## 3075

## Relationship between educational level and breast cancer.

## Sun W, Zhang Y, Hooke J, Brzeski H, Shriver CD, Liebman MN, Hu
H. Windber Research Institute, Windber, PA; Walter Reed Army Medical
Center, Washington, DC

Background: In the Clinical Breast
Cancer Project (CBCP), comprehensive demographic and medical data
collected from patients consisting of over 450 fields has gone through
extensive QA procedures. A specific advantage of the CBCP is that
military family members / patients have equal access to healthcare
upon diagnosis which rules out many socio-economic factors from data
interpretation. Here we present the results of a preliminary study on
the demographics in relation to pathological categories and tumor
stages.

Methods: Patients undergoing biopsy
(n = 933) were placed in four pathological groups: invasive carcinoma
(Invasive); lobular or ductal carcinoma in situ (IS); atypical
hyperplasia (Atypical); and benign. Tumor stage was determined
according to AJCC standards. Analysis was done using SPSS and age of
diagnosis, ethnicity, education level, and tumor stage were included
in the analysis.

Results: Patients with higher
education (4-year college degrees or higher, n = 580) have fewer
Invasive cases (26.0%, p=0.015)
than those with lower education (no 4-year college degree, n = 241;
34.4%). We also observed a trend that the former population have more
IS and Atypical cases than the latter. There is no difference in
educational level among White, African, Asian, Hispanic and others
ethnic groups (n = 595, 208, 52, 55, and 23 respectively; although
some education data are missing). Patients with higher-stage breast
cancer (II, III or IV; n = 118, mean ± SD = 56.47 ± 14.61, p = 0.01) are younger than those with
lowerstage cancer (0 or I; n = 194; 60.53 ± 12.64).

Discussion: Our observation that
invasive cases are fewer in patients of higher educational levels
cannot be attributed to socioeconomic factors since our patients’
accessibility to healthcare is equal at time of diagnosis and is
independent of educational or ethnic backgrounds. One explanation of
the data is that people with a higher education are better informed
and so are more likely to proactively attend for medical examinations
when the disease is less severe so that the Invasive percentage is
lowered. It is also possible that the higher education population has
a different life style so the prevalence of the Invasive disease is
lower. The finding that patients with higher-stage cancer are younger
than those with lower-stage is also intriguing. The above
relationships mined from the CBCP database show that careful
collection, data cleansing and analysis is of significant importance
in breast cancer research. 

## 3076

## Dying with breast cancer - an audit.

## Clemons M, Simmons C, Sue J, Fralick J, Fralick M, Blair A,
Fitzgerald B, Zalany L, Beaudoin G, Marcus T. Sunnybrook and Women’s
College Health Science Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada

## Introduction:
Most patients dying of metastatic breast cancer (MBC) would
prefer to die at home if possible. However, from the literature,
there is a considerable discordance between preferred and actual
location of death, with significantly less than 30% of these pts
dying at home. The low incidence of home death is associated with a
low rate of palliative care referral and a high rate of specialist
care at the end of life. At our centre coordination of palliative
care and supportive care services is facilitated by a dedicated
social work (SW) team. The purpose of our study was to review the
management of end of life care of MBC pts to determine if it was
consistent with their wishes and to identify areas of
improvement.

## Methods:
Pts with MBC who died under the care of one oncology team
between May 2002 and May 2005 were identified. Pt demographics,
place of death, and expressed preference for place of death were
recorded. Health care professionals involved with each pt were
interviewed.

## Results:
55 pts died during the audit period. Mean age was 57 yrs (30–84
range). Median time with metastatic disease was 32 months (range
1 week–125 months). While 70% of pts expressed that they wished to
die at home, only 44% actually did. 28% died in a palliative care
unit, and 28% died in an acute care setting. Overall, there was 40%
discordance between desired and actual location of death amongst
patients who had specified their wishes. 80% of pts were seen by SW
prior to death. Health care professionals felt earlier referral to
SW and earlier discussion of palliative care services may help meet
pts needs.

## Conclusions:
Despite the presence of a coordinating supportive care team,
there remains a significant discordance between pt wishes and
actual place of death. From clinical experience, while many acute
hospital admissions at the end of life occur due to poor
coordination of palliative resources or primary care-giver
distress, earlier referral to SW may help in the coordination of
resources to improve pt management.

## 3077

## Patient satisfaction in breasst cancer care - results from the
patient satisfaction and quality in oncological care study (PASQOC®
2004).

## Kleeberg UR, Behrens MS, Heiden I. Hamburg Cancer Society,
Hamburg, Germany; GlaxoSmithKline GmbH & Co. KG, Munich, Germany;
Picker Institute Deutschland, Hamburg, Germany
The study on Patient Satisfaction and Quality in Oncological Care
(PASQOC®) 2002 was the first assessment in Germany focussing directly
on patient satisfaction in oncological care. In 2004 PASQOC® was
executed again, this time with an additional focus on breast cancer
patients.
Objective: Compare breast cancer (BCa) patients with other female
cancer patients.
Method: To assess and observe quality of oncological ambulatory
care, the formally validated questionnaire PASQOC® was distributed to
all cancer patients presenting at the investigators’ practices within
a defined recruiting period. Patients’ inclusion criteria: German
speaking, ≥18 years, confirmed cancer diagnosis, physical/ mental
ability to complete a self-administered questionnaire. The
questionnaire is analysed by creating dichotomous ‘problem scores’
indicating the presence or absence of a problem with lower scores
marking fewer problems (scale range: 0–100). These are summed into 13
‘dimension scores’, each clustering a defined set of questions.
Results: The 49 practices recruited n = 2617 women, 43.3 % with
breast cancer (BCa); mean age with BCa: 59 years (others: 63 years;
p≤0.001). Samples did differ significantly in structure, eg. therapy
goal, status of employment etc.
Women with BCa reported on average more problems than women with
other tumours in all 13 dimensions but “communication with other
patients”. Differences were highly significant (p≤0.01) for
patient-physician relationship (BCa: 10.6; other tumours: 8.3),
communication with physicians (21.6; 19.1), handling of side effects
(41.4; 36.6), involvement of family and friends (19.4; 15.3) and need
for further information (21.4; 18.9). Women with BCa showed particular
concern in respect to information on impact on sexual life (43.0;
36.6) as well as consideration of family situation (21.5; 17.0).
Furthermore, BCa patients reported a greater need for information on
therapy related side-effects.
Conclusion: Quality assurance in patient satisfaction in
oncological care is of importance. The PASCOQ® questionnaire is a tool
to assess not only status quo but is also feasible to detect
differences in patient perception of quality of care of defined
patient populations. Further analysis will focus on the explanations
for those differences. Irrespective of the underlying reasons, women
with BCa have more need for targeted care especially information. It
is up to the professional carers to find ways and means to serve those
needs.

## 3078

## Efficacy of internet-based education for patients with post breast
therapy pain syndrome and lymphedema.

## Wascher RA, Rosenbaum E, Andrews A, Manuel F, Shapiro R,
Dollbaum CM. Cancer Research Center, University of Hawaii, Honolulu,
HI; Stanford Hospitals and Clinics, Palo Alto, CA; Union Memorial
Hospital, Baltimore, MD; University of California at San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA
Background: The ability to use personal computers is an essential
function in the professional and private lives of millions of people
and the medical profession around the world. The impact of Post Breast
Therapy Pain Syndrome (PBTPS) and Lymphedema on the ability to
comfortably use a computer has received little attention in the
published medical literature on complications of breast cancer therapy
and illness.
PBTPS is associated with a wide variety of etiologies, symptoms,
durations and severities. PBTPS is difficult to clinically define,
understand, discuss, and manage. Upper extremity lymphedema is also a
potentially debilitating side-effect of breast cancer therapy. PBTPS
and Lymphedema remain prevalent problems now and for the foreseeable
future, as an estimated 10% to 50% of breast cancer survivors who
develop these complications will remain symptomatic throughout their
lives.
Methods: Pilot questionnaires were developed in September 2002 to
evaluate the perceived utility of information about “Post Breast
Therapy Pain Syndrome”, “Living with Lymphedema” on
CancerSupportiveCare.com. From September 2002 through May 2005,
responses were received from interested health care providers and
patients in over 130 countries, including the US. Based upon current
data, this website will serve an estimated 800,000 pages in 2005 (the
number of website hits is not included because the term hit can be
vastly misleading, e.g. 100 graphics + 1 web page = 101 hits).
Specific results will be presented.
Conclusion: By participating in an on line patient education
program, and preliminary therapeutic concepts, a worldwide audience of
patients and health care personnel derived significant and useful
information and insight into the infrequently underreported breast
cancer treatment complications of PBTPS and Lymphedema. Internet-based
patient and health care worker education will assist clinicians to
better serve the needs of their patients, and improve the quality of
their lives. 

## 3079

## Neoadjuvant vs. adjuvant chemotherapy: young women’s experiences,
attitudes and information needs after diagnosis.

## Berlin LM, Westphal LM, Rugo HS. Young Moms with Breast Cancer,
San Jose, CA; Stanford University, Stanford, CA; University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Background: Response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (NCT) provides important prognostic information for
patients and their physicians that may affect choice of subsequent
therapy. Young women frequently have larger tumors amenable to NCT. We
explored the information needs and decisions of young women after
diagnosis, and the impact of chemotherapy and surgery sequence on
their attitudes and subsequent decisions.

Methods and Subjects: As part of a
study of information needs and decision-making in young women with
breast cancer, 23 women were interviewed. Participants (pts) were
chosen via theoretical sampling. Median age at diagnosis: 35 years
(range 27–45), median time from diagnosis 3 years (5 mo–10 yrs). 65%
had children at dx. 26%, 48% and 26% were stage I, II, III
respectively. 7/23 (30%) had NCT. Interviews were semi-structured and
were audiotaped, transcribed and coded for emergent themes.

Results: All women for whom NCT was
recommended agreed to NCT. Participants who had surgery first reported
ongoing concern about tumor resistance to their adjuvant chemotherapy.
The key reasons why women did not have NCT were (a) excisional biopsy,
(b) MD did not mention, or did not recommend NCT and (c) surgeon
advised excision first. The key perceived benefits of NCT were (a)
ability to monitor response and change to another regimen based on
response, (b) ability to start chemo quickly, and (c) reduced anxiety
for responders. The key concerns about NCT were (a) would the same
regimen be continued despite poor response or progression? (b) risk of
metastatic spread during NCT, and (c) misinformation, (e.g., that CT
does not work on the breast). Two pts who had surgery first would not
have chosen NCT, but all pts would have liked information about the
benefits of monitoring tumor response to CT. For most pts who had NCT,
monitoring tumor response reduced anxiety and/or guided chemotherapy:
two women had pCR; two received a 2nd regimen due to +nodes at time of
surgery. 2 pts who aborted NCT after 1–3 cycles for earlier surgery
regretted not continuing NCT until CR.

Conclusions: Women need better
information about treatment options at the time of primary diagnosis,
and in particular about NCT. The majority of women with surgery first
wished that their surgeon had informed them of NCT and the potential
benefit of assessing chemosensitivity. Women after NCT reported
finding tumor response information useful: not just those with a good
response or pCR, but also two who were N+ after NCT. Communication of
treatment options and rationale for each option is important for
participatory decision making and should be emphasized in MD
training.
Funded by a Community-Research Collaboration (CRC) Grant of the
California Breast Cancer Research Program.

## 3080

## Does inequality of access affect whether patients have breast
reconstruction after mastectomy? A survey of breast care nurses in the
South West region of the UK.

## Scarrott S, Cassidy-Gray M, Thomas A, Mansoor I, Titcomb D,
Bristol JB, Chan HY. Cheltenham General Hospital, Cheltenham,
Gloucestershire, United Kingdom

## Introduction
Rates of breast reconstruction vary considerably across the UK
and many parts of the world. In the UK and some parts of Europe,
‘oncoplastic’ breast surgeons, as opposed to plastic surgeons,
perform breast reconstruction for women with breast cancer. As a
result, more women in the UK now have access to ‘on site’
reconstruction services, as their cancer surgeon also performs
their reconstruction. Nevertheless, many centres still do not have
‘on site’ reconstruction and hence access to reconstruction is not
equal for all women. In the UK, Breast Care Nurses (BCNs) perform
much of the counselling with women prior to choosing
reconstruction. The value of BCNs in helping surgeons has been
presented previously (SABCS 2004 abstract 2082). As BCNs are
pivotal in discussing reconstruction with women, we decided to
address whether these inequalities might affect their counselling
and the patients’ decision.

## Method
BCNs at 21 centres in the South West of the UK were surveyed by
post and subsequently by telephone. Centres were asked whether they
had ‘in house’ reconstruction and what type of surgeon performed
reconstruction. They were also asked whether the access (or lack
thereof) to this service coloured the discussions with patients and
whether the BCNs felt that this influenced patient choice about
reconstruction. Results were analysed using Statview 5.0
statistical software.

## Results
87% of centres replied to the survey (18 out of 21). These
individual centres treated between 110 – 430 cancers per year, with
an average caseload per surgeon of almost 130 cases per year. These
centres treat over 10% of all breast cancers in the UK. 50% of
centres (9 out of 18) had an ‘on site’ reconstruction service (the
‘on site’ centres); centres having an “on site’ service were
staffed by ‘oncoplastic’ surgeons, whilst those centres referring
elsewhere (the ‘off site’ centres) tended to send women to plastic
surgeons at other hospitals. When asked as to whether access to
reconstruction influenced their discussions with women, 67% of the
‘off site’ centres said it did, compared to 55% of the ‘on site’
centres. In reply to whether they felt that access to
reconstruction influenced the final decision of the women, 67% of
the ‘off site’ centres and 77% of the ‘on site’ centres felt it
did. The proportion of women having reconstruction was higher in
‘on site’ centres compared to ‘off site’ centres.

## Discussion
The availability of breast reconstruction has increased greatly
in recent years. However, lack of access to reconstruction at a
local centre may lead many women in the UK away from breast
reconstruction. This study suggests that access (or lack thereof)
may significantly influence patient counselling and ultimately
patient choice.

## 3081

## Alamo breast cancer foundation patient advocate program.

## Eastman D.

Background: In 1997, the San Antonio
Breast Cancer Symposium directors, Charles A. Coltman Jr., M.D. and C.
Kent Osborne, M.D., requested that the Alamo Breast Cancer Foundation
develop, organize and facilitate an advocate program in conjunction
with the annual Symposium. The directors saw the need for an advocate
program because of the increasing Symposium attendance of advocates
and the absence of specific planned activities to acknowledge their
presence and thier interest in breast cancer research. With the
Symposium directors’ encouragment and support, the first Alamo Breast
Cancer Foundation Advocate Program was held in December 1998 in
association with the 20th Annual San Antonio Breast Cancer
Symposium.

Methods: The Alamo Breast Cancer
Foundation Patient Advocate Program in conjunction with the San
Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium is designed to increase the
dissemination of latebreaking information on breast cancer. Advocates
who apply for financial assistance from the Alamo Breast Cancer
Foundation to attend the Symposium must represent an organization with
a constituency. In addition, the advocate must have a basic knowledge
of research either by being a Project LEAD graduate or from
participation on committees, panels or review boards related to breast
cancer. The funded advocates are assigned a “Hot Topic” and will go to
all the sessions, talks, and poster sessions relevant to their
particular topic. Mentor sessions are offered every evening of the
Symposium to interpret in lay terms the scientific presentations of
the day and to help put the information into perspective to aid in the
eventual writing of “Hot Topic” reports. The mentor sessions are also
open to anyone wishing to attend. The mentors consists of scientists,
researchers, and clinicians highly regarded in the field of breast
cancer. The “Hot Topic” reports are due one month after the Symposium
is over and are compiled in a CD-ROM. This interactive CD-ROM is a
complete record of meeting highlights that can be circulated by
advocacy groups worldwide. In addition, The Alamo Breast Cancer
Foundation Patient Advocate Program Committee selects two advocates
from the participants to serve as a patient advocate on the two
Symposium Case Panels. Subsequent to each Annual San Antonio Breast
Cancer Symposium, the Alamo Breast Cancer Foundation holds an Annual
Breast Cancer Update Forum for the San Antonio public.

Results: 240 advocates have been
funded since 1998. 6 “Hot Topic” books have been printed and
circulated. 7 Annual Breast Cancer Update Forums were held in San
Antonio. One CD-ROM was produced.12 patient advocates have served on
the Symposium Case Panels.

## 3082

## Knowledge and practice of breast-self examination in underserved
population (Goiania - Brazil).

## Freitas Junior R, Koifman S, Santos NRM, Nunes MOA, Melo AFB.
Goias Federal University, Goiania, GO, Brazil; Oswaldo Cruz
Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil; Hospital das Clinicas, Goias
Federal University, Goiania, GO, Brazil

Objective: To ascertain the
prevalence of women in a hospital sample in Goiania, Brazil, who
mention to know and to carry out breast-self examination (BSE),
likewise the factors yielding to have the knowledge and to practice
this diagnostic method. Methodology:
A descriptive study was carried out aiming to identify which factors
are potentially associated to BSE in a sample of 2,073 women. Data was
collected using a standardized questionnaire with women’s age,
education level, origin, parity, civil status, income and
breastfeeding antecedents. Results:
75% of women knew BSE and 51% practiced it. A multivariate analysis
yielded the following odds ratios: BSE knowledge was 4.2 times higher
among housewives than women working outside home; 2.1 times higher
among those aged 30 or older, having 5 year at school or higher, 1.98
times higher among those living in the Great Goiania, 1.4 times higher
among those with 2 children or more, and 1.68 times higher among those
with an income higher than 2 minimal wages. According to BSE practice,
it was 1.7 times more frequently carried out among housewives and that
30 year or older, 1.8 times higher among those with more years at
school and 1.2 higher among women with an income higher than 2 minimal
wages. Conclusions: The majority of
women reported to know BSE, and half of them, to do it. The poorest
women, those with low health information and awareness about this
technique usefulness to early breast cancer detection, presented high
proportions of not knowing and practicing BSE.

## 3083

## Assessing the needs of women with advanced (metastatic) breast
cancer.

## Mayer M, Grober SE, Caplan ES. Living beyond Breast Cancer,
Ardmore, PA

Background:As new treatments extend
life, women with advanced (metastatic) breast cancer (ABC) have
increased needs for information and support. The purpose of this study
was to conduct an in-depth assessment of these needs and to help plan
new programs and services.

Methods: Living Beyond Breast Cancer
(LBBC) staff, consultants and an advisory committee developed a
64-question survey administered online and on paper to people with
ABC, focusing on valued and desired services. Online, in-person, print
media, and telephone services were assessed. Data was gathered using
webbased & paper survey versions.

Results: A total of 697 people with
ABC responded, 619 online; 78 on paper. Those who took the survey on
paper were older, with 47% aged 60 and over, while 70% of online
respondents were ages 40–59. Further differences between online and
paper survey groups await analysis.
In a preliminary combined analysis of respondents, 87% were US
residents, 94% were Caucasian, and 99% were female. Four-fifths (86%)
relied on private insurance and/or Medicare. Nearly half (47%) were
working full or part-time, with 24% on disability or unemployed.
Three-quarters (77%) had children, many still at home.
Length of time since ABC diagnosis was variable: 22% ≥1 year, 35%
1–2 years, 29% 3–5 years, 10% 6–10 years, 4% >10 years.
Three-quarters (75%) were currently in treatment with active disease,
with metastases to bone (68%), liver (47%), lungs/pleura (37%), and
CNS (11%). One-half (49%) received hormonal treatment for ABC, 43%
chemotherapy, and 30% biological therapy, while 6% had enrolled in
clinical trials. Most frequently reported current
symptoms/side-effects were fatigue or weakness (67%), cognitive
problems (60%), sexual dysfunction (60%), disturbed sleep (56%), hot
flashes (50%), pain (49%), depression (34%), and anxiety (28%).
However, 44% found maintaining daily routines and activities very
easy/easy, 37% somewhat easy, and only 19% difficult/very
difficult.
The desire for information and support was strong. Two-thirds (67%)
of respondents sought information on ABC at least weekly, 27% daily.
Similarly, 62% sought emotional/practical support at least weekly, and
30% daily. Top ranked informational needs focus on treatment options,
including clinical trials and symptoms/side-effects management. Top
ranked support needs include stress management and online and
in-person support groups. Top ranked practical needs center on
referrals for medical care and information with health insurance,
Medicare/Medicaid and disability.

Conclusions: There is a growing need
for targeted education, information and support for women with
advanced (metastatic) breast cancer. This survey offers key insights
into the experiences, preferences and behaviors of this underserved
population and will be used both to inform program development at LBBC
and to educate other health professionals in the breast cancer
community. In-depth analyses will be presented at the
conference.

## 3084

## Creating a DNA bank for pharmacogenomic epidemiology: the Friends
for Life study.

## Lemler S, Rufenbarger C, Skaar T, Murphy V, RushTaylor A, Garvey
J, Thompson B, Christmon D, Coleman N, Rosenberg L, Schneider B, on
Behalf of the Friends for Life Volunteers. Indiana University,
Indianapolis, IN; Catherine Peachey Fund

Background: Increasing interest in
genomics and pharmacogenetics has necessitated the recruitment of
subjects at low risk for cancer to serve as controls. In order to make
valid comparisons, large numbers of subjects with and without a
personal history of cancer are required. While subjects with cancer
can be recruited from clinic populations indefinitely, recruitment of
controls is challenging. A research project evaluating the role of
polymorphic differences in genes important in the angiogenesis pathway
in breast cancer became the impetus for creating a model for
addressing this challenge. 500 women with history of breast cancer and
500 controls were statistically required to address the hypothesis. We
estimated total accrual would take months or years to complete with
extensive financial funds. To minimize need for resources and to
optimize time, an oncology fellow and research nurse from Indiana
University (IU) and an advocate from the Catherine Peachey Fund,
coordinated to obtain subjects for the trial in a single day.

Methods: The study included the
completion of a 5 page questionnaire (consisting of risk factors,
medications, and demographic information) and collection of one 9ml
tube of blood (for future DNA extraction and genotyping). The
Catherine Peachey Fund, the Breast Cancer Research Foundation and the
NIH-Pharmacogenetics Research Network supported the project;
additional support was obtained from the IU General Clinical Research
Center and pharmaceutical representatives. The Indianapolis Affiliate
of the Susan G. Komen Foundation provided support by allowing on-site
advertising for the project which would ultimately take place five
blocks from the Race for the Cure. Over 160 volunteers from a variety
of disciplines assisted with advertising, recruitment, consent,
questionnaires and phlebotomy.

Results: On Saturday, April 16, 2005,
a total of 855 subjects successfully completed the study over a
5.5 hour period. Demographic information for enrollment revealed 92%
of participants were Caucasian, 5% were African American, 1% were
Asian, and 2% were other. The mean age of controls was 41 and the mean
age of breast cancer survivors was 52. The majority of women enrolled
did not have a history of breast cancer (ratio 7 to 1). Recruitment to
complete enrollment for breast cancer survivors continues in the
clinics; 6 weeks after the event, we have enrolled a total of
350.

Conclusion: IU has developed a model
for collecting large groups of subjects for epidemiology studies in a
time frame of hours rather than months or years. With detailed
logistical planning and concerted effort by a committed group of
volunteers, we have demonstrated that it is feasible to obtain
biologic samples from a large group of breast cancer survivors and
controls within several hours.

## 3085

## Mucositis – an evolving problem.

## Dollbaum CM, Andrews A, Wascher RA, Rosenbaum E, Ignoffo RJ.
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Stanford
Hospitals and Clinics, Palo Alto, CA; Cancer Research Center,
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI
Mucositis occurs when cancer treatments break down the rapidly
divided epithelial cells lining the GI tract, particularly in the oral
cavity, leaving the mucosal tissue open to ulceration and infection.
Oral Mucositis is probably the most common, debilitating complication
of cancer surgery, chemotherapy and radiation. It occurs in 20–40% of
patients treated with chemotherapy alone and up to 50% of patients
receiving combination radiation and chemotherapy. The consequences of
mucositis can be mild requiring little intervention to severe
(hypovolemia, electrolyte abnormalities, and malnutrition) that may
result in fatal complications.
Taste loss tends to increase in proportion to the aggressiveness of
treatment. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, xerostomia and oral cavity pain
further impair oral intake. Thus, maintaining adequate nutrition is
frequently a challenge for patients undergoing therapy. Reduction of
caloric intake can lead to weight loss, loss of muscle mass and
strength, as well as decreased immunocompetency. Patients with
chemotherapy-associated mucositis and immunosuppression are prone to
opportunistic oral and enteric infections. Breast cancer patient
educators must address the risks and the under-reporting of mucositis.
Delayed or reduced medical treatment doses may reduce chances for
cure. The potential impact of morbidity and mortality with oral
Mucositis should not be underestimated.

Methods: Based upon 2005 website
activity to date, this website will serve an estimated 800,000 pages
in 2005 (the number of website hits is not included because the term
hit can be vastly misleading, e.g. 100 graphics + 1 web page = 101
hits). A pilot questionnaire was developed in December 2004 to
evaluate the perceived utility of the new education Internet site, “
Mucositis - Oral, Esophageal and Gastrointestinal Problems and
Solutions” on CancerSupportiveCare.com. Respondents were interested
patients, and health care providers from 50 USA and non USA countries.
Specific results will be presented.

Conclusion: The worldwide audience of
patients and health care personnel derived significant and useful
clinical information and insight into Mucositis. Internet-based
patient and health care worker education will assist clinicians to
better serve the needs of their patients, and improve the quality of
their lives. 

## 3086

## Emerging solutions: moving from informed consent to informed
choice, an advocate collaborative model.

## Devine P, Brady C. Cancer Information & Support Network,
Pleasanton, CA

Background: In today’s clinical trial
arena interest in accrual and retention is extremely high among
investigators. A 2001 study by Lara et al, at U.C. Davis, reported
that the consent process, with its legalistic and confusing forms, is
itself a barrier to patient participation.
This work began with UCSF SPORE advocates who wrote letters for
specific studies conducted at UCSF. Under the guidance of UCSF
researchers Laura Esserman and Nola Hylton, Ms Devine developed an
advocate component for an ACRIN MRI / CALGB correlative science
clinical trial. A suite of materials were created to assist patients
as they underwent the informed consent process.
The study has been open for three years, accrual is close to target
projections and retention is 100% three years and 177 patients later.
Our goal at Cancer Information and Support Network (CISN) is to
continue this work (using patient centered educational support
materials to accompany the consent form) with other projects.
CISN principals are now working with UCSF, ACOSOG, ACRIN, Pfizer,
Genomic Health, the Colorectal Cancer Coalition, the Ovarian Cancer
National Alliance, GlaxoSmithKline, the Summit on Clinical Trials and
Genentech on various projects that will provide patients with better
ways to understand specific clinical trials. These studies provide a
bold new blueprint for advocate involvement in the informed consent
process.

Hypothesis: Patient centered
educational materials designed to enhance the informed consent
process, may increase patient literacy, improve patient satisfaction,
and advance public trust in the research enterprise, leading to
responsible increased accrual and retention. This new model moves from
informed consent to informed choice where patients are presented with
more information and support as they undergo consent so they can truly
make an informed decision.

Discussion: CISN continues to
introduce the medical community to an array of issues affecting
patients considering participation in clinical trials: lack of
literacy about research requirements; tissue donation; understanding
the informed consent process; the importance of meaningful and full
disclosure to patients resulting in increased trust of the research
enterprise.
CISN works closely with academic, government, other non-profits and
industry researchers to help foster public awareness about the
importance of medical research to daily life. We address these issues
and present various strategies that might be applied to cooperative
group and industry trials so as to bridge the research gap, move
research forward and adopt the best course to serve the needs of the
community, researchers and patients.

## 3087

## Differential gene expression in normal breast tissue from African
American and Caucasian women.

## Field LA, Love BJ, Kane J, Deyarmin B, Hooke JA, Ellsworth RE,
Shriver CD. Windber Research Institute, Windber, PA; Walter Reed Army
Medical Center, Washington, DC

Background: Despite lower overall
incidence of breast cancer in African American women (AAW) compared to
Caucasian women (CW), AAW have earlier disease onset and less
favorable clinical prognosis. These differences can be partly
attributed to differences in socio-economic status. However, tumors in
AAW have larger size, high grade nuclear atypia, more frequent lymph
node involvement, and a higher frequency of estrogen receptor
negativity, suggesting that a biological component(s) may also
contribute to the poorer prognosis and outcome observed in AAW. In the
present study, we used microarray analysis to determine if gene
expression differences exist in normal breast tissue that may
predispose AAW to earlier onset and a more aggressive tumor
phenotype.

Materials and Methods: Normal breast
tissue (reductive mammoplasty and/or disease-free biopsy specimens)
was collected from age-matched AAW (n = 25) and CW (n = 25) enrolled
in the Clinical Breast Care Project. From each sample, 400 mg of
breast tissue was removed and RNA isolated using the Qiagen RNeasy
Lipid Tissue Midi kit. RNA was amplified, fragmented, and hybridized
to a CodeLink Human Whole Genome Bioarray representing 45,000
transcripts. Mann-Whitney testing was performed to detect differential
gene expression between AAW and CW (P < 0.01). Differentially
expressed genes were then categorized according to their gene
ontology.

Results: Over 500 transcripts were
differentially expressed between AAW and CW (P < 0.01). When the
up-regulated genes in each ethnic group were mapped to their
biological process ontology, genes involved in cell proliferation were
found to be overrepresented in the AAW group. Specifically, although
less than 0.9% of transcripts on the array represent genes involved in
cell proliferation, 4.3% of genes up-regulated in AAW fell into this
category compared to only 0.5% in CW (P < 0.05). Among the genes
up-regulated in the AAW group are the proto-oncogene RAF1, fibroblast
growth factor 1 (FGF1), and prokineticin-1/EGVEGF, all of which have
been reported to increase cell proliferation.

Discussion: While poor clinical
outcomes in AAW with breast cancer have often been attributed to
health care disparities, the data from this study may explain why
breast cancer in AAW occurs at a higher frequency in young women. The
increased expression of genes involved in cellular proliferation in
disease-free tissues suggests that breast cells in AAW may be dividing
more rapidly than those in CW. This increased cellular proliferation
may serve as an oncogenic stimulus and/or prematurely age the breast
tissue in AAW. Efforts are currently underway to identify
population-specific DNA variants in these genes that may account for
the increased expression and gene expression changes in breast tumors
to determine whether these changes detected in disease-free tissue are
associated with tumor development.

## 3088

## Racial disparities in the utilization of adjuvant chemotherapy and
radiation therapy in elderly patients with early stage breast cancer: a
population-based study.

## Hershman DL, McBride RB, Wang X, Grann VR, Jacobson JS, Neugut
AI. Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York,
NY; College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York,
NY

Background: African American women
(black women) with breast cancer have poorer survival than women of
predominantly European descent (white women). The purpose of this
study is to assess racial disparities in the utilization of adjuvant
chemotherapy and radiation therapy in elderly patients with early
stage breast cancer.

Methods: The Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results- Medicare database represents
approximately 14% of the US population and provides clinical and
demographic information on cancer patients covered by Medicare, along
with health care utilization data from Medicare claims files. We
analyzed the association of demographic and clinical factors with
treatment among patients diagnosed from 1992 to 2000 with stage I or
III breast cancer at ≥65 years of age.

Results: About 15% of elderly
patients with early-stage breast cancer received some form of
chemotherapy within 12 months of diagnosis, and 34% received radiation
therapy (89% postlumpectomy). In a multiple logistic regression model,
black patients were 25% less likely to initiate chemotherapy or to
initiate radiation therapy. Black patients with hormone-sensitive
tumors were less likely to receive chemotherapy (HR = 0.65) compared
to white patients with hormone-sensitive tumors. In the same model
stratified by age, black patients with hormone-sensitive tumors aged
65–69 were half as likely to receive chemotherapy (HR = 0.55). Both
chemotherapy use and radiation therapy use decreased with increasing
age. With patients aged 65–69 years as the reference group, the odds
ratios (ORs) (95% CI) of receiving chemotherapy were 0.70 (0.6–0.7)
for ages 70–74, 0.40 (0.3–0.4) for ages 75–79, 0.10 (0.1–0.1) for ages
80+ years. Patients >80 years were less than half as likely as
younger patients to receive radiation therapy.

Conclusions: Despite the proven
efficacy of adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy, elderly black
women appear to be less likely than elderly white women to receive
these treatments. To reduce the burden of cancer overall, further
research on the causes of this treatment disparity, and interventions
to reduce it are needed.

## 3089

## Delays and receipt of adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy
in breast cancer patients: a population-based study.

## Hershman DL, Wang X, McBride RB, Jacobson JS, Grann VR, Neugut
AI. Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York,
NY; College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York,
NY

Background: Delay in the diagnosis of
breast cancer is associated with both poor survival and non-white
race. Few studies have analyzed the determinants or effects of delay
in the receipt of adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy and radiation
therapy) following surgery for localized breast cancer.

Methods: The Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)-Medicare database, representing
approximately 14% of the US population, provides clinical and
demographic information on cancer patients covered by Medicare, along
with health care utilization data from Medicare claims files. Among
female patients in the SEER-Medicare database aged ≥65 years,
diagnosed in 1992–2000 with stage I or III breast cancer, we
investigated the time intervals between breast cancer surgery and the
receipt of chemotherapy or radiation therapy and the association of
those intervals with survival.

Results: Among 60,756 women in our
sample with stages I–III breast cancer, 9,316 (15%) received adjuvant
chemotherapy and 19,975 (33%) received adjuvant radiation therapy
(17,857 (89%) after lumpectomy; 2,118 (11%) after mastectomy). Among
15% of those who underwent adjuvant chemotherapy, the time interval
from surgery to chemotherapy was ≥12 weeks (n = 1411). While 13% were
delayed >12 weeks in receiving their post-mastectomy RT, only 5%
were delayed >12 weeks beyond their lumpectomy. Delayed
chemotherapy was associated with increasing age, African- American
race, earlier stage, hormone receptor positive tumors, increased
comorbidity, and lower grade. Delayed post-lumpectomy RT was
associated with race, earlier stage, advanced stage, and increased
comorbidity. Delayed radiation therapy predicted poorer survival,
either post-lumpectomy (HR 1.6, 95% CI 1.5–1.6) or post-mastectomy
(Hazard Ratio 1.7, 95% CI 1.6–1.8).. Delay in RT following
chemotherapy was also associated with poorer survival (HR 1.9, 95% CI
1.6–2.3), but delay in initiating chemotherapy was not (HR
1.0).

Conclusions: Although long delays
(>12 weeks) in receipt of adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation
therapy are not very common following surgery, certain groups, notably
African-Americans, those who are older, and those with comorbidities,
are more likely than others to experience such delays. Although delays
in the initiation of radiation may be causally linked to poor
prognosis, they may also reflect uncontrolled confounding by host
factors or generally inadequate medical care.

## 3090

## Impact of ethnicity on conditional survival of breast cancer
patients: analysis from the SEER database.

## Wang SJ, Luh JY, Fuller CD, Thomas, Jr CR. University of Texas
Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX

Background: Conditional survival is a
more accurate estimate of survival probability for patients who have
already survived one or more years following diagnosis. The purpose of
this study was to determine whether ethnicity plays a role in the
5-year conditional survival rates for breast cancer patients.

Methods: Using the Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER 11) database from the NCI, we
analyzed 98,845 breast cancer patients diagnosed between 1988 and
1994. Patients were divided into 4 ethnic groups, White
(non-Hispanic), Hispanic, African-American, Asian/Pacific Islander.
Using the life table method, we computed the observed 5-year
conditional survival, stratified by stage and ethnicity, for patients
who had already survived up to 5 years after diagnosis.

Results: In general, five-year
conditional survival rates rose most significantly for advanced stage
patients (III and IV) as survival time since diagnosis increased.
African-American women had the lowest survival rates at diagnosis for
all stages, and the lowest conditional survival for most survival
times since diagnosis. The disparity was particularly marked for stage
III patients at the time of diagnosis, where African-American women
had survival of 34%, compared to 50–51% for the other ethnic groups.
However, this difference resolved by 5 years after diagnosis, where
conditional survival became comparable to that for White women (62%).
Asians/Pacific Islanders had slightly higher conditional survival than
other ethnic groups for stage I (90–94%) and stage II (81–83%), for
all time periods from 0 to 5 years after diagnosis. Conditional
survival increased significantly with time for all stage IV patients,
but was most pronounced for Hispanic patients, where 5-year
conditional survival rose from 17% at time of diagnosis, to 55% at
5 years after diagnosis.

Conclusion: For breast cancer
patients surviving a period of time after diagnosis, 5-year
conditional survival rates vary by ethnicity. Asian/Pacific Islanders
with stage I and II disease had higher conditional survival than other
ethnic groups. The most significant increases in conditional survival
were seen for African- American women with stage III disease, and for
Hispanic women with stage IV disease. Conditional survival can provide
more accurate prognostic information for breast cancer patients who
have already survived several years after diagnosis. 

Five-Year Conditional Survival

## 3091

## Low socio-economic status African-American, Hispanic & white
women with breast cancer demonstrate similar hormone receptor status,
tumor grade & survival.

## Dookeran KA, Wang Y, Ferrer K, Sekosan M, Gao X, De La Torre R,
Diaz de Leon L, Lukaszcyk B, Roman G, Muthyala N, Rogowski WA, Zaren
HA. University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL; Stroger Hospital
of Cook County, Chicago, IL

Background: Compared with other
races, African-American (AA) women with breast cancer are more
frequently diagnosed with high grade, hormone receptor (HR) negative
tumors, and have poorer survival. However, recent studies suggest that
women with low socio-economic status (SES), regardless of race,
demonstrate similar HR status and poor outcome. We hypothesized that
low SES AA, White and Hispanic women with breast cancer, treated at a
single institution, would demonstrate similar tumor biology and
survival.

Materials & Methods:
Clinical-pathological features and survival were evaluated for 462
consecutive low SES women with breast cancer, diagnosed and treated at
the MBCCOP, Stroger Hospital of Cook County, which treats the
medically-underserved & indigent in Chicago. Results were compared
for AA, White and Hispanic women, and included adjustment for
variations in age and stage.

Results: There were 291 AA, 85 White
and 86 Hispanic women. Significantly fewer AA (31%) & White (35%)
women were age < 50 years old, compared to Hispanics (56%;
p < 0.01). No significant differences occurred between races with
regards to tumor size (T3 = 12, 8 & 8% for AA, White &
Hispanic respectively), tumor grade (grade 3 = 52, 54 & 56%),
lymph node status (positive = 46, 53 & 54%), stage at diagnosis
(>2B = 58, 57 & 58%), HR status (negative = 41, 42 & 43%)
and disease free (DFS; events = 28, 27 & 23%), distant disease
free (DDFS; events = 20, 21 & 19%) or overall survival (OS; 18, 17
& 13%). High grade tumors were significantly more likely to be HR
negative (p < 0.01) and higher stage (p < 0.01). Multivariate
analyses adjusted for age and stage, demonstrated no difference in HR
status, tumor grade or survival for AA versus White or Hispanic
women.

Discussion: These results indicate
that underserved or low SES AA, White and Hispanic women with breast
cancer, treated at a single institution, demonstrate similar survival
and tumor biology, with higher frequency of both high grade and HR
negative tumors. Prevalence of low SES and data heterogeneity, may be
responsible for the relative excess of high grade, HR negative tumors
seen in AA women in prior studies.

## 3092

## Racial/ethnic differences in delay in obtaining medical care for
breast symptoms.

## Friedman LC, Kalidas M, Elledge R, Chang J, DuLay MF, Romero C,
Liscum KR. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; Baylor College of
Medicine-The Methodist Hospital Breast Care Center, Houston,
TX

Background: Delay in obtaining
medical care for breast symptoms is associated with increased
morbidity and mortality. A number of factors have been associated with
delay, for example, African American or Hispanic ethnicity, younger
age, lower income, less education and presence of symptoms other than
breast lumps. Despite the fact that African Americans, Hispanics and
the poor are more likely to delay, differences in delay among these
groups has received little attention.

Material and Methods: Participants
were a multiethnic sample of 97 women with breast symptoms attending
an outpatient breast clinic in a public sector general hospital. Only
women without diagnosed breast cancer were eligible for this study.
Participants completed questionnaires measuring demographic and
medical characteristics, perceived risk of developing breast cancer,
degree of spirituality and barriers to obtaining medical care for
breast symptoms.

Results: Mean age was 44 years.
Participants were 59% Hispanic, 30% African-American and 11%
Caucasian. Thirty-five per cent were married, 40% were employed and
74% had a high school education or less. Twenty-four per cent reported
a family history of breast cancer. Forty-six per cent had delayed
obtaining medical care three months or longer after having detected a
breast symptom, the mean delay being nine months. Over 50% of the
women perceived little or no chance of developing breast cancer
despite reporting breast symptoms. Hispanics were younger, delayed
longer and were less spiritual than Caucasians or African Americans
(p’s < 0.05). Hispanics reported more barriers to seeking a medical
consultation than Caucasians (p < 0.05). Less educated Hispanics
reported more symptoms other than breast lumps than less educated
African Americans or Caucasians (p’s < 0.05). Hispanics reported
worry about cancer being a barrier to seeking medical care more than
did Caucasians (p < 0.01). The three racial/ethnic groups did not
differ in their perceptions of risk.

Conclusion: The current study
suggests that Hispanic women in public sector settings are at
increased risk for late stage diagnosis of breast cancer due to delay
in seeking medical consultation for breast symptoms. Low-income women
with less education should be instructed about their risk of breast
cancer and the importance of seeking prompt medical
consultation.

## 3093

## Factors affecting breast cancer screening practices among African
American women in Western New York.

## Hurd TC, Chapman IR, Kelly M, Wall B, Rodgers T, Womack SD.
University of Texas Health Sciences Center, San Antonio, TX; Roswell
Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY; State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY

Background: African American women
have lower breast cancer screening utilization rates than other
populations. This study was conducted to assess correlates of
screening among women who participated in a community based breast and
cervical cancer education program.

Methods: The Witness Project is a
community based breast cancer education program delivered by African
American women. In this setting, African American women over age 18
who attended Witness Project programs gave informed consent and
completed a questionnaire at the completion of the program
presentation. Current and prior screening practices (breast self exam
(BSE), clinical breast exam (CBE), mammography), screening barriers,
knowledge of breast cancer risk factors, method of referral for
screening and demographic information were queried and entered into a
central data base. Uni- and multivariate analysis were performed using
the SPSS statistical software package.

Results: Twenty five percent of 688
women who completed the questionnaire were under age 40 and 19%(129)
were ≥70 years of age. Sixty four percent attained education beyond
grade 12. 58% of participants under age 40 did not perform BSE in the
prior month and 37% denied having a clinical breast exam in the prior
year. Conversely, over 70% of women ≥ age 40 had BSE and CBE. While
388/514 women who were screening eligible received a mammogram in the
preceding 12 months, only 46% had yearly mammography during the
preceding 5 years. Cost, insurance status and lack of a regular
provider were significant barriers to screening for women who did not
have mammograms. Furthermore, 28% of these women ‘felt they didn’t
need one’. Only 7% of women cited lack of referral as a barrier.
Multivariate analysis showed that women age 40–69 had significantly
higher odds of having BSE, CBE and annual mammograms in the prior
5 years compared to women ≥70 years (OR 2.26 [0.96–0.39] vs. 0.39
[0.15–1.04];p < 0.05). Neither higher educational level nor
knowledge of breast cancer risk factors increased the odds of having
combination screening.

Discussion: Educational level and
knowledge of risk factors do not increase combination breast cancer
screening in this cohort. Sustained annual screening rates remain low
despite the increase in reported mammography rates. Older African
American women are less likely to have guideline concordant breast
cancer screening when compared to younger women.

## 3094

## Racial differences do not predict response to induction
chemotherapy.

## Maloney N, Schneider H, Elkins D, Goffman T, Laronga C. Eastern
Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA
Introduction: Racial disparities exist in breast cancer for a
plethora of reasons. African American (AA) women typically present at
a younger age with larger receptor negative tumors and increased nodal
positivity. Induction chemotherapy (IC) is offered to women with large
tumor or node positive disease at presentation. Our objective was to
determine if any racial differences exist in response to IC between
the AA and the Caucasian (C) women.
Methods: A retrospective review of prospectively gathered data on
women diagnosed with locally advanced breast cancer and treated with
IC was conducted at our institution. Data collected focused on tumor
size at presentation based on clinical exam and/or imaging studies,
pathological tumor size at surgery, calculation of response to
therapy, nodal status, type of surgery performed and survival.
Statistical analysis was by Chi square and paired T-tests.
Results: From 3/96 to 10/04, 66 women (33 AA, 33 C) were diagnosed
with locally advanced breast cancer and treated with IC. Overall the
median age was 46 years (AA = 46 yrs, C = 47 yrs; p = 0.168). The
median tumor size was 4 cm (range = 0–25 cm) (AA = 5.0 cm, C = 3.5 cm;
p = 0.015) based on initial clinical examination. Median tumor size
radiographically was 2.7 cm (range = 0–12 cm) (AA = 3.2 cm,
C = 2.55 cm, p = 0.024). Median final pathological size was 2.2 cm
(range = 0–20 cm) (AA = 3.5 cm, C = 1.75 cm, p = 0.339). At least a
partial response (> 50% reduction in clinical tumor size) was seen
in 26 women (47.3 %) (AA = 9, C = 17) [3AA and 1C had a complete
pathological response]. There were no significant racial differences
based on either the follow-up clinical examination after the course of
IC (p = 0.075) or based on radiographic imaging after IC (p = 0.393).
Axillary node involvement post IC occurred in 45.5% (AA = 48.5%,
C = 42.4%, p = 0.621). As of 5/05, 14 (21.2%) women have died of their
disease (AA = 9, C = 5; p = 0.228.) and another 6 (9.1%) women have
distant metastatic disease currently (AA = 4, C = 2; p = 0.392).
Conclusions: African Americans present with larger breast cancers than
Caucasian women. However, no racial differences could be identified in
women receiving IC for their breast cancer with regards to response to
therapy, lymph node involvement after IC, or survival. Better
treatment strategies for locally advanced breast cancer are equally
needed for both races.

## 3095

## Eligibility to the study of tamoxifen and raloxifene (STAR) by
ethnicity in New Mexico (NM).

## Vargas Y, Parsons A, Heurtin-Roberts S, Verschraegen C, Moser R,
McCaskill-Stevens W. NCI/NIH, Bethesda, MD; UNM, Albuquerque,
NM

Background: Preliminary results from
STAR present data on Hispanics in aggregate. Results may not
generalize to the many diverse ethnic groups comprising the U.S.
Hispanic population. NM is 39% Hispanic. Descendents of original
Spanish settlers populate the north and Mexican immigrants populate
the south. We sought to compare eligibility characteristics for STAR
in northern NM according to Hispanic and non-Hispanic white ethnicity
from 1999–2004. Methods: Eligibility
to STAR was determined by responses to the Gail model-based risk
assessment tool. Calculated risk for developing invasive breast cancer
(IBC) was based upon current age, age of menarche, number of breast
biopsies, age at first live birth, number of first degree relatives
with IBC, and ethnicity. Eligibility required a modified Gail risk of
≥1.67% of IBC at five years from assessment. Ethnicity was selfS158
Abstracts . Poster Session III reported. Using zip codes, residence
was established to be north or south of 34.5° latitude. Risk factors
for Hispanics and Non-Hispanic whites were compared using t-test or
χ2 analyses. Logistic regression was
used to assess predictors of eligibility including interactions with
ethnicity. Results: 95.5% (n = 297)
of respondents resided in northern NM. Eligibility differed by
ethnicity (χ2=21.1, p < .01) with a
lower proportion of Hispanics (50.7%, n = 35) eligible than
non-Hispanics whites (78.9%, n = 180). Mean Gail risk scores differed
by ethnicity (t= 2.78, p < .01) with Hispanics having a lower mean
(2.29%) relative to non-Hispanic whites (3.02%). No difference was
detected in mean Gail risk between the ethnicities when stratified
into eligible or ineligible respondents. Nor was there a difference in
mean current age, age of menarche, or number of breast biopsies by
ethnicity. Mean age at first live birth differed for Hispanics,
20.7 years compared to non-Hispanic whites, 23.3 years (t= 3.87,
p < .01). Hispanics had a lower proportion (30.3%) of a maternal
history of breast cancer compared to non-Hispanic whites (54.1%)
(χ2=11.5, p < .01). Hispanics
reported a fewer number of first degree relatives affected with IBC
(0, 1, or ≥2) than non-Hispanic whites
(χ2=10.4, p < .01). No interaction was
detected between ethnicity and each of the other risk factors as they
predict eligibility.

Conclusions: Hispanics were less
likely to be eligible to STAR than non-Hispanic whites in northern NM.
Respondents differed significantly in eligibility characteristics by
ethnicity and by IBC risk factors . overall Gail score, mean age at
first live birth, maternal history of IBC, and number of first degree
relatives. Risk factors did not predict eligibility differentially by
ethnicity. Gail risk for eligible women did not differ statistically
by ethnicity. Results support Gail’s premise that the risk required
for Hispanics to be eligible to STAR is greater relative to
non-Hispanic whites.

## 3096

## Breast cancer treatment and survival in African Americans and
Caucasians.

## Banerjee M, Schwartz K, May HC, Noone AM, Vigneau F, Simon M.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Karmanos Cancer Institute,
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI
BACKGROUND: Breast cancer (BC) is currently the most common
malignancy diagnosed among women, and the second leading cause of
cancer mortality in the United States. African Americans (AA) suffer
disproportionately higher mortality from BC compared to Caucasian
Americans (CA). Poorer survival among AA is often attributed to a more
advanced stage of disease at diagnosis. However, residual disparities
in BC survival remain even after adjusting for stage at diagnosis,
suggesting that factors other than stage contribute to the poorer
survival in AA. In recent years, a competing theory that cancer
biology is different in AA compared to CA has gained prominence. Yet,
few studies have evaluated the role of treatment aggressiveness in
survival differences between AA and CA. This study examined if racial
differences in BC survival can be partly explained by treatment
differences in the two groups, using the Metropolitan Detroit SEER
registry data. METHODS: Eligibility criteria for this study were: AA
or CA cases diagnosed with primary invasive BC between 1988 and 1992,
and living in the Detroit tri-county area at the time of diagnosis.
Cases were obtained from the Detroit SEER registry and geocoded to
census block group. Data were linked to 1990 Census of Population and
Housing Summary Tape File 3A to obtain information on socioeconomic
status. Information on treatment (primary as well as adjuvant) and
survival were obtained from SEER. Polytomous logistic regression was
used to compare the two racial groups in terms of treatment patterns,
after adjusting for age, socioeconomic status, tumor size, and number
of positive lymph nodes. Cox proportional hazards model was used to
compare survival in AA versus CA, after adjusting for age,
socioeconomic status, tumor size, number of positive lymph nodes, and
treatment received. RESULTS: A total of 9,597 BC cases diagnosed with
local or regional disease were analyzed. CA comprised 82% of the
cases. Sixty-three percent of the cases were local stage, and 36% were
regional stage. Eleven percent of the cases had lumpectomy only, 21%
had lumpectomy with radiation, 62% had mastectomy only, and the
remaining 6% had mastectomy with radiation. There was significant
difference in treatment patterns between AA and CA (p-value = 0.009),
with AA receiving radiation less frequently for both local and
regional stage disease. Among patients diagnosed with regional stage
disease, AA had poorer survival compared to CA after adjusting for
age, SES, tumor size, number of positive lymph nodes, and treatment.
There were no significant differences in survival between the two
races for local stage disease, after adjusting for age, SES, tumor
size, number of positive lymph nodes, and treatment. CONCLUSION:
Findings from this research can help objectively address the factors
that contribute to the disparate mortality in AA, by targeting patient
education and intervention efforts in this population.

## 3097

## Understanding racial differences in outcome from metastatic breast
cancer (MBC): a pooled analysis of Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB)
9342 and 9840.

## Polite BN, Cirrincione C, Fleming GF, Berry DA, Seidman AD, Muss
H, Norton L, Hudis C, Winer EP. University of Chicago Medical Center,
Chicago, IL; Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; University of Vermont,
Burlington, VT; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA

Background: African American (AA)
women are more likely to be diagnosed with MBC than Caucasians (C).
They also have lower 5 year survival rates once diagnosed. The reasons
for this survival difference are not clear. This study examines racial
differences in survival and response in the setting of two large
cooperative group randomized clinical trials.

Methods: The study cohort consisted
of 787 C (80%) and 195 AA (20%) patients (pts) with MBC enrolled in
CALGB trials 9342 (paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 v 210 mg/m2 v 250 mg/m2 q
3 weeks) and 9840 (weekly v q 3 week paclitaxel). Sixty-one pts (6%)
who were non-C and non-AA and 13 pts (1%) with unknown ethnicity were
excluded from the analyses. Overall survival (OS), response rate (RR)
and time to failure (TTF) differences were examined by race. Future
analyses will use statistical modeling to adjust for differences in
known prognostic factors between the groups and will explore
differential rates of toxicity including neutropenia.

Results: AA pts were more likely to
be younger (median age 52 vs 57), premenopausal (26% vs 15%), and have
ER negative tumors (51% vs 38%). AA women were also more likely to
have had a performance status of 2 or greater (9% vs 5%) and to have
received prior chemotherapy (51% vs 41%). Stratified by previous
therapies, RR were 40% for AA and 35% for C in first line (p = 0.41)
and 20% vs 25% in second line (p = 0.32). With 779 deaths (166 AA and
613 C), unadjusted median OS was 14.3 months (mo) for AA and 18.75 mo
for W (p = 0.0001). Unadjusted median TTF was 4.9 mo for AA and 6.4 mo
for W (p = 0.019).

Conclusions: Consistent with data
from epidemiological studies, in this cohort, AA pts have a shorter
survival for MBC than do C. The extent to which this survival
disparity stems from underlying differences in measured tumor and
patient specific factors will be explored further. Despite these
differences, AA appear to derive equal benefit from therapy in terms
of tumor response.

## 3098

## Does screening underserved/minority women for breast cancer under
the age of 50 make a difference?

## Shum M, Robles E, Kankipati S, El-Khoury M, Bodofsky E, Grana G.
The Cancer Institute of New Jersey at Cooper University Hospital,
Camden, NJ

Background: Although breast cancer
screening rates have increased in recent years nationwide, the
importance of screening underserved/minority women at a younger age
has not been clearly reported. We initiated this study to determine
the number of women under the age of 50 who were screened and
diagnosed with breast cancer from our Camden County Cancer Screening
Project (CCCSP) and compared these results with our institutional
registry, state and national findings.

Methods: We retrospectively
identified all women diagnosed with breast cancer through our
screening project using the CAncer Screening Tracking System. All
women screened were minority, uninsured, or living at or below 250% of
the poverty line in Camden County, New Jersey. Age comparison at
diagnosis was made utilizing the Cooper registry and the National
Cancer Database (NCDB).

Results: A total of 3,458
unduplicated women were screened for breast cancer from 1993–2004.
Sixty-three women (African- American-17, Asian-1, Caucasian-29,
Hispanic-16) were diagnosed with breast cancer. Median age of
diagnosis was 50 years (range, 29–84 years). Final histology resulted
in 14 cases of DCIS and 49 cases of invasive carcinoma. TNM staging
revealed: 14 (22.2%) with stage 0, 14 (22.2%) with stage I, 23 (36.5%)
with stage II, 11 (17.5 %) with stage III, and 1 (1.6 %) with stage
IV. Interestingly, 31/63 (49.2%) of the women from the CCCSP were
diagnosed under the age of 50 with no known cases of BRCA 1/2
mutations. Approximately 1,940/3,458 (56.1%) of the women screened
were under 50. Additionally, 11/17 (64.7%) of our African Americans
were <50 vs. 29.3% for the total NJ data, t= 2.71, p = .02 and
30.4% for the total US data, t = 3.02, p < .01. Series of
comparisons from the CCCSP with the Cooper registry, the state and
national figures are noted below.

Conclusions: Our screening project
and our institutional registry had a proportionately higher percentage
of women diagnosed with breast cancer <50 when compared to the
state and the national figures. Comparing our data for African
Americans vs. NJ and US (NCDB 2001) showed that our patients were
younger. Further evaluation is needed to elucidate whether
socioeconomic factors (i.e. nutrition, housing conditions,
environmental exposures, and education) are contributing to this rise
in early breast cancers in underserved/minority women. 

## 3099

## Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) may not increase the incidence of
breast cancer in Japan.

## Saeki T, Takashima S, Takeuchi M, Sano M, Honjo H, Sonoo H,
Ochiai K, Komoike Y. Saitama Medical School, Irumagun, Saitama, Japan;
Shikoku Cancer Center, Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan
Background: A prospective study conducted by Woman’s Health
Initiatives demonstrated an increased risk of breast cancer in the
United States. Other studies also supported this result and hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) has been considered as one of risk factors
of breast cancer. However, the incidence of breast cancer is still low
in Japanese population comparing to the USA. We conducted a
case-control study to clarify the relationship between HRT and breast
cancer incidence in Japan. Material and Methods: 45 to 69 years aged
women with histological confirmed breast cancer in 3 major cancer
centers and 3 university hospitals were selected to be a case group.
We sent questionale to 4500-breast cancer patients treated with those
institutions by mail. In a case group, we selected patients who
already had recieved treatments and we asked the history of HRT before
their onset of breast cancer. On the other hand, a control group was
selected with regard to hospital based and to records of screening for
GI disease and respiratory disorders, and no history of previous
treatment for breast cancer, gynecological and hormonal disease was
essential. Control group must be 45–69 years aged healthy
post-menpausal Japanese women and be no diagnosed breast cancer at
this moment. Forty-five thousands Japanese women were selected by the
inclusion criteria of the protochol and questionale were sent by mail.
Contents of questionale included factors, which were related to breast
cancer incidence. Institutional review board in each institution
reviewed and our protocol was certified. Data center was located in
Kitasato University and collected data were analyzed independently.
For statistical analysis, SAS8 (version 8.2) was used and two
statisticians evaluated the statistical results independently.
Results: 5035 questionale were collected by the end of December 2004.
We have sent 6282-questionale and compliance was approximately 80%. We
planned an interim analysis when we analyzed 2000 questionale. On
December 2004, 2344 cases (1224 case and 1120 control) were analyzed.
Out of 1224 persons in a case group, 46 patients (3.8%) received HRT
and 104 of 1120(9.6%) healthy women received HRT. Odds ratio was 0.374
(95%CI = 0.262–0.535). Four of 46 patients received HRT more than
5-years, otherwise 21 of 104(20.2%) healthy women received. There was
no statistical significance in BMI, history of smoking, history of
benign breast disease, age of first child, daily excise and family
history between a case and a control group. Discussion: Our interim
analysis of the case-control study demonstrated no correlation between
HRT and breast cancer in Japanese women. These results came from
interim analysis of 38% planned data set of the case-control study and
we are planning to analyze 6282 questionale until the end of August
2005.

## 3100

## Cyclophosphamide and 5-fluorouracil: an alternative neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for patients with stage II breast cancer in underdeveloped
countries.

## Vigil CE, Vigil KJ, Valdivia S, Velarde R, Vigil Sr CE. Henry
Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI; Instituto de Enfermedades Neoplasicas,
Lima, Peru
In underdeveloped countries, like Peru, the majority of patients
cannot afford current standard recommended chemotherapeutic cancer
regimens secondary to its expensive cost. Therefore, we designed a
neoadjuvant chemotherapeutic protocol for the treatment of patients
with stage II breast cancer with cyclophosphamide and 5 fluorouracil,
affordable drugs for our population.

Material and Methods: Forty patients
with stage II breast cancer received neoadjuvant chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide 1000 mg/m2 IV and 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2 IV every
21 days for four cycles. Afterwards, lumpectomy and axillary
dissection were done, followed by breast irradiation. Patients with
axillary node involvement received four additional courses of the same
adjuvant chemotherapeutic regimen. Overall survival rate and disease
free survival rate were calculated.

Results: Thirteen of the forty
patients (32.5%) had stage IIB breast cancer. The average tumor size
was 3.12cm and axillary lymph node metastases were found in 42.5%. The
overall response rate was 60%, with complete clinical response in
17.5% of cases. The pathological complete response was 5% and
carcinoma in situ was found also in 5%. The overall survival rate at
5 years was 77.3 % and the disease free survival rate 70%, similar to
results reported with other standard regimens.

Conclusions: Combination of
cyclophosphamide and 5- fluorouracil demonstrated similar overall and
disease free survival rate compared to the standard chemotherapy
regimen recommended in the literature and it can be used as an
alternative regimen of neoadjuvant chemotherapy treatment for patients
with stage II breast cancer who cannot afford expensive
chemotherapy.

## 3101

## A comparison of clinicopathological features and molecular markers
in British and Nigerian women with breast cancer.

## Gukas ID, Jennings BA, Mandong BM, Girling A, Igun G, Prime W,
Leinster SJ. University of East Anglia; Norfolk and Norwich University
Hospital Trust, Norwich, United Kingdom; Jos University Teaching
Hospital, Jos, Nigeria; Univeristy of Liverpool, Liverpool, United
Kingdom

Background: Several studies have
suggested that breast cancer in black women is more aggressive than in
white women. This study examines the clinical stage, grade and five
molecular markers in breast cancer material from Nigeria and United
Kingdom to see if there are biological differences.

Methods: The histological diagnoses
of 178 consecutive Nigerian patients with breast cancer and 113
consecutive British patients with breast cancer were retrieved from
their hospital records. A subset of 68 age-matched Nigerian and
British patients was staged and their tumours typed and graded.
Immunohistochemical staining of sections from paraffin wax embedded
tissues from these cases for the expression of oestrogen receptor
(ER), progesterone receptor (PGR), ERBB2 (HER2/neu), P53 and cyclin D1
(CCND1) was carried out using the avidin biotin complex (ABC)
procedure. The Chi square test was used for statistical
analysis.

Results: Invasive ductal carcinoma
made up 92.7% of the Nigerian patients compared to 77% seen in the
British patients. Significant difference in clinical stage but not
tumour grades was also observed. The expression of ER and Cyclin D1
was significantly higher in the British patients than the Nigerian
patients (X2= 6.0123 P= 0.0142,
X2= 3.9272 P= 0.0475 respectively).
Other markers showed no statistical difference.

Conclusion: The differences in
prognosis of breast cancer between Nigeria and Britain may be partly
explained by differences in hormone receptors and cell cycle
regulation in addition to the obvious differences in stage at
presentation.

## 3102

## The SNP309 HDM2 polymorphism is associated with chemoresistance and
poor survival in breast cancers harboring mutations in the TP53
gene.

## Staalesen V, Knappskog S, Geisler S, Baumbusch L, Børresen- Dale
AL, Lillehaug JR, L ønning PE. University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway;
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway; The Norwegian
Radiumhospital, Oslo, Norway

Background: Chemoresistance is the
main obstacle to cancer cure. We previously reported mutations in the
TP53 gene to be associated with
resistance to doxorubicin and subsequently mitomycin treatment in
breast cancer. The key role of the p53 pathway was recently
substantiated by the finding of a mutation in the CHEK2 gene in one of
our patients wildtype for TP53
expressing resistance to doxorubicin. Recently, a novel polymorphism
(SNP309, T/G) in the HDM2 promoter
was described and homozygosity for the G allele was associated with
early cancer development as well as increased risk of development of
multiple cancers in Li-Fraumeni families, and attenuated response to
etoposide in cell cultures. The SNP309 promoter variant alters a
transcription factor binding site, leading to increased HDM2
expression in cell lines during cellular stress.

Materials and Methods: To investigate
the possibility that the SNP309 polymorphism might affect breast
cancer risk, as well as response to chemotherapy, we analyzed tumor
DNA from 122 patients with locally-advanced breast cancers previously
evaluated for the predictive value of TP53 status to chemoresistance. In addition, we also
analyzed blood DNA from 92 healthy controls.

Results: We here report homozygosity
for the G allele to be associated with drug resistance in patients
harboring TP53 mutations affecting
the L2 / L3 domains (P = 0.0188), but not in patients wildtype for
TP53.

Discussion: Our observations that
homozygosity for the G allele of the HDM2 polymorphism was associated with drug resistance
in tumors harboring TP53 mutations
suggest that this allele could interact with, and amplify, the effect
of TP53 mutations. This finding
ties in with our recent observation with respect to the CHEK2 gene. Similar to TP53, mutations in CHEK2 is associated with the Li-Fraumeni syndrome, and
we recently found a somatic mutation in this gene in one of our tumors
wildtype for TP53 expressing
resistance to doxorubicin treatment. As HDM2 and CHK2 are closely
linked (CHK2-mediated p53 phosphorylation inhibits HDM2-p53 complex
formation), a similar effect of the G allele of the SNP309 on p53 as
that resulting from CHK2 inactivation may be hypothesized. It is
therefore highly interesting to note that while CHEK2 mutations substitute for p53
defects, HDM2 overexpression seems to cause its effect in concert with
TP53 mutations, both with regard
to cancer risk and treatment response.

## 3103

## Activation of nuclear factor (NF)-kB is linked to resistance to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer patients.

## Montagut C, Tusquets I, Domingo-Domenech J, Corominas JM, Ferrer
B, Bellosillo B, Fernandez PL, Rovira A, Suarez M, Albanell J.
Hospital del Mar - IMAS, Barcelona, Spain; Hospital Clinic, Barcelona,
Spain

Background: The NF-kB system is
viewed as a promising anticancer target due to its role in oncogenesis
and in chemoresistance. To provide further evidence on the expression/
role of NF-kB in breast cancer, we aimed here to: (1) characterize the
expression and subcellular localization of p65 protein, the most
common form of NF-kB, in normal breast, DCIS and infiltrating breast
cancer, and (2) explore the value of p65 in predicting response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced breast cancer as well as
pharmacodynamic changes in p65 expression after chemotherapy.

Patients and Methods: Normal breast,
ductal breast carcinoma in situ (DCIS) and infiltrating carcinoma
specimens were assayed by IHC for p65 expression. We used a
semiquantitative score using p65 staining intensity and distribution
to evaluate p65 cytoplasmic overexpression. The presence of any
nuclear immunoreactivity was considered as positive. Since p65
activation results in nuclear translocation, nuclear p65 expression
was interpreted as an activated form of NF-kB.

Results: Normal breast showed mainly
weak p65/NF-κB cytoplasmic staining and occasional faint nuclear
staining. DCIS had strong and diffuse cytoplasmic p65NF-kB staining.
Twelve out of 14 (86%) ER-negative infiltrating breast cancers
exhibited p65NF-kB activation (i.e. nuclear staining), whereas only 2
out of 6 (33%) ER-positive specimens had p65NF-kB activation
(p = 0.037). We then analyzed an additional set of 54 patients with
locally advanced breast cancer treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy;
a total of 37 pre- and 50 post-chemotherapy (n = 87) specimens were
available for this study. Patients received anthracycline- and/or
taxane- based chemotherapy as preoperative treatment. Nuclear staining
was positive in 10% of the pretreatment biopsies (n = 4), and in 28%
(n = 14) post-therapy surgical specimens, thus suggesting that
activation of NF-kB appears to be inducible upon chemotherapy
exposure. Nuclear p65 staining was linked with resistance to
chemotherapy while cytoplasmic p65 was not associated to response
(data not shown). In patients with tumors with pre and/or
post-chemotherapy nuclear staining the clinical response rate (RR) was
significantly lower (37% RR) than in patients with negative (both pre-
and post-) nuclear p65 (91% RR) (p<0.05). Notably, 3 patients
experienced a complete pathological response and none of them had
pre-treatment p65 nuclear staining.

Conclusions: These results show that
activation of p65/NF-kB (i.e nuclear translocation) occurs in the
transition of DCIS to infiltrating breast cancer and indicate that
NF-kB activation is linked to resistance to neoadjuvant chemotherapy
in breast cancer. These findings strengthen the rationale for the
association of NFkB inhibitors to chemotherapy to prevent or revert
chemoresistance.

## 3104

## Altered prostaglandin-signalling in hormone resistant breast cancer
by microarray and real time PCR validation.

## Scott DJ, Cummings M, Parkes AT, Poola I, Speirs V. Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Epidemiology and Cancer Research, University of
Leeds, Leeds, W Yorks, United Kingdom; Howard University, Washington,
DC
The non-steroidal antiestrogen tamoxifen (TAM) still remains the
“gold standard” treatment for hormone dependent breast cancer and
provides good therapeutic activity to approximately 60–70% of all
breast cancer patients with ER(α)+ lesions.
However, following initial anti-tumour activity, resistance often
develops resulting in tumour recurrence. Mechanisms associated with
the acquisition of an antiestrogen-resistant phenotype are poorly
understood. Due to the complexity of ER-signalling it is becoming
increasingly apparent that investigation of a single or small number
of genes will be insufficient to delineate the mechanisms of
TAM-resistance (TAM-r). An approach that reflects a broad range of
changes between the sensitive and resistant phenotypes is clearly more
rational. To begin to address this we have applied microarray
technology to an in vitro model of
TAM-r, developed in house from the breast cancer cell line MCF-7.
Using Affymetrix U133A GeneChips, we have identified 131 up-regulated
genes and 156 down-regulated genes whose steady state expression
levels differed by at least 3-fold between TAM-r cells and their
TAM-sensitive (TAM-s) controls (Scott et
al., submitted). Further detailed analysis of these data
revealed differential regualtion of several components of the
prostaglandin-signalling pathway in TAM-r cells. We observed increased
mRNA expression of phospholipase A2 group III
(PLA2G3), COX-1 and EP4 and decreased mRNA expression of EP3 and hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase 15-NAD
[HPGD]), which is responsible for prostaglandin
inactivation, in TAM-r cells. No changes were observed in COX-2, EP1 or EP2 expression. Our data was
validated by real time PCR and Western blotting. Taken together these
changes in gene expression would suggest an increase in prostaglandin
production and signalling is associated with TAM-r. This is currently
being validated by our group in a clinical model of TAM-r.

## 3105

## Gene expression profile of ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter
in breast cancer patient in relation to the response to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy.

## Park S, Shimizu C, Shimoyama T, Takeda M, Hasegawa T, Nishio K,
Ando M, Katsumata N, Kouno T, Fujiwara Y. National Cancer Center
Hospital, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan; National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Background: From the clinical point
of view, multidrug resistance is one of the major problems in the
treatment of the cancer patient. ABC (ATP binding cassette)
transporter is supposed to play important roles in chemoresistance by
affecting absorption, distribution, excretion of chemotherapeutic
agent. In particular, ABCB1 (MDR1-PgP), ABCC1 (MRP1), and ABCG2 is
well known to be related with resistance to several chemotherapeutic
agent. In the present study, we analyzed the gene expression profile
of breast cancer patients focusing on the relationship between ABC
gene expression and sensitivity to drug on the basis of
microarray.

Materials and methods: Using tissue
microarray data of the breast cancer patients underwent neoadjuvant
chemotherapy, we analyzed the expression profile of all 48 set of ABC
transporter gene. The majority of the patients received 4 courses of
CEF combination chemotherapy (Cyclophosphamide, Epirubicin, 5- FU)
followed by 12 courses of weekly paclitaxel. For HER-2 positive
patients determined by IHC staining, the specific inhibitory antibody
of HER-2 receptor, Herceptin® (Trastuzumab)
was added in the course of the treatment. Every patient underwent
surgery on the completion of the neoadjuvant chemotherapy and the
histopathologcal study was accompanied.

Results: 29.4% of patients achieved
pathologic CR. We found ABCA1, ABCA12 and ABCC5 were highly expressed
in patients with residual tumor in comparison with pCR patients with
statistical significance (p<0.05) Ongoing studies are evaluating
whether theses gene are prognostic factors in breast cancer
patients.

Discussion: Using the microarray
data, we evaluated if there is any difference in the gene expression
profile of ABC transporter according to the response to
chemotherapy.
We found increased gene expression of several ABC transporters are
associated with decreased response in the breast cancer patients who
underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy. This study is supported by Health
and Labour Science Research Grants, Research on Advanced Medical
Technology, H14-Toxico- 007. 

## 3106

## Elevated c-met expression accompanies endocrine resistance in MCF7
breast cancer cells and promotes in vitro cell migration and
invasion.

## Hiscox S, Harper M, Jiang WG, McClelland R, Nicholson RI.
Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom; Cardiff University
Medical School, Cardiff, United Kingdom

Background: The c-met receptor is
overexpressed in a number of human cancers and is strongly implicated
as a mediator of tumour metastastic spread in vivo through its ability
to promote cell motility and invasion. In this study, we have
investigated the expression and function of the c-met/HGF pathway in
fulvestrant-resistant (FulR) MCF7 breast cancer cells, which display a
significantly elevated motile and invasive nature in vitro compared to
their wild-type counterparts.

Materials and Methods: FulR cells
were derived through the continual exposure of wtMCF7 cells to
fulvestrant (10–7 M) for at least 18 months. This resulted in a cell
line which displayed a highly invasive and motile phenotype in vitro
and a higher growth rate than wild-type, endocrine-responsive MCF7
cells. Gene expression was determined by Affymetrix analysis and
confirmed with RT-PCR. c-met protein expression and pathway activity
under basal and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)-stimulated conditions
was determined by immunocytochemistry and Western blotting using
phospho-specific antibodies. Cell invasion was determined by seeding
cells onto a Matrigel-coated porous membrane in the presence or
absence of HGF. After 3 days, invasive cells were fixed, stained and
counted. Cellular migration was measured by seeding cells onto
uncoated and fibronectin-coated membranes with or without HGF. After
24 hours culture, migratory cells were fixed, stained and
counted.

Results: FulR cells had significantly
elevated c-met mRNA and cell-surface protein levels compared with
wtMCF7 cells. HGF treatment induced c-met autophosphorylation and
activation of Src, AKT, MAPK, FAK and paxillin in a time and dose
dependent manner in FulR cells together with promoting colony
scattering, cellular migration and invasion. No significant effects
were observed upon stimulation of wtMCF7 cells with HGF.

Discussion: Our data demonstrates
that fulvestrant resistance in MCF7 cells results in significant
overexpression of the c-met receptor which, upon activation, is able
to greatly augment their aggressive in vitro phenotype.

## 3107

## A novel role for the ASK/JNK pathway in mediating Akt-induced
endocrine therapy resistance.

## Nielsen A, Silva JM, Friedrichs WE, Beeram M, deGraffenried LA.
UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
Several studies have now implicated aberrant activity of the Akt
kinase as a significant mechanism by which breast cancer tumors are
unresponsive to tamoxifen. Recent studies suggest that Akt-induced
resistance is mediated through both estrogen receptor-dependent as
well as estrogen receptor-independent mechanisms. Several studies,
including our own, have demonstrated a significant role for mTOR in
modulating drug sensitivity in models of Akt-induced resistance.
Intriguingly, the ASK1/JNK pathway has been shown to induce apoptosis
in breast cancer cells in response to tamoxifen, and in separtate
studies has been shown to be suppressed by activation of the mTOR
pathway. These findings, in combination with our own preliminary data,
have led us to propose the following hypothesis: that Akt suppression
of the ASK1/JNK pathway is a significant mechanism by which Akt
confers tamoxifen resistance and that mTOR inhibitors such as
rapamycin restore response to tamoxifen by relieving this suppression.
In this current study, we have explored how modulation of the ASK1/JNK
pathway contributes to tamoxifen resistance, and how the use of mTOR
inhibitors reestablishes normal response to tamoxifen. We assessed
tamoxifen response in MCF-7 breast cancer cells expressing either
wild-type (control) or constitutively-active Akt (myrAkt1) and a
dominant-negative ASK1 (DNASK1). We found that similar to our myrAkt1
cells, our DNASK1 cells were much more resistant to the growth
inhibitory effects of tamoxifen. At the molecular level, treatment
with tamoxifen resulted in phosphorylation (activation) of cJUN, in
the control cells, but not in either the myrAkt1 or DNASK1 cells.
Importantly, rapamycin is unable to restore tamoxifen sensitivity in
our model of Akt resistance after both molecular and pharmacological
inhibition of ASK1 and JNK activity. These studies have the potential
for identifying and elucidating a novel mechanism by which Akt confers
tamoxifen resistance and could provide the rationale for developing
clinical trials investigating the efficacy of mTOR inhibitors for the
treatment of hormone-resistant breast cancer.

## 3108

## Zinc-dependant stimulation of Src, EGFR and IGFR signalling
pathways in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer and the role of zinc
transporters.

## Taylor KM, Vichova P, Hiscox S, Nicholson RI. Cardiff
University, Cardiff, UK, United Kingdom
Treatment of oestrogen receptor positive breast cancer with
antioestrogens is the therapy of choice in the clinic. However, with
time, these cancers can develop resistance to anti-hormone therapy
leading to the subsequent re-growth of the tumour. Zinc, which is
essential for normal cell growth, is present in elevated levels in
breast cancer tissue and recent evidence suggests zinc can activate
growth factor signalling pathways such as EGFR. We have shown that
intracellular zinc concentration is elevated in our ‘in house’ models
of tamoxifen resistance compared that observed in wildtype cells.
Interestingly, affymetrix array results have demonstrated elevated
levels of ZIP zinc transporter family members in these
tamoxifen-resistant cells. Of particular interest is the increased
expression of HKE4 (SLC39A7), a zinc transporter present on
intracellular membranes and capable of elevating intracellular zinc by
transporting zinc into the cytosol from intracellular stores.
We have demonstrated that short term zinc treatment of
Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells can activate various
signalling pathways that have been implicated in anti-hormone
resistant proliferation. Treatment of tamoxifen-resistant breast
cancer cells with 20uM zinc for 15minutes clearly demonstrated a
zinc-dependant activation of EGFR at tyrosine residue 845 which was
reduced by both the zinc chelator TPEN and the Src kinase inhibitor
SU6556. Importantly, this activation of EGFR by zinc is not only
observed in the absence of EGF stimulation but is also of greater
magnitude than that produced by EGF alone. Activation of EGFR was also
accompanied by a parallel zinc-dependant activation of both Src kinase
and IGFR. We also demonstrate downstream activation of Mapkinase by
the addition of zinc. We have used fluorescent microscopy to visualise
the localisation of zincactivated EGFR and Src kinase in cells,
confirming plasma membrane localisation after zinc treatment and
demonstrate the co-localisation of EGFR and vinculin in focal
adhesions.
We have also established that longer term (6 days) zinc treatment
of Tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells can increase cell growth
threefold and invasion through Matrigel twofold. These results
together suggest that increased intracellular zinc levels can help to
protect cells from the effects of anti-hormones such as tamoxifen.
Further investigation of any causal role of zinc transporters in this
pathway may provide a useful new therapeutic target for antihormone
resistant breast cancer.

## 3109

## Overexpression of c-Myc confers anti-estrogen resistance in breast
cancer cells.

## McNeil CM, Sergio CM, Butt AJ, Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL.
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, NSW,
Australia
Background: It has been hypothesized that aberrant expression of
cell cycle targets of estrogen action may contribute to the
development of anti-estrogen resistance in breast cancer cells. We
have previously demonstrated that constitutive overexpression of
cyclin D1 reduces the sensitivity of MCF-7 cells to anti-estrogen
treatment. Since the transcription factor c-Myc is also a central
mediator of estrogen-stimulated cell cycle progression we assessed the
consequences of c-Myc overexpression in MCF-7 cells on their
sensitivity to anti-estrogen mediated inhibition of
proliferation.
Methods: Clonal MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines were constructed
with constitutive or zinc-inducible overexpression of c-Myc.
Proliferation rates and cell cycle phase distribution were measured
over a 48 hour time course following treatment with 0–100nM of the
pure steroidal anti-estrogen ICI 182,780 (ICI). Protein lysates were
collected for Western blotting of cell cycle regulatory
proteins.
Results: Two-fold elevation of c-Myc expression resulted in
significantly reduced sensitivity to ICI. After 48 hours of treatment
with 10 nM ICI, the percentage of cells in S phase was 3–5 times
higher in the overexpressing cells, as compared with empty vector
control cells. A reduction in cyclin D1 expression was observed even
in the presence of c-Myc overexpression, and despite persistent Rb
phosphorylation.
Conclusion: These data confirm that c-Myc overexpression induces
resistance to anti-estrogens. However, the anti-estrogenic response
was only partially attenuated by increased c-Myc expression. Cyclin D1
was downregulated, suggesting that cyclin D1 was regulated
independently of c-Myc and that cyclin D1 downregulation might be
responsible for the residual sensitivity to anti-estrogen.

## 3110

## Expression patterns of 5-fluorouracil metabolism-related genes in
breast cancer using focused DNA array.

## Shimada K, Kuroki S, Ohshima A, Takeda T, Shirahane K, Koga K,
Tanaka M. National Hospital Organization, Kokura Hospital, Kitakyushu,
Fukuoka, Japan; Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan

Backgrounds: 5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
and its prodrugs are widely used for a number of breast cancer
patients. However, unlike colorectal cancer, little is known about the
expression of metabolic enzymes of 5-FU in breast cancer. We examined
the transcriptional expression of these enzymes using newly developed
DNA array.

Material and Methods: Samples of
breast cancer and normal Abstracts . Poster Session III S163 breast
tissue were obtained from 21 patients with a median age of 52 years
undergoing surgery. After extraction and DNace treatment, total RNA
was reverse-transcribed and applied to focused DNA array (FDA, Taiho
Pharmaceutical Co., Japan). This array consisting of 52 genes (25
genes related to 5-FU metabolism, 9 genes to DNA repair, 8 genes to
drug resistance and others) was designed for minimizing background
noise and cross-hybridization with other genes resulting in
semiquantification with better sensitivity and specificity in a single
assay.

Results: In all patients, expression
of dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD), the rate-limiting enzyme for
5-FU catabolism, was decreased in cancer tissue comparing with matched
normal breast tissue (P<0.001). However, there was no significant
difference in the expression of key enzymes in the 5-FU activation
pathways such as thymidine phosphorylase (TP), uridine phosphorylase
(UP) and orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (OPRT) between cancer and
normal tissues. Expression ratio of each of these enzymes to DPD was
significantly increased in cancer tissue (P<0.01). In normal
tissue, expression of thymidylate synthase (TS) had positive
correlations with OPRT and other enzymes which were located downstream
of OPRT, whereas it had a negative correlation with TP. In cancer
tissue, however, correlations between expression of TS and other
anabolic enzymes were almost lost.

Conclusions: 5-FU is mainly
catabolized by DPD in normal breast tissue, however, the degradation
of 5-FU is decreased in cancer tissue leading to produce active forms
mainly via the OPRT pathway. Because breast cancer tissue has been
reported to possess higher expression of DPD protein and enzyme
activity compared with normal tissue, there might be a
posttranscriptional regulation in DPD expression. Correlations between
expression of each anabolic enzyme were decreased in cancer tissue,
therefore, comprehensive analysis of the enzymes related to 5-FU
metabolism is important for an effective use of this agent for breast
cancer patients.

## 3111

## Tamoxifen failure in breast cancer: use of gene expression array
and immunohistochemistry tissue micro arrays to define a molecular
signature of tamoxifen resistance.

## Bray SE, Robertson K, Vendrell J, Nguyen C, Purdie CA, Thomson
G, Thompson AM, Cohen P. University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom;
University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France; University of
Aix-Marseille II, Marseille, France

Background: Despite the increasing
use of aromatase inhibitors, tamoxifen will remain a therapy for
recurrent or advanced disease. However, the mechanisms of tamoxifen
resistance remain uncertain. The aim of this study was to identify a
gene signature for tamoxifen resistance and based on this signature
develop an immunohistochemical approach for future clinical
application.

Materials and Methods: 21 patients
who had initially responded to tamoxifen then progressed requiring
surgery, were divided into a training set and test set and compared
with a control group of age matched female patients. cDNA mini-array
gene expression was conducted on a 1034 nylon membrane human gene
array. Cross analysis using several statistical methods and
hierarchical cluster analysis using the
ClusterTM and
TreeviewTM software yielded a group of
genes with significantly different expression in the tamoxifen
resistant cancers. Real Time Quantitative (RTQ)- PCR was performed to
confirm gene expression. Tissue microarrays were constructed using 6
cancer cores of each of the tamoxifen resistant or control tumours and
stained with commercially available antibodies for the genes
highlighted by the gene expression array and quantitative
RT-PCR.

Results: 61 genes (encoding proteins
of the immune system, the regulation of proliferation, apoptosis,
invasion, or adhesion) discriminated the resistant cancers by
hierarchical cluster analysis. Micro-array expression correlated by
Spearman rank testing with RTQ-PCR for 9 key genes (and was
statistically significant for 8 genes) demonstrating close correlation
between the two techniques. The key genes included ERalpha, TGFBR2,
IGFBP4 and STAT1.Excellent quality morphology and staining definition
was achieved with antibodies for 8 of these genes and showed
concordance with the RNA based techniques.

Discussion: This study has identified
a gene signature set for tamoxifen resistance and suggests that
immunohistochemistry could be employed on tumour cores taken from
cancers undergoing endocrine therapy to identify emerging resistance
and guide therapeutic decision making.

## 3112

## Therapeutic modulation of anti-estrogen resistance through histone
deacetylase inhibition.

## Beeram M, Russell DH, Friedrichs WE, Silva JM, deGraffenried LA.
UT Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
Tamoxifen (TAM) is one of the most effective current therapies for
breast cancer. However, only 60% of estrogen receptor expressing (ER+)
breast cancers respond to TAM (40% de-novo
resistance). Continuous treatment
with TAM beyond 5-years leads to emergence of acquired resistance in
these initially-responsive cancers. A fundamental problem is the lack
of understanding of events underlying the loss of responsiveness to
antiestrogenic therapies. Compelling in
vitro and clinical evidence suggests that one potential
mechanism of resistance is through transcriptional upregulation of the
Her2/neu promoter which is transactivated by ER. One-fourth of
patients with ER+ breast cancers treated with TAM convert from
HER-2/neu negative to positive phenotype upon disease progression.
Another significant mechanism for resistance appears to be loss of ER
expression. In this current study, we developed an in vitro model of tamoxifen resistance to
test whether acquired HER-2/neu expression and/or loss of ER
expression is a significant mechanism for mediating TAM-resistance in
breast cancer cells exposed to TAM. Forty-eight (48) MCF-7 breast
cancer single-cell colonies were isolated, and then each of the
forty-eight were separated into four (4) treatment groups exposed for
four months to the following: media containing complete 10% FBS, media
containing complete 10% FBS and 10−7 M
tamoxifen, media containing 10% charcoal-stripped media (which removes
steroids, including estrogen), and media containing 10%
charcoal-stripped media with 10−7 M
tamoxifen. 30 of 40 (75%) clones grown in the charcoal-stripped media
survived the four months, but only 21 of 48 (44%) grown in complete
media with tamoxifen and only 16 of 48 (33%) grown in
charcoal-stripped media with tamoxifen survived. Intriguingly, by
Western blot analysis, we observed that of the 16 clones that
developed tamoxifen resistance under conditions of estrogen
deprivation, 6 (38%) demonstrated strong
expression of phosphorylated (active) Her-2. All 16
clones were Her-2 negative at the start of the study. Her-2 expression
strongly correlated with estrogen receptor expression. ER expression
was lost in 9 of the 16 (56%) resistant clones with a concomittent
increase in phosphorylated Rb levels. Studies elucidating the
trascriptional mechanisms of resistance, by co-treating the resistant
clones with the HDAC inhibitor TSA, are on-going, and will be
presented at this meeting. These preliminary results indicate that
in vitro modeling systems can be
developed to investigate the molecular changes associated with
clinical outcome and serve as the platform for clinical evaluations
which result in pharmacological interventions that abrogate and/or
reverse the emergence of TAM- resistance.

## 3113

## SERM-resistant breast cancer is cross-resistant to
tibolone.

## Osipo C, Meeke K, Cheng D, Betrucci A, Weichel A, Kloosterboer
HJ, Jordan VC. Feinberg School of Medicine Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL; Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA; Organon,
Netherlands

Background: Tibolone is a selective
estrogen activity regulator that prevents bone loss without
stimulating the endometrium. The current study investigates the growth
properties of tibolone in four in
vivo breast cancer models: selective estrogen receptor
modulator (SERM)-naïve MCF-7 and T47D; and SERM-resistant, raloxifene
(MCF-7RAL) and tamoxifen (MCF-7TAMLT) MCF-7 xenograft models.
Methods: T47D, MCF-7, MCF-7RAL,
and MCF-TAMLT xenografts were implanted into either 50 or 60
ovariectomized athymic mice. Mice-bearing T47D or MCF-7 tumors were
treated as follows: vehicle control, 0.30 cm 17b-estradiol silastic
capsules (implanted intrascapularly) releasing circulating blood
levels of 83–96 pg/ml, estradiol plus 1.5 mg tamoxifen (fed orally by
gavage 5 days/week), 20 mg/Kg tibolone (fed orally by gavage
5 days/week), estradiol plus tibolone, or estradiol plus tamoxifen
plus tibolone. Mice-bearing MCF-7TAMLT or MCF-7RAL tumors were treated
with vehicle control, 1.5 mg tamoxifen, 1.5 mg raloxifene (fed orally
by gavage 5 days/week) 0.30 cm estradiol capsules, or 20 mg/Kg
tibolone. Tumor area was measured weekly with the use of vernier
calipers and tumor cross sectional area was calculated using the
following formula: [(length × width) × p] / 4. Results: Tibolone inhibited growth of
estradiol-stimulated T47D tumors while having little effect on the
combination of estradiol plus tamoxifen. Tibolone modestly, but
significantly increased estradiol-stimulated growth or
tamoxifen-inhibited growth of MCF-7 tumors. In addition, treatment
with tibolone alone of both T47D and MCF-7 tumors did have a slight
but significant growth-stimulatory effect compared to controls.
However, growth of both SERM-naïve tumors with estradiol plus
tamoxifen, estradiol plus tamoxifen plus tibolone, or tibolone alone
was significantly decreased versus treatment with estradiol alone. In
contrast, tibolone stimulated growth of both tamoxifen- and
raloxifene-resistant MCF-7 tumors. Discussion: The data demonstrate that tibolone has a
minor agonist effect but little effect on tamoxifen-inhibited growth
of SERM-naïve breast tumors, T47D and MCF-7. Furthermore, breast
tumors that are resistant to raloxifene or tamoxifen are
crossresistant to tibolone.

## 4001

## Genetic counseling and testing for hereditary breast cancer in
underserved women.

## Beattie MS, Lee RF, Crawford B, Komaromy M, McLennan J, Luce J,
Ziegler J. University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA
Genetic counseling and testing for heritable susceptibility to
breast cancer due to mutations in BRCA genes is largely unavailable to underserved women
in the USA. In 2002, the UCSF Cancer Risk Outreach Program (CROP)
began at San Francisco General Hospital (SFGH). Genetic counseling and
testing as well as follow up procedures and surveillance are available
to high risk individuals at SFGH free of charge. This report analyzes
the first 3 years of experience of genetic counselling and testing at
a public hospital.

Methods: Patients were recruited
through clinical inservices, oncology and breast clinic consultations,
community outreach and mammography screening questionnaire. Patients
identified as high risk for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer were
offered genetic counseling, cancer risk assessment, genetic testing
(if appropriate) and follow-up care.

Results: 350 individuals have been
seen for a total of 580 genetic counselling visits. Approximately half
of the patients were Caucasian, 26% Latina, 13% Asian and 12% African
American. 72 patients were offered genetic testing, based on a prior
probability of testing positive of over 10%, and 2 declined. Of the 70
who tested: 48 (67%) tested negative, 5 were BRCA1 positive and 12 were BRCA2 positive (table 1). This 2:1 ratio of BRCA2 to BRCA1 mutation carriers is the opposite of most genetic
testing programs across the US, including the Cancer Risk Program at
the UCSF Mt. Zion Comprehensive Cancer Center (CCC). 5 patients at
SFGH carry a total of 14 Variants of Undetermined Significance, a
slightly higher rate than most programs nationwide. Of the 17 women
who tested positive, 13 have elected increased surveillance and 4 have
opted for prophylactic surgery according to recommended guidelines.
Although these numbers are small, this profile of risk reduction
compares with the CCC experience. 

Discussion: The CROP at SFGH has been
well received by staff and patients. Uptake of genetic testing was
high, and the percentage of patients testing positive is similar to
the positive rate of the CRP in the CCC. The majority of positive
results, however, had mutations in BRCA2, a surprising difference from the CRP in the CCC.
It is possible that BRCA2 mutations are more common diverse
populations. Future studies will examine the role of ethnic diversity
and VUS as well as follow up on risk reduction strategies.

## 4002

## German populations with infrequent CHEK2*1100delC and minor associations with early-onset and
familial breast cancer.

## Hamann U, Rashid MU, Jakubowska A, Justenhoven C, Harth V, Pesch
B, Baisch C, Pierl CB, Bruening T, Ko Y, Benner A, Wichmann HE, Brauch
H, the GENICA Network. German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany; Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland; Dr.
Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany; Berufsgenossenschaftliches Forschungsinstitut für
Arbeitsmedizin, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany; Johanniter
Krankenhaus, Bonn, Germany; GSF-National Research Centre for
Environment and Health, Institute of Epidemiology, Neuherberg,
Germany

Introduction:
CHEK2*1100delC is associated with a
2-fold increased breast cancer risk. This was shown in a collaborative
analysis of European populations, but not in other populations from
Europe and the US. Accordingly, there is a need to clarify the role of
CHEK2*1100delC in breast
cancer.

Materials and Methods: We established
the prevalence of CHEK2*1100delC in
two German populations GENICA (Northrhine-Westphalia, n=724) and KORA
(Bavaria, n=600) and in women with breast cancer. The latter included
cases (n=688) from the GENICA breast cancer case-control study,
patients with early-onset breast cancer (n=86) and patients with
familial breast cancer (n=71). The latter patient groups were
previously investigated for BRCA1/2-mutations and tested negative. Mutation analysis
was performed by combined PCR/DHPLC methodology.

Results:
CHEK2*1100delC was found in 0.9% of
GENICA controls and was absent in the KORA controls indicating a
significant difference between the two populations (P=0.03). The
frequency of CHEK2*1100delC in
age-matched cases of the GENICA collection was 0.8% and thus not
different from controls (OR 0.88, 95% CI 0.21-3.50). In patients with
early-onset disease CHEK2*1100delC
was found at a frequency of 2.3% referring to an increased breast
cancer risk of 2.56 (95% CI 0.25–14.58). In patients with familial
disease the frequency was 1.4% referring to an increased risk of 1.53
(95% CI 0.03-12.93).

Conclusion: Our data showed
variations in CHEK2*1100delC
prevalence within German populations suggesting possible inaccuracies
in breast cancer risk assessments from non populationbased studies. In
patients with a high-risk profile however, CHEK2*1100delC was indicative for this risk and highest
for early-onset breast cancer.

## 4003

## Actively approaching breast cancer patients for genetic counseling
during adjuvant radiotherapy: does it harm?

## Warlam-Rodenhuis CC, Schlich-Bakker KJ, van Echtelt J, Ausems
MG, ten Kroode HF. University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
Netherlands

## Background
In a previous study we searched for factors predictive for the
presence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in recently diagnosed breast
cancer patients (Eur J Cancer, in press). As many as 60% of
patients at risk rejected genetic counseling. Genetic counseling is
increasingly offered to breast cancer patients shortly after
diagnosis although little is known about its psychological impact.
This was the subject of a new study.

## Patients and methods
Patients referred for adjuvant radiotherapy with a first
diagnosis of breast cancer and < 75 years of age were eligible
for the trial. Medical history and sociodemographic aspects were
registered. Patients filled out a baseline questionnaire (‘T0’)
before the first vist to the Department of Radiotherapy, followed
by a next (‘T1’) 5 weeks later. By then patients had been informed
on the presence or abcense of predictive factors for hereditary
breast cancer, and had started radiotherapy. If predictive factors
were present, compilation of a family pedigree and the option of
referral to a clinical geneticist had been offered. Both at T0 and
T1 general anxiety and depression were measured using the ‘Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Scale’ and breast cancer specific distress
was measured by use of the ‘Impact of Event Scale’. Quality of
life, coping strategy and optimism were determined as well.

## Results
684 patients were invited to participate. The first
questionnaire was filled out by 482 patients (70%), and both were
returned by 410 patients (60%). 225 patients had at least one
predictive factor for hereditary breast cancer and were offered
initial counseling.
High scores of general anxiety, depression and breast cancer
specific distress were noted in the group as a whole: 49% of
patients showed values above the clinically important cut-off
scores, at T1. Medical history (time elapsed from surgery,
mastectomy versus lumpectomy, adjuvant chemotherapy before
radiation, lymphe node status) was not of influence. Scores were
influenced however by psychological resources: high distress was
more often seen in patients with lower experienced quality of life,
a lower level of optimism and showing an avoiding coping system.
Slightly more distress was present in patients with a low level of
education and in singles.
No differences of general anxiety and depression and breast
cancer specific distress were found between the patients approached
for initial genetic counseling and controls. In both groups of
patients comparable significant decreases in anxiety and breast
cancer specific distress were seen after the start of
radiotherapy.

## Conclusion
Breast cancer patients can be actively approached for genetic
counseling several weeks after diagnosis and surgery, without
causing short term additional psycholgical burden.

## 4004

## Genetic testing for BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutations in the Hispanic
population.

## Erlichman J, Valero V, Lu K, Rivera E, Strong L, Arun B. UT MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Background: Approximately 5–10% of
all breast cancer is inherited. Molecular genetic testing of the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes is now available, making it
possible to identify individuals with a genetic susceptibility to
breast cancer. Studies have shown that individuals from certain ethnic
groups are more likely to carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation based on the presence of founder mutations. To date, there is
no data regarding the incidence of inherited breast cancer in persons
of Hispanic ancestry. This information is needed so that clinicians
can provide Hispanic individuals with accurate risk estimates when
evaluating their families for the likelihood of carrying a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Our aim in this study is to describe
the prevalence of BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutations in a cohort of
Hispanic women who underwent genetic counseling at a single
Institution.

Materials and Methods: Under an IRB
approved protocol, the M.D. Anderson Clinical Cancer Genetics database
was queried for Hispanic individuals who underwent genetic counseling
at M.D. Anderson from 2001-present. Information regarding the number
of patients who went on to have genetic testing and the genetic
testing results were collected.

Results: From 2001 to present, 1055
individuals have undergone genetic counseling for inherited breast
cancer at U.T. M.D. Anderson Cancer Center (UTMDACC). Of those
individuals, 98 (9%) were of Hispanic origin. After receiving genetic
counseling, 47 (48%) Hispanic individuals went on to have genetic
testing of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. 8 (17%) were found to have a
deleterious BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation, 22 (47%) had uninformative
negative results, 10 (21%) were found to be negative for a known
mutation in the family, 3 (6%) were found to have a variant of
uncertain significance in BRCA1 or
BRCA2, 2 were found to have a
deleterious mutation and a variant of uncertain significance, and 1
was found to have two deleterious mutations (one in BRCA1 and one in
BRCA2) as well as a variant of uncertain significance in BRCA2. The remaining individual’s test
results are still pending. Overall, 8/98 (8%) of all Hispanic
individuals who underwent genetic counseling at UTMDACC were found to
carry a deleterious BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutation. Interestingly, 2
of these patients, with no reported Jewish ancestry, were found to
carry the BRCA1 Ashkenazi Jewish
185delAG mutation.

Discussion: This is the first
reported single Institution study of Hispanic individuals undergoing
genetic counseling for inherited breast cancer risk. About 9% of all
individuals who underwent genetic counseling at UTMDACC were
individuals of Hispanic origin. After having identified these
individuals through this study, next we will prospectively analyze
patterns of risk perception and decision making process among Hispanic
individuals who undergo genetic counseling and testing at UT
MDACC.

## 4005

## Determinants in the uptake of genetic testing for BRCA1/2
mutations.

## Fowler ES, Neese ER, Schwartzberg LS.
Baptist Centers for Cancer Care, Memphis, TN; The West Clinic,
Memphis, TN

Background: Disparities exist in the
utilization of and access to genetics services among various groups.
This study examined variations in the uptake of genetic testing for
hereditary breast/ovarian cancer among patients according to
ethnicity, age, and a priori risk of a positive test result. We
evaluated the uptake of genetic testing for hereditary breast/ovarian
cancer in patients with breast cancer or DCIS that received
comprehensive genetic counseling in a community-based setting.

Materials and Methods: Data from 307
patients with breast cancer or DCIS who had genetic counseling between
January 1999-March 2005 were abstracted. Data was analyzed according
to the uptake of BRCA1/2 testing and was stratified by patient
ethnicity, age at breast cancer diagnosis, and a priori risk of a
BRCA1/2 mutation. Patients with personal and family histories
suggestive of mutations in other genes were excluded from the data
set.

Results: 49.2% (151/307) of patients
pursued BRCA1/2 testing. Differences in the uptake of genetic testing
following genetic counseling were identified. 78.6% (22/28) of
Ashkenazi Jews, 49.4% (115/233) of Caucasians, 26.8% (11/41) of
African Americans, and 60% (3/5) of patients who were other
ethnicities (Hispanic, Pacific Islander, Native American) elected to
have BRCA1/2 testing. 59.3% (32/54) of patients diagnosed with breast
cancer before age 40 pursued genetic testing, as compared to 47.0%
(119/253) of patients diagnosed with breast cancer after age 40 (p =
.103). As the a priori risks of identifying mutations increased, so
did the uptake of genetic testing and the proportion of positive test
results: <10% a priori risk of mutation - 21% (13/62) proceeded to
genetic testing, no deleterious mutations detected; 10–24% a priori
risk of mutation - 53.6% (60/112) proceeded to genetic testing, 3.3%
(2/60) had deleterious mutations; 25–49% a priori risk - 53.6% (44/74)
proceeded to genetic testing, 15.9% (7/44) had deleterious mutations;
50–74% a priori risk - 38.6% (17/44) proceeded to genetic testing,
35.3% (6/17) had deleterious mutations; 75-100% a priori risk - 71.9%
(23/32) proceeded to genetic testing, 47.8% (11/23) had deleterious
mutations. Associations between a priori risks of a mutation, uptake
of genetic testing (p = <0.001), and the discovery of deleterious
mutations (p = <0.001) were statistically significant.

Discussion/Conclusions: Our findings
demonstrate a higher uptake of genetic testing in the Ashkenazi Jewish
population and a lower rate of uptake in the African American
population. A priori risks of identifying a BRCA1/2 mutation correlate
not only with a higher rate of genetic testing uptake regardless of
ethnicity, but also with a higher percentage of positive test results.
Ethnicity and a priori risks of BRCA1/2 mutations influence the uptake
of genetic testing in patients with breast cancer.

## 4006

## Breast cancer risk management choices by women with inherited
breast cancer predisposition: a preliminary analysis.

## Kurian AW, Hartman AR, Mills MA, Jaffee M, Chun NM, Garber JE,
Ford JM, Plevritis SK. Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA; Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA

Background: More than 250,000 women
in the United States are estimated to have a high inherited risk of
breast cancer. Genetic counseling and testing permits identification
of such women; options for management of their breast cancer risk
include prophylactic mastectomy (PM) or intensive screening,
incorporating mammography and breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Factors predicting women’s choices for breast cancer risk management
have not been fully characterized.

Methods: Women at high breast cancer
risk, either because of a mutation in BRCA1/2 or another cancer
susceptibility gene, or because of a greater than 10% predicted chance
of BRCA mutation carriage due to family history, were evaluated in
cancer genetics clinics and educated about options for breast cancer
risk management, including PM or screening with annual mammography
plus breast MRI. After genetic counseling and testing, they were
mailed an 11-item questionnaire about their intended management of
their breast cancer risk, and the Revised Impact of Event Scale
(RIES), a validated measure of breastcancer related anxiety.
Statistical analysis used Fisher’s exact test, 2-sided for categorical
variables and t-test or Wilcoxon Rank Sum test for continuous
variables.

Results: 55 women were sent a
questionnaire, and 36 have responded to date, yielding a response rate
of 65.5%. The median age of responders was 40.5 years; 50% were
mutation carriers and 50% at high risk due to family history. Thirteen
(36.1% [22.5– 52.6%]) women declared a low, 16 (44.4% [29.6–60.5%]) a
moderate, and 7 (19.4% [9.5–35.5%]) a high likelihood of choosing PM.
There was a non-significant trend toward increase in median RIES score
from low (score=18) to moderate (score=21) to high (score=25) PM
likelihood groups (p=0.56); this range of scores was similar to scores
previously reported in women with high breast cancer risk. Compared to
moderate and low PM likelihood groups combined, the high likelihood
group had a greater proportion of patients with personal cancer
history (100% vs. 44.8%, p=0.01). Low PM likelihood patients had a
significantly lower proportion of mutation carriers (23.1% vs. 65.2%,
p=0.04) and a non-significantly higher median age (46 vs. 38 years,
p=0.17) than high and moderate likelihood groups combined.

Discussion: In a clinic-based sample
of women at high inherited breast cancer risk, personal cancer
history, BRCA or other high-risk mutation carriage, and higher breast
cancer-related anxiety as measured by RIES, were more frequent among
women likely to choose PM over intensive breast screening. Evaluation
of a larger number of high-risk women is ongoing, and updated data
will be presented. Follow-up questionnaire administration is planned
for women who have chosen intensive breast screening, permitting
identification of experiences and characteristics which predict choice
of continued screening versus PM.

## 4007

## Characteristics of pre-menopausal invasive breast cancer and
age-associated risk of breast cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers
compared with non-carriers (BRCA0).

## McLennan JL, Crawford BC, Stewart N, Mak J, Lee R, Braithwaite
D, Esserman L, Ziegler J. UCSF Comprehensive Cancer Center, San
Francisco, CA

Background: Published data indicate
that the historical cohort of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers have a
lifetime risk of developing invasive breast cancer (IBC) by age 80y of
up to 82%. BRCA associated IBC is marked by an earlier age of onset
and a characteristic pattern of histo-pathological features. It has
been observed that in the general population the incidence of IBC is
increasing and the age of diagnosis of breast cancer
decreasing.

Methods: From 1998–2005 we collected
data on a cohort of more than 900 high-risk individuals and their
families who had BRCA testing and enrolled in 20-year IRB-approved
follow up study at UCSF Cancer Risk Program. To date we have
identified more than 250 BRCA mutation carriers (140:110 BRCA1:BRCA2)
and also collected data on an additional 460 of their family members
who have also been identified as having a BRCA mutation. 359 UCSF BRCA
tested women had IBC for whom histopathology and tumor markers were
available (75 BRCA1, 54 BRCA2, 230 BRCA0). We also compared BRCA1
probands and BRCA1 positive family members (n=533), BRCA2 probands and
BRCA2 positive family members (n=180) and BRCA0 probands (n=727) for
age of diagnosis of IBC.

Results: High grade ER/PR/HER2
negative IBC in pre-menopausal women (age 50 or younger) is
significantly associated with finding a BRCA1 mutation (p>0.001).
HER2 negative IBC is significantly associated with pre-menopausal
BRCA2 related IBC (p>0.001) but BRCA2 IBC cannot be separated from
BRCA0 IBC by other distinct histo-pathological patterns. BRCA1
mutations were found exclusively in IBC cases diagnosed at 55y or
younger. 86% of BRCA1 associated IBC is diagnosed at or before age 50y
compared with 82% of BRCA2 associated IBC. In a time-to-failure
logrank analysis, BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers did not differ from one
another and had a significantly earlier age of diagnosis of IBC
compared to BRCA0 women (p<0.001). Adjustment for birth cohort, age
at menarche, age of first birth, parity and Ashkenazi Jewish descent
did not alter this finding.

Conclusion: Over 80% of IBC in BRCA
carriers occurs in the pre-menopausal years, has an accelerated onset,
and typically shows adverse characteristics. Thus, genetic counseling
and BRCA testing is particularly urgent in young women at hereditary
risk of IBC in order to achieve the greatest risk reduction
benefit.

## 4008

## Patients’ perceived breast cancer risk and psychological distress:
can oncologist-based counseling achieve durable improvements?

## Mertens WC, Katz D, Quinlan M, Barham R, Carr C, Makari- Judson
G. Baystate Regional Cancer Program, Springfield, MA

Background: Women tend to
overestimate their risk of breast cancer development. While studies
have evaluated formal genetic/ nurse educator-based counseling, little
work has been reported on short- and long-term effects of risk
counseling by oncologists.

Methods: High-risk clinic patients
consented prior to the physician visit and completed the Brief Symptom
Inventory-18 (BSI) and their estimates of 5-year and lifetime risk of
breast cancer and BRCA mutation probability before (PRE), immediately
(POST) and 2 months (2 MO) after counseling. Gail model (or, for
lobular carcinoma in situ [LCIS], accepted literature data) and BRCA
mutation estimates were shared during physician counseling.

Results: 81 patients were enrolled.
PRE risk perceptions were much greater than calculated estimates (mean
5-year: 33.1 v. 2.7%; lifetime 48.0 v. 23.4%; BRCA 41 v. 9%, all
p<0.0001). POST perceptions decreased significantly (p<0.0001)
but continued to exceed shared calculated estimates (5-year mean
difference 18.4%, p<0.0001; lifetime 11.1%, p=0.0003; BRCA 14.7%, p<0.0001). POST perceptions
correlated with PRE perceptions (P<0.0001) but not with estimates.
Patient 2 MO risk perceptions tended to be greater than POST
perceptions. PRE BSI T-scores were greater for anxiety (ANX; p=0.0001)
but other indices were similar to standardized community norms; all
POST indices demonstrated declines (p<0.0001). POST and 2 MO ANX
scores were similar and both were correlated strongly with PRE ANX.
Younger patients and those with LCIS demonstrated greater PRE and POST
ANX scores. ANX scores correlated with PRE, POST and 2 MO risk
perceptions. While changes in patient risk perceptions (5-year:
p=0.005; lifetime: p=0.032) differed between physicians, similar
results were not found for ANX. In multivariate analysis PRE 5-year
risk perception was positively associated with PRE ANX (p=0.0004),
number of breast cancer-affected relatives (p=0.018) and body-mass
index (BMI; p=0.012). Excess POST 5-year risk perception was
associated with PRE perception (p<0.0001) and counseling physician
(p=0.003). Lifetime perceptions yielded similar results. Increased PRE
ANX was associated with younger age (p=0.006), LCIS (p=0.010), past
psychiatric diagnosis (p=0.045) and increased PRE 5-year risk
perception (p=0.06). POST ANX was associated with PRE ANX
(p<0.0001), and recommendation for genetic counseling
(p=0.073).

Conclusions: 1) PRE risk perceptions
predict those at POST/2 MO which remain several-fold greater than
actual estimates; 2) increased PRE ANX is associated with younger age,
LCIS, past psychiatric diagnosis and increased PRE risk perception; 3)
POST ANX remained strongly correlated with PRE ANX, despite
improvements in scores; 4) modification of risk perception, but not
ANX, differed between physicians. Counseling is effective in reducing
ANX despite persistent risk perception overestimation.

## 4009

## Risk-reducing strategies in breast cancer: a decision
analysis.

## Chagpar AB, Studts JL, Abell T, Ruberg J, Fleming M, McMasters
KM. University of Louisville, Louisville, KY; Ouray Research
Consulting, Ouray, CO

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study
was to examine the impact of ductal lavage (DL) and genetic testing
(GT) on decisions regarding risk-reducing strategies (RRS) in women at
high risk of developing breast cancer (BC).

METHODS: Medical students (N=155)
were given a hypothetical scenario of a 35 year old woman at high risk
for developing BC, and asked what they felt her risk would be. They
were then given 3 situations, each with additional data. In part 1,
they were given the calculated Gail 5-year risk of 1.8% (lifetime risk
of 40%). In part 2, they were given the finding of atypical cells on
DL and told that this may increase
their risk to an uncertain degree. In part 3, they were given the
finding of a BRCA1 mutation, increasing their lifetime risk of
developing BC to 85%. For each of these parts, they were asked to
choose a RRS: (a) frequent surveillance (FS), (b) chemoprevention (CP)
which would decrease risk by 50%, © bilateral prophylactic mastectomy
(BPM) which would decrease risk by 95%, or (d) bilateral prophylactic
oopherectomy (BPO) which would decrease risk by 50% and would also
reduce the risk of ovarian cancer. Statistical analyses were performed
using SPSS 11.0.

RESULTS: Students overestimated the
risk of developing BC (median 5-year and lifetime perceived risk 50%
and 75% respectively, p<0.001 by one-sample t-test). Although 60%
of students opted to undergo DL for risk assessment, only 42% of
students changed their RRS based on the findings of the DL. Over 95%
of students opted to pursue GT. When given a positive test for a
mutation, 72% of students changed their original RRS based on the
findings of GT. Significantly more students changed their RRS based on
GT than on DL findings, p<0.001 (likelihood ratio test).

CONCLUSIONS: Most people are likely
to overestimate their actual risk of BC. While many may opt for
risk-stratification procedures, such as DL, such techniques do not
significantly alter decision-making in the absence of quantitative
data regarding the level of risk. Techniques such as GT, for which
quantitative information exists, have a significant impact in altering
decisions regarding RRS. 

## 4010

## BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a South American population.

## Reyes JM, Jara L, Bustamante E, Seccia L, Rodriguez J,
Bustamante M, Martinez V, Catenaccio A, Lay-Son G, Blanco R,
Gonzalez-Hormazabal P. Instituto Oncologico, Clinica Las Condes, Las
Condes, Santiago, Chile; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, School of
Medicine, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile; Corporracion Nacional
del Cancer, Santiago, Chile
A sample of sixty four high-risk breast and/or ovarian cancer
families from Chile, South American were screened for germline
mutations in BRCA1 (MIN # 113705)
and BRCA2 (MIN # 600185), using
conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) and direct
sequencing. Seven families (10.9 %) were found to carry BRCA1 mutations and three families (4.7 %)
BRCA2 mutations. Six different
pathogenic mutations were detected in BRCA1, from which four had been previously reported
(c.187_188delAG; c.300T>G, c.3450_3453delCAAG and IVS17-1G>A)
and 2 were novel mutations (c.2605_2606delTT and c.4185_4188delCAAG).
In BRCA2, we found three different
pathogenic mutations, two previously described (c.6174delT and
c.6503_6504delTT) and one novel mutation (c.5667delT). Also, we
identified 9 variants of unknown significance (5 in BRCA1 and 4 in BRCA2). These findings indicate that the Chilean
population has an heterogeneous spectrum of prevalent BRCA mutations.
Given the results obtained in our study the screening of the whole
coding region of BRCA1 and
BRCA2 is necessary for the
molecular genetic testing of the Chilean high-risk breast/ovarian
cancer patients. This is the first genetic study carried out in Chile
in relation to mutations in the BRCA genes. The Chilean population has
a well known admixture Amerindian-Caucasian ratio and therefore our
findings have not only importance per
se but they constitute the basis that will allow to give
a much better and specific genetic counselling and will also be useful
to support the preventive campaigns carried out in the Chilean
population.

## 4011

## A strong family history of breast cancer increases the use of
systemic treatment among patients with early-onset breast cancer: results
from a population-based study.

## Verkooijen HM, Chappuis PO, Rapiti E, Vlastos G, Fioretta G,
Sarp S, Sappino AP, Schubert H, Bouchardy C. Institute for Social and
Preventive Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland; Geneva University Hospital,
Geneva, Switzerland
Background: Breast or ovarian cancer among family members increases
the individuals risk to develop breast cancer. In this
population-based study we evaluate the impact of a strong family
history on the diagnostic and therapeutic management of women with
early onset breast cancer.
Methods: With information of the Geneva cancer registry we
identified all women diagnosed with breast cancer at 50 years of
younger between 1990–2001. We compared patients with a highly
increased familial risk to those with no affected relatives. With
multivariate logistic regression analysis, we compared both groups in
terms of tumour characteristics, method of detection and
treatment.
Results. This study includes 58 patients with a highly increased
familial risk and 575 without affected relatives. Tumours of high
familial risk patients were equally often screen-detected as those of
low familial risk patients. Women with a highly increased familial
risk received significantly more often hormonotherapy. For lymph node
negative disease, high familial risk patients were significantly more
often treated with chemotherapy, hormonotherapy or both.
Conclusions: This population based study shows that a strong family
history of breast cancer influences the use of systemic therapy among
patients with early-onset breast cancer.

## 4012

## Preliminary results of a randomized phase IIb doubleblind 2×2 trial
of low-dose tamoxifen and fenretinide for breast cancer
prevention.

## Bonanni B, Guerrieri-Gonzaga A, Robertson C, Serrano D,
Cazzaniga M, Mora S, Gulisano M, Johansson H, Galimberti V, Intra M,
Latronico A, Franchi D, Pelosi G, Decensi A. European Institute of
Oncology, Milan, Italy; Strathclyde University, Glasgow, United
Kingdom; Ospedale San Bortolo, Vicenza, Italy

Background and Purpose: Low-dose
tamoxifen and fenretinide, a vitamin A derivative, have both shown to
modulate biomarkers of breast cancerogenesis in premenopausal women.
In the present study we are investigating whether the combination of
the two drugs have a synergistic effect on putative surrogate
biomarkers of breast cancerogenesis in premenopausal women at
increased risk for breast cancer. Additionally, we are interested in
studying the safety and the endometrial effects of the drug
combination.

Patients and Methods: Between October
1998 and April 2002, 235 women were randomly assigned in a
double-blind 4-arm trial to tamoxifen 5 mg/day, fenretinide
200 mg/day, both agents, or placebo for 2 years. All subjects are
being followed for three additional years. The primary endpoints were
the changes in circulating insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and
computerized mammographic percent density.

Results: Subjects were included
because of a previously excised DCIS (57%), LCIS (13%), micro-invasive
breast cancer (7%), or a 5-year Gail risk ≥1.3% (23%). There was a 15%
reduction on IGF-I levels on tamoxifen, as early as after 6 months of
treatment, while the reduction on fenretinide was about 2%.
Recruitment was stopped earlier, based on the lack of a synergistic
interaction of the two drugs on plasma IGF-I levels. After a median
follow-up of 40 months, 35 subjects dropped the study for refusal
(n=19) or adverse events (n=16). So far, 24 primary or recurrent
breast cancers have been observed, with no difference among arms. Of
the three serious adverse events, one stage-I endometrial cancer
occurred in the fenretinide arm, one optic nerve ischemia and one deep
venous thrombosis occurred in the tamoxifen arm. There was no
increased endometrial thickness and no difference in endometrial
polyps among the four arms.

Conclusions: The combination of
low-dose tamoxifen and fenretinide is safe and well tolerated, but is
not synergistic in lowering circulating IGF-I levels. Low-dose
tamoxifen does significantly reduces IGF-I levels and does not affect
endometrial proliferation. Mammographic percent density is currently
under evaluation and updated results will be presented at the
conference.

## 4013

## Celecoxib downregulats estrogen receptor expression in breast
tissue of women at increased risk for developing breast cancer.

## Arun B, Valero V, Hornbeak J, Gong Y, Broglio K, Logan C, Browne
D, Hortobagyi G, Sneige N. The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX; BMO, Houston, TX; Houston, TX; NCI, Bethesda,
MD

Background: Shortterm phase II
chemoprevention trials offer a convenient model to screen potential
chemopreventive agents and to identify surrogate endpoint biomarkers.
One of the potential agents is the selective cyclooxygenase-2
inhibitor, celecoxib, which has antiproliferative, antiangiogenesis
and apoptosis inducing properties. In this prospective study, we aimed
to evaluate changes in proliferation and apoptosis induced by
celecoxib in breast tissue of high risk women. Here, we report changes
in estrogen receptor (ER) expression and proliferation index.

Methods: 32 patients (pts) are
enrolled into the study who underwent baseline fine needle aspiration
(FNA) and started celecoxib at a dose of 400 mg BID. So far, 26 pts
underwent a repeat FNA after 6 months of therapy and data is available
on 30 paired FNA samples (including bilateral FNAs). Median age:
51 yrs (range: 39–71 yrs). Risk factors include: Gail risk > 1.67%
(n=9), lobular carcinoma insitu (LCIS) (n=6), atypical hyperplasia
(AH) (n=)8, previous history of contralateral breast cancer (n=3). For
ER and Ki-67 testing, thin preparations slides were incubated with
primary mouse monoclonal antibody 6F11 against the ER
(Novacastra/Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) at a dilution of 1:50
for 30 minutes and mouse monoclonal antibody, clone MIB-1 (Dako),
respectively. The EnVision+ method was employed on Dako Autostainer
instrument. Appropriate negative and positive controls were included.
At least 100 epithelial cells were evaluated per slide.
Immunoreactivity for each marker was scored as the percentage of
positive nuclei.
Difference in ER and Ki-67 levels before and after treatment was
assessed using a Wilcoxon signed rank test.

Results: The average pre- and
postreatment ER expression was 45% (0–100) and 27.4 (0–100),
respectively. The difference in ER levels was statistically
significant (p = 0.04). The average Ki- 67 pre-and postreatment levels
were 1.8%(range: 0–10%) and 1.2 % (range: 0–5%), respectively. The
median difference in Ki-67 levels was not statistically significant (p
= 0.63).

Conclusions: We have found a
significant downregulation of ER expression with 6 months celecoxib
treatment in breast epithelium of women who are at increased risk to
develop breast cancer. Since ER expression is a marker of
proliferation, this finding confirms celecoxibs antiproliferative
properties. Currently, we have not observed a a change in Ki-67; this
could be partly due to the small number of samples and the fact that
Ki-67 is low in normal epithelium. Further analysis and correlation
with other proliferation (COX-2, EGFR) and apoptosis markers (Bcl-2)
are currently going on.

## 4014

## Chemopreventive efficacy of new RXR specific retinoids against
mammary cancers and correlations with shortterm biomarkers.

## Christov K, Muccio D, Brouillette W, Atigadda R, Desphande A,
Bland K, Beenken S, Grubbs C, Lubet R. University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL; University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL; National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD
A series of structurally varied RXR agonists that were synthesized
based on computer fitting to the RXR receptors were evaluated for
their long term chemopreventive efficacy in the methylnitrosourea
(MNU)-induced ER+ rat mammary cancer model. To predict their efficacy
and toxicity, agents were given in the diet for 7 days and their
ability to modulate proliferation and apoptosis in small mammary
cancers and their effect on serum triglycerides levels were measured.
Synthesized rexinoids (RA-IV- 10A, AM3-2, UAB-20, RA-IV-69A, and
UAB-30) plus the rexinoid targretin and 9-cis-retinoic acid (9-cis-RA)
were administered in the diet. Targretin and RA-IV-10A decreased
cancer multiplicity by 75–85%; UAB-30 and 9-cis-RA decreased
multiplicity by 45- 60%, while a low dose of Targretin, and UAB-20 and
AMD3-2 decreased multiplicity <35%. RA-IV-69A had no effect on the
number of cancers. A correlation was observed between the longterm
chemopreventive efficacy of these agents and their ability to decrease
cell proliferation in mammary cancers after shortterm treatment.
However, only the highly effective agents (RAIV- 10A and targretin,
150 mg/kg diet) significantly increased apoptosis. Although most of
the effective rexinoid treatments increased serum triglycerides levels
2.5 – 4.0 times, one moderately effective chemopreventive agent
(UAB-30) had minimal effects on serum triglycerides levels. Thus,
these short-term in vivo methods
could predict both chemopreventive efficacy and toxicity of new
rexinoids.

## 4015

## Reproducibility of ductal lavage findings in high-risk
women.

## Bhandare DJ, Nayar R, Masood S, Bryk M, Cohn R, Hou N, Rademaker
A, Khan SA. Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL; University of Florida College of Medicine, Jacksonville,
FL

Background: Ductal lavage (DL) is a
minimally invasive technique that allows repeat sampling of ductal
epithelium. We are conducting a Phase II trial, wherein high-risk
women may opt for Tamoxifen (TAM), or decline it, following an entry
DL procedure. We present data from the non-intervention arm of our
study, to assess the reproducibility of cannulation, cell yield and
cytological diagnosis from DL of the same duct at two
time-points.

Methods: Consenting women undergo DL;
the samples are alcohol-fixed and centrifuged to separate the cells
from the supernatant. The first 1/4 sample of cells is used to prepare
a Thinprep, Papanicoloau-stained slide for cyto-morphology evaluation.
The other aliquots are assayed for biomarker studies. A repeat lavage
six months later is analyzed similarly. Cytodiagnosis on the same set
of samples is compared between two experienced cytopathologists (RN
and SM) to assess interobserver agreement.

Results: Of the 104 women (mean age
52 years, mean Gail score 2.6%) who have had a follow-up DL, 65 are
from the nonintervention (No TAM) group. Of the 179 ducts lavaged at
baseline, successful recannulation of the same duct/s could be
accomplished on 159 ducts (88%). Epithelial cells sufficient for
analysis (>100) could be obtained in 42/63 (67%) women (kappa=0.3)
and 76/159 (47%) ducts (kappa=0.2) at both time points. Overall, the
cytological diagnosis at first lavage was reproducible in 29/63 (46%)
women (kappa=0.2) and 75/159 (47%) ducts (kappa=0.14) at second
lavage. The breakdown by cytodiagnosis is shown in Table
1.Interobserver variability for cytodiagnosis between two observers
(RN and SM) showed good agreement with kappa index of 0.56 (by duct)
and 0.68 (by woman). Variability in diagnosis was seen either in the
“benign” or “mild atypia” category.

Conclusion: We were able to
successfully resample at least one duct in all but one woman.
Sufficient cells for analysis can be procured at repeat lavage in
two-thirds of women. The value of cytologic atypia as a reproducible
biomarker is limited. As more women return, we will evaluate
reproducibility of estrogen response biomarkers in this cohort of
subjects.
Supported by the Bluhm Family Program for Breast Cancer Early
Detection & Prevention and NIH/NCI P50 CA89018. 

## 4016

## Bone turnover by osteocalcin and risks of breast cancer and
fracture: a prospective study.

## Cummings SR, Blackwell T. California Pacific Medical Center
Research Institute, San Francisco, CA; University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Background: Osteocalcin is a protein
secreted by osteoblasts and is used to assess bone remodeling.
Osteoblasts are sensitive to the effects of E2. Women with little or
no estradiol (E2) tend to have high rates of bone remodeling and
increased levels of osteocalcin (OC). Women with little or no E2 also
have a substantially decreased risk of breast cancer. E2 is also
synthesized by aromatase in both osteoblasts and breast tissue. We
used the placebo group of the Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene (MORE)
trial to test the hypothesis that women with high OC levels have a
decreased risk of breast cancer. We compared this association to the
relationship of OC to risk of fracture.

Methods: OC was measured at baseline
(CIS Biointernational) in 913 postmenopausal women (mean age
67.5 years) with low BMD or osteoporosis. Serum E2 was measured by a
double-antibody method (Covance). Incident breast cancer was confirmed
by histopathology reports. Incident non-spine fractures were confirmed
by radiographs and incident vertebral fractures by semiquantitative
grading and morphometry of baseline and followup spine
radiographs.

Results: After adjustment for age, OC
level had no relationship to risk of non-spine (RH=1.10; 95%CI
0.88–1.38) or vertebral fracture (RR=1.13; 95%CI 0.86–1.47). However,
twelve incident breast cancer cases were confirmed during the 4-year
trial. And after adjustment for age, women with high OC (>28 g/L)
had a lower risk (no cases) of breast cancer than did women with lower
OC levels (P for trend =0.027; Figure). Adjustment for baseline E2 did
not attenuate this relationship. 

Conclusion: If confirmed by larger
studies, OC may be a better marker of breast cancer than fracture
risk.

## 4017

## Chemopreventive effects of the EGFr inhibitor Iressa in the
methylnitrosourea (MNU) - induced model of mammary
carcinogenesis.

## Grubbs C, Christov K, You M, Wang Y, Steele V, Juliana M, Lubet
R. University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL; University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL; Washington University, St. Louis,
MO; National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD
The efficacy of the EGFr inhibitor Iressa to prevent mammary
cancers was determined in female Sprague-Dawley rats administered MNU.
In this model, the mammary cancers are estrogen receptor positive, and
approximately 50% of the cancers have mutations in the HaRas oncogene.
The rats were given a single dose of MNU (75 mg/kg BW), IV via the
jugular vein, at 50 days of age. Beginning five days later and
continuing until the end of the study, Iressa was administered by
gavage, 6×/week. The vehicle for Iressa was ethanol: polyethylene
glycol 400 (10:90 v/v). A low dose (10 mg/ kg BW/day) of Iressa was
given until the end of the experiment, while a high dose (20 mg/kg
BW/day) was given only until 82 days after MNU (11 weeks of treatment)
due to clinical signs of toxicity. At 82 days post MNU, control rats
had 2.5 mammary tumors/rat, while rats receiving either the high or
low doses of Iressa had 0.3 mammary tumors/rat (88%↓). At the end of
the study (126 days after MNU), MNU-treated only rats had 5.5 mammary
cancers/ rat while Iressa (low dose) treated rats exhibited only 0.6
cancers/ rat (89%↓). Rats receiving the high dose for a limited time
showed only a 58% decrease in cancer multiplicity. Treatment for 11
weeks, therefore, did not stop the appearance of cancers once
treatment was discontinued. Thus, Iressa was an effective agent in
this model despite the fact that it was similarly expressed (RT-PCR)
in both normal mammary epithelium and in cancers. Additional data
examining Iressa’s therapeutic effects in this model will also be
presented.

## 4018

## Breast endoscopy in the evaluation of individuals in a highrisk
breast cancer clinic.

## Ley M, Frank D, Davis J, Degan J, Lacovara J, Waer A, Kim C.
University of Arizona, Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, AZ; ; University
of Arizona

Background: Current models of breast
cancer risk assessment are limited. Previous studies show that
cytologic and karyometric analyses of ductal lavage fluid can assist
in the risk stratification of high risk individuals. Breast endoscopy
is a minimally-invasive procedure that allows direct visualization of
breast ducts with access to terminal ductal lobular units and has the
potential for high cellular yield using intraductal brushings. We
report our experience with breast endoscopy in evaluating patients
enrolled in a high risk clinic.

Methods: Of the 91 patients followed
in the High Risk Breast Cancer Clinic from 11/2003 to 5/2005, 22
patients had either spontaneous (11) or elicited nipple discharge
(11). High risk criteria included family history, 5-year risk Gail
score ≥ 1.7, personal history of breast cancer or spontaneous nipple
discharge. All patients had normal screening mammograms. Information
was collected prospectively on patient demographics, visual endoscopic
findings, distance travelled by endoscope, patient comfort and
complications. Cytology and karyometry of intraductal brushings were
performed.

Results: All 22 patients with
fluid-yielding ducts underwent 29 breast endoscopies (7-multiple) and
intraductal brushings. The average distance traveled with the
endoscope was 4.5cm (range 2– 8 cm). Cellular yield was adequate in
23/29 (79%) of intraductal brushings, which is improved from our
previously reported catheterbased ductal lavages (66%). Results are
shown figure 1. Intraductal lesions were found in 8/15 endoscopies
performed for spontaneous nipple discharge. Subsequent surgical
excisions revealed 7 papillomas and 1 DCIS. All patients who had
elicited nipple discharge had normal endoscopic findings with benign/
normal cytology (7), mild atypia (4) and insufficient cells (3). All
patients tolerated the procedure without discomfort or complications.
Karyometric analyses showed quantitative differences in nuclear
abnormality between normal controls and patients with atypia or
DCIS.

Discussion: Breast endoscopy is safe,
feasible and well tolerated in individuals at higher risk of breast
cancer. This minimallyinvasive procedure may be used as an adjunct to
risk stratification in these patients. We are currently exploring
various biomarkers in intraductal brushings to further improve risk
stratification and evaluate efficacy of chemoprevention agents. 

## 4019

## Chemopreventive effects of the statins, lipitor (Atorvastatin) and
lovastatin, in the methylnitrosourea (MNU) induced model of mammary
carcinogenesis.

## Lubet R, Grubbs C, Steele V, Eto I, Juliana M, Kopelovich L.
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD; University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
The statins have proven to be highly effective in lowering
cholesterol by inhibiting HMGCoA reductase. More recently, there has
been a limited amount of epidemiologic data showing that the use of
statins may decrease the incidence of certain types of cancer (e.g.,
colon). The abilities of Lipitor and Lovastatin, either administered
as single agents or in combination with suboptimal doses of the SERM
tamoxifen or the RXR agonist Targretin, were evaluated for prevention
of ER positive mammary cancers in the rat mammary model. Female
Sprague-Dawley rats were administered MNU (50 mg/kg BW) at 50 days of
age and the chemopreventive agents beginning five days later. Lipitor
(500 mg/kg diet) alone did not significantly affect cancer incidence
or multiplicity. Suboptimal doses of tamoxifen (0.4 mg/kg diet) or
Targretin (80 mg/kg diet) reduced cancer multiplicity from 4.60
(control) to 3.75 and 1.13, respectively. Combining Lipitor with
either of these two effective agents minimally changed their efficacy.
Although this dose of Lipitor did not decrease serum triglycerides
levels in control rats, it significantly decreased triglycerides
levels which had been increased in Targretin-treated rats. Experiments
performed with a second statin, Lovastatin (500 mg/kg diet), in the
same model system yielded similar results; specifically, a) limited
activity when administered alone; b) no obvious synergy with
suboptimal doses of tamoxifen or Targertin; and c) an ability to
decrease the Targretin induced increase in serum triglycerides. Thus,
the statins had minimal activity in a rat model of mammary cancer in
which roughly half of the cancers are mutated at the HaRas locus, and
which has previously been shown to respond to hormonal therapies that
are significant in human (e.g., SERMS, aromatase inhibitors, and
pregnancy).

## 4020

## Curcumin induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in an in vitro model for hormonally non-responsive
ductal carcinoma in situ..

## Crawford CV, Thakur S, Kim D, Osborne MP, Katdare M. Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY; Strang Cancer
Prevention Center, New York, NY

Background: The overexpression of
oncogene HER-2/neu and ER-/PR- are markers for poor prognosis in
Ductal Carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
Despite intensive management, post-operative survival and remission
are challenged by dose limiting side effects of therapy. Nontoxic
phytochemicals are known to reduce tumor incidence, and we have shown
cytostatic arrest of growth and induction of apoptosis in an in vitro murine model for breast cancer by
curcumin. Present experiments were designed to identify its preventive
mechanism in an in vitro model for
human comedo DCIS.

Materials and Methods: The
preclinical model for DCIS, represented by HER-2/neu transfected
184B5/HER cells, exhibits hyperproliferation, high anchorage
independent growth and tumorigenecity compared to the immortalized,
non-transformed 184B5 breast epithelial cells. Normal or transformed
cells in log phase were exposed to 0, 10, 20, 40 and 60 uM CUR for 72
hr and analyzed for growth response, viable cell counts, cell cycle
distribution and apoptosis. cDNA libraries were constructed using 5 ug
of total RNA from cells of the 0uM and 20uM CUR treatment groups at
24 hr. Biotin-labeled RNA was transcribed from the cDNA and hybridized
to human genome microarrays. Genes that showed more than 1.5 fold
changes in expression with p< 0.05 were filtered by
GeneSpringTM and DAVIDTM. Select cell cycle and apoptosis related genes from
this list were then verified by western blot.

Results: 184B5/HER cells exhibited a
dose dependent sensitivity to CUR compared to 184B5 cells. The
response of 20 uM CUR exposure to 184B5/HER cells was observed within
12 hr as cytostatic growth arrest, decreased
G0/G1:S+G2/M
ratio and induction of apoptosis which peaked at 24hr ( 45±0.7%
inhibition and 40±0.5% apoptosis) and persisted for 72 hr. Microarray
analysis of 184B5/HER cells exposed to 20 uM of CUR for 24 hr revealed
380 downregulated genes and 177 upregulated. Amongst the downregulated
genes, 12 were specific to S+G2/M phases:
cyclin A1 (−2.79), cyclin A2 (−3.60), cyclin B1(−3.45), cyclin B2
(3.89), CDK1 (3.96), CDK 2 (−1.69), Dbf4 (−2.56), Wee (−1.6), Cdc25C
(−3.80), Chk1 (−2.58), BubR1 (−2.82) and PTTG (−2.77). HDAC- 6 was the
only gene upregulated (+7.65) in this group. Apoptosis specific
survivin (−3.28) was also modulated. Western blots of cyclin A1,
cyclin B2, CDK1 and CDK2 correlated with the microarray data.

Discussion: Our results confirm the
preventive efficacy of CUR in 184B5/HER cells, via cytostatic arrest
in S+G2/M phases of cell cycle and induction of
apoptosis. The modulation in
G0/G1:S+G2/M
ratio and apoptosis was dose-dependent and correlates with the altered
transcription and expression of genes in proliferative phases. The
effects of CUR on this DCIS model were not observed under identical
conditions in nontumorigenic cells, suggesting the chemopreventive
potential of CUR for breast cancer is worthy of further
investigation.

## 4021

## Effect of estrogen deprivation on proliferation marker Ki-67 and
minichromosome maintenance protein-2 (Mcm-2) in normal postmenopausal
breast tissue: potential biomarkers for chemoprevention.

## Kendall AH, Williams GH, Stoeber K, Salter J, Dowsett M. Royal
Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Wolfson Institute for
Biomedical Research, University College London, London, United
Kingdom

Background: In a previously reported
pilot prevention study we examined changes in proliferation marker
Ki67 in normal breast tissue from 30 postmenopausal women exposed to
the aromatase inhibitor letrozole for 3 months [1]. Pre-treatment Ki67
levels were low (mean 1.28% (95% CI 1.0-1.65)) and although this was
reduced post treatment the change was not statistically significant
(mean 0.99 % (95%CI 0.59–1.66); p=0.65). Mcm-2 is a licensing factor
for DNA replication. Mcm-2 expression is elevated above Ki67 levels in
breast malignancy [2]. This study investigated whether Mcm-2 was
changed to a greater degree than Ki67 in normal postmenopausal breast
tissue exposed to letrozole and might therefore be a potential marker
for chemoprevention.

Materials and Methods:
Immunohistochemical staining for Mcm-2 was performed on archival
paraffin embedded 14G corecut biopsies from 20 paired specimens
available from the initial study. A median of 2362 (1032 - 4104)
luminal epithelial cells were scored for Mcm-2 with results expressed
as a percentage of cells stained. Paucity of cellular material limited
the planned 3000 cell count.

Results: There was no evidence of a
correlation between Mcm- 2 and Ki67 pre-treatment (Rs 0.31, 95%CI:
−0.16 to 0.67) or post-treatment (Rs 0.27, 95%CI: −0.21 to 0.64)
although the point estimates indicate it is not possible to rule out
weak correlations (Rs = Spearman Rank Correlation coefficient). Of the
20 paired samples that were re-evaluated mean Ki67 expression fell by
8.2% (95%CI: 41% less to 42% greater, p=ns), mean values falling from
1.47 to 1.35, after 3 months of letrozole therapy. Mean Mcm-2
expression fell by 24.2% (95%CI: 66% less to 70% greater, p=ns), mean
values falling from 1.55 to 1.20. Mcm-2 expression was not
significantly higher than Ki67 in this study population, Mcm-2 values
being on average 10% lower (95%CI: 42% lower to 39% higher). However,
there was a suggestion that the change in Mcm-2 levels correlated with
that of Ki67 (Rs 0.43,95%CI: −0.03 to 0.74, p=0.06).

Conclusions: Mcm-2 expression can be
determined in archival paraffin embedded tissue and shows expression
levels similar to that of Ki67. The lack of significant change of
either of these markers after 3 months of letrozole suggests that they
have little utility as biomarkers for chemoprevention. We are
currently assessing genome wide mRNA changes in these tissues to
determine if such markers exist in normal postmenopausal breast
tissue.

## References:
1. Harper-Wynne C et al. Cancer Epidem, Biomarkers and
Prevention. Vol 11 614–621 2002
2. Gonzalez MA et al. Journal of Clinical Oncology Vol 21 No23
4306–4313 2003

## 4022

## Association of RAR 2, ER, BRCA and p16 promoter methylation with cytologic
atypia in random periareolar fine needle aspiration (RPFNA) breast tissue
of asymptomatic women at high risk for breast cancer.

## Seo PH, Bean GR, Baker Jr. JC, Scott JV, Rasheed K, Yee LD,
Troch MM, Case N, Bowie ML, Marcom PK, Kimler BF, Zalles CM, Sloane R,
Fabian CJ, Seewaldt VL. Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC;
Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, OH; University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS

Background: DNA methylation of tumor
suppressor genes may be a marker of early breast carcinogenesis.
Previously we have shown that hypermethylation of RAR 2 promoter in breast tissue of asymptomatic high-risk
women was associated with mammary cytologic atypia, an independent
marker of breast cancer risk. This study reports on the association of
RAR 2, ER, BRCA and p16 promoter methylation with
cytologic atypia.

Methods: RPFNA is a research
technique that obtains a representative sampling of the whole-breast.
Women at high-risk had a 5-year Gail risk ≥ 1.7%, prior atypical
hyperplasia, LCIS or DCIS or known BRCA1/2 mutation. A dedicated
pathologist determined cell count and atypia (Masood cytology index).
Methylation-specific PCR was performed for RAR 2 at two regions (M3 and M4), ER, BRCA and p16.
Wilcoxon Rank Sum determined the association of methylation status
with Masood index. Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel (CMH) trend test determined
the association of methylation status with stratified Masood index of
normal (6–10), proliferative (11–14), hyperplasia (15–17) and
suspicious for cancer (18+). Spearman correlation (rho) determined
relationship of cell count with Masood index.

Results: 95 RPFNA breast tissue
samples were obtained from 66 asymptomatic high-risk women (mean
46.1 years (range 25-64)). Masood indices and cell counts ranged from
8-19 and <10−10000 respectively. 

56 RPFNA samples (58.9%) had all 5 methylation sites analyzed. 9/56
samples (16.1%) had 3 or more methylated sites. Masood index for
samples with 0-2 methylated sites (mean 12.2) compared to 3 or more
methylated sites (mean 13.5) were similar (p=0.36). Cell count was
correlated with Masood score (rho=0.69, p<0.0001).

Conclusions: Our preliminary results
show that RARβ2 hypermethylation and cell count in RPFNA breast tissue
continue to be significantly associated with cytologic atypia.
Although ER, BRCA, p16 or multiple gene methylations did not confer an
association, completion of methylation analyses for all 5 sites in all
samples may disclose additional methylation patterns.

## 4023

## Effect of raloxifene on invasive breast cancer incidence in
postmenopausal women stratified by body mass index (<25 and ≥
25 kg/m2).

## Cauley J, Disch D, Dowsett S, Mershon J. University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA; Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis,
IN

Background: The Continuing Outcomes
Relevant to Evista® (CORE) trial was a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, 4-year followup to the 4-year Multiple Outcomes of
Raloxifene Evaluation (MORE) trial. The purpose of CORE was to examine
the effects of raloxifene on invasive breast cancer incidence.
Raloxifene was associated with a 59% reduction in invasive breast
cancer incidence versus placebo.Since obesity has been associated with
an increased risk of breast cancer, the present pre-specified
secondary analysis compared the effect of raloxifene with placebo on
invasive breast cancer incidence over 8 years in postmenopausal women
with osteoporosis, grouped by BMI (< 25 and ≥
25 kg/m2). A BMI ≥ 25
kg/m2 is considered overweight, and was
close to the median for this population (median
=24.8 kg/m2).

Methods: Of the 7705 postmenopausal
women enrolled in MORE, 4011 continued in CORE. Those women randomized
to raloxifene 60 or 120 mg/d in MORE were assigned to raloxifene
60 mg/d in CORE; those randomized to placebo in MORE received placebo
in CORE. BMI was calculated using MORE baseline data. Time to first
invasive breast cancer was analyzed using Cox proportional hazard
models.

Results: In the placebo group,
invasive breast cancer incidence was numerically greater in women with
BMI ≥ 25 kg/m2 versus those with BMI≥
25 kg/m2, but this difference was not statistically significant
(hazard ratio [HR] 1.29, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.77–2.17;
p=0.33). The effect of raloxifene on breast cancer incidence is shown
in the table.

Conclusion: In this population of
postmenopausal women with osteoporosis, the incidence of invasive
breast cancer did not differ between those women with BMI < 25
versus ≥ 25 kg/m2. Raloxifene significantly
reduced the incidence of invasive breast cancer in both groups, and
the magnitude of its effect was not dependent upon BMI group.
Raloxifene is indicated for osteoporosis prevention and treatment in
postmenopausal women. 

## 4024

## Identification of genes modulated by LGD1069, a rexinoid that
prevents mammary tumorigenesis.

## Li Y, Kim H, Uray I, Bissonnette R, Lamph W, Johnson K, Brown P.
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; Ligand Pharmaceuticals, Inc,
San Diego, CA; National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD

Background: Retinoids are natural and
synthetic vitamin A analogues that have been shown to prevent breast
cancer in animal models. LGD1069, an RXR-selective retinoid
(rexinoid), inhibits the growth of normal breast cells and suppresses
the development of ER-negative mammary tumors in mice with reduced
toxicity. However, the mechanism by which this rexinoid suppresses
carcinogenesis is not fully understood. We hypothesized that LGD1069
exerts its chemopreventive effects by modulating the expression of
growth regulatory proteins in normal breast cells.

Material and Methods: By performing
cDNA microarray profiling, we compared the gene expression patterns
between normal human mammary epithelial cells treated with vehicle and
LGD1069. Genes found to be regulated by LGD1069 were validated by
quantitative real time RT-PCR. To determine which retinoid receptor
plays role in the regulation, we also tested the response of these
genes to other pathway-selective retinoids such as 9cRA, LG100268 and
TTNPB. The regulation of selected growth control proteins was further
characterized by western blot analysis and luciferase reporter assays.
Sequential deletion analysis was then conducted to map the response
elements in the promoter of the selected retinoid responsive
genes.

Results: We identified the set of
genes that are modulated by LGD1069 treatment in HMECs. These genes
includes short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase 1 (SDR1), involucrin
(IVL), differentiated embryonic chondrocyte 2 (DEC2), retinoic
acid-induced 3 (RAI3), cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and cyclin D1. Most of
these genes were also regulated by 9cRA and TTNPB, and not by
LG100268, suggesting that the modulation of gene expression occurs
primarily through the RAR signaling pathway. We also observed that
LGD1069 repressed the expression of cyclin D1 protein and induced a G1
cell cycle block. Therefore, we next investigated whether LGD1069
suppressed the activation of the cyclin D1 promoter. Our studies
showed that LGD1069 inhibited the transcription of cyclin D1 promoter
reporter constructs after 12 hours of treatment. The response elements
of this repression were found to be within −254bp of the proximal
promoter.

Conclusion: These results suggest
that LGD1069 prevents mammary tumorigenesis in part by modulating the
expression of growth control proteins including cyclin D1 and COX-2.
Our studies also suggest that LGD1069 modulates the expression of many
genes through RAR signaling pathways. By elucidating the mechanism by
which rexinoids prevent cancer, it will be possible to develop more
effective and less toxic drugs for the prevention of breast
cancer.

## 4025

## Activation of ATM and p53 in mammary gland epithelial cells as a
possible breast cancer prevention model.

## Loehberg CR, Thompson T, Kastan MB, Conneely OM, Medina D,
O’Malley BW. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; St. Jude
Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, TN

Background: Breast cancer remains the
major cancer among women in the United States with more than 200,000
new cases annually. The use of possible breast cancer preventive
agents to complement existing therapies has the potential to improve
breast cancer treatment. Quinoline sulfonamide family members like
chloroquine or quinidine have shown effects of reduced cell
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. We considered the
anti-malarial drug chloroquine to be an interesting candidate as a
possible cancer preventive agent.

Materials and Methods: Cell culture:
non-tumorigenic mammary gland epithelial cell line MCF10A, Methods:
Immunoblotting, siRNA technology, cell growth assays, flow
cytometry

Results: Chloroquine, a known
chromatin-modifying agent, inhibits cell proliferation and activates
the tumor-suppressor protein p53 in the human mammary gland epithelial
cell line MCF10A. Using p53 and phospho-specific antibodies we could
demonstrate a significant up-regulation of both total p53 and its
activated form phospho-p53-Ser15. The
phosphorylation at Ser15 appeared specific since no phosphorylation at
Ser6, 9, 20, 37, 46 was detected in
Western blot experiments. In order to assess the involvement of
protein kinases we utilized antibodies against the Chk1 and Chk2
protein kinases and could not detect up-regulation. In contrast, we
were able to demonstrate activation of the ATM protein kinase, a
central player of cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. To further
confirm this data we used ATM-siRNA and showed both a down-regulation
of ATM and p53 phosphorylation at Ser15.
Moreover the tumor-suppressor protein p21, a cell cycle inhibitor and
downstream target gene of p53, was up-regulated. To determine the
cellular effects of cholorquine treatment, we performed cell growth
assays and flow cytometry and showed reduced proliferation and a G0/G1
cell cycle arrest after chloroquine. Only at high doses was apoptosis
detected. Using Histone 3/4 and H2AX antibodies we demonstrated that
neither DNA damage (no H2AX phosphorylation) nor Histone 3/4
hyperacetylation is required to activate the ATM-p53-p21 molecular
pathway with choloroquine.

Discussion: Our results reveal that
the chromatin-modifying agent chloroquine activates ATM, p53 and p21
without detectable DNA damage and causes G0/G1 cell cycle arrest in a
non-tumorigenic mammary gland epithelial cell line. Chloroquine is
known to alter chromatin structures in the absence of DNA breaks. The
pharmacokinetic properties of this quinoline sulfonamide are well
characterized by excellent oral bioavailability, extensive tissue
penetration, low protein binding and a long half-life. Our results
indicate that the drug could have a preventative application for
tumorigenesis.

## 4026

## Induction of apoptosis in the absence of p53: implications for
chemoprevention for ER-negative breast cancer.

## Lee MH, Ganai S, Barnard Z, Mason HS, Arenas RB. Pioneer Valley
Life Sciences Institute, Springfield, MA; Baystate Medical Center,
Springfield, MA; University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA
Mutations of p53 cause an imbalance of regulatory controls leading
to breast cancer and downregulate the expression of estrogen and
progesterone receptors, hence complicating cancer treatment. High
levels of estrogen, 12-lipoxygenase (12-LOX), oncogenic Ras proteins,
and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) have been associated with cancer by
increasing cell proliferation while decreasing programmed cell death
or apoptosis. Prior studies reveal an inverse relationship between
COX-2 and p53 expression. We are evaluating chemopreventive agents
that target estrogen receptor (ER) negative breast cancer utilizing a
p53 mutated mouse model. Overproduction of estrogen and prostaglandins
has been associated with ER-negative breast cancer in these mice. The
evolution of ER-negative breast cancer from ER-positive breast tissue
may involve pathways mediated by aromatase and later by COX-2. We
hypothesize that inhibition of COX-2 and aromatase leads to an
increase in apoptosis providing protection against ER-negative breast
cancer. Fourth mammary glands of 8-week old wildtype and p53-null
females were sustained in tissue culture for four days in the presence
or absence of estrogen and progesterone. Several agents were tested
for their potential chemopreventive properties: COX-2 and 12-LOX
inhibitors, selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM), aromatase
inhibitor, farnesyltransferase (Ras) inhibitor, or a control medium. On the fourth day,
the mammary glands were irradiated to induce DNA damage and mimic
tumor development. The glands were then harvested and apoptosis was
quantified by fluorescent TUNEL. Our results show that an increase in
apoptosis by Tamoxifen, the COX-2 inhibitor NS-398, as well as
farnesylthiosalicylic acid, requires the presence of hormones but is
independent of p53 status (p<0.05). The 12-LOX inhibitor Baicalein
increases apoptosis only in p53-null mammary glands (p<0.05). The
most effective chemoprotection is from a combination of NS-398 with a
phytochemical compound, Rhodiola, known to suppress tumor growth
(p<0.05). In conclusion, mammary gland apoptosis in p53 mutated
mice may be influenced by the inhibition of several important pathways
implicated in breast cancer. Agents influencing this increase in
apoptosis may serve as chemopreventive agents for ER-negative breast
cancer. 

## 4027

## Expression of prostaglandin E2 receptor,
EP1, in breast cancer.

## Morimiya A, Mehrotra S, Konger R, Badve S. Indiana University,
Indianapolis, IN
Background: Cyclooxygenases (COX) enzymes in conjunction with
prostaglandin E (PGE2) synthases (mPGES) are
involved in the biosynthesis of PGE2. COX
enzymes play an important role in carcinogenesis and increased
expression has been reported in cancers arising at a number of
different sites. Most, if not all of these actions are thought to be
mediated by prostaglandin E (PGE2). The actions
of PGE2 are mediated via four main prostanoid
receptors, designated EP1,
EP2, EP3 and
EP4 based on their different pharmacological
properties and secondary messenger pathways. Of these
EP3 and EP4 are
ubiquitous, whereas the expression of EP1 &
EP2 is cell dependent. Recently, expression
of EP1 rat mammary gland has been reported in
rat mammary gland and inhibition of this receptor has been documented
to have chemopreventive effect in this animal model. More recently,
EP1 has also been shown to decrease the
incidence of colon cancer in mouse models. In this study analyze the
expression of EP1 in normal and malignant
breast tissues and correlate it with the expression of COX-2 and
mPGES-1.
Material and Methods: Expression of EP1 was
analyzed in breast (benign and cancer) cell lines (MCF-10A, MCF-7,
MDA-MB- 231, Hs578T, MDA-MB-468, ZR-75-1, T47D, SK-BR-3, DU4475) by
reverse-transcriptase PCR and by Western Blot analyses. These cell
line data was compared with expression of COX-2 and mPGES. In
addition, expression was analyzed by immunohistochemistry
(anti-EP1 antibody from Cayman) in normal
breast tissues and in 90 cases of breast cancer. Peptide blocking was
performed to verify specificity of staining. Semiquantitative analysis
of the staining was performed. The data were compared with patient
age, tumor size, lymph node positive status, ER, PR, Her-2 (IHC),
COX-2 and mPGES-1 expression status.
Results: EP1 expression was detected in
breast cell lines by WB and RT-PCR and was up-regulated in human
breast cancer by IHC. Cytoplasmic expression of EP1 was seen in 70 of
89 cases (78%) and expression was nuclear in 36 cases (40%). Nuclear
EP1 expression correlated with lymph node
metastasis, however, EP1 expression did not
correlate with expression of COX-2 or mPGES- 1 or with hormone
receptor status.
Conclusions: Expression of EP1 is frequently
up-regulated in human breast cancers and. Further experiments are
being carried out to analyze the effects of blocking of these
receptors using specific and non-specific antagonist in relation to
tumor growth and apoptosis and to assess the feasibility of using EP1
antagonists as chemopreventive agents in human breast cancer.

## 4028

## Counceling and care combined with breast self examination training
as motivation strategy for breast cancer awareness and participation in
breast cancer screening programs.

## Artmann A, Heyne M, Ruessmann B, Hammes A, Kiechle M, Harbeck N.
Technical University of Munich, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Germany

Objectives: In Germany, participation
in gynecologic cancer screening is only about 30%, and about 32% in
the Bavarian breast cancer screening. Therefore, we evaluated the
impact of counceling together with confidence in breast self
examination (BSE) after structured BSE training withon breast cancer
awareness, acceptance of screening offer, and actual participation
rate.

Method: Since 2003, 154 women (mean
age 35 y; range 19-65 y; 59% ≥ 40 y) got intensive breast cancer
counceling and were professionally trained in
MammaCareTM BSE (3 hours, 4 trainees);
41% had positive breast cancer family history. In their first
beginner’s course, trainees got general BSE information, covering
breast anatomy, periodical and permanent breast tissue changes, breast
symptoms, cancer and breast cancer screening, and breast cancer
therapy. Participants practised BSE, after they learned on tactually
accurate silicone breast models, that include simulated lumps in order
to discriminate normal nodularity from lumps. Finally, trainees got
information about visual inspection. After 3 months, rescreening or
supervision sessions included BSE evaluation and instruction in
presence of a professional took place. In a model exam, number of
detected lumps, false positive and negative findings were documented.
In breast exams, performance technique and breast tissue coverage were
assessed. Again, importance of screening programs was reinforced. At
both initial sessions and after 12 months, questionnaires on BSE
practice, experience, and compliance, cancer worry, healthcare
behaviour, changes in lifestyle, acceptance and participation at
cancer screening programs were evaluated.

Results: Breast cancer worry,
anxiety, and lack of information were the main reasons for program
participation. Within 3 months after the base course, mean decrease of
breast cancer worry was about 96%. Participation in gynecologic cancer
screening and screening mammography (≥ 40 y) more than doubled (94%
and 86%). Even after 12 months, these numbers remain consistent. 78%
of participants practice BSE monthly, and 46% reported changes in
lifestyle regarding nutrition and obesity.

Rationale: Our approach emphasizes
importance of self confidence and awareness for participation in
cancer screening also in women with breast cancer family history.
Counceling, BSE reevaluation and reinforcement are correlated with
decreased breast cancer worry and anxiety, a main barrier against
participation in breast cancer and gynecologic cancer
screening.

## 4029

## Anticarcinogenic effects of citrus auraptene on rat breast
cancer.

## Kleiner HE, Campbell CT, Prince M, Robertson TA, Krishnan P, Li
BD, Chu QD. Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, LA

Background: Auraptene is a simple
coumarin possessing a geranyloxyl side chain and is abundant in citrus
fruit. It has been shown to block carcinogenesis in rat colon and oral
cancers, and mouse skin cancer. However, its effectiveness in blocking
mammary cancer has not been fully investigated.

Material and Methods: Female
Sprague-Dawley rats (8 rats per group) were fed Teklad mesh diet with
or without auraptene (200 ppm). At day 50, rats were treated with
N-methylnitrosourea (MNU) (50 mg/kg, i.p.) or saline. At 19 weeks
after MNU, rats were euthanized and all tumors were counted during
necropsy. To evaluate the effects of auraptene on cancer development,
auraptene was tested on MCF-7 cells and MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer
cell lines.

Results: All rats fed with Teklad
diet and MNU developed mammary tumors (average 3.13±1.55 tumors/rat).
No tumors were observed in the control group. In rats fed Teklad with
auraptene (200 ppm), there was a statistically significant (P<
0.05, t-test) reduction in tumor incidence by 25%. Furthermore, the
diet was well tolerated since there were no significant changes in
body weight nor overt signs of toxicity observed in the treatment
groups. In MCF-7 cells, auraptene inhibited cell viability (measured
by trypan blue uptake) by 59%, 19% and 8% at 6 h; and by 93%, 17%, and
5% at 24 h at 200  M, 50  M and 25  M, respectively. In MDA-MB-231 cells, auraptene
inhibited cell viability at 24 h by 77%, 61%, and 30% at 200 
 M, 50  M and 25  M, respectively. Interestingly, auraptene had no
effect on MDA-MB-231 cell viability at 6 h. Auraptene blocked
ornithine decarboxylase activity in MCF-7 cells by 83% and 39% at 200 
 M and 50  M, respectively. Finally, auraptene blocked invasion
of MDA-MB-231 cells into Matrigel (a basement membrane substance) by
46% at 50  M in vitro.Conclusion: These preliminary results suggest that
auraptene may have promising chemopreventive effects on breast
cancer.

## 4030

## A case-control study evaluating the association of purposeful
physical activity, body fat distribution and steroid hormones on
pre-menopausal breast cancer risk.

## Kumar NB, Riccardi D, Cantor A, Dalton K, Allen K. H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Inst, Tampa, FL

## BACKGROUND:
The objective of this case-control study was to investigate the
relationship between purposeful physical activity, body fat
distribution, body mass index and steroid hormones. These factors
are known to be implicated in modulating breast cancer risk in
premenopausal women.

## METHODS:
One hundred and twelve newly diagnosed, pre-menopausal breast
cancer patients and 106 age matched pre-menopausal disease-free
controls were admitted to the study. Information regarding
personal, medical, hormonal and reproductive history, smoking and
alcohol use, physical activity history and anthropometric
measurements was obtained. Serum samples for steroid hormone assays
were collected and analyzed.

## RESULTS:
Disease-free pre-menopausal controls had a significantly higher
physical activity index (PAI) (P=<0.05), however, significantly
higher weight (P=<0.05), body mass index (P=0.01), waist
(P=<0.005), hip (P=<0.05)
circumferences, wasit:hip ratios (P=<0.05) and serum total
estradiol levels (<0.0005) were observed in cancer cases. The
final model using stepwise logistic regression analysis indicates
that the variables that significantly predicted breast cancer risk
were waist:hip ratio (OR =1.11 p=<0.005) and serum total
estradiol levels (OR=1.03 p=<0.0001).

CONCLUSION: Our study provides
some evidence that purposeful physical activity may reduce upper
body fat distribution associated with adult weight gain. This may
be a result of alterations in the steroid hormone pathway such as
reduced estradiol levels. This demonstrates the potential mechanism
through which increased physical activity can reduce the risk for
breast cancer in pre-menopausal women.

## 4031

## The controversy of annual mammographic screening (AMS) for 40 to
69y-o women of Brazilian cohort of 10.000 underserved women.

## Caleffi M, Duarte Filho D, Skoniesky G, Bedin Jr A, Zignani JM,
Antunes LP, Dias EC, Ashton-Prolla P, Weber B, Kivitz P, Graudenz MS,
Pohlmann PR. Hospital Moinhos de Vento, Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil

Introduction: Porto Alegre has the
highest breast cancer (BC) incidence and mortality in the country,
being the main general cause of death among 25–49y-o women. Use of AMS
for women in their 40s is controversial, due to the lower frequency of
the disease at this age group and to the higher density of their
breasts. The NMPOA cohort included patients over 40y-o for screening.
Radiological findings at one year of the cohort were analyzed.
Material and Methods: From Mar/04
to Apr/05, of 3200 women, a subgroup of 1330 within 40–69y of age were
asymptomatic and selected for AMS. Age stratification for the present
analysis: 40–49 y-o (n=690); 50–59y-o (n=423); 60–69y-o (n=217).
BI-RADS Classification of Mammography was used. Results: Age at menarche, number of children,
menopausal status, tabacco use, previous breast biopsy, hormonal
replacement therapy (HRT) and familial BC history were balanced among
the groups. BI-RADS zero was found in 2.3% of patients, soon recalled
for new imaging evaluation. So far 4 cases of cancer were detected:
One 48y-o pat (GIII DCIS) and 3 cases at the 50’s age group
(T1micN0M0, GIII DCIS and T2N0M0). Three of
the 4 cancer cases were initially classified as BI-RADS zero. BI-RADS
I was present in 84.9%, 71.4% and 68.7% of the 40’s, 50’s and 60’s age
groups, respectively (p<0.001). Breast density was affected by age,
number of children, HRT and menopausal status. ‘Fatty’ or ‘almost
fatty’ breast cathegories for the 40’s, 50’s and 60’s age groups were
45.3%, 65.1% and 76.9%, respectively (p<0.001). Conclusion: Numbers are still small for
definitive conclusions, but accrual rates exceed expectation for an
underserved community in Latin America. BIRADS zero were found to
shelter relevant conditions, emphasizing the need for an organized
program for recall. All early diagnosed cases were potentially
agressive, indicating the benefit of AMS to communities often
presenting as stage III/IV disease. Cost-effectiveness is a major
issue to evaluate the intervention in the 40 to 49y-o group.

## 4032

## Tubular carcinoma: outcomes analysis of favorable breast cancer
treated with breast conserving therapy.

## Perkins GH, Middleton LP, Tran RT, Garcia SM, Buchholz TA. The
University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
Purpose: To evaluate outcomes data for patients with tubular
carcinoma treated with breast conserving therapy.
Methods: The features of 293 pathologically reviewed patients with
a diagnosis of tubular carcinoma were compared with respect to bct,
axillary management, sytemic therapy, and percentage of tubular
formation. OS, DMFS, DFS, and Local-regional control were also
compared. Kaplan Meier statistics were utilized.
Results: Median age at diagnosis was 55 (range 33–81 years). Median
follow-up was 95 months (range 3–284). 14% had + lymph nodes. 20% had
multifocal and or multicentric presentation after workup. 5 and
10 year OS, LRC,DMFS, and DFS were as follows: 96%/ 93%;
98%/96%;99%/95%;97%/93%. For patients treated with BCT 5/10 year OS vs
mastectomy was 98%/95% vs 98%/89% (p=.07). LRC was 99%/98% vs 98%/94%
(p=.8). OS and LRC were not significantly different at 5 and 10 years
for BCT patients not treated with xrt who had negative margins (93/93
vs 97/97; 99/96 vs 100/100). Similarly patients undergoing ALND had
rates of OS and LRC that were not siginificantly different at 5 and
10 year interval (98/92 vs 92/92 and 99/96 vs 100/100 (p= .3 and .6
respectively)
Conclusions: This large retrospective analysis demonstrates
equivalent efficacy in carefull selected patients undergoing BCT with
a diagnosis of tubular carcinoma even when xrt is omitted. It is noted
however that 20% of patients had mutifocal or multicentric
presentation. In this study the axilla was effectively managed with
and without ALND although 15% of patients had psotive nodal
presentation. Consensus criteria tubular carcinoma (70% + tubules)
yields excellent outcome when managed in the context of the
multidisciplinary team. Individualized therapy is an appropriate
standard to insure high quality of care.

## 4033

## Decision-making process for early-stage breast cancer is surgeon
driven.

## Nkoy FL, Rees W, Sause W, Hammond E, Pinto K, Rowe K.
Intermountain Health Care (IHC), SLC, UT

Background: Breast Conserving Surgery
(BCS) has become the standard of care for early stage breast cancer
and is considered as one of the quality indicators of a breast program
practice. Several studies have reported that BCS is still under
utilized, mostly, because of patient’s choice. However, surgeons’
decision-making process has not been emphasized. Based upon an overall
baseline frequency of 55% of BCS in 2001, the Intermountain Health
Care (IHC) oncology clinical program developed a quality of care
initiative to increase the use of BCS for women with early stage
breast cancer treated at IHC facilities. This initiative resulted in a
significant increase in the frequency of BCS to 67% overall, 2 year
after implementation of data feedback to surgeons. The objective of
this study was to evaluate the difference in clinical factors that
affected the use of BCS before and after implementation of data
feedback.

Methods: We extracted cancer registry
data of 3236 women with early-stage breast cancer who received BCS at
IHC facilities between 1999–2004. We conducted a retrospective study.
Multiple logistic regression was used to generate odds ratios (ORs)
and 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs) to determine change in clinical
factors associated with increase in the frequency of BCS after
implementation of data feedback.

Results: Before the implementation of
data feedback (years 1999–2001), the ORs were respectively: age
(OR=0.98; 95% CI, 0.97–0.99), number of nodes positive (OR=0.68; 95%
CI, 0.50–0.93), tumor size (OR=0.97; 95% CI, 0.96–0.98) and grade
(OR=0.83; 95% CI, 0.73–0.96) and stage (OR=0.86; 95% CI, 0.69–1.08).
After implementation of data feedback (years 2002–2004), the ORs were:
age (OR=0.98; 95% CI, 0.97-0.99), number of node positive (OR=0.76;
95% CI, 0.53–1.09), tumor size (OR=0.99; 95% CI, 0.99-1.0) and grade
(OR=0.85; 95% CI, 0.75–1.0) and stage (OR=0.53; 95% CI,
0.41–0.69).

Conclusions: Before implementation of
data feedback the clinical factors that affected the surgeon’s
decision-making process for BCS were age, number of nodes positive,
tumor size and grade. After implementation of data feedback, we found
that the following clinical factors, number of nodes positive, tumor
size and grade, were no longer influencing the surgeon’s
decision-making for BCS. However, an increase in patient age and stage
decreased the chance of having a BCS. The data demonstrated that
surgical decisionmaking process for early stage breast cancer is very
much surgeon’ driven and that any strategy to increase the frequency
of BCS should also emphasize widespread education to surgeons.

## 4034

## Adjuvant chemotherapy in stage II node positive male breast
cancer.

## Walshe JM, Vatas U, Berman AW, Steinberg SM, Llppman ME,
Anderson WF, Swain SM. Cancer Therapeutics Branch; Biostatistics and
Data Management Section, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD;
Univ of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Division of Cancer Epidemiology &
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD

Background: Male breast cancer (MBC)
is a rare disease, which accounts for an annual estimate of 0.2% of
all cancers and 0.1% of all cancer deaths in men in the US, with
approximately 1,690 new breast cancer cases and 460 breast cancer -
specific deaths among men per year. We present the long-term follow-up
of a prospective study of MBC with node positive disease treated with
adjuvant chemotherapy.

Material and Methods: Between 1974
and 1988, men with Stage II node positive disease were entered on
study MB82. Following mastectomy, patients were treated with 12 cycles
of CMF therapy. The treatment protocol utilized intravenous
cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2, 5-fluorouracil 600 mg/mg2 and methotrexate
60 mg/m2 all given on day 1 and 8 of a 28-day cycle for one year.
Three patients received tamoxifen therapy.

Results: Thirty one patients were
enrolled on study with a median age of 61 yrs at diagnosis (38–74yrs).
Twenty-three patients (74%) had 1–3 positive axillary lymph nodes
while 8 patients (26%) had 4 or more positive nodes. Estrogen receptor
status was determined in 23 patients (74%); positive in 22 patients
and negative in one patient. Progesterone receptor status was
determined in 19 patients (61%); positive in 17 patients and negative
in two patients. Median potential follow-up for all patients is
22.0 years with a median survival of 15.2 years. Twenty patients have
died, one from a treatment-related complication (GI hemorrhage), six
patients from recurrent breast cancer, three from other cancers
(prostate, esophageal, and lung cancer), 2 from non-cancer related
causes, and 8 unknown. Eleven patients remain alive at a median of
17.9 yrs. The survival probability at 10 years is 64.0% (95% CI: 46.2
to 75.8%), at 15-years is 50.5% (95% CI: 33.6 to 67.3%) and at
20 years is 45.4% (95% CI: 28.6 to 63.5%). In 1988, the NCI’s SEER
program began to collect information regarding tumor size and nodal
status for n=2,258 male breast cancer cases and specifically n=810
known node positive male breast cancer cases. Notably, the 10-year
cumulative relative survival rate for men with node-positive breast
cancer was 57.9%, consistent with MB82.

Discussion: We present the long-term
results of a prospective study of node positive MBC. By comparing our
results with the population-based SEER-program, it is difficult to
draw definitive conclusions regarding the benefit of adjuvant CMF in
the MB82 study. Trials using different chemotherapeutic combinations
and/ or hormonal therapies possibly should be considered for this
mostly hormone receptor positive type of breast cancer.

## 4035

## Long-term risk of cardiovascular disease in 10-year survivors of
breast cancer.

## Hooning MJ, Botma A, Aleman BM, Klijn JG, van Leeuwen FE.
Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Erasmus MC,
Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands

Purpose: To assess cardiac risk
according to radiation field in breast cancer patients, accounting for
cardiac risk factors.

Patients and methods: We studied
incidence of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in a group of 10-year
survivors (n=4368) who were treated in the Netherlands Cancer
Institute and the Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center for early breast
cancer between 1970 and 1987. Follow-up was for 98% complete until
January 2000. Treatment-specific incidence of CVD was evaluated by
calculating standardized incidence ratios (SIRs) based on comparison
with general population rates and by using Cox proportional hazards
regression.

Results: After a median follow-up of
18 years 942 cardiovascular events (acute myocardial infarction (MI),
angina pectoris and congestive heart failure) were observed resulting
in a SIR of 1.3 (95% CI: 1.2–1.4) and an absolute excess risk of
63/10,000 personyears. For the treatment period 1970–79, radiotherapy
(RT) on the internal mammary chain (IMC) was associated with an
increased risk of MI both for patients with left- and right-sided
tumors in comparison with non-irradiated patients; hazard ratio (HR),
2.2; 95% CI: 1.3–3.7, and 2.9; 95% CI: 1.7–5.1, respectively, while
for the treatment period 1980–86, these risks had declined to 0.8 (95%
CI: 0.4–1.6) and 0.9 (95% CI: 0.5–1.7), respectively. Patients
irradiated on the left chest wall experienced a significantly
increased risk of MI as compared to those treated with surgery only in
both treatment periods (HR, 2.8; 95% CI: 1.4–5.5, and 3.7; 95% CI:
1.2–11.5, respectively). RT on the right chest wall showed a
non-significantly 1.5–fold increased risk of MI for the period
1970–79, while from 1980 on, no MIs occurred in this treatment group.
RT on the breast only, applied from 1980 on, was not associated with
an increased risk of MI, with HRs of 0.7 (95% CI: 0.3–1.6) for
left-sided, and 0.9 (95% CI: 0.4–2.2) for right-sided tumors.
Hypertension, smoking, diabetes mellitus and hypercholesterolemia
acted as independent risk factors for MI, with HRs of 2.0(95% CI:
1.5–2.7), 2.1(95% CI: 1.5–2.7), 1.3(95% CI: 0.9–1.8) and 3.0(95% CI:
2.2–4.1), respectively. Analysis on the combined effects of smoking
and RT revealed a more than additive effect on MI, with a HR of 3.0;
95% CI: 2.0–4.5 (HR for irradiated non-smokers, 1.3; HR for
non-irradiated smokers, 1.4).

Conclusions: Radiotherapy after 1979
is not associated with increased MI risk, with the only exception for
radiation to the left chest wall. The combination of smoking and RT
appears to exert a greater than additive effect on MI risk.

## 4036

## Stroke rates and risk factors in patients treated with radiation
therapy for early stage breast cancer.

## Jagsi R, Griffith KA, Koelling T, Roberts R, Pierce LJ.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Massachusetts General Hospital
(Visiting Researcher, U of Michigan), Boston, MA
INTRO: Radiation therapy (RT) increases risk of stroke in head
& neck cancer patients. Meta-analyses show increased vascular
mortality in patients receiving RT for breast cancer (BC). A recent
study reveals increased stroke incidence in Swedish BC patients. We
examine whether the common technique of supraclavicular RT (SCRT) is
associated with stroke in BC patients.
METHODS: 867 consecutive patients with Stage I/II BC were treated
with breast-conserving surgery & RT at U of Michigan Hospital from
1983–2000. 841 had records sufficient to determine incidence of
cerebrovascular accident (CVA) or transient ischemic attack (TIA) in
follow-up. Observed rates of CVAs (excluding & including TIA) were
compared to expected age, gender, & racespecific rates calculated
from the National Hospital Discharge Surveys to obtain standardized
incidence ratios (SIRs). Relationships between potential risk factors
and actuarial rate of first CVA were analyzed. Characteristics found
on univariate analysis to be at least marginally associated with time
to stroke (p<0.1) were included in a multivariate Cox model, along
with potential 2-way interactions. Factors were removed stepwise until
only characteristics significant at the 0.05 level remained.
RESULTS: 15 cases were excluded because they received RT to the
neck for other causes. Median follow-up was 6.8 years (range 0.1-
20.3). This yielded 6164 person-years of observation. Median age was
55.6 (range 21.5-88.4). At time of BC diagnosis, 317 patients had a
history of hypertension, 58 diabetes, 302 smoking, 211
hypercholesterolemia, 14 previous stroke, 84 coronary artery disease
(CAD), and 15 atrial fibrillation (AF). 373 received adjuvant
tamoxifen, and 222 SCRT.
21 patients (2.5%) had at least one CVA in follow-up; 36 (4.4%) had
at least one CVA/TIA. The SIR of CVA was 1.67 (95% CI 1.08–2.14). The
SIR of CVA/TIA was 1.56 (1.13–2.11). On univariate analysis, factors
significantly associated with actuarial of first CVA included
hypertension(p=0.004), age(p<0.001), CAD(p=0.002), AF(p=0.01), and
SCRT(p=0.03). Factors associated with CVA/TIA were
hypertension(p<0.001), CAD(p=0.002), and age(p<0.001), with
SCRT(p=0.09) and AF(p=0.06) trending towards significance. Tamoxifen
use alone was not significant(p=0.26), but tamoxifen combined with
baseline hypertension did lead to increased risk of CVA/TIA
(p<0.001). On multivariate analysis, only age(p<0.001) and
hypertension(p=0.005) remained significant predictors of CVA/ TIA. Age
was the only significant predictor of CVA alone(p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that BC survivors have an elevated
risk of stroke compared to the general population. While recent
studies have raised concerns that SCRT may lead to increased strokes
in BC patients, this study reveals no significant association between
SCRT and stroke, after controlling for other risk factors.

## 4037

## Inverse-planned, dynamic, multi-field, intensity modulated
radiation therapy (IMRT) for left sided breast cancer: comparison to best
standard technique.

## Olivotto IA, Beckham W, Popescu C, Patenaude V, Wai ES, Cao F.
Vancouver Island Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Victoria, BC,
Canada

Background: Delivering radiation
therapy (RT) to the left breast plus internal mammary nodes (IMNs)
without excessive dose to the heart is a challenge. The purpose of
this study was to determine if dynamic, multi-field, inverse-planned
IMRT would improve conformity and reduce dose to the heart and lungs
without an excessive increase in healthy tissue dose, compared to best
standard plans, when treating women with left-sided breast cancer with
the IMNs included in the 95% planning target volume (PTV).

Material and Methods: PTVs (breast
plus IMNs), heart, lungs, body and medial right breast for 30 randomly
selected patients after lumpectomy for left-sided breast cancer were
contoured. IMRT was a class solution employing 11 equally-spaced beams
oriented through a 190 degree sector angle around the left thorax.
Dose-volume histograms (DVHs) were derived for IMRT and best standard
plans (modified wide tangent or direct internal mammary techniques).
Conformity Index (CI = Volume PTV divided by the volume receiving
>95%), Homogeneity Index (HI = % PTV >95% and <105%) and
doses to normal tissues were compared. The proportion of patients
benefiting at various thresholds for improved cardiac dose were
assessed.

Results: IMRT vs best standard plans
improved mean values of CI (0.892 vs 0.559), V30-heart (0.45% vs
6.59%) and V20-left lung (12.8% vs 20.6%). HI was improved with IMRT
(0.97 vs 0.73). All differences were significant (paired t-test, p
< 0.001). Mean Healthy Tissue dose (whole body minus PTV) was 5.2Gy
vs 5.3Gy (p=0.46). The improvement in heart V30 dose was positively
correlated with maximum heart depth in the best standard plan
(R2=0.76). Changing from standard planning to IMRT when the maximum
heart depth was 2.3 cm reduced heart V30 by 10%. To reduce V30 by 10%
would require IMRT for approximately 20% of our randomly selected
patients.

Discussion: Dynamic, inverse-planned,
IMRT significantly improved conformity by decreasing dose to heart and
ipsilateral lung with minimal increase in mean healthy tissue dose.
The maximum heart depth in the best standard plan is useful to select
patients likely to benefit from conformal IMRT. If a goal for heart
dose improvement is established then it is possible to calculate the
proportion of patients requiring IMRT.

Supported by a grant from the Canadian Breast
Cancer Foundation, BC/Yukon Chapter

## 4038

## One year analysis of cosmesis and treatment efficacy by the
American Society of Breast Surgeons (ASBS) MammoSite breast brachytherapy
registry trial in patients treated with accelerated partial breast
irradiation (APBI).

## Vicini FA, Beitsch P, Quiet CA, Keleher A, Garcia D, Snider H,
Gittleman M, Zannis V, Kuerer H, Whitacre E, Whitworth P, Fine R,
Haffty B. William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, MI; Dallas Breast
Center, Dallas, TX; Arizona Oncology, Phoenix, AZ; Western PA
Hospital, Pittsburgh, PA; St.Louis Cancer and Breast CTR, St. Loius,
MO; Baptist Medical Center, Montgomery, AL; Sacred Heart Hospital,
Allentown, PA; MDACC, Houston, TX; The Breast Ctr of Southern Arizona,
Tuscon, AZ; The Breast Ctr, Marietta, GA; Yale, New Haven,
CT

Purpose: This report presents data on
cosmesis and overall treatment efficacy with a minimum of one year
follow-up for patients treated on the ASBS MammoSite Registry
trial.

Materials and Methods: Since closure
of the ASBS sponsored Registry Trial in November 2004, a total of 1550
patients have been treated with the MammoSite device. Follow-up data
on cosmesis and efficacy have continuously been recorded to examine
changes in these endpoints over time. A total of 488 patients treated
with APBI have been followed ≥ 12  months, 211≥18 months and 83 ≥ 24
months. These patients constitute the study population.

Results: A total of 5/488 patients
(1%) have experienced a local failure (13, 13, 16, 22 and 26 months
after APBI) for a 2-yr actuarial rate of 2% (None of the 83 patients
followed ≥ 24 months developed a local recurrence). No clinical,
technical or pathologic variable was associated with the development
of a local recurrence. The % of patients with good/excellent cosmetic
results at 6, 12, 18 and 24 months were as follows: 93.9, 92.4, 90.5,
and 92.8 (p=NS). (The rate of good/excellent cosmetic results in the
83 patients followed ≥ 24 months was 94% at 12 months and 92.8% at
24 months (p=0.7)). At 12 months (n=488 patients), factors associated
with good/excellent cosmetic results included increasing median skin
spacing (p=0.016) and smaller bra size (p=0.0016). Skin spacing (≥
7 mm) and the lack of developing an infection were borderline
significant (p=0.082 and 0.081).

Conclusion: Treatment efficacy and
cosmesis with a minimum of 1 or 2 years of follow-up after treatment
with APBI using the MammoSite device are excellent and appear
comparable to those reported with standard whole breast RT. Additional
follow-up will be needed to establish the stability of these findings
with time.

## 4039

## ATM sequence variants as predictors for adverse radiation responses
in breast cancer patients.

## Ho AY, Atencio DP, Fan G, Green S, Formenti SC, Haffty BG,
Bernstein JL, Stock RG, Cesaretti JA, Rosenstein BS. Mount Sinai
School of Medicine, New York, NY; NYU School of Medicine, New York,
NY; Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY

Objective: To examine whether
sequence variants in the ATM gene
predict for the development of late radiation-induced adverse effects
resulting from external beam radiation therapy for breast
cancer.

Methods: 107 patients with a minimum
of a 2-year follow-up underwent breast-conserving surgery and standard
adjuvant radiation therapy for either DCIS or early stage breast
cancer at three tertiary referral centers in the United States between
1990 to 2003. These patients were screened for DNA sequence variations
in all 62 coding exons of the ATM
gene. DNA was isolated from blood lymphocytes and each coding exon
amplified using PCR. Genetic variants were identified using denaturing
high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). The clinical course of
each genetically characterized patient was obtained from a database of
patients treated and examined during follow-up visits. The RTOG/ EORTC
late morbidity scoring schemes for skin and subcutaneous normal
tissues were applied to quantify radiation-induced effects. The
chi-squared test was used to compare groups with respect to
categorical endpoints (e.g. radiation-induced late effects).

Results: 34 of the 107 screened
patients were found to carry ATM
sequence alterations located within exons, or in short intronic
regions flanking each exon that encompass putative splice sites. For
this group, 77% (26/34) exhibited at least one form of adverse
response. In contrast, of the 73 patients who did not harbor an
ATM sequence variation, 51%
(37/73) manifested radiation-induced adverse responses (p=0.02,
two-sided). Nine of the patients in this study specifically possessed
the G→A transition polymorphism at nucleotide 5557, which results in
substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid at position 1853 of the
ATM protein. For this group,
100% (9/9) exhibited an adverse response. In contrast, of the 98
patients who did not have this polymorphism, 55% (54/98) manifested a
late response (p = 0.02, two-sided).

Conclusions: Possession of sequence
variants in the ATM gene predict
for the development of late adverse radiotherapy responses among
breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant radiation therapy. In
particular, the 5557 G→A polymorphism is associated with the
development of adverse late responses. The number of patients without
ATM sequence variants who
nevertheless developed late normal tissue effects suggests that
variants in radiation response genes other than ATM may also play a role conferring
radiosensitivity, and could therefore serve as additional predictors
of adverse radiation effects.

## 4040

## Improved survival, quality of life (QOL), and qualityadjusted
survival (QAS) in breast cancer patients treated with efaproxiral
(EFAPROXYNTM) + whole brain radiation
therapy (WBRT) for brain metastases.

## Scott C, Suh J, Stea B, Nabid A, Hackman J. CBS Squared;
Cleveland Clinic Hospital; U of AZ Health Sciences Center; Centre
Hospitalier U de Sherbrooke; Allos Therapeutics

Background: Approx. 25% of breast
cancer patients will develop brain metastases. The effectiveness of
WBRT as primary therapy for brain metastases is limited by tissue
hypoxia, which has been shown to cause radioresistance in solid
tumors. Efaproxiral is a novel therapeutic agent that sensitizes
radiation by acting as an allosteric modifier of hemoglobin,
facilitating O2 release & decreasing tissue
hypoxia. Although survival is the primary endpoint of many therapeutic
regimens in oncology, maintaining a good QOL is also important, as
there are usually adverse events associated w/brain therapy, primary
tumor therapy, & symptoms of each disease site.

Methods: A randomized, open label
Phase 3 study was conducted comparing efaproxiral combined w/WBRT
& supplemental O2 to WBRT &
supplemental O2 alone in patients w/newly
diagnosed brain metastases from various solid tumors (the REACH
study). Patients w/KPS ≥ 70, at least one measurable lesion, & no
prior WBRT or stereotactic radiotherapy were eligible. QOL was
assessed prior to initiation of WBRT & periodically in follow up
using the Spitzer Quality of Life Index (SQLI). QAS was modeled using
the method of Willan et al. (2003), which involved multiplying QOL
& survival estimates at periodic intervals then computing the area
under the curve (AUC). Analysis was performed on all eligible patients
w/a pre-treatment SQLI score & on the subgroups of these patients
w/NSCLC or breast cancer primary site.

Results: A total of 500 patients were
eligible & had a pre-treatment SQLI score; of these, 282 patients
had NSCLC primary & 106 patients had breast cancer primary. SQLI
was a statistically significant prognostic factor (p<0.001),
w/higher baseline SQLI scores associated w/better survival outcome. No
difference was observed in Median Survival Time (MST), QAS, or QOL
between treatment groups in the overall group or the subgroup of
patients w/NSCLC primary. However, there was an increase in survival
for efaproxiral-arm patients w/breast cancer, which was accompanied by
a highly statistically significant improvement in both QAS & QOL
(see Table 1). 

Conclusion: Survival, QOL, & QAS
were all improved in breast cancer patients w/brain metastases
receiving efaproxiral & WBRT compared to those receiving WBRT
alone. The survival benefit realized for the breast cancer patients
was not clinically compromised by a decline in QOL.

## 4041

## Radiation therapy and cardiac toxicity in breast cancer patients
65 years and older: a population-based study.

## Doyle JJ, Neugut AI, McBride RB, Jacobson JS, Grann VR, Hershman
DL. Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York,
NY; College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York,
NY

Purpose: Among high-risk patients
with early-stage breast cancer, the benefit of adjuvant radiation
therapy (RT) may be counterbalanced by an elevated risk of cardiac
toxicity. Patients receiving RT on the left side, patients with
pre-existing heart disease (HD), and the elderly may be especially
vulnerable. We studied the cardiac effects of RT in a population-based
sample of breast cancer patients aged ≥65 years with long-term
follow-up.

Patients and Methods: In the
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)-Medicare database,
we analyzed treatments and outcomes among women ≥65 years of age
diagnosed with stage I–III breast cancer 1/1/92–12/31/99. A multiple
logistic regression model was used to control for known predictors of
receiving radiation, baseline HD, surgery type and chemotherapy use.
Cox proportional hazards models and propensity analysis were used to
estimate the risk of myocardial infarction (MI), congestive heart
failure (CHF), and HD in the five years following diagnosis.

Results: Of 31,748 women with stage
I–III breast cancer. 11,429 (36%) had breast-conserving surgery (BCS),
and 19,906 (63%) had a mastectomy. Overall, 14,461 (46%) received RT,
but of the BCS patients, 8,396 (73%) received RT. RT use was
associated with BCS, younger age, fewer comorbidities, hormone
receptor negativity, multiple primaries, white race, non-rural
residence, chemotherapy use and advanced disease. Pre-existing HD did
not influence receipt of radiation therapy. Among RT patients,
leftsided radiation therapy (LSRT) was associated with a 25% increase
in the hazard rate of MI (HR = 1.26; 95% CI (1.05–1.49)) but not with
other cardiac outcomes. The RT-associated cumulative risk of MI
increased over time (Figure 1).

Conclusion: In this cohort of elderly
patients, a previous diagnosis of HD was not associated with RT use.
Although patients who received LSRT had a higher risk of MI than those
who received right sided RT, this risk was not amplified in patients
that had prior chemotherapy compared to those who did not. In
addition, RT did not increase the risk of CHF. This analysis
highlights the need for cardiac surveillance among high-risk patients
and emphasizes the need for new treatment approaches that prolong
survival while minimizing adverse effects. 

## 4042

## Accelerated partial breast irradiation compared to whole breast
radiotherapy: the potential for reduced contralateral breast dose and
heart dose.

## Ben-David MA, Marsh RB, Moran JM, Balter JM, Hayman JA, Griffith
KA, Pierce LJ. University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI;
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI

Background: While most studies do not
show an increase in longterm radiation-associated complications in
patients treated with conservative surgery and radiotherapy (RT)
compared to surgery alone, other studies do suggest an increase in
complications, including cardiac toxicity and increased contralateral
breast (CB) cancers, in women treated with breast RT. Therefore,
techniques that can reduce or eliminate the dose to the CB and heart
would have the potential for improving overall outcome and survival.
For these reasons, we evaluated the potential of accelerated partial
breast irradiation (APBI) combined with breath hold (BH) to deliver
less dose to the CB and heart when compared with whole breast
radiotherapy (WBRT).

Methods: Following IRB approval, 10
patients diagnosed with stage 0/I BC have been enrolled in a Phase
I–II study of APBI using intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) in
the Radiation Oncology Department of the University of Michigan School
of Medicine. Following lumpectomy, patients were treated twice daily
for 5 days to 38.5 Gy. All patients underwent a CT scan using an
Automated Breathing Control (ABC) device and a scan at free breathing
(FB) prior to treatment. Patients were treated using the ABC device
with a BH at 65–80% inhale state to maximize the heart-chest wall
distance. A WBRT plan using the FB scan was also generated for each
patient using two opposed tangent fields. Doses to the CB and heart
were calculated using a convolution/ superposition algorithm for both
techniques and compared. Heart doses were evaluated only for the 5
patients who were treated to the left breast.

Results: As shown in the table there
was no difference between the two techniques in the mean dose to the
whole heart. However, the mean dose to 20% of the heart volume (V20)
was significantly higher with the WBRT technique (p=0.008), suggesting
a higher dose to the anterior portion of the heart, containing the
left anterior descending artery and left ventricle. For the CB, the
mean average dose was not different between the techniques, but there
was a highly significant difference between the V10 (p=0.0006) and the
V20 (p=0.02) of the CB, consistent with a higher (medial) breast dose
for the WBRT technique.

Conclusions: Our data suggest that
heart dose and CB dose are reduced when the patient is treated with
APBI using IMRT with BH compared with WBRT in a FB state. These
results support the need to accrue to randomized trials for long term
outcomes of patients treated with APBI vs. WBRT. 

## 4043

## A phase I dose escalation trial of gemcitabine with radiotherapy
for breast cancer in the treatment of chest wall recurrences.

## Lin A, Hayman JA, Schipper MJ, Schott AF, Shewach DS, Pierce LJ.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI

Background: The standard treatment
for an isolated local or local-regional failure after mastectomy is
radiotherapy (RT), with a preceding surgical resection when feasible.
However, rates of durable local control following RT salvage average
only approximately 50%. We previously established that the maximum
tolerated dose of gemcitabine with concurrent RT for chest wall
disease was 300 mg/m2/week. We now present
our final results in the 12 patients enrolled on our phase I
study.

Materials and Methods: After
obtaining Institutional Review Board approval, all patients with
unresectable and resectable localregional recurrence of breast cancer
following mastectomy seen at the University of Michigan Breast Care
Clinic who signed informed consent were eligible to participate in
this phase I trial. Gemcitabine was given at
300 mg/m2/week. RT was delivered
initially to the chest wall and supraclavicular fossa to a total of
50 Gy in 2 Gy fractions. If the axillary and/or internal mammary lymph
nodes were clinically involved, these nodal sites were included in the
initial treatment volume. Additional boosts of 10 to 20 Gy were given
to the areas of re-excision or to remaining gross disease. Endpoints
were local-regional control, progressionfree, and overall survival by
resection status.

Results: Of the total 12 patients
enrolled, 0/12 patients experienced a local-regional re-recurrence
after treatment as first failure or as any failure (median F/U of
31.5 months, range 1.1 – 68.9). With a median F/U of 61.8 months
(range 1.1 – 68.9) progression-free survival was 50%, and overall
survival was 69% in the 7 patients with unresectable disease. Of the 5
patients who had resectable disease, with a median F/U of 5.9 months
(range 3.5 – 9.1), both progression-free survival and overall survival
were 80%. There was no statistically significant difference in
progressionfree survival (p=0.94) or overall survival (p=0.85) by
resectability status.

Discussion: Patients with resected or
unresected chest wall recurrences treated concurrently with
gemcitabine and RT appear to have excellent rates of local-regional
control. While we will continue to follow these patients over time to
assure sustained local control, these preliminary results are
encouraging given the baseline high rates of local failure previously
observed with RT alone. A phase II trial with concurrent gemcitabine
and RT is warranted.

## 4044

## Targeted intraoperative radiotherapy (TARGIT) as a boost yields
very low recurrence rates.

## Vaidya JS, Baum M, Tobias JS, Wenz F, Massarut S, Hilaris BS,
Houghton J, Murphy O, Saunders C, Corica T, Harrisson E, Keshtgar M,
Douek M, Sainsbury R, Kraus-Tiefenbacher U, Melchart F, Joseph D.
University of Dundee and Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom;
University College London, United Kingdom; University of Mannheim,
Mannheim, Germany; CRO, Aviano, Italy; Our Lady of Mercy New York
Medical College; Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth,
Australia
The value of tumour bed boost after breast conserving surgery has
been well demonstrated, especially in those with higher risks of local
recurrence. However, accurate targeting of this boost is difficult and
the risk of a “geographical miss” is estimated to occur in 50% to 80%
of cases, substantially contributing to local recurrence.
Beginning in 1998, we have been treating patients of early breast
cancer suitable for breast conserving surgery with TARGeted
Intraoperative radioTherapy (TARGIT) using the
IntrabeamTM. system. This was a pilot
series to test the feasibility and safety of the new approach as a
prelude to the randomised trial which would test if intraoperative
radiotherapy would alone be sufficient for local control in selected
patients.
This series now includes patients from the UK, USA, Italy, Germany
and Australia. Patients suitable for breast conserving surgery were
given intraoperative radiotherapy at the time of surgery, using the
IntrabeamTM system, delivering 20Gy to
the surface of the tumour bed, followed external beam radiotherapy
(EBRT) as per local guidelines, but excluding the boost.
324 patients have been treated. The median follow up is 26 months
(longest 77 months). The treatment is well tolerated and the local
recurrence rate is very low (table).
These data suggest that TARGIT + EBRT results in an extremely low
local recurrence rate and the time is ripe for a randomised trial to
test whether the conventional external boost should be replaced by
Targit, especially in high risk women. We are planning to commence
this study to run in parallel with the ongoing TARGIT trial. For young
high risk patients n=476 will be well powered to detect a difference
between 2% and 8%. 

## 4045

## Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) enhancement beyond the
tumor margin: implications for radiation therapy.

## Rembert JL, Klifa C, Lu Y, Gibbs J, Hylton N, Park C. University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Background: Radiation therapy (RT) is
used after lumpectomy for breast cancer to decrease the risk of local
recurrence. However, the optimal volume for treatment is not well
characterized. Contrast-enhanced breast MRI is often used as a
diagnostic tool based on signal enhancement characteristics of
extravasated gadolinium-based contrast. Signal enhancement ratios
(SER), which reflect the physiologic blood flow in the breast, can be
quantified on a voxel-by-voxel basis within the 3-dimensional
architectural information provided by one pre-contrast, one
post-contrast at 2.5 minutes and one late post-contrast at 6 minutes
MRI scans.

Purpose: To determine if breast MRI
signal enhancement ratios (SER) could be used to characterize stromal
tissue beyond the tumor margin in patients with invasive breast cancer
before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Methods: We included
contrast-enhanced fat-suppressed breast MRI data from 11 patients with
invasive breast cancer taken before and after one cycle of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Volumetric SER maps were generated using an
institutionally developed, validated, computer-based algorithm. On one
sagittal slice representing the tumor, five circular regions of
interest (ROI’s), 5 mm in diameter each, were drawn to extend radially
out from the tumor. The first ROI was completely placed within
enhancing tumor while the
2nd–5th ROI’s
extended into fibroglandular stroma. We used fat-suppressed MRIs where
the signal intensity in regions of fat appears nearly as dark as the
image background, and therefore regions of fat were not included in
ROIs calculations. Two unique ROI sets were obtained on each pre and
post-chemotherapy scan provided adequate non-tumor fibroglandular
tissue was present. A mixed random effects model was used to fit the
data by quadratic curves of the distance from tumor before and after
chemotherapy as the fixed effect, patients as the random effects, and
SER as the dependent variable. F-test was used to assess the
significance of the distance from tumor as well as the effects of
chemotherapy. A 5% statistical significant level was used.

Results: The mixed random effects
model showed a significant quadratic relationship between the distance
from the tumor and SER. The average vertex of this curve reached an
inflection point at approximately 1.25 cm from the margin of the
tumor. Chemotherapy shifted the curve downwards significantly
(p=0.02), but had no effect on the overall shape of the curve.

Conclusions: Physiologic information
from breast MRI may reflect stromal abnormalities beyond the tumor
margin. Volumetric SER may be a useful tool in defining the optimal
volume for breast RT.

## 4046

## Risk of internal mammary recurrence after mastectomy in absence of
internal mammary chain radiation therapy. A retrospective
study.

## Lerouge D, Levy C, Ollivier JM, Switsers O, Vie B, Delozier T.
Centre Francois Baclesse, Caen, France

Purpose: Many controversies remain
about the role of internal mammary lymph node (IMLN) radiation therapy
for breast cancer, without evidence for real benefit in term of
loco-regional recurrence or survival.
In order to evaluate the risk of recurrence in IMLN, and to
determine possible risk factors, we retrospectively study a population
of 1353 women, treated by mastectomy, eventually associated by chest
wall radiotherapy, but without IMLN radiation therapy.

Material and methods: From 1985, ILMN
irradiation was excluded of local treatment after breast surgery.
After mastectomy, post operative radiation therapy (50 Gy) was limited
to the chest wall (+/− supra-clavicular area) in case of uncomplete
resection and/or extensive axillary involvement.
Between 1985 and 1996, this protocol was applied to 1353 women
(mean age 55 years). Clinical characteristics:13 % T1, 50 % T2, 37 %
T3–T4. Inner or central tumor: 46,3 %, external 53,7 % .pN negative =
39 %, pN1 1–3 = 34 %, N+ >3 = 27 %.
52 % of these patients received chest wall radiotherapy, 42,4 %
adjuvant chemotherapy and for 65,6 % of the population an adjuvant
hormonal therapy was administered.

Results: The 5-yrs rate of internal
mammary nodes recurrence is 2 %. No statistically significant
difference in IMNL recurrence rate was observed according to clinical
features (age, hormonal status, tumor size, tumor location),
histological features (axillary involvement vs not, grade, hormonal
receptors, histological type) or adjuvant treatment (chemo and/or
hormonal therapy vs not). The largest rate of IMLN recurrence was
observed in the subgroup of N+>9 (8,3 %). The number of axillary
positive nodes (N+ 1–3, N+ 4–9, N+ >9) is the most important
parameter, but the difference remains under statistical value (p =
0.06). Inner/central tumors experienced more IMLN recurrence (1,08 %)
than external tumors (0,3%), but this rate remains low and the
difference is not statistically significant (p = 0.2).
In addition, historical comparison with 1226 patients treated with
IMLN radiation after mastectomy (+/− chest wall irradiation) from 1973
to 1984 was made. In this group, no internal mammary nodes recurrence
was observed. This difference in IMLN recurrence did not affect the
survival: the 5 and 10 years overall survival is higher in the NO-
IMLN-radiation group (respectively 79 and 62 % versus 73 and 58 %) (p
<0.005).

Conclusions: IMLN recurrences remain
very rare, therefore the benefit of ILMN radiation therapy must be
discussed. Waiting for results of ongoing randomised trials,
retrospective evaluation of no-IMLN treated patients give us
interesting data about ILMN recurrence risk. Even in the subgroups for
which the radiation therapy is often proposed (inner/central tumor
location, axillary nodes involvement), the recurrence rate remains low
and the reduction of this small incidence by radiation is eventually
without effect on survival.
The “pertinent” indications of ILMN radiation therapy remain to
define.

## 4047

## Frequency of asymptomatic brain metastases in Her-2 positive breast
cancer patients.

## Niwinska A, Tacikowska M, Pienkowski T, Lemanska I,
Bauer-Kosinska B, Glogowska I, Rudnicka H. Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute, Warsaw, Poland

Introduction: Clinically evident
brain metastases are observed in 10–16% of breast cancer patients
(pts). In HER-2 positive breast cancer the percentage is much higher
and makes up 30–48%. Since trastuzumab has been introduce in the
treatment of breast cancer, that’s brain metastases are the direct
cause of death, specially in pts with clinical response in viscera.
This is the reason of performing screened magnetic resonance imaging
(MR) of the brain in pts with disseminated disease without
neurological symptoms in order to early detection and irradiation of
brain metastases.

Aim: The aim of the study was to
evaluate the frequency of asymptomatic brain metastases in HER-2
positive breast cancer pts and to establish the extent of regression
after radiotherapy.

Material and Methods: Screened MR of
the brain was performed in 32 HER-2 positive breast cancer pts
currently treated in Breast Cancer Clinic with trastuzumab and
chemotherapy because of visceral metastases and/ or locoregional
failure. In those pts in whom asymptomatic brain metastases were
detected irradiation to the brain 30 Gy in 10 fraction was undertaken.
Than, control MR was performed 3 months after radiotherapy in order to
assess the extent of regression of metastases.

Results: In 11 (34%) pts asymptomatic
brain metastases were detected: in 5- solitary, in 6 – numerous. Pts
with brain metastases were younger (51 vs 54 years), with shorter DFS
(25 vs 32 months) and more often with distant than with locoregional
failure but differences were not statistically significant. Median
time from recurrence to brain metastases was 15 months. In 10 pts
radiotherapy of brain was undertaken. In control MR, performed
3 months after radiotherapy, 3 complete and 7 partial regressions were
stated.

Conclusion: Higher than expected
percentage of asymptomatic brain metastases was detected in HER-2
positive breast cancer pts. Good radiological response in all pts was
achieved. It seems, that it is reasonable to introduce MR screening of
the brain in HER-2 positive breast cancer pts with disseminated
disease for early detection and irradiation of brain metastases before
neurological signs and symptoms appear. Longer follow-up is necessary
in order to evaluate risk reduction of neurological symptoms and the
cause of death of pts

## 4048

## Over expression of apoptotic markers - p53 and bcl-xl is associated
with axillary recurrence following radiotherapy in breast cancer
patients.

## Jameel JK, Garimella V, Long E, Beavis A, Drew PJ, Cawkwell L.
Postgraduate Medical Institute, University of Hull, Castle Hill
Hospital, Cottingham, East Yorkshire, United Kingdom; Hull & East
Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust, Hull, East Yorkshire, United
Kingdom

Introduction: Management of the
node-positive axilla from carcinoma of the breast remains
controversial, axillary radiotherapy and axillary clearance being the
two options. Specific molecular markers in axilla and primary tumour
that mediate radioresistance could influence the choice of
treatment.

Aim: Toassess the expression of
apoptosis proteins as markers for axillary recurrence following
axillary radiotherapy.

Methods: Ten patients who developed
axillary recurrence following axillary radiotherapy were identified
and were compared with 10 matched controls who remained disease free
5 years post-treatment. All patients underwent a wide local excision
(WLE)/mastectomy followed by radiotherapy to the breast/chest wall and
axilla under a similar regime. Immunohistochemical analysis was
performed on primary tumour, axillary node samples for p53,
anti-apoptotic markers (bcl-2, bcl-xl, mcl-1) and pro-apoptotic
markers (bad, bak, bax). Over expression was recorded in cases where a
clonal pattern of nuclear staining was seen in >10% of malignant
cells for p53 and anti-apoptotic markers, while loss of expression was
recorded when there was absence of staining in >50% of malignant
cells for the pro-apoptotic markers. Scoring was done by 2 independent
observers.

Results: In 5 out of the 10 cases,
the primary tumour was positive for p53 as opposed to none in the
controls, the difference being statistically significant (p= 0.016,
Fisher’s exact test). A statistically significant difference was also
found in the expression of bcl-xl between the axillary samples of
cases and controls (p=0.035, Fisher’s exact test). None of the other
markers were significantly different between the 2 groups.

Conclusion: p53 mutation in the
primary tumour is a significant risk factor for axillary recurrence
following axillary radiotherapy. Overexpression of bcl-xl in the
axillary sample may also contibute to radioresistance by failing to
initiate an appropriate apoptotic response in cells with radiation
induced damage.

## 4049

## Improved survival after radiotherapy for brain metastases in
patients with HER2 positive breast tumors.

## Maur M, Frassoldati A, Piacentini F, Ramundo D, Sabbatini R,
Giovannelli S, Ficarra G, Bertolini F, Falchi AM, Conte PF. University
of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy

Background: A high incidence of brain
metastases (BM) has been reported in patients with HER2 positive
breast tumors. This could be the combined result of more aggressive
tumor biology and better control of systemic disease with trastuzumab.
In order to define how HER2 status affect the CNS involvement and the
response to radiotherapy we conducted a retrospective chart review of
patients (pts) with BM.

Patients and methods: Data from 53
consecutive patients with BM from BC were retrieved. Median age at CNS
progression was 56 years (range 33 to 76); 38/53 pts (71%) had two or
more CNS metastases (23 brain, 6 cerebellum, 14 brain/cerebellum, 3
brain/ cerebellum/leptomeningeal), 43/53 pts (81%) had multiple extra
cranial metastases. Median time to developing CNS mts after primary
diagnosis was 50 months (range 32 to 236). Forty-one pts (77%) had
received prior chemotherapy (37/53 antracyclinebased, 21/53
taxane-based). The tumor biological characteristics were as follows:
high grade 27/53 (51%), high proliferative rate (MIB-1 >20%) 33/53
(62%), ER positive 23/53 (43%), PgR positive 12/53 (22%). Twenty-five
(47%) were HER2 positive. Three patients only underwent to brain
metastasectomy. Fortynine pts were treated with whole brain
radiotherapy (WBR) plus prednisolone (28 pts 30 Gy/10 fractions, 21
pts 20 Gy/5 fractions) and 4 pts had received stereotassic
radiosurgery (SRS). At the time of diagnosis of BM 16/53 (30%) were on
treatment with trastuzumab.

Results: No significant correlation
between site of CNS relapse and tumor histology (p=0.877), grading
(p=0.495), HER2 status (p=0.127), ER status (p=0.499), PgR status
(p=0.152), anthracycline based (p=0.998) or taxane-based chemotherapy
(p=0.756) was observed. The response status after radiotherapy was: 1
complete response (CR), 20 (57%) partial response (PR), 11 (31%)
stable disease (SD), 3 (8.5%) progression disease (PD), response was
not assessed in 18 pts. No difference between type of response to
radiotherapy and histology (p=0.681), grading (p=0.183), HER2 status
(p=0.844), CNS metastatic site (p=0.116), number of CNS mts (p=0.677)
and trastuzumab-therapy (p=0.389) was observed. A significant better
response was observed with high dose (30 Gy/10 fractions) of WBR (p=
0.01). So far 38/53 (72%) died for disease progression, 13/53 (25%)
are alive with disease. Median survival of all pts was 9 mos.
Significant predictors for better overall survival were: HER2 status
(positive 21 mos vs negative 3 mos, p= 0.005), age (<55 years 10
mos vs >55 years 3 mos, p= 0.007) and among HER2 positive patients
continuous treatment with trastuzumab (yes 21 mos vs no 5 mos,
p=0.026).

Conclusions: breast cancer patients
with HER2 positive BM experience a more long survival when treated
with radiotherapy and trastuzumab.

## 4050

## Efficacy of accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) as a
neoadjuvant treatment for patients with breast cancer: a pilot
study.

## Sato K, Uematsu M, Saito T, Hiraide H. National Defense Medical
College, Namiki, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan; Keio University School of
Medicine, Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Saitama Red Cross
Hospital, Kami-ochiai, Chuo-ku, Saitama, Japan

Background: Breast conserving
treatment (BCT) consists of breast-conserving surgery and followed by
whole-breast irradiation (WBI). Accelerated partial breast irradiation
(APBI) is being considered as a possible alternative to WBI.
Neoadjuvant APBI might provide more benefit than postsurgical APBI
because tumor downstaging will enhance the likelihood of BCT.

Method: APBI was delivered as 50 Gy
in 5 fractions over 5 days before surgery for patients with breast
cancer of 3–4 cm diameter. Patients with 3 cm or less tumor were
deemed to be candidates for breast-conserving surgery.

Results: Between September 1998 and
August 1999, 12 women were enrolled. The mean tumor diameter and
volume were reduced from 3.4 to 1.8 cm (reduction rate: 47%) and from
8.1 to 2.2 cm3 (reduction rate: 71%),
respectively. The mean pathologic tumor size was 1.5 cm, and a
complete pathologic response was found in one patient (8%). All
patients were eligible for breast-conserving surgery. Noipsilateral
breast recurrences have been observed to date.

Conclusion: This is the first report
of neoadjuvant APBI for relatively large breast cancers. Although the
number of participants was small, these results would encourage the
development of clinical trials exploring the efficacy of neoadjuvant
APBI. 
 

## 4051

## Mammosite brachytherapy: predictive factors for complications and
cosmesis.

## McLaughlin M, Isreal P, Fine R, Corgan K, Robbins A, Hughes L,
Haile K, Vanipalli J, Pope K. North Georgia Radiation Therapy,
Marietta, GA; Wellstar Kennestone Hospital, Marietta, GA

Background: This study reviewed
factors that predicted cosmesis and complications in women treated
with Mammosite based partial breast irradiation.

Material/Methods: Eighty.one patients
(T1No–64; T2N0–8; CIS–9] underwent lumpectomy. This was followed by
Mammosite partial breast irradiation. CT was used for dosimetric
planning.

Results: CT showed the minimum skin
spacing to be 5.6 mm in 19, 7.8 mm in 54 and greater than 9 mm in 8
patients. Four patients were explanted because of inadequate skin
spacing, one patient because of extensive pain secondary to balloon
inflation and one from suboptimal conformance of the surgical cavity
to the Mammosite balloon. Fifty–two patients had no–to–mild skin
reactions, 21 developed moderate skin reactions and 8 developed
desquamation. Predictive factors include balloon–to–skin spacing,
balloon volume, post–radiotherapy exposure to adriamycin–based
chemotherapy, infection and body position of the patient during
treatment (sitting vs. supine). Nineteen patients developed an
infection. Large balloon volume was predictive for infection
(>60 cc). Patients’ perception of cosmesis was good–to–excellent in
64; Skin reaction, infection and the amount of breast tissue removed
were predictive of the patients’ perception.

Discussion: Mammosite accelerated
partial breast irradiation is a safe method for treating early stage
breast cancer and CIS. The factors that predict suboptimal outcomes
include, small balloon–to–skin distance (5–6 mm], adriamycin based
chemotherapy, balloon volume >60 cc and infections. Patients with
small balloon–to–skin distance should be aware of the potential poorer
cosmesis. All patients should be evaluated by a Medical Oncologist. If
adriamycin is recommended, this should be delivered at least 6–8 weeks
post–irradiation to reduce radiation recall. If a breast infection
develops, chemotherapy should not be delivered until the infection has
resolved. If the balloon volume is >60 cc, the patient should be
placed on prophylactic antibiotics.

## 4052

## Fatty acid synthase (FAS)-catalyzed endogenous fatty acid
metabolism regulates Her-2/neu (erbB-2) oncogene expression via malonyl-coenzyme-a-dependent expression of the
Ets protein polyomavirus enhancer
activator 3 (PEA3), a transcriptional repressor of Her-2/neu promoter
activity in cancer cells.

## Menendez JA, Papadimitropoulou A, Vellon L, Colomer R, Lupu R.
Evanston Northwestern Healthcare, Evanston, IL; Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL; Institut Catala
Oncologia, Hospital Universitari Dr. Josep Trueta, Girona, Catalonia,
Spain
We recently revealed that FAS-catalyzed endogenous fatty acid
metabolism is a novel regulator of Her-2/neu oncogene in cancer cells
(Menendez et al. PNAS USA. 2004;
101:10715–20). Her-2/ neu-overexpressing tumor cells exhibited
noteworthy reductions of Her-2/neu protein and Her-2/neu mRNA
following pharmacological inhibition of FAS activity with C75, a novel
small-compound targeting the -ketoacyl synthase partial activity of FAS. We here
addressed the ultimate molecular mechanism linking tumor cells’
response to FAS inhibition and Her-2/neu gene expression. Transient
transfection experiments demonstrated that pharmacological FAS
blockade specifically repressed Her-2/neu promoter activity, while
concomitantly induced the upregulation of the Ets protein PEA3 (a
transcriptional repressor of Her-2/neu promoter activity) in cancer
cells naturally exhibiting Her-2/neu gene amplification but not in
cancer cells expressing low to undetectable Her-2/neu. Indeed, an
intact PEA3 DNAbinding site at the wild-type Her-2/neu promoter was
essential for C75-induced Her-2/neu gene repression as either a
Her-2/neu promoter bearing a PEA3 site-mutated sequence or a
full-length Her-2/neu cDNA controlled by a SV40 viral promoter were
not subject to negative regulation by C75. Importantly, these effects
were recapitulated by siRNA-induced inhibition of FAS gene expression,
thus demonstrating that C75 exerts its anti-Her-2/neu effects through
its FAS target. If palmitate starvation mediated the regulatory
effects of C75 on the transcriptional activity of Her-2/neu gene, then
any other FA synthesis inhibitor should produce similar effects.
Bezafibrate, known to block the activity of the rate-limiting enzyme
of FA synthesis Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase, failed to regulate either
Her-2/neu promoter activity or PEA3 expression. Interestingly,
exogenous supplementation with the FAS substrate Malonyl-CoA
dramatically decreased Her- 2/neu promoter activity while
concomitantly promoting PEA3 accumulation, thus mimicking the
regulatory actions of C75- induced inhibition of FAS activity on
Her-2/neu gene expression. Considering difference in the site of
action of C75 and bezafibrate along FA synthesis pathway, these
findings strongly suggest that Malonyl-CoA -but not FA starvation- not
only represents a previously unrecognized signal of fuel availability
able to trigger repression of Her-2/neu gene expression via the Ets
protein PEA3 but further support the notion of FAS-dependent de novo
FA biogenesis as a valuable molecular target in the management of
Her-2/neu-overexpressing carcinomas.

## 4053

## Epigenetic alteration of a protein tyrosine phosphatase and its
role in tamoxifen-resistance in breast cancer.

## Ramaswamy B, Motiwala T, Kutay H, Majumder S, Shapiro CL, Jacob
ST. Ohio State University, Columbus, OH

Background: Protein tyrosine
phosphatases (PTPs) such as PTPL1, PTPG, and LAR are induced by
tamoxifen (TAM) and the resulting increase in PTP activity is
important for its anti-apoptotic effects. [Friess G etal.Crit rev Onc Hem. 2004]. Moreover,
in vitro and in vivo studies
show that high tyrosine kinase activity in breast tumors may result in
tamoxifen resistance, suggesting that PTP activity may be reduced
under these conditions. We have shown that the gene for receptor-type
protein tyrosine phosphatase type O (PTPRO) is suppressed by methylation in primary rat
hepatocellular carcinoma [Motiwala T et al.
Oncogene 2003], and in several human primary tumors
including chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), hepatocellular
carcinomas, and lung cancer. We have further shown the growth
suppressing potential of PTPRO in
lung cancer [Motiwala T etal. PNAS
2005]. Additionally, PTPRO is localized to chromosome region 12p12.3, a
region characterized by loss of heterozygosity in several tumor types,
a hallmark of classical tumor suppressors. We hypothesized that
PTPRO may function as a tumor
suppressor in normal breast and is epigenetically silenced in breast
cancer which may contribute to tamoxifen resistance. Further, this
suppression may be hormonally mediated.

Results: Using RT-PCR, we found that
normal human mammary epithelial cell (HMEC), 48R and 184 express
PTPRO. We demonstrate that the
PTPRO promoter is unmethylated
in these cells using combined bisulfite restriction analysis (COBRA)
and sequencing. In estrogen receptor (ER)+ MCF-7 and ER- MB231 cell
lines, PTPRO is suppressed and its
promoter is densely methylated (COBRA and bisulfite sequencing).
Moreover, treatment of MCF-7 and MB231 cell lines with M and M of demethylating agent, 5-azadeoxycytidine
(Decitabine) for 72 and 96 hours, respectively, resulted in
re-expression of PTPRO.Treatment of MCF-7 and MB231 cells grown in
phenol-red free media with 50 nM of TAM for 48 and 72 hours resulted
in up-regulation of PTPRO in
ER+ MCF-7 cells but not in ER- MB231
cells.
In our pilot study of primary breast tumors, we have thus far
analyzed 9 tumor samples and three normal breast tissue samples by
methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) and found that the PTPRO promoter is methylated in all the
tumor samples and unmethylated in all the normal breast tissue
samples.

Conclusions: These results show that
PTPRO promoter is methylated in
human breast cancer and not in normal breast tissue; PTPRO can be re-expressed by decitabine in
both ER negative and positive cell lines, and PTPRO is induced by anti-estrogens in
ER+ MCF-7 cells. Ongoing studies are
evaluating whether PTPRO exhibits
growth suppressive and/or pro-apoptotic effects in breast cancer and
its induction is crucial for the anti-tumor effect of TAM. Methylation
and suppression of PTPRO could be a
predictive marker of response to TAM and a molecular target for
epigenetic therapy.

## 4054

## EPLIN, epithelial protein lost in neoplasm, is aberrantly expressed
in human breast cancer and is related to clinical outcomes.

## Jiang WG, Martin TA, Douglas-Jones A, Mansel RE. School of
Medicine, Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
Wales, United Kingdom; Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United
Kingdom

Introduction: EPLIN, epithelial
protein lost in neoplasm, is a protein that has been found to be
reduced or lost after cellular transformation. It is also reduced in
cancer cells, such as oral cancer cells. However, the role of the
molecule in human cancers, including breast cancer has not been
investigated. The current study examined the expression and levels of
expression of EPLIN in a cohort of human breast cancer tissues and
analysed its correlation with the clinical outcomes.

Methods: Invasive breast tumours
(n=120) and normal mammary tissues (n=32) were used. A panel of human
breast cancer, fibroblast and endothelial cell lines were also used.
EPLIN transcript was assessed qualitatively and quantitatively using
conventional and real-time quantitative PCR, respectively. Methylation
of the EPLIN gene promoter was investigated using methylation specific
PCR (MSP). The levels of the EPLIN transcript was analysed against the
clinical and pathological information. Median follow up for the
current cohort was 120 months.

Results: Breast cancer cell lines had
detectable EPLIN transcript, but at reduced level. Fibroblast cell
line had virtually no detectable EPLIN. Breast cancer tissues
generally displayed a low level of EPLIN, compared with normal
tissues. Grade 2 and grade 3 tumour had significantly lower levels of
EPLIN compared with grade 1 breast tumours (p=0.047 and p=0.046 vs
grade 1, respectively). Significantly lower levels of EPLIN was seen
in TNM4 tumours (3.1±1.5 copies/50 ng RNA in TNM4 tumours vs 30.5±8.7
in TNM1 tumours). When the Nottingham Prognostic Index was used as a
prognosis indicator, patients who had poor prognosis had a
significantly lower levels of the EPLIN transcript compared with those
with good prognosis (2.73±0.8 in patients with poor prognostic index
vs 32.8±10 in patients with good prognostic index, p=0.0081). Over a
median 10 year follow up, patients who developed local recurrence and
who died of breast cancer had significantly lower levels of EPLIN
compared with those who remained disease free (p=0.0003 and p=0.0008,
respectively). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis has shown that patients
with high levels of EPLIN transcript had longer survival than those
with low levels (median survival 141.6 months vs 135.4 months,
respectively, p=0.064). Methylation specific PCR had shown presence of
hypermethylation of the EPLIN promoter in breast tumour tissues.
Hypermethylation of the EPLIN promoter was also frequently seen in
breast cancer cell lines.
It is concluded that expression of EPLIN in breast cancer is
downregulated in breast cancer cells and tissues. A potential
mechanism of the aberrant expression is via the EPLIN promoter
hypermethylation. The levels of EPLIN transcripts are linked to the
clinical outcomes in patients with breast cancer.

## 4055

## BRCA1 promoter methylation confers sensitivity to cisplatin
in vitro.

## Nanda R, Dignam JJ, Collins C, Xu J, Dolan ME, Olopade OI.
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL

Background: Women with BRCA1 mutations are more likely to have
breast cancers that are hormone receptor and HER2/neu negative. We
have previously demonstrated that BRCA1 promoter methylation occurs to some degree in
20–30% of all sporadic tumors, and up to 50% of high-grade hormone
receptor negative tumors, making it much more common than germline
mutation (Wei et. al., in press). Given the role of BRCA1 in DNA repair, it is likely that
cells deficient in BRCA1 secondary to promoter methylation will have
increased sensitivity to DNA damaging agents, as has previously been
demonstrated in cells deficient in BRCA1 secondary to mutation. The
role of BRCA1 methylation in
determining chemosensitivity is not yet known.

Methods: Using an in vitro model, the relative sensitivity
of BRCA1 methylated, mutated and
competent cells was determined in four representative breast cancer
cell lines: UACC-3199 (methylated BRCA1), HCC-1937 (mutated BRCA1), MCF-7 (wildtype BRCA1, ER positive) and MDA-MB-231 (wildtype BRCA1, ER negative). Exponentially growing
cells were treated with doses of cisplatin between M and M. Cells were harvested 96 hours after drug exposure
and stained with Annexin-V and DAPI. Cell survival and apoptosis were
determined by flow cytometry using FACS DiVa. FlowJo FACS analysis
software (version 6.1.1) was used to generate percent apoptotic and
live cells. IC50 values and 95% confidence
intervals were calculated from dose response curves.

Results: The
IC50 values for the UACC-3199 and HCC-1937
cells were M (95% CI 9.49–14.88) and M (95% CI 40.45–94.63), respectively. The
IC50 values for MCF-7 and MDA-MB- 231 cells
were not reached, even at a dose of M. Peak percentage of apoptotic cells observed for
the UACC-3199 was 38% at a cisplatin concentration of M. Peak percentage of apoptotic cells observed for
the HCC-1937, MCF-7 and MDAMB-231 cells were 20%, 18.7% and 20% at
cisplatin concentrations of M, M, and M, respectively.

Discussion: Previous studies have
demonstrated that cells deficient in BRCA1 secondary to mutation are more sensitive to
cisplatin than BRCA1 competent
cells. We have demonstrated for the first time that cells deficient in
BRCA1 secondary to promoter
methylation are also highly sensitive to cisplatin. As varying degrees
of BRCA1 methylation occurs in a
significant proportion of high-grade hormone receptor negative tumors,
it represents a potential therapeutic target in the treatment of a
subset of sporadic breast cancers.

## 4056

## ER status and age-at-diagnosis determine frequency and structural
severity of breast cancer p53 mutations.

## Fedele V, Roydasgupta R, Tommasi S, Paradiso A, Albertson D,
Benz C. University of California, San Francisco, CA; National Cancer
Institute-Bari, Bari, Italy; Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato,
CA
Breast cancer markers thought to refect genomic instability (e.g.
abnormal p53, high nuclear grade, aneuploidy) show strong inverse
associations with patient age-at-diagnosis, while estrogen receptor
(ER) overexpression shows a strong positive association with aging. As
well, breast cancer p53 immunopositivity correlates imperfectly with
p53 DNA mutation status and both correlate negatively with ER
overexpression. Thus, the present study was undertaken to compare the
relationship between ER status, ageat- diagnosis, frequency and type
of p53 mutations from a cryobank of 111 primary breast cancer cases
recently diagnosed and treated at NCI-Bari, subdivided into younger
(Y≤ 45y; n = 52; 44% ERnegative) and older (O≥70y; n = 59; 15%
ER-negative) age cohorts. Overall, we identified DNA coding mutations
within p53 exons 5–8 (p53mut) in 20 cases (18%), consistent with the
reported p53 mutation rate for breast cancers worldwide
(www-p53.iarc.fr). ER-positive breast cancers showed a p53mut rate of
only 6%, while ER-negative cancers showed a p53mut rate of 46%
(p<0.0001). When controlled for ER status, age cohorts showed no
significant differences in p53mut rates. Breast cancer p53 mutations
resulted from base transitions (11/20), transversions (8/20) and an
in-frame micro-deletion (1/20), producing missense amino acid
substitutions (17/20) and nonsense protein truncations (2/20). Half of
these p53 DNA mutations resulted in structurally more severe changes
in p53 protein primary sequence, characterized by protein truncations
or amino acid polarity and H-bond changes within evolutionarily
conserved regions of the p53 DNA-binding domain. Among all cases, 90%
of these more severe changes occurred in Y cohort tumors (p = 0.007);
among ER-negative cases, 100% of these more severe changes occurred in
Y cohort tumors (p = 0.015). Array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (array CGH) showed significantly more genome copy number
gains/losses in p53mut vs. p53wt cases, and in ER-negative vs.
ER-positive cases, but not in Y vs. O cases controlled for ER status.
Altogether, these findings indicate that ER status rather than
age-at-diagnosis associates with breast cancer p53mut frequency and
genomic instability. In contrast, age-at-diagnosis may associate with
the functional consequences of p53 DNA mutations since, when
controlled for ER status, younger age appears associated with more
severe changes in p53 primary structure.

## 4057

## The human p53 gene encodes nine p53 protein isoforms that can
modulate p53 tumour suppressor activity.

## Bourdon JCR, Murray-Zmijewski F, McDowell H, Thompson A, Lane
DP. University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, United Kingdom
The p53 gene is central to tumorigenesis and response to therapy in
breast cancer. However, unlike most epithelial cancers, p53 mutation
is much less common than expected in breast cancer. The recently
discovered p53-related genes, p73 and p63, express multiple splice
variants and amino-terminally truncated forms initiated from an
alternative promoter in intron-3. To date, no such complexity has been
described for the p53 gene. In this study, we show that human p53 gene
expresses multiple splice variants and contains an internal promoter.
Therefore, p53 gene has a similar gene organization than p63 and p73
and can encode for at least nine p53 protein isoforms.
The conservation of the internal promoter in the p53 gene from
drosophila to man suggests an essential role for the p53 isoforms and
reveals an unforeseen complex regulation conserved through
evolution.
p53 isoforms are expressed in multiple normal human tissues. One
isoform can act in a dominant-negative manner towards wild-type p53
for its function in transcription and apoptosis, revealing a new
mechanism by which p53 can be inactivated. This mechanism would not be
detected by the current sequencing and immunohistological methods used
to determine p53 status of human cancers.
Some p53 isoforms are differentially expressed in breast cancer
where they can act to modulate the p53 activity threshold and could
therefore influence the susceptibility to cancer development and
response to therapy.

## 4058

## mda-7: a remedy for oncogene addiction
in breast cancer?

## Chada S, Mhashilkar A, Liu Y, Bocangel D, Zheng M, Ramesh R,
Meyn R, Hunt K. Introgen Therapeutics Inc., Houston, TX; UTMD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background: The concept of oncogene
addiction has been proposed as a mechanism for breast cancer growth
and proliferation supporting the rationale for development of
molecularly targeted therapies. It is clear that acquisition of
genetic mutations results in dysregulation of oncogenic signaling
pathways in tumor cells, and recent studies have indicated that
persistence of these dysregulated oncogenes is essential for
maintaining the tumorigenic phenotype. We evaluated the role of
mda-7 gene transfer in
oncogene-addicted breast cancer cells. Current therapies used in the
treatment of breast cancer are limited by systemic toxicity, by rapid
drug metabolism and by intrinsic and acquired drug resistance. We have
previously shown that transfer of the melanoma
differentiation-associated gene-7 (mda-7) elicits growth inhibition and apoptosis in
various tumor types when delivered by adenoviral mediated gene
transfer (Ad-mda7). In the current study, we evaluated the role of
Ad-mda7 as a tool to inhibit the growth of oncogene addicted breast
cancer cells.

Methods: We evaluated the effects of
Ad-mda7 alone and in combination with other therapeutics against a
panel of nine breast cancer cell lines and their normal counterparts.
These therapeutics exhibit diverse modes of action, including
formation of bulky adducts, inhibition of DNA replication (Adriamycin,
XRT), damage to microtubules (Taxotere), non-steroidal estrogen
antagonists (Tamoxifen), or HER-2/neu receptor blockade (Herceptin).
We analyzed growth inhibition, G2/M cell cycle arrest, and apoptosis
induction by Admda7 and combination therapy.

Results: in
vitro, Ad-mda7 inhibited growth and induced cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in all breast tumor lines, but not in normal
mammary epithelial cells. In vivo, Ad-mda7-induced p53-independent
tumor growth inhibition in multiple breast cancer xenograft models
(p<0.004). We then evaluated the activity of Ad-mda7 in combination
with other agents commonly used to treat breast cancer. Treated with
Tamoxifen, Taxotere, Adriamycin or radiation, MDA-7-expressing cells
displayed additive or synergistic cytotoxicity. Increased rates of
apoptosis correlated with decreased BCL-2 expression and BAX
up-regulation in breast cancer cell lines. In
vivo, animals that received Ad-mda7 in combination with
XRT had a significant reduction of tumor growth (p<0.002).

Conclusions: This is the first report
of the synergistic effects of Ad-mda7 combined with chemotherapy or
radiotherapy on human breast carcinoma cells. These data suggest that
mda-7 gene transfer can overcome the oncogene addiction observed in
breast cancer.

## 4059

## Brg1, a chromatin remodeling gene, is
suppressed in ERnegative breast cancer in human.

## Pan M. Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Santa Clara,
CA

Background: Brg1 is an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling gene of
SWI/SNF complex, and is a candidate tumor suppressor gene. In
Brg1+/− mouse heterozygotes,
15% developed epithelial carcinomas. Mutations of Brg1 gene have been identified in multiple
human cancer cell lines. Brg1 interacts with BRCA1 as well as Rb
(retinoblastoma gene) protein in mammalian cells and a
dominant-negative Brg1 mutant
abrogates p53-stimulated BRCA1 transcription, suggesting that
Brg1 participates in tumor
suppression pathways. This study aimed to investigate expression of
Brg1 gene in human breast
cancer.

Methods and Materials: Paraffin
blocks of 104 cases of invasive breast cancer were retrieved,
sectioned and immunohistochemically stained with a polyclonal antibody
against human Brg1 (J1). H&E staining was performed as well on all
cases. The level of Brg1 expression was determined as percentage of
cells stained and intensity of staining (on a scale of 1 to 3). The
histologic characteristics of cases were retrieved from computerized
records.

Results: Brg1 is expressed in the
nucleus of normal human breast ductal epithelial cells with 80 to 100%
cells stained with intensity of 2 to 3, while normal myoepithelial
cells did not show detectable staining. In 104 cases of invasive
breast cancer studied, 80 were ER-positive, 24 were ER-negative, and
20 were HER2 over-expressed. In ER-positive cases, Brg1 staining was
detected in a median of 95% of carcinoma cells with intensity of 2 to
3. In contrast, in ER-negative tumors, Brg1 staining was detected in a
median of 60% of carcinoma cells with intensity of 1 to 2. Among 22
cases that Brg1 expression was suppressed (detected in less than 50%
of carcinoma cells), 10 were ER-negative (42% of all ER-negative
cases), 12 were ER-positive (15% of all ER-positive cases), which is
statistically significant (p<0.01). Expression of Brg1 also
appeared to be suppressed in poorly differentiated tumors with high
proliferation rate. Of 22 cases with suppressed expression of Brg1, 7
were HER2/NEU over-expressed (or amplified). However, no statistically
significant relationship with regard to HER2/NEU status was
observed.

Conclusion: Expression of
ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling gene Brg1 appears suppressed in ER-negative and poorly
differentiated invasive breast cancer in human. This is consistent
with the previous observation that Brg1 is candidate tumor suppressor gene and may be a
useful marker in breast cancer in human.

## 4060

## Notch ligands and receptors are co-expressed at high levels in a
subset of breast tumors with poor prognosis pathological
features.

## Reedijk M, Odorcic S, Chang L, Zhang H, Egan SE. The Hospital
for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada; Princess Margaret Hospital,
The University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada

Background: Notch receptors are
powerful regulators of cell fate specification, stem cell
self-renewal, proliferation and apoptosis. Aberrant Notch activation
has been implicated in the formation of a number of malignancies
including T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia. The mouse mammary tumor
virus causes breast cancer in mice through activation of the Notch4
gene.

Materials and Methods: To test if
Notch signaling plays a role in human breast cancer we used mRNA
in situ hybridization to analyze
expression of Notch receptors (Notch1, 2, 3, 4), ligands (Jagged1,
Jagged2, Dll1, Dll3, Dll4) and Fringes (LFng, MFng, RFng) in this
disease.

Results: We surveyed approximately 25
invasive carcinomas for most genes, as well as several carcinomas
in situ (CIS). 5/25 tumors for
which we have data on most receptors and ligands expressed high levels
of one or more of Notch 1, 3 or 4 genes. In each case, the tumor also
expressed high levels of one or more Notch ligand, and in three of
these tumors the Radical Fringe gene was highly expressed.
Interestingly, all of these tumors were high grade, estrogen receptor
and progesterone receptor negative tumors that had spread to the
ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes (node status was not determined in
one of the five tumors), suggesting that high level co-expression of
Notch receptor, ligands (and perhaps Fringes) is associated with poor
prognosis pathological features in breast cancer. Furthermore, all
tumors displaying high-level Notch ligand and receptor co-expression
were of the basal (CK5/17 positive) subtype. In contrast to the
selective high-level co-expression of Notch1, Notch3 or Notch4 with
Notch ligand mRNA in a subset of tumors, Notch2 was highly expressed
in19 of 22 tumors tested, and in most cases without co-expression of a
Notch ligand gene. Finally, several Notch receptors and ligands were
highly expressed in tumor-associated blood vessels.

Discussion: MMTV is known to cause
breast cancer in mice through activation of Notch4. The findings in
the current study highlight a potential role for activation of several
different Notch receptors and ligands in a subset of aggressive human
breast cancer.

## 4061

## Pattern of expression of genes linked to epigenetic silencing in
human breast cancer.

## Munot K, Bell SM, Horgan K, Lane S, Quirke P, Speirs V.
Institute of Molecular Medicine Epidemiology and Cancer Research,
University of Leeds, Leeds, W Yorks, United Kingdom
Epigenetic mechanisms such as DNA methylation are now recognised to
play an important role in neoplasia. The aim of this study was to
determine the pattern of expression of multiple key cancer genes that
are known to undergo epigenetic inactivation by promoter
hypermethylation in breast cancer. These included the tumour
suppressor gene p16, estrogen receptor (ER) , and , progesterone receptor (PR) and the DNA repair genes
hMLH1 and MGMT. Their expression was determined using
immunohistochemistry in a panel of 200 breast cancers. The majority of
breast cancers showed loss of expression of at least one gene (n =
157, 78%), while 23/200 (11.5%) showed loss of expression of at least
3 genes. More specifically, loss of expression of MGMT, ER
 , ER , PR and p16 was observed in 19%, 24%, 13%, 40% and
50% of cases, respectively, while hMLH1 expression remained
constitutive. A strong correlation was seen between highgrade tumours
and loss of expression of ER , ER and PR (all ) and MGMT (P=0.04), while loss of expression of p16 was associated
with low/intermediate-grade tumours (P< 0.001). In addition, methylation-specific PCR was
performed in a subset of 20 cancers to confirm the role of DNA
methylation in the loss of expression of MGMT and a significant
association was observed (P<0.001). In conclusion we have observed
methylation-linked silencing of several key breast cancer genes in a
cohort of high grade breast tumours. These have potential as new
targets for therapeutic strategies based on epigenetic
intervention.

## 4062

## Genomic alterations in axillary lymph node metastases are
associated with clinical outcomes in patients with breast
cancer.

## Becker TE, Ellsworth RE, Ellsworth DL, Deyarmin B, Hooke JA,
Shriver CD. Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, DC; Windber
Research Institute, Windber, PA

Background: Metastatic breast
carcinomas exhibit patterns of genomic alterations that differ from
those in the primary tumors. Effectiveness of treatment regimens based
on histologic or genetic features of primary tumors may thus be
inadequate for treating metastatic disease, which may contribute to
the poor clinical outcome of patients with metastatic breast cancer.
We analyzed allelic imbalance (AI) in primary breast carcinomas and
corresponding lymph node metastases to examine relationships between
levels of genomic instability in primary and metastatic axillary lymph
node tumors and clinical outcomes defined by recurrence and
survival.

Methods: DNA was extracted from pure
populations of tumor cells obtained by laser microdissection of
primary breast and corresponding metastatic axillary lymph node tumors
from 50 patients enrolled in the Clinical Breast Care Project.
Referent DNA for each patient was obtained from blood or disease-free
skin samples. A panel of 52 microsatellite markers from 26 chromosomal
regions commonly altered in breast cancer was used to assess AI, which
was determined by a peak height ratio of ≤ 0.35 between tumor and
referent alleles. Fisher’s exact test (2-sided) and Student’s t-tests
were used to test for significant differences in levels of AI between
patient groups defined by clinical outcome. Patient subsets included
poor clinical outcome (n=25) consisting of those who were alive with
disease (AWD) from recurrence or dead of disease (DOD) and good
clinical outcome (n=25) consisting of those who had no evidence of
disease (NED).

Results: Median follow-up for all
patients is 29 months. Median time lapse from diagnosis to recurrence
in the AWD subset is 17 months and median survival after diagnosis in
the DOD subset is 27 months. Patients with poor clinical outcomes
showed significantly more AI in their metastatic axillary lymph node
tumors (32%) than patients with good clinical outcomes (20%;
P<0.001). Compared to patients with a good prognosis (NED),
patients with a poor prognosis (AWD and DOD) showed significantly
higher levels of AI in their metastatic tumors at chromosomal regions
10q23.31–q23.33 and 17p13.1 (P<0.001), which contain the tumor
suppressor genes for PTEN and p53, respectively. Conversely, patterns
of AI in primary breast tumors did not differ significantly between
patients with poor versus good clinical outcomes.

Conclusions: Genomic changes in
metastatic breast carcinomas may have greater utility in identifying
patients at risk for poor clinical outcomes than information derived
from primary tumors. Molecular characterization of metastatic tumors
may identify novel therapeutic targets for effective treatment of
metastatic disease that are not revealed in the primary breast
carcinomas.

## 4063

## Manipulation of expression of MMP-14 and its impact on the
invasivess and progression of breast cancer cells.

## Jiang WG, Davies G, Martin TA, Parr C, Mason MD, Mansel RE.
School of Medicine, Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom

Introduction: MMP-14, otherwise known
as MT1-MMP (membrane type-1 matrix metalloproteinase) is a proteolytic
enzyme known to be involved in degradating extracellular matrix and
assist progression of cancer invasion and progression. The current
study investigated the impact of targeting the expression of MMP-14 in
breast cancer and its clinical relevance.

Methods: Human breast cancer cell
line MDA MB 231 was used in genetic manipulation studies. Expression
of MMP-14 in the breast cancer cell line was targeted by way of
retroviral ribozyme transgene. The in
vitro invasion, growth and cell migration were
determined on cell lines transfected with either the transgene or
control plasmid. Protein and message levels of MMP14 in a cohort of
human breast cancer were also assessed using immunohistochemistry and
real time quantitative analysis, and correlated with clinical and
pathological information of the patients.

Results: Retroviral ribozyme
transgene to human MMP-14 successfully knocked down the levels of
MMP-14 mRNA from MDA MB 231 cells, which otherwise strongly expressed
MMP-14. Reduction of MMP-14 from the breast cancer cells had resulted
in significant reduction of the in
vitro invasiveness and loss of response to an invasion
stimulus, HGF (hepatocyte growth factor), compared with transfection
control and wild type cells. The invasion indices for MMP-14 knockdown
cells were 13±3.1 (without HGF) and 16.4±2.3 (with HGF, p=0.14), and
the indices for transfection control cells 25.3±4.3 (without HGF) and
40.4±4.1 with HGF, p=0.0049). Transfection with the transgenes did not
change the rate of cell growth. In clinical breast cancer, MMP-14
staining was both membranous and cytoplasmic. Tumours cells displayed
stronger staining compared with normal mammary epithelial cells.
Tumour tissues had a marginal higher levels of the MMP14 transcript
(8.6±1.9), compared with normal tissues (4.7±1.4), p=0.13. No
significant difference was observed between node positive and node
negative tumours (9.0±2.2 vs 8.7±3.1, p=0.24). Marginal higher levels
of the MMP14 transcript were seen in tumours which developed
metastasis and local recurrence. However, tumours from patients who
died of breast cancer related causes had significantly higher levels
of the transcript, compared with tumours from patients who remained
disease free, 10 years after initial surgery (12.2±2.5 vs 6.3±1.2,
p=0.0091).

Conclusion: MMP-14 is a proteolytic
enzyme that is pivotal in controlling the invasiveness of breast
cancer cells. It is highly expressed in aggressive breast tumours and
is associated with clinical outcome. The enzyme is a potential
therapeutic target in breast cancer.

## 4064

## Osteopontin expression increases lymphatic metastasis of breast
cancer: experimental and clinical studies. Vantyghem SA, Allan AL, George
R, Lee MW, Hodgson N, Engel CJ, Holliday R, Girvan D, Scott L, Al-Katib
W, Stitt L, Yeatman TJ, Chambers AF, Tuck AB. London Regional Cancer
Program, London, ON, Canada; London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON,
Canada; H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute University of
South Florida, Tampa, FL

## Background: Although a primary route
of breast cancer metastasis is believed to be via lymphatics, the
molecular factors involved are poorly understood.

Design: To identify candidate genes
involved in lymphatic metastasis, we performed gene expression
profiling of breast cancer cell lines of high (468LN) vs. low
(MDA-MB-468) metastatic ability specifically to lymph nodes. One of
the genes most highly overexpressed (42x) in the lymph node metastatic
line was the secreted protein, osteopontin (OPN). The significance of
this gene to lymphatic metastasis was assessed both experimentally, by
transfection into weakly metastatic MDA-MB-468 cells, and clinically,
by analysis of OPN expression (by immunohistochemistry) in a group of
patients undergoing sentinel lymph node biopsy.

Results: High-level expression of OPN
in 468LN cells was validated by Western blotting. Transfection of OPN
into MDA-MB-468 cells resulted in increased lymphatic invasion,
regional lymph node metastases and micrometastases to lung after
mammary fat pad injection in nude mice. In a group of 108 patients
undergoing sentinel lymph node biopsy for breast cancer, OPN levels
were significantly higher in the lymph node metastases of lymph node
positive patients, than in the primary tumors (p<0.001).

Conclusion: OPN overexpression is a
key molecular event involved in lymphatic metastasis of breast
cancer.

## 4065

## Withdrawn by Author

## 4066

## Tumour-associated tenascin-C isoforms promote breast cancer cell
invasion and proliferation.

## Alcock RA, Holliday DL, Shaw JA, Walker RA, Pringle JH, Jones
JL. University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom; Institute of
Cancer, Cancer Research UK Clincial Centre, Charterhouse Square,
London, United Kingdom
Interactions with the extracellular matrix (ECM) control many
aspects of cell function, therefore changes in tumour-associated ECM
may be expected to influence tumour cell behaviour. One consistent
change in breast cancer is the up-regulation of the extracellular
matrix glycoprotein Tenascin-C (TN). TN exists as multiple isoforms
generated through alternative splicing and in-vitro studies suggest
that these isoforms have different effects on cell adhesion, migration
and proliferation. We have identified a switch in isoform profile in
malignant compared to normal and benign breast tissue, with expression
of two isoforms, one containing exon 16 (TN16), the other containing
exons 14 plus 16 (TN14/16), in addition to the normal adult truncated
TN (tTN) in the majority of invasive carcinomas and a proportion of
DCIS.
The aim of this study was to investigate the hypothesis that TN14
and TN14/16 promote breast cancer progression either via direct
interactions with tumour cells or indirectly through modifying
fibroblast function. Flag-tagged clones of a series of TN isoforms
were generated including adult tTN, TN16, TN14/16 and the unspliced,
full-length LTN, and transiently expressed in breast cancer cells
(MCF-7, T47D, MDA MB 468 and MDA MB 231) and in primary normal breast
fibroblasts. The effect of over-expression of individual isoforms on
tumour cell invasion and proliferation was analysed using transwell
Matrigel invasion assays and incorporation of BrdU, respectively, and
their ability to influence expression of members of the Matrix
Metalloproteinase (MMP) family was analysed by RT-PCR, ELISA and
zymography.
Over-expression of TN16 and TN14/16 in breast cancer cells led to
significantly higher levels of tumour invasion compared to tTN, LTN,
vector-only and non-transfected controls. A similar effect on tumour
cell proliferation was also demonstrated. The ability of conditioned
media (CM) from transfected and non-transfected normal breast
fibroblasts to promote tumour cell invasion was also measured and
demonstrated significantly higher invasion in the presence of CM from
TN16 and TN14/16 transfected cells. In both tumour cells and
fibroblasts, all TN isoforms were found to up-regulate MMP gene
expression and MMP release, and invasion was inhibited in the presence
of an MMP inhibitor.
In conclusion, TN16 and TN14/16 specifically enhance breast cancer
cell invasion and proliferation which is in part MMP-mediated, though
other isoform-specific mechanisms are implicated. The largely
tumour-specific nature of these isoforms make them potential
therapeutic targets.

## 4067

## The CxCR4 mRNA and/or protein expression in breast cancer tissue
does not always correlate with cancer metastasis.

## Koyama Y, Valera V, Kaneko K, Kanbayashi C, Hatakeyama K.
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical & Dental Sciences,
Niigata, Japan

Background: Cancer metastasis is a
major prognostic factor for breast cancer patients. Recent findings
suggest that the chemokine receptor CxCR4, expressed on breast cancer
cells, may have an association with breast cancer metastases. The aim
of the present study was to examine both CxCR4 mRNA and protein
expression in the clinical specimens of primary breast cancer, and to
explore whether CxCR4 expression in breast cancer correlate with
cancer metastasis and other conventional clinicopathological
parameters.

Materials and methods: Fresh tissue
samples were obtained from 55 breast cancer patients undergoing
mastectomy or breast conserving surgery. Total RNAs were isolated from
55 surgical specimens of breast cancer tissue and 16 non-cancer breast
tissue. The relative mRNA abundance of CxCR4 was measured by real time
reverse transcription-PCR analysis based on TaqMan method, and the
results were standardized with b-globin mRNA expression. The CxCR4
protein expression was examined by immunohistochemistry of
paraffin-embedded sections of corresponding patients by using
anti-human CxCR4 antibody (R&D). The intensity of CxCR4 staining
was classified into 3 categories; i) negative-, ii) weakly- and iii)
strongly-staining. Statistical analyses were performed using
Mann-Whitney test and Kruskal-Wallis test, and the statistical
significance was defined as p<0.05.

Results: CxCR4 mRNA expression was
significantly higher in breast cancer tissues compared to non-cancer
tissues (p<0.01). However, neither mRNA nor protein expression of
CxCR4 correlated with any clinicopathological factors such as lymph
node status, lymphatic invasion, venous invasion, hormone status,
distant metastasis or tumor stage. Furthermore, there was no
correlation between CxCR4 protein and mRNA expression.

Conclusions: These results suggest
that CxCR4mRNA expressions, significantly up-regulated in tumor
specimens compared with non-cancer breast tissue, might have an
association with carcinogenesis in breast cancer. However, because the
metastasis will be formed not only by chemokine receptor but also its
ligand at site, it seems to be difficult to predict cancer metastasis
only by examination of the expression of CxCR4 mRNA and/or
protein.

## 4068

## Targeting Rho-C by way of ribozyme transgene in human breast cancer
cells and its impact on cancer invasion.

## Lane J, Martin TA, Jiang WG. Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom

Background: The Rho-GTPases have been
shown to play a key role in transformation, transcription and cell
motility. In particular, we have shown that expression of the family
member Rho-C is significantly raised in breast tumour tissue with this
increase being linked to axillary node involvement and poor prognosis.
This study aimed to examine whether targeting Rho-C using retroviral
ribozyme transgenes would have an impact on the invasiveness of breast
cancer cells.

Material and Methods: A panel of
hammerhead ribozymes that specifically targeted human RHO-C were
generated using touch-down PCR. Transgenes were generated using these
ribozymes and a tetracycline regulated retroviral vector. Breast
cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, was transduced with either retroviral
Rho-C transgene, or control retroviral transgene. Stably transfected
cells MDA-MB-231DRHO-C,
MDA-MB-231pRevTRE were tested for their
invasiveness and migratory properties in
vitro using MDA-MB- 231WT as
control. Statistical analysis was carried out using Mann-Whitney U
test and significant difference was taken at p<0.05.

Results: MDAMB
231WT cells expressed high levels of
Rho-C.Of the ribozyme transgenes constructed, all were active. The
expression of Rho-C in MDA MB 231 cells was successfully eliminated by
the retroviral hammerhead ribozyme transgene for Rho-C as revealed by
RT-PCR. TransfectedMDA-MB-231DRHO-C cells
had significantly reduced invasiveness into Matrigel when compared
with MDA-MB-231WT cells and
MDA-MB-231pRevTRE (mean±SEM 13.4±1.68 vs
26.2±6.16 vs 25.2±4.25 respectively, p<0.005). An even greater
reduction in invasiveness was shown by
MDA-MB-231DRHO-C cells in response to
hepatocyte growth factor when compared with
MDA-MB-231WT cells and
MDA-MB-231pRevTRE (11.8±2.16 vs
56.75±8.75 vs 40.0±4.08 respectively, p<0.004). Transfection of MDA
MB 231 cells with either ribozyme transgenes or control vectors did
not affect the growth of the cells.

Conclusions: The expression ofRho-C,
which is aberrantly expressed in breast tumours, was successfully
knocked out in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells by utilising hammerhead
ribozyme transgenes. These
transfectedMDA-MB-231DRHO-C cells showed
a dramatic decrease in their in
vitro invasiveness. This study suggests that targeting
Rho-C may have important therapeutic implications in breast
cancer.

## 4069

## The use of DNA microarray to determine potential pathways of tumor
cell metastasis.

## Moulder SL, Enkemann S, Dupont E, Riker A, Furman B, Carter WB,
Hoover S, Cox C, Eschrich SA, Yeatman T, Diaz N. H.Lee Moffitt Cancer
Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL

Background: Metastatic disease and
chemoresistance are the two principal causes of breast cancer
mortality. This project was designed to examine functional genomic
differences between matched primary and metastatic tumors that could
possibly lead to novel therapeutic targets.

Methods: After obtaining informed
consent, tissue was harvested from treatment naive breast cancer
patients undergoing biopsy or definitive surgical resection of an
invasive breast primary tumor (PT) and ipsilateral axillary lymph
nodes metastasis (LNM). Two to four core-shaped fragments of tissue
from PT and LNM >0.5 cm were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen
sections were used to confirm the presence of tumor then non-tumor
tissue was grossly microdissected from the tumor block. Microarray
analysis of PT and LNM was performed using standard techniques with
the Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChipTM
array. Expression profiles from matched pairs of PT and LNM were
compared using a matched pair analysis in the Affymetrix Microarray
suite software as previously published. Genes of interest were
selected if changes were present in at least 8 out of 10 lymph
node/primary tumor pairs regardless of the magnitude of change in gene
expression.

Results: One hundred and twenty two
genes were identified. Genes with >3 fold change in expression in ≥
9 matched pair samples are listed in table below.

Discussion: Genetic differences can
be detected in tumor sample obtained from a breast primary and lymph
node metastasis. Interesting observations include a decrease in MMP7
and an increase in complement component 7 in 10/10 samples analyzed.
Although all visible lymphoid tissue was removed from the LNM, many
genes with prominent changes were lymphatic in origin and likely
represent the presence of lymphoid cells. These data are promising in
that they validate the detection of changes not only in tumor cells,
but in the microenvironment as well. Microarray analysis of lymphatic
tissue microdissected from non-involved nodes is currently being
performed to utilize a subtraction approach and remove lymphoid
confounders. 

## 4070

## The role of angiotensin II in integrin mediated breast cancer cell
metastasis.

## Puddefoot JR, Udeozo U, Vinson GP. Quen Mary, University of
London, London, United Kingdom

Background: Because breast cancer
remains the most common cause of cancer death in women, there is a
continuing need not only to further characterise the processes of
cancer progression, but also to improve accuracy of prognostic
markers. Breast epithelial cells express components of the renin
angiotensin system (RAS) and studies suggest that these may be altered
in disease progression. In addition altered integrin expression
correlates with lymph node metastasis. The aim of this study was to
investigate the relationship between Angiotensin II (Ang II) and
integrins in breast tissue and, in particular, their role in breast
cancer cell metastasis.

Materials and Methods: Cells were
cultured in serum free medium in the presence or absence of
Angiotensin II (AII). These cells were harvested and then used for
cell adhesion to 96 well plates coated with extracellular matrix
proteins collagen, fibronectin and laminin or invasion assays through
membranes with an 8uM pore which have been coated with the same
extracellular matrix proteins. In addition these cells were utilised
to provide RNA for RTPCR analysis of integrin a3 and b1 or protein for
western blot analysis.

Results: Using in vitro assays, AII
(10−6 M) treated MCF-7 breast cancer
cells both reduced adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins collagen,
fibronectin and laminin coated wells (p<0.001). and reduced
invasion through collagen, fibronectin and laminin coated membranes
(p<0.001). This action was inhibited by co-treatment with the
angiotensin type 1 receptor (AT1R) antagonist DUP753
(10−5 M), (p<0.001). The addition of
the angiotensin type 2 receptor antagonist PD123319
(10−5 M) to AII treated cells had no
significant effect. Addition of the tripeptide RGD (150 mg/ well),
which antagonises integrin binding, to matrix proteins also inhibited
adhesion and invasion in the same manner as AII but the two effects
were not additive. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and western blotting
revealed that cells treated with AII
(10−6 M) expressed lower levels of both
integrin a3 and b1.

Discussion: These data suggest that
AII reduces cell adhesion and invasion through the type 1 receptor and
that this effect may be due to reduced expression of integrins, in
particular a3 and b1. These processes all appear to be mediated via
the AT1 receptor. It is therefore possible that breast tumours become
metastatic partly through changes in AII availability.
Regulation of AII expression and components of the local RAS may be
important in disease progression and altered expression of these
factors may convey information on prognosis of the disease.

## 4071

## Gene profile of fibroblasts from involved and uninvolved lymph
nodes from breast cancer patients and influence of malignant cancer cells
on their gene expression.

## Santos RPC, Rozenchan PB, Katayama MLH, Brentani HP, Carraro DM,
Patrao DFC, Mota LDC, Bastos EP, Lyra EC, Goes JCGS, Brentani MM,
Koike Folgueira MAA. Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao
Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Instituto Ludwig de Pesquisa Sobre o Cancer,
Sao Paulo, Brazil; Instituto Brasileiro de Controle do Cancer, Sao
Paulo, Brazil

Background: Some carcinoma cells may
attach and grow in the lymph node of breast cancer (BC) patients, in
contrast to others, that never establish regional metastases. Such
behavior may depend on the epithelial cells themselves, as well as on
microenvironment characteristics. Soluble factors produced by
fibroblasts from lymph nodes may influence the epithelial cells,
which, on the other hand, may exert similar effects on fibroblasts.
Our aim was to characterize fibroblasts obtained from involved and
uninvolved lymph nodes BC patients, to evaluate whether there were
differences in their proliferation rate and gene expression. Another
aim was to determine the influence from malignant (MDA MB-231) or non
malignant (MCF10A) mammary epithelial cells in the gene expression of
these fibroblasts.

Material and methods: Primary
cultures of fibroblasts from lymph node samples (3 involved and 3
uninvolved) from 6 differents BC patients were established and the
expression of vimentin and smooth muscle actin, confirmed the stromal
origin of these cultured cells. Co-cultures of MCF10A and MDA MB 231
cells and fibroblasts from lymph nodes, physically separated by a
porous membrane, which allow the passage of soluble factors, were
carried out for 72 h. Total RNAs from cells were isolated and
two-round RNA amplification procedure using a template-switching
primer was carried out. Gene profile of fibroblasts, upon co-culture
or not, was analyzed on a c-DNA microarray glass slides containg 4,608
spotted sequences. Genes satisfying a p<0.01, FDR<0.01 and at
least a two fold variation, were considered differentially
expressed.

Results: There was no statistical
difference in the proliferation rate from fibroblasts obtained from
involved and from uninvolved lymph nodes and only 0.28% of the genes
were differentially expressed between them. Fibroblasts co-cultured
with mammary epithelial cells, had 2.2.7.8% trancripts modulated.
Several genes expressed by the fibroblasts were commonly modulated by
malignant as well as non-malignant mammary cells. Other genes were
exclusively regulated upon co-culture with a specific cell lineage,
and MDA MB-231 cells modulated 1% genes expressed by fibroblasts from
uninvolved nodes and other 1% genes of fibroblasts from involved lymph
nodes.

Discussion: Fibroblasts obtained from
involved or uninvolved lymph nodes from BC patients present a similar
gene expression profile. Genes exclusively differentially expressed by
fibroblasts of involved or uninvolved lymph nodes upon co-culture with
transformed MDA-MB231 cells may be implicated in the development of
regional metastases in breast cancer.

## 4072

## Enhanced growth of KGF-transfected human breast cancer cells in a
mouse xenograft model.

## Zang XP, Howard EW, Jupe ER, Manjeshwar S, Pento JT. University
of Oklahoma HSC, Oklahoma City, OK

Background: Previously, we reported
that keratinocyte growth factor (KGF) produced a rapid increase in the
motility of ERpositive breast cancer cells. Others have demonstrated
that KGF treatment in rodent species produces rapid mammary ductal
hyperplasia. Epithelial cells do not produce KGF; thus, in the present
study we stably transfected MCF-7 cells with a KGF expressing vector
and compared the motility and morphology of transfected,
non-transfected and empty vector cells. In addition, the growth of
KGF-transfected human breast cancer cells was examined in a mouse
xenograft model.

Methods: A KGF-cDNA vector was
transfected into MCF-7/ cells (MCF-7 cells stably transfected with
 -gal) and two stable clones (T8 and T9) were
identified. Western blotting and ELISA were used to confirm the
expression of KGF in the transfected cells and the secretion of KGF
into 24 hour conditioned media from these transfected clones. We
compared the motility of parental and KGF-transfected MCF-7 cells
using a cell culture-wounding model which examined cell migration over
a period of 1–3 days. Viable MCF-7 cells (5×106) transfected with KGF
vector or empty vector, were embedded into 0.2 ml Matrigel and
implanted into female nude mice at 6 weeks of age that had been
pre-implanted with an estrogen pellet, and randomly placed into three
groups. Animal weights and tumor volumes were measured twice weekly
for four weeks and the animals were then euthanized and primary tumor,
lung and liver tissue were removed and -gal assayed to quantify MCF-7 cells.

Results: Western blots demonstrated
that the expression of KGF in both T8 and T9 cell lines and in
conditioned media from these cells was higher than the parental and
MCF-7/ (control) cell lines. The cell proliferation and
migration distance was significantly greater for both KGF-transfected
MCF-7 cell lines than the control cell lines. In addition, changes in
motile morphology were observed in both the T8 and T9 cell lines when
compared to the control cell lines. In the mouse xenografts, tumor
size was 3–4 fold greater for the KGF-transfected MCF-7 cell lines
than the EV-transfected cell line. Thus, autocrine production of KGF
in the KGF-transfected MCF-7 cells enhanced cell migration and
migration-related morphology in culture and enhanced the growth and
metastasis of KGF-transfected human breast cancer cells in the
xenograft model.

Discussion: KGF-transfected MCF-7
cells displayed a much greater motility than non-transfected cells,
confirming our previously observed enhancement of motility by KGF.
Additionally, enhanced tumor growth and metastasis of KGF-transfected
cancer cells was observed in a mouse xenograft model. This model will
be useful for elucidating the mechanism of KGF-mediated cell motility
and to identify potential therapeutic agents to prevent KGF-mediated
metastatic progression. Supported in part by grants from NCI
(CA-89740), DOD (DAMD17-01-1-0591) and from the OU Cancer Center ACS
Inst. Award.

## 4073

## Increased expression of CD44 in visceral metastases of breast
cancer.

## Cabioglu N, Sahin AA, Guray M, Islam R, Morandi P, Meric-
Bernstam F, Hortobagyi GN, Cristofanilli M. MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX

Background: CD44, a widely expressed
extracellular matrix glycoprotein, plays a major role in cell-cell
adhesion, lymphocyte homing, and tumor metastasis. Recent studies have
shown that high expression of CD44 in certain types of tumors is
associated with the hematogenic spread of cancer cells. We therefore
evaluated the CD44 expression in matched primary and metastatic breast
cancers, and associated tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) to
determine whether this marker was preferentially expressed in any
organ-specific metastases.

Methods: CD44 expression levels were
evaluated using paraffinembedded tissue sections of matched primary
and metastatic breast cancers by immunohistochemical staining.
Sections were incubated with a primary antibody for CD44 (clone SFF-2,
Chemicon International, Temecula, CA) following heat-induced antigen
retrieval using a standard immunoperoxidase assay with
diaminobenzidine chromogen. CD44 staining was evaluated in tumor cells
and in tumor infilrating lymphocytes independently. In both tumor
cells and lymphocytes, any disctinct cytoplasmic staining in more than
5% of the cells were considered to be positive. Missing cases were
excluded from the statistical analysis for each parameter.

Results: Archival tissue material
obtained from 33 tumors by either diagnostic biopsy or surgical
resection of their metastatic site along with their corresponding
primary tumors were evaluated. The metastatic sites included: bone
(n=11), brain (n=14), lung (n=5), and other visceral organs including
liver/omentum (n=3). CD44 was expressed in 21% of in primary tumors
(6/29), and in 40% of metastatic tumors (12/30). Expression of CD44 in
primary tumors did not correlate with the occurrence of visceral or
bone metastases (5/19 vs 1/10, respectively; p=0.633). However, CD44
was more likely expressed in visceral metastases, as detected in 61.5%
of brain metastases (8/13) and 80% of lung metastases and in none of
the bone metastases (60% of all visceral metastases vs 0% of bone
metastases, p= 0.002). Presence of CD44-positive TIL was significantly
associated with the expression of CD44 in both primary and metastatic
tumors (p=0.008 and p=0.004, respectively). Furthermore, patients with
HER2-neu positivity (3+ by immunohistochemistry) were more likely
found to have CD44-positive metastatic tumors (HER2-neu-positive, 6/7
vs HER2-neu-negative, 6/21; p=0.023).

Conclusions: These results indicate
that CD44 was differentially expressed in metastatic sites suggesting
that particularly CD44 can contribute to the homing of breast cancer
cells to the visceral organs such as brain and lung. More studies are
needed to validate the clinical implications of anti-CD44 targeted
therapies in patients with visceral organ metastases.

## 4074

## Women with breast cancer heterozyous for CC chemokine receptor5Δ32
(Δ32/WT) may have a greater tendency for metastatic pleural effusion than
those with wild type CCR5 (WT/WT).

## Kaplan MH, Dosik MH, Lu R, Wang XP. North Shore University
Hospital, Manhasset, NY; Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
NY
RANTES is the natural ligand for CCR5. It is expressed in breast
cancer cells. Antagonists of RANTES inhibit breast cancer (BCa) tumor
progression in the murine model. Polymorphisms in CCR5 notably CCR5Δ32
occur in 5–15% of people. We evaluated patients(pt) with BCa plerual
effusion (PE) to determine the incidence CCR5Δ32 and to study the
different expression of RANTES, MMP2,MMP9, IFN!‘g and TNFa using real
time PCR(RT-QPCR) in PE effusions and PE derived cell lines.

Method: Cells from BCa PE were
harvested. RNA was extracted and tested for expression of RANTES MMP2,
MMP9, TNFa and IFN using RT-QPCR. DNA was extracted from either PBMCs
or PE cells and tested for CCR5 and CCR5Δ32 using standard PCR
technology

Results: In BCa pts. 11/97
(11/3%)[PBMCs] in contrast to 5/ 13(38.5%) pts with BCa PE were
heterozygous for CCR5Δ32. RT-QPCR revealed that RANTES expression in
Δ32/WT (n=3) vs WT/WT (n=5) was decreased (0.23vs1), while MMP2 and
MMP9 expression was significantly increased in Δ32/WT vs WT/ WT
4737:1; and 23:1 respectively. TNFa gene expression was decreased
0.67:1 in Δ32/WT vs WT/WT while there was no detectable IFN
 in all 8 tested samples and or in K151(Δ32/WT),
K259(WT/WT) primary cell lines derived from PEs. K234(Δ32/ WT) cell
line showed some inducible IFN expression. RANTES gene expression became down
regulated when primary PE cells were induced to become breast cancer
cel lines. Two cell lines from Δ32/WT PEs and one form WT/WT showed
such downregulation of RANTES.

Conclusion: Δ32/WT PE cells and cell
lines show reduced RANTES expression relative to WT/WT. MMP2 and MMP9
in contrast are overexpressed while Δ32/WT underexpressed TNFa and
showed no IFN production. Patients with Δ32/WT may also have a
marked decrease in the natural receptor for RANTES notable CCR5.
Thedifferent expression of these cytokines and chemokines and
chemokine receptors may indicate a greater potential for metastases in
Δ32/WT patients.

## 4075

## Identification of estrogen regulated metastasis-associated genes
using hormone-responsive bone metastases models.

## Simons LA, Thurn KE, Satcher RL, Levenson AS. Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL

Introduction: Bone is one of the most
frequent sites for metastasis in breast cancer patients.
Interestingly, it has been shown that patients with ER-positive tumors
have had bone metastases three times more often than patients with
ER-negative tumors. However, the role of estrogens (E2) in progression
of breast cancer bone metastases is largely unknown partially because
there are very few ER-positive in
vitro and in vivo models of breast cancer bone
metastases. Results: To study complex
molecular mechanisms responsible for bone metastases we have
established an in vitro
hormone-responsive bone metastases model, which consists of ER (
 or )-positive metastatic breast cancer cells and ER (
 or )-positive osteoblasts. Using bi-compartmental
co-culture system we examined expression of E2-regulated
metastasis-associated genes involved in “vicious cycle” in co-cultured
breast cancer (MDA-ER or MDA-ER ) and bone cells stably expressing ER (U2OS-ER
 or U2OS-ER ). We found that E2 down-regulates uPA expression in
both breast cancer and bone cells alone, however co-culturing
increases expression of uPA by bone cells. In contrast, expression of
IGFBPs (1 & 3) was increased in the presence of E2 in co-cultured
cancer cells. More interestingly, the levels of IGFBPs were
dramatically increased in co-cultured MDA-ER cells compared with co-cultured MDA-ER
 . These results suggest that increased levels of
inhibitory IGFBPs might block the activity of IGFs, which have strong
mitogenic and antiapoptotic effects on breast cancer cells. Together
with down-regulation of uPA, which plays role in several aspects of
bone resorption, including osteoclast formation, mineral dissolution
and degradation of the organic matrix, these data imply possible
favorable effects of E2 via ER and in higher degree via ER in the pathogenesis of breast cancer bone
metastases. In addition, experiments are in progress to determine the
role of ER /ER in the development of osteoblastic/ osteolytic bone
metastases using an in vivo mouse intracardiac model. For this, breast
cancer cells expressing either ER or ER were inoculated into the left ventricle of 4–6 
week-old mice. Radiography, bone histology and histomorphometric
analysis are in the process for the evaluation of the phenotype of the
bone metastases. Conclusions: Our
data demonstrate that the transcriptional effects of E2 via ER
 and ER are distinct in cocultured breast cancer and bone
cells indicating possible unique biological roles of each isotype in
the development and progression of bone metastases. Identification of
critical metastasis-associated genes and respective roles of ER
 and ER in response to E2 will suggest possible new
strategies of hormonal therapy in advanced metastatic disease.
Supported by the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation grant to
ASL.

## 4076

## Expression of secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor in human
breast carcinoma.

## Yoshida S, Sugino T, Yasuda M, Hiroya S, Ohtake T, Takenoshita
S, Suzuki T. Fukushima University School of Medicine, Fukushimashi,
Fukushima-ken, Japan

Introduction: Secretory leukocyte
protease inhibitor (SLPI), a molecule sized 12 kDa, is a member of
serine protease inhibitor (SPI) family and important protective
component of secretory fluids at sites of degenerative and
inflammatory disease. SLPI is also expressed in various human cancers,
like lung, breast, cervical, head and neck cancers. Recently SLPI
expression level some cancers is reported to be correlated with tumor
aggressiveness and metastasis. The aim of this study is to investigate
the relationship between SLPI expression and clinicopathological
factors of human breast cancers.

Materials and Methods: 46 patients of
invasive ductal carcinoma and 25 cases of carcinoma in situ were
retrieved from breast cancer list of Second Department of Surgery,
Fukushima University School of Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.
Immunohistochemistry with anti-SLPI antibody was performed for
formalin fixed specimens of the patient carcinoma tissue. Intensively
expressed cases compared with the normal grand are judged as
positive.

Result: The age distribution of
patients was 25 to 89 year-old (median 51.7 year-old). Follow up time
ranged 0.03 to 12 years (median, 8.3). In invasive ductal carcinoma
cases, 15 cases were recurrent, and 11 cases were dead on disease.
SLPI positivity in carcinoma in situ (all of 25 cases, 100%) was
significantly higher than invasive ductal carcinoma (26 of 46 cases,
63%, p=0.002). In invasive ductal carcinomas, there were significant
differences between SLPI expression and recurrence (23 of 31 cases
without recurrence, 74% vs 6 of 15 cases with recurrence, 40%:
p=0.025) and overall survival (23 of 31 alive cases, 71% vs 4 of 11
cases dead on disease, 36%: p=.038). SLPI expression had no
significant correlation with the receptors for estrogen (28 of 35
positive cases, 71% vs 16 of 25 negative cases, 64%: P=0.167, unknown
in 11 cases), and progesterone (13 of 20 positive cases, 65% vs 31 of
40 of negative cases, 77%: p=0.302, unknown in 11 cases) and, in
invasive ductal carcinoma, lymph node metastasis (15 of 26 positive
cases, 58% vs 13 of 19 cases, 68%: p=0.462, unknown in one
cases).

Conclusion: In contrast to other
types of cancers, breast cancers showed reverse correlation of SLPI
expression with cancer progression including invasiveness and
prognosis. These results suggest that SLPI expression can be a
favorable prognostic factor in breast cancers.

## 4077

## Epidermal growth factor induces the IGF signaling protein insulin
receptor substrate-2 via the JNK/AP-1 pathway and NF-kB transcription
factor in breast cancer cells.

## Cui X, Kim H, Kuiatse I, Lee AV. Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX
Both epidermal growth factor (EGF) and the insulin-like growth
factors (IGFs) are critically involved in cell proliferation,
survival, and malignant transformation. Aberrant activation of these
two signaling pathways is commonly observed in solid human tumors.
Understanding how they cross-talk with each other to regulate cancer
development and progression is important for developing effective
therapies against aggressive breast cancer, in which these two
pathways frequently play a dominant role. In this study, we found that
EGF remarkably induces expression of a major IGF signaling component,
insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2), in all EGFR positive breast
cancer cells. This EGF effect, which can be blocked by common EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, is via a transcriptional mechanism. Using
small molecule signaling inhibitors, we found that JNK specifically
mediated the EGF regulation of IRS-2. This is confirmed by ectopic
expression of dominant active and constitutively active mutants of JNK
and its upstream kinase MEKK1. In addition, blockade of AP-1 function
suppressed the IRS-2 transcription induced by EGF, suggesting that the
MEKK1/JNK/AP-1 pathway mediates the EGF effect. Surprisingly, we also
found that inhibition of NF-kB transcription factor abolished the
IRS-2 transcription by EGF. In line with the increase of total IRS-2
levels, EGF treatment prior to IGF-I stimulation resulted in higher
tyrosine-phosphorylated IRS-2 levels, increased binding of IRS-2 to
the PI3K regulatory subunit p85, and correspondingly enhanced ERK and
Akt activation, as compared with IGF-I-only conditions. Moreover, EGF
pretreatment enhanced the tyrosine phosphorylation of IRS-2 and its
downstream signaling elicited by integrin engagement. Using IRS-2
siRNA, we found that repressing IRS-2 expression remarkably reduced
the EGF-induced cell motility and invasion to the level under non-EGF
conditions, suggesting that increased IRS-2 mediates the EGF effect on
breast cancer cell migration. Taken together, our data suggest that
EGF can interact with IGF signaling by upregulating IRS-2 through
integration of JNK/AP-1 and NF-kB signaling. This modulation of IRS-2
reveals a novel level of crosstalk between EGF and the IGFs, and may
provide implications in the efficacy of therapeutic targeting EGFR in
breast tumors. As JNK/AP-1 and NF-kB are highly activated in
aggressive breast cancer, our work may also provide support to
establish IRS-2 as a useful marker for aggressive breast
cancer.

## 4078

## Autophophorylation of the hepatocyte growth factor receptor, cMET
in human breast cancer.

## Jiang WG, Davies G, Watkins G, Mason MD, Mansel RE. School of
Medicine, Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff,
Wales, United Kingdom
Introduction. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a cytokine that has
direct effect on cancer cells and on endothelial cells, via its
receptor, cMET. The action of HGF on these respective cells results in
stimulation of invasion and progression of breast cancer cells and
induction of angiogenesis in tumours. The HGF receptor has been
reported to be highly expressed in cancer cells in a number of tumour
types. The current study examined the coexpression of HGF and its
receptor proteins, and most importantly the activation status of the
HGF receptor, its autophosphorylation within mammary tissues.
Methods. Fresh frozen human mammary tissues were used in the
current study. Consecutive frozen section from tissues were stained
with ant-HGF antibody, anti-cMET and anti-Phospho-cMET antibodies. The
staining patterns of the cytokine, it’s its receptor and the activated
receptor (phosphorylated on tyrosine residual) were assessed and
analysed using computerised imaging analysis.
Results. The HGF receptor, cMET, was strongly stained in both
normal mammary epithelial cells and in breast cancer cells, together
with vascular endothelial cells. Breast tumours cells had a higher
level of staining of cMET ( ), compared with normal epithelial cells
(0.067±0.030, p=0.014). In both normal and tumour cells, cMET was
primarily membranous staining, but cytoplasmic staining was also seen.
The most striking difference between normal and tumour tissues was the
differential presence of autophosphorylated cMET in tissues. In normal
tissues, there was virtually no to very low levels of
autophosphorylated cMET protein detected (0.023±0.017), despite high
levels of cMET. However, significantly high levels of phosphorylated
cMET were seen in tumour cells (0.072±0.018, p<0.0001 vs normal
epithelial cells). In addition, vascular endothelial cells in tumour
tissues stained strongly for both cMET and phosphorylated cMET.
Vessels in normal mammary tissues were otherwise shown to have only
very weak staining of phosphorylated cMET. Normal mammary tissues
stained very little HGF, which was largely confined to stromal
fibroblasts. In contrast, cancer cells in mammary tissues, together
with tumour associated stromal cells had marked stronger
staining.
Conclusion. Auto-phosphorylation of the HGF receptor is frequently
present in human breast cancer. This is likely the result of the
ligand, HGF, expressed in both autocrine (in breast cancer cells) and
paracrine (stromla fibroblasts) fashions. This has important
implications in understanding the biology of the stromal-tumour
interactions and the role of HGF in progression and angiogenesis in
breast cancer.

## 4079

## Results of BCIRG 103: a presurgical study to evaluate molecular
alterations that occur in human breast cancer tissue after short-term
exposure to gefitinib.

## Finn RS, Wilson CA, Dering J, Ginther C, Cook AM, Glaspy P,
Venkatesen N, Raab G, Pawlicki M, Gerber B, Pinter T, Eiermann W, von
Minckwitz G, Mackey J, Reese D, Kiger C, French T, Barrett I, Chang
KM, South M, Slamon DJ. Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA; Frauenklink von Roten Kreuz, Munich, Germany; Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Institute, Krakow, Poland;
Frauenklink der LMU, Munich, Germany; Petz Aladar County Hospital,
Gyor, Hungary; Frauenklinik von Roten Kreuz, Munich, Germany; JW
Goethe-Universitats-Frauenklinik, Frankfurt, Germany; Cross Cancer
Institute, Edmonton, Canada; TORI, Los Angeles; CIRG, Edmonton,
Canada; AstraZeneca, Manchester, United Kingdom
Gefitinib (IRESSA) is a small molecule inhibitor of the epidermal
growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase (EGFR-TK), which has been
approved for the treatment of advanced non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) in patients who have previously received chemotherapy.
Recently, mutations in the EGFR-TK have been described that may
predict for response to gefitinib in NSCLC. These mutations have not
been identified in breast cancer to date. Numerous pre-clinical
studies have suggested that gefitinib may play a role in the treatment
of breast cancer. However, Phase II studies of single agent gefitinib
have yet to show significant clinical benefit. To determine the
potential role of gefitinib in human breast cancer we performed a
comprehensive translational science program. We first determined
gefitinib sensitivity in vitro in
>40 human breast cancer cell lines. Basal expression profiles
(Agilent microarrays) were generated for all of these cell lines and,
at this time, potential predictive markers for response and resistance
in a subset of cell lines have been identified. In addition, 16 cell
lines have been treated with gefitinib, and pre-and post-treatment
expression profiles obtained. In parallel, a presurgical clinical
study (BCIRG 103) was conducted at multiple centers in the United
States, Canada, Australia, and Europe. BCIRG 103 enrolled 59 women
with primary breast cancer. Frozen tumor core biopsies were obtained
at baseline and RNA was isolated. Patients then received gefitinib
250 mg orally each day until definitive surgery (minimum 14 days). At
the time of surgery, frozen tissue was obtained for RNA isolation. In
addition, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on the pre-and
post-treatment samples, for downstream effectors of the EGFR pathway,
Ki67, and ER/PR status. 43 matched pre-and post-treatment tumor
samples were evaluable for microarray and IHC analysis. As in the
in vitro studies, subsets of
tumors that have gene expression changes in key growth regulatory
pathways have been identified. Detailed data analysis is ongoing and
will be presented at the meeting. IRESSA is
a trademark of the AstraZeneca group of companies

## 4080

## Gefitinib has a low clinical benefit rate in advanced breast cancer
patients.

## Francis P, Green M, Gebski V, Harvey V, Karapetis C, Chan A,
Snyder R, Forbes J. Australian New Zealand Breast Cancer Trials Group
(ANZ BCTG), Newcastle, NSW, Australia

Background: in vitro studies in estrogen receptor (ER) positive
breast cancer cells with acquired hormone resistance show a switch to
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signalling pathways compared
with the parental hormone sensitive cells. Breast cancer cells show an
inverse correlation between ER and EGFR, thus ER negative breast
cancers are more likely to express EGFR. Gefitinib is an orally active
inhibitor of EGFR-tyrosine kinase.

Materials and Methods: This phase II
trial of gefitinib (‘Iressa’) was designed to assess the efficacy and
safety of single agent gefitinib 500 mg once daily in two separate
parallel groups of advanced breast cancer patients: (i) Hormone
resistant: defined as hormone receptor positive disease progressing
after both tamoxifen and an aromatase inhbitor and (ii) Hormone
receptor negative breast cancer. It was planned to enrol 45 patients
in each group. Eligibility required measurable disease and allowed
only one prior chemotherapy regimen for advanced disease. The primary
end point was the clinical benefit rate (Complete Response [CR] +
Partial Response [PR] + Stable Disease at 24 weeks) in each patient
group. Tumor samples from primary or relapsed disease were tested for
EGFR expression using the DakoCytomation pharmDx kit to assess the
potential correlation with disease control by gefitinib.

Results: Sixty-six patients entered
the study with a mean age of 58 years. Among 40 patients with acquired
hormone resistance, one patient (2.5%, 95%CI 0.1–13.2%) achieved SD
with treatment for 28 weeks. Among 25 treated patients with hormone
receptor negative disease, two patients (8%, 95%CI0.9–26.1%) achieved
SD with treatment for 24 and 40 weeks. The patient treated for
24 weeks ceased gefitinib due to skin rash. At this dose of gefitinib,
85% patients experienced skin rash (>grade 1 in 43%). No patient in
either group achieved CR or PR. Most patients had progression at the
first assessment at 8 weeks. In view of the absence of responses and
low clinical benefit rate, the trial was prematurely closed to further
enrolment. Tumor samples from 46 patients are undergoing central
testing for EGFR expression.

Discussion: Previous preliminary
reports (Proc ASCO 2003: abstracts # 23 Robertson JF et al, # 24
Baselga J et al) suggested some activity of gefitinib in advanced
breast cancer. This study of gefitinib in advanced breast cancer
patients who were not heavily pretreated, did not produce any
responses and was associated with a low clinical benefit rate.

## 4081

## Mammary specific overexpression of insulin receptor substrate-1
(IRS-1) or IRS-2 in mice results in tumorgenesis and
metastasis.

## Dearth RK, Cui X, Kim HJ, Lazard Z, Lawrence N, Kuiatse I,
Britton O, Mohsin S, Hadsell DL, Lee AV. Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX; Children’s Nutrition Research Center, Houston,
TX
Numerous cell culture, animal, and clinical studies support the
importance of locally produced IGF-I acting in an autocrine/ paracrine
manner to initiate/propagate breast cancer development and survival.
Importantly, critical IGF-I/IGFR down stream signaling proteins, the
insulin receptor substrates (IRSs) have recently been implicated in
playing a role in breast cancer cell proliferation and metastasis.
Both IRS-1 and IRS-2 are expressed in breast cancer cells and we have
previously shown that over expression of IRS-1 reduces the survival
rate in ER-positive breast cancer patients. However, little is known
about disease-free IRS signaling proteins with regards to the role
they may have in mammary tumorgenesis. Therefore, we assessed the
ability of forced overexpression of IRS-1 or IRS-2 to cause a
disruption in the IRS signaling cascade resulting in mammary
hyperplasia or tumorgenesis. To facilitate this study we developed
novel transgenic mice that overexpress HA-tagged human IRS-1 or −2
specifically in the mammary gland using the mouse mammary tumor virus
(MMTV) promoter. IRS-1 or −2 were specifically shown to be
overexpressed in only the mammary gland by western blot and PCR
analysis. Overexpression of IRS-1 or −2 had little affect on normal
ductal development, pregnancy, or lactation. However, multi-parous
female MMTV-IRS-1 and IRS-2 mice developed mammary tumors, mainly
consisting of adenocarcinomas and adenosquamous carcinomas. Median
time to tumor formation was 68 weeks and 100 weeks in MMTV-IRS-2 and
MMTV-IRS-1 respectively. Virgin MMTV-IRS-2 female mice developed
hyperplasia at 24 weeks of age which were pronounced at 52 weeks of
age, but didn’t begin to develop tumors until 72 wks of age, a
significant delay compared to the multi-parous female mice.
Interestingly, MMTV-IRS-2 tumors metastasized to the lungs. MMTV-IRS-1
and IRS-2 tumors showed complex histology consisting of
adenocarcinomas with alveolar differentiation and milk secretion,
squamous metaplasia, and myoepithial differentiation. These
histological features have recently been ascribed to tumors arising
from alterations in the wnt/ -catenin signaling pathway. Consistent with this, we
found increased - catenin levels in IRS-2 tumors compared to adjacent
mammary glands. In addition, MMTV IRS-2 tumors had increased p-Akt and
p-ERK. These results are the first to show that altered IRS production
results in mammary tumorgenesis; thus implicating critical IGF-I
down-stream IRS signaling proteins as major candidates in propagating
breast cancer.

## 4082

## The ROCK Inhibitor Y-27632 supresses the effect of HGF in human
breast cancer cells.

## Lane J, Martin TA, Jiang WG. Wales College of Medicine, Cardiff
University, Heath Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom

Background: Rho-associated
serine-threonine protein kinases (ROCKs) are key factors in regulation
of motility & invasion of breast cancer cells. They function as
downstream effectors of the Rho-GTPase signalling pathway & are
associated with tumour progression by regulation of actin cytoskeletal
reorganisation & formation of focal adhesions. Rho-GTPases are
also involved in tight junction (TJ) regulation. This study
investigated the effect of inhibiting ROCK function on distribution of
TJ proteins in relation to motility & invasion in invasive &
less invasive breast cancer cell lines.

Methods: MDA-MB-231 & MCF-7
breast cancer cell lines were assessed. Functional assays were
performed . invasion, Cytodex 2-bead motility & trans-epithelial
resistance (TER) - using wild type cells. Cells were treated with HGF
(25 ng/ml), ROCK inhibitor Y-27632
(10−6 mm) or HGF&Y-27632. MDA-MB-231
& MCF-7 cells were treated with HGF or Y-27632 or both &
immunostained for either ZO-1, occludin or the linker molecule,
ezrin.

Results: As expected both cell types
treated with HGF showed a significant increase in invasion compared
with untreated cells (p<0.001). The addition of ROCK inhibitor to
the assay caused a significant decrease in invasion (p<0.002).
Cells treated with a combination of HGF/Y27632 also showed a
significant decrease in invasivion compared with wild type & with
HGF treated cells (p<0.005). Motility of both cell types increased
significantly with addition of HGF (p<0.001) as expected but the
effect of HGF was negated on the addition of HGF/Y27632 with motility
greatly reduced in these cells (p<0.002). MDA-MB-231 cells
exhibited reduced TER when treated with HGF, as expected. However,
addition of ROCK inhibitor reduced this effect. Immuno-fluorescent
staining for the TJ proteins ZO-1 & occludin together with ezrin
showed an overall increase in staining with cells more tightly packed
together when treated with Y-27632 & with HGH/Y-27632 combination
than untreated cells or cells treated with HGF alone. Staining of ZO-1
was more intense in MCF-7 than in MDA-MB-231 cells with edge staining
of occludin and ezrin seen in the MCF-7 cell line. Membrane ruffling
was observed in the MCF-7 HGF treated cells with lamellopodia
formation & separation of individual cells. Conversely, no
membrane ruffling was seen in MCF-7 cells treated with the ROCK
inhibitor or with HGF/Y27632 combination.

Conclusion: The effect of HGF on
motility & invasion of cells is well documented but this study
shows the effect of the ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 on HGF activity within
breast cancer cell lines. ROCK inhibitor decreased motility &
invasive action of HGF in both invasive MDA-MB-231 & MCF-7 breast
cancer cells. Staining of junctional & cytoskeletal linker
molecules showed a stronger concentration of occludin & ezrin at
TJ regions of the MCF-7 cells when the cells were treated with ROCK
inhibitor and with HGF/Y-27632 combination, suggesting a role for ROCK
in the signalling pathway for TJ regulation.

## 4083

## Human epidermal growth factor receptor 1 (EGFR) expression was not
associated with gene amplification but intimately associated with HER2
gene amplification and protein expression in tissue microarray of
clinical breast cancers.

## Park K, Kim H, Lim S, Kwak K, Han S. Inje University Sanggye
Paik Hospital, Seoul, Korea

Background: Introduction of
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor 1 (EGFR) biologic therapeutics
for numerous human malignant diseases mandates the appropriate
understanding on the biologic properties of EGFR. We performed the
current study to investigate the frequency and clinical implication of
EGFR gene amplification and protein expression in breast
cancer.

Methods: EGFR gene amplification was
assayed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and protein
expression was assayed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) on tissue
microarray (TMA) of 165 non-selected invasive breast cancer.

Results: The EGFR was expressed in 34
(20.6%) of 165 studied invasive breast cancers, whereas EGFR gene was
amplified in 13 (7.9%) by FISH. The EGFR protein was expressed in 5
(38.5%) of 13 EGFR amplified tumors, whereas it was expressed in 29
(19.1%) of 152 EGFR non-amplified tumors. The EGFR protein expression
was increased in EGFR amplified tumors but the difference was not
statistically significant. EGFR protein was expressed in 33.3% of HER2
amplified tumors whereas it was expressed in only 16.3% of HER2
non-amplified tumors. EGFR expression was significantly increased in
HER2 amplified breast cancer. The finding was similar when EGFR
expression was analyzed according to HER2 protein expression. During
the median follow-up period of 56 months (range: 13–80 months), 41
patients (24.8%) had recurrent disease and 26 patients (15.7%) died
due to recurrent breast cancer. EGFR expression was a significant
prognostic factor for the disease free and overall survival of the
patients together with lymph node metastasis and Ki67 labeling index
in univariate survival analysis but lymph node metastasis was an only
significant prognostic factor in multivariate analysis.

Conclusions: EGFR expression was
independent of EGFR gene amplification and was intimately associated
with HER2 amplification and overexpression. Low frequency of EGFR gene
amplification hampers its clinical utility as a tool to identify
proper patient population for the specific treatment. In contrast,
EGFR protein expression seems to have a role as a useful predictive
factor if it is rationally integrated with other biologic predictive
factors.

## 4084

## Combination approach using RAD001 plus or minus tamoxifen or
letrozole. A preclinical model of the treatment of endocrine-resistant
breast tumours.

## Farmer I, Evans DB, Lane HA, Lykkesfeldt AE, Dowsett M, Martin
L-A. Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, London, United
Kingdom; Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland; Institute of Cancer
Biology, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark

Background: Estrogens exert their
effects by binding to the estrogen receptor (ER), which in turn
interacts with estrogen response elements (ERE) on target genes
controlling proliferation and cell survival. This knowledge has been
exploited clinically by the development of endocrine agents that
perturb the steroid hormone environment either by blocking E2
biosynthesis or competing with E2 for the ER. Despite the success of
current endocrine agents the majority of women eventually relapse
whilst maintaining functional steroid receptors. Cross-talk between
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) and ER signaling pathways may
contribute to endocrine-resistance by sensitizing breast tumour cells
to estrogens or by circumventing the need for hormone. Based on this
evidence, one strategy to improve the efficacy of current endocrine
agents as well as delaying the onset of resistance is to target the ER
and pertinent signal transduction pathways concomitantly. One obvious
choice is mTOR which regulates cell cycle progression, by enhancing
translation initiation and/or the stability of cell cycle regulatory
proteins such as D-type cyclins In the following study we investigated
the use of RAD001 (everolimus), a specific inhibitor of mTOR in
combination with tamoxifen or letrozole on a panel of human breast
cancer cell lines modelling endocrine-sensitive and -resistant
disease.

Materials and Methods:
Tamoxifen-resistant (TamR) and longterm
estrogen-deprived cells (LTED) were generated from the parental cell
line MCF7. In essence TamR cells were
selected after long-term culture in 2% FBS containing
10−6 M tamoxifen and were compared in
all assays to their parental line cultured similarly but in the
absence of tamoxifen (2% FBS MCF7). The MCF7 Arom-1 cell line was
engineered to constitutively express aromatase under control of the
CMV promoter. The effect of RAD001 alone or in combination with
tamoxifen or letrozole was assessed in proliferation and ER
 -mediated transcription assays. Inhibition of mTOR
signalling in response to RAD001 was analysed by
immunoblotting.

Results: The LTED and
TamR cell lines (both previously shown
to have enhanced pMAPK and pAKT activity respectively) revealed
enhanced expression of proteins downstream of mTOR compared to their
parental cell lines. Treatment of the target cell lines shown in table
1, with increasing concentrations of RAD001 resulted in a
dose-dependent decrease in both proliferation and ER -mediated transcription together with a concomitant
decrease in phosphorylated p70S6 and S6. The
TamR cells were exquisitely sensitive to
the anti-proliferative effects of RAD001 but no additive effect was
noted with the addition of tamoxifen as expected. However, treatment
of the 2% FBS MCF7 cells with RAD001 in combination with
10−6M tamoxifen resulted in a c.10- fold
shift in sensitivity to RAD001. Similarly treatment of the Arom-1
cells with letrozole (10−7M) in combination
with a suboptimal dose of RAD001 resulted in a further 50% reduction
in proliferation compared to letrozole alone. 

Discussion: These data provide
evidence that combinations of RAD001 with tamoxifen or letrozole may
provide enhanced antitumour activity in endocrine-resistant disease
and may be applicable in the treatment of primary disease by delaying
the onset of resistance.

## 4085

## The effect of silencing the insulin-like growth factor receptor on
tamoxifen sensitive and tamoxifen resistant breast cancer
cells.

## McVittie CJ, Khalaf S, Ogunkolade BW, Bustin SA, Jenkins PJ,
Carpenter R. St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Bart’s
and the London, London, United Kingdom

Background: The growth
hormone/insulin-like growth factor I (GH/IGF-I) axis has been shown to
be important in the pathogenesis of breast cancer and IGF-I is a known
proliferative and antiapoptotic agent in breast cancer cells.
Increased IGF-I signaling through the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR), has
been postulated to play a role in the development of tamoxifen
resistance in breast cancers.

Aims: To investigate the importance
of IGF-I signaling in tamoxifen resistant (TR) and wild-type (WT)
MCF-7 breast cancer cells by using small interfering RNA (siRNA) to
cause transcriptional silencing of the IGF-IR and investigate the
effect this has on cell proliferation.

Methods: WT MCF-7 breast cancer cells
have previously been obtained from ATCC and we have developed a TR
cell line from this parent cell line. WT and TR cells (104 cells/well)
were cultured in serum-free medium alone (media only) or media +
Oligofectamine (mock-transfected) or media + oligofectamine + 200 nM
siRNA specific to the IGF-IR (siRNA-transfected). Cell proliferation
was assessed at 48 and 72 hours using the colorimetric MTS assay.
IGF-IR silencing was confirmed by extracting RNA from the transfected
cells and performing quantitative real time PCR to look at expression
levels of IGF-IR mRNA at 72 hours after transfection. These
experiments have been repeated in triplicate.

Results: Cell number as percentage of
media only in the WT and TR cells at 48 and 72 hours after mock or
siRNA transfection (mean of 3 experiments +/− SEM). 

WT cells transfected with siRNA showed significantly decreased
proliferation compared to siRNA-transfected TR cells (P<0.005).
However no difference was seen in cell proliferation in the
mocktransfected cells between the 2 cell lines.
IGF-IR mRNA copy number as percentage of media only IGF-IR copy
number in the WT and TR cells at 72 hours after transfection (mean of
3 experiments +/− SEM). 

The PCR results confirm down regulation of IGF-IR mRNA expression
level in the siRNA transfected cells of both cell lines but no
significant decrease of IGF-IR expression level in the mocktransfected
cells.

Conclusions: The decreased
proliferation of WT cells in response to siRNA against IGF-IR confirms
the importance of IGF-I as a proliferative agent in breast cancer. The
lack of similar response in the tamoxifen resistant cells suggests
that disruption of the normal GH/IGF-I signaling pathway might be
important in the development of tamoxifen resistance.

## 4086

## Does HER2 positive breast cancer have a prelediction to metastasise
to the brain?

## Paterson C, McIntyre A, Canney PA. Beatson Oncology Centre,
Western Infirmary, Glasgow, United Kingdom

Background: There have now been
several reports of an increased rate of central nervous system (CNS)
relapse in patients with metastatic HER2 positive tumours treated with
Trastuzemab. However in one report CNS metastases occurred as
frequently in patients with HER2 positive tumours but who had not been
exposed to Trastuzemab [1], suggesting that CNS disease in these
patients may not just be an effect of better control of systemic
metastatic disease leading to longer survival. To investigate this
further we have examined the rate of HER2 positivity in a sequential
cohort of patients treated for brain metastases from breast
cancer.

Material and Methods: Between April
2003 and October 2004 a cohort of 60 patients with a diagnosis of
breast cancer who were treated with palliative radiotherapy for brain
metastases were identified from the radiotherapy bookings system. A
further 9 patients were excluded due other primary tumours. HER2 and
ER status were obtained from the patient’s case records.

Results: 34/60 (57%) patients had
HER2 positive breast cancers and 26/60 (43%) were HER2 negative. Of
the patients with HER2 positive tumours 14 (41%) had not received
Trastuzemab before developing their brain metastases. 13/34 patients
(38%) with HER2 positive brain metastases were also ER positive, and
10/26 of patients with HER2 negative tumours (38%) were ER
positive.

Discussion: The reported rate of HER2
positivity in the general population of breast cancer patients is
between 20% – 25%, less than half the rate in this series of patients
with brain metastases. In contrast the rate of ER positivity in this
group of patients was lower than expected and not related to the HER2
status. These results suggest that the high rate of brain metastases
in HER2 positive patients is an intrinsic feature of the disease not
just an effect of better control of systemic metastases by
Trastuzemab. 1. Lai et al. Cancer.
101(4):810−6, 2004.

## 4087

## Inhibition of PCDGF/GP88 expression by SiRNA restores tamoxifen
responsiveness in tamoxifen resistant breast cancer cells.

## Tian C, Serrero G. A&G Pharmaceutical Inc., Columbia,
MD
Tamoxifen therapy is widely used for the treatment of breast
cancer. The inhibitory effect of tamoxifen is observed almost
exclusively in breast tumors that are estrogen receptor positive
(ER+), since estrogen is the major
growth stimulator for these types of tumors. However, after prolonged
anti-estrogen hormonal therapy, breast cancer often progresses from an
estrogen sensitive to insensitive state. Constitutive overexpression
of autocrine growth factor is one possible mechanism of tamoxifen
resistance. PCDGF/GP88 (PC-Cell Derived Growth Factor, also known as
progranulin) is an 88 kDa autocrine growth factor, shown to play a
critical role in breast tumorigenesis. GP88 is expressed in human BC
tumors in a positive correlation with their tumorigenicity. In
estrogen receptor positive (ER+) cells,
GP88 expression is low and is stimulated by estradiol whereas in ER
negative cells, it is constitutively overexpressed. Inhibition of GP88
expression by antisense transfection in ER negative breast carcinoma
leads to inhibition of breast tumor incidence and growth in nude mice.
In addition to stimulating proliferation, GP88 increased survival,
inhibited apoptosis, stimulated migration, matrix metallo-protease
activities and angiogenesis. Pathological studies have shown that GP88
is expressed in 80% of human invasive ductal carcinomas and correlates
with expression of markers of poor prognosis whereas normal tissues
and benign breast lesions are negative. We have shown that in
ER+ cells, GP88 mediates estrogen
mitogenic activity. Increased GP88 expression rendered
ER+ MCF-7 cells tamoxifen resistant
while they remained estrogen receptor positive. GP88 overexpressing
cells were able to proliferate in the absence of estrogen and in the
presence of tamoxifen, both in
vitro and in vivo. More importantly, tumor growth of the
overexpressing cells was significantly increased when the mice were
treated with tamoxifen. Conversely, tamoxifen resistant variants of
MCF-7 displayed a 10 to 20-fold increase in GP88 level suggesting a
strong correlation between tamoxifen resistance and GP88 expression in
human breast cancer cells.
Based on this data, we investigated whether inhibition of GP88
expression by Si RNA in tamoxifen resistant breast cancer cells would
restore cellular responsiveness to tamoxifen treatment. We show here
that administration of GP88 SiRNA restored the ability of tamoxifen to
inhibit cell proliferation in vitro
and stimulate apoptosis in a dose dependent fashion. In contrast,
treatment of the cells with unrelated Si RNA, used as negative
control, had no effect. These data as well as in vivo mouse xenograft
studies will be presented here. These results demonstrate the
important role of GP88 expression in the development of tamoxifen
resistant breast cancer and suggest that GP88 is a suitable molecular
therapeutic target for endocrine therapy resistant breast
cancer.

## 4088

## The intrinsic effects of IGFBP-3 on the survival of human breast
epithelial cells involve the sphingolipid ‘rheostat’.

## Perks CM, Holly JM, Carter JV, Winters ZE. University of
Bristol, Bristol, South-West, United Kingdom

Background: We have shown previously
that IGFBP-3 is a growth inhibitor for breast cancer cells and
enhances their sensitivity to radio- and chemotherapy induced
apoptosis, but has the opposite effects in normal breast epithelial
cells. In addition, these effects of IGFBP-3 are reversed by
activation of fibronectin receptors. The balance of sphingolipid
metabolite second-messengers, ceramide (which can induce apoptosis)
and sphingosine-1- phosphate (S-1P) (which can promote survival),
plays a critical role in controlling cell growth and apoptosis. These
can be interconverted by the action of ceramide synthase(CS) and
sphingosine kinase(SK), which therefore form a sphingolipid
‘rheostat’.

Aims: We investigated whether the
enzymes controlling this sphingolipid rheostat are involved in IGFBP-3
effects on breast cancer cell survival in normal MCF10A breast
epithelial cells and in Hs578T breast cancer cells.

Methods: Cells were dosed with
C2-ceramide (14 mM) or antimycin A with or without IGFBP-3 (100 ng/ml)
in the presence or absence of inhibitors of a) SK(DMS, 0.5 mM) b)
CS(fumonisin B1,FUM,1 mm) and c) blocking antibody to ceramide
(anti-CER). Cell death was assessed by Trypan blue cell counting and
apoptosis confirmed using flow cytometry. Cell surface ceramide was
detected using flow cytometry with an antibody to ceramide.

Results: In Hs578T cells, we found
that inhibiting the production of S-1P with DMS accentuated the
ability of 100 ng/ml IGFBP-3 to promote apoptosis (apoptosis:-IGFBP-3
without DMS= 137%; with DMS=220%). Conversely inhibiting the
endogenous production of ceramide with FUM reversed the action of
IGFBP- 3, such that it then acted as a survival factor
(apoptosis:-IGFBP- 3 without FUM= 137%; with FUM=68.4%). With
apoptosis induced by antimycin A, IGFBP-3 significantly (p<0.05)
increased the level of ceramide on the cell surface, which was blocked
in the presence of FUM. In addition, the ability of IGFBP-3 to enhance
antimycin A-induced apoptosis was also switched in the presence of
anti-CER, such that again IGFBP-3 acted as a survival factor
(apoptosis:-IGFBP-3 without anti-CER=172%; with anti- CER=62.3%).
Conversely, on fibronectin, the ability of IGFBP-3 to confer cell
survival in the presence of DMS was switched, such that IGFBP-3 then
accentuated apoptosis (apoptosis:-IGFBP-3 without DMS=74%; with
DMS=120%). Interestingly, in the normal MCF-10A cells, where IGFBP-3
acts as a survival factor against C2-ceramide (p<0.05), DMS was
without effect.

Summary & Conclusion: These data
indicate that in cancer cells, the ability of IGFBP-3 to accentuate
cell death is dependent upon endogenous production of ceramide, but
limited by enhanced generation of S-1P, whereas on fibronectin the
effects of IGFBP- 3 are reversed. These results suggest that IGFBP-3
affects cell survival in cancer cells, but not in normal cells, by
modulating the sphingolipid ‘rheostat’.

## 4089

## EGFR is necessary but not sufficient for YB-1-mediated EGF
independence.

## Pang B, Wu R, Chen YQ, Berquin IM. Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC

Background: Y-box binding-protein 1
(YB-1) is a multifunctional regulator of gene expression belonging to
the cold-shock domain family of proteins. Increased expression and
nuclear localization of YB-1 has been linked to poor patient outcome
in breast cancer and several other cancer types. YB-1 overexpression
in human mammary epithelial cells leads to epidermal growth factor
independence (EGFi) and increased EGFR levels. Induction of EGFi may
be relevant to the poor prognosis of breast cancer patients with
increased YB-1 levels, but the mechanism is unclear.

Materials and Methods: Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was used to determine if YB-1 could bind to
the EGFR gene in intact human mammary epithelial cells.
Tetracycline-inducible EGFR-overexpressing cell clones were used to
determine if EGFR overexpression was sufficient to activate receptor
phosphorylation and EGFi.

Results: Using ChIP, we found that
YB-1 bound to a downstream enhancer of the EGFR gene. Although
tetracycline-induced EGFR overexpression was sufficient to trigger
EGFR phosphorylation at several auto-phosphorylation sites, it was not
sufficient for EGFi. However, EGFR kinase inhibitors prevented
EGF-independent proliferation of YB-1-overexpressing cells.

Discussion: We confirmed that YB-1
binds to an enhancer region located within intron 1. YB-1 has
previously been shown to bind naked DNA from this region, but binding
within the natural cromatin context in live human mammary epithelial
cells had not been demonstrated. Our results suggest that YB-1
mediates EGFR transcription, which contributes to EGFR activation and
EGFi. However, EGFR overexpression appears to be insufficient for
EGFi. Therefore, additional targets of YB-1 may be involved in this
phenotype.

## 4090

## Estrogen receptor alpha modulates TGF-beta signaling independent
from its activation status.

## Buck MB, Laukemann S, Peusser T, Knabbe C. Institute of Clinical
Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany; Robert Bosch Hospital, Stuttgart,
Germany

Background: Transforming Growth
Factor beta (TGF ) is a hormonally regulated multifunctional growth
factor in breast cancer. It is a potent growth inhibitor of breast
cancer cells in early tumor stages, in later stages however it appears
to exhibit pro-metastatic activity. Previous results of a clinical
study from our group provide evidence, that loss of estrogen receptor
(ER) expression is involved in the modification of TGF effects on tumor progression (Clin Cancer Res 2004,
10:491). The aim of this study was to further characterize the
influcence of ER expression on TGF signal transduction.

Material and Methods: ER
 was transiently transfected into MDA435 ER negative
breast cancer cells. The TGF sensitive reporter plasmid p3TP-lux was used as an
end point marker of TGF signal transduction. Re-expressed ER was either fully activated by addition of estradiol
or completely blocked by addition of the antiestrogen fulvestrant.
Overexpression of Smad3, Smad4, c-jun or c-fos was used to further
characterize the influence of specific pathways.

Results: Expression of ER
 significantly attenuated TGF dependent induction of p3TP-lux. The effect was
independent from ER activation status. Expression of Smad3 and c-fos
strongly enhanced basal and TGF induction of the reporter in absence of ER
 . This effect was abrogated by co-expression of ER
 , again independent from its activation status. Smad4
and c-jun had no effect.

Discussion: It has been suggested
that Smad3 and MAPK signaling are required for pro-metastatic effects
of TGF in late stage breast cancer. Our results show that
enhanced TGF signaling induced by Smad3 and c-fos is attenuated
by ER . ER is known to bind AP- 1 (c-jun/c-fos) as well as
Smads. As the effect of ER was independent from its activation status,
direct binding of ER to c-fos and Smad3 is a likely mechanism for the
observed effects, preventing activation Smad or c-fos dependent TGF
 sensitive promotors. In conclusion, our results
suggest that in breast cancer cells ER counteracts pro-metastatic
effects of TGF .

## 4091

## Long term culture of MCF-7 breast cancer cells with small
interfering RNA to the insulin-like growth factor receptor causes
decreased cell proliferation.

## McVittie CJ, Khalaf S, Ogunkolade BW, Bustin SA, Jenkins PJ,
Carpenter R. St Bartholomew’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom; Barts
and the London, London, United Kingdom

Introduction: The Growth
hormone/Insulin-like growth factor I (GH/IGF-I) axis has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of breast cancer and development of
tamoxifen resistance. We have previously used small interfering RNA
(siRNA) for short term silencing of the IGF-I receptor (IGF-IR) in
MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

Aims: To investigate the use of siRNA
to cause long term silencing of IGF-IR.

Methods: MCF-7 cells were cultured in
phenol red-free medium (RPMI 1640) with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS). We
used a specific siRNA duplex designed to target IGF-IR mRNA. MCF-7
cells (104 cells/well) were washed and cultured in serum-free medium
alone (un-transfected) or transfected with Oligofectamine alone
(mocktransfected), or with Oligofectamine plus 200 nM siRNA
(siRNAtransfected). Every six days, cells were re-transfected with
siRNA in the same manner. Every three days, cell proliferation was
assessed using the colorimetric MTS assay, cells were lysed and RNA
extracted for quantitative real time PCR for IGF-IR and c-myc mRNA.
The expression level of c-myc mRNA was quantified to demonstrate that
the siRNA was specific for IGF-IR.

Results: Mean cell proliferationas
percentage of un-transfected (media only) cells. Mean of three
experiments +/− SEM.

 

There is a significant decrease in cell proliferation in the
siRNAtransfected cells compared to media only but no significant
difference in cell proliferation in the mock-transfected cells
cultured with transfection agent only.
Real-time RT-PCR confirmed that in the siRNA-transfected cells
there was a significant decrease in IGF-IR mRNA levels compared to
un-transfected cells, but no effect on c-myc mRNA levels. In the
mock-transfected cells there was no significant difference in IGF-IR
or c-myc mRNA expression levels compared to untransfected
cells.
mRNA copy number expressed as a percentage of un-transfected cells
+/− SD 

Conclusions: Repeated transfection of
MCF-7 cells with IGF-IR siRNA every six days enables prolonged IGF-IR
knock down and a sustained decrease in cell proliferation. This
anti-proliferative effect of IGF-IR siRNA is confirmed by the decrease
in IGF-IR mRNA expression in siRNA-transfected cells.

## 4092

## Blockade of p38 and JNK kinases inhibits the growth of normal and
malignant breast cells.

## Krisko T I, DuPre E N, Kim H, Brown P H. Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX

Purpose: Signal transduction
networks, and particularly MAPK pathways, transduce signals from
peptide and steroid hormones that control gene regulation and cell
growth. Several kinases in these pathways have been found to be
overexpressed or deregulated in cancer cells. Previous studies have
shown that the MAPkinases ERK, p38, and JNK are highly expressed in
aggressive, invasive breast cancers, and that increased levels of
activated MAPKs are markers of poor prognosis. In this study we
investigated whether blockade of these signaling kinases will decrease
the growth of normal and malignant breast cells. Such studies will
determine which of these signaling molecules are most appropriate as
targets for the therapy of breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: Normal breast
cells (HMEC) and malignant breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB-468,
MDA-MB- 361) were treated with specific small-molecule inhibitors of
either p38 (SB203580) or JNK (AZ11551384). The biochemical activity of
the inhibitors was confirmed by western blot analysis using antibodies
specific for the phosphorylated forms of substrates of these kinases
(JNK: p-cJun; p38: p-MAPKAPK-2). The rate of growth of the cells was
measured using a standard proliferation assay (MTS assay).

Results: Treatment with the p38
inhibitor (10−5M) completely blocked p38
activity in all three cell lines, as demonstrated by western blot
analysis measuring the phosphorylation of the p38 substrate MAPKAPK-2.
Growth assays revealed that the p38 inhibitor caused a significant
decrease of growth in both HMEC (p<0.0001,
ED50=5×10−6M) and
MDA-MB-468 (p<0.0001,
ED50=10−6M) cell
lines, as compared to vehicle treatment. However, MDA-MB-361 cells
demonstrated no inhibition of growth
(ED50>10−5M).
Treatment with the JNK inhibitor (10−4M)
demonstrated complete blockade of JNK activity in MDA-MB- 468 cells,
and a partial blockade in both HMEC and MDA-MB- 361 cells as
determined by measuring levels of p-cJun, a substrate of JNK, using
western blot analysis. Growth assays revealed a statistically
significant inhibition of cell growth in MDA-MB-468 (p=0.02), HMEC
(p=0.02), and MDA-MB-361 (p<0.0002) cell lines, as compared to
vehicle. The resulting ED50 for all three cell
lines was 5×10−5M. We are currently
investigating the effect of specific knockdown of JNK and p38 isoforms
(JNK 1,2,3 and p38 ) using siRNA.

Conclusion: These results suggest
that small-molecule inhibitors successfully block p38 and JNK activity
in both normal and malignant breast cells. In addition, this blockade
leads to an inhibition of both normal and malignant breast cell
proliferation. The greater sensitivity of MDA-MB-361 cells to the JNK
inhibitor suggests dominance of the JNK pathway over the p38 pathway
in this cell line. Taken together, these results provide the
foundation for testing specific signal transduction inhibitors for the
treatment of breast cancer.

## 4093

## Anti-idiotype antibody vaccine therapy for HER2/Neu overexpressing
breast cancer.

## Nahleh ZA, Mohanty K, Pal S, Mallick P, Saha A, Chatterjee SK,
Jazieh A, Foon KA, Bhattacharya-Chatterjee M. University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH; University of Pittsburg, Pittsburg,
PA

Background: Amplification of HER2/neu
is associated with poor prognosis in breast cancer. HER2/Neu
proto-oncogene is a suitable target for cancer immunotherapy. However,
HER2 /neu is a nonmutated self protein, and immune tolerance commonly
develops. In our attempts to circumvent immune tolerance to HER2/neu,
our goal is to apply an anti-idiotype (Id) based vaccine approach for
the treatment of HER2/Neu positive breast cancer. Our strategy is
active specific immunotherapy in which patients immunized with an
anti-Id antibody mimicking HER2/Neu will generate sustained high titer
HER2/Neu specific antibodies.

Methods: We have developed and
characterized one such anti-Id, designated 6D12(IgG1, k), which mimics
a specific epitope of HER2/Neu and can be used as a surrogate antigen
for HER2/Neu. The anti-Id 6D12 (Ab2) was raised by immunization
against the anti HER2/Neu murine monoclonal antibody 4D5 (Ab1).
Immunization of allogeneic C57BL/6 mice and rabbits with 6D12 induced
anti-HER2/Neu specific antibodies that reacted with antigen positive
SKBR3 cells by ELISA and FACS analysis. The immune sera inhibited
binding between Ab1 and Ab2 and vice versa (binding of Ab2 to Ab1)
indicating that it was a true anti-anti-Id (Ab3) antibody. The Ab3
sera, or purified Ab3, demonstrated strong reactivity with EL4 cells
transfected with HER2/Neu gene, but no reactivity at all with parental
EL4 cells by FACS analysis showing specificity of the binding. In
in vitro culture, immune sera
killed HER2/Neu positive tumor cells by antibody dependent cellular
cytotoxicity (ADCC). Mice immunized with 6D12 were protected against a
challenge with lethal doses of EL4-HER, whereas no protection was
observed when 6D12 vaccinated mice were challenged with HER2 negative
EL4 cells ; also no protection was observed when mice were vaccinated
with an unrelated anti-Id antibody and challenged with
EL4-HERcells.

Conclusion: These data suggest that
the anti-Id 6D12 vaccine can induce protective HER2/Neu specific
antitumor immunity in mice and would be potentially useful for the
treatment of patients with HER2/Neu positive tumors. A phase I
clinical trial in breast cancer patients is being planned. Supported
by the NIH Grant 1RO1 CA 91878.

## 4094

## Enhanced HER2/neu specific T-cell immunity in vitro by HER2/neu Ii-key modified “agonist” class II
peptides in breast cancer patients.

## Murray JL, Kawano K, Efferson C, Babiera G, Meric-Bernstam F,
Ibrahim N, Kallinteris NL, Humphreys RE, Von Hofe E. M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Antigen Express, Inc., Worchester,
MA

Research objectives: The purpose of
this laboratory research study was to determine whether novel “hybrid”
Ii-Key HER2/neu specific MHC class II peptides were capable of
generating greater T-cell immunity compared to unmodified peptides
when tested in vitro using
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from breast cancer (BC)
patients.

Results: PBMC from 13 BC patients (4
HER2+, 9 HER2-) and 6 normal donors were incubated with individual
Ii-Key peptides (AE37,38,39,47,48) or unmodified peptides G89 and
AE36. Ii- Key peptides differed from unmodified peptides in that they
contained a specific amino acid sequence [LMRK(“Ii-key”)] coupled to
the N-terminus of each class II epitope to allow for prolonged contact
and “charging” of the MHC class II molecule. Following 6 days of
incubation gamma interferon (IFN ) secretion in pg/ml and the number of IFN
 producing lymphocytes was measured using ELISA and
ELISPOT, respectively. Results were expressed as a stimulation index
(S.I.) calculated as: pg/ml IFN or spot number IFN producing cells from PBMC incubated with peptide(s)
 IFN produced by PBMC incubated without peptide. S.I.≥2
were considered significant.
Greater IFN production as assessed by both ELISA and ELISPOT
respectively, occurred following 96 hours of incubation compared to 48
or 72 hours. The frequency of positive responses (S.I.≥2) was greatest
for Ii-Key peptides AE37, 39 and 47, was significantly greater for
HER2+ patients compared to HER2- patients (p<0.04), and was
significantly greater for Ii-Key peptide AE37 (78%) compared to all
other peptides combined (24%; <0.0001). Median S.I. was also
significantly greater for AE37 (3.0) compared to combined median for
other peptides (1.2; p<0.04). A combination of either Ii-Key
peptide AE37 or AE47 and class I HER2 peptide, E75, induced greater
numbers of CD8+ E75+ effector T-cells than each individual peptide
alone. The absolute number of CD8+ Tcells induced was inversely
associated with the number of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T-cells. These data
may have relevance with respect to the design of more immunogenic
peptide vaccines and suggest that certain epitopes may have agonist or
inhibitory effects depending on the ratio of CD8+ effector/ CD4+CD25+
regulatory T-cell subsets.

## 4095

## CpG DNA augments dendritic cell-based therapy of breast
cancer.

## Baar J, Cai Q, Kublo L. University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute, Pittsburgh, PA
Dendritic cells (DC) are potent antigen-presenting cells whose
cytotoxic T-cell priming function is enhanced by CpG DNA. To establish
a rationale for breast cancer therapy using tumor lysateloaded DCs
with CpG DNA, 4 groups of 5 BALB/c mice were inoculated in their right
flanks with 5×104 syngeneic TS/A mammary
tumor cells, which were allowed to grow until they were palpable
(1 mm2). Mice were then vaccinated subcutaneously twice, 7 days apart,
in their left flanks with either (a) PBS, (b) TS/A lysateloaded DCs
alone, (c) CpG DNA alone, or (d) DCs + CpG DNA. The combination of DCs
+ CpG DNA was more effective in mediating the regression of the
established TS/A tumor than either PBS, DCs, or CpG DNA alone. Also,
surviving mice successfully withstood a rechallenge with fresh TS/A
tumor cells, indicating the generation of antitumor immune memory. We
also show that the intratumoral injection of DCs + CpG DNA is better
than DCs alone in slowing the outgrowth of an established TS/A tumor
in BALB/c mice. Based on these results, there is a compelling
rationale for DC-based therapy of breast cancer using CpG DNA to
augment DC function.

## 4096

## Cellular immunotherapy in late stage breast cancer patients with
reactivated autologous memory T-cells derived from bone marrow.

## Schuetz F, Ehlert K, Schneeweiss A, Schirrmacher V, Diel IJ,
Sohn C, Beckhove P. University of Heidelberg, Medical School,
Heidelberg, Germany; German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany
Tumorspecific Memory T-cells (MTC) can be found in the bone marrow
(BM) in the majority of primary and metastatic breast cancer (BC)
patients by using ELISpot-analysis. Upon specific restimulation with
tumourantigen-pulsed dendritic cells (DC) those autologous T-cells
exert specific effector functions like IFN-gamma or perforin
production and specific cytotoxicity. Furthermore we have shown in
NOD/Scid-mice that reactivated MTC are able to infiltrate autologous
and heterologous tumor tissue, proliferate and kill tumor cells by
induction of apoptosis, leading to a marked or complete tumor
rejection within 21 days after transfer (Nature Med, 2001). Endocrine
and cytostatic cancer therapies only have a limited influence on the
frequency of tumorspecific MTC in BM of BC patients. In a phase-I
trial 11 patients with metastatic BC (inclusion criteria) were treated
with autologous reactivated MTC of BM. Primary objective were
feasbility, and toxicity, secondary were clinical response, and
immunomonitoring. After testing patient’s BM for presence of
tumorspecific MTC those cells were reactivated by incubating them
in vitro with autologous DC
pulsed MCF-7 lysate for 12 days. Reactivated T-cells and pulsed DCs
were injected once intravenously. Follow Ups were done after 7, 14,
21, 28, and 120 days. Study design was feasible in every way. There
were no side effects found during and after T-cell injection. There
was a partial response in 3 of 5 measurable patients. In 5 Patients
-who received a maximum of reactivated T-cells- we were still able to
find these cells 7 days after vaccination. We conclude that cellular
immunotherapy with autologous reactivated MTC is an new way of BC
treatment. We thus prepare a phase-II trial in metastatic and primary
BC patients.

## 4097

## Whole cell autologous/allogeneic vaccine induces an immune response
to specific antigens in breast cancer patients.

## Head JF, Fort KA, Hsu K, Elliott RL. Mastology Research
Institute, Elliott-Elliott-Head Breast Cancer Research and Treatment
Center, Baton Rouge, LA

Introduction: Immune responses to
tumor-associated antigens have been correlated with longer
diseases-free and overall survival in breast cancer patients. The
purpose of this study was to boost immune response to tumor-associated
antigens and other specific cancer antigens with a mixed
autologous/allogeneic breast cancer vaccine in patients that were
found to be immune depressed.

Methods: Immune responses for 41
patients were measured with a lymphocyte blastogenesis assay (LBA)
before and after the vaccination series. The components of the vaccine
are as follows: patients’ own breast tumor cells
(106 cells when available), allogeneic
cell line (106 MCF-7 cells), CA 15-3
(1,000 IU), CA 125 (1,000 IU), CEA (2ug), PSA (50ug), IL-2
(2×104 IU), GMCSF (16.7ug). The standard
vaccine series was a subcuticular injection on weeks 0,1,2,6,10,14 in
alternating femoral triangles. A significant response was defined as
an LBA response ratio of >1.5.

Results: The average response for all
the antigens after the vaccination series was 38%. Specifically, 56.2%
of the patients responded to their own tumor cells, 31.7% responded to
the allogeneic cell line, 43.6% responded to CA 15–3, 35.1% to CEA and
35.9% to CA 125. Also, 31.7% of the patients responded to 1 antigen,
14.6% to 2 antigens, 19.5% to 3 antigens, 7.3% to 4 antigens, 2.4% to
5 antigens, and only 24.4% of the patients responded to 0
antigens.

Discussion: The breast cancer vaccine
was most successful at boosting the patients’ response to their own
tumor cells, suggesting that the autologous cells are the most
antigenic. CA 15–3 was the most antigenic protein antigen. There was
no general antigen response pattern for the patients, indicating that
response to one antigen is independent of response to another antigen.
Continued follow-up will be needed to determine the effect of the
vaccine on the survival of these patients.

## 4098

## Evaluation of foxp3 expression in sentinel nodes in breast cancer
patients.

## Matsuura K, Yamaguchi Y, Osaki A, Ueno H, Ohara M, Arihiro K.
Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan; Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan

Background: Detection of sentinel
nodes (SNs) and their clinical significance have been established.
Recent advances in molecular immunology have enabled us to analyze
precise immune responses. In the present study, we attempted to
clarify regulatory T (T-reg)- cell responses in SNs in patients with
breast cancer.

Method: SNs and non-SNs were
identified by a radio-guided method and a blue dye-guided method in 88
consecutive patients with clinically N0 breast cancer. The SNs and
non-SNs were immediately cut into two pieces, one half of which were
subjected to histological analysis, while the other half were frozen
for mRNA analysis. Total RNA was extracted from SNs and non-SNs, and
the expression of foxp3, which is the master regulatory gene for
developmental differentiation of Treg, was evaluated using
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Moreover, the immunological status of
the SNs was further analyzed with regard to micrometastasis, which was
identified as microscopically negative but positive by RT-PCR specific
for mammaglobin.

Results: Out of 88 patients, 28
(31.8%) had positive metastasis in SNs (pN0(mol+): 11, pN1: 14, pN2:
3). Among 60 metastasisnegative patients, RT-PCR analysis revealed
that no significant differences were indicated in the expression level
of Foxp3 mRNA when compared between SNs and non-SNs. Next, the
immunological parameters were compared between 60 metastasis-negative
and 28 metastasis-positive SNs. The metastasis-positive SNs showed
significantly higher expression of Foxp3 mRNA than the
metastasis-negative SNs(p=0.0008). Moreover, the expression level of
Foxp3 mRNA was significantly higher in SNs than in non- SNs(p=0.0367),
when compared between SNs and non-SNs in 28 metastasis-positive
patients.

Conclusion: The regulatory T cell
responses are triggered and may suppress anti-tumor immune responses
in SNs, once the metastasis is occurred in SNs in patients with breast
cancer. 

## 4099

## Synthetic peptide vaccine candidates and their matching profile
with the proteome.

## Mittelman A, Ashok BT, Kanduc D, Tiwari RK. New York Medical
College, Valhalla, NY; University of Bari, Bari, Italy
HER-2/neu is an overexpressed oncoprotein that is a target of
immunotherapy in breast cancer. Since multiple antigenic epitopes to a
single protein can be generated and the patients’ response to these
antigens is also not against a single epitope, it is imperative to
generate synthetic peptides that can be used in combination as
multivalent immunogens. To this end, some current approaches that may
yield dividends are (i) reverse immunology which involves screening of
immunogenic epitopes in a protein that is least represented in the
proteome (ii) clinical screening of large number of peptides that are
both B and T cell activators. We have identified eight different
peptides from a synthetic phage display peptide library, LX-8
consisting of 12-mer peptides by panning the library against an
antibody (c-erbB-2 Ab-2; Clone 9G6.10) that recognizes the
extra-cellular domain of the HER-2/neu protein. Three different
peptides were injected in mice that resulted in peptide specific
immune response with only a minimal degree of crossreactivity. We used
the sequences to search the human and mouse proteome data bases for
matches. The immunogenicity potency of the peptides was calculated and
the peptides could be categorized in descending order of potency. The
peptide sequences were reduced to five-mer sequences and number of
matches to human and mouse proteome determined using combinations of
several data base searches. We also calculated the MHC peptide matches
using the epitope prediction program SYFPEITHI and determined the
peptide ligation strength to different MHC alleles. Our methodology
may be able to predict the most optimized immunogenic peptides that
will help in analyzing the data obtained by either protein sequence
analyses or peptide library searches for multivalent peptide antigens
against clinically relevant proteins.

## 4100

## An important role for AIB1 phosphorylation in mediating growth
factor signaling dependent estrogen agonist activity of tamoxifen in
breast cancer cells.

## Shou J, Choudhury P, Chamness G, Osborne K, Schiff R. Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX
The nuclear receptor coactivator AIB1 is the most important member
of the p160 protein family for breast cancer development and
progression. Overexpression of AIB1 reduces tamoxifen’s antagonistic
activity in cultured breast cancer cells, and breast tumors in
patients overexpressing both AIB1
and HER2/neu (HER2) are more
resistant to tamoxifen than tumors with only one of these factors
elevated. Therefore we hypothesized that signaling from high HER2
leads to phosphorylation and activation of AIB1, which may then
contribute to development of tamoxifen resistance by increasing its
antagonist activity on estrogen receptor (ER) and stimulating tumor
growth. In this study, using ERdependent transcription assays with
ERE-luciferase constructs, we found that AIB1 significantly increased
tamoxifen’s agonist activity in HER2-overexpressing MCF7/HER2-18
breast cancer cells compared to parental MCF-7 cells. Downregulating
AIB1 with specific siRNA markedly
reduced tamoxifen’s agonist activity in this assay. Analyzing the AIB1
sequence, we identified several potential phosphorylation sites
including a specific serine located between the nuclear receptor and
the CBP interaction domains of AIB1, which can be phosphorylated by
Akt in in vitro kinase assays.
Antibody generated to an AIB1 peptide containing this specific
phospho-serine recognized an IGF-1, heregulin, and Aktinduced
phosphorylated form of AIB1 in
vivo, including in breast cancer cells. Mutating this
serine to glutamic acid to mimic phosphorylation greatly increased
ER-dependent gene transcriptional activity, while substitution by
alanine (S>A) at this site, which doesn’t change AIB1’s cellular
distribution, greatly reduced AIB1 coactivation of both ER and
androgen receptor dependent but not progesterone receptor dependent
gene transcription. Constitutively active Akt1 further increased
activity of wt AIB1 but not the S>A mutant. This specific
phosphorylation may mediate p300’s enhancement of ER-dependent
transcription, since the S>A mutation at this site significantly
attenuated this activity. AIB1-induced tamoxifen agonist activity
seems to be largely dependent on this specific phosphorylation, since
the S>A mutation almost completely diminished tamoxifen-induced
ERdependent gene transcriptional activity, while the mutation with
glutamic acid dramatically increased tamoxifen’s agonist activity.
Thus, this serine phosphorylation site appears important for AIB1
function and may link tamoxifen’s agonist activity on the nuclear
receptor pathway to growth factor pathways that activate Akt. Our data
thus offer a mechanistic explanation for our previous clinical
observation that high levels of both HER2 and AIB1 are required for tamoxifen
resistance in breast cancer, suggesting that we might impede the
clinical onset of tamoxifen resistance by blocking signaling from HER2
to AIB1.

## 4101

## Gene expression changes during acquired resistance to letrozole; a
preclinical model of post-menopausal breast cancer.

## Macpherson NA, Moore S, Brodie A, Thiantanawat A, Jelovac D,
Nelson CC. BC Cancer Agency, Victoria, BC, Canada; Vancouver General
Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada; University of Maryland, Baltimore,
MD

## Background:
Most metastatic breast cancers initially respond to hormonal
treatment but all become resistant to these treatments over time.
The genetic events that occur during acquired resistance are
unknown. To examine the gene expression changes during acquired
hormonal resistance, we used a model that mimics ER positive breast
cancers in the post-menopausal setting with the tumors responsive
to both Tamoxifen (TAM) and aromatase inhibitors. Tumors were
analyzed with high density cDNA microarrays to identify genes
associated with Letrozole (LET) resistance.

## Methods:
Aromatase-transfected MCF-7Ca human breast cancer cells were
grown as tumor xenografts in female ovariectomized athymic nude
mice in which an androstenedione supplement was converted to
estrogen to stimulate tumor growth. When tumor volume was
approximately 300 mm3, the animals were
grouped (4 groups, each with n=20) for continued supplementation
with androstenedione (Δ4A) only (control), LET (an aromatase
inhibitor) 10  g/day + Δ4A, TAM 100  g/day + Δ4A, or vehicle. Tumors were then
retrieved at various time points during the development of hormone
resistance. Tumor RNA samples were compared to reference RNA from
Stratagene and incubated with 14K microarrays (Array-Ready Oligo
Set, Qiagen). Expression results were analyzed with Genespring 6.1
(Silicon Genetics).

## Results:
We have identified 16 LET-resistant associated genes that are
over- or under-expressed by at least 2-fold and significant by
ANOVA, after controlling for genes associated with house-keeping
function (vehicle and short term control), proliferation (freely
growing tumors without anti-estrogens), and LET inducible genes.
They include; PELP1 a modulator of non-genomic activity of the
estrogen receptor, POU2F2 a transcription factor, and hydroxyacyl
dehydrogenase a gene involved in fatty acid metabolism.

## Conclusions:
A number of LET- acquired resistance-associated genes have been
identified. These are different than the TAM-resistance genes we
identified in earlier work.Patient biopsies are currently being
collected and analyzed to validate these observations.

## 4102

## Raloxifene effectively inhibits the growth of tamoxifen resistant
T47D:A18/PKC tumor.

## Zhang Y, Zhao H, Tonetti DA. University of Illinois at Chicago,
Chicago, IL

Background: Tamoxifen (TAM) is
approved as a chemopreventive for breast cancer in women at high risk
for developing the disease. Our laboratory previously reported that
overexpression of protein kinase C alpha (PKC ) in T47D:A18 breast cancer cells (T47D:A18/PKC
 ) resulted in hormoneindependent, TAM-resistant
growth both in vivo and in vitro (Chisamore MJ et. al.,2001, Clin Cancer Res.
7(10):3156–65). By comparing PKC expression in biopsies from patients exhibiting
disease recurrence with patients remaining disease-free following TAM
treatment, overexpression of PKC was found to correlate with TAM resistance (Tonetti
DA, et al, 2003 Br. J. Cancer 88: 1400–1402). Furthermore,
PKC upregulation was evident in the primary tumor at
diagnosis suggesting the alteration is likely an early event. In this
study we investigated the susceptibility of T47D:A18/PKC
 cells and tumors to raloxifene(RAL). RAL is a
selective estrogen receptor modulator (SERM) and is currently being
compared with TAM as a chemopreventive in the STAR trial.

Material and Methods: The growth rate
of T47D:A18/ PKC cells in the presence of RAL, 4-hydroxytamoxifen,
and 17 - estradiol (E2) was monitored by proliferation
assay. T47D:A18/ PKC tumors were established by injection of cells into
ovariectomized athymic mice and divided into three treatment groups:
TAM (1.5 mg/day), RAL (0.5 mg/day), and RAL (1.5 mg/ day). In a
separate experiment, preexisting long- term TAMtreated (5 years)
T47D:A18/ PKC tumors were passaged to 20 mice and were randomized
to either RAL or TAM treatment. All drugs were administrated p.o. and
tumor cross-sectional areas were measured weekly. The expression
levels of total Akt, phospho- Akt, HER2/neu, phospho-HER2/neu in
differentially treated tumors were detected by western blot.

Results: Cell proliferation assays
indicate that neither RAL nor TAM inhibits T47D:A18/ PKC
 cell growth in
vitro. However, T47D:A18/ PKC tumors were growth inhibited by RAL but not TAM.
Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of RAL is dose dependent. RAL
inhibited the growth of the pre-existing long-term TAMtreated tumors.
There were no significant differences in the levels of total Akt,
phospho-Akt, total HER2/neu nor phospho-HER2/ neu comparing TAM and
RAL-treated tumors.

Discussion: TAM prevention trials
achieved an overall 49% decrease in the development of disease. We
observed that RAL can inhibit the growth of T47D:A18/ PKC
 tumors whereas TAM fails to do so. Initial
mechanistic studies show that both AKT and HER2 expression levels are
similar in both RAL and TAM treated tumors, indicating that the AKT
and HER2/neu signaling pathways may not be involved. Although our
mouse model is not a cancer prevention model, our studies suggest that
RAL may be more beneficial as a chemopreventive than TAM in those
patients that may harbor pre-existing cellular changes involving PKC
 upregulation. Although RAL is a failed breast cancer
therapeutic, it may be effective in pre-selected patients with PKC
 - overexpressing tumors.

## 4103

## The phytoestrogen resveratrol acts opposite of estrogen to inhibit
migration and differentially signal to the actin cytoskeleton of
metastatic breast cancer cells.

## Azios N, Krishnamoorthy L, Harris M, Cubano L, Dharmawardhane S.
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX; Universidad Central del
Caribe, Bayamon, Puerto Rico

Background: Resveratrol, a
phytoestrogen from grapes and red wine, binds estrogen receptors (ER)
 and to exert both estrogenic and antiestrogenic effects.
Resveratrol is a potential cancer preventive due to its antioxidant,
antiproliferative, and proapoptotic properties, yet the effects of
resveratrol on metastatic breast cancer are relatively unknown.
Metastasis is initiated by cell migration, which is regulated by Rho
GTPases like Rac and Cdc42. To evaluate the role of resveratrol on
breast cancer cell migration, we investigated the effects of
resveratrol on the actin cytoskeleton and Rac1 and Cdc42 activity in a
metastatic human breast cancer cell line.

Materials and Methods: Directed cell
migration was determined using transwell assays where cells migrated
for 8 hrs in response to estradiol (E2), epidermal growth factor
(EGF), resveratrol (Res), or combinations of Res/E2 or Res/EGF. The
effects of E2, EGF, Res, Res/E2, or Res/EGF on the actin cytoskeleton
was determined by treating cells with these compounds for 10 min and
staining with rhodamine phalloidin. To test the hypothesis that Res
and E2 signal to Rac or Cdc42 to modulate the actin cytoskeleton, we
created MDA-MB-231 cells (ER / ) stably expressing dominant negative Rac1(T17N) or
Cdc42(T17N). These cell lines were treated with Res, E2, or EGF for
10 min and stained with rhodamine phalloidin. Rac1 or Cdc42 activity
in response to Res was determined by pulling-down the active GTP-Rac1
or GTP-Cdc42 with GST-Rac/Cdc42-GTP binding domain conjugated to
glutathione-sepharose beads and probing with anti-Rac or anti- Cdc42
antibodies.

Results: We recently reported that
Res significantly decreases directed cell migration at 8 hrs, while E2
or EGF significantly increases cell migration. Res can maintain a
significant inhibition of migration even in the presence of E2 or EGF.
We hypothesize that the inhibitory action of Res on cell migration may
depend on it’s induction of sustained global actin structures called
filopodia. E2 or EGF induced lamellipodia, actin structures known to
promote cell migration. Stable expression of Rac1(T17N) did not affect
Res-induced filopodia extension, though Res did induce Rac activity at
5–30 min. E2 or EGF did not induce lamellipodia in cells expressing
Rac1(T17N) indicating that E2 and EGF signal via Rac to promote cell
migration. Res was partially effective in filopodia extension in cells
stably expressing Cdc42(T17N), but did not affect Cdc42 activity at
5–30 min.

Discussion: These data indicate novel
Rac1- and Cdc42- dependent and independent signaling pathways for
resveratrolmediated modulation of the actin cytoskeleton leading to
persistent filopodia extension and decreased cell migration.
Therefore, resveratrol may act as an antiestrogen and novel
chemopreventive for breast cancer metastasis.

## 4104

## Comparison of effects of 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen and trilostane on
oestrogen-regulated gene expression in MCF- 7 cells: up-regulation of
oestrogen receptor beta.

## Barker S, Malouitre SD, Glover HR, Puddefoot JR, Vinson GP.
Queen Mary, University of London, London, United Kingdom

## Background:
Acquired resistance to tamoxifen treatment of breast cancer is a
major concern. Tamoxifen is a selective estrogen receptor modulator
(SERM) acting to competively block binding of oestrogen to the
oestrogen receptor (ER). Trilostane
(ModrenalTM) is a non-competitive
inhibitor of ER alpha function that has shown clinical benefit in
patients with advanced postmenopausal breast cancer after relapse
on tamoxifen. The different modes of action of tamoxifen and
trilostane suggests that their effects on gene expression within
breast tumours will also be different. The aim of this study was to
compare the effects of tamoxifen and trilostane on gene expression
in MCF-7 breast cancer cells using cDNA microarrays.

Materials and Methods: RNA was
prepared from cells cultured in phenol red free medium containing
charcoal-stripped foetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were treated
with 10 nM 17-beta oestradiol alone or together with 4-hydroxy
tamoxifen (1  M) or trilostane (10  M) for 72 hours. Fluorescently labelled cDNAs were
synthesised from the RNA and hybridised to 20 000 gene human
microarrays. Real-time RT-PCR was then used to confirm the changes
observed for selected genes of interest. In addition, experiments
using trilostane treated rats were used to follow these effects in
vivo, using both RT-PCR and immunoblotting of rat tissue
homogenates.

Results: We observed a striking
difference in the changes in gene transcription resulting from
treatment with tamoxifen versus trilostane. Transcription of genes
involved in cell cycle regulation and cell adhesion and matrix
formation was affected by both tamoxifen and trilostane, however,
in most cases these were not the same genes. Of particular interest
was a selective up-regulation of ER beta by trilostane. Another key
gene affected was the multidrug resistance gene (ABCG2);
down-regulated by trilostane but not by tamoxifen. As ER beta has
an important role to play in regulation of ER-dependent gene
transcription, the regulation of this gene by trilostane was
investigated in vivo.
Specifically it was found that ER beta was up-regulated in the
uterus of trilostane treated rats at the level of mRNA and protein
expression.

Discussion: This data shows that
4-hydroxy tamoxifen and trilostane regulate the expression of
different sets of genes and some if these changes may account for
the reported efficacy of trilostane after patients have become
resistant to tamoxifen treatment. An increase in ER beta would have
a suppressive effect on oestrogen-mediated tumour growth through
both ERE and AP1-dependent (growth factor driven) cell survival
pathways. A reduction in the multidrug transporter ABCG2, known to
be highly expressed in breast tumour stem cell populations,
suggests a possible mechanism by which trilostane can show
consistent efficacy after development of acquired endocrine
resistance.

## 4105

## Glyceollins (I–III), novel anti-estrogenic phytochemicals isolated
from soy.

## Zimmermann MC, Salvo VA, Boue SM, Fonseca JP, Elliot S, Dugan
CM, Zhu Y, Corbitt C, Collins-Burow BM, Weldon CB, Curiel TJ, Shih BY,
Carter-Wientjes C, Wood C, Clarkson TB, Erhardt P, McLachlan JA,
Cleveland TE, Beckman BS, Burow ME. Tulane University, New Orleans,
LA; Tulane Cancer Center, New Orleans, LA; The Center for
Bioenvironmental Research, New Orleans, LA; Tulane University Health
Science Center, New Orleans, LA; Southern Regional Research Center,
USDA, New Orleans, LA; University of Louisville, Louisville, KY; Wake
Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC; University of
Toledo, Medical College of Ohio, Toledo, OH
Background: Members of the flavonoid family of phytochemicals,
particularly those derived from soy, have received attention regarding
their estrogenic activity as well as their effects on human health and
disease. We have identified the isoflavonoid glyceollins I, II and III
in soy plants grown under stressed conditions which exhibit marked
anti-estrogenic effects on ER function. Here we examine the ability of
the glyceollins to suppress the tumorigenesis of ER-positive
estrogen-dependent breast cancer cells and inhibiting ER-dependent
gene expression.
Materials and Methods: The effects of glyceollins (I–III) on gene
expression were determined by ERE-luciferase and RT-PCR assays.
ER-dependent cancer cell lines were transfected with an ERE-Luc
plasmid, treated with glyceollins in the presence and absence of
estrogen stimulation, and harvested for luciferase activity. The cells
were also analyzed for the expression of PgR and SDF1 genes after
glyceollin treatment with and without estrogen stimulation.
Ovariectomized female mice were injected into the mammary fat with
breast cancer cells and treated with glyceollin subcutaneously for
20 days.
Results: We have established the ability of glyceollins to
significantly suppress basal and estrogen-stimulated tumor growth in
animal models. We further demonstrate that the effects of glyceollins
on suppression of tumor growth correlate with inhibition of estrogen
stimulated gene expression and suppression of EREreporter gene
activation.
Discussion: Our results establish the in
vivo suppression of estrogendependent and independent
tumor growth by glyceollins (I-III) while also providing critical
information for the understanding and treatment of breast cancer. The
glyceollins may represent important components of a soy-based diet in
terms of chemoprevention and in the treatment of tamoxifen resistant
breast cancer.

## 4106

## Down regulation of p42/44 MAPK and pAKT in response to neo-adjuvant
tamoxifen or anastrozole (IMPACT) in ER positive breast cancer.

## Salter J, A’Hern R, Smith IE, Dowsett M. Royal Marsden Hospital,
London, United Kingdom

Background: Numerous signal
transduction inhibitors are now under development for breast cancer
treatment, frequently in combination with endocrine therapy. Studies
have suggested that these combinations not only improve the efficacy
of endocrine agents in the advanced disease setting but may also delay
the onset of resistance. Hence assessment of the activation state of
downstream signaling partners such as p42/44 MAPK and pAKT is an
important aspect of their evaluation. To date few studies have
investigated the effect of endocrine agents on these major signal
transduction pathways. We have therefore assessed the effect of
tamoxifen and the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole on p42/44 MAPK and
pAKT in the neoadjuvant IMPACT study.

Materials & Methods: Post
menopausal patients (28) with ER positive breast cancer from the
neo-adjuvant tamoxifen vs anastrozole vs combination trial (IMPACT)
were immunohistochemically assessed for p42/44 MAPK (Cell signalling)
and pAKT(Cell signalling) pre-and 3-months post therapy. Samples were
scored using the Allred score (values 0–8)

Results: Analysis of patient samples
pre- and post-treatment resulted in a significant decrease in p42/44
MAPK and pAKT signalling irrespective of the agent used (Table 1).
There was a trend for anastrozole to be more effective than tamoxifen
at inhibiting pAKT expression. 

Conclusion: Tamoxifen and anastrozole
both down-regulate the expression of p42/44 MAPK and pAKT (generally
considered key components of the cell proliferation and survival
pathways) and may form a significant component of the endocrine
response mechanism. This observation could also provide important
information when considering the impact of signal transduction
inhibitors in combination with endocrine therapies for the development
of optimal treatment regimes.

## 4107

## Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (CSF-1) overexpression leads
to mammary tumorigenesis: induction of CSF-1 receptor, c-fms, by steroid
hormones.

## Kirma NB, Liu Y, Nair HB, Tekmal RR. University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
In addition to its essential role in normal mammary development
during lactation, the macrophage colony stimulating factor (CSF- 1) is
a cytokine that has been also implicated in breast cancer. Lack of
CSF-1 signaling in mice, either due to deficiency in CSF- 1 expression
(CSF-1op/op) or disruption of the CSF-1
receptor (c-fms), leads to defects in lactation. On the other hand,
elevated levels of both CSF-1 and c-fms have been detected in breast
cancer. The concomitant expression of CSF-1 and its receptor in breast
cancer cells has been demonstrated to correlate with high grade and
metastatic breast cancer. Although breast cancer cells have been shown
to express CSF-1 and its receptor c-fms, another source of CSF-1 in
mammary tumors is from infiltrating macrophages, which may interact
with tumor cells in a paracrine fashion, leading to tumor cell
migration and metastasis. To study the role of CSF-1 in mammary
carcinogenesis, we developed a transgenic mammary mouse model that
over-expresses CSF-1 under the control of the MMTV promoter. These
mice overexpress CSF-1 specifically in the mammary glands and show
extensive precancerous lesions (hyperplasia and dysplasia) that are
aggravated by pregnancy and develop into palpable tumors in aged mice.
Our data also show infiltration of macrophages in tumors of MMTV-CSF-1
mice. This infiltration contributes to the pool of CSF-1 present in
the microenvironment of the glands. The mammary glands of MMTV-CSF-1
mice exhibit increased levels of c-fms, suggesting that CSF-1 may
enhance its signaling through a positive feedback loop. The levels of
estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER and PR) are also increased in
these mice raising the possibility that these steroid receptors may
mediate induction of c-fms expression in these mice. Interestingly,
our preliminary data show that c-fms expression is elevated in
aromatase transgenic mice, which maintain elevated estrogen levels in
mammary glands due to local aromatase over-expression. Furthermore,
estrogen and progesterone treatment of human breast cancer cell lines
resulted in increased c-fms expression and induction of mouse and
human c-fms promoter activity, as determined by the luciferase
reporter assay. Combined, the data suggest that estrogen and
progesterone may mediate induction of c-fms by its ligand CSF-1. These
data have implications in understanding the cross-talk between CSF-1
signaling and that of steroid receptors as well as in the development
of breast cancer therapies that target CSF-1 signaling.

## 4108

## Lipid profile and homocysteine levels in postmenopausal women with
early breast cancer at low risk treated for two years with exemestane:
follow-up results of a randomized, placebo-controlled study.

## Lønning PE, Geisler J, Krag L, Ottestad L, Risberg T, Hagen AI,
Schlichting E, DiSalle E, Polli A, Paolini J. Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway; Central Hospital of Rogaland, Stavanger,
Norway; The Norwegian Radiumhospital, Oslo, Norway; University
Hospital of Northern Norway, Tromsø, Norway; St. Olavs Hospital,
Trondheim, Norway; Ullevål University Hospital, Oslo, Norway;
Pharmacia Italia S.p.A. / Pfizer Group, Milan, Nerviano,
Italy

Background: Estrogens favorably
modify the lipid profile in postmenopausal women. Aromatase inhibitors
markedly reduce estrogen levels. We reported the effects of 2 years of
treatment with exemestane (Aromasin®), a steroidal aromatase
inactivator, on plasma levels of total cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol,
LDLcholesterol, triglycerides, apoliporotein A1, lipoprotein A,
apolipoprotein B and serum homocysteine (Lønning et al., J Clin Oncol
2005, in press). During treatment, lipid profile was similar in
exemestane and placebo patients, except for a modest reduction in
HDL-cholesterol and apolipoprotein A1; homocysteine levels slightly
increased. No change was observed in coagulation parameters.

Methods: Randomized, double-blind
study evaluating the effect of exemestane on bone metabolism,
endocrinological and metabolic parameters in 147 patients randomized
to exemestane (25 mg/day p.o.) or placebo for 2 years, with a 1-year
follow-up. We report here the results of the follow-up period for the
lipid profile and homocysteine levels, assessed at month 27, 30 and
36, corresponding to 3, 6 and 12 months after treatment
discontinuation.

Results: 147 pts have been enrolled,
73 on exemestane and 74 on placebo. Follow-up results are available
for approximately 45–55 patients per group. Preliminary results show
that the slight decrease in HDL-cholesterol and apolipoprotein A1
caused by two years of exemestane treatment disappeared shortly after
treatment discontinuation. Homocysteine levels remain slightly
increased during the entire follow-up period in both treatment arms.
Similar levels were observed during follow-up in the two treatment
groups for all the assessed parameters. Final results will be
presented.

Discussion: The very minor changes in
the circulating levels of HDL-cholesterol and apolipoprotein A1
observed after two years of exemestane treatment disappeared shortly
after treatment discontinuation. The slight increase over time of
homocysteine levels in both groups is consistent with the reported
increase during aging (Nygard et al., JAMA 1995; 274:1526). We
conclude that the effects of exemestane therapy on lipids are mostly
reversible within three months after treatment withdrawal. This
suggests exemestane adjuvant therapy should not have long term
detrimental effects on lipid profile.

## 4109

## Aromtase X HER-2/Neu double transgenic mice: effect of local
estrogen on mammary development and carcinogenesis.

## Tekmal RR, Perla RP, Nair HB, Liu Y-G, Kirma NB. University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX
A majority of breast cancers are hormone-responsive and will
require estrogen for growth, and respond to hormonal therapy that
blocks estrogen receptor action. Breast tumors lacking estrogen
receptor fail to respond to antiestrogen therapy yet require estrogen
for tumor initiation. To address directlythe importance of breast
tissue aromatase in initiation and progression of breast cancer, we
have generated aromatase transgenic mice (MMTV-aromatase) and shown
that elevated estrogen levels due to aromatase overexpression resulted
in the induction of hyperplastic and dysplastic lesions and they are
persistent even without circulating estrogens. Aromatase transgenic
mice form ER-positive mammary tumors when exposed to DMBA within four
to five months. To our knowledge, this is the first in vivo model that clearly demonstrated
the direct involvement of breast tissue aromatase/ estrogen in
tumorigenesis. To address the importance of synergistic role of
estrogen with oncogenes and their receptors we have crossed
MMTV-aromatase with MMTV-neu mice. Presence of continuous local
estrogen results in down regulation of ER, PR and a number of growth
factors in double transgenic mice. Unlike previous studies, continuous
estrogenic stimulation in double transgenic mice at prepubertal stage
results in reduced tumor incidence or no tumor formation even at one
year of age. Presence of high levels of local estrogen production
during the mammary development (at prepubertal stage) and before the
initiation of tumor formation by HER-2/neu appears to have a
protective effect on the tumor formation in double transgenic animals.
Ongoing studies are focused on determining tumor incidence, estrogen
receptor status after blocking local estrogen beginning with 5 weeks
of age with letrozole as well as molecular changes during various
stages of development. These studies provide interesting in vivo
observations that aid in understanding the biology of breast cancer
and in developing potential therapeutic and prevention strategies.
Supported by NIH/ NCI grant CA75018.

## 4110

## Total body aromatization is strongly correlated to plasma leptin
levels in postmenopausal breast cancer patients.

## Geisler J, Haynes B, Ekse D, Dowsett M, Lønning PE. Haukeland
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway; Royal Marsden Hospital, London,
United Kingdom

Background: Obesity as well as
elevated plasma estrogen levels are well-established risk factors for
breast cancer development in postmenopausal women. However, the link
between obesity and elevated plasma estrogens is still uncertain.
Leptin, encoded by the ob gene, has
recently been shown to influence on aromatase expression in vitro. Thus, we intended to evaluate
the influence of plasma leptin levels in postmenopausal breast cancer
patients on basal levels of total body aromatization in vivo.

Materials and Methods: 22
postmenopausal women with metastatic breast cancer, previously
participating in tracer studies for the measurement of “total body
aromatization” (TBA) in vivo were
available. Total body aromatization was calculated following an
intravenous double-tracer
(3H/14C)
bolus injection in HPLC-purified urinary estrogen fractions. Plasma
leptin levels were measured using a commercial kit provi ded by
Diagnostic Systems Laboratories, Webster, TX, USA. Plasma estrogen
levels (estrone, estradiol, and estrone sulfate) were measured by
highly sensitive radioimmunoassays established in our
laboratory.

Results: Plasma leptin levels varied
from 1,83 to 95,51 ng/ml. Values for total body aromatization varied
from 1,46% to 4,72%. All plasma estrogens were in the normal range
expected for postmenopausal women. We found a significant correlation
between pre-treatment leptin levels and total body aromatization (p =
0.01; Spearman). In addition, plasma leptin levels correlated to
plasma levels of estrone (p = 0.009), estradiol (p = 0.007), and
estrone sulfate (p = 0.01). In contrast, basal levels of TBA did not
correlate to body mass index (BMI).

Discussion: Our results show that
plasma levels of leptin are strongly correlated to basal levels of
total body aromatization in postmenopausal women with metastatic
breast cancer. In vitro findings by
Catalano et al. suggest that leptin enhances aromatization by
interaction with the promoters II and I.3. Our findings may also
provide an explanation for the association between breast cancer
outcome and diet intervention (Chlebowski et al. ASCO abstract # 10,
2005).

## 4111

## Effects of aromatase inhibitors on human osteoblast cells: a
possible androgenic bone protective effects induced by
exemestane.

## Miki Y, Suzuki T, Igarashi K, Kanno J, Sasano H. Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; National
Institute of Health Sciences, Biological Safety Research Center,
Tokyo, Japan

Background: Effects of aromatase
inhibitors (AIs) on human skeletal system could become clinically very
important due to their increasing use as an adjuvant therapy in
postmenopausal patients. However, possible effects of AIs on human
bone cells have been largely unknown. We studied effects of AIs the
steroidal AI, exemestane (EX), the non-steroidal Aromatase Inhibitor I
[AI-I; 4-(Imidazolylmethyl)-1-nitro-9H-9-xanthenone; Calbio] and
aminoglutethimide (AG; Sigma-Aldrich) on osteoblast cells.

Materials & Methods: We employed
the human osteoblast cell line, hFOB (ATCC) which expressed estrogen
receptor (ER) and androgen receptor (AR) as in human osteoblasts.
We first examined effect of 100 pM-1  M of estradiol (E2), 5. -DHT (DHT), EX, AI-I, and AG treatments in hFOB cells
using cell proliferation assays (WST-8). We examined whether these
effects were mediated through steroid receptors using corresponding
blockers to ER [ICI182,780 (ICI)], to AR [flutamide (FL)], or to
progesterone receptor [RU38,486 (RU)] as pretreatment. We subsequently
screened E2, DHT, and EX responsive genes using an mRNA microarray
analysis in these cells for further characterization.

Results: There was a significant
increase in the number of the cells after 72 h treatment with E2 and
DHT (≥10 nM) and EX (≥100 nM). FL pre-treatment partially inhibited
this effect of EX but no inhibition was seen with ICI or RU
pre-treatment. AI-I exerted no effects on cell proliferation treated
for 72 hours. AG diminished the number of the cells. In microarray
analysis, gene expression profile patterns after treatment with EX
resembled patterns seen with DHT but not with E2 treatment.

Discussion: Steroidal Aromatase
inhibitor, EX stimulated hFOB cell proliferation via both AR dependent
and independent pathway. Upregulation by EX of specific genes in hFOB
cells will be discussed in relation to cell proliferation and
osteoblast differentiation.

## 4112

## Effect of nomegestrol acetate on aromatase activity in MCF-7aro
breast cancer cells.

## Chetrite G, Shields-Botella J, Postruznik D, Pasqualini JR.
Institut de Puériculture et de Périnatalogie, Paris, France;
Laboratoires Merck-Théramex, Monaco, Monaco
Background: The progestin nomegestrol acetate (NOMAC), a
17a-hydroxy-nor-progesterone derivative (17a-acetoxy-6-
methyl-19-nor-4,6-pregnadiene-3,20-dione, the active substance in
Lutenyl®) is largely used as an oral contraceptive and in the
treatment of menopausal complaints. In previous studies in this
laboratory we demonstrated that NOMAC is an anti-sulfatase agent in
hormone-dependent MCF-7 and T-47D breast cancer cells. In the present
study, we explore the effect of NOMAC on the aromatase activity in a
stable aromatase-expressing estrogen receptor-positive human breast
cancer cell line: the MCF-7aro.
Materials and Methods: The MCF-7aro cell line was a gift from Dr S.
Chen (Beckman Research Institute, Duarte, U.S.A). For experiments, the
cells were stripped of endogenous steroids and incubated with
physiological concentrations of [3H]-testosterone (5× 10−9 M) alone or
in the presence of NOMAC (5× 10−5 M and 5× 10−6 M) for 24 h at 37°C.
The cellular radioactivity uptake was determined in the ethanolic
supernatant and the DNA content in the remaining pellet. [3H]-E2,
[3H]-estrone (E1) and [3H]- testosterone were characterized by thin
layer chromatography and quantified using the corresponding
standard.
Results: It was observed that aromatase activity is present at a
high level in MCF-7aro cells, since the concentration of [3H]-E2 found
was 5.78±0.55 pmol/mg DNA in the non-treated cells. NOMAC, at the
concentrations of 5× 10−5 M and 5× 10−6 M significantly inhibits this
conversion by 42% and 27%, respectively.
Conclusion: The MCF-7aro cell line shows a high detectable
aromatase activity and NOMAC can act as an anti-aromatase agent by
inhibiting this activity. This is an important new effect of this
progestin, as it was previously demonstrated that NOMAC is also an
anti-sulfatase agent. This dual effect of NOMAC can provide attractive
possibilities for clinical trials.

## 4113

## Estradiol is an anti-aromatase agent in human breast cancer
cells.

## Pasqualini JR, Chetrite G. Institut de Puériculture et de
Périnatalogie, Paris, France
Background: Estradiol (E2) is an important risk factor in the
development and progression of breast cancer. However, a ≪ direct
effect ≫ of E2 in breast cancerization has not yet been demonstrated.
Breast cancer cells possess all the enzymes [sulfatase, aromatase,
17ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17ß-HSD)] for the local bioformation
of E2. In the last years many studies have shown that treatment of
patients with breast cancer using antiaromatase agents has beneficial
therapeutic effect. In the present study, we explore the effect of E2
on the aromatase activity in a hormone-dependent breast cancer cell
line which overexpressed the aromatase gene: the MCF-7aro cell.
Materials and Methods: The MCF-7aro cell line was a gift from Dr S.
Chen (Beckman Research Institute, Duarte, U.S.A). For experiments, the
cells were stripped of endogenous steroids and incubated with
physiological concentrations of [3H]-testosterone (5× 10−9 M) alone or
in the presence of E2 (5× 10−5 – 5× 10−7 − 5× 10−9 M) for 24 h at
37°C. The cellular radioactivity uptake was determined in the
ethanolic supernatant and the DNA content in the remaining pellet.
[3H]-E2, [3H]-estrone (E1) and [3H]- testosterone were characterized
by thin layer chromatography and quantified using the corresponding
standard.
Results: It was observed that [3H]-testosterone is converted mainly
into [3H]-E2, and not to E1, which suggests no oxidative 17ß- HSD
activity in these experimental conditions. The aromatase activity,
corresponding to the conversion of [3H]-testosterone to [3H]-E2 after
24 h, is relatively high, since the concentration of E2 was 2.25±0.15
pmol/mg DNA in the non-treated cells. E2 inhibits this conversion by
73%, 54% and 20% at the concentrations of 5× 10−5 M, 5× 10−7 M and 5×
10−9 M, respectively.
Conclusion: E2 has a paradoxical effect by significantly inhibiting
the aromatase activity in MCF-7aro cells. In a previous study, we have
shown that E2 can also exert a potent anti-sulfatase activity in two
cell lines: MCF-7 and T-47D, where the aromatase activity is very low
or non-detectable. The dual inhibition of the sulfatase and aromatase
activities, two crucial enzymes for the biosynthesis of E2, by E2
itself in breast cancer add interesting and attractive information for
the use of estrogen treatments.

## 5001

## MRI surveillance downstages invasive cancer (IC) to DCIS in women
at high risk for hereditary breast cancer.

## Warner E, Causer PA, Hill KA, Ramsay E, Jong RA, Wong JW, Wright
FC, Detzler G, Glazier J, Murray C, Muldoon J, Messner SJ, Eisen A,
Rosen B, Verity L, Chung A, Yaffe MJ, Narod SA, Plewes DB. Sunnybrook
& Women’s College Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada;
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Sunnybrook & Women’s
College Health Sciences Centre, Canada; Sunnybrook & Women’s
College Health Sciences Center, Canada; Sunnybrook & Women’s
College Health Sciences Centre

Background: In 2 multicenter
surveillance studies of women at high risk for hereditary breast
cancer (Kriege et al. NEJM 351:427,2004; Leach et al. Lancet
365:1769,2005) MRI was twice as sensitive as mammography (M) for IC
but M was much more sensitive for DCIS. However, we found MRI superior
to M for both IC and DCIS (ASCO 2004, #9500). It might be argued that
MRI-only detected cases of DCIS are clinically irrelevant either
because they may never progress to invasion or because they may
eventually be detected by M prior to invasion.

Methods: In November, 1997 we began a
surveillance study of annual MRI, M and ultrasound for women ages 25
to 65 at high risk for hereditary breast cancer. All cases of DCIS ±
microinvasion and IC in our study were analyzed in 2 time frames:
before (period A) and after (period B) July, 2001 when a radiologist
(PC) with special training in MRI joined the study. In period A, 225
women had a total of 487 rounds of screening, and in period B 396
women (247 new patients) had 877 rounds of screening.

Results: In period A there were 16
cases of DCIS or IC detected (3.3% of screens) compared to 27 cases
(3.1% of screens) for period B. Of the 16 cases in period A, 2 (12%)
were DCIS compared to 12 (44%) of the 27 cases in period B (p=0.04) of
which 3 had microinvasion. Both DCIS cases in period A were detected
by M only. All 12 DCIS cases in period B were detected by MRI but only
1 (8%) by M. No cases of DCIS were detected by ultrasound. These
differences could not be explained by age, mutation status, previous
M, or year of screening. Sensitivity of MRI vs. M for invasive cancer
was 79% vs. 43% in period A, but 93% vs. 13% in period B.

Discussion: In view of the similar
total case detection rate in both periods, it is unlikely that the
additional cases of DCIS detected in period B (1.4% vs. 0.4%) are
incidental findings, particularly since 3 had already progressed to
microinvasion. The lower IC detection rate in period B (1.7% vs. 2.9%)
suggests downstaging of IC to DCIS by earlier detection with MRI. The
100% detection rate of DCIS by MRI in period B challenges the need for
M in addition to MRI for hereditary cancer surveillance in highly
experienced centers.

## 5002

## Clinical guidelines for early detection of tumor response to
neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer using contrast-enhanced
MRI.

## Loo CE, Schlief AT, vd Vijver MJ, Muller SH, Rodenhuis S,
Gilhuijs KG. The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Plesmanlaan,
Netherlands

Background: Contrast-enhanced (CE)
MRI has been shown useful to assess response of locally advanced
breast cancer after completion of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. However if
signs of unfavorable response are visible early after the start of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the treatment may be changed accordingly,
thus improving survival of the patient.

Purpose: The aim of our study was to
establish clinical guidelines for the early detection of unfavorable
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy of locally advanced breast
cancer.

Methods: Fifty-four patients
(24–66 years) with locally advanced breast cancer (>3 cm and/or
lymph node positive) were consecutively included between September
2000 and September 2004. Tumors (45 IDC, 9 ILC) were examined with CE
MRI prior and after 2 (of 6) courses neoadjuvant chemotherapy. A
combined MRI protocol was employed: fast dynamic imaging in the first
45 s after contrast injection (Turbo-FLASH) followed by dynamic
imaging in 5 consecutive series at 90 s intervals (FLASH-3D). MRI
findings were assessed by dedicated breast radiologists and correlated
with postoperative pathology findings.
Multivariate logistic regression with double cross-validation and
ROC analysis was employed to identify temporal and morphological
characteristics of contrast uptake that are predictive of unfavorable
outcome with regard to tumor response after the second course of
chemotherapy.

Results: Postoperative pathology
showed unfavorable response (presence of residual disease after 6
courses of chemotherapy) in 39 (72%) of 54 patients.
After 2 courses of chemotherapy imminent unfavorable response was
best indicated by the change of largest washout diameter on the second
MR examination relative to the first (Az=0.73).
Reduction of the largest washout diameter less than 25% yielded 95%
specificity to identify unfavorable response.
This operating point was selected as a clinical guideline for a new
randomized prospective phase 2 study (tailored preoperative
chemotherapy).

Conclusions: Insufficient change of
largest washout diameter is the most predictive MRI characteristic for
tumor response during chemotherapy and may be used as a clinical
guideline for early detection of unfavorable response.

## 5003

## Correlating breast cancer grade and hypoxia status with MRI
features.

## Ah-See M, Makris A, Taylor NJ, Stirling JJ, Daley FM, Richman P,
Harris A, d’Arcy J, Collins D, Padhani AR. Mount Vernon Cancer Centre,
Northwood, Middlesex, United Kingdom; Weatherall Institute, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom

Background: Tumour grade and
oxygenation are important prognostic features in breast cancer. The
purpose of the current study is to see whether Blood oxygenation level
dependent (BOLD) or dynamic contrast enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) are
predictive of tumour grade and hypoxia status of breast
cancers.

Methods: 32 untreated breast cancer
patients with invasive ductal cancer were studied. A standard series
of T2*-weighted images with different echo-times were used to
quantify the BOLD signal (intrinsic susceptibility - R2*). The DCE-MRI scans were performed using Gd-DTPA as the
contrast agent and sequences that directly measured or were sensitive
to blood flow, blood volume and microvessel permeability. Whole tumour
measurements of maximum amplitude of enhancement and wash-out gradient
together with transfer constant (Ktrans;
previously called permeability surface area product), lesion leakage
space (ve), relative blood volume (rBV) and
flow (rBF) were obtained. Tumours were graded according to the
Bloom-Richardson system on core biopsies or surgical specimens. Low
(n=1) and moderate grade tumours (n=15) were grouped as not
high-grade. Immunohistochemical staining to assess the oxygenation
status of breast cancer was done on the pre-treatment diagnostic
corebiopsy samples using the carbonic anhydrase-IX (CA-IX) mouse
monoclonal antibody. CA-IX immunostaining was quantified in carcinoma
cells as either positive or negative. Univariate and multivariate
analyses dividing morphology (size), BOLD-MRI and DCE-MRI kinetics
were performed. For assessment of R2*, only patients with solid masses (n=23) were included.
Multivariate analysis of the most significant univariate variables was
done. The statistical significance for the 2-tailed Mann-Whitney
U-test was set at a p-value of <0.01.

Results: Univariate analysis showed
significant positive MRI correlates of tumour grade (maximal
amplitude, P=0.006; washout gradient, p=0.01; rBV/rBF; p=0.001) and
inverse correlation with R2* (p <0.001). Multivariate analysis showed that maximum
amplitude was the dominant explanatory variable. The only MRI
correlate of tumour CA-IX staining was rBV/rBF with positively
staining tumours having higher rBV/rBF; p=0.001).

Conclusions: There is a strong
relationship between breast cancer blood volume/flow and tumour grade.
The inverse correlation between blood volume/flow and our marker of
tumour hypoxia (CA-IX) was unexpected. However the paradox of large
blood volume and concomitant tumour hypoxia is well recognized in the
literature. BOLD-MRI does not reflect on tumour hypoxia status in
breast cancers as detected by CA-IX.

## 5004

## Observer variability in dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI when used for
prediction of response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in primary breast
cancer.

## Beresford MJ, Makris A, Taylor NJ, Stirling JJ, Ah-See M, d’Arcy
JA, Collins D, Padhani AR. Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood,
Middlesex, United Kingdom

Background: Dynamic contrast MRI
(DCE-MRI) can be used to assess breast cancer microvasculature in
response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We have previously shown that
changes in T1- weighted DCE-MRI kinetic parameters after 2 cycles of
chemotherapy (5-FU, epirubicin and cyclophosphamide) were able to
predict pathological response following 6 cycles. Tumour size failed
to predict for eventual pathological response, but changes in median
transfer constant (Ktrans) predicted
response with a sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 72%. For this
technique to be useful in practice, it is necessary to confirm the
repeatability of the definition of tumour regions of interest (ROI) by
observers.

Methods: 30 untreated women with
primary breast cancers were studied. T1
weighted DCE-MRI studies were acquired before and after administration
of 0.1 mmol/kg of Gd-DTPA with 40 time points over 8 min, through the
centre of the tumour. Two observers (a - a radiologist with 7 years of DCE-MRI experience
and b - an oncologist with no prior
DCE-MRI experience) independently outlined ROIs on the same image
slice of each tumour on five separate occasions (giving comparisons of
ROIs defined 2 months apart, 2 weeks apart, 1 day apart and on the
same day). For homogeneous and well-defined lesions the entire lesion
was outlined around its outer border. For infiltrating lesions the
dominant enhancing nodule was outlined. Parameters including ROI size,
Ktrans, leakage space, rate constant and
area under the Gd-DTP A concentration curve at 90 seconds were
calculated. Descriptive and Bland-Altman reproducibility statistics
were applied.

Results: For the non-expert observer
the reproducibility of ROIs improved as the time interval reduced. The
coefficient of variance (wCV) for lesion size at 2 months, 2 weeks,
1 day and same day intervals was 11.6%, 10.7%, 4.8% and 2.6%
respectively. The variability in kinetic parameters also reduced
(Ktrans wCV: 8.9%, 9.7%, 6.7% and 3.2%).
For the expert observer, values were more consistent, but again showed
improvement when regions were drawn on the same day (size wCV: 7.5%,
6.2%, 7.1% and 3.7%; Ktrans wCV: 5.4%,
5.3%, 5.6% and 4.5%). Inter-observer variability was calculated for
regions defined on different days (wCV size: 10.5%;
Ktrans: 7.4%) and on the same day (wCV
size: 7.1%; Ktrans: 6.0%).

Conclusions: Longer intervals between
ROI definition result in greater variability. Inter-observer
variability was no worse than intra-observer variability for regions
defined on different days, but did not improve as much for regions
defined on the same day. If DCE-MRI is to be used as a method of
monitoring treatment response, the same observer should outline pre-
and post-treatment ROIs at the same sitting. For the most important
vascular parameter (Ktrans) the observer
variability is approximately 5% which should be taken into account
when setting thresholds for judging response.

## 5005

## Mammographic breast density as a predictor for local recurrence
after breast conserving surgery and radiotherapy.

## Park C, Rembert J, Chew K, Moore D, Kerlikowske K. University of
California, San Francisco, CA

Introduction: Mammographic breast
density (MGD) has been shown to be an independent risk factor for
breast cancer, and also to correlate with the risk for local
recurrence (LR) following treatment for ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS). However, the role of MGD as a prognostic factor following
breast-conserving surgery (BCS) and radiation therapy (RT) for
invasive cancer is not known.

Purpose: To investigate the role of
MGD as a risk factor for LR in patients with invasive breast cancer
who have undergone BCS and RT.

Methods: A retrospective analysis was
performed among 139 women who presented to UCSF or California Pacific
Medical Center for primary AJCC Stage I-II breast cancer diagnosed
between 1982–1999, who had BCS and RT, and mammographic density
reading prior to or at the time of breast cancer diagnosis. Median
follow-up was 7.4 years (range 2.1–16.3 years). Mammographic breast
density was previously quantified using a validated computerbased
threshold. The craniocaudal view was digitized using a Lumisys
LumiScan 200 radiographic films digitizer (Kodak,Inc). The
mammographic image was divided into a distribution of gray values
using a computer-automated system, with darker regions representing
adipose tissue and lighter regions representing dense tissue. The
percentage of dense tissue in the breast was determined by dividing
the number of pixels outlined in the dense regions by the total area
of the breast.
A multivariate cox proportional hazards model was used to analyze
factors for their association with local recurrence. Factors included
in the analysis were patient age, tumor size, number of nodes positive
(0, 1–3, ≥ 4), tumor grade, estrogen receptor status, progesterone
receptor status, surgery, chemotherapy, hormone therapy, body mass
index (BMI, kg/m2) and MGD (quartiles).

Results: Within the follow-up period,
there were 18 local recurrences (LR), 18 distant recurrences (DM) and
7 contralateral breast cancers (CBC). The site of first failure was LR
in 18, DM in 16 and CBC in 7. In the multivariate logistic regression
model, MGD was the most important independent predictor of local
recurrence with a hazard ratio (HR) of 2.60 (95% confidence
interval=1.35–4.99). In addition, BMI was also significantly
associated with LR and progesterone receptor expression was associated
with a lower risk for LR (Table 1). 

Conclusions: MGD was the most
important factor in predicting for local recurrence after BCS and RT.
Progesterone receptor expression and BMI were additional factors
associated with LR. These findings suggest that a subset of women with
high MGD may need more aggressive local treatment. Further studies are
needed to determine how MGD, BMI and progesterone receptor may be
acting in concert to modify risk for LR.

## 5006

## Effect of 4-hydroxytamoxifen gel treatment on breast density and
safety in premenopausal women.

## Harvey JA, McTiernan A, LeNestour E. UVA Health System,
Charlottesville, VA; Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Ctr, Seattle, WA;
Besins International, Paris, France

Background: Breast density is a
significant risk factor for breast cancer. Tamoxifen reduces breast
density, but time to response may be slow, acute adverse effects (AE)
decrease compliance, and long-term use increases health risks. The
study’s goal was to determine the effect of 4-OHT gel on breast
density and assess tolerability in healthy premenopausal women. 4-OHT
is a potent antiestrogen delivered percutaneously, thus avoiding
1st-pass liver metabolism.

Materials and Methods: Otherwise
healthy premenopausal women (18–45 yrs) with 50–80% breast density
(n=61) and >80% breast density (n=19) were enrolled in a stratified
manner to this randomized, double-blind, phase 2 study of 2-mg/day
4-OHT gel vs placebo. Primary efficacy endpoint was >10% decrease
in breast density relative to placebo (responder), based on digitized analysis at 6 mo.
Secondary endpoints included treatment effect at 4 mo and several
safety/tolerability parameters. Paired mammograms from each
participant were digitized at 100  mm pixel size with 14-bit precision and read by
blinded investigator. All mammograms were performed at the same day of
menstrual cycle as baseline mammogram ±7 days. Breast density was
assessed using left craniocaudal (CC) view or with right CC view if
left positioning between CC views was noticeably different.

## Results:
≥10% Reduction in Breast Density After 6 & 4 Months of 4-OHT
Gel (Efficacy Evaluable Population) 

Statistical significance was achieved only on secondary endpoint
in 50–80% group at 4 mo. However, multivariate logistic regression
with treatment group as independent variable showed pts in 50–80%
group treated with 4-OHT had 8.6 times higher likelihood of being
responders at 6 mo than placebo pts (CI, 1.07–69.5) and that women
<40 yrs had 7.1 times higher likelihood of success than women
>40 yrs (CI, 0.93–54.5). No drug-related serious adverse event
occurred in any treatment group. There were no significant
clinically relevant changes in hot flash episodes and no menstrual
cycle disruption following exposure to 4-OHT.

Discussion: The study suggests
transdermal 4-OHT may have some effect on breast density. However,
a cleaner effect of 4- OHT gel on breast density may have been
obscured by age, which in a logistic regression model showed large
effect on treatment outcome. A larger, longer trial assessing
efficacy of 4-OHT gel on breast density is warranted because (1)
duration of follow-up may have been too short; (2) dose may have
been too low; and (3) safe and tolerable options for
chemoprevention remain an important need. 4-OHT gel was safe and
tolerable, consistent with a highly favorable safety/tolerability
profile seen in a previously reported cyclic mastalgia
trial.

## 5007

## Baseline radiological staging in primary breast cancer: impact of
an educational intervention on adherence to published
guidelines.

## McWhirter E, Yogendran G, Fralick J, Sue J, Fralick M, Wright F,
Dranitsaris G, Clemons M. Sunnybrook and Women’s Health Sciences
Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada

Background: The purpose of baseline
radiological staging in breast cancer patients is to rule out distant
disease. We have previously reviewed the use of radiological staging
at our institution, in comparison to those recommended by the Cancer
Care Ontario Practice Guidelines Initiative (CCOPGI). These guidelines
recommend no radiological staging for pathological Stage I; bone scan
for Stage II; bone scan, chest x-ray (CXR), and abdominal ultrasound
(US) for Stage III. The results showed that from January 2000 to
December 2002, a high proportion of the 135 patients analyzed
underwent unnecessary investigations.

Objectives: To implement an
educational intervention for the staging guidelines, and then
re-assess the extent of radiological investigations.

Methods: In January 2003,
multidisciplinary educational rounds were held, highlighting the
CCOPGI guidelines in the context of the staging investigations taking
place at our institution. Subsequent to this, the staging guidelines
were included in the Clinical Practice Guidelines of the Breast
Disease Site Group, Toronto-Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre (TSRCC).
By retrospective chart review of a random sample of patients, (N=132),
we have now analyzed the staging investigations for a similar group of
patients from January 2003 to April 2005, to explore the effects of
these educational interventions on actual practice.

Results: For patients with Stage I
breast cancer, there was a significant decrease (p <0.004) in each
type of investigation: 37% of patients had a CXR (a 2-fold decrease);
23% of patients had a bone scan (2.5-fold decrease) and 14% of
patients underwent abdominal US (4-fold decrease). For patients in
Stage II, there was no significant change in the proportion of
patients undergoing radiologic investigations, with approximately 50%
of patients having CXR’s and bone scans, and 40% of patients having an
abdominal US. For patients with Stage III disease, there was a
nonsignificant trend towards appropriately receiving all 3
investigations, with 65%–75% of patients undergoing imaging.

Conclusions: Our results demonstrate
that prior to the educational interventions many patients with early
breast cancer were undergoing inappropriate radiological staging.
Since 2003 however, for Stage I patients there has been a significant
improvement in adherence with the guidelines, and a nonsignificant
trend towards improvement in Stage III patients. We hypothesize that
our educational intervention had a positive impact on improving the
utilization of baseline radiological staging in patients with primary
breast cancer. Staging in accordance with these guidelines may have
both an economic and psychological impact.

## 5008

## Discomfort and pain during mammography.

## Freitas Junior R, Fiori WF, Ramos FJF, Godinho E, Rahal RMS,
Oliveira JG. Hospital Araujo Jorge, Goias Anticancer Association,
Goiania, GO, Brazil; Clinica ARO, Goiania, GO, Brazil; Goias Federal
University, Goiania, GO, Brazil

Introduction: Mammography is the most
important method for early detection of breast cancer. However,
patients frequently complain of discomfort and pain.

Objective: Evaluating how often
discomfort and pain are felt during a mammography and identifying
factors that may be associated to these complaints.

Methods: Prospective study including
2,164 patients recruited from the public (996) and private (1,168)
health services. After the imaging procedure, patients quantified the
pain using a linear analogical scale. Discomfort was qualitatively
evaluated through multivariate analysis.

Results: Discomfort was reported by
90% of the patients, and of these women, 12% rated the sensation as
intense or intolerable. Only 2% of the women in the study group did
not feel any pain during the procedure. Factors associated to the pain
were: patient age, use of birth control methods (BCM), previous
mastalgia and patients from the private health sector. Discomfort was
independently associated to the service where the procedure was
performed (OR = 2.50 IC 1.64–5.17) and to previous mastalgia (OR =
3.15 IC 1.96–7.12). When asked about a repeat mammography, 98% of the
patients said they would comply.

Conclusion: Young women (<
50 years), BCM users, mastalgia patients and women who were using the
services of a private clinic felt more intense pain and discomfort
during the mammography.

## 5009

## Estrogen receptor alpha gene polymorphisms and mammographic density
in postmenopausal women without hormonal therapy.

## Kemp C, Ramos EHM, Silva IDCG, Chambo D, Nogueira de Souza NC.
EPM-UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil

Background: Genes that encode
proteins involved at biosynthesis, action and metabolism of sexual
steroids are polymorphic. This condition represents individual
responses to sexual hormones that could explain individual variations
in mammographic density. The present research intends to verify the
eventual association between polymorphisms Hae III and Msp I, from
estrogen receptor alpha gene, and mammographic density in
postmenopausal women.

Material and Methods: The study
included 115 postmenopausal women not in use of hormonal therapy and
also without clinical or mammographic breast lesions. All of them
underwent bilateral mammography and radiology density was determined
by two independent observers, considering the
ACR-BIRADS® 2003 classification of
mammographic patterns. In order to obtain a numerical value for breast
density, and knowing that left breast is more affected by cancer,
mammographic images from left medium lateral oblique incidences were
captured and digitalized through a CX312. T scanner (Radiographic
Digital Imaging, Compton, CA, USA). Density was calculated using the
gray scale histogram from software adobe Photoshop 7.0. Oral swabs
were obtained to extract DNA, following the Kit GFXÒ from
Amersham-Pharmacia protocol to oral cells. After DNA extraction,
PCR-RFLP (Polymerase Chain Reaction - Restriction Fragment Length
Polymorphism) was performed to analyze the presence of polymorphisms
in Intron 1 from estrogen receptor (HaeIII e MspI).

Results: Alpha estrogen receptor
HaeIII (heterozygous. 29.6%; mutated - 7.8%; normal - 62.6%) and alpha
estrogen receptor MspI (heterozygous - 47%; mutated - 36.5%; normal-
16.5%). After variables analysis (age, menopausal age, parity, smoker,
breast feeding, age of first delivery), we found no significant
association of mammographic density with the assessed polymorphisms.
Only age at menarche and Body Mass Index (BMI) showed significant
association independent of the observer classification, once they
agreed in their results.

Discussion: There was not found
significant association when analyzing polymorphisms and the most part
of variables, probably due to the sample size. More researches are
needed to find out a reliable relationship between receptor estrogen
alpha gene polymorphisms and mammographic density.

## 5010

## Significant improvement in the diagnosis of breast lesion by means
of real-time elastographie.

## Thomas A, Fischer T, Kristiansen G, Lichtenegger W, Kuemmel S.
University of Berlin, Charité, CCM, Berlin, Germany; Institut of
Pathology, University of Berlin, Charité, CCM, Berlin,
Germany

Background: Real-time elastography
was carried out in 108 candidate patients with histologically
confirmed findings as a new, non invasive method for the diagnosis of
mammary carcinoma. The goal of the study consisted of testing the
suitability of the method for tumour diagnosis in clinical
practice.

Materials and Methods: Differences
between healthy and tumour tissue were visualised by measurements of
elasticity, based on the correlation between tissue properties and
elasticity modulus. The study contained 108 female potential breast
cancer patients with histologically confirmed focal signs (58 benign,
50 malignant) in the age range of 16 to 84 years old. Evaluation was
made with the 3D Finite Element method (Hitachi Eub 8500) and was
colour coded and superimposed on the ultrasound scan in brightness
mode (B-mode). The results were compared with the data of previous
ultrasound investigations and histology, and were statistically
assessed with the aid of matrices and ROC curves. A second examiner
was employed, in order to evaluate the objectivity of the
method.

Results: The study showed that the
correspondence between elastography and ultrasound in the BIRADS
classification of mammary carcinoma was good. Assessment in McNemar’s
Test gave a weighted kappa of 0.5565–0.7751. Benign tissues were
recognised with certainty, although malignant findings resulted in
significant differences compared to the histological results which
were moreover dependent on the examiner (p = 0.008/0.012). Overall,
elastography possesses a sensitivity of 91% and a specificity of 83%.
ROC curve results gave a sensitivity of elastography from BIRADS 3 and
more advanced stages of 92%, compared to the B-mode scan of 98 %. The
sensitivity is at 53% compared with the B-mode of 47%.

Conclusion: The conclusion is
measurement of tissue elasticity by means of realtime elastography
combined with the familiar B image improves significant diagnosis of
breast lesions. Additional the method can be integrated easily into
daily clinical practise.

## 5011

## Menstrual-cycle dependence of breast parenchyma elasticity
determined by realtime sonoelastography: finding the optimal time for
examination.

## Wojcinski S, di Liberto A, Cassel M, Ertan AK, Schmidt W.
University of Saarland, Homburg, Germany

Background: Realtime sonoelastography
of the breast is a promising diagnostic method that enables a highly
accurate estimation of the tissue elasticity distribution. Like colour
Doppler, sonoelastography can be performed with conventional
ultrasound probes and does not require additional instruments. The
examination results are represented in colour in addition to the
conventional B-mode image. With the additional information, lesions
can be classified with higher accuracy than with conventional
ultrasound, and even lesions invisible on B-mode images can be
detected. It is yet unclear, which time is the best during the
menstrual cycle to perform elastography. The aim of this study was to
examine the changes in breast tissue elasticity during the menstrual
cycle using realtime sonoelastography.

Materials and Methods: 23 healthy
volunteers (age 18–33, median 22) without breast disease and without
history of lactation were examined once a week during 2 menstrual
cycles resulting in a total of 184 measurements. Group 1 (n=11) was
without any hormonal treatment and had a regular cycle, group 2 (n=12)
took contraceptive medication. Examinations were performed with the
sonoelastography module that can be integrated into the platform of
the HITACHI EUB-8500 system. Each elastographic image was acquired at
a defined breast segment using the HITACHI EUP-L53L long-linear probe
(92 mm, 10 Mhz, with adapted waterbag). The elasticity of the skin,
fibroglandular tissue and fatty tissue was analyzed and the median
values of elasticity over the menstrual cycle were determined.

Results: All volunteers presented a
repeating pattern concerning the parenchyma elasticity during 2
cycles. Generally parenchyma was softer in group 1 than in group 2
(p=0.02). Group 1 showed continuously decreasing parenchyma elasticity
during the menstrual cycle with relatively soft parenchyma during the
follicular phase and harder during the luteal phase (p=0.0002). Group
2 presented constant values during the 3 weeks of hormonal intake and
significantly softer parenchyma only during the menstrual phase
(p=0.001). The elasticity of fatty tissue was independent of
contraceptive medication and menstrual cyclicity. The skin showed
significant different elasticity distribution in the two groups. Women
taking hormones presented a homogenous elasticity whereas women
without hormonal treatment had an irregular distribution of skin
elasticity (p=0.002).

Discussion: Previous studies using
MRI and clinical examination have already demonstrated the
menstrual-cycle dependence of breast parenchyma elasticity. These
changes can also be demonstrated with the use of the new method of
realtime sonoelastography. Regarding elastography as a tool to find
and evaluate breast lesions, the best time to perform the examination
seems to be during the menstrual phase, because malignant breast
lesions present as hard tissue and therefore can be better located in
the relatively soft surrounding fibroglandular tissue.

## 5012

## Clinicopathological and radiological characteristics of screening
ultrasound-detected breast cancers with negative mammography
findings.

## Hwang SE, Han WS, Cho N, Park IA, Hwang KT, Lee JE, Shin HJ, Kim
SW, Moon WK, Noh DY. Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea

Purpose: Mammographically dense
breast tissue can be a cause of false-negative findings on
mammography. This study aimed to evaluate radiological and
clinicopathological features of screening ultrasound (US)-detected
breast cancers.

Material and methods: For last five
years, 23,129 women at average or high risk of breast cancer with
dense breasts underwent supplemental screening US in addition to
mammography. Thirtytwo surgically proven cancers from different
individuals (aged 36–65; mean 46.6 years) were identified by US alone
and were not seen on mammography, even in the retrospective review.
Eighty consecutive screening mammography-detected cancers and 80
biopsy-proven nonpalpable benign masses were selected for a control
group. Two experienced radiologists blindly analyzed US images of
these 192 lesions without mammographic information and provided final
consensus assessment according to the ACR BIRADS US lexicon.

Results: Significant differences
between US and mammographically detected cancers were found for the
following US findings: shape (oval or round 31.3% vs 10%, irregular
64.7% vs 90%; p=0.007), margin
(circumscribed 21.9% vs 3.8%, spiculated 0% vs 18.8%; p=0.006), boundary (abrupt interface 87.5%
vs 52.5%, echogenic halo 12.5% vs 47.5%; p=0.001), posterior acoustic features (no posterior
echo 59.4% vs 52.5%, shadowing 15.6% vs 30.0%; p=0.008), and final assessment (category 4a: 31.3% vs
8.8%, category 4b: 25.0% vs 22.5%, category 4c: 31.3% vs 28.8%,
category 5: 3.1% vs 37.5%; p=0.001). Screening US-detected cancer was smaller (mean
1.34 cm vs 2.27 cm; p<0.001),
often stage I invasive carcinomas (68.8% vs 43.8%; p=0.008), and lower
histologic grade (grade 1: 39.1% vs 3.8%, grade 2: 43.5% vs 65.4%,
grade 3: 17.4% vs 30.8%; p<0.001) than mammographically detected cancer.
However, there was no statistically significant difference between the
two groups for nodenegativity and proportion of in situ cancer. In
immunohistochemical staining, the US-detected cancer showed lower ER
expression (50% vs 73.1%; p=0.023)
and lower c-erbB2 expression (30.0% vs 55.1%; p=0.019). Regarding operation method, breast conserving
surgery was performed more frequently for US-detected cancer (68.8% vs
52.5%; p=0.015)

Conclusion: US-detected breast cancer
was often an oval or round mass without boundary echo and posterior
acoustic change. The majority of screening US detected cancer was
stage I invasive carcinomas. The advantage of screening breast
sonography in the population of women with dense breast was a
potential to detect small breast cancers that are not found on
mammography or clinical breast examination and to increase the breast
conservation rate. The use of US as an adjunct to screening
mammography in women with increased risk of breast cancer and dense
breasts may be especially beneficial.

## 5013

## Is ultrasound useful in the management of patients with ductal
carcinoma in situ?

## Zager JS, Al-Refaie WB, Hunt KK, Khakpour N, Kuerer HM, Lin E,
Yen T, Stephens T, Feig BW, Ames FC, Singletary SE, Ross MI, Babiera
GV. MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background: Mammography (MMG) is the
gold standard for screening and detection of ductal carcinoma in-situ
(DCIS) of the breast.Recently, ultrasound (US) technology has improved
making it a reliable tool. We sought to elucidate the role of US in
the management of patients (pts) with DCIS by determining 1) the
accuracy of US in estimating pathologic tumor size (PATH) compared to
MMG and 2) the ability of US to detect foci of invasive disease in the
breast or metastatic disease in the axilla.

Methods: Following institutional
review board approval, 248 pts were identified who received treatment
at our institution from 1999 to 2004 after a diagnosis of DCIS by core
(n=200) or excisional (n=48) biopsy (bx) for diagnosis. Data analysis
was performed on 172 pts who had identifiable lesions visualized on
US. Of these 172 pts, 135 (68%) had an US of the ipsilateral nodal
basins as well. Clinicopathologic (demographics, nuclear grade,
receptor status, final pathologic diagnosis, tumor size and nodal
status), and radiologic (size of the lesion on US and MMG, and
axillary US findings) variables were evaluated. Statistical analysis
was performed using chi square, linear regression models, and Fisher’s
exact test.

Results: The mean size of the lesions
on US, MMG and PATH were 1.6, 2.9, and 2.5 cm, respectively. Overall,
there was a stronger correlation between MMG size and PATH than US
size and PATH, r2=0.73 and 0.44,
respectively. Of the 172 pts with identifiable lesion(s) on US, 28
(16%) were diagnosed by excisional bx and 144 (84%) were diagnosed by
core bx. There was no significant association between US size and PATH
for either method of diagnosis. US upstaged 7 (4%) of the 172 pts by
identifying invasive disease. Of the 49 pts who had axillary US and
FNA of a suspicious node, final surgical treatment was changed in 2
(4%) of the 49 pts due to findings of axillary nodal metastasis. On
univariate analysis, there was no significant association between US
findings and PATH, nuclear grade, or findings of invasive disease
final PATH. Analysis of the relationship between tumor size on US and
PATH stratified by age groups (age ≤ 50 or >50) revealed a
significant association for those pts >50y (p <0.006), whereas
MMG size significantly correlated with PATH for both age groups
(p<0.001).

Conclusions: MMG is the gold standard
in the screening and detection of DCIS. Overall, MMG correlated better
with final PATH than did US. There appears to be minimal benefit in
using US along with MMG to detect additional disease in the breast or
nodal basins for pts with DCIS. US did not outperform MMG for younger
pts with dense breasts (≤50 years old). Cost-benefit analyses are
needed to determine the overall usefulness of US in the preoperative
assessment of pts with DCIS.

## 5014

## Preoperative FDG-PET/CT can change the tumour stage in locally
advanced breast cancer.

## Segaert I, Neven P, Ceyssens S, Amant F, Berteloot P, Leunen K,
Smeets A, Wildiers H, Paridaens R, Vergote I, Christiaens MR.
UZ-Leuven, Leuven, Belgium

Background: The feasibility and
accuracy of FDG-PET in breast cancer has been demonstrated in a
recently published meta-analyses (Breast Cancer Res Treat
2005;90:105). However, the clinical interpretation of FDG-PET can be
difficult because (1) anatomical localisation of FDG uptake is not
easy and (2) normal physiological accumulation of FDG can be
misinterpreted as a pathologic area. The functional anatomic fusion
imaging with FDG-PET/CT has the potential to improve this
interpretation. Only a few studies have been conducted on the
potential role of FDG-PET/CT in breast cancer patients. We compared
conventional preoperative staging and FDG-PET/CT in women with a
locally advanced breast cancer.

Materials and methods: Single
institution prospective study of selected patients with a biopsy
proven breast cancer stage ≥IIB (revised AJCC) between July 2003 and
April 2005. All patients underwent conventional staging with
biochemistry, chest X-ray, bone scanning and liver ultrasound followed
by FDG-PET/CT. We examined whether FDG-PET/CT identified metastatic
disease better than conventional imaging and how often patients were
classified as metastatic on the basis of PET-CT only.

Results: A total of 75 patients
matched the inclusion criteria. 14 women underwent primary surgery
with classical axillary clearance, 37 neoadjuvant therapy and 24 women
were considered metastatic. Two patients had a FDG-PET/CT negative
breast tumour. Eight patients out of the 14 with primary axillary
clearance were lymph node positive. In this group, clinical
examination together with axillary ultrasonography had a higher
positive predictive value (6/8) than FDG-PET/CT (5/8). Twenty four
patients had distant metastases according to the revised AJCC. In 19
patients this diagnosis was based on conventional staging. In one of
these patients the tumour was negative on FDG-PET/CT. In all other 18
cases, FDG-PET/CT was also positive. FDG-PET/CT did find another
metastatic localisation as compared with conventional imaging in 13 of
the 19, mainly in mediastinal nodes (8), lung (5), pleura (1), kidney
(1) and bone (1); another primary tumour (GIST) was detected in 1
case. In 5 other patients FDG-PET/CT did localise at least one
metastatic deposit not diagnosed with conventional imaging:
mediastinal lymph nodes (4), lung (1), pleural metastasis (1), and
bone metastases (1). If all women would have had CT scanning for
conventional imaging 2 with a positive FGD-PET would be missed; both
with positive lymph nodes in the mediastinum.

Conclusion: In our series FDG-PET/CT
did change staging and therapy in 5/75 patients with a locally
advanced breast cancer. The use of a FDG-PET/CT may identify extended
disease earlier than conventional imaging methods and thus influence
treatment decisions. FDG-PET/CT can influence the planning of
treatment at staging in patients with locally advanced breast
cancer.

## 5015

## Evaluation of 18-FDG PET in initinal staging of the axilla in
breast cancer.

## Jeong J, Lee S, Yoon S, Lee I, Ryu Y, Jung W, Lee H. Ongdong
Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Republic of Korea

Background: Although sentinel lymph
node biopsy(SLNB) has increased in frequency as an alternative
procedure, axillary lymph node dissection(ALND) is still preformed in
most women with invasive breast cancer. ALND has well known
complication like lymphedema and other upper extremity discomforts.
SLNB is an effective and accurate method and has become the standard
care for evaluating the axillary lymph nodes in breast cancer
patients. However, for successful SLNB, the surgeon should be
sufficiently trained before practice.
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET) is a noninvasive imaging modality that can detect
malignant lymph node. We evaluated the accuracy of FDG-PET as a method
for axillary lymph node staging by comparision with the pathologic
findings of ALND and SLNB.

Material and Methods: Between March
2004 and April 2005, 79 breast cancer patients were entered into this
study. FDG-PET was performed within 3 days before surgery. PET
scanning was carried using the 10 mCi(370 MBq) FDG. Patients fasted
for at least 6 hours before PET scanning and their serum glucose level
was controlled below 115 mg/dl. Visual analyses of
attenuationcorrected PET images were compared with histopathologic
findings.

Results: PET correctly diagnosed
axillary metastasis in 65 of the 79 cases; three false- positive and
eleven false-positive results were found. The overall sensitivity,
specificity and accuracy of PET for axillary metastasis were 68%, 93%
and 82%, respectively. After surgery, 34(43.0%) of the 79 cases showed
axillary lymph node metastasis. Seventeen out of the 34 cases were
belonged to N1a, 12 cases were N2a and 5 were N3a. The detection rate
of axillary metastasis by PET was 80%(4/5) in N3a group, 75%(9/ 12) in
N2a group and 59%(10/17) group. The less the number of axillary node
metastasis is, the lower the detection rate is (p<0.05). As the
axillary node metastasis cases were grouped according to the biggest
metastasis size, 6 cases were belonged to ≤0.5 cm, 11 cases were
belonged to bigger than 0.5 cm and none bigger than 1.5 cm, and 4
cases were belonged to >1.5 cm (Metastasis size was measured in 21
cases). When the metastasis size was ≤0.5 cm, the detection rate was
33.3%(2/6), in bigger than 0.5 cm and none bigger than 1.5 cm group,
the detection rate was 72.7%(8/11), and 75%(3/4) in bigger than 1.5 cm
group. Metastasis size is also significantly related to the detection
rate (p<0.05). Extra nodal extension was found in 14cases and
thirteen out of 14 (93%) cases were detected by PET.

Discussion: PET showed relatively
good overall diagnostic accuracy in the detection of axillary
metastases(82%). In case of small number of metastasis and small size
of metastasis, false negative rate was high. However, because of
relatively high specificity and positive predictive value, omitting
SLNB and forging ALND may be considered in positive axillary
metastasis cases detected by PET.

## 5016

## Cone beam breast CT - a feasibility study with surgical mastectomy
specimens.

## Yang WT, Shaw CC, Chen L, Altunbas C, Wang T, Lai CJ, Cheenu K,
Tu SJ, Liu X, Whitman GJ. The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background: X-ray mammography has
been an important tool in the screening, diagnosis and management of
breast cancers. However, the effectiveness of mammography,
conventional or digital, has been compromised by the overlapping of
cancers with breast anatomy in the projection views. Tomosynthesis
imaging may partially overcome this limitation but its image quality
suffers from a crude depth resolution and associated artifacts. Cone
beam CT technique, on the other hand, can provide true 3-D breast
images with isotropic resolution (140  m or smaller) and no reconstruction artifacts. We
have constructed a flat panel detector based cone beam CT system to
investigate the feasibility of using it for dedicated breast
imaging.

Materials and Methods: The
experimental system consists of a general radiography tube pointing at
a 30×40 cm2 a-Si/CsI flat panel detector
(Paxscan 4030CB, Varian Medical Systems, Salt Lake City, UT). A motor
driven rotation stage is used to hold and rotate the specimen to
simulate dedicated breast CT imaging in which the patient would lie on
a table in supine position with one breast drawn downward through an
opening to allow the x-ray tube and detector to rotate around and scan
the breast beneath the table. The scans are performed at 50–80 kVp
with a voxel size of 140 or 300  m. The dose level is estimated to be 1.5–1.8 cGy at
the isocenter, corresponding to 2.5–3 times of the mean glandular dose
limit (0.6 cGy) for two view mammograms of a 5 cm thick compressed
breast.

Results: The mean scanning time is 12
seconds for low resolution (binning) mode which is adequate for
visualizing tissue structures, and 48 seconds for high-resolution
(non-binning) mode necessary for visualizing small calcifications.
Artifacts encountered from high density metallic tumor marker coils
are successfully removed or reduced by post-processing techniques
without compromising tissue detail. Structured noise is minimal due to
absence of overlapping. Breast anatomy is well resolved on all images
as skin, adipose and glandular regions. Image noise is visible but low
as compared to the tissue contrast. Clear visualization of 250 
 m or larger calcifications is successfully
demonstrated. The detection of cancers is based on morphological
assessment of tissue structures that is improved compared to
mammography due to lack of overlapping. Cancer is visualized as an
area of architectural distortion, an irregular spiculated mass with
associated microcalcifications, or an irregular mass with overlying
skin thickening.

Discussion: Cone beam breast images
demonstrate exceptional tissue contrast that tomographic images of the
breast can provide, and can potentially reduce exam time with
comparable radiation dose and eliminate the need for compression and
additional workup views that is routine with mammography.

## 5017

## A chart review of method of detection of contralateral breast
cancers in two different age cohorts of patients.

## Robinson AG, Speers C, Olivotto I, Chia S. British Columbia
Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Background: Screening for a
contralateral breast cancer after an initial primary breast cancer
diagnosis typically consists of annual mammography and physician
physical exams at 6 monthly intervals. Mammography is known to be less
sensitive in younger women with denser breasts. Recent studies have
demonstrated MRI to be superior to mammography as primary screening in
patients at high risk for breast cancer (BRCA 1/2 carriers or those
with a strong family history). It is unknown at this time if
mammography screening for contralateral breast cancer works equally
well in younger patients as compared to older cohorts.

Methods: Patients with a
contralateral breast cancer diagnosed between 1985 and 2004 following
a prior diagnosis of a stage I-II breast cancer were identified from
the BCCA Breast Cancer Outcomes Unit database. Patients were divided
into two age cohorts based on the age at which they developed their
primary cancer: <40y (Group A) and 55–60y (Group B). Information
regarding characteristics of the initial and contralateral tumours was
recorded, as well as method of detection of the contralateral breast
cancer. Chi square and student t-test were used for between group
comparisons.

Results: Out of 240 patients
identified, we have currently collected full data on 140 patients.
Younger patients (age <40 years) were significantly less likely to
have their contralateral breast cancer detected by screening
mammography compared with the older cohort (20% vs 60%, p<0.001).
The contralateral breast cancers diagnosed in younger patients were
more likely to be ER negative (63% vs. 30%, p=0.002), grade 3 (64% vs.
37%, p=0.002), and trended towards being larger in size. Conversely,
tumours detected by mammography were more likely to be of a lower
grade, ER positive, and smaller in size.

Conclusions: Older patients are much
more likely to have a contralateral breast cancer detected by
mammography, while younger patients are more likely to present with
physical exam abnormalities or with symptoms. A one size-fits all
approach to detection of a contralateral breast cancer may not be
justified, particularly for younger patients. Full data and
statistical analysis will be obtained prior to presentation.

## 5018

## Local recurrence rates in screen detected breast cancers from
1996–1997.

## MacNeill FA. East of England Screening Quality Assurance
Reference Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom

Background: Recurrence rates, a
surrogate measure of surgical and adjuvant therapy are not routinely
monitored in the UK national screening programme (NHSBSP), yet
increasingly women are encouraged to seek out performance figures when
choosing providers. For a screened population with early disease the
combination of very low local recurrence rates and small numbers
limits meaningful interpretation of individual institutional data. A
collaborative approach may be the answer.

Methods: In 1996-7 the East of
England region NHSBSP screened 110,000 women between 50–65 yrs. All
resulting cancers were identified from the regional NHSBSP data base.
Each screening unit then retrieved pathology, therapy and relapse data
from clinical records. Missing data was actively recovered and
regional cancer/ death registers interrogated.

Results: 709 NHSBSP cancers were
identified from 11 units (range 21–116) of which 563 were available
for analysis from 10 units: one unit was unable to participate. 123
(22%) cancers were in-situ (30% were high grade, mean size 16 mm) and
427 (76%) invasive of which 60% were good or excellent prognosis using
the Nottingham Prognostic Index. Age at diagnosis 58yrs. Mean time to
recurrence 4.2 years (62 yrs). Median follow-up 6 years. All relapses
for in-situ disease occurred following breast conservation (BCT):70%
recurred as invasive disease but none were node positive on relapse.
High grade DCIS accounted for 30% of the total but 50% of the
relapses. Margins were originally reported as clear in 90% of in-situ
relapse. 

In total 12% of woman died: 7% from breast cancer (BC) and 5% from
other causes, No woman with DCIS or local relapse has died from BC.
Time from distant relapse to death was 12 months.

Discussion: Our data collection was
rigorous and deaths confirmed using well validated national cancer
registers. Local recurrence rates for both in-situ and invasive
disease are substantially below those published. Time from distant
relapse to death is shorter than published. Regional collaboration has
allowed us to collect meaningful data on local and distant relapse
rates in a highly selected good prognostic group. Our units now have
performance data available for public consultation.

## 5019

## An analysis of breast cancer recurrences for screen detected and
symptomatic breast cancers diagnosed in the West Midlands in 1996 and
1997.

## Lawrence G, Pritchard MG, Kearins O, Casey M. West Midlands
Cancer Intelligence Unit, Birmingham, United Kingdom; Royal
Wolverhampton Hospital NHS Trust, Wolverhampton, United
Kingdom
Aim: To use routine cancer registration data to generate recurrence
data for women diagnosed with screen detected or symptomatic breast
cancer in the West Midlands region in 1996 and 1997. To compare the
levels of ascertainment and data completeness achieved by passive
(registration) and active (notes review) follow up.
Method: Over 4000 breast cancers are diagnosed annually in the West
Midlands. Cancer registration data are obtained from routine clinical
information sent to the West Midlands Cancer Intelligence Unit by
pathology and radiotherapy departments. Recurrences in screen detected
and symptomatic breast cancers diagnosed in 1996 and 1997 were
identified from the cancer registration database. Recurrences
occurring before December 2002 were included giving a median follow up
of 70 months. For one hospital trust, an audit of the data available
in the original patient notes was also undertaken in order to compare
the levels of ascertainment and data completeness achieved by passive
(cancer registration) and active (patient notes review) follow
up.
Results: 6823 cancers (983 screen detected and 5840 symptomatic)
were included. Median age at diagnosis was 57 for screen detected
cases and 65 for symptomatic cases. To reduce the effect of the higher
age at diagnosis among the symptomatically diagnosed cohort, 983
patients were sampled in a pseudo-random manner using random number
tables to give a group of symptomatic patients with an equal median
age and variance of age at diagnosis as the screen detected patients.
There were 28 (2.8%) local or nodal recurrences in the screen detected
arm compared with 64 (6.5%) in the symptomatic arm and 50 (5.1%) and
152 (15.5%) distant recurrences respectively. 37 women with a screen
detected cancer died of their cancer during the study period compared
with 129 symptomatic patients. The incidence of local recurrence
decreased with increased margin size, distant metastases were more
prevalent in the positive lymph node patients and recurrences
increased with increasing grade. All types of recurrence increased
with Nottingham Prognostic Index score. However, 92 cases in the Poor
Prognostic Group did not have a recurrence. These cases had extensive
radiotherapy (89%) and chemotherapy (48%). Conversely, 19 cases in the
Excellent or Good Prognostic Group developed distant metastases and 10
died from breast cancer. These cases had poor nodal ascertainment (22%
had <4 nodes examined) and only 11% had chemotherapy. Active follow
up identified 1 less recurrence and 6 fewer deaths than passive follow
up. Cancer registries can provide accurate information on the
incidence of recurrence in patients with breast cancer. Despite
improvements in the management of the disease, there remains a
significant difference in survival of women with a screen detected and
symptomatic breast cancer independent of age at diagnosis.

## 5020

## Mammographic breast density, dense area and breast area by phase in
the menstrual cycle.

## Buist DSM, Aiello EJ, Miglioretti D, Mahoney L, White E. Group
Health Cooperative, Seattle, WA; University of Washington, Seattle,
WA

Background: For women under 50 years
old, the question of screening efficacy has been controversial, in
part because mammographic breast density is significantly higher in
premenopausal women. Three small studies suggest that mammographic
breast density may be lower in the follicular phase (days 1–14) of the
menstrual cycle compared to the luteal phase (days 15–30), which may
be influenced by lower circulating progesterone levels in the
follicular phase.

Objective: To examine if percent
breast density, breast area or dense rea (all measured continuously)
are greater in the luteal compared to the follicular phase of the
menstrual cycle.

Methods: We identified 211
premenopausal women who met our eligibility criteria and had 2
mammograms within 9–18 months of one another, with 1 mammogram taken
during days 9–14 and 1 mammogram taken during days 22–35 of the
menstrual cycle. All women were members of a breast cancer screening
program at Group Health Cooperative, an integrated health plan in
western Washington State. We included women who were having regular
periods (<35 day cycles) and were <55 years at both mammograms.
We excluded women who had previous breast cancer, bilateral biopsies,
breast augmentation/reduction, or who used hormone therapy,
raloxifene, tamoxifen, or oral contraceptives. We used Cumulus
software developed at the University of Toronto to measure percent
breast density, breast area, and dense area on the craniocaudal view
of the left breast. We used linear regression, fitted with generalized
estimating equations accounting for clustering within women, to test
for change in densities from the follicular to luteal phase adjusting
for age and body mass index (BMI) at each exam, time between exams and
parity.

Results: Women were on average
45.6 years (standard deviation [SD] 4.1) and were normal weight (BMI
25.5 (6.0)). The mean (SD) percent breast density was 36.1% (21.3) in
the follicular phase and 37.1% (21.6) in the luteal phase. Percent
breast density decreased with age and BMI and increased with parity.
Dense area decreased with BMI, increased with parity and had no
association with age. Breast area decreased with age and parity and
increased with BMI. 

Conclusions: There are small but not
clinically meaningful increases in percent breast density, dense area
and breast area in the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. However,
there are other factors that may differ by menstrual cycle phase that
we were not able to assess (e.g., breast compression), which may
ultimately influence mammographic sensitivity by menstrual cycle
phase.

## 5021

## Association of travel distance to mammography and breast cancer
tumor size at diagnosis.

## Schroen AT, Lohr ME. University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
VA

Background: Access to screening
mammography facilitates breast cancer early detection. We hypothesize
that shorter travel distance to mammography is associated with smaller
tumor size at diagnosis.

Methods: Data on all incident, female
invasive breast cancer patients diagnosed in Virginia between 2000–01
was collected from the state cancer registry. Data included patient
age at diagnosis, race, tumor size (cm) and AJCC stage. Travel
distance to the nearest mammography facility was calculated for each
patient using ArcGIS 9.0 geographical software (<=2 km, >2–5 km,
>5–10 km, >10–15 km, >15–25 km, >25 km). Socioeconomic
status was approximated by mean per capita income (PCI) by patient
census tract from the 2000 U.S. Census (< $15 K, $15<20 K,
$20<25 K, $25–35 K, $ >35 K). The outcome of interest was tumor
size at diagnosis in relation to driving distance to nearest
mammography facility, adjusting for patient age, race, and PCI.

Results: Of 9,482 eligible cases,
7,767 invasive cancer cases had known tumor size under 10 cm. Mean
tumor size was 2.1 cm (SD 1.6) with larger tumors more common in women
<40 years of age, of non-white race, and living in census tracts
with lower PCI (< $20,000). Mean distance to mammography was
9.1 km, with 18% of women living >15 km from the nearest
mammography facility. Tumor size for screening-age women (40+) varied
minimally with travel distance to mammography (2.1 cm at <=2 km;
2.0 cm at >2–5 km; 2.1 cm at >5–10 km; 2.0 cm at >10–15 km;
2.3 cm at >15–25 km; 2.1 cm at >25 km). In multivariate
analysis, distance to mammography was not significant in relation to
tumor size, adjusting for patient age, race, and PCI.

Discussion: Travel distance to
mammography did not have a clinically significant impact on tumor size
at diagnosis. Altering geographic access to mammography is unlikely to
translate into earlier detection of breast cancer unless other access
barriers are addressed simultaneously.

## 5022

## Resource and service implications of a screening clinic for women
at increased breast cancer risk from a family history.

## Gui GPH, Kadayaprath G, Darhouse N, Ward A, A’Hern R, Self J,
Eeles R. Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom;
Institute of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom

## Introduction
The value of screening women at increased breast cancer risk
from a family history remains controversial. Despite this,
individual breast units in the United Kingdom are expected to offer
screening to such women <50  years of age outside the auspices
of the national programme. Little is known about recall rates,
false negative outcomes and the impact on clinical service.

## Methods
Screening consisted of annual clinical examination and
mammography from the age of 35 years. The active audit period ran
for four months and each patient was followed through a further
screening cycle.

## Results
1132 patients attended for their routine incident screen. 137
women were classified to be at high-risk (lifetime risk ≥25%),
803 at moderate risk (lifetime risk <16%) and 192 at standard
risk. Seven cancers were diagnosed during the 4 month study period
at their incident screen. During follow-up, a further 10 patients
were diagnosed with cancer (2 interval and 8 at the next screen).
The total cancer incidence rate was 17/1132 (1.5%). 13 patients had
invasive cancer and 4 ductal carcinoma in-situ. The median invasive
tumour size was 15 (range 7–28) mm. 10/13 (76.9%) invasive cancers
were ≤20 mm and 2/13 patients (15.4%) were lymph node positive. The
sensitivity and specificity of mammography was 85.7% and 98.8%,
leading to 20.3 radiology recalls per 1000 patients over the four
month active audit period. The benign to malignant surgery ratio
was 8:17 (0.5%).

## Conclusion
Early breast cancer detection rates in family history breast
clinics are comparable to that of older women attending the
national screening programme.

## 5023

## Diffuse optical spectroscopy: a novel laser-based approach for
breast cancer diagnosis and screening in young women.

## Shah NS, Cerussi AE, Hsiang D, Yu H, Su M, Nalcioglu O, Tromberg
BJ. Beckman Laser Institute, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
CA; University of California, Irvine Medical Center, Orange, CA;
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA

Background: Diffuse Optical
Spectroscopy (DOS) is a noninvasive, non-ionizing technique that
quantitatively determines concentrations of biological components of
breast tissue in vivo. DOS uses near-infrared light to quantify
concentrations of deoxyhemoglobin (Hb-R), oxy-hemoglobin
(Hb-O2), lipid and water which are related
to several disease processes in the breast including angiogenesis,
necrosis and increased metabolism and cellularity. Because DOS focuses
on tissue function rather than structure it is not impeded by
radiographic density. Thus DOS techniques may be suitable for
screening and characterization of lesions in young women with dense
breasts, a population where current radiographic techniques, such as
x-ray mammography, have limitations.

Materials and Methods: A DOS
instrument was used to determine a full near-infrared scattering and
absorption spectra (600-1000nm) in 58 subjects (18 to 81 y.o) with
malignant lesions. DOS-derived parameters were compared to the healthy
contralateral breast in the same subject as a control. A Tissue
Optical Index (TOI = [Hb- R][Water]/[Lipid]) was developed as a
contrast function that relates to tissue metabolism. DOS results were
validated using dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging
(DCE-MRI).

Results: DOS results for the subjects
were segregated into five age groups: <30, 30–39, 40–49, 50–59 and
>59. The contralateral breast shows a strong age dependence on
physiological parameters with a 6-fold difference in TOI between the
<30 and >59 age group. Malignant tumor tissue shows an average
of higher THC, water and scattering and lower lipid and StO2 than
normal tissue (p<0.0001). Women 30–50 y.o. (n=25) showed 3:1
contrast in TOI between normal and tumor tissue (p<0.0001).
Co-localization with DCE-MRI shows increased THC in regions with
increased contrast-enhancement and significant TOI contrast
corresponding to MRI morphological information

Discussion: DOS can quantitatively
characterize malignant lesions in vivo. In addition DOS can
distinguish tumor tissue in pre-menopausal women with significant
contrast. Thus DOS may be suitable as an adjunct to current techniques
for screening in young women with high breast density.

## 5024

## Role of fine needle aspiration cytology as an adjunct to core
biopsy in the diagnosis of screen-detected breast carcinoma.

## Lieske B, Ravichandran D, Wright D. Bedfordshire and
Hertfordshire Breast Screening Unit and Luton & Dunstable Breast
Unit, Luton, Bedfordshire, United Kingdom
Introduction: Core biopsy (CB) has now largely replaced fine needle
aspiration cytology (FNAC) in the preoperative assessment of breast
cancer. We studied the contribution of FNAC, when done as an adjunct
to CB, to the pre-operative diagnosis in screendetected breast
carcinoma.
Materials & Methods: Data was prospectively collected for all
women who attended the Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Breast Screening
Unit in England during 4 consecutive screening years (April 1999 –
March 2003). During this period most women who attended for assessment
of a screen-detected lesion had both FNAC and CB performed of the
lesion. All women who had both tests performed and subsequently had
malignancy confirmed by open biopsy were reviewed.
Results: During the 4-year period 150,840 women were screened,
2,994 were recalled for assessment of a screen-detected lesion and 843
cancers (DCIS or invasive) were diagnosed. In 771 cancers both FNAC
& CB were performed at assessment. Malignancy was subsequently
confirmed by histological examination after open biopsy in all
cases. 

Conclusion: CB is better than FNAC at preoperative diagnosis of
screen-detected breast cancer as it missed fewer cancers. However,
FNAC is a useful adjunct as two-thirds of those cancers missed by CB
were picked up by concurrent FNAC.

## 5025

## Molecular profiling of human breast cancer with serum mass spectrum
data.

## Zhang Y, Zhu L, Ru Q, Brzeski H, Liebman MN, Hooke J, Shriver
CD. Windber Research Institute, Windber, PA; Walter Reed Army Medcical
Center, Washington, DC

Background: Mass spectrum (MS)
analysis identifies peptides by mass/charge ratio (M/Z) and is
semi-quantitative. Sera from breast cancer patients enrolled in the
Clinical Breast Care Project have been systematically analyzed by MS.
In this abstract, we report results of artificial neural network (ANN)
analysis of the serum MS profile to classify the pathological category
of breast cancer patients

Methods: Sera from 120 breast disease
patients in 6 pathological categories: breast carcinoma invasive (49),
lobular/ductal carcinoma in situ (13), atypical hyperplasia (13),
benign neoplastic (11), benign non-neoplastic (24) and normal (10)
were digested with trypsin and loaded to a BioBasic SCX column (Thermo
Electron, Co.). Peptides eluted from the column with a 100 mM
NH4Cl salt step was further separated on a
BioBasic-18 reverse phase column (Thermo Electron, Co.) and analyzed
by mass spectrometry. The maximum peptide abundance from the full MS
scan over the entire retention time was extracted for each M/Z
(rounded to 0 decimal points) after normalization. Samples were
randomly split into modeling (65%) and test (35%) data set. With the
modeling data, ten M/Zs were selected for each pathological category
using top signal-to-noise ratios and an ANN model was trained using
Clementine (SPSS, Inc.) and evaluated with the test data. The process
was repeated to build multiple models.

Results: Twelve ANN models were built
and involved 347 M/Zs. The overall accuracy of prediction
(identification of class) on the test data was 77.8%. Accuracy of
individual models ranged from 70.6% to 82.4%. The ANN models performed
best on invasive carcinoma (212 predictions, 94% accurate) followed by
benign non-neoplastic (96, 81.3%), normal (38, 79.0%), benign
neoplastic (51, 66.7%), atypical hyperplasia (44, 50.0%) and
lobular/ductal carcinoma in situ
(60, 41.7%).

Discussion: Our results show that
serum MS profile has potential for dis-criminating various types of
breast diseases, including cancer, but more work is needed to make
them more robust. It can potentially be used to assist physicians on
breast cancer diagnosis.

## 5026

## A phase II, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of the safety and
efficacy of dexmethylphenidate (d-MPH) as a treatment for fatigue and
“chemobrain” in adult cancer patients.

## Fleishman S, Lower E, Zeldis J, Faleck H, Manning D. Beth Israel
Cancer Center, New York, NY; University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH; Celgene Corporation, Summit, NJ

Background: This study investigated
the safety and efficacy of d-MPH (Focalinä) in the treatment of
persistent fatigue and cognitive impairment (“chemobrain”) after
chemotherapy in nonanemic breast cancer patients.

Methods: Breast cancer patients
(excluding those with primary or metastatic brain tumors) treated with
≥4 cycles of cytotoxic chemotherapy (completed ≥2 months prior to
entry) were eligible. Patients completing the single-blind placebo
period with no improvement in disease status were randomized to the
8-week double-blind phase. Dosing (d-MPH or placebo) was adjusted from
10  mg/day to a maximum of 50 mg/ day, based on clinical criteria. The
optimal dose was maintained ≥2 weeks. Efficacy endpoints were change
from Baseline using last observation carried forward in the Functional
Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Fatigue Subscale (FACIT-F) Total
Score (primary endpoint) and High Sensitivity Cognitive Screen (HSCS)
Overall Total and Subscale Scores (secondary endpoint). The planned
accrual was 160 patients to obtain 120 completed patients, based on a
comparison of FACIT-F scores in the 2 groups, assuming a 2-sided test
with Type 1 error rate of 0.05, providing 80% power to detect a 15%
difference with a standard deviation of 10.5.

Results: In total, 152 cancer
patients were randomized with a majority (n=110) being breast cancer
patients (placebo: n=54; d- MPH: n=56). In this breast cancer subset,
significant improvement in the FACIT-F Total Score (Weeks 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7, and 8; p<0.05) was observed in the d-MPH group versus
placebo. The change from Baseline in cognitive assessments did not
reach a level of significance. Mean highest dose of d-MPH was
27.8 mg/day. Common adverse events (AEs) were headache (d-MPH: 42.9%;
placebo: 40.7%), dry mouth (d-MPH: 28.6%; placebo: 11.1%) and nausea
(d-MPH: 28.6%; placebo: 7.4%), and were mostly mild to moderate. Hot
flashes were not exacerbated with d-MPH. The incidence of insomnia in
d-MPH-treated patients was not significantly different from
placebo-treated patients. Eight d-MPH treated patients were
discontinued due to AEs. No deaths were reported. One placebo-treated
patient reported a serious AE.

Conclusions: Dexmethylphenidate was
well-tolerated and significantly more effective than placebo for
improving fatigue after chemotherapy in breast cancer patients. While
positive trends in cognitive assessments were identified, a larger
study of appropriate power will be needed to draw conclusions. For
breast cancer patients with fatigue after chemotherapy,
dexmethylphenidate therapy should be strongly considered.

## 5027

## Anemia is a common and neglected complication of adjuvant
chemotherapy for early stage breast cancer.

## Goldrick AJ, Olivotto IA, Alexander C, Speers CH, Barnett J,
Allan S. British Columbia Cancer Agency, Victoria and Vancouver, BC,
Canada

Background: Chemotherapy related
anemia [Hemoglobin (Hb)<100g/L] adversely affects quality of life.
The purpose of this study was to define the frequency and severity of
anemia associated with adjuvant chemotherapy and whether corrective
interventions were undertaken.

Methods: British Columbia (BC),
Canada has a universal access health care system where all
antineoplastic drugs (but not support medications) are supplied free
of charge to patients with cancer through the BC Cancer Agency (BCCA).
Among 933 patients receiving breast cancer adjuvant chemotherapy at
four BCCA clinics in 2002 or 2003, a retrospective chart review was
conducted of a 50% random sample of those receiving AC (doxorubicin
and cyclophosphamide) and all patients receiving other chemotherapy
combinations. In total, 702 patients were studied. Chemotherapy was
CEF (C, epirubicin and 5 fluorouracil) n=325 (46%), AC n=228 (32.5%),
AC-T (AC followed by paclitaxel) n=55 (8%), CAF n=48 (7%), oral CMF
n=31 (4%) and FEC100 n=17 (2%). The dates of the first Hb in the
ranges 110–119, 100–109, 90–99 and <90 g/L and any discussion about
or delivery of interventions for anemia (transfusion or epoetin alfa)
were recorded.

Results: Median age was 53 and varied
by chemotherapy type. 12% of subjects had a Hb<120g/L prior to
starting chemotherapy. Overall, the proportion of subjects with at
least one Hb <120 was 78%, <110 was 54%, <100 was 31% and
<90 was 14%. Hb <100g/L occurred in 54%, 27%, 12% and 5% of
women using CEF, ACT, FEC100 and AC, respectively. Intervention rates
increased as Hb declined. Interventions based on Hb value are
summarized in the Table. 

Conclusions: Anemia was relatively
common and varied with chemotherapy type. Documentation of a
discussion of anemia occured in a minority of patients with a Hb of
90-99g/L and only half of patients with Hb<90g/L. Intervention
rates were relatively low at Hb values where randomized trials have
shown that intervention can improve quality of life.

## 5028

## Greater area under the hemoglobin change curve is associated with
improved outcomes in breast cancer patients receiving epoetin alfa for
chemotherapy-related anemia.

## Lefebvre P, Duh MS, McKenzie RS, Piech CT. Groupe d’Analyse,
Ltée, Montreal, QC, Canada; Analysis Group, Inc., Boston, MA; Ortho
Biotech Clinical Affairs, LLC, Bridgewater, NJ

Background: Several measures have
been used to assess the efficacy of erythropoietic agents in patients
with chemotherapyrelated anemia (CRA). Previous research has shown
that area under the 16-week hemoglobin (Hb) change curve (Hb
AUC16) is a more sensitive and comprehensive
efficacy measure compared to traditional single time-point or
threshold-based measurements, such as hematopoietic response. This
subgroup analysis of breast cancer patients with CRA evaluates the
clinical significance of higher Hb AUC16 values
in this unique population.

Methods: Data from three large
multicenter EPO clinical trials were evaluated (EPO 1: N=378; EPO 2:
N=541; EPO 3: N=117). In EPO 1, patients received 10,000 Units
three-times-weekly (TIW) with potential escalation to 20,000 Units
TIW. In EPO 2 and EPO 3, patients received 40,000 Units once weekly
(QW) with potential escalation to 60,000 Units QW. Inclusion criteria
for this analysis were breast cancer patients, with a baseline Hb
≤11 g/dL, and receipt of chemotherapy with or without radiotherapy. Hb
AUC16 was calculated using sequential
trapezoidal methodology based on the Hb changes over 16 weeks of
treatment and was stratified into quartiles to assess correlation with
clinical and drug utilization outcomes. Trend tests were performed to
determine if the following outcomes had significant linear trends
across the Hb AUC16 quartiles: proportion of patients transfused, time
to hematopoietic response (Hb rise ≥2 g/dL over baseline or Hb
≥12 g/dL during study), EPO utilization, and QOL score changes
measured by the Linear Analogue Scale Assessment (LASA) and the
Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy subscales for anemia (FACT-An)
and fatigue (FACT-F) parameters.

Results: Greater Hb
AUC16 values had a strong linear association
with decreasing proportion of patients transfused (p<.001),
decreasing time to hematopoietic response (p<.0001), decreasing
average weekly EPO dose (p<.0001), and increasing QOL improvements
(p<.05).

Discussion: In breast cancer
patients, greater Hb AUC16 values were
associated with significant improvement in clinical outcomes,
including percentage of patients transfused, time to hematopoietic
response, QOL improvements, and EPO utilization. Hb
AUC16 is an objective and comprehensive
metric that summarizes hematologic response over the course of
treatment and is associated with clinical benefits in breast cancer
patients receiving epoetin alfa therapy.

## 5029

## Acute and delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting and its
impact on quality of life in patients with breast cancer in community
practice settings.

## Cunningham RS, Hu HX, Chen Y-T. The Cancer Institute of New
Jercey, New Brunswick, NJ; Merck & Co., Inc, West Point,
PA

Objective. Chemotherapy-induced
nausea and vomiting (CINV) is an important, but often underestimated
consequence in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. We examined the
occurrence of acute (on the day of chemotherapy) and delayed (days 2–5
post chemotherapy) CINV during the first cycle of chemotherapy and its
impact on quality of life in breast cancer patients.

Methods. Adult patients were
recruited from community-based medical oncology practices and were
eligible to participate in the study if they had highly or moderately
emetogenic chemotherapy planned for at least two cycles with at least
6 days between cycles. Information on demographics, prior experience
and risk factors for nausea and vomiting were obtained by patient
self-report at baseline. Data on cancer type and past and current
chemotherapy/ anti-emetic regimen were reported by treating physicians
prior to each chemotherapy cycle. Incidence of acute and delayed
nausea and vomiting and their impact on quality of life (QoL) were
reported by patients via the interactive voice response (IVR) system
on days 2 and 5 post treatment. QoL was assessed using Functional
Living Index - Emesis.

Results. A total of 461 breast cancer
patients were enrolled; the mean age was 54.4 (SD 10.6) years, 78%
were Caucasian, and 15% had prior chemotherapy experience. The most
common chemotherapy regimens were cyclophosphamide (52%) and
doxorubicin (45%), All patients but 3 (99%) received antiemetics on
the day of chemotherapy and 95% were prescribed antiemetics post
chemotherapy. The most commonly used antiemetic regimens were
dexamethasone (74%) and palonosetron (34%) on the day of chemotherapy
and compazine (41%), ondansetron (20%), granisetron (19%), and
dexametheseon (18%) post chemotherapy. After the first cycle of
chemotherapy, the incidence of acute and delayed nausea was 53% and
66%; the frequency of acute and delayed vomiting was 48% and 45%.
Overall, delayed CINV had greater impact on patients QoL compared to
acute CINV. Furthermore, nausea appeared to have greater impact on
worsened quality of life than vomiting.

Conclusion. Despite anti-emetic
treatment, nausea and vomiting, both acute and delayed, were frequent
in breast cancer patients post-chemotherapy. Delayed nausea had the
greatest impact on quality of life. There is room for improvement in
the management of nausea and vomiting in breast cancer patients
receiving chemotherapy.

## 5030

## A randomised controlled trial to assess the efficacy of Maharishi
Amrit Kalash . an ayurvedic herbal compound in ameliorating toxicity of
cancer chemotherapy in women with breast cancer.

## Srivastava A, Seenu V, Saxena A, Dixit S, Parshad R, Taranikanti
V, Misra MC. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
Delhi, India
Background: Anorexia, Nausea, Vomiting, Stomatitis, diarrhea,
weight loss and alopecia are common side-effects of cytotoxic
chemotherapy. Some of these side effects are related to free oxygen
radical release and can be reduced by antioxidants. Maharishi Amrit
Kalash (MAK) is an ayurvedic compound containing many herbs rich in
antioxidants.
Aim: Aim of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of
MAK in controlling toxicity of chemotherapy.
Materials and Methods: Design: Open 2 arms randomized controlled
clinical trial. We recruited 214 patients with breast carcinoma
receiving cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5- flourouracil (CMF) or
cyclophosphamide, adriamycine, and 5-flourouracil (CAF), adjuvant or
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy. The toxicity of chemotherapy was assessed
according to WHO criteria. Statistical analysis was carried out on
Epi-info 6 and STATA-7.
Result: There was significant reduction in following toxicities in
MAK group: Poor performance status was prevented with Prevented
Fraction (PF)=60.6% (95% confidence interval 22.1 to 80.1). Vomiting
was prevented with PF=40.3%, (95% confidence interval 15.1 to 58.1).
Anorexia was reduced with PF= 35.6%. (95% confidence interval 17.6 to
49.7). No improvement occurred in stomatitis, diarrhea, alopecia and
leucopenia.
Discussion: MAK was beneficial in reducing vomiting, anorexia and
improving general well being of patients receiving chemotherapy. We
suggest its use along with cytotoxic chemotherapy to reduce the above
side-effects.

## 5031

## First and subsequent cycle pegfilgrastim results in low rates of
neutropenic events in patients receiving myelosuppressive
chemotherapy.

## Rader ME, Breyer W, Luedke S, Truscinski D, Ding B, Dansey R,
Ozer H. Nyack Hospital, Nyack, NY; Cancer Center, Provo, UT; Cancer
& Breast Institute, St Louis, MO; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA; U
of Oklahoma, Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK

Background: Patients (pts) with
early-stage breast cancer often receive reduced chemotherapy (CT) dose
intensity when treated with adjuvant CT (Lyman 2003), potentially
compromising longterm survival (Bonadonna 1995). Neutropenia is the
major doselimiting toxicity of CT. First and subsequent cycle
pegfilgrastim has been shown to dramatically reduce febrile
neutropenia in cycle 1 (11% vs <1%) and overall (17% vs <1%;
p<0.001) for pts receiving CT with a moderate risk of febrile
neutropenia compared with placebo (Vogel 2005). We have undertaken a
prospective, community-based study to determine if real-world pts
supported by pegfilgrastim from cycle 1 receiving commonly used
myelosuppressive CT regimens experience a similarly low incidence of
neutropenic events.

Methods: This open-label, single-arm
study has enrolled 2252 pts (1008 breast cancer) at 319 sites. Pts
≥18 yrs with cancers other than leukemia or MDS were eligible,
including pts with major comorbid illnesses not generally eligible for
clinical trials. Key exclusions were weekly CT and concurrent
radiotherapy (RT). Pts received pegfilgrastim 6 mg approximately
24 hours after CT in each cycle for up to 8 cycles of any
myelosuppressive CT. Endpoints included neutropenic complications and
CT dose reductions and delays. Point estimates and 95% confidence
limits (CL) are provided.

Results: Cycle 1 and 2 data are
available from 444 pts with breast cancer at 162 sites. The mean (SD)
age was 53.9 years (11.3). 92% of pts had earlier-stage (I, II, or
III) disease, 12% received prior CT, 7% received prior RT, and 16% had
significant comorbidities. 56% of pts received one of 4 standard
regimens containing doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC): AC every
21 days (n=70); AC every 14 days (n=78); AC followed by paclitaxel
every 14 days (n=76); and docetaxel with AC (TAC; n=25). Most of the
remaining pts received either an anthracycline- or taxanebased
regimen. 10% of pts experienced serious adverse events, which were
consistent with those generally observed in pts receiving
myelosuppressive CT. 

Conclusions: Patients with breast
cancer in a real-world community setting, treated with
myelosuppressive CT (regardless of specific regimen) supported by
pegfilgrastim, experienced a low incidence of neutropenic events in
cycle 1 similar to data reported by Vogel and colleagues.

## 5032

## Synchronicity: evaluating darbepoetin alfa administered at 300 mcg
every three weeks to treat chemotherapyinduced anemia in breast cancer
patients.

## Silberstein P, Boccia R, Liu D, Tchekmedyian S, Holladay C,
Tomita D, Rossi G, Otterson GA. Creighton University, Omaha, NE;
Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Bethesda, MD; New York Medical
College, Valhalla, NY; Pacific Shores Medical Group, Huntington Beach,
CA; Charleston Cancer Center, Charleston, SC; Amgen Inc., Thousand
Oaks, CA; Ohio State University, Columbus, OH

Background: Breast cancer therapies
are highly myelosuppressive (Cristofanilli et al, 2004) and can result
in anemia and reduced quality of life (Groopman and Itri, 1999).
Darbepoetin alfa (DA) can effectively treat chemotherapy-induced
anemia in breast cancer patients (pts) (Schwartzberg et al, 2004). Due
to its extended serum half-life, DA can be given at extended
intervals. This offers the possibility for DA therapy to be
synchronized with a conventional chemotherapy schedule (often every 3
weeks [Q3W]).

Methods: This 16-week, open label,
single-arm study evaluated DA 300 mcg Q3W in achieving and maintaining
hemoglobin (Hb) in a target range of 11 to 13 g/dL (consistent with
evidence based guidelines) in anemic pts (Hb < 11 g/dL) undergoing
chemotherapy. Secondary endpoints included transfusion requirements,
incidence of a hematopoietic response, and the mean changes in Hb and
FACT-F scores from baseline (BL) at the end of study (EOS). The
analysis was stratified by BL Hb (<10 g/dL or ≥10 g/dL).

Results: Data from the breast cancer
pt subset are presented (n =354; 29% of all pts). DA 300 mcg Q3W
effectively alleviated anemia (see table). More pts with BL Hb
≥10 g/dL reached target Hb and achieved a hematopoietic response than
pts with BL Hb <10 g/dL; pts with BL Hb ≥10 g/dL also required
fewer transfusions. Hb increases correlated with clinically
significant improvements in quality of life as measured by the FACT-F
scale. The mean (95% CL) change in FACT-F scores for all patients at
EOS was 6.3 (4.7, 7.9) from a mean (95% CL) BL FACT-F score of 27.9
(26.5, 29.2). Safety results were consistent with those reported for
this pt population in other DA studies.

Discussion: DA 300 mcg Q3W
effectively achieved and maintained Hb in the target range. The
possibility of increased convenience created by synchronizing DA
therapy with common chemotherapy regimens may be important for breast
cancer pts who are often younger than pts with other tumor types, more
likely to be working, and are often primary caregivers for their
families (Ganz et al, 2004). 

## 5033

## Darbepoetin alfa administered once every three weeks is effective
for treating chemotherapy-induced anemia.

## Canon J-L, Bodoky G, Mateos MV, Bastit L, Ferreira I, Amado R,
Vansteenkiste J. Centre Hospitalier Notre Dame et Reine Fabiola,
Charleroi, Belgium; Szt. Laszlo Hospital, Budapest, Hungary;
University of Salamanca Hospital Clinic, Salamanca, Spain; Centre
Frederic Joliot, Rouen, France; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA;
University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Netherlands

Background: Chemotherapy-induced
anemia (CIA) increases the risk of red blood cell transfusions and
debilitating fatigue. Darbepoetin alfa
(Aranesp®; DA) is licensed in Europe for
treatment of CIA using every-three-week (Q3W) or weekly (QW)
administration. The DA Q3W schedule is of particular interest as it
can be synchronized with most chemotherapy regimens, resulting in
fewer clinic visits and increased convenience for patients (pts). This
study evaluated the comparability (non-inferiority) of DA 500 mcg Q3W
with DA 2.25 mcg/kg QW with respect to efficacy and safety.

Methods: This was a randomized,
double-blind, double-dummy, active-controlled phase 3, multicenter
study. Eligibility criteria included ≥18 years of age, anemia
(hemoglobin [Hb] < 11 g/dL), diagnosis of hematologic malignancies
and solid tumors, and ≥12 weeks planned chemotherapy. Pts were
randomized 1:1 to either a fixed dose of DA 500 mcg Q3W or DA
2.25 mcg/kg QW for up to 15 weeks. The primary endpoint was the
incidence of transfusions from week 5 to end of treatment period
(EOTP). Non-inferiority for the primary endpoint was determined if the
upper limit of the 95% confidence interval (CI) of the difference in
transfusions between groups did not exceed a 12.5% margin based on
previous placebo-controlled studies of DA 2.25 mcg/kg QW. Secondary
endpoints included the proportion of pts achieving target Hb level
(≥11 g/dL; not to exceed 13 g/dL), the change in FACT-F scores at
EOTP, and safety.

Results: 705 pts were randomized in
this study (353 in the Q3W arm; 352 in the QW arm). Of these, 54% were
women and 112 (16%) patients had breast cancer. Of all pts, 672 were
analyzed for the primary endpoint. The unadjusted Kaplan-Meier
percentage (95% CI) of all pts requiring transfusions from week 5 to
EOTP was 23% (19 to 28) and 30% (25 to 35) for the Q3W and QW groups,
respectively (difference: −6.8 percentage points [−13.6 to 0.1]).
Transfusion results were consistent when adjusted for stratification
factors. The percentage (95% CI) of all pts achieving target Hb during
the entire study was 84% (81 to 88) in the Q3W arm and 77% (72 to 81)
in the QW arm. The mean difference (95% CI) between groups in change
in FACT-Fatigue scores at EOTP between groups was 0.75 (−0.97 to
2.46). The safety profile was similar between the two treatment
groups. Results specific to the breast cancer subgroup will be
presented.

Conclusions: The fixed 500 mcg DA
dose regimen was comparable to the weight-based 2.25 mcg/kg QW regimen
as the upper limit of the CI of the transfusion incidence fell
substantially below the pre-determined non-inferiority margin. These
results demonstrate effective anemia management with less frequent
dosing of DA.

## 5034

## Comparison of outcomes in patients receiving standard community
care while enrolled on a nationwide registry with those enrolled in a
prospective nationwide communitybased clinical trial.

## Lyman GH, Rader M, Wolff D, Culakova E, Ding B, Dansey R, Ozer
H. University of Rochester, School of Medicine, Rochester, NY; Nyack
Hospital, Nyack, NY; Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA; University of
Oklahoma, Oklahoma City, OK

Background: The Awareness of
Neutropenia in Chemotherapy (ANC) Study Group recently established a
prospective registry of cancer patients (pts) receiving systemic
chemotherapy (CT) in over 100 community practices to study the
incidence of and associated risk factors for neutropenic
complications. FIRST, a phase 4 community-based study, evaluated the
impact of first and subsequent cycle pegfilgrastim protection on
neutropenic events in pts with similar characteristics to those
enrolled in the Registry. In order to test the feasibility of
comparing the outcomes of these 2 pt cohorts, data from breast cancer
pts receiving doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC) CT every 3 weeks
(Q3W) were examined in each population.

Methods: Both studies comprised adult
cancer pts starting a new CT regimen across all tumor types (except
leukemia and MDS), including pts with most major co-morbidities and
performance status. Registry pts received supportive care including
CSFs under conditions of standard community care. FIRST pts received
pegfilgrastim 6 mg approximately 24 hours after each cycle for up to 8
cycles of any myelosuppressive chemotherapy. Both studies evaluated
neutropenic complications. Point estimates and 95% confidence limits
are provided.

Results: The Registry has enrolled
more than 4326 pts at over 100 sites; of these, 387 are breast cancer
pts receiving AC Q3W. The FIRST study has completed enrollment of 2252
pts at 319 sites. Interim data from 874 pts are available; of these 70
are breast cancer pts receiving standard AC Q3W. Demographics are
shown (table). 39% Registry pts received a myeloid growth factor
either proactively or reactively in the first cycle of CT, compared
with 100% of pts on the FIRST study. The incidence of neutropenia in
the first cycle was 60% (55, 65) in Registry pts and 31% (21, 44) in
FIRST pts. The incidence of febrile neutropenia (FN) in the first
cycle was 8% (6, 11) in Registry pts and 4% (1, 12) in FIRST
pts. 

Conclusions: The comparison of these
specific pt groups appears to be feasible. Although 39% of Registry
pts received some form of first cycle CSF support, consistent first
cycle use in the FIRST study resulted in a lower FN rate. More
detailed analyses of other pt cohorts and regimens are planned. The
ability to compare pt outcomes from an observational registry with an
interventional clinical trial may provide useful information regarding
the impact of growth factor use on neutropenic complications in
community practice.

## 5035

## Darbepoetin alfa administered once every three weeks either
synchronously or asynchronously with every-threeweek chemotherapy
improves anemia in breast cancer patients.

## Glaspy J, Henry D, Patel R, Tchekmedyian NS, Berg R, Hendricks
L, Rossi G. UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA; Joan Karnell
Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA; Comprehensive Blood and Cancer
Center, Bakersfield, CA; Pacific Shores Medical Group, Long Beach, CA;
Amgen Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA

Background: Breast cancer patients
undergoing chemotherapy often develop anemia that is associated with
an increased risk of red blood cell (RBC) transfusions and
debilitating fatigue. Chemotherapy-induced anemia can be effectively
treated with darbepoetin alfa. Because of its prolonged half-life,
darbepoetin alfa can be administered on an every-three-week (Q3W)
schedule, which is compatible with most chemotherapy regimens.

Methods: This randomized,
multicenter, open-label study focuses on the efficacy of darbepoetin
alfa 6.75 mcg/kg Q3W administered with Q3W chemotherapy in cancer
patients with anemia (hemoglobin [Hb] ≥9 and ≤11 g/dL). This analysis
compares response to Q3W darbepoetin alfa therapy in patients with
breast cancer compared with all patients enrolled in the study.
Patients were randomized 1:1 to receive darbepoetin alfa for 16 weeks
on either an asynchronous schedule (begin chemotherapy day 15) or a
synchronous schedule (begin chemotherapy day 1). The primary endpoint
of mean change in Hb from baseline after 6 weeks of therapy was chosen
to prevent confounding effects of chemotherapy delays, patient
attrition, and differential dose escalation. Secondary endpoints
(measured over the entire 16 weeks of treatment) included the
incidence of RBC transfusion, incidence of hematopoietic response and
time to hematopoietic response. For the incidence endpoints,
percentage with the event and time to event were estimated using
Kaplan-Meier methodology.

Results: Of the 81 randomized
patients in this study, 32 (40%) patients had breast cancer
(asynchronous, n= 20; synchronous, n = 12). Regardless of synchronous
or asynchronous timing, robust increases in Hb were observed, with
mean Hb reaching the 11 to 13 g/dL target range within 4 weeks. For
patients with an Hb evaluation after 6 weeks of treatment, the mean
(95% confidence interval [CI]) change in Hb was 1.2 (0.8 to 1.5) g/dL
and 1.0 (0.7 to 1.3) g/dL among breast cancer and all patients,
respectively. The percentage (95% CI) of patients who received an RBC
transfusion was 9% (0 to 20) (breast cancer) and 28% (18 to 39) (all
patients). The percentage (95% CI) of patients achieving a
hematopoietic response (≥2 g/dL Hb increase from baseline or Hb
≥12 g/dL) was 78% (62 to 94) (breast cancer) and 74% (61 to 87) (all
patients). Median (95% CI) time to hematopoietic response was 43 (29
to 58) days (breast cancer) and 49 (36 to 58) days (all
patients).

Conclusions: These results indicate
that Q3W administration of darbepoetin alfa is effective in treating
chemotherapy-induced anemia in breast cancer patients and may allow
for once-percycle dosing with added convenience for patients and their
caregivers.

## 5036

## Cost-utility evaluation of adjuvant hormonal options in
postmenopausal women with breast cancer: tamoxifen vs. anastrazole vs.
tamoxifen then exemestane.

## Skedgel C, Rayson D, Dewar R, Younis T. Dalhousie University,
Halifax, NS, Canada; Queen Elizabeth Health Sciences Centre, Halifax,
NS, Canada; Cancer Care Nova Scotia, Halifax, NS, Canada
Background: Based on the ATAC and IES trials, adjuvant Anastrazole
(ANA) for 5 years or Tamoxifen followed by Exemestane (TAM-EX) for
2.5 years each have become acceptable alternatives to Tamoxifen (TAM)
for 5 years in postmenopausal women with hormone receptor positive
breast cancer. As these newer options are associated with higher drug
costs, a cost-utility evaluation was undertaken to compare the
relative costeffectiveness (CE) of ANA and TAM-EX relative to TAM
alone in terms of cost per quality-adjusted life year (QALY)
gained.
Methods: A Markov model was developed to calculate incremental
costs and QALYs in a hypothetical cohort of 1,000 postmenopausal women
with early-stage breast cancer. The model was constructed based on
monthly probabilities of cancer recurrence and general mortality rates
for women aged 60–80, taken from Statistics Canada life tables. The
baseline rate of cancer recurrence with TAM and treatment benefits
associated with ANA and TAM-EX were derived from the ATAC and IES
trials. Unit costs of drug treatment were based on 2005 average
Canadian wholesale prices. Other costs, event rates and health state
utilities were taken from a review of the literature. The primary
analysis assumed local recurrences increased the risk of a subsequent
distant recurrence and treatment benefit was modeled to persist for
5 years beyond adjuvant treatment. After 10 years of treatment
benefit, hazard ratios for recurrent cancer events with ANA and TAM-EX
relative to TAM were set to 1.0. Adverse side effects were not
included in the primary analysis. The analysis took a direct payer
perspective and adopted a 20-year time horizon to reflect life
expectancies. Costs and outcomes were discounted at 3%. Costs are
reported in 2005 Canadian dollars (CDN$1.00=US$0.82).
Results: Both ANA and TAM-EX were associated with QALY gains
relative to TAM alone. Per 1,000 patients treated, ANA resulted in an
incremental gain of 364 QALYs relative to TAM alone, while TAM-EX had
an incremental gain of 334 QALYs relative to TAM alone. Incremental
costs, including hormonal treatment and cancer recurrences, were
$7.7 million with ANA and $3.4 million with TAM-EX per 1,000 treated,
relative to TAM. The CE of ANA relative to TAM alone was $21,098 per
QALY gained, while TAM-EX relative to TAM alone was $10,305 per QALY
gained. The CE of ANA relative to TAM-EX was $138,838 per QALY gained.
These relative rankings were robust and were not affected by changes
in rates of cancer recurrence. A complete sensitivity analysis will be
presented.
Conclusions: Relative to TAM alone, both ANA and TAMEX were
cost-effective, with incremental cost-effectiveness ratios well below
$50,000 per QALY gained. TAM-EX appears to the preferred option as the
cost-effectiveness of ANA relative to TAM-EX was unfavourable.

## 5037

## Cost-effectiveness of switching to exemestane following
two-to-three years of therapy with tamoxifen in postmenopausal women with
primary breast cancer.

## Thompson D, Taylor DCA, Montoya EL, Winer E, Weinstein MC.
INNOVUS Research, Inc., Medford, MA; Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA; Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA

Objective: Although a 5-year course
of tamoxifen has been the standard adjuvant therapy for postmenopausal
women with primary breast cancer, data from the Intergroup Exemestane
Study suggest that switching to the aromatase inhibitor, exemestane,
after 2–3 years prolongs disease-free survival versus continuing
tamoxifen therapy. We sought to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of
this management strategy from a U.S. perspective.

Methods: A Markov model with a
10-year time horizon for recurrence and a lifetime horizon for
survival and costs was developed to predict patients’ transitions
across various health states based on treatment strategy (continuing
tamoxifen versus switching to exemestane), breast cancer recurrence
status (none, local, contralateral, distant), and other related health
events (osteoporosis, endometrial cancer, death). Recurrence was
estimated using data from the Intergroup Exemestane Study, which
directly compared the two treatment strategies over a 4-year period of
follow-up; the 4-year data were extrapolated by conservatively
assuming equivalent hazards between treatment strategies in years 5–10
(i.e., no difference in recurrence risk). Similarly assumptions were
made to extrapolate hazards for osteoporosis and endometrial cancer in
years 5–10. Survival and lifetime medical-care costs by type of
recurrence were estimated using SEER-Medicare data. Health state
utilities were obtained from the published literature. The model was
used to estimate direct costs (in 2004 U.S. dollars, discounted at 3%
per annum), life expectancy, quality adjusted life years (QALYs), and
incremental cost-effectiveness. Deterministic and probabilistic
sensitivity analyses were performed to assess uncertainty in model
results.

Results: Switching to exemestane was
associated with increased recurrence-free survival (11.12 vs.
10.58 years), QALYs (8.45 vs. 8.23), and net costs of cancer care
($17,168 per patient vs. $13,588) over the lifetime versus continuing
tamoxifen therapy. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of
exemestane was $16,000 per QALY gained (95% CI: $7,600 to $53,800).
One-way sensitivity analyses showed model results were robust to
plausible variations in recurrence rates, costs, and utilities, with
ICERs ranging from $8,500 to $40,600 per QALY gained. Probabilistic
sensitivity analyses indicated that there was a 70.2% probability that
switching to exemestane is a cost-effective treatment strategy at a
$20,000/QALY threshold, and a 96.9% probability at a $50,000/QALY
threshold.

Conclusions: Switching postmenopausal
early breast cancer patients to exemestane after 2–3 years of
tamoxifen appears to be a cost-effective treatment strategy at
currently accepted thresholds.

## 5038

## Cost-effectiveness of adjuvant chemotherapy for node + breast
cancer: modeling the downstream effects of adjuvant TAC vs FAC: docetaxel
(T), adriamycin (A), cyclophosphamide (C) compared to 5-fluorouracil (F)
A C.

## Au HJ, Golmohammadi K, Chia S, Verma S, Younis T, Chin C, Jacobs
P. Cross Cancer Institute, Edmonton, AB, Canada; Institute of Health
Economics, Edmonton, AB, Canada; Vancouver Cancer Centre, Vancouver,
BC, Canada; Ottawa Hospital Integrated Cancer Care Program, Ottawa,
ON, Canada; QEII Health Sciences Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada; Aventis
Pharma Inc., Montreal, QC, Canada; University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada

Background: BCIRG 001 investigated
TAC vs FAC adjuvant chemotherapy for women with node positive breast
cancer demonstrating prolonged disease-free and overall survival for
TAC. TAC though is associated with increased acute toxicity and
initial chemotherapy drug costs. However, with reduced disease
recurrence, downstream cancer-related symptoms, treatment toxicity,
and treatment costs may be decreased with TAC. Treatment regimens used
in disease recurrence are influenced by the initial adjuvant
chemotherapy choice and the time to recurrence from the adjuvant
setting. This study evaluates the overall quality-adjusted survival
and cost-effectiveness of adjuvant TAC vs FAC chemotherapy, taking
downstream decisions and events into account, including the later
choices of palliative chemotherapy with taxanes.

Methods: A Markov model was developed
to project outcomes over a 5-year time horizon for a hypothetical
cohort of women with unilateral node positive breast cancer who are
eligible for adjuvant anthracycline chemotherapy. The perspective is
that of a Canadian health care government payer. Data input included
clinical and resource utilization data collected prospectively as part
of BCIRG 001, including rate of recurrence based on Her2 status and
within or after 1-year of adjuvant therapy. Treatment decisions and
outcomes with disease recurrence are based on a systematic literature
review with validity reviewed by a national panel of breast cancer
oncologists. Unit costs were obtained from Alberta provincial cost
list. Utility scores were derived from the literature based on
standard gamble ratings. Costs were discounted at 5% per annum.
Incremental cost-effectiveness (ICE) in cost per quality-adjusted
life-years (QALYs) gained for TAC vs. FAC was calculated. Sensitivity
analyses being completed include the use of prophylactic G-CSF for
prevention of febrile neutropenia with TAC.

Results: For 1000 women with node
positive breast cancer the model showed that TAC would lead to a gain
of 276 QALYs (246 LYs) at an additional cost of $6.7 Million compared
to FAC over a 5-year time horizon. The ICE of TAC vs. FAC was $24,304
per QALY gained. Sensitivity analyses will be reported.

Conclusion:For women with node
positive breast cancer, TAC improves disease-free and overall survival
compared to FAC and, by commonly accepted standards, is a
cost-effective adjuvant chemotherapy.

## 5039

## Economic evaluation of sequential capecitabine (X) and taxanes vs.
the combinations in patients (pts) with advanced/ metastatic breast
cancer (MBC): a Mexican Oncology Study Group (MOSG) Trial.

## Reynoso N, Torrecillas L, Soto C, Reyes S, Perez-Michel L,
Ramirez M, Cervantes G, Benitez H, Delgadillo F, Talavera J. Centro de
Investigacion en Ciencias Medicas UAEM, Toluca, Mexico; ISSSTE Centro
Medico 20 de Noviembre, Mexico City, Mexico; IMSS, Mexicali, Mexico;
IMSS, San Luis Potosi, Mexico; IMSS, Cd. Obregon, Mexico; IMSS,
Chihuahua, Mexico; IMSS, Guadalajara, Mexico; ISSSTE, Guadalajara,
Mexico; IMSS Siglo XXI, Mexico City, Mexico

Background: Adding X
(Xeloda®) to docetaxel (T) extends
overall survival, time to progression and response rate beyond T
alone. Sequential single-agent therapy could offer convenience
benefits and may be more appropriate than combination chemotherapy for
some pts. In the MOSG trial, pts with anthracycline-pretreated MBC
received 3-weekly cycles of one of the following: X→TorP (X
1250 mg/m2 bid d1.14, followed after
progression by T 100 mg/m2 or paclitaxel
[P] 175 mg/m2 day 1; XP (X 825 mg/m2 bid
days 1.14 + P 175 mg/m2 day 1) or XT (X
825 mg/m2bid days 1. 14 + T
75 mg/m2 day 1). We conducted a separate
analysis of cost effectiveness to determine the cost per
quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) in each group.

Materials and Methods: A
costeffectiveness analysis was performed on the MOSG trial data using
the Mexican Health Social-Security Institute (IMSS) economic/ health
parameters; the perspective was of healthcare systems. Clinical data
from the trial showed similar overall survival for the 3 arms. In our
analysis, we used the actual overall survival data in each treatment
arm in the MOSG trial (31, 29, and 34 months). To determine cost
effectiveness (mean cost/QALY), we considered direct treatment costs
and costs involved in managing toxicities. The resources needed to
handle each grade of toxicity and the number of lost days of
productivity due to toxicity were estimated by an expert panel of
breast cancer specialists; the cost of each treatment administration
during the first 8 cycles was obtained from an electronic public
source of costs/expenses (Portal de transparencia IMSS, 2004). QALYs
were determined using internationally validated utility scores and the
overall survival for each arm in the study. Being an international
standard currency, US dollars were used in this analysis.

Results: Mean cost per QALY (US
dollars) and Incremental Cost-Effectiveness Ratio (ICER) of X→TorP vs.
XP and XT vs. X→TorP are shown in the table. 

Conclusion: Sequential X→TorP therapy
produced a 43% cost saving per QALY compared with XP, and a 118% cost
saving per QALY compared with XT. These findings indicate that
sequential X→TorP therapy is dominant (less expensive and more
effective) compared with XP and is more cost effective than XT.

## 5040

## Clinical and cost-effectiveness implications of the adjuvant
transtuzumab in HER2+ breast cancer trials.

## Hillner BE. Virginia Commonwealth Univ., Richmond, VA
Earlier in 2005, benefits were reported from adding trastuzumab (T)
to adjuvant chemotherapy to women with HER2+ breast cancer (BCa). The
recurrence free survival (RFS) was reduced >50% at 2–3 yrs
appropriately leading to stopping these trials. With time, substantial
benefits in RFS and overall survival (OS) are anticipated. This good
news comes with unprecedented cost consequences. One yr of T costs
about $60,000 and varies minimally between countries. This upfront
cost must be balanced against the anticipated long-term benefits.
Herein, we have modified previously developed simulations of the
long-term cost and benefits of adjuvant therapies to address this
question.
Method: A Markov model compared cohorts of 50 y.o. women as if they
entered the above trials. Adverse events and direct U.S. healthcare
costs considered were BCa systemic relapse and death, congestive heart
failure (CHF), and non-BCa death. The T cohort had a 52% reduction in
RFS for 5 yrs. After 5 yrs, the relative efficacy declined such that
the absolute benefit in RFS remained nearly constant (EBCTCG overview,
Lancet 2005). Due to late use of T, the non-T cohort had a greater
survival after recurrence. The model was run with and w/out the
T-cohort having a 4% CHF incidence with a 20% annual mortality. Costs
for T and its delivery were based on Medicare reimbursements and for
metastatic disease and CHF from the literature.
Results: The table shows the projected RFS and 0S at 3, 10 and
20 yrs. The RFS benefit plateaus at 12% after 5 yrs. The OS benefit
steadily increases and approximates the RFS benefit at 20 yrs. By
13 yrs, the increase in OS exceeds one yr. The costs difference
gradually narrows since the non-T cohort has greater BCa recurrence
costs. At 20 yrs, 30% of the T associated costs are offset. The CEA
ratios varied dramatically with changes in time horizon and crossed
thresholds of $100,000 and $50,000 per life year (LY) at 10 yrs and
16 yrs. If the hazard ratio with T were 0.6 (vs. 0.48), the CEA ratio
at 20 yrs would be $101,000 per LY. Including CHF increased the CEA
ratios about 25%.
Conclusion: The cost of adjuvant T are substantial and only
modestly offset by reduced BCa recurrences. Using assumptions
consistent with other studies of the duration of benefit from adjuvant
Rx and the declining BCa recurrence risk, the projected benefits and
CEA ratios for adjuvant T is consistent with other accepted Rxs. 

## 5041

## Cost-evaluation of second generation adjuvant chemotherapy options
in breast cancer.

## Al-Shehri A, Skedgel C, Rayson D, Sellon M, Younis T. Queen
Elizabeth II Health Sciences Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada

Introduction: A number of adjuvant
chemotherapy regimens have become standard treatment options for many
patients with early stage breast cancer. Three second-generation
anthracyclinebased regimens commonly employed in Canada include: CEF
[cyclophosphamide (C)- epirubicin (E)- 5-flurouracil (F)], FEC 100,
and AC-T [adriamycin (A)- C followed by taxol (T)]. These regimens are
assumed to be equally efficacious although randomized comparative data
is lacking. MA 21, a recently completed three arm trial, directly
compared CEF and AC-T, but efficacy results are not yet available.
Assuming comparable survival among these accepted regimens, an
economic evaluation may be helpful in selecting a preferred
option.

Methods: A cost minimization analysis
was performed for CEF (6 cycles), FEC 100 (6 cycles), and AC-T (8
cycles). We examined the direct costs of chemotherapy drug
acquisition, supportive medications, laboratory investigations, and
health resources utilization for a standard course of these three
regimens. We also included the costs of febrile neutropenia (FN)
management and secondary G-CSF use based on reported incidence, and
local practice. Indirect patients costs including travel and
employment loss were also estimated based on average provincial wages
and participation rates. This analysis was performed in Canadian
dollars (Cdn$) at the Nova Scotia Cancer Center, and assumes complete
drug delivery. Sensitivity analyses were performed. A
cost-effectiveness (CE) model estimated the required lower risk of
cancer recurrence associated with the costly regimen to be cost
effective at commonly accepted CE threshold.

Results: The CEF regimen was
associated with higher direct costs compared to FEC 100 or AC-T
regimens (Table I). The total direct costs for uncomplicated
chemotherapy delivery for standard courses of treatments were $7470,
$5995, and $5853 for the CEF, FEC 100, and AC-T regimens,
respectively. Of these costs, 72% were for chemotherapy drug
acquisition on average. The estimated additional cost of FN management
and other indirect costs further increased the incremental cost
associated with the CEF regimen. Estimated costs of FN management and
secondary G-CSF use in the different regimens accounted for 5% – 37 %
of the total direct costs of therapy. Indirect patient related costs
amounted to 13% of the overall combined costs. Sensitivity analyses
will be presented. For CEF to be a CE option at 5 year follow-up, a
29% relative benefit of CEF compared to AC-T is required.

Conclusions: The CEF regimen is
associated with higher direct and indirect costs compared to the FEC
100 or AC-T regimens. Unless the recently completed MA 21 trial
reports a significant benefit in favor of CEF, other second generation
regimens, such as FEC 100 or AC-T, are likely to be preferred. 

## 5042

## Predictive value of health economic models: similarity in lifetime
results using three-year versus five-year observations from the ATAC
Trial.

## Verma S, Rocchi A. The Ottawa Hospital Regional Cancer Centre,
Ottawa, ON, Canada; Axia Research, Hamilton, ON, Canada

Background: Compared to tamoxifen,
anastrozole (Arimidex) has demonstrated a reduced risk of recurrence
in post-menopausal, hormone receptor positive (HR+) women with early
breast cancer over five years in the ATAC trial (Arimidex, Tamoxifen
Alone or in Combination). We originally conducted a health economic
analysis using three-year data and have now finalized the analysis
using recently released completed-treatment (CT) five-year
data.

Methods: A Markov model extrapolated
trial results over a lifetime horizon for the typical ATAC trial
patient. Data from the HR+ subset of the ATAC trial were used to
determine rates of recurrence, death and adverse events for 3 years
(original) or 5 years (CT). Tamoxifen recurrences were based on the
1998 EBCTCG overview; recurrences for anastrozole were 82% (original)
and 83% (CT) of tamoxifen rates (based on the hazard ratio of
disease-free survival from the ATAC trial). Anastrozole benefit was
assumed to be constant and to last for 10 years; tamoxifen benefit was
assigned for 15 years.

Results: The three-year analysis
predicted an incremental difference of 7.6% in the total recurrence
rate and 3.2% in the breast cancer mortality rate; the CT analysis
predicted a 5.7% difference in total recurrences, and a 2.8%
difference in breast cancer mortality. The number of locoregional
recurrences and contralateral cancers predicted originally were very
similar to the recurrences observed in years four and five of the ATAC
trial; distant recurrences were less frequently observed than
predicted. Minor differences were noted in the predictions of
tolerability, adverse events and mortality. There was only a small
difference in the cumulative number of lives saved; thus, the
cost-utility ratio was stable at CDN$26K/QALY (three-year analysis)
and CDN$28K/QALY (CT analysis). In the five-year CT model, the range
of possible cost-utility results was much narrower in the sensitivity
analysis, since the extent and duration of anastrozole benefit were
proven to be consistent and durable.

Conclusions: Three year observations
were highly predictive in determining economic conclusions regarding
the use of anastrozole in place of tamoxifen in the treatment of
postmenopausal women with HR+ breast cancer.

## 5043

## Physician-based active cost management of gynecologicaloncological
therapies reducing pharmaceutical costs by −83.4% in two years without
leaving standard of care.

## Jacobs VR, Thoedtmann J, Euler U, Niemeyer M, Paepke S, Fischer
T, Harbeck N, Kiechle M. Technical University Munich, Munich,
Germany

Objective: Performance of chemo
therapy is expensive and can cause the financial ruin for any clinic
if not performed cost covering. Expensive innovative chemo drugs,
increasing financial pressure of limitation of ressources with growing
physicians’ responsibility for accurate coding is contributing to the
problem. In the following we report about a successful concept of a
physician-based active cost management for gynecologicaloncological
therapies in a German university OB/GYN clinic.

Methods: Primary target is
identifying not cost covering oncological therapies and assignment to
a cost covering reimbursement without reducing standard of oncological
care. The model contains four steps: 1. financial as-is analysis, 2.
precalculation of standardized pharmaceutical cost, 3. a case-bycase
management with cost optimizing individual decision and 4.
postcalculation of actual patient-individual pharmaceutical cost and
correction of potential reimbursement mistakes.

Results: Over 4.000 oncological
cycles were individually analyzed within a two year project. Depending
on several factors for each patient a cost covering pathway was
defined. Within two years the cost for oncological pharmaceuticals
were so reduced by 778.339 • (−83.4%), but neither the number of chemo
cycles performed was reduced nor innovative pharmaceuticals
substituted with older and cheaper therapies. Further reasons for a
financial deficit were identified and eliminated.

Conclusion: In contrast to previously
published cost efficiency analysis this is the first cost
reimbursement analysis by physicians. With this model oncological
therapies on a maximum care level can be performed cost covering so
far even in a university clinic without leaving the standard of care.
Although developed for optimization of reimbursement in Germany this
model is applicable anywhere chemos are performed. 

## 5044

## Cost-effectiveness of nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel versus
docetaxel in the treatment of metastatic breast cancer.

## Gradishar W, Vishalpura T, Franklin M, Bramley T. Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL; Applied Health
Outcomes, Palm Harbor, FL

Background: An albumin-bound,
solvent-free nanoparticle formulation of paclitaxel was recently
approved for the treatment of metastatic breast cancer (MBC). Patients
receiving nanoparticle, albumin-bound (NAB) paclitaxel have
demonstrated higher response rates, lower neutropenia rates (despite
higher doses infused over shorter periods of time), longer time to
tumor progression, and an absence of severe hypersensitivity reactions
when compared to patients receiving Cremophor-based paclitaxel in the
treatment of MBC (Gradishar 2005 in press). Like NAB-paclitaxel,
docetaxel has also demonstrated superior clinical outcomes as compared
to Cremophor-based paclitaxel (Ravdin 2003). However, docetaxel has
also been associated with hematologic toxicities and a high incidence
of febrile neutropenia, often requiring support with granulocyte
colony stimulating factor. The purpose of this study was to compare
the clinical and economic outcomes of NABpaclitaxel to
docetaxel.

Material and Methods: A decision
analytic model was developed to evaluate the economic impact and
clinical outcomes in the treatment of MBC with NAB-paclitaxel and
docetaxel from a payer perspective. The total cost per patient, cost
per progression-free survival, and cost per responder are reported.
Utilization costs considered were medical and pharmacy costs
associated with a full course of chemotherapy, pretreatment medication
costs, drug administration times, and costs for management of
toxicities associated with each agent. Clinical inputs for dosing
schedules and toxicity frequencies were derived from Phase III
clinical trials (Gradishar 2005 in press, Ravdin 2003). Drug costs
were based on average wholesale prices. Other unit costs were obtained
from published reimbursement rates. Patients receiving docetaxel were
assumed to receive first and subsequent cycle use of pegfilgrastim to
prevent the occurrence of febrile neutropenia as demonstrated in a
recent Phase III trial and received dexamethasone to prevent
hypersensitivity reactions (Vogel 2005). Usage of pegfilgrasitm in
patients receiving NAB-paclitaxel was obtained from Phase III data.
These patients did not require premedication to prevent
hypersensitivity reactions as NAB-paclitaxel is solvent-free.

Results: Total costs per patient were
$28,854 for NAB-paclitaxel and $39,568 for docetaxel. The cost per
month of progressionfree survival as well as the cost per responder
was lower for NABpaclitaxel than docetaxel ($5,702 versus $6,942; and
$87,436 versus $106,941, respectively).

Discussion: Both NAB-paclitaxel and
docetaxel have demonstrated superior response rates as compared to
conventional paclitaxel; however, docetaxel has higher total costs
when compared to NAB-paclitaxel. NAB-paclitaxel is a cost-effective
novel treatment option for patients with MBC.

## 5045

## Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) analysis
of breast cancer patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy: analysis of
tumour subtypes and chemotherapy-related molecular genetic
changes.

## Pierga J-Y, Reis-Filho JS, Cleator SJ, Dexter T, MacKay A, Jones
R, Ashworth A, Smith IE, Powles T, Dowsett M. Breakthrough Breast
Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer Research, London,
United Kingdom; Royal Marsden Hospital, London, United Kingdom;
Institut Curie, Paris, France

Background: Several studies have
shown that gene expression profiling may be useful to predict response
to neoadjuvant chemotherapy (CT) in breast cancer (BC) patients.
Although changes in gene expression during neoadjuvant CT have been
reported, little is known on chemotherapy-related genomic alterations.
We analysed the molecular genetic changes in paired breast cancer
samples before, during and after a neoadjuvant combination of
doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide (AC).

Methods: Microdissected frozen breast
core biopsies from 44 patients were obtained before CT (pre). In 17
patients, frozen samples were obtained 3 weeks after the first course
of CT (D21) and in 21 patients, paraffin embedded surgical specimens
were obtained after 4 to 6 cycles. Surgical specimens in pathological
complete and good clinical responders were not available. aCGH was
performed using the 5.8 K Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre
microarray platform, containing 5620 bacterial artificial chromosome
clones (BACs) spaced at <1 Mb intervals throughout the genome. Data
were analysed using S-Plus and a modified version of the aCGH package
built on R. BACs were classified as gains, losses, or no-change
according to their smoothed log2 ratio values. Thresholded data for
each BAC were also used for categorical analysis using a Fishers exact
test adjusted for multiple-testing with a permutation correction based
on the false discovery rate.

Results: Subgroup analysis of 44 pre
treatment biopsies showed that 5q11.2 and 16q23-q24 losses, 7q32-q36
and 2p25 gains were more frequently associated with oestrogen receptor
negativity, 16q21-q22.1 losses with lobular carcinoma, 5q33.3-q4 and
18p11.31 losses, 6p25.1-p25.2 and Xp11.4 gains with HER2 amplification
on 17q11.2-12. The comparison of the pretreatment, the D21 biopsies
and the tumor excised after CT did not reveal significant differences
in DNA profile. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis based
upon genetic alterations on all chromosomes showed that all pre and
D21 post biopsies clustered together (N=17 cases). In 12 cases, three
samples were available for the same patient (pre, D21 and at surgery),
all clustering together. All but two surgical samples clustered with
the respective pre CT sample.

Conclusions: Specific
chemotherapy-driven genomic changes were not detected following 3
weeks or even 4 months of treatment. The hypothesis of resistance to
neoadjuvant CT related to early induced gene amplifications or losses
is not supported by our results.

## 5046

## Predictive gene signatures for response to neoadjuvant
TAC-chemotherapy from expression profiling.

## Rody A, Karn T, Munnes M, von Minckwitz G, Loibl S, Gaetje R,
Solbach C, Holtrich U, Kaufmann M. J.W.Goethe-University, Frankfurt,
Germany; Bayer Healthcare AG, Leverkusen, Germany; German Breast
Group, Neu-Isenburg, Germany

Background: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy
of breast cancer provides a unique opportunity to directly monitor and
excactly assess response to treatment. We previously demonstrated the
feasibility of performing gene expression profiling on pretherapeutic
material in this setting in order to identify predictive gene
signatures to guide the selection of the individual therapy.

Material and Methods: Pretherapeutic
core biopsies from patients undergoing neoadjuvant docetaxel,
adriamycin, cyclophosphamide (TAC) chemotherapy within the
GEPARTRIOtrial were fresh frozen. Samples were classified according to
standard pathology including ER, PR and HER2 IHC/FISH and amount of
cancer cells. Only biopsies containing more than 80 % tumor cells were
considered further. RNA was isolated and expression profiling
performed using Affymetrix HG-U133 Arrays (22,500 genes).
Expressionist software package (GeneData, Basel) was used for
subsequent bioinformatic analyses.

Results: Sufficient amounts of RNA
for microarray analysis were isolated from two thirds of the biopsies
and high quality data were obtained for 70 samples. In addition, for a
subset of patients expression profiles of residual tumor at time of
surgery were aquired. For signature identification consecutive samples
were splitted into training (n=50) and test-cohort (n=20) based on
date of surgery. Unsupervised clustering of samples broadly revealed a
correlation with hormone receptor status. More than 90 % concordance
was observed when data from immunohistochemical analyses and
corresponding mRNA expression as measured by microarrays were
compared. Several described prognostic marker sets from microarray
studies yielded no straight correlation with response to preoperative
systemic therapy. Therefore, 50 samples were used in a supervised
class prediction approach utilizing paired statistical tests and
principle component analysis to identify a predictive gene signature
for complete remission. This analysis resulted in a marker set
encompassing 90 genes allowing the identification of all cases of
stable and progressive diseases as well as the discrimination of all
eight pathologic complete remissions. This gene signature was used in
a KNN-cross-validation approach and subsequently verified on 20
additional independent samples. Interestingly, ESR1 status as well as
PGR status did not seem to play a dominant role in the final signature
while genes from the HER2 locus on chromosome 17q were highly
expressed among many of the samples with pathologic complete
remission.

Discussion: Our analysis revealed an
informative gene set correlated with treatment outcome to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy with TAC. The gene signature was verified in a
training/test cohort setting. Genes identified in this study do
represent cell cycle regulation as well as cell signaling.

## 5047

## Preoperative doxorubicin / cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxel
(AC-Doc) versus dose-dense doxorubicin and docetaxel (Adoc) as
preoperative treatment in operable breast cancer: first analysis of the
event-free survival of the GeparDuo-Study.

## Raab G, Kaufmann M, Schuette M, Hilfrich J, Blohmer JU, Gerber
B, Costa SD, Eidtmann H, Eiermann W, Lampe D, Jackisch C, du Bois A,
von Minckwitz G. Marien Hosp., Stuttgart, Germany; Univ. Hosp.,
Frankfurt, Germany; Bethesda Hosp., Essen, Germany; Henriettenstift,
Hannover, Germany; St. Gertrauden Hosp., Berlin, Germany; Univ. Hosp.,
Rostock, Germany; Univ. Hosp., Magdeburg, Germany; Univ. Hosp., Kiel,
Germany; Rot-Kreuz Hosp., Munich, Germany; Hosp., Weissenfels,
Germany; Univ. Hosp., Marburg, Germany; Horst-Schmidt-Kliniken,
Wiesbaden, Germany; German Breast Group, Neu-Isenburg,
Germany
Background: Sequential AC-DOC is more effective than dosedense ADOC
as preoperative treatment at inducing pathologic complete response for
patients with operable breast cancer. Whether this advantage
translates into improved survival rates needs to be shown.
Methods: This phase III study investigated 913 women with untreated
operable breast cancer (T2-3, N0-2, M0) randomized to receive either
doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 plus docetaxel
75 mg/m2 every 14 days for four cycles
with G-CSF support (ADOC; n=455) or doxorubicin
60 mg/m2 plus cyclophosphamide
600 mg/m2 every 21 days followed by
docetaxel 100 mg/m2 every 21 days for four
cycles each (AC DOC; n=458). The primary endpoint was the incidence of
pathologic complete (invasive and non-invasive) response (pCR) in the
breast and axillary nodes (von Minckwitz et al., J Clin Oncol 2005).
We report here on disease-free (e.g. intrabreast, local, regional, and
distant) and overall survival rates as one of the secondary endpoints.
Analysis is planned after 226 events resulting from an expected median
event-free survival at five years of 65% in the ADOC and 73.4% in the
AC-DOC group (relative risk reduction 24%).
Results: Both groups were well balanced for conventional prognostic
factors at randomization: Median age: 51 (24–77) years, median
clinical tumor size 40 (10–160) mm, cN+ 40.1%, ER +: 67.4%, PR+:
58.5%. A pCR was achieved with ADOC in 7.0% and AC-DOC in 14.3%
(p<0.001). At the analysis after a median follow-up of 30 months,
177 patients with events including 84 deaths and 154 local recurrences
or metastases have been reported.
Conclusion: An updated follow-up with a medium survival of approx.
40 months and more than >226 events will enable the first planned
analysis of event-free survival and will be presented at the SABCS
2005.

## 5048

## Operable breast cancer: preliminary results of a phase II, double
blind, placebo controlled, randomized trial of preoperative chemotherapy
+/- gefitinib with biomarkers evaluation.

## Guarneri V, Frassoldati A, Ficarra G, Giovannelli S, Borghi F,
Puglisi F, Mansutti M, Andreetta C, Banna G, Masci G, Santoro A, Boni
C, Bisagni G, Michelotti A, Crispino S, Conte PF. Modena University
Hospital, Modena, Italy; Modena University Hospital, Modena; Udine
University Hospital; Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano; Arcispedale
Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia; S Chiara University Hospital, Pisa;
USL7, Siena

Introduction: EGFR is expressed in
14–80% of breast cancers (BC). The activity and safety of TKIs in
earlier stages and in combination with chemotherapy has yet to be
characterized. To evaluate the in vivo interaction between gefitinib
and its target in patients (pts) with operable BC, we designed this
phase II randomized trial of preoperative chemotherapy +/- gefitinib.
Secondary aims: evaluation of biomarker modulation at baseline and at
surgery, percentage of pathologic complete response (pCR), and
toxicity.

Patients and Methods: After core
biopsy, pts with stage IIB-IIIA BC were randomized to receive:
epirubicin (E) 90 mg/m2 iv and paclitaxel (T)
175 mg/m2 iv on day 1 plus: gefitinib
250 mg daily from day 5 to16 (Arm A), gefitinib 250 mg daily from day
1 to 21 (Arm B), or placebo (Arm C). Four courses were administered
every 3 wks, and then pts underwent surgery. The following parameters
were evaluated at baseline, and on the specimens of definitive
surgery: pMAPKinase, EGFR/aEGFR expression, Ki67, apoptotic index
(TUNEL test), and VEGF-R (Flk1) expression.

Results: So far 40/90 planned pts
have been entered; thirty-three pts have received at least one course
of treatment and are evaluable for toxicity. Median age was 50 years
(range:34–66); 85% of pts had stage IIA-IIB disease. A total of 104
courses were administered; treatment was generally well tolerated. Two
pts experienced febrile neutropenia. Seven pts discontinued treatment:
2 due to progressive disease, 1 died for a car accident, and 4 due to
toxicity (cutaneous:1, severe mood alteration:1, grade 4
hepato-biliary toxicity: 1; grade3 hypertransaminasemia:1). Twenty-one
pts completed treatment plan and underwent surgery; 7 pts (33%)
received breast conservative surgery. A pCR was observed in 2 pts
(9,5%). Median expression at baseline and after therapy were
respectively: Ki67: 33.3% (range3–90%) and 17.5% (range: 1–80)
(p=0.039); EGFr: 8.2% (0–80%) and 0.5% (0–4%); pMAPK: 13.8% (0–65) and
8.3% (0–70), VEGFR positivity 54% and 23.5%.

Conclusions: Despite the low number
of pts, the inclusion of gefitinib in a preoperative chemotherapy
program is feasible, and the toxicity profile of this combination is
not dissimilar to that reported for gefitinib or for the ET
combination alone. By preliminary assessment, the expression of all
the evaluated biomarkers tended to be lower after treatment, despite
this reduction is significant for Ki67 only. Complete analysis
including biomarker evaluation will be available at the time of the
meeting.

## 5049

## Prospective data of additional patients treated with neoadjuvant
therapy with paclitaxel followed by FEC chemotherapy with trastuzumab in
HER-2 positive operable breast cancer, and an update of initial study
population.

## Buzdar AU, Valero V, Ibrahim N, Francis D, Theriault RL, Green
M, Hunt K, Sahin A, Buchholz T, Hortobagyi GN. The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
Purpose: The initial data of our prospective trial of concomitant
chemotherapy ± trastuzumab were published (JCO 23:3676–3685; 2005). An
additional 23 patients were treated with chemo+H on this study after
closure of the control arm. An update on efficacy and safety on all
patients is included here.
Patients and Methods: After modification of study (closure of
control arm) an additional 23 patients were treated with chemo+H (1 pt
after initiation of therapy withdrew her consent). Median age 51
(range 21–70). Tumor size was T1 (3 pts), T2 (14 pts), and T3 (5
 pts). Nine pts had clinically negative axilla, and 13 pts had N1
(confirmed by FNA). Safety and efficacy results of initial 43 patients
have been updated.
Results: Of 22 pts, the 2nd cohort, 12
patients (54.5%) had pathological complete remission (pCR; in breast
& nodes). In 4 pts, (18.2%) the residual tumor in the breast
consisted of presence of scattered single tumor cells in the tumor bed
and/or the tumor volume ≤ 2 mm. In 4 pts, residual disease in the
breast was >0.2 mm–1.1 cm, and additional two pts had pCR in
breast, but had residual disease in a node measuring 0.2 mm and
0.5 cm. A > 10% decrease in left ventricular ejection fraction was
observed in 6  pts. Of the initial 45 patients, with a median
follow-up of 32 months (range 20–48 months), 1 patient in the control
group had disease recurrence. All patients treated with chemo+H have
remained free of disease without any clinical cardiac
dysfunction.
Conclusion: Additional data support the initial observations that
this approach can result in high pCR in patients with HER-2 positive
breast cancer. With additional follow-up of initial study population,
the efficacy and safety data remain unchanged.

## 5050

## Pathological complete response with neoadjuvant docetaxel,
carboplatin and trastuzumab in HER2-positive, locally advanced breast
cancer on behalf of the GETN(A) Group.

## Coudert B, Largillier R, Chollet P, Camponne M, Coeffic D, Priou
F, Gligorov J, Martin X, Trillet Lenoir V, Weber B, Arnould L, Bleuse
JP, Vasseur B, Serin D, Namer M. CAC GF Leclerc, Dijon, France; CAC A
Lacassagne, Nice, France; CAC J Perrin, Clermont Ferrand, France; CAC
R Gauducheau, Nantes, France; Clinique du Mail, Grenoble, France; CH
Les Oudairies, La Roche sur Yon, France; Hopital Tenon, Paris, France;
Clinique Ste Marie, Chalon sur Saone, France; Institut St Catherine,
Avignon, France; Sanofi Aventis, Paris, France; Roche, Neuilly,
France; CHU Lyon Sud, Lyon, France; CAC A Vautrin, Nancy,
France

Background: The study assessed the
complete pathological response (Sataloff or Chevallier scales) to
neoadjuvant docetaxel (T), carboplatin (C) and trastuzumab (H) in
HER2-positive (immunochemistry [IHC] 3+), locally-advanced breast
cancer patients (pts).

Materials and methods: Six TCH cycles
were scheduled with three-weekly T
(75 mg/m2) and C (AUC 6) and weekly H
(4 mg/kg loading dose then 2 mg/kg/week for 17 weeks). Safety (WHO
criteria), objective response (OR; RECIST criteria) and rate of
breast-conserving surgery were secondary endpoints. All breast cancers
were IHC scored; final centralized IHC and fluorescence in-situ
hybridization (FISH) determination is ongoing.

Results: From January 2003 until
December 2004, 70 pts were enrolled. Preliminary data are available
for 44 pts: mean age 48 years [24–66]; 16 (36%) post menopausal; mean
clinical tumor size 40 mm [18–90]. All pts had an normal initial
cardiac evaluation before entry. Some pts stopped treatment
prematurely during cycles 1–5. Clinical and radiological response
(n=30) was complete in 10 pts (33.3%), partial in 18 (60%), stable in
2 (6.7%). Surgery was conservative in 23 patients (92%) and mastectomy
in 2 (8%). Pathological tumour Sataloff classification (n=23) was T-A
in 11 patients (47.8%), T-B in 7 (30.4%), T-C in 4 (17.4%), T-D in 1
(4.3%). Pathological node Sataloff classification was N-A in 6
patients (26.1%), N-B in 7 (30.4%), N-C in 8 (34.8%), N-D in 2
(8.7%).Pathological Chevallier classification was grade 1 in 5
patients (21.7%), grade 2 in 4 (17.4%), grade 3 in 11 (47.8%), grade 4
in 3 (13%). Preliminary centralized IHC testing on 45 cases showed
that 5 tumours (11%) were in fact HER2−1+, while 3 (6.5%) were HER2−2+
and 37 (82.5%) were HER2−3+

Conclusions: In HER2 positive (3+)
locally advanced breast cancer patients, targeted primary chemotherapy
with Trastuzumab, Docetaxel and Carboplatine was active and promising,
achieving high histological complete response without significant
toxicity. Final results on all patients and according to centralized
IHC and FISH determination will be presented
Acknowledgements are due to P Attali, P Caille, S Detry (GETN(A)
and OSMO)for their permanent assistance to the study
Supported by Sanofi Aventis Laboratories and Roche
Laboratories

## 5051

## Prospective randomized comparison of neoadjuvant / primary systemic
therapy (PST) with dose-dense sequential epirubicin (E)/ paclitaxel (P)
chemotherapy versus standard dose therapy regimen in patients with breast
cancer (bc), multicentre study of the AGO, Germany): subgroup analysis of
inflammatory bc.

## Ditsch N, Bauerfeind I, Kahlert St, Lenhard MS, Himsl I, Untch
M. Ludwig-Maximilians.University, Grosshadern, Munich, Bavaria,
Germany
Introduction: Inflammatory breast cancer is a rare rapidly
progressive disease; prognosis remains poor despite improved primary
systemic therapy (PST). Mastectomy is still the current standard of
surgical therapy. This analysis was designed to compare response
rates, frequency of breast conserving surgery (BCS) and side effects
of Epirubicin/Paclitaxel as either a dose-dense sequential regimen
(Arm A) or as standard chemotherapy (Arm B) in a subgroup of patients
with inflammatory breast cancer.
Patients and methods: In 679 breast cancer patients diagnosed
between 1998 and 2002, 101 patients presented with inflammatory type.
Patients were randomized to receive 3xE 150 mg/m2 followed by 3×T
250 mg/m2 q2w with G-CSF (Filgrastim) support (5 mg/kg/d, d3-10) (Arm
A) or 4 ×ET 90/175 mg/m2 q3w (Arm B) as preoperative therapy. All
patients received 3 × CMF q4w (500/40/6000 mg/m2 d1+8) after surgery;
locoregional radiotherapy was also mandatory. All HR+ pts received
adjuvant endocrine treatment.
Results: Data are available for 93 (A n=42, B n=51) patients with
inflammatory disease. All patients were scheduled for mastectomy
before starting PST, however in 23% of patients BCS was performed. BCS
was possible after PST in 12 / 36 patients with a tumor-size ranging
from 3 to 7.9 cm. Clinical downstaging regarding tumor size was
achieved in 37 patients and for nodal status in 23 patients.
Pathologic complete response rate was in favour of the dose dense arm
(21% vs 12%).
Conclusion and discussion: Even in inflammatory disease the rate of
mastectomy could be reduced after PST. Pathologic response showed a
benefit in favour of the dose-dense sequential Arm A, but patients
with inflammatory breast cancer have a poor prognosis independent of
pcR rate in both arms at the time of this analysis. The side effects
were tolerable with no clinical relevant cardiac, hematolgic and
nonhematologic toxicities.

## 5052

## Mature results from a randomized phase III trial of
docetaxel/capecitabine (TX) vs. doxorubicin/ cyclophosphamide (AC) as
primary chemotherapy for patients (pts) with stage II/III breast cancer
(BC).

## Lee KS, Lee ES, Kwon YM, Nam BH, Kwon HS, Chung KW, Kang HS, Kim
EA, Kim SW, Ro J. National Cancer Center, Goyang, Republic of
Korea

Background: Use of T in the
preoperative setting increases clinical and pathologic response. The
oral fluoropyrimidine X (Xeloda) is effective and well tolerated as
single-agent therapy in pts with metastatic BC and adding X to T
improves survival, TTP and response rates vs. T alone. We compared the
efficacy and safety of TX vs. AC as primary chemotherapy for stage
II/III BC.

Materials and Methods: Eligible pts
had positive axillary lymph nodes by PET or ultrasound-guided
fine-needle aspiration (FNA), adequate organ and hematological
profiles and good PS (ECOG 0/ 1). No prior hormonal, chemotherapy,
radiotherapy or surgery was permitted. Pts were stratified according
to age (<50 years vs. >50 years), ER status (+ve vs.−ve), and
stage (II vs. III). They were randomized to preoperative TX (T
75 mg/m2 i.v. d1 + X 1000
 mg/m2 twice daily d1-14) or AC (A
60 mg/m2 i.v. d1 + C
600 mg/m2 i.v. d1), q3 wks x4. Following
surgery, pts crossed over to receive the other treatment with further
radiotherapy+tamoxifen as required. Assessment for clinical response
was by ultrasound at baseline and after the 2nd and 4th cycles.

Results: 209 pts were enrolled
between Aug02 and Apr05. Age, ECOG PS, stage, and hormone receptor
status were balanced in each arm. 191 pts (96 on TX; 95 on AC) had
undergone surgery by Apr05 and 18 pts are still receiving preoperative
chemotherapy. Safety is currently evaluable in the 202 pts who have
completed at least 2 cycles of preoperative chemotherapy. Compared
with AC, TX led to increased clinical response rate (93% vs. 79%,
p=0.0058), and pathological complete response (pCR) in primary tumors
(23% vs. 8%, p=0.0059) and lymph nodes (33% vs. 22%, p=0.08). pCRs in
primary tumors were observed regardless of stage, ER/PR and HER2
status. Significantly more lymph node pCRs were seen in ER/PR.ve pts
in the AC group. More pts on TX benefited from primary tumor shrinkage
(52% vs. 47%) and lymph node shrinkage (100% vs. 50%). A higher
breast-conservation rate (p=0.0001) was possible in pts with stage II
disease (90% on TX vs. 78% on AC) compared with stage III (32% on TX
vs. 40% on AC). TX caused less nausea and vomiting but more myalgia,
skin and nail toxicities than AC. The most common grade 3/4 adverse
events (TX vs. AC) were neutropenia (72% vs. 85%), vomiting (5% vs.
25%), hand-foot syndrome (22% vs. 0%), stomatitis (10% vs. 0%) and
desquamation (5% vs. 0%).

Discussion: In stage II/III BC, TX
significantly increased clinical and pathological response compared
with AC. TX and AC resulted in high breast-conservation rates in pts
with stage II disease. A non-anthracycline-based regimen consisting of
TX proved effective as primary therapy in early stage breast cancer.
QoL data using the EORTC QLQ-BR23/C30 questionnaire will be presented
at the meeting.

Supported by NCC grant-0210150, Sanofi-Aventis
and Roche Korea.

## 5053

## Evaluation of the effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy on tumour
microvessel density (MVD), pericyte coverage index (PCI) & vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in primary breast cancer.

## Ah-See MW, Harris AL, Burcombe RJ, Fox SB, Richman PI, Daley FM,
Padhani AR, Bentzen SM, Makris A. Mount Vernon Hospital, Northwood,
Middlesex, United Kingdom; John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford,
Headington, United Kingdom

Background: Angiogenesis is critical
for the growth & metastasis of breast tumours & can be
quantified using MVD. Pericyte recruitment to the tumour
microvasculature is thought to reflect vessel maturation & thus
PCI provides a qualitative measure of tumour angiogenesis. VEGF is the
key angiogenic factor driving neovascularisation within breast
cancers. Here we assess the effect of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC)
on MVD, PCI & VEGF expression in primary breast cancer
(PBC).

Methods: Paired pre- &
post-treatment pathological specimens (diagnostic core biopsy &
definitive surgical resection specimen) from 80 women with PBC (median
age 47 years; range 29 – 70) who received 5-fluorouracil, epirubicin
& cyclophosphamide (FEC) NAC were analysed for MVD & PCI.
Immunohistochemical doublestaining was performed using the
panendothelial marker, CD34, & alpha-smooth muscle actin (
 -SMA). MVD & PCI were scored from random fields
(median 9; range 2–31) at x200 magnification or, in the case of small
samples (n=20), from all fields (median 2; range 1–12). Individual
microvessels (CD34 positive) were counted per field & MVD
expressed per mm2. PCI was scored as the
number of CD34 & α -SMA positive vessels & expressed as a
percentage of all CD34 positive vessels within the field. VEGF
expression was evaluable on samples from 48 of the women & was
analysed using the anti-VEGF monoclonal antibody, VEGF AB-7. The
intensity of VEGF staining was scored as: negative=0, weak=1,
moderate=2, strong=3. The percentage of cells staining was scored as:
0% = 0, <5% = 1, 5–20% = 2, 20–50% = 3, >50% = 4. A VEGF
immunoreactive score (IRS) was calculated as the product of the
intensity of staining & the percentage of cells staining. Change
in median MVD, PCI & VEGF IRS following NAC was evaluated using
the Wilcoxon’s signed ranks test.

Results: The median (interquartile
range) pre-NAC MVD, PCI & VEGF IRS values were
76.4/mm2
(46.5–106.6/mm2), 17.3% (6.6 –30.4%)
& 6 (4–9) respectively & the post-NAC values were
72.2/mm2 (50 –
100/mm2), 25.5% (18.2 – 43.3%) & 4
(3–6) respectively. There was no significant difference between the
pre- & post-NAC MVD values (p = 0.48), however, there was a
significant increase in PCI (p<0.0001) & a significant
reduction in VEGF IRS following NAC (p<0.005).

Conclusions: The MVD of breast
tumours following FEC NAC is not significantly different to that in
the pre-NAC diagnostic core biopsy. A significant increase in the PCI
& a significant reduction in VEGF expression occurs following
NAC.This suggests a differential effect of NAC on the tumour
microvasculature according to functional status, with a reduction in
the proportion of “immature” blood vessels. This effect may be
mediated by VEGF.

## 5054

## Frequent pathologic complete responses seen with neoadjuvant q4week
carboplatin and weekly paclitaxel ± weekly trastuzumab in resectable and
locally advanced breast cancer: a Brown University Oncology Group (BrUOG)
Study.

## Fenton MA, Ries LM, Strenger R, Dizon DS, Legare RD, Joseph PJ,
Theall KP, Graves TA, Gass JS, Sikov WM, Brown University Oncology
Group. Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI; Women and Infants
Hospital of Rhode Island, Providence, RI; The Miriam Hospital,
Providence, RI; Memorial Hospital of Rhode Island, Pawtucket,
RI

Background: Achievement of pathologic
complete response (pCR) with neoadjuvant chemotherapy correlates with
improved disease-free survival in patients (pts) with resectable
breast cancer. Weekly paclitaxel (P) enhances the pCR rate compared to
q3week P (M Green, ASCO 2002). Based on data in advanced disease, we
performed a phase II study to assess the addition of carboplatin (Cb)
to neoadjuvant weekly P in HER2- pts and weekly P with trastuzumab (H)
in HER2+ pts.

Methods: Pts were stratified by
resectability (stage IIA–IIIA vs. stage IIIB–C) and HER2 status
(defined by FISH). Pretreatment pathologic evaluation of suspicious
lymph nodes (LN) was encouraged. Pts received Cb AUC 6 q4wks and P
80 mg/m2 weekly x 16 wks, with weekly H
2 mg/kg in HER2+ patients, followed by surgery with axillary LN
sampling (except in pts with (-) sentinel LNs pre-chemo). Post-op
therapy was left to the discretion of the treating physicians. The
study was designed to detect a pCR rate of >25% in at least 40
resectable pts.

Results: 55 patients (43 with
resectable disease) were enrolled in 18 months. Median age 54 (31–74).
Pts received median 16/16 weekly treatments. Doses were held in 13 pts
for neutropenia (ANC<800) and in 3 pts for grade 3
thrombocytopenia. Serious adverse events were limited to one pt each
with pulmonary embolus, syncope, port infection, and dehydration. No
episodes of febrile neutropenia were reported. Grade 2 (4 pts) or 3
(1 pt) neuropathy was uncommon. Other grade 3 toxicities were rare.
Overall the pCR rate was 45% (24/53, 95% CI 32–60%); HER2+ pts were
more likely to achieve a pCR (78%) than HER2- pts (29%). The pCR rate
in resectable pts was 43% (18/42, 95% CI 28–59%). pCRs by strata are
tabulated below: 

Conclusion: This carboplatin/weekly P
± H neoadjuvant regimen was very well tolerated and demonstrates
significant activity, particularly in HER2+ and ER−/HER2− pts, despite
the omission of an anthracycline. We conclude that this regimen merits
further study in the neoadjuvant setting.

## 5055

## A phase II randomized study to compare the neoadjuvant
administration of docetaxel and vinorelbine or docetaxel followed by
adriamycin and cytoxan with all chemotherapy administered in a dose dense
fashion to women with stage II and stage III breast cancer.

## Limentani SA, Brufsky AM, Rubin P, Lambert-Falls R, Carroll M.
Blumenthal Cancer Ctr, Charlotte, NC; Magee Women’s Hospital,
Pittsburgh, PA; Moses Cone Reg Cancer Ctr, Greensboro, NC; S Carolina
Onc Assoc, Columbia, SC
We have previously demonstrated that a combination of docetaxel (D)
(60 mg/m2) and vinorelbine (V)
(45 mg/m2) administered every two weeks
for 6 cycles to women with breast cancer in a neoadjuvant fashion
results in a pathologic complete response rate (pCR) of 27%. However,
the incidence of fever and neutropenia (F/N) was unacceptably high
(22%) in spite of the use of prophylactic filgrastim and quinolones.
We reasoned that a decrease in the dose of V
(30 mg/m2) would result in a lower
incidence of F/ N. Furthermore, the incorporation of doxorubicin
(60 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide
(600 mg/m2) (AC) administered every two
weeks for 4 cycles following the completion of TN would result in an
increased pCR rate (arm 1). Based on the Norton-Simon hypothesis we
also evaluated the administration of D
(75 mg/m2) for 6 cycles followed by AC
administered every two weeks for 4 cycles (arm 2). One hundred and six
patients (pts) (arm 1 = 51, arm 2 = 55) have been enrolled with a
planned accrual of 70 pts per arm. Arm 1, 35 pts stage II, 16 pts
stage III, arm 2, 39 pts stage II, 16 pts stage III. 341 cycles have
been administered on arm 1 and 332 cycles on arm 2. Grade 3/4
toxicities include mucositis: arm 1 = 2, arm 2 = 0, fatigue: arm 1 =
3, arm 2 = 2, epiphora: arm 1 = 0, arm 2 = 1, hand foot syndrome
(HFS): arm 1 = 2, arm 2 = 2, Diarrhea: arm 1 = 1, arm 2 = 3,
pulmonary: arm 1 = 0, arm 2 = 2, fever and neutropenia: arm 1 = 3, arm
2 = 1. Dose modifications have been performed in 13 pts on arm 1 and
15 pts on arm 2. Four pts in arm 1 had dose reductions of AC, two pts
in arm 2 had dose reductions of AC. Five pts have had chemotherapy
stopped prematurely because of toxicity, two from arm 1 and three from
arm 2. Clinical partial responses have been seen in 10/29 (34%) pts on
arm 1 and 11/34 (32%) pts on arm 2, complete response 17/29 (58%) pts
arm 1 and 18/34 (53%) pts arm 2, stable disease 2/29 (7%) arm 1, 4/29
(12%) arm 2, progressive disease in 1/34 (3%) on arm 2. Overall
response rate 93% on arm 1 and 85% on arm 2. pCR has been seen in 7/26
(27%) pts on arm 1 and 9/27 (33%) pts on arm 2. In pts with hormone
receptor negative disease 4/11 (36%) pts have had a pCR on arm 1 and
6/ 8 (75%) pts have had a pCR on arm 2. In summary, chemotherapy has
been well tolerated by most pts irrespective of the arm upon which
they have been treated. Two early concerns, F/N on arm 1 and HFS on
arm 2 have been infrequent occurrences. Although preliminary, both
clinical and pathologic response rates are encouraging. The findings
in hormone receptor negative disease support the contention that these
pts have a better response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

## 5056

## High pathological complete remission rates with paclitaxel and
carboplatin ± trastuzumab (TC±H) following dose dense doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide (AC) supported by GM-CSF in breast cancer-a phase II
study.

## Mehta RS, Schubbert T, Hsiang D, Butler J, Baick C, Su M-Y.
University of California, Irvine, Orange, CA
Background: We reported an 87% (CI .47–.99) pathological complete
remission (pCR) with AC, TCH administered sequentially with relative
cardiac safety in eight consecutive breast cancer (BC) patients (SABC
2004). Tolerability data of the sequential AC, TC+H in a follow up
phase II setting demonstrated the safety of this outpatient regimen
(ASCO 2005). We report here the final outcome analysis of the first 21
patients who received a maximum of 4 cycles of dose dense AC supported
by GM-CSF. Two weeks following AC, 13 Her-2 negative patients received
2–4 cycles of TC (6–12 weekly doses), and 8 Her-2 positive (IHC3+/and
or FISH positive) patients received 3–4 cycles of TCH (12–16 weeks of
trastuzumab), respectively. Twelve patients were hormone receptor
positive. An additional 20 patients have completed 1–4 cycles of AC.
Ten of these patients are candidates for TCH following AC.
Results: Of > 140 AC cycles supported by GM-CSF, only 1 cycle
was associated with neutropenic fever. Two additional neutropenic
febrile episodes developed in the few cycles supported by G-CSF or
pegfilgrastim. A pCR rate of 50% (95% CI 0.29–0.76) by NSABP criteria
was achieved in the first 20 assessable patients with stage II–IV
breast cancer. Lymph node negativity rate was 65% at final surgery. On
subset analysis, 5 of 7 (71%) Her-2 positive, and 5 of 13 (38%) Her-2
negative patients achieved pCR. Three additional patients had rare
cells, and a fourth had a 1.5 mm residual cancer, therefore, 70% of
patients achieved a T0/T1mic/T1a status in a heterogeneous BC
population. One additional stage IV patient with Her-2 positive
inflammatory breast cancer not included in the analysis died of septic
shock following TCH. She had no evidence of breast cancer but had
undiagnosed cirrhosis at autopsy. Following TCH, there was no clinical
cardiac dysfunction or EF<55% by Echo, and only 1 patient had
>15% reduction from the baseline EF.
Conclusion: A 50% pCR and a 65% lymph node negative rate, and a 70%
T0/T1mic/T1a status is one of the highest reported for a heterogeneous
BC population. An impressive pCR rate in the Her-2 positive BC subset
not only validates our 8 patient pilot data but mirrors the remarkable
disease free survival improvement observed in the adjuvant setting
with sequential anthracycline, trastuzumab based regimens.
Extrapolating from NSABP neoadjuvant studies, each 10% increment in
pCR should yield 2–3% increment in survival. Minimum anthracylines may
be important in achieving a high pCR rate as the studies of
neoadjuvant taxane, platinum, and trastuzumab based regimens have
yielded low pCR rates. Moreover, this study suggests trials of shorter
duration trastuzumab (12–16 weeks) versus longer duration of
trastuzumab are warranted.

## 5057

## Semi-quantitative gene expression profiling for therapy prediction
in a breast cancer neoadjuvant therapy study applying
docetaxel/epirubicin/cyclophosphamide.

## Schlotter CM, Vogt U, Tidow N, Kemming D, Bosse U, Bonk U,
Ergoenc Y, Adiguezel H, Egbert M, Brandt BH. Clinical Centre,
Ibbenbueren; European Laboratory Association, Ibbenbueren; GeneSys
Lab, Muenster; Institute of Tumor Biology, University Medical Center,
Hamburg; Institute of Pathology, Osnabrueck; Institute of Pathology,
Bremen; St. Anna Hospital, Herne; Institute of Tumor Biology,
University Medical Centre, Hamburg
More than 28000 curated human genes can be analyzed
semiquantitatively using a new chemiluminescent detection technology
and 60mer oligonucleotides on a Human Genome Survey Microarray (HGSM,
Applied Biosytems). Our results demonstrate a low rate of
false-positives (1.2%), a high specificity and quantification accuracy
of HGSM system. Comparison of data from HGSM and RT-PCR obtained on
mRNA from fresh frozen tissue resulted a Pearson-correlation of 0.92
to 0.63 for the breast cancer genes, e.g. EGFR, HER2, estrogen
receptor a (ESR1), progesterone receptor (PGR), urokinase-type
plasminogen activator (PLAU, uPA), and plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (PAI-1).
HGSM expression profiling was performed on biopsy samplesfrom a
setting of patients under neoadjuvant treatment. The protocol for a
phase II study was elaborated for the treatment of breast cancer
patients suffering from a primary tumor > 1,5 cm or inflammatory
breast cancer with Docetaxel/Epirubicin/Cyclophosphamide (TEC) prior
to surgical treatment. The study was approved by the local ethical
committee and 40 patients will be included into the study after
written informed consent. Twenty two patients have been already
included in the ongoing study. In this prospective study a biopsy from
the tumor is taken before chemotherapy. Therefore, success of
treatment is detectable directly at the operated residual tumor. First
expression profiling results are obtainable showing that a subset of
43 genes indicates patients with complete remission (CR, no detectable
tumor at end of chemotherapy), partial remission (PR) and progressive
disease (PD). Remarkable, that the expression profile clearly
separated CR and PD tumors whereas PR tumors presented with a closer
relationship to PD tumors than to CR tumors but displayed small
specific subprofiles. A comparable separation of the groups could not
achieved by established tumor markers, e.g. ER, PgR, HER2, uPA etc.
which are measured simultaneously on the HGSM.
In Conclusions, HGSM semi-quantitative expression profiling is
promising to have the potential to figure out genes that are related
to cancer progression and chemotherapy resistance, especially in
primary systemic chemotherapy.

## 5058

## Multicenter study of nonpegylated liposomal doxorubicin and
docetaxel as neoadjuvant treatment in patients with stage II – III breast
cancer.

## Modolell A, Mayordomo J, Garcia JM, Machengs I, Alvarez I,
Palombo H, Yubero A, Murillo L, Belon J, Andres R, Burillo M, Lambea
J, Centelles M, Tres A. I Corachan, Barcelona; H Clinico, Zaragoza; P
Miramar, Palma; H Sagrado Corazon, Barcelona; H S Jorge, Huesca; Cl
Remedio, Barcelona; H Obispo Polanco, Teruel; H R Sofia, Tudela; H
Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain

Background: Non-pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin (Myocet)(M) and docetaxel(T) are active agents for
patients with breast cancer. M has been shown to be as effective as
doxorubicin at the same dose while reducing the cardiotoxicity. This
study was designed to evaluate clinical and pathological response
rates (RR) and toxicity after induction chemotherapy with D plus M in
patients with breast cancer.

Patients and Methods: Patients with
histological confirmation of breast cancer (stage II–III), age >
18 years, left ventricular ejection fraction > 45% and adequate
bone marrow, renal and hepatic function were included in the study.
Prior systemic therapy, radiotherapy or surgery for breast cancer were
not allowed. Treatment: D (75 mg/m2) iv and
M (75 mg/m2) iv, both on day 1 every
21 days for 4 courses, followed by surgery.

Results: Fifty patients have been
enrolled. Median age was 52 years (28–76). ECOG PS was 0 in 88% of
patients and 1 in 12%. 56% of patients were premenopausal. TNM
category of the primary tumor was T1 in 1 pts (2%); T2 in 20 (40%); T3
in 10 (20%) and T4 in 19 (38%). In addition, 13 pts (26%) had palpable
regional lymph nodes. Receptor status was ER+PR+ in 46% of pts; ER+PR−
in 14%; ER+PR unknown in 2%; ER−PR+ in 2% and ER−PR− in 36%. Patients
received a total of 188 courses (median 4, range 2–4). Median relative
dose intensity was 99% for both D and M. Fortyone pts have been
evaluated for clinical response (9 treatment ongoing): 5 achieved CR
(12.2%), 26 PR (63.4%), 9 SD (22.0%) and 1 PD (2.4%), for a clinical
RR of 75.6% (95% CI: 62.5– 88.7%). Surgery was performed in 40
patients (1 pending): 6 (15.0%) achieved pathological CR, 25 (62.5%)
pPR, 9 (22.5%) pSD resulting in a pathological RR of 77.5% (95% CI:
64.6– 90.4%). Median disease-free and overall survival have not been
reached. Grade III/IV toxicities per course were: neutropenia (4.8%),
thrombocytopenia (1.1%), anemia (0.5%), febrile neutropenia (3.7%) and
asthenia (2.1%).

Conclusion: 4 courses of D and M
every 21 days is an active and well tolerated induction treatment for
patients with stage II and III breast cancer.

## 5059

## Dose-dense taxotere (T) and adriamycin/cyclophosphamide (AC) as
neoadyuvant treatment in locally advanced breast cancer (LABC).

## García-Mata J, Calvo L, García-Palomo A, Mel JR, Almanza MC,
Ramos M, de Paz L. H. Santa María Nai, Ourense, Spain; H. Juan
Canalejo, A Coruña, Spain; H. de León, León, Spain; H. Xeral Calde,
Lugo, Spain; Clinica Povisa, Vigo, Spain; Centro Oncológico, A Coruña,
Spain; H. Arquitecto Marcide, Ferrol, Spain

Background: Systemic and local
therapy is the standard care in the management of LABC. DD
chemotherapy has shown improvement in clinical outcomes for BC. This
study was designed to evaluate the efficacy of DD therapy with T × 4
followed by AC × 4. Main objective is clinical response rate and
pathological complete response.

Patients and methods: Women with
histological confirmation of LABC, ECOG PS ≤ 2, age ≥ 18 years and
adequate bone marrow, hepatic, renal and cardiac functions were
included. Prior systemic therapy and radiotherapy were not allowed.
Neoadyuvant treatment: T 100 mg/m2 iv and
prophylactic G-CSF, every 2 weeks × 4 cycles followed by A
60 mg/m2 iv and C
600 mg/m2 iv, every 2 weeks × 4 cycles.
Response was evaluated every 4 cyclesaccording to RECIST
criteria.

Results: Up to date, 54 patients (pt)
were enrolled, with a median age of 49 years (31–80), ECOG PS was 0/1
96.1/3.9%. Breast locations were: left 48.1%, right 48.1% and both
3.7%. 27 pt (57,5%) presented stage III breast cancer. Forty pt
(74.1%) had infiltrating ductal carcinoma. Menopausal status was:
premenopausal 55.6%, postmenopausal 42.6% and perimenopausal 1.9%.
Hormonal receptor status was positive in 66.7% of pt (RE+ 62.8% and
RP+ 51.0%) and 14 pt of 39 with available data had Her-2
overexpression. Up to date, 53 pt have received T and 51 AC. A total
of 211 cycles of T (median 4), and 203 of AC (median 4) were
administered. Median relative dose intensity was 100% for T and 96%
for both A and C. Of 49 evaluated pt for efficacy, 12 achieved CR, 28
PR, 7 SD and 2 PD, resulting in an ORR of 81.6% (95%CI: 70.8%, 92.5%).
Surgery was performed in 50 pt; 6 of them achieved pCR (12%; 95%CI:
3.0%, 21.0%), 28 pPR, 13 R minor and 3 SD, and 20 (51.3%) were free of
malignant cells in the nodes. The median number of positive nodes was
1 (0–21). Breast conservative surgery rate was 36%. During T
treatment, main grade III/IV toxicity per p was skin toxicity (17.0%),
neutropenia (3.8%), asthenia (3.8%) and hepatotoxicity (3.8%); during
AC treatment was neutropenia (19.6%), leucopenia (5.9%), amenorrhoea
(9.8%) and stomatitis (3.9%). Main grade I/II toxicity during T
treatment was asthenia (66.0%), nauseas (43.4%), skin toxicity
(37.7%), diarrhoea (37.7%) and stomatitis (35.8%); during AC treatment
was asthenia (62.7%), nauseas (49.0%), skin toxicity (35.3%), vomiting
(33.3%), anaemia (31.4%) and stomatitis (31.4%).

Conclusion: This scheme of DD
neoadyuvant chemotherapy is an active regimen, even in a particular
high risk cohort of LABC p (57.5% stage III), with a manageable
toxicity profile.

## 5060

## Neoadjuvant capecitabine chemoradiation (X-RT) for patients (pts)
with locally advanced breast cancer (LABC) failing anthracycline-based
neoadjuvant therapy: findings from a prospective phase II
trial.

## Gaui M, Amorim G, Pereira G, Moreira D, Djahjah C, Spector N.
Instituto Nacional do Cancer, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

Background: In Brazil, LABC remains a
serious heath problem and represents approximately 30% of all newly
diagnosed breast cancer pts. Anthracycline-based neoadjuvant therapy
is a standard treatment, but approximately 30% of pts do not respond.
For these refractory pts, there is no standard approach. Retrospective
data from our institution indicate that, despite receiving RT, the
majority of pts still progress: only 60% became operable and the
majority of pts still have gross residual disease; 4 pts have minimal
residual disease (9%) with only 1 pathologic complete response (pCR,
4%). X is highly active and well tolerated as a single agent and
extends survival, time to progression and response rates when added to
docetaxel in metastatic breast cancer. Because X is a potent
radiosensitizer, and it has been proven effective and well tolerated
in chemoradiation for locally advanced rectal cancer, we studied the
concomitant use of RT and X in pts with LABC.

Materials and Methods: Eligible pts
had inoperable LABC refractory to FAC, ECOG PS 0.2 and adequate bone
marrow, renal and hepatic functions. Pts received RT 50cGy/d plus X
850 mg/m2 bid orally on d1.14. Pts
underwent surgery, if appropriate, after completion of neoadjuvant
therapy. Pts with hormone receptorpositive tumors received tamoxifen
after surgery.

Results: We enrolled a total of 30
pts. Baseline characteristics were as follows: median age 47 years
(range 26.70); median tumor size (after anthracyclines)
80 cm2 (range
36.357 cm2); inflammatory carcinoma
(21%); hormone receptor positive tumor (ER 37.5%, PR 41%): 12 pts were
HER2 2+ or 3+ (50%). Two pts were excluded from the analysis as they
were protocol violators (they received an inadequate dose of X).
Treatment with X-RT rendered 23 of the 28 evaluable pts (82%)
operable. Four pts did not undergo surgery because of disease
progression. After surgery, histology reports showed pCR in 3 pts
(11%) and minimal residual disease in 4 pts (14%). A median residual
tumor size of 11 cm2 (range
0.72 cm2) and a median number of 2
positive nodes were observed. Treatment was well tolerated. The most
common (all grade) adverse events were nausea/vomiting, diarrhea and
mucositis. There were no grade 3/4 adverse events.

Discussion: Our data indicate that
neoadjuvant X-RT is feasible, well tolerated and effective in pts with
LABC refractory to FAC, rendering pts eligible for surgery. These
findings suggest that a randomized study should be performed to
compare RT vs. X-RT.

## 5061

## The farnesyl transferase (FTase) inhibitor (FTI) tipifarnib
inhibits FTase in vivo and enhances the efficacy of neoadjuvant
dose-dense doxorubicin-cyclophosphamide (AC) in patients with locally
advanced breast cancer (LABC).

## Moulder SL, Sparano JA, Kazi A, Wright J, Munster PN, Vahdat L,
Minton S, Hershman D, Diaz N, Malafa M, Riker A, Lee D, Pellegrino C,
Li T, Negassa A, Sebti S. H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research
Institute, Tampa, FL; New York Phase II Consortium (N01-CM-57018), New
York, NY

Background: Ras protein
overexpression has been associated with a poor prognosis in breast
cancer. Combination of AC with agents inhibiting the Ras pathway and
downstream elements augment the effects of AC in vitro.

Materials and Methods: Patients with
stage IIB–IIIC breast cancer received up to 4 cycles of neoadjuvant AC
(A=60mg/m2, C=600mg/m2) IV q 2 weeks with G-CSF (5 mcg/kg days 2–13)
plus tipifarnib 200 mg BID PO on days 2–7 of each cycle, followed by
definitive surgery. The primary endpoint was pathologic complete
response (pCR) in the breast (defined as no invasive cancer).
Enzymatic assays measuring FTase activity and western blotting for
signaling proteins (pSTAT3, pERK, pAKT, p27, Bcl-xL, and Bax) were
performed on optional tumor biopsies obtained before starting therapy
and 2 hours after the last dose of tipifarnib in 5 evaluable
patients.

Results: 21 eligible patients
enrolled on the 1st stage of the phase II trial and initiated
treatment; accrual of 29 additional patients to the
2nd stage is ongoing. 7/21 patients
(33%; 95% C.I. 15%, 55%) treated in the 1st stage had a pCR in the
breast (including 5/12 ER and/or PR+ cases [42%] and 2/9 ER/PR
negative cases [22%]). 5 patients (24%; 95% C.I. 8%, 47%) had pCR in
the breast and lymph nodes. Comparing post vs. pre-treatment specimens
in 5 evaluable patients, the median decrease in FTase enzyme activity
was 100% (range 55%, 100%), 4/5 exhibited decreased p-STAT-3, and
there were variable effects on other proteins. 1 patient who underwent
serial biopsies had a pCR in the breast (FTase decreased 91% and
p-STAT-3 decreased).

Discussion: Tipifarnib inhibits FTase
activity in human breast cancer in vivo, and is associated with
downregulation of p-STAT- 3 (which may potentiate apoptosis). The 33%
pCR rate in the breast (42% for ER-positive cases) in LABC exceeds the
pCR rate of about 13% in non-LABC (6% for ER-positive disease)
expected after 4 cycles of non dose-dense AC (J Clin Oncol 2003; 21:
4165–4174), suggesting that tipifarnib may overcome mechanisms of
resistance to AC, particularly in patients with ER-positive disease.
Further studies of this combination are warranted.

## 5062

## Neoadjuvant dose dense chemotherapy (NDDC) with sequential
doxorubicin/cyclophosphamide (AC) followed by taxane yields high
pathologic complete response (pCR) rate in stage II/III breast
cancer.

## Schwartzberg LS, Kanter LR, Huang R, Tauer KW, Somer BR. The
West Clinic, Memphis, TN; Accelerated Community Oncology Research
Network, Memphis, TN

Background: Adjuvant dose dense AC
followed by paclitaxel delivered at 14 day intervals improves disease
free survival and overall survival compared to standard 21 day
schedules of the same drugs and doses. We reasoned that NDDC could
increase responses before definitive surgery and improve
outcome.

Methods: From 1/03 to 12/04,
consecutive patients (pts) with large primary (T >3 cm) or locally
advanced non-metastatic breast cancer were treated in a
community-based cancer clinic with sequential AC
60/600 mg/m2× 4 cycles followed by
paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 (N=34) or docetaxel
90–100 mg/m2 × 4 cycles (N=8) every
14 days with pegfilgrastim support. Pts were evaluated pre and post
NDDC by clinical and imaging measurements (mammography +/− ultrasound)
and pathologically after partial mastectomy or total mastectomy and
SLNB and/or ALND. pCR was defined as no invasive tumor in both the
breast and LNs by H&E.

Results: A total of 42 pts were
treated, 35 with infiltrating ductal, 6 infiltrating lobular, 1
unknown histology; Grade: 19 Grade 3, 11 grade 2, 1 grade 1, 10 not
reported; 18 ER+, 12 PR+; 8 Her2+; Clinical Stage: 6 IIA, 12 IIB, 10
IIIA, 5 IIIB, 9 IIIC. Mean size of primary tumor was 5.9 cm by
clinical exam, 4.0 cm by imaging and 26 pts had clinically + LNs. NDDC
was well tolerated, with majority of patients receiving full dose
intensity on schedule. After NDDC, 19/42 (49%) achieved clinical
(c)CR, 18/42 (46%) achieved cPR, and 2 had stable disease. Mean size
of the primary tumor after chemotherapy was 1.0 cm by clinical exam
and 1.2 cm by imaging. Four pts did not go to surgery: 1 developed
brain metastases, 2 refused, 1 lost to follow-up, all with cIIIC
disease pre chemotherapy. Of the 38 evaluable post surgery pts, 14
(38%) had pCR in breast and LNs, 22 (58%) had pPR and 2 (5%) had no
response. pCR occured in 6/20 (30%) pts with cStage III vs. 8/18 (44%)
pts with cStage II disease. 10/16 (62.5%) with cCR demonstrated pCR
vs. 3/18 (16.7%) with cPR. There was a significant association between
hormone receptor (HR) status and pCR: 52.4% of HR- vs. 17.6% of HR+
(p=0.036). No significant association with pCR was seen for tumor
histology (p=1.0), tumor grade (p=0.59), or Her2 status
(p=0.33).

Conclusions: NDDC is associated with
a high pCR rate in breast and LNs, even in locally advanced cancer,
and is completed safely and more rapidly compared to standard
sequential neoadjuvant therapy. HR negative tumors are significantly
more likely to achieve pCR to NDDC. Triple negative breast cancers
(ER-PR-Her2−) are likely to benefit most from this approach.

## 5063

## Response to primary chemotherapy in breast carcinoma depends on
histological tumor type: a study on 860 patients from one
institution.

## Tubiana-Hulin MJ, Stevens DM, Guinebretiere JMR, Bouita L, Lasry
S, Cohen-Solal C, Cherel P, Rouesse J. Centre Rene Huguenin, Saint
Cloud, France

Background: The poor responsiveness
of invasive lobular breast carcinoma to chemotherapy has been recently
described. We studied in our data-base the impact of primary
chemotherapy on response and outcome in operable invasive lobular
breast carcinoma (ILC) compared to invasive ductal breast carcinoma
(IDC).

Patients and Methods: We extracted
from the data base all operable breast cancer patients entirely
diagnosed, treated, and followed in our institution from 1990 to 2002
and who received a combined strategy including neoadjuvant
chemotherapy, adapted surgery, radiotherapy and adjuvant hormonal
treatment in case of hormonal receptors positivity. They were selected
on histological type: pure invasive lobular (n=118, 14%) or pure
invasive ductal carcinomas (n=742, 86%). Different neo-adjuvant
chemotherapy protocols were successively used: all were
anthracyclin-containing regimens, 16% ILC and 12% IDC received also
taxanes. Median follow-up was 65 months for ILC, and 58 months for
IDC.

Results: The median age was 53 years
for ILC and 49,6 years for IDC [p=0.0002].ILC presented with larger
tumors (T3: 38,1 % vs 21,4%, T2: 45,9% vs 54,3 % p <0.0007), more
N0 nodal status (55,9% vs 43,3 % p=0.007), less inflammatory tumors
(5.9% vs 11.8% p=0.01), more hormonal receptor positivity (89% vs 60
%, with entirely receptor negative tumors 4 times less frequent
compared to IDC, p=0.0001), lower histological grade (low nuclear
grade [MSBR1] 92,9% vs 61,7%, p<0.0001). Final surgery was a
mastectomy in 70 % of patients with ILC (of whom 34 % were reoperated
after initial partial mastectomy) and in 52 % of IDC after 9 % of
reoperation (p =0.0004).
A complete pathologic response (pCR) without invasive lesion was
achieved in 1 % of ILC and 9% of IDC (p=0.002). At axillary level,
nodes were found microscopically negative in 25 % of ILC and 37% of
IDC patients. The median number of involved nodes was 4,4 for ILC and
4,2 for IDC.
The outcome at 60 months, was significantly better for disease free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) for ILC: DFS was 76.5% (CI95%
[66.2–84.4]) vs 60.8%(CI95% [56.6–64.8]); OS was 91.7% (CI95%
[83.7–96]) vs 79.3% (CI95% [75.6–82.6])

Conclusions: In our study, ILC breast
tumor appeared to be less responsive to chemotherapy however these
patients presented a better outcome than those with IDC. While
expecting new informations on intimate biological features of ILC that
could improve treatment, we consider that neoadjuvant endocrine
therapy in hormonal receptors positive ILC may be a more adapted
approach than neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

## 5064

## Quality of life during three-weekly versus weekly neoadjuvant
docetaxel: a randomised trial.

## Walker LG, Eremin JM, Vassanasiri W, Walker MB, El-Sheemy M,
Jibril JA, Valerio D, Cowley G, Clarke D, Kamal M, Thorpe G, Beer J,
Wiseman J, Eremin O. Oncology Health Centres and Institute of
Rehabilitation, University of Hull, Kingston upon Hull, United
Kingdom; Lincoln County Hospital, Lincoln, United Kingdom

Background: We have previously shown
that neoadjuvant docetaxel (D) following anthracycline-based
chemotherapy improves clinical and pathological responses and 3-year
survival in women with large or locally advanced breast cancer. The
aim of this study was to compare the effects on quality of life (QoL)
of weekly versus 3-weekly sequential neoadjuvant D.

Material and Methods: Eighty-nine
women with large (>3 cm) or locally advanced (T3, T4, TXN2) breast
carcinoma (median age 50, range 27.72 years) received four cycles of
neoadjuvant doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 and
cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 at 3- week
intervals. They were then randomised to four cycles of D 100 mg/m2 at
3-week intervals, or to 12 cycles of D 33 mg/m2 at weekly intervals
with a 2-week break between cycles 6 and 7. QoL, mood and coping were
assessed serially during chemotherapy and at follow up (FU) 3 weeks
after the final cycle. The primary outcome measure was the Trial
Outcome Index (TOI) of the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy
(breast cancer version) (FACT-B) at FU.

Results: The TOI for the two regimens
at FU did not differ significantly (ANCOVA F=0.03, p=0.86), and
between-group analysis of the FACT-B subscales (physical, social,
emotional and functional well-being; additional concerns) also failed
to reveal significant differences. No differences were found at FU
using the Rotterdam Symptom Checklist (RSCL) (psychological symptoms
F=2.057, p=0.15; physical symptoms F=0.335, p=0.57) or Hospital
Anxiety and Depression Scale total scores (F=1.943, p=0.16). However,
during treatment, women on weekly D reported significantly less
distress at all time points assessed, and significantly less
tiredness, unhappiness, vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation, nail
problems, pain and neuropathy during at least one assessment. Women on
3-weekly D reported more energy before the final cycle.

Discussion: D regimens given weekly
or every 3 weeks are similar in terms of generic measures of QoL
(FACT-B, RSCL) at FU. However, during treatment, weekly D appears to
have fewer/less distressing side effects. As the two groups did not
differ in terms of clinical response (complete, partial, minimal, no
response, progression) ( =3.117, p=0.54) or pathological response (1.5 scale)
( =2.811, p=0.59), the fewer/less distressing side
effects associated with weekly D treatment do not come at the expense
of response. Weekly D utilises more staff time and hospital resources,
and some women may prefer treatment every 3 weeks. Where resources
permit, women should be offered the choice of weekly D.

## 5065

## The changes of histologic and biologic markers induced by
neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally advanced breast cancer.

## Choi UJ, Lee KM. Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan,
Jeongbuk, Korea

Background: Neoadjuvant chemotherapy
(NCT) has become the standard treatment of locally advanced breast
cancer. The postoperatively adjuvant systemic treatment is based on
the status of histological and biological markers of either the
pre-NCT or post-NCT. There have been several reports which show the
expression of some of those markers (e.g. bcl-2 and Ki67) changed
after NCT. The aim of this study is toinvestigate the effect of NCT on
the ecpression of histological and biological markers of breast
cancer.

Material and Methods: We analyzed
paired pre- and post-NCT tumor specimens from 27 patients with stage
IIIa or IIIb breast cancer. All patients received 2 to 4 cycles of
anthracyclinecontaining NCT. Over 6 pieces of pre-NCT tumor specimens
were taken by 14G core needle from multiple sites of a tumor and
post-NCT specimens were taken at the time of operation. Tumor
histologic grade and immunohistochemical expression of estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), c-erbB2, p53, Ki-67, CD31,
p-glycoprotein and cathepsin-D were analyzed in paired pre- and
post-NCT tumor specimens from 24 patients, excluded 3 patients with
complete response to NCT.

Results: After NCT, partial response
was seen in 14 patients and stable disease in 10 patients. Sixteen
patients (66.7%) had significant changes in more than one parameter.
ER/PR were changed from positive to negative in 5 patients; c-erbB2
was changed in 3 patients; p53 in 1 patient; Ki-67 in 4 patients; CD31
in 4 patients; p-glycoprotein in 3 patients; cathepsin-D in 2 patients
and histologic grade in 2 patients. In 9 patients (37.5%), significant
changes were observed in the parameters which can influence the
selection of postoperative systemic therapy (i.e. histologic grade,
ER, PR and c-erbB2).

Discussion: The specimens for
histologic and biologic markers of a tumor should be taken before NCT
because NCT can have influencing factors on the expression of
prognostic parameters of locally advanced breast cancers, which
subsequently may influence the prediction and the decision-making of
adjuvant systemic treatment.

## 5066

## Doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by weekly docetaxel
(AC-T) as neoadjuvant chemotherapy in operable breast cancer patients:
GEICAM 2002–03 Study.

## Estévez LG, Adrover E, Barnadas A, Cuevas JM, Segui MA. On
Behalf of the Spanish Breast Cancer Research Group (GEICAM), San
Sebastian de los Reyes, Madrid, Spain

Objective: to assess the safety and
efficacy of AC-T as neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NC) in operable breast
cancer patients (pts).

Methods: Eligible pts had
pathologically confirmed measurable stage II or IIIA untreated breast
cancer. Doxorubicin (A) 60 mg/m2 and
cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 were given on
day 1 every 3 weeks (wks) for 4 cycles (Cy); docetaxel
36 mg/m2 was given intravenously once a
wk for 6 wks followed by a 2 wk break then 6 more wks of treatment (12
doses in a 14-wk period). After all chemotherapy was completed,
clinical responses were assessed. After surgery, pathological
responses were evaluated using the Miller & Payne scoring scale
(MPSS).

Results: 63 pts have been enrolled.
Median age was 48.5 years (range 25.5–80.4) and median tumour size
5 cm (range, 1.5–12.5). Five pts (8%) presented with stage IIIA
disease and 58 pts (92%) with stage II; 36 pts (57%) were
premenopausal; 32 pts (51%) had histological grade 2–3 tumours; and 8
(12.7%) were ER-PgR-negative. Median number (nr) of administered AC
and T cycles was 4 and 2 (range 1–2) respectively. Objective clinical
response rate was 89% (95% CI: 81.3–96.7) with 28 (44%) complete
responses and 28 (44%) partial responses. 43 pt (68%) underwent
conservative surgery, 10 pts (15.8% [95% CI: 6.8–24.8]) achieved a
pathological complete response in breast (Grade 5 in MPSS). 32 pt
(51%) were nodenegative after surgery. Main
grade (G) 3/4 toxicities during AC treatment: leucopenia
was present in 3 pts (4.8%) and 12 Cy (4.8%); neutropenia in 10 pts
(15.8%) and 14 Cy (5.5%), febrile neutropenia in 3 pts (4.7%) and 4 Cy
(1.6%). Main toxicity during T
treatment: G 2/3 onycolysis was present in 26 pt (41.3%)
and 93 cy (52%), G2 rash in 7 pts (11%) and 11 Cy (17.5%), and G3
asthenia in 4 pts (6.3%) and 8 Cy (4.5%). 1 patient (1.6%) experienced
symptomatic cardiac heart failure. 7 pt (11%) withdrew treatment due
to toxicity.

Conclusions: Weekly docetaxel
following four cycles of AC is an effective and feasible regimen in
operable breast cancer.

## 5067

## Dynamic infrared imaging - a real-time, non-invasive tool for
monitoring tumor response to neoadjuvant therapy for breast
cancer.

## Fanning S, Andresen S, Silverman P, Hicks D, Budd GT, Moore H,
Crowe J, Weng DE. Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH; Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
Strategies to improve the efficacy of neoadjuvant chemotherapy for
breast cancer have primarily focused on the development of more potent
chemotherapy/endocrine regimens. Another important strategy is to
develop improved methods for monitoring tumor response to treatment
during therapy, with the option to[MD1] change primary treatment
regimens when response is inadequate.
Current means of assessing therapy effectiveness include serial
measurements by physical exam, radiographic methods (ultrasound,
mammography, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission
tomography (PET)), or repeated biopsies. Reasons of expense, time, or
patient risk make repeated assessments using these methods
impractical.
A new, innovative approach for imaging tumor response to therapy
involves the use of dynamic infrared imaging.
DIRI® couples a highly sensitive
NASA/JPL-developed quantum well infrared photon (QWIP) sensor, which
detects photon emission in the 8–10 micron wave-length, with
proprietary software programs to analyze the emission patterns over
time. Twenty second scans are obtained at 100 frames/second (max. 400
frames/second) with each frame comprised of 256×256 pixels.
Temperature changes can be detected with a sensitivity of
0.009°C.
The technology is particularly suited to the pathophysiology of
cancer cells. Neoplastic cellular production of interstitial nitric
oxide (NO) results in increased capillary blood flow. When this effect
approaches the skin surface, the minute changes in temperature
secondary to increased blood flow can be detected. Anti-tumor
therapies of either chemo/hormonal therapy-induced cell death or
anti-angiogenic therapies can result in decreased peri-tumoral
capillary blood flow. The resulting changes in temperature can be
detected through dynamic infrared imaging, providing a non-invasive,
easily repeatable tool for real-time clinical assessment that can
provide serial objective measurements of the effectiveness of ongoing
neoadjuvant therapy.
This paper will outline the preliminary findings of a study
utilizing DIRI® sequentially over the
course of treatment to assess the effectiveness of neoadjuvant
therapies for breast cancer compared to standard imaging techniques
(mammogram, ultrasound, dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI), and to the
pathological assessment of tumor response at the time of surgical
treatment. [MD1]

## 5068

## Recurrence rates after dynamic contrast enhancedmagnetic resonance
image guided planning for breast conserving surgery following neoadjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer.

## Garimella V, Qutob O, Iwuagwu O, Mahapatra TK, McManus P, Fox
JN, Long ED, Lowry M, Chaturvedi A, Turnbull LW, Drew PJ. University
of Hull, Hull, East Yorkshire, United Kingdom; Hull and East Yorkshire
Hospitals NHS Trust, Hull, East Yorkshire, United Kingdom; Hull and
East Yorkshire NHS Trust, Hull, East Yorkshire, United
Kingdom
Background: Neoadjuvant therapy results in a significant increase
in breast conserving surgery. However, traditional imaging methods are
unable to accurately predict the extent of viable residual disease
leading to uncertainty in surgical planning and some previous studies
have shown a disproportionately high incidence of locoregional
recurrence. Dynamic Contrast Enhanced-MRI (DCEMRI) has been shown to
provide a potentially more accurate prediction of residual
disease.
Aims: To assess the incidence of locoregional recurrence in
patients treated with breast conserving surgery planned using DCE-MRI
after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and to identify factors implicated in
local and overall recurrence.
Methods: Patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast
cancer in our unit are staged with a DCE-MRI of the breast performed
at 1.5 T before, during and after treatment and the final result used
to plan surgery. The clinicopathological details of these patients
were obtained from a prospectively collected database.
Results: 204 patients with breast cancer were treated with
neoadjuvant chemotherapy between 1996 and April 2005. 18 of these
patients had distant metastases at the time of initial diagnosis and
so were excluded from the present study. Following neoadjuvant
chemotherapy, 186 patients underwent surgical treatment. Of these, 68
patients had breast-conserving surgery. At a median follow up of
30 months (range 5.6–72 months) 21 patients in this group developed
subsequent recurrence (21/68–30%) of whom 7 (7/68–10%) had
locoregional recurrence, 5 had local recurrence (5/68–7%), and 17
(17/68-25%) had distant recurrence. Two of the 17 patients with
distant recurrences also had loco regional recurrence. Logistic
regression analysis revealed only vascular invasion of the tumour to
be significantly associated with overall recurrence. None of the
pathological factors (ER, PR status, vascular invasion, lymph node
metastases, pathological complete response to neo adjuvant
chemotherapy) showed a significant association with locoregional
recurrence.
Conclusion: In this high risk group a local recurrence rate of 7%
at nine years is comparable to patients treated with breast conserving
therapy for early breast cancer. Breast conserving surgery with
DCE-MRI planning after neoadjuvant chemotherapy provides an acceptable
level of local recurrence without the need for mastectomy. The planned
UK NEOCOMICE study will provide the further data required to confirm
these results.

## 5069

## Impact of pre-operative three different regimens on
breastconservation surgery (BCS) and pathological complete response rates
(pCR) in locally advanced breast cancer (LABC) in Pakistani
patients.

## Lal AM, Alidina AG, Khan SM, Valimohd AT, Vaziri IA. AKU, Khi,
Sind, Pakistan

Background: LABC accounts for 28% (n
350) of all breast cancer cases (1370 patients) treated at our AKUH
over the last 15 years. This is sharp comparison to the US data (only
3–6% of all cases). Pre-operative chemotherapy PC) given in LABC
impacts type of surgery and survival.

Methods: One hundred and seventy
cases receiving PC were evaluated. Patients receiving TAC chemotherapy
(n 60) were evaluated in a prospective Phase II study (2003- ongoing),
compared with FAC/AC or CMF regimens given from 1998–2005, the data of
which were extracted for BCa Tumor registry. End points included RR;
evaluate pCR and BCS. Women were eligible if they were; histological
confirmed invasive infiltrating carcinoma, stage III A–C, as per AJCC
(6th edition), PS 0-I.
After 3–4 cycles of chemotherapy, definitive surgery was performed.
Type of surgery depended upon the response rates and the patients’
desire. Balance to complete a total of 4–6 cycles of chemotherapy was
given in the adjuvant setting. Adjuvant hormone therapy was given for
receptor positive cases.

Results: Demographics, response
rates, BCS and toxicities are reported in table below:

Conclusions: Preoperative TAC
chemotherapy leads to impressively higher response rates, pathological
complete response rates and probability of BCS, than when compared
with FAC/AC chemotherapy or CMF chemotherapy, given in the same
setting. Where as survival data of patients with TAC is not available,
we feel that this will be superior to AC/FAC or CMF, given higher
pathological complete response rates. 

## 5070

## Preliminary results of a phase II study of neoadjuvant treatment
with docetaxel (T), doxorubicin (A) and capecitabine (X) in locally
advanced or inflammatory breast cancer.

## Pérez-Manga G, Méndez M, Palomero MI, Quiben R, Belón J.
Hospital Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain; Hospital de Móstoles,
Madrid, Spain; Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain

Background: Previous studies suggest
that combined treatment of chemotherapy + surgery + radiotherapy has a
high survival rate in patients with locally advanced or inflammatory
breast cancer. Primary objective was evaluate response rate. Secondary
objectives were time to progression and toxicity profile of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy T, A and X in patients with locally advanced
or inflammatory breast cancer.

Patients and methods: Eligibility
criteria: Patients with histological confirmation of locally advanced
or inflammatory breast cancer, ECOG PS ≤2, age ≤75 years and LVEF >
50%,adequate bone marrow, renal and hepatic function. Prior systemic
therapy, surgery or radiotherapy for breast cancer was not allowed.
Patients with invasive bilateral breast cancer were not included.
Treatment: T (30 mg/m2) iv day 1, 8 and 15,
A (50 mg/m2) iv day 1 and X
(1500 mg/m2 o.d.) days 1–14, in a 4
weeks course. This scheme was repeated up to 4 cycles followed by
surgery. According to investigator criteria patients receive a maximum
of six cycles. Radiotherapy and hormonal treatment are allowed
depending on molecular markers. Expression of markers was performed by
inmunohistochemistry before chemotherapy.

Results: thirty-four patients were
included in this interim analysis, with a median age of 48 years
(25–68). The ECOG PS was 0 in 31.3% and 1 in 68.8% of patients.
Hormonal receptor status was ER+ 30%, PR+ 42% and C-erb2+ 50%.Primary
tumour sites were breast: left (n=18) and right (n=16). A total of 118
cycles (median 3.5, range 1–4) were administered. Median relative dose
intensity was 87% for T, 91% for A and 92% for X. Thirteen patients
are still undergoing treatment; of 29 evaluable patients for efficacy,
9 achieved CR, 19 PR and 1 PD resulting in an ORR of 96.6% (CI 95%:
90–100). Surgery was performed in 25 patients: three (12.0%) of them
achieved pathological CR and one additional patient had non invasive
carcinoma. All patients were evaluable for toxicity. Grade III/IV
toxicity per patient was neutropenia (70.6%), leucopenia (50.0%),
febrile neutropenia (8.8%); diarrhea (11.8%), mucositis (11.8%),
nausea/vomiting (5.9%), dysgeusia (2.9%) and asthenia (2.9%). Median
follow up time was 5.7 months.

Conclusions: T, A and X every 28 days
administered during 4 cycles as neoadjuvant chemotherapy in locally
advanced or inflammatory breast cancer is an active and well tolerated
regimen.

## 5071

## Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for invasive lobular carcinomas of the
breast: a poorer response rate but not a worse prognosis than invasive
ductal carcinoma.

## Vincent-Salomon A, Pierga J-Y, Gautier C, Sigal-Zafrani B,
Freneaux P, Lae M, Rosty C, Asselain B, Salmon R, Sastre-Garau X.
Institut Curie, Paris, France

Background: Invasive Lobular
Carcinomas (ILC) at initial presentation are larger tumors, with a low
proliferative rate and higher hormonal receptors positivity compared
to invasive ductal carcinomas (IDC), characteristics known to be
negative predictive factors for response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Our aim was to retrospectively analyze the overall response rate of
the ILC to neoadjuvant chemotherapy and compared it to those of ductal
carcinomas (IDC).

Material and methods: We selected
from our database, patients with T2T3 (<7 cm) N0-N1a N1b ductal or
lobular unilateral breast carcinoma, treated with neoadjuvant
chemotherapy (4 cycles of anthracyclines-based chemotherapy) from 1990
to 1999. All slides of lobular carcinomas were retrospectively
reviewed. The Ecadherin expression was assessed by
immunohistochemistry. We retrospectively analyzed, the clinical and
pathological response rates to chemotherapy of the lobular compared to
the ductal carcinomas. We also determined the conservative treatment
and the survival rates (overall survival OS, disease-free DFS and
metastasis-free MFS) for patients in each group.

Results: 802 patients were studied
(median follow-up: 109 months), 86 (11%) with an ILC and 716 with an
IDC. All ILCs except 3 were E-cadherin negative. The pathological
characteristics showed that ILC, when compared to IDC, were more
frequently grade I (39%versus 12%, p< 0.0001), ER positive (77%
versus 64%, p= 0.02) and PR positive (75% versus 61%, p=0.02). A
conservative surgery was possible for 53% of the ILC and for 64% of
the IDC (p=0.04). Pathological response (tumor and nodes) was
available for 584 patients (532 IDC, 52 ILC) and showed that only one
patient with ILC presented a complete pathological response
contrasting with to 32 complete pathological response in the IDC
group. DFS, MFS and OS were identical within the two groups of
patients.

Conclusion: We showed that after
neoadjuvant chemotherapy, a conservative treatment was less frequently
possible for ILC than for IDC and that complete pathological response
to neoadjuvant chemotherapy was very rarely observed in ILC. But
patients with ILC presented the same outcome than patients with IDC.
This poor response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy can be related to the
biological characteristics of ILC. As one of the major goal of
neoadjuvant chemotherapy is to increase breast conservative surgery,
the ILC patients are not good candidates for this treatment.

## 5072

## Neoadjuvant, biweekly, dose-dense chemotherapy with epirubicin and
cyclophoshamid followed by docetaxel in primary breast cancer.

## Cramer EM, Moers C, Zarghooni V, Bosse K, Mallmann P, Warm M.
Faculty of Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

Background: Primary chemotherapy is
established in the treatment of local advanced breast cancer. Two
important benefits are an increasing rate of breast conserving surgery
and the chance to detect the clinical responders during the
chemotherapy. Given good results with dose-dense chemotherapy in the
adjuvant setting we tested the benefit of this approach in a primary
chemotherapy protocol.

Material and Methods: This clinical
trial (01/2003–05/2005) enroled81 females (age range 28–65 years) with
advanced breast cancer (sonographic average tumor size: 32 mm). The
patients received four courses of epirubicin (90mg/m2) and
cyclophosphamide (600mg/m2) followed by four courses of docetaxel
(75mg/m2, 100mg/m2) every two weeks. During pretesting19 patients were
treated with docetaxel 100mg/m2 in the beginning. Among this group 10
required a reduction to 75mg/ m2 due to a hand-foot-skin reaction
grade 3. This was the reason to reduce docetaxel to 75mg/m2 for the
following patients. During the first four cycles a support with
pegfilgrastim was performed to reduce the risk of neutropenic
complications. Every two cycles a clinical and sonographical
examination was performed to determine tumor response. Clinical and
pathological response, toxicity and the rate of breast conserving
surgerywas evaluated.

Results: Pathological complete
remission of the invasive tumors was observed in 20 patients (25%),
sonographic partial remission in 32 patients (40%) minimal response in
16 patients (20%), a stable disease in 11 patients (13,75%) and
disease progression in 1 patient (1,25%). Two patients developed
neutropenic fever and stopped the chemotherapy after the 5th and 6th
cycle, respectively. One patient died after the 8th cycle in
neutropenic sepsis. During this trial the main sideeffect of docetaxel
was a hand-foot skin reaction.

Discussion: This neoadjuvant
dose-dense chemotherapy regime seems to be a potent therapy in the
treatment of primary breast cancer - although the number of patients
in this trial is still small. Support with pegfilgrastim results in
low rates of neutropenic complications. Using Docetaxel with 75mg/m2
instead of 100mg/ m2 the chemotherapy is in general well tolerated.
Our results warrant further investigation.

## 5073

## Neoadjuvant dose dense chemotherapy alternating gemcitabine (G) +
docetaxel (D) and vinorelbine (V) + epirubicin (E) in locally advanced
non inflammatory breast carcinoma (LABC): a phase II study.

## Levy E, Jenabian A, Scotte F, Lecuru F, Lefrere-Belda MA,
Hoffman H, Eme D, Rideller K, Medioni J, Andrieu JM. Georges Pompidou
European Hospital, Paris, France

Purpose: These four drugs resulted in
the highest response rates (RR) in breast cancer treatment. Since
pathological complete response (pRC) after primary chemotherapy is the
best prognostic factor, search for combination allowing high pRC is
relevant. This study was designed to evaluate pRC rates with this dose
dense alternating multidrug regimen in non inflammatory locally
advanced breast cancer.

Method: 62 women with LABC more than
3 cm with adequate liver, renal, cardiac and haematological function
were included. Treatment: G 1000 mg/m2+ T
75 mg/m2 D1 and D15, V
25 mg/m2 + E
100 mg/m2 D29 and D43. Tumor assessment
was planned on day 56. In case of objective response, two additional
cycles with G+T D57 and E+N D71 were prescribed. Surgery was planned
4 weeks after the last cycle. Post operative radiotherapy was
prescribed according to guidelines. All patients with RE+ tumor were
treated with adjuvant hormonotherapy.

Patient characteristics: 62 pts were
included, 56 evaluable. Reasons for exclusion were anaphylaxis (4),
patient decision (1), metastatic disease (1). Median age was 49 years.
TNM: 1 T1, 44 T2, 6 T3, 5 T4. 31 N0, 22 N1, 2 N2, 1 N3. SBR grade I: 8
pts, II: 32, III: 16. R0+: 24 pts (43%).Clinical and radiological
median size were 43 and 24 mm respectively.

Results: 43 pts (76%) achieved 6
cycles. 13 pts underwent surgery after 4 cycles because of no or minor
response, or patient decision. Toxicity: grade 4: 11 neutropenia (19%) (1 febrile).
Grade 3: 21 neutropenia (37%), 1 Gemcitabine induced pneumopathy, 4
anaphylaxis related to docetaxel, 1 acute cardiac failure. No toxic
death was observed. Response:
Clinical and radiological objective RR were 96% and 91% respectively.
Despite this size reduction rates, only 50% of pts underwent breast
conservative surgery, with lymph node dissection. The great number of
radical surgery is in part explained by the high number of central
tumors in our series. Pathological results: Pathological median tumor
size was 13 mm. 15 pts(27%) were free of infiltrating residual
carcinoma [1 CR (19.6%), 4 intraductal carcinoma (7%)]. 1 CR with node
positive, 10 residual tumor <5 mm, 31 significant residual tumor.
According to the classification of Chevallier, we observed 12 grade 1
(21%), 4 grade 2 (7%), 9 grade 3 (16%), 33 grade 4 (56%). The Median
of follow up was 13 months. 4 pts relapsed (metastase: 3, local:
1).

Conclusion: this regimen combining
four major drugs in breast carcinoma exhibit a high pathological
complete response rates, with no major complication.

## 5074

## Sequential FEC100 and taxotere as a neoadjuvant treatment for
operable breast cancer.

## Servent V, Baranzelli MC, Deschildre L, Chauvet MP, Giard S,
Belkacemi Y, Fournier C, Bonneterre J. Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille,
France
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy is proposed in all the patients in whom a
total mastectomy should be performed due to the tumor size. We report
the results of the sequential treatment: 4 cycles of FEC100 followed
by 4 cycles of Taxotere.

Patients and Methods: Between October
2003 and May 2005, 54 patients treated in a single institution were
included in the study; 2 of them had a bilateral breast cancer. The
patients with inflammatory, locally advanced or metastatic breast
cancer were excluded. The regimen included 4 cycles of FEC 100, then 4
cycles of Taxotere at the dose of 100mg/m2, all given every 3 weeks.
The rationale for using 8 cycles was based on the results of the NSABP
B27 and Aberdeen studies.

Results: Patients median age was
47.8 years (31–66); 30% were premenopausal ; the median size of the
tumor was 5 cm (2–11); 28 patients had clinical axillary nodes; 48
tumors were ductular, 5 lobular, 1 medullary, 1 mucinous and 1
undifferenciated. 61, % were estradiol receptor positive (ER+), 59%
progesterone receptor positive(PgR+) . 16% were HER2+++ (n= 38). All
the patients had a metallic clip in their tumor to allow adequate
localization for surgery even in case of complete clinical
response(CCR).
The treatment was done according to the protocol in 65% of the
patients. No febrilee aplasia has been observed. After 4 courses, the
CCR rate was 29%, the partial response(PR) rate 35%. No patients had
progressive disease (PD). The echographic figures were the following,
CR: 10%, PR: 56% . After 8 courses the CCR rate was 51%, the PR rate
20%, the echographic CR rate was 30%, PR rate 36%. 64 % patients had a
tumorectomy, 36% a mastectomy which can be considered as a failure of
the treatment. 25 % of the patients experienced a pathological
complete response

Conclusions: The sequential regimen
is feasible and effective in patients who had to be treated by total
mastectomy. The predictive factors of response will be
presented.

## 5075

## Monitoring early treatment response of breast cancer to neoadjuvant
chemotherapy using MR spectroscopy.

## Su MY, Baik HM, Yu H, Mehta RS, Nalcioglu O. University of
California, Irvine, CA; UCIMC, Orange, CA
Introduction: MR spectroscopy has been proven helpful in improving
specificity in diagnosis of breast cancer, also the Choline peak is
known to be sensitive to chemotherapy. The single-voxel technique can
be easily implemented, but it is not optimal for studies of large
heterogeneous lesions. In this study we investigated the reduction in
Choline peak in patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy using
single voxel (SV) and chemical shift imaging (CSI) techniques.
Materials and Methods: Fourteen patients (31 to 57 years old) with
biopsy proven breast cancer who elected to receive neoadjuvant
chemotherapy were studied, 7 patients with single voxel technique
(2×2×2 cm voxel size), and 7 patients with chemical-shift imaging (8×
8 grids, each grid 1×1×1.5 cm). Two studies were performed, the
baseline before chemotherapy and the F/U after 1–2 cycles AC
treatment. Dynamic contrast enhanced MRI was first performed, and the
single voxel or the CSI grid was placed on the enhanced tissues. In
CSI, a region of interest consisting of 2× 2 grids from the area
showing the highest Cho was chosen, and a mean Cho peak value was
measured. If the patient continued to receive 4 cycles AC, another F/U
was performed at that time.
Results: All 7 patients studied using the SV technique showed Cho
reduction (33 to 99%) after 1–2 cycles AC. Of these, 5 patients did
not show a substantial size reduction at that time. Among the 7
patients studied with CSI, the Cho reduction was found in 5 patients
but not from the two diagnosed with inflammatory breast cancer.
Despite the elevated Cho, these 2 patients were responders after 4
cycles AC. Excluding these 2, 8 of remaining 12 patients completed 4
cycles AC. Of them, 7 were responders and one was a nonresponder. In
this patient, a 72% reduction in Cho was found after 1 cycle AC which
was not predictive of final response. The reduction of Cho (from 100%
in the baseline study) for all patients are shown in Figure 1.
Discussion: The results indicated that Cho was sensitive to AC
treatment in ductal or lobular cancer but not in inflammatory cancer.
The percentage reduction in Cho was much higher than the percentage
size reduction after 1–2 cycles AC, and in 7/8 patients the Cho
reduction was correlated with further size reduction after 4 cycles
AC. More data are needed to establish its early predictive value for
final outcome. 

## 5076

## Skeletal effect of exemestane in the Intergroup Exemestane Study
(IES) – 2 year bone mineral density (BMD) and bone biomarker
data.

## Coleman RE, Banks LM, Girgis SI, Vrdoljak E, Fox J, Porter LS,
Snowdon CF, Hall E, Bliss JM, Coombes RC. Yorkshire Cancer Research
Centre, Weston Park Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom; Imperial
College, London, United Kingdom; Clinical Hospital Split, Split,
Croatia; Castle Hill Hospital, Cottingham, United Kingdom; Institute
of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom; On Behalf of the
Intergroup Exemestane Study (IES)

Background: It is known that
Tamoxifen (T) preserves bone in postmenopausal women but aromatase
inhibitors (AI) accelerate bone loss and increase the fracture risk.
Pre-treatment with T, coupled with possible anabolic effects of the
steroidal AI exemestane (E), would be expected to cause fewer adverse
effects on bone than 5 years of unopposed AI use.

Methods: 4724 postmenopausal women
with early breast cancer, disease-free following 2–3 yrs T, were
randomised to further T or E to complete 5 yrs adjuvant therapy. 206
of the IES patients (100E, 106T) without osteoporosis or osteoporotic
fracture took part in a detailed bone sub-protocol. BMD was assessed
by dualenergy x-ray absorptiometry of the lumbar spine and hip at
prerandomisation, 6, 12, 24 mths, end of treatment (EOT) and annually
following treatment completion. Biochemical markers of bone resorption
(urinary NTX and DPD, serum CTX), and formation (BAP, osteocalcin and
PICP) were collected before randomisation, and then at 3, 6, 9, 12,
18, 24, 30 mths, EOT and annually following treatment completion. The
12 mth BMD and bone marker data are shown here but 24 mth data will
also be available for presentation.

Results: At randomisation patient
demographics, BMD and bone markers in the T and E groups were
comparable. Bone marker measurements showed increased bone turnover in
the E group with significant increases in both bone resorption and
formation at all time points after randomisation (p=<0.001). At
12 mths there was a significant negative correlation between BMD and
all bone markers (p=<0.001) except PICP vs total hip (p=0.033).
Changes at 12 mths from baseline in BMD and bone markers were: 

Discussion: In contrast to patients
remaining on T, those switching to E had significant BMD loss. Whilst
this is consistent with changes seen with other AIs, we are uncertain
whether the observed effect in the IES is due to T withdrawal, E
treatment or both. The 2-year follow-up data should help us elucidate
this.

## 5077

## Withdrawn by author

## 5078

## Inhibition of steroid sulfatase by 667 COUMATE (STX64): a new
treatment paradigm for breast cancer.

## Stanway S, Purohit A, Woo LW, Wilson R, Sufi S, Dobbs N,
Vigushin D, Stanczyk FZ, Potter BV, Reed MJ, Coombes RC. Imperial
College, London, United Kingdom; University of Bath, Bath, United
Kingdom; Belfast City Hospital Tower, Belfast, United Kingdom; Cancer
Research UK, London, United Kingdom; USC Keck School of Medicine,
Womens and Childrens Hospital, Los Angeles, CA

Background The development of potent
steroid sulfatase (STS) inhibitors represents a new approach to the
treatment of postmenopausal (PM) women with hormone-dependent breast
cancer. STS inhibitors block the formation of estrone (E1) from
estrone sulfate (E1S) but also inhibit the formation of androstenediol
(Adiol), a steroid with potent estrogenic properties, which originates
from dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS).

Patients and Methods PM with ER+
metastatic breast cancer were recruited for this Phase I study. All
had received at least two previous lines of endocrine therapy and all
but one had received prior chemotherapy. STX64 was administered as an
initial dose (5 mg or 20 mg p.o.) followed one week later by 3 two
weekly cycles with dosing for 5 days followed by 9 days off treatment.
Nine patients have been treated at the 5mg dose and 5 at the 20 mg
dose. Blood samples were collected for the assessment of STS activity
in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and steroid concentrations. For
some patients core biopsies of tumor samples were also taken before
and during therapy.

Results After 5 doses of STX64 at the
5mg and 20mg doses STS activity in PBLs was inhibited by 98% (IQR
95–99%) and 97% (IQR 96–99%) respectively. Overall, tumor STS activity
was inhibited by > 90%. Inhibition of STS activity was accompanied
by significant increases in the ratios of DHEAS: DHEA and E1S: E1 and
significant decreases in serum concentrations of estradiol and Adiol.
Serum concentrations of androstenedione (A) and testosterone (T)
decreased by up to 86% and 82% respectively. Four out of twelve
evaluable patients, who had all progressed whilst on aromatase
inhibitor therapy, were considered by the treating investigators as
having stable disease.

Conclusions Inhibition of STS was
associated with expected decreases in serum concentrations of
estradiol and Adiol, but the decreases in A and T were not
anticipated. This finding suggests that in PM women the major part of
A originates from peripheral conversion from DHEAS rather than by
direct secretion from the adrenal cortex as was previously thought to
occur. Thus, inhibition of STS not only blocks the production of
Adiol, but also that of the major substrates (A and T) for the
synthesis of estrogens in peripheral tissues. Only minor adverse
events have been reported and the disease stabilisation (>6 months)
reported in 3 patients suggest a significant clinical potential for
this new therapeutic approach.

## 5079

## Rosiglitazone sensitizes breast cancer cells to early apoptosis and
synergizes with roscovitine to inhibit cellular proliferation.

## Mody M, Dharker N, McCaffrey TA, Yang Z, Pumfery AM, Glickman
TS, Pinzone JJ. The George Washington University, Washington,
DC
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR ), a member of the nuclear hormone receptor
superfamily, is widely expressed and has multiple ligands including
rosiglitazone (rosi). Ligand binding induces heterodimerization with
retinoid-X-receptor (RXR ), and the resultant complex transcriptionally
regulates genes important for development and cellular growth and
metabolism. PPAR agonists decrease cellular proliferation and S234
Abstracts . Poster Session V induce apoptosis of various tumor types
including breast cancer cells. In this study we investigated the
mechanism of rosi-induced apoptosis of MDA-MB-231 (MDA) human breast
cancer cells. We first determined a rosi dose that inhibits MDA cells
in vitro. In humans, an 8 mg rosi dose leads to a plasma concentration
of about 500 ng/mL (equivalent to 1.4  M), while in a rodent tumor model, a dose of
150 mg/kg/day was used for up to 4 wks with significant tumor
shrinkage but no apparent adverse effects.1 We found no growth
inhibition with 1.4  M rosi; however, growth inhibition of MDA cells did
occur in a dose-dependent manner at 50 and 100 mM. We then used a PPAR
 response element-driven luciferase reporter to
demonstrate transcriptional activation as early as 1 hr after addition
of 100 mM rosi to MDA cells. Based on this, MDA cells were treated
with 100 mM rosi for 4 hrs and gene expression changes determined
using Affymetrix microarrays which indicated increased expression of
p21 (1.6 fold, p<0.05), p53 (2.3 fold, p<0.02), and Bax (1.5
fold, p<0.05); confirmatory Western analysis was performed. With
early up-regulation of Bax and p53, we predicted that rosi would
quickly sensitize MDA cells to apoptosis. MDA cells were treated for
24 hrs with 100 mM rosi and then either CH11 (trimerizes Fas) or tumor
necrosis factor- (TNF ) was added and cellular proliferation was measured
24 hrs later.2,3 Rosi + CH11 and rosi + TNF
 inhibited cellular proliferation by 42% and 45%
respectively, compared to CH11 4%, TNF 8%, and rosi 17%. With the early increase of p21 and
p53 we hypothesized that rosi would synergize with a CDK inhibitor
(roscovitine) to decrease cellular proliferation. MDA cells were
cultured in the presence of rosi + roscovitine for 96 hrs; this
combination synergistically decreased cellular proliferation compared
to either agent alone (rosi 21%, roscovitine 45%, rosi + roscovitine
90%). We conclude: 1. microarray analysis is an important tool for
predicting synergistic drug activity, 2. sensitization to apoptosis
can be achieved with a high dose, short duration treatment with
rosiglitazone followed by either CH11 or TNF , 3. synergistic inhibition of cellular growth can be
achieved with rosiglitazone + roscovitine.

## 5080

## Molecular changes in response to pre-operative endocrine
therapy.

## Richer JK, Harvell DME, Spoelstra NS, Singh M, Elias AD, Horwitz
KB. University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora,
CO

Background. Preoperative hormonal
therapy in patients with locally advanced, ER+, breast cancers
increases the frequency of breast conserving surgery without adversely
affecting event-free and overall survival. Aromatase inhibitors and
tamoxifen are effective for preoperative use. Known predictors of
responsiveness include small tumor size, early stage, and presence of
estrogen (ER) and progesterone receptors (PR). However, despite
predictors, at least 30% of receptor positive tumors do not respond to
hormone treatments. We postulated that specific genes in the
expression profile of breast cancers can be used to predict response
to preoperative endocrine therapy.

Methods. Paired pre- and
post-treatment tumor specimens were obtained from patients with
locally advanced, ER+ and/or PR+ breast cancers enrolled in a clinical
trial evaluating the effectiveness of preoperative exemestane with or
without tamoxifen. The tumors were analyzed by expression profiling
using an Affymetrix platform. Robust statistical analyses identified
187 putative E-regulated genes involved in tumor growth or regression.
To confirm the gene assignments, human breast cancer cells were grown
as estrogen dependent xenografts in ovariectomized nude mice. Sets of
mice received no estradiol (C) for 8 weeks, estradiol for 8 weeks
(+E), or E for 7 weeks followed by 1 week of E withdrawal (Ewd). Six
independent tumors per group were expression profiled.

Results. Paired biopsies of tumors
and uninvolved, adjacent normal breast tissue from 5 patients have
been analyzed and the results compared to data from the xenograft
models. At least 18 genes have been identified that were consistently
altered by estrogen blockade therapy in the clinical trial, and
estrogen regulated in the xenograft model. Additionally, 90 genes
changed in response to neoadjuvant endocrine therapy that have been
previously identified as “ER identifier genes”.

Conclusions. Using dynamic, rather
than static profiling studies, we have now determined which genes,
among putative “ER identifier genes” are actually involved in E
signaling and E-dependent tumor growth and regression. These genes and
their protein products have potential as future therapeutic
targets.
The first two authors contributed equally to these studies.

## 5081

## Synergistic interaction between recombinant human insulin-like
growth factor-binding protein 3 (rhIGFBP-3) and letrozole in estrogen
positive breast cancer.

## Alami N, Banerjee K, Page V, Brossard M, Shiry L, Brodie A,
Leyland-Jones B. McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada; Insmed Inc.,
Richmond, VA; University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD

Background: Progression of
hormone-sensitive breast cancer is a result of stimulation by estrogen
acting through the estrogen receptor (ER),thereby regulating the
transcription of several target genes and growth factors. Accumulating
evidence for cross-talk between estrogen and insulin-like growth
factor (IGF) system has been reported.IGF receptor-mediated signaling
is modulated by IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs 1–6) which regulate IGF
bioavailability. IGFBP-3 is the highest affinity carrier protein for
IGFs. IGFBP-3 inhibits cell proliferation largely through sequestering
circulating IGFs and preventing their interaction with IGF receptors.
IGFBP-3 has also apoptotic effects independent of IGF-binding.Both
IGFs and estrogen act as mitogens promoting cell proliferation in
breast carcinomas.Currently, the use of letrozole, a non-steroidal
aromatase inhibitor that blocks estrogen synthesis, has proved to be a
significant improvement in postmenopausal hormone-dependent breast
cancer treatment. This study was specifically designed to explore the
ability of rhIGFBP- 3 to enhance the letrozole efficacy, previously
demonstrated by Brodie et al. in a postmenopausal cancer model.

Material and Methods:
Estrogen-dependent human breast cancer cells stably transfected with
aromatase,MCF-7Ca,were used. Cells were treated with rhIGFBP-3, at
concentrations: 0.02 to 200  g/ml, either alone or in combination with 1
 M letrozole, in the presence of 1 nM androstenedione.
Their in vitro effects were
assessed by MTT assay following 6 days exposure.

Results: Treatment with rhBP-3, as
single agent, inhibited the AD-induced growth of MCF-7Ca cells in a dose-dependent manner. The
IC50 obtained was 90 g/ml. Letrozole alone reduced cell proliferation by
50% at concentrations 1–5 M. The combination of various concentrations of
rhBP-3 with a constant dose of letrozole elicited a strong
dose-dependent enhancement of letrozole activity in MCF-7Ca cells.
Synergistic interactions (CI<1) were observed with all the rhBP-3
doses, as evaluated by the combination index-isobologram method(Chou
and Talalay). Preliminary observations in the MCF-7Ca xenograft model using rhBP-3 and
letrozole, either alone or in combination, are consistent with our in
vitro results.

Discussion: rhIGFBP-3 displayed
synergistic interactions with letrozole in the MCF-7Ca model. Our findings provide further
evidence that co-targeting IGF and ER may have important clinical
therapeutic implications in breast cancer. Our previous work examining
rhBP-3 downstream signaling effects in ER+ and ERmodels, differences
in IGFI-dependent and -independent p-MAPK signaling were observed.
Ongoing work is directed towards correlating rhBP-3 and letrozole
effects on IGFR and ER signaling pathways in the MCF-7Ca model, both in
vitro and in
vivo.

## 5082

## A role for aromatase inhibition in the treatment of estrogen
receptor- negative breast carcinoma.

## Brandy KP, Maier KG, Lemke SM, O’Donnell RW, Landas SK, Gatto
LA, Kort KC. SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY; SUNY
Geneseo, Geneseo, NY; SUNY Cortland, Cortland, NY

Background: Despite improvements in
early detection and therapy of invasive breast cancer, nearly 30% of
women develop metastatic disease. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) are
necessary for many of the cellular events associated with metastases.
Previous studies have shown that MMP-2 and MMP-9 are overexpressed in
invasive breast cancers and their inhibition may be an early
therapeutic option. Further, the use of aromatase inhibitors have
shown success in postmenopausal women with estrogen receptor positive
(ER+) breast cancer. Aromatase activity is detectable in both ER+ and
ER- breast tumors. We hypothesized that the use of the MMP inhibitor
(COL-3) alone or with the aromatase inhibitor (letrozole) would result
in decreased tumor growth and metastasis in ER- breast cancer.

Methods: MDA-MB-435 cells were
incubated for 48 hrs. in 4 treatment groups: Vehicle, letrozole (LET),
COL-3, both LET and COL-3. Proliferation/cytotoxicity was quantitated
in vitro by the CyQuant cell
proliferation assay. In our postmenopausal in vivo model, nude
ovariectomized mice were implanted with 17 - estradiol slow releasing pellets 3 days prior to
injection of 106 MDA-MB-435 ER- breast
cancer cells. Mice were gavaged daily for 8 weeks with one of four
treatments; Vehicle (1% carboxymethyl cellulose, n=4), LET (1mg/kg,
n=5), COL-3 (30 mg/ kg, n=5), both LET and COL-3 (n=5). Tumor volume
was estimated weekly as: V= (w2 x l)/2. At
necropsy organs were histologically assessed for metastases.

Results: Both in vitro and in
vivo, the administration of LET led to decreased cellular
growth (p<.05), tumor volume (p<.05) and metastases. COL-3 alone
had no significant effect, whereas the combination of COL-3 and LET
led to fewer metastasis and decreased tumor volume. 

Metastatic pulmonary lesions were observed in 100% of the controls,
75% of the COL-3 mice, 25% of the LET group and 0% of the combination
of COL-3 and LET mice.

Discussion: The use of an aromatase
inhibitor in an ER- breast cancer cell line significantly reduced
tumor cell growth both in vitro and
in vivo. Further, there was a
marked reduction in the development of metastases when LET was used
with a MMP inhibitor. These data indicate that aromatase inhibition
may have clinical efficacy in the treatment of breast cancer
regardless of estrogen receptor status.

## 5083

## Inhibition of ER and PI3K/Akt pathways improve sensitivity of long term
estrogen deprived breast cancer cells to antiestrogens.

## Sabnis GJ, Jelovac D, Long BJ, Brodie AM. University of
Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, MD
Estrogens play an important role in development and progression of
breast cancer. Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) that block the synthesis of
estrogen are proving to be superior to antiestrogens (AEs) and may
replace tamoxifen as first line treatment for postmenopausal ER
positive breast cancer patients. Thus, the potential for developing
subsequent resistance to estrogen deprivation is a major concern. In
order to study the effects of long term estrogen deprivation on breast
cancer, we have developed a long term estrogen deprived cell line,
UMB-1Ca. These cells were derived from ER positive human breast cancer
cells stably transfected with the aromatase gene (MCF-7Ca), and
cultured in steroid depleted medium for 8 months until they had
acquired the ability to proliferate. Estradiol and aromatase substrate
androstenedione ( A) did not stimulate the growth of UMB-1Ca cells. As
we previously reported UMB-1Ca cells showed an increase in ER
 , and HER-2 compared to parental MCF-7Ca. Activation
of PI3K pathway as seen by increased expression
of phospho-Akt was shown by western immunoblotting and in vitro protein kinase assay. UMB-1Ca
growth was partially inhibited by AE fulvestrant and a higher dose of
AI letrozole, but completely resistant to AIs anastrazole, exemestane,
formestane and AE tamoxifen. When PI3K pathway
was blocked by wortmannin proliferation of UMB- 1Ca cells was markedly
inhibited, whereas no effects of this agent were seen in parental
MCF-7Ca cells. However, when treatment of UMB-1Ca cells was combined
with PI3K inhibitor wortmannin, the
anti-proliferative effects of tamoxifen and anastrazole were restored
(p<0.005). To determine
whether sensitivity to AE ans AIs can be regained in tumor xenografts,
we innoculated UMB- 1Ca cells into overiectomized athymic female nude
mice. Animals were divided into two groups and injected sc with either
vehicle or A. Tumors grew equally well with and without
 A indicating that these cells have developed ability
to proliferate in estrogen deprived conditions. Twelve weeks after
innoculation animals were divided into six groups and injected with
vehicle, tamoxifen ( g/ mouse/day-sc), wortmannin(0.35 mg/kg/day-ip-2X
weekly), fulvestrant (1 mg/mouse/day), tamoxifen plus wortmannin, fulvestrant plus wortmannin. Tamoxifen was not
effective in suppressing tumor growth. The combination of wortmannin
with tamoxifen or fulvestrant was better than either one alone.
However, combination of wortmannin plus fulvestrant was the most
effective treatment. The treatment of tumors with wortmannin alone and
in combination was associated with downregulation of phospho- Akt as
seen by western immunoblotting. After 120 days of treatment, this
combination had maintained tumor regression to 30% of their starting
volume.
These results suggest that blocking both pathways ER and growth
factor receptor could provide better control over tumor growth of long
term estrogen deprived human breast cancers.

## 5084

## Randomized pre-operative study of 750 mg of fulvestrant and 20 mg
tamoxifen in premenopausal women with estrogen receptor-positive breast
cancer.

## Young O, Renshaw L, White S, Macaskill EJ, Cameron D, Thomas J,
Faratian D, Dixon JM. Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, Scotland,
United Kingdom

Introduction: Fulvestrant is a pure
antioestrogen that has been shown to be as effective as anastrozole in
postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer who
have progressed or recurred on tamoxifen. A small pre-operative pilot
study of fulvestrant at a dose of 250 mg showed no significant effect
on breast cancers in premenopausal women. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of fulvestrant (F) at a dose of 750 mg and
compare its effects with tamoxifen (T) in a pre-operative study in
premenopausal women.

Materials and Methods: 60
premenopausal women with operable, invasive estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive breast cancer have been randomized to receive either:-
750 mg of F (given as 3 separate intramuscular, 5 ml
injections) or 20 mg of oral T both started 14–16 days before
surgery.
Breast cancer tissue is being assessed before and after
treatment for ER, progesterone receptor (PgR), HER2, and
proliferation (Ki67) by immunohistochemistry with FISH for
HER 2+. ER and PgR are given as Allred scores and
proliferation as % Ki67 positive cells. Results are presented
as means (SEM); analysis is by paired t test.
54 have completed the study (29T, 25F): and complete
histology data and data on tolerability, side effect profile
and pain scores during injections are available on all
54.).

Results: ER
expression fell significantly with F from a mean Allred
score of 7.15 (0.25) to 4.38 (0.61), p<0.0001. The fall with T from
7.21 (0.19) to 4.14 (0.98) was also significant, p<0.0001. The fall
in ER was significantly greater for F than T, p=0.02.

PgR expression fell significantly
with F from a score of 6.11 (0.47) to 4.0 (0.63), p=0.002. The change
with T from 6.34 (0.31) to 5.39 (0.53) was not significant, p=0.06.
The fall in PgR was significantly greater for F than T, p=0.02.

Proliferation F reduced the mean % of
Ki 67 positive cells from 14.29 (1.55) to 8.18 (1.55), p<0.0001, a
48% median reduction. T reduced proliferation from 12.36 (1.71) to
4.12 (0.98), a 71% median reduction, p<0.0001. Direct comparison of
F and T showed no significant difference, p=0.06.

HER2: 5/25 F patients were HER 2+ as
were 2/29 T patients. All these 7 patients had a reduction in tumour
cell proliferation.
Average pain per injection was 1.6/10. Swelling (12%), bruising
(16%), and skin sensitivity (12%) were also reported at injection
sites with F. Side effects with T included light headedness (10%) and
hot flushes (14%). With F hot flushes (16%), loose stools (12%) and
headache (28) were reported. All were grade 1 or 2. No patient
contacted staff due to adverse events, before routine review.

Conclusions: In premenopausal women
750 mg fulvestrant is well tolerated and significantly reduces ER and
PgR expression to a greater degree than tamoxifen. Fulvestrant and
tamoxifen both produce reductions in proliferation in ER+ breast
cancers. Fulvestrant reduces proliferation in both HER2+ and Her2-
tumors. Fulvestrant is biologically active in premenopausal women.

## 5085

## Regulation of aromatase expression in the breast by LRH- 1: a new
potential target for breast cancer therapy.

## Simpson ER, McDonnell DP, Kovacic A, Clyne CD, Safi R. Prince
Henry’s Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia;
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
Aromatase inhibitors are replacing Tamoxifen as the breast cancer
therapy of choice for postmenopausal women in the first line, adjuvant
and neoadjuvant settings. However, these compounds have side effects
such as bone loss and arthralgia due to the fact that they inhibit the
catalytic activity of aromatase. Consequently they inhibit the enzyme
in a global fashion, not only in breast but in other tissues where
estrogen action is beneficial such as bone, vasculature and brain.
Ideally we wish to inhibit aromatase specifically in the breast and
leave other sites of synthesis such as bone and brain protected. This
is theoretically possible because in the post-menopausal woman,
aromatase expression in a tumorbearing breast is regulated by the
proximal promoter II which is activated by tumor-derived factors such
as prostaglandins and inhibited by COX2 inhibitors. In the breast this
promoter uniquely utilizes the monomeric orphan nuclear receptor LRH-1
as an obligatory basal enhancer. In the present studies we have shown
that LRH-1 activation of aromatase promoter II in breast preadipocytes
utilizes PGC1a but not a related gene product, PGC1b, as coactivator.
This interaction is inhibited by a sub-class of LXXLL containing
peptides. The same sub-class of peptides also inhibits the ability of
PGC1a to coactivate RXRa. We have previously shown that RXR and PPARg
agonists inhibit aromatase expression from promoter II in primary
human preadipocytes via an indirect mechanism not involving binding of
either RXR or PPARg to the aromatase promoter. Based on the present
results, we conclude that these ligands inhibit aromatase expression
by activating RXR and PPARg respectively. The activated receptors
compete with LRH-1 for coactivators such as PGC1a, and thus inhibit
LRH-1-induced local aromatase expression and estrogen production
within breast tissue. RXR ligands are promising molecules for both
chemoprevention and therapy of a number of cancers. In particular,
9-cis retinoic acid and RXR-selective ligands are efficacious in
preventing breast cancer in experimental animal models. We suggest
that the action of these factors may be to inhibit LRH-1
transcriptional activity, thus blocking aromatase expression and local
estrogen production within the breast. However, the greatest efficacy
in terms of breast-specific inhibition of aromatase would likely be
achieved by antagonists/inverse agonists of LRH-1. When such compounds
are developed they may prove highly effective as the next generation
of endocrine therapeutic agents for breast cancer.

## 5086

## Relationship between CYP2D6 and SULT1A1 genotypes and serum
concentrations of tamoxifen and its metabolites during steady state
treatment in breast cancer patients.

## Gjerde J, Hauglid M, Breilid H, Lundgren S, Varhaug JE, Kisanga
ER, Mellgren G, Steen VM, Lien EA. Haukeland University Hospital,
Norway; Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway;
University of Bergen; St. Olavs Hospital Trondheim University
Hospital; Haukeland University Hospital

Background: The metabolism of
tamoxifen (tam) shows considerable inter-individual variation in man.
The drug is normally hydroxylated by CYP2D6 to the potent metabolites
4OHtamoxifen (4OHtam) and 4OH-N-demethyltamoxifen (4OHNDtam). The
CYP2D6 activity shows a polymorphic distribution that divides
populations into poor (PM), extensive (EM) and ultrarapid (UM)
metabolizers. The hydroxylated compounds are conjugated by a
sulfotransferase (SULT1A1) which has a polymorphic distribution as
well. We therefore aimed at examining the relationship between CYP2D6
and SULT1A1 genotypes and serum concentrations of tam and its
metabolites in breast cancer patients during steady state tam
treatment.

Material and Methods: A total of 153
patients with tamoxifentreated (20 mg daily) breast cancer were
enrolled in the study. The concentrations of tam, 4OHtam, 4OHNDtam,
N-demethyltamoxifen (NDtam), N-dedimethyltamoxifen (NDDtam), and
tamoxifen-N-oxide (tamNox) in serum were measured by a liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method. CYP2D6 (CYP2D6*3,
CYP2D6*4, CYP2D6*5, CYP2D6* and CYP2D6*2X2) and SULT1A1 (SULT1A1*2)
polymorphisms were determined by long-PCR- and multiplex-PCR-based
methods and PCR-RFLP assays. The Jonckheere-Terpstra test was used to
compare the mean tamoxifen and metabolite levels and ratios over the
four genotype groups. Mann-Whitney test was used for comparison
between groups. All statistical tests were two-sided.

Results: The median (range) of tam,
4OHtam, 4OHNDtam, NDtam, NDDtam, and tamNox concentrations (ng/ml)
were 102 (27–302), 6.2 (1.7–17.2), 55.2 (24.3–184.8), 255 (90.1–691),
40 (11–93) and 10.6 (2.7–38) respectively. The levels of 4OHNDtam and
NDtam were significantly associated with the CYP2D6 genotype
distribution (PM, n=12; heterozygous EM, n=50; EM, n=87; UM, n=4)
(p<0.005), whereas the levels of tam, 4OHtam, NDDtam and tamNox
were not. In the total patient group no differences in tam or
metabolite concentrations between those with the SULT1A1 [ *1/*1]
alleles and those with the SULT1A1 [ *1/*2] alleles were observed.
However, in the postmenopausal subgroup (n=120) tam as well as
4OHNDtam were lower in those with the SULT1A1[ *1/*1] (n=56) alleles
compared to those with the SULT1A1[ *1/*2] (n=64) alleles (97 vs
111 ng/ml (p=0.04) and 52 vs 61 ng/ml (p=0.007) respectively).

Conclusion: The metabolism of
tamoxifen is clearly influenced by both CYP2D6 and SULT1A1
polymorphisms. This effect may in part explain the inter-individual
variation in serum concentrations of tamoxifen and its metabolites
observed during steady state tamoxifen treatment.

## 5087

## A randomised, blinded, phase II study of tipifarnib
(Zarnestra®) combined with letrozole in the
treatment of advanced breast cancer after antiestrogen therapy.

## Johnston SRD, Semiglazov V, Manikhas G, Spaeth D, Romieu G,
Dodwell D, Wardley A, Neven P, Bessems A, Ma Y-W, Howes AJ, on Behalf
of the R115777 INT-22 Investigators. Royal Marsden Hospital, London,
United Kingdom; Petrov Research Institute of Oncology, St Petersburg,
Russian Federation; City Oncology Dispensary, St Petersburg, Russian
Federation; Centre Alexis Vautrin, Nancy, France; Centre Val
D’Aurelle, Montpellier, France; Cookridge Hospital, Leeds, United
Kingdom; Christie Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom; Universitair
Ziekenhuis Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium; Johnson & Johnson PRD,
Raritan, NJ

Background: Tipifarnib, an orally
administered farnesyltransferase inhibitor (FTI), has shown activity
as a single agent in a previous phase II study in advanced breast
cancer. Several groups have reported, in pre-clinical models, an
additive or synergistic effect on inhibition of breast cancer cell
growth when FTIs were combined with endocrine therapies. This trial
was designed to explore whether tipifarnib could enhance the response
rate to an aromatase inhibitor.

Methods: 121 postmenopausal patients
(median age 61 years, range 31–82) with advanced ER+ve breast cancer
that had progressed after tamoxifen were randomised (2:1) to
placebo+letrozole (L; n=40) or tipifarnib+letrozole (T+L; n=81).
Tamoxifen had been adjuvant therapy in 70% patients, and firstline
therapy for advanced disease in 30%. The dominant site of metastasis
was visceral in 57%, soft tissue in 36%, bone in 7% patients.
Tipifarnib/placebo was administered at a dose of 300 mg bid for 21 of
28 days, and letrozole at 2.5 mg daily. The primary objective was to
estimate the objective response rate, with secondary endpoints of
duration of response, time to treatment failure, clinical benefit
rate, overall survival and safety profile.

Results: Objective response rate was
38 % (95% CI; 23%, 55%) for the L-group, and 26% (95% CI; 16%, 37%)
for the T+Lgroup. The median duration of objective response was
similar (479 days vs. 443 days). An equal proportion of patients had
stable disease for >24 weeks (23% in both groups), giving clinical
benefit rates of 62% (95% CI 45%, 77%) and 49% (95% CI 37%, 61%),
respectively. There was no difference in time to disease progression
or overall survival, and 30 patients remain on treatment. Grade 3/4
adverse events were recorded in 30% of Lpatients and 45% of
T+L-patients, the difference being mainly related to asymptomatic
neutropenia observed in 15/81 (19%) tipifarnib treated patients. The
most common adverse events were fatigue, nausea and diarrhoea.

Discussion: While this trial has
shown no improvement in response rate for the addition of tipifarnib
to letrozole, it was not powered to detect any impact on time to
disease progression. Further clinical trials are in progress to
determine whether tipifarnib can enhance the benefit of endocrine
therapy in advanced breast cancer.

## 5088

## Changes in estrogen binding to ER during endocrine therapy measured
by serial [F-18]-fluoroestradiol positron emission tomography (FES
PET).

## Linden HM, Link JM, Stekhova S, Livingston RB, Gralow JR, Ellis
GK, Schubert EK, Peterson LM, Krohn KA, Mankoff DA. University of
Washington/Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA; University of
Washington, Seattle, WA
Introduction: Endocrine therapy is targeted to the Estrogen
Receptor (ER). Agents such as tamoxifen (TAM) and fulvestrant (FUL)
antagonize estrogen binding to ER, while aromatase inhibitors (AIs)
lower estrogen levels. Treatment therefore changes estrogen binding to
ER and may result in an increase or decrease in ER expression. Since
FES PET measures regional in vivo estrogen binding to ER at all tumor
sites, we used serial FES PET to measure in vivo pharmacokinetics of
estrogen binding to ER as a pharmacodynamic effect of endocrine
therapy of metastatic breast cancer.
Methods: We performed serial FES PET in patients with Stage IV
breast cancer undergoing treatment with TAM (n=2), AIs (n=14), and FUL
(n=5). Patients were imaged a median of 29 days (range 8 to 97 days)
after starting treatment. Estrogen binding at tumor sites was measured
as the average FES standardized uptake value (SUV) of up to the 3 most
prominent tumor sites included in dynamic imaging 30 to 60 minutes
after injection. Changes in whole-body FES PET images were also
evaluated qualitatively.
Results: FES uptake declined for most patients (mean −22%, range
−66% to +38%). The decline in FES SUV was greater for antagonists (TAM
or FUL, mean −42%) versus AI (mean −11%) (p < .05). In patients on
AIs, responding tumors showed an average decline in FES uptake, while
non-responders had no change (p=.06). In patients treated with
antagonists (TAM or FUL), there were no objective responses seen,
although some had disease stabilization. The decline if FES uptake was
greater in TAM versus FUL treated patients, but not statistically
significant. Post-treatment qualitative FES uptake showed complete
blockade with TAM, but incomplete blockade with FUL in 4 of 5
patients, despite complete blockade of uterine uptake.
Conclusions: Serial FES PET measures changes in ER estrogen binding
during endocrine therapy. For AIs, response is associated a small
early decline in estrogen binding, possibly reflecting response. ER
antagonists lead to a larger decrease in estrogen binding. Unlike TAM,
FUL appears to incompletely block estrogen binding in tumor sites.
Further study is needed to elucidate the mechanisms underlying these
changes and the ability of serial FES PET to predict response to
endocrine therapy. (Supported by CA42045 and CA72064)

## 5089

## Modeling for cost-effective strategies in adjuvant hormonal therapy
for postmenopausal women with breast cancer: upfront aromatase inhibitors
vs sequential tamoxifenaromatase inhibitors.

## Younis T, Rayson D, Dewar R, Skedgel C. Queen Elizabeth II
Health Sciences Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada

Background: Aromatase inhibitors (AI)
have become standard adjuvant options for postmenopausal (PM) women
with hormone receptor positive (HR+) breast cancer. The higher upfront
drug costs associated with AI may be offset by lower downstream costs
of recurrent breast cancer due to the disease free survival benefit
observed in randomized clinical trials. For the first five years of
therapy, Tamoxifen (TAM) with a crossover to AI (TAM-AI) and upfront
AI are both cost-effective (CE) alternatives to TAM alone. Modeling
for the cost-effectiveness of TAM-AI versus upfront AI, however, may
help in selecting a preferred CE strategy.

Methods: A Markov model was developed
to project 5 to 20 year benefit and cost outcomes for a hypothetical
cohort of 60 year old PM women with HR+ early stage breast cancer
undergoing adjuvant hormonal therapy. Baseline estimates of events for
TAM alone were derived from reported recurrence rates and life tables,
with survival modeling for recurrences. Unit costs and utility scores
were derived from the literature, and costs of adverse events were not
included in the primary analysis. Hormonal treatments costs were based
on average wholesale prices (Cdn$) in Canada in 2005. Sequential
TAM-AI and upfront AI were examined relative to TAM alone across a
wide range of hazard ratio (HR) benefits, including those reported in
the different trials. A carry over benefit for 5 years beyond AI
therapy was assumed. Cumulative costs, life year gains (LYG), quality
adjusted LYG (QALYG), and incremental CE ratios (ICER) were calculated
across a wide range of efficacy HR to predict a preferred CE strategy
at commonly accepted ICER thresholds. The analysis took a direct payer
perspective. Both costs and benefits were discounted at 3%.

Results: Predictions of the preferred
CE strategy are generated, with two way sensitivity analyses, across a
wide range of efficacy HR. Based on the HR reported in the AI trials,
the model predicts a superior CE for sequential TAM-AI compared to
upfront AI over a 20 year horizon. Based on the ARNO and ATAC studies,
however, upfront AI appears to be the preferred CE strategy for
patients with estrogen receptor positive (ER+) / progesterone receptor
negative (PR-) breast cancer. A complete sensitivity analysis will be
presented, with subset analyses for node positive and negative
patients.

Conclusions: Sequential TAM-AI is the
preferred CE adjuvant strategy compared to upfront AI in PM women with
HR+ breast cancer. For ER+/PR- breast cancer, however, upfront AI
appears to be the preferred CE strategy. This model predicts the
preferred CE strategies at commonly accepted CE thresholds across a
wide range of efficacy HR, and baseline recurrence risks. Modeling for
CE strategies may help select a preferred adjuvant hormonal therapy
until evidence from direct comparative randomized studies is
available.

## 5090

## Metabolism of the aromatase inhibitor drug letrozole by the human
hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme system.

## Desta Z, Ward BA, Flockhart DA. Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN

Background/Aims: We used human liver
microsomes (HLMs) to identify the CYP isoforms involved in letrozole
metabolism. Letrozole, a potent inhibitor of aromatase (a ratelimiting
enzyme in the biosynthesis of estrogens), is increasingly used to
treat women with breast cancer. Although letrozole is cleared by
metabolism via human hepatic cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, the
specific isoforms involved have not been fully clarified.

Methods: Initial experiments were
performed in human liver microsomal preparations to define linear
conditions for time of incubation and microsomal protein
concentration. Letrozole (10 M) was incubated for 0 to 90 min at 37°C in HLMs (0
to 2 mg protein/ml) and a NADP-generating system. Negative control
experiments included no cofactor, no microsomal protein and no
substrate. Subsequent incubation studies to determine kinetic,
inhibition and correlation analysis were performed by incubating
letrozole in HLMs (0.5 mg protein/ml) at 37°C for 30 min.

Results: HPLC chromatograms of
microsomal incubates of letrozole showed one major metabolite that was
consistent with 4,4’-methanol-bisbenzonitrile (MI). The formation of
this metabolite showed sigmoidal kinetics: apparent
Km, 38.4 M; Vmax, 14.4 pmol/min/mg
protein; and Hill coefficient, 1.75. MI formation from letrozole (10
 M) correlated significantly with the activity of
CYP3A (Spearman’s r = 0.67; p=0.039) and CYP2B6 (r = 0.68; p=0.035).
Of the CYP isoform specific inhibitors, CYP3A inhibitors potently
inhibited letrozole metabolism: troleandomycin (50 M), ritonavir (1 M) and ketoconazole (1 M) by 100% (complete inhibition), 83.8% and 61.3%
respectively. Pilocarpine (50 M; CYP2A6 inhibitor) also showed moderate inhibition
(by 46.7%). The IC50s for the inhibition of MI
from letrozole (10 M) by ritonavir, troleandomycin, ketoconazole and
pilocarpine were 0.3, 0.5, 0.4 and 25 M respectively.

Conclusions: Our in vitro data implicate CYP3A as a major
catalyst of letrozole metabolism, with some contribution of CYP2A6.
Genetic polymorphisms in CYP3A and CYP2A6 and drug interactions that
potently induce or inhibit these enzymes may influence letrozole
clearance and clinical response.

## 5091

## A phase I, open-label, non-randomized, dose-finding safety,
tolerance, and pharmacokinetic study of TAS-108 administered orally in
postmenopausal female patients with breast carcinoma following standard
endocrine therapies.

## Noguchi S, Saeki T, Aogi K, Inaji H, Tabei T, Ikeda T. Osaka
University Medical School, Suita, Osaka, Japan; National Shikoku
Cancer Center Hospital, Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan; Osaka Medical Center
for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Higashinari-ku, Osaka, Japan;
Saitama Cancer Center Hospital, Kitaadachi-gun, Saitama, Japan; Keio
University School of Medicine, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan

Background: TAS-108 is a novel
steroidal anti-estrogen compound that has a strong binding affinity to
the estrogen receptor and, in preclinical studies, has antitumor
activity against tamoxifenresistant breast cancer cell lines. Its
molecular mechanisms of actions are different from those of tamoxifen
and fulvestrant. TAS-108 showed an agonist activity in the bone and
cardiovascular systems, and did not show any agonistic effect on the
endometrium in preclinical study. A Phase I (open-label and ascending
singledose) study for TAS-108 was conducted at the doses 40, 80, or
120 mg in healthy Japanese volunteers. It had good safety profile with
no severe adverse effects (AEs). The drug has linear pharmacokinetics.
The objective of the present study was to investigate the dose-finding
safety and tolerance and to document any antitumor activity observed
with TAS-108 in Japanese postmenopausal breast cancer patients who had
progressed on the standard endocrine therapies.

Methods: TAS-108 was administered
orally at 40 mg/day with planned escalations to 80 and 120 mg after
14 days observation at each dose level. If there were no study
drug-related (possibly, probably or definitely related) serious AEs in
the 5 pts at that dose level, then pts were enrolled at the next
level. Safety was assessed with NCI-CTC (v2.0) and efficacy was with
RECIST.

Results and Discussion: Total 16 pts
were enrolled, and 15 pts were eligible. Fifteen (15/15) pts
experienced 122 AEs. Of these, there were 4 pts with AEs of Grade
(G)1, 8 with G2, and 3 with G3. Eight pts, one in the 40mg dose group,
3 in the 80 mg dose group, and 4 in the 120 mg, experienced 19 study
drug-related AEs. Of these, there were 6 pts with AEs of G1, and 2 pts
with G2. The most frequent study drug-related AEs were ALT increase
3(3/15), hot flush 2(2/15), and arthralgia 2(2/15). Study drug-related
G2 AEs were T-cho increase, sweaty, and arthralgia (1 pt each).
Endometrial hypertrophy was experienced in one pt (80 mg dose group),
but there were no notable change from baseline in the endometrial
thickness in the other pts. There were 2 PR, 3 SD for at least
24 weeks, 6 SD and 3 PD. The objective response rate (ORR) was
13.3%(2/15) and clinical benefit (CR+PR+SD for at least 24 weeks) was
33.3%(5/15). Eleven pts had received 3 or more prior endocrine
therapies and 8 pts had received 2 or more prior chemotherapies. These
data suggest that TAS-108 will be effective and tolerable in the
treatment of postmenopausal breast cancer patients.

## 5092

## Similar time to response between fulvestrant and anastrozole:
comparison from two phase III trials.

## Pippen J. Baylor Sammons Cancer Center & US Oncology
Research, Dallas

Background: Fulvestrant is
administered as a sustained-release intramuscular (IM) injection and
takes between 3 to 6 months to reach steady-state levels, which is in
contrast to some tablet therapies that take only a few days. This has
led to speculation amongst some physicians that this pharmacokinetic
difference may equate to a delayed time to response (TTR) with
fulvestrant compared with other treatments such as the aromatase
inhibitors.

Materials and Methods: TTR data were
collected from two International Phase III trials (0020 and 0021) of
fulvestrant 250 mg/month (IM injection) versus anastrozole 1 mg/day
(orally) in the treatment of postmenopausal women with advanced breast
cancer who had recurred or progressed on prior tamoxifen therapy.
Trial data were analyzed individually and collectively to determine
median TTR with each treatment. Median TTR was calculated from
randomization to the observation of an objective response (complete or
partial response).

Results: In the combined analysis,
objective responses (OR) were observed in 82 patients (19.2%) in the
fulvestrant group and 70 patients (16.5%) in the anastrozole group.
Clinical benefit (OR + stable disease ≥ 24 weeks) rates were 43.5%
(n=186) and 40.9% (n=173) in the two groups, respectively. The time
taken to achieve an objective response was similar with fulvestrant
and anastrozole in both individual and combined analyses (Table).
Median TTR with fulvestrant was close to 3 months in each case and
almost identical to that of anastrozole, but values ranged between
0.9–33.1 months overall, suggesting that an objective response may
still occur after a long period of stable disease with fulvestrant
treatment.

Discussion: Median TTR was similar
between fulvestrant and anastrozole, despite differences in their mode
of administration and subsequent pharmacokinetics. These data suggest
that patients without rapidly progressive disease should be kept on
endocrine treatment for at least 3 months to allow a response to be
achieved prior to considering changing treatments. Furthermore,
objective responses may occur following a long period of stable
disease during fulvestrant treatment. 

## 5093

## Ovarian histopathology in premenopausal patients with breast cancer
receiving gonadotropin-releasing hormone(GnRH) agonist and/or cytotoxic
chemotherapy.

## Sato N, Sano M, Kaneko K, Kanbayashi C, Honmma K. Niigata Cancer
Center Hospital, Niigata, Japan

Introduction: Chemotherapy-related
amenorrhea is the most frequent long-term toxicity from adjuvant
chemotherapy for earlystage breast cancer. Induction of gonadal
quiescence using GnRH agonists during chemotherapy has shown promise
in reducing rates of amenorrhea in patients with lymphoma. In the
metastatic setting, we performed surgical oophorectomy after efficacy
of ovarian function suppression has been confirmed by GnRH agonist for
premenopausal patients with positive hormone receptors.

Purpose: The purpose of this study is
to examine histological influence of chemotherapy and/or GnRH agonist
on breast carcinoma patient’s ovary.

Materials and Methods: Records of
twenty-five patients undergoing oophorectomy as endocrine therapy for
metastatic breast cancer from January 1995 to May 2005 were evaluated.
The median of age was 44 years old (range 34 to 52 years old). The
patients were classified into two groups; control group (N=16) without
chemotherapy, and Chemotherapy and GnRH agonist (Cx_GnRHa) group (N=9)
receiving both chemotherapy and GnRH agonist. Four patients received
standard doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (CPA) for four cycles, two
received CAF for six cycles, two received CAF followed by high-dose
chemotherapy and autologous peripheral blood stem cell
transplantation, and one received FAM (5Fu, CPA, Mitomycin C). The
average dose of CPA given before oophorectomy was 15.3 g (range 1.4 g
to 40.6 g). Gosereline was given in a dose of 3.75 mg IM and repeated
every four weeks until completion of chemotherapy. Cx_GnRHa group was
compared with control group with regard to gonadal histology. Ovarian
damage was evaluated histologically by absence of ovarian
follicles.

Results: Impaired ovarian maturation
was found 50% (8 out of 16 pts) in control group, compared with 89% (8
out of 9 patients) in Cx_GnRHa group (p=0.0518).The average number of
total ovarian follicles in control group was 19 compared with 4 in
Cx_GnRHa group (p=0.0161).

Conclusion: Ovarian damage was
confirmed in premenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer
after chemotherapy with GnRH agonist. From these results, it is
suggested that patient age, cumulative dose and the specific agent
used should be taken into considerations to interpret possible effect
of GnRH agonist on preservation of ovarian function.

## 5094

## Side effect profile of anastrozole compared with tamoxifen in
Japanese women:findings from N-SAS BC03 Trial.

## Aihara T, Nishiuchi H, Takatsuka Y, Ohashi Y. Kansai Rosai
Hospital, Amagasaki, Hyogo, Japan; University of Tokyo, Bunkyoku,
Hongo, Tokyo, Japan
Serective aromatase inhibitors now serve as treatment of choice for
hormone responsive postmenopausal early breast cancer. The difference
in the toxicity profile between aromatase inhibitors and tamoxifen has
been noted. Tamoxifen was associated with a higher incidence of
gynecological symptoms and venous thrombosis than aromatase
inhibitors, while musculoskeltal disorders and fractures were more
common with aromatase inhibitors (Lancet 2005; 365:60–62. N Engl J Med
2004;350:1081-92.). These data are derived from the clinical trials
conducted in the Western countries. The ethnic difference may exist in
terms of the toxicity profile, however few data concerning the
difference in the toxicity profile between aromatase inhibitors and
tamoxifen among Asian women is available. Hence we investigated the
adverse events among Japanese women who participated in Phase III
Randomized Adjuvant Study of Tamoxifen Alone Versus Sequential
Tamoxifen and Anastrozole in Hormone-Responsive Postmenopausal Breast
Cancer Patients (N-SAS BC 03 trial). The worst toxicity grade after
randomization of fifteen predefined adverse events were compared
between anastrozole arm (n=277) and tamoxifen arm (n=279) using
Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test stratified with the toxicity grade at
baseline. p<0.05 was considered as statistically significant. The
toxicity was graded according to the NCI-CTC ver2.0.
No significant difference was observed in any of the predefined
adverse events, but marginally significant difference was observed in
hot flushes and vaginal discharge in favor of anastrozole which was
similar to the above studies. Further follow-up will reveal the
similarity and difference in the toxicity profile of aromatase
inhibitors between Western and Asian population. 

## 5095

## Celecoxib anti-aromatase neoadjuvant (CAAN) Trial for locally
advanced breast cancer.

## Chow LWC, Toi M. University of Hong Kong Medical Centre, Hong
Kong, Hksar, Hong Kong; Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan

Background: Anti-aromatase
therapy is important in the treatment of breast cancer in
postmenopausal women. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors have been
shown to be effective in chemoprevention in animal and clinical
studies.

Patients and Methods: A proof of
principle study was performed to investigate the efficacy of combing
anti-aromatase therapy (exemestane) and COX-2 inhibitors neoadjuvantly
in 82 postmenopausal patients with histologically confirmed invasive
hormone-sensitive breast cancers. 30 patients were randomly assigned
to receive exemestane 25 mg daily and celecoxib 400 mg twice daily
(group A), 24 patients to receive exemestane 25 mg daily (group B) and
28 patients to receive letrozole 2.5 mg daily (group C).

Results: All groups showed
clinical response (62% for group A, 55% for group B and 60.7% for
group C) and decrease in tumor area (61.8% for group A, 58.1% for
group B and 55.7% for group C). However, out of the 5 patients with
complete clinical response, 3 were observed from group A. Of the 58
patients operated, there were 2 patients with pathologic complete
response and both were observed in group C. The mean microscopic size
of the tumor was 2.57 cm for group A, 3.05 cm for group B and 2.02 cm
for group C. The differences were only statistically significant when
group C was compared with group B (p = 0.031). The serial changes in
tumor area were shown in (figure1).

Conclusion: Anti-aromatase
therapy is effective in the treatment of breast cancer and may be
safely used preoperatively. The addition of COX-2 inhibitors may
provide additional benefit. 

## 5096

## Female sexual dysfunction and changes in hormonal levels in
patients with early breast cancer on anti-estrogen therapy.

## Amsterdam AD, Wheler J, Hudis C, Krychman ML. Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY

Objective: To determine if
differences exist between breast cancer patients on tamoxifen or
aromatase inhibitors or no treatment with respect to female sexual
dysfunction (FSD) and estrogen and testosterone levels.

Methods: A retrospective review was
performed on 119 patients with early breast cancer who attended the
Sexual Health Program at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Patients were seen from March 2003 through December 2004 and were
evaluated by a sexual medicine gynecologist.

Results: Of the 119 breast cancer
patients, 21 (18%) received tamoxifen, 26 (22%) an aromatase inhibitor
and 72 (61%) did not receive any hormonal therapy for their disease.
The majority of patients were menopausal at initial consultation and
FSD symptoms were seen most commonly in the aromatase inhibition
group. 

Using Pearson’s Chi-Square test, no significant difference was seen
between the groups with respect to menopausal status or reported
symptoms of FSD. When evaluating continuous variables with ANOVA, a
significant difference in estradiol levels (p = 0.021) and sex hormone
binding globulin (p = 0.007) was noted between the 3 groups. Only
minor differences were seen when evaluating testosterone levels (p =
0.169) and age (p = 0.055).

Conclusion: Breast cancer patients
treated with tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor frequently report
symptoms of FSD. The results of this study fail to demonstrate a
significant difference among treatment groups in terms of symptoms of
FSD, suggesting that other factors, in addition to hormone levels,
contribute to development of these symptoms. Further studies are
warranted in larger groups of patients to confirm these
findings.

## 5097

## Primary hormone therapy in locally advanced breast
cancer.

## Buhari SA, Cheung Kl, Robertson JFK. Nottingham Breast
Institute, Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, United
Kingdom

## Background
In 1989, our institute started a prospective randomized trial
comparing multimodality therapy (neoadjuvant chemotherapy, Patey
mastectomy, postoperative radiotherapy and adjuvant home therapy)
versus initial hormone therapy for the treatment of locally
advanced breast cancer. Early and medium-term result showed no
statistically significant differences in the rates of survival,
metastasis and uncontrolled locoregional disease. The number of
therapies required for the initial hormone arm was less (3.6 versus
4.9). On subgroup analysis, estrogen positive subgroup showed
better initial objective response rate (80% versus 36%). We
concluded that initial hormone therapy might be a reasonable option
in managing locally advanced breast cancer, especially for estrogen
receptor positive tumours.

## Material and Method
To validate these results, we recruited 81 patients presenting
with locally advanced breast cancer, between 1997 and 2004. All had
estrogen receptor positive tumours and treated initially with
hormone therapy. They were followed up for a mean duration of
32 months.

## Results
Overall objective response at 6 months was 96.8% and at
24 months was 69.2%. Among the responders, 25% developed local
recurrence or progression with a mean time of 21.4 months. The mean
number of therapies at 2 years was 1.4. There was no locoregional
failure. On subgroup analysis, neither did initial response at
6 months nor the tumour grade predict the development of local
recurrence or progression. Overall survival at 2 years is 95% and
at 5 years 75%.

## Discussion
Initial hormone treatment is an option in the treatment of
locally advanced breast cancers, which are estrogen receptor
positive. Being a predictor for response, estrogen receptor status
should be used in patient selection for this therapy. Our results
validate the results of earlier trial, with comparable outcome
measures.

## 5098

## Tipifarnib with tamoxifen as a rescue for tamoxifen acquired
clinical resistance for metastatic ER and/or PgR positive breast cancer
after releapse under tamoxifen. Preliminary results.

## Dalenc F, Lacroix-Tikri M, Mourey L, Debled M, Gladieff L,
Tilkin AF, Faye JC, Seronie-Vivien S, Roche H. Claudius Regaud
Institute, Toulouse, France; Bergonie Institute, Bordeaux,
France

Background: tipifarnib (t), a
farnesyltransferase inhibitor (FTI), has a modest antitumor activity
in heavily pretreated patients (pts) with metastatic breast cancer
(MBC). Given preclinical experiments, combining FTIs and tamoxifen (T)
is a promising clinically approach. Specially FTIs could regenerate T
responsiveness in de-novo resistant or acquired resistant disease. In
this phase II, we evaluate safety and activity of T+ t. The
pharmacokinetics of drugs and serum predictors biomarkers of
responsivness or resistance were also assessed.

Methods: Postmenopausal pts with
measurable, ER and/or PgR expression MBC were enrolled. All disease
were in progression on T therapy. There were no limitations regarding
prior chemotherapy or hormonotherapy regimens. Initially pts were
treated with t at 300 mg p.o twice daily for 21 day of 28 days + T
20 mg once daily. Pts were reassessed every 4 weeks with toxicity
assessment, physical exam and metabolic panel. Tumor assessment was
were done every 8 weeks (RECIST).

Results: To date, 20/40 pts were
accrued and 19 assessed. 1 pt presented a cutaneous rash and was
rapidly ruled out. The majority have visceral metastases (16) and 3
have only bone metastases. 2 were treated with aromatase inhibitor
before T. The median age was 63 [39–72] years. The median time of
progression on T was 30.5 months [9–60].

Toxicity: at 300 mg p.o twice daily,
7/12 pts required dose reduction due to toxicities:grade 3-4
neutropenia (2), grade 3 thrombopenia (2), grade 3 mucositis (1),
venous thrombosis (2) and grade 3 neurotoxicity (1). Then t doses were
decreased to 200 mg p.o twice daily and well tolerated (no further
dose reduction was necessary).

Efficacy: 8 pts were still on
treatment. 11 were rouled out:9 for progressive disease (4, 2, 2, 1
respectively at 2, 4 and 6 and 8 months) and 2 for toxicity
(neurotoxicity and venous thrombosis). There were 1 partial response,
6 and 4 stable disease ≥ 4 and 6 months respectively (18 months +).
The last 2 pts included are in stable disease at 2 months.
Pharmacokinetics and predictors biomarkers will be evaluated.

Conclusion: t (200 mg p.o twice
daily) +T was well tolerated. Preliminary efficacy data are
encouraging.

## 5099

## Tolerance for adjuvant letrozole in daily practice.

## Fontaine C, Vandenbossche K, Dewaele A, Verfaillie G, Collen K,
Neyns B, Schallier D, Vermeij J, Bourgain C, De Greve J. AZ-VUB,
Brussels, Belgium
Recent results from randomized clinical trials (RCT) have
demonstrated a superiority of adjuvant aromatase inhibitors (AI) over
tamoxifen in relapse free survival, administered either immediately
postoperatively (anastrazole and letrozole) or in cross-over setting
in patients on tamoxifen (exemestane) or in extended setting after
5 years of tamoxifen (letrozole), challenging the historical standard
tamoxifen. AI’s were associated with fewer gynaecological side-effects
and vascular events than tamoxifen, but athralgia and bone
demineralization are increased. As a result of these studies, adjuvant
AI was introduced in daily clinical practice in a general population
that does not necessarily match the RCT inclusion criteria. Post
registration observational studies might therefore provide
complementary information to RCT.
We have evaluated retrospectively the short-term outcome and
tolerance of adjuvant letrozole in such a setting.
Hundred and twelve consecutive patients were included of which 81
received adjuvant letrozole as a first line hormonal treatment, while
31 patients were crossed over from tamoxifen to letrozole. Median age
was 57 yrs (37–85 y) years. Pre- or postoperative chemotherapy
preceded hormonal treatment in 88/110 pts. The breast cancers were
ER+/PR+ in 81%, ER+/PR- in 11%, ER-/PR+ in 6%, ER+/PR unknown in 2%.
Median time on letrozole was 6.5 mth (1 wk–24 mth). Main toxicities
were arthralgia (33%), hot flushes (27%) and increased fatigue (8%);
one patient developed arterial hypertension and another patient
diarrhoea G3 under letrozole. The proportion of patients without any
subjective toxicity was only 33%. Sixteen of the 112 (14 %) of the
patients discontinued the adjuvant therapy with letrozole (after a
median duration of treatment of 4.5 months (1 wk–7 mth)), because of
athralgia G1+2 in 7 (50%) pts (sometimes debilitating), mood
disturbances in 2, and gastrointestinal toxicity G2, arterial
hypertension, fatigue and hair loss G1, headache, diarrhoea G3 in one
pt each and PD in 2 pts. The PD patients received chemotherapy, 13
patients were switched to tamoxifen with excellent tolerance and 1
patient refused further endocrine therapy. Conclusion: This
retrospective analysis suggests that possibly threefold more patients
than observed in RCT’s withdraw from adjuvant AI due to tolerance
issues, including previously unreported toxicities. Such a discrepancy
might be explained by different patient selection and by the absence
of the coaching effect derived from a trial context. Until more data
on potential patient enrichment criteria and survival data for AI
adjuvant treatment vs tamoxifen adjuvant treatment become available,
it appears reasonable to either start patients with lower risk
profiles on adjuvant tamoxifen or to switch back to tamoxifen whenever
tolerance for AI interferes with quality of life.

## 5100

## Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are unlikely to improve overall survival
in postmenopausal women with stage I breast cancer.

## Diab S. Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers, Aurora, CO; The Women’s
Breast Center-Aurora Medical Center

Objective: To determine causes of
mortality in breast cancer patients 50 and older with stage I disease.
Method: 88542 patients with
stage I invasive breast cancer diagnosed between 1973 and 2002 were
analyzed in the SEER database. Results: As shown, overall survival (OS), but not
breast cancer specific survival (BCSS), decreased with advancing age
indicating that the majority of patients are not dying from breast
cancer. Cardiac and stroke were major causes of mortality with
increasing significance in older patients. 

Conclusion: Since 10 year breast
cancer specific survival is already very high without the use of
aromatase inhibitors and since the majority of patients are either
alive or are dying from non-breast cancer, it is unlikely that AIs
would improve overall survival. Since increasing vascular events might
be associated with lowering estrogen levels, a negative impact of AIs
on overall survival in early stage patients should be carefully
evaluated.

## 5101

## Standardization of estrogen and progesterone receptor assay
values.

## Chapman JW, Jasani B, Ibrahim M, Miller K, Murray D, Hewlett B,
Daidone MG, Allred C, Hammond E, Li D, Sweep F, O’Malley FP, Kelly J,
Goss P. National Cancer Institute of Canada, Kingston, ON, Canada;
UK-NEQAS, United Kingdom; University of Toronto, Canada; Milan, Italy;
Baylor Breast Center, TX; Intermountain Health Care and University of
Utah; Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Netherlands; BC
Cancer Agency, Canada; Harvard University
Background:The increasing use of aromatase inhibitors, requires a
decision about likely responsiveness to such breast cancer treatment.
Estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) are currently
assessed most frequently with immunohistochemical (IHC)
methods.
Materials and Methods:We will review a variety of laboratory
control processes to show the rationale for an adjunct to good
laboratory control. ER and PR may be standardized with the conversion
to continuous Z-scores, like bone mineral density (BMD). We will then
examine support for the routine use of continuous Z-scores to obtain
more uniform clinically relevant cut-points.
Results:Decades of world-wide laboratory control work will be
reviewed to demonstrate that inter-laboratory comparability of
hormonal assay results is still problematic with varying methods for
assessment and the classification of tumors as being ER-positive or
-negative based on a variety of different cut-points. However, IHC
assessment yields a continuous quantity (i.e. percent positive stain),
so a quality control program could be developed which externally
records the results of a particular laboratory’s assessments for a
common set of tumor materials. Providing a laboratory meets adequate
scientific practice levels, the laboratory-specific mean and standard
deviation for test assessments could be utilized to standardize
routine clinical assessments. The standardization process could be
implemented with as few as 10 assessments per year to improve
inter-laboratory comparability; the same quality control data could be
used to follow long term performance of a particular laboratory, i.e.
intra-laboratory coefficient of variation. Records for multiple years
of similarly good quality control work would further improve the
laboratory-specific adjustments. ER and PR in standardized units would
be applicable across a number of assessment platforms to investigate
more generalizable associations with clinical outcome(s).
Discussion:An international consortium is proposing an analogous
strategy to BMD for ER and PR of laboratory standardization to
Z-scores. The adjunct of statistical standardization to a quality
control program would benefit both research and clinical
practice.

## 5102

## Inhibition of MAPK restores anti-estrogen response in vitro and ER
 expression in breast tumors.

## Bayliss JM, Hilger AM, Murthy S, Diehl KM, El-Ashry D.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
Breast cancer presents as estrogen receptor (ER ) positive, or negative. ER - tumors have a poor prognosis, are resistant to
hormonal therapies, and frequently show overexpression, amplification,
and/or hyperactivation of growth factor receptors, such as the erbB
family. Using MCF-7 breast cancer cell line models that mimic this
elevated growth factor signaling by EGFR and erbB-2, we have
previously shown that hyperactivation of downstream MAPK results in
the reversible loss of ER expression, and that in addition to the direct
effect of MAPK on ER , indirect activation of NFkB by MAPK also plays a
role. The primary mechanism underlying this MAPK-induced
downregulation of ER involves targeting ER for proteasomal degradation as inhibition of the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway restores ER expression to levels similar to that with inhibition
of MAPK activity. Here, we set out to determine if inihibition of MAPK
activity in established ER - breast cancer cell lines could restore ER
 expression and further, if this re-expressed ER
 could restore antiestrogen response. MAPK inhibition
via treatment with U0126 in the low ER + BT474 breast cancer cell line and in 2 ER
 - breast cancer cell lines, SUM 149 and SUM 229,
resulted in increased or reexpressed ER protein, respectively. To ascertain that this
reexpressed ER could restore anti-estrogen sensitivity, growth
assays analyzing the effects of 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen (4HT) and the pure
antiestrogen ICI 182,780 (faslodex) at 10-7 M alone, 5 
 M U0126 alone, or the combination of 4HT or ICI and
U0126 on cell proliferation were performed. BT474 and ER
 - SUM 149 and 229 cells were resistant to both 4HT
and ICI. While having little or no growth inhibitory effects on its
own, 5 M U016 restored the growth inhibitory effects of both
4HT and ICI in both BT474 and ER - SUM 229 cells, but not in SUM 149 cells. To
determine if these in vitro cell line results would extrapolate to a
real breast tumor situation, ER - tumor specimens were obtained from the Tissue
Procurement Core. Tumors were minced and divided evenly into a
baseline sample and into tissue culture dishes containing medium
alone, or supplemented with 10  M U0126 or vehicle control DMSO. The minced tumor
specimens in medium plus or minus U0126 were incubated at 37oC/5%CO2
for 20 hours. RNA was prepared from all treatment groups and analyzed
for ER mRNA level by qRT-PCR. Of the 12 tumors received to
date, 6 displayed increased ER mRNA levels after treatment with U0126.
Collectively, these data are supportive of our hypothesis that there
exists a population of ER - tumors where upregulated growth factor signaling is
directly involved in the generation of the ER - phenotype by repressing ER expression and that further, this reversible
downregulation may be targeted clinically such that this repression
can be reversed by inhibiting signaling through MAPK, resulting in
re-expression of ER and restoration of antiestrogen sensitivity.

## 5103

## Estrogen-induced suppression of gene expression:mechanisms of
down-regulation.

## Cuba VL, DeNardo DG, Hilsenbeck SG, Brown PH. Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX

Background: Estrogen
(E2), a critical mitogen for breast cancer
cells, modulates gene expression by interaction with the estrogen
receptors (ER + ). Previous microarray experiments have shown that
over two-thirds of the genes modulated by estrogen are downregulated.
We have investigated the mechanisms by which estrogen down-regulates
gene expression to better understand the role of estrogen in breast
cancer development and progression.

Hypothesis: We hypothesized that
estrogen down-regulates gene expression either directly through
immediate effects on ERdependent genes or indirectly through
regulation of expression of other transcriptional regulators such as
transcription factors, coactivators, and co-repressors.

Methods: In this study we identified
a set of estrogen downregulated genes using Affymetrix array analysis
of RNA from vehicle- or estrogen-treated MCF7 cells. Affymetrix array
data was compared using dChip analysis software. Genes that were
present and varied by ≥ 1.2-fold were selected for further study.
Selected genes were analyzed by Q-RT-PCR to determine whether they
were E2-down-regulated in a panel of ER+ and
ER- breast cancer cell lines. The kinetics of down-regulation was then
measured over 48 hours. E2-responsive regions
within the promoter were mapped by cloning promoter fragments upstream
of the transcriptional start site into a luciferase vector. Luciferase
activity was measured using the Dual- Luciferase Reporter
Assay.

Results: Of 12,000 gene transcripts,
at least 120 genes were found to be statistically down-regulated by
estrogen (p<0.05). Of these genes, twenty were further analyzed in
MCF7 cells using RTPCR to determine if they were down-regulated by
E2. Eleven genes were confirmed to be down
regulated within 24 hours using Q-RTPCR analysis. These genes were
categorized into different subsets based on the kinetics of
down-regulation:those that were downregulated early (1–6 hours after
treatment; JunB, Btg2, Cathepsin H, RAI3, CD24, TGF- 1) and those that were down-regulated late
(12–24 hours after treatment; NPIP, SSM4, LXR- , Brd2, Brd3). The kinetics of down-regulation was
also observed in T47D, MDAMB- 231, and MDA-MB-468 breast cancer cells.
Ten of these genes were modulated only in ER-positive breast cancer
cells suggesting that the observed down-regulation is ER dependent. We
are currently mapping the E2-responsive region
within the promoter of these genes, and are investigating whether
E2 affects the occupancy of ER, other
transcription factors, and co-regulators on these genes’ promoters.
The E2-responsive region of Btg2 is within the
first 500 bases upstream of the start site as determined by luciferase
assays. These results suggest that E2-treatment
reduces expression of cell cycle regulators (Btg2), growth inhibitory
transcription factors (JunB), and anti-proliferative factors (TGF-
 1). This E2-induced down
regulation of gene expression may be critical for the basic biology of
breast cancer.

## 5104

## Loss of estrogen receptor (ER) expression in MCF-7 cells following
long-term exposure to fulvestrant.

## Giles M, Fiegl H, Widschwendter M, Gee J, Wakeling A, Nicholson
R. Cardiff University, United Kingdom; University Hospital, Austria;
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, United Kingdom

Background: The pure antiestrogen
fulvestrant is registered for use in breast cancer patients previously
treated with partial agonists like tamoxifen. Thus, as the mechanisms
of resistance to fulvestrant must differ from those to tamoxifen, we
studied development of resistance to fulvestrant in ER + MCF-7 human breast cancer cells exposed to the drug
for short (6 months) and long (24 months) time periods.

Material and Methods: MCF-7 cells
were exposed continuously to fulvestrant (10-7M) for at least 6 months
at which time the proliferation rate recovered to that of the parental
cells. Continuing exposure to fulvestrant generated a cell line which
grew faster than the wild-type cells. Cells exposed to fulvestrant for
6 or 24 months were characterized for ER and PS2 gene promoter
methylation status, mRNA and protein levels by qRTPCR,
Southern/Western blotting and MethyLight assays. The promotors of
these genes were examined for chromatin modifications associated with
transcriptional activity using ChIP.

Results: Fulvestrant initially
inhibits the growth of MCF-7 cells but after 6 months growth resumed
at a rate equal to that of the parental cells. ER protein levels in these cells were extremely low,
but were restored to near normal levels 2 months after removal of
fulvestrant. Restoration of functional ER signalling after fulvestrant
withdrawal was demonstrated by estradiol growth stimulation and
regulation of PS2. This is consistent with clinical experience which
showed that patients who respond to fulvestrant and then relapse can
benefit from further endocrine therapy. In contrast, continued
exposure of the cells to the drug for a further 18 months produced an
ER -negative phenotype that was not reversible upon drug
withdrawal. Gene dosage and rearrangement studies confirmed the ER
gene was not deleted and lacked major somatic modifications in these
cells. A MethyLight assay showed very low level methylation of the ER
promoter compared with MDA 231 cells in which the gene is fully
methylated and not expressed. The ER -negative phenotype of the long-term fulvestrant
treated cells was not reversed by methylation (DNMT) inhibitors alone
or in combination with an HDAC inhibitor. Subsequent ChIP studies
indicated, that members of the Polycomb group of transcriptional
repressor complexes may have initiated and maintained transcriptional
silencing of the ER gene.

Conclusions: The development of
resistance to fulvestrant after short term in
vitro exposure resulted in a reduction of ER mRNA and
functional protein that was reversible on removal of fulvestrant. The
development of resistance following in
vitro longterm drug treatment may be associated with ER
 gene silencing. The clinical significance of these
findings is unknown. Knowledge of the silencing mechanism may
ultimately allow ER to be reexpressed, with the potential
re-establishment of endocrine response.

## 5105

## Scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) – an estrogen receptor
 corepressor.

## Meyer R, Dobrzycka KM, Ivanova M, Jiang J, Kang K, Oesterreich
S. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX

Background: The estrogen receptor
 (ER ) plays a critical role in the development and
progression of estrogen-dependent breast cancer. ER activity is regulated by a variety of coactivators
and corepressors, as well as through interactions with several other
signaling pathways involved in the development and progression of
breast cancer. The Scaffold attachment factor B1 (SAFB1) was cloned
and defined as ER corepressor in our laboratory. Its chromosomal locus
19p13.3 shows one of the highest rates of loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
described so far in breast cancer. SAFB1 mutations have been found in
breast cancer specimens that are not present in normal tissues. SAFB1
is a strong growth inhibitor, and a lost or reduced expression in
breast cancer is correlated with a shorter overall survival. We are
now asking the question which genes are controlled by the SAFB1/ER
 complex, and whether the loss of this regulation
contributes to breast tumor genesis.

Material and Methods: We have
generated a SAFB1 knockout mouse which display pleiotropic phenotypes,
and use mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) from this model for the
analysis of SAFB1’s role in transcriptional repression. We reintroduce
SAFB1 and mutants in which functional domains have been deleted
(SAFBox, RRM, or repression domain) into the knockout MEFs to study
mechanisms of altered gene regulation. To analyze the estrogen
regulation by SAFB1 in human cells, we use human breast cancer cell
lines deficient in SAFB1 by using RNAi technique.

Results: Comparing
SAFB1+/+ and
SAFB1−/− MEFs we observed significant
differences in ER activity. Consistent with our previous observation
that overexpression of SAFB1 results in a dosedependent repression of
ER transcriptional activity, SAFB1 deletion resulted in
2-3-fold increased ER activity. Furthermore, the antagonistic activity of
tamoxifen was decreased in the SAFB1−/−
MEFs as compared to SAFB1+/+. Using
specific siRNA we decrease SAFB1 expression in human breast cancer
cell lines to analyze the transcriptional ER activity under various conditions, and measure the
expression of endogens ER regulated genes.

Discussion: Our preliminary data show
that the corepressor SAFB1 plays a critical role in regulating ER
 activity. The transfection of SAFB1-deletion
proteins will allow us to study separate functions of different
domains and their involvement in regulation of endogens gene
expressions. The depletion of SAFB1 in human breast cells results in
increased transcriptional activity of ER , ultimately leading to increased breast tumor
genesis.

## 5106

## Thyroid hormone may induce breast cancer progression via
interactions with the estrogen receptor.

## Thor A, Liu B, Ordonez-Ercan D, Edgerton S. OUHSC, Oklahoma
City, OK

Background: Approximately 50% of
breast cancer patients have been shown to have overt or sub-clinical
thyroid disease. Estrogen receptors (ER) and thyroid hormone receptors
(THR) belong to the same nuclear receptor superfamily and demonstrate
structural similiarities. Binding of ER by thyroid hormones (TH) has
been demonstrated. We hypothesize that TH may promote cellular
proliferation and disease progression, in ER positive breast cancer
patients.

Materials and Methods: We examined
the clinical records of 808 lymph node negative (LN-) breast cancer
patients, median follow up 10.2 yrs, for thyroid disease and or TH
supplementation, as well as other clinical and histologic factors.
Archival fixed breast cancers from these same patients were stained
for ERa and proliferation associated antigens. In vitro cell growth
was measured by a Cell Titer 96TMAQ
non-radioactive cell proliferation kit

Results: LN-, ER+ breast cancer
patients who received thyroid hormone replacement therapy had a mean
the disease free interval (DFI) of 68 months (n=28), as compared to
untreated LN-, ER+ patients (DFS 158 mo., n=431; p<0.0001). The
disease specific overall survival (DSS) for these same TH treated
patients was also significantly shorter, with a mean of 80 as compared
to 211 months (p=0.0004). Similar interactions with TH were not
observed in LN-, ER- breast cancer patients (n=349). For breast cancer
patients treated with tamoxifen (n=107), those also receiving TH
therapy (n=6) had the shortest DFI (mean 40 months) as compared to
tamoxifen alone (mean 93 months, n=101; p=0.0003). We have observed
similar interactions using in vitro models of breast cancer. The ER+
cell lines MCF-7 and T47D show enhanced cell proliferation with
estrogen, T3 or T4 while the pure estrogen receptor antagonist ICI
182,780, inhibits cell proliferation. ICI 182,780 abrogates growth
promotion induced by estrogen, T3 or T4 when co-administered in vitro.
Similar interactions were not detectable in the ER- cell lines SKBR3
or MDA-MB-468.

Conclusions: These clinical and
pre-clinical data suggest thyroid hormone may induce breast cancer
cell proliferation and disease progression. The mechanism of this
induction likely involves ER, as it is not identified in ER- cancer
patients or cell lines. This research is generously supported by a
grant from the Mary Kay Ash Foundation.

## 5107

## Day of surgery affects estrogen receptor test results in women with
breast cancer.

## Nkoy FL, Hammond E, Rees W, Sause W, Pinto K, Rowe K.
Intermountain Health Care (IHC), Salt Lake City, UT

Background: Estrogen (ER) and
Progesterone (PgR) Receptor tests are used to select breast cancer
patients who would benefit from adjuvant endocrine therapy. Recent
reports have indicated that tumors may be falsely classified as
negative due to specimen processing considerations. LDS Hospital
(LDSH) in SLC, Utah serves as the reference laboratory for ER and PgR
tests ordered from IHC facilities located, in some cases, many miles
away from SLC. A standardized, automated test method is routinely used
at LDSH lab. However, variation in specimen handling or delay in
specimen processing at sending facilities may affect test results. In
this study, we evaluated the association between ER negative test
results and the day surgery was performed. We hypothesized that
specimens removed at the end of the week would have high ER negative
test results. To our knowledge, no study has ever looked at the impact
of the day of surgery on ER and PgR test results.

Methods: We extracted cancer registry
data of 5028 women with breast cancer who received surgery at IHC
facilities, and were tested for ER between 1997–2003. We conducted a
cross-sectional study. We calculated the prevalence of ER negative
test results associated with the day of the week the surgery was
performed. Trend test was used for significance. For each IHC
facility, we compared the prevalence of ER negative test results
between Group A (specimens removed between Sunday and Thursday) and
Group B (specimens removed on Friday and Saturday). Chi-Square tests
were used to evaluate whether ER negative test results were
significantly different between the groups.

Results: The prevalence of ER
negative tests by the day of the week were:Sunday (19%), Monday (18%),
Tuesday (21%), Wednesday (22%), Thursday (21%), Friday (24%) and
Saturday (27%), p= 0.020. The overall prevalence of ER negative test
results was 20% for Group A vs. 24% for Group B, p=0.030. Except for
LDSH (20% vs. 18%), the reference lab, the respective prevalence of ER
negative test results for each facility was consistently higher for
Group B:AFH (26% vs. 39%), AVH (20% vs. 26%), CWH (24% vs. 26%), DXH
(23% vs. 30%), MKH (15% vs. 29%) and UVRMC (23% vs. 25%). Both groups
were similar in regard to age distribution.

Conclusion:For facilities sending
specimens to the reference lab,we found a significant association
between ER negativity and the day surgery was performed. Specimens
removed at the end of the week have the highest ER negative test
results. Since many if not most pathology laboratories do not process
routine specimens on the weekends, specimens removed Friday or
Saturday are likely to remain fresh at refrigerator temperatures or be
fixed for prolonged intervals in buffered formalin. These conditions
are likely to result in false negative results. We recommend further
study since many healthcare facilities across the United States use
reference laboratories for special tests.

## 5108

## Role of estrogen receptor and corepressors in estrogenmediated repression of
genes.

## Zubairy S, Wilscher E, Oesterreich S. Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX
The estrogen receptor (ER ) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor that
when bound to estrogen can regulate the transcription of a large
number of genes. ER is also regulated through its interaction with
cofactors which can either enhance (coactivators) or repress
(corepressors) its activity. Although the role of estrogenmediated
activation of genes is well
established, the relevance of repression of genes is only beginning to be
appreciated. Large scale expression analysis has revealed that more
genes are repressed than are activated following estrogen treatment.
Our hypothesis is that ER
 
-corepressor complexes are critically involved
in estrogen-mediated down-regulation of genes. We have
performed a meta-analysis of estrogen-mediated down-regulated genes on
published studies and have generated a table of 236 genes that are
significantly repressed by estrogen. We find several genes like
Chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4), Cyclin G2 (CCNG2), Nmyc down-regulated
gene 1 (NDRG1), Claudin 4 (CLDN4), B cell linker (BLNK), and Kruppel
like factor 6 (KLF6) that are clearly important in human breast
cancer. Additionally, we have analyzed various transcription factor
binding sites in the promoters of these genes including ERE, AP-1 and
SP-1. One gene that is of interest is CXCR4 because of its recently
reported role in growth and metastasis of breast cancer cells. Real
time quantitative PCR has been performed to confirm down-regulation of
CXCR4. Interestingly, CXCR4 has 1 AP-1 site and 9 SP-1 sites in its
promoter. Further analysis of the functional transcription factor
binding sites is ongoing to determine whether and which ER
 corepressor complexes are recruited to the promoter
regions of these genes, and how they may function.

## 5109

## High ER expression is associated with improved survival on
tamoxifen in breast cancer.

## Witton CJ, Tovey SM, Cooke TG, Dunne B, Bartlett JM. University
of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom; DakoCytomation A/S, Copenhagen,
Denmark

Background: ER expression in breast tumors is used clinically to
predict response to hormonal therapies. The role of ER is not fully established in this setting with
conflicting data about whether Abstracts. Poster Session V S245
expression predicts response to hormonal therapies and whether it is
an independent prognostic factor.

Materials and Methods: We examined
carcinoma tissue from 389 ER positive primary breast tumors from patients treated
with Tamoxifen for a median 5 years. Median follow up was 7 years and
median tumor size 20 mm in diameter. There were 186 node negative and
170 node positive patients and 86/181/103 grade 1/2/3 tumors. The
tumor specimens were obtained from the archive and tissue microarrays
(TMA) were constructed in triplicate. Ethical approval was obtained
from the GRI Ethics committee. ER monoclonal antibody (Abcam) was used at 1/200 g/ml
and a Streptavidin-Biotin kit for detection (Biogenex, CA). Antigen
retrieval was carried out by heating for 5 minutes under pressure in a
microwave in citrate buffer. The ER staining was assessed using a weighted
histoscore.

Results: Staining was observed in
both the nucleus and cytoplasm of tumor cells and also in the nucleus
of surrounding stromal cells. For ER positive cases 379 (97.4%) showed some ER
 staining in the nucleus, and 266 (68.4%) showed some
staining in the cytoplasm. Nuclear staining had higher median (120 vs.
50, interquartile range 100–160 vs. 0–100). Expression was separated
into “high” (198/389) and “low” expression (190/389) around the median
expression value before further analysis. High ER expression was associated with decreased chance of
recurrence while taking Tamoxifen (p=0.0241) but not decreased overall
survival (p=0.065). This was not independent of nodes, grade and size
of tumor by multiple regression analysis PgR and HER1-3 were also not
independent in this analysis. High ER expression correlated with negative human epidermal
growth factor receptors (HER) 1–3 (p=0.0054, CHI-squared) and with
positive progesterone receptor (PgR, p=0.0081, CHI-squared). There was
no significant correlation of ER with grade, size or nodal status.

Discussion: Despite the strong
correlations, ER is not likely to be acting as a surrogate for PgR or
HER1-3, as both HER positive ER positive and PgR positive ER negative tumors were observed (see table). In
keeping with previous studies our data suggests that reduced ER
 expression may predict de novo resistance to
Tamoxifen, as it appears to be a predictor of response to Tamoxifen in
ER positive tumors. 

## 5110

## Loss of heterozygosity at 14q does not correlate with estrogen
receptor negative breast cancer.

## Parker MD, Hanby AM, Bell SM, Speirs V. Institute of Molecular
Medicine, Epidemiology and Cancer Research, University of Leeds,
Leeds, W Yorks, United Kingdom
Estrogen receptor (ER ) is expressed abundantly in normal mammary gland but
its expression is lost or reduced in some breast tumours. In recent
years, epigenetic modification has emerged as an important regulatory
event associated with transcriptional silencing. There is mounting
evidence that this is the case in breast cancer with loss of
expression of ER due, in some cases, to methylation of its promoter.
Rather surprisingly, no study has considered genetic mechanisms,
despite the fact that cytogenetic analysis has revealed deletions of
14q in in situ breast cancer (1,2). This is relevant as ER
 maps to 14q22–24. Thus in addition to the epigenetic
mechanism detailed above, allelic loss of ER could also contribute to its loss of expression in
some breast cancers and consequently, be an important early event in
breast carcinogenesis. The aim of this study was to investigate if
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) commonly contributes to loss of ER
 expression in breast tumours. Following ethical
approval, cases were selected from the Leeds Breast Tissue Bank. Prior
to freezing, samples were harvested by a specialised breast
histopathologist (AMH) who ensured separate selection and segregation
of tumour / normal pairs for each banked case and examined frozen
sections to ensure the banked samples contained representative amounts
of either tumour or normal tissue (>80%). The selected cases
corresponded to those which had previously been analysed
immunohistochemically for ER expression in other studies by our group. The cohort
consisted of 5 grade I, 12 grade II and 10 grade 3 tumours (age range
30–93 years). Seventeen were lymph node positive and 10 were node
negative. Immunohistochemical analysis of ER was conducted using previously published protocols.
DNA was isolated from 27 paired primary breast tumour and adjacent
normal tissue specimens. LOH was determined using four polymorphic
markers spanning chromosome 14q22–24 and included D14S1026, AL359235,
D14S63 and AL122035. Allele ratios of tumour and normal samples were
calculated for informative cases from the peak heights obtained from
the electrophoretograms and a tumour/normal ratio calculated. A value
of <0.5 indicated LOH. LOH was correlated to immunohistochemical
expression of ER . LOH was detected in 21% of cases in a region
immediately adjacent to the location of ER but not within the ER region itself. No correlation between LOH and loss
of expression of ER by immunohistochemistry was observed. Thus, the loss
of expression of ER observed in some breast cancers does not appear to
be a mutational event in most cases and is most likely to be in
association with epigenetic inactivation such as methylation, as
reported in other studies.
1. Burki NG et al., Int J Cancer
88:607–13, 2000
2. James LA et al., Oncogene
14:1059–65, 1997

## 5111

## Expression of estrogen receptor variant mRNA in primary breast cancer - a potential
role in predicting hormonal responsiveness.

## Vinayagam R, Davies MPA, Sibson DR, Holcombe C. Royal Liverpool
University Hospital, Liverpool, Merseyside, United Kingdom;
Clatterbridge Cancer Research Trust, Bebington, Wirral, United
Kingdom

Background: Estrogen receptor alpha
(ER ) is an accepted marker for response to hormonal
therapy, but may fail to accurately predict outcome. The role of
estrogen receptor beta (ER ) and its variants in breast cancer is poorly
understood. Published studies are conflicting, partly due to different
case selection and study methods.
Materials and Methods:We quantitatively measured mRNA of ER
 1 (wild-type), C-terminal splice variants (ER
 2/ER cx, ER 5) and exon deletion variants (ER 5, ER 3) in 100 primary breast cancers [70 ER
 positive (ER ) and 30 ER negative (ER )] from postmenopausal women treated with surgery and
adjuvant endocrine therapy, but not chemotherapy. ER qRTPCR results were related to clinical and
histopathological variables and to outcome [breast cancer relapse
(BCR) or breast cancer survival (BCS), median follow-up
>5 years].
Results:In ER cases ER 2 was expressed at the highest level followed by ER
 5 then ER 1, but in ER cases ER 5 was highest followed by ER 2 then ER 1. ER 5 was only detected in 20 cancers, 17 of which were
ER and 14 of which were high grade; ER was only detected in 3 cases. Mean ER
 1 levels were significantly higher in ER
 cases than ER cases, but mean ER 5 and ER 5 were significantly higher in ER than ER cases (T-test all P<0.003). All C-terminal ER
 variant levels were higher in low grade tumors; but
only ER 5 was significantly higher in low grade tumors within
the ER subgroup.
Outcome analysis was limited to 62 ER cases receiving tamoxifen. High ER 2 levels were most closely associated with good
outcome; in a ER 2-high group (ER copies/ g total RNA, n=30) the 5 year cumulative relapse-free
population was 81%, compared to 55% in the ER 2-low group (n=32); Log-Rank BCR P=0.0095, BCS
P=0.010. In multivariate analysis, high ER 2 was significantly associated with reduced BCR
independent of grade, size or nodal status (Cox P=0.04).
In node negative cases (n=33), using a lower cut-off (ER
 copies/ g total RNA), ER 2 was significantly associated with better outcome;
the 5 year cumulative relapse-free population was 96% in the ER
 2-high group, compared to 55% in the ER
 2-low group; Log Rank BCR P=0.0005, BCS
P<0.00005.

Discussion: Differential expression
of ER variants was seen in relation to ER status and tumor grade. Using a treatment-specific
adjuvant tamoxifen cohort, high ER 2 mRNA levels were significantly associated with
favorable outcome. Notably, in node negative breast cancers, low ER
 2 identified a poorly performing sub-group. Our
results indicate that specific ER splice variants may be useful predictive markers and
are potentially important in determining response to endocrine
therapy. These results need to be validated in larger cohorts of
patients.

## 5112

## Estrogen (E2)/anti-estrogen driven estrogen
receptor (ER) transcription complex assembly in resistant human breast
cancer cell lines.

## Naughton C, Kuske B, MacLeod K, Langdon SP, Smyth JF, Cameron
DA. University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom
Transcriptional activation by ER is a complex and multistep process influenced by
coactivator and corepressor proteins (cofactors) that can either
positively or negatively modulate ER mediated transcriptional activity. Deviations from
this process due to alterations in either the levels or activity of ER
 cofactors have been proposed mechanisms for the
development of endocrine resistance in human breast cancer.
To examine this hypothesis further, we have investigated
transcription complex assembly at the pS2 promoter in a panel of human
breast cancer variants derived from hormone sensitive MCF-7 cells.
MCF-7/LCC1 cells have become E2 independent with respect to growth,
whereas MCF-7/LCC9 cells have in addition acquired resistance to
anti-estrogens. RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that pS2 expression
increased more than 100-fold in MCF-7 cells following
E2 treatment for 48 h, whereas Tamoxifen
(Tam) treatment resulted in a less than 3-fold increase. In contrast,
LCC1 and LCC9 cells have high basal expression of pS2 (levels
comparable with E2-stimulated MCF-7 cells) with only minor changes
being observed following either E2 or Tam
treatment in LCC1 cells (2–5 fold) or LCC9 cells (2–3 fold). In
addition, LCC1 cell lines displayed elevated protein levels for both
ER (4–6 fold) and the coactivator SRC-1 (>2 fold) whereas
expression levels in LCC9 cells were comparable to MCF-7 cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was used to compare factors
recruited over a 90 min time course to the pS2 promoter in response to
E2 (10−9 M) or
Tam (10−6 M) treatment, in each cell line.
ChIP analysis demonstrated that the coactivators AIB1 and SRC-1 form
part of the ER transcription complex assembled at the pS2 promoter in
MCF-7 cells in response to E2, whereas Tam caused recruitment of the
corepressors NCoR and SMRT. The ER transcription complex formed in
LCC1 and LCC9 cells differs from that seen in MCF-7 cells in terms of
H4 acetylation, ER recruitment and cofactor binding. Specifically, the
E2 driven recruitment of AIB1 and SRC-1 was greatly increased in both
LCC1 and LCC9 cells, despite E2 having little or no effect on growth
in these cell lines. However, in LCC1 and LCC9 cell lines, Tam did not
recruit either NCoR or SMRT to the pS2 promoter consistent with the
observation that Tam causes only minimal growth retardation in LCC1
cells and no effect on growth in LCC9 cells. In conclusion, these data
support the hypothesis that changes in cofactor recruitment to the ER
transcription complex may be related to endocrine resistance and these
observations are being explored further using RNAi technology.

## 5113

## ER- 36, a novel variant of estrogen receptor-
 , mediates membrane-initiated mitogenic estrogen
signaling in ERnegative breast cancer cells.

## Shen P, Zhang X-T, Loggie BW, Wang Z-Y. Creighton University
Medical School, Omaha, NE; First Affiliated Hospital, Medical College,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
Clinically, breast cancers are classified as either ER-
 positive or as ER- negative breast cancer. It is well known that breast
tumors with an ER- positive phenotype are more differentiated and have
lower metastasis potential than ER- -negative tumors. Therefore, the absence of ER-
 is correlated with a worse prognosis in terms of
disease-free survival and overall survival.
We recently identified and cloned a novel variant of ER-
 with a predicted molecular weight of 35.7 kDa. The
transcript of this ER- variant is initiated from a previously unidentified
promoter in the first intron of the original ER- gene. This ER- variant differs from the original ER-
 by lacking both transcriptional activation domains
(AF-1 and AF-2) but retaining the dimerization, DNA-binding and
partial ligand-binding domains. In transient transfection assays, this
ER- variant exhibited no intrinsic transcriptional
activity but strongly inhibited ligand-dependent and –independent
transactivation activities mediated by the original ER-
 and ER- . Immunohistochemistry analysis using a specific
antibody against this ER- variant revealed that 21 of 35 cases (60%) breast
cancer specimens examined express this ER- variant on the plasma membrane and cytoplasm, and 11
out of 14 ER-negative breast caner specimens also express this ER-
 variant. Western blot analysis of proteins prepared
from normal mammary epithelial cells and established breast cancer
cell lines demonstrated a single protein band with 35-kDa molecular
weight in most of breast cancer cells but not in normal mammary
epithelial cells. Interestingly, ER- 36 is highly expressed in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-436
cells, two well-known ER- negative breast cancer cell lines, and also
expressed in ER- positive breast cancer cells such as MCF7, T47D and
H3396. RT-PCR analysis further demonstrated that this ER-
 variant has an inverse expression pattern of the
original ER- in established breast cancer cells.
Immunofluorescence microscope analysis showed that this ER-
 variant is expressed on the plasma membrane and in
the cytoplasm and nucleus of MDA-MB-231 cells. In MDA-MB-231 cells, 17
 - estradiol (E2 ) treatment activated a membrane-initiated effect of
estrogen signaling by activating the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway that led to an increase of cell proliferation and foci
formation on soft agar. Antiestrogens such as tamoxifen,
4-hydroxtamoxifen and ICI 182,780 at l0 nM strongly activated the MAPK
pathway and stimulated cell growth. However, antiestrogens at higher
concentrations (>5 mM) arrested cell growth and induced apoptotic
cell death. Our findings thus demonstrate a novel ER- variant that mediates membrane-initiated mitogenic
estrogen signaling in ER-negative breast cancer cells, and suggest
that aberrant expression of this ER- variant contributes to development of ER-negative
human breast cancer.

## 5114

## Differential overexpressions of EGFR, c-erbB-2, and IGF1R in
histological types, nuclear grades, and hormone receptors status of
breast carcinoma.

## Ueda S, Tsuda H, Sato K, Takeuchi H, Shigekawa T, Mochizuki H.
National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Saitama, Japan
Although IGF1R and EGFR overexpressions are reported to occur in
breast cancer, their pathological significance is still unclear. We
examined IGF1R, EGFR, and c-erbB-2 overexpressions
immunohistochemically in 150 cases of surgically resected breast
cancer and their correlation with the histological type and grade and
ER and/or PgR subgroups of primary tumor. To facilitate the analysis,
we constructed a tissue microarray comprising 2-mm diameter tissues
cored from the representative tissue block of each tumor. IGF1R, EGFR,
and c-erbB-2 overexpressions were detected in 70 (47%), 12(8%), and
23(15%), respectively. The EGFR was more frequent in the IDCs of
solid-tubular type than in other histological types (P<0.05), and
the c-erbB2 was more frequent in DCIS in the group of IDC. On the
contrary, the IGF1R was comprehensively overexpressed in the groups of
both IDC and DCIS. The EGFR was significantly correlated with nuclear
grade 3 (P=0.0005), lymph node matastasis (P=0.007), and tumor size
(P=0.014). The IGF1R was more frequent with nuclear grade 2 (P=0.017),
while the c-erbB-2 was not correlated with nuclear grades. The
correlations with tumor size, lymph node status were not observed for
c-erbB-2 and IGF1R. In cases of ER negative and PgR negative status,
the EGFR and c-erbB2 were significantly detected in 12 (92%)
(P<0.0001) and 16 (64%)(P=0.0003), respectively, while in the cases
of ER positive and PgR positive status, the IGF1R was detected in 41
(59%) (P=0.0005). The EGFR appeared to be an indicator of breast
cancer groups with high-grade or lymph node metastasis. Both EGFR and
c-erbB2 appeared to be independent from hormone receptors status,
while the IGF1R appeared to depend on hormone receptors status.

## 6001

## Method of cooking and risk of breast cancer in the
Philippines.

## Kotsopoulos J, Liede A, De Leon Matsuda ML, Sun P, Narod SA.
Sunnybrook and Women’s College Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada;
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; College of Medicine and
Philippine General Hospital, University of the Philippines, Manila,
Philippines

Background: Evidence from
epidemiological studies suggests that environmental exposures,
including lifestyle and dietary factors, play an important role in the
etiology of breast cancer. Among Asian countries, the highest
age-standardized rates have been reported for the Philippines. The
influence of diet and nutrition as possible contributors to these high
rates has not been of intense research. Recent epidemiological studies
have suggested a relationship between methods of food preparation and
the risk of breast cancer. Other studies suggest that dietary intake
of added fats and oils from both animal and vegetable sources may also
influence the risk of cancer. We examined the possible role of current
and adolescent cooking methods and the risk of breast cancer in a
case-control study conducted in Manila, Philippines.

Materials and Methods: Eligible
subjects were women undergoing evaluation at the Philippine General
Hospital, Manila for a breast complaint (mass, pain, or nipple
discharge). All of the women completed a risk factor questionnaire by
personal interview with a research assistant prior to the
determination of their case or control status. Information regarding
current, as well as usual method of cooking in the household at
12 years of age was obtained. Unconditional logistic regression was
used to examine the association between various methods of cooking and
the risk of breast cancer. Adjusted odds ratios (OR) and 95%
confidence intervals (CI) are reported.

Results: Boiling food in coconut milk
was associated with a significantly increased risk of breast cancer
(OR = 2.2; 95% CI 1.3–3.8). There were positive associations between
boiling food in coconut milk currently (OR = 1.9; 95% CI 1.0–3.3), and
at 12 years of age (OR = 2.9; 95% CI 1.6–5.5), and the risk of breast
cancer. A positive association between frying food and breast cancer
risk was restricted to women whose household fried food at 12 years of
age (OR = 1.89; 95% CI 1.1–3.4).

Discussion: The results of this study
suggest that various cooking methods during adolescence (rather than
in adulthood) have a substantial influence on the risk of breast
cancer, though these findings need to be confirmed. The high content
of saturated fat and calories in coconut products, as well as the
mutagenic compounds generated from high-temperature cooking, may
underlie the increased risks. Primary prevention initiatives that
promote healthy lifestyle practices may help decrease the high rates
of breast cancer reported for this population of women.

## 6002

## A single gene biomarker identifies undifferentiated breast cancers
associated with short duration of breastfeeding.

## Symmans WF, Fiterman DJ, Anderson SK, Ayers M, Rouzier R,
Dunmire V, Stec J, Valero V, Sneige N, Albarracin C, Wu Y, Ross JS,
Wagner P, Theriault RL, Arun B, Kuerer H, Hess K, Zhang W, Hortobagyi
GN, Pusztai L. M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Millennium
Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Cambridge, MA; Albany Medical College, Albany,
NY
Background. The pathogenesis of breast cancers that do not express
estrogen receptors or Her-2/neu receptors (ER-/HER2- phenotype) is
incompletely understood. We initially observed markedly elevated gene
expression of gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor pi
subunit (GABApi, GABRP) restricted to ER-/HER2- breast cancers in a
pilot analysis of cDNA microarrays. Other evidence indicates that
GABApi expression is related to endocrine changes during pregnancy and
parturition.
Materials and Methods. Transcriptional profiles (TxPs) were
obtained from 82 primary invasive breast cancers using oligonucleotide
microarrays. Real time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was used to measure GABApi gene expression in a separate
cohort of 121 invasive breast cancers. GABApi gene expression values
from TxP and RT-PCR were compared with combined ER and HER2 status and
clinicopathologic characteristics in 203 patients.
Results. Elevated GABApi gene expression was identified in 16% of
breast cancers (13/82 TxP, 20/121 RT-PCR), including 60% of ER-/HER2-
breast cancers (13/21 TxP, 18/31 RT-PCR), 60% of breast cancers in the
basal-like genomic category (13/22 TxP), and 72% of tumors that are
both ER-/HER2- and basal-like (13/18 TxP). Genes co-expressed with
GABApi in the TxPs are associated with undifferentiated cells. In a
multivariate linear regression analysis of main effects, GABApi gene
expression was associated with ER-/HER2- phenotype (p < 0.0001),
younger age at diagnosis (p = 0.0003), and shorter lifetime duration
of breastfeeding (<= 6 months) in all women (p = 0.017) and
specifically in parous women (p = 0.013). In a two-way interaction
analysis GABApi expression was positively associated with the
combination of ER- /HER2- phenotype and high grade (p = 0.002), and
with the combination of Hispanic ethnicity and high grade (p =
0.036).
Discussion. GABApi gene expression defines an undifferentiated form
of breast cancer that is significantly associated with shorter
lifetime history of breastfeeding and with high-grade breast cancer in
Hispanic women. This suggests that prolonged breastfeeding is
protective from future development of an undifferentiated and
estrogen-independent form of breast cancer.

## 6003

## Past exogenous hormone use and current endogenous sex hormone
status in postmenopausal women in the EPICNorfolk population
cohort.

## Chan MF, Khaw KT, on Behalf of EPIC-Norfolk Collaborators,
University of Cambridge. Institute of Public Health, University of
Cambridge
High endogenous sex hormones are implicated in breast cancer risk.
Use of exogenous hormones in the form of oral contraeptives (OC) and
hormone replacement therapy (HRT) are also associated with disease
risk.
In 1983 postmenopausal women aged 55 to 81 years not currently on
hormones in the EPIC-Norfolk population-based study, we examined the
association between past OC and HRT use and circulating endogenous
levels of estrogens, androgens and SHBG. In multiple linear regression
analyses, past OC and HRT use was independently associated with lower
17-OHprogesterone and testosterone levels, age-matched, and then after
adjusting for age, body mass index, parity, ages at menarche and
menopause, alcohol and smoking status, and physical activity. Past OC
use was also associated with reduced androstenedione and SHBG levels
compared to never-OC use, and past HRT with lower testosterone/SHBG
ratio compared to never-HRT. In multivariate analysis, both OC and HRT
use had independent effects on current testosterone levels.
Conclusion: Past exogenous hormone use is associated with
differences in currrent endogenous hormone levels in postmenopausal
women not apparently explained by known confounding factors. This
raises questions about long-term and lifelong physiological effects of
exogenous hormone use in earlier life. 

## 6004

## Antidepressants and breast cancer risk: casual link or no cause for
concern?

## Masry P, George R, Jackman M, Thain D, Walker R, Warner J,
Wintonic A, Melinyshyn S, Sunderland C. Queen’s University, Kingston,
ON, Canada; Hotel Dieu Hospital, Kingston, ON, Canada

Background: There has been debate
about antidepressant medications and the development of breast cancer
in women. Several studies suggest antidepressants as potential
initiators or promoters, while others have supported no correlation.
These medications are increasingly being prescribed among women for
the management of menopausal symptoms, as well as for depressive
illness. As such, it is important to shed light on antidepressant (AD)
culpability as a risk factor for breast cancer development. This
prospective study extends our previous report from 2003 at the San
Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium.

Methods: A prospective cohort study
was initiated at a regional breast assessment program accruing 1591
patients referred for investigation of an abnormal mammogram or
clinical breast finding. Data included demographic information,
antidepressant use, Gail scores, menopausal status, hormonal therapy
and family history. Biopsy results, imaging reports, receptor status
and staging information were collected on follow up. Nonparametric
data was analyzed with the Chi-square test and parametric data with
the Student’s t-test. All patients were followed to a diagnosis of
cancer or the confirmation of benign disease.

Results: Of 1591 women, 595 were
found to have invasive cancer or DCIS. 27.2% of all women referred
were current or previous users of AD. Among those found to have breast
cancer 27.1% were AD users, compared to 27.3% in those with benign
disease; no difference (p=0.960). AD class (selective antidepressants
versus tricyclic antidepressants – no patient reported MAOI use) could
not be correlated with the diagnosis of cancer, nor did antidepressant
use or class of antidepressant used relate to the receptor status of
those found to have breast cancer.

Conclusions: A high proportion of
women referred for breast assessment were or had been prescribed
antidepressant medications (27.2%).There was no correlation between
the use of antidepressants, or any class of AD and the diagnosis of
breast cancer. Similarly, AD use did not influence the receptor status
among women found to have a cancer.

## 6005

## Pilot study of changes in mammographic density in women treated
with letrozole or placebo on NCIC CTG MA17.

## Vachon CM, Ingle JN, Scott CG, Olson JE, Goss PE. Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA

Background: Mammographic density in
healthy women has been associated with breast cancer risk. It is also
known to be reduced by the anti-estrogen tamoxifen and to increase in
women on hormone or estrogen replacement therapy. Changes in
mammographic density in women on aromatase inhibitors (AI) could be a
marker of efficacy and a surrogate of response to treatment or a
preventative effect. To examine mammographic density in response to AI
therapy, we examined the influence of letrozole (LET) on mammographic
density in a subset of women enrolled on the NCIC CTG MA-17 clinical
trial.

Methods: MA-17 randomized 5187
postmenopausal women to receive LET or placebo (PLAC) after 5 years of
tamoxifen. Women enrolled at Princess Margaret Hospital or the Mayo
Clinic were eligible for this study. Eligible participants had one
intact non-cancerous breast, a mammogram available before
discontinuing TAM and at least one mammogram post randomization to LET
or PLAC. Percent mammographic density (%) and absolute density
(cm2) were estimated on the craniocaudal
views of the noncancerous breast using the Cumulus program developed
at the University of Toronto. Age, weight and height at each
mammogram, tumor stage and nodal involvement were abstracted from
medical records. Change in mammographic density over time was compared
between the LET and PLAC groups using a mixed model repeated measures
approach adjusting for the abstracted variables.

Results: 57 women randomized to LET
and 48 to PLAC were eligible for this pilot study. 17% of women had
two mammograms available for review; 67% had three mammograms and 16%,
four or more. Mean age, weight, height, body mass index (BMI), percent
and absolute density at first mammogram (while on TAM prior to entry
on MA.17) were similar between the LET and PLAC groups. Adjusted for
age, BMI, tumor stage and nodal status, there was a greater decrease
in percent density per year for women on LET (−0.55 per year) vs.
women on PLAC (−0.07 per year), but this difference was not
statistically significant (p=0.33). Similar, but more pronounced
differences were seen for absolute density; women on LET experienced a
−0.29 cm2 decrease in absolute density
per year while women on PLAC experienced a
0.10 cm2 increase per year (p=0.10).
There was no evidence to suggest that these associations differed by
categories of BMI or age.

Conclusion: Women transitioning from
TAM to LET in this pilot study experienced greater decreases in
mammographic density than TAM to PLAC, supporting the hypothesis that
LET decreases mammographic density. The decreases observed did not
achieve statistical significance, likely because of the small sample
size, and a larger study examining the AI and mammographic density
association is being conducted.

## 6006

## Influence of family history on breast cancer risk in women with
biopsy-confirmed benign breast disease: results from the Nurses’ Health
study.

## Collins LC, Baer HJ, Tamimi RM, Connolly JL, Colditz GA, Schnitt
SJ. Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School;
Brigham and Women’s Hospital; Harvard School of Public Health; Harvard
Center for Cancer Prevention, Boston, MA

Background: Prior clinical and
epidemiologic studies have demonstrated an association between
histologic category of benign breast disease (BBD) and risk of
subsequent cancer. However, the influence of a positive family history
of breast cancer on breast cancer risk among women with
biopsy-confirmed BBD is less certain.

Methods: To address this issue, we
conducted a case-control study of benign breast disease and breast
cancer risk nested within the Nurses’ Health Study and the Nurses’
Health Study II. Cases were women with breast cancer who had a
previous confirmed benign breast biopsy (n=353). Controls were women
who also had a previous biopsy-confirmed diagnosis of benign breast
disease, but who were free from breast cancer at the time the
corresponding case was diagnosed (n=1495). Controls were matched to
cases on year of birth and year of benign breast biopsy. Histologic
sections of the benign breast biopsies were reviewed and categorized
as showing either non-proliferative lesions, proliferative lesions
without atypia, or atypical hyperplasia (AH).

Results: Among all women with BBD,
those with a family history of breast cancer in a first-degree
relative (mother or sister) had an increased breast cancer risk when
compared with women without a family history (multivariate O.R. 1.58;
95% CI, 1.14–2.19). Compared to women with non-proliferative lesions
and no family history, women with proliferative lesions without atypia
and a positive family history had a slightly higher breast cancer risk
(multivariate O.R. 2.68; 95% CI, 1.67–4.29) than those without a
family history (multivariate O.R. 1.55, 95% CI, 1.14–2.12), and this
difference approached statistical significance (p=0.06). In contrast,
a family history of breast cancer did not significantly increase the
risk among women with AH. The multivariate O.R. for the development of
breast cancer was 4.55 (95% CI, 3.04–6.83) for women with AH and no
family history and 5.50 (95% CI, 2.76–10.95) for those with AH and a
positive family history (p=0.64). Moreover, among women with AH, those
with a family history were at only a non-significant 14% greater risk
compared to those with no family history.

Conclusions: We conclude that in this
case-control study, a family history of breast cancer in a
first-degree relative slightly increased the breast cancer risk among
women with proliferative lesions without atypia, but did not further
increase the risk among those with atypical hyperplasia.

## 6007

## Ultra-sensitive GC/Tandem mass spectrometry assay for estradiol
measurements in post-menopausal women.

## Santen RJ, Demers LM, Ohorodnik SK, Settlege JA, Langecker P,
Wang S. University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA; Penn State,
Hershey, PA; Taylor Technologies, Princeton, NJ; Intarcia
Therapeutics, Emeryville, CA
Pooled data from 9 separate studies (JNCI 94:606–16, 2002) reported
that a single plasma estradiol (E2) level predicted the risk of
developing breast cancer over the ensuing years (2.0 to 12.1 years
median) in postmenopausal (pm) women.
A notable aspect of the pooled analysis was that the median E2 levels
from the 9 studies ranged from a high of 40 pg/ml to a low of
6.3 pg/ml. Such variations in the normal ranges of E2 in pm women conclusively demonstrate that
currently available E2 assays for post-menopausal women are
insufficiently sensitive and specific to reproducibly measure actual
circulating E2 levels. A critical need is to develop new, valid,
ultra-sensitive assays of E2 to predict who will develop breast
cancer.
The current study examined an ultra-sensitive, gas chromatographic,
triple derivative, tandem mass spectrometry assay (GC/MS) for use in
pm women. Validation included assessment of precision, recovery and
sensitivity as well as correlation with biologic parameters (i.e BMI
and % suppression of plasma E2 with aromatase inhibitors).
The sensitivity of the GC/MS assay is 0.6 pg/ml (1 ml sample).
Precision for between assay measurements at levels of 0.8, 5, and
20 pg/ml were 8%, 6% and 6% respectively (within assay). Recoveries of
added E2 in samples with varying levels of E2 were 105%, 96% and 102%
respectively and linearity of recovery of added E2 was
r=0.9977.
Basal levels of E2 in 30 normal postmenopausal women were
7.26±4.82 pg/ml (SD). With the GC/MS assay and 11.9±12.0 pg/ml (SD)
with a previously characterized radioimmunoassay. For 55 women with
breast cancer the mean level of E2 with the GC/ MS assay was 5.88±3.43
(SD) pg/ml. Correlation of the GC/MS assay with BMI was r=0.674 versus
a range of r=0.14 to 0.574 with 7 different RIA methods.
Both RIA and GC/MS assays were used to assess the levels of E2
during administration of the aromatase inhibitor atamestane, plus the
antiestrogen toremiphene or the aromatase inhibitor letrozole alone.
No differences were detected between groups and accordingly, data were
pooled. Mean levels for the women on aromatase inhibitors were less
than 0.6 pg/ml when measured by GC/MS (119 of 120 samples
undetectable) and by RIA, mean levels were 8.8 pg/ml. The degree of
suppression with aromatase inhibitors was 89% if assessed by GC/MS and
only 49% by RIA. Using the “gold standard” isotope kinetic method, the
reported level of suppression is 97–99% % for third generation
aromatase inhibitors which correlates best with the GC/MS. Taken
together, these data suggest that the GC/MS assay is a superior method
for analysis of E2 in pm women and should now be used in a prospective
study to predict the risk of breast cancer.

## 6008

## Unilateral congenetial breast abnormalities and laterality of
breast cancer.

## Olsson HL, Luts L, Anderson H. University Hospital, Lund,
Sweden

Background: Congenital abnormalities
have in some instances been related to cancer risk such as double
ureters and lack of testicular descent (chryptorchism). In the present
study unilateral congenital breast abnormalities have been related to
which side the breast cancer presents.

Material and Methods: Consecutive
women with breast cancer (n=1578) at the Department of Oncology,
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden were questionned and examined about
congenital breast abnormalities. Unilateral abnormalies were related
to the laterality of the breast cancer.

Results: Twelve women displayed a
unilateral congenital nipple retraction, confirmed by clinical
investigation at breast cancer diagnosis. In all cases the woman
underlined that the inverted nipple had been present since
birth/childhood. In three cases a unilateral breast hypoplasia were
present. Extra mammary tissue (breasts) were found in 5 cases.
Presence of extra nipples was not assessed.
Among the cases with inverted nipples, the tumor developed in all
cases on the inverted nipple side, 12/12, (p =
0.512 = 0.00024). Also among the women
with hypoplasia, the tumor developed on the same side, while there was
no relationship between extra breast tissue and breast cancer
laterality.

Discussion: The findings suggest that
breast tumors more often develop in a breast that either is
hypoplastic or has a congenitally inverted nipple. The reason could be
that the breast fails to differentiate leaving a larger proportion of
epithelial stem cells or progenitor cells prone to carcinogenesis.
Patho-anatomic investigations to elucidate this are underway.

## 6009

## The relationship between serum cholesterol level and axillary lymph
node statu in breast cancer patients.

## Utkan G, Onur H, Akbulut H, Yalcin B, Buyukcelik A, Tek I, Doruk
H, Dogan M, Demirkazik A, Icli F. Ankara University School of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey

Background: Estrogen is known to
decrease total cholesterol and low density lipoprotein levels whereas
it increases high density lipoprotein level. The aim of the study is
evaluation of the association between serum total cholesterol level,
tumor size and axillary status.

Material and Method: In this
retrospective study, 150 patients who underwent breast cancer surgery
and adjuvant chemotherapy were evaluated for axillary lymph node
status, tumor size and serum total cholesterol level. Measurement of
serum total cholesterol level within 3 months before or after cancer
surgery was accepted as reference value. Body mass index (BMI) was
calculated for all patients. None of them had hypothyroidism,
hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus and alcohol abuse. Level above
200 mg/dL for serum total cholesterol was defined as
hypercholesterolemia.

Results: Characteristics of patients
are listed in Table 1. BMI was found significantly associated with
age, menopausal status and total cholesterol level (p=0,0001, p=0,012,
p=0,038; respectively). There was no correlation between serum total
cholesterol level and number of resected axillary lymph nodes
(p=0,069). Number of positive axillary lymph nodes was inversely
correlated with serum total cholesterol level (r:−0,189, p=0,022).
Serum total cholesterol level was determined as an independent
prognostic factor for evaluating number of positive axillary lymph
nodes in multivariate analysis (p=0,01). The relationship between high
serum total cholesterol level and number of positive axillary lymph
nodes is shown in Table 2 (p=0,05).

Conclusions: Despite small number of
patients in this study, we found an inverse correlation between serum
total cholesterol level and number of positive axillary lymph nodes.
The effect of BMI in breast cancer is known. But relation with total
cholesterol level, axillary involvement and the effect on survive,
should experienced by large number of studies. 
 

## 6010

## Association of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) gene
polymorphism and breast cancer in males and females.

## Bica CG, Silva LLM, Toscani NV, Da Cruz IBM, Graudenz MS.
FFFCMPA, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil

Background: One of the several
metabolic pathways involved in breast carcinogenesis is the human
polymorphism AA in the mitochondrial targeting sequence Val16Ala of
the manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) gene, which has previously been associated with
an increased risk of breast cancer in females. Since there’s no
previous report on the MnSOD
polymorphism in males with breast cancer, the objective of this study
is to analyse the MnSOD
polymorphism in a population of male breast cancer from the
southernmost state of Brazil, compared to healthy controls and to
female breast cancer.

Methodology: A case-control study of
100 patients affected by breast cancer (11 men and 89 women) and 370
healthy ageadjusted data-base controls (153 men and 217 women) was
performed. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and
paraffinembedded tumoral tissue and MnSOD polymorphism was determined by PCR-RFLP
techniques using restriction enzyme Hae III. Chi-square test was used to compare the
MnSOD frequencies
distribution.

Results: MnSOD genotypes and allele frequencies for all patients
with breast cancer were AA=15%, AV=56% and VV=29%. Either male or
female patients with breast cancer presented significantly higher AA
frequencies compared to controls (p=0,035), suggesting a strong
association of this genotype with breast cancer. A 2.15-fold (95% CI
1.393–4.541) risk of breast cancer was found among individuals
carrying the MnSOD AA
allele-containing genotypes compared with the MnSOD VV genotype.

Discussion: These results confirm the
already established association of the MnSOD
AA genotype with female breast cancer and further
indicates a similar frequency distribution and increased risk in the
male population. Our study supports the idea that although gender
differences may influence breast carcinogenesis through different
pathways, MnSOD polymorphism seems
to share the same role in both genders.

## 6011

## Ductal carcinoma in situ and risk factors for breast cancer: can we
target individuals for surveillance?

## Saettler ER, George R, Thain D, Walker R, Warner J, Wintonic A,
Melinyshyn S, Sunderland C. Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada;
Hotel Dieu Hospital, Kingston, ON, Canada

Background: Ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS) is recognized as a precursor to breast cancer. Overall 10 year
survival rates after treatment approaches 97%. The purpose of this
study was to investigate the risk factors associated with a
presentation of DCIS, to more effectively identify people for
surveillance strategies.

Methods: New referrals with a breast
complaint (abnormal imaging, symptom or finding) were administered a
pre-assessment questionnaire. Patients were asked age,
reproductive/menstrual history, medications, hormonal use, previous
breast health and detailed personal/family histories were obtained.
Gail scores were calculated. Patients were followed to a diagnosis of
benign, malignant or in situ disease. N=1223

Results: Of 1223 patients 753 (61.5%)
had benign and 470 (38.5%) a malignant diagnosis. DCIS accounted for
16% of the latter group. There was no age difference between people
with DCIS and infiltrating cancer (mean ages 58 and 57), but noncancer
patients were significantly younger (mean age 49.7, p=0.001). 52% of
DCIS patients had elevated Gail scores (>1.67 as per NSABP P.1
prevention trial), compared to 41% of the invasive and only 27% of the
benign groups (OR=3.05, p=0.0001). Also significantly associated with
a diagnosis of DCIS were prior breast biopsies (51% of DCIS group,
OR=3.15, p=0.005), family history in first-degree relatives (35% of
DCIS group, OR=1.77, p=0.002), and prior breast cancer
(p=0.001).

Conclusions: Careful assessment of
individual risk factors, including Gail scores, prior biopsies and
significant family history, identified the majority of DCIS patients
in this series as having been at risk for breast cancer. While
completely sporadic cases occur, this series challenges the notion
that a majority of cases will have no identifiable risk
factors.

## 6012

## Morphological and immunohistochemical aspects of the breast tissue
in postmenopausal women before and after hormone replacement
therapy.

## Elias S, Dardes RC, Baracat EC, Logullo AF, Kemp C. Federal
University of São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil

Background: Estrogen replacement
therapy isolated or combined with progestin is still a controversial
issue and most studies associate with increased risk of breast cancer
after hormone replacement therapy for over 5 years. However, despite
this important evidence, not much is known about the mechanisms by
which hormones act on normal breast epithelium. In this study breast
tissue of postmenopausal women was analyzed before and after 6 months
of continuous combined estrogen-progestin replacement therapy.

Material and Methods: The normal
breast tissue (48 samples) was obtained from the upper outer left
quadrant, through a percutaneous large-core breast biopsy. Epithelial
density and nuclear volume on hematoxylin-eosin stained plates were
evaluated for the morphological study. Morphometry was graphically
analyzed with the use of IMAGELAB 2000 software, after acquisition of
a microscopic image by the VIDCAP 32 system. In addition, we evaluated
the epithelial proliferative activity through the monoclonal antibody
Ki-67, the expression of the estrogen and progestin receptors and the
stroma, using CD-34 antibody, an angiogenic marker.

Results: After 6 months of
estrogen-progestin replacement therapy, there was a significant
increase in nuclear volume, in late postmenopausal women. There was no
difference in epithelial density, neither in Ki-67 labelling index and
CD34 marker. Additionally, estrogen and progestin receptors did not
change with the treatment.

Discussion: As a conclusion,
estrogenprogestin combined replacement therapy for 6 months induced an
enhanced in nuclear volume of breast epithelial cells, suggesting an
increase in their metabolic activity. However, it is important to
emphasis that this finding was observed only in late postmenopausal
women. The increased nuclear volume could precede others events that
confirm the stimulation of cellular proliferation by these hormones.
Certainly, factors such as duration of treatment, type of hormone
therapy, the timing of hormone initiation, the treatment regimen used
and individual characteristics interfere directly in the response of
the breast epithelium and stroma to hormonal therapy.

## 6013

## Transfer of lipids to HDL in patients with breast cancer.

## Grazianni SR, Hegg R, Morikawa A, Puk CG, Vinagre CG, Maranhao
RC. Heart Institute-USP, Sao Paulo, Brazil; University of Sao Paulo,
Sao Paulo, Brazil

Background: Neoplastic diseases are
often accompained by changes on lipid metabolism, such as alterations
in the plasma concentration of lipoproteins. Lipoproteins are
constantly being remodeled, and transfer proteins such CETP and PLTP
shift cholesterol esters (CE), phospholipids (PL) and triglycerides
(TG) from one to other lipoprotein class. Free cholesterol (FC) can
freely diffuse from the lipoprotein particle although PLTP may
accelerate its transfer. The characterization of these changes is
relevant for the understanding of some pathophysiological mechanisms
of cancer. In this study, we use a simple method of measuring the
transfer rates from an artificial lipoprotein model to HDL in subjects
with or without breast cancer (BC).

Material and Methods: Twenty five BC
patients aged 58±2 years and 14 paired controls were studied. Blood
samples were collected and plasma aliquots (200 m L) were incubated
with an artificial nanoemulsion labeled with
3H-TG and
14C-FC or 3H-CE
and 14C-PL. After precipitation of
nanoemulsion and apoBcontaining lipoproteins, the supernatant
containing HDL was counted for radioactivity. Total and HDL
cholesterol, and triglycerides levels were determined through the
enzime colorimetric method. LDL and VLDL cholesterol were calculated
by the Friedewald formula.

Results: The BC group shows lower
levels of total, LDL and HDL cholesterol, and triglycerides when
compaired to the control group (p<0,05). However, the transfer of
PL, TG, FC from the nanoemulsion to HDL were greater in BC group when
compaired to control group (p<0,01).

## Discussion:
Hypocholesterolemia due to low LDL as well as low HDL levels
were rather commom findings in BC group patients. Those results are
possibly related to the increased need of lipids for synthesis of
new membranes required by the cell proliferation. Transfer of
nanoemulsion lipids to HDL were increased in BC, except CE. Further
studies concerning elevated lipids transfer rates in BC patients
will be evaluated in the future.

## 6014

## Risk factors in breast cancer, a myth – an Indian
experience.

## Pant CS, Tandon A. Col Pant’s Imaging Centre, New Delhi, Delhi,
India

## Objective:
An array of breast cancer risk factors have been established
over the years, which include age of patient, family history,
parity, age at first childbirth, no breast feeding, smoking,
non-vegetarian diet and Hormone Replacement Therapy. Considering
these factors Indian women would fall in low risk group as most
women here have an early marriage, early childbirth, breast feed
for more than six months, are vegetarians and non smokers.
Surprisingly, though, the incidence of breast cancer is moderately
high in Indian population. Hence, this study was conducted to
determine the validity of established breast cancer risk factors in
Indian population.
Materials & Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 449 cases
of breast cancer (240 freshly diagnosed &159 on follow up) for
the presence on absence of risk factors. Additional, 200 cases with
benign breast disease were taken as control. The risk factors
included in the study were age, parity, age at first childbirth,
duration of breast feeding, smoking, non vegetarian diet, family
history & Hormone replacement therapy. A univariate &
multivariate statistical analysis was then performed on data from
both study groups.

## Results:
Only 5.8% of Indian women with breast cancer were childless and
13.2% had their first child after 30 years. On the contrary 86.8%
had their first child before 30 yrs with as many as 13% having had
it before 20 years of age. Age at first childbirth was, thus, not
significantly associated with breast cancer (p value 0.457). Lack
of breast feeding again was not statistically a significant risk
factor. About 80% of women had breast fed their babies with as high
as 40% having breast fed for about one year. A large number of
women with breast cancer were vegetarians (61.7%) and non smoker
(95.1%). Hormone replacement therapy (HRT) again was not
statistically significant risk factor (p value 0.537),only 8% of
cancer group had taken HRT.
Age of the patient (p value 0.000) and family history (p value
.007) came up as the only two significant risk factors. The risk of
breast of breast cancer was nearly two times greater in women over
50 yrs in comparison to those < 35 yrs (ODDS ratio 1.86, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.879–3.957). Women with family history
had 1.8 times more risk of breast cancer (ODDS ratio 1.78, 48, 95%
CI 1.126–2.712)

## Conclusion:
In Indian population, except for patient age and family history
none of the other established risk factors had any positive
association with breast cancer. Hence, we conclude that all these
risk factors are a myth.

## 6015

## The effect of the oral contraceptive pill on prognosis and survival
in women with breast cancer.

## Clarke E, Haji A, Kalimuddin S, Hajduga V, Bates T. William
Harvey Hospital, Ashford, Kent, United Kingdom

## Aim
To determine whether the oral contraceptive pill (OCP) has an
effect on the prognosis, age of diagnosis and survival in women
with breast cancer.

## Methods
The hospital cancer database was analysed to identify women who
had been diagnosed with breast cancer between 1990 and 1999. 1116
women were identified and divided into two groups, never users of
the OCP (Group 1, n=665), and current or previous users of the OCP
(Group II, n=423). Tumour prognostic factors were compared for both
groups using non parametric t tests. Five year Breast cancer
specific survival (BCS), Disease Free Survival (DFS) and Overall
Survival (OS) were compared between the two groups using
Kaplan-Meir Survival analyses.

## Results
We identified 665 women in Group 1 and 423 in Group II. There
were more patients in Group II with Grade III tumours when compared
with Group 1 (p=0.02). Evaluation of the other prognostic factors
revealed no significant difference between the two groups. There
was a significant correlation between the age of first starting the
pill and the age of diagnosis of breast cancer (p=<0.01), with
age of first pregnancy not acting as a counfounding factor
(p=0.63). There were no significant differences in BCS (p=0.57) and
DFS (p=0.97), however overall survival was improved in the “ever
users” of the OCP compared with “never users” (p=<0.01).

## Conclusion
Use of the OCP is not associated with a worse prognosis and
survival in breast cancer and may lead to less clinically advanced
disease. However, we observed that the earlier the pill was
started, the earlier the age of diagnosis of breast cancer.

## 6016

## Prediction of axillary sentinel node status: study of a large
single institution series of breast cancer patients.

## Zurrida S. European Institute of Oncology, Milan,
Italy

Background: Sentinel node biopsy
(SNB) has emerged as a powerful predictor of axillary status and can
spare axillary dissection when the sentinel nodes (SN) are disease
free. Identification of reliable predictors of SN metastases would
enable selection of patients for SNB, sparing those at very low risk
of axillary involvement.

Materials and Methods: We examined
clinical and pathologic characteristics in 4351 consecutive patients
with primary invasive breast cancer who had SNB from 1996 to 2003 at
the European Institute of Oncology. Mean age was 54.7 years, range:
24–85. Logistic regression was used to assess relations between
characteristics and presence of SN metastases. Variables significantly
associated with SN involvement by univariate analysis were included in
a multivariate model.

Results: SN metastases were found in
1446 (33.2%) patients. The SN(s) were the only involved axillary nodes
in 766 (57.3%). By multivariate analysis, presence of SN metastases
was directly associated with tumor above 1 cm (P<0.0001),
multifocality (P<0.0001) and presence of perivascular invasion
(PVI) (P<0.0001), and inversely associated with favorable
histotypes (P=0.0007) and lack of progesterone receptors (P=0.004).
PVI was the most powerful predictor of SN metastases with odds ratio
of 5.26 (95% CI 4.44–6.23).
When patients were stratified according by a predictive model of
features associated with SN status (tumor size, histotype type,
focality and presence of PVI) lowest risk of SN metastases (10.1%) was
in patients with favorable histology, tumors up to 1 cm, without PVI
(n=178, 4% of population); highest risk (77.2%) was in those with
tumors >2 cm and PVI (n=250, 5.7% of population); all other
combinations had intermediate risk of SN involvement.

Discussion: Tumor size and PVI
emerged as the most powerful independent predictors of SNN metastases.
However no combination of features identified patients with risk of SN
metastases below 10%, we therefore conclude that SNB should continue
to be offered to all eligible patients.

## 6017

## Telomere DNA content and allelic imbalance predict disease-free
survival and define field cancerization in histologically normal tissue
adjacent to breast tumors.

## Heaphy CM, Bisoffi M, Fordyce CA, Haaland-Pullus CM, Hines WC,
Joste NE, Mangalik A, Griffith JK. University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM; University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA

Purpose: Cancer arises from
mutations that promote the selection of cells with increasingly
malignant phenotypes. Previous studies show genomic instability is a
driving force behind this process. One mechanism leading to genomic
instability is loss of telomere function. Telomeres are specialized
nucleoprotein complexes that protect the ends of chromosomes from
degradation and end-toend fusion. Genomic instability has been shown
to occur in histologically normal tissue adjacent to breast tumors.
The purpose of this study was to identify fields of histologically
normal, yet genetically unstable cells within breast tissues. We
measured telomere DNA content (TC) and allelic imbalance (AI) at
defined distances from breast tumor margins, and tested the hypothesis
that TC correlates with breast cancer progression.

Methods: The present study
included three independent cohorts of breast tissues. The first cohort
consisted of normal, diseasefree breast tissue obtained from reduction
mammoplasties (n=20). The second cohort consisted of archival breast
tumors (n=38) and their matched tumor adjacent histologically normal
tissues. The third cohort consisted of breast tumors (n=11) with
matched histologically normal tissues excised at 1 cm and 5 cm from
the tumor margins. TC was measured by chemiluminescence hybridization
and AI was determined by multiplex PCR analysis of 16 microsatellite
loci. Survival curves were generated by Kaplan/ Meier Log Rank
analysis. Associations between TC, AI and tissue site were analyzed by
Wilcoxon/Kruskal Wallis Rank Sums test.

Results: The distributions of
TC and AI in tumor adjacent histologically normal tissues resembled
that of their matched tumors, rather than the normal, disease-free
breast tissues. TC was associated in tumors with disease recurrence
within 84 months of surgery (p=0.012) and with time of disease-free
survival (p=0.017). TC was also associated with recurrence and time of
disease-free survival in tumor adjacent histologically normal tissues
(p=0.025 and p=0.006). Tissues from the third cohort showed TC and AI
differed as a function of distance from the tumor margin (p=0.0003 and
p=0.0066, respectively).

Conclusions: Our study shows
that TC is a prognostic marker of disease recurrence in breast cancer.
In addition, our data indicate that telomere attrition occurs early in
fields of breast tissues, including histologically normal areas; and
leads to genomic instability, which represents a fertile ground for
the malignant transformation. The finding that markers of genomic
instability occur in fields of histologically normal tissues is of
practical importance, as it has implications for the definition of
appropriate tumor margins and the assessment of recurrence risk
factors in the context of breast-sparing surgery.

## 6018

## Validation of reference genes for relative real time PCR to study
hormone-dependent gene expression in breast cancer biopsies.

## Larionov AA, Dixon JM, Krause A, Evans DB, Miller WR. WGH,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom; Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Switzerland

Background: Relative gene expression
measurement by realtime quantitative PCR (qPCR) is widely used in
breast cancer research and may soon come into clinical practice.
Because of the relative nature of the quantitation, appropriate
selection of reference genes is essential for qPCR interpretation and
reproducibility. So far there have been no reports directly addressing
stability of expression of different reference genes in breast cancer
biopsies during hormonal treatment. In the present study the stability
of 10 potential reference genes was compared in ER+ve breast cancer
biopsies before and after neoadjuvant treatment with the aromatase
inhibitor letrozole.

Methods: The potential reference
genes were selected using microarray data along with literature
searches. Stability of their expression was then validated using qPCR.
The microarray data were based on patients receiving neoadjuvant
letrozole (Miller 2005). The genes were ranked by a stability score
accounting for both (i) overall coefficient of variation and (ii)
individual variation before and after treatment. Five genes
technically optimal for qPCR detection (consistently annotated gene
structure, no pseudogenes, no alternative splicing etc) were selected
among the most stably expressed ones. Five other candidate reference
genes were added from the literature: (i) three common reference
genes: ACTB, GAPDH and TBP (TBP was selected due to the high stability
rank in the microarrays) and (ii) two other genes that have been
specifically recommended for use in breast cancers: MRPL19 and PUM1
(Szabo 2004). qPCR validation of candidate reference genes was
performed using a separate group of 19 patients. Stability of gene
expression in qPCR was estimated by two different methods
(Vandesompele 2002, Szabo 2004).

Results: Both methods placed the
genes in the following order according to the stability of their
expression (from most stable to the least stable): KIAA0674, TBP,
PUM1, FLJ10385, SNX11, MRPL19, GAPDH and ACTB. Due to sub-optimal
performance in qPCR, MSH3 and MYL4 were excluded from
assessment.

Discussion and Conclusions: There is
no universal reference gene that is stably expressed in all
experimental systems. Instead, reference genes should be validated for
each experimental system individually. Ideally an average of 2 or 3
carefully validated genes should be used to normalize expression of
target genes in qPCR (Vandesompele 2002). Our results show that in
breast cancer biopsies ACTB and GAPDH have the less stable expression
among all studied potential reference genes. It confirms that these
genes traditionally used as positive controls in qualitative studies
may not be optimal as references for quantitative measurements. The
most stable expression was observed for KIAA0674, TBP and PUM1. The
geometric average of these genes may be recommended for normalization
in qPCR to study hormonedependent gene expression in breast cancer
biopsies in the neoadjuvant setting.

## 6019

## Molecular risk estimation and adjuvant chemotherapy in
node-negative breast cancer patients - a status report of the prospective
clinical trial NNBC 3-Europe.

## Herbst F, Paepke D, Gauger K, Gaskill N, Sweep F, Meisner C,
Schmitt M, Jaenicke F, Thomssen C, Harbeck N. Universitaetsklinikum
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; Technische Universitaet Muenchen,
Muenchen, Germany; University Hospital Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
Netherlands; Institute fuer Medizinische Datenverarbeitung,
Universitaet Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany; Martin-Luther-Universitaet
Halle, Halle, Germany

Background: Risk assessment in node
negative breast cancer patients by the use of the invasion markers
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) and its inhibitor PAI-1 has
been demonstrated in several single studies and a large meta analysis.
Patients with low uPA and/or PAI-1 tumor levels have an excellent
5-year overall survival (>95%) even without any adjuvant therapy.
The use of these molecular markers have shown to spare adjuvant
chemotherapy in app. one half of all node-negative breast cancer
patients. Whereas patients with an intermediate grade tumor can easily
be differentiated in low and high risk. In addition, patients with
high uPA and/or PAI-1 levels seem to have an enhanced benefit from
adjuvant chemotherapy. The NNBC-3-Europe trial seeks to answer two
questions: Is risk assessment by the molecular markers uPA/PAI-1
superior to that by clinico-pathological factors with
regard to identification of low-risk patients?
Is adjuvant chemotherapy using an anthracycline-taxane
containing sequence (FEC-Docetaxel) superior to standard
FEC in high-risk patients?

Methods: In the NNBC 3-Europe
trial, participating centres opt to either perform risk estimation by
clinico-pathological factors or by the invasion markers. Low-risk
patients will be then observed without adjuvant chemotherapy.
High-risk patients are randomised to adjuvant chemotherapy (FEC-100 *6
versus FEC-100 *3 followed by Docetaxel-100 *3). Patients with steroid
hormone receptor positive tumors receive an endocrine therapy.

Results: Of the first 312 patients
(22 centers) in the study arm with the biological risk assessment, 33
had a grade 1 tumors, and 110 had grade 3 tumors. Among grade 2 tumors
(n=169), 64 had low levels of uPA (med. 0,9 ng/mg protein) and PAI-1 (med. 7,9 ng/mg); 105
patients presented with elevated values: uPA (med. 3,8 ng/mg) and
PAI-1 (med. 21 ng/mg). Grade 3 tumors showed uPA at 2,9 ng/mg and
PAI-1 at 20,4 ng/mg (med.). Overall, 97 (31%) of the patients were
allocated to the low-risk group.

Conclusion: An adjuvant
chemotherapy trial based on uPA/PAI-1 determination in the primary
tumor is feasible in a multicenter setting. Applying these molecular
markers for risk assessment for almost on third of the patients an
adjuvant chemotherapy could be spared. The patient distribution shows
to be in line with the expected distribution. The study is planned to
recruit 5.700 patients. This study is performed in association with
the EORTC Receptor and Biomarker Group and the German AGO Breast
Group.

## 6020

## Repeatability and sources of uncertainty in relative real time PCR
gene expression measurements in breast cancer biopsies.

## Larionov AA, Dixon JM, White S, Anderson TJ, Miller WR. WGH,
Edinburgh, United Kingdom

Background: Relative real time PCR is
widely used in breast cancer research and potentially may be used for
molecular tumour profiling in clinic. At the same time there is lack
of publications addressing repeatability of the PCR results in breast
cancer biopsies. In present study we evaluated intra-laboratory
repeatability of PCR measurements for Cyclin B1 (CB1) and Mammaglobin
1 (MGB1) in core biopsies of breast tumours.

Materials and Methods: Paired
biopsies were taken from 9 breast tumours. After RNA extraction two
separate reverse transcriptions have been performed for each biopsy.
Two separate PCRs were run then on each of cDNAs. Therefore 4
measurements were taken for each biopsy (8 measurements for each
tumor). Coefficients of repeatability (p=0.95) were calculated
according to Bland and Altman (1986). Relative input of sampling,
reverse transcription and PCR into results uncertainty was estimated
using the analysis of components of variance.

Results: Results are summarised in
the figure below (grey and white bars represent PCR measurements on
different biopsies). Relative coefficients of repeatability for CB1
and MGB1 were 2.2 times and 15 times correspondingly. Exclusion of the
most obvious outliers (circled on the figure) dramatically improved
the coefficients of repeatability (to 1.3 and 3.1 times
correspondingly). The components of variance analysis showed that just
1% of the total variance was introduced by PCR, 4% was introduced by
reverse transcription and 10% was introduced by sampling. 85% of
observed variation reflected true differences between tumours.

Discussion and Conclusions: Currently
real time PCR is the most precise method of gene expression
measurement. However, the pre-PCR factors (first of all – tumour
heterogeneity) may introduce uncertainty in gene expression
measurements in breast biopsies. In research studies this uncertainty
may be overcome by accumulating appropriate sample size. This can not
be applied for individual interpretation of real time PCR measurements
for potential clinical purposes. In this case the repeatability
coefficients can be applied. For breast cancer biopsies they are gene
specific and should be based on a validating series of double biopsies
taken from the same tumours. To improve the reliability of
measurements the additional criteria for outliner detection may be
considered (e.g. stability of reference genes expression or routine
use of double biopsies). 

## 6021

## Identification of predictive biomarker panels by computational
modeling of treatment responses in breast cancer patients.

## Samadzadeh LK, Lett SG, Stella G, Nagle RB, Grogan TM, Beresford
PJ, Pestano GA. Ventana Medical Systems Inc., Tucson, AZ; The
BioAnalytics Group Inc., Princeton, NJ; University of Arizona Cancer
Center, Tucson, AZ

Background: The epidermal endothelial
growth factors (EGF) are highly potent growth promoting proteins with
effects that include the regulation of normal physiologic processes.
However, these factors also promote solid tumor growth and
hematological malignancies. The diversity of the families of ligands
and receptors and resulting outcomes from EGF signaling have, in part,
contributed to the difficulties in identifying robust prognostic and
diagnostic candidate biomarkers for targeted therapies. In this
report, we have applied computational methods including, high
throughput logistic regression models, to determine panels of markers
that predict the most likely patient outcomes after treatment with
Herceptin®.

Materials and Methods: Multi-tissue
arrays with 147 evaluable patient samples previously treated with
Herceptin® were utilized for these
analyses. Molecular biomarkers hypothesized to be expressed in
response to the EGF ligands were assessed by immunohistochemistry
(IHC). The factors utilized in the development of the computational
models included age and pathology reviewed expression of nine markers.
Actual survival within this patient group was 41.49% based on status
at last check. We trained the logistic regression model on this data,
and compared predicted probabilities of survival with actual
outcomes.

Results: We first determined
threshold probabilities to separate the patients into two groups. The
group above the threshold probability of 45% was likely to survive
post Herceptin® treatment. Patients in the
group below this cut-off were unlikely to survive. We were then able
to reduce the model to determine panels of markers that may be used to
increase the survival responses without excluding a significant number
of known survivors. We identified at least one subset panel of markers
that may increase the response rate from 41.67% to 74.07%. Using this
panel for stratification would result in the loss of 4.7% of the
patient population actually known to survive.

Discussion: Using logistic regression
models to analyze IHC derived tissue microarray data we were able to
determine marker panels that were significant in the prediction of
survival for patients treated with
Herceptin®. These methods may be
extended for general use in patient stratification for other targeted
therapies.

## 6022

## A new rabbit monoclonal antibody (4B5) for the immunohistochemical
(IHC) determination of the HER2 status in breast cancer: comparison with
CB11, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and interobserver
variability.

## Hicks DG, Prescott N, Tarr S, Pettay J, Laniauskas S, Swain E,
Grogan T, Roche P, Powell W, Tubbs R, Hartke M. Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH; Ventana Medical Systems Inc., Tucson,
AZ

Background: The two methodologies in
current clinical use to assess HER2
status in breast cancer are FISH to evaluate HER2 gene amplification and IHC to detect protein
over-expression. While most HER2
gene/protein studies have shown good concordance, a consistent finding
has been that from 3% to 15% of breast cancers over-express HER2
protein without evidence for gene amplification. The clinical
importance of accurate determination of the HER2 status has significant implications for the
selection of the most appropriate patients for
TrastuzumabTM therapy. Rabbit monoclonal
antibody technology (RMoAb) provides for high-quality IHC reagents
with improved sensitivity and specificity. We report here our
preliminary experience with a new RmoAb, 4B5, for HER2 IHC.

Materials and Methods: A synthetic
peptide from the carboxyterminal domain of the HER2 protein was used
to generte a new RMoAb, 4B5, for the evaluation of HER2 status in 201
wellcharacterized breast cancer cases. Staining for 4B5 was performed
on a BenchMark XT® automated stainer
(Ventana Medical Systems, Inc., Tucson, Az) and scored in a blinded
fashion by 3 pathologists (0-3+), for comparison with CB11 staining
results (Pathway®), FISH
(PathVysionTM), and determination of
interobserver reproducibility.

Results: Of the 201 non-consecutive
breast cancer cases, 94 were HER2
non-amplified (HER2/CEP17<2), 90 were HER2 amplified (HER2/CEP17>2.3), 10 were low-level
amplified (HER2/CEP17=2–2.3). Six cases could not be evaluated due to
lack of invasive tumor. Staining results for 4B5 were highly
comparable to those obtained for CB-11, and 4B5 demonstrated sharper
membrane staining with less cytoplasmic background. Among the
HER2 non-amplified cases, 93%
(87/94) were scored as negative with 4B5 (0 - 1+) with 7 discordant
cases (6 cases - 2+, and 1 case - 3+). Among the HER2 amplified breast cancers, 90% (81/90)
were scored as 2+ or 3+ for 4B5 with 9 discordant cases (5 cases - 0,
and 4 cases - 1+). 60% (6/10) of HER2 low-level amplified cases were scored as 2+ or 3+
while 40% were negative (0-1+). Using FISH as the reference standard,
the sensitivity for 4B5 was 90% (CI = 81.9% - 95.3%), specificity was
92.6% (CI = 85.3% - 97%), and there was very good interobserver
agreement for 4B5 interpretation (Kappa 0.831–0.932).

Conclusions: Using FISH as the
reference standard, RMoAb 4B5 provides excellent sensitivity,
specificity, and interobserver reproducibility for the detection of
HER2 status in breast
cancer.

## 6023

## Improvements of breast cancer cure fractions in surveillance,
epidemiology, and end results (SEER) estimated using CanSurv
software.

## Lee S-J, Royce ME, Wallace AM, Chapman JW, Tai P. University of
New Mexico Cancer Research and Treatment Center, Albuquerque, NM;
National Cancer Institute of Canada-Clinical Trials Group, Queen’s
University, Kingston, ON, Canada; University of Saskatchewan, Allan
Blair Cancer Center, Regina, SK, Canada

Background: Population trends in SEER
data provide an assessment of breast cancer survival experience over
three decades. We hypothesized that a parametric Mixture Cure Model,
on population-based grouped data, might produce results that differ
from those obtained with the standard Cox Model.

Materials and Methods: Patients
diagnosed with breast cancer were abstracted from SEER-9 registries
from 1973–2002 to study the cause-specific survival. All stages and
ages from the same time periods were compared. The cure fractions were
estimated using the Log-logistic Mixture Cure Model and breast cancer
specific survival was estimated using the Cox Model in the CanSurv
software: http://srab.cancer.gov/cansurv/.

Results: Breast cancer cure fraction
by Log-logistic Model and breast cancer specific survival by Cox Model
are presented in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. 
 

Discussion: There has been a
consistent increase in breast cancer specific survival over the past
three decades. Longer follow-up time is needed to accurately apply
parametric Mixture Cure Models.

## 6024

## Factors predicting the axillary lymph node status in women with an
ER-positive breast cancer are age-dependent.

## Neven P, Huang HJ, Drijkoningen M, Amant F, Leunen K, Berteloot
P, Wildiers H, Van Limbergen E, Paridaens R, Christiaens MR, Vergote
I. University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan

Background: Axillary lymph node
status (ALNS) is an important prognostic factor in breast cancer. We
examined whether classical tumour predictors for lymph node status
differ by age.

Patients and Methods: The ALNS of all
consecutive patients with a primary operable invasive ER-positive
breast cancer between January 2000 and July 2003. I In this period
ALNS was always based on complete axillary clearance; axillary staging
with the sentinel node procedure was performed in selected patients
from July 2003 onwards. The ALNS was correlated with
clinicopathological factors in multivariate analysis for the overall
population (n=1104) and for the age groups ≤ 50 (n=328) and
>50 years (n=776). We considered the following tumour variables to
predict ALNS: maximal microscopic tumour size and grade, PRand
HER-2/neu status. PR and HER-2/neu were measured by
immunohistochemistry using respectively the H- and DAKO-score. A
H-score from 50–300 and a DAKO-score of 2+ and 3+ were considered
positive.

Results: Only tumour size (>20 mm
vs ≤20 mm; P < 0.001) and grade (3 vs 1–2; P = 0.008) were
independent predictors for ALNS in the overall group. The prognostic
factors differed for women ≤ and >50 years of age. In the younger
age group, a large tumour size and a negative PR were predictors
whereas in the elder age group only a large tumour size was
predictive. Near significance was reached for a positive HER-2/neu
status and high tumour grade respectively in younger and elder
women. 

Conclusion: In women with an
ER-positive breast cancer, tumour size is an independent predictor for
ALNS in either age group. Other predictors for the lymph node status
like tumour grade, a negative PR and HER-2/neu overexpression differ
by age.

## 6025

## Lymph node ratio (LNR) is better survival predictor than
conventional nodal categories: a surveillance, epidemiology, and end
results (SEER) database analysis for node-positive breast cancer
(BC).

## Royce ME, Lee S-J, Wallace AM, Woodward WA, Ueno NT, Vinh- Hung
V, the International Nodal Ratio Working Group. University of New
Mexico Cancer Research and Treatment Center, Albuquerque, NM; U.T.
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; U.T. M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX; AZ-VUB, Jette, Belgium; Spain, Belgium,
USA

Background: The current AJCC staging
introduced pathologic nodal stage (pN) to reflect the prognostic
impact of increasing absolute number of positive lymph nodes (LN).
However, LNR (# LN positive/ # LN examined) may have greater
prognostic value than absolute number of positive nodes. Previous
studies of LNR have been on relatively homogeneous single institution
data or large population data with restrictive selection. This study
investigates LNR- vs. pN-based classification performance, without
adjustment, among heterogeneous cases of node-positive BC.

Materials and Methods: Except for
histologic confirmation and regional nodal examination, unselected
data for women diagnosed in 1988–1997 with primary invasive
node-positive BC were abstracted from the SEER 9-registries (2004).
Three LNR categories were defined, low LNR ≤0.25, intermediate LNR
>0.25 – 0.75, and high LNR >0.75. Performance was evaluated
between prognostic groups using LNR- vs. pN-categories (AJCC
6th ed). Comparison was performed in all
cases and in subgroups according to stage by AJCC
3rd ed. The end-point is breast cancer
specific survival (BSS) using the Kaplan-Meier method and log rank
test.

Results: 37,015 cases were available.
Median follow-up was 94 months, age 58 years, tumor size 24 mm, number
involved nodes 3, nodes examined 15. Global 10-year BSS was 65.7% (95%
confidence interval 65.1–66.3). Performance by pN- vs. LNRcategories
by stage is given in Table 1. 2,061 cases of unknown stage were not
analyzed. 

Discussion: LNR showed wider
prognostic separation compared to pN for all stages including
previously stage IV. Further investigation of the prognostic advantage
of LNR over absolute number of nodes from randomized data sets is
warranted.

## 6026

## Flourescence in situ hybridization (FISH) as the primary
methodology for the assessment of HER2 status in adenocarcinoma of the
breast: a single institution experience.

## Tubbs R, Hicks DG, Downs-Kelly E, Pettay J, Hartke M, Myles J,
Budd GT, Crowe JP. Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland,
OH

Background: Diagnostic assays for
HER2 expression in breast cancer
independently guide therapeutic decisions as to the suitability for
trastuzumab targeted treatment. Despite the importance in determining
patient management, consensus on testing methodologies for HER2 assessment is lacking. Retrospective
clinical studies have suggested that FISH for HER2 gene amplification is superior in predicting a
benefit from trastuzumab compared with immunohistochemistry for
HER2 protein expression, and has
lead to an increasing demand for primary FISH testing in the clinical
setting. However, direct reagent cost, the need for specialized
equipment, and a lack of familiarity with the technical aspects needed
to perform and interpret FISH assay results have limited
implementation within the greater laboratory community.

Materials and Methods: FISH
(PathVysion HER2 DNA Probe Kit,
Vysis, Downer’s Grove, IL) is the primary method for determining
HER2 status of breast carcinomas
at our institution. We report here our experience with FISH testing in
727 consecutive cases of breast cancer, for the calender year
2004.

Results: 81.6% (593/727) of breast
cancer cases were not amplified for HER2 (HER2/CEP17-0.8–1.9), while 18.4% (134/ 727) of cases were
HER2 amplified (HER2/CEP17>2.0). Among the HER2 amplified cases, 3.3% (24/727) were
low-level amplified (HER2/CEP17
ratio2.0–2.3). Genotypic heterogeneity, with <50% of tumor cells
demonstrating HER2 gene
amplification was observed in 5.5% (40/727) of cases, and was reported
as such. HER2 monoallelic deletion
(HER2/CEP17<0.7) was
demonstrated in 1.9% (14/727) of cases while CEP17 monosomy
(CEP17-<1.4 in >90% of tumor cells), eusomy (CEP17-1.4–2.1), and
polysomy (CEP17->2.1) was seen in 5.2% (38/727), 64% (468/727), and
35.4% (257/727) respectively. Polysomy if defined as CEP17 spot count
3.0 or greater, was observed in 8.0% (58/727); among this group of
polysomic cases, 5.1% (37/727) were not HER2 amplified, 0.6% (4/727) were low level amplified
for HER2 (HER2/ CEP17 ratio 2.0 – 2.3), and 2.3% (17/727) were
HER2 amplified.

Conclusions: FISH for the assessment
of HER2 status in breast cancer is
quantitative, specific, and a better predictor of Trastuzumab response
in retrospective reports. The additional time and direct laboratory
expense involved in FISH testing, although an important consideration,
needs to be carefully weighed against the cost of inappropriate
classification and potential inappropriate treatment of patients. The
clinical significance of low level gene amplification, aneusomy,
monosomic states for chromosome 17, HER2 allelic deletion,and genotypic heterogeneity
encountered with FISH assays for HER2 is unclear at this time and warrants further
study.

## 6027

## Newly established ELISA suitable for evaluation of HER2 antibodies
in sera of patients with primary or advanced breast cancer, or benign or
premalignant breast lesions.

## Willems A, Harbeck N, Henrichs C, Kiechle M, Peschel C, Bernhard
H, Schmitt M. Technical University of Munich, Klinikum Rechts der
Isar, Germany

Purpose: HER2, a growth factor
receptor, is overexpressed in tumor cells of 25–30 % of patients with
invasive breast cancer. HerceptinTM, a
humanized monoclonal mouse antibody to HER2, reduces tumor growth in
HER2 overexpressing tumors. Considering that the extracellular domain
(ECD) of HER2 is shed into serum as part of its degradation process, a
so-called “shed antigen”, it would be of considerable clinical
interest to evaluate whether an autologous antibody reaction triggered
by this shed ECD is detectable. To pursue this idea, we set up an
ELISA to test for active HER2 antibodies and screened prospectively
collected sera from patients with newly diagnosed breast cancer or
benign breast disease.

Patients and methods: HER2 antibody
detection in serum was done by ELISA. Target antigen is the
recombinant ECD attached to a microtiter plate to which serum is added
to screen for putative human antibodies to HER2 ECD. As a secondary
antibody, we introduced peroxidase-labeled anti-human IgG.
HerceptinTM spiked serum served as
“positive” control, and serum of healthy female donors not treated
with HerceptinTM as “negative” control.
Lowest detectable concentration of
HerceptinTM was 10 ng/ml. In serum of
patients under HerceptinTM treatment, the
antibody was detectable up to a dilution of 1:160,000. We screened
sera of 173 patients, 132 of whom had newly diagnosed breast cancer,
and 41 (23.7 %) had non- malignant breast disease. HER2 status of
tumor tissues was determined by
HercepTestTM with 33 (25%) of the
malignant tumors being HER2 3+ (25 %).

Results: Although HER2 antibodies in
serum from patients treated with
HerceptinTM were detectable up to a
dilution of 1:160,000, by our test, in sera of patients with newly
diagnosed breast cancer (even at a low serum dilution of 1:10), a
specific HER2neu antibody reaction was not detected.

Conclusion: We could not detect a
preexisting antibody response against HER2/neu in patients with breast
cancer or benign breast tumors. The failure to detect HER2-reactive
antibodies in patients with HER2-overexpressing breast cancer is in
contrast to previous data derived from an ELISA using a lysate of
HER2-overexpressing human breast cancer cells (Disis et al. J Clin
Oncol 1997). This discrepancy can be explained by the hypothesis that
naturally occurring anti-HER2 antibodies may not crossreact with the
recombinant ECD used in our ELISA. Therefore, the serum samples are
currently being reevaluated for the presence of HER2-directed
antibodies using a lysate-based ELISA. Moreover, this newly developed
assay can also be used for monitoring of
HerceptinTM levels in body
fluids.

## 6028

## Automation of preanalytical components and image quantification of
direct dual label fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for HER2 gene
amplification.

## Tubbs R, Pettay J, Swain E, Roche P, Powell W, Hicks D, Grogan
T. Cleveland Clinic & the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH; Ventana Medical Systems International,
Tucson, AZ
Determination of HER2 status by
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) correlates well with
response to targeted therapy and prognosis. However, the preanalytical
and quantification aspects of the procedure may be challenging for
some laboratories. We examined the feasibility of automating these
components of the FISH assay.

Material and Methods: A tissue
microarray (TMA) and a series of whole sections of breast carcinomas
were used for this study. The TMA constructed contained 118
consecutive well-characterized primary invasive breast cancers
diagnosed at the Cleveland Clinic Foundation between 1995 and 1996 and
consisted of 8 × 12 arrays of 1.5 mm tissue cores from archived
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded surgical blocks. Two separate tissue
cores of invasive carcinoma represented each surgical case in the TMA.
Each separate tissue core was made anonymous and assigned a unique TMA
location number, which was subsequently linked to an IRB approved
database containing corresponding 5-year clinical follow up data. An
automated in situ workstation (Discovery
XTTM; Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson)
was used to automate a programmed overnight start, on line baking,
deparaffinization, cell conditioning, protease digestion, and
prehybridization buffer washing. Probe/target
codenaturation/hybridization and stringency washing were done off line
using a directly labeled CEP17
SpectumGreenTM and HER2
SpectrumOrangeTM probe set (Abbott
Vysis; Downers Grove). The HER2 and
CEP17 spot counts were quantified, and the HER2/CEP17 ratio calculated, via ISIS and Metaphor
TM analysis on a MetaCyte4 imaging
workstation (Metasystems; Belmont, Ma). Results were benchmarked
against manual counts for whole sections, and bright field in situ
hybridization {silver in situ hybridization (SISH)} and CB11
immunohistochemistry for the TMA.

Results: Automated FISH results using
whole sections well correlated well with manual results HER2 spot count correlation coefficient
r=0.87; p<0.0001; HER2/CEP17
ratio correlation coefficient r=0.82; p=0.0002). Correlations between
automated and manual FISH results for the TMA were also excellent
(automated FISH ratio versus SISH one-way ANOVA p<0.001). Disease
free survival was significantly shorter (p<0.001) for the HER2 amplified cases evaluated by
automated FISH of the TMA.

Discussion: Automation of the
laborious preanalytical and image quantification components of FISH
using directly labeled probes is feasible. Operational gains and
enhanced consistency are inherent in this automated approach to
HER2 FISH clinical
testing.

## 6029

## Blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) contrast MRI for early
evaluation of breast cancer chemotherapy.

## Jiang L, McColl R, Weatherall P, Tripathy D, Mason RP. UT
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX

Background: Tumor microcirculation
and oxygenation play critical roles in tumor growth and responsiveness
to cytotoxic treatment and might provide prognostic indicators for
therapy. Deoxyhemoglobin (dHbO2) can serve as
an endogenous contrast agent. Interventions improving tumor
oxygenation, which convert dHbO2 to
HbO2 produces a BOLD signal gain, and this
may complement conventional MRI.

Material and Methods: Seven patients
with locally advanced breast cancer received doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide (AC) for four cycles every two or 3 weeks. Prior to
start of chemotherapy and after 1 and 4 cycles, MRI was performed on a
1.5 T scanner. For the BOLD study, patients breathed room air for
45 sec, then oxygen for 6 min and finally room air again. The imaging
parameters were TR/TE (500/41.4 ms) and matrix (256×256). During a
standard MRI study, the patient breathed room air and received
gadolinium.

Results:
1H MRI showed BOLD contrast enhancing
regions in all patients with a typical signal change of 3%. The
relative signal gain during DCE was much greater. Both responses
decreased with chemotherapy. However, it was notable that two patients
with an exceptionally high BOLD-effect (>10%) achieved a
pathological response after chemotherapy.

Discussion: While these data are
preliminary, it appears that BOLD MRI may add value to the prognostic
capability of imaging. Moreover, BOLD is non-invasive and we now
routinely achieve artifact-free results. 

## 6030

## Multicenter, phase IV randomized study to assess efficacy of
continuous versus alternate administration of pamidronate to breast
cancer patients with symptomatic bone metastasis: GEICAM/2000–01
Trial.

## Ruiz-Borrego M, Lluch A, Martin M, Calvo L, Bayo J, Ramos M,
Adrover E, Franquesa R, Rodriguez-Lescure A, Barnadas A. On Behalf of
the Spanish Breast Cancer Research Group (GEICAM), San Sebastián de
los Reyes, Madrid, Spain

Background: Pamidronate (PMT) is
effective in reducing skeletal related events (SRE) in breast cancer
(BC) patients (pt) with bone metastasis (BM). Its best way of
administration and optimum treatment duration are still to be
determined. Objective: evaluate the
efficacy of continuous administration (arm A) vs. alternate
administration (arm B) of PMT to delay time to first SRE in BC pt
presenting with symptomatic BM.

Methods: pt aged >18, ECOG
performance status ≥ 2, adequate renal function, and BC symptomatic BM
were eligible. BM was defined as presence of 3 or more hot spots (HS)
in skeletal scintigraphy (SS), or any number of HS in SS if
osteolytic, osteoblastic or mixed bone lesions determined by
radiography, or 2 or less HS in SS if magnetic resonance or CT scan
confirmation of BM. Symptomatic BM was defined as pain associated to
SS HS, or SRE (pathological fractures or spine cord compression or
radiation bone treatment or tumour induced hypercalcemia), or
treatment with analgesia due to bone pain. Pt were allowed up to 1
previous chemotherapy and 2 previous hormone therapy lines for
metastatic disease. Antineoplastic therapy could be changed at any
time during the study. Eligible pt were stratified (isolated bone
metastasis or associated to node or skin lesions vs. bone metastasis
associated to visceral disease) and randomized to receive 2 hour-iv.
PMT 90 mg every 3–4 weeks for 18 months (arm A) or iv. PMT 90 mg every
3–4 weeks for 6 months, followed by a 6 months rest, and a new
6 months ontreatment period (arm B). Quality of Life (QoL) was
measured with SF-36 questionnaire. Study complied with GCP/ICH with
100% source data verification.

Results: 152 pt were enrolled, 80
(52.6%) in arm A, and 72 (47.4%) in arm B. Main pt characteristics
were balanced between arms (Table I). Median number of BM sites and
foci were 2.9 and 6 (arm A) vs. 3 and 6.6 (arm B). Median time of
study participation was 13.3 (arm A) and 13.9 months (arm B). Median
time to first SRE was 7.9 vs. 10.2 months in A and B treatment arms,
respectively (p=0.339, Mann-Whitney U test). There were 33 (22%) SRE
in arm A vs. 20 (13%) in arm B (p=0.086). 9 (11%) pt achieved a
partial response while in study in arm A, vs. 11 (15%) in arm B.
Analysis of treatment-related pain and QoL items showed no difference
between arms.

Conclusion: no differences in time to
first SRE have been found between continuous or alternate
administration of PMT. 

## 6031

## Accurate tumor response assessment in bone-only metastatic breast
cancer by comprehensive imaging and by new response criteria.

## Hamaoka T, Costelloe CM, Madewell JE, Islam R, Rondon G, Ayers
GD, Champlin RE, Berry DA, Hortobagyi GN, Ueno NT. St Luke’s
International Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX

Background: Accurate assessment of
bone metastases is necessary to improve prognostication to ensure
appropriate treatment decisions. Attempts to assess such responses
using criteria from the UICC and the WHO have not been satisfactory;
these criteria are based only on radiography (XR) and skeletal
scintigraphy (SS) and have led to bone metastasis being considered
unmeasurable disease. We recently proposed new imaging criteria based
on CT to assess bone response (JCO 22:2942,
2004). Here we describe a retrospective review of images
from patients with bone metastases to evaluate (a) the accuracy of the
new MDA criteria vs the WHO criteria and (b) the accuracy of each
imaging modality for assessing bone response.

Methods: Two sets of response
criteria, MDA and WHO, were used to compare progression-free and
overall survival (PFS, OS) of patients with bone-only metastatic
breast cancer who responded or did not respond to treatment
(chemotherapy or hormonal therapy). Sensitivity and specificity were
also compared against clinical evidence of response (symptoms, tumor
markers, imaging) as an internal control. Images were reviewed by 2
musculoskeletal radiologists at baseline and early (2–6 mo) and late
(11–13 mo) after treatment. Responses were ranked as complete,
partial, stable, or progressive disease. Independent diagnostic images
(CT vs SS) were also compared, but too few independent XRs and MRIs
were available for comparative analysis.

Results: Forty-one patients had
sufficient image sets for analysis. Patients who showed a response
early in treatment (according to the MDA criteria) had better PFS and
OS (25.8 mo and 71.6 mo) than nonresponders (9.2 mo [P = 0.014] and
38.7 mo). The WHO criteria did not show differences in PFS or OS. The
MDA criteria were also more sensitive (87%; 95% CI 60%.98%; P=0.07) at detecting true response than
the WHO (47%; 95% CI 21%–73%). CT tended to separate responders from
nonresponders in PFS (24.0 mo vs 15.3 mo) and in OS (65.0 mo vs 37.8
mo). SS did not distinguish responders vs nonresponders in PFS and OS.
CT was more sensitive (69%; 95% CI 38%–91%; P=0.07) than SS (36%; 95% CI 13%–65%) for detecting
response.

Conclusions: The new MDA criteria,
which include findings from CT scanning, are better than the WHO
criteria for assessing bone metastasis. Prospective studies are
warranted to test whether use of the CT-inclusive MDA criteria
improves the ability to detect and quantify responses in bone
metastasis.

## 6032

## Efficacy and safety of systemic samarium 153 therapy in metastatic
breast cancer patients with widespread bone metastases.

## Lacko A, Pajak K, Kolodziejczyk A, Zebrowski J, Garncarek A,
Filipczyk-Cisarz E. Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland; Lower
Silesian Oncology Center, Wroclaw, Poland; IV Military Hospital,
Wroclaw, Poland

Background: Bone metastases are
present in approximately 75% of breast cancer patients, therefore
bones are the most frequent localization of metastases and the only
site of metastatic spread in many patients. The commonly used
treatment options for bone pain palliation include: external beam
radiotherapy, bisphosphonate therapy and systemic radionuclides. The
aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of samarium
153 (153Sm) in breast cancer patients with
widespread bone metastases.

Materials and Methods: We analysed
100 153Smadministrations at a dose
1.0 mCi/kg in 70 metastatic breast cancer patients with bone
metastases (median age, 57 years; range: 23–75). Fifty five (79%)
patients had bone only disease, while in 15 (21%) presence of
metastases to other organs was confirmed. Fourty (57%) patients were
treated with external beam radiotherapy before radionuclide therapy
with median of 13.5 % irradiated bone marrow (range: 3–45%). Twenty
two (31%) patients received more than 1
153Sm treatment. All patients were
monitored with CBC every 2 weeks, until the resolution of acute
hematologic toxicities. Efficacy of treatment was assessed by VAS
(Visual Analogue Scale) performed before treatment, and at every
follow up visit. We also analyzed the impact of the previous systemic
radionuclide treatment and radiotherapy on the bone marrow
supression.

Results: 93% of patientshad partial
to complete relief of pain.The primary hematologic toxicities
consisted of: generally mild leucopenia seen in 73% of cases (grade
III in 7%) and thrombocytopenia in 78% of cases (grade III and IV in 8
% of pts) with nadirs at 4 and 5 weeks respectively. Grade IV
thrombocytopenia was observed only in 2 patients, however it was
asymptomatic. All hematologic toxicities resolved in 8 weeks.
Correlation was not found between neither previous systemic
radionuclide treatment nor radiotherapy with bone marrow
supression.

Conclusion: Clinical reports
regarding application of 153Sm in breast
cancer are limited to several studies performed in patients with
variety of tumors, with poor breast cancer patients representation. We
demonstrated that treatment with 153Sm was
generally well tolerated with mild, short-term, asymptomatic bone
marrow supression. Repeated administration of
153Sm and previous radiotherapy did not
effect toxicity of treatment. Results of this study indicate that in
metastatic breast cancer patients systemic
153Sm is safe and provides effective
paliation.

Key words: metastatic breast cancer,
bone metastases, samarium 153

## 6033

## Non-inferiority of oral ibandronate to intravenous zoledronic acid
for reducing markers of bone turnover in metastatic breast cancer
patients.

## Lichinitser MR, Coleman RE, Tjulandin SA, Bergström B, Body JJ.
RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation; Cancer Research Centre, Weston Park
Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom; Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., Nutley,
NJ; Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium

Background: Bisphosphonates are the
standard of care for breast cancer patients with bone metastases. Oral
bisphosphonates enable at-home treatment, which is more convenient for
patients. Ibandronate is a single-nitrogen bisphosphonate available in
intravenous and oral formulations with a similar efficacy for the
treatment and prevention of skeletal-related events (SREs). There is
increasing data suggesting that levels of bone turnover markers
predict the incidence of SREs in patients with metastatic bone
disease. In this study, oral ibandronate was compared with intravenous
zoledronic acid for effects on bone turnover markers.

Methods: In a head-to-head,
multicenter, randomized, open-label, parallel-group trial, breast
cancer patients with advanced disease and at least one confirmed
osteolytic or mixed bone lesion received 12 weeks of treatment with
oral ibandronate 50mg daily (n=128) or intravenous zoledronic acid 4mg
infused over 15 minutes every 4 weeks (n=126). The primary endpoint
was the mean percentage change in serum cross-linked C-terminal
telopeptide of type I collagen (S-CTX) levels at the end of the study.
Other assessments included urinary CTX (U-CTX), and serum levels of
bone specific alkaline phosphatase (BAP), amino-terminal procollagen
propeptides of type I collagen (P1NP), and osteocalcin (OC).

Results: Treatment with ibandronate
or zoledronic acid was associated with comparable reductions in all
bone turnover markers at study endpoint (Table 1).

Conclusion: In this study, oral
ibandronate was statistically non-inferior to intravenous zoledronic
acid for inhibiting bone resorption, as demonstrated by comparable
effects on S-CTX and U-CTX. Both agents also reduced serum markers of
bone formation (BAP, P1NP and OC) to a similar extent. Overall, a
convenient oral ibandronate dose of 50mg/day is as effective as
intravenous zoledronic acid in suppressing bone turnover markers,
suggesting comparable efficacy for the prevention of SREs.
Head-to-head studies comparing SRE rates are warranted to confirm
results. 

## 6034

## Intravenous ibandronate 15-minute infusion followed by daily oral
ibandronate for metastatic bone disease: bone marker data.

## Bergström B, Lichinitser MR, Andreeva N, Budde M, Body JJ.
Hoffman-La Roche Inc., Nutley, NJ; NN Blokhin Russian Cancer Research
Center, Moscow, Russian Federation; Semashko Central Clinical
Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation; F. Hoffmann La- Roche AG, Basel,
Switzerland; Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Brussels, Belgium

Background: Bone turnover markers in
serum or urine are prognostic indicators of skeletal complications in
patients with metastatic bone disease. Current guidelines suggest that
all patients with metastatic breast cancer should receive continuous
bisphosphonate treatment from initial diagnosis. Ibandronate is a
single-nitrogen, non-cyclic bisphosphonate available in intravenous
and oral formulations. In phase III trials of breast cancer patients,
both formulations decreased the incidence of skeletal-related events
and reduced metastatic bone pain scores. This 12-week trial examined
changes in bone turnover markers following a single rapid infusion of
intravenous ibandronate followed by daily oral ibandronate.

Methods: Patients (n=39) with breast
cancer or advanced multiple myeloma and ≥1 confirmed lytic or mixed
bone lesion received a single 15-minute infusion of intravenous
ibandronate 6mg immediately followed on Day 2 by 12 weeks of oral
ibandronate 50mg once daily. Serum levels of cross-linked C-terminal
telopeptide of type I collagen in serum (S-CTX) were measured at
various timepoints to indicate bone resorption. Bone formation was
assessed by measuring serum bone specific alkaline phosphatase (BAP),
amino-terminal procollagen propeptide of type I collagen (P1NP), and
osteocalcin (OC). Safety monitoring included adverse event reporting,
serum chemistry, and urinalysis.

Results: Treatment with intravenous
ibandronate followed by oral ibandronate was associated with a rapid
decrease in S-CTX levels of 77% from baseline within 2 weeks of
treatment, and this was maintained throughout the 12-week trial. At
study endpoint, levels of BAP, P1NP, and OC had decreased by 27%, 42%,
and 24%, respectively, from baseline. The treatment schedule was well
tolerated with few adverse events.

Conclusions: A rapid 15-minute
infusion of intravenous ibandronate 6mg followed by daily oral
ibandronate 50mg was associated with a marked decrease in bone
turnover markers with no safety concerns. This further confirms the
efficacy of ibandronate for metastatic bone disease observed in phase
III trials. The novel treatment regimen described here is undergoing
further assessment.

## 6035

## Safety of oral ibandronate and intravenous zoledronic acid in
breast cancer patients with metastatic bone disease.

## Body JJ, Lichinitser MR, Tjulandin SA, Coleman RE, Bergström B.
Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium; NN Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russian
Federation; Cancer Research Centre, Weston Park Hospital, Sheffield,
United Kingdom; Hoffman-La Roche, Inc., Nutley, NJ

Background: Ibandronate is a
single-nitrogen, non-cyclic bisphosphonate with proven efficacy for
the treatment and prevention of skeletal-related events. In phase III
trials of breast cancer patients, both oral and intravenous
formulations of ibandronate were well tolerated and had safety
profiles comparable to placebo. Here, we report comparative safety
data from a head-to-head trial of oral ibandronate and intravenous
zoledronic acid.

Methods: In an open-label,
multicenter, parallel-group study, breast cancer patients with at
least one confirmed osteolytic or mixed bone lesion were randomly
assigned to receive oral ibandronate 50mg/day (n=137) or intravenous
zoledronic acid 4mg via 15-minute infusion every 4 weeks (n=137) for
12 weeks. All adverse events (AEs) were recorded throughout the
study.

Results: In general, both
bisphosphonates were well tolerated. However, a higher proportion of
patients in the zoledronic acid group experienced AEs (76% versus 65%
in the ibandronate group). In particular, there was a higher incidence
of AEs during the first 3 days of the study for zoledronic acid than
ibandronate (47% versus 8%). This was composed predominantly of
acute-phase response events, including pyrexia, chills, flu-like
illness, arthralgia, and myalgia, that were probably or possibly
treatment-related (41% of the zoledronic acid group versus 5% of the
ibandronate group). Throughout the entire study, a higher proportion
of patients reported bone pain in the zoledronic acid group than the
ibandronate group (21% versus 12%), although the incidence of
gastrointestinal (GI) AEs was slightly lower for zoledronic acid (18%
compared with 23% for ibandronate). The incidence of serious AEs
(zoledronic acid 8.0%; ibandronate 5.8%) and withdrawals (zoledronic
acid 5.1%; ibandronate 2.9%) was lower for ibandronate.

Conclusion: In this first direct
comparative trial of third-generation bisphosphonates, more AEs were
experienced by patients treated with intravenous zoledronic acid than
oral ibandronate. In particular, a high proportion of the zoledronic
acid group reported events associated with an acutephase response
following initial treatment, a known side-effect with a
disproportionate risk among intravenous bisphosphonates. The frequency
of GI AEs was only slightly higher for oral ibandronate than
intravenous zoledronic acid. Oral ibandronate represents an effective
and well-tolerated treatment for metastatic bone disease with apparent
AE advantages over intravenous zoledronic acid.

## 6036

## Fractures negatively affect survival in patients with bone
metastases from breast cancer.

## Hei YJ, Saad F, Coleman RE, Chen YM. Novartis Oncology, East
Hanover, NJ; Hôpital Notre-Dame, Montreal, QC, Canada; Weston Park
Hospital, Cancer Research Centre, Sheffield, United Kingdom

Background: Patients with advanced
breast cancer are at high risk of developing multiple skeletal
complications, including pathologic fractures, which contribute to the
poor prognosis for these patients. To assess the effect of fractures
on survival in patients with bone metastases from breast cancer, we
conducted a retrospective analysis of time to death for patients
enrolled in a large, randomized, controlled trial (Rosen LS, et al.
Cancer. 2003;98:1735–1744) based
on whether they experienced a pathologic fracture on study.

Material and Methods: A Cox
regression model using fractures as a time-dependent variable was
performed in the subset of patients with bone metastases from breast
cancer (N = 1,130) who received 4 or 8/4 mg zoledronic acid or
pamidronate every 3 to 4 weeks for up to 24 months. Treatment was also
included in the model. Time to death was defined as the time from
randomization to the final visit (month 25). Patients were censored at
the final visit if death was not observed by end of study. Data from
the full 25 months of followup were included in the analyses and all
analyses were performed on the safety-evaluable population.

Results: Patients who experienced a
pathologic fracture on study had a significantly worse survival
outcome compared with patients who did not experience a fracture.
Overall, 35% of patients experienced a fracture on study, and these
patients had a significantly increased risk for death (hazard ratio =
1.586; 95% confidence interval = 1.145 to 2.197; P = .006) compared with patients who did
not experience a pathologic fracture.

Conclusions: Pathologic fractures
appear to be an independent adverse prognostic factor for survival in
patients with bone metastases from breast cancer. Therefore,
preventing pathologic fractures may provide a survival
advantage.

## 6037

## Efficacy and safety of intravenous ibandronate 6mg infused over
15 minutes: results from a 2-year study of breast cancer patients with
metastatic bone disease.

## Heras P, Hatzopoulos A, Mitsibounas D. General Hospital of
Nafplio, Nafplio, Greece; Hellenic Medical Society for the Study of
Psychosomatic Disorders, Athens, Greece

Background: Metastatic bone disease
is associated with various skeletal-related events (SREs), including
pathological fracture, spinal cord compression, and radiotherapy or
surgery to bone. Ibandronate is a single-nitrogen, non-cyclic
bisphosphonate with proven efficacy for decreasing the incidence of
SREs. In this study, a randomized, placebo-controlled trial was
performed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of ibandronate infused
over 15 minutes in a cohort of breast cancer patients with metastatic
bone disease.

Methods: Patients received
intravenous ibandronate 6mg or placebo via a 15-minute infusion every
4 weeks for 24 months. Study endpoints included the proportion of
patients who developed SREs and time to first event.

Results: In a group of 150 women with
breast cancer and bone metastases, intravenous ibandronate
significantly reduced the proportion of patients who experienced an
SRE compared with placebo (38% versus 49%; p=0.028). Time to first SRE
was also delayed significantly (median 459 versus 306 days; p=0.008).
In a multiple-event analysis, ibandronate reduced the risk of
developing an SRE by 32% (hazard ratio=0.69; 95% confidence interval
0.42–0.79; p=0.003). In general, ibandronate was well tolerated, with
a renal adverse event profile comparable to placebo and no
clinically-relevant changes in serum creatinine levels.

Conclusions: These data demonstrate
the efficacy and safety of 15-minute infusions of ibandronate.
Compared with placebo, ibandronate reduced the proportion of patients
who experienced an SRE, and decreased the median time to first SRE and
the SRE risk. There was no evidence of renal toxicity. Ibandronate is
a safe and effective treatment for preventing the complications of
metastatic bone disease in breast cancer patients.

## 6038

## Changes in tumor metabolism and local bone turnover in patients
treated for bone-dominant metastatic breast cancer measured by
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and fluoride positron emission tomography
(PET).

## Gralow JR, Brenner W, Linden HM, Livingston RB, Ellis GK,
Schubert EK, Peterson LM, Muzi M, Mankoff DA. University of
Washington/Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle, WA; University of
Washington, Seattle, WA; University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany
Purpose: Following response of bone-dominant metastatic breast
cancer poses a significant clinical challenge. Standard imaging
studies such as bone scan and MRI rely on changes in surrounding bone
to detect tumor sites and therefore often do not reflect tumor
response to treatment. We have previously shown that serial FDG PET,
which measures tumor glucose metabolism, accurately depicts bone
metastasis response to therapy. In this study we investigated the
quantitative relationship between tumor metabolism, using FDG PET and
adjacent bone turnover, using fluoride PET.
Methods: Patients with bone-dominant metastatic breast cancer
underwent FDG PET and dynamic fluoride PET prior to treatment and
again post-treatment with either endocrine therapy (N=6) or
chemotherapy (N=3). FDG images were analyzed quantitatively using the
standardized uptake value (SUV). Fluoride images were analyzed using
SUV and by detailed kinetic analysis of dynamic images. Whole-body
survey images for both tracers were reviewed qualitatively.
Results: As expected, tumor metabolism and local bone turnover,
represented by FDG and fluoride SUV respectively, did not correlate,
suggesting that two different processes were being measured. Patients
with lytic metastases had low fluoride uptake and had high FDG uptake,
while some patients with sclerotic metastasis had high fluoride uptake
and had low FDG uptake, often close to normal bone background.
Patients with disease progression after therapy showed increases in
both FDG and fluoride post-treatment. Responding patients tended to
have a decline in FDG uptake, but some responders had an increase in
fluoride uptake, likely indicating local bone healing in response to
tumor regression, akin to a bone scan “flare”. Kinetic analysis of
fluoride images showed that changes in both fluoride delivery and
retention contributed to changes in fluoride uptake, indicating that
changes in both vascularity and new bone formation contribute to
changes in fluoride uptake post-therapy.
Conclusions: Serial imaging of both tumor metabolism and local bone
turnover using FDG and fluoride PET provides insights into the
response of breast cancer bone metastases to therapy and may help
guide treatment of bone-dominant disease. Supported by CA72064

## 6039

## Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS). Discovery modalities, treatments
and long term outcome. Analysis of 183 cases.

## Cutuli B, Levi C, Lemanski C, Brunaud C, Giard S, Quetin P,
Cohen-Solal Le-Nir C, De Lafontan B, Meunier A, Fay R. Polyclinique de
Courlancy, Reims, France; French Cancer Centers Breast Group, Paris,
France; Centre d’Investigation Clinique, Toul, France

## Background
Recent studies have suggested that LCIS was a precursor of
subsequent in situ or invasive breast cancer (IBC); its treatment
remains very debated and our study evaluated a cohort of patients
(with LCIS) treated by three different options.

## Material and methods
A retrospective multicentric study was performed in 8 French
Cancer Centers to collect all pure LCIS treated from 1985 to 2000
(excluding patients with previous or synchronous DCIS or IBC). 183
cases were evaluable.

## Results
Median age was 49 years (32–79). Overall median follow up was
10 years. Family history of BC and previous benign breast disease
were found in 49 (27%) and 39 (21%) patients. 76 (42%) women were
post menopausal and 16 of them had taken HRT prior to
diagnosis.
LCIS was discovered by mammography in 116 (63%) cases and by
clinical symptoms in 57 (31%) cases. Incidental finding was noted
in 10 cases (6%).
Conservative surgery alone (CS), CS with radiotherapy (CS+RT)
and mastectomy (M) were performed in 135 (74%), 30 (16.4%) and 18
(9.6%) of the cases. Multiple foci of LCIS were found in 81 (44%)
cases. Associated epithelial atypical hyperplasia (AH), lobular AH
and sclerosing adenosis were found in 57 (31%), 67 (37%) and 55
(30%) cases. Among the 30 patients who underwent RT, median dose to
whole breast was 50 Gy, with a 10-Gy boost in 21 cases. 22 women
underwent Tamoxifen. Cancer-related events are shown in the
Table.
Among the 135 patients in the CS group, LR rates at 5, 8 and
10 years were 13%, 19% and 24%. 14 out of 24 (58%) LR were
invasive, with 10 lobular and 4 ductal carcinomas.
No clinical or pathological LR risk factors were found. Among
the 9 contralateral BC, 6 were invasive. Globally, 172/183 patients
(94%) are still alive, 3 (1.6%) are evolutive and 8 (4.4%) died
(one of IBC, 4 of second cancer and 3 of intercurrent
disease).

## Conclusions
LCIS is not always an “indolent” disease and, in several cases,
it looks like DCIS, but with a longer relapse length.
More aggressive subtypes have not yet been clearly identified.
Both mastectomy or CS+RT might be seen as possible options instead
of simple lumpectomy. 

## 6040

## Role of sentinel lymph node biopsy in screen detected ductal
carcinoma in situ: analysis of 587 cases.

## Goyal A, Douglas-Jones A, Stevens G, Monypenny I, Sweetland H,
Mansel R. Cardiff University, Cardiff; Breast Test Wales, Cardiff,
United Kingdom

## Background
The role of sentinel lymph node biopsy(SLNB) in patients with a
core needle-biopsy diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in situ(DCIS) has
been intensely debated. Core needle-biopsy has an inherent sampling
error leading to histologic underestimation of invasive disease. If
SLNB is not performed at the time of the definitive operative
procedure, patients found to have an invasive cancer, will require
a second operative procedure.
The study was designed to determine whether the risk of finding
invasive disease on final pathology evaluation in patients with an
initial diagnosis of DCIS was sufficiently high to justify the use
of SLNB. In addition, we evaluated the factors that may predict
preoperatively which patients with DCIS will be upstaged to
invasive cancer at the time of definitive surgery.

## Methods
We identified 587 women with an initial core needle-biopsy
diagnosis of DCIS in the prospective Breast Test Wales(BTW)
database from 1990 through 2005. A variety of clinical,
mammographic and histologic features were identified and correlated
with the presence of invasion at excision.

## Results
Median age of patients at the time of diagnosis was
58 years(range 41 to 83 years). 201 patients(36%) were treated by
mastectomy and 354(64%) by breast conservation surgery. 220 of 587
patients(38%) were found to have invasive disease on final
pathology. The rate of upstaging was related to the presence of a
clinically palpable mass and size of the mass(p<0.001,
Mann-Whitney test); mammographic presence of a mass and size of the
mass(p<0.001, Mann-Whitney test); presence of microinvasion on
core biopsy(p=0.005, chi-square test). Multivariate analysis
revealed that clinical size of mass and mammographic size of mass
were independent predictors of invasive carcinoma on final
pathology(p=0.047 and p<0.001 respectively). Age, grade of DCIS,
and presence of comedonecrosis did not help in distinguishing
between patients with DCIS and those upstaged to invasive carcinoma
at definitive surgery.
Axillary nodal staging(four node sampling or clearance) was done
at the time of surgery in 269 of 342 patients(79%) with available
information. Axillary nodal metastases were found in 35 of 269
patients(13%). All 35 patients had invasive carcinoma on final
pathology.

## Conclusion
In patients with a pre-operative diagnosis of DCIS, presence of
a palpable mass or mammographic mass increases the risk for
invasion at definitive surgery. Even though moderate discriminatory
power is obtained using these variables, it is not possible to
identify a subgroup in which SLNB can be safely omitted. 38% of
patients with an initial diagnosis of DCIS will be found to have
invasive carcinoma on final pathology and thus need second surgery
for nodal staging. SLNB is difficult after lumpectomy and
impossible after a mastectomy. Given the low morbidity associated
with SLNB, this procedure should be considered for all patients
with an initial diagnosis of DCIS.

## 6041

## Effects of letrozole and anastrozole on ductal carcinoma in situ
(DCIS): results from a randomised trial.

## Faratian D, White S, Murray J, Renshaw L, Young O, Macaskill EJ,
Evans DB, Cameron D, Miller WR, Dixon JM. Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom; Novartis Pharma AG, Basel,
Switzerland

## Introduction
A number of ongoing clinical studies are investigating the
effectiveness of aromatase inhibitors in patients with DCIS. To
date there have been no studies looking at the biological effects
of aromatase inhibitors on DCIS. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of letrozole and anastrozole on cell
proliferation in patients with DCIS.

## Materials and methods
206 postmenopausal women with 209 invasive estrogen receptor
(ER) positive breast cancers were enrolled into a randomised
preoperative trial of 14 days treatment with either 2.5 mg of
letrozole or 1 mg of anastrozole. A review of initial core biopsies
at diagnosis and excision specimens at surgery identified 27
patients with 28 pairs of samples [15 who received anastrozole (A)
and 13 letrozole (L)] with sufficient ER positive invasive cancer
and DCIS for analysis. Assessment included ER, progesterone
receptor (PgR), HER2, and proliferation (Ki67) by
immunohistochemistry with FISH for HER 2+. ER and PgR were scored
by Allred scores and proliferation scored as % Ki67 positive cells.
Results are presented as means (SEM); analysis is by paired t tests
and Pearson’s correlation.

## Results

## Invasive cancers: Proliferation

A reduced tumour cell
proliferation from baseline in 14/15 cancers from a mean of 9.33
(2.31) to 1.43 (0.46), p=0.001 – median and mean reduction 78%
(58–91) and 71.1% (8.7) from baseline.

L reduced proliferation from
baseline in all 13 cancers from a mean of 7.46 (1.52) to 0.96
(0.39), p=0.001 – median 85% (66–94) mean 78.8% (6.6) reductions
from baseline.

## DCIS: Proliferation

A reduced proliferation in DCIS
from 10.1 (3.0) to 4.24 (1.52), p= 0.058, by a median of 57%
(−68−89):mean fall was 24.4% (31.8).

L reduced proliferation from
11.8 (2.34) to1.86 (0.76), p<0.001 by a median of 83% (68–92)
and a mean of 77% (6.9). 

There was a significant correlation between the magnitude of
change in cell proliferation between invasive cancers and DCIS
in same patient for L, p=0.026, but not for A, p=0.72.

## DCIS: PgR
PgR fell with A from a mean score of 4.8 (0.72) to 3.20
(0.83), p=0.03 and with L from 5.2 (0.76) to 3.46 (0.89),
p=0.038.

## HER2

A; 3 invasive cancers and 4
DCIS were HER2 +. The 3 invasive cancers and 3/4 DCIS had a
reduction in cell proliferation with A.

L: 1 invasive and 1 DCIS was
HER2+ both had a fall in cell proliferation with L.

## Conclusions:
DCIS has a similar rate of cell proliferation to invasive
cancer. In DCIS, Letrozole significantly reduced proliferation and
PgR expression; Anastrozole significantly reduced PGR expression
but the fall in proliferation did not reach significance possibly
due to the small sample size. Letrozole should be further evaluated
in DCIS.

## 6042

## Changes in DCIS features and treatment over a 20-year period.
Analysis of 2512 patients.

## Cutuli B, Lemanski C, Cohen-Solal Le-Nir C, Fourquet A, De
Lafontan B, Fay R, Jourdan R. Polyclinique de Courlancy, Reims,
France; Centre Val d’Aurelle, Montpellier, France; Centre Rene
Huguenin, Saint Cloud, France; Institut Curie, Paris, France; Centre
Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, France; Centre d’Investigation Clinique,
Toul, France; Astra Zeneca, Rueil, France

## Backgroud
DCIS frequency has increased from 3-4% in the 80s to 15-20% in
recent years. Several changes occurred during this period in
clinicoradiological features as well as in treatment
modalities.

## Material and methods
A prospective national survey (NS) on pure DCIS was conducted in
France from March 2003 to April 2004 on 1289 patients. Results were
compared to those of 1223 patients previously treated in 9 French
Cancer Centers from 1985 to 1996 (French Study). Treatments
included conservative surgery alone (CS), conservative surgery with
radiotherapy (CS+RT) and mastectomy (M).

## Results
Median age was 52 versus 56 years in NS and French study,
respectively. Similarly, family history of breast cancer was
reported in 30% versus 23% of the patients.
Radiological/pathological features and treatments are compared in
the table. Endocrine therapy was used only in the NS in 170 (13.2%)
patients. Several inter-regional differences were observed in the
NS regarding mastectomy rates (from 22.6% to 39%), RT use (from 81%
to 96%) and endocrine therapy (from 6% to 34%).

## Conclusions
The most important changes in both studies were the 22% absolute
increase in MD tumors, the 12% increase in RT after CS and, more
particularly, the 41% decrease in axillary dissection, whereas
median tumor size and mastectomy rate remained identical. The NS
results are globally in accordance with the French DCIS guidelines
recently published (www.fnclcc.fr). 

## 6043

## LIBERATE Trial: a safety study of tibolone in breast cancer surgery
patients – design and baseline data.

## Foidart JM, Bundred NJ, Kenemans P, Kubista E, von Schoultz B,
Sismondi P, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R. Univ of Liege, Liege, Belgium;
Univ of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom; Free Univ, Amsterdam,
Netherlands; Medical Univ, Vienna, Austria; Karolinska Inst,
Stockholm, Sweden; Univ of Turin, Turin, Italy; Anderson Cancer
Center, Univ of Texas, Houston

Background/Objectives: Hormone
therapy is contraindicated in women with a history of breast cancer. A
pilot study has shown that tibolone relieves vasomotor symptoms in
patients receiving tamoxifen after breast cancer surgery. Studies have
also shown that tibolone does not stimulate breast tissue, prevents
osteoporosis and might therefore be a promising agent to treat
vasomotor symptoms in these women. LIBERATE was designed as a
randomized, double-blind 5-year trial to evaluate that tibolone
2.5 mg/day (Livial®) is non-inferior to
placebo regarding breast cancer recurrence in women with vasomotor
symptoms who have been surgically treated for primary breast cancer
within the last 5 years. Secondary objectives are overall survival as
well as effects on vasomotor symptoms, BMD and health-related
QoL.

Methods: Patients were eligible when
they had histologically confirmed and surgically treated invasive
breast carcinoma (T1-3, N0-2, M0). In non-hysterectomized women, entry
required normal thickness of endometrium as judged by transvaginal
ultrasound, defined as absence of endometrial polyps in tamoxifen
users and double-layer thickness ≤ 4 mm or 4–8 mm (when
inactive/atrophic) in non-tamoxifen users. The primary end-point
(confirmed by blinded adjudication) is breast cancer recurrence,
including contralateral. Yearly BMD will be assessed in a subset of
patients. The primary analysis will be performed mid 2007, with a
followup analysis on all data in 2009.

Baseline data: Recruitment started in
July 2002 and was completed in December 2004. 3149 patients were
randomized at 245 centers in 31 countries worldwide. Based on the data
in May 2005, the mean age at randomization was 53 years, the mean body
mass index 27, and the mean time since surgery 2.1 years. The mean
daily number of hot flushes and sweating episodes was 7 and 6,
respectively. A pathological tumor size of > 2.0 cm (T2/3) was
originally reported for 48% of the patients and a node positive status
(N1/2) for 58%. Of the 78% patients with a known receptor status, 79%
were ER+, 66% were PR+, and 61% were both ER+ and PR+. 74% received
tamoxifen and 9% aromatase inhibitors. Regular unblinded safety
reviews performed so far by an independent DSMB have led to
recommendations to continue without modification.

Discussion: Tibolone has been shown
to relieve vasomotor symptoms after breast cancer surgery. Several
trials investigating the effects of E(P)T on breast cancer risk (e.g.
HABITS) were stopped prematurely. The LIBERATE trial remains the
largest and only ongoing, well-controlled study in this field
investigating breast safety.

## 6044

## Vaginal estrogens appear to be contraindicated in postmenopausal
women on adjuvant aromatase inhibitors.

## Kendall AH, Dowsett M, Folkerd EJ, Smith IE. Royal Marsden
Hospital, London, United Kingdom

Background: Atrophic vaginitis is a
significant problem in approximately 40% of postmenopausal women.
Associated dryness, pain, urinary incontinence and dysparenuia are
consistently associated with marked deterioration in quality of life
scores [1]. Postmenopausal women with breast cancer being treated with
aromatase inhibitors (AI) can experience a worsening of these symptoms
due to profound estradiol suppression [2]. As more women are treated
with adjuvant AIs physicians are increasingly asked to advise on
vaginal estrogen therapy. Vagifem vaginal tablet is commonly used due
to good compliance and efficacy in treating atrophic vaginitis and is
perceived to result in a low systemic absorption of estradiol
[3].

Materials and Methods: We are
monitoring the oestradiol levels in 6 women with symptomatic vaginitis
who wished to commence Vagifem whilst concurrently on an AI for
adjuvant therapy. Vagifem 25mcg was prescribed as per manufacturer’s
recommendations; administered daily for 2 weeks then twice per week as
a maintenance therapy. Estradiol in serum was measured by
radioimmunoassay, after ether extraction, using an assay sensitised to
quantify the low levels of estradiol found in postmenopausal women
[4]. Levels were measured at baseline, Day 14 and Day 28. Currently
results are available from the first 4 women and are reported
below. 

Discussion: Estradiol levels so far
analysed in these women using Vagifem are around and above those
usually seen in the postmenopausal state (mean 19pmol/L) [5] and
greatly exceed those in women on an AI. Thus our initial experience in
this group raises concerns over the anti-breast cancer efficacy of
such a combination because of raised systemic estradiol levels to a
degree which reverses the activity of aromatase inhibitors. Physicians
should be advised to avoid this treatment combination and recommend
non-hormonal preparations.
1.Ganz, P.A. et al. J Natl Cancer Inst, 2000. 92(13): p.
1054–64.
2.Morales, L. et al. Anticancer Drugs, 2004. 15(8): p.
753–60.
3.Suckling, J. et al. Cochrane Database Syst Rev, 2003(4): p.
CD001500.
4.Dowsett M. et al. Cancer Res 1987; 47:1957–1961
5.Dunning A.M. et al. JNCI Vol 96 No. 12 2001 p.936–945

## 6045

## Menopausal hormone therapy after breast cancer-why are the results
so different?

## von Schoultz E. Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden

Background: In 2003/2004 two
randomized trials of menopausal hormone therapy in breast cancer
survivors were stopped and showed significantly different results. The
risk of recurrence in the HABITS-study was HR 3.3, CI 1.5 – 7.4 and in
the Stockholm trial 0.8, CI 0.4 . 1.9 (p = 0.02).

Material and Methods: Available
patient data from the Stockholm trial were analyzed and compared with
findings reported from the HABITS. The number of women with follow-up
was 345 in HABITS and 359 in the Stockholm study. Median follow-up was
2.1 and 4.1 years respectively.

Results: Among the 175 women
allocated to hormone therapy in the Stockholm trial, the median age
was 56.9 years, time from diagnosis to randomization 1.3 years, 16 %
were node positive, 65 % were ER-positive, 76 % had used hormones
prior to diagnosis and 52 % were on adjuvant tamoxifen. The
corresponding figures for the 174 women on hormone therapy in the
HABITS study were 55.5 years, 2.6 years, 26 %; 56 %; 52 % and 21 %
respectively. The protocol recommendations on hormonal treatment were
different. In the Stockholm material perimenopausal women were started
on cyclic EPT (22 %) and postmenopausal women on a spacing out regimen
where progestogen was only given every third month (50 %). After
progestogen addition there was one week off treatment. In the HABITS
protocol, treatment was given according to standard local practice.
Perimenopausal women started on sequential EPT (26 %) and
postmenopausal women were recommended continuous combined EPT
(46%).

Discussion: The management of
menopausal symptoms in breast cancer survivors remains an unsolved
clinical problem of growing importance. The findings that in the
Stockholm material, fewer patients were node positive and more women
were on adjuvant tamoxifen, could be one explanation for the different
results. It could also be that doses of estrogen and progestogen and
treatment regimens may be associated with the recurrence of breast
cancer. The possibility that estrogen alone or with a minimum of
progestogen may have a favorable risk/benefit balance needs further
elucidation.

## 6046

## The effects of natural progesterone and medroxyprogesterone acetate
on risk markers for breast cancer in the normal postmenopausal
breast.

## Wood CE, Register TC, Lees CJ, Cline JM. Wake Forest University
School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC

Background: Recent evidence indicates
that the addition of the synthetic progestin medroxyprogesterone
acetate (MPA) to postmenopausal estrogen therapy significantly
increases the risk of breast cancer. A major question in women’s
health at this time is whether this adverse effect is specific to MPA
or characteristic of all progestogens. Natural progesterone (P4) has
attracted recent attention as a “bioidentical” hormone alternative to
synthetic progestin compounds, although the effects of P4 on breast
cancer risk are currently unknown.

Material and Methods: In this project
we used a postmenopausal primate model to compare the effects of MPA
and P4 when given with oral estradiol (E2) on risk biomarkers for
breast cancer. Twenty-five ovariectomized adult female cynomolgus
macaques were divided into social groups and rotated randomly through
the following 4 treatments (expressed as equivalent doses for women):
(1) placebo; (2) E2 (1 mg/day); (3) E2 + micronized P4 (200 mg/ day);
and (4) E2 + MPA (2.5 mg/day). Treatments were administered orally,
and all animals were individually dosed. Hormone treatments lasted two
months and were separated by a one-month wash-out period. Breast
biopsies were taken at the end of each treatment and uterine area was
measured by ultrasound. This interim report includes data from 2 of
the 4 treatment cycles.

Results: Compared to placebo, E2+MPA
resulted in significantly greater breast epithelial area and
proliferation (Ki67 expression) in lobular and ductal epithelium
(p<0.05 for all), while E2+P4 did not significantly increase any of
these parameters. Expression of progesterone receptor in ductal
epithelium was also significantly higher following E2+MPA (p<0.05)
but not E2+P4 treatment compared to placebo. Uterine area and vaginal
maturation were greater in E2, E2+P4, and E2+MPA groups versus placebo
(p<0.0001 for all).

Discussion: These preliminary
findings suggest that natural progesterone has a more favorable effect
on biomarkers of breast cancer risk than the synthetic progestin
MPA.

## 6047

## Role of hormonal replacement therapy(HRT) on clinical
characteristics tumors histo-pronostic factors and survival of patients
with breast cancer.

## Czernichow C, This P, Asselain B, Savignoni A, Salmon RJ.
Institut Curie, Paris, France
The role played by HRT in the pathogenesis of breast cancer has
been demonstrated by recent studies. Using the Institut Curie
database, we compared the clinical characteristics,tumors
histopronostic factors and patient survival according to the presence
or absence of HRT.
6,766 post-menopausal women were enteredinto the data-base between
1988 and 1999; 1,492(22%) had taken HRT for more than 6 months.The
mode of discovery,age at diagnosis,preoperative and post-operative
clinical and laboratory characteristics of the cancer were collected
for all patients(BMI,TNM,SBR grade,Hormonal Receptors,Mitotic
Index).The type of treatment,local recurrence
rate,metastasis,recurrence-free survival and overall survival were
compared between the two populations. Mammographic detection was more
frequent in patients receiving HRT and the age at diagnosis was lower
than that of patients not taking HRT(p<10–4). Cancers detected in
women receiving HRT were smallers and had a less aggressive biological
profile; there were more lobular cancers and the conservative
management rate was higher(p<10–4). The number of local recurrences
was identical in the two groups but metastasis-free survival and
overall survival were better in patients receiving HRT.
HRT remained an independant prognostic factor on
multivariateanalysis with a mean follow-up of 97 months.
As the increasing incidence of breast cancerin western countries
also affects pre-menopausal women,HRT alone cannot account for the
increasing incidence of breast cancer

## 6048

## Tibolone and its metabolites inhibit invasion of human mammary
carcinoma cells in vitro.

## Depypere HT, Bracke ME, Vanhoecke BW, Kloosterboer HJ. State
Universty, De Pintelaan 185, Ghent, East Flanders, Belgium; Organon,
Oss, Netherlands
Tibolone is a synthetic compound that has been very successfully
used to alleviate climacteric symptoms. In many European countries it
is the number one selling product. After oral administration, tibolone
is converted into 3 alfa OH and 3 Beta OH tibolone and a small amount
of delta 4 tibolone and 3 alfa OH sulfate. To explore the effect of
tibolone and its metabolites breast cancer cells we performed invasion
assays. One assay for invasion was based on the in vitro confrontation
between cancer cell aggregates and embryonic chick heart fragments in
organ culture. The second invasion assay comprised the scoring of the
number of cancer cells penetrating into collagen type I gel.
Cultures with 100  M tibolone, 3 alfa OH tibolone, 3 Beta OH tibolone
and delta 4 tibolone inhibited invasion of MCF 7/6 cells completely.
However, 10  M was not active. A significant antiinvasive effect
of 100  M tibolone and 3 alfa OH tibolone on the invasion of
T47-D cells was observed.
Invasion of extracellular matrix requires MMP activity. MMP-9
gelatinase activty was reduced in the supernatant of cells treated
with tibolone, 3 alfa OH tibolone and delta 4 tibolone.
These results add valid information on the influence of tibolone
and its metabolites on breast cancer behavior.

## 6049

## Hormone replacement therapy in women with breast cancer. A survey
of patient’s attitudes.

## Turner LE, Bundred NJ. South Manchester University Hospital,
Manchester, United Kingdom

Background: Menopausal symptoms such
as hot flushes, night sweats and osteoporosis lead to considerable
morbidity in the Western World. Women with breast cancer often develop
an early menopause due to treatment effects such as chemotherapy,
oophorectomy, hormonal drugs and / or the abrupt discontinuation of
hormone replacement therapy (HRT). HRT is effective in relieving
menopausal symptoms but its use is generally discouraged in women with
breast cancer.

Methods: A case controlled survey was
conducted to examine the incidence and severity of menopausal symptoms
and to identify what factors predicted HRT use in postmenopausal women
with breast cancer compared to a control group. Self-completed
questionnaires, including Spielberger’s (1977) State / Trait Anxiety
Inventory (STAI), were distributed to women who had been diagnosed
with breast cancer within the past five years attending the South
Manchester University Hospital breast out-patient clinics.
Questionnaires were mailed to 300 women (control) whose previous
routine mammogram screening results were normal. Hopwood’s (2001) Body
Image Scale questionnaire was also given to women with breast
cancer.

Results: Incidence and severity of
menopausal symptoms were greater in 146 women with breast cancer,
particularly those on adjuvant therapy or after chemotherapy compared
to 133 controls (p<0.05). Psychosocial problems such as depression,
state anxiety and loss of sexual interest were correlated with women
treated for breast cancer (p<0.05). Factors associated with HRT use
were the need for effective treatment of symptoms (positive
correlation, p=0.01) and women with breast cancer (negative
association, p=0.03). A negative linear relationship existed between
Body Image Score and the time following treatment (p=<0.05),
likewise with age (p=<0.05).

Discussion: For women with breast
cancer the menopause experience has a huge impact on quality of life
both in physical and psychosocial ways. Screening such symptoms using
tools like the STAI is imperative to address the needs of women with
breast cancer. Hence appropriate services and comprehensive treatments
can be directed throughout their care. The perception of need and a
history of breast cancer are the main predictive factors associated
with HRT use.

## 6050

## The sentinel lymph node biopsy in male breast cancer: the European
Institute of Oncology experience.

## Chagas ERM, Gentilini O, Intra M, Silva L, Luini A. European
Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy
Background: Male breast cancer comprises approximately 1% of all
cases of breast carcinoma It is a rare disease, and for this reason,
the treatment standards for male breast carcinoma have traditionally
been extrapolated from those established for women. This study was
undertaken to ascertain the outcomes of male breast carcinoma patients
who recived treatment at European Institute of Oncology in Milan with
sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy.
Materials and Methods: We reviewed our database to identify males
who underwent SLN biopsy for breast cancer between 1999 and 2005. SNL
biopsy was performed in thirty-two male patients. Pre-operative
diagnosis of cancer was documented by fine-needle aspiration
cytological examination or core-biopsy in 19 patients. The other 13
patients had previously been admitted with excisional biopsy.
Lymphoscintigraphy was performed one day before surgery by injecting
colloid particles of human serum albumin labeled with freshly eluted
99{mTc (12MBq), in a volume of 0.2mL.
The lymphoscintigraphy was successful in 32 patients. The sentinel
lymph nodes were processed in the following manner: briefly, each
sentinel node was measured and cut along its entire longitudinal axis
into sections of 50 m intervals thickness, amounting to around 60
sections per lymph node (30 sections per half lymph node). One section
of each pair was stained with haematoxylineosin. All patients had
normal bone scans, chest X-rays and liver ultrasound.

Results: The average ages was
58 years (range 33-80). Tumor type distribution was twenty-four
invasive ductal carcinomas, four intracystic papillary carcinomas and
four extensive DCIS. Pathological T stage presentation was:
twenty-eight T1 and four T2. Tumor grades were: 35% low, 50%
intermediate and 15% high. Only in four cases was there lymphovascular
invasion. Tumors were ER positive in 97% of cases. A mean number of
1,5 SLN were identified. No patients with internal mammary lymphatic
drainage were identified. Twenty-six patients had negative SLN(s), six
patients had positive SLN. Modified radical mastectomy was realized in
six. Four men were treated with chemotherapy adjuvant, twenty-five men
received adjuvant hormonal. Radiotherapy was realized in 14 patients.
Thirty-one patients were followed up wevery 2.3 years.
Discussion: The optimal management of breast cancer in men is as
yet unknown because the rarity of the disease precludes large
randomized trials. SLN biopsy in male patients with early stage breast
cancers is comparable to its use in women. It seems to be a simple and
realiable method for stanging the axilla accurately, avoiding the
complications of axillary dissection plus having the secondary benefit
of cost reduction.

## 6051

## Selective inhibition of ADAM metalloproteases blocks Her-2
extracellular domain (ECD) cleavage and potentiates trastuzumab in
blocking the growth of Her-2 overexpressing breast cancer
cells.

## Liu X, Wang Q, Yang G, Covington M, Marando C, Fridman J,
Caulder E, Zhuo J, Li Y, Yao W, Vaddi K, Newton R, Friedman S, Scherle
P. Incyte Corporation, Wilmington, DE
Her-2, a member of ErbB family of receptor tyrosine kinases, is
overexpressed in significant portions of human breast (20 30 %),
non-small cell lung (2060 %), ovarian (1030 %) and gastric (1525 %)
cancer patients. In breast cancer, Her-2 overexpression is associated
with poor clinical outcome in patients with lymph node positive
disease. The humanized monoclonal antibody, trastuzumab, which is
directed against the extracellular domain (ECD) of Her-2, has proven
to be an effective therapy for Her-2 positive metastatic patients,
suggesting that Her-2 is a critical driver of tumor growth in this
patient population. In Her-2 overexpressing cells, the ECD is
frequently cleaved, rendering the remaining transmembrane portion of
Her-2 (p95) constitutively active. In breast cancer patients, the
presence of p95 has been shown to correlate with increased metastasis
and decreased survival, suggesting that signaling via p95 is
clinically relevant and may represent an attractive target for
therapeutic intervention. It was previously reported that Her-2
cleavage is inhibited by matrix metalloprotease inhibitors. Data from
our laboratories demonstrate that this cleavage is mediated by a
subset of the ADAM metalloprotease family members in vitro. To test
the role of ADAM metalloproteases in regulating the growth of tumor
cells that overexpress Her-2, we have identified a series of potent,
selective, orally active small molecule inhibitors of ADAM
metalloproteases exemplified by INCB003619. INCB003619 effectively
blocks Her-2 ECD shedding (IC50 within
nanomolar range) and potentiates the antiproliferative activity of
trastuzumab in Her-2 overexpressing breast cancer cell lines in vitro. Biochemical data further suggest
that the potentiating effect is mediated by enhanced inhibition of ERK
and AKT activation. In addition, INCB003619, in combination with
trastuzumab, enhances the pro-apoptotic and antiproliferative
activities of the chemotherapeutic agent, paclitaxel, and the EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, gefitinib. Consistent with these in vitro findings, INCB003619 also
enhances the antitumor effect of trastuzumab in the xenograft tumor
model derived from the Her-2 overexpressing BT-474 breast cancer cell
line. Together, these findings suggest that the selective inhibition
of ADAM metalloproteases may represent a novel and effective approach
for treating Her-2 overexpressing breast cancer patients when combined
with trastuzumab and other cytotoxic or biological antitumor
agents.

## 6052

## 4-OHT gel demonstrates potent clinical antiestrogenic activity in
the breast: implications for treating benign breast pain and reducing
cancer risk.

## Mansel RE, O’Connell K. University of Wales College of Medicine,
Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom; Columbia Univ Medical Ctr, New York,
NY

Background: Tamoxifen is indicated
for breast cancer prevention but has not achieved widespread use due
to side effects. Tamoxifen has also been shown to alleviate cyclic
mastalgia, but acute adverse effects (eg, hot flushes) and long-term
risks (eg, endometrial cancer, cardiovascular risk) preclude
widespread use. 4-Hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), a highly potent metabolite
of tamoxifen that is absorbed through the skin, is currently under
investigation for the treatment of cyclic mastalgia. The goal of this
study was to determine the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of 4-OHT
gel in cyclic mastalgia.

Material and Methods: Premenopausal
women were randomized to receive 2-mg (n = 43) or 4-mg (n = 46) 4-OHT
gel, or placebo (n = 41). Efficacy assessments included change from
baseline in the average of the 7 worst Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)
scores; physician’s clinical evaluation of pain, tenderness, and
nodularity; and patient’s global assessment of pain. Results: After 4 cycles of treatment, 4-mg
4-OHT resulted in a significant improvement in mean VAS scores (−32.1,
vs −19.3 with placebo; P = 0.034).
Mean VAS scores with 4-mg 4-OHT decreased from 73.3 at baseline to
52.8 (cycle 1), 37.6 (cycle 2), 30.6 (cycle 3), and 30.6 (cycle 4).
With placebo, mean VAS scores decreased from 69.6 at baseline to 54.0
(cycle 1), 48.6 (cycle 2), 42.1, and 42.2. A significant placebo
effect was observed at cycle 1, but from cycles 2–4 a clear separation
in 4-OHT vs placebo emerged. Significant improvements with 4-mg 4-OHT
versus placebo were observed in physician’s assessments of pain
(P = 0.010), tenderness
(P = 0.012), and nodularity
(P = 0.017), as well as patient
assessment of pain (P = 0.022). For
all 4 parameters, the rating of “very much improved” was consistently
higher in the 4-mg 4-OHT group. 

No drug-related severe adverse event (SAE) occurred in any
treatment group. There were no significant changes in progesterone or
estradiol plasma concentrations and no evidence of menstrual cycle
disruption following exposure to 4-OHT.

Discussion: Following 4 months of
daily 4-OHT treatment, the symptoms of cyclic mastalgia significantly
improved as measured across both physician- and patient-rated scales.
4-OHT appears to offer a safe and tolerable treatment of cyclic
mastalgia, providing breast surgeons, gynecologists, and breast
physicians with a treatment option for patients presenting with benign
breast pain, but also the potential for a new prevention
strategy.

## 6053

## The effects of relaxation guided imagery on natural killer (NK)
cell and cytokine IL-2 induced NK cytotoxicity in breast cancer
patients.

## Lengacher CA, Bennett M, Gonzalez L, Cox C, Cantor A, Djeu J,
Carter WB, Buck H, Yang CY. University of South Florida, Tampa, FL; H.
Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL; Indiana
State University, Terre Haute, IN

Background: Psychoneuroimmunology is
an evolving science, concerned with bidirectional interactions between
behavioral, neural, endocrine and immune system interactions. The use
of relaxation-guided imagery has great potential to reduce stress and
improve immune function for patients with breast cancer. To date,
limited data exist that objectively measure these outcomes in patients
using relaxation-guided imagery. We hypothesized that application of
relaxation-guided imagery in breast cancer patients would improve
immune function, and tested immune function using NK cell
cytotoxicity.

Methods: This pilot study used a
randomly assigned pre-test, post-test experimental design with 28
breast cancer patients, aged 25–75, with the diagnosis of stage I or
stage II breast cancer. The experimental group received
relaxation-guided imagery, and the control group received standard
care. The effects of guided imagery on immune function was measured by
NK cell cytotoxicity and IL-2 activation of NK cell cytotoxicity prior
to surgery and four weeks post surgery. Peripheral blood mononuclear
cells were serially diluted to achieve effector cell: target cell
concentrations of 100:1, 50:1, 25:1 and 12.5:1. NK activity was
measured using a 15 hour incubation, chromium-release assay.
Cytotoxicity of NK cells was measured against chromium labeled K-562
(human leukemia) target cells. IL-2 was used to enhance reactivity of
patient NK cells. After incubation, cytotoxicity was measured through
the release of radioactive chromium, detected using standard gamma
counter protocol. Student’s t-test was used to statistically evaluate
the two groups.

Results: Relaxation guided imagery
significantly enhanced NK cytotoxicity and IL-2 activated NK
cytotoxicity at 4 weeks post surgery. Increased NK cytotoxicity for
the guided imagery group was significant at 100:1, 50:1, and 25:1
dilutions (p< .01 at 100:1 and 50:1; p<.05 at 25:1), and
increased IL-2 activated NK cytotoxicity (p<0.01 at 100:1, 50:1,
and 25:1, and p < 0.05 at 12.5:1). No differences were identified
in the pre-treated groups.

Discussion: Relaxation-guided imagery
enhanced NK cytotoxicity and IL-2 activated NK cytotoxicity in post
operative breast cancer patients. These findings suggest that a
relaxation intervention such as guided imagery could have a profound
effect on immune function. Use of alternative therapies such as guided
imagery could be an effective intervention in clinic practice to
improve outcomes by enhancing immune function, and additional studies
to support this hypothesis are warranted.

* This study was funded by the American Cancer
Society

## 6054

## Decision criteria for adjuvant chemotherapy or hormonal therapy in
node negative breast cancer: results of a french oncologist
survey.

## Cowen D, Gligorov J, Pignon T, Padovani L. Hopital Timone,
Marseille, France; Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France
Between oct. 2004 and feb. 2005, we mailed a questionnaire to 59
French oncologists selected for their experience in the field of
breast cancer (written or oral communication, congress lectures), as
to identify factors associated with chemotherapy prescription over
hormonal therapy alone or no adjuvant treatment. The oncologists were
also asked to answer 3 clinical cases with increasing risks of
recurrence and death due to cancer, which had been calculated
according to the website http://www.adjuvantonline.com. Benefits of associating chemotherapy and hormonal
therapy over hormonal therapy alone were calculated for cases 1, 2 and
3 and were respectively 0.8%, 1.8% and 1.5% for absolute 10- year
survival, and 4.7%, 3.4% and 3.8% for 10-y recurrence risk.

Results: participation was 68%, with
80% male and 20% female. Mean age was 49 years. Medical practice was
public for 63% of participants and private for 37%, and experience in
the field of breast cancer was superior to 10 years in 75% of cases.
According to oncologists, the factors associated with a chemotherapy
prescription were age, size and grade (100% for each), hormonal
receptor status (95%), micro-metastasis in sentinel node (SN) (60%),
cerb-2 status (38%), Ki-67 value (36%), PAI-1 (23%) and tumor location
in the inner quadrants (10%). However, maximum age for chemotherapy
prescription was 65, 70, 75, and 80 years for 10%, 25%, 50% and 15% of
answers. Age under 35 was a sufficient criteria for giving
chemotherapy in 56% of cases while 35% required an extra risk factor,
and 9% two more factors. Giving chemotherapy to patients above
70 years of age was acceptable only if there were 1, 2 or 3 additional
risk factors respectively in 20%, 40% and 25% of answers. Seemingly,
the minimal size required for prescribing chemotherapy was 5 mm,
10 mm, 15 mm, and 20 mm respectively for 8%, 25%, 32% and 35% of
answers. Also, while 60% would prescribe a chemotherapy in case of a
micrometastasis in a SN, among these 37% would do so for cells only
visible with IHC staining. Finally, for clinical cases 1, 2 and 3,
chemotherapy was prescribed in 82%, 55% and 50% of answers, although
in case 1 the absolute 10 year survival was 96% with no further
treatment. Chemotherapy prescription was not related to the benefit
over hormonal therapy or over no treatment, in terms of absolute
survival, or recurrence risk. Detailed analysis will be
presented.

Conclusion: among experts in the
field, there are very wide differences in the risk factors necessary
for prescribing adjuvant treatments in node negative breast cancer
patients. Our study underlines the necessity of evidence based
decision making.

## 6055

## Premature menopause following chemotherapy for early stage breast
cancer: long-term results from IBCSG trials V and VI.

## Gelber S, Partridge A, Gelber RD, Castiglione-Gertsch M,
Goldhirsch A, Winer E. DFCI, Boston, MA; University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland; European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy

Background: The likelihood of
premature menopause has not been thoroughly explored in women who
remain premenopausal following completion of adjuvant chemotherapy for
breast cancer.

Material and Methods: We evaluated
the age of menopause in women with early stage breast cancer who
remained premenopausal following adjuvant chemotherapy using data from
the International Breast Cancer Study Group (IBCSG) Trials V and VI.
From 1981–1985, Trial V enrolled 1407 eligible premenopausal women
randomized by nodal status: 692 with N- disease received either no
systemic therapy (No CT) or CMFx1 perioperatively (PeCT); 715 with N+
disease received either CMFx6 postoperatively (CMFx6), or PeCT +
CMFx6. Median follow up is 19 years. Trial VI enrolled 1475 eligible
women from 1986-1993 and randomized to a 2x2 factorial design
evaluating 3 versus 6 initial cycles of CMF and the efficacy of an
additional 3 delayed cycles of CMF. The median follow up is 13 years.
From Trial VI we included only the 375 women randomized to receive 6
initial cycles of CMF.

Results: We excluded women who
reported no menses during 12- 24 months after randomization (N=934),
history of hysterectomy (N=16) or bilateral oophorectomy (N=8), or
missing 12-24 month menses data (N= 57), creating a cohort of 767
women in the following age at diagnosis groups: < 30 years (N= 26),
30-34 years (N=89), 35-39 years (N=186), 40–44 years (N= 237) and 45
and over (N=229). 540 women had received No CT or PeCT (mean age =
42 years); 227 had received CMFx6 or PeCT+CMFx6 (mean age = 39 years).
Using a Cox proportional hazards model, censoring at recurrence, new
primary or death, we found that CMF (6 or 7 cycles) (HR= 2.03, p
<0.0001) and temporary amenorrhea (HR= 1.96, p <0.0001) were
associated with premature menopause. Age at diagnosis (HR= 0.84, p
<0.0001) appears to be confounded by competing risks, such as an
increased risk of recurrence for younger women and more frequent
amenorrhea for older premenopausal women. Using a logistic regression
model for subjects alive and disease free at 5 years (N=478) and
10 years (N= 309), the table below predicts the percent of women in
menopause by age at diagnosis and treatment.

Discussion: Women who remain
premenopausal after 6 or 7 cycles of CMF have a higher likelihood of
going through menopause at an earlier age than women who received 0 or
1 cycle. Temporary cessation of menses appears to be a marker for
earlier onset of menopause. These findings may assist in making
reproductive decisions after a diagnosis of breast cancer. 

## 6056

## The evaluation of the clinical effectiveness of telemedicine in
breast cancer multidisciplinary decision making: TELEMAM, a cluster
randomised trial.

## Kunkler IH, Fielding RG, Brebner J, Prescott RJ, Maclean JR,
Chetty U, Bowman A, Neades G, Lee R, Smith M, Dixon JM, Swann S,
Macnab M, Cairns J, Gardner T, Lee M. Edinburgh University, Edinburgh,
United Kingdom
Background: In Scotland regional managed clinical networks of
cancer professionals have been adopted as the administrative framework
to provide equity of access to high standards of cancer care
regardless of domicile. Telemedicine (TM) provides a tool for linking
multidisciplinary team meetings (MDTM) between peripheral cancer units
(PCU) and cancer centres (CC) for clinical decision making without the
need for oncologists to travel from the CC to PCUs.There is limited
information on the clinical effectiveness of TM to support joint
decision making on the management of breast cancer between CCs and
PCUs.
Aims and methods: We report the primary clinical outcome measure of
the first randomised trial (TELEMAM) evaluating the clinical
effectiveness of telemedicine for breast cancer MDTMs. The weekly
MDTMs for the discussion of new or recurrent breast cancer cases at
two PCUs (Dumfries, Fife), were randomised to standard ‘face-to-face’
(S) or to TM delivered meetings linked to the Edinburgh Cancer Centre.
Imaging +/- pathology was remotely displayed from PCUs to the CC.
Randomisation was in 4 week blocks over 1 year with 2:1 weighting in
favour of TM. The primary endpoint was satisfaction of breast MDT
members with mode of meeting delivery. Satisfaction of the MDT members
was recorded per patient discussion on a standardised proforma
assessing consensus on management, confidence in and appropriate
sharing of the decision.
Audio, video and image quality were noted.
Results: Data was collected on 76 meetings involving 473 patient
discussions, 28 standard (12 Dumfries, 16 Fife) and 48 TM delivered
meetings (24 Dumfries, 24 Fife). Meetings in the two arms had a
similar balance of new, re-staging and postoperative adjuvant
patients. Participants’ satisfaction that consensus as to the next
steps in caring for the patient was reached by all involved,
confidence that the decision reached was in the best interests of the
patient, and feeling that the discussion was appropriately shared were
similar in both arms of the trial (Table). While there was a tendency
for better outcomes in the standard arm, these were not clinically
important.
Conclusions: The clinical effectiveness of TM as a mode of breast
MDT meeting delivery is similar to standard ‘face to face’ meetings.
It facilitates involvement of a regional network of cancer
professionals in decisions on patient management irrespective of
distance. 

## 6057

## Fatigue, weight gain, lethargy and amenorrhea in breast cancer
patients on chemotherapy: is subclinical hypothyroidism the
culprit?

## Kumar NB, Allen K, Riccardi D, Bercu B, Cantor A, Minton S,
Balducci L, Jacobsen P. H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research
Inst, Tampa, FL; University of South Florida, Tampa, FL

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study
was to prospectively observe the relative contribution of each viable
mechanism such as hyperphagia, physical activity, body composition,
steroid hormonal and thyroid function, fatigue scores on changes in
body weight in breast cancer patients, receiving adjuvant
chemotherapy.

METHODS: This was a prospective
observational research design where 198 consecutive breast cancer
patients receiving adjuvant chemotherapy were monitored from start to
end and 6 months post therapy on changes in anthropometics, fatigue,
nutritional intake, physical activity, thyroid and steroid
hormones.

RESULTS: We observed a weight gain
over >5 lbs in 22.2% of this patient population with a significant
and progressive gain of 6.7 lbs (P<0.0001) at six months. Ninety
four percent of all patients reported fatigue and 56% of patients
reported lowered physical activity. A significant reduction in serum
free and total estradiol (P<0.0001) was observed indicative of
reduction in ovarian function with 86% amenorrehic at the end of
treatment. A significant reduction in mean serum triiodothyronine
uptake levels (P <0.05), in addition to a significant increase in
TBG (P<0.0001) from baseline to end of chemotherapy, was observed.
In addition 20–25% of this patient group was already diagnosed with
clinical hypothyroidism at diagnosis and treated. Changes in fatigue
frequency and serum sex-hormone binding globulin (SHBG) were variables
significantly predictive of weight gain (P<0.0001).

CONCLUSIONS: Cytotoxic agents may
influence thyroid function in breast cancer patients contributing to
and progressively worsening symptoms such as weight gain, amenorrhea,
fatigue and lowered physical activity in this population. The present
study indicates the value of screening breast cancer patients for
thyroid function at diagnosis or pre-treatment.

## 6058

## The Toyota production system applied to breast cancer
care.

## Wechter DG, Dubuque DP, Jacobs AD. Virginia Mason Medical
Center, Seattle, WA; The Cancer Institute, Virginia Mason Medical
Center, Seattle, WA

Background: In 2002, Virginia Mason
Medical Center first applied the key principles of the Toyota
Production System to health care delivery. These are takt time, the
amount of time required to meet daily patient demand; one piece flow,
providing patient service in a continuous flow without waits; pull,
providing service when and how desired by the patient; and standard
work for all providers.

Materials and Methods: A value stream
map outlined the steps a breast cancer patient needed to take from
diagnosis to followup. Our goals were to reduce the time from
diagnosis to first step in treatment (lead time), standardize
pretreatment evaluation and post-treatment follow-up, develop patient
education tools, and create a standard intake form. A
multidisciplinary team of providers participated in one week of daily
intensive process improvement activities called a Rapid Process
Improvement Workshop (RPIW) in which new ideas were tested and
refined.

Results: Lead time was reduced from a
mode of 21 to 10.5 days by providing consultations with all providers
in one day when desired by the patient, shifting consultations for in
situ carcinoma from medical oncologists to nurse practitioners,
creating schedule hold times, eliminating some appointments with
medical oncologists by developing follow-up guidelines, and by
standardizing pretreatment studies and imaging through the
introduction of teamwide decision tools. Pretreatment evaluation and
follow-up guidelines were based on National Comprehensive Cancer
Network (NCCN) recommendations. Our website was updated and we
designed a Personal Care Journal which included each patient’s
reports, standard educational materials, and a 5 year follow-up
calendar. A single health history intake form was created
incorporating data needed for all providers so the patient would not
need to fill out a different form for each consultation.

Discussion: Although manufacturing
principles may seem far removed from the daily practice of medicine,
we found that the same concepts yielding defect-free efficient
production of automobiles with great customer satisfaction can be
applied to the complex steps involved in the delivery of breast cancer
care. Application of the Toyota Production System concepts improved a
process involving many providers by reducing or eliminating wasteful
steps rather than increasing the speed of any one task or adding new
resources. Variation and inefficiency were reduced resulting in an
improvement in quality and service.

## 6059

## Correlation between preference for adjuvant therapy prior to
surgery and actual choice of therapy.

## Fama T, Wood ME, Muss HB. University of Vermont, Burlington,
VT

Background: Several studies have
shown that women would choose adjuvant therapy for a small gain in
survival. This study examines patient pretreatment preferences for
hormonal and chemotherapy prior to breast cancer surgery and compares
these preferences with actual choices.

Methods: All women with invasive or
noninvasive breast cancer with clinically negative nodes seen at
Fletcher Allen Health Care were eligible and offered study
participation. After informed consent and prior to definitive surgery
women completed a measure of psychological distress (the impact of
events scale) and were asked to choose preference for therapy (no
therapy, hormonal or chemotherapy or both) in response to three
clinical scenarios. The scenarios provided precise risk, benefit
(using ADJUVANT!, a web-based tool) and side effect information with
low (10%), moderate (25%) or high risk (44%) risk of death from breast
cancer at 10 years. Presented here are the women with ER+ invasive
cancer and risk of recurrence matching one of the three scenarios.
Statistical methods were based on contingency table approaches and the
calculation of p-values using Fishers Exact Tests as implemented with
SAS.

Results: 69 women were enrolled from
2/02–4/05, with a mean age of 56 (range 36-89), 24% over age 65, 52%
were low, 7% moderate and 12% high risk of recurrence. 42.7% of women
saw a medical oncologist as part of their pre-surgical evaluation.
Prior to surgery 56% of women chose both chemo and hormonal therapy
regardless of risk of recurrence. Only 38% made the same choice after
surgery as before surgery. No variable correlated with treatment
preference prior to surgery, however, women with greater education
were more likely to choose no therapy in the low recurrence risk
scenario (p=0.15). Age, insurance status, psychological distress, risk
and seeing a medical oncologist prior to surgery (but not pretreatment
therapy preference) was significantly correlated with actual choice of
therapy in univariate analysis (p<0.05). A logistic regression
analysis revealed that greater risk, younger age and more intrusive
thoughts were most significantly correlated with more aggressive
treatment choice (p<0.01).

Discussion: This study is among the
first to correlate pretreatment preference for therapy with the actual
therapy chosen and received. Although, there was not a correlation
between pre surgical preference for adjuvant therapy and actual
choice; level of risk, psychological distress and age do correlate
with the actual choices that women make. It is therefore important to
address psychological distress and provide the most accurate
assessment of risk to women making decisions for adjuvant therapy for
breast cancer.

## 6060

## One year outcomes of an early identification and intervention model
to reduce upper extremity morbidity related to breast cancer
treatment.

## Gergich NL, Pfalzer LA, McGarvey CL, Augustine EA, Springer B,
Gerber LH, Soballe PW. National Naval Medical Center, Bethesda, MD;
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; University of Michigan-
Flint Campus, Flint, MI; Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington,
DC

Background: It is widely accepted
that early detection and management of impairments and limb
dysfunction after breast cancer treatment contribute to more
successful functional outcomes. Health care providers should be
encouraged to preemptively assess for upper extremity (UE) morbidities
after breast cancer treatment including; shoulder dysfunction,
scarring and skin changes, pain, fatigue and lymphedema. This can be
accomplished by adopting cost-effective models for early
identification of impairments and providing intervention while the
functional limitations are minimal, thereby preventing long term loss
of function.

Materials and Methods: A prospective,
observational study (n=159) with one year follow-up assessed the
effects of an early identification and intervention model used on
women after breast cancer treatment. Measurement of UE morbidities,
impairments and disability after cancer treatments were taken, e.g.
quality of life as measured by the MOS SF 36, active range of motion,
strength, lymphedema as measured by the optoelectronic volumeter
(Perometer®), and self-reported physical activity disability.
Individuals were screened prior to surgical treatment and followed-up
at approximately two to four weeks postoperatively and at three month
intervals thereafter, up to 18 months.

Results: A small group of women
demonstrated UE impairments (AROM, strength) prior to breast cancer
treatment (5 to 8%). The incidence of UE impairments at one year after
treatment ranged from 3-8%. The incidence of lymphedema within the
first year of treatment ranged from 5–9% using 150 ml volume change
from baseline as the criteria for lymphedema. QOL at one year after
treatment showed that mental and physical function were similar (mean
of 47 vs.45) and generally high but mental function had twice as much
variability (Standard deviation of 9 vs.18).

Discussion: Incidence of UE morbidity
after breast cancer treatment has been documented in the literature as
high as 50% with lymphedema incidence reported on average at 33%. This
study clearly demonstrates the potential for substantial reduction in
UE dysfunction related to breast cancer treatment when using an early
identification and intervention model. Many morbidities such as pain,
reduced range of motion, decreased strength and subclinical lymphedema
were detected early and managed with minimal, cost-effective
intervention. Additional research is needed to assess ways of
maintaining this cost effective model of care in the long-term.

## 6061

## Longitudinal patterns of weight gain after breast cancer diagnosis:
observations beyond the first year.

## Makari-Judson G, Judson CH, Barham RB, Mertens WC. Baystate
Medical Center, Springfield, MA

Background: Weight gain after a
breast cancer diagnosis has been reported, but few have reported
weight gain patterns and associations beyond the first year.

Purpose: To determine the durability
of weight changes observed one year after diagnosis, and to identify
groups with differing weight gain risks two and three years after
initial diagnosis.

Methods: Retrospectively-identified
breast cancer patients (stage I-IIIB) were evaluated for parameters
including weight at diagnosis and one, two and three years later,
height, body mass index (BMI), age, menopausal and change in
menopausal status, as well as therapy and pathologic stage. Regression
models identified significant independent predictors of weight change.
Recursive partitioning analysis (RPA) was employed to divide the
dataset into relevant and significant groups.

Results: Regression models/RPA
demonstrated that weight gain at one year (n=185; mean 1.5 kg; 95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.9, 2.3) was associated with younger age,
adjuvant chemotherapy, and lower BMI (Proc ASCO 2003; 22:726). Weight
change at two years was greater than at year one (mean 2.7 kg; 95%CI
1.9, 3.6). Univariate associations with year two weight gain were year
one weight gain (p<0.0001), younger age (p<0.0001), adjuvant
chemotherapy (p<0.0001), adjuvant anthracycline therapy (90% of
regimens, p<0.0001), and lower BMI (p=0.05). Stepwise multivariate
analysis revealed year two weight change from baseline was associated
with weight change at year one (p<0.0001), adjuvant chemotherapy
(p=0.012) and younger age (p=0.049). RPA for weight change at year two
identified four groups (age ≥ 56, BMI ≥
25.6 kg/m2 [mean change −2.2 kg]; age
< 56 without adjuvant anthracycline therapy [mean 1.4 kg]; age ≥
56, BMI < 25.6 [mean 2.6 kg]; and age < 56 treated with
anthracyclines [mean 5.2 kg]). Weight change from year two to year
three was not significant (n=150 mean change 0.3 kg, 95%CI −0.3, 0.9,
p=0.86), and was not associated with any variable in univariate
analysis. Patients with RPA-derived factors associated with mean
weight loss at year one (age≥59, BMI≥30) continued to weight less at
year three than at baseline. Repeated measures model for weight change
over three years from diagnosis revealed weight gain for age<59
(p<0.0001), BMI<30 (p=0.0007), anthracycline therapy (p=0.0028),
as well as the product of age<59 and BMI<30 (p=0.009); the model
for weight change over 2 years was similar.

Conclusions: Weight gain in
early-stage breast cancer patients continues two years after
diagnosis, with no further significant change at three years. Those
gaining weight at one year (younger patients and those receiving
adjuvant chemotherapy) tended to gain further weight, while those
tending to lose at year one (older, obese women) remained stable.
Weight changes are not a shortterm phenomenon, and persist three years
beyond diagnosis. Longer observation periods are needed to determine
the full extent of the change and the effectiveness of
interventions.

## 6062

## Meta-analysis examining the efficacy of serotonin selective
reuptake inhibitors in the treatment of women with hot flashes.

## Mukherjee SD, Al-Sagheir A, Levine M. Juravinski Cancer Centre,
Hamilton, ON, Canada

Background: Hot flashes can be
particularly troublesome in postmenopausal women as well as those who
are on medications such as Tamoxifen or aromatase inhibitors for
breast cancer treatment. Patients with chemotherapy-induced menopause
may also develop hot flashes that can impact on their quality of life.
Serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRI’s) have been studied to
determine if they reduce the frequency or severity of hot
flashes.

Objective: To provide a
systematic review of the published literature considering all
randomized controlled trials (RCT’s) evaluating SSRI use in women
experiencing hot flashes.

Methods of Review: Five medical
literature databases were searched to identify all potential
randomized placebo-controlled trials evaluating SSRI’s in women with
hot flashes. The methodological quality of the RCT’s was assessed. The
results of all studies that met our inclusion criteria were compiled
and systematically reviewed. The primary outcomes for the pooled
analyses were the number of patients who had a 50% decrease in hot
flash frequency or hot flash score. Other outcome measures included
absolute reductions in hot flash frequency and hot flash score, and
the number of withdrawals in the treatment and placebo arms.

Results: A total of 7 RCT’s met
the study inclusion criteria. An odds ratio of 0.59 (95% confidence
interval 0.38, 0.93) favoured treatment with SSRI’s for the primary
outcome of a fifty percent decrease in hot flash frequency or score.
Pooled analyses also favoured treatment with SSRI’s for the outcome
measures of absolute reduction in hot flash frequency (weighted mean
difference 0.91, 95% CI 0.48 to 1.34) and hot flash score (weighted
mean difference 2.48, 95% CI 0.51 to 4.44). Pooling of studies with
greater than 50% breast cancer patients suggested that SSRI’s were
efficacious in both women with breast cancer and those without breast
cancer. Studies involving a treatment duration of 4–8 weeks showed a
significant benefit for SSRI’s, while pooling of 2 studies with data
for 3 months of treatment showed no benefit of SSRI’s in reducing hot
flashes, although this latter analysis was underpowered. Overall,
SSRI’s were well tolerated with only minor side effects
reported.

Conclusions: SSRI’s reduce the
number and severity of hot flashes in women with and without breast
cancer. Whether or not the treatment effect lasts more than 2 months
requires further studies to answer this question.

## 6063

## Time to progression as a surrogate endpoint of clinical benefit in
the taxanes and aromatase inhibitors decade: “El Álamo”
project.

## De la Haba J, Aranda E, Lluch A, Llombart A, Martín M, Alba E,
Munárriz B, Balil A, Ramos M, Martínez del Prado P. On Behalf of the
Spanish Breast Cancer Research Group (GEICAM), San Sebastián de los
Reyes, Madrid, Spain

Background: retrospective studies
have shown an improvement in overall survival of metastatic breast
cancer (MBC) patients (pts) during the last decades, which seems to be
related to the availability of new drugs for the standard daily care
of pts (Giordano, S.H., et al., Is breast
cancer survival improving? Cancer, 2004. 100(1): p.
44–52). However, other factors, such as the improvement of supportive
cancer care might be influencing the positive outcomes shown in this
analysis. We consider time to progression (TTP) as an adequate
endpoint to predict clinical benefit in MBC. Its relationship to
standard administration of new therapies is examined. Objectives: to analyze a 10 year- time
course of TTP vs. therapeutic measures adopted as first-line (FL)
standard of treatment for MBC pts. Methods: El Álamo project is a retrospective analysis
of 15381 pts diagnosed of BC between 1990 and 1997 across 43 of the
main Spanish hospitals. For the present analysis three cohorts have
been considered: Álamo I (AI) consisted of pts diagnosed with MBC
between 1990 and 1993; Álamo II (AII) consisted of pts diagnosed
between 1994 and 1997; Álamo III (AIII) consisted of pts diagnosed
between 1998 and 2001. 158 items per pt were recorded, including
demographic, therapeutic and outcome data. TTP has been analysed by
means of contingency tables and Kaplan-Meier log-rank test. Inferences
has been analysed with c2 and log-rank
tests. Results: baseline pts
characteristics in the three cohorts are well-balanced regarding age,
visceral disease, number of metastatic sites, tumor grade and hormonal
receptor status. Median TTP in first vs. second vs. third pts cohorts
are: 9.44 vs. 12.8 vs. 15.92 months. Both the second (1994–1997) and
the third (1998–2000) cohorts of pts show a significant improvement in
median TTP (p< 0.001) when compared to first cohort (1990–1993).
Standard therapeutic management of MBC pts has been compared for all
three cohorts. The most relevant findings are the increase in the
standard administration of aromatase inhibitors and taxanes as FL
treatment. Percentage of pt who received aromatase inhibitors in each
cohort was 2.7% (AI) vs. 16.2% (AII) vs. 49.4% (AIII) (p<0.001).
Percentage of pt who received taxanes in each cohort was 1.1% (AI) vs.
13.9% (AII) vs. 30.2% (AIII) (p<0.001). Conclusion: Spanish population of MBC pts have
experienced an important improvement in TTP since 1990. This better
outcome could be related to standard administration of new FL
therapies, such as aromatase inhibitors and taxanes.

## 6064

## The effect of a pilot exercise intervention on bone remodeling and
body composition in breast cancer survivors.

## Knobf MT, Insogna K, Fennie K, Thompson AS, DiPietro L. Yale
University, New Haven, CT
Significance: Postmenopausal breast cancer survivors are at risk
for bone loss, accelerated bone loss has been reported with
chemotherapy-induced menopause and weight gain over time is well
documented and associated with increased health risks.
Purpose: The purpose of this pilot study was to assess feasibility
and to evaluate the effect of a weight loaded exercise intervention on
primary outcomes: bone remodeling, weight and body composition, and
secondary outcomes: physical functioning, general health, physical and
psychological symptom distress. This analysis will report on the
primary outcomes.
Methods: A one group pre and post test design was used to test a 3
times per week, 16–24 week supervised brisk treadmill walking exercise
intervention. Target heart rates (HR) were individually calculated and
HR recorded q 5 minutes during the 45 minute sessions. A waist belt
was progressively loaded with 1 lb to 5 lbs weeks 1–5 and then
maintained at weeks 5–24. Women who experienced chemotherapy induced
menopause, or were within 2 years of natural menopause or discontinued
hormone replacement therapy and within 2 years of completing breast
cancer therapy were eligible. Bone remodeling was measured by serum
biomarkers, specifically N-terminal propeptides of type I collagen
(NTX) and serum osteocalcin. DEXA scans measured body composition,
specifically lean muscle mass and % fat mass. Data were collected at
baseline, 16 and 24 weeks.
Findings: The sample consisted of 26 subjects, the majority of whom
were married, well educated, employed with a mean age of 51.3 yrs
(SD=6.2). Sixty-five percent completed adjuvant chemotherapy; 35% were
on Tamoxifen and 27% on an Aromatase Inhibitor. The intervention was
feasible demonstrated by high adherence rates (M=88.2 % SD=6.8). There
was no significant difference in serum osteocalcin or serum NTX over
time or by adjuvant hormone therapy. Mean weight at baseline was 156.8
(+21.3) and 155.1 (+20.1) at 24 weeks. Lean muscle mass did not differ
over time (p=.08). There was no significant difference in % fat mass
for the group as a whole but there was an interaction effect for
hormone treatment over time (p=.04).
Conclusions: The intervention was feasible, women maintained their
weight, lean muscle mass and % fat mass although small increases in %
fat mass were observed for women on hormone therapy over time. These
results support the design of a larger adequately powered randomized
control group study.

## 6065

## Acute and delayed nausea still a considerable problem in adjuvant
breast cancer chemotherapy.

## Malmström A, Norberg B, Börjeson S, Hursti T, Sundqvist M,
Peterson C, Andersson B, Jungå A-S, Ljung U. Linköping University
Hospital, Sweden; Jönköping County Hospital, Sweden; Linköping
University, Sweden; Uppsala University, Sweden; Kalmar County
Hospital, Sweden

Background: In adjuvant breast cancer
chemotherapy thecurrent use of combinations of
5HT3-blocking agents and corticosteroids has
been a major advance in controlling chemotherapy induced nausea and
vomiting (CINV). This improvement has mainly been noted for acute
symptoms - within the first 24 hour period after delivery of
chemotherapy. Less attention has been paid to the problem of delayed
CINV which also seems to be less affected by current antiemetic
treatments. In order to evaluate the extent and to explore predictive
parameters of acute and delayed nausea we conducted this study in
three out-patient chemotherapy units within the South-East Health Care
Region in Sweden. This study provides unique data from the patients
entire treatment period of 7 cycles of chemotherapy.

Methods: Between November 2000 and
January 2003 all breast cancer patients who fulfilled the inclusion
criteria (adjuvant chemotherapy, ability to communicate in Swedish)
were offered to participate in the study. 126 patients accepted. All
had been diagnosed and surgically treated according to a regional
management program. Therapy consisted of 7 cycles of FEC(5-
fluorouracil, epirubicin, cyclophosphamide) in 83 % of patients and iv
CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil) in 17 %. To
prevent acute CINV patients received antiemetics comprising a
5HT3 receptor antagonist and a
corticosteroid and to prevent delayed symptoms a
5HT3 receptor antagonist combined with
corticosteroid/metoklopramide was generally prescribed. A
questionnaire was collected before the first chemotherapy cycle with
report on baseline data regarding probable och possible predictors for
CINV. Also the HAD and LSQ questionnaires were collected. Nausea (none
mild moderate severe) and vomiting (no of episodes) was reported in a
patient diary day 1–10 of each cycle in total 70 days.

Results: Mean number of days with
nausea of any degree was 26 during the 70-day observation period. Only
2 (2 %) patients reported no nausea at all. Sixteen (13 %) patients
reported more than 40 days with nausea. Mean number of days with
vomiting was 4 during the same 70-day period, with 55 (44 %) reporting
no vomiting at all. Fourteen (11 %) patients reported more than 7 days
of vomiting. Over 50 % of patients experienced nausea during days 1,
2, 3 and 4 when reports from all 7 cycles are combined, with a maximum
of 61 % having mild, moderate or severe nausea on day 4.

Conclusion: Acute and especially
delayed CINV still constitutes a considerable problem in adjuvant
breast cancer chemotherapy in spite of modern antiemetic prophylaxis.
There is clearly still room for further improvement.

## 6066

## Breast cancer and HIV.

## Hurley J, DeCesare T, Gomez-Fernandez C, Powell J. Jackson
Memorial Hostpital, Miami, FL; University of Miami/Sylvester Cancer
Center, Maimi, FL

Background: Breast cancer is the most
common malignancy in women in the United States and the second most
common cause of female cancer deaths.Cancers such as Kaposi Sarcoma
and Non Hodgkins Lymphoma frequently occur in patients with Human
Deficiency Virus (HIV) infection but breast cancer has seldom been
reported. The fastest growing group of newly infected HIV patients are
women. Breast cancer and HIV can occur in the same patient and little
is known about the proper treatment of these patients.Thirty three
patients with both Breast Cancer and HIV infection seen at the
University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Hospital between January 1988 to
May 2005 were retrospectively analyzed.

Clinical Characteristics: All stages
of breast cancer were seen: ductal carcinoma in situ (2 patients),
stage I (3 patient), stage II (12 patients), stage III (13 patients),
and stage IV (3 patients). 16 (53%) of the tumors had estrogen
receptors. Five of the 20 patients who underwent axillary lymph node
dissection had abnormal lymph node findings, including 3 with
follicular hyperplasia and 2 with caseating granulomas.

Patient Characteristics: mean age 44
(range31–62), premenopausal 80%, Black 70%, White 30%, Latin 18%, non-
Hispanic white 12%, African American 58%, Caribbean Islander
12%

Results: Of the 30 patients who
presented with local disease, 15 have died: 5 of breast cancer, 7 of
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, 1 of cardiac arrest, and 2 died of
unknown causes. Ten of 21 (48%) patients remain free of disease >
5 years and 3 of 11 (27%) patients are alive >10 years. Thirteen
patients have been treated with either neoadjuvant or adjuvant
chemotherapy. Of those 13 patients, 7 had complications such as herpes
zoster, candida esophagitis, neutropenic fever and ARDS.

Conclusion: Women with HIV and breast
cancer can have prolonged survival from their breast cancer. They
should undergo stage appropriate surgery. They do not tolerate
chemotherapy as well as immunocompetent patients. Despite treatment
with prophylactic medications and growth factor support, they are
prone to complications and frequently need to have their chemotherapy
doses adjusted. Firstline therapy with hormonal manipulations should
be seriously considered as adjuvant therapy in this heavily ER
positive group.

## 6067

## The impact of paclitaxel on menstrual function.

## Oktay K, Libertella N, Oktem O, Beck L, Cil A. Weill Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, NY; Fertile Hope, New York,
NY

Background: Breast cancer is the most
common malignancy in reproductive age women. Chemotherapy regimens
commonly include cyclophosphamide, which has a well documented
negative impact on fertility (1,2). Previous studies suggested that
doxorubicin+cyclophosphamide (AC) results in lower rates of
postchemotherapy amenorrhea when compared to
cyclophosphamide+methotrexate+5-FU (CMF) (3,4). Recent adjuvant and
neo-adjuvant chemotherapy regimens have incorporated taxanes in to the
treatment of early stage breast cancer, however, much less is known
about the effects of these agents on ovarian function. Our goal was to
determine whether the addition of paclitaxel to AC (AC+T) results in a
higher incidence of post-chemotherapy amenorrhea, compared to AC
alone.

Design: Prospective observational
study

Methods: Between the years 2000–2005,
273 breast cancer patients who were counseled for fertility
preservation were also asked to participate in a follow up study. All
patients were asked to keep a record of their menstruation during and
after chemotherapy treatment. From these patients, we identified 44
women with clinical breast cancer stage I–IIIA, who received either
AC+T (n=28) or AC (n=17), and who had at least one year of follow up
after the initiation of chemotherapy. We then compared the menstrual
history of women who received AC+T with those who received AC
only.

Results: The mean length of follow up
was 30 months with a range of 12 to 70 months. The patients who
received AC+T were younger than those receiving AC (34.0±1.0 vs.
37.2±1.0, p=0.03). Of those who received AC+T, all but one (27/28,
96%) lost periods during chemotherapy; 48% (13/27) recovered after a
mean 7.1±1.4 months. Of the women who received AC, 14/17 (82%) ceased
menstruation during chemotherapy but 64% (9/14) regained after a mean
6.7±0.9 months. Despite their younger age, a higher percentage of
patients receiving AC+T experienced persistent amenorrhea 6 months
beyond postchemotherapy (14/28; 50%) compared to AC (5/17,29%)
(P=0.03). Of the patients who developed persistent amenorrhea, the
percentage of patients receiving tamoxifen was similar (AC vs. AC+T,
80% vs. 85%, p>0.05). A logistic regression analysis was performed
to control for differences in age and length of follow up. On logistic
regression, the odds ratio for developing persistent amenorrhea after
AC+T was 3.9 (95% C.I. 0.85-17.7) compared to AC alone.

Conclusions: Our findings suggest
that paclitaxel may adversely affect ovarian function. Young women
with breast cancer should be counseled regarding the possibly
increased likelihood of ovarian failure and infertility when
paclitaxel is added to the AC regimen.

## References:
1. Sonmezer & Oktay. Hum Reprod Update 2004;
10:251-266.
2. Oktay et al. J Clin Oncol. April 11, 2005 (Epub ahead of
print).
3. Goodwin et al. J Clin Oncol. 1999; 17:2365–2370.
4. Bines J et al. J Clin Oncol 1996; 14:1718–1729.

## 6068

## Attitudes and management approaches of physicians who care for
women with DCIS.

## Partridge AH, Winer JP, Sampson E, Blood E, Dees C, Emmons K,
Winer EP. Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Brigham and
Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA; University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC
Physicians’ attitudes about DCIS may vary, and this variability may
impact on patient care, patient risk perceptions and satisfaction with
care. We sought to assess attitudes and management approaches of those
physicians identified as providing care to women in our ongoing cohort
study of women with DCIS.

Methods: Physicians identified by our
DCIS study participants were invited to participate in a one-time
mailed survey. A financial incentive of $10 was sent with the survey,
and repeat fax, email, or phone reminders were used to enhance
response rate. Results: 208
physicians were sent the survey. 158 responded to the survey (76%), 41
did not respond, and 9 surveys were returned to sender. Of the
responders, 7 indicated that they did not believe the survey was
applicable to them; 151 completed the survey. The average age of
respondents was 49 years (range 32–75). 53% were male, and 71% had
been in practice for over 10 years. Subspecialties were as follows:
surgical specialty 35%; medical oncology 29%; radiation oncology 16%;
ob/gyn 5%; internal medicine/primary care 7%; other 8%. Most
physicians (64%) saw <5 patients with DCIS per month, and 28%
reported at least 60 percent of their patients have breast cancer
(including DCIS). Physicians were asked to rate the general risk
associated with DCIS for a patient’s overall long-term health, on a
scale of 1–5(1= not at all risky, 5=extremely risky). Physicians’
responses included: 1 (9%), 2 (54%), 3 (27%), 4 (9%), 5 (0%), blank
(1%). Physicians demonstrated wide variability with regard to
management approaches when responding to clinical vignettes. For a
healthy 45 year-old women with high grade ER+ DCIS who needs further
surgery for positive margins, 23% would recommend a lymph node
evaluation, 66% would not, and 11% would recommend it only if the
patient undergoes a mastectomy rather than re-excision. If this woman
underwent a mastectomy and only had DCIS, 70% of respondents would
recommend tamoxifen therapy, and 29 percent would not; if she were
76 years old, 50% would recommend tamoxifen after mastectomy for DCIS,
and 48% would not. Additional scenarios and analyses will be
presented. Conclusions: There is
substantial variation among physicians regarding perceptions and
management approaches for women with DCIS. Gaining a better
understanding of physician views may help to facilitate the
development of interventions to improve the decision-making process
and risk perceptions for women newly diagnosed with DCIS.

## 6069

## When less is more? Follow up strategies for patients with breast
cancer.

## Sheiner J, Fitzgerald B, Blair A, Callaghan W, Clemons M.
Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON,
Canada

Background: The prevalence of breast
cancer (BC) continues to rise, due in part to the aging population
& also improvements in screening & treatment. This, coupled
with rapid changes in adjuvant endocrine strategies has generated
increasing clinic workloads for oncologists. Early breast cancer
patients are being followed for longer periods of time & require
ongoing surveillance for complications of estrogen suppression.
Strategies are therefore required to enable the most efficient
utilization of scarce oncologist resources.

Materials and Methods: A prospective
program utilizing evidenced-based guidelines was developed. The goal
was to transfer eligible patients from our medical oncology practice
to ongoing follow up by their family physicians (FP) soon after
completion of adjuvant chemo/radiotherapy or initiation of adjuvant
endocrine therapy. A patient information package was provided at time
of transfer, followed by a mailing of follow-up guidelines to the
FP.

Results: Since April 2005, 110 pts
have been assessed for transfer back to the FP. 83% of pts were
hormone receptor positive; 58% were being followed by another oncology
discipline (of these pts 18% were being followed by surgical oncology,
40% <INS cite=mailto:default dateTime=2005-05-31T10:19>by </
INS>radiation oncology, & 36% by both). 93% of pts had a FP.
42% of all pts seen were considered suitable for transfer to the FP.
58% were deemed unsuitable for transfer, mainly due to clinical trial
enrollment (51%), planned changes in endocrine therapy (25%), &
the development of new symptoms (1%).

Discussion: An evidence-based program
for breast cancer patients to facilitate transfer of care to the FP is
presented. 42% of the 110 patients assessed were suitable for transfer
back to their FPx. This offers another strategy to improve workload
volumes & thus enable the medical oncologist to direct care to
where it is most needed. It also allows the development of effective
follow up guidelines for both the patient & the FP that take into
account rapidly evolving changes in BC management.

## 6070

## The adherence of practice guidelines in the assessment of bone
health in women with chemotherapy-induced amenorrhea.

## Tham YL, Sexton K, Kramer R, Weiss H, Grollman J, Minnix J,
Friedman LC. Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX

Background: Twenty-five per cent of
invasive breast cancers occur in premenopausal women, most of whom
receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Women who develop chemotherapy-induced
amenorrhea are at risk for developing osteoporosis. For this reason,
in 2003, ASCO issued guidelines recommending that physicians regularly
assess the bone health of these women.

Methods: We surveyed women who were
<50 years of age and premenopausal at initiation of chemotherapy
and identified those who developed permanent amenorrhea. The women
were recruited from a dedicated breast clinic and the Young Survival
Coalition. The performance of recommended screening and preventive
measures for osteoporosis was assessed.

Results: Two hundred and twenty
eligible women completed the survey. Eighty-nine had permanent
amenorrhea (40%); 64 were ≤ 40 years of age and 25 > 40 years old.
Forty-nine were on tamoxifen and seven on an aromatase inhibitor. Only
55% had discussed bone health with their health care providers. Age at
diagnosis, race and use of tamoxifen were not associated with this
discussion. Regular exercise was recommended to 72% of the women,
calcium/vitamin D supplement to 57% and bone mineral density (BMD)
testing to 40%. Approximately one-half of the women regularly
exercised and took a calcium/vitamin D supplement; however, over 40%
of the latter took less than the recommended dose of the supplement
(1000–1500mg/day) for prevention of osteoporosis. Thirty-two per cent
of the women reported having had BMD testing. Women 40 years of age or
younger were less likely to undergo BMD testing (25%) than women over
40 years of age (48%) (p=0.04).

Conclusion: For nearly one half of
patients, physicians did not adhere to the published guidelines for
assessing bone health after chemotherapy induced amenorrhea.
Oncologists should more uniformly encourage maintenance and assessment
of bone health, especially in women 40 years old or younger, who are
less likely to take advantage of BMD testing.

## 6071

## A prospective longitudinal study of the impact of adjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer (BC) on older patients’ functional status
and quality of life.

## Hurria A, Hurria A, Panageas K, Zuckerman E, Fornier M, D’Andrea
G, Dang C, Moasser M, Robson M, Seidman A, Currie V, Vanpoznak C,
Theodoulou M, Norton L, Atienza M, Hudis C. Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY; Suny Upstate, Syracuse, NY; University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA

Background: Older patients are less
likely to receive adjuvant chemotherapy than younger patients. Fear of
toxicity and its associated impact on functional status and quality of
life may factor into decision-making. This prospective study examined
the toxicity experienced by a cohort of older patients receiving
adjuvant chemotherapy for BC and the longitudinal impact on functional
status and quality of life (QOL).

Methods: Fifty patients ≥ age 65 with
primary invasive BC enrolled in an IRB-approved protocol. A geriatric
assessment consisting of measurements of functional status [activities
of daily living (ADL), instrumental activities of daily living (IADL),
KPS], comorbidity (Charlson), mood (Geriatric Depression Scale),
nutritional status (BMI) and quality of life (FACT-B) was performed at
the following time points: pre-chemotherapy, end-ofchemotherapy, and
6 months later. Inclusion criteria were age ≥ 65, stage I-III BC, and
receipt of adjuvant chemotherapy at MSKCC [CMF (cyclophosphamide
600mg/m2 IV, methotrexate 40mg/m2 IV, 5-fluorouracil 600mg/m2 IV q3
wks × 8) or an anthracycline-based regimen: AC (doxorubicin 60mg/m2,
cyclophosphamide 600mg/m2 q3 wks × 4), AC→T (AC followed by Paclitaxel
175mg/m2 IV q 3 wks × 4), or AC→TH (AC→T followed by trastuzumab × 52
weeks on another study)] with dose modifications per cause.

Results: 50 patients (mean age 68,
range 65–84) enrolled in the protocol, of which 49 are evaluable.
Staging was: I (35%), IIA (49%), IIB (14%), IIIA (2%). Comorbidity,
measured by Age- Adjusted Charlson Comorbidity Scale was low: score 2
(43%), 3 (33%), 4 (12%), 5 (8%), 6 (4%). 53% (26) had any grade 3 or 4
toxicity: 31% (15) hematologic toxicity, 27% (13) nonhematologic.
Despite this toxicity, there was no significant longitudinal change in
functional status as measured by ADL (p = 0.64) or IADL (p = 0.42),
Charlson Comorbidity score (p = 0.95), Geriatric Depression Scale
(p=0.56), BMI (p = 0.95), or QOL as measured by FACT B (p = 0.49).
Patients had a decrease in KPS immediately post-chemotherapy (p =
0.02) but recovered to baseline functioning by 6 months
post-chemotherapy.

Discussion: Despite toxicity from
adjuvant chemotherapy, older patients maintained their functional
status and quality of life from pre-chemotherapy to 6 months
post-chemotherapy. Subtle changes in higher order functioning may be
missed by these traditional geriatric assessment scales.

## 6072

## Overestimation of risk among women with DCIS: longitudinal results
from a cohort study.

## Partridge AH, Adloff K, Blood E, Dees C, Kaelin C, Weeks J,
Emmons K, Winer EP. Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA; Brigham
and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA; University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC
DCIS is a complex clinical entity with a variable natural history,
but a favorable overall prognosis. Limited data suggest that women
with DCIS may overestimate the risk of disease recurrence.

Methods: Women newly diagnosed with
DCIS in Massachusetts and North Carolina were asked to participate in
a longitudinal study of risk perceptions, psychosocial factors and
health behaviors. Questionnaires were administered at baseline, 9 and
18 months. Results: 499 women with
DCIS (64% of eligible participants) completed baseline surveys. Median
age 53 years (range 26–90); 86% ≤ 65 years old; 94% white; 62%
graduated college; 68% married/partnered;44% working full-time. 7% of
women recalled significant anxiety, and 3% depression in the month
prior to diagnosis using the Hospitalized Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS). The median Revised Impact of Event Scale (RIES) score at
baseline was 12.9 (range 0–58), indicating a low-moderate level of
DCIS-related anxiety. Respondents were queried about their future
risks. 

In questions to define the meaning of qualitative risk estimates,
“moderate or greater” was associated with a perceived 30–40% absolute
risk; “unlikely or very unlikely” was associated with a 4–5% risk. A
multivariate model revealed that baseline anxiety, assessed by the
HADS and RIES, was associated with elevated perceptions of risk of
distant disease. Non-significant factors included age, race,
education, marital status, employment, financial status, comorbidity,
treatment, and satisfaction with treatment. To date, follow-up data
are available from 215 women (complete–data will be available for
presentation). At 18-mos, 24% believed there was a moderate or greater
chance that DCIS would spread to other places. Some patients’
perception of risk increased over time, and others’ decreased, without
a consistent trend in either direction (McNemar’s Test p-value=0.79).
Baseline factors associated with elevated perception of risk of
distant disease at 18-months were: non-white race, < full-time
employment, lack of satisfaction with treatment and tamoxifen
use.

Conclusions: A substantial proportion
of women with newly diagnosed DCIS harbor grossly inaccurate
perceptions of the breast cancer risks they face and these persist
over time. Future research should assess the impact of altered risk
perceptions on decision-making and psychosocial outcomes. Clinicians
caring for women with DCIS should be aware of these inaccurate
perceptions. (Supported by the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center SPORE
in Breast Cancer 5 P50 CA89393-03)

## 6073

## Post-decision regret following breast reconstruction among women
with breast cancer.

## Sherman KA, Sheehan JC, Lam T, Boyages J, Zibdeh S. Macquarie
University, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; New South Wales Breast
Cancer Institute, Westmead, NSW, Australia

Background Whether or not to undergo
reconstructive surgery is a difficult decision faced by many women
following mastectomy for breast cancer. Prior studies indicate that
regret following a medical decision may be attributed to inadequate
preparatory information, as well as psychosocial factors such as body
image disturbance and emotional distress. However, with a lack of
theoretically informed studies, little is known of the factors
associated with decision regret among these women. Adopting the
theoretical framework of the Monitoring Process Model (S.M. Miller),
the current study assessed the association of dissatisfaction with
information, negative changes in body image, disease specific and
general-distress with post-decision regret.

Methods Women diagnosed with breast
cancer who had undergone immediate or delayed breast reconstructive
surgery following mastectomy at the New South Wales Breast Cancer
Institute were invited to participate in the study. With an uptake
rate of 52%, 123 consenting participants completed a questionnaire
consisting of validated scales including the Decision Regret Scale,
Body Image Scale, Impact of Events Scale (disease-specific distress)
and the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scales (general distress).
Dissatisfaction with information was assessed with a series of
researcher-developed items based on prior research. The potential
moderating effect of coping style (i.e., high versus low monitoring)
was assessed by the Monitor Blunter Style Scale. Demographic and
medical history characteristics, social support and current mood state
were assessed and treated as potential covariates.

Results Decision regret was found in
47.1% of participants. Dissatisfaction with preparatory information at
some level was reported by 36.6% of participants. The majority of
participants reported minimal negative changes in body image,
disease-specific and general distress. Bivariate analyses indicated
that decision regret was associated with body image disturbance,
disease-specific distress, dissatisfaction with information, and
general distress. Controlling for mood state and time since last
reconstructive procedure, multinominal logistic regression analyses
showed that: increases in body image disturbance (OR=1.13, p=.04) and
anxiety (OR=1.25, p=.03), and decreases in depression (OR=.80, p=.01)
were associated with increased likelihood of a participant
experiencing regret. In addition, monitoring coping style
significantly moderated the association between anxiety and regret
(OR=.91, p=.01), such that low monitors who were more anxious had a
greater likelihood of experiencing regret.

Conclusions These results provide
theoretically-guided data regarding decision outcomes among breast
cancer patients undergoing reconstructive surgery. The association
between body image disturbance and regret reinforces the necessity of
actively informing and educating women about realistic outcome
expectations in terms of aesthetic appearance. The finding that
anxiety and low monitoring coping style were associated with increased
likelihood of regret suggests the need for interventions tailored to
individual coping style that are designed to enhance coping responses
of women undergoing breast reconstruction.

## 6074

## Memory impairments with anastrozole versus tamoxifen therapy in
women with early stage breast cancer.

## Bender CM, Sereika SM, Ryan CM, Casillo FE, Vogel VG, Berga SL,
Cohen SM, Rastogi P, Brufsky AM. University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
PA; Emory University, Atlanta, GA

Background and Purpose: Cognitive
impairments have been associated with adjuvant hormonal therapy in
women with breast cancer. These impairments may include deficits in
attention, memory and psychomotor efficiency and may be related to the
effects of hormonal therapy on hormone levels. Estradiol levels are
significantly lower in women with breast cancer who receive
anastrozole compared to women who receive tamoxifen. The purpose of
this pilot study was to compare cognitive function in women with early
stage breast cancer who were receiving tamoxifen versus anastrozole
therapy.

Methods: Cognitive function was
assessed with a battery of measures evaluating attention, learning and
memory, mental efficiency, visuospatial ability, and psychomotor
efficiency in women with stage I and II breast cancer who had received
a minimum of three months of tamoxifen or anastrozole therapy.
Depression was measured with the Beck Depression Inventory-II, anxiety
was measured with the Profile of Mood States (POMS) Tension/Anxiety
subscale, and fatigue was measured with the POMS Fatigue/Inertia
subscale. Data were analyzed using hierarchical linear
regression.

Results: Results suggest that, after
controlling for age, education level, time on hormonal therapy,
depression, anxiety, and fatigue, women who received anastrozole
(n=15) had significantly more severe impairment than women who
received tamoxifen (n=16) in: 1) visual learning and memory as
measured by the Rey Complex Figure Test in the immediate (p=.006) and
delayed (p=.011) recall conditions and 2) verbal learning and memory
as measured by the Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test Total (p<.001)
and delayed recall (p=.002) scores, and the Rivermead Story Recall in
the immediate (p=.040) condition and marginally significantly worse
performance in the delayed recall condition of the Rivermead Story
Recall (p=.069).

Conclusions: These results suggest
that women who receive anastrozole therapy experience more severe
impairment in cognitive function than women who receive tamoxifen
therapy. Cognitive impairment may be limited to the domains of verbal
and visual learning and memory. Further evaluation of cognitive
function and the potential relationship between scores on cognitive
function measures and hormone levels is needed in this population to
facilitate education of women who take anastrozole and the development
of interventions to prevent or compensate for such cognitive
impairments.

## 6075

## Distress in a nationwide cohort study of Danish women treated for
locoregional invasive breast cancer. Prevalence and associations with
histopathological variables, type of treatment and social
relations.

## Christensen S, Zachariae R, Jensen AB, Mϕller S, Ravnsbæk J,
Væth M, Maase HVD. Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark;
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark

Background: Breast cancer is one of
the leading causes of cancerrelated death and is generally found to be
associated with significant psychological morbidity. There is,
however, considerable betweenstudy variation, which could be explained
by selection bias, zerotime bias as well as potential buffering
psychosocial factors e.g. social support. A large nationwide study is
needed to clarify these issues. Materials and
methods: As a part of an ongoing nationwide prospective
study of psychosocial factors and survival of breast cancer patients,
baseline data were analyzed for the 3400 women included in the study
(response rate: 68%). Eligible patients were identified by DBCG and
the surgical departments in Denmark and were all treated for
locoregional invasive breast cancer between Oct., 2001 to March, 2004.
Approx. 12–16 weeks post-surgery a questionnaire was mailed out
including measures of depressive symptoms (BDI-II), avoidance and
intrusive thoughts about cancer (IES), social support (SSQT), social
constraints (SC), SF-36 Physical Function (PF) and Sleep Quality (SQ).
Clinical data were obtained from the DBCG registry. Results: Participants were younger than
non-participants (median 55.7 yrs. vs. 58.0 yrs; range: 23–70 yrs).
Participation was not influenced by histopathological variables or
adjuvant treatment when accounting for age in a logistic regression.
Prevalence of moderate to severe depression was 8.6 %, and 7.3 % had
symptoms indicating possible PTSD (high avoidance and high intrusion).
In univariate analyses significant higher BDI-II scores were found for
women receiving chemotherapy and/or with positive axillary node status
whereas higher scores on IES were found in case of radiotherapy and/or
positive axillary node status. Controlling for treatment and
histopatological variables in a hierarchical logistic regression,
moderate to severe depression was significantly positively associated
with SC (OR: 1.08), and IES (OR: 1.07), and inversely associated with
being married (OR: 0.57), age (OR: 0.97), SSQT (OR: 0.98), and SQ (OR:
0.50). Neither histopathological variables nor type of treatment were
associated with depression. In a similar analysis high
avoidance/intrusion was positively associated with BDI-II (OR: 1.11),
and SC (OR: 1.04), and inversely associated Abstracts . Poster Session
VI S275 with chemotherapy (OR: 0.53), PF (OR: 0.94), and SQ (OR:
0.76). Discussion: The cohort was
nationally representative with respect to both histopathological
variables and type of treatment but non-participants were slightly
older. Being married, good sleep quality, physical function, and
social support were inversely associated with distress, while
experienced constraints from others in talking about their cancer was
associated with increased distress.

## 6076

## Pre-surgical screening for emotional distress and psychiatric
co-morbidity among women with newly diagnosed early stage breast
cancer.

## Moore CP, Kearing S, Collins ED, Hegel MT, Ahles TA, Gillock KL,
Riggs RL, Clay KF. Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center; Dartmouth
Medical School
Background: Emotional distress is prevalent among breast cancer
patients but few studies have documented this among women who are
recently diagnosed. Screening tools are available but underutilized
due to time and resource constraints. We developed the Dartmouth
Computer-Based Screening Tool (DCST) to screen newly diagnosed breast
cancer patients for distress and psychiatric co-morbidity prior to
their surgical consultation. This web-based questionnaire identifies
patients meeting a threshold for intervention (having a positive score
on one or more screening elements) and instantly generates an email
alert to specially trained social workers. Social workers personally
assess and triage patients as needed.
Methods: All women presenting with newly diagnosed early stage
breast cancer complete the DCST prior to their surgical consultation.
The tool records demographics and health history. It also screens for
distress (Distress Thermometer); PTSD (PCPTSD questionnaire);
depression, panic and anxiety (subsets of the Patient Health
Questionnaire); general mental functioning (SF-8), history of
depression, medication usage, and past mental hospital admission.
Those who screen positive for distress or other psychiatric disorders
are contacted by a social worker.
Results: Since its launch in March of 2004, 134 patients have
completed the DCST. Most were white/non-Hispanic (97%), married (62%),
employed (59%), and educated beyond a high school degree (74%). Their
mean age was 59. Nearly half of patients (49%, n= 66) scored positive
on one or more of the mental health screening components. Elevated
distress was reported by 42% (n=56). The most commonly reported
sources of distress were uncertainty about long term outcome,
treatments, chances of complications, and chances of success, as well
as emotional factors such as worry, nervousness, and fears. Additional
results follow: 

Conclusions: A substantial number of women with newly diagnosed
breast cancer were found to have levels of distress and/or psychiatric
disorders that met our thresholds for intervention by a social worker.
The prevalence of distress in this pre-surgical sample suggests a need
for periodic re-screening and follow-up over the course of ongoing
breast cancer care.

## 6077

## Oncology rehabilitation improves patient physical function and
emotional health.

## Smith KY, Rodgers RG, Cancer Association of Anderson, Anderson,
SC; AnMed Health, Anderson, SC

Background: Women diagnosed with
breast cancer tend to reduce physical activity, which can have a
negative impact on both survival and general health due to increase in
body weight, a known risk factor for poorer prognosis. Women who are
obese at the time of diagnosis experience the greatest decline in
activity. Many studies have documented the value of support groups of
cancer survivors to their emotional health. Addressing both
psychosocial and fitness needs in a comprehensive oncology
rehabilitation program is an important supplement to treatment for
breast cancer.

Materials and method: Twenty-seven
breast cancer patients ranging from stage I to IV, either in active
treatment or within a year of completion, participated in an
eight-week general oncology rehabilitation program at Anderson Area
Medical Center between September 2003 and December 2004. Each received
a full scholarship from the Cancer Association of Anderson funded by
the Lance Armstrong Foundation. Patients met at the hospital’s
LifeChoice gym twice a week for two hours of exercise, instruction in
nutrition, management of stress and depression and other topics
designed to give them a sense of control and guide lifestyle changes.
Participants could join a wellness program upon completion of Onc
Rehab.

Results: Participants answered pre
and post-completion questionnaires, showing dramatic improvements in
physical functioning levels (81 percent), mental health scores (72
percent), and Beck depression scores (72 percent) and a 95 percent
improvement in knowledge about cancer. Twenty-two of the 27 patients
completed all 16 sessions, and 19 of these opted for an additional
month of wellness training. Three of the 27 continue wellness to the
present. One graduate completed two tri-athlons and one marathon in
the year following treatment. Three of the 27 patients died, but one
had dropped out after one session and another contracted a second
primary cancer of the stomach. In written comments, patients give
oncology rehab high marks for both making them feel stronger and, as
one patient put it, making her feel “less isolated and more in
control.”

Discussion: The combination of
exercise, instruction and cameraderie with other survivors gave
participants more stamina, an improved sense of well-being and a group
of “fellow travelers” with whom they could share their fears,
frustrations and successes. A supervised oncology rehab program, with
physician approval, helps many people bridge the gap from patient to
survivor.

## 6078

## Determinants of presentation delay in locally advanced breast
cancer.

## Kerr-Cresswell DM, Fitzgerald B, Fergus K, Gould J, Clemons MJ.
Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Center, Toronto, ON,
Canada

Background: While there have been
marked improvements in the prognosis of women with early breast
cancer, these gains have not been echoed to the same degree in
patients with locally advanced breast cancer (LABC). Accounting for 10
to 30% of all new primary breast cancers, 5-year survival for LABC
remains poor at around 55%. Research suggests that many women with
LABC have delayed presentation of symptomatic breast cancer, with up
to 30% waiting at least 3 months before presenting to a health care
provider. Delays may be associated with more advanced lesions and
lower survival rates. The characteristics of these patients and
reasons for their delaying behaviour are poorly understood.

Methods: From January 2002 to June
2005, all new patients referred to our dedicated LABC clinic had data
collected asking what date she discovered her breast cancer symptom,
the type of symptom, her appraisal of that symptom, and the date of
initial presentation to a health care provider. Sociodemographic data
were also collected.

Results: 102 patients were referred
with LABC. 99% were female. 74% were Caucasian, 11% Asian, and 9%
Black. Median age at presentation was 51 years (range 27–83). 55% were
married. For those who identified their initial symptom, it was
describes as follows: painless breast lump (59%), axillary mass (9%),
breast erythema (9%), nipple inversion (4%), or other symptom (19%).
In these patients, median time from symptom discovery to presentation
to health care provider was 3 months (range 0–416 weeks). Factors that
negatively affected a timely diagnosis were: mistaken attribution of
symptom as benign process, fear of cancer, belief that breast cancer
was unlikely in the absence of a positive family history, belief that
it is better “not to know”, decision to pursue complementary therapies
first, concern about significant other’s ability to cope, and
competing life demands.

Conclusions: Late-stage presentation
of breast cancer is associated with poor survival. 50% of newly
diagnosed LABC patients in this study waited over three months before
presenting to a health care provider with their breast cancer
symptoms. Further research is necessary to identify the complex social
and psychological factors involved in a woman’s decision to delay
presentation as it relates to breast symptoms. Understanding the
barriers these women face in accessing the health care system will be
important in the development of an effective, targeted health
intervention program to ultimately improve their survival.

## 6079

## The role of fatigue in mediating “chemo fog” in breast cancer
patients.

## Awad N, Collins B, Dent S, MacKenzie J, Bielajew C, Stewart A.
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada; Ottawa Hospital, Ottawa, ON,
Canada; Ottawa Hospital Regional Cancer Centre, Ottawa, ON,
Canada

Background: Previous studies show
that up to 75% of breast cancer patients show signs of cognitive
decline during or shortly after chemotherapy treatment. Patients refer
to this as “chemo fog”. There is recent evidence to suggest that
fatigue may be an important contributory factor to chemo fog. The
purpose of this study was to determine if changes in fatigue over the
course of adjuvant therapy predicted cognitive changes over the same
interval, and if fatigue was related to declining hemoglobin (Hg) in
the chemotherapy patients.

Material and Methods: Eighty-eight
post-menopausal women with early stage breast cancer from an ongoing
prospective study underwent a comprehensive neuropsychological test
battery and completed the Profile of Mood States (POMS) prior to
commencement of adjuvant chemotherapy (mostly FEC, FAC, or AC) or
hormonal therapy (tamoxifen or arimidex), and again within an average
of one month of completing chemotherapy (or at an equivalent time
point for patients receiving hormonal treatment). The POMS includes a
fatigue subscale. Linear regression analysis was used to determine if
change in fatigue predicted neuropsychological performance at second
testing, after controlling for baseline test performance. Correlations
between change in fatigue and change in Hg were calculated for 34
chemotherapy treated patients for whom Hg values were
available.

Results: Changes in fatigue from
first to second testing session were found to strongly predict changes
on a measure of working memory and processing speed (Paced Auditory
Serial Addition Test,b =
-.20,p = .006), such that
greater increases in fatigue were associated with poorer performance.
Change in fatigue correlated significantly with changes in Hg level
from pre- to post-treatment in a subset of 34 of the
chemotherapy-treated patients (r =
-.37; p = .03).

Discussion: These findings suggest
that fatigue is a significant contributor to “chemo fog” and that
fatigue in some patients may be related to declining Hg. This suggests
that maintenance of optimum Hg levels may help prevent “chemo
fog”.

## 6080

## What do patients bring to the consultation? Professional and social
support in breast cancer: the role of childhood abuse.

## Clark LK, Holcombe C, Hill J, Krespi R, Fisher J, Downey H,
Salmon P. The University of Liverpool, Liverpool, Merseyside, United
Kingdom; Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, Merseyside,
United Kingdom; Royal Liverpool Childrens Hospital (Alder Hey),
Liverpool, Merseyside, United Kingdom

Background: The importance of support
in breast cancer patients has been stressed and emphasis is placed on
enhancing the skills of professional carers. Little attention has been
given to what the patient brings to the consultation. Research has
shown that a history of low maternal care in childhood influences
women’s perception of professional support. We tested whether the
preexisting factors of social support and a history of childhood abuse
influence breast cancer patients’ perception of professional
support.

Materials and Methods: Female
patients (N=360, mean=58 years) participated in a two-phase study. At
phase 1, patients completed self-report questionnaires within 2 weeks
of operation. Measures of social and professional support and recall
of childhood abuse were taken. 350 patients provided sufficient data
for analysis.

Results: Patients with more current
social support rated their medical interactions as more supportive
than those with less (r=.282, p<.001). A history of physical abuse
reduced ratings of social (r=-163, p<.005) and professional
(r=-246, p<.001) support. Emotional abuse reduced perceived
professional support (r=-.150, p<.001) only. Covariance structure
modelling fitted the data well (Comparative Fit Index=0.97, Root Mean
Square Error of Approximation index=0.05).

Discussion: Breast cancer patients
with good support experience their professional interactions more
positively than those with less. Moreover, sufferers of childhood
abuse report less social and professional support. Therefore the
perceived support that patients gain from medical interactions may not
be attributable to the skills of professional carers, but to a
patients’ personal history. Clinicians should be aware of the impact
childhood abuse may have on their relationships with patients.

## 6081

## Using interleukin-6 and hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
function as potential diagnostic markers in the assessment of depression
in patients with advanced breast cancer.

## Jehn CF, Kuehnhardt D, Bartholomae A, Pfeiffer S, Schmid P,
Possinger K, Flath BC. Charite Berlin Mitte, Berlin, Germany
Background: The diagnosis of depression in cancer patients is
difficult because symptoms of depression are often similar to those of
cancer or its treatment. Immune activation and dysregulation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis have been implicated in the
pathophysiology of depression. The objective of this study was to
evaluate IL-6 and HPA function as screening tools for depression in
pts with breast cancer.
Methods: 63 patients with metastatic breast cancer were assessed by
the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) for depression and
diagnoses was established according to the DSM-IV criteria. A level of
>11 was considered significant on the HADS-D axes for depression.
Plasma concentrations of IL-6 were measured in addition to cortisol
levels (at 8AM and 8PM). As a measure of the circadian function of the
HPA axis, the relative diurnal variation of cortisol (cortisol VAR),
was calculated. In the statistical analysis the Mann-Whitney test and
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis were
applied.
Results: There was no significant difference in mean age and
Karnofsky-index between breast cancer pts with depression (n=22) and
breast cancer pts without depression (n=41). There was a significant
difference in median plasma concentration of IL-6 between pts with
depression and without depression (19,6 vs. 2,8 pg/ml; p<0,001).
Plasma cortisol concentrations at 8PM were significant higher in
depression. The relative cortisol VAR (17,5 vs. 56,2% respectively;
p=0,001) was significantly decreased in pts with depression compared
to the pts without depression, demonstrating a disturbed circadian
function of the HPA axis. IL- 6 concentrations yielded as a predictor
for the presence of depression at a cutoff value of 10,6 pg/ml a
sensitivity of 82% and a specificity of 83% (AUC=0,86; 95% CI
0,76-0,96), whereas cortisol VAR showed a sensitivity of 85% and a
specificity of 75% (AUC=0,77; 95% CI 0,59-0,95) at a cutoff value of
34,7%.
Conclusions: Depression and increased plasma IL-6 concentrations
are strongly associated in pts with breast cancer. Pts with depression
show a dysfunction of the HPA-axis, characterized by increased
cortisol evening levels and a decreased diurnal variation of cortisol.
The high sensitivity and specificity of these parameters for the
presence of depression at the respective cutoff values make IL-6 and
cortisol VAR helpful tools in the diagnosis of depression in pts with
breast cancer.

## 6082

## Using the Brief Symptom Inventory-18 to screen patients referred to
high-breast cancer risk assessment clinic: patient factors associated
with “caseness” before and after counseling.

## Katz D, Makari-Judson G, Barham R, Carr C, Quinlan M, Mertens
WC. Baystate Regional Cancer Program, Springfield, MA

Background: Women have been shown to
exhibit high levels of stress prior to high-risk breast cancer
assessment and genetic counseling. The Brief Symptom Inventory-18
(BSI) is an assessment tool assessing three dimensions (anxiety [ANX],
depression [DEP] and somatization [SOM]) as well as a general symptom
index (GSI) that can be completed easily by patients in a clinical
setting.

Methods: High-risk clinic patients
consented prior to the physician visit and completed the BSI and their
estimates of 5- year/lifetime breast cancer risk and BRCA mutation
probability before (PRE), immediately (POST) and 2 months (2 MO) after
counseling. Excessive distress (“Caseness”) was defined as
community-based T-scores ≥ 63 on GSI or on at least two
dimensions.

Results: “Caseness” definition was
met in 13 of 81 enrolled cases prior to counseling (16%); all met the
criteria based on GSI; while 11 (85%) did so for ANX. PRE caseness
patients had a past diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder (p=0.0006) and
of lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS;
31 v. 6%, p=0.02), and tended to be
younger (39.9 v. 45.6 years,
p=0.09) and non-white (31 v. 11%,
p=0.08). PRE caseness subjects reported higher PRE breast cancer risk
perceptions (5-year: 46.3 v. 31.3%,
p=0.046; lifetime 66.2 v. 45.8%,
p=0.029), but not of BRCA mutation (p=0.17) than others. After
counseling, seven patients exhibited caseness (9%, p<0.0001);
similar results were found at 2 MO. Univariate associations with POST
caseness included past psychiatric diagnosis (31 v. 4.5% of non-caseness patients,
p=0.012), non-white race (27 v. 6%,
p=0.05), younger age at first live birth (19.2 v. 24.7 yr, p=0.05) and LCIS (43 v. 7%, p=0.02). POST caseness patients had
greater excess risk perceptions after counseling than others (5-year:
38.2 v. 17.1%, p=0.015; lifetime:
32.6 v. 8.1%, p=0.02). PRE caseness
was associated in multivariate analysis with past psychiatric
diagnosis (p=0.0004) and LCIS (p=0.020), as was POST caseness (p=0.010
and p=0.018, respectively).

Conclusions: BSI “caseness” appears
to be an effective screen for excessive distress in this setting.
Physician counseling reduces the number of patients exhibiting
disproportionate symptoms, but those demonstrating POST caseness
continue to vastly overestimate their risk. Counseling does not appear
to result in patients exhibiting “caseness” if they had not
demonstrated “caseness” prior to the intervention. Those with past
psychiatric diagnoses and/or LCIS are prone to high BSI scores and are
candidates for more intensive education and support.

## 6083

## Pre-chemotherapy assessment of cognitive function using functional
magnetic brain imaging in women with breast cancer.

## Cimprich B, Hayes DF, Therrien B, Reuter-Lorenz P, Noll D,
Normolle D, Welsh R, Clark PM, Vincent C, Nelson J. University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; School of Medicine; ; Biomedical
Engineering

Background: Cognitive impairment or
‘chemo brain’ is recognized as a distressing side effect of adjuvant
chemotherapy for breast cancer. Despite the reported frequency of
cognitive deficits associated with chemotherapy, the underlying brain
mechanisms are not well understood. Basic cognitive processes,
attention and working memory, are prerequisites for effective
functioning in daily life and have been shown to be affected by the
diagnosis of breast cancer. The purpose of this study was to determine
prechemotherapy cognitive responses using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) in women with early stage breast cancer as a
basis for future research.

Methods: Ten women (31–61 yrs. of
age) with a primary diagnosis of Stage I or II breast cancer were
tested pre-chemotherapy with an established attention and working
memory task (Verbal Working Memory Task) during fMRI, and 9 healthy
female controls (31 – 64 yrs. of age) were tested after a negative
screening mammogram. Accuracy of responses and reaction times were
analyzed, and fMRI image analyses were performed using the SPM99
analysis package.

Results: The breast cancer group was
significantly (p < .05) less accurate and showed slower reaction
times on behavioral measures in the more demanding task conditions. On
image analysis, a comparison of high vs. low demand conditions showed
differences in brain activation patterns between the breast cancer and
control groups (using a statistical threshold of p < .01). Controls
showed expected activation in the anterior cingulate in the medial
frontal cortex (MFC) in Brodmann’s area (BA) 32 and 6. In contrast,
patients showed activation not only in the MFC but also in the left
and right inferior frontal gyri (BA 44, 45, and 47), left and right
insula (BA 10), and left parietal (BA 7) and right parietal areas (BA
7 and 40).

Discussion: The findings showed
poorer behavioral performance on an attention and working memory task
in a group of women with early stage breast cancer prior to any adjuvant chemotherapy. In
order to perform the more demanding task, these patients showed
bilateral brain activation with recruitment of additional components
of the attention/working memory circuitry in both hemispheres. The
behavioral and imaging findings in this study suggest slowed responses
and compromise in attention and working memory systems in middle age
women with breast cancer prior
to any adjuvant chemotherapy and provide baseline data
for future studies of the cognitive impact of chemotherapy.

## 6084

## A quantitative study of tumor response and progression-free
survival as surrogate endpoints for overall survival in first-line
treatment of metastatic breast cancer.

## Burzykowski T, Piccart MJ, Sledge G, Carmichael J, Luck HJ,
Mackey JR, Nabholtz JM, Paridaens R, Biganzoli L, Jassem J, Blohmer
JU, Bontenbal M, Bonneterre J, Chan S, Atalay G, Therasse P, Buyse M.
Limburgs Universitair Centrum, Diepenbeek, Belgium; Institut Jules
Bordet, Brussels, Belgium; IDDI, Brussels, Belgium
Background: The traditional endpoint to assess the efficacy of
chemotherapies for metastatic breast cancer is overall survival (OS),
but this endpoint can only be observed after prolonged follow-up.
Moreover, with the number of active compounds available in this
disease, any potential effect of first-line therapies on OS may be
confounded by the effects of second-line therapies. It is therefore of
interest to investigate whether tumor response or progression-free
survival (PFS) could replace OS as the primary S278 Abstracts . Poster
Session VI endpoint in randomized trials for patients with metastatic
breast cancer.
Methods: Individual patient data were collected on 4,256 patients
in 12 randomized trials comparing an anthracycline (alone or in
combination) with a taxane (alone or in combination with an
anthracycline). Tumor response was assessed using WHO criteria.
Progression-free survival was calculated from date of randomization to
progression or death from any cause. Overall survival was calculated
from date of randomization to death from any cause. Surrogacy was
assessed through the correlation between the endpoints as well as the
correlation between the treatment effects on the endpoints.
Correlation coefficients were estimated along with their 95%
confidence interval (CI).
Results: Median follow-up of alive patients was 41 months, median
OS 20 months, median PFS 7 months. Tumor response was strongly
associated with PFS (survival odds ratio=5.8, 95% CI=5.0–6.5) and with
OS (survival odds ratio=3.0, 95% CI=2.6–3.3). The correlation
coefficient between response log odds ratios and PFS log hazard ratios
was 0.97 (95% CI=0.74–1.21). The correlation coefficient between
response log odds ratios and OS log hazard ratios was 0.56 (95
CI=−0.33–1.44). The rank correlation between PFS and OS was 0.695 (95%
CI=0.693–0.696). The correlation between the log hazard ratios for PFS
and OS was 0.44 (95% CI=− 0.41–1.30).
Conclusions: Tumor response is predictive of longer PFS and longer
OS. Treatment effects on response are strongly correlated with
treatment effects on PFS but not on OS. PFS is poorly correlated with
OS, and treatment effects on PFS are poorly correlated with treatment
effects on OS. These results indicate that tumor response is an
acceptable surrogate for PFS but no endpoint is a good surrogate for
OS in these trials. Associations between treatment effects are not
precisely estimated despite the relatively large sample sizes.

## 6085

## Chemotherapy and cardiotoxicity in older breast cancer patients: a
polulation-based study.

## Doyle JJ, Neugut AI, Jacobson JJ, Grann VR, Hershman DL. Mailman
School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, NY; College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY

Purpose: Adjuvant chemotherapy,
especially when it includes anthracyclines, is known to cause acute
and chronic cardiotoxicity in breast cancer patients. We studied the
cardiac effects of chemotherapy in a population-based sample of breast
cancer patients aged ≥65 years with long-term follow-up.

Patients and Methods: In the
Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER)-Medicare database,
we analyzed treatments and outcomes in the first five years after
diagnosis among women ≥65 years of age diagnosed with stage I–III
breast cancer 1/1/92–12/31/99. Propensity scores were used to control
for known predictors of receiving chemotherapy and baseline heart
disease, and Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate the
risks of cardiomyopathy (CM), congestive heart failure (CHF) and heart
disease (HD) following chemotherapy.

Results: Of 31,748 women with stage
I–III breast cancer, 5,575 (18%) received some form of chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy use was associated with younger age, fewer comorbidities,
hormone receptor negativity, multiple primaries, and more advanced
disease. Patients who received chemotherapy were less likely than
other patients to have pre-existing HD (45% vs 55%, p<0.001). The
hazard ratios for CM, CHF, and HD for patients treated with
doxorubicin compared to patients who received no chemotherapy were
2.48 (95% CI 2.10–2.93), 1.38 (95% CI 1.25–1.52), and 1.35 (95% CI
1.26–1.44), respectively. The incidence of cardiotoxicity among
patients who received doxorubicin compared to untreated patients was
highest within the first year but remained elevated five years after
diagnosis (figure 1).

Conclusions: Elderly patients with
pre-existing heart disease were less likely to receive adjuvant
chemotherapy. Even when baseline cardiac disease was taken into
account, patients who received chemotherapy, especially with
anthracyclines, were more than twice as likely as other patients to
develop cardiomyopathy in the five years after diagnosis. As the
number of long-term survivors increases, new approaches will be needed
to extend survival while minimizing the short- and long-term adverse
effects of treatment. 

## 6086

## Effects of taxanes alone or in combination with anthracyclines on
tumor response, progression-free survival and overall survival in
first-line chemotherapy of patients with metastatic breast cancer: an
analysis of 4,256 patients randomized in 12 trials.

## Piccart MJ, Burzykowski T, Sledge G, Carmichael J, Luck HJ,
Mackey JR, Nabholtz JM, Paridaens R, Biganzoli L, Jassem J, Blohmer
JU, Bontenbal M, Bonneterre J, Chan S, Atalay G, Therasse P, Buyse M.
Institut Jules Bordet, Brussels, Belgium; Limburgs Univsersitair
Centrum, Diepenbeek, Belgium; IDDI, Brussels, Belgium
Background: Taxanes (T, paclitaxel or docetaxel), in view of their
partial lack of cross resistance with anthracyclines (A, doxorubicin
or epirubicin), generated great enthusiasm in the 1990’s for the
treatment of breast cancer. Taxanes were sequenced or combined with
anthracyclines and compared with standard regimens for first-line
treatment of advanced disease. Randomized trials, however, have shown
inconsistent results, particularly in terms of survival, which was
rarely improved. This prompted the current meta-analysis of individual
patient data from all relevant trials, in order to reliably detect any
advantages of taxanes in terms of tumor response, progression-free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) in first-line treatment of
patients with metastatic breast cancer.
Methods: Between December 2002 and May 2005, individual patient
data were collected on 9 randomized combination trials comparing A + T
(+ cyclophosphamide in 1 trial) with A + cyclophosphamide (+
5-fluorouracil in 4 trials), and on 3 single agent trials comparing T
(paclitaxel in 2 trials) with A. Combination trials included 3,337
patients, single agent trials 919 patients. Tumor response was
assessed using WHO criteria. Progression-free survival was calculated
from date of randomization to progression or death from any
cause.
Results: Median follow-up of alive patients was 41 months, median
OS 20 months, median PFS 7 months. In single agent trials, overall
response rates were 33% (4% complete) in the T arms and 38% (6%
complete) in the A arms (P=0.08). The hazard ratios for T compared
with A were 1.19 (CI 1.04 – 1.36, P=0.01) for PFS and 1.01 (CI 0.88 –
1.16, P=0.90) for OS. In combination trials, response rates were 56%
(10% complete) in T-based combinations and 45% (6% complete) in
control arms (P<0.001). The hazard ratios for T-based combinations
compared with control arms were 0.93 (CI 0.87 – 1.00, P=0.06) for PFS
and 0.95 (CI 0.88 – 1.03, P=0.23) for OS.
Conclusions: Single agent A was significantly better than single
agent T in terms of PFS, marginally better in terms of response rate
but not different in terms of OS. T-based combinations were
significantly better than A-based combinations in terms of response
rates, marginally better in terms of PFS but not different in terms of
OS.

## 6087

## A phase III randomized trial of doxorubicin (A) and docetaxel (D)
versus doxorubicin and paclitaxel (P) in metastatic breast cancer.
preliminary results of the Erasme 3 study.

## Cassier PA, Chabaud S, Freyer G, Peaud PY, Tigaud JD, Cure H,
Orfeuvre H, Salles B, Martin C, Jacquin JP, Agostini C, Bachelot T.
Centre Leon Berard, Lyon, France; Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, Lyon,
France; Centre Hospitalier, Valence, France; Hopital Edouard Herriot,
Lyon, France; Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France; Centre
Hospitalier, Bourg-en-Bresse, France; Centre Hospitalier,
Chalon-sur-Saone, France; Centre Hospitalier, Annecy, France; Clinique
de la Digonniere, St Etienne, France; Centre Hospitalier, Chambery,
France

Background: In first line metastatic
breast cancer, bothpaclitaxel doxorubicin (PA) and docetaxel
doxorubicin (DA) combinations have been shown to be superior to
treatment without taxane. The aim of this study was to compare those
two combinations. As systemic therapy for breast cancer in this
setting remains largely palliative, quality of life (QOL) is therefore
an essential aspect of treatment and was chosen as the primary
end-point of this study.

Material and Methods: Primary
endpoint was the overall QOL measured by EORTC QLQ-C30 scale after 4
courses. The planned sample size was 204 pts based on a minimum
expected difference of 10 points in global QOL with 5% α error and 90%
power. Secondary aims were to compare toxicity, overall survival (OS),
progression free survival (PFS) and all the sub scores of quality of
life after 8 and 12 courses. Primary endpoint was compared between
groups using wilcoxon rank test on relative variation from baseline.
Survival distributions were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method,
and compared using the Log Rank test (LR).

Results: Between March 2000 and April
2004, 210 pts (median age 57 range [32–79]) were randomized, 103 pts
(49%) were assigned to PA group and 107 (51%) to PD group. Patient
characteristics were well balanced between the groups. After 4 and 8
courses of therapy, global QOL scores between groups or when compared
to baseline scores did not differ significantly. Relative variation in
QOL after 4 courses decreased in PA group while it was stable in DA
group for physical, cognitive, or fatigue sub scores. Concerning
diarrhoea sub score, absolute variation is also in favour of DA group.
Response rate was 40% and 42% for DA and PA respectively. After a 24.8
[22.8–26.8] median follow-up median PFS was 8.7 months [CI95% 8.1–9.3]
and 8.0 [CI95% 7.0–9.0] in groups DA and PA respectively (LR=0.96).
Median survival were 22.6 months [CI95% 16.7–28.4] and 24.1 [CI95%
20.5–27.7] for DA and PA groups (LR=0.17). Neuropathy (grade 3–4)
occurred more frequently in PA group

Conclusion: In this studypaclitaxel
or docetaxel combined with adriamycin were equivalent in terms of
global QOL scores and efficacy.

## 6088

## Timing of initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy for early breast
cancer does not influence disease-free survival. A Spanish Breast Cancer
Research Group (GEICAM) analysis.

## Jara C, Ruiz A, Martín M, Antón A, Munárriz B, Plazaola A,
Cerrato L, Martínez del Prado P, Alba E, Fernández-Aramburo A. On
Behalf of the Spanish Breast Cancer Research Group (GEICAM), San
Sebastián de los Reyes, Madrid, Spain

Objective: the proper time for
initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy (ACT) of breast cancer (BC) is not
well established. A better outcome has been suggested for an early
initiation of ACT. Methods: we
investigated the relationship between moment of initiation of ACT and
prognosis for early BC from GEICAM’s centralized database (El Álamo).
Cox proportional hazards regression model was used to test the
independent effect of timing of chemotherapy (TCT) after adjusting for
prognostic covariables. 2782 patients (pts) diagnosed with stage I–II
BC between 1990 to 1997, and who had received ACT, were selected. Pts
who were treated with neoadjuvant or high-dose CT were excluded.
Factors considered to potentially have an influence on disease-free
survival (DFS), were: time between breast surgery and beginning of
chemotherapy (TCT)(categorized as less of 3 weeks, 3 to 6 weeks, 6 to
9 weeks and more than 9 weeks), and tumour size, vascular/ lymphatic
permeation, histopathologic grade, number of axillary nodes involved,
hormonal receptor status (positive vs. negative), age and chemotherapy
scheme (categorized as CMF, antracyclines/ taxanes, others). Results: median follow-up was 74 months. TCT
does not influence DFS (p=0.68). Cox multiple regression analysis
shows that variables influencing DFS are tumour size, number of
positive nodes, age, vessel invasion, hormonal receptors status,
tumour grade and scheme of chemotherapy (Table I). Conclusion: we have been unable to identify
any significant benefit for DFS from an early starting or a
deleterious effect of delaying chemotherapy after surgery either
overall or in any subset of patients. 

## 6089

## A multicenter phase III trial comparing docetaxel plus epirubicin
versus docetaxel plus capecitabine as first line treatment in patients
with locally advanced and metastatic breast cancer. Preliminary
report.

## Mavroudis D, Boukovinas I, Ardavanis A, Syrigos K, Kouroussis
CH, Kakolyris S, Malamos N, Athanasiadis A, Varthalitis I, Potamianou
A, Georgoulias V. Hellenic Oncology Research Group, Heraklion,
Greece

Background: Docetaxel plus Epirubicin
(DE) is an effective regimen in first-line treatment of advanced
breast cancer (ABC). Docetaxel plus Capecitabine (DC) is an effective
treatment in anthracycline-pretreated ABC. In this multicenter phase
III study we compared the efficacy and tolerability of the two
regimens as front-line treatment in patients (pts) with ABC.

Patients and Treatment: Untreated pts
with ABC, measurable disease, good performance status (PS 0–2) and
organ function (including cardiac) were randomized to receive either
epirubicin 75 mg/m2 plus docetaxel
75 mg/m2 (DE) on day 1 or docetaxel
75 mg/m2 on day 1 plus capecitabine 950 mg/m2 orally twice daily on
days 1–14 (DC) in cycles every 21 days. Pts who had received
anthracycline-based adjuvant chemotherapy more than one year before
were allowed to participate. The primary end point of the study was to
compare the time to disease progression (TTP).

Results: A total of 196 pts were
randomized to DE (n=98) and DC (n=98). All pts were evaluable for
toxicity and 86 DE and 84 DC pts for response. Nine (DE) vs 8 (DC) pts
were premenopausal, 13 vs 15 pts had stage IIIB disease and 3 pts on
each arm had PS 2. Thirty-three DE and 37 DC pts had previously
received adjuvant anthracycline-based treatment. We observed 12(14%)
vs 7(8%) complete responses and 34(40%) vs 32(38%) partial responses
for an overall response rate of 53.5% vs 46.4% (p=0.3) in DE vs DC
pts, respectively. The median duration of response was 13 vs
13.5 months (p=0.9) and the median TTP 11.8 vs 10.9 months (p=0.6) for
DE and DC pts, respectively. A total of 534 DE and 492 DC cycles were
administered with 2 toxic deaths due to sepsis both on the DE regimen.
Severe toxicity included grade 4 neutropenia 42% vs 28% (p=0.08),
febrile neutropenia 10% vs 5% (p=0.07), diarrhea 3% vs 0% (p=0.03) for
DE and DC pts, respectively.

Conclusions: In this preliminary
analysis the DE and DC regimens showed similar activity but the DC
regimen was associated with less severe toxicity. Updated results will
be presented at the meeting.

## 6090

## Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin in previously treated patients with
metastatic breast cancer- a large multicenter phase II trial.

## Al-Batran SE, Bischoff J, von Minckwitz G, Atmaca A, Kleeberg U,
Meuthen I, Morack G, Lerbs W, Hecker D, Jager E. Krankenhaus Nordwest,
Frankfurt, Germany; Klinik Bad Trissl, Oberaudorf, Gabon;
Universitaets-Frauenklinik, Frankfurt, Finland;
Heamatologisch-Onkologische Praxis Altona, Hamburg, Germany;
Krankenhaus Holweide, Köln, Germany; Klinikum Berlin-Buch, Berlin,
Germany; Essex Pharma, Munich, Germany; Essex Pharma, Munich,
Switzerland

Background: This study was designed
to evaluate the safety and the clinical benefit of Pegylated liposomal
doxorubicin (PLD) in an anthracycline and taxan pretreated patient
population with metastatic breast cancer (MBC).

Patients and Methods: 101 female
patients with MBC were enrolled at 25 German centers. Patients
received intravenous PLD 50 mg/m2 every
four weeks (one cycle), and were evaluated for toxicity prior to each
treatment, and for response every two cycles.

Results: 99 of 101 patients were
evaluable for the safety analysis and 98 for response. The median age
was 60 years (range 31–79) and the median Karnofsky performance status
was 90 (range 60–100). All patients were previously treated with
chemotherapy (53% of patients had ≥3 chemotherapies), and 80% of
patients had a prior exposure to an anthracycline. The clinical
benefit response (objective response + stable disease) was 41%. Median
time to progression and overall survival were 3.6 and 10.2 months,
respectively. The median response duration was 11.8 months, and the
median time to progression in patients with stable disease was
8.8 months. NCICTC grade 3–4 toxicities were neutropenia in 17 (17.7%)
patients followed by stomatitis in 14 (14.2%) and PPE in 7 (7.1%)
patients.

Conclusions: PLD is safe and active
in patients with MBC who had received multiple prior chemotherapies
including anthracyclines and taxans.

## 6091

## Results of a phase II trial of combination therapy with oral
capecitabine and weekly paclitaxel for metastatic breast cancer:
preliminary results in taxane pretreated women.

## Blum JL, Dees EC, Asmar L, Vukelja S, McMahon R, Amare M, Gill
D, Ilegbodu D, Boehm KA, O’Shaughnessy J. US Oncology Research, Inc.,
Houston, TX; Baylor-Charles A. Sammons Cancer Center, Dallas, TX;
Texas Oncology, P.A., Dallas, TX; The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC

Background: There is evidence of
synergy between the taxanes and capecitabine (C). This trial was
designed to determine the efficacy of weekly paclitaxel (P) plus C in
subjects with metastatic breast cancer who have previously received
taxane on an every 3- week schedule.

Subjects and Methods: Subjects had
histologically proven breast cancer, with measurable metastatic
disease by RECIST. Exclusion criteria included prior weekly taxanes or
any prior C or infusional 5-FU. Participants received C
825 mg/m2/dose PO BID
(1650 mg/m2/day) for Days 1–14 followed
by 1 week of rest. P 80 mg/m2was
administered IV weekly on Days 1 and 8 followed by 1 week of rest.
Cycles were repeated every 3 weeks.

Results: Fifty-three (53) eligible
taxane pretreated women were enrolled; 30 subjects (57%) were either
ER or PR positive. Metastatic sites included: soft tissue (58%),
viscera (51%), liver (34%), and bone (26%). To date, 30 patients (57%)
are evaluable for response. Complete responses were achieved in 7
patients (23%) and partial responses in 12 patients (40%), for an
overall response rate of 63%. An additional 20% had stable disease;
17% have progressed. The median duration of response for CR+PR was
8.8 months (range, 2.4–18.5). Grade 4 treatment-related adverse events
were minimal and limited to neutropenia (n=2). Grade 3
treatment-related adverse events were limited to hand and foot
syndrome (n=7), neutropenia (n=4), and fatigue (n=2).

Conclusions: We have previously shown
that weekly PC is an active regimen in taxane-naïve women with MBC.
Weekly PC appears highly active and well tolerated in
taxane-pretreated patients. The results of all 53 patients will be
presented. Supported by Roche Laboratories, Inc., Nutley, NJ

## 6092

## Phase II trial of gemcitabine plus carboplatin (plus trastuzumab in
HER2+ patients) in metastatic breast cancer patients.

## Loesch DM, Asmar L, McIntyre KJ, Doane LL, McKittrick RJ,
Monticelli MA, Paul D, Vukelja SJ, Zhan F, Boehm KA, O’Shaughnessy J.
US Oncology Research, Inc., Houston, TX; Central Indiana Cancer
Centers, Indianapolis, IN; Texas Oncology, P.A., Dallas, TX; Kansas
City Cancer Centers, Overland Park, KS; Kansas City Cancer Centers,
Kansas City, KS; Williamette Valley Cancer Center, Springfield, OR;
Rocky Mountain Cancer Centers, Denver, CO; Tyler Cancer Center, Tyler,
TX; Baylor-Charles A. Sammons Cancer Center, Dallas, TX

Background: Gemcitabine (G) and
carboplatin (C) have significant preclinical synergy, and both provide
synergistic antitumor activity in combination with trastuzumab (H).
Presently, no Phase II data exist for G+C in MBC patients. This
multicenter Phase II trial studied the efficacy and safety of biweekly
G+C±H in MBC patients.

Patients and Methods: Patients were
stratified into 3 groups; Group 1: HER2+; Group 2: HER2- (taxane
naïve); and Group 3: HER2- (prior taxane). Included were: women
≥18 years of age, ECOG 0–2, with measurable MBC, defined by RECIST
either HER2- or HER2 (3+) by IHC or FISH+, and normal organ functions;
prior radiation completed ≥3 weeks prior to study entry.

Treatment: All cycles were 14 days
for all groups of patients, Day 1 G
1500 mg/m2 followed by C AUC=2.5. For
Group 1, treatment also included H 8 mg/kg Cycle 1, followed by
4 mg/kg for Cycles 2–9, followed by 6 mg/kg for Cycles 10+.

Results: 40, 51, and 49 patients have
been enrolled and 36, 48, and 41 patients were treated in Groups 1, 2,
and 3, respectively. The table below summarizes responses and
toxicities of these patients: 

Conclusions: G+C+H is active in HER2+
patients with metastatic breast cancer. Biweekly G+C is active in
HER2- MBC patients. Prior taxane therapy does not seem to affect the
response rate. G+C±H is associated with a low frequency of toxicity:
neutropenia (<50%) and anemia (<15%). Alopecia was infrequent;
Grade 2 (<5%). Additional data will be provided. Supported by Eli
Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN.

## 6093

## The impact of educational attainment on initial doses of breast
cancer adjuvant chemotherapy.

## Griggs JJ, Sorbero MS, Culakova E, Lyman GH. University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY; RAND Corporation, Pittsburgh, PA

Objective: The purpose of this study
was to examine the impact of educational attainment, a proxy for
socioeconomic status (SES), on initial chemotherapy doses in the
adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. Initial chemotherapy dose
reductions represent intentional physician prescribing decisions.
Methods: Initial (first cycle)
breast cancer adjuvant chemotherapy doses were prospectively collected
from the records of 764 patients treated between March 2002 and
September 2004 in 91 practices. For each subject, the ratio of the
actual dose to the expected dose (using actual height, weight, and
standard published doses) was calculated for individual drugs and then
averaged for the regimen. Bivariate analyses were used to assess the
association between first cycle dose reduction (defined as a 10%
reduction below published doses using actual body weight). Chi-squared
tests were used to assess for significance. Logistic regression models
were used to study the impact of educational attainment on the use of
first cycle dose reduction, controlling for regimen, comorbidity, body
mass index (BMI), race, age, and treating practice. Practice level
random effects were also included. Robust standard errors were used to
account for the correlation between multiple patients receiving care
from the same practice. Results: The
delivery of reduced doses below 90% of the calculated dose was
observed in 150 (19.6%) of the sample. Among subjects with less than a
high school education, 33% received a first cycle dose reduction
compared to 14% among those with at least a high school degree (p =
0.002). First cycle dose reduction was also significantly associated
with increasing body mass index (p < 0.0001). These results were
confirmed in multivariate analyses (educational attainment, p = 0.03
and increasing BMI, p<0.0001). Conclusions: The disparity in breast cancer outcomes
according to SES may be in part the result of suboptimal chemotherapy
doses in the adjuvant treatment of breast cancer. Efforts to address
such prescribing patterns may help reduce SES disparities in breast
cancer survival.

## 6094

## CHAT–an open-label, randomized phase II study of trastuzumab plus
docetaxel with or without capecitabine in patients with advanced and/or
metastatic, HER2-positive breast cancer: second interim safety
analysis.

## Wardley A, Antón-Torres A, Otero Reyes D, Jassem J, Toache LMZ,
Alcedo JC, Bell R. Christie Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom;
Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain; Hospital CIMA,
San Jose, Costa Rica; Akademia Medyczna, Gdansk, Poland; Hospital
Rosevelt, Guatemala, Guatemala; Instituto Oncológico Nacional, Panama,
Panama; Andrew Love Cancer Centre, Geelong, Victoria,
Australia

Background: The CHAT trial compares
trastuzumab (H; 8mg/ kg loading dose and 6mg/kg q3w) plus docetaxel
(T; q3w 75mg/m2 in the three-drug and
100mg/m2 in the two-drug arm) with or
without capecitabine (X; 950mg/m2 BID) in
patients (pts) with advanced or metastatic HER2-positive breast
cancer. A higher than expected incidence of complicated neutropenia
(CN; 32% overall) led to temporary suspension of recruitment. After a
thorough review, the independent Data Safety Monitoring Board
recommended continuation of the trial four months later. Stricter
entry criteria were used; only pts with ECOG 0.1 were enrolled while
pts with dyspnea and on chronic concomitant steroids were excluded.
All episodes of febrile neutropenia, neutropenic infection or
neutropenic sepsis were considered as CN.

Methods: Data from 110 pts (who
received at least one cycle of study drug) are presented. Pts received
a median of 8 H doses. Whilst median number or cycles were 6 and 7
respectively, cumulative T dose was higher with HT than HTX (median
1,050mg vs 732mg). HTX pts received a median of 6 cycles of X. There
were no significant differences in baseline characteristics. Blood
counts were obtained precycle and on days 8 and 15 of cycle 1.

Results: Leukopenia and neutropenia
were the most significant hematological abnormalities. Grade 3/4
neutropenia occurred in 52% of pts in the HTX arm and 76% in the HT
arm. Overall incidence of CN was lower (26%) than in the first safety
analysis, 29% in the HT arm and 24% in the HTX arm. CN generally
occurred in the first cycle of HT and in later cycles of HTX
treatment. The overall incidence of symptomatic congestive heart
failure is 2% (one pt in each treatment arm), which is within the
expected range for pts receiving H plus chemotherapy in recent trials
(3.4%).

Discussion: T is a myelosuppressive
drug, associated with a significant level of grade 3/4 neutropenia and
CN in a small but significant minority of pts. The overall incidence
of CN in this study at end of June 2004 is 24% (31/131 pts), which is
comparable to that seen in the M77001 and SO14999 trials (20% and 19%,
respectively). No other new safety concerns have emerged to
date.

## 6095

## Who profits most from a guideline based Treatment for advanced
breast cancer?

## Dieing A, Possinger K, Schmid P, Regierer AC, Schulz CO, Wolters
R, Wischnewsky MB. Charité, Camöus Mitte, Humboldt University, Berlin,
Germany; University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany
BACKGROUND: The purpose of this work was to test, whether a
guideline-based treatment leads to a better outcome (objective
response (ORR), time to progression (TTP) and overall survival (OS))
for advanced breast cancer patients. Background is the actual german
national guideline 2004, which includes the results of more than 20
other guidelines from various countries. The purpose of this work was
to evaluate whether guideline-based treatment for metastatic breast
cancer is associated with better outcome.
METHODS: 120 patients with ABC were consecutively enrolled to an
open study. They were treated between 1991 and 2004 with the
respective valid standard therapies. Patients characteristics were:
age: median 50.0 y.; (; premenopausal: 53.3%; ER / PgR: positive
64.2%, negative 23.3%, erB2 positive: 24.2%. Dominant visceral
metastases had 47.5% of the patients at first diagnosis of metastases.
We used a prognostic score (PPS) for ABC-pts based on the 3 clinical
parameters dominant site of metastases (DSM), receptor status (RS),
and disease free interval (DFI) (Possinger 1984). Patients can be
classified as low (PPS £ 7) and high-risk (PPS >7). In the study
cohort, 58.3% of the pts were PPS-low risk. First line cytostatic
treatment was checked for accordance to the current guidelines.
RESULTS: 26.7% of the treatments were in accordance with the actual
guidelines. Main reasons for guideline inconsistency were that many
patients were treated before the introduction of substances, which are
recommended in the current guidelines, e.g. taxanes. The groups
(guideline-compliant treatment or not) were compared referring to ORR,
TTP and OS. Median overall survival (=OS) of all patients was
43 months, ORR in first line therapy was 30.8%. Considering the entire
cohort, there was no difference in outcome of the 1st line therapy or
overall survival with respect to guideline compliance. However,
accordance to the current guideline compliance was relevant in
subgroups: Whereas in high-risk-patients guideline-compliant treatment
was associated with significant longer TTP and OS, there were no
relevant differences in patients in the low-risk group. Results are
summarized in table 1.
CONCLUSIONS: This open study shows that high-risk patients profit
most from a guideline based treatment for advanced breast cancer. In
contrast to this, an evidence-based guideline-oriented treatment for
low-risk pts does not lead to a significant better outcome (ORR, TTP,
OS). 

## 6096

## Characterization of anti-fatty acid synthase expression in normal
breast and breast cancer.

## Jensen KC, Montgomery K, West RB, van de Rijn JM. Stanford
University Medical Center, Stanford, CA

Background: Expression of fatty
acid synthase has been reported in many different tumors. In gene
microarray studies of breast carcinoma, a fatty acid synthase gene
(FASn) co-clustered with
cytokeratins 5 and 17 and other genes that defined the basal-like
subset of breast cancers.

Materials and Methods: A rabbit
polyclonal antiserum (S143) to a synthetic peptide of the fatty acid
synthase (FASn) gene was developed.
Various tissue microarray and whole tissue sections were stained with
the S143 antiserum. The tissue microarrays included breast cancer (979
cases), other tumors (259 cases), normal breast (15 cases) and various
fetal tissues (90 cases). The breast cancer tissue microarray included
clinical outcome data, with a mean follow-up of over 17 years. Whole
tissue sections consisted of benign and malignant tissue from breast
resection specimens.

Results: The S143 antiserum was
expressed in a wide range of normal and pathologic tissues, but showed
a restricted pattern of expression in normal breast with reactivity in
a small subset of basal and suprabasal cells. Dual staining
experiments revealed that the subpopulation of cells labeling with
S143 did not coexpress cytokeratins 5/6 or p63, but did coexpress
e-cadherin. In addition to staining the subset of basal cells, the
antiserum diffusely decorated epithelial cells with apocrine
differentiation (including a case of carcinoma with apocrine
differentiation), and stained 3 of 5 cases of columnar alteration with
prominent apical snouts and secretions (CAPSS) and 5 of 5 cases of
flat epithelial atypia. Despite its association with basal keratins in
gene array studies, S143 protein expression did not correlate
significantly with clinical outcome.

Conclusions: We describe a novel
antiserum that highlights only a subset of basal and suprabasal cells
in normal breast ducts and we show by dual expression studies that
this subset of cells are different from myoepithelial and basal
cytokeratin-positive cells. Interestingly, studies by others postulate
that stem cells for normal breast may reside in a subpopulation of
basal cells. Further studies are needed to determine whether
S143-positive cells contain a breast stem cell. In addition, S143
expression is described in apocrine metaplasia, CAPSS and flat
epithelial atypia, suggesting that this antiserum may be useful in
diagnosing these lesions.

## 6097

## DD-M111/ hAG-2 is highly expressed in ductal and lobular breast
cancer.

## Naar EM, Macina RA, Vartanian S, Simon I, Liu SH, Shroyer KR.
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO; diaDexus
Inc., South San Francisco, CA

Background: DD-M111 is a secreted
protein of 175 aa known as hAG-2 that in Xenopus laevis is known to be
expressed during embryologic development and may play a role as a
differentiation factor. We identified DD-M111 by cDNA library analysis
as a novel gene over-expressed in breast cancer compared to normal
breast or other benign somatic tissues. The over-expression of DD-M111
mRNA was verified by microarray and real-time quantitative RT-PCR with
microarray results showing up-regulation in more than 50% of early
stage breast cancers. In the current study, we investigated the
expression of DD-M111 at the protein level in benign, premalignant,
and malignant breast lesions, as a potential diagnostic marker of
breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: Archival
formalin-fixed tissue blocks from 52 breast cancer cases were
evaluated for DD-M111 expression by an indirect immunoperoxidase
method using a mouse monoclonal antibody and heat antigen retrieval in
citrate buffer (pH 6.0). The specificity of this antibody was
confirmed by Western Blot of supernatant from T47 breast cancer cell
lines, and by substitution of the primary antibody with
subclass-matched non-immune mouse immunoglobulin in
immunohistochemical assays. The proportion of DD-M111 positive cells
and the intensity of staining (0-3+) were compared with histologic
type, grade, stage, hormone receptor status, and Her-2 neu status.

Results: DD-M111 was exclusively
detected in the cytoplasm of epithelial tissue components and was
detected in 38/46 (82.6%) ductal carcinomas and in 5/5 (100%) lobular
carcinomas. Among positive cancer cases, 32/43 (74.4%) tumors showed
staining in greater than 10% of cells (median 80%), with a median
staining intensity of 1.5. The expression of DD-M111 in breast cancers
did not appear to be correlated with hormone receptor status, Her-2
neu status, or with other
clinicopathologic variables. DD M111 was also detected in 22/43 (51%)
of in situ carcinomas (DCIS/LCIS),
(median 40% positive cells) with a median stain intensity of 1. Most
normal or benign proliferative lesions were negative for DD-M111
although high levels of expression (1.5 intensity in at least 50% of
cells) was noted 4/8 fibrocystic lesions adjacent to breast
cancers.

Discussion: The high level of DD-M111
overexpression in most invasive breast cancers, independent of tumor
grade or stage, suggests that this protein may play a critical role in
breast carcinogenesis and could be a useful diagnostic marker for
breast cancer. In contrast to results utilizing mRNA profiling (1),
however, DD-M111 protein expression showed no correlation with
estrogen receptor status in breast tumors.
(1) Fletcher GC, Patel S, Tyson K, Adam PJ, Schenker M, Loader JA,
et al. hAG-2 and hAG-3, human homologues of genes involved in
differentiation, are associated with oestrogen receptor-positive
breast tumours and interact with metastasis gene C4.4a and
dystroglycan. Br J Cancer. 2003 88:579–85.

## 6098

## Increased tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (Trap) expression in
breast cancer, patients’ sera and cell lines.

## Honig A, Rieger L, Kapp M, Krockenberger M, Dietl J, Kammerer U.
University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany

Introduction: TRAP5b was investigated
as a marker of bone disease in breast cancer (BC) patients with and
without bone metastases. Surprisingly, even patients with exclusively
visceral metastases showed increased TRAP5b serum values. This
observation led to the hypothesis, that it is not only the osteoclast
but also the tumor cell, that secrets TRAP. In order to elucidate this
phenomenon we investigated a broad range of primary and commercially
available BC cell lines as well as benign cell lines with regard to
TRAP expression using ELISA, immunocytology and RT-PCR techniques. In
addition, samples of benign tissue and breast cancer at different
stages of disease were analyzed for TRAPexpression by
immunohistochemistry.

Results: By ELISA, we found high
concentrations of TRAP in the supernatant of primary BC cell cultures.
In commercially available BC cell lines, the levels of TRAP 5b were
quite low, comparable to the low concentrations detected in benign
cell cultures. Interestingly long term culture seems to affect TRAP
expression as its expression decreases with the time of in vitro
culture and only traces can be detected in some long-term established
BC cell lines. By RT-PCR and immunocytology we could confirm that
tumor cells express and secrete TRAP. By immunohistochemistry we found
a high expression of TRAP in malign tissue whereas only very little
expression was found in normal breast tissue of the corresponding
patient.

Conclusion: TRAP expression was
restricted to cancer cells in breast tissue. Increased serum levels of
TRAP are not specific for bone metastases but rather show an increase
of tumor cell mass. TRAP might therefore serve as a potential target
for future treatment of breast cancer.

## 6099

## Withdrawn by Author

## 6100

## The loss of 14-3-3 sigma (σ) protein expression in invasive
adenocarcinoma of the breast is associated with promoter hypermethylation
and a more favorable clinical outcome.

## Yang B, Yoder BJ, Roma AA, Wang L, Tarr S, Laniauskas S, Tso E,
Choueiri T, Budd GT, Crowe JP, Hicks DG. Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
Cleveland, OH

Background: The 14-3-3σ protein is a
p53-regulated G2/M inhibitor, which plays a role in numerous signaling
pathways involved in cell cycle control, DNA repair and cell survival.
Recent reports have demonstrated a loss of 14-3-3σ expression early in
the development of many breast cancers through epigenetic
hypermethylation of the gene promoter. Furthermore, study in
colorectal cancers showed that loss of 14-3-3σ is associated with
chemosensitivity and better prognosis. However, the prognostic
significance of altered 14-3-3σ protein expression for invasive breast
cancer remains unclear. Therefore, we have examined the relationship
between 14-3-3σ expression, promoter methylation and established
clinical and pathologic features in breast cancer.

Materials and Methods: Tissue
microarrays were constructed containing 332 primary invasive breast
cancers with 5-year clinical follow up. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for
14-3-3σ (1:100 dilution, LabVision, Fremont Ca) was qualitatively
scored on a 0-2+ scale, and compared with established prognostic and
predictive factors. In addition, a subset of these cases was examined
for hypermethylation of the 14-3-3σ promoter by RTPCR, as a possible
mechanismcontributing to loss of 14-3-3σ expression.

Results: 14-3-3σ expression was seen
in 16% (53/332) of breast tumors (2+-3+), while the remaining 84%
(279/332) of cases were negative (0 - 1+). There was no significant
association between the expression of 14-3-3σ and age, ER, PR, HER2,
grade, nodal status or clinical stage (p>0.05). However, there was
a significantly shorter mean disease free survival (p=0.001) and a
trend toward shorter mean overall survival (p=0.1) for tumors
expressing 14-3-3σ (2-3+). For 10 negative and 10 positive 14-3-3σ
cases by IHC, there was a significant correlation between loss of
immunoreactivity and promoter methylation of the 14-3-3σ gene
(p<0.05).

Conclusions: The loss of 14-3-3σ
expression through promoter methylation appears to be an early event
in breast cancer development leading some to speculate that this
protein functions as a tumor suppressor in breast carcinogenesis.
However, the results reported here suggest that expression of 14-3-3σ
in the context of an established malignancy may contribute to a more
aggressive clinical course for breast cancer. Given that 14-3-3σ is an
antiapoptotic protein, as characterized in other tumors, our study
suggests that silencing expression of 14-3-3σ through promoter
hypermethylation may be associated with a better prognosis. Further
study of the biologic and clinical significance of these findings,
with emphasis on the potential role for this protein in predicting
response to adjuvant therapies, is warranted.

## 6101

## Growth regulation is altered in cancer-containing
breasts.

## Walker RA, Rodrigues CM, Gordon-Weeks A, Luckett JC, Jones JL.
University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom; Queen Marys School
of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom

Background: We have previously
identified that non-involved tissue from cancer-containing breasts has
lower apoptosis than age-matched normal breast, plus changes in EGFR
expression. Many factors regulate apoptosis and proliferation and
myoepithelial cells have been shown to have an important role. This
study has compared apoptotic and myoepithelial proteins in normal
tissue from cancer-containg breasts (NTCCB) and age matched controls,
and the in vitro effect of myoepithelial cells from both groups on
proliferation/apoptosis of breast cancer cells.

Materials and Methods: Tissue from 58
NTCCB (taken at least 4cms away from the cancer) and 61 age- matched
controls were examined using immunohistochemistry for bcl-2, bax,
caspase3, FGF2, p63, 14-3-3σ with proliferation index (PI) and
apoptotic index (AI) determined using Ki67 and M30, respectively.
Myoepithelial cells were isolated from 6 controls (reduction
mammoplasty) and 3 NTCCB, conditioned media prepared and its effects
on PI and AI of MCF-7 and T47-D cells determined. All cultures were
for 24hr and in duplicate.

Results: There was a significantly
lower AI in NTCCB than controls but PIs were similar. Expression of
bcl-2 and FGF2 was significantly greater in NTCCB, with lesser
differences for bax and p63. Conditioned media from myoepithelial
cells from normal caused a decrease in PI and increase in AI but that
from NTCCB increased PI and decreased AI of T47-D cells. The effects
on MCF-7 cells were less significant.

Discussion: Lower levels of apoptosis
have been identified again but in a different cohort of NTCCB, along
with higher expression of the anti-apoptotic protein bcl-2. FGF2,
which is important in growth regulation, has been found at a higher
level in myoepithelial cells in NTCCB. Preliminary in vitro studies
indicate that the tumour suppressor effect of myoepithelial cells is
modified in cancer-containing breasts. This, and the changes in
apoptosis identified in tissues, could result in an impairment in
removing cells that have undergone DNA damage and enhance cancer
development. It also implies that there are widespread changes in
breasts in which a cancer develops.

## 6102

## Tumour necrosis factor-a converting enzyme (TACE) promotes
apoptosis in breast cancers by cleaving HER4.

## Kirkegaard T, Naresh A, Tovey SM, Dunne B, Jones FE, Bartlett
JMS. Endocrine Cancer Group, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, United
Kingdom; Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow, United Kingdom; Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA

Background: HER4 is associated with
improved outcome in breast cancer
patients1. Proteolytic processing of HER4
by tumour necrosis factor-a converting enzyme (TACE) and
presenilin-dependent g-secretase, releases the intracellular domain
(4ICD) of HER4. 4ICD harbours a BCL-2 homology 3 (BH3)-domain and can
therefore induce apoptosis of breast cancer
cells2.

Material and Methods: TACE and HER4
expression was determined by immunohistochemistry in 413 breast
carcinomas. HER4 expression was determined using 2 antibodies raised
against either an intracellular epitope (aa 1249–1264; clone HFR-1) or
against an extracellular fragment (clone designation H4.77.16) both
from Neomarkers. Apoptotic activity was measured by TUNEL assay.
Statistics were performed using SPSS. Correlations were calculated
using the Spearman rank test and patient survival assessed using
Kaplan-Meier plots with log-rank testing.

Results: Positive cytoplasmic TACE
expression was seen in 213/ 413 (51.6%) breast carcinomas, mainly in
tumour with high membrane (p<0.001 for both HER4 antibodies) or
intracellular (4IED) (p=0.015 and p=0.003 for HFR-1 and H4.77.16,
respectively) HER4 expression. Positive TACE expression was also seen
in tumours with high nuclear HER4 expression when the HFR-1 HER4
antibody (p=0.028), and not the H4.77.16 HER4 antibody (p=0.197), was
used. Apoptotic activity was noted in 156/398 (39.2%) breast
carcinomas, mainly in tumours with high intracellular (4ICD) HER4
expression (p=0.024), but not in tumours with high membrane (p=0.727)
HER4 expression. No impact of tumour TACE expression and apoptotic
activity on patient survival was observed.

Discussion: The association between
HER4 and improved patient outcome has so far been unexplained. Recent
data, however, shows that HER4 expression is associated with decreased
proliferation3 and that proteolytic
released HER4 (4ICD) is linked to
apoptosis2 in breast cancer cells. Here
we further demonstrate that TACE expression is associated with
increased levels of intracellular HER4 (4ICD) and that intracellular
HER4 is linked to apoptosis. However, more studies need to be
performed to further investigate the role of HER4 and TACE in
mediating apoptosis of breast cancers cells.
1: Witton et al., J Pathol
2003;200:290–97
2: Vidal et al., J Biol Chem
2005; 208: 19777–833
3: Tovey SM et al., Breast
Cancer Res 2004; 6:R246–51

## 6103

## Inhibition of BRCC36 enhances apoptosis by disrupting BRCA1
phosphorylation in breast cancer cells exposed to ionizing
radiation.

## Arciero CA, Chen X, Godwin AK. Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA
We have previously reported the identification and characterization
of a novel BRCA1 and BRCA2 interacting protein complex, BRCC (Dong et
al., Molecular Cell, 2003). One protein in this multiprotein complex,
referred to as BRCC36, was found to directly interact with BRCA1. It
was demonstrated that BRCC36 has an important role in regulating the
ubiquitin E3 ligase activity of BRCC and that it is overexpressed in
the majority of breast cancer cell lines (75%) and clinical breast
tumors (60%) evaluated when compared with normal counterparts.
Moreover, when evaluated using laser capture microdissection, 100% of
the invasive mammary ductal carcinomas examined showed elevated levels
of BRCC36 mRNA relative to the normal ductal epithelium. To further
elucidate the functional consequence of BRCC36 over expression in
breast cancer, we performed in vitro silencing studies using small
interfering RNAs (siRNA) targeting BRCC36 in MCF-7 cell line, a breast
cancer cell line which constitutively expresses high levels of BRCC36.
There was no significant difference in non-specific cell killing of
either BRCC36 siRNA nor control siRNA treated cells. Since BRCC36
directly interacts with BRCA1 and previous studies indicated that the
BRCA1 protein is activated via the ATM/CHK2 signaling pathway
following the exposure of cells to DNA damaging agents such as
irradiation, we sought to determine if BRCC36 may be important in this
response. Therefore, siRNA-transfected MCF-7 cells were exposed to
ionizing radiation and examined for DNA damage-induced cell killing.
When combined with BRCC36 abrogation, ionizing radiation exposure lead
to an increase in apoptotic cells (45.9% ± 4.3% vs. 34.9% ± 1.9%)
(p<0.05) and a lower fraction of viable cells (50.9% ± 5.8% vs.
58.4% ± 5.7%) when compared to the siRNA control group. Furthermore,
immunoblot analysis showed that abrogation of BRCC36 had no effect on
the expression of p21, p53 and ATM following IR exposure, but
disrupted IR-induced BRCA1 phosphorylation. These results suggest that
downregulation of BRCC36 expression impairs the DNA repair pathway
activated in response to IR via BRCA1 and appears to sensitize breast
cancer cells to IR-induced apoptosis. Therefore, BRCC36 may be a
therapeutic target for the management of radiation resistant breast
tumors. This work was supported in part by an AACR Anna Barker
postdoctoral fellowship for basic research, the Eileen Stein-Jacoby
Fund, and a grant from the DOD, DAMD17-03-1-0707.

## 6104

## Therapeutic potential of antisense Bcl-2 as a chemosensitizer for patients with breast
cancer.

## Kim R, Emi M, Tanabe K. Research Institute for Radiation Biology
and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan

Purpose: Bcl-2 confers resistance
to apoptosis, thereby reducing the effectiveness of chemotherapy. We
performeda preclinical evaluation of antisense (AS) Bcl-2 as an enhancer of the
chemotherapeutic effect in the treatmentof breast cancer.

Methods: AS Bcl-2 was used with 18-mer phosphorothiated
oligonucleotides inthe MDA-MB-231, BT-474, and ZR-75-1 breast cancer
cell lines. Drug sensitivity in
vitro was evaluated by the MTT assay, and antitumor
effect in vivo was evaluated by the
nude mouse xenograft. Apoptosis was determined with TUNEL assay. AS
Bcl-2
in vitro was treated with
lipofectin, whereas it was administered intraperitoneally at a dose of
5 mg/kg for 6 consecutive days twice in q2wks in vivo. Anticancer drugs were administered
intraperitoneally four times in qwk.

Results: Bcl-2 was downregulated to
60% ofinitialvalueafter the treatment with 1.0 M of AS Bcl-2 compared to the controls of random and
mismatched ODNs. Drug sensitivity to doxorubicin (DOX), paclitaxel
(TXL), and docetaxel (TXT) was increased three- to ten-fold when
usedin combination with AS Bcl-2,
which was determined with IC values in comparison with the control. Increased
drug sensitivity was associated with apoptosis, increasing in Bax,
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase and decreasing in phosphorylated Akt.
Theantitumor effect of DOX and taxanes in
vivo was significantly enhanced in combination with
ASBcl-2 (P<0.05, ANOVA with
Fisher’s LSD test). Downregulation of Bcl- 2 was observed at day 4
after the treatment with AS Bcl-2.
ASBcl- 2 ODNs induced
splenomegaly in association with increased serum IL-12 and expression
of CD80, CD83, CD86, and CD27, which was attenuated by methylation of
the CpG motifs of AS Bcl-2,
however, methylated CpG failed to negate the increased antitumor
effect of AS Bcl-2. Conclusions:Combination treatment with AS
Bcl-2 and anticancer drugs,
including DOX and taxanes, may be a new strategy for enhancing the
chemotherapeutic effect in the treatment of breast cancer.

## 6105

## Bystander activity of Ad-mda7: human MDA-7 protein kills breast
cancer cells via an IL-20 receptor-dependent pathway.

## Zheng M, Bocangel D, Menander K, Hunt K, Chada S. Introgen
Therapeutics Inc., Houston, TX; UTMD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX
The melanoma differentiation-associated gene-7 (mda-7/IL24) is a
unique member of the IL-10 family of cytokines, with ubiquitous tumor
cell proapoptotic activity. Transduction of tumor or normal cells with
an Adenoviral vector encoding the mda-7 gene (Admda7) results in
selective killing of tumor cells, with no effect on normal cells.
However, both tumor and normal cells express high levels of MDA-7
protein after Ad-mda7 treatment and secrete glycosylated MDA-7
protein. Recent data indicate that secreted MDA-7 protein functions as
both, a pro-Th1 cytokine and a potent antiangiogenic molecule. MDA-7
protein binds two distinct type II cytokine heterodimeric receptor
complexes: IL-20R1/IL- 20R2 (type 1 IL-20R) and IL-22R1/IL-20R2 (type
2 IL-20R). In this study we analyzed the activity of glycosylated
secreted MDA- 7 against human breast cancer cells. MDA-7 protein
induced phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of STAT3 in breast
tumor cells. MDA-7 protein also induced dose-dependent cell death in
breast tumor cells, mediated via apoptosis. Antibodies against MDA-7
and the IL-20R1 receptor subunit were effective in blocking cell
killing suggesting that the bystander apoptotic effect of MDA-7 is
effected through type I IL-20R complexes. These results define a
tumor-selective cytotoxic bystander role for secreted MDA-7 protein
and identify a novel receptor-mediated death pathway in breast cancer
cells.

## 6106

## The tumour-suppressor function of breast myoepithelial cells is
mediated in part through regulation of S100A9.

## Mulligan KT, Wang H, Shaw JA, Hart IR, Jones JL. Institute of
Cancer, Cancer Research UK Clinical Centre, Charterhouse Square,
London, United Kingdom; University of Leicester, Leicester, United
Kingdom
Cell-matrix interactions are known to be important in the control
of many cellular functions including proliferation, apoptosis and
tissue-specific gene expression. In normal breast, myoepithelial cells
(MEC) form the major interface of the epithelial compartment with the
extracellular matrix, however, this interface is disrupted with the
development of invasive carcinoma.
We previously have demonstrated that primary MEC derived from
normal breast exert a broad tumour-suppressor effect, reducing breast
cancer cell proliferation and invasion and enhancing apoptosis. To
address the mechanisms involved, we have performed cDNA microarray
analysis on T47-D tumour cells co-cultured with MEC and compared the
expression pattern to that obtained from T47-D cells grown alone. A
number of potential tumoursuppressor genes were up-regulated in
co-cultured T47-D cells including the calcium-binding protein S100A9
which showed an approximately 30-fold increase in the presence of MEC.
S100A9 has been implicated in the control of cell growth, and
therefore was a potential mediator of the MEC-induced reduction in
proliferation. To investigate whether the MEC-mediated reduction in
proliferation is mediated via S100A9, co-cultured T47-D cells were
transfected with S100A9 siRNA. In the presence of S100A9 knockdown
there was significant abrogation of MEC-mediated suppression of
proliferation compared to control cells.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that normal breast MEC exert a broad
tumour-suppressor role and that the suppression of breast cancer cell
proliferation is mediated at least in part through the regulation of
S100A9. Dissecting the molecular mechanisms involved in MEC-mediated
tumour-suppression may help identify new prognostic markers and
potential therapeutic targets.

## 6107

## Evidence that PI3K/Akt pathway is involved in the short non genomic
autocrine loop between 17-β estradiol and aromatase activity.

## Catalano S, Barone I, Giordano C, Rizza P, Gu G, Mastroianni F,
Bonofiglio D, Ando’S. Faculty of Pharmacy, Rende, CS, Italy

Background: Estrogens are strongly
associated with breast cancer development and tumor growth in both
premenopausal and postmenopausal women. The intratumoral conversion of
androgens to estrogens by aromatase within the breast may be an
important mechanism through which 17-β estradiol (E2) stimulates
hormone-dependent breast cancer growth. The expression of aromatase in
breast cancer tissue has been demonstrated by immunocytochemistry,
RT-PCR and enzymatic activity. It has been shown how E2 may regulate
aromatase activity in other vertebrates. The aim of the present study
was to evaluate if E2/ER can modulate this enzymatic activity in human
breast cancer cells.

Material and Method: In MCF-7 cells
we examined, by the tritiated water release assay using 0.5
 M [1β 3H] androst-4-ene- 3-17 dione as substrate,
aromatase activity in the presence or absence of E2, ICI 182,780,
inhibitors or dominant-negative of MAPK and PI3K/Akt pathway and
PTPase inhibitor. Western Blotting and immunoprecipitation assay were
performed to evaluate Akt activation and phosphorylation status of
aromatase protein upon E2 treatment.

Results: An increase of aromatase
activity in MCF-7 cells, upon short exposure to E2 100nM, was observed
without any change in the enzyme expression, whereas the addition of
ICI 1 M reversed E2-induction (control=15.3±1.2;
E2=36.4±1.9; E2+ICI=13.5±1.1 fmol/h/mg protein). The above reported
effect was also reproduced in MCF-7 cells overexpressing aromatase
ectopically. When we attempted to evaluate how an important pathway of
cell survival, like PI3K/Akt, may influence aromatase activity, we
revealed that either LY 294002 10 M or a dominant-negative of Akt ectopically expressed
in MCF-7 abrogated the E2-induction. In the presence of constitutively
active Akt we observed an increase in E2-stimulated aromatase
activity. In ER-negative SKBR-3 cells, an up-regulatory effect of
aromatase activity was induced by E2 only in the cells transfected
with ERα, but not with ERβ. Finally, in the presence of sodium
orthovanadate 10 M, a PTPase inhibitor, an increase of aromatase
activity was noticeable, addressing how changes in phosphorylation
status may influence aromatase activity.

Discussion: It is well known that
aromatase is regulated at the transcriptional level through the
alternative use of tissue specific promoters, while there are a few
studies regarding post-translational regulation of aromatase activity.
Our results for the first time demonstrated that E2/ERα up-regulates
aromatase activity via interaction with the PI3K/Akt pathway. The
phosphorylation processes of the aromatase protein sound to play a key
role in the rapid changes in its enzymatic activity. All these data
suggest the existence of a non genomic autocrine loop between E2 and
aromatase activity in breast cancer cells.

## 6108

## (18)F flurothymidine (FLT) for imaging of tumor cell proliferation;
an in vitro-study for monitoring chemoendocrine treatment in breast
cancer cells.

## Fersis N, Jusufoska A, Gargya B, Rupp C, Wallwiener D, Dittmann
H. University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; University of
Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany

Objectives: F- FLT-PET is a promising
tool for imaging primary breast cancer and metastases. Studies are
needed to evaluate the clinical usefulness of FLT-PET for monitoring
tumor response of neoadjuvant treated patients. Aim of the study was
to evaluate whether FLT detects permutation of tumor cell
proliferation as induced by chemo-endocrine treatment.

Methods: MCF-7 breast cancer cells
were treated with chemotherapeutic agents Doxetaxel (TAX) and
Adriamycin (ADR) or with the anti-estrogen Tamoxifen (TAM) and
Faslodex (FAS). Cellular F-18-FLT uptake was estimated after 3, 5, or
7 days of treatment with anti-estrogenes or 4 hours, 1, 3 and 5 days
after chemotherapy. Incorporation of H-3 thymidine and the fraction of
S-phase cells were measured in comparison at the respective time
points. Using colony formation assay and Probit/ logit fit the
inhibitory concentrations (IC 25–95) of the chemotherapeutic drugs
were estimated. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was employed for
statistical analysis.

Results: Cellular uptake of FLT was
correlated to the proliferation inhibition mediated both by the
chemotherapeutic agents (TAX and ADR), as well by the endocrine
treatment with (TAM, and FAS). At high doses of chemotherapy (IC 95)
the reduction of proliferation resulted in a reduction of FLT-uptake
as early as 4 h after treatment. Overall, the reduction of FLT
accumulation was greater in cell cultures treated with ADR than at the
corresponding IC of TAX. Anti-hormone treatment showed also a
significantly reduction of FLT accumulation. For both treatment
modalities, cellular accumulation of FLT was strongly correlated to
that of H- 3- Thymidine (ADR, TAX: r=0.91; FAS: r=0.92; TAM:
r=0.88).

Conclusion: FLT uptake is strongly
correlated to the results of classic in vitro-tests for tumor cell
(MCF-7) proliferation. F-18- FLT appears to be suitable for monitoring
preoperative treatment of breast cancer with PET.

## 6109

## The role of the JNK signaling pathway in breast cancer cell
lines.

## Xue Y, Jordan CV. Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
PA

Background: The c-Jun N-terminal
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) pathway is activated
by numerous cellular stresses. Although it has been implicated in
mediating apoptosis and growth factor signaling, its role in
regulating cell growth is not yet clear. In the present study we
investigated the role of the JNK signaling pathway in cell growth of a
panel of breast cancer cell lines: the MCF-7 WS8, 2A and 5C cells. The
WS8 cell line, a clone of the MCF-7 cells, grows in response to
estrogen, and this estrogendependent growth is inhibited by
antiestrogens such as 4- hydroxytamxifen and fulvestrant. The 2A and
5C cell lines were derived from the parental WS8 cells following long
term estrogen deprivation, and became estrogen-independent for growth.
The 2A cells express two forms of the estrogen receptor (ER), a
wildtype ER66 and a mutant
ER77 (Pink et al., Cancer Res. 55,
2583–2590, 1995), while the 5C cells only express wildtype ER. Recent
studies in our laboratory demonstrate that estradiol treatment
dramatically reduces the growth of 5C cells which is associated with
the induction of apoptosis (Lewis et al., J. Steroid Biochem. Mol.
Biol. 94,131–141, 2005).

Material and Methods: The
pharmacological JNK inhibitor, SP600125 was used to inhibit JNK
activity. DNA quantitation assay was used to determine the growth of
all three cell lines following SP600125 or estradiol and SP600125
treatment. Propidium iodine staining of cellular DNA was used to
analyze cell cycle changes following SP600125 or estradiol and
SP600125 treatment in these three cell lines.

Results: DNA quantitation assay
results showed that SP600125, at concentrations as low as 5 mM,
reduced proliferation of these three breast cancer cell lines in a
dose - dependent manner. Significant inhibition of cell growth by
20 mM SP600125 was observed starting at day four of treatment in the
presence or absence of estradiol. Flow cytometry results showed that
20 mM SP600125 treatment caused G2/M arrest of
all three cell lines.

Discussion: Taken together, these
results indicate that JNK signaling is required for the growth of WS8,
2A and 5C cells possibly through regulation of cell cycle at
G2/M, regardless of estrogen-dependent or
estrogen-independent growth.

## 6110

## The selectivity of Ras signaling in tumor formation.

## Cheng C-M, Onken B, Philips M, Chang EC. Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX; New York University School of Medicine, New
York, NY
The Ras G-protein signaling pathways are very complex in humans.
There are four Ras proteins. The N-termini of these Ras proteins are
over 90% identical in primary sequences, which include the
effector-binding domains, and in
vitro they interact with many effectors with nearly the
same efficiency. However, how a given Ras protein selectively
activates a particular effector in the cell to induce tumor formation
is poorly understood. One leading model suggests that the C-termini of
Ras proteins undergo specific posttranslational modifications, e.g.,
lipidation, and that such modifications allow Ras to localize and
signal from at least two distinct compartments: the plasma membrane
and the endomembrane.
To unambiguously test this model, we have turned to the fission
yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe,
which has only one Ras protein, but it is still capable of controlling
two highly conserved pathways. Our data show that S. pombe Ras selectively activates a MAP
kinase pathway to mediate pheromone signaling at the plasma membrane,
while it activates Cdc42 at the endomembrane to control cell polarity
and mitosis. Ras also appears to act via Cdc42 to transform mammalian
cells, and Cdc42 can be found at the endomembrane. We thus
investigated whether in mammalian cells Ras can also selectively
activate Cdc42 at the endomembrane, and whether this interaction is
important in tumor formation. We have transformed fibroblasts with
endomembrane-restricted Ras and are currently testing whether such
transformation can be blocked by Cdc42 inactivation. However, although
the signaling of Ras proteins has been extensively studied in
fibroblasts, Ras signaling in epithelial cells, from which most tumor
cells arise, remains to be explored. While activating Ras mutations
are not common among human breast tumors, breast tumors that lose the
estrogen receptor are adapted to receive growth signals from receptor
tyrosine kinase pathways, which frequently act via Ras. Therefore, to
determine whether compartmentalized Ras signaling may play a role in
breast tumorigenesis, we have examined Ras localization in MCF-7 cells
and found that as in fibroblasts, Ras is concentrated in both the
plasma membrane and the endomembrane. We are currently investigating
whether endomembrane restricted Ras and/or Cdc42 can transform MCF10A
nonmalignant breast cells.

## 6111

## Non-transformed basal (cytokeratin 5/14 postitive) breast cells
migrate in matrigel by collective cell migration.

## Clare SE, Kolanko P, Blosser R, Xiao H, Badve S, Herbert B.
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN

Background Cytokeratin 5 and 14
positive breast cells are referred to as basal cells because of their
location abutting the basement membrane of the duct. Boecker et al have proposed that CK 5/14 positive
breast cells are progenitor cells able to differentiate into luminal
or myoepithelial cells. Sorlie and
colleagues identified the basal-like as one of five subtypes of breast
cancer. These cells are ER, PR and Her-2 negative. The basal-like gene
expression was correlated with decreased survival. Additionally,
tumors from women with BRCA 1 meditations are characterized by a basal
epithelial phenotype in that they frequently over-express cytokeratin
5/6 and are cytokeratin 8/18 negative.
Cells migrateeither as single cells or, as groups of cells, sheets
or strands of multiple cells that are motile yet connected to one
another by cell-cell junctions. This latter mechanism of cell
migration is referred to as collective cell migration. It is seen, for
example, in keratinocytes migrating across a provisional wound matrix,
and in human cancer explants invading 3D collagen matrices.

Hypothesis We hypothesized that
if CK 5/14 cells are the breast progenitor cell, these cells should be
able to form a breast duct/ acinus structure if cultured in an
appropriate environment.

Methods We developed a
horizontal culture system consisting of three concentric rings of
Matrigel in a 35 mm tissue culture dish. The inner most ring, 8 mm in
diameter, and outermost ring, 10 mm in width, were made with Matrigel
with phenol red. The middle ring, 7 mm in width, was fashioned using
Matrigel without phenol red; this color difference enabled the
observation of invasion as there initially are no cells within the
ring without phenol red. CK 5/14 positive, CK 8/18/19 negative human
breast cells immortalized with telomerase were grown in a single focal
plane in the inner or outer ring.

Results Cells coalesced to form
duct and acinar structures by 4 days after commencing culture. They
invaded the Matrigel without Phenol Red and this was captured on
time-lapse video microscopy. The cells move by collective cell
movement. Additionally, there are individual cells which act as
scouts. Migration ceases at 8–10 days after initiation of culture.
Switching from commercially available media, MEGM (Cambrex) to a
supplemented H-14 media (Bissell) resulted in structures showing
squamous features with pilar differentiation.

Discussion Based on the
similarities between collective cell migration and the pushing margins
of BRCA1 positive lesions, the basal cell phenotype of most BRCA1
lesions and the fact that metaplastic (squamous) tumors are CK 5/14
positive and triple negative, we hypothesize that these lesions arise
from a transformed CK 5/14 precursor cell.