eLifeElife1894elife101579614eLifeeLife2050-084XeLife Sciences Publications, LtdPMC7338057PMC7338057.1733805773380573258425810.7554/eLife.57492574921Research ArticleGenetics and GenomicsAlternative polyadenylation mediates genetic regulation of gene expression
MittlemanBriana Ehttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-4979-4652 ) found that the majority of autoimmune GWAS loci do not appear to affect mRNA expression levels. Two other studies observed that many genetic variants that affect protein expression levels (pQTLs) do not affect mRNA expression levels ( ; ). Specifically, Battle and colleagues found that about half of the cis-pQTLs they identified in human LCLs (146 out of 278, 52%) did not appear to impact gene expression levels in the same lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) ( ). Altogether these findings indicate that there may be unknown or understudied regulatory mechanisms that link genetic variation to complex traits, and that these mechanisms are independent of changes in the amplitude of mRNA expression levels. Moreover, even when a disease-associated variant impacts mRNA expression levels, the mechanisms by which expression is affected are often unclear. Indeed, a third of all eQTLs identified in human LCLs are not associated with variation in chromatin as measured using assays for chromatin accessibility or for modification levels of several histone marks ( ). These observations raise the possibility that understudied regulatory mechanisms mediate the effect of a substantial number of genetic variants on gene expression level.
One such understudied mechanism is alternative polyadenylation (APA). Well over half of all human protein coding genes encode multiple polyadenylation sites (PAS), resulting in the production of diverse mRNAs with alternative termination sites ( ; ; ). Unlike alternative mRNA splicing, which leads to changes in splice site selection, APA leads to changes in the transcript termination site, often resulting in 3’ untranslated regions (UTRs) with different lengths. As 3’ UTRs are densely packed with regulatory elements that impact mRNA stability, miRNA binding, and mRNA localization (reviewed in ; ), genetic control of APA may be a key mechanism by which genetic variants impact gene regulation, including mRNA expression levels, without affecting chromatin-level phenotypes such as promoter or enhancer activity. Moreover, proteins translated from different APA isoforms may differ in length and protein-protein interactions, and these differences can impact cellular phenotype. For example, globally increased usage of intronic PAS has been shown to increase risk for multiple myeloma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia through the translation of truncated mRNAs into truncated proteins, which impairs tumour-suppressive functions ( ; ).
To evaluate the role of APA in mediating genetic effects on gene expression and disease, we sought to identify genetic variants associated with APA on a genome-wide scale. To date, the few studies that have used genome-wide methods to identify variants associated with APA (apaQTLs) have used existing RNA-seq data to infer PAS locations and usage ( ; ; ; ; ). While using existing RNA-seq to study APA is economical, identifying PAS and estimating usage using RNA-seq are error-prone and often imprecise ( ). Furthermore, using standard RNA-seq data alone to study APA is not informative with regard to whether inter-individual differences in PAS usages are the result of variation in transcriptional termination site choice, or isoform-specific decay or export. Here, we used 3’ RNA-seq (3’ Seq) to measure PAS usage in steady-state mRNA collected from whole cells as well as mRNA collected from the nucleus, which is comprised of a high proportion of nascent mRNA. This design allowed us to study the effect of genetic variation on isoform PAS at multiple stages of the mRNA lifecycle. Importantly, we collected these data from a panel of human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) that were previously profiled in great molecular detail, including measurements at the chromatin, RNA, and protein levels ( ; ; ; ). Integrating the apaQTLs we identified with previously collected molecular data allowed us to study the impact of APA variation on the major steps of the gene regulatory cascade ( ). We use these data to show that genetic effects on APA can affect virtually all steps of gene regulation (mRNA expression level, translation rate, and protein expression level), and that such effects can impact protein expression, without affecting RNA expression.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

## Results

## Alternative polyadenylation in human LCLs as defined using nuclear and total mRNA 3’ Seq
To measure inter-individual variation in APA, we quantified PAS usage in a panel of 52 Yoruba HapMap LCLs. These same cell lines have been the subjects of multiple studies of gene regulation over the last decade ( ; ; ; ). We applied 3’ Seq to mRNA collected from whole cells (total mRNA fraction) of 52 LCLs and used a peak calling approach (Materials and methods) to comprehensively identify PAS and estimate their usage ( ). Our approach obviates the need for existing annotations, which are biased towards highly expressed isoforms or isoforms expressed in well studied cell-types with higher RNA-seq coverage. In addition, to capture polyadenylated mRNA that may be under-represented or absent in the total mRNA fraction due to rapid turnover, we separately applied 3’ Seq to mRNA from isolated nuclei (nuclear fraction) of the same 52 LCLs. We found that the ratio of the number of nuclear 3’ Seq read count to total mRNA 3’ Seq read count is positively correlated with two different measures of mRNA decay ( ), indeed supporting our expectation that 3’ Seq applied to the nuclear mRNA fraction captured RNA transcripts at an earlier stage of RNA processing. Because 3’ Seq uses polyA priming to capture the location of polyadenylation sites and is therefore prone to internal priming at transcribed regions that are A-rich, we carefully filtered our data to ensure a minimal effect of mispriming on the set of PAS we considered (Materials and methods). Specifically, similar to methods previously described, we filtered both individual reads and PAS that map to genomic regions with 70% A nucleotides or a stretch of 6 A’s in the 10 nucleotides upstream ( ; ). After quality control and filtering, we defined the usage of each PAS in a sample as the ratio of the number of reads that map to the PAS to the number of reads that map to all PAS for the same gene ( ) (Materials and methods). Thus, we measure the usage of a PAS as the fraction of transcripts using that PAS over the total number of transcripts from the same gene.
We identified 41,810 nuclear PAS in 15,043 genes with at least 5% mean usage across the 52 LCL samples. We found that 67% of the protein coding genes expressed in LCLs harbor multiple PAS, suggesting that APA can impact the regulation of most genes ( ; ; ). Interestingly, we identified a slight negative correlation between the expression level of a gene and the number of PAS identified for the gene (Pearsons Correlation = −0.12, ). In particular, genes with a single PAS tend to be expressed more highly than genes with multiple PAS. This observation is counter-intuitive from a statistical perspective, and it shows that, in general, our ability to detect PAS was not limited by 3’ Seq coverage ( , Materials and methods). We found that the polyA binding protein motif (AATAAA), also known as the polyadenylation signal site, is the most strongly enriched motif in the 50 bp regions upstream of our PAS (hypergeometric test, ).
We observed that PAS in the 3’ UTR are more likely to have a polyadenylation signal compared with intronic PAS ( , difference of proportion t-test, 75.0% vs 24.8%,) ( , ) and that nearly half (48.3%) of all 41,810 PAS we identified are located in 3’ UTRs (19.4x enrichment) ( ). Nevertheless, despite an overall depletion of PAS in introns (0.35x genome-wide levels), we found that the number of PAS in introns is notable (12,793/41,810; 30.6%) ( , ). While signal sites were more highly enriched near 3’ UTR PAS than intronic PAS, PAS in introns show clear enrichment of polyadenylation motif 10–50 bp upstream of the cleavage site compared to background intronic sequences (24.8% vs 0.24% , difference of proportion t-test, ). Thus, the recognition of intronic polyadenylation signals is a general mechanism that can result in premature termination of transcription.
We tested the hypothesis that the intronic PAS we identified correspond to truncated mRNA transcripts that escaped telescripting, whereby the U1 snRNP protects introns from premature cleavage and polyadenylation ( ; ; ). Because the main role of U1 snRNP is to bind and recognize 5’ splice sites, the telescripting model predicts that weaker 5’ splice sites can result in decreased U1 snRNP affinity for an intron and thus higher rates of early cleavage and polyadenylation. We estimated 5’ splice site strength for all introns using MaxEntScore ( ) and found that introns with the weakest 5’ splice sites harbored more PAS than introns with stronger 5’ splice sites (1.5x fold difference, first decile vs remaining deciles, hypergeometric test , , Materials and methods) ( ). Moreover, we found that the top 10% of most highly used intronic PAS have weaker 5’ splice sites than introns with lowly used PAS or a random set of introns (Mean MaxEntScore 6.43 vs 7.26 vs 7.48, , Wilcoxon rank sum test). These observations are consistent with the hypothesis that telescripting protects nascent transcripts from early cleavage and polyadenylation in introns, and that the intronic PAS we observe result from transcripts that escape telescripting ( ; ; ).
We observed that intronic PAS have on average lower usage across individuals than PAS located in 3’ UTRs (16.9% vs 46.2%). Lower usage of intronic PAS may be explained by weaker polyadenylation signals at intronic PAS compared to 3’ UTR PAS or by the impact of telescripting on intronic polyadenylation. However, we hypothesized that some intronic PAS have low usage because premature polyadenylation at intronic sites can produce short-lived transcripts that are rapidly degraded and thus are under-represented in the total mRNA fraction. To test this hypothesis, we identified PAS that are used more often, or exclusively, in the nuclear fraction compared to the total mRNA fraction. By comparing PAS usage estimated in the nuclear and total mRNA fractions from all 52 individuals, we identified at 10% FDR 591 PAS in 585 genes that are used at least 20% more in the nuclear compared to the total mRNA fraction. Of these 591 PAS, 134 were found to be used by 1% or less of the transcripts in the total mRNA fraction, suggesting that these transcripts may be absent from the cytoplasm ( ,  , Materials and methods). Notably, we found that 387 of the nuclear-enriched PAS are intronic ( ), a large proportion of which (83.4% vs 43% for all PAS) are absent from a comprehensive annotation of PAS compiled from 78 human studies that used 3’ Seq (Materials and methods, ; ). While no other study has directly measured PAS usage in nuclei, a proportion of the nuclear enriched intronic sites have been identified in a number of human tissues (up to 10%, ). These findings suggest that mRNA transcripts are terminated and polyadenylated in introns at a higher frequency than generally appreciated, and that many of these isoforms escape detection from studies of total mRNA fraction owing to their rapid decay or their propensity to remain within the nucleus.

## Genetic loci associated with variation in APA
Having established that APA can contribute to the generation of complex transcript isoforms, we sought to identify genetic loci associated with inter-individual variation in APA. We normalized each PAS usage ratio using LeafCutter ( ) and tested cis-associations between genetic variants and PAS usage, correcting for batch and the top principal components (Materials and methods, – ). Using 3’ Seq data from the nuclear fraction, we identified 602 nuclear apaQTLs in 479 genes at 10% FDR. In the total mRNA fraction, we identified 443 apaQTLs in 353 genes at 10% FDR. For example, individuals with the C/C genotype (rs11032578) show higher usage of an intronic PAS in the ABTB2 gene compared to individuals that are heterozygous C/T or homozygous T/T ( ). In both fractions, apaQTL lead SNPs are enriched near the PAS they most strongly correlate with and near the 3’ ends of gene bodies ( , ). The proximity of the apaQTL lead SNPs to PAS may suggest that genetic variants that affect polyadenylation signal motifs drive most of the genetic effects on APA. Although we observed an enrichment of apaQTLs in signal motifs, genetic variants that alter signal motifs are unlikely to explain the majority of apaQTLs ( ).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our study design provides the unique opportunity to evaluate the likely mechanisms by which genetic variation controls PAS usage. While previous studies have demonstrated that genetic variants can impact PAS usage, it has been difficult to discern whether the variation in PAS usage is primarily driven by genetic effects on cleavage and polyadenylation ( , Model 1), or on the mRNA lifecycle (e.g. by impacting miRNA binding sites and decay) ( , Model 2). We reasoned that if genetic effects functioned primarily by affecting post-transcriptional regulation such as decay or export, then this effect would be detectable in the total mRNA fraction, but would be smaller or undetectable in the nuclear mRNA fraction ( ). Interestingly, we found that only 97 apaQTLs (of 443 apaQTLs, 21.9%) identified in the total mRNA fraction were not detected in the nuclear mRNA fraction and these associations are much weaker than shared apaQTLs ( ). We thus suspect that we currently lack statistical power to detect most of these 97 apaQTLs in the nuclear mRNA fraction. To estimate sharing of apaQTLs across the two mRNA fractions, we used Storey’s statistics and found that the vast majority of apaQTLs identified in the total mRNA fractions were estimated to also affect PAS usage in the nuclear mRNA fraction ( =0.87, ). In addition, we found that the genetic effect sizes on PAS usage were very similar across the two mRNA fractions ( =0.66; , , ). Altogether these observations show that most genetic variants impact PAS usage by affecting polyadenylation site choice. Supporting this notion, we found weak or no enrichment of apaQTLs in sites bound by RNA binding proteins as identified using eCLIP data from ENCODE ( ).

## Impact of apaQTLs on gene expression levels
While we believe that nearly all genetic variants impact PAS usage by affecting polyadenylation site choice and not isoform-specific decay or export, this model is not incompatible with a model in which genetic variants can sometimes impact expression by affecting APA. For example, a genetic variant might increase the relative production of an isoform that is less stable, in which case total transcript levels would decrease. Therefore, next, we asked whether genetic variants could impact gene expression levels by direct effects on APA. We hypothesized that this mode of genetic regulation may be prevalent, in particular for genes with intronic PAS, because isoforms using intronic PAS are often subject to rapid decay. In this model, the genetic effect changes the relative production of isoforms with different relative stabilities rather than specifically modulating the stability of an isoform, for example by increasing affinity for microRNA binding in the 3’ UTR.
To test this hypothesis, we focused on the set of 602 apaQTLs that we identified in the nuclear mRNA fraction, representing genetic variants that impact PAS choice. Our hypothesis predicts that genetic variants that increase intronic PAS usage should decrease gene expression levels. In line with this prediction, we found a negative correlation between the genetic effect sizes for intronic PAS usage and mRNA expression levels ( , , ). Thus, our analysis suggests a widespread mechanism whereby genetic variants decrease mRNA expression levels by increasing choice of isoforms with premature PAS that are subject to rapid decay. Of interest, we found that 13 apaQTLs that were detected only in the nuclear fraction are also eQTLs, which highlights the importance of considering early stages of the mRNA lifecycle to uncover eQTL mechanisms.
 
 
 
 
To further investigate the contribution of APA to gene expression, we sought to understand the relationship between apaQTLs and a set of eQTLs that we previously classified as those with explained putative mechanisms, explained eQTLs (1164 eQTLs, ∼60%) or as unexplained eQTLs (801 eQTLs, ∼40%) using data from the same LCLs ( ). The eQTLs with explained putative mechanisms were associated with chromatin-level phenotypes including DNase-I hypersensitivity, histone marks, or DNA methylation, and thus are likely to be mechanistically explained by effects mediated by chromatin-level phenotypes (e.g. enhancer or promoter activity). To test whether apaQTLs might account for unexplained eQTLs, we first asked whether genes with unexplained eQTLs were more likely to also harbor apaQTLs than compared to genes with explained eQTLs. Indeed, we found a significantly higher enrichment of low p-value associations with APA for genes with unexplained eQTLs ( , , ) and significantly larger absolute apaQTL effect sizes for unexplained eGenes compared to explained eGenes (0.35 vs. 0.3, Wilcoxon Rank sum test, ). We also found that apaQTLs exhibited an association with chromatin states that was more similar to the unexplained eQTLs than the explained eQTLs. In particular, apaQTLs and unexplained eQTLs were more likely to lie in regions of transcription elongation or are associated with weak transcription, and less likely to lie in enhancers or promoters than explained eQTLs ( , Materials and methods). Overall, we estimated that 17.3% of otherwise unexplained eQTLs were associated with PAS usage (see Materials and methods). For example, an unexplained eQTL for C10orf88 (rs7904973) colocalizes with an apaQTL associated with increased usage of an intronic PAS ( ). More generally, we found that eQTLs and apaQTLs colocalize for the majority of genes that had both (Materials and methods, ). This observation thus highlights APA as one important mechanism by which genetic variation impacts gene expression independent from enhancers and promoters.

## APA mediates gene regulation independently of mRNA expression levels
Previous joint analyses of molecular QTLs suggested that functional genetic variants tend to affect gene regulation in a simple and straightforward manner: first impacting chromatin activity, then mRNA expression, and finally protein expression ( ; ). However, because isoforms with different 3’ UTRs have been shown to vary in terms of their translation efficiency, we hypothesized that apaQTLs can impact ribosome occupancy and protein expression levels without affecting mRNA expression levels ( ). To test this possibility, we asked whether apaQTLs are enriched among genes without a known eQTL, but that are associated with a ribosome occupancy QTL (riboQTL) or a protein expression QTL (pQTL). Indeed, we found that apaQTLs are enriched among genes with a ribosome QTL (rGenes; Wilcoxon rank sum test ) and genes with a pQTL (pGenes; ) compared to genes with no molecular association ( , ; ; ). In addition, we observed a small but significant positive correlation between individual variance in APA usage and ribosome occupancy (correlation = 0.15, , ), supporting a model in which APA impacts translation efficiency.
 
 
 
In total, we found 24 apaQTLs that affect protein expression, but not mRNA expression ( ). Of these, five apaQTLs were significantly associated with ribosome occupancy ( ). This finding is particularly noteworthy because nearly all genetic effects on ribosome occupancy have been proposed to be mediated by effects on mRNA expression ( ). Yet, here we provide direct evidence that APA can mediate genetic effects on ribosome occupancy without affecting mRNA expression levels. For example, the apaQTL in the EIF2A gene that is associated with a switched usage of two 3’ UTR PAS, colocalizes with a pQTL and a ribosome occupancy QTL ( , ), but is not associated with EIF2A mRNA levels ( ). Interestingly, the QTL in EIF2A affects usage of two PAS in the same 3’ UTR implying that the protein sequence encoded by the two isoforms are identical. Thus, the regulatory associations uncovered at EIF2A cannot simply be explained by differences in protein isoform stability. Moreover, while differences in 3’ UTR are often assumed to play a regulatory function by influencing decay ( ), mechanisms involving RNA decay cannot be operational in this case because steady-state mRNA expression is unchanged. Instead, differences between the two isoforms may reflect differential binding of factors that impact translation ( ), or differential rates of translation re-initiation at the end of a translation cycle ( ).
We identified 19 pQTLs that were associated with APA but not steady-state gene expression or ribosome occupancy levels. Two previous studies also reported the discovery of pQTLs that were not eQTLs ( ; ). In both studies, the authors proposed that some genetic effects on protein expression levels were mediated by changes in the protein sequence or by changes in the expression levels of interacting proteins, which would manifest post-translationally. Our finding reveals yet another mode of genetic regulation of protein expression levels by APA (e.g. by affecting recruitment of interacting proteins). Thus, these findings provide clear evidence that APA can affect protein expression levels without affecting gene expression levels. Altogether, our findings suggest complex modes of gene regulation independent of mRNA expression driven by variation in APA.

## APA mediates genetic effects on complex traits
Genetic variation may impact disease risk through APA. We asked whether common variants in the regions around PAS, that is regions enriched for apaQTLs, are enriched in disease heritability. Using LDscore regression to estimate the heritability enrichment of 35 traits in 1 kb regions centered around PAS, we found that 14 of the tested traits were significantly enriched ( ). Of note, genetic variation around PAS was estimated to tag 15.35% of the SNP heritability for rheumatoid arthritis (7.88 fold enrichment, ). We further asked whether we could identify specific apaQTLs associated with phenotype. Indeed, 19.3% of apaQTLs (including SNPs in LD with ) are significantly associated with at least one trait in the UCSC GWAS catalog (Materials and methods) ( ). For example, an apaQTL that colocalizes with the eQTLs in the C10orf88 gene (rs7904973) has been associated with increased LDL cholesterol ( ), suggesting that eQTLs mediated by APA can impact organismal phenotype. Taken together, we propose that APA is a complex regulatory mechanism relevant to our understanding of how genetic variation can affect disease. Thus, comprehensive maps of apaQTLs can enhance our ability to interpret GWAS loci, particularly when the implicated variants are not eQTLs ( ; ). For example, an apaQTL in the ELL2 gene (rs56219066) is correlated with increased usage of an intronic PAS and is associated with risk for multiple myeloma ( ). Interestingly, multiple myeloma is among the cancer types in which widespread dysregulation of intronic APA has been documented previously ( ; ).

## Discussion
Obtaining a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms that affect gene regulation is crucial for the functional interpretation of noncoding genetic variation. Yet, existing studies that examine the role of genetic variation on APA are generally characterized by two important shortcomings. Firstly, the study of inter-individual variation in PAS usage have been mostly restricted to APA in the 3’ UTRs ( ; ; ), leaving genetic variants that impact PAS usage in other regions, for example intronic PAS, understudied. Secondly, nearly all existing studies use standard RNA-seq to estimate PAS usage, which not only limits the accuracy of usage quantification, but also makes it difficult to disentangle the contribution of co-transcriptional mechanisms to APA regulation from post-transcriptional mechanisms such as isoform-specific decay. In this study, we overcome these shortcomings by applying 3’ Seq to total and nuclear mRNA fractions separately to directly measure PAS usage including that of PAS in intronic regions.
It is worthwhile to note here that despite the many advantages of using 3’ Seq to identify and quantity APA isoforms, 3’ Seq experiments are known to be susceptible to mispriming, which occurs when polydT primers designed to recognize the polyA-tail of transcripts anneal to adenosine stretches within a transcript, thus introducing false positive polyadenylation sites. While we used stringent criteria to reduce the effect of mispriming, we found that a small proportion of PAS used in this study may be the result of mispriming. In particular, we found an enrichment of adenosine nucleotides at a subset of intronic PAS which were discovered in our study and not previously annotated, suggesting that 10–20% of unannotated intronic PAS may be false positives ( ). To ensure that these false positive PAS do not affect the validity of our analyses, we performed the main analyses presented in this study after removing unannotated intronic PAS and found that our conclusion were robust to the small number of potential false positive intronic PAS ( ; ).
By collecting data from both total and nuclear mRNA fractions, we were able to study the effects of genetic variation on polyadenylation at multiple stages of the mRNA lifecycle, and to distinguish putative regulatory mechanisms by noting the stages at which the genetic effects on APA were observed. For example, genetic variants can impact steady-state isoform ratio either co-transcriptionally by affecting PAS choice during transcription ( ,Model 1 ), or post-transcriptionally by affecting binding of miRNAs or RNA-binding proteins and consequently isoform decay ( , Model 2). We found that the vast majority of genetic variants that affect PAS usage ratio in total mRNA fraction, were also found to have similar effect sizes on PAS usage ratio in the nucleus. This observation implies that inter-individual variation in steady-state APA levels can generally be explained by variation in co-transcriptional mRNA processing, or mRNA processing that occur soon after transcription.
There are several co-transcriptional mechanisms that may result in variation in PAS usage. For example, previous reports have suggested that variation in the polyadenylation signal site may cause variation in PAS usage. While we found that this was the case for a small number of examples, disruption of canonical signal motifs does not appear to be a major mechanism for generating apaQTLs, an observation that is also supported by a recent study on APA in GTEx data ( ; ). Other possible co-transcriptional mechanisms involved in PAS choice include competition between the spliceosome and polyadenylation factors for example mediated by the spliceosomal RNA U1 ( ), and RNAPII pausing ( ). Indeed, recent studies have reported that sequence and chromatin context can pause or slow down RNAPII elongation across the gene body ( ), suggesting that variation in RNAPII pausing may impact PAS choice ( ). For example, in Drosophila melanogaster paused RNAPII promotes the recruitment of ELAV on the pre-mRNA, which prevents usage of a proximal PAS ( ). In addition, Liu et al. observed a tissue-specific shift toward usage of proximal PAS sites in Drosophila melanogaster mutant for a slow elongation form of RNAPII ( ). These findings further suggest that variants affecting RNAPII elongation rate could underlie the genetic effects on PAS usage we detected in this study.
Although our data suggest that apaQTLs do not generally impact rates of mRNA decay, for example by affecting miRNA or RBP binding motifs, we did find some apaQTLs that appear to promote polyadenylation site choices that result in the production of isoforms with different rates of decay. For example, we observed that genetic variants that increase the usage of isoforms ending at intronic PAS tend to be associated with lower levels of gene expression. This observation is consistent with reports that isoforms with premature polyadenylation are often substrates for nonsense mediated decay or nonstop decay ( ; ). More generally, our results suggest that apaQTLs can affect gene expression levels post-transcriptionally by impacting the production of isoforms with varying levels of stability. Importantly, our study highlights APA as an eQTL mechanism independent of promoters and enhancers.
While the effect of genetic variants on gene regulation is generally assumed to move linearly from chromatin, to mRNA, to protein level, our study reveals several complex modes of genetic regulation for both gene expression and protein expression levels by APA. Although we were unable to study the genome-wide effects of APA on protein expression owing to a scarcity of protein-level data, we identified several apaQTLs that affect protein, but not gene expression levels. These results strongly suggest that APA can affect protein expression levels without affecting gene expression levels, because our power to detect genetic effects on gene expression levels far exceeds that to detect genetic effects on protein expression levels. Furthermore, some of these pQTLs were associated with ribosomal occupancy and some were not, which implies multiple pathways by which genetic variants can impact protein expression levels through APA.
In conclusion, there are many pathways through which genetic variants can impact gene regulation and, consequently, organismal phenotypes. While many studies have demonstrated the importance of gene expression regulation through promoters or enhancers, very few studies have focused on co- or post-transcriptional gene regulation. Our study shows that co- and post-transcriptional processes such as APA can mediate the effects of a substantial number of genetic variants on mRNA expression levels, protein expression levels, and risk for complex diseases.

## Materials and methods

## Cell culture
We cultured 54 Epstein-Barr virus transformed LCLs under identical conditions at 37 C and 5% CO2. These LCLs were derived from Yoruba individuals originally collected as part of the HapMap project ( ).The sampleIDs and Research Resource Identifiers (RRIDs) are the following: 184_86_N-RRID:CVCL_P452, 18486_T-RRID:CVCL_P452, 18499_N-RRID:CVCL_P457, 18499_T-RRID:CVCL_P457, 18501_N-RRID:CVCL_P458, 18501_T-RRID:CVCL_P458, 18505_N-RRID:CVCL_N803, 18505_T-RRID:CVCL_N803, 18508_N-RRID:CVCL_F279, 18508_T-RRID:CVCL_F279, 18853_N-RRID:CVCL_P470, 18853_T-RRID:CVCL_P470, 18870_N-RRID:CVCL_P479, 18870_T-RRID:CVCL_P479, 19128_N-RRID:CVCL_0X44, 19128_T-RRID:CVCL_0X44, 19141_N-RRID:CVCL_P523, 19141_T-RRID:CVCL_P523, 19193_N-RRID:CVCL_E126, 19193_T-RRID:CVCL_E126, 19209_N-RRID:CVCL_P548, 19209_T-RRID:CVCL_P548, 19223_N-RRID:CVCL_P553, 19223_T-RRID:CVCL_P553, 19225_N-RRID:CVCL_P554, 19225_T-RRID:CVCL_P554, 19238_N-RRID:CVCL_9633, 19238_T-RRID:CVCL_9633, 19239_N-RRID:CVCL_9634, 19239_T-RRID:CVCL_9634, 19257_N-RRID:CVCL_P560, 19257_T-RRID:CVCL_P560, 18511_T-RRID:CVCL_P462, 18511_N-RRID:CVCL_P462, 18519_T-RRID:CVCL_P465, 18519_N-RRID:CVCL_P465, 18520_T-RRID:CVCL_P466, 18520_N-RRID:CVCL_P466, 19092_T-RRID:CVCL_P498, 19092_N-RRID:CVCL_P498, 18858_T-RRID:CVCL_P473, 18858_N-RRID:CVCL_P473, 18861_T-RRID:CVCL_P475, 18861_N-RRID:CVCL_P475, 19119_T-RRID:CVCL_P513, 19119_N-RRID:CVCL_P513, 19130_T-RRID:CVCL_0X49, 19130_N-RRID:CVCL_0X49, 19210_T-RRID:CVCL_P549, 19210_N-RRID:CVCL_P549, 18909_T-RRID:CVCL_P487, 18909_N-RRID:CVCL_P487, 18916_T-RRID:CVCL_P492, 18916_N-RRID:CVCL_P492, 19160_T-RRID:CVCL_P533, 19160_N-RRID:CVCL_P533, 19171_T-RRID:CVCL_P534, 19171_N-RRID:CVCL_P534, 19200_T-RRID:CVCL_P543, 19200_N-RRID:CVCL_P543, 19137_T-RRID:CVCL_P520, 19137_N-RRID:CVCL_P520, 19152_T-RRID:CVCL_P530, 19152_N-RRID:CVCL_P530, 19153_T-RRID:CVCL_P531, 19153_N-RRID:CVCL_P531, 19093_T-RRID:CVCL_P499, 19093_N-RRID:CVCL_P499, 18912_T-RRID:CVCL_P489, 18912_N-RRID:CVCL_P489, 19144_T-RRID:CVCL_P525, 19144_N-RRID:CVCL_P525, 19140_T-RRID:CVCL_P525, 19140_N-RRID:CVCL_P525, 19131_T-RRID:CVCL_P519, 19131_N-RRID:CVCL_P519, 19207_T-RRID:CVCL_P547, 19207_N-RRID:CVCL_P547, 18498_N-RRID:CVCL_P456, 18498_T-RRID:CVCL_P456, 18504_N-RRID:CVCL_P460, 18504_T-RRID:CVCL_P460, 18510_N-RRID:CVCL_P461, 18510_T-RRID:CVCL_P461, 18516_N-RRID:CVCL_P463, 18516_T-RRID:CVCL_P463, 18522_N-RRID:CVCL_P467, 18522_T-RRID:CVCL_P467, 18502_N-RRID:CVCL_P459, 18502_T-RRID:CVCL_P459, 18517_N-RRID:CVCL_P464, 18517_T-RRID:CVCL_P464, 18855_N-RRID:CVCL_P471, 18855_T-RRID:CVCL_P471, 18852_N-RRID:CVCL_P469, 18852_T-RRID:CVCL_P469, 18856_N-RRID:CVCL_P472, 18856_T-RRID:CVCL_P472, 18862_N-RRID:CVCL_P476, 18862_T-RRID:CVCL_P476, 18913_N-RRID:CVCL_P490, 18913_T-RRID:CVCL_P490, 19101_N-RRID:CVCL_P503, 19101_T-RRID:CVCL_P503, 19138_N-RRID:CVCL_P521, 19138_T-RRID:CVCL_P521, 18907_N-RRID:CVCL_P485, 18907_T-RRID:CVCL_P485. Details for each cell line are found in . We grew cells in a glutamine depleted RPMI [RPMI 1640 1X from Corning (15–040 CM)], completed with 15% FBS, 2 mM GlutaMAX (from gibco (35050–061), 100 IU/ml Penicillin, and 100 ug/ml Streptomycin. After passaging them 3 times the lines were maintained at a concentration of cells per mL. In preparation for extraction, we allowed the cells to grow until a concentration of cells per mL was reached and then proceeded to extraction.

## Collection and RNA extraction
We collected 30 million cells from each line and divided them into two 15 million cell aliquots. We spun the cells down at 500 RPM at 4C for 2 min, and then washed the pellets with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and spun down again. After this we aspirated the PBS, leaving the cell pellet. All washing steps occurred on ice or in cooled centrifuges. At this point every cell line had two separate pellets each from an input of 15 million cells. From each line we took one of these pellets for nuclear isolation. We then carried out nuclear isolation using the nuclear isolation steps outlined by . Once we washed and spun down the pellets in the nuclei wash buffer, we resuspended them in 700 ul of the QIAzol lysis reagent (Qiagen). We extracted both RNA cell pellets from the same line in the same batch using the miRNeasy kit (Qiagen) according to manufacture instructions, including the DNase step to remove potentially contaminated genomic DNA. Details for the collection such as cell viability and cell concentration at time of collection are found in . We checked the quality of the collected RNA using a nanodrop. RNA concentrations and absorbance levels from the collection are in .
In order to verify fraction separation, we completed the Mayer and Churchman protocol to isolate chromatin and collected cell lysates for each step in the fractionation ( ). We performed western blots against both GAPDH (GAPDH antibody (6C5) Life Technologies AM4300) and the Carboxyl Terminal Domain of Pol-II (CTD) (Pol II CTD Ser5-P antibody, Active Motif, 61085). We ran each lysate on Mini-protean TGX precast gels (bioRad 456–1093) after digesting any remaining DNA molecules from the nuclear isolate with benzonase nuclease. We used Goat anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) (Invitrogen 32430) as a secondary antibody for the GAPDH antibody and Goat anti-Rat IgG (H +L) (Invitrogen 31470) as a secondary antibody for the CTD antibody. We diluted all antibodies in a 1:1000 dilution with blocking solution made from dry milk (LabScientific Lot 1267N Cat M0841). We show GAPDH isolated in the cytoplasm and CTD to the chromatin fraction ( ).

## 3' sequencing library generation
We generated 108 single-end RNA 3' sequencing libraries from the total and nuclear RNA extract using the QuantSeq 3' mRNA-Seq Library Prep Kit ( ) as directed by the manufacturer. We used 5 ng of each sample as input. We submitted the libraries for sequencing on the Illumina NextSeq5000 at the University of Chicago Genomics Core facility using single end 50 bp sequencing.

## 3' sequencing data processing
We mapped 3' Seq reads to hg19 ( ) using STAR RNA-seq aligner ( ) using default settings with the WASP mode to filter out reads mapping with allelic bias ( ). Similar to previously published 3' Seq methods, we accounted for internal priming by filtering reads preceded by 6 Ts in a row or 7 of 10 Ts in the 10 bases directly upstream of the mapping position in the reference genome ( ; ; ). We verified the individual identity of all bam files using VerifyBamID ( ). Due to low confidence in the identity of 2 individuals, they were removed from all analysis. Raw read and mapped read statistics after accounting for internal priming can be found in ( – ).

## Identification and characerization of PAS
We merged all mapped reads and called peaks using an inclusive method, identifying all regions of the genome with non-zero read counts in 90% percent of libraries and an average read count of greater than 2 counts. This resulted in 138,181 peaks. We assigned each of these peaks to a genic location according to NCBI Refseq annotations for 5' UTRS, 3' UTRs, exons, introns, and regions 5 kb downstream of annotated genes downloaded from the UCSC table browser ( ). When a region mapped to multiple genes we used a hierarchical model, similar to the method used by to assign the peak to a gene annotations. Our method prioritizes annotations in the following order: 3' UTRs, 5 kb downstream of genes, exons, 5' UTRs, and introns. To further verify absence of PAS detected as a result of internal priming we removed PAS with 6A’s or 70% As in the 15 basepairs downstream of the site. We next utilized a gene level noise filter to account for non-uniform read coverage across the genome. We created a usage score for each PAS based on of the number of reads mapping to the PAS over the number of reads mapping to any PAS associated with the same gene. We filtered out peaks with a mean usage of less than 5% in both the total and nuclear libraries. After this filter, we were left with 35,032 PAS in the total mRNA fraction and 39,164 PAS in the nuclear fraction. The merged set with PAS from both fractions used for PAS QC is available on GEO and has 41,810 PAS. We compared our set of PAS to the human PolyADB release 3.2 annotation ( ;  ). We explored the relationship between number of PAS detected and gene expression using TPM estimates from YRI LCLs after removing very lowly expressed genes (less than 1 TPM) ( ). We calculated the 5’ splice site strength using the MaxEntScore tool, for each of the introns in our annotation ( ). We binned the introns by decile according to the scores and evaluated the distribution of the introns containing PAS. We also used the scores for the introns containing PAS to investigate the relationship between PAS usage and 5’ splice site strength.

## PAS signal site enrichment and locations
We used the Homer findMotifsGenome.pl script with the -size −300,100 option to identify binding motifs in the 50 bp upstream of each PAS ( ). As a background, we used genome shuffle to randomly chose the same number of 50 bp regions. To explore the location of the signal site relative to the PAS (most 3' end of each identified peak), we determined the relative position of previously described potential signal sites to this position ( ). We then extended each PAS 100 bp upstream and identified the starting position of each of the 12 PAS signal site variations identified by Beaudoing et al. without allowing for sequence mismatch ( ).

## Differential isoform analysis
We mapped 3' Seq reads to all PAS peaks with mean coverage of 5% in the total or nuclear fraction libraries. This results in 41,813 annotated sites. We assigned reads to PAS using the featureCounts tool with the -O flag to assign reads to all overlapping features ( ). We ran the leafcutter_ds.R script on chromosomes 1–22 separately using the cellular fraction label as the sample group identifier ( ). This analysis tests 9790 genes and resulted in 8227 genes with significant (FDR 10%) isoform level differences between the total and nuclear cellular fraction. We called differentially used PAS as sites with a Δ polyadenylation site usage (ΔPAU) greater than 0.2 or less than −0.2. In our analysis a positive ΔPAU corresponds to increase usage in the total cellular fraction while a negative ΔPAU corresponds to increased usage in the nuclear fraction.

## apaQTL calling in both fractions
We used the Leafcutter prepare_phenotype_table.py script with default settings to normalize the PAS usage ratios across individuals within each fraction. This method also outputs the top principal components (PCs) of the data to use as covariates. We plotted the proportion of variation explained by each PC in order to identify the number of PCs to include in the analysis ( ). We included the top 4 PCs as well as the library preparation batch as the covariates. We plotted the proportion of variance explained by a number of cofactors in each of the top 10 PCs ( ). The top four PCs correlate most strongly with the cell count at collection ( ). We used the same genotypes from , available at http://eqtl.uchicago.edu/jointLCL/genotypesYRI.gen.txt.gz ( ). We removed individual NA19092 due to lack of genotype information in this file, bringing our sample size to 51 individuals for this part of the analysis. Only SNPs with a MAF >5% in our sample were included. We used FastQTL to map apaQTLs in cis (25 kb on either side) with 1000 permutations to select the top SNP-PAS association ( ). We called apaQTLs in each fraction as variants passing 10% FDR (Benjamini-Hockberg) after permutations. In order to plot interpretable effect sizes for each association we computed nominal PAS:SNP associations for the pre-normalized PAS ratios.

## Association of apaQTLs with chromatin states
We downloaded the GM12878 chromatin HMM annotations for hg19 from the UCSC table browser ( ). We overlapped the eQTLs identified and published in as well as the total and nuclear fraction apaQTLs with these categories. We calculated 95% confidence intervals for each measurement by sampling the number of QTLs in the set with replacement 1000 times ( ).

## apaQTL overlap with eQTLs
We obtained the set of explained and unexplained eQTLs from . In order to test whether genes with an unexplained eQTL are more likely to be explained by variation in APA, we separated the permuted apaQTL association (top snp per PAS) into three categories: unexplained eGene, explained eGene, non eGenes. We tested for significant enrichment of apaQTLs in each category using one-sided Wilcoxon rank sum tests. In order to test if each explained and unexplained eQTLs described in overlaps with an apaQTL, we extracted the nominal associations for each eQTL gene-SNP pair from the apaQTL data in both fractions. In order to account for multiple PAS associations for each pair, we selected the most significant p-value and used a Bonferroni correction to account for the number of PAS tested in the gene. We consider an eQTL as explained by an apaQTL if the corrected p-value is less than 0.05 but report the values for a range of cutoffs in ). We performed colocalization with the R coloc package ( ). The Bayes Factor colocalization method reports Bayes Factors for 4 alternative hypotheses. PP0: No association with either trait, PP1: No association with trait 1, PP2: No association with trait 2, PP3: Association with trait 1 and trait 2, two independent SNPs, and PP4: Association with trait 1 and trait 2, one shared SNP. If causal SNPs for an apaQTL and an eQTL is the same SNP, then PP4 is expected to be large (greater than 0.5). We accounted for incomplete power using the method described in Ongen et al. ( ; ).

## apaQTLs overlap with ribosome specific and protein specific QTLs
The list of protein specific QTL genes can be found in the supplementary information from . In order to show that genes with an eQTL and protein specific QTLs are likely to be associated with APA, we separated the permuted apaQTL association (top snp per PAS) into three categories: eGene, pGene, or neither pGene nor eGene. We performed the same analysis with rGenes, eGenes, and neither rGenes nor eGenes. We tested for significant enrichment with one sided Wilcoxon rank sum tests ( and ).

## Identification of molecular QTL associations
We sought to test if SNPs identified as apaQTLs are significantly associated with other molecular phenotypes previously tested in the same panel of LCLs. We tested for associations between the genotypes used in this study and each gene for each phenotype with fastqtl using the top 5 PCs calculated in as covariates. We used normalized RNA expression, RiboSeq values, and protein levels, published in .

## PAS heritability estimates and apaQTL overlap with GWAS catalog
We downloaded GWAS summary statistics from both ; We augmented our PAS sites by 500 bp on either side and ran LD score regression using methods described in We downloaded the CRCh37hg19 GWAS catalog for UCSC table browser ( ). We identified SNPs in LD with the nuclear apaQTLs using the LDproxy tool from LDlink with YRI as the population ( ). We filtered all results to SNPs with an r2 greater than 0.9. We overlapped the full set with the GWAS catalog using pybedtools.

## Funding Information
This paper was supported by the following grants:
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health
T32 GM09197 to Briana E Mittleman.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health
F31HL149259 to Briana E Mittleman.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health
R01GM130738 to Yang Li.
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002National Institutes of Health
K12 HL119995 to Sebastian Pott.

## Acknowledgements
We thank N Gonzalez, JP Staley, MC Ward for comments on the manuscript. Funding: This work was supported by the US National Institutes of Health (R01GM130738 to YIL). BEM supported by T32 GM09197 to the University of Chicago and F31HL149259 to BEM from National Heart, Lung, And Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health. SP was in part supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the NIH (K12 HL119995). This work was completed in part with resources provided by the University of Chicago Research Computing Center.

## Additional information

## Competing interests
No competing interests declared.

## Author contributions
Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Visualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing - review and editing.
Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - review and editing.
Data curation, Writing - review and editing.
Formal analysis, Visualization.
Formal analysis, analysis and interpretation of data.
Visualization, analysis and interpretation of data.
Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Writing - review and editing.
Conceptualization, Resources, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - review and editing.

## Additional files
Supplementary file 1.

## Supplementary Text.
Supplementary file 2.

## ApaQTL whose lead SNP is nominally associated with protein expression levels but not expression.
Table includes p-value and slope for the associated between the lead SNP and nuclear APA usage, gene expression levels, protein expression levels, and ribosome occupancy (as measured using ribo-seq).
Supplementary file 3.

## Library information for each Yoruba lymphoblastoid cell line, including sample, collection, and read information.
Transparent reporting form

## Data availability
Fastq files and PAS annotations are available at GEO under accession GSE138197. All reproducible scripts and software versions can be found at through Zenodo with https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3905372.
The following datasets were generated:
MittlemanBEPottSWarlandSFZhengTMuZKaurMGiladYLiYI2020Alternative polyadenylation mediates genetic regulation of gene expressionNCBI Gene Expression OmnibusGSE13819710.7554/eLife.57492PMC733805732584258
MittlemanBEPottSWarlandSFZhengTMuZKaurMGiladYLiYI2020Alternative polyadenylation mediates genetic regulation of gene expressionZenodo10.5281/zenodo.3905372PMC733805732584258

 10.7554/eLife.57492.sa1Decision letter
YeoGene WReviewing EditorUniversity of California, San DiegoUnited StatesIn the interests of transparency, eLife publishes the most substantive revision requests and the accompanying author responses.
Acceptance summary:
This article presents an interesting link between alternative polyadenylation, decay rates and genetic variation in gene expression control.
Decision letter after peer review:
[Editors’ note: the authors submitted for reconsideration following the decision after peer review. What follows is the decision letter after the first round of review.]
Thank you for submitting your work entitled "Alternative polyadenylation mediates genetic regulation of gene expression" for consideration by eLife. Your article has been reviewed by three peer reviewers, one of whom is a member of our Board of Reviewing Editors, and the evaluation has been overseen by a Senior Editor. The reviewers have opted to remain anonymous.
Our decision has been reached after consultation between the reviewers. Based on these discussions and the individual reviews below, we regret to inform you that your work cannot be considered further for publication in eLife, at least in its current form. However, a substantially revised version that successfully addresses all the major comments raised in the reviews below would be suitable for reconsideration.
Li and colleagues perform 3'seq on nuclear and total RNA to evaluate the diversity of alternative polyadenylation (APA) site choice from 52 lymphoblastoid cell lines. A surprising finding that is a large fraction of the nuclear fraction apaQTLs are intronic. This suggests that apaQTLs may contribute to eQTLs that are not associated with chromatin fractions and can lead to protein level changes without RNA abundance differences. A novel mechanism for genetic variants that modify ribosome occupancy of a transcript independently of its expression level is suggested. While the manuscript is certainly intriguing and highlights the potential importance of APA to human biology, which is of interest to the RNA and genetics field, there are many significant technical concerns that need reanalysis and clarification, in order for the biological implications to be sufficiently justified. The final results are somewhat underwhelming and in its current form insufficient to cross the threshold for publication in eLife.
Reviewer #1:
In this manuscript, Mittleman and colleagues contribute another layer of annotations to a historied collection of LCLs. By performing 3' Seq on nuclear and total mRNA, the authors are able to document the diversity of polyadenylation site choice in cells and the extensive regulatory activity occurring in between nascent transcription and steady state mRNA levels. They find that polyadenylation sites that produce nonfunctional transcripts (predominately but not solely in intronic segments) are invisible in standard RNA-seq datasets. Although they may be used uncommonly, these noncanonical sites may outnumber those in 3' UTRs. The authors extend the repertoire of QTL calling and learn that apaQTLs exhibit chromatin and other features distinct from those of eQTLs. More importantly, they find a novel mechanism for genetic variants that modify ribosome occupancy of a transcript independent of its expression level. However, while this work presents a transparently useful resource, the manuscript is conspicuously narrow in scope; it doubles down on alternate polyadenylation site architecture and chromatin state even when the identified trends are subtle at best.
1) The main takeaways (polyadenylation site choice is more diverse than expected, and traditional datasets obscure the role of alternative polyadenylation in mediating eQTLs) are cemented by the schematic in Figure 4C, but startlingly few figures address this point elsewhere. Figure 2D and Figure 3—figure supplement 3 and 4 are offered as supporting evidence, but the entirety of at least one main text figure should be dedicated to this in this reviewer's opinion. The principal findings simply need more attention.
Figure 1B elliptically addresses mRNA stability versus nucleus-biased transcripts, but there is a lot to unpack here. The panel title argues that polyadenylation choice is only weakly correlated, but the text takes care to establish a positive correlation. The trendline looks very ill fit to me. This is a rather critical point: is 3' Seq complementary, redundant or synergistic with 4su-seq? In other words, is 3' Seq really telling us something new, or is it recapitulating 4su? Additionally, Figure 2D is presented as critical evidence, and I feel that more should be done to bolster it. I was under the impression that more apaQTLs were called in nuclear than total mRNA fractions because transcripts had undergone decay. If effect sizes aren't changing, then does that mean both alleles of apaQTLs are equally disenriched in total mRNA fractions? The discussion does not take a clear stance on the relationship between alternative polyadenylation, translational efficiency and mRNA decay, which should be central to the message of the paper.
2) The majority of the plots delve into subtle differences of polyadenylation in various transcript elements (like introns and UTRs) and in nuclear mRNA versus total mRNA and for explained or unexplained QTLs. While these figure panels may show some slight differences (e.g. Figure 3), this leaves the reader with questions.
What percent of nonsense-mediated decay is dedicated to screening prematurely polyadenylated transcripts? For simultaneous apaQTL/eQTLs, approximately what percent of eQTL variance could be explained by apaQTL variance? Is the same extent of intronic alternative polyadenylation in nuclei observed in other cell types? Does higher variance in alternative polyadenylation for a transcript correlate with higher variance in ribosome occupancy (irrespective of QTLs)? Are alternatively polyadenylated sites enriched for heritability for a panel of traits (i.e. using LD score regression)? More conserved? Are genes with more frequent alternative polyadenylation longer? More highly expressed? Expressed more selectively across tissues? Enriched for certain gene annotations (e.g. GO terms)? More likely to contain certain RNA-binding protein motifs? More likely to bind RBPs as shown by CLIP? Less likely to be annotated with multiple transcription start sites?
3) The manuscript is not an easy read. Even with the current results, the format and layout would be daunting for generalists unfamiliar with this subject matter. Figures are called out too soon in some cases. Axis and panel titles frequently obfuscate rather than illuminate the subject matter. Numerous tracks are illegible at true size and somewhat difficult to discern even in the zoomed in figures (nonetheless a very helpful addition to the manuscript). These points really do need to be addressed.
4) The content of Figure 4 is quite anecdotal. Ideally there would be follow up work on the mechanism of riboQTLs or pQTLs without eQTLs. It may also be appropriate to combine Figures 3 and 4 and send some panels to the supplementary materials.
Reviewer #2:
In this paper, Mittleman et al. used 3' seq to analyze alternative polyadenylation (APA) isoform expression levels in nuclear and total RNA fractions from 52 lymphoblatoid cell lines. They identified about 600 apaQTLs in both fractions. A surprising finding is that a large portion of the nuclear fraction apaQTLs are intronic. They indicate that apaQTLs may contribute to some eQTLs that have not been associated with chromatin functions and can also lead to protein level changes without RNA abundance difference. Overall this proof-of-principle type work highlights the functional relevance of APA to human traits, a message that is of value to both RNA processing and human genetics fields. The experiment and data analysis were well carried out in general. However, some aspects of this work need further polishing and alternative explanations need to be considered in their data interpretations.
It is not clear to what extent internal priming cases have been addressed. The QuantSeq kit uses oligo(dT) for RT priming, which can lead to substantial internal priming at A-rich regions of RNA. Even though the authors seem to have employed a rigorous computational approach to cull their data, internal priming cases can still exist. One way to gauge the extent is to check the nucleotide frequency profile around the polyA sites that matched polyA DB vs. those did not. If internal priming problem persists, they would see an A-rich peak around the polyA site for those non-matched sites. This issue is highly relevant to their conclusion, because many of the intronic polyA sites could well be A-rich regions in retained introns. As such, some of the cases might in fact be intron retention rather than intronic polyadenylation.
For intronic polyA regulation, the authors need to consider the possibility of variations of 5' splice site strength and/or intron size (through insertion or deletion), which were shown to be important for intronic polyadenylation by Tian et al., 2007.
The authors claim that the relative number of nuclear seq reads to total reads is indicative of RNA decay. This is not well supported by their data. The data shown in Figure 1—figure supplement 1 had a quite dismal correlation coefficient and the p-value is not 2.2x10-16 as mentioned in the main text. The possibility of nuclear export control, in addition to decay, should be considered.
The description of ribosome occupancy is quite scant. Because intronic polyadenylation would truncate transcripts, change of ribosome occupancy could be simply due to transcript size change (thus ribosome number per nucleotide changes) rather than ribosome number per transcript. The authors need to distinguish these two different scenarios.
Reviewer #3:
The authors are studying genetic variation that affect APA. While there has been a fair amount of interest in the study of eQTLs the focus on this specific mechanism is less explored. This summer there was a fairly large study of genetic variation and apa published this summer (PMID: 31475030). It may be appropriate to mention this work to set the study in the appropriate context. Nevertheless, there are novel contributions in this study that offer more resolution in terms of mechanism. The work uses 3' RNA-seq (3' Seq) to measure PAS usage in whole cells as well as the nucleus for the purpose of distinguishing differences in PAS usage from differential stability. The use of lymphoblastoid cell lines was a good decision given the deep characterization of this resource in the literature. In general, the study is thorough and makes a solid contribution. I felt that the all the computational analyses were thorough, appropriate and executed well. On the negative side, there is a potential limitation that the functional consequence of the events cannot really be determined from the relative RNA-seq measures in nuclear versus whole cell. It is possible the eQTL that trigger APA create changes in isoform ratios but these are not reflected in ribosome/polysome associated transcripts. In general, I struggled to identify any single high impact discovery but in its totality there is significant biology in the paper in terms of the discovering how variants expressed gene expression.
In terms of impact and broad appeal, I would think this would be appropriate for eLife.
10.7554/eLife.57492.sa2Author response
[Editors’ note: the authors resubmitted a revised version of the paper for consideration. What follows is the authors’ response to the first round of review.]
Li and colleagues perform 3'seq on nuclear and total RNA to evaluate the diversity of alternative polyadenylation (APA) site choice from 52 lymphoblastoid cell lines. A surprising finding that is a large fraction of the nuclear fraction apaQTLs are intronic. This suggests that apaQTLs may contribute to eQTLs that are not associated with chromatin fractions and can lead to protein level changes without RNA abundance differences. A novel mechanism for genetic variants that modify ribosome occupancy of a transcript independently of its expression level is suggested. While the manuscript is certainly intriguing and highlights the potential importance of APA to human biology, which is of interest to the RNA and genetics field, there are many significant technical concerns that need reanalysis and clarification, in order for the biological implications to be sufficiently justified. The final results are somewhat underwhelming and in its current form insufficient to cross the threshold for publication in eLife.
Thank you for sending the reviews and allowing us to submit a revised version. We also thank all reviewers for their help in improving this manuscript.
We have responded to each of the reviewer’s concerns and suggestions, as detailed below, and more generally, we have completely restructured the figures and edited the text to address the general sentiment that the main insights in our paper were not clearly reported.
Of particular note:
Reviewer 1 challenged us with a large number of questions, and we have carried out all of the proposed additional analyses. We want to particularly thank this reviewer, as we believe that our reported study is better and more robust with these additional insights.
Reviewer 2 challenged us to further explore the potential issue of mispriming, and we are grateful. We believe that our analysis is now much improved.
Reviewer #1:
1) The main takeaways (polyadenylation site choice is more diverse than expected, and traditional datasets obscure the role of alternative polyadenylation in mediating eQTLs) are cemented by the schematic in Figure 4C, but startlingly few figures address this point elsewhere. Figure 2D and Figure 3—figure supplement 3 and 4 are offered as supporting evidence, but the entirety of at least one main text figure should be dedicated to this in this reviewer's opinion. The principal findings simply need more attention.
Thank you for the comment. We have now completely revised the structure of the figures and several sections of the manuscript to improve the focus on the main claims.
Figure 1B elliptically addresses mRNA stability versus nucleus-biased transcripts, but there is a lot to unpack here. The panel title argues that polyadenylation choice is only weakly correlated, but the text takes care to establish a positive correlation. The trendline looks very ill fit to me. This is a rather critical point: is 3' Seq complementary, redundant or synergistic with 4su-seq? In other words, is 3' Seq really telling us something new, or is it recapitulating 4su?
We are sorry for this misunderstanding. We initially included Figure 1B to show that 3’-Seq collected from the nuclear cell fraction represents mRNA that are less subject to decay. This was meant to be a quality control and not speak to whether 3’-Seq is complementary, redundant, nor synergistic with 4sU. In other words, we simply wanted to highlight that nuclear mRNA 3’-Seq and total mRNA 3’-Seq provide different information, in case one might ask whether the two data sets are redundant.
We have now moved Figure 1B to S as it simply represents a quality control that we performed.
Additionally, Figure 2D is presented as critical evidence, and I feel that more should be done to bolster it. I was under the impression that more apaQTLs were called in nuclear than total mRNA fractions because transcripts had undergone decay. If effect sizes aren't changing, then does that mean both alleles of apaQTLs are equally disenriched in total mRNA fractions? The discussion does not take a clear stance on the relationship between alternative polyadenylation, translational efficiency and mRNA decay, which should be central to the message of the paper.
We thank the reviewer for asking this question, and again we are sorry for the confusion. As mentioned above, the compassion with the RNA decay data was for reported simply as a QC measure and we have now moved it to the supplement.
We also now clarify that most of the apaQTLs are discovered in both fractions and have highly correlated effect sizes. The implication of this observation is that most genetic variants impact steady-state relative isoform usage during transcription.
We also revised the text to clarify the following results: We show that only a subset of apaQTLs impact gene expression levels by increasing the usage of isoforms with lower stability. We also show that a subset of apaQTLs impact translational efficiency, and protein expression levels, independently of effects on mRNA expression levels.
2) The majority of the plots delve into subtle differences of polyadenylation in various transcript elements (like introns and UTRs) and in nuclear mRNA versus total mRNA and for explained or unexplained QTLs. While these figure panels may show some slight differences (e.g. Figure 3), this leaves the reader with questions.
Thank you for these questions. We hope our explanations below address these concerns. We added many of the analyses described below to the paper.
What percent of nonsense-mediated decay is dedicated to screening prematurely polyadenylated transcripts?
It is very difficult to answer this question using our 3’-seq data as our data does not capture nonsense-mediated decay transcripts. We can only infer decay (or lack of export) by observing differences between nuclear and total mRNA fractions.
That said, to gain insights into the links between NMD and APA, we considered a list of genes known to be a target of NMD from a study conducted by Colombo et al. (Colombo et al., 2017). Interestingly, we found that genes with differential usage between the total and nuclear fractions are significantly enriched among genes targeted by NMD (2.14X enrichment, p-value=4.59x10-5).
We also found that the 57 examples of QTLs with larger effect sizes in nuclear than in total are significantly enriched for genes targeted by NMD (p=0.0017, hypergeometric test). This observation suggests that the genetic effects on gene expression through APA may be mediated through NMD.
One caveat of our analysis is that the Colombo et al. study used Hela cells rather than LCLs. We have thus decided to omit this result from the revised manuscript.
For simultaneous apaQTL/eQTLs, approximately what percent of eQTL variance could be explained by apaQTL variance?
Good questions! We cannot address it by directly comparing the effect sizes because the effect sizes for apaQTLs and eQTLs are not on the same scale (the APA phenotype is a ratio of reads while expression is a sum of reads across a gene). Instead, to address this question, we considered colocalization of the eQTLs and apaQTLs. If the eQTL and apaQTL colocalize (are likely to have the same causal SNP), we can infer that the apaQTL explains 100% of the eQTL variance.
To quantify the amount of colocalization between our apaQTLs and eQTLs, we used coloc (Wallace et al., 2012) package to test for whether the phenotypes share a causal SNP. We found that eQTLs and apaQTLs in the vast majority of genes (78.8%) are more likely to share a causal SNP than not. Thus, we conclude that most apaQTLs that are determined to be eQTLs are likely to be causal, and thus likely explain most or all the SNP effect on gene expression.
These results are now reported in the paper in subsection “Impact of apaQTLs on gene expression levels”.
Is the same extent of intronic alternative polyadenylation in nuclei observed in other cell types?
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first study to separate nuclei from whole cells with the goal to quantify intronic APA, so we are unable to provide a comprehensive answer to this question without collecting much more data.
Nevertheless, to provide some insight, we reasoned that because total mRNA captures a small fraction of nuclear mRNA, it may be possible to use total mRNA to quantify the extent of intronic alternative polyadenylation in nuclei. For example, we found that 387 intronic PAS that were highly used in LCL nuclear mRNA were also detectable in LCL total mRNA. We can thus ask what fraction of these 387 intronic PAS also show evidence of usage in other cell-types from data collected by other studies on PAS, which used a similar strategy for collecting total polyadenylated mRNA to ours.
As baseline, we used 3’-seq usage data collected by Lianoglou et al., which include LCLs and four other cell-types (Breast, Ovary, Testes, Stem Cells). We found that about 10% of the 387 intronic PAS showed detectable usage in total 3’ seq from LCLs collected by the Lianoglous study. By contrast, around 5% of the intronic PAS showed usage in Breast, and Testes. Usage of 3’ Seq data from another study performed by Derti and colleagues suggest that nearly 10% of the 387 PAS showed detectable usage.
Put together, these results suggest that there is at most a 2-fold difference in alternative polyadenylation in nuclei in other cell-types.
These results are now reported in the paper in subsection “Alternative polyadenylation in human LCLs as defined using Nuclear and Total mRNA 3’ Seq”.
Does higher variance in alternative polyadenylation for a transcript correlate with higher variance in ribosome occupancy (irrespective of QTLs)?
There are multiple polyadenylation sites per gene, by definition, but only one measure of ribosome occupancy per gene. To overcome this difficulty, we simply asked whether the variance of the usage of the most highly used PAS correlates with variance in occupancy. We observed a small but significant positive correlation between individual variance in APA usage and ribosome occupancy (Correlation = 0.15, p <2.2x10-16).
These results are now reported in the paper in subsection “APA mediates gene regulation independently of mRNA expression levels”.
Are alternatively polyadenylated sites enriched for heritability for a panel of traits (i.e. using LD score regression)?
This is a very good idea, thank you. We addressed this question by considering LD score regression with 1kb regions around each PAS and a panel of immune related traits. Using our PAS augmented by 500bp on each site as annotation, we observed a significant enrichment for many traits, notably rheumatoid arthritis, lymphocyte count, and neutrophil count. This result strengthens our claim that genetic control of alternative polyadenylation is likely relevant for complex human phenotypes.
These results are now reported in the paper in subsection “APA mediates genetic effects on complex traits” and in Figure 4—figure supplement 3.
More conserved?
We tested whether the 50bp upstream of each PAS were more conserved than a control region of further 50bp upstream of that. We measured conservation using PhyloP scores downloaded from UCSC table browser. PhyloP scores measures conservation across 100 vertebrate species at a base pair resolution with a larger value reflecting more conservation than expected by genetic drift. For genes with one to four PAS, we saw higher phyloP scores for PAS than control regions (See ). The difference is more pronounced the fewer PAS are identified in each gene, suggesting less evolutionary constraint on PAS when the number of PAS is large.
 Are genes with more frequent alternative polyadenylation longer?
We tested this by comparing the number of identified PAS and the length of each gene. We found that genes with multiple PAS are significantly longer than genes with only 1 identified PAS (median 11.3kb vs 34.4kb, Wilcoxon p-value < 2.2x10-16). We also found that 3’ UTR length was highly correlated with the number of PAS in the 3’ UTR (correlation = 0.42, pvalue =< 2.2x10-16) (See ).
 More highly expressed?
We considered the relationship between number of identified PAS and mean normalized mRNA expression level in YRI LCLs. We do not expect a high positive correlation in this analysis because we do not expect PAS number to scale with expression. Indeed, a strong relationship between gene expression and PAS may suggest that our identification is biased towards highly expressed genes. Reassuringly, we found that there is a slight negative correlation between number of PAS and TPM after removing the very lowly expressed genes (<1 TPM) (Pearson Correlation = -0.12, p-value < 2.2x10-16).
These results are now reported in the paper in subsection “Alternative polyadenylation in human LCLs as defined using Nuclear and Total mRNA 3’ Seq” and in Figure 1—figure supplement 1.
Expressed more selectively across tissues?
We note that this question has previously been addressed in a 2013 studies from Lianogluo et al.(Lianoglou et al., 2013) in which genes ubiquitously expressed were found to be more likely to harbor multiple PAS. In our case, we now asked whether the number of PAS for a gene is negatively correlated with its gene expression variance from GTEx, a measure of expression selectivity. If genes that are ubiquitously expressed are more like to harbor multiple PAS, as suggested by Lianogluo and colleagues, then we would expect a negative correlation between gene expression variance across tissues and number of PAS (lower variance likely indicate ubiquitous expression). Indeed, we found a significant negative correlation between a gene’s expression variance and its number of PAS (Pearson’s correlation -0.17, p < 2.2 x 10-16)
 Enriched for certain gene annotations (e.g. GO terms)?
We performed a GO analysis for genes with APA and identified many significant processes, functions, and components at q < 10-9.
More likely to contain certain RNA-binding protein motifs? More likely to bind RBPs as shown by CLIP?
To address this question, we downloaded eCLIP data for 25 different RNA binding proteins in K562 cells from the ENCODE project. We asked whether 3’ UTR with an apaQTL were more likely to be bound by an RBP as shown by eCLIP than expected by chance. Interestingly, we found that the RNA binding proteins with the strongest enrichments are FUS and SAFB. These are intriguing result given the known function of FUS as a splice factor that guide nuclear export.
These results are now reported in the paper in subsection “Genetic loci associated with variation in APA”.
Less likely to be annotated with multiple transcription start sites?
To answer this question, we downloaded CAGE-seq data performed on the nuclear fraction of GM12878 LCL, from the ENCODE consortium. We identified 9,896 genes that were measured in both CAGE-seq and 3’ Seq, with multiple PAS and multiple TSS. We found no correlation between the number of PAS and the number of TSS. However, we found that genes with multiple annotated PAS are significantly enriched for genes with multiple TSS (p = 7.97x10-6) compared to genes with a single TSS. It also appears like gene length is an indicator for variation in number of PAS and number of TSS (nPAS and nTSS)
 3) The manuscript is not an easy read. Even with the current results, the format and layout would be daunting for generalists unfamiliar with this subject matter. Figures are called out too soon in some cases. Axis and panel titles frequently obfuscate rather than illuminate the subject matter. Numerous tracks are illegible at true size and somewhat difficult to discern even in the zoomed in figures (nonetheless a very helpful addition to the manuscript). These points really do need to be addressed.
We thank this reviewer for these criticisms, which have prompted us to revamp all figures improving flow. We have modified the figures to increase track size and to increase general readability of the paper.
4) The content of Figure 4 is quite anecdotal. Ideally there would be follow up work on the mechanism of riboQTLs or pQTLs without eQTLs. It may also be appropriate to combine Figures 3 and 4 and send some panels to the supplementary materials.
While we agree with the reviewer that we present anecdotal evidence to support our claims, it should be noted that the identification of other types of QTLs (pQTLs, riboQTLs) would require a completely new data collection and that kind of follow up work needs to be reserved to a different project. Without additional data, we now discuss proposed potentially mechanisms in subsections “Impact of apaQTLs on gene expression levels” and “APA mediates genetic effects on complex traits”.
Reviewer #2:
It is not clear to what extent internal priming cases have been addressed. The QuantSeq kit uses oligo(dT) for RT priming, which can lead to substantial internal priming at A-rich regions of RNA. Even though the authors seem to have employed a rigorous computational approach to cull their data, internal priming cases can still exist. One way to gauge the extent is to check the nucleotide frequency profile around the polyA sites that matched polyA DB vs. those did not. If internal priming problem persists, they would see an A-rich peak around the polyA site for those non-matched sites. This issue is highly relevant to their conclusion, because many of the intronic polyA sites could well be A-rich regions in retained introns. As such, some of the cases might in fact be intron retention rather than intronic polyadenylation.
Thank you for this important comment. We originally took various measures to ensure that misprimed reads are not included in our analysis. For example, we include filters both at the read and PAS level according to previous reports using the same experimental protocol. Now, upon your suggestion, we considered the base composition around our PAS. We have separated PAS based on their location and whether the PAS is annotated in polyADB (Wang et al., 2018).
We found a very similar basepair composition for all PAS except for intronic PAS that are unannotated in polyA DB. This suggests some amount of mispriming as hypothesized by the reviewer. By quantifying the increase in A at nearby position around unannotated intronic PAS relative to annotated intronic PAS, we estimate that up to 20% of our unannotated intronic PAS may be explained by mispriming.
We thus repeated our analysis after removing all intronic PAS that have not been previously annotated, and we show that our results are robust with respect to this property. We report this analysis in the paper and we sincerely thank the reviewer for this suggestion.
For intronic polyA regulation, the authors need to consider the possibility of variations of 5' splice site strength and/or intron size (through insertion or deletion), which were shown to be important for intronic polyadenylation by Tian et al., 2007.
We thank the reviewer for this suggestion. Tian et al. reported that introns with intronic PAS are associated with weak 5’ splice sites (SS). We used MaxEntScan scores as proxy for the 5’ SS strength for all of our nuclear intronic PAS (Yeo and Burge, 2004). We found that, as expected, the top 10% most highly used intronic PAS are in introns with significantly lower maxent scores than the bottom 10% (6.43 vs 7.26, Wilcoxon p=1.4x10-3). However, we found no a correlation between mean PAS usage and the 5’ SS strength. We added these results to subsection “Alternative polyadenylation in human LCLs as defined using Nuclear and Total mRNA 3’ Seq”.
The authors claim that the relative number of nuclear seq reads to total reads is indicative of RNA decay. This is not well supported by their data. The data shown in Supplementary Figure 1 had a quite dismal correlation coefficient and the p-value is not 2.2x10-16 as mentioned in the main text. The possibility of nuclear export control, in addition to decay, should be considered.
We are sorry for this misunderstanding. We initially included Figure 1B to show that 3’-Seq collected from the nuclear cell fraction represents mRNA that are less subject to decay. This was meant to be a quality control and not speak to whether 3’-Seq is complementary, redundant, nor synergistic with 4sU. In other words, we simply wanted to highlight that nuclear mRNA 3’-Seq and total mRNA 3’-Seq provide different information, in case one might ask whether the two data sets are redundant.
We have now moved Figure 1B to Supplementary file 1 as it simply represents a quality control that we performed.
The description of ribosome occupancy is quite scant. Because intronic polyadenylation would truncate transcripts, change of ribosome occupancy could be simply due to transcript size change (thus ribosome number per nucleotide changes) rather than ribosome number per transcript. The authors need to distinguish these two different scenarios.
While it is true that intronic polyadenylation can truncate transcripts, the apaQTL that we identified as riboQTL were not eQTL. Because ribosome occupancy is calculated in the same way as mRNA expression levels, we would expect apaQTLs resulting in more or less truncated transcripts to be also eQTLs. Furthermore, if transcript length differences accounted for the changes in ribosome occupancy, the shorter isoform would always be estimated to have lower ribosome occupancy and we do not see this pattern.
Reviewer #3:
The authors are studying genetic variation that affect APA. While there has been a fair amount of interest in the study of eQTLs the focus on this specific mechanism is less explored. This summer there was a fairly large study of genetic variation and apa published this summer (PMID: 31475030).
We added this as a reference.