3814phenaturepgHandbook of Practical Fine Needle Aspiration and Small Tissue BiopsiesHandbook of Practical Fine Needle Aspiration and Small Tissue BiopsiesPMC71894247189424718942410.1007/978-3-319-57386-1_6Lung and Mediastinum
LiuHaiyan ZhangJun LinFan 4Department of Laboratory Medicine, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA USA 5Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ USA ✉Corresponding author.
292017243243–3012942020© Springer International Publishing AG 2018This article is made available via the PMC Open Access Subset for unrestricted research re-use and secondary analysis in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are granted for the duration of the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19 as a global pandemic.

## Abstract
Fine needle aspiration and small tissue biopsies have become a primary modality to achieve a definitive diagnosis of a mass-like lesion of the lung and mediastinum. This chapter delineated cytologic and histologic features of common and rare neoplastic and nonneoplastic mass-like lesions of the lung and mediastinum. The utilities and pitfalls of commonly used diagnostic immunohistochemical (IHC) stains, such as TTF1, Napsin A, p40 and CK5/6, and small diagnostic IHC panels, were described. Multiple challenging and yet practical cases at the end of the chapter were used to reemphasize important points illustrated throughout the chapter.
Keywords: Lung, Mediastinum, Thymus, Adenocarcinoma (Lepidic adenocarcinoma), Acinar adenocarcinoma, Papillary adenocarcinoma, Micropapillary adenocarcinoma, Solid adenocarcinoma, Invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma, Mixed invasive mucinous and nonmucinous adenocarcinoma, Colloid adenocarcinoma, Fetal adenocarcinoma, Enteric adenocarcinoma, Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma, Nonmucinous, Mucinous, Preinvasive lesions, Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, Adenocarcinoma in situ (nonmucinous mucinous), Squamous cell carcinoma, Keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, Nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, Basaloid squamous cell carcinoma, Preinvasive lesion, Squamous cell carcinoma in situ, Neuroendocrine tumors, Small cell carcinoma, Combined small cell carcinoma, Large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, Combined large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, Carcinoid tumors, Typical carcinoid tumor, Atypical carcinoid tumor, Preinvasive lesion, Diffuse idiopathic pulmonary, Neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia, Large cell carcinoma, Adenosquamous carcinoma, Sarcomatoid carcinomas, Pleomorphic carcinoma, Spindle cell carcinoma, Giant cell carcinoma, Carcinosarcoma, Pulmonary blastoma, Other and unclassified carcinomas, Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma, Nuclear protein in testis (NUT) carcinoma, Salivary gland-like tumors, Mucoepidermoid carcinoma, Adenoid cystic carcinoma, Epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma, Pleomorphic adenoma, Papillomas, Squamous cell papilloma (exophitic inverted), Glandular papilloma, Mixed squamous and glandular papilloma, Adenomas, Sclerosing pneumocytoma, Alveolar adenoma, Papillary adenoma, Mucinous cystadenoma, Mucous gland adenoma, Pulmonary hamartoma, Chondroma, PEComatous tumors, Lymphangioleiomyomatosis, PEComa (benign), Clear cell tumor, PEComa (malignant), Congenital peribronchial myofibroblastic tumor, Epithelial hemangioendothelioma, Pleuropulmonary blastoma, Synovial sarcoma, Pulmonary artery intimal sarcoma, Pulmonary myxoid sarcoma with EWSR1-CREB1 translocation, Myoepithelial tumors, Myoepithelioma, Diffuse malignant mesothelioma, Epithelioid mesothelioma, Sarcomatoid mesothelioma, Desmoplastic mesothelioma, Biphasic mesothelioma, Localized malignant mesothelioma, Epithelioid mesothelioma, Sarcomatoid mesothelioma, Biphasic mesothelioma, Well-differentiated papillary mesothelioma, Adenomatoid tumor, Epithelioid hemangioendothelioma, Angiosarcoma, Synovial sarcoma, Solitary fibrous tumor, Malignant solitary fibrous tumor, Desmoid-type fibromatosis, Calcifying fibrous tumor, Desmoplastic round cell tumor, Thymoma, Lymphoma, Sarcoma, Germ cell tumor, Metastatic carcinoma, Candida species, Aspergillus species, Phycomycosis (such as mucormycosis), Cryptococcus neoformans, Histoplasma capsulatum, Blastomyces dermatitidis, Coccidioides immitis, Pneumocystis carinii, TTF1, Napsin a, Calretinin, WT-1, CK5/6, p40, p63, MIB-1 (Ki67), Chromogranin, Synaptophysin, CD56, MOC31, PAX8, CD5, CD117, GLUT1, p53, p16, TdT

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractedno

## Summary of Pearls and Pitfalls

The concept of personalized medicine and the remarkable advances in lung cancer genetics and therapy in the past decade have changed lung pathology practice dramatically.
The 2015 World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the lung specifies that immunohistochemistry is required for lung cancer diagnosis, not only for small biopsies and fine needle aspiration (FNA) specimens but also for certain resected specimens such as solid adenocarcinoma (ADC), nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinom a, large cell carcinoma, neuroendocrine tumors, and sarcomatoid carcinomas.
New criteria and terminology for the diagnosis of lung cancer based on small biopsies and cytology are proposed in the 2015 WHO classification and are summarized in Tables and .

The role of cytopathologists has expanded to not only making a specific diagnosis, including histopathological subtyping of tumors, but also to thoughtfully utilizing the limited material for necessary genetic studies to help personalize treatment strategies for advanced lung cancer patients.
Thyroid transcription factor 1 ( TTF1) and napsin A are accepted markers for ADC differentiation; p40 is reported to be the most specific and sensitive marker for squamous cell differentiation. A reasonable recommendation is that, when immunohistochemistry is deemed necessary, at least one antibody each for squamous and glandular differentiation, but no more than two antibodies, should be used for an initial workup (e.g., TTF1 and p40 or p63). Thus a limited panel of TTF1 and p40 (or p63) is suggested for subtyping the tumor to preserve tissue for molecular testing.
Molecular testing for epithelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement is recommended in tumors classified as ADC and in cases where an ADC component cannot be excluded.
When evaluating a computed tomography (CT)-guided FNA of a lung lesion in the periphery, mesothelial cells are frequently seen on smears; reactive mesothelial cells may mimic carcinoma, and caution should be taken.
Diagnosis of ADC with a lepidic growth pattern can be challenging in FNA specimens. Both quality (degree of atypia) and quantity (groups of atypical cells) need to be considered. In a typical case of ADC with a lepidic growth pattern, the smears tend to be very cellular, containing many groups of atypical epithelial cells. In contrast, in a reactive condition, such as pulmonary infarction, atypical reactive pneumocytes are usually less numerous.
In mucinous ADC with a lepidic growth pattern, the neoplastic epithelial cells may mimic pulmonary macrophages. Features such as a mucinous background, cytoplasmic mucin/vacuoles, eccentrically located nuclei, and more abundant cytoplasm are helpful in reaching a correct diagnosis.

Basaloid squamous cell carcinoma may mimic small cell carcinoma; therefore, cellblock preparation in conjunction with immunostains will be helpful.
Infection such as aspergillosis may result in squamous cells with significant cytological atypia; therefore, infectious etiologies should be excluded before a diagnosis of well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma is rendered.
A lesion from the mediastinum should be considered if cytological features do not fit the description of a typical “lung lesion.”
Thymoma is rare in young patients and children. In lymphocyte-dominant thymoma, the main component of the aspirate may contain cortical thymocytes with expression of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase ( TdT) and cluster of differentiation (CD)99; therefore, caution should be taken to avoid misdiagnosing it as a lymphoblastic lymphoma.
Thymic neuroendocrine neoplasm may mimic an epithelial-dominant thymoma; therefore, immunohistochemistry should be performed in cases with equivocal features.

 

## Lung
Tables and summarize new criteria and terminology for the diagnosis of lung cancer based on small biopsies and cytology from the 2015 WHO classification.

## Normal Cytology

## Upper Respiratory Tract

Ciliated columnar cells , see Fig. .

Squamous cells , see Fig. .

 

## Lower Respiratory Tract

Trachea and bronchiCiliated columnar cells
Goblet cells , see Fig. .

Basal/reserve cells , see Fig. .

Terminal bronchiolesNon-ciliated cuboidal/columnar cells (Clara cells)
Alveoli
Type I and II pneumocytes
Alveolar macrophages
, see Fig. .

 

## Respiratory Infections

## Viral Infections 
Specific viral infections, such as herpes simplex (Fig. ) and cytomegalovirus (Fig. ), can cause significant cytological changes that may mimic a malignant process. The diagnosis can be confirmed by immunoperoxidase studies.

 Severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS) caused by a novel coronavirus ( SARS-CoV) became a worldwide outbreak in 2003, affecting more than 8000 patients, with a fatality rate of 9.2%. SARS-CoV belongs to a family of large, positive, single-stranded ribonucleic acid (RNA) viruses. The key pathologic finding is diffuse alveolar damage ( DAD) . Depending on different phases in the disease progression, the composition of inflammatory cells may vary; however, macrophages (including multinucleated forms) and lymphocytes usually predominate. Other pathologic findings, such as fibrosis, prominent vascular injury, hemophagocytosis, squamous metaplasia, apoptosis, and atypical pneumocytes, including multinucleated giant pneumocytes with irregularly distributed nuclei or pneumocytes with large atypical nuclei, prominent eosinophilic nucleoli, and granular amphophilic cytoplasm, were reported. Ancillary tests, such as in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, viral isolation, or reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), are necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Representative images are shown
in Fig. a, b.

 

## Fungal Infections 
FNA is a useful means of diagnosing pulmonary fungal infection, which should be suspected whenever there is granulomatous inflammation. Silver or periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stains are used on cellblock sections.
The common fungal infections include (1) Candida species ; (2) Aspergillus species , Fig. ; (3) phycomycosis (such as mucormycosis); (4) Cryptococcus neoformans, Fig. a–d; (5) Histoplasma capsulatum, Fig. a, b; (6) Blastomyces dermatitidis, Fig. a, b; (7) Coccidioides immitis, Fig. a, b; and (8) Pneumocystis carinii, Fig. a–c. The morphological features of these fungi are summarized in Table .

 

## Strongyloidiasis 
Pulmonary strongyloidiasis affects immunocompetent and, more commonly, immunosuppressed persons presenting with pneumonitis with hemoptysis. The etiological agent is the nematode. Strongyloides stercoralis in sputum is shown in Fig. .

 

## Bacterial Infection 
Infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis is often a granulomatous inflammation containing clusters of epithelioid histiocytes, lymphocytes, and Langhans giant cells, with or without necrosis. In immunocompromised patients there may be abundant acid-fast organisms without obvious granulomatous inflammation.

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) patients are especially susceptible to Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, an acid-fast organism producing negative images on Romanowsky stain. Special stains on cellblock section are particularly helpful.

Nocardia, a weakly acid-fast filamentous organism, often infects immunocompromised patients, producing cavitary nodules on radiographs, which may mimic a neoplastic process
.

## Other Types of Granulomatous Inflammation

## Sarcoidosis

## Key Clinical Features

Sarcoidosis is characterized by non-caseating granulomas in many organs, most commonly the lung.

## Key Radiological Features

Chest x-ray: bilateral hilar adenopathy is a classic finding; variable lung parenchyma changes, from normal, diffuse reticular, or ground glass opacities, nodular consolidation or cystic scarring.
CT and positron emission tomography (PET) scan can also be used.

## Cytological Features

Aggregates of epithelioid histiocytes, with or without Schaumann and asteroid bodies
Multinucleated giant cells and lymphocytes

## Differential Diagnosis
An essential part of the diagnosis of sarcoidosis is the exclusion of alternative possibilities:
Granulomas caused by infectious agents, such as mycobacterial infection and fungal infection
Drug-induced, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, or foreign body granulomatosis
Pulmonary histiocytic disorders
Granulomatous disorders associated with vascular inflammation such as Wegener granulomatosis and Churg-Strauss syndrome

## Wegener Granulomatosis

## Key Clinical Features

Wegener granulomatosis is characterized by necrotizing vasculitis and may present as a lung mass with or without involvement of nasal passages and kidneys.

## Key Radiological Features

Multiple pulmonary nodules on imaging

## Cytological Features

Neutrophils, giant cells, necrotic collagen, and epithelioid histiocytes
The findings are nonspecific; therefore, serologic studies are necessary.

## Differential Diagnosis

Granulomatous inflammations
Metastatic diseases
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas 

## Nodular Pulmonary Amyloidosis (Amyloid Tumor)

## Key Clinical Features

Amyloid deposits in the lung, forming discrete nodular masses

## Key Radiological Features

Discrete pulmonary nodules/masses (amyloidomas) on imaging

## Cytological Features

Irregular, waxy, amorphous, hypocellular material with a scalloped, occasionally cracked appearance, which is blue-green on Papanicolaou (Pap) stain and shows apple-green dichroism under polarized light after staining with Congo red

## Differential Diagnosis

Granulomatous inflammations
Metastatic diseases
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas 

## Pulmonary Neoplasms
The 2015 WHO Classification
of Tumors of the Lung, Pleura, Thymus and Heart has been published recently. There are numerous important changes in the classification of lung tumors, as summarized in Table .

 

## Representative Benign Neoplasms of the Lung

## Pulmonary Hamartoma 

## Key Clinical Features

The most common benign pulmonary neoplasm
Usually asymptomatic, incidental finding
Common in males, especially elderly men

## Key Radiological Features

Chest x-ray: solitary or multiple discrete, round, golf ball-like lesions (“coin lesions”), usually peripherally located, about 10% endobronchial

## Cytological Features

A mixture of mesenchymal and epithelial elements
Immature fibromyxoid matrix
Mature cartilage with chondrocytes in lacunae
Benign glandular cells
Adipocytes
Representative images are shown in Fig. a, b.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Epithelial malignancy

## Histology

Round to multilobulated, well-circumscribed tumor nodules composed of mesenchymal tissues, including chondroid or chondromyxoid tissue, fat, connective tissue, smooth muscle, and bone in various proportions, intermixed with clefts of respiratory epithelial cells
Chondromyxoid tissue usually predominates.
Representative images are shown in Fig. c, d.

Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemistry is usually not necessary for diagnosis.
Pulmonary hamartomas have a high frequency of translocation t(3;12)(q27–28;q14–15) leading to a gene fusion of the high mobility group protein gene AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) and the lipoma preferred partner (LPP) gene.

## Inflammatory Myofibroblastic Tumor 

## Key Clinical Features

Most often young patients, under the age of 40
Male = female
The most common endobronchial mesenchymal lesion in childhood

## Key Radiological Features

Chest x-ray: a peripheral, discrete, solitary nodule. If endobronchial location, post-obstructive pneumonia and atelectasis may be evident.

## Cytological Features

Spindle cells
Storiform pattern
Polymorphous inflammatory cells
Minimal to no necrosis

## Differential Diagnosis

Sarcoma

Mesothelioma

Solitary fibrous tumor

## Histology

Composed of a mixture of spindle cells and obscuring inflammatory cell infiltrates, including lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes.
Touton giant cells are often seen.
The spindle cells contain oval nuclei with a fine chromatin pattern, inconspicuous nucleoli, and abundant bipolar lightly eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in fascicles or a storiform architecture.
Representative images are illustrated in Fig. a, b.

 
Immunohistochemistry

Positive for vimentin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), and rarely to desmin
Negative for myogenin, myoglobin, CD117, and S100 protein
Focal cytokeratin (CK) positivity was reported in 1/3 of cases, likely due to alveolar entrapment.
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1 (ALK1) expression was noted in 40% of cases.

p53 is negative; however, positivity is associated with recurrence and malignant transformation.
Representative images are illustrated
in Fig. c, d.

## Representative Malignant Neoplasms of the Lung

## Squamous Cell Carcinoma 
Squamous cell carcinomas are malignant tumors that either morphologically show squamous cell differentiation (keratinization and/or intercellular bridges) or are morphologically undifferentiated non-small cell carcinomas but show squamous cell differentiation immunohistochemically. The 2015 WHO classifications of tumors of the lung reclassified squamous cell carcinomas into keratinizing, nonkeratinizing, and basaloid subtypes. The nonkeratinizing tumors require immunohistochemical proof of squamous differentiation.

## Key Clinical Features

About 20% of all pulmonary malignancies
Clinical presentation is similar to other non-small cell carcinomas.

## Key Radiological Features

Usually a central mass with cavitation and post-obstructive pneumonia

## Cytological Features

Keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma:
Abundant dyshesive cells with dense cytoplasm, may be orangeophilic
Polygonal, rounded, or elongated cells
Tadpole or fiber-like cells
Pleomorphic, pyknotic nuclei with obscured nucleoli and chromatin detail
Anucleated cells and twisted keratin strands (Herxheimer spirals)
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–d.

 
Nonkeratinizing or basaloid squamous cell carcinoma:
Cohesive groups of cells with larger nuclei and coarsely granular chromatin
Cyanophilic cytoplasm on Pap stain
Rare or no keratinization
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–f.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Squamous metaplasia
Cavitary infection
Pemphigus vulgaris
Radiation/chemotherapy effect
Other non-small cell carcinoma

Small cell carcinoma

Upper airway cancer contamination 

## Histology

Three subtypes of squamous cell carcinoma in the 2015 WHO classification of tumors of the lung: keratinizing, nonkeratinizing, and basaloid subtypes:
Keratinizing squamous cell carcinomas exhibit recognizable keratinization, keratin pearls, and/or intercellular bridges, as illustrated in Fig. a, b.

Nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinomas are without recognizable keratinization, keratin pearls, or intercellular bridges, as illustrated in Fig. .

Basaloid squamous cell carcinomas are tumors with a basaloid component in greater than 50% of the tumor, regardless of the presence of any keratinization, as illustrated in Fig. .

 
Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemistry is required for the diagnosis of nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinomas.
Squamous cell carcinomas express p40, p63, and CK5/6.

TTF1 is usually negative in keratinizing squamous cell carcinomas, may be weakly focally positive in nonkeratinizing squamous cell carcinomas.
Representative images are illustrated in Fig. a–d.

Squamous cell carcinomas of lung are characterized by complex genomic alterations, frequently involving the following pathways:Cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 2A/retinoblastoma 1/nuclear factor, erythroid 2 like 2/Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1/cullin 3 (CDKN2A/RB1, NFE2L2/KEAP1/CUL3)
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase/protein kinase B (PI3K/AKT)
Sex-determining region Y box 2/tumor protein 63/Notch (Drosophila) homolog 1(SOX2/TP63/NOTCH1)

 Gene copy number alterations involving chromosomes 3q (SOX2, TP63), 7p (EGFR), and 8p (fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 [FGFR1]) are characteristic. Almost all tumors display somatic mutation of tumor protein 53 (TP53). Deletion of chromosome 9p (CDKN2A) was observed in 72% of cases
.

## Adenocarcinoma ( ADC)

## Key Clinical Features

The most common primary pulmonary malignancy, accounting for about 40% of cases.
Mortality and incidence rates have generally been highest in high-income countries but are now declining, especially in younger males and females.
Has been more common in men than in women, but has begun to converge.

## Key Radiological Features

Usually a solitary peripheral nodule/mass

## Cytological Features

Cohesive, three-dimensional groups.
Eccentric, irregular nuclei with granular chromatin, and prominent nucleoli.
Transparent, foamy cytoplasm, may have secretory vacuoles.
Invasive mucinous ADC: high cellularity, sheets and three-dimensional groups of relatively uniform cells, nuclear enlargement and irregular contour, and nucleoli. May have pseudoinclusions, psammoma bodies, and nuclear grooves/clearing.
Poorly differentiated ADC: cohesive groups of overtly malignant cells with nuclear pleomorphism, nuclear membrane irregularity, and coarse chromatin pattern; cytoplasmic mucin is inconspicuous.
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–h.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Metastatic ADC
Reactive/reparative changes
Goblet cell hyperplasia
Granulomatous inflammation
Vegetable cells

## Histology

In 2011, the new International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC)/ American Thoracic Society (ATS)/ European Respiratory Society (ERS) classification of lung ADC proposed significant changes to the 2004 WHO classification for resected tumors:Discontinuing the terms bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC) and mixed subtype ADC
Adding adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) as a preinvasive lesion to join atypical adenomatous hyperplasia

Adding minimally invasive adenocarcinoma (MIA)

Classifying invasive ADCs according to the predominant subtype after comprehensive histologic subtyping in 5% increments
Using of “lepidic” to describe a noninvasive component (previously BAC) as part of an invasive ADC
Replacing mucinous BAC with invasive mucinous ADC excluding tumors that meet the criteria for AIS or MIA
Discontinuing the subtypes of clear cell and signet ring ADC
Discontinuing the term mucinous cystadenocarcinoma and including these under the category of colloid ADC

In the 2015 WHO classification, large cell carcinomas with expression of TTF1 and/or napsin A are reclassified as solid ADCs even if mucin is absent. The solid ADC must be distinguished from squamous cell carcinomas and large cell carcinomas by the identification of at least two high-power fields with five or more cells showing intracytoplasmic mucin and/or the expression of TTF1 and/or napsin A.
The diagnostic criteria for AIS:Solitary, small tumor ≤3 cm.
Purely lepidic growth pattern.
No invasion: stromal, vascular, or pleural.
No pattern of invasive ADC: acinar, papillary, micropapillary, solid, colloid, enteric, fetal, or invasive mucinous ADC.
No spread through air spaces.
Mainly nonmucinous cell type, rare mucinous.
No or inconspicuous nuclear atypia.
Septal widening with sclerosis/elastosis is common .

The diagnostic criteria for MIA:
Solitary, small tumor ≤3 cm.
Predominantly lepidic growth pattern.
≤0.5 cm invasive component in greatest dimension in any one focus.
The invasive component to be measured includes any histologic subtype other than a lepidic pattern; tumor cells infiltrating myofibroblastic stroma.
MIA diagnosis is excluded if the tumor invades lymphatics, blood vessels, air spaces, or pleura, contains tumor necrosis, and spreads through air spaces.
The cell type is mostly nonmucinous, but rarely may be mucinous .

The 2015 WHO classification of tumors of lung classifies ADC as lepidic, acinar, papillary, micropapillary, or solid according to the predominant pattern after a comprehensive histologic subtyping to identify all of the different histologic patterns in 5% increments.
Other variants of ADCs include invasive mucinous ADC, colloid ADC, fetal ADC, and enteric ADC.
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–d.

 
Immunohistochemistry

Positive for TTF1 and napsin A: commonly used markers for pneumocytes, with comparable sensitivity, about 75%; much lower TTF1 expression in solid ADCs and mucinous ADCs
Positive for CK7

Negative for squamous cell markers; however, p63 positivity was reported in up to 30% of lung ADCs.
Representative images are shown in Fig. e–h.
EGFR, Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene (KRAS), and ALK mutations are specific for lung ADCs. The ADCs with EGFR or ALK alteration are usually located in the periphery; in contrast, the ADCs with KRAS mutation are frequently located in hilar region. The prevalence for KRAS and EGFR mutations is 10–30%; the transforming fusion gene echinoderm microtubule-associated protein-like 4 (EML4)-ALK is found in 5% of lung ADCs. The characteristics of patients with EGFR mutation are Asians, never smokers, with nonmucinous tumors; for ALK mutation, patients are younger age, male gender, and never or light smokers; for KRAS mutation patients are non-Asians, smokers, with invasive mucinous ADCs usually negative for TTF1, and positive for mucin (MUC) 2,5,6 immunophenotypes
.

## Neuroendocrine Tumors
This group of tumor represents a morphologic and biologic spectrum of tumors that is classified by the 2015 WHO classification of tumors of the lung into four types: preinvasive lesion (including diffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia), carcinoid tumors (including typical and atypical carcinoid tumors), large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC) , including combined LCNEC, and small cell carcinoma (including combined small cell carcinoma).

## Carcinoid Tumor

Carcinoid tumors are neuroendocrine epithelial malignancies, including typical carcinoids, defined as those with <2 mitoses/per 2 mm2, lacking necrosis, ≥0.5 cm in size, and atypical carcinoids, which are those with 2–10 mitoses/per 2 mm2 and/or foci of necrosis.

## Key Clinical Features

Account for <1% of all lung cancers.
Majority (70–90%) are typical carcinoids.
More common in female, white, and <60 years old.
Clinical syndromes are uncommon, including carcinoid syndrome, Cushing syndrome, and acromegaly.

## Key Radiographic Findings 

Chest x-ray: usually a centrally located, lobulated mass with a prominent endobronchial component; one third of tumors in periphery.
CT using intravenous contrast medium shows considerable enhancement; calcification, especially in centrally located tumors; atelectasis; bronchiectasis; and hyperlucency for tumors with bronchial involvement.

## Cytological Features

Loosely cohesive groups and single uniform cells with granular nuclei and ample eosinophilic cytoplasm and naked nuclei.
Round, columnar, or plasmacytoid cells, forming acinar or rosette-like structures.
Branching capillaries.
Clean background.
May show pleomorphism and prominent nucleoli in atypical carcinoids.
Mitoses uncommon, no necrosis in typical carcinoids; necrosis and mitosis seen in atypical carcinoids.
Representative images are shown in Fig. a, b.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Small cell carcinoma

Lymphoma
Benign bronchial epithelial cells
Mesenchymal tumor (spindle cell carcinoid)
ADC

## Histology

Usually uniform polygonal or spindled cells arranged in organoid or trabecular patterns.
Other growth patterns also seen: rosette formation, papillary, pseudoglandular, or follicular patterns.
Significant pleomorphism and prominent nucleoli may be seen in typical carcinoids.
The differential features for atypical carcinoids are the presence of 2–10 mitoses per 2 mm2 and/or necrosis. These changes may be focal.
Representative images are shown in Fig. c–f.

Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemistry is recommended for the diagnosis of neuroendocrine tumors, not only in small biopsy or cytology cases but also in resected specimens.
The typical phenotype expresses neuroendocrine markers ( CD56, synaptophysin, chromogranin); most are positive for panCK and negative for high molecular weight cytokeratins (HMWCKs) and TTF1. However, TTF-1 expression was reported in 43–53% of cases.
The proliferative index (ki-67) is valuable in distinguishing carcinoids from high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas, especially in small biopsies or cytology specimens with significant crush artifact. Small cell carcinomas have high proliferative index (>50%) in contrast to <10–20% in carcinoids.
Ki-67 is not recommended for the distinction of typical from atypical carcinoids due to the lack of cutoff value.
Representative images are shown
in Fig. a–d.

 

## Large Cell Neuroendocrine Carcinoma ( LCNEC)

## Key Clinical Features

Heavy smokers in >90% of cases.
Paraneoplastic syndrome is uncommon.

## Key Radiological Findings 

Usually a periphery mass with irregular margin, with or without intratumoral calcification
The tumors are usually large, showing central inhomogeneous enhancement on CT with contrast.
Cavitation uncommon

## Cytological Features

Overlapping with other neuroendocrine tumors and ADCs
Loosely cohesive or single, monotonous tumor cells with a hyperchromatic nuclear chromatin pattern but easily appreciated nucleoli, nuclear membrane irregularity, and preserved moderate to abundant, delicate cytoplasm
Necrosis or apoptotic debris may be seen.
Representative images are shown in Fig. a, b.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Other neuroendocrine tumors, including small cell carcinoma

Other non-small cell carcinomas, such as ADC, basaloid squamous cell carcinoma, and large cell carcinoma

Melanoma
Metastasis

## Histology

Usually arranged in typical neuroendocrine tumor growth patterns, such as organoid, trabecular, rosette-like, peripheral palisading, or solid patterns.
The tumor cells are often larger, with nucleoli (often prominent) and moderate to abundant cytoplasm.
Mitotic figures >10/per 2 mm2 (with an average of 75) of viable tumor; tumors with <30 mitoses/per 2 mm2 are rare.
The proliferative index (ki-67) is usually in the range of 40–80%.
Necrosis is common.
Representative images are shown in Fig. c, d.

Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemical markers such as synaptophysin, chromogranin, and CD56 are required to confirm neuroendocrine differentiation of the tumor.

CD56 was reported in 92–100% of cases, chromogranin in 80–85%, and synaptophysin in 50–60%.
About 50% of cases are positive for TTF1.
PanCK, low molecular weight cytokeratin (LMWCK), and CK7 are expressed in either dot-like or diffuse cytoplasmic patterns.

CD117 positivity was reported in >70% of cases .

## Small Cell Carcinoma

## Key Clinical Features

Thirteen percent of all newly diagnosed lung cancers are small cell carcinomas.
Virtually all are heavy smokers, male predominant.

## Key Radiological Findings 

Usually a centrally located lobulated mass, with occasional endobrochial involvement; 5% peripherally located
A large hilar mass with bulky mediastinal lymph nodes is characteristic; invasion of hilar vessels and vena cava is common; cavitation is rare.

## Cytological Features

Small cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, powdery chromatin texture, indistinct nucleoli, nuclear molding, and scant cytoplasm
Marked mitosis and single cell necrosis
Nuclear debris and crush artifact in the background
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–d.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Reserve cell hyperplasia
Carcinoids
Small blue cell tumors, such as lymphoma, Ewing sarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma
Non- small cell carcinoma

Pulmonary blastoma

Merkel cell carcinoma 

## Histology

The tumor usually presents in a sheetlike pattern.
The tumor cells are small, containing round, oval, or spindled nuclei, with a fine granular chromatin pattern, inconspicuous nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm, without defined cell borders.
Nuclear molding is frequent.
High mitotic rate is seen, at least 10 mitoses/per 2 mm2, with an average of 60 mitoses/per 2 mm2. The proliferative index (ki-67) is >50%, with an average of >80%.
May show extensive necrosis
Representative image is shown in Fig. .

Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemical studies may be required to confirm neuroendocrine and epithelial differentiation of the tumor.
CK AE1/3, CAM5.2, and MNF116 are positive in nearly 100% of cases, with either dot-like, paranuclear, or diffuse cytoplasmic staining patterns.
Neuroendocrine markers ( CD56, synaptophysin, and chromogranin) are reactive in the majority of cases; CD56 and synaptophysin are usually diffuse and strong, but chromogranin is often focal and weak.
<10% of small cell carcinomas may lack or have only very focal expression of neuroendocrine markers.

TTF1 is positive in up to 90–95% of cases.

CD117 positivity was reported in 60% of cases.
Representative images are shown
in Fig. f–j.
The features of differential diagnosis for neuroendocrine tumors are summarized in Table .

 

## Large Cell Carcinoma 

## Key Clinical Features

About 2.3% of all pulmonary malignancies.
Usually in the sixth decade, male predominant.
Most patients are smokers.

## Key Radiographic Features

Chest x-ray: usually a peripheral mass, rarely may be cavitated

## Cytological Features

Single cells or loose clusters
Vesicular, pleomorphic nuclei with irregular nuclear membrane, multiple nucleoli and high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio
Ill-defined, feathery cytoplasm

## Differential Diagnosis

Poorly differentiated non- small cell carcinoma

Melanoma
Metastatic carcinoma
Radiation reaction
Large cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Anaplastic lymphoma
Sarcoma 

## Histology

Large cell carcinoma can only be diagnosed in a resected specimen, after ruling out the presence of squamous cell carcinoma, ADC, and small cell carcinoma morphologically, immunohistochemical evidence of squamous or ADC differentiation, and mucin stain.
For small biopsy or cytology cases, large cell carcinomas can only be diagnosed as non-small cell lung carcinoma, not otherwise specified (NSCLC, NOS).
Composed of sheets or nests of polygonal cells with vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and moderate amounts of cytoplasm.

Immunohistochemistry

Immunohistochemical evaluation for TTF1, p40, and, if indicated, neuroendocrine markers ( synaptophysin, chromogranin, and CD56) to exclude the presence of ADC, squamous cell carcinoma, and high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas (small and large cell).
Only cases with negative phenotypes for those markers or cases with unclear patterns are classified as large cell carcinomas.
Three subtypes of large cell carcinomas are based on immunophenotype:
Large cell carcinoma with null immunohistochemical features: mucin −; cytokeratin +; TTF1 −; p63/ p40/ CK5/6 −

Large cell carcinoma with unclear immunohistochemical features: mucin −; cytokeratin +; TTF1 −; p63/ p40/ CK5/6: any one of them showing focal +

Large cell carcinoma with no additional stains: no immunohistochemical or mucin staining available

Genomic data are limited to marker-null large cell carcinomas. The mutations found are those showing association with ADCs, such as KRAS and occasional EGFR. TP53 mutations, CDKN2A deletions, and MYC as well as cyclin E1 (CCNE1) amplifications are also reported, with a similar frequency to that of other histological types. Therefore, molecular testing is recommended for large cell carcinomas
.

## Sarcomatoid Carcinoma 
Sarcomatoid carcinoma is a general term that includes pleomorphic carcinoma, carcinosarcoma, and pulmonary blastoma, which are individual entities in the 2015 WHO classification. This group of tumors accounts for 2–3% of all cancer cases in a surgical series and <1% of all lung cancers. Definitive diagnosis of this group of tumors is very difficult or impossible in small biopsies and cytology specimens.
The characteristic features of individual tumors in this group are summarized in Table .

 Representative images
are illustrated in Fig. a–h.

 

## Nuclear Protein in Testis (NUT) Carcinoma 
This is a new entity in the 2015 WHO classification of tumors of lung. The group of carcinomas associated with chromosomal rearrangement in the NUT gene is designated as NUT carcinoma.

## Key Clinical Features

Affects people of all ages, although, it was originally reported in children and younger adults
Male equals female
Fewer than 100 cases reported
Usually presents at an advanced stage, with pleural effusion, chest pain, weight loss, and respiratory symptoms

## Key Radiological Features

Chest x-ray: extremely rapid-growing tumor, with complete opacification of the thorax within 2–8 weeks
CT: a hypoattenuating, heterogeneously enhancing, often extensively necrotic mass with poorly defined, infiltrative borders. High fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake is characteristic.

## Cytologic Findings 

Usually cellular smears
Discohesive clusters and single of small to intermediate size, monomorphic cells with irregular nuclear membrane, granular to coarse chromatin pattern, and discrete nucleoli
Mitoses, necrotic debris, and crush artifact are common.
Representative image is shown in Fig. .

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Poorly differentiated malignant neoplasms

Basaloid squamous cell carcinoma

Small cell carcinoma

Ewing sarcoma

Germ cell tumor

Acute leukemia 

## Histology

NUT carcinoma, also known as NUT midline carcinoma
Usually composed of sheets and nests of small- to intermediate-size undifferentiated cells with a monomorphic appearance
The tumor cells are primitive-appearing, with irregular nuclear membrane, distinct nucleoli, granular to coarse chromatin, and pale eosinophilic to basophilic cytoplasm.
Neutrophil infiltration is a prominent feature.
Foci of abrupt keratinization are characteristic.
Representative image is shown in Fig. .

Immunohistochemistry

Speckled nuclear positivity in more than 50% of tumor cells with NUT antibody is a constant finding and is diagnostic.
Broad-spectrum cytokeratins are positive in majority of cases.
Other epithelial markers, such as epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), epithelial cell adhesion molecule (BerEP4), and carcinoembryonic (CEA) antigen showed variable results.
Most of cases are positive for p63/ p40 and CD34.
Occasional reactivity to synaptophysin, chromogranin, and even TTF1 was observed.
NUT carcinomas are defined by the presence of NUT gene rearrangement, which is a chromosomal translocation between the NUT gene (NUTM1) on chromosome 15q14 and other genes: Bromodomain containing 4 (BRD4) on chromosome 19p13.1 (70%), BRD3 on chromosome 9q34.2 (6%), or an unknown partner gene
(24%).

## Metastasis to the Lung (See Chap. 10.1007/978-3-319-57386-1_7 on the Liver and Other Chapters) 
The most common metastatic tumors are carcinomas, especially from the gastrointestinal tract, gynecological tract, breast, urothelial, head and neck, prostate, and other sites, followed by sarcomas, melanomas, and germ cell tumors. Sex and age distribution depend on tumor types, such as colorectal cancers in elderly patients of both sexes, breast cancer and melanoma in younger adults, and germ cell tumors and sarcomas in young adults or children. Metastases can be single or multiple, usually involving the lung parenchyma and the pleura. However, bilateral, multiple, peripherally located round, variable-size nodules (hematogenous metastases), or diffuse thickening of the interstitium (lymphangitic carcinomatosis) are typical.
Cytological features, histological findings, and immunoprofile are the same as the primary tumors. The differential immunophenotypes for the most common metastatic carcinomas are summarized in Table .

 

## Pleura
The WHO classifications of tumors of the pleura, 2015, are summarized in Table .

 

## Mesothelioma

## Key Clinical Features

Usually occurs in older adults, ≥60 years
More often in men
A strong association with asbestos exposure
Pleural effusion is very common.

## Key Radiological Features

Variety of presentations, classically exhibiting a diffuse circumferential ring of nodular pleura associated with ipsilateral effusion
Less commonly presents with pleural effusion without obvious pleural nodularity
Pleural plaques, especially associated with calcifications, are suggestive of asbestos exposure.

## Cytological Features

Hypercellular specimen with mixed epithelial and spindle cells.
Can be epithelial or spindle cell dominate.
Resemble ordinary mesothelial cells.
Tumor giant cells, granulomas, and psammoma can be seen.
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–c.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Pulmonary ADC (Table )

Metastatic carcinoma
Reactive mesothelial cells (Table )

 

## Histology

Epithelioid Mesotheliomas

Account for 60–80% of malignant mesotheliomas
Variety of histological patterns. Most common patterns: solid, tubulopapillary, and trabecular; less common patterns: micropapillary, adenomatoid (microcystic), clear cell, transitional, deciduoid, and small cell
The tumor cells are usually bland, with eosinophilic cytoplasm and a bland vesicular chromatin pattern. Occasional anaplastic forms may be observed.
The fibrous stroma can vary from scant to prominent, showing varying degree of cellularity from hyalinized acellular to highly cellular stroma. Myxoid changes may be seen in 5–10% of cases, with nests of bland-looking, vacuolated epithelioid cells floating in the matrix.
Representative images are shown
in Fig. d–f.

Sarcomatoid Mesotheliomas

Characterized by a proliferation of spindle cells arranged in fascicles or with a haphazard pattern and involves the adipose tissue of the parietal pleura or the adjacent lung parenchyma.
The tumor cells show variety of morphology, from plump to thin, elongated cells with scant cytoplasm.
The degree of nuclear atypia, mitotic activity, and necrosis vary from minimal to moderate to marked
.

Desmoplastic Mesotheliomas

Characterized by areas of atypical spindle cells arranged in a so-called patternless pattern within a dense, hyalinized, fibrous stroma constituting at least 50% of the tumor
Invasion of adipose tissue is the most reliable criterion to distinguish desmoplastic mesothelioma from organizing pleuritis.

Biphasic Mesotheliomas

Show any combination of the patterns described above constituting at least 10% of the tumor

Immunohistochemistry

Positive for CK AE1/3, calretinin, CK5/6, WT1, and D2–40.
Negative for BerEP4, MOC-31, B72.3, and CEA.
See Tables and for differential diagnosis.
Multiple chromosomal alterations, more common with chromosomal losses, especially on chromosomal arms 1p, 3p, 4q, 6q, 9p, 13q, 14q, and 22q; alterations in several tumor suppressor genes, including neurofibromin 2 (NF2), CDKN2A (p16INK4a), CDKN2B (p15INK4b), and BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1).
Representative images are shown
in Fig. a–f.

 

## Mesenchymal Tumors

## Solitary Fibrous Tumor

## Key Clinical Features

Most common in sixth to seventh decades
No sex predisposition
Accounting for <5% of primary pleural tumors
Unknown etiology
Slow-growing, relatively benign tumors, up to 10% malignant
Usually asymptomatic, incidental finding

## Key Radiological Features

Usually solitary, well-circumscribed mass arising from visceral pleura
Can be multiple and distributed throughout the pleural cavity

## Cytological Features

Cellular smear with bland-appearing, small, oval to spindled cells
No mitosis or necrosis
Representative images are shown in Fig. , b.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Neuroendocrine tumors

Synovial sarcoma

Sarcomatoid mesothelioma

Nerve sheath tumor
Type A thymoma

## Histology

Uniform fibroblastic spindle cells with tapering nuclei, scant, pale, indistinct cytoplasm, variable cellularity, and patternless architecture.
Focal storiform or fascicular growth pattern may be seen.
Prominent stromal and perivascular hyalinization.
Branching hemangiopericytoma-like vessels of varying size and number.
Usually <3 mitoses/per 2 mm2; malignant: > 4 mitoses/per 2 mm2, rarely showing dedifferentiation.
Representative images are shown in Fig. c, d.

Immunohistochemistry

Positive for signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6): > 95% of cases, specific.
Positive for CD34, B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (Bcl2), and CD99: nonspecific.
Occasionally may be positive for SMA, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), keratin, S100, or desmin.
Representative images are shown in Fig. e, f.
The tumor harbors characteristic gene fusion NGFI-A binding protein 2 (NAB2)-STAT6
.

## Mediastinum

## Overview
The mediastinum can be divided into four hypothetical compartments: superior, anterior, middle, and posterior. The distribution of organs and tumors of the mediastinum is summarized in Table .

 In adults, the distribution of tumors is as follows: 46% thymic epithelial tumors, 23% lymphomas, 16% endocrine tumors, and 15% germ cell tumors. In children, the frequency of tumors is 47% neurogenic neoplasms, 19% germ cell tumors, 12% lymphomas, 10% thymic epithelial tumors, 6% cysts, and 6% mesenchymal tumors. The 2015 WHO classification of tumors of the thymus is summarized in Table .

 Selected entities will be discussed in the section below.

## Cysts 

## Key Clinical Features

Bronchogenic cyst –any part of the mediastinum
Enteric cyst – posterior mediastinum
Thymic cyst – anterior mediastinum
Pericardial cyst –middle mediastinum

## Cytological Features

Hypocellular smear
Dependent upon the type of the cyst

## Epithelial Tumors

## Thymoma

## Key Clinical Features

Rare malignancy overall, but the most common mediastinal tumors in adults
Median age of 50 years, rare in children
May present as a mass lesion or an incidental finding
May be associated with myasthenia gravis, pure red cell aplasia, hypogammaglobulinemia (Good syndrome), and/or other autoimmune disorders

## Key Radiological Features

Usually a mass lesion, well-circumscribed or invasive borders, depending on the subtypes of thymoma

## Cytological Features

Usually moderate to hypercellular smear
Two populations of relatively bland neoplastic epithelial cells and lymphocytes
The proportion of epithelial cells and lymphocytes is dependent upon subtype.
In epithelial subtype, epithelial cells are dominant; in lymphocyte-predominant subtype, small mature lymphocytes are dominant; and in spindle cell type, spindle epithelial cells are predominant.
Neoplastic epithelial cells tend to be cohesive and have a delicate nuclear membrane, fine nuclear chromatin, and small nucleoli.
Few or no mitoses are present.
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–f.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Thymic carcinoma
Thymic hyperplasia
T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma
Neuroendocrine neoplasm

## Histology

Type A thymoma:
Complete or incomplete fibrous capsule may display coarse lobulation with thick fibrous bands.
Microcystic pattern is most common, more prominent in subcapsular areas.
Other patterns: rosettes (with or without a central lumen), glandular or glomeruloid structures, Masson’s hemangioma-like papillary projections in cystic spaces, meningioma-like whorls, fascicular growth, and storiform growth.
Hassall corpuscles are absent.
The tumor cells are spindled and/or oval-shaped with bland nuclei, finely dispersed powdery chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli.
Low mitotic activity, usually <4 mitoses/per 2 mm2.
No or very few immature lymphocytes.
When hypercellularity, increased mitotic counts, and focal necrosis are present, designate as atypical type A thymoma variant.
Representative images are shown
in Fig. a, b.

Type AB thymoma:
Well-demarcated and encapsulated tumor showing a lobulated growth pattern.
Highly variable mixture of a lymphocyte-poor type A component and a more lymphocyte-rich type B-like component including a prominent infiltrate (often in dense clusters) of immature, TdT+ T cells. Infiltrate of TdT+ lymphocytes in >10% of the tumor area is a feature used to distinguish from type A thymoma.
The tumor cells are small, oval to plump, spindled, or polygonal shaped, containing round to oval pale-staining nuclei showing dispersed chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli.
Medullary islands are very rare; Hassall corpuscles are absent.
Summary of three distinctive features of type AB thymoma: (a) an admixed spindle cell-predominant, lymphocyte-poor component and lymphocyte-rich component; (b) bland, spindly, oval, and focally polygonal thymic epithelial cells; and (c) a focal or diffuse abundance of immature T cells
.

Type B1 thymoma
:Thymus-like architecture with predominance of cortical areas.
Either absence of lobulation or lobulated with larger lobules traversed by hypocellular, collagenous septa.
The neoplastic epithelial cells are individually embedded in densely packed nonneoplastic immature lymphocytes; the epithelial cells have poorly defined, pale eosinophilic cytoplasm, and relatively uniform, oval to slightly irregular round nuclei, showing pale chromatin, distinct nuclear membranes, and small central nucleoli.
Medullary islands are always present and may contain Hassall corpuscles and myoid cells; perivascular spaces are often seen.
Summary of two distinctive features of type B1 thymoma: (a) close resemblance to the normal, non-involuted thymic cortex; (b) the consistent presence of medullary islands.
Representative images are shown
in Fig. c, d.

Type B2 thymoma
:Encapsulated tumor, composed of lymphocyte- predominant, irregular size and shape tumor lobules surrounded by delicate fibrous septa, giving a lobular architecture and blue appearance on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain.
Interspersed among the lymphoid cells are single or poorly defined clusters of epithelial cells (≥ 3 cells).
The epithelial cells have round or slightly oval nuclei with vesicular chromatin and small but prominent nucleoli; rare focal anaplasia may be seen.
Perivascular spaces composed of a central venule surrounded by a clear space containing proteinaceous fluid or lymphocytes.
Hassall corpuscles are rare; medullary islands are uncommon.
Summary of distinctive features of type B2 thymoma: (a) polygonal (non-spindle shaped) neoplastic thymic epithelial cells in clusters; (b) high content of intermingled immature T cells
.

Type B3 thymoma
:Tumor lobules separated by fibrous septa, pushing borders at the invasion front, prominent perivascular spaces with epithelial palisading, rare Hassall corpuscles.
Tumor cells are polygonal with eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm and slightly/moderately atypical, round to elongated, grooved, or raisinoid nuclei.
Summary of distinctive features of type B3 thymoma: (a) predominance of polygonal epithelial cells forming solid sheets, resulting in a pink appearance on H&E; (b) paucity of admixed nonneoplastic immature T cells
.

 
Immunohistochemistry

Epithelial cells: usually positive for AE1/3, CK7, CK19, p63, PAX8, forkhead box N1 (FOXN1), CD57, and CD205; negative for EMA, CD117, and CD5.
Small lymphocytes (thymocytes) are mature T-cells, but positive for CD3, CD5, TdT, CD99, with a high MIB1 (Ki-67) proliferative index.
Representative images are shown in Fig. e–h.

## Thymic Carcinomas 
Thymic carcinomas include of a variety of histological types of tumors, accounting for approximately 22% of all thymic epithelial neoplasms. The squamous cell carcinomas are the most common type, accounting for approximately 70% of all thymic carcinoma cases. Lymphoepithelioma-like carcinomas are rare, accounting for 6–32% of all thymic carcinomas; sarcomatoid carcinomas account for 5–10%; and basaloid carcinomas account for <5%. Other types, such as mucoepidermoid carcinomas, clear cell carcinomas, ADCs, NUT carcinomas, and undifferentiated carcinomas, are very few. The characteristic features of the three most common types
are summarized in Table .

 

## Thymic Neuroendocrine Tumors
Thymic neuroendocrine tumors are categorized into two major groups: (1) low-grade typical carcinoids and intermediate-grade atypical carcinoids, which always show characteristic morphological and immunohistochemical neuroendocrine features, and (2) high-grade LCNECs and small cell carcinomas, which may lack some neuroendocrine features.

## Key Clinical Features

No established association with smoking.
More aggressive clinical course: propensity for recurrence, lymph node or distant metastases, and tumor-associated death.
Atypical carcinoids account for the majority of the tumors.
Only carcinoids reported in setting of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1).
Average age at presentation: 49 years.
Carcinoids show a strong male predominance .

## Key Radiological Features

Typically a lobulated, heterogeneous mass in the anterior mediastinum

## Cytological Features

Same as pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors; please refer that section in this chapter.
Representative images are shown in Fig. a–i.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors: careful clinical and radiological correlation is the primary way to distinguish pulmonary from thymic neuroendocrine tumors.
Thymoma, especially type A, to distinguish from carcinoids.
Thymic carcinoma usually shows focal and/or weak expression of neuroendocrine markers.

## Histology
The same as pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors, respectively.

Immunohistochemistry

Same as the pulmonary neuroendocrine tumors, respectively .

## Germ Cell Tumors of the Mediastinum

## Key Clinical Features

Accounts for 3–4% of all germ cell tumors; up to 16% of all mediastinal tumors
In prepubertal patients (mean <8 years): teratomas (58%), yolk sac tumors +/− teratoma (42%)
In postpubertal female patients: teratoma (93%), seminoma (dysgerminoma) (4%), embryonal carcinoma (2%), and others (<1%)
In postpubertal male patients (mean 25–29 years): teratoma (35%), seminoma (32%), mixed (16%), yolk sac tumor (10%), embryonal carcinoma (4%), and choriocarcinoma (3%)
In patients with Klinefelter syndrome: mediastinal non-seminomatous germ cell tumors particularly common but not seminomas or testicular germ cell tumors
Depending on tumor type, may have increased serum levels of the β-subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin (βhCG), α-fetoprotein (AFP), and lactate dehydrogenase 

## Key Radiological Features

Anterior mediastinal mass: uncalcified and homogeneous for seminomas, heterogeneous with central attenuation, and a frond-like periphery for non-seminomatous germ cell tumors.
Multilocular cystic lesions can accompany any type of mediastinal germ cell tumor (particularly seminomas), also others, such as thymomas, thymic carcinomas, Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphomas, and metastases .

## Cytological Features

Seminomas
:Highly cellular smears composed of small loose syncytium-like clusters or isolated large tumor cells with centrally located round nuclei containing one or more prominent, irregular nucleoli, and clear to granular cytoplasm.
Mitoses present.
Admixed with polymorphous lymphocytes, occasional epithelioid histiocytes.
A characteristic tigroid background.
Representative images are shown
in Fig. a–h.

Embryonal carcinomas
:Highly cellular smears
Three-dimensional clusters or sheets of large, pleomorphic tumor cells with high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, irregular nuclear contours, coarse chromatin, and several nucleoli
Indistinct pale cytoplasm
Bizarre-shaped cells, mitoses, and necrosis frequent

Yolk sac tumors
:Clusters of medium to large pleomorphic tumor cells with irregular nuclear contours, vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and eosinophilic or vacuolated cytoplasm.
Some tumor cells contain intracytoplasmic dense hyaline globules.
Granular debris and mucoid or metachromatic material in background.
No lymphocytes or epithelioid histiocytes
.

Choriocarcinomas
:Cellular smears
Malignant cytotrophoblasts: mononucleated, medium-size cells with vacuolated, basophilic cytoplasm, and eccentric nuclei
Malignant syncytiotrophoblasts: very large tumor cells with one or several nuclei, distinct nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasm
Atypical mitoses
Significant hemorrhage and necrosis in the background

Teratoma
:Mature teratoma: cytology diagnosis is difficult; may be paucicellular with few anucleated squamous cells and macrophages in a proteinaceous background; ciliated bronchial cells, smooth muscle, and cartilage are present; a mucoid background with bland-looking signet ring cell-like mucus cells may be seen.
Immature teratoma: may be cellular, composed of aggregates or individual small, round, hyperchromatic cells with high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, and inconspicuous nucleoli; rare rosettes with neuropils, rhabdomyoblasts, immature cartilage, and blastema-like stromal cells may be identified
.

 

## Differential Diagnosis

Metastatic gonadal germ cell tumors

Metastatic carcinomas
Small round blue cell tumors
Sarcomas

## Histology

Seminoma
:

Sheets, cords, or irregular lobules of monotonous, round to polygonal tumor cells with central nuclei, macronucleoli, and abundant clear to lightly eosinophilic cytoplasm.
Delicate fibrous septa, with infiltrates of lymphocytes, may form germinal centers.
Granulomatous reaction and fibrosis.
Syncytiotrophoblastic cells may be scattered throughout
.

Embryonal carcinoma
:

Sheets, tubules, and papillary structures of large polygonal or columnar cells with round to oval, vesicular, hyperchromatic nuclei containing one or multiple nucleoli and a moderate amount of cytoplasm.
Numerous mitoses, apoptotic bodies, and coagulated necrosis are common.
Scattered single or small clusters of syncytiotrophoblasts in one third of cases
.

Yolk sac tumor
:

Various patterns: reticular-microcystic, spindle cell, solid, macrocystic, papillary, forming Schiller-Duval bodies, polyvesicular vitelline, glandular-alveolar, and hepatoid patterns.
The tumor cells may be flat or columnar, with intracellular and extracellular hyaline globules, as well as basement membrane-like material deposition between the cells
.

Choriocarcinoma
:

Two cell components, syncytiotrophoblasts and cytotrophoblasts, arranged in solid nests or sheets, occasionally in a villus-like arrangement.
The syncytiotrophoblasts are large, vacuolated, multinucleated giant cells with dark eosinophilic cytoplasm.
The cytotrophoblasts are uniform, medium-size, polygonal cells with abundant clear cytoplasm and distinct cytoplasmic borders.
Hemorrhage and necrosis are frequently observed
.

Teratoma
:

Mature teratoma: solid or multicystic; cysts may be filled with clear, keratinous, gelatinous, or mucinous material; cartilage, spicules of bone, patches of pigmented tissue, or brain tissue may be discernible; an admixture of ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm is seen, assembled in either a disorganized or organized pattern.
Immature teratoma: the immature teratomatous elements are mostly cellular spindle mesenchymal components, but immature neural and epithelial elements can be seen; frequent mitoses; embryonic rhabdomyoblastic tissue, blastomatous tissue resembling embryonic kidney or lung, primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET), and other epithelial or mesenchymal malignant transformations can be seen
.

Immunohistochemistry

The immunophenotypes of mediastinal germ cell tumors
are summarized in Table .

 

## Lymphomas of the Mediastinum

## Primary Mediastinal Large B-Cell Lymphoma

## Key Clinical Features

An aggressive large B-cell lymphoma, of putative thymic B-cell origin
Accounting for 2–3% of all non-Hodgkin lymphomas
Predominantly in young adults, third to fourth decades
Female predominance
No known risk factors

## Key Radiographic Features

Anterior-superior mediastinal mass, often bulky, invading adjacent structures
The mass typically shows a regular contour.

## Cytological Features

Atypical medial to large-size, monomorphic lymphoid cells with irregular, round to oval nuclei, small nucleoli and clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm
Background of lymphoglandular bodies and abundant necrosis

## Differential Diagnosis

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
Hodgkin lymphoma

## Histology

Diffuse, sheets, or clusters of medium to large, monomorphic tumor cells with irregular, round to oval nuclei, small nucleoli, and clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm; some cases show cells with pleomorphic nuclei and abundant amphophilic cytoplasm resembling Hodgkin lymphoma or non-lymphoid tumors.
Admixed, especially at the periphery, are reactive lymphocytes, macrophages, and granulocytes.
Distinct fibrosis to form irregular collagen bands dividing tumor into variable size compartments .

Immunohistochemistry

Express CD19, CD20, CD22, and CD79a.
Express PAX5, B-cell Oct-binding protein 1 (BOB1), OCT2, and PU.1.
Lack expression of immunoglobulin; CD10 is often negative.
CD30 expression in >80% of cases, but usually weak and heterogeneous.
Positive for interferon regulatory factor 4/multiple myeloma oncogene 1 (IRF4/MUM1) (75%), CD23 (70%), and variable to Bcl2 and Bcl6.
Positive for myelin and lymphocyte (MAL) antigen, CD54, CD95, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 (TRAF1), p63, and nuclear REL
.

## Other Types of Lymphomas
Refer to Chap. 10.1007/978-3-319-57386-1_4 on lymph nodes.

Case Presentations

## Case Scenario 1: Reactive Metaplastic Changes in Viral Infection 

## Learning Objectives

To describe the cytological features of this entity
To become aware of its cytologic atypia, a potential mimic of malignancy
To become familiar with the utility of lab tests in the diagnosis of this entity

## Case
A 14-year-old female with a medical history of Rett syndrome presented with respiratory illness, fatigue, and pneumonia for 2–3 months. Respiratory secretion for culture and RT-PCR and bronchial washing for cytology and differential cell count were received.
The bronchial washing specimen revealed scattered atypical squamoid cells with large nuclei, high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, and hyperchromatic, smudged chromatin with a suggestion of nuclear inclusions in background of intense acute inflammation, reactive respiratory epithelial cells, and pulmonary macrophages. The cellblock material showed similar findings. Immunohistochemically, the scattered atypical cells were decorated by CK7, but nonreactive to p40; the profile suggested that those cells are pneumocytes. Representative images are shown in Fig. a–d.
 
SARS, a new human emergent infectious disease mainly involving the lower respiratory tract, became a worldwide outbreak in 2003, affecting more than 8000 patients, with a fatality rate of 9.2%. A novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV), a member of a family of large, positive, single-stranded RNA viruses, was identified as the etiological agent for this disease. The key pulmonary pathology is that of DAD, featured by pronounced pulmonary edema and hyaline membrane formation. There are interstitial thickening, fibrosis, and intra-alveolar exudates with granulation tissue formation, as well as sparsely inflammatory cell infiltrates, including macrophages (often multinucleated forms) and lymphocytes. Depending on different phases in the disease progression, the degree of fibrosis and the composition of inflammatory cells may vary. Other pathologic findings, such as prominent vascular injury, hemophagocytosis, squamous metaplasia, apoptosis, and atypical pneumocytes, including multinucleated giant pneumocytes with irregularly distributed nuclei or pneumocytes with large atypical nuclei, prominent eosinophilic nucleoli, and granular amphophilic cytoplasm, were reported. However, distinct viral inclusions were not apparent. Ancillary tests, such as in situ hybridization, immunohistochemistry, viral isolation, or RT-PCR are necessary to confirm the viral infection.
For the index case, serology testing and culture of the respiratory secretion were positive for coronavirus OC43. Electron microscopy (EM) revealed viral-like particles in pneumocytes, but not in macrophages or other cell types of lung. The findings confirmed the viral infection.
The atypical pneumocytes, metaplastic squamous cells, and apoptosis may mimic malignancy. Caution should be exercised in the interpretation of specimens from patients with a history of SARS and coronavirus infection. The awareness of clinical history and the limited amount of atypical cells should alert the pathologists to avoid overdiagnosis in this clinical setting.

## Case Scenario 2: Metastatic Melanoma

## Learning Objectives

To describe the cytological features of this entity
To become aware of the common differential diagnoses of this tumor
To become familiar with the potential utility of the immunohistochemical markers in the diagnosis of this tumor

## Case
An 81-year-old gentleman with no documented past history of malignancy presented with dizziness and difficulty of breathing. CT imaging of the chest revealed multiple lung nodules and lymphadenopathy. In addition, a possible brain lesion was noted on imaging. An ultrasound-guided FNA of the hilar lymph node was performed. The smears were highly cellular, composed of clusters, aggregated cell groups, and abundant single spindled to plump cells with hyperchromatic nuclei without prominent nucleoli. Some rosette-like structures were seen, as well as scattered pigment-laden macrophages. The pigments were dusky and brown granules on Pap stain and blue-black on Diff-Quik stain. Abundant necrosis was noted. Representative images of the FNA smears and cellblock material were shown in Fig. a–d.
 The cytological features raise a differential diagnosis that includes neuroendocrine tumor, spindle cell tumors, including sarcomatoid carcinoma and metastatic melanoma of the spindle cell type. A limited panel of immunoassays was performed, revealing tumor cells with strong and diffuse nuclear staining for sex determining region Y box 10 ( SOX10) and cytoplasmic staining for vimentin and human melanoma black 45 ( HMB45), focally for melanoma antigen recognized by T cells ( MART1) and S100 (both nuclear and cytoplasmic), while CK AE1/3 and neuroendocrine markers ( synaptophysin, chromogranin and CD56) were nonreactive. Representative images are illustrated in Fig. e–h. The overall findings are those of a metastatic spindle cell melanoma.
The diagnosis of metastatic spindle cell melanoma can be challenging on FNA specimens. The spindled tumor cells can display a wide range of morphologies, from deceptively bland-appearing reactive fibroblast-like cells to highly pleomorphic, high-grade sarcomatous spindle cells. The diagnostic cytological features of conventional melanoma, such as a dispersed single cell pattern, eccentric nuclei, cytoplasmic melanin pigments, intranuclear pseudoinclusions, prominent macronucleoli, and bi- or multinucleations, are often subtle or even lacking. For the index case, the presence of melanin pigments is a valuable clue to raise the suspicion for melanoma which, in conjunction with the immunophenotype, justified the diagnosis of spindle cell melanoma. The presence of cytoplasmic melanin pigments in FNA samples varies, reported in the range of 30–80%. However, these pigments can occasionally be identified in melanotic schwannomas and melanotic malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors ( MPNSTs).
Immunohistochemistry plays a critical role in the diagnosis of spindle cell melanoma, especially in the clinical scenario of metastasis. Metastatic spindle cell melanomas tend to lose expression of some melanoma markers. Piao and colleagues reported that spindle cell melanomas express S100, HMB45, and MART1 in 67%, 50%, and 18% of cases, respectively. Although the sensitivity of S100 for melanoma in general is very high (~93–100%), its specificity is low. The expression of S100 can be seen in a variety of tumors. HMB45 is expressed in melanocytic tumors, also in clear cell sarcomas, perivascular epithelial cell tumors (PEComas), melanocytic schwannomas, meningeal melanocytomas, some ovarian steroid tumors, and renal cell carcinomas with the t(6;11)(p29;q12) translocation. The sensitivity of HMB45 for melanoma in general is in the range of 70–90%, but only 0–30% for desmoplastic melanomas. MART1 has a sensitivity of ~85–97% for primary and ~57–92% for metastatic melanomas, but only 0–33% for desmoplastic melanomas; its specificity for melanoma is 95–100%. MART1 expression is also seen in PEComas and clear cell sarcomas.

SOX10 is a transcription factor that is essential for the survival of neural crest-derived cells and for the maintenance of the multipotency of neural crest cells. The cells derived from neural crest multipotential cells include neurons and glial cells in the peripheral nervous system, melanocytes of the skin, C cells of the thyroid, catecholaminergic cells of the adrenal gland, and cartilage and bone of the face. Studies have shown that, among tumors, SOX10 is commonly expressed in melanomas, including desmoplastic melanomas, tumors with Schwann cell differentiation, myoepithelial cell tumors of the soft tissue and some salivary gland neoplasms, particularly those with myoepithelial differentiation, and acinic cell carcinomas. When compared with other melanocytic-associated markers, SOX10 is highly sensitive and specific and can assist in the differential diagnosis of melanomas. Even in desmoplastic melanomas, SOX10 expression was reported in 100% of cases. Studies of SOX10 expression in tumors of the nervous system reported that SOX10 is commonly expressed in schwannomas (100%), neurofibromas (98–100%), and, less frequently, MPNSTs (~50–55%).
The differential diagnosis of this case is summarized in Table .
 

## Case Scenario 3: Metastatic Carcinoma

## Learning Objectives

To describe the cytological features of this entity
To become aware of the subtle differences in cytology and to raise the question of a metastasis
To become familiar with the potential utility of immunohistochemical markers in the diagnosis of this tumor

## Case
A 72-year-old female with a past medical history of noninvasive low-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma a year ago presented with coughing and chest pain for month. CT imaging of the chest revealed multiple lung nodules and lymphadenopathy. An ultrasound-guided FNA and biopsy of the hilar lymph node were performed. The smears were highly cellular, composed of loosely cohesive clusters and single spindle to plump cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, coarse chromatin, occasional discernible to prominent nucleoli, and abundant delicate cytoplasm without defined borders. Some of the cells appeared spindled, columnar or racket-shaped, with eccentrically located nuclei and cytoplasmic tails, also called cercariform cells. Abundant necrosis was noted in the background. Representative images of the FNA smears and biopsy are shown in Fig. a–f.
 The cytological features raise a differential diagnosis that includes a non- small cell carcinoma of lung, especially squamous cell carcinoma, a sarcomatoid carcinoma, and metastatic carcinoma, especially metastatic urothelial carcinoma. A panel of immunoassays was performed, revealing that the tumor cells were positive for CK7, CK20 (focal), CK5/6, uroplakin II, p40, and placental S100 (S100P) while negative for TTF1, napsin A, synaptophysin, and chromogranin. Representative images are illustrated in Fig. g–j. The final diagnosis is metastatic carcinoma with urothelial differentiation
There are limited reports in literature regarding the cytology of metastatic urothelial carcinomas. The following features were reported: (1) loosely cohesive cells occurring singly and in syncytial clusters; (2) large hyperchromatic nuclei with irregularly distributed granular chromatin and abundant granular or fibrillar cytoplasm; (3) distinct cell borders; (4) multilayered papillary fragments; (5) cells with eccentric nuclei, multiple nucleoli, and intracytoplasmic vacuoles; and (6) cercariform cells, “bipolar” cells, and spindled-shaped cells. Among those, multilayered papillary fragments and cercariform cells are the most helpful features in the distinction of urothelial carcinoma from others. The cercariform cells, first described in 1993 by Johnson and Kini and further defined in 1995 by Powers and Elbadawi, are fusiform, pyramidal, or racket-like cells with eccentric nuclei that form non-tapering, flattened, bulbous, or fishtail-like cytoplasmic extensions in varying lengths. The presence of a small vacuole in the bulbous tail was also a helpful criterion. These cells, which are encountered in 57–100% of metastatic urothelial carcinomas, are interpreted in favor of urothelial carcinoma, particularly when they are observed in large numbers. However, they are not specific and must be considered alongside other clinical and morphological characteristics and immunohistochemical phenotypes. The cytological features of metastatic urothelial carcinomas are very difficult to differentiate from mesenchymal tumors and squamous cell carcinomas. Immunohistochemical analyses play a crucial role.

Urothelial cell carcinomas express both CK7 and CK20. In addition, they express HMWCKs ( CK5/6, CK903), p63, GATA binding protein 3 ( GATA3), uroplakin II, and S100P. GATA3 is a zinc finger transcription factor with a diverse range of biologic roles. GATA3 is a newer generation of urothelial specific marker. GATA3 expression was reported in approximately 80% of urothelial carcinomas, over 90% of breast carcinomas, 100% of parathyroid gland tissue or tumors, salivary gland tumors, especially the salivary ductal carcinomas (~90%), and transitional proliferations of the gynecological tract. In addition, 0–12% of pulmonary squamous cell carcinomas and approximately 10% of pancreatic carcinomas were also reported to be positive for GATA3, although weakly and focally in the majority of positive cases.
The immunohistochemical differential diagnosis of metastatic urothelial carcinomas is summarized in Table .
 

## Abbreviations List

 

## Suggested Reading

## Cytology/Fine Needle Aspiration
 

## Histology
 

## Ancillary Tests