358wtpaNature cancerNat CancerPMC761206276120627612062EMS1332643487023710.1038/s43018-021-00259-9Proteogenomics of non-small cell lung cancer reveals molecular subtypes associated with specific therapeutic targets and immune evasion mechanisms
LehtiöJanne ArslanTaner SiavelisIoannis PanYanbo SocciarelliFabio BerkovskaOlena UmerHusen M MermelekasGeorgios PirmoradianMohammad JönssonMats BrunnströmHans BrustugunOdd Terje PurohitKrishna Pinganksha CunninghamRichard AslHassan Foroughi IsakssonSofi ArbajianElsa AineMattias KarlssonAnna KotevskaMarija HansenCarsten Gram HaakensenVilde Drageset HellandÅslaug TamboreroDavid JohanssonHenrik J BrancaRui M PlanckMaria StaafJohan OrreLukas M 
1Department of Oncology and Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Science for Life Laboratory, Solna, SE-17165, Sweden
2Division of Oncology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund and CREATE Health Strategic Center for Translational Cancer Research, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
3Department of Pathology, Laboratory Medicine Region Skåne, Lund, Sweden
4Division of Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
5Section of Oncology, Drammen Hospital, Vestre Viken Health Trust, Drammen, Norway
6Department of Cancer Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
7University of Edinburgh Centre for Inflammation Research, Institute for Regeneration and Repair, Queen’s Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh bioQuarter, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK
8MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Regeneration and Repair, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh bioQuarter, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, UK
9Genomic Medicine Center, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Clinical Genomics Facility, Department of Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
10Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden
11Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
12Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway$Corresponding author Contact Information, Correspondence tojanne.lehtio@ki.se
#Contributed equally.
2211202121112241224–12422252022Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, subject always to the full Conditions of use: https://www.springernature.com/gp/open-research/policies/accepted-manuscript-termsThe publisher's version of this article is available at Nat Cancer

## Abstract
Despite major advancements in lung cancer treatment, long-term survival is still rare, and a deeper understanding of molecular phenotypes would allow the identification of specific cancer dependencies and immune evasion mechanisms. Here we performed in-depth mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteogenomic analysis of 141 tumors representing all major histologies of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We identified six distinct proteome subtypes with striking differences in immune cell composition and subtype-specific expression of immune checkpoints. Unexpectedly, high neoantigen burden was linked to global hypomethylation and complex neoantigens mapped to genomic regions, such as endogenous retroviral elements and introns, in immune-cold subtypes. Further, we linked immune evasion with LAG3 via STK11 mutation-dependent HNF1A activation and FGL1 expression. Finally, we develop a data-independent acquisition MS-based NSCLC subtype classification method, validate it in an independent cohort of 208 NSCLC cases and demonstrate its clinical utility by analyzing an additional cohort of 84 late-stage NSCLC biopsy samples.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2021 Nov.

## Introduction
Lung cancer is the most common type of cancer worldwide with 2.1 million new cases each year. Most cases are diagnosed when the cancer has already metastasized and surgical resection is no longer an option, resulting in a dismal overall 5-year survival rate for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) of 24% and only 6% in stage 4 disease (seer.cancer.gov). Rapid development of targeted therapies and immunotherapy present a major opportunity, but the impact on survival so far is blunted by a lack of biomarkers for therapy selection and limited knowledge of how therapies should be combined. Exploratory DNA- and RNA-level omics analyses of clinical cancer cohorts have demonstrated the value of a systems-level understanding of lung cancer , .
With the improved analytical depth provided by modern mass spectrometry (MS) we can finally measure the actual druggable molecular phenotype directly, i.e., the proteome, which is imperative for predictive medicine. An important feature of such analysis is that it provides a readout of not only the cancer cells in the sample, but also the stromal component and infiltrating immune cells. Altogether, this provides a picture of the dominant molecular cancer phenotype, or simply the most distinct features of the tumor as an organ . For lung cancer, proteogenomic studies was recently performed on squamous cell carcinoma (SqCC, n=108) , and on adenocarcinoma (AC) in three studies (Gillette et al. , n=110; Xu et al
 , n=103; and Chen et al. , n=103). For the AC studies, much focus was put on cancer in never-smokers (46%, 77%, and 83% of cohorts, respectively) and consequently on EGFR mutation-driven AC due to enrichment of this mutation in never-smoker cases (EGFR mutations in 34%, 50%, and 85% samples, respectively).
Here we have performed, in-depth analysis of the NSCLC proteome landscape, covering nearly 14,000 proteins and all major NSCLC histological subtypes. Based on this data, we defined six proteome subtypes of NSCLC and used the protein-level information to demonstrate clinical implications of the proteome subtypes, such as prognostic or treatment predictive value. Our in-depth analysis provides crucial new information for potential stratification of NSCLC patients in relation to immuno-therapy and targeted therapy, underscoring the value of the herein defined proteome subtypes. Finally, we developed a MS-based classification method that can be used for both early- and late-stage NSCLC samples in a clinical setting.

## Results
1.

## Proteome subtypes of NSCLC
The 2015 WHO histological classification subdivides NSCLC into AC, SqCC, large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma (LCNEC), and large-cell lung cancer (LCC), all represented in the current cohort of resected tissue samples (n=141), together with two small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) samples for reference ( , ). The cohort primarily consists of early-stage (I-II, 87%) cancer, as late-stage (III-IV) NSCLC rarely involves surgical removal of the tumor. For a comprehensive phenotype-level analysis of NSCLC we used isobaric labelling and HiRIEF-LC-MS , with data-dependent acquisition (DDA) reaching an analytical depth of 13,975 identified proteins (gene-centric search, FDR<1%, , ). In addition to MS-data, mutation analysis for cancer-associated genes was performed by panel sequencing (n=370 genes), furthermore genome-wide methylation and mRNA-level data were available for most samples – ( ).
 For proteome-level molecular subtyping of NSCLC consensus clustering was performed resulting in six distinct clusters ( , ), hereinafter, referred to as (proteome) Subtypes 1–6. To evaluate the robustness of these subtypes we also performed NMF clustering , indicating only minor differences in sample clustering ( ). Subtype 1–4 samples were primarily AC (77–100%), Subtype 5 samples LCNEC (64%), and Subtype 6 samples SqCC (96%), and both SCLC samples grouped together with LCNEC samples as expected due to neuroendocrine lineage origin. Further, never-smokers were enriched in Subtype 1 while evaluation of sex, tumor stage, and age distribution did not reveal any specific enrichment patterns ( ). A previous subtyping of the current NSCLC cohort based on mRNA-level analysis revealed ten different subtypes showing a partial overlap with the six proteome subtypes identified here ( , ). Subtyping performed by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) network based on mRNA expression for AC specifically identified three expression subtypes; terminal respiratory unit (TRU); proximal-inflammatory (PI); and proximal proliferative (PP) . Classification of the AC samples in the current cohort into these three subtypes based on RNA-level data revealed that Subtype 1 consisted primarily of TRU samples, Subtype 2 of PI samples, and Subtype 4 of PP samples ( , ). Importantly, Subtype 3 did not show enrichment of any previous AC mRNA subtype. SqCC mRNA expression subtypes (“classical”, “primitive”, “secretory”, and “basal”) have also been described by the TCGA network . Interestingly, all “classical” SqCC samples (9/9) in our analysis are found in Subtype 6, while “primitive” are found in Subtype 5 (3/5) or Subtype 4 (2/5), and 5/8 of the “secretory” in Subtype 3 ( ). SqCC samples clustering outside of Subtype 6 (12/35) commonly also express lower levels of SqCC markers (KRT5 and KRT6A), indicating that these cancers may be more atypical SqCC ( ). Recently, a proteomics-based subtyping was reported for SqCC, with 4,880 proteins identified in at least 90% of samples where consensus clustering indicated three subtypes termed “Inflamed” (40% of samples), “Redox” (47%) and “Mixed” (13%) . Analysis in relation to mRNA expression subtypes showed that the “Redox” subtype consisting primarily of “classical” samples, while “secretory” and “basal” samples spread out over “Inflamed” and “Mixed” subtypes and “primitive” samples distributed evenly over all three proteome subtypes . Based on this, we conclude that Subtype 6 defined here most closely parallels the “Redox” SqCC proteome subtype defined by Stewart et al.
For a broad phenotypic characterization of the NSCLC proteome subtypes we performed a network analysis ( , ) based on protein-level differences identified using DEqMS ( , ). This analysis indicated subtype separation based on cell types and cell signaling with clear immune infiltration in Subtypes 2 and 3 and stromal component in Subtype 3, also supported by signature analysis using the ESTIMATE method ( ). These results agreed with the cell composition evaluation, as Subtypes 2 and 3 showed the lowest tumor cell content (“purity”, ). Further, the network analysis indicated the highest proliferation in Subtype 5, and the lowest in Subtype 1, which was supported by Ki67 levels as measured by MS ( ).
Panel sequencing confirmed previously reported mutation patterns in NSCLC and revealed enrichment of EGFR mutations in Subtype 1; STK11, KEAP1 and SMARCA4 in Subtype 4; RB1 mutations in Subtype 5 and TP53 mutations in Subtype 6 ( , , ). Further, the mutation patterns agree with the phenotype-level network analysis as E2F1/MYC signaling and RB1 mutations were enriched in Subtype 5, metabolism and STK11 mutations in Subtype 4, and both p53 signaling and TP53 mutations in Subtype 6. Interestingly, all three SqCC samples in Subtype 5 harbored RB1 mutations, and the only LCNEC sample outside of Subtype 5 was mutated for both STK11 and KEAP1 and grouped with Subtype 4. This indicates that the NSCLC Proteome Subtypes capture dominant molecular cancer phenotypes related to driver signaling pathways notwithstanding the formal histological classification.

2.

## Cancer- and driver-related proteins
To associate proteome-level information to known cancer-associated genes, we defined a list of 951 “Cancer- and Driver-Related Proteins” (CDRPs), 832 of which were quantified in the NSCLC cohort ( , ). Out of these CDRPs, 291 showed outlier levels (defined here as extreme level, i.e., sample protein level > 3-fold up or down compared to cohort median, ) in at least one sample, 85% of the samples showed outlier expression of at least one oncogene, and 26% of at least five. Subtype 5 showed the highest number of overexpressed oncogenes per sample ( ), commonly including the transcriptional activator MYB. Of the AC-enriched subtypes (Subtypes 1–4), Subtype 4 showed the highest number of overexpressed oncogenes per sample with common overexpression of the receptor tyrosine kinase RET ( ). Further, the analysis revealed overexpression of known NSCLC drivers such as EGFR, ERBB2, and KRAS, but also of oncogenes not commonly implicated in NSCLC such as the oncogenic kinase SGK1 ( , ).
Overall, the mRNA-protein correlation for the majority of CDRPs with outlier expression was high, however, for a subset of CDRPs mRNA levels poorly explained the protein levels ( ). As contributing causes for this, we noted significantly lower mRNA-protein correlation for known miRNA targets , known protein complex members as well as mRNAs and proteins with low stability ( ). For example, the analysis pointed out a lack of mRNA-protein correlation for HMGA2 (regulation by the let-7 microRNA ), MUC4 (degraded via hypoxia-induced autophagy ), IRS4 (oncogenic driver in breast cancers ), and E2F1 (regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system , ). Interestingly, E2F1 protein levels were specifically elevated in Subtype 5 samples, suggesting that E2F1 degradation was reduced specifically in this subtype. Elevated E2F signaling in Subtype 5 was also identified by the network analysis ( ).
The analytical depth of our MS-analysis, together with supporting genome-wide transcriptomics and methylation data allowed evaluation of gene regulation levels. Plotting the promoter methylation-mRNA correlation against mRNA-protein correlation indicated genes likely to be epigenetically regulated, transcriptionally regulated, and post-transcriptionally regulated ( , ). This analysis indicated several CDRPs potentially regulated epigenetically (significant negative methylation-mRNA and positive mRNA-protein correlation) such as LCK, HNF1A, LCP1, CARD11 and IRS2 ( ). LCK, LCP1, and CARD11 all showed modestly higher mRNA and protein levels in more immune-infiltrated subtypes (Subtypes 2 and 3, ), consistent with blood cell- and lymphoid tissue-specific expression as indicated in the Human Protein Atlas (www.proteinatlas.org). IRS2 and HNF1A, on the contrary, showed outlier expression in a subset of Subtype 4 samples ( ). IRS2 is an insulin receptor substrate, methylation of this gene is associated with high fasting insulin levels, indicating epigenetic control of IRS2
 . HNF1A is a liver-specific transcription factor that is a master regulator of metabolism, mutations in this gene are one of the most common causes of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) . Interestingly, overexpression of these two proteins occurred in different cases, suggesting that sample-specific altered epigenetic control of different metabolic genes occurs in Subtype 4 ( ).

3.

## Immune landscape of NSCLC Subtypes
To evaluate the infiltrating immune cell subpopulations in the cohort samples, we applied previously described immune signatures to our MS-data. This analysis confirmed the overall high immune infiltration in Subtypes 2 and 3 samples. In particular, there was high signal for T-cells and IFN signaling in Subtype 2, and for B-cells in Subtype 3, suggesting a differential immune response in these two subtypes ( , ). CD3 and CD8A immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on a subset of cases and showed correlation between MS data and stromal staining ( , ). In contrast, Subtype 4 had very low signals for all immune cell subpopulations, indicating an overall immune-cold subtype. Next, we investigated antigen processing and presentation machinery (APM, ) in relation to tumor mutation burden (TMB, ) to evaluate the potential of neoantigen-dependent immune cell activation as recently performed for endometrial carcinoma . This analysis indicated that Subtype 2 samples were associated with both high TMB and APM, while Subtype 3 showed high APM but low TMB, and Subtype 4 high TMB but low APM ( ). Subtype 2 thus fulfils the requirements to elicit a strong immune activation as high TMB and APM would suggest production of neoantigens that are also presented. Interestingly, the subtype marker analysis revealed PD-L1 as one of the clearest marker proteins of Subtype 2 ( , ), suggesting that targeting the PD-L1/PD-1 immune checkpoint would be efficient in these patients. In addition, Subtype 2 showed the highest mRNA and protein levels of the chemokine CXCL9 that was described as one of the strongest predictors of immune checkpoint response in a recent meta-analysis of clinical studies across different cancer types ( ).
 The immune landscape evaluation suggested high infiltration of B-cells in Subtype 3 samples, and in addition we noted a dichotomy between the expression of B-cell markers and the expression of PD-L1 ( ). B-cell rich tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) have previously been shown associated with good prognosis and response to immunotherapy . An evaluation of TLS markers based on mRNA-level analysis as previously described indicated high expression in a subset of Subtype 3 samples ( ). To investigate this further we evaluated tumor sections from a subset of the samples with either high levels of PD-L1 (Subtype 2) or B-cell markers (Subtype 3, ). This analysis supported the presence of TLSs in Subtype 3 ( , ), but also indicated differences in predominant growth patterns between AC samples in Subtypes 2 and 3 ( ). While Subtype 2 samples almost exclusively showed a solid growth pattern with low stromal component, Subtype 3 samples showed variable degrees of lepidic, acinary, papillary, micropapillary, mucinous, and solid growth patterns ( ). Overall, these results emphasize that while both Subtypes 2 and 3 samples are infiltrated by immune cells, the type of infiltrating immune cells and the AC growth pattern is strikingly different.

4.

## Tumor neoantigen burden in NSCLC
Apart from mutations, aberrant transcription of cancer testis antigens (CTAs) and of DNA sequences not expected to produce proteins at all, such as pseudogenes or endogenous retroviral (ERV) elements, could also produce neoantigens and elicit an immune reaction against the cancer cells – . These so-called “non-canonical”, “alternative”, or “aberrantly expressed” structures will be referred to here as non-canonical proteins/peptides (NCPs). Out of 230 CTAs (CTdatabase or annotated as testis-enriched in www.proteinatlas.org) identified at the protein level in the current cohort, 70 were identified with at least 2 unique peptides and showed outlier expression pattern (sample protein level > 3-fold up compared to the cohort median) and were evaluated further. Intriguingly, the expression of CTAs was found to be higher in the immune-cold subtypes (Subtype 4–6, , ).
 Next, for an unbiased evaluation of NCPs, we performed proteogenomic analysis by searching MS-data against a peptide database produced by 6-reading frame translation (6FT) of the entire human genome as previously described , ( , ). Following the same outlier expression pattern as in CT antigens (FC > 3), we identified 651 NCPs (class-specific FDR estimation<1%), with 13% of the corresponding genetic loci supported by more than one peptide ( ). As the actual FDR is difficult to estimate in searches against large proteogenomic databases we evaluated the spectra of 105 NCPs by comparison to the spectra of the corresponding synthetic peptides ( ), suggesting a false discovery rate of approximately 35%, not atypical of proteogenomics using very large search spaces ( ). Interestingly, as in the case of CT-antigens, these complex NCP-antigens were detected in highest numbers in immunologically cold tumors (Subtypes 4 and 6, , ). Further, regression analysis suggested that the number of NCPs per sample was associated with tumor cell content (P = 0.011) and TP53 mutation (P = 0.057), but not to TMB or proliferation probed by Ki67 ( ).
Previous research has shown that global hypomethylation and promoter-specific hypomethylation is associated with CTA expression . In our proteome-wide analysis, the number of identified CTAs per sample showed a significant negative correlation to both global methylation and promoter methylation, indicating that looser epigenetic control contributes to protein-level expression of CTAs in NSCLC ( , ). Importantly, also the number of identified NCPs per sample showed negative correlation to global methylation ( , ). Further, the analysis revealed significant differences between subtypes in global and promoter methylation ( ), with the lowest methylation found in Subtypes 4 and 6.
To evaluate the potential for activation of anti-cancer immune response more comprehensively, we evaluated TMB in relation to CTA and NCP expression in the NSCLC cohort and summarized these three metrices into a Tumor Neoantigen Burden (TNB) score ( ). This analysis indicates that while Subtype 2 has the highest TMB, Subtypes 4, 5, and 6 produce other types of neoantigens that could elicit a strong immune response given efficient presentation and infiltration of immune cells.
Next, we performed a systematic evaluation of immune checkpoints based on previously identified inhibitory receptors (IRs) and their corresponding ligands , ( , ). This analysis indicated that the protein levels of IRs in general correlated with infiltration of T-cells. IR ligands (expressed by cancer cells and APCs), on the contrary, showed more variable patterns, suggesting that different subtypes may use different immune evasion mechanisms. The most striking IR ligand expression was found for PD-L1 in Subtype 2, but intriguingly the analysis also revealed two other subtype-specific IR ligands, FGL1 in Subtype 4 and B7-H4 in Subtype 6 ( ). FGL1 was recently identified as a tumor cell-secreted, high-affinity ligand to LAG3, causing FGL1-LAG3-mediated supression of T-cells . B7-H4 acts as an immune checkpoint to prevent autoimmunity , and targeting of B7-H4 reduces the tumor growth and the formation of lung metastases in CT26 mouse models . Taken together, the immunophenotype, the neoantigen burden, and the checkpoint analyses show that the NSCLC proteome subtypes identified here may have predictive value for different types of checkpoint inhibitors already in clinical use, or investigated in clinical trials.
 
5.

## STK11 inactivation and liver-specific signaling in Subtype 4
To investigate the mechanism behind FGL1 expression in Subtype 4, we performed a correlation analysis to identify FGL1-associated proteins and transcripts. This analysis showed a strong negative correlation between FGL1 and the tumor suppressor STK11/LKB1 at protein, but not mRNA, level, suggesting post-transcriptional regulation of STK11 ( , ). STK11 forms a functional heterotrimeric complex with STRADα and CAB39 (MO25α) , and in our data a stabilizing effect of this complex was supported as the correlation between STK11 and STRADα was much higher at protein level (0.69) than at the mRNA level (0.25, ). Further evaluation revealed a strong coincidence between STK11 mutation and high FGL1 protein and mRNA levels in Subtype 4 ( , ).
 Intriguingly, the protein/mRNA with the highest correlation to FGL1 was CPS1, a mitochondrial urea cycle enzyme known to be upregulated in cancer through the AMPK-mTOR signaling pathway after inactivation of STK11 ( and ). FGL1 and CPS1 are normally only expressed in liver , , but our data suggests that STK11 inactivation results in transcriptional upregulation of both genes also in lung cancer. Evaluating the FGL1 mRNA/protein correlation analysis against transcriptions factors as annotated in the animalTF database indicated the liver-specific HNF1A as the highest correlating transcription factor ( ). Interestingly, as described above, HNF1A was also noted as a gene potentially regulated by epigenetic mechanisms in NSCLC which is common for tissue/lineage-specific genes ( ).
Further, gene expression data covering 31 different cancer types (TCGA PanCancer dataset ) supported a strong co-expression of FGL1, CPS1, and HNF1A but not correlation between FGL1 and STK11, as in our NSCLC data ( ). Hepatocellular carcinoma samples showed high mRNA-levels of FGL1 and CPS1 as expected, but importantly also a subset of lung adenocarcinoma ( ). Further, both genes were significantly higher expressed in STK11-mutated AC cases, supporting that FGL1 and CPS1 transcription is controlled by STK11-dependent signaling ( , ). STK11 wild-type lung adenocarcinoma with high mRNA expression of FGL1 and CPS1 showed reduced mRNA level of STK11, indicating that transcriptional or epigenetic regulation could contribute to STK11 inactivation ( ). Increased FGL1 and CPS1 mRNA levels and reduced STK11 mRNA expression was particularly evident in lung adenocarcinoma, suggesting cancer type-specific deregulation ( , ). Finally, FGL1 mRNA expression significantly correlated to HNF1A mRNA expression in lung adenocarcinoma ( ).

6.

## HNF1A and FGL1 are controlled by STK11-AMPK in NSCLC
Analysis of the mRNA levels of FGL1 and CPS1 across 926 cell lines in the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC) project revealed co-expression specifically in a subgroup of NSCLC cell lines ( ). Focusing on NSCLC cell lines (n=109), we continued to evaluate differences in drug response between cell lines with high FGL1 and CPS1 expression (n=11) and the remaining cell lines (n=98) ( ). This analysis revealed higher sensitivity of FGL1/CPS1-expressing cells to docetaxel, a chemotherapeutic agent commonly used in NSCLC, but strikingly also higher sensitivity to multiple compounds targeting mTOR signaling ( , ). STK11 inhibits mTOR signaling through activation of AMPK, and in cancer cells with loss of AMPK activity, mTOR becomes an oncogenic driver . Our results indicate that elevated FGL1/CPS1 levels is a solid indicator of loss of STK11-AMPK signaling, and as such a potential predictor of mTOR addiction in this group of lung adenocarcinoma. Importantly, STK11 mutation alone could not predict sensitivity to mTOR inhibitors, again indicating alternative STK11 inactivation mechanism and highlighting the need of phenotype-level information for a more comprehensive understanding of pathway activity ( ).
 Treatment of HepG2 cells (liver cancer) with the AMPK activator A-769662 for 24 and 48 h resulted in reduced levels of HNF1A and FGL1 as evaluated by Western blot analysis ( ). Importantly, the same effect of AMPK activation on HNF1A and FGL1 levels was detected in STK11-mutated (mut) lung cancer cell lines, NCI-H1944 and NCI-H1395 ( , HNF1A not detected in NCI-H1395). Finally, we validated the role of STK11 signaling in a rescue experiment by introducing wild-type (wt) STK11 in NCI-H1944 cells ( ). Re-expression of this tumor suppressor was poorly tolerated by the cells, nevertheless three replicate experiments showed that STK11wt protein expression was associated with loss of both FGL1 and HNF1A. Thus, our analysis shows that STK11 inactivation in lung cancer results in loss of AMPK dependent control of downstream signaling, leading to upregulation of several liver specific genes including the transcription factor HNF1A, FGL1, and CPS1 ( ). Further, our analysis indicates that this signaling aberration is a feature of Subtype 4 that together with overactivation of mTOR signaling, potentially contributes to both immune evasion and cancer growth.

7.

## DDA- and DIA-based classification of NSCLC Subtypes
Our analysis above indicated clinical value of the NSCLC proteome subtypes presented here. To enable knowledge transfer into a clinical setting, we developed two NSCLC classification pipelines: one support vector machine (SVM)-based for classification of sample cohorts, and one k-Top Scoring Pairs (k-TSP)-based for single-sample classification ( , ). The SVM classifier was optimized by Monte Carlo cross-validation (100 iterations) indicating consistently high accuracy (average: 94%, ) and an overlap in selected feature sets ( , ). Misclassifications were sparse (6%, ) and mostly restricted to samples with ambiguity in the consensus index analysis generated during the original clustering of the 141 samples, indicating that the samples were cluster outliers ( ).
 For the k-TSP single-sample classifier, we first re-analyzed the NSCLC cohort using rapid label-free, data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based MS analysis. As expected, due to limited MS time per sample, the proteome coverage in the DIA analysis (6,717 proteins identified, median 3,967 IDs per sample, FDR<1%) was less comprehensive, but importantly showed overall high correlation to the original DDA data ( , ). The k-TSP classifier uses quantitative information from a set of protein pairs measured in a single sample for classification ( , ). The k-TSP classifier was optimized as the SVM classifier and resulted in high accuracy (average: 87%, , , ), and feature pair overlap between iterations ( ). Misclassifications spread out between subtypes, largely overlapping with subtype outliers as indicated by the consensus index ( ).
Due to the lack of previous datasets describing the NSCLC proteome across histology types, we validated the SVM classifier using a NSCLC transcriptomics meta-dataset (GEO NSCLC dataset ). Importantly, the classification of the GEO NSCLC cohort reproduced the six NSCLC proteome subtypes with highly similar characteristics in terms of subtype size, signature, and marker expression ( ). Notably, AC samples that were classified into Subtype 6, showed expression of SqCC markers (KRT5 and KRT6A) and lacked the AC marker Napsin A (NAPSA). The associated overall survival data indicated differences in prognosis between the classified subtypes, suggesting a predictive value of the NSCLC proteome subtypes ( ). Next, we used the TCGA lung AC transcriptomics dataset (TCGA-LUAD, n=510 samples), but as this dataset is restricted to AC, we re-trained the SVM classifier for the four AC enriched proteome subtypes (Subtypes 1–4). Again, SVM classification reproduced the 4 AC proteome subtypes in terms of subtype size, mutation enrichment pattern, signature, and marker expression ( ), with a trend for poorer survival in Subtype 4, and better survival in Subtype 1 ( ). This finding indicates that adjuvant therapy could be beneficial in Subtype 4. To further validate the proteome subtypes, we analyzed a recently published MS-dataset (TMT-labeled) for lung AC (Gillette et al. ). Overall, the classification of this dataset again demonstrated that proteome Subtypes 1–4 were distinct and reproducible between datasets and analytical platforms ( ). The k-TSP classifier was evaluated in another recent lung AC MS-dataset (label-free, Xu et al. ). In this dataset the lowest k-TSP feature pair coverage was 92%, and all 103 cases were included in the analysis, resulting in successful classification of 99 cases. Once again, the classification produced subtypes with characteristics matching those in the original discovery cohort ( ).

8.

## DIA-based validation in two independent cohorts
To further evaluate the full MS-based classification pipeline, a second independent cohort of NSCLC was analyzed using DIA-MS (“Validation cohort”, n=208, , and ). Samples with at least 50% coverage of the k-TSP feature pairs were selected for classification (188 samples, and ), resulting in successful classification of 175 cases ( ). The validation cohort classification reproduced the six NSCLC proteome subtypes described here with similar characteristics of subtype and histology distributions ( ). As previously, unexpected classifications (AC samples in, and SqCC outside of Subtype 6) were commonly associated with atypical expression of AC and SqCC marker proteins (KRT5, KRT6A, and NAPSA, and ). Further validating the results from the initial cohort, EGFR mutant cases were classified to Subtype 1 in 13/19 cases (Fisher test P = 6.8 × 10-5) and poorly differentiated cancers were enriched in Subtype 2 (3.5-fold, P = 0.004). The DIA-MS analysis resulted in identification of both FGL1 and CPS1 in only nine cases, and eight of these were classified as Subtype 4, underscoring the capacity of the DIA-based classification pipeline of identifying this potentially clinically important NSCLC subgroup ( ). Further, 3/5 LCNEC cases were classified into Subtype 5, and all five Subtype 5 cases showed high protein levels of BCL2 and CDK2 ( ), two targetable oncogenic proteins indicated as Subtype 5 markers in the initial NSCLC cohort analysis ( ). Finally, analysis of relapse-free survival (RFS) in the validation cohort samples once again indicated differences in prognosis between the classified subtypes, with significantly longer RFS in Subtype 1 cases than in Subtype 4 cases ( ).
 Next, to evaluate the k-TSP classifier in a late-stage setting, we analyzed a cohort of biopsy samples from inoperable NSCLC (“late-stage cohort”, 84 samples, ) by label-free DIA-MS ( ). The analytical depth was lower in the late-stage cohort compared to the discovery cohort and the validation cohort, likely as a result of inferior quality in biopsy samples compared to surgical material samples ( ). The 50% feature pair coverage cutoff left 61 samples ( ) for single-sample k-TSP classification, 58 of which were successfully classified with an overall good agreement between histological subgroup and the classified NSCLC proteome subtype ( ). Disagreement was however indicated for a few samples, e.g., SqCC samples classified to Subtype 3 and SCLC samples classified to Subtypes 1 and 3, possibly due to atypical or borderline histology samples as shown by KRT5/Napsin A levels ( ) and neural markers ( ). In summary, this analysis shows that DIA-MS-based analysis of either early-stage surgical material or late-stage biopsy material enables accurate classification of NSCLC into the six NSCLC proteome subtypes described here.

## Discussion
Apart from early detection, prediction of treatment response and optimal therapy combinations are two of the most urgent clinical needs in the management of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). A systems-level understanding of the disease biology is crucial to achieve more accurate and precise molecular subtyping of the disease and fulfil these needs. The current study subdivides NSCLC into six proteome subtypes by in-depth molecular phenotype analysis of tumors, capturing driver pathways and new immune phenotypes.
Intriguingly, TNB was highest in the immune-cold Subtypes 4 and 6, that also showed common expression of NCPs exemplified by peptides from ERV elements and intronic/intergenic regions. Such peptides with longer “non-self” stretches are suggested to be more immunogenic than SNV-mutation derived neoantigens, which are often too similar to the self-antigen , . These findings suggest that expression of highly immunogenic CTAs and NCPs may be incompatible with immune infiltration as this would elicit a strong immune response and killing of the cancer cells. Further, NCPs did not correlate with TMB suggesting that mutations are not the main cause of these types of neoantigens. Instead in our data, both CTA and NCP expression are associated with global hypomethylation suggesting looser epigenetic control, in line with previous reports for CTAs . It is also likely that immunoediting impacts the evolution of the neoantigen repertoire and its relation to immune evasion mechanisms in individual tumors. From a treatment point of view these findings are interesting as NCP-antigens are more likely to be widely shared by different tumors than SNV-mutation-derived neoantigens, which tend to be patient-specific . This renders NCP neoantigens more promising for off-the-shelf immunotherapy development.
In relation to current immunotherapy, Subtype 2 is characterized by high PD-L1 and CXCL9 levels, T-cell infiltration, activated IFNγ signaling, proficient antigen presentation and high TMB, all indicators of response to PD1/PD-L1 checkpoint inhibition. Currently used single predictive biomarkers for PD1/PD-L1 inhibitors in NSCLC (PD-L1 IHC or the less-established TMB) have low sensitivity or may even be uninformative, and complex biomarkers that hold multi-level information are likely to improve the predictive accuracy . Our data presented here indicate that MS-based proteome-level subtyping of NSCLC could offer a powerful and competitive method for therapy prediction in the future.
A second wave of checkpoint inhibitors are currently investigated in clinical trials with targets including the inhibitory T-cell receptors LAG-3, TIM-3, and TIGIT . Based on positive results in mouse models , antibody-based inhibition of LAG-3 is currently investigated in multiple clinical trials with the majority focusing on combined LAG3 and PD-1/PD-L1 inhibition . Importantly, FGL1 was recently identified as a high-affinity ligand to LAG-3: binding resulted in T-cell suppression while blockade of the interaction potentiated anti-tumor immunity . Our analysis reveals that FGL1 is overexpressed in Subtype 4 NSCLC, which depends on inactivation of the tumor suppressor STK11. Interestingly, Subtype 4 is immune-cold and secretion of FGL1 could potentially contribute to a systemic inhibition of T-cell activation and of tumor infiltration by immune cells. Further, if FGL1 is indeed the major cancer-derived ligand of LAG-3, our data indicate that immune cell infiltration or intra-tumoral CD8 (+) cells would be a poor predictor of response to LAG-3 inhibitors as neither of these correlate with FGL1 levels. Instead, our analysis suggests that Subtype 4 could function as stratification for checkpoint inhibitors targeting LAG-3, or, if developed, FGL1.
Our analysis also indicates that B7-H4 may contribute to immune evasion in Subtype 6, which is supported by previous studies where B7-H4 and B7-H3 were found to be higher in SqCC than in AC . B7-H4 belongs to the same ligand family as PD-1 and CTLA4, and it inhibits T-cell growth, cytokine secretion, and development of cytotoxicity , but so far the target receptor has not been identified. Similarly to FGL1, B7-H4 can also be secreted as was previously demonstrated in both rheumatoid arthritis and ovarian carcinoma , however the impact of secreted B7-H4 on the immune response in cancer remains to be shown. For the highly proliferating and relatively immune-cold Subtype 5 (LCNEC) our data do not reveal any subtype-specific IR ligand expression. The neoantigen burden analysis however indicates high expression of potentially immunogenic proteins. This raises the question if other, so far unidentified, IR ligands are expressed on the surface of or secreted by Subtype 5 cancer cells. Subtype 1 (EGFRmut-enriched) is also immune-cold but has low neoantigen burden, low immune infiltration, and low levels of all clinically relevant ligands of T-cell inhibitory receptors, in line with EGFR-mutant NSCLC being refractory to checkpoint inhibitors . Overall, our study reveals new patterns of checkpoint protein expression and provides a resource for filling the knowledge gaps.
Our analyses show a striking co-expression of FGL1, CPS1, and HNF1A in a subset of Subtype 4 samples with STK11 inactivation. HNF1A is a liver-specific transcription factor as shown by us and others , that activates broad liver-specific transcriptional programs with the potential to reprogram fibroblasts into hepatocytes . Further, transfection of HNF1A into human fibroblasts resulted in a dramatic upregulation of multiple genes including FGL1
 . No direct link has previously been shown between STK11 inactivation and HNF1A activation, however the mouse equivalent to HNF1A, TCF1 is upregulated and activated by mTORC1-STAT3 . Our analysis here suggests that reduced HNF1A promoter methylation in STK11 mutated samples contributes to elevated HNF1A mRNA levels, but the mechanism for this epigenetic regulation of HNF1A remains to be further elucidated. Collectively our data indicates that inactivation of STK11 in NSCLC modulates two cancer hallmarks at once by increasing growth rate by loss of mTOR signaling control and promoting immune evasion by expression of FGL1. Importantly, this finding also indicates a potential future combination therapy strategy in Subtype 4 NSCLC cases, where LAG-3/FGL1 checkpoint inhibitors are combined with mTOR inhibitors.
As our analysis demonstrates clinical utility of the proteome subtypes of NSCLC, we developed two methods for classification/subtyping of NSCLC that would be applicable in a clinical setting. The cohort-level classifier (SVM-based) is valuable in a clinical trial setting where multiple samples are collected and analyzed together. The single sample classifier (k-TSP) can be used in a routine diagnostic setting for rapid, label-free analysis of individual samples. Both classifiers showed high accuracy and robustness, and evaluation of the developed classifiers in multiple independent internal and external cohorts replicated close to perfectly the characteristics of the six proteome subtypes. Importantly, in a first proof-of-concept analysis we demonstrate that the DIA-MS based single-sample k-TSP classifier can be successfully utilized even in late-stage NSCLC where very limited sample material is available. It should be noted that neither the sampling, nor the sample preparation was optimized for MS-based classification, so we predict significant improvement and increased quality of the DIA-based classification method.
In summary, we present a first comprehensive proteome analysis of NSCLC, demonstrating the value of high-resolution molecular phenotype analysis as an important component in our quest to understand cancer. Importantly, our analysis indicates, for the first time, that different immune evasion mechanisms are used by cancer cells depending on the type of neoantigens expressed. Immune response towards simpler mutation-derived neoantigens appear to be neutralized locally by PD-L1 as seen in Subtype 2, featuring high TMB but low non-canonical neoantigens. Immune infiltration would be detrimental to cancer cells with complex, likely more immunogenic neoantigens, thus secreted checkpoint ligands, such as FGL1, are expressed for a systemic inhibition of the immune response as seen in Subtype 4. Further studies are needed to determine how these strong neoantigens push for immune evasion mechanisms that hinder immune cell infiltration, and how to best target these processes.

## Methods

## Collection of NSCLC samples and ethical approvals
The early-stage cohort (also referred to as the “discovery cohort”) comprised resected lung cancer tumor samples from a total of 192 patients with operable lung cancer that were surgically treated at the Skåne University Hospital in Lund, Sweden. The samples were collected as described in previous studies – . The late-stage cohort comprised biopsy material from inoperable lung cancer (84 samples). The study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board in Lund, Sweden (Registration no. 2004/762 and 2014/32), and all experiments were conducted in agreement with patient consent and ethical review board regulations and decisions.
By decision of the Ethical Review Board, and as no sensitive data were used for this study, specific written informed consent was not required for the minority of patients who were included before the Southern Swedish Lung Cancer Study (conducted 2004–2014) or the ongoing LUCAS study (The Lung Cancer Study in Southern Sweden, started 2014), for which written informed consent existed. In accordance with the decision of the Ethical Review Board, information about the study was available for all patients through local advertisements in news media in the region. The validation cohort comprised resected lung cancer tumor samples from a total of 209 patients that underwent surgery for lung cancer at the Oslo University Hospital in Oslo, Norway from 2006 to 2015. Tumor tissue from the tumor center was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C until shipment on dry ice and further processing in 2020–2021. One sample was excluded due to insufficient material. Survival was followed until November 2018. All patients signed informed consent. The study was approved by the Regional Ethical Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics, REK South-East in Oslo, Norway (ref: S-06402b). Clinical data from medical journals including follow-up has been made available for all patients. EGFR status was retrieved from routine diagnostics and TP53 status was retrieved from analysis performed in a previous publication .
All relevant clinical data for the samples in the three cohorts are reported in the source data.

## MS-based proteomic analysis of NSCLC cohorts
Detailed methods describing HiRIEF-LC-MS data-dependent acquisition (DDA)-based and label-free data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based analyses of NSCLC cohorts are deposited at the Nature Portfolio Protocol Exchange platform .

## Synthetic peptide analysis
Synthetic versions of the 105 randomly selected non-canonical peptides (NCPs) were purchased from JPT Peptide Technologies. To improve the probability of success of the synthesis and also to limit costs, we limited the selection of peptides so as to include only lengths up to 20 amino acids. The peptides were pooled into 5 batches, labeled by TMT 10plex reagent 131, cleaned by SCX-SPE (Strata-X-C columns P/N 8B-S029-TAK-TN from Phenomenex), dried in a SpeedVac, dissolved in LC solvent A (final solution containing 100 ng/μl of each peptide), and analyzed by LC-MS using the same settings as described above. Annotated spectra of synthetic peptides were obtained by searching the MS raw files against a database containing only the 105 peptides. The annotated MS2 spectra of synthetic peptides were then aligned to their endogenous counterparts in “mirror plots” shown in . One synthetic peptide failed to produce useful MS2 spectra and thus 104 “mirror plots” remained to be manually assessed. The inspection focused mainly on ions from the b and y series that are notable on the synthetic side but absent from the endogenous side, and also on peak proportionality, particularly in regard to the general expectation of a strong peak on the n-term side of proline residues.

## Panel sequencing of early-stage NSCLC cohort

## Library preparation and sequencing
An amount of 250 ng genomic DNA of each sample was used for library preparation, which was performed with Twist Biosciences enzymatic library preparation kit (Twist Biosciences) with the following modifications: fragmentation using a 7-min incubation in fragmentation step, xGen Duplex Seq adapters (3–4 nt unique molecular identifiers, 0.6 mM, Integrated DNA Technologies) were used for the ligation and xGen Indexing primers (2 mM, with unique dual indices, Integrated DNA Technologies) were used for PCR amplification (5 cycles). Target enrichment was performed in a multiplex fashion with a library amount of 187.5 ng (8-plex). The libraries were hybridized to a custom designed capture probes panel (Twist Bioscience), xGen Universal Blockers - TS Mix (Integrated DNA Technologies) and COT Human DNA (Life Technologies) for 16 h. The post-capture PCR was performed with xGen Library Amp Primer (0.5 mM, Integrated DNA Technologies) for 10 cycles. Quality control was performed with the Qubit dsDNA HS assay (Invitrogen) and TapeStation HS D1000 assay (Agilent). Sequencing was done on NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina) using paired-end 150 nt readout, aiming at 30 M read pairs per sample. Demultiplexing was done using Illumina bcl2fastq2 Conversion Software v2.20.
The custom designed panel is a 370-gene panel and has been designed to enable detection of clinically relevant single-nucleotide variants (SNV) and insertion/deletion variants (INDEL), copy-number aberrations (CNA), fusion events (fusions), microsatellite instability (MSI) and to estimate the tumor mutational burden (TMB) in a single assay. The panel also contains selected hotspot variants in 9 genes where there is strong evidence of pharmacogenetic relevance. The panel contains approximately 21,000 baits, covering 1.9 Mb of target. Full coding sequence is captured of 198 genes, hotspot regions of 132 genes, CNVs for 86 genes, intronic sequences for SV detection of 19 genes and full gene-body sequencing of 9 genes.

## Sequence data analysis
Detailed methods describing the data analysis are deposited at the Nature Portfolio Protocol Exchange platform .

## Gene expression and DNA methylation analysis
Pre-processed Illumina gene expression data for 118 cases in the early-stage NSCLC cohort was obtained from Karlsson et al. and DNA methylation data was available from previous studies for 113/141 lung cancer tumors in this cohort (GSE60645 and GSE149521) , . DNA methylation data processing and filtering were performed as previously described , , resulting in a final dataset interrogating 459,790 genomic positions. Methylation probes were annotated using the IlluminaHumanMethylation450kprobe (v2.0.6) R package and promoter regions were defined as TSS +/- 500bp and extracted using the promoters() function in the TxDb.Hsapiens.UCSC.hg19.knownGene (v3.2.2) R package. Methylation probes and promoter regions were overlapped using the findOverlaps() function in the GenomincRanges R package (v1.34.0), resulting in a total of 72,442 methylation probes in the promoter regions of 19,327 genes. For each gene, the promoter-overlapping probe with the highest standard deviation was selected and the Pearson correlation between probe methylation beta values and log2 transformed mRNA levels was derived.
The promoter methylation score for each tumor was calculated as the per sample mean of methylation beta values for promoter-overlapping probes. Similarly, the overall methylation score per sample was derived as the mean of methylation beta values for all probes.

## Immunohistochemistry
Detailed methods describing immune landscape evaluation, including histological, tertiary lymphoid structure, and immunohistochemical analysis, performed on a subset of early-stage NSCLC samples are deposited at the Nature Portfolio Protocol Exchange platform .

## Statistical analysis of NSCLC cohort data
All statistical analyses were conducted using R (v.3.6.2 or higher). Correlations and associated p-values (Spearman and Pearson) were calculated with the R functions cor() or cor.test(). Linear models built with the R function lm(). Pairwise comparisons were computed by two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test with the R function wilcox.test() or two-sided Welch’s t-test using t.test(). For the multiple group comparisons, Kruskal-Wallis test was used with the R function kruskal.test() or ANOVA test using anova(). Two-sided post-hoc tests were computed using dunn.test() R function from dunn.test R package (v.1.3.5). Enrichment analysis were conducted in R by one- or two-sided hypergeometric tests with the R function phyper() or fisher.test(). Where indicated, p-values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) method in R. Survival analysis was conducted using Kaplan-Meier estimator from survminer (v.0.4.8) and survival (v.3.2-7) R packages. For the analysis of differential protein levels between samples DEqMS (v1.6.0) R package was used. BiomaRt R package (v.2.44.1) was used for gene-symbol conversion across data. Plots were created using base R graphics and ggplot2 (v.3.3.3) and using ComplexHeatmap (v.2.2.0) R packages.

## Integrated downstream analysis and bioinformatics

## Consensus clustering for determination of NSCLC Proteome Subtypes
Consensus clustering R package (v.1.50.0) was used to group samples based on proteins quantified across all samples (input matrix: 9793 x 141). The following parametrization was applied: clusterAlg = ‘hc’, innerLinkage, finalLinkage = ‘ward.D2’, distance = “spearman”, pItem=0.8, pFeature = 1, reps = 1000, maxK = 11. The number of clusters (k = 6) was determined by the elbow method applied to the relative change in consensus index cumulative distribution function (CDF) curve and the empirical assessment of enriched mutations, MSigDB hallmark gene sets and immune/stroma signatures for k = 5,6,7. The consensus index for each sample was extracted and normalized to unity as an indication of the sample membership/outlierness to each cluster.

## Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) clustering
Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) clustering for proteomics data was performed using NMF R package (v.0.23.0) as previously described in . Specifically, the input data consisted of a concatenated non-negative log2 ratio matrix generated by the initial proteomics data after two modifications: firstly, after converting all negative numbers to zero and, secondly, after converting all positive numbers to zero and removing the signs of all negative numbers. NMF function was run with the following parameters: K = 2:11, method = ‘brunet’, nrun=100. The cophenetic correlation coefficient was used to evaluate the clustering quality. The cluster membership score was estimated as the fractional score of the corresponding column in the factorized matrix H.

## Correlation network analysis
Filtering was first performed based on DEqMS analysis (|log2 ratio| > 0.5 and P.adj. < 0.01) and quantitative data in at least 70% of samples. Pairwise Pearson correlations were then calculated for the remaining 5,257 proteins. The resulting correlation matrix (input matrix: 5257 x 5257) was used for downstream analysis with Seurat R package (v.4.0.0) . Specifically, PCA dimensionality reduction was performed on standardized correlations and the first 8 principal components were retained according to the elbow of the PCA standard deviation plot (PCAtools v1.2.0). These components were used to project proteins in 2-dimensional UMAP coordinates with n.neighbors = 20 and min.dist = 0.2 after empirical assessment of the local and global patterns captured in visualizations with different parameters. An Euclidean distance-based, shared nearest neighbor graph was constructed using the same n.neighbors (n=20), and Louvain community detection algorithm was applied to find distinct protein clusters. The resolution parameter (n_resolution = 0.6) was chosen as the maximum value for which every cluster could be assigned to at least one MsigDB hallmark (ClusterProfiler v3.14.3 , enrichment adj.p-value < 0.05). Cell-type enrichments were assigned with the same p-value significance threshold based on genes with absolute average log2 fold change > 0.5, adjusted p-value < 0.01) taken from Travaglini et al. . Per subtype networks were visualized after estimating the median of the log2 ratios for each protein across the respective samples. The heatmap shows the above-estimated ratios averaged per term.

## mRNA-protein differences
We calculated mRNA - protein Pearson correlations of genes with quantification values in at least 70% of samples (n.genes = 8,865). The correlations were Fisher z-transformed, and the differences caused by complex membership, stability – based on ranking in the top (bottom) one third of half-lives for stable (unstable) assignment – and miRNA-targeting were assessed using external experiment data – . Two-group and multi-group comparisons were assessed with two-sided t-tests and ANOVA, respectively.

## Immune/stroma estimation – immune gene-set scores
Standardized immune and stroma scores were calculated using the ESTIMATE (v1.0.11) method on the complete proteomics data. Previously defined immune cell markers and hallmarks of ‘INTERFERON ALPHA RESPONSE’ and ‘INTERFERON GAMMA RESPONSE’ from MSigDB were used as input for single-sample gene-set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) in GSVA R package (v. 1.34.0) .

## TMB – antigen presentation machinery correlation
To evaluate the relationship between TMB and antigen presentation machinery (APM), a similar analysis to Dou et al. was followed. Specifically, samples were separated into TMB-high/-low cases based on their log2 TMB values and into APM-high/-low based on their enrichment score in ‘KEGG ANTIGEN_PROCESSING_AND_PRESENTATION’ . k-means algorithm was used with means of five highest and lowest values of TMB as initial centers for TMB-high and -low groups. We performed a similar analysis based on enrichment scores to define AMP-high/-low samples. For each of the four TMB/APM categories, subtype over-representation was evaluated by hypergeometric test and p-values were corrected for multiple testing.

## Cancer- and driver-related proteins (CDRPs)
Detailed methods describing the identification of CDRPs are deposited at the Nature Portfolio Protocol Exchange platform . The list of 832 CDRPs and their annotations can be found in .

## Proteogenomics 6FT search
Detailed methods describing the proteogenomics 6FT search are deposited at the Nature Portfolio Protocol Exchange platform .

## NCP - TMB relationship
Based on prior knowledge about factors that influence tumor mutational burden, we evaluated the relationship between the number of NCPs per sample and TMB using lm() function in R under the following linear model specification: 
 NCPs ∼TMB+MKI67+ TP53-mutation + Purity Where:
NCPs – number of NCPs per sample,
TMB – log2 values of the tumor mutational burden,
MKI67 – Proteomics log2 ratios of Ki-67 as a proliferation index,
TP53-mutation – presence/absence of mutation in TP53 gene, and
Purity – ASCAT-estimated sample purity.

## Tumor Neoantigen Burden (TNB)
We devised the TNB score per tumor by: 
Applying min-max normalization to each of the TMB, NCP and CTA values across tumors in order to rescale them to a range of [0,1].
Summing the rescaled TMB, NCP and CTA values per sample.
Applying min-max normalization to the sums.
Per subtype TNB score was estimated by the median of the TNB scores across the respective tumors.

## Building and applying cohort and single-sample classifiers
Detailed methods describing the support-vector machine (SVM)-based cohort classifier and k-TSP-based single-sample classifier are deposited at the Nature Portfolio Protocol Exchange platform . The list of features/marker proteins for the classifiers can be found in .

## STK11 pathway in vitro validation
Detailed methods describing in vitro validation of the STK11 pathway, including via AMPK activation, rescue of STK11wt and subsequent Western Blot analysis are deposited at the Nature Portfolio Protocol Exchange platform . Uncropped blots are available as .

## Extended Data
 

## Supplementary Material
Source Data to Extended Data Fig 1Source Data to Extended Data Fig 2Source Data to Extended Data Fig 3Source Data to Extended Data Fig 4Source Data to Extended Data Fig 5Source Data to Extended Data Fig 6Source Data to Extended Data Fig 7Source Data to Extended Data Fig 8Source Data to Extended Data Fig 9Source Data to Extended Data Fig 10Source Data to Fig 1Source Data to Fig 2Source Data to Fig 3Source Data to Fig 4Source Data to Fig 5Source Data to Fig 6Source Data to Fig 7Source Data to Fig 8Supplementary Data Synthetic MirrorplotsSupplementary FiguresSupplementary TablesUncropped blots

## Acknowledgements
DNA sequencing was performed at SciLifeLab Clinical Genomics Facility, at Stockholm; and the MS-analysis was supported by SciLifelab proteogenomics facility and Karolinska University Hospital Clinical proteomics facility. We thank Dr. Marcus Buggert for critical reading of the immune system regulation related parts. We thank Dr. Johan Lindberg and Dr. Valtteri Wirta for expert support on DNA sequencing analysis. pBABE-FLAG-LKB1 was a gift from Lewis Cantley (Addgene plasmid #8592). The study was funded by The Swedish Research Council, Swedish Cancer Society, The Cancer Research Funds of Radiumhemmet, European Council H2020 financing (projects Rescuer, OncoBiome, AipBAND, DART), The Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research, The Erling-Persson Family Foundation, the Sjöberg Foundation, the Fru Berta Kamprad Foundation, Karolinska Institutet’s funding for doctoral education (KID), BioCARE a Strategic Research Program at Lund University, Stiftelsen Jubileumsklinikens Forskningsfond mot Cancer (Gustav V:s Jubilee Foundation), and The National Health Services (Region Skåne/ALF). C.G.H. lab is supported by a University of Edinburgh Chancellor’s Fellowship and the Worldwide Cancer Research. K.P.P. is funded by MRC Precision Medicine DTP Studentship.

## Footnotes

Author contributions

The project was conceived and supervised by J.L., M.Planck, J.S. and L.M.O. Clinical data review and inclusion of patients: S.I., M.K., and M.Planck. Clinical sampling, sample prep and transcriptomics data generation was performed by M.J., A.K., and J.S. Pathological evaluation and immunohistochemistry was performed by F.S., M.J., and H.B. Clinical sampling, inclusion of patients and clinical data review for the validation cohort was performed by O.T.B., V.D.H., and Å.H. In-vitro cell line part was coordinated and performed by O.B. and L.M.O. STK11 rescue experiments were performed by K.P.P., R.C. and C.G.H. Proteomics sample prep, MS data generation and searching was performed by Y.P., O.B., G.M., M.Pirmoradian, H.J.J, and R.M.B. Analysis of the sequencing data was performed by T.A., I.S., H.F.A., and D.T. DNA methylation data generation and analysis: E.A. and M.A. Proteogenomics analysis was performed by I.S., H.M.U., R.M.B and L.M.O. Classification was performed by T.A. and L.M.O. Integrative downstream analyses were performed by T.A., I.S., O.B., and L.M.O. The paper was written by J.L. and L.M.O.

Competing interests

J.L. has received grant funding from AstraZeneca, Roche and Novartis (not financing of the current manuscript). J.L. and L.M.O. are share holders of FenoMark Diagnostics. J.L., T.A., I.S., and L.M.O are co-inventors on a patent application related to this work. J.L. and D.T. are associate with Roche financed Cancer Core Europe clinical trial (not associated to current manuscript). Since completing his contribution to the current work, M.Pirmoradian has become an employee of AstraZeneca. All other authors declare no competing interests.

Reporting summary

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.

## Data availability
The mass spectrometry proteomics data for DDA and DIA analyses have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD020191 (DDA discovery cohort), PXD020548 (DIA discovery and late-stage cohorts), and PXD025560 (DIA validation cohort).
For panel sequencing, sequence data has been deposited at the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA), which is hosted by the EBI and the CRG, under accession number EGAS00001005482.
Previously published proteomics data that was re-analyzed in this study are available in PRIDE with the identifier PXD010429, in iProx Consortium with the subproject ID IPX0001804000 and CPTAC Data Portal (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu/study-summary/S056).
Previously published gene expression data that were re-analyzed here are available under accession codes GSE60645 and GSE149521, and in ArrayExpress with the identifier E-MTAB-6043. The human [Pan-Cancer Atlas and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) gene expression data] data were derived from the TCGA Research Network: http://cancergenome.nih.gov/. The dataset derived from this resource that supports the findings of this study is available at https://gdc.cancer.gov/access-data.
Previously published resource of drug sensitivity in cancer cell lines data are available at https://www.cancerrxgene.org/. Source data for all figures and Extended Data figures have been provided as Source Data files. All other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

## Code availability
Custom code for the classifiers (SVM-RFE and k-TSP) can be found at https://github.com/lehtiolab/Code-Availability/tree/main/Lehtio_et_al_Nature_Cancer_2021.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Source Data to Extended Data Fig 1Source Data to Extended Data Fig 2Source Data to Extended Data Fig 3Source Data to Extended Data Fig 4Source Data to Extended Data Fig 5Source Data to Extended Data Fig 6Source Data to Extended Data Fig 7Source Data to Extended Data Fig 8Source Data to Extended Data Fig 9Source Data to Extended Data Fig 10Source Data to Fig 1Source Data to Fig 2Source Data to Fig 3Source Data to Fig 4Source Data to Fig 5Source Data to Fig 6Source Data to Fig 7Source Data to Fig 8Supplementary Data Synthetic MirrorplotsSupplementary FiguresSupplementary TablesUncropped blots

## Data Availability Statement
The mass spectrometry proteomics data for DDA and DIA analyses have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD020191 (DDA discovery cohort), PXD020548 (DIA discovery and late-stage cohorts), and PXD025560 (DIA validation cohort).
For panel sequencing, sequence data has been deposited at the European Genome-phenome Archive (EGA), which is hosted by the EBI and the CRG, under accession number EGAS00001005482.
Previously published proteomics data that was re-analyzed in this study are available in PRIDE with the identifier PXD010429, in iProx Consortium with the subproject ID IPX0001804000 and CPTAC Data Portal (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu/study-summary/S056).
Previously published gene expression data that were re-analyzed here are available under accession codes GSE60645 and GSE149521, and in ArrayExpress with the identifier E-MTAB-6043. The human [Pan-Cancer Atlas and lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) gene expression data] data were derived from the TCGA Research Network: http://cancergenome.nih.gov/. The dataset derived from this resource that supports the findings of this study is available at https://gdc.cancer.gov/access-data.
Previously published resource of drug sensitivity in cancer cell lines data are available at https://www.cancerrxgene.org/. Source data for all figures and Extended Data figures have been provided as Source Data files. All other data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Custom code for the classifiers (SVM-RFE and k-TSP) can be found at https://github.com/lehtiolab/Code-Availability/tree/main/Lehtio_et_al_Nature_Cancer_2021.