pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLoS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC9176802PMC9176802.1917680291768023567535410.1371/journal.pone.0269620PONE-D-22-027221Research ArticleMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsCarcinomaBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCell ProcessesCell DeathPhysical SciencesChemistryChemical CompoundsOrganic CompoundsCarbohydratesMonosaccharidesGlucosePhysical SciencesChemistryOrganic ChemistryOrganic CompoundsCarbohydratesMonosaccharidesGlucoseBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryLipidsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryGlycobiologyGlycogensMedicine and Health SciencesOncologyCancers and NeoplasmsMalignant TumorsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryLipidsFatty AcidsBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryBioenergeticsEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaEvidence for a novel, effective approach to targeting carcinoma catabolism exploiting the first-in-class, anti-cancer mitochondrial drug, CPI-613
CPI-613 and drugging carcinoma metabolismGuardado RivasMoises O.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyWriting – review & editing StuartShawn D.ConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionVisualizationWriting – review & editing ThachDanielData curationInvestigationResourcesWriting – review & editing DahanMichaelData curationInvestigationResourcesWriting – review & editing ShorrRobertMethodology ZacharZuzanaConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationProject administrationSupervisionValidationWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8927-1872BinghamPaul M.ConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationSupervisionWriting – original draft 1
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, United States of America2
Graduate Program in Genetics, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, United States of America3
Rafael Pharmaceuticals, Cranbury, NJ, United States of AmericaBanerjeeDebabrataEditor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Research clinicians and basic scientists have long thought that targeting the altered metabolism of cancer cells might be a promising therapeutic approach; however, this strategy has proven challenging in practice [ – ] (Supplementary References in ).
First, the intrinsic redundancy of metabolism complicates its targeting. This results, in part, from pathway redundancy for production of some crucial metabolites. As well, extensive anastomosis of metabolic pathways and the scavenging of endogenous stores and exogenous resources contribute (below).
Second, normal and tumor cell metabolism differs primarily quantitatively and in their regulation; whereas, qualitative distinctions in pathway steps are rare.
Finally, there is growing awareness that traditional in vitro cell culture conditions may be suboptimal for discovery/analysis of agents attacking cancer metabolism. Specifically, conventional cell culture media, originally developed for other purposes, are increasingly thought to be too nutrient replete to reliably recapitulate tumor cell metabolic behavior in the in vivo tumor microenvironment [ – ] (Supplementary References in ). Results presented herein support this view and we describe an analytical approach circumventing some of the impacts of this technical impediment.
The first-in-class drug CPI-613® (devimistat) redundantly targets cancer mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolism in an apparently unique fashion and with substantial tumor selectivity in vitro [ , ] (see , respectively, in these references). This tumor selectivity is apparently sufficient to produce an acceptable safety profile in single agent and combination studies [ – ]. Moreover, CPI-613’s novel mechanism of action makes it a useful experimental probe of cancer metabolism. Capitalizing on this analytical opportunity has yielded new insights into carcinoma catabolism and its potential targeting ( ).
CPI-613 is a lipoate derivative, small molecule drug. This agent is hypothesized to act as a stable, covalent analog of normally transient catalytic intermediates of the lipoate cofactors of mitochondrial TCA cycle-related enzymes. These enzymes include the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (KGDH; also designated OGDH or α-KGDH) complexes. Levels of these lipoate catalytic intermediates are central metabolic-status signals read by evolved regulatory systems. These lipoate-sensitive regulatory systems, in turn, are reconfigured during emergence of advanced metastatic disease, creating potentially general, cancer-selective drug targets [reviewed in – ] (Supplementary References in ).
CPI-613 preferentially targets tumor regulation of both PDH (carbohydrate carbon TCA entry) and KGDH (glutamine carbon entry and ongoing TCA cycling), in turn, producing robust suppression of mitochondrial TCA-dependent ATP production ( ) [ , ]. The TCA cycle is indispensable for diverse pathways, including those constituting redundant routes to generating the bulk of tumor cell ATP (including, oxidative burning of carbohydrates, fatty acids, and amino acids). Cell viability requires adequate ATP levels. Thus, CPI-613 has the capacity to significantly choke off many of the redundant catabolic pathways essential to sustaining tumor cell survival.
CPI-613 can show strong activity in some preclinical in vivo models ( ) [ , , ] and, apparently, in a few patients [ , ]. For example, among 18 evaluable patients in an investigational PDAC trial, 3 achieved complete responses and 8 achieved partial responses [ ]. However, substantial resistance to CPI-613 is seen in other preclinical models ( ) and in most patients [ , ]. Of particular relevance here are the initial indications of some success in a small clinical trial [ ], followed by the absence of a clear aggregate signal in two large, multicenter trials (NCT03504410 and NCT03504423; Discussion).
Herein we present several lines of evidence that this variable in vivo tumor CPI-613 sensitivity/resistance correlates strongly with endogenous nutrient store levels accumulated under in vitro culture conditions. Mobilization of some of these nutrient stores can support sufficient ATP synthesis to evade cell death in the face of the drug’s action on the TCA cycle, including during the pharmacological pulse of the drug in vivo. Specifically, in vitro, these endogenous nutrient stores include glycogen (supporting TCA cycle-independent glycolysis), on the one hand, and other carbon sources, including lipids, capable of feeding some electrons directly to the mitochondrial electron transport system (ETC; by-passing the TCA cycle CPI-613 target), on the other.
We show that CPI-613 drives the rapid, inefficient, homeostatic consumption of these resistance-producing nutrient stores (induced starvation). Homeostatic consumption in this context refers to the observation that CPI-613 treatment drives increased flux through metabolic pathways capable of restoring ATP levels that would otherwise be depleted in response to drug treatment. This ATP restoration results from the capacity of these fluxes to by-pass the TCA cycle targeted by CPI-613; these pathways include glycolysis and fatty acid beta-oxidation ( ). Presumably as a result of low intrinsic in vivo carcinoma glucose levels, glycolysis appears to be insufficient to support robust in vivo CPI-613 resistance in the PDAC tumor models investigated herein. In contrast, we show that the most resistant tested PDAC tumor line we investigate is fully protected from CPI-613 in vivo, under conditions in which a sensitive tumor line responds robustly. This case of strong in vivo resistance includes a significant contribution from lipid stores during the in vivo pharmacological drug pulse. We show that details of this particular resistance process render it successfully targetable in ways that may be clinically feasible. Other results indicate that this lipid-dependent resistance process is a specific case of a small, well-defined, general class of resistance processes.
These and related results constitute useful initial tests-of-principle for a clearly defined, practical, potentially general strategic approach to effective clinical targeting of carcinoma catabolism.

## Results

## Assaying CPI-613 under controlled nutrient availability; exogenous glucose strongly reduces carcinoma cell CPI-613 sensitivity
Studies in this section introduce the analytical procedures we use throughout to minimize the misleading properties of nutrient hyper-replete, conventional cell culture media for analysis of anti-metabolism drugs (see , legend to Figs and ). Moreover, based on pilot studies, we chose four adherent carcinoma lines that encompass both the shared qualitative features and quantitative differences between carcinoma cell lines in their CPI-613 responses ( ): PANC1 (isolated from untreated primary PDAC tumor; ATCC; Materials and Methods), AsPC1 (isolated from metastasis of treatment-resistant PDAC tumor; ATCC; Materials and Methods), H460 (non-small cell lung cancer from pleural effusion; ATCC), and PC3 (from advanced grade 4 prostate adenocarcinoma; ATCC).
 Clinical infusion of CPI-613 produces a triphasic pharmacokinetic profile [ ]. Plasma drug concentrations show a transient peak during the 1–2 hour infusion in the range of 100 μM, followed by rapid decline over ~8 hours, finally leveling off in the 5μM range and declining more slowly for ~24hrs.
In vitro exposure to doses of CPI-613 approximating this pharmacological range for 8–15 hours in the absence of exogenous nutrients (in carbonate buffered balanced salts, CBS2; Materials and Methods) produces variable, cell line-specific levels of cell death ( ). A brief elevated CPI-613 pulse, mimicking the clinical pattern, modestly sensitizes tested cell lines to this killing ( ). In contrast, inclusion of 5mM glucose (approximating glucose levels in serum) substantially protects tested carcinoma cell lines from this CPI-613-induced cell death at these drug doses ( ).
In view of these results, we executed many of the in vitro studies herein under low CPI-613 doses and exogenous nutrient-free conditions. Results from this analytical approach, in turn, appear to be significantly predictive of in vivo tumor behavior (see below for supporting data and additional rationale). Moreover, we have focused especially on the two PDAC lines, PANC1 (CPI-613 sensitive) and AsPC1 (CPI-613 resistant) ( ).
CPI-613 treatment of all tested carcinoma lines drives accelerated import of exogenous glucose, both at the higher drug doses required in nutrient-replete complete media and the lower doses sufficient in nutrient-depleted CBS2 (Figs and ). In the case examined in detail ( ), this accelerated uptake correlates with increased cytosolic glucose levels and lactate production, directly corroborating that this carcinoma cell response involves increased glycolytic flux, as predicted from a homeostatic response. Sufficiently robust glycolysis is expected to sustain ATP synthesis under CPI-613 inhibition of the TCA cycle.
Characterizing nutrient levels actually encountered by cells in the in vivo tumor microenvironment has proven challenging and occasionally controversial. Approaches using bulk tumor extracellular liquid recovery, potentially including fluids within dysfunctional vascular elements to which tumor cells may not have access, suggest relatively higher levels of free nutrients, including glucose [see, for example, – ]. In contrast, different approaches to assay of tumor fluids indicate extracellular tumor glucose levels of ≤100 μM compared to ~1mM in flanking non-cancerous tissue [ – ].
Our in vivo results below are more easily interpreted as indicating that xenograft PDAC tumor cells experience low, limiting access to glucose. Moreover, the strong CPI-613 induction of exogenous glucose consumption seen in vitro (Figs and ) suggests that these limiting levels of extracellular tumor glucose in vivo might be rapidly exhausted under drug treatment and, thus, may play a limited role in drug resistance in vivo in many carcinomas.

## Endogenous stores predict carcinoma cell line-specific CPI-613 sensitivity in the absence of exogenous nutrients and in vivo
As noted above, when the effects of extracellular nutrients in the media are removed, consistent and significant residual quantitative differences in intrinsic CPI-613 sensitivity between carcinoma cell lines emerge ( ). These in vitro sensitivity differences are strikingly predictive of in vivo drug response, as assessed by xenograft tumor growth inhibition (TGI; ).
 Thus, it is plausible to hypothesize that understanding the mechanisms of these cell line differences under exogenous nutrient-free in vitro conditions might be informative about sources of variation in CPI-613 response in vivo.
This in vitro cell line-specific sensitivity variation correlates with differences in levels of endogenous stores accumulated during growth of cells in nutrient-replete culture media prior to treatment in the absence of exogenous nutrients. Moreover, these endogenous nutrient stores are consumed (presumably homeostatically) at an accelerated rate under CPI-613 treatment. Finally, this accelerated consumption is necessary for resistance (following sections).
First, resistant AsPC1 cells show significantly higher levels of glycogen than sensitive PANC1 cells ( , left). Moreover, depletion (mobilization) of glycogen stores is accelerated by exposure to CPI-613, providing more glucose to the resistant AsPC1 cells than is available to the more sensitive PANC1 cells in vitro ( ).
Second, resistant AsPC1 cells consistently show higher levels of lipid droplet (LD) stores than more sensitive PANC1 cells ( ). Moreover, consumption of the elevated AsPC1 LD stores is dose-dependently accelerated by CPI-613 treatment ( , panels i-iv). This accelerated LD consumption is suppressed in the presence of high levels of exogenous glucose ( , compare panels iv and vii), suggesting that nutrient store catabolism may be coordinated, with LD consumption being reduced prior to exhaustion of carbohydrate supplies.
Consistent with this hypothesis, dose-dependence of CPI-613 driven LD consumption is non-linear, as expected if prior drug-induced glycogen depletion accelerates the process ( , compare panels i-iii). Moreover, blockade of mobilization of AsPC1 glycogen with a phosphorylase inhibitor (GPi; below) results in increased LD depletion, including in response to CPI-613 ( , compare panels pairs i/v and ii/vi). Thus, elevated AsPC1 glycogen levels not only potentially provide higher levels of glucose in response to CPI-613 than is available in PANC1, but these elevated glycogen levels also delay the onset of consumption of the elevated AsPC1 LD stores.
We further tested the generality of these correlations by taking advantage of the exceptional CPI-613 sensitivity of the prostate cancer cell line PC3 ( , see legend; below). As predicted, PC3 shows dramatically lower levels of glycogen than the resistant AsPC1 cell line and significantly less than the already low levels in the more moderately sensitive PANC1 cell line ( ). Likewise, lipid levels in PC3 are substantially lower than in resistant AsPC1 and comparable to or somewhat below the low levels in moderately sensitive PANC1 cells ( ).
This first set of results represents correlative support for the hypothesis that resistance to CPI-613 results from endogenous nutrient stores, mobilized in response to the drug. We began testing this hypothesis further by assessing empirical conformity to some of its additional predictions.
For simplicity of exposition, we will speak herein as if acute ATP level depletion in vitro in response to CPI-613 treatment reflects inhibition of ATP synthesis (also see below). However, we note that contributions to this effect from concomitant drug-induced acceleration of ATP consumption cannot be excluded, though no such effects are directly predicted. Nonetheless, this ambiguity has little or no effect on the preclinical in vivo tests of feasibility of exploiting these phenomena to be described below.
As our working hypothesis predicts, CPI-613-induced reduction in ATP synthesis and commitment to cell death are time dependent and this time dependence differs between store-deficient PANC1 and store-replete AsPC1 ( ). As also predicted, pre-feeding PDAC cell lines with high exogenous levels of glucose and/or oleic acid (to enhance store formation), significantly protects from subsequent CPI-613 treatment in the absence of exogenous nutrients ( ).
Thus, commitment to carcinoma cell death induced by CPI-613 correlates extensively with ATP depletion, which correlates, in turn, with nutrient store depletion. For simplicity of exposition, we will speak herein as if ATP levels are the signal directly used to make CPI-613-induced cell death decisions. However, we cannot rule out that other signals, for which ATP is a covarying proxy, are also involved. Note further that the comparison of the acute metabolic and cell death commitment effects in these studies indicate that even relatively modest residual ATP levels are sufficient to sustain cell survival (see, for example, ).
Collectively, the results in Figs , , , represent a diverse body of circumstantial evidence consistently supporting the hypothesis that clinical dose ranges of CPI-613 kill carcinoma cells in vitro by inducing accelerated consumption of nutrient resources, followed by starvation, ATP depletion, and commitment to cell death. Moreover, the data in support the hypothesis that variation in nutrient stores contributes to differences in drug sensitivity in vivo. We test these hypotheses directly below.

## Features of fatty acid catabolism-dependent CPI-613 resistance in carcinoma cells
A direct approach to testing the causal role of endogenous nutrient store mobilization in CPI-613 resistance is inhibitor blockade of this mobilization.
We tested two well-characterized inhibitors of fatty acid catabolism, etomoxir (ETX; inhibitor of CPT1 fatty acid import into mitochondria) and thioridazine (TZ; inhibitor of peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation) [reviewed in – ] (Supplementary References in ). ETX inhibits the carnitine-dependent mitochondrial import of fatty acids characteristic of abundant serum lipids and endogenous stores, including lipid droplets. TZ inhibits the first step in peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation catalyzed by acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX1) specific to this organelle.
Both ETX and TZ enhance CPI-613 sensitivity in AsPC1 cells; TZ also sensitizes other tested carcinoma lines ( ). Moreover, these effects correlate with the ability of both agents to inhibit oleic acid (OA) beta-oxidation ( ). Finally, each agent also blocks exogenous fatty acid-dependent ATP synthesis in the presence of GPi inhibition of glycogenolysis and CPI-613 inhibition of the TCA cycle ( ), directly demonstrating that OA oxidation can protect from CPI-613 inhibition of mitochondrial ATP synthesis.
 We corroborated that the known TZ inhibition of ACOX activity contributes to the drug’s effects on CPI-613 sensitivity by demonstrating that anti-sense knockdown of the ACOX1 protein produces analogous effects to those of TZ ( ).
Extensive additional analysis will be required to unambiguously assess all the mechanistic details of TZ inhibition of carcinoma cell fatty acid oxidation to CO2; more complex hypotheses are conceivable. For example, regulatory interactions between the two organelles following peroxisomal beta-oxidation blockade could conceivably be involved. However, this mechanistic ambiguity has no significant effect on our deployment of TZ in the studies below.
Collectively, these results directly support the hypothesis that fatty acid catabolism/electron flow in both peroxisomes and mitochondria strongly contribute to CPI-613 resistance in tested carcinoma lines in vitro.

## Logic and validation of the hypothesis that catabolic electron flow to the mitochondrial electron transport system (ETC), bypassing the CPI-613-targeted TCA cycle, contributes substantially to CPI-613 resistance in carcinomas
A more detailed mechanistic hypothesis emerges from the studies immediately above, a hypothesis that can be further tested by investigation of the metabolic features of these effects. Specifically, first, the rapid, metabolically inefficient consumption of glucose stores in response to CPI-613 can be explained by glycolytic ATP generation (generating ~2 ATPs/mole of glucose), while TCA cycle support of full oxidation of glucose-derived pyruvate (an additional ~28 ATPs/mole of glucose) is inhibited by CPI-613 ( ) [ , ].
Second, an analogous hypothesis is plausible for the rapid, inefficient burning of lipids in response to CPI-613 implied by drug-accelerated lipid store consumption (compare ATP levels in and lipid depletion in , for example). Specifically, the initial fatty acid beta-oxidation process, itself, can provide electrons directly delivered to ETC (bypassing the TCA cycle) for ATP synthesis. Under these conditions CPI-613 is expected to inhibit efficient TCA cycle-dependent ATP synthesis from oxidation of the resulting acetate units, reducing molar fatty acid ATP yield ( ).
This hypothesis is also consistent with the observation that inhibition of ETC electron flow by the Complex I inhibitor, phenformin, sensitizes AsPC1 cells with high endogenous lipid stores to CPI-613 killing ( ).
 The general hypothesis supported by these data can be subjected to a robust, direct, independent test using an alternative metabolite, glutamine (GLN). GLN catabolism can deliver both one electron pair directly to the ETC, independently of the TCA cycle (through glutamate dehydrogenase), as well as alpha-ketoglutarate directly to the TCA cycle [reviewed in ]. As predicted by the mechanistic interpretation above, exogenous GLN robustly protects carcinoma cells from CPI-613, analogously to OA rescue, while alpha-ketoglutarate alone provides no significant protection ( , left; also see and Figs). This GLN rescue from CPI-613 inhibition of ATP synthesis and induction of cell death requires GDH-derived electrons that can be delivered directly to the ETC, as predicted ( , right).
Finally, the additional electron pair in lactate, relative to pyruvate, can also be shuttled to the ETC. We asked whether this effect could engender CPI-613 resistance. In contrast to GLN and glucose, lactate produces no rescue from CPI-613-induced cell death at robust drug doses (80μM; ). This is expected as ongoing PDH activity, inhibited by CPI-613, drives the lactate/malate/aspartate shuttle forward; this is the shuttle that delivers these electrons to the ETC [ ]. As this view predicts, lactate produces modest rescue at lower CPI-613 doses, where some residual PDH flux is expected ( ).
See for a graphic summary of the mechanistic picture emerging from these experiments and those immediately below.

## Additional direct evidence that variation in endogenous nutrient stores accounts largely or entirely for cell line-specific differences in CPI-613 sensitivity in vitro
First, a well-characterized inhibitor of phosphorolytic mobilization of glycogen stores (CP91149, GPi) [ ] can sensitize to CPI-613 as predicted (Figs , ). GPi is effective in depressing glycogen mobilization, as expected ( ). GPi robustly sensitizes to CPI-613-induced commitment to cell death in the resistant AsPC1 cell line, possessing high levels of glycogen stores. In contrast, this agent interacts weakly with CPI-613 in the already sensitive PANC1 cell line, possessing more limited glycogen stores ( ).
 Second, both glycogen and lipid stores can also be mobilized by autophagy (glycophagy or lipophagy, respectively) [ , ] (Supplementary References in ). Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) is thought to inhibit late steps in autophagic delivery of such catabolic resources. Consistent with the induced starvation hypothesis above, HCQ interacts strongly with CPI-613, enhancing induction of commitment to death in both PANC1 and AsPC1 cells in the absence of exogenous nutrients ( ).
Moreover, HCQ treatment significantly accelerates glycogen consumption in both PANC1 and AsPC1 ( ). On the one hand, together with the GPi results above, this result argues that glycophagy may be relatively unimportant for glycogen mobilization in these two cell lines. On the other, this result argues that some effect of autophagy inhibition homeostatically accelerates glycogenolysis; lipophagy inhibition is a likely candidate.
Third, as discussed above, targeting peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation is effective in sensitizing tested carcinoma cell lines to CPI-613 ( ). Consistent with the HCQ observations above, TZ inhibition of fatty acids beta-oxidation accelerates glycogen consumption, again, representing a homeostatic response to inhibition of fatty acid catabolism ( , right).
Collectively, these results indicate that inhibition of mitochondrial ATP synthesis in any way stimulates accelerated store depletion/consumption. Using three well-characterized, non-cancer-specific mitochondrial metabolism inhibitors [ ], rotenone (ETC Complex I inhibitor), BAM (Mitchell/Moyle proton gradient uncoupler), and oligomycin (mitochondrial ATP synthase inhibitor), we observe this predicted effect on glycogen depletion ( ).
Fourth, if the CPI-613-induced starvation hypothesis is correct and if the nutrient store mobilization inhibitors described above are sufficient to interfere with most or all drug-induced enhancement of carbon/electron flow, we expect to be able to robustly sensitize resistant carcinoma cells to CPI-613 with a cocktail of all three of these inhibitors (TZ, HCQ, GPi). Moreover, if variation in endogenous nutrient store levels is largely or entirely responsible for variation in cell line-specific CPI-613 resistance in vitro, this inhibitor cocktail is predicted to more strongly sensitize resistant cells such that more resistant lines will converge with intrinsically more sensitive carcinoma lines. Strikingly, this inhibitor cocktail-induced convergence in CPI-613 sensitivity for the resistant AsPC1 and sensitive PANC1 lines is observed ( ).

## First evidence that inhibition of fatty acid catabolism reduces carcinoma CPI-613 resistance in vivo
The studies above establish the central role of nutrient store formation (during culture in replete media) and ultimate mobilization (during subsequent treatment in the absence of exogenous nutrients) in defining in vitro cell line-specific CPI-613 sensitivity/resistance. The question then becomes how well (or poorly) these in vitro phenomena predict the in vivo features of the CPI-613 response. We elected to subject our working theory of resistance to an initial in vivo test by targeting lipid rescue for the following reasons [ ].
First, both CPI-613 and TZ inhibition of their respective target pathways induce accelerated, inefficient depletion of glycogen stores and (at least for CPI-613) exogenous glucose stores (Figs , and ). Thus, it is plausible that CPI-613/TZ cotreatment will also engender indirect depletion of glycogen/glucose availability, obviating the need to target their mobilization directly in vivo, leaving lipid stores to play a more conspicuous role in resistance.
Second, published studies of the role of peroxisomes in normal fatty oxidation indicate that the importance of this pathway in carcinoma cells we observe is expected to be tumor-specific [reviewed in ], making attack on this pathway less likely to produce byproduct toxicity.
Third, two FDA approved agents are available to target lipid rescue, including TZ (also see below). In contrast, while CB839 is a promising agent for targeting GLN metabolism/rescue [ ], it is not yet FDA approved.
Our initial tests of theory using CPI-613 and TZ separately and together in targeting tumor growth in xenografts of highly resistant AsPC1 cells are shown in . As expected from the in vitro results and strongly supporting the importance of lipid metabolism to in vivo tumor behavior, CPI-613/TZ combinations produce robust resistant tumor TGI not seen in corresponding treatment with CPI-613 alone ( ). Moreover, the three high-confidence point pairs in the two lefthand panels in , collectively, strongly support interactions between CPI-613 and TZ in vivo analogous to those observed in vitro (above). Furthermore, the trend lines in the upper left panel are likewise consistent with this conclusion. Finally, we also observe that TZ alone can have strong, significant TGI effects ( ). This outcome is not unexpected in view of the in vitro behavior of TZ (including the rightmost panel in ).
 However, we also observe quantitative complexities not seen in vitro. First, TZ shows potentially differential potency in the two independent in vivo experiments (compare and upper left panel in ). The preparation of seeding tumor cells and the animal husbandry were nominally identical in these two experiments; in view of the in vitro results, it is likely that unrecognized variation in one or both of these experimental processes produced these quantitative effects. Second, the 5mg/kg TZ dose in the study may be somewhat more potent than the 10mg/kg dose. An exhaustive preclinical in vivo study with TZ combinations in the future might yield additional insights useful to ultimate clinical application of this agent.
We note that no noticeable adverse responses were observed in the well monitored experimental animals to CPI-613/TZ combinations. This is consistent with the expected tumor selectivity of each agent (text). Of course, dose-escalation toxicity studies would be necessary at the beginning of any clinical application of this combination.

## A second, mechanistically independent approach to targeting lipid-driven CPI-613 resistance; metabolic effects of the crizotinib tyrosine kinase inhibitor (RTKi)
In view of the control of features of cancer metabolism by some cancer-related regulatory tyrosine kinases [reviewed in ], we asked whether the apparently tumor-specific routing of fatty acid oxidation through the peroxisome might be among these metabolic processes. Strikingly, we found that a subset of RTKi’s mimic TZ in suppressing this process and sensitizing resistant tumor cells to CPI-613.
Specifically, the RTKi crizotinib (CRZ) mimics TZ in vitro, preferentially inhibiting OA-dependent rescue of CPI-613-inhibited ATP synthesis ( ) and sensitizing to CPI-613 killing in several carcinoma cell lines ( ). Supporting our working theory for in vivo resistance to CPI-613, CRZ shows robust enhancement of CPI-613 efficacy in resistant AsPC1 tumor xenografts ( ).
 Like many RTKi’s, CRZ is significantly promiscuous. Among its relatively high affinity targets are the ALK, ROS1, and MET kinases [ ]. While additional analysis will be required to rigorously establish the CRZ target(s) necessary to produce the lipid metabolic effects observed here, in vitro assays of selected additional inhibitors with partially overlapping targeting patterns suggest that MET kinase inhibition may contribute significantly to these CRZ lipid catabolic effects (Figs , ). The known MET modulation of tumor metabolism more generally [ ] is consistent with this working mechanistic hypothesis.

## Discussion
Several technical details of our results have notable implications. First, results herein account for earlier observations that carcinoma cell lines display much smaller inter-line response differences and uniformly higher levels of CPI-613 resistance than we observe. Specifically, these original assays employed conventional, nutrient-replete culture media, in contrast to the CBS2 assays used herein [ , ] (also compare ). We can now predict that these older studies would require the high drug doses and long exposure times observed. CPI-613 sensitivity under these conventional media conditions requires lengthy depletion of media glucose. Moreover, sensitivity is largely control by external media composition under these conditions, rather than endogenous store formation central to the line-to-line variation observed here.
Second, our observation that carcinoma lipid catabolism displays strong dependence on peroxisomal oxidation is important. Unlike mitochondria, peroxisomes do not oxidize fatty acid carbon to CO2 [ ]. In normal tissues, peroxisomes are thought to pre-process exotic and unusually long fatty acids, followed by transport of the resulting smaller, simplified products to mitochondria for oxidation to CO2. Our results indicate that carcinoma cells under CPI-613 attack make more general use of this peroxisome-to-mitochondria catabolic pathway, including for more abundant classes of fatty acids (like OA; ). Some components of this peroxisome-to-mitochondrial transport can apparently be targeted by ETX; it is likely that these reflect relatively large fatty acid products from peroxisomal metabolism requiring subsequent CPT1 transport [ ].
More generally, Our preclinical results indicate a clearly defined, detailed, potentially general class of approaches to improved clinical targeting of carcinoma catabolism. CPI-613 preferentially suppresses multiple essential components of the TCA cycle in carcinomas. The TCA cycle is indispensable to almost all of the extensively redundant catabolic networks. Thus, this drug’s effects can selectively strip carcinoma cells of a large fraction of their capacity to generate the ATP sustaining cell viability. Moreover, these drug effects also include indirect induction of rapid, inefficient, homeostatic depletion of apparently limited carcinoma glycolytic resources, further reducing catabolic redundancy.
In contrast to the apparently limited glucose/glycogen support of resistance we observe in carcinomas, studies reported by the Takeuchi group [ ] in a clear cell sarcoma (CCS) strongly suggest that the massive glycogen stores in this tumor cell type [reviewed in ] can be decisive in CPI-613 resistance in this different case. In particular, motivated by a different theoretical approach than ours, these investigators showed that a CPI-613-resistant CCS tumor xenograft could be robustly sensitized by co-treatment with HCQ.
Our insights here allow us to refine potential interpretations of this important result. The large CCS glycogen stores are likely mobilized by glycophagy, rather than the glycogenolysis we find in tested PDAC lines ( ) [reviewed in ]. This likely CCS feature allows suppression of fruitful glucose store mobilization by HCQ. Thus, the CPI-613-driven inefficient burning of glycogen-derived glucose we observe in carcinomas (Figs and ) may not be sufficient to exhaust the vast CCS glycogen stores during the in vivo pharmacological CPI-613 drug pulse.
In contrast, again, our results indicate that lipid stores can be more important than the more modest glycogen stores in carcinomas. Specifically, our results support the hypothesis that the lipid-derived ETC-direct electron flow significantly contributes to CPI-613 resistance in carcinoma cell lines. This flow is essential to full-blown resistance in a strongly refractory PDAC cell line studied in detail here, under conditions including or reflecting the in vivo tumor nutrient microenvironment (Figs , and ).
Importantly, we find that this source of resistance depends significantly on carcinoma cell redesign entailing substantial reliance on peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation ( ), a process that is largely dispensable in normal adult tissues on the time scales of cancer treatment [ ]. Thus, it is expected that this lipid electron flow can be targeted in a clinical setting without unacceptable side effect toxicity, including with clinically achievable levels of thioridazine ( ) [ , ]. In an initial test of our overall theory of CPI-613 resistance, we show that this FDA approved drug significantly sensitizes otherwise fully resistant tumor xenografts to CPI-613 ( ). In contrast, the etomoxir (ETX) inhibitor of mitochondrial fatty acid uptake, while also sensitizing resistant carcinoma cells to CPI-613 in vitro, is not FDA approved and is currently unpopular as a candidate for clinical development, including in view of its possible liver toxicity [ ].
Moreover, we find that this redesign of carcinoma lipid metabolism likely depends on tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling. We can apparently target this regulation using the crizotinib (CRZ) RTK inhibitor. Specifically, CRZ suppresses metabolic processes supporting the same peroxisomal lipid beta-oxidation electron flows targeted by TZ (Figs , ). Clinical plasma CRZ concentrations achieve the effective range for CPI-613 enhancement defined in our in vitro assays ( ) [ ]. As predicted, CRZ sensitizes the resistant PDAC tumor to CPI-613 in vivo ( ). CRZ is also an FDA-approved, orally delivered drug; it is currently deployed against a specific subclass of lung cancers [ ]. Our preclinical results indicate that CRZ might be substantially more broadly useful when combined with CPI-613 (Figs , ).
More generally, our in vitro results indicate that this pattern of inhibitor combination vulnerability may allow robustly improved targeting of catabolism in many carcinomas. We anticipate that more potent/efficacious CPI-613-based agent cocktails exploiting these general design principles can be developed.
Specifically, for example, our results further suggest additional, analogous approaches to clinical attack, including in other carcinoma types that may not have the same preferential dependence on lipid-derived ETC electrons for CPI-613 resistance observed in PDAC. For example, the addition of the clinically well-tolerated glutaminase inhibitor, CB839 (to preempt GDH ETC electron flow) [ ], to a CPI-613 cocktail may prove effective in some cases or tumor types. Newly published in vivo results from others [ ] (below) strongly support this prediction. Further, the tumor selectivity of CPI-613 may be sufficient to make CB839-containing cocktails clinically workable.
Results herein also add to a diverse, rapidly growing body of studies of tumor lipid metabolism, collectively indicating that further investigation of this area is likely to be clinically fruitful [reviewed in , ] (Supplementary References in ). New insights in this area might lead to additional useful clinical agent synergies with CPI-613, analogous to those described herein.
Collectively, our results, including those in Figs , , and , indicate that targeting ETC-direct electron flow-dependent CPI-613 resistance has the potential to significantly enhance the clinical efficacy of attacking carcinoma catabolism.
These insights also suggest plausible rationales for the absence of an aggregate signal in large-scale, multi-center CPI-613 clinical trials to date (NCT03504410 and NCT03504423). These trials deployed combinations of CPI-613 with therapeutic standards of care, including modified FOLFIRINOX in PDAC patients [ ]. FOLFIRINOX components target nucleotide synthesis and DNA synthesis/repair [reviewed in ]. Based on our new results herein, this concerted attack could produce some metabolic stress, with the potential for some sensitization to CPI-613. Perhaps in a few patient tumors with sensitive metabolic patterns this effect might account for the relatively robust responses apparently seen in a few individuals [ ]. However, FOLFIRINOX is an untargeted, indirect attack on metabolism, expected to be relatively inefficient in this role.
During the drafting of this manuscript, the Teng group published two related papers on CPI-613 interaction with cancer metabolism [ , ]. In contrast to the work herein, these authors’ in vitro studies were done in replete conventional media, requiring high drug doses (150–250μM) and prolonged drug exposure (72 hours) to observe robust CPI-613 cell death effects, consistent with our original studies [ , ]. Moreover, their theoretical perspective was different than ours. Nonetheless, combining their orthogonal results with ours produces some potentially useful additional insights as follows.
First, Gao, et al. [ ] show that AMPK kinase is activated in vitro by CPI-613 in carcinoma lines, as predicted by inhibition of mitochondrial metabolism [reviewed in ]. They observe modest, but significant effects on in vitro CPI-613 sensitivity in response to inhibitors of elements of the AMPK response. They propose that these effects depend on targeting “AMPK-ACC signaling.” Our work allows us to propose a more specific, detailed interpretation of these results (Figs , , and ). In particular, targeting AMPK regulatory effects are predicted to modulate rates of lipid metabolism [reviewed in ], thereby changing the rates of lipid depletion after glucose depletion (and, thus, CPI-613 sensitivity) during the prolonged CPI-613 treatment (72 hours) required under the Gao, et al. [ ] conventional nutrient-replete conditions.
Second and more importantly, Lang, et al. [ ] show that targeting GLN metabolism with the CB839 glutaminase inhibitor under nutrient depleted in vivo conditions strongly sensitizes head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) xenografts to CPI-613. This is in conspicuous contrast to the modest effects of such treatments these authors observe in vitro in nutrient-replete media. These in vitro effects, again, require prolonged drug exposure (72 hours) sufficient to drive glucose depletion. Our studies indicate that the in vivo effects of CB839 likely ensue from targeting GDH-dependent electron flow directly to the ETC (Figs and ), rather than glutaminolysis more broadly. Given our results in , in vivo CB839 sensitization to CPI-613 likely reflects targeting of ongoing exogenous GLN flux, including from mobilization of amino acids from the tumor extracellular matrix [ ]. In view of our insights, this important new in vivo result argues that adding the clinically well-tolerated CB839 [ ] to CPI-613-based cocktails might also improve the targeting of carcinomas in addition to HNSCC. As with lipid-dependent resistance ( ), it will likely be of great clinical importance to establish how general in vivo GLN-dependent CPI-613 resistance might be among diverse cancers.
With this series of results in hand, we can productively return to the issue of the concentrations of free monomeric glucose available to xenograft solid tumors (and, thus, likely in the clinical context). Our CPI-613 combination PDAC xenograft results in Figs and and those in clear cell sarcoma [ ] and HNSCC carcinoma [ ] discussed above all show potent TGI without direct targeting of glycolysis. These results collectively indicate that none of these tumors has adequate access to free glucose in vivo to engender glycolysis-dependent rescue from CPI-613. Should conventional normal tissue glucose concentrations (1-5mM) have been available to these tumors, they should have been robustly resistant to the CPI-613 combinations in question (see Figs and , for example). Finally, we note again that diverse measurements from clinical samples further support the view that in vivo tumor glucose levels are likely to be substantially lower than in normal tissues [ – , ].
Of note in view of our results, CPI-613 has shown occasional strong single agent activity against otherwise largely untreatable relapsed, refractory, Myc-driven Burkitt lymphoma in ongoing clinical trials. Most recently, these responses include one complete remission in a set of 8 Phase I patients [ ]. It is noteworthy that Burkitt tumors show generally high, but substantially variable, levels of endogenous lipid stores [ ]. It will be of great interest to determine if these lipid store levels are predictive of clinical response and, if so, whether combination of CPI-613 with either TZ or CRZ might improve response rates, extents, and/or durabilities in these Burkitt patients.
In final overview, our results herein and the important orthogonal results from the Takeuchi and Teng groups indicate that continued investigation of the metabolic basis of CPI-613 resistance is likely to yield practical, promising approaches to substantially improved clinical attack on cancer metabolism.

## Materials and methods

## In vitro analysis of carcinoma drug responses

## Cells
AsPC1, PANC1, BxPC3, H460, A549, and PC3 cells were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA). PANC1, BxPC3, H460, and PC3 were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)-1640 medium and AsPC1 in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), both supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 units/ml penicillin and 100μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen). All cells were initially plated in their corresponding complete media for metabolic and cell death analyses. Cells were incubated at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2. We avoid exposing carcinoma cell lines to heat-inactivated serum to maintain stable metabolic behavior.
The two PDAC lines, PANC1 and AsPC1, both resemble the majority genotype of pancreatic cancers in having activated KRAS and mutant p53 [ ]. Moreover, CDKN2A is epigenetically down-regulated in both cell lines [ , ]. The CPI-613-resistant member of this pair, AsPC1, was isolated from a post-treatment metastasis [ ]; whereas, CPI-613-sensitive PANC1 was isolated from an untreated primary tumor [ , ]. AsPC1 displays SMAD4 loss, as do the majority of clinical PDACs (whereas PANC1 retains SMAD4 expression) [ ]. Collectively, these features are consistent with AsPC1 being a useful model for difficult-to-treat clinical PDAC cases more generally.

## Adherent carcinoma cell treatment under low nutrient level conditions
Cells were plated at 80% confluency in complete media with 10% fetal bovine serum in black, clear bottom 96-well plates or 35-mm dishes for ATP, protein and glycogen analysis, or on glass coverslips for fluorescence visualization. To create low nutrient conditions, cells were seeded in complete medium; after ~24 hours, complete medium was replaced with corresponding serum-free medium with 11mM glucose (henceforth CM/ns) for an additional 18–24 hours. Prior to drug treatment, cells were incubated in a nutrient-free carbonate buffered balanced salt solution (CBS2) for 3 hours (see for flow diagram of this sequence). Drug treatments were then carried out in CBS2 with addition of nutrient sources and/or chemical agents as described in figures. CBS2 formulation is shown in immediately below.
 

## Acute ATP measurements and cell survival ATP measurements
See Supplementary Materials and Methods in and for detailed discussion of the logic of these assays and their validation.
Technical details. To assess direct metabolic effects immediately after drug treatments, acute ATP levels of cells were measured in black, clear bottom 96-well plates using the CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Cell Viability Assay (catalog# G775B) or CellTiter-Glo® 2.0 Cell Viability Assay (catalog # G9243) following Promega (Madison, WI) protocol. To assess cell viability, after drug treatments, drug/agent-containing medium was replaced with CM/ns and cells were incubated for an additional 17–24 hours as indicated in figures to allow metabolic recovery of viable cells, without additional cell division. After this recovery period, ATP levels were measured using CellTiter-Glo® Luminescent Cell Viability Assay as described above.
See for examples of validation of this assay procedure [also see ].

## Additional details for in vitro cell assays
The serum-free pretreatment steps above produce cell cycle arrest, but leave cells metabolically active. In the absence of exogenous nutrients and of accelerated, drug-induced starvation (text), these metabolically active carcinoma cells ultimately exhaust endogenous nutrient stores, undergoing passive starvation and cell death indistinguishable from the drug-induced process. The time to this passive starvation varies characteristically between cell lines, ranging from ~15 hours for the very sensitive PC3 cell line to ~2 days for PANC1 and H460 and ~5 days for AsPC1.
The main effects analyzed in this paper are highly reproducible, in spite of modest experiment-to-experiment quantitative variation (see, for example, ). This variation likely results from small differences in cell density (and, thus, nutrient availability) during complete-medium culture (see ). Moreover, most experiments are internally controlled for this variation.
It remains to be determined how this procedure might require modification for application to leukemia or lymphoma cells.

## Steady state metabolite levels determination
The steady state metabolomics analysis in used well established assays and procedures in collaboration with Metabolon, Inc. Other results from this study were originally described and reported in [ ] (also see Supplementary Materials and Methods in ). Data were displayed using a conventional box and whisker plots [see, for example, ].

## 2-deoxyglucose uptake
8 X 106 ( ) or 3 X 105 ( ) cells were treated with CPI-613 in complete medium (240μM drug; ) or in CBS2 with low levels of glucose (60μM drug; ). After one hour of treatment, 2-3H-2-deoxyglucose was added to the treatment medium and cells were incubated for an additional one hour. Cells were washed and lysed in situ and the lysates counted to assess uptake. See Supplementary Materials and Methods for additional details in .

## Staining of lipid droplets
Approximately 500,000 cells were seeded in 35-mm dishes containing coverslips. Following treatment described in figure legends, coverslips were washed in ice cold PBS, fixed for 18hrs at 4°C in 5% paraformaldehyde then exposed to the neutral lipid stain BODIPY 493/503 (Invitrogen) at a concentration of 1μg/ml for 2 hours at room temperature. Coverslips were mounted in ProLong Diamond plus DAPI mounting solution (Invitrogen). Images in Figs and were captured on an Axiovert 200M (Zeiss) microscope with a 63X objective and AxioVision software (version 4.5) at a fixed exposure time. Images in were captured using an AMG EVOS FL inverted microscope with a 20X objective at a fixed exposure time.

## Triple cocktail experiment
This study was done as described in the legend to . The two cell lines employed (AsPC1 and PANC1) have substantially different levels of glycogen and lipids (Figs and ). Given mass action effects, the sensitivities of the two cell lines to the three “triple cocktail” reagents differ noticeably. Thus, we chose concentrations of this reagent combination producing the same modest, but significant cell death (~5%) in the absence of CPI-613 in these two lines (see 0μM CPI-613 points in ). These concentrations were as follows. AsPC1: GPi (50μM), HCQ (100μM), and TZ (5μM). PANC1 GPi (25μM), HCQ (50μM), and TZ (2.5μM). Note that the proportions of the three agents were equivalent.

## Determination of glycogen content
Glycogen was quantified using the Glycogen Assay Kit II (colorimetric) from AbCam (ab169558) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, approximately 2 x 106 cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and collected via scraping in 300μl ice-cold ddH2O. Cells were immediately sonicated on ice for 5 x 1s pulses with a probe sonicator (Misonix Inc, model XL2000), then heated to 80°C for 10 minutes. Samples were stored overnight at -20°C, then thawed, centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatants collected and assayed for glycogen hydrolysis and quantification, followed by protein concentration determination (Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit #23227) according to manufacturer’s instructions.

## Xenograft tumor growth inhibition studies
Studies were carried out according to Stony Brook University Institutional Animal Care and Use committee (IACUC) standards for ethical treatment of animals. Experimental procedures were performed by Division of Laboratory Animal Resources (DLAR) professional veterinary staff. Female, 6 week old, CD1-nu/nu mice were inoculated subcutaneiously in the flank with 2.5X106 PANC1 cells in 100ul of HBSS or 5X106 AsPC1 cells in HBSS. Treatment commenced when tumors reached 100-200mm3 (as indicated in figures) and lasted for 5 weeks. Mice were treated three times a week (MWF) with vehicle or drugs as indicated in figures. Tumors were measured once a week. Administration route was oral gavage for crizotinib and intraperitoneal for CPI-613 and thioridazine. Use of Matrigel for tumor innoculation was avoided in TGI experiments with this class of agents.

## Thioridazine and etomoxir inhibition of CO2 release
Radioactive CO2 released from AsPC1 cells was captured after treatment with TZ, ETX, or mock control for 1 hour, followed by 30 minute pulse with 0.1μCi of 1-14C labeled oleic acid added to the media (see Supplementary Materials and Methods for additional details in ).

## Statistical analysis
All data are expressed as mean±SEM.

## Cell assays
Sample size for each point in all cells assays was n = 3 (biological replicates). Results were analyzed using unpaired t test with Welch’s correction, GraphPad Prism version 9.1.2 (226) for Windows, GraphPad Software, La Jolla California USA.

## Tumor Growth inhibition (TGI) assays
The sample size (n) for each TGI experiment is specified in the figure legends. TGI data were analyzed using unpaired t test with Welch’s correction, using GraphPad Prism version 7.04 for Windows, GraphPad Software, La Jolla California USA. www.graphpad.com.

## Steady state metabolomic analysis ( )
This statistical analysis was performed according to established procedures as described in Supplementary Materials and Methods in and in [ ].

## Supporting information
S1 FigA. Analytic procedure and validation of cell death assay in adherent carcinoma lines, part 1. A: Flow diagram for analysis of drug effects on acute ATP levels (metabolism) and commitment to/execution of drug-induced cell death in the absence (or controlled presence) of exogenous nutrients (see for additional details). The serum-free pretreatment steps diagrammed produce cell cycle arrest, but leave cells metabolically active. In the absence of exogenous nutrients and accelerated, drug-induced starvation (text), these metabolically active carcinoma cells ultimately exhaust endogenous nutrient stores, undergoing passive starvation and cell death indistinguishable from the drug-induced process. The time to this passive starvation varies between cell lines, ranging from ~15 hours for the highly sensitive PC3 cell line to ~2 days for H460 and PANC1; and ~5 days for AsPC1. It remains to be determined how this procedure might require modification for application to leukemia or lymphoma cells. The main effects analyzed in this paper are highly reproducible, in spite of modest experiment-to-experiment quantitative variation (see, for example, ). This variation likely results from small differences in cell density (and, thus, nutrient availability) during the complete medium pre-feeding step. B-C. Analytic procedure and validation of cell death assay in adherent carcinoma lines; part 2. B. Cells were plated and grown as indicated in panel A and the legend to . Drug treatment time was 6.5hrs (H460) or 20hrs (AsPC1). Cells were photographed (H460; panel C), then incubated for an additional 25hrs in CM/ns and again photographed (panel C). One duplicate plate was then analyzed for survival by ATP level measurement and the other by hemocytometer cell counts (Supplementary Materials and Methods in ). Note that these cells were treated in the absence of exogenous nutrients (CBS2; see ). The elevated values of ATP RLUs in this experiment resulted from our use of reflective white plates (as a result of supply chain constraints) rather than the absorbent black plates used for the other experiments in this study. C. Photography of H460 cells from panel B immediately before analysis. Note that CPI-613-induced cell death in CBS2 is generally predominantly necrotic (or necrosis-like). Morphology of necrotic cells is visible, especially in recovery after 40μm and 80μm CPI-613 treatment. Note also that necrotic cell ghosts visible here disperse as finely divided subcellular debris during trypsinization for hemocytometer counting in panel B and are not counted (Supplementary Materials and Methods in ). D-F Fig. Analytic procedure and validation of cell death assay in adherent carcinoma lines; part 3; supporting data for . D: H460 cells were treated in nutrient hyper-replete complete media with CPI-613 at 250μM (or mock treated) for 17hrs, followed by a 24hr recovery after removal of drug and replacement with fresh CM/ns (analogous to ). This clinically unrealistically high drug dose drives media glucose depletion ( ) and overrides protection from glutamine and serum lipids. Execution of apoptotic cell death is readily visible in the phase contrast microscope [also see ]. CPI-613-induced cell death under these nutrient-replete media conditions is more commonly apoptotic, rather than necrosis-like, as in nutrient-depleted conditions (panel C). E: Additional case of time dependence of CPI-613 inhibition of ATP synthesis (left panel) and induction of/commitment to cell death (right panel) in H460 NSCLC cells. See legend to for technical details. F: Raw, non-normalized data shown in normalized form in the leftmost panel of .
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 FigA-B Fig. Pre-feeding of cells designed to enhance endogenous nutrient stores can strongly affect CPI-613 response. A: Effects of
pre-feeding
PANC1 and AsPC1 cells with GLUC and/or OA on resistance to subsequent CPI-613-induced acute ATP loss and commitment to cell death in the absence of exogenous nutrients. If endogenous nutrient store depletion is necessary for CPI-613-induced reduction in ATP levels and carcinoma cell death commitment, enhancing such stores should increase carcinoma cell resistance to the drug. To test this prediction, we investigated the drug response of PANC1 and AsPC1 cells under identical treatment conditions after differential pre-feeding with glucose (GLUC) and/or oleic acid (OA). These actions are designed to enhance carbohydrate and/or lipid stores, respectively ( ; main text). Again, all CPI-613 treatment conditions shown in this experiment are identical; only the immediate history of the cells’ prior exposure to exogenous glucose and/or oleic acid distinguishes the various samples. Pre-feeding has robust effects on both cell lines, providing significant protection from CPI-613 effects both on acute ATP levels and/or ensuing commitment to cell death. Moreover, the differences in the details of these responses in the two cell lines are consistent with AsPC1 having higher intrinsic levels of nutrient stores (before pre-feeding) and/or acquiring higher store levels during pre-feeding; in contrast, the behavior of the sensitive PANC1 line is consistent with its having and/or acquiring lower nutrient store levels. Specifically, cells were pre-fed for 5hrs with the indicated concentrations of glucose and/or oleic acid in CBS2 immediately before drugging in nutrient-free CBS2 ( ). Exogenous nutrient-containing medium was removed, cells were washed, and then treated with the indicated concentrations of CPI-613 for 10hrs in CBS2. At the end of this treatment, ATP levels were measured directly (left; predominantly acute metabolic effects) or media was replaced with CM/ns to allow recovery of viable cells for 20hrs, followed by measurement of ATP levels to assess cell survival (right) ( , , and legend to ). Representative statistical significance (p values) for differences between non-pre-fed (CBS2) and pre-fed sample sets in each of the plots are shown in Panel B below. B. Plots of selected data from panel A above, including statistical significance. These data also support data in the main text indicating that both endogenous carbohydrate and lipid stores likely contribute to CPI-613 resistance in vitro. Specifically, while GLUC pre-feeding alone produced relatively modest effects on cell death commitment under the CPI-613 doses and treatment times used in this particular experiment, OA pre-feeding produced larger effects. Moreover, this OA-dependent resistance was further significantly enhanced by combination with glucose pre-feeding. *indicates p < 0.05. ** indicates p < 0.01. *** indicates p < 0.001. **** indicates p < 0.0001. C-F Fig. Supplementary data for , CBS2 glucose uptake, PC3 nutrient stores. C. Monochrome version of the data in . D. 2-deoxyglucose uptake acceleration in response to 60μM CPI-613 in CBS2 media. This study in nutrient free media is parallel to the study in nutrient replete complete medium ( ). After growth in complete medium cells were washed in CBS2 containing either 0.1mM or 1mM glucose and CPI-613 as indicated in the figure ( ). Cells were incubated for 1 hour in these media, followed by 3H-2DG addition (0.25μCi) and a second 1 hour incubation. Cells were washed and lysed and the lysate was counted (Supplementary Methods in ). E. Glycogen levels in AsPC1 (CPI-613 resistant), PANC1 (moderately sensitive) and PC3 (highly sensitive) cells. Cells were grown, processed, and assayed in strict parallel using the procedure describe in the legend to with 20 minute CBS2 preincubation. F. Lipid staining of AsPC1 (CPI-613 resistant), PANC1 (moderately sensitive) and PC3 (highly sensitive) cells. Cells were grown, processed, and photographed in strict parallel using the procedure described in the legend to . A different photomicroscopy system and lower initial magnification was used for these images than for those in panel C above and ( ). ** indicates p < 0.01. *** indicates p < 0.001. **** indicates p < 0.0001.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S3 FigA-F Fig. Additional plots of nutrient store inhibitor enhancement of CPI-613 potency. A-C: Reference copies of data in Figs and in main text, as well as additional data showing PANC1 TZ response under conditions described in legend to . D-E: Statistical significance for data in bar graph interaction plots as described in legend to . Dashed green lines indicate the combination value predicted if the two indicated agent levels act independently of one another. F: ACOX1 protein levels were knocked down with antisense morpholino oligos at left (Supplementary Materials and Methods in ). Control oligo was used at 2.5μM and the anti-ACOX1 oligos were a mixture of two independently targeting the ACOX1 message (each at 1.25μM). ATP levels were assayed after antisense treatment followed by exposure to indicated CPI-613 concentrations for 19hrs at right (Supplementary Materials and Methods in ). [Higher RLU values observed in this experiment result from the use of reflective white plates, due to supply chain constraints. Absorbent black plates were used for all other experiments herein except ] Note that the morpholino antisense procedure induces some CPI-613 sensitization independently of the effects of ACOX1 knockdown (compare to for example), most likely indicating metabolic stress induced by the antisense treatment procedure, itself, independently of ACOX1 targeting. Dashed green line indicates the combination value predicted if CPI-613 and the ACOX1 antisense oligo act independently of one another. G. Original Westerns from which the data in panel above were extracted. The wells used in the panel above are indicated by the brackets.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S4 Fig

## Nutrient access and CPI-613 response.
A. These experiments were carried out as described in , including 19-22hr post-treatment CM/ns recovery to assess cell death commitment. Initial drug treatment times were 15hrs for all cell lines. [Note that PC3 cells undergo passive starvation and death in the absence of exogenous carbon under these conditions.] B. CB839 inhibition of glutaminase GLN mobilization produces limited effects on CPI-613-induced cell death in the absence of exogenous nutrients, particularly in AsPC1. Cells were treated in CBS2 in the presence of CB839 for 15hrs, followed by 28hrs CM/ns recovery to assess cell death (see legend to ). CB839 concentrations used span the range necessary to fully inhibit glutaminase activity in carcinoma cells (see , for example). C. OA rescues CPI-613-induced (60μM) ATP depletion in the presence of GPi (60μM) in a concentration dependent manner (6hr treatment). Other tested carbon sources not providing electrons directly to the ETC do not (acetate, dimethyl-alpha-ketoglutarate, and pyruvate). [Note that pyruvate oxidation is also blocked by CPI-613 effects on PDH.] The statistical significance (p value) for the differences between 400μM acetate and 50μM oleic acid is <0.0002 and for 400μM pyruvate and 50μM oleic acid is <0.0006. D. Unlike the glutamine GDH electron pair, the extra lactate electron pair (relative to pyruvate) cannot rescue from CPI-613-induced cell death at a robust drug dose (80μM; in the presence 50μM GPi; 16hrs treatment, 22hrs recovery, as in ). At the lower 40μM CPI-613 dose lactate produces modest rescue. Both these results are as expected (text). Carbon sources were 1mM glucose, 2mM glutamine, and 2mM lactate. The statistical significance (p value) for the differences between lactate and glutamine and lactate and glucose at 80μM CPI-613 are <0.002 and <0.02, respectively. This significance value is <0.02 for the difference between lactate and CBS2 at 40μM CPI-613.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S5 Fig

## Differential effects of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (RTKi’s) on PDAC cell metabolism and CPI-613 sensitivity in vitro.
A: Tested high affinity MET inhibitors (left and ) robustly sensitize to CPI-613-induced cell death (resistance dependent on endogenous nutrient stores). In contrast, the two tested low affinity MET inhibitors (right) show more limited sensitization (see for inhibitor affinities). These patterns of sensitization are also supported by the acute data in panel B. Assessment of cell death (treatment followed by CM/ns recovery; ; Materials and Methods) induced by the indicated combinations of CPI-613 and RTKi’s during 15hrs of treatment followed by 20–24 hrs recovery (reference ). Note that PHA6654752 induces a substantial, stable elevation of ATP levels at low doses in PANC1, presumably reflecting an RTK regulatory effect. B. High affinity MET inhibitors (left and ) show robust inhibition of acute ATP synthesis driven by OA. In contrast, the two tested low affinity MET inhibitors (right) show little or no inhibition of OA-dependent ATP synthesis. Also see legend to and Figs , , and for additional technical details (50μM GPi; 60μM CPI-613; 50μM oleic acid; 1mM glucose; 1mM glutamine; treatment time 3 hours) and secondary controls. Each of the strong METi’s also has a distinct pattern of effects on ATP synthesis driven by glucose and glutamine (*). These distinctions presumably reflect other metabolic targets idiosyncratic to each of these regulatory agents. Dose range for each drug was chosen on the basis of its effects in assays in the published literature. For convenience of visualization, each data line is normalized to its own mock treated point, analogously to . C. Raw data from , plotted without normalization.
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 File(DOCX)
Click here for additional data file.

We are grateful to Yusuf Hannun, Scott Powers, Ute Moll, Adam Rosebrock, Tim Pardee, Rumin Zhang, and Sunita Gupta for helpful discussions. Of course, the authors are entirely responsible for the contents of this manuscript. Finally, we thank anonymous reviewers for input that significantly improved the clarity of exposition and the quality of supplementary evidence at several points.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0269620.r001Decision Letter 0
BanerjeeDebabrataAcademic Editor© 2022 Debabrata Banerjee2022Debabrata Banerjeehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
7 Mar 2022

PONE-D-22-02722Evidence for a novel, effective approach to targeting carcinoma catabolism exploiting the first-in-class,
anti-cancer mitochondrial drug, CPI-613PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Bingham,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Apr 21 2022 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Debabrata Banerjee, Ph.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. Thank you for stating the following in the Competing Interests section: 
[The original Stony Brook University CPI-613 patents (ZZ and PMB inventors) were licensed to Rafael Pharmaceuticals currently pursuing clinical development of this drug family. SDS, MD and DT were Rafael Pharmaceuticals employees during the work described herein. MOGR was a Rafael Pharmaceuticals employee for 5 months upon completion of his PhD.  ZZ, PMB, and RS hold an equity stakes in Rafael Pharmaceuticals.]
Please confirm that this does not alter your adherence to all PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, by including the following statement: "This does not alter our adherence to  PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.” (as detailed online in our guide for authors http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/competing-interests).  If there are restrictions on sharing of data and/or materials, please state these. Please note that we cannot proceed with consideration of your article until this information has been declared. 
Please include your updated Competing Interests statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
3. PLOS ONE now requires that authors provide the original uncropped and unadjusted images underlying all blot or gel results reported in a submission’s figures or Supporting Information files. This policy and the journal’s other requirements for blot/gel reporting and figure preparation are described in detail at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-blot-and-gel-reporting-requirements and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-preparing-figures-from-image-files. When you submit your revised manuscript, please ensure that your figures adhere fully to these guidelines and provide the original underlying images for all blot or gel data reported in your submission. See the following link for instructions on providing the original image data: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/figures#loc-original-images-for-blots-and-gels. 
  
In your cover letter, please note whether your blot/gel image data are in Supporting Information or posted at a public data repository, provide the repository URL if relevant, and provide specific details as to which raw blot/gel images, if any, are not available. Email us at plosone@plos.org if you have any questions.
4. Please amend your list of authors on the manuscript to ensure that each author is linked to an affiliation. Authors’ affiliations should reflect the institution where the work was done (if authors moved subsequently, you can also list the new affiliation stating “current affiliation:….” as necessary).
5. We note you have included a table to which you do not refer in the text of your manuscript. Please ensure that you refer to Table 1 in your text; if accepted, production will need this reference to link the reader to the Table.
6. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
Additional Editor Comments:
This submission the authors investigate potential mechanisms of primary resistance to CPI-613, an inhibitor of several TCA cycle enzymes, that had disappointing clinical activity in pancreatic cancer and AML. Cell line models of pancreatic cancer were used to provide data suggesting that blockade of glycogen and lipid mobilization potentiates tumor cell response to CPI-613.
Overall the data are clearly and logically presented and support the model presented, although the data presented are mostly from one or two cell line models, which limits scope of the conclusions.
The reviewers are in general agreement that this submission is acceptable after suitable modification.
The authors are encouraged to pay particular attention to comments from reviewers 2 and 3 and make the suggested changes.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The authors Bingham and colleagues have studied CPI-613 as an anti-cancer mitochondrial drug in the manuscript titled “Evidence for a novel, effective approach to targeting carcinoma catabolism exploiting the first-in-class, anti-cancer mitochondrial drug, CPI-613”. The authors have investigated an exclusive targeting approach for altered metabolism of tumor cells and have shown interesting findings. The manuscript can be accepted without any revision.
The research findings of the study are promising and of high clinical relevance. The results display effectiveness in overcoming the limitations associated with targeting metabolic machinery including single-agent resistance by using multi-target approach with tumor-preferential inhibition of the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle by CPI-613 (devimistat), a first-in-class drug. This translational approach can be investigated further for the advancement of current therapeutics.
The study offers strong evidence to support strategies for superior clinical targeting of carcinoma catabolism. However, authors show that cell line-specific, lipid stores in cancer cells may lead to CPI-613 resistance. Interestingly, using FDA approved agents, together with CP1-613 shows promising results in targeting resistant cells and may be highly beneficial in clinical setting in the future.
Targeting the fatty acid flow by clinically practical agents is possible and using such agents significantly sensitized a fully CPI-613-resistant carcinoma xenograft in vivo. The study also offers great advantage in understanding of the mechanistic pathways associated with resistance. However, heterogeneous effect of CPI-613 on different cells makes it more interesting as a candidate.
Reviewer #2: The authors present data showing that sensitivity of cell lines in vitro to CPI-613 is significantly impacted by nutrient availability. Additionally exposure of cell lines to CPI-613 was correlated with an increase in glucose uptake. They show that cell line sensitivity is correlated with cellular levels of glycogen and lipids. The blockade of glycogen and lipid mobilization potentiates tumor cell response to CPI-613. Interestingly the TKI crizotinib also potentiates CPI-613 activity and the authors present data suggesting that MET inhibition could be important in this effect. This is an very nice body of work.
To broadly identify correlation between resistance to CPI-613 and increased glycogen and lipid stores it would be useful to assess this across several additional cell lines. Do H460 and PC3 have lower glycogen or lipid stores?
The increase in glucose uptake in response to CPI-613 exposure is really interesting. For the results in shown in figure 1C why was 240micromolar CPI-613 used? Was there a dose response of the uptake of glucose to CPI-613 when glucose concentration was not limiting? It would be interesting to know what concentrations of glucose were limiting.
Figure 1E: I don’t completely understand this figure. Are these 3 independent experiments where cell death was assessed at 3 different time points or is this a single large experiment with 3 time points? Without data points on the dose response curve its hard to tell how similar the results are. If all of the PANC1 cells are dead at 30micromolar CPI-613 why use 40 micromolar in the experiment?
The impact of blocking the TCA cycle in combination with fatty acid beta oxidation may impact normal cell types in addition to cancer cells. It would be interesting to determine the impact of these combinations on normal cells.
Some of the text that occurs in the results section would be better incorporated into the discussion section (line 154-157; 174-178; 182-85;254-260; 313-323 etc)
Line 57-59 – because CPI-613 has not been effective as a single agent, there have been significant toxicities associated with the drug (4 patients with renal failure: ref 14), and clinical PD data as far as I know I would change “with sufficient tumor selectivity to have robust clinical safety” to something like …has had an acceptable safety profile in single agent and combination studies.
Line 77-81: Would give the specifics of the clinical response seen in the trials discussed in this paragraph ( ie for ref 14 there were 4 responses out of 21 patients).
Line 83-84: I am not sure it is completely accurate to say that the levels of endogenous nutrient stores are cell line specific. It is possible that endogenous stores for each cell line are impacted by environmental conditions that have not been completely explored for each cell line. Would take out cell line specific.
Line 90: What does homeostatic consumption mean?
Line 97: would change “likely” to …..that may be
Line 219: remove “This systematic”
Line 265: I think I would take out “cell line-specific”
Figure 5: add concentration of agents in the cocktail to the figure legend
Figure 6: Its hard to know how to interpret the differences in the response of the tumors to TZ in panel A and B (as indicated in the text). It looks in both panels like TK+CPI-613 group and the TK treated group are the same. Is the effect on tumor growth largely due to TX. What was the difference in size of the tumors at the start of treatment for panels A and B? Was there any change in weight of the mice in each group?
The resolution of the photos in figure 2C and D is not great. This may be a consequence of my equipment or poor IT skills. Would it be possible to get higher resolution photos either from the authors or through PLOS?
Reviewer #3: In this manuscript, the authors investigate potential mechanisms of primary resistance to CPI-613, an inhibitor of several enzymes in the TCA that had disappointing clinical activity in recent trials in both pancreatic cancer and AML. The authors use cell line models of pancreatic cancer and present data that suggest that ability of cells to use intracellular energy stores present in cellular glycogen and lipid stores, mediates resistance to CPI-613. They show that inhibition of either fatty acid metabolism or glycogen use with small molecule inhibitors can reverse resistance to CPI-613 in AsPC1 model in a glucose dependent manner in vitro. The authors go on to show that surprisingly, crizotinib also impacts fatty acid catabolism, and this TKI can induce sensitivity to CPI-613 in xenograft models of AsPC1.
Overall the data are clearly and logically presented and support the model presented, although the data presented are mostly from one or two cell line models, which limits generalizability of the conclusions. Some points the authors could address include:
1. The authors interpretation of in-vivo data depends on peri-tumoral glucose levels being much lower than plasma glucose levels, which in fasting mice are in the range of 5 mM. The data in xenograft models suggest that glucose levels in peri-tumoral environment are low, but are not directly measured or assayed. Also tumors initiated by flank injections, especially in early stages. May have very different tumor microenvironment than that seen in naturally occurring tumors or autochthonous models. This should be at least discussed.
2. Some data suggest that in pancreatic tumor lactate is may be more important than glucose; it may be important for the authors to show if high lactate levels, like glucose, can also rescue the effects of combined metabolic inhibition.
3. Figure 6B; The fact that the vehicle and CPI alone data on all panels are the same data replicated should be clearly emphasized. Also it appears that the s difference between TZ vs TZ +CPI seen at the 10 mg/kg dose of TZ but not 5 mg/kg dose appears to be driven by less efficacy of TZ alone at 10mg/kg vs TZ alone at 5 mg/kg? This requires explanation or more repeats of the experiment as this may be an experimental fluke,.
4. Burkitt’s lymphoma appears to potentially be sensitive to CPI-613 in patients; the author should comment on this recent clinical observation and potential metabolic microenvironment and dependencies of this myc-driven disease.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
Reviewer #3: No
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: anti-cancer mitochondrial drug, CPI-613.pdf
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0269620.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
20 Apr 2022

Before addressing specific comments by the reviewers we note that we detected and corrected a quantitative clerical error in one treatment duration in the legend to Fig 4B. We emphasize that this correction has no impact on the interpretation of the results in this figure or any conclusions in the larger manuscript.
REVIEWER 1:
Reviewer 1 supported publication of our original manuscript without revision.
 
REVIEWER 2:
Reviewer 2 asks that we add data testing the generality of the glycogen and lipid store correlations with drug sensitivity characterized in PDAC cells lines. We have taken advantage of the exceptional sensitivity of the PC3 prostate cancer cell line to do this (see new figures S2E,F Fig; text lines 251-256). We find the predicted very low levels of glycogen and lipid stores in this very sensitive line. Collectively, our results robustly support the generality of the correlation between the levels of endogenous nutrient stores and CPI-613 sensitivity in carcinoma cells.
As requested by reviewer 2, we examined CPI-613 effects on glucose uptake under the nutrient depleted CBS2 conditions and correspondingly lower drug doses used in many of the experiments herein (see new figure S2D Fig; also see text lines 171-173). We find robust drug stimulation of glucose uptake under these conditions, analogous to those observed at higher drug doses in nutrient replete complete media (Fig 1C,D). 
Reviewer 2 asked for further clarification of the significance of the three panels making up Figure 1E. We have edited the 1E legend to make this clearer (text lines 149-155).
Reviewer 2 asks about normal cell tolerance of CPI-613/TZ co-treatment. We enhanced our discussion of tumor selectivity of CPI-613 in lines 59-63 and of TZ in lines 491-493. We believe that the most reliable assessment of this issue comes from in vivo systems; thus, we have added additional comments on the current state of our knowledge about normal tissue responses to CPI-613/TZ combinations in the legend to Fig 6 (lines 530-533).
Reviewer 2 asks for clarification of several issues covered in Fig 6. We have extensively revised the presentation of these results. We improved the plotting of data in the lower left panel Fig 6B (uploaded figure has a “rev” extension reflecting this). As well, we annotated an additional important, statistically significant data point pair in this panel; collectively, the various annotated point pairs in Fig 6B make a strong case for the in vivo interactions of CPI-613 and TZ mimicking the in vitro results. We substantially revised our discussion of Fig 6 in the main text (lines 497-514) to further address the various concerns of reviewer 2 about the interpretation these data.
In response to reviewer 2’s request, we have increased the resolution of the figures containing the Fig 2C,D panels and the related supplementary figure panels (S2C,F Fig). This eliminates pixilation of these images at magnifications sufficient for visualization of all the captured features of the fluorescent images. Each of these two figures has an HD extension reflecting this. 
Reviewer 2 asks about the definition of the term “homeostatic consumption.” We provide a definition of this term the first time it is used in the main text (lines 97-101). The gist is that CPI-613-induced accelerated flux through glycolysis or fatty acid beta-oxidation provides resources that can overcome/prevent the ATP depletion that would otherwise result from drug targeting of the TCA cycle as a result of by-passing this target.
Finally, Reviewer 2 has suggested various local changes to the text. We have accepted all these suggestions with minor exceptions, as follows (line numbers in original manuscript draft are shown in parentheses).
 First, we have made the requested revisions to each of the following lines: 61-63 (57-59), 82-83 (77-81), and 88-90 (83-84), 107 (97), 229 (219), 281 (265), and Fig 5 legend 442-444 (410).
 Second, lines in the original text, 154-157 and 313-323, were moved from the RESULTS to the DISCUSSION and revised [see lines 579-596 in revised text], as requested.
Third, however, we have left the segments represented by lines 184-188 (174-178), 192-195 (182-85) and 270-276 (254-260) in their original locations, rather than moving them to the DISCUSSION. We understand why the reviewer might view the content of these brief segments as appropriate for the DISCUSSION; nonetheless, we believe they serve an important function in their current locations to allow the reader to more readily follow the logic of the arguments and experimental design developed in the flow of the RESULTS section. 
 
REVIEWER 3:
In response to an initial comment on the generalizability of lipid and glycogen stores determining PDAC CPI-613 sensitivity by reviewer 3, we have taken advantage of the exceptional sensitivity of the PC3 prostate cancer cell line to test this, as also noted above. We find the predicted very low levels of glycogen and lipid stores in this very sensitive line (see new figures S2E,F Fig; text lines 251-256). Collectively, our results robustly support the generality of the correlation between the levels of endogenous nutrient stores and CPI-613 sensitivity in carcinoma cells.
Reviewer 3 asks about the potential of lactate to rescue from CPI-613-induced cell death, in view of glucose rescue. In contrast to glutamine and glucose, lactate does not rescue from robust CPI-613 doses (80µM; see new S4D Fig). This outcome is expected in view of the properties of the shuttle delivering the extra lactate electron pair (relative to pyruvate) to the ETC, as explained and referenced in the added text (lines 402-407). Specifically, the lactate-malate-aspartate shuttle responsible for transfer of the extra lactate electrons to the ETC requires ongoing matrix metabolism of the pyruvate generated by the “reverse” LDH reaction to drive this shuttle in the forward direction (see reference 30 in the MANUSCRIPT). This matrix pyruvate metabolism is, of course, initiated by PDH and, thus, inhibited by CPI-613 (see reference 11 in MANUSCRIPT). As expected on this view, at lower CPI-613 doses lactate can produce modest rescue (S4D Fig), presumably reflecting a small amount of flux through PDH. 
Reviewer 3 asks that we further clarify our current understanding of the levels of free glucose in the solid tumor environment, both in preclinical and clinical contexts. We have done this in lines 695-704. 
Review 3 asks that we clarify the interpretation of several features of the in vivo TGI data in Fig 6, some initially unexpected. He/she also asks that we clarify the replication of the control data in the individual excerpts from a large TGI study (Fig 6B). We substantially revised the discussion of these results in response to these comments (lines 497-514). We have also revised the legend to Fig 6 and replotted the data in the lower left panel of Fig 6B to improve readability. Further, we annotated an additional significant, relevant point pair difference in this same panel; these revisions further clarify and emphasize the value of the evidence in this figure in addressing the issues in question.
Reviewer 3 asks that we comment on the significance of recent reports of promising CPI-613 single agent responses in Burkitt lymphoma clinical trials, in light of our results. We have done this in lines 705-711.
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Guardado Rivas, et al - RESPONSE TO REVIEWERS.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0269620.r003Decision Letter 1
BanerjeeDebabrataAcademic Editor© 2022 Debabrata Banerjee2022Debabrata Banerjeehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
25 May 2022

Evidence for a novel, effective approach to targeting carcinoma catabolism exploiting the first-in-class,
anti-cancer mitochondrial drug, CPI-613
PONE-D-22-02722R1
Dear Dr. Bingham
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Debabrata Banerjee, Ph.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: All comments were addressed very well and supported with data in the revised version of the manuscript.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
10.1371/journal.pone.0269620.r004Acceptance letter
BanerjeeDebabrataAcademic Editor© 2022 Debabrata Banerjee2022Debabrata Banerjeehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
30 May 2022

PONE-D-22-02722R1 
Evidence for a novel, effective approach to targeting carcinoma catabolism exploiting the first-in-class,
anti-cancer mitochondrial drug, CPI-613 
Dear Dr. Bingham:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Debabrata Banerjee 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE