pmcTher Adv Med OncolTher Adv Med Oncol1560tam101510808TAMTherapeutic Advances in Medical Oncology1758-83401758-8359SAGE PublicationsPMC9806411PMC9806411.1980641198064113660163310.1177/1758835922114410810.1177_175883592211441081Using RNA Sequencing and Profiling in Diagnosis and Treatment of CancerReviewClinically relevant fusion oncogenes: detection and practical
implications
SorokinMaksim , Genomic instability is
associated with both the appearance of ‘driver’ and ‘passenger’ mutations and
accelerated molecular evolution of the tumor. There are two main levels of genomic
instability. At the nucleotide level, it generates mostly single
nucleotide substitutions, short insertions and deletions, insertion of transposable
elements, and variability of the microsatellite loci. , In turn, chromosomal
instability implies shuffling of the bigger fragments of the genome and is
associated with aneuploidy, deletions or amplifications of genes, chromosomal
rearrangements, translocations, and gene fusions. Chromosomal instability is
currently considered one of the most common features of cancer cells. Approximately
90% of solid tumors and more than a half of hematopoietic cancers have large-scale
chromosomal aberrations. 
Genomic instability generates genomic aberrations and can lead to accelerated
evolution of cancers toward drug and immune resistance. , The increased mutation rate
can help cancer cells to control drug response by eliminating or amplifying genes
related to drug efficacy mechanisms. These processes, underlaying resistance,
include loss or gain of chromosomes and their fragments, as well as nucleotide-level
mutations. For instance, the reversion mutations of BRCA1/2 in
solid cancers make tumors more resistant to platinum or PARPi therapy. Oncogenic
mutations can provide immune evasion, such as mutations in KRAS
that promote immune suppression in colorectal cancer. Moreover, high level of
cancer cells aneuploidy negatively correlates with the effectiveness of
immunotherapy. On the other hand, deficient DNA repair systems can also
lead to the increased mutation load in protein coding regions, thus expanding the
amount of neoantigens in tumor. This makes tumors susceptible
to recognition by immune system, thus potentially enhancing immunotherapy
efficiency. Thus, high tumor mutation burden is one of the major
biomarkers for immunotherapy prescription. 
Genomic instability is preceded by accumulation of mutations in proto-oncogenes,
tumor suppressor genes, or genetic predisposition that lead to defective regulation
of tightly connected mechanisms of DNA damage response and repair, cell cycle progression,
senescence, and apoptosis, that coincide with inefficient elimination of transformed
cells by the immune system. For example,
negative regulators of Wnt pathway that plays a crucial role in cell proliferation,
migration, polarity, and cell fate determination, are usually mutated and,
consequently, downregulated in lung cancer cells. This results in abnormal cell
proliferation and can provoke metastasis. Immunosuppression can be
caused by various random events such as viral infection, , insufficient generation and
CD8 T-cell exhaustion, and tissue repair associated with M2 macrophage
polarization. 
Chromosomal instability is associated with an ability to move and interconnect
different pieces of chromosomes. , During normal germ cell
development, DNA is exchanged or crossed-over between chromosomes during prophase 1
of the meiosis followed by haploid cell division to generate cells with a single
copy of each chromosome. These mechanisms are absent in the somatic cells and
re-emerge in cancer leading to translocations and aneuploidy. 
One of mechanisms that promotes genomic instability is the so-called replication
stress, that is, disturbances in the DNA replication process that lead to the arrest
or destruction of the replication fork. In turn, termination of
replication in the absence of timely repair can provoke DNA double-strand
breaks. 
Hotspots of the DNA double-strand breaks often occur at specific ‘fragile’ sites on
chromosomes. At these loci, there is an increased frequency of loss of
homozygosity or heterozygosity in cancer cells. In regions of nucleotide
tandem repeats, mutations also occur due to malfunctions of the replication
fork. The system repairs DNA double-stranded breaks by the homologous
recombination of adjacent genome regions. As a result, duplications of
microhomologous chromosomal regions can occur, which are found in many types of
cancer, such as ovarian and breast cancers. 
Mitotic disorders are another reason for the appearance of genomic instability at the
chromosomal level. Errors can occur both in the early and late stages of cell
division. The contribution to the development of genomic instability of sister
chromatids pairing violations is well known. Also, mutations in the genes
responsible for the passage of cell cycle checkpoints can be associated with genome
instability. A common occurrence in the anaphase of cancer cells is
chromosome lagging. This is usually due to abnormal attachment of chromosomes,
when one kinetochore attaches to microtubules extending from different poles of the
spindle. Because this phenomenon is not recognized by the spindle assembly
checkpoint, this merotelic attachment and the resulting lagging of the chromosome is
an important cause of genomic instability. Mitotic disorders can lead to
aneuploidy and even genome-wide duplications. It is important to note that
the ploidy of the genome is directly related to the ability of cells to adapt.
Tetraploid cells have more mutations per genome, but not per chromosome, which
increases the adaptability of the cell. In addition, it has been
experimentally shown that genome-wide duplications increase the resistance of cells
to subsequent manifestations of genomic instability. 
Telomere changes can also lead to genomic instability. Thus, shortening of telomeric
regions is a frequent event in the early stages of tumor development. Normally, it
occurs as a result of the accumulation of the effect of previous acts of progenitor
cell replication, and when the threshold value is crossed, such cells undergo aging
and/or are eliminated. However, mutations in the cancer cell, for instance, leading
to loss of function of negative regulators of cell proliferation, can help to avoid
apoptosis. Alternatively, mutations can result in function gain for
the different protein families that inhibit apoptosis, for example, members of IAP
and Bcl-2 protein families, or other prosurvival factors. This has a strong potential
to evade programmed cell death. Telomere shortening can also
be associated with various manifestations of genomic instability at the chromosomal
level, from amplification or deletion of individual loci to changes in entire
chromosomes. Late-stage tumors typically reactivate telomerase or
activate an alternative telomere elongation pathway. The latter mechanism appears
to be associated with significant genomic rearrangements and defects in DNA repair
systems. 
In addition, high expression and insertions of LINE-1 and other active transposable
elements within accessible chromatin regions generate multiple somatic variants, and
contribute to the genomic instability in cancers. Moreover, epigenetic factors
can also cause and promote genomic instability. The key epigenetic factors
contributing to gene expression regulation and mutagenesis are DNA methylation,
histone modification, nucleosome remodeling, and non-coding RNAs. 

## Novel fusion genes in cancer
Chromosomal translocations, deletions, insertions, and inversions can lead to the
formation of chimeric genes with oncogenic functions. The first chimeric gene was
described within the so-called Philadelphia chromosome, which is formed as a result
of the translocation of regions of chromosomes 9 and 22 [t (9;22) (q 34; q 11.2)]
and occurs in approximately 90% of all cases of chronic myeloid leukemia. , As a result
of structural rearrangement, a chimeric gene BCR-ABL1 is formed,
which encodes the corresponding chimeric protein BCR-ABL. It is a continuously active
tyrosine kinase that permanently activates proliferation, replication,
differentiation, and also renders the cell resistant to apoptosis. Active
proliferation can lead to an increased rate of mutagenesis, which contributes to the
development of drug resistance in cancer cells. 
Since the discovery of the Philadelphia chromosome, many other chimeric genes have
been found that are specific to a particular type of cancer. For example,
the chimeric EWSR1-FLI gene is characteristic for a number of
sarcomas. , 
KIAA1549-BRAF fusion oncogene is characteristic for spinal
intramedullary astrocytomas, and fusions with
JAZF1 and YWHAE genes frequently occur in
leiomyosarcomas. , In many cases, fusion genes are just passenger mutations
accompanying carcinogenesis that do not play any significant role in cancer
progression. On the other
hand, some fusion genes harbor specific tumor promoting molecular activities and
are, therefore, referred to as driver mutations. Their tumor-promoting
activities may strongly differ in nature and are still most probably not completely
understood.
However, even for the fusion oncogenes, only a tiny fraction of them currently serves
as the targets for cancer therapeutics. All such chimeras are fusions with receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK) genes. Presence of such fusion gene in the genome can be a
significant biomarker both for the diagnosis and prognosis of the disease, and for
the choice of therapy. Tens of small molecular mass therapeutics that inhibit kinase
activities of these gene products have been approved by the US FDA for treatment of
tumors with confirmed chimeric genes ( ). In particular, chimeric
transcripts of genes for RTKs ALK, FGFR 1-4, NTRK 1-3, RET, ROS1,
and MET are used for prescription of the respective targeted
therapeutics ( ).
 For these fusion oncogenes, all paternal tyrosine kinase receptor proteins have a set
of common structural features ( ). They consist of (at least) an extracellular ligand-binding
domain, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains. , 
 Binding of the ligand to the extracellular part of the receptor causes dimerization
and transphosphorylation of tyrosine residues of the intracellular domain. This
leads to activation of the kinase domain and subsequent triggering of various
intracellular cascades. In this case, the signaling pathway of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK pathway), the phosphoinositide-3-kinase/protein kinase B
(PI3K/AKT/mTOR), protein kinase C (PKC), and STAT-dependent pathways are activated,
which are responsible for the induction of proliferation and cell
survival. Breakage and ligation
during chimera formation occur in the intron region and, thus, due to splicing, the
exon–intron structure of both parts of the transcript is preserved. Ligand binding
leads to autophosphorylation and adaptor protein binding that further phosphorylate
and ubiquitinate receptor which is subsequently internalized into lysosomes followed
by either recycling or degradation, , Internalized RTK continues to
signal inside the cell.
There are two main types of structure of chimeric tyrosine kinase genes ( ). In the first case,
the N-terminal extracellular and transmembrane domains-encoding part of a tyrosine
kinase receptor gene may be replaced by a partner gene, which results in the
presence of tyrosine kinase domain is the 3′-moiety of a chimeric gene. In this
case, the 5′-partner domains, as a rule, contribute to the dimerization of the
tyrosine kinase domain. For example, the coiled coil motif, sterile alpha domain,
LIS 1-homologous, IMD domain, and caspase domain can be mentioned as the
contributing structural motifs of the 5′ fusion partner. This can lead to
ligand-independent dimerization of the tyrosine kinase domain which triggers further
carcinogenic properties of such fusion oncogene.
 In the second type, the tyrosine kinase receptor is the 5′-terminal partner, and the
3′-partner most probably can additionally stabilize the chimeric RNA or protein
product. The breakpoint in such case is usually located after the
exons encoding the tyrosine kinase domain. Thus, the partner gene is fused to the
C-terminus of a nearly full-length tyrosine kinase receptor. 
Importantly, for both types, the main feature is the preservation of the active
tyrosine kinase domain. This appears to be a key factor distinguishing a ‘driver’
mutation from random chimeric products arisen as a side effect of genomic
instability. The second factor is the preservation of an open reading
frame for both parts of the chimera. Both factors are important to distinguish
between the ‘driver’ and ‘passenger’ gene fusion events. For example, in infant
hemispheric glioma, only the patients with preserved open reading frame for a
ZCCHC8-ROS1 fusion were responding to entrectinib. Note also
the published outstanding case of heavily pretreated glioblastoma which expressed
transcripts for four clinically relevant fusion transcripts: with ALK,
FGFR2, NTRK2, and NTRK3 genes. Due to tumor
heterogeneity, these were, however, expressed each by only a minor fraction of tumor
cells, and the prescription of the corresponding targeted therapies would be most
likely unsuccessful. 

## Fibroblast growth factor receptor gene fusions
Fibroblast growth factor receptors 1–4 (FGFR1–4) are a highly conserved family of
transmembrane tyrosine kinases that can form chimeric oncogenes in various
tumors. Normally, FGFR family members play important roles in cell
proliferation, embryonal development, organogenesis, maintenance of homeostasis,
and tissue integrity. In turn, structural aberrations of FGFR family genes
contribute to oncogenesis, tumor progression, and development of drug
resistance. In about 8% of the cases, abnormal increase in FGFR activities in
cancers is thought to be caused by their gene fusions. 
Many chimeric gene partners of the FGFR family have been described. The
FGFR1-HOOK3 and FGFR1-TACC1 chimeras have
been described for cases of the gastrointestinal stromal tumor and
gliomas. 
FGFR1-ZNF703 chimeric gene is found in breast cancer. The
products of these chimeras include the N-terminal portion of the FGFR1 protein
and the coiled coil motif at the C-terminal, which induces dimerization of the
tyrosine kinase triggering various signaling cascades.
Among all family members, FGFR2 gene is more likely than others
to form chimeras. As a result of the fusion, the normally prohibited
activation of FGFR2 and the launch of various signaling
cascades also occur, which can stimulate oncogenesis. FGFR2
fusions are characteristic for cholangiocarcinomas, where they occur in 10–16%
of the cases. Thus, in patients with cholangiocarcinoma, the
chimeric genes FGFR2–AHCYL, FGFR2–BICC1, FGFR2–PPHLN1, and
FGFR2–TACC have been identified and functionally
characterized. The chimeric FGFR2-CCDC6 gene can
initiate the proliferation of cancer cells in vivo. 
Furthermore, more than a hundred of FGFR2 chimeric partners
have been identified but not studied in detail. Such partners include
KIAA1217, KIAA1598, DDX21, LAMC1, NRAP, NOL4, PHC1, RABGAP1L,
RASAL2, ROCK1, TFEC, AFF4, CELF2, DCTN2, DNAJC12, DZIP1, FOXP1, INA, KCTD1,
LGSN, and other genes. In addition to
cholangiocarcinoma, chimeric FGFR2 genes are also frequently
found in colorectal cancer, lung cancer, and in hepatocarcinomas. , 
In turn, FGFR3 fusions are characteristic for glioblastoma,
lung, and bladder cancers. One of the best studied
chimeras is FGFR3-TACC3. The product of this
chimeric gene is a fusion of the N-terminal region of the FGFR3
with the coiled coil domain of TACC3. Coiled coil motif is
located at the C-terminus of the protein and is normally involved in the
formation and stabilization of the mitotic spindle. The
FGFR3-TACC3 fusion has been found in different types of
cancer: in gliomas, in cancers of the lung, bladder, head and neck, and
cervix. , , The formation of this chimeric oncogene results in
constitutive activation of the FGFR3 tyrosine kinase domain and, as a
consequence, activation of the MEK/ERK and STAT1 signaling pathways. Also,
the chimeric protein FGFR3-TACC3 is localized to the mitotic spindle and induces
errors in the chromosome segregation process, thus resulting in the appearance
of aneuploid cells in glioblastoma. In contrast, in bladder
cancer cells, FGFR3-TACC3 chimera inhibits TACC3 localization to mitotic
spindle, thereby contributing to aneuploidy. 
FGFR3 fusions with other genes have also been detected but have
not been characterized in-depth. For example, the product of the
FGFR3–BAIAP2L1 chimera was found in bladder and lung
cancers, and the AES, ELAVL3, JAKMIP1, TNIP2, and
WHSC1 genes are also known among the confirmed
FGFR3 fusion partners. , 
Fusions with FGFR genes are important prognostic molecular markers. A study was
made of tumors of the bile ducts: 152 cholangiocarcinomas and 4 intraductal
papillary mucinous tumors were analyzed by fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) for the presence of FGFR2
chimeras. Totally, 13 tumors carrying FGFR2
translocations were found which showed statistically significantly longer
overall survival: 123 versus 37 months for the patients without
translocations. Similar results were
obtained in a study of 377 patients with biliary tract cancer, of which 63 had
FGFR2 chimeras. 

## Neurotrophic TRK family gene fusions
The neurotrophic TRK (NTRK) family includes TRKA, TRKB, and TRKC proteins which
are encoded by the NTRK1, NTRK2, and NTRK3
genes, respectively. Normally, these tyrosine kinases play a pivotal role
in neuronal survival and CNS plasticity. 
Various mutations of the NTRK family genes in cancer cells have
been described leading to single nucleotide substitutions, amplifications, and
abnormal splice isoforms. However, the formation
of chimeric oncogenes is the most common mutation type that leads to increased
kinase activity. NTRK gene sequences including a tyrosine
kinase domain are usually located at the 3′ end of the chimeras, and are fused
to the 5′ region of a partner gene. The product of the
chimeric gene is an oncoprotein capable of activating the tyrosine kinase domain
without the involvement of a ligand binding. Various
NTRK chimeric 5′ partners are known, including
ETV6, TPM3, and LMNA, yet their exact
roles in the function of an oncoprotein have not been fully
characterized. 
NTRK fusion oncogenes were found in multiple types of cancer. At
the same time, their occurrence is relatively low. The analysis of 13,467 adult
and pediatric tumor samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and St. Jude
PeCan databases showed that the frequency of chimeric NTRK
genes in the most common cancer types was less than 1%. Another
study by Rosen and colleagues showed that, when present, functional chimeric
NTRK genes are expressed from the very beginning until the
most advanced stages of carcinogenesis, thereby indicating a ‘driver’ rather
than a ‘passenger’ nature of the mutation. 

## RET gene fusions
RET mutations such as amplifications, single nucleotide
substitutions, insertions and deletions, and the formation of chimeric genes
have been described in cancer cells. Chimeras with the 3′ RET
moiety are more frequently detected and better described. In this case, the
tyrosine kinase domain part is usually placed under the control of a stronger
promoter, which leads to its overexpression. Many 5′ fusion partners
of RET have been described, of which the most common are
CCDC6, NCOA4, and KIF5B. , , 
RET activation as a result of chimera formation can occur
through different mechanisms. First, as already noted, the substitution of the
5′-part of RET for a gene fragment with a stronger promoter.
Second, dimerization of RET tyrosine kinase domains due to
fusion with partners providing a coiled-coil motif, as in the case of
CCDC6 gene. As a result, ligand-independent kinase
activation occurs. Also, oncogenic hyperactivation of
RET in a fusion is possible due to the loss of the
autoinhibitory N-terminal region. 

## ROS1, ALK, and MET gene fusions

## ROS1 fusions
ROS1 is a proto-oncogene encoding a tyrosine kinase with
unknown physiological function. The first ROS1 chimeric
gene was found in the U118MG glioblastoma cell line in 1987. 
Interestingly, the tyrosine kinase domain of ROS1 has high
structural identity with another RTK, ALK. 
Impaired expression of ROS1 is known for many cancer types,
and at least 55 5′-terminal partners of the ROS1 chimeras
were reported. The frequency of occurrence of 5′-partners in the
chimeras may depend on the cancer type. In particular, large heterogeneity
of the 5′-partners is characteristic of glioblastoma, non-small-cell lung
cancer (NSCLC), and of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors. In NSCLC tumors,
the most common 5′-partners for the ROS1 chimeras are
CD74 (~44%), EZR (16%),
SDC4 (14%), and SLC34A2
(10%). 
ROS1 chimeras are formed due to both intra- and
interchromosomal rearrangements. For example, in glioblastoma, the chimeras
are more often the result of intrachromosomal translocations, and in NSCLC,
they are instead interchromosomal. , 
The most common structure of the ROS1 chimera includes the
loss of virtually the entire extracellular domain of ROS1
and the fusion with the 5′ part of the partner gene, retaining the open
reading frame and a complete intracellular kinase domain. As
before, the formation of chimeras usually results in ligand-independent,
constitutive activation of the ROS1 tyrosine kinase domain.
The intracellular localization of the chimeric ROS1 gene
depends on the 5′-partner gene and influences the activation of specific
signaling pathways. For example, the SDC4-ROS1 and
SLC34A2-ROS1 chimeras are localized in endosomes and
activate the MAPK pathway more efficiently than the
CD74-ROS chimera localized in the endoplasmic
reticulum. It was shown in mice models that the presence of
the chimeric ROS1 gene alone may be sufficient to induce
carcinogenesis. However, when combined with the loss of tumor suppressor
p16Ink4a, this results in development of a more aggressive
tumor. 

## ALK fusions
Also, many tumors including large cell lymphoma, diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, glioma, NSCLC, colorectal cancer, breast, ovarian, and esophageal
cancer have chimeras with tyrosine kinase ALK. More than 90
5′-partner genes of ALK have been described, .
ALK translocations are not uncommon and are found in
approximately 8% of all NSCLCs. As a result of
structural rearrangements, the chimeras retain a full-fledged ALK tyrosine
kinase domain at the C-terminus. As in other cases, dimerization of chimeras
results in aberrant persistent kinase domain activity. 
ELM4-ALK is the most frequent ALK fusion in NSCLC. ELM4 is a spindle
checkpoint protein required for the proper chromosome alignment and
attachment of microtubules to the kinetochore. Accordingly,
ELM4-ALK fusion inhibits spindle assembly checkpoint control, that is,
inhibits cell cycle arrest in response to the paclitaxel and leads to the
mitotic errors ( ), , This effect is partially due to the kinase
activity of ALK domain and, most likely, other oncogenic ALK fusions have
acquired kinase activity as well. 

## MET fusions
The MET gene is another important RTK-encoding
proto-oncogene. The formation of chimeras with MET is a
relatively rare event, but such products are found in various cancer types.
The first described chimeric gene was TPR-MET. The
replacement of MET extracellular and juxtamembrane domains containing
regulatory regions by TPR two leucine zipper domains leads to a
constitutively dimerized and therefore activated Met kinase
domain. The dimerization domains are essential for
TPR-MET oncogene transforming activity, as well as the
absence of MET extracellular and juxtamembrane domains. 
Similar to many other RTKs, the increased MET activity promotes activation
of downstream intracellular pathways and signaling axes RAS-MAPK and
PI3K-AKT. 
Structural rearrangements involving MET were detected in
0.5% of cases of NSCLC, 3% of glioblastomas, and isolated cases were
described in secretory carcinoma of the salivary gland and pediatric
fibrosarcoma. Several partners of
MET chimeras have been described: the HLA-DRB1,
KIF5B, PTPRZ1, STARD3NL, and ST7
genes. The stability and
degradation of the MET receptor is regulated by an intracellular
peri-membrane domain encoded by exon 14. Interestingly, the
formation of TPR-MEt also resulted in the loss of exon 14
of MET without disturbing the reading frame. Mutations
resulting in the loss of exon 14 in the MET mRNA occur in
3–5% of NSCLCs. This can be caused by both structural
rearrangements and point mutations leading to splicing disorders. 
Mutations are detected both in the intron region around exon 14 and directly
in the splicing sites. After pre-mRNA maturation, a mutant MET receptor with
an increased lifetime is then translated. These mutations are
characteristic of lung adenocarcinomas; however, they are also found in
other types of cancer: pulmonary sarcomatoid (pleomorphic) carcinomas,
squamous cell NSCLC, and less often in gliomas and other tumors. , 

## Application of protein fusion inhibitors in clinical practice
The recent findings revealed overall better response rate to the approved TKIs in
patients with different target RTK fusion genes. Thus, development of new
and broader testing of already approved drugs in more than 100 clinical trials
targeting 26 gene fusions is currently underway ( ).
 Accordingly, the presence of chimeric genes for RTKs is one of the key biomarkers
facilitating the choice of therapy. For example, the drug larotrectinib is approved
by the US FDA for tumors harboring chimeric NTRK genes. 
Enterectinib is another drug with a similar profile of action, with somewhat broader
activity : it can also inhibit ROS1 and
ALK chimeric products. In addition, broad-spectrum
tyrosine kinase inhibitors were the first drugs to treat tumors with
FGFR chimeras: dovitinib, lenvatinib, lucitanib, nintedanib,
derazantinib, and ponatinib. In addition to their activity against
FGFR, they can also inhibit VEGFR, RET, KIT,
and PDGFR.
However, drugs with low specificity may cause more serious side effects. Therefore,
more precise inhibitors have been developed that act specifically against mutations
of FGFR family members, including fusion formations. Two selective
inhibitors for the treatment of tumors with FGFR chimeric genes
have been approved by the US FDA. Erdafitinib is approved for the treatment of
urothelial carcinomas with FGFR2 and FGFR3
mutations, which included the chimeric gene FGFR3-TACC3. 
Selective RET inhibitors pralsetinib (BLU-667, NCT03037385) and selpercatinib
(LOXO-292, NCT03157128) in early-stage clinical trials of NSCLC with
RET fusions resulted in 56% overall response rate for
pralsetinib. , LOXO-292 was recently approved by the US FDA for the treatment
of lung and thyroid cancers with RET driver mutations, with respect
to fusions. In addition, cases have been described of the acquisition of
drug resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in tumors with EGFR
mutations, which occurs as a result of structural rearrangements of
RET. This also highlights the importance of
RET analysis for selecting the optimal treatment strategy.
For the treatment of NSCLC with ROS1 rearrangements, crizotinib has
been approved in multiple countries, with an overall response rate of
65–80%. Crizotinib is also the first targeted drug for the treatment of
tumors with ALK rearrangements. 
Entrectinib is an US FDA-approved drug for the treatment of NSCLC with
ROS1 rearrangements. Entrectinib is able to
penetrate the blood–brain barrier, which is especially important in the treatment of
tumors that have metastasized to the brain. Currently, clinical trials investigate
the activity of entrectinib against tumors with ROS1 fusions
regardless of the cancer type. It was possible to observe objective responses, for
example, even for the cases of melanoma and high-grade gliomas. , 
Crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib, brigatinib, and lorlatinib are approved by the US
FDA for the treatment of ALK chimeric lung cancer. Response to
ALK-inhibiting therapy has also been described in studies on
renal cell and colon cancers. Of note, a retrospective
clinical study showed that progression-free survival after treatment of
ALK-positive NSCLC depends on the 5′-partner of the chimera
with the 3′-part of ALK. However, the partner genes
of the ALK chimeras are not currently routinely taken into
consideration when prescribing therapy.
In addition, the drugs capmatinib and tepotinib have recently been approved for the
treatment of NSCLC with MET mutations resulting in exon 14
skipping. 

## Experimental methods for identification of fusion oncogenes
Identification of fusion oncogenes is a non-trivial task because there are many
alternative methods available that can produce results which may contradict each
other ( ). It is
important, therefore, to carefully select method(s) of choice for the experimental
testing considering availability of biomaterials, costs, equipment, high throughput,
time of analysis, and even complexity of bioinformatic data interpretation.
 

## Fluorescent in situ hybridization
FISH is a method based on the hybridization of labeled specific DNA probes. It
allows detecting changes in the number of chromosomes, gene fusions, loss of a
chromosomal locus or an entire chromosome in both fresh and fixed tumor tissue
samples. For example, FISH is used to detect amplifications of
the ERBB2 gene for Her2 protein, an important prognostic marker
for breast cancer. FISH is also a standard method for detecting the
Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myeloid leukemia. In particular, probes
for loci that are contiguous in the absence of rearrangements are used to detect
translocations. The signal from the native chromosome will be a pair of closely
spaced color signals, whereas in the case of rearrangement, the two colors are
separated in space. 
The chimeric EML4-ALK gene is a characteristic biomarker of lung
adenocarcinoma. Routine detection of this well-known translocation can also be
performed using the FISH method. Likewise, FISH is used
to detect known rearrangements of the ETV6 gene in secretory
carcinoma and pediatric fibrosarcoma specimens. A number of
laboratories use this approach to detect NTRK gene
rearrangements and other fusions such as the FGFR3-TACC3
chimeric oncogene. , Nevertheless, FISH diagnostics does not provide
information about the functional activity of translocations including
preservation of an open reading frame and expression level and does not allow
detection of the non-canonical or unknown rearrangements. In addition, this
method is poorly sensitive to the detection of local intrachromosomal
rearrangements that are characteristic of FGFR2 fusion
genes. 

## Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry ((IHC) method is simple, does not require complex equipment,
is relatively affordable, and fast in execution. In addition, reliable results
can be obtained using a relatively small amount of starting material. The use of
IHC has been approved by the US FDA for the detection of ALK
rearrangements in lung cancer samples for selection of patients for treatment
with ALK-targeted therapy. Also, a ROS1-specific
monoclonal antibody is used to detect ROS1 rearrangements by
the IHC. 
Apparently, IHC method detects not the chimeric gene products themselves, but
rather the expression level of the respective tyrosine kinase domain. Thus,
increased IHC signal can be registered also due to stronger expression of the
whole, non-fusion RTK gene which still can be targeted by the respective
specific drug(s). Although this method is easy to perform and inexpensive, its
accuracy may be reduced due to technical issues arising from tissue fixation, or
other pre-analytical variables. Specifically,
comparisons of IHC with FISH and next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods for
screening of ALK rearrangements in lung cancer resulted in
prevalence of ALK-positive samples tested by IHC. Furthermore, most of
IHC-positive and FISH-negative samples were shown to be negative by NGS, thus
supporting the hypothesis of frequent misleading detection of mutations other
than fusions (e.g. amplifications) using IHC. However, some patients
who were FISH negative but IHC positive for ALK fusion showed
complete or partial responses to ALK-targeted therapy, thus supporting the
relevance of IHC application in practice and clinical importance
of other factors, such as the overexpression of ALK. 

## PCR-based methods
PCR-based methods are widely used both for the diagnosis and for the prognosis
and treatment of cancer. Also, reverse transcription PCR is a standard method
for confirming the presence of chimeric transcripts resulting from structural
rearrangements of chromosomes. , Several kits are
commercially available to detect NTRK, ALK, Ret, and ROS fusions in
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) RNA by the multiples real-time PCR using
mutation-specific primers and/or hybridization probes with about 1% or more
sensitivity and 100% specificity. Detection of 22 fusion genes in AML patients
RNA using a commercial quantitative PCR kit demonstrated 99% concordance with
cytogenetic analysis. Nonetheless, an agarose gel electrophoresis was used
for measurements of multiple EWSR1-ETS and FUS-ETS fusions in Ewing sarcoma by
multiplex RT-PCR (Ueno-Yokohata et al. 2021). In turn,
high-resolution capillary electrophoresis was used to detect 9 fusion
transcripts in the single multiplex reaction. Intriguingly, out of
122 patients examined, abnormal size was detected for one sample due to a rear
deletion of the ETV6 exon 5 within ETV6-RUNX1 chimeric gene. Interestingly,
RT-PCR was used in Idylia GeneFusion assay to detect fusion products of the NTRK
gene without knowledge of the fusion partner by measuring an imbalance between
5′ and 3′ end of the gene. The Idylia GeneFusion
assay is basically a device that automatically extracts RNA and performs
expression analysis directly from the samples including fresh and FFPE samples.
The data demonstrated good concordance between Idylia GeneFusion, IHC, and
RNA-seq based Oncomine Focus Assay. Another method, droplet digital multiplied
PCR, measures the presence of RNA in small droplets, and each of them
encompasses a single RNA molecule, allowing ‘YES-NO’ quantification of PCR
results. Thereby, RNA is measured by counting positive and negative droplets.
This method was recently used to measure gene fusions from as little as 1 pg of
RNA with great success. , 
To conclude, traditional and novel PCR-based tools represent a gold standard for
fusion detection in cancer and are widely used in clinical practice, research,
and development.

## NGS methods
NGS is an increasingly common method for analyzing tumors. It has a number of
advantages over the approaches listed above. Thus, NGS is a more accurate and
sensitive method that allows one to analyze various genetic variants in one
experimental procedure, eliminating the need to conduct multiple tests in
sequence to identify significant biomarkers, thereby significantly reducing the
time for selecting therapy. , It should be noted that
in order to obtain informative results, NGS technologies require a minimum
amount of tumor material; they are also able to capture DNA variants present in
a minority of cells. To date, many approaches have been proposed for the
detection of molecular markers of tumors based on NGS. Although whole genome
studies are not widely used in clinical practice, in particular due to their
high cost, whole exome analysis, gene panel analysis, and whole transcriptome
technologies are increasingly used in the selection of cancer therapies. Methods
based on NGS have been developed to search for single nucleotide substitutions,
deletions, and duplications of genes, to assess the mutation load of tumors,
structural rearrangements of chromosomes, as well as to analyze the level of
expression of clinically significant genes and to detect chimeric
transcripts. , 
Several clinical trials investigating applicability of NGS for prognosis and
ultimately for treatment decision can be mentioned including Strata PATH
(NCT05097599), GITIC Study (NCT02013089), The MATCH Screening Trial
(NCT02465060), MyTACTIC (NCT04632992), and BALLETT (NCT05058937). The
methodology for detection of mutations used in these studies is based on the
NGS. The aim of these studies was formulated as to determine the presence of
molecular targets for the approved drugs (including gene fusions) and to verify
whether patients will benefit more from the targeted treatment.

## DNA sequencing
Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is the most comprehensive platform for genome
profiling. The method has potential to identify the genomic
locations of all known and currently unknown fusion events. 
However, application of WGS in tumor biology is nowadays limited to research
field due to high costs, lack of standardization, and median turnaround
times.
Methods based on whole exome sequencing (WES) are used to detect deletions
and duplications of genes, assess the mutational load of tumors, and
determine the MSI status. Whole exome studies
mainly cover only coding regions of the genome (less than 2%), which
provides a reduced cost compared to whole genome analysis with sufficient
coverage. Despite technical difficulties, the method is widely used to
determine various changes in the genome. For example, several approaches
have been developed to detect changes in the copy numbers of specific genome
regions [copy number aberration (CNA)] using sequencing data. 
Perhaps the optimal approach for the analysis of WES data for CNA is
measuring of the sequencing depth of different genome regions. If,
after normalization, an imbalance in the number of reads in certain part(s)
of the genome is detected, then this can be interpreted as a marker of a
copy number alteration in the corresponding chromosomal region(s). 
However, this algorithm cannot detect fusion genes. Moreover, WES as a basis
for fusion detection tool has a strong technical limitation, namely its
focus on gene exons, whereas most of fusion junctions are located in
introns. Thus, WES capacity to detect fusion breakpoints is strongly
limited. Indeed, the attempt to develop fusion detection tool based on WES
data showed lower sensitivity compared to RNA-seq-based approach. 
To detect structural rearrangements of chromosomes that lead to the formation
of chimeric genes, a number of targeted DNA sequencing approaches have also
been developed. Thus, the panel to detect both known and not yet described
chimeric genes for regulatory kinases ALK, ROS1, RET, BRAF, MET, FGFR1-3,
and NTRK1-3 has been developed. The panel consists of DNA probes labeled
with biotin that are complementary to the intron and exon sequences of the
genome, which are known breakpoints in the formation of chimeric
genes. Similar approaches have been used in commercial
panels to search for chimeric genes from different manufacturers. Most
fusions occur in intron sequences, which often contain repetitive sequences,
such as insertions of transposable element, and are sequenced less
efficiently than coding sequences. This leads to
false-negative results when the presence of the chimeric gene is confirmed
by another method, for example, FISH or RNA sequencing.
Davies et al. compared three approaches for detecting
rearrangements of ROS1 gene in lung cancer. 
Targeted DNA sequencing did not detect 4 out of 18 chimeric genes confirmed
by alternative approaches. The authors attribute false-negative results to
specific structural features of specific introns.
Also, Benayed et al. analyzed the quality of chimeric genes
detection using DNA sequencing panels. 14% of tumors with
confirmed chimeric genes for clinically relevant tyrosine kinases were not
detected when analyzed by the US FDA approved MSK-IMPACT panel, which is
based on biotinylated oligonucleotides to capture genomic sequences of
interest. False-negative results are also associated with the structural
features of introns.

## Sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA
Sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA from plasma of cancer patients
revealed the presence of mutations characteristic for tumor DNA. 
Sequencing of cell-free DNA from plasma of NSCLC patients with
ALK mutation revealed acquisition of additional
mutations in ALK and co-occurring amplification of
MET1, 
KRAS amplification, and a PI3KCA E545K
mutation. , This method requires prompt isolation of plasma
for DNA extraction and permits non-invasive and cheap monitoring of cancer
patients.

## RNA sequencing
RNA sequencing is a method that has several advantages over DNA-based
approaches. This approach has been proven informative for analyzing the
expression level of various genes associated with the effectiveness of the
response to anticancer drugs, activation or
inhibition of various molecular pathways. , , Approaches for the
analysis of the mutational load of tumors according to full transcriptome
analysis are also described. , Therefore, the use
of RNA sequencing makes it possible to assess the manifestation of various
clinically important biomarkers in one experimental procedure.
The detection of chimeric transcripts has a number of advantages over DNA
sequencing approaches. For example, when analyzing transcriptomic profile
data, only transcriptionally active chimeric genes are identified, thereby
filtering in only those fusions that might be the drivers of cancer
progression and leaving out the passenger mutations. Second, in such a way
both parts of a fusion gene can be identified at once – equally effective
for both known and previously unknown fusions. Third, integrity of an open
reading frame can be easily assessed, as well as the presence of a kinase
domain in the chimeric gene product.

## Targeted RNA sequencing
A variety of targeted panels have been proposed to search for both known and
novel chimeric transcripts using RNA sequencing. Two approaches are widely
used: selection of genes of interest by hybridization of cDNA with
oligonucleotides labeled with biotin and complementary to exons of the
target genes; or enrichment of libraries by PCR with specific primers
complementary to the exon boundaries of the genes of interest and the
universal adapter sequence ( ). , 
 In a recent study, Heydt et al. compared four RNA sequencing
and one DNA-sequencing-based targeted panels for the detection of chimeric
genes from cell lines and FFPE tumor samples. As in the studies
described above, the DNA-based approach appeared to be less sensitive,
producing more false negatives in the analysis of biopsies. Among the
alternative RNA analytical panels, three were enriched by amplification:
Archer FusionPlex Lung Panel (ArcherDX), QIAseq RNAscan Custom Panel
(Qiagen), and Oncomine Focus Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). In turn,
TruSight Tumor 170 Assay (Illumina) is based on hybridization of target
sequences with biotinylated oligonucleotides. The best results were obtained
for the TruSight Tumor 170 Assay (Illumina), which detected all chimeric
transcripts in the samples under analysis. The single false-negative signal
was observed in the results of ArcherDX and Qiagen panels; however, Qiagen
panel returned more false-positive chimeras. The Thermo Fisher Scientific
assay did not find 7 chimeric genes out of 18. The low sensitivity of the
last panel is explained by the fact that the approach is based on classical
PCR: both primers are complementary to known sequences of chimeric
transcripts, which makes it impossible to detect chimeras that were never
described previously and not included in the panel design. Thus, in general,
RNA sequencing approaches are technically more effective than DNA analysis
for the detection of chimeric oncogenes. 
Methods for generation of sequencing libraries enriched in regions close to
susceptible chimerization point are highly sensitive, especially for the
detection of known structural rearrangements. However, this approach is
limited by the set of probes available in the targeted panels, which does
not allow detecting in such a way rearrangements at previously unknown loci.
Also, the use of panels limits the set of biomarkers that can be analyzed in
one experimental procedure. These shortcomings are devoid of total RNA or
mRNA sequencing.

## Whole transcriptome RNA sequencing for detection of fusion genes
Genome-wide RNA sequencing evaluates mutations of the transcribed DNA in an
unbiased manner. A number of approaches have been proposed for the detection
of chimeric transcripts in the analysis of full-transcriptome data. There
are two main directions to the analysis of the RNA sequencing data for the
detection of chimeric transcripts: (i) alignment of reads per genome and
search for those reads that map to different loci or (ii) initial assembly
of reads into long transcripts followed by a search for chimeras that do not
map entirely to one genome region ( ). 
 In search for chimeric transcripts, Haas and colleagues used both approaches
to compare 23 analytic algorithms. The authors showed
that the sensitivity of methods based on primary alignment is higher than
for the approaches based on assembly of reads. The best analytic tools
identified were STAR-Fusion, Arriba, and STAR-SEQR. It is important to note
that algorithms for searching of the chimeric reads have been developed
primarily for the analysis of cell lines and fresh frozen
biopsies. , Most of the work devoted to assessing their
quality was carried out on artificial data, or again data obtained from cell
lines and fresh frozen biopsies. , However,
paraffin-embedded biopsies fixed in formalin are the most common type of
biomaterial in clinical practice, which is stored in collections for a long
time. , 
However, RNA in paraffin blocks is more degraded due to the fixation and
storage procedures, which can lead to more false-negative results when
searching for chimeric transcripts from the RNA sequencing data using
existing algorithms. Validation of the work of the studied algorithms for
this type of biomaterial has not yet been published.

## Analysis of gene fusions from the FFPE material by RNA-seq
The use of DNA and RNA from archival material for genome-wide studies attract
researchers’ attention for a long time and it was initially demonstrated
that about 80% of genes, expressed in the fresh tissue can be detected in
the FFPE samples by microarrays. , Since then, we have
witnessed considerable progress in the field and more recent investigations
of RNA from paraffin blocks for gene expression analysis using
microarrays and
sequencing , revealed sufficient quality of RNA obtained from the
FFPE samples to generate reproducible data consistent with RNA from the
unfixed material. Furthermore, specific features such as conservation of
open reading frame in both fusion partners, presence of RTK domain, and
finding of several non-duplicate transcript reads for a fusion were shown as
the efficient criteria for discriminating true versus
artifact fusion reads in FFPE-derived RNA sequencing data. 
Indeed, despite the absolute gene expression levels being not necessarily the
same, very similar pathways were overrepresented within dysregulated genes
obtained from the FFPE and freshly extracted RNA, , thus demonstrating
consistency with IHC studies. , 
Fusion transcript detection by RNA-seq from FFPE samples was recently
reviewed, focusing on the experimental variables; however, the difference in
bioinformatics approaches of fusion transcript detention was not
discussed. Gene fusions were detected by RNA sequencing in 7
out of 8 cases of DNA-fusion positive fibrous histiocytomas. 
Interestingly, comparison of ChimeraScan with TopHat software used in this
study revealed better sensitivity of the former (9 versus 5
fusion transcripts detected) suggesting that detailed analysis of the
software applications for the fusion transcript detection is
needed. It was shown that RNA-seq from the FFPE clinical
material detects fusions with 94% (43 out of 46 fusions) concordance with
DNA fusions, and one ST7-MET fusion was detected only by
RNA-seq. 

## Analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing
High-throughput sequencing technology made single-cell RNA (scRNA) or DNA
analysis possible at an unprecedented scale. Lately, several consortiums
published aggregations and the analysis of the scRNA sequencing
data. 
Functional enrichment analysis distinguishes different cell types as well as
cancer cells, which also can be distinguished by the mutations and copy
number variations typically observed in cancer, 
Importantly, single-cell sequencing characterizes not only cancer cells, but
also immune cells infiltrating the tumor. And, analysis of this data might
reveal information which is relevant to tumor progression and treatment
strategies. For example, sequencing of the T-cell receptor repertoire from
glioblastomas treated by vaccination with heat shock protein peptide
complex-96 identified dominant T-cell clones that reside in glioblastomas
before treatment and stratify patients that are more sensitive to
therapy. 
Various methods have been developed to analyze gene expression of single
cancer cells and to dissect their molecular subgroups. 
Finding of gene fusions at single cell level can potentially shed light on
specific features of cells and their subtypes. Several algorithms for fusion
identification in bulk RNA-seq data have been developed, , but
detection of fusions on single cell level is still largely unsolved task.
Indeed, the ambiguous and complicated library preparation steps result in
generation of artificial chimeric reads and significant increase in the
number of false-positive results. Moreover, the probability to detect fusion
present in many cells is higher using bulk methods. Thus, several approaches
both for sample preparation and for data analyses stages have been proposed.
For example, using full-length scRNA-seq method enabled to detected and
experimentally verify more gene fusions in scRNA-seq data than in bulk
RNA-seq data for HeLa S3 cells. These results were
congruent with the finding published by another group of authors who could
identify well-known as well as potential new fusion in colon cancer samples
solely on single cell level. However,
experimental verification could not be performed here; thus, the increased
number of fusions might at least partly represent artifacts of library
preparation. Another attempt to
increase sensitivity of fusion detection at single cell level is to include
specific primers targeted for the genes of interest. 
This approach increased sensitivity of BCR-ABL1 detection
in chronic myeloid leukemia cells. However, this
method is suitable only for the analysis of known fusions.
A more recent algorithm called scFusion was published for improving data
analysis step. This method utilizes both statistics and a deep
learning model to exclude false-positive results. The algorithm also relies
on the hypothesis that cells collected from one sample are more likely to
contain the same gene fusions. This limits its
ability to detect rare or low expressed fusions, especially in highly
heterogenous samples. Overall, scFusion requires greater sequencing depth as
well as sequencing of larger amounts of cells from the same sample for
obtaining reliable results. Analysis of the single-cell DNA sequencing of
the NSCLC cohort enrolled in the MATCH-R (NCT0251782) trial that developed
osimertinib resistance revealed heterogeneity of acquired mutations in the
cells including FGFR3-TACC3, KIF5B-RE, and
STRN-ALK fusions that can be treated by existing drugs,
thus suggesting possible treatments to overcome osimertinib
resistance. Similarly, RNA
sequencing revealed that ALK junctional heterogeneity in
NSCLC may predict resistance to crizotinib. Likewise scRNA-seq
of chemoresistant cervical cancer revealed induction of the (PI3K)/AKT
pathway. Thus, it is possible to infer the mechanisms of
acquired resistance and to monitor clonal changes of tumors in response to
therapy.
Detection of fusions at single cell level can improve distinguishing cells
subpopulations, thus shedding light on drug-resistant subclones in a tumor.
However, this type of analysis still has strong limitations such as low
coverage per individual cells, high PCR amplification bias and lack of
standardization in data analysis.

## Fusion oncogene databases
The fast growth of gene fusion data necessitates major organizational effort to
gather them in the databases, and there is currently nearly a dozen of published
databases of cancer fusion genes. summarizes the common databases
that are specified for fusion genes. One of the first databases designed to catalog
gene fusions is the Mitelman database of chromosome aberrations and gene
fusions in cancer that was first published in 1994. This database is
supplemented with clinical association information that relate cytogenetic and
genomic abnormalities, in particular gene fusions, to tumor characteristics or
patient prognosis, based either on individual cases or associations. The database is
searchable by a wide variety of fields, such as patient age, publication authors,
gene, tumor histology, tissue type, mutation recurrence, associated clinical
features, and cancer types. 
 The Mitelman database was followed by COSMIC database in 2004, that
started with only four genes, then evolved to contain
more than 5 million somatic mutations and more than 19 thousand gene
fusions. 
RNA-seq data is a major source of mining fusion transcripts. Several fusion databases
were generated from transcript sequences available datasets, such as TCGA dataset.
The Fusion Analysis Working Group identified 25 664 fusion events using RNA-seq data
from tumor and normal samples from TCGA using multiple fusion calling
tools. Similarly, TumorFusions database is a
searchable portal that catalogues over two thousand gene fusions detected in cancer
and normal samples from TCGA. , 
ChimerDB is another knowledgebase database of fusion genes , ; this
database contains fusions identified using bioinformatics analysis of transcript
sequences compiled from GenBank and various other well-known public fusion databases
and PubMed articles reporting fusion genes. ChimerDB is composed of three modules
dealing with the analysis of deep sequencing data (ChimerSeq) and text mining of
publications (ChimerPub) with extensive manual annotations (ChimerKB). 
Newer gene fusion database is the ChiTaRS, generated by performing a
bioinformatics analysis of transcript sequences and expressed sequence tags (ESTs)
for multiple organisms in GenBank, starting from three organisms in the first
version, then extended to include eight organisms: human, mouse,
fruit fly, rats, zebrafishes, cows, pigs, and yeast in the most recent
version. The latest version includes an extended information about
fusions features, as well as 3D chromatin contact maps. In addition,
FusionCancer database contains cancer fusion genes deduced from
RNA-seq data. 
Other databases combine fusion genes functional, regulatory, and genomic information.
Example of such is the FARE-CAFE database that collect various
aspects and data concerning fusion genes and proteins as protein domains,
domain–domain interactions, protein–protein interactions, transcription factors and
microRNAs. FARE-CAFE database incorporates chimeric transcripts and their Genomic
information from different resources including Mitelman’s, dbCRID and the Trans
location in Cancer (TICdb) databases. 
dbCRID is a comprehensive database of human chromosomal
rearrangements events and their associated diseases that documents the type of each
event with the related disease or symptoms, the breakpoint positions and other
genomic information. Similarly, TICdb documents the precise
location of each breakpoint inside a fusion gene. TICdb gather molecular information
on gene fusions resulting from reciprocal translocation events associated with
tumors. 
Aside from cataloging gene fusions, numerous algorithms have been developed to
predict fusion candidates from transcriptome data. Data aggregation and functional
annotation with visualization support are necessary to assess the reliability,
functional significance, and biological roles of predicted fusions. Programs such as
GFusion, FusionScan, and STAR-Fusion are thought to be highly sensitive in detecting
fusions with less false positives. More recently, FusionHub
introduced an integrated web platform that supports both annotation and
visualization for the largest collection of fusion gene datasets aggregated from 24
resources. 
HYBRIDdb is one of the earliest databases of hybrid genes to use a
bioinformatics analysis for identifying gene fusions. HybridDB identified more than
3000 fusions from mRNA, EST, cDNA, and transcript sequences in the NCBI
database. 
Kim and Zhou built FusionGDB (Fusion Gene annotation DataBase) that
gathers more than 40,000 fusion genes from fusion gene public resources such as
TumorFusions and ChiTaRS 3.1. FusionGDB provides extensive functional annotations
for these collected fusion events. Most importantly, the gene assessment across
pan-cancer fusion genes, open reading frame (ORF) assignment and retention search of
protein features. FusionGDB was recently updated using deep learning
techniques to provide eight categories of annotations: Fusion Gene Summary, Fusion
Gene ORF analysis, Fusion Gene Genomic Features, Fusion Protein Features, Fusion
Gene Sequence, Fusion Gene PPI analysis, Related Drugs, and Related
Diseases. 
Since kinase gene fusions are valuable biomarkers and promising drug targets,
specific databases of such fusions have been developed. KuNG FU
(KiNase Gene FUsion) is one of the largest curated databases, containing precise
annotations on solely in-frame kinase gene fusions with intact kinase domain, which
parameters were investigated in cancer cell lines. KuNG FU database is an available
and informative tool for facilitating drug development and diagnostic
studying. 

## Conclusions and further perspectives
Gene rearrangements stand among the major driver mutations in cancer. Recent
developments unravel several therapeutically actionable fusion genes with approved
targeted drugs effective against hematological and solid tumors. Many additional
drugs targeting these and other fusion genes are in clinical trials and in
development. Altogether, this gives physicians more options for the choice of
therapy. However, cancer genomic instability leads to clonal heterogeneity and
selection of cells with resistance to treatment, immune evasion, and metastatic
potential, in many cases leading to failure of the therapy. Metastasis is the major
problem in oncology. In particular, the picture becomes more complicated by the fact
that each metastasis loci represents an individual clone with different mutational
profile and drug sensitivity. To choose a proper therapy, it is critically important
to provide a physician with actionable information about emerging clones. Thus, the
future clinical oncology will utilize methods that will be able to measure mutations
in the individual clones and assess the status of immune cells regulating tumor
microenvironment. While single-cell sequencing methods that can measure clonal
heterogeneity become available for academic research, targeted sequencing, FISH, and
IHC remain the working horse of oncology.
To conclude, NGS-based methods provide several advantages for fusion detection both
in clinical practice and in research studies. First, they combine fusion detection
with finding of other clinically relevant biomarkers, thus providing more relevant
information than ‘classical’ methods in just one test, which requires minute amounts
of biosample. NGS approaches are suitable for the investigation of different sample
types, including cell lines, fresh frozen, and FFPE biopsies. Different
computational algorithms have been developed for the analyses of DNA and RNA NGS
derived data and obtaining of highly reliable results. Further improvements in
fusion detection approaches at both sample preparation and data analysis stages will
expand the current knowledge of fusion frequencies among different cancer types, and
of their particular impact on tumorigenesis, drug sensitivity, and resistance
development. The latter has a strong potential of increasing efficacy of cancer
treatment.

We thank Drs. Xinmin Li (UCLA), Ira Skvortsova (University of Innsbruck), and Ella
Kim (University of Mainz) for fruitful discussion and insightful comments.
ORCID iD: Tharaa Mohammad 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4237-0846

## Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate: Not applicable.
Consent for publication: Not applicable.
Author contribution(s):
Maksim Sorokin: Writing – original draft.
Elizaveta Rabushko: Writing – review & editing.
Julian Markovich Rozenberg: Writing – original draft.
Tharaa Mohammad: Writing – review & editing.
Aleksander Seryakov: Writing – review & editing.
Marina Sekacheva: Project administration; Writing – review &
editing.
Anton Buzdin: Conceptualization; Project administration; Writing
– original draft.
Funding: The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This study was
supported by the Russian Science Foundation grant 22-24-00682.
Authors Maxim Sorokin and Anton Buzdin were employed by the company OmicsWay
Corp. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed
as a potential conflict of interest.
Availability of data and material: Not applicable.