pmcSci AdvSci Adv2850sciadv101653440sciadvScience Advances2375-2548American Association for the Advancement of SciencePMC12542958PMC12542958.112542958125429584112427110.1126/sciadv.ady9758ady97581Research ArticleBiomedicine and Life SciencesSciAdv r-articlesBiochemistryLife SciencesMolecular BiologyMetabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease alters brain function and behavior: Insights from liver-targeted siRNA therapy
The brain-liver axis in MASLDhttps://orcid.org/0000-0001-9204-581XCardoso DelgadoTeresaConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionVisualizationWriting - original draftWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1074-3724Martín-CuevasCeliaInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5785-2990Sánchez HidalgoAna C.InvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9622-1761Gil GómezAntonioInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4586-5975Rejano GordilloClaudia M.InvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7644-7517LandaJonFormal analysisInvestigationValidationVisualizationWriting - review & editing Gallego DuránRocíoInvestigationMethodology Goikoetxea-UsandizagaNaroaInvestigationMethodology González-RecioIreneInvestigation https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2220-0612Gil-PitarchClàudiaConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationResources https://orcid.org/0009-0003-3433-7699Zapata-PavasL. EstefaníaInvestigationWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0009-0007-5972-6796Barrenechea-BarrenecheaJon AnderFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationValidation https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5999-8667ConterCarolinaInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5856-9377Martínez-CruzLuis AlfonsoConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisition https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6082-7320Ramos HerreroVíctor D.InvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9976-9930NogueirasRubénResourcesWriting - original draftWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9115-3202AzkargortaMikelInvestigationMethodology https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8839-5438ElortzaFelixInvestigationMethodology Moncho-AmorVerónicaConceptualizationFormal analysisInvestigationValidationVisualizationWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8248-0172CrespoJavierInvestigationVisualizationWriting - review & editing MatheuAnderFormal analysisFunding acquisitionMethodologyWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8494-8947Romero GómezManuelConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0033-7132Crespo-FacorroBenedictoConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting - original draftWriting - review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6446-9911Martínez-ChantarMaría LuzConceptualizationFormal analysisFunding acquisitionInvestigationMethodologyProject administrationResourcesSupervisionValidationVisualizationWriting - original draftWriting - review & editing 1Liver Disease Lab, Center for Cooperative Research in Biosciences (CIC bioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), 48160 Derio, Bizkaia, Spain.2Metabolic Liver Disease Laboratory, Biobizkaia Health Research Institute, 48903 Barakaldo, Bizkaia, Spain.3IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.4Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERer), 28029 Madrid, Spain.5Translational Psychiatry, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.6Spanish Network for Research in Mental Health (CIBERSAM, ISCIII), 28029 Madrid, Spain.7Clinical and Translational Research in Liver and Digestive Diseases–SeLiver Group, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.8Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBERehd), Carlos III National Health Institute, 28029 Madrid, Spain.9Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Sevilla, 41012 Sevilla, Spain.10Cellular Oncology Group, 20014 Biogipuzkoa Health Research Institute, San Sebastian–Donostia, Spain.11Department of Physiology, CIMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; CIBER Fisiopatologia de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Madrid, Spain; Galician Agency of Innovation (GAIN), Xunta de Galicia, 15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.12Proteomics Platform, Center for Cooperative Research in Biosciences (CIC bioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), 48160 Derio, Bizkaia, Spain.13School of Medicine, University of Cantabria, Clinical and Translational Research in Digestive Diseases, Valdecilla Research Institute (IDIVAL), 39011 Santander. MedicineAI, 28028 Madrid, Spain.14Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Fragilidad y Envejecimiento Saludable (CIBERfes), 28029 Madrid, Spain.15Department of Medicine and Psychiatry, University Hospital Virgen del Rocio, IBiS, 41013 Seville, Spain.*Corresponding author. Email: tcardosodelgado@gmail.com (T.C.D.); mlmartinez@cicbiogune.es (M.L.M.-C.)†These authors contributed equally to this work.
‡These authors contributed equally to this work.
24102025221020251143499280eady9758
1352025
2592025
221020252310202523102025Copyright © 2025 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).2025The Authorshttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial license, which permits use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, so long as the resultant use is not for commercial advantage and provided the original work is properly cited.Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), a liver-centric condition, is associated with cognitive impairment and sensorimotor alterations. However, it remains unclear whether MASLD is sufficient to drive central nervous system deficits. Here, using diet-induced mouse models, we showed that MASLD was associated with alterations in social memory, sensorimotor processing, and hippocampal function, including decreased parvalbumin-positive interneurons, reduced dendritic spine density, and diminished dentate gyrus neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation. Then, we selectively modulated liver metabolism through N-acetylgalactosamine small interfering RNA (siRNA) therapy against Cyclin M4 (CNNM4), a magnesium transporter dysregulated in MASLD. Liver-specific intervention with siRNA-Cnnm4 reversed impaired social memory and sensorimotor processing in association with recovery of hippocampal synaptogenesis and mitochondrial function pathways, alongside activation of neurogenesis-associated transcriptional programs. Our findings demonstrate that liver pathology is sufficient to drive neurobehavioral and hippocampal dysfunction in MASLD. Hepatic-specific intervention restores brain function, strongly supporting the existence of a causal and therapeutically targetable liver-brain axis for MASLD-associated neurological complications.

MASLD drives deficits in social memory, sensorimotor processing, and hippocampal function.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100018693Horizon Europe
101095679
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100031478NextGenerationEU
PMP21/00112
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100004587Instituto de Salud Carlos III
AC23_2/00034
MICINN
PID2022-139395OB-100
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100015755Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas

2018 BBVA Foundation Grants for Scientific Research Teams- UMBRELLA
MINECO
RYC2020-029316-I
MINECO
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033
MINECO
PID2020-117116OB-I00
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100006751Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental
RH-0063
integrado en el Plan Estatal de Investigación Científica y Técnica e Innovación, cofinanciado con Fondos FEDER

CIBEREHD

MIguel Servet
CP23/00111
CIBERSAM
G26
Spanish Association against Cancer
PRDVZ233980ZAPA
Carlos III Health Institute
FIS-PI22/01853
http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/501100011033Agencia Estatal de Investigación
10.13039/501100011033
Ayuda Juan
JDC2023-052761-I
Agencia Estatal de Investigaci
PID2019-109405R
Agencia Estatal de Investigaci
PI-0014-2022
Ministerio de Ciencia Innovaci Universidades MICINN
CEX2021-001136-Spmc-status-qastatus0pmc-status-liveyespmc-status-embargonopmc-status-releasedyespmc-prop-open-accessyespmc-prop-olfnopmc-prop-manuscriptnopmc-prop-legally-suppressednopmc-prop-has-pdfyespmc-prop-has-supplementyespmc-prop-pdf-onlynopmc-prop-suppress-copyrightnopmc-prop-is-real-versionnopmc-prop-is-scanned-articlenopmc-prop-preprintnopmc-prop-in-epmcyespmc-license-refCC BY-NC

## INTRODUCTION
Metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD), previously known as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), is defined as steatotic liver disease (SLD) in the presence of one or more cardiometabolic risk factors and the absence of harmful alcohol intake ( ). Beyond hepatic pathology, MASLD is associated with gut microbiota dysbiosis, visceral fat accumulation, insulin resistance, oxidative stress, and chronic inflammation, factors implicated in extrahepatic complications, including diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and kidney disease ( , ), underscoring that MASLD is a multisystem disease.
Emerging evidence from recent years suggests that MASLD can substantially affect brain health, being associated with cognitive dysfunction, structural abnormalities, and an increased risk of neurodegenerative disorders. A meta-analysis has shown a 1.44-fold higher risk of cognitive impairment in individuals with MASLD compared to healthy controls ( ), and data from community cohorts suggest reductions in total and gray matter brain volumes in MASLD. Liver fibrosis, assessed via FibroScan, correlates with imaging markers of neurodegeneration, and MASLD severity is linked to memory deficits and hippocampal alterations ( ). In preclinical rodent models, diets rich in saturated fats and simple sugars, known to induce MASLD, cause impaired cognitive function. Likewise, high-energy diets in mice disrupt memory and learning processes ( ), provoke neuroinflammation, activate complement-mediated synaptic degradation ( ), and induce magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)–detectable brain changes consistent with inflammation ( ). MASLD has also been associated with low-grade brain hypoxia, glial activation, cerebrovascular dysfunction, and behavioral changes that may persist or worsen with disease progression, increasing the risk of Alzheimer’s disease and related conditions ( ). These findings highlight the need to explore the liver-brain axis within the MASLD pathophysiology.
While clinical and epidemiological data support the association between MASLD and impaired brain function, the causal role of MASLD in brain dysfunction and the underlying mechanisms remain under investigation. To date, chronic systemic inflammation, changes in cerebrovascular perfusion, brain aging, and incipient neurodegeneration have been highlighted as causes of cognitive dysfunction in patients with MASLD ( ). Direct therapeutic strategies targeting MASLD-related cognitive dysfunction are limited. However, the impact of MASLD reversal on neurobehavioral outcomes warrants investigation, particularly given the emergence of therapeutic options for MASLD originally developed for type 2 diabetes and obesity, such as pioglitazone, glucagon-like peptide–1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists, multiagonists, and sodium-glucose transport protein 2 inhibitors ( ), and, more recently, the approval of resmetirom, a thyroid hormone receptor β–selective agonist for patients with at-risk metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis ( , ).
In this study, we conducted a comprehensive behavioral and cognitive assessment, along with brain cellular characterization, in two well-characterized mouse models of diet-induced MASLD: the choline-deficient, l-amino acid–defined (CDAA) diet and the CDAA high-fat diet (CDAHFD), which have been previously well characterized for liver phenotype ( ). A group of animals was treated with small interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting Cyclin and Cystathionine-beta-Synthase (CBS) domain divalent metal cation transport mediator 4 or Cyclin M4 (CNNM4). CNNM4 is a key magnesium transporter that regulates intracellular magnesium homeostasis, which is critical for maintaining mitochondrial function, adenosine 5′-triphosphate production, and redox balance ( – ). Previous results have shown that silencing Cnnm4 in mouse livers is an effective therapeutic strategy for ameliorating MASLD ( ). Here, siRNA-CNNM4 is conjugated to N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), a targeting ligand that binds highly selectively to asialoglycoprotein, which is abundantly expressed on hepatocytes surface, leading to rapid endocytosis and ensuring hepatocyte-specific delivery of the siRNA-CNNM4. By silencing Cnnm4 specifically in hepatocytes, we aimed to modulate magnesium flux and hepatic metabolic stress and evaluate whether this intervention could ameliorate neurobehavioral impairments, thereby uncovering previously unknown mechanistic links in the liver-brain axis.

## RESULTS

## Behavioral, neurocognitive, and sensorimotor alterations in a nonobese preclinical model of diet-induced MASLD
Mice fed a CDAA diet for 6 weeks develop pronounced macrovesicular steatosis, inflammation, and liver fibrosis ( ), as previously described ( ). Notably, these animals are not insulin resistant ( ) and are not obese ( ), which enables the assessment of liver-specific pathology without the confounding effects of obesity and diabetes. After 6 weeks on the CDAA diet, mice exhibit hypertransaminasemia ( ), along with a trend toward increased serum ammonia levels—an established liver-derived neurotoxin implicated in the pathogenesis of hepatic encephalopathy ( ) ( ).
 To understand the association between the liver-brain axis in MASLD, we carried out a preliminary battery for behavioral screening in the CDAA diet–induced MASLD mouse model. These assessments include basic sensory and motor function tests, neurophysiological status, and sociability. In the open-field test, CDAA-fed rodents present normal activity, indicating that animals on the CDAA diet for 6 weeks are not weak and do not exhibit motor impairment (fig. S1A). Moreover, no significant difference was found between the CDAA and control-fed rodents in the elevated plus maze test, a well-established task for assessing anxiety-like conflict behavior in rodents (fig. S1B).
In the three-chamber sociality test, sociability is defined as the subject mouse spending more time interacting with the novel target mouse than with the inanimate novel object. The second phase measures the preference for a novel mouse compared to the familiar mouse when the latter is presented in the previously empty chamber, a measurement of the social memory index. Under these conditions, CDAA-fed rodents show decreased social novelty preference index ( ). Social behavior of a tested subject may be affected by other confounding variables, such as social rank and aggressiveness ( ). To address this, we carried out a tube test, a simple and robust behavioral assay used to measure social hierarchy in mice. No differences were observed in the tube test between CDAA-fed rodents and standard chow–fed healthy animals (fig. S1C). Last, the hotplate test is a test of the pain response in animals, and the CDAA-fed rodents show equal sensitivity to heat as control animals (fig. S1D).
Next, we aimed to examine multiple aspects of cognition that cover different domains of functioning, including preattention and attention, and various aspects of learning and memory. No significant differences were found in the Y-maze experiment used to test the spatial working memory between the control group and the mice model of CDAA diet–induced MASLD (fig. S1E). Last, the rodent acoustic startle response (ASR) test is commonly used to study fundamental properties of the central nervous system, including habituation, sensitization, classical conditioning, fear and anxiety, sensorimotor gating, and drug effects. Of relevance, mice on a CDAA diet for 6 weeks presented decreased ASR processes without alteration in the prepulse inhibition (PPI) response relative to their control group ( and fig. S1F), highlighting that altered sensorimotor processes characterize these MASLD mice. In summary, animals for 6 weeks on a CDAA diet, a nonobese animal model of diet-induced MASLD, are characterized by impaired alterations in sociability and sensorimotor processing.

## Neurocognitive and sensorimotor processing function in experimental models of diet-induced MASLD after liver-targeted therapy
The neurocognitive and sensorimotor processing responses to liver-targeted therapy were assessed in CDAA diet–induced MASLD mice. A single subcutaneous injection was administered at week 3, consisting of a validated liver-specific therapeutic: GalNAc-conjugated siRNA targeting Cnnm4. In CDAA-fed mice, this hepatocyte-targeted Cnnm4-GalNAc siRNA lowered hepatic Cnnm4 levels and ameliorated steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis, without altering body weight compared to vehicle-treated controls ( ), in line with our previous findings ( ). Notably, liver-specific Cnnm4 knockdown also translated into neurological benefits. Treated animals displayed an improvement in social memory performance ( ) and restoration to control healthy animal levels of the ASR ( ).
 Overall, our results demonstrate that in the CDAA diet–induced animal model of MASLD, liver-targeted therapy restores neuro-behavioral domains related to sociability and sensorimotor processing, underscoring the functional relevance of the liver-brain axis in this metabolic context.

## Restoration of hippocampal dendritic spine density following liver-targeted therapy in experimental models of diet-induced MASLD
Previous studies in the clinical setting and experimental mouse models suggested that the presence and severity of MASLD were associated with increased risk of memory impairment and hippocampal structural and functional abnormalities ( , ). Thus, we decided to evaluate the impact of the CDAA diet and liver-targeted therapy on the hippocampus. We completed a detailed characterization of glial and neural cells to understand the lineages affected by the liver disease. There are no significant differences in the immunolabeling of glial fibrillary acidic protein (an astrocyte marker), oligodendrocyte [expressing sex-determining region Y-box 10 (Sox10)], and ionized calcium–binding adapter molecule 1– and CD68-labeled microglia in the dentate gyrus (DG) of animals with diet-induced MASLD, which are also unaltered after treatment (fig. S2, A to C). Next, we studied parvalbumin-positive (PV+) inhibitory interneurons. PV+ interneurons present particular morphological and functional properties that precisely control local circuitry, brain networks, and memory processing ( ). Here, we detected a decrease in the immunolabeling of PV interneurons in the hippocampus (subfields CA1, CA2, CA3, and CA4) of animals maintained on a CDAA diet for 6 weeks. The number of these PV+ neurons is restored in animals with ongoing liver-targeted therapy ( ). The loss of PV+ neurons in the hippocampal region of CDAA diet–fed mice is not accompanied by colocalization with cleaved caspase-3, as staining was negative across all experimental conditions. This suggests that the reduction in PV immunoreactivity is not due to apoptosis or neurodegeneration but rather reflects a down-regulation of PV expression, indicating functional plasticity of these neurons (fig. S3A).
 Hippocampal PV+ interneurons form numerous dendritic spines with highly variable densities and input-selective organization. Dendritic spines are small, thin, specialized protrusions from neuronal dendrites and are important structures in the control of the synaptic input of the hippocampal neuron family. To test whether MASLD may induce structural plasticity, we quantified dendritic spine density in the hippocampal regions (CA1 and CA3) and the prefrontal cortex of animals fed a CDAA diet for 6 weeks. The density of dendritic spines in the CA3 and CA1 hippocampus areas is reduced in animals fed for 6 weeks on a CDAA diet relative to healthy rodents on a standard chow diet. However, when we treated these animals with the liver-targeted siRNA-Cnnm4 GalNAc conjugate, the dendritic spine density was restored to control levels ( ). In contrast, no significant changes were detected regarding dendritic spine density in the prefrontal cortex ( ). In summary, liver-targeted therapy in MASLD preclinical mouse models improves the brain’s neurocognitive and sensorimotor processing responses in association with remodeling of hippocampal PV+ interneurons and dendritic spine density.

## Hippocampal neural stem and neurogenesis indicators in experimental models of diet-induced MASLD after liver-targeted therapy
Structural plasticity of the hippocampus involves the reorganization of synapses and changes in dendritic arborization in the CA3 and CA1 areas, while cellular plasticity involves stem cell activity and neuronal differentiation in the DG. The DG of the hippocampus is a critical neurogenic region in the brain that continuously generates new neurons throughout adulthood. Approximately one-third of DG neurons lost during adulthood are replaced by adult-born neurons ( ).
Here, we evaluated the differences in Sox2 (marker of neural stem and progenitor cells), doublecortin (Dcx; an immature neuroblast marker), and Ki-67 (a proliferating cell marker) immunolabelling in the DG. Sox2 immunolabeling costaining with Ki-67 is reduced in the DG of animals on 6 weeks on a CDAA diet and increased upon liver-targeted therapy for MASLD ( ). Both Dcx and Ki-67 immunolabeling in the DG are decreased in CDAA diet–fed rodents. Otherwise, liver-targeted siRNA-Cnnm4 GalNAc conjugate treatment restores control levels of the Ki-67 and Dcx ( ). Moreover, the hippocampal expressions of C-X-C chemokine 1 and 2 ligands (Cxcl1 and Cxcl2), important for neurogenesis ( ), are diminished in the hippocampus of rodents on a 6-week CDAA, and upon MASLD liver-targeted therapy, their expression is tendentially restored to control levels (fig. S4A).
 Transcription factors are crucial in orchestrating the correct cell-specific and temporal expression of all factors involved in neurogenesis. The transcription factor adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate response element–binding protein (CREB) is critical for efficient neurogenesis and is involved in the differentiation process ( ). To further characterize the processes of neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation, we studied CREB phosphorylation (pCreb) alone or in combination with DCX and costaining of DCX and Ki-67. In addition, we also performed immunostaining for markers of mature neurons [β, tubulin-III (Tuj-1), and calbindin]. The pCreb is reduced after 6 weeks on a CDAA diet and restored upon liver-targeted therapy of MASLD, as it is also the Dcx immunolabeling costaining with pCreb ( ). In contrast, Dcx immunolabeling costaining with Ki-67 is not significantly altered after dietary intervention or treatment (fig. S5A), with Dcx immunostaining with pCREB being significantly reduced after 6 weeks of CDAA and its expression restored upon liver-targeted treatment in MASLD. Last, we also observed that the CDAA diet for 6 weeks reduced the immunolabeling in the DG of markers of mature neurons (Tuj-1 and calbindin), being its expression restored to healthy control levels after liver-targeted therapy (fig. S5B). In summary, our data show that liver-targeted therapy in MASLD increases the expression of DG neural stem/progenitor, neurogenesis, and neuronal differentiation markers.

## Behavioral and cellular alterations in an experimental model of advanced diet–induced MASLD after liver-targeted therapy
Next, we completed a similar battery of experiments in a mouse model with more severe MASLD, putting animals on a CDAHFD for 6 weeks. These nonobese, noninsulin-resistant animals ( ) are characterized by overt macrosteatosis, inflammation, and significant liver fibrosis ( ). In this group of animals, we performed magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) of liver intrahepatic lipids and observed that after 6 weeks on a CDAHFD, there is a higher enrichment in unsaturated triglycerides than the saturated component of triglycerides (fig. S6A). These animals are characterized by augmented serum transaminases already at week 3 of dietary intervention and significantly augmented serum ammonia after 6 weeks of diet ( ). This model of diet-induced MASLD is characterized by altered social memory index ( ) and reduced ASR ( ). No alterations were observed in the open field, object recognition, Y-maze (working memory), Y-maze (spatial memory), PPI acoustic startle response tests between CDAHFD-fed rodents and control animals (fig. S7, A to D). In agreement, MRS of the hippocampus region at 6 weeks of CDAHFD shows decreased abundance of metabolites such as creatinine, glycerophosphocholine, and inositol. These changes were specific to the hippocampus, as these were not observed in the prefrontal cortex of animals for 6 weeks on CDAHFD (fig. S6, B and C). Notably, the choline derivative glycerophosphocholine is an important precursor of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine and plays important roles in brain and nervous system function. Moreover, animals on a CDAHFD already present reduced immunolabeling staining for hippocampal PV+ interneurons and a nonsignificant reduction of hippocampal neurogenesis indicators, Ki-67 and Dcx, at 3 weeks of CDAHFD, which worsens and are statistically significant at 6 weeks of CDAHFD (fig. S8, A and B).
 At 3 weeks of diet, CDAHFD-fed rodents were treated with a single subcutaneous injection of the GalNAc-siRNA for Cnnm4 liver-targeted therapy. As previously reported ( ), treatment with siRNA-Cnnm4-GalNAc to CDAHFD-fed rodents reduced liver Cnnm4 expression while decreasing liver steatosis and inflammation, without significant changes in weight relative to vehicle-treated CDAA-fed mice ( ). Treatment with siRNA-Cnnm4-GalNAc to CDAHFD-fed rodents results in a nonsignificant increase in the immunolabeling staining for PV neurons ( ) and a significant augmentation of Dcx, while Ki-67 is increased, although not statistically significant ( ). Overall, liver-targeted siRNA therapy partially restores social memory, sensorimotor processing, and hippocampal alterations in advanced diet–induced MASLD mice, recapitulating findings from the early CDAA diet model.
 

## Hippocampal proteomic changes in experimental models of advanced diet–induced MASLD after liver-targeted therapy
The in-depth identification of hippocampal protein expression changes is critical for understanding the mechanisms underlying MASLD-induced alterations and MASLD recovery. We identified 122 differentially expressed proteins in the hippocampus of animals fed a CDAHFD diet compared to control animals, with 13 significantly up-regulated and 108 down-regulated proteins ( ). Functional enrichment using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) revealed strong inhibition (z-score < −2) of the synaptogenesis signaling pathway and oxidative phosphorylation (synaptogenesis signaling pathway z-score = −2.646 and oxidative phosphorylation z-score = −2.236), along with activation (z-score > 2) of the mitochondrial dysfunction canonical pathway (mitochondrial dysfunction z-score = 2.646).
 In addition, we analyzed the hippocampal proteome following liver-targeted reversal of MASLD using siRNA-Cnnm4-GalNAc conjugates in CDAA-fed animals. Volcano plots displaying the differentially regulated proteins are shown in . IPA analysis of canonical pathways based on differentially expressed proteins in both the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, comparing animals fed a CDAHFD diet for 6 weeks with those receiving Cnnm4-GalNAc therapy, is presented in tables S1 and S2, respectively. In the hippocampus, proteins whose expression was down-regulated by the CDAHFD diet and restored upon treatment include SRP54 (signal recognition particle subunit SRP54), PLCB1 (1-phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate phosphodiesterase β1), CAMSAP3 (calmodulin-regulated spectrin-associated protein 3), TRAPPC11 (trafficking protein particle complex subunit 11), and CPNE2 (copine II) ( ). These proteins are involved in calcium signaling, membrane trafficking, and processes related to endoplasmic reticulum–to–Golgi transport.
Upstream regulator analyses by IPA of hippocampal proteins regulated in liver-targeted treated rodents suggest that KLF3 (Krüppel-like factor 3) is a transcription regulator predicted to be activated ( ). KLF3 is a transcription factor highly expressed in the adult hippocampus, particularly in the DG (www.proteinatlas.org). Immunolabeling analysis of Klf3 staining does not show significant differences between the control group, animals on CDAHFD diet, or liver-targeted treated MASLD animals (fig. S9A). Previous results showed that KLF3 is a fundamental suppressor that operates as a feedback inhibitor of RELA/p65 and may be important in facilitating the resolution of inflammation ( ). Other results showed that KLF3 activates the WNT signaling pathway in gastric cancer ( ) and WNT is highly relevant in neurogenesis activity ( ). Here, we confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay that in MASLD mouse biopsies of the hippocampus of liver-targeted treated animals, Klf3 binding to the promoter region is augmented in several genes involved in neurogenesis, such as proliferating cell nuclear antigen (Pcna) and Wnt1. In agreement, Pcna and Wnt1 mRNA levels are augmented upon liver-targeted therapy in MASLD mice ( ). In summary, liver-targeted therapy in MASLD is associated with increased transcriptional activity of hippocampal KLF3 that plays a role in regulating several genes involved in DG neurogenesis.

## DISCUSSION
MASLD is now understood as a systemic condition, extending beyond hepatic manifestations to increase the risk of cardiometabolic diseases ( ), chronic kidney disease ( ), and intrahepatic and extrahepatic cancers ( – , ). To isolate liver-specific effects, we used two nonobese, nondiabetic dietary mouse models of MASLD (CDAA and CDAHFD) and observed altered social behavior and impaired sensorimotor gating after 6 weeks of feeding. These effects were reversed by a single administration of a liver-targeted siRNA therapy (GalNAc-siRNA against Cnnm4), previously shown to ameliorate hepatic inflammation and fibrosis without affecting body weight ( ). These findings point to a liver-originated mechanism contributing to MASLD-associated alterations of specific neurocognitive behavioral dysfunction, independent of systemic metabolic derangements. As a limitation of this study, only male animals were used. Although earlier results have demonstrated that young adult female mice exhibit protection against MASLD ( ) and, in humans, MASLD more often affects men while premenopausal women are protected from developing MASLD ( ), future studies in female mice will broaden our observations on the brain-liver axis in MASLD.
While methionine- and choline-deficient diets are established tools for inducing MASLD in mice ( ), they may also affect brain function directly, given the roles of methionine and choline in neurotransmitter synthesis and neuronal signaling ( , ). Low choline intake has been linked to increased risk of dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease ( ), as well as higher anxiety and depression levels ( , ). However, the cognitive improvements we observed following hepatocyte-specific therapy, despite continued dietary restriction, support a direct contribution of the liver to the observed brain alterations.
A recent MRI-based study showed hippocampal atrophy in patients with MASLD, particularly in subregions linked to memory such as the subiculum and presubiculum ( ). The hippocampus is a key integrative hub for memory, emotional regulation, and sensorimotor processing ( , ). In our study, we have found that MASLD mice present altered social behavior and impaired sensorimotor gating. To date, evidence on the role of the hippocampus in regulating these behavioral domains is limited. The hippocampus is not a primary regulator of spontaneous social exploration, being more linked to social memory, especially of familiar conspecifics ( ). Otherwise, social exploration/sociability is more directly regulated by other brain areas, such as the amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex, and hypothalamus ( , ). Moreover, only an early study shows that startle-induced sensitivity is coordinated by hippocampal networks ( ). However, this is related to fear-enhanced startle, being that the hippocampus has been shown to modulate startle in contexts involving fear or environmental context and not to the startle response evoked by a loud sound. Usually, the acoustic startle response is primarily mediated by brainstem structures, particularly the pontine reticular nucleus ( ). On this basis, it has been described that the hippocampus and the brainstem reciprocally influence each other, with the hippocampus influencing some brainstem functions ( ).
Here, by analyzing the hippocampal structure, we observed a reduction in hippocampal PV+ interneurons and dendritic spine density, both of which were restored following liver-targeted Cnnm4 silencing. PV+ interneurons regulate neural synchrony and plasticity and are highly sensitive to oxidative stress ( – ). Our proteomic analysis revealed mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative phosphorylation impairment in the hippocampus of MASLD mice, consistent with increased oxidative stress as a potential driver of interneurons’ vulnerability. Moreover, dendritic spine loss in hippocampal subfields CA1 and CA3, known to correlate with synaptic weakening ( ), was also reversed by hepatic therapy, suggesting restoration of synaptic architecture and function.
These findings are supported by earlier reports linking changes in hippocampal calcium signaling proteins (e.g., CPNE6) with cognitive dysfunction in MASLD models ( ). Our study identifies a similar dysregulation of CPNE2, a calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding protein involved in membrane trafficking and synaptic plasticity ( , ), which was down-regulated in MASLD and rescued by liver-directed therapy. Given that mitochondrial calcium overload promotes oxidative stress ( ), these findings converge on a disrupted mitochondrial-synaptic axis in MASLD-induced social memory and sensorimotor processing deficits, as well as hippocampal dysfunction.
In addition to structural plasticity, we examined adult hippocampal neurogenesis in the DG, a process essential for learning and memory ( ). Although neurogenesis in the adult human brain remains debated ( , – ), studies in rodents consistently show that stress, aging, and metabolic insults reduce neural stem cell (NSC) proliferation. Our results suggest that dietary intervention reduces both the number of SOX2+ neural stem/progenitor cells and their proliferation (SOX2+/Ki-67+), indicating a reduction in the progenitor pool and proliferative activity. While the number of proliferating immature neurons (DCX+/Ki-67+) remains unchanged, the decrease in DCX+/pCREB+ cells suggests that neuronal differentiation is impaired under dietary conditions. In line with this idea, markers of mature neurons such as calbindin and Tuj-1 are also reduced. Treatment not only restores SOX2+/Ki-67+ cell numbers, indicating a recovery of progenitor pool, but also increases DCX+/pCREB+ and TUJ-1+/calbindin+ cells, supporting the notion that neuronal differentiation is likewise rescued. Although labeling experiments using 5-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine or 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine would help to confirm whether quiescent NSCs are also impaired and precise cell lineage steps, these findings support a model in which dietary intervention impairs both proliferation and differentiation within the neurogenic niche, whereas treatment can restore both processes. These observations are consistent with prior studies showing that methionine-choline deficiency impairs neurogenesis ( ) and that mitochondrial protein folding stress limits NSC maintenance and function ( ). Moreover, treatment with liraglutide, a GLP-1 receptor agonist being evaluated in clinical trials for MASLD, was previously shown to attenuate the depressive- and anxiety-like behavior in the corticosterone-induced mouse depression model by improving hippocampal neural plasticity measured as increased density of DCX-positive immature neurons in hippocampal slices ( ). These results suggest that GLP-1 receptor agonists may combine a dual effect in MASLD therapy by improving both the liver, by decreasing steatosis and fibrosis, and the brain by promoting neurogenesis in the DG.
Our proteomic data show increased activation of the protein ubiquitination pathway and upregulation of KLF3, a transcription factor enriched in the adult hippocampus, particularly in the DG. We show that KLF3 transcriptional activity correlates with the expression of WNT1 and PCNA, key regulators of NSC proliferation and differentiation. WNT signaling is essential for adult neurogenesis ( , ), and its restoration suggests a regenerative neurogenic response driven by liver-brain communication. These results need to be further confirmed by studies that demonstrate the functional necessity or sufficiency of KLF3 in promoting neurogenesis in MASLD animal models.
While our work highlights mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced neurogenesis as mechanistic links, systemic mediators may also play a role. Circulating neurotoxins such as ammonia, a known contributor to hepatic encephalopathy, are elevated in MASLD ( , – ) and may contribute to neuronal damage or impair neurogenesis. The interplay between metabolic by-products, inflammation, and neural plasticity warrants further investigation.
Together, our findings demonstrate that MASLD leads to changes in behavioral domains related to social memory and sensorimotor processing deficits through structural and cellular changes in the hippocampus, including reduced interneuron density, synaptic loss, and impaired neurogenesis. These effects are reversible through hepatocyte-specific therapy, underscoring the existence of a mechanistically relevant and therapeutically targetable liver-brain axis in MASLD. These insights pave the way for a more comprehensive understanding of the neurobiological impact of liver disease and point to the liver as a promising intervention point for mitigating MASLD-associated neurological complications.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## Animal maintenance
Male adult (3-month-old) C57BL/6 mice were maintained at the Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla and CIC bioGUNE animal facilities upon approval of the local Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee according to the ARRIVE guidelines (Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments). Mice were maintained on a 12/12-hour light/dark cycle at 21° ± 1°C and a humidity of 45 ± 10% with ad libitum access to water and diet. Two different dietary interventions were compared to a control group on a regular diet containing choline (1.030 mg/kg) and 0.3% methionine and 13% kcal from fat (Teklad Global 14% Protein Rodent Maintenance Diet): 6 weeks of a diet devoid of choline with 0.1% methionine, CDAA diet (A02082006i, Research Diets Inc., NJ, USA) and 6 weeks of a diet devoid of choline with 0.1% methionine and high fat–enriched (CDAHFD) (A06071302, Research Diets Inc., NJ, USA). In a random group of animals, at week 3 of dietary intervention (CDAA and CDAHFD), animals were given a single dose of a subcutaneous injection of a liver-targeted therapy previously validated, GalNAc-siRNA for Cnnm4 conjugates, at 3 mg/kg. At the end of the experiment, blood was withdrawn, and liver and brain tissues were collected for further analysis. All animals were euthanized between 9 a.m. and 12 a.m. after overnight ad libitum feeding and water consumption.

## Dissection of hippocampal DG
The brain was carefully dissected from a euthanized mouse and immediately placed in ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The brain was then cut along the longitudinal fissure, and the posterior regions, including the midbrain, hindbrain, and cerebellum, were removed. The cerebral hemisphere was oriented with the medial side facing up, and after carefully removing the diencephalon, the DG became visible. Using a sharp needle, the DG was isolated, transferred into a sample tube, and stored at −80°C for further use ( ).

## Liver hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) liver samples were sectioned, dewaxed, and hydrated. Samples were then deparaffinized in Histo-Clear (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA, USA) and rehydrated through graded alcohol solutions. Next, sections were stained with Harris hematoxylin (HHS80, Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min, followed by eosin staining (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min. Then, samples were washed in running tap water for 5 min and differentiated in 0.5% HCl for 1 s. Samples are then dehydrated in graded alcohol solutions until 100% and mounted in DPX mounting medium (Sigma-Aldrich).

## Liver Oil Red staining
For the histological quantification of hepatic lipids, we used Oil Red staining. Briefly, liver cryostat liver sections of 8 μm, included in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound, were incubated with freshly prepared Oil Red stain (Sigma-Aldrich) and contrasted with Mayer’s hematoxylin (MHS32, Sigma-Aldrich).

## Liver Picrosirius Red staining
FFPE liver samples were sectioned, dewaxed, and hydrated. For Sirius Red staining, rehydrated liver sections were stained with Sirius Red solution 1 (0.01% Fast Green FCF in picric acid; Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min and then with Sirius Red solution 2 (0.04% Fast Green FCF/0.1% Sirius Red in picric acid; Sigma-Aldrich) for another 15 min. After the respective staining, sections were dehydrated directly in 100% alcohol and mounted in DPX mounting medium (Sigma-Aldrich). Five to 10 random images per sample were obtained using an AXIO Imager A1 microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Jena, Germany).

## Liver immunohistochemistry
FFPE liver samples were sectioned, dewaxed, and hydrated. All procedures were performed according to standard protocols using the EnVision+ System HRP (Dako, Denmark). Samples were incubated with Vector VIP substrate (VectorLabs, Burlingame, USA) for color development. Five to 10 random images per sample were taken using an AXIO Imager A1 microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Jena, Germany). Stained area percentage of each sample was calculated using FRIDA software (FRamework for Image Dataset Analysis) (RRID:SCR_002285). F4/80, a membrane macrophage marker, was identified using the antibody MCA497BB from Bio-Rad (RRID:AB_323893), and CNNM4 was identified using the antibody Abcam (ab191207) (RRID:AB_3099690).

## Serum transaminases
Serum samples were analyzed using a Selectra Junior SpinLab 100 analyzer (VitalScientific, Dieren, Netherland) according to the manufacturer’s suggested protocol and following appropriate serum dilutions

## Serum ammonia
Serum ammonia was quantified using a commercially available kit, EnzyChrom Ammonia/Ammonium Assay from BioAssay Systems (#ENH3-100).

## Behavioral and neurocognitive assays
In the last week of dietary intervention, animals were submitted to a battery of behavioral and neurocognitive assays, as detailed below. The whole test battery was carried out between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. Only one test was performed each day according to the following order:
1) CDAA first study: open field, three-chamber test, elevated plus maze, Y-maze, tube test, self-grooming, PPI, hotplate, and fear conditioning
2) CDAA + GalNAc: open field, novel object recognition, three-chamber test, tube test, self-grooming, PPI, and hotplate.
3) CDAHFD: open field, novel object recognition, three-chamber test, tube test, Barnes maze, PPI, Y-maze (spatial recognition), Y-maze (working memory), and hotplate.

## Open field test
The open field test assessed locomotion and anxiety-like behavior. Mice explored a 50 cm–by–50 cm arena for 15 min, with movement analyzed using Viewer software (Biobserve). A 30 cm–by–30 cm central zone and a peripheral zone were defined to measure total distance traveled and mean velocity.

## Elevated plus maze test
The elevated plus maze test assessed anxiety-like behavior using a cross-shaped apparatus (Panlab) with two open and two enclosed arms (6 cm by 30 cm each) elevated 50 cm above the floor. Mice were placed at the center and allowed to explore for 5 min. Time spent in open and enclosed arms and the number of entries into each arm were recorded.

## Three-chamber sociability test
The three-chamber test, performed with minor modifications from ( ), assessed social preference and novelty in a 42 cm–by–60 cm arena (Panlab). The test consisted of three 10-min phases: exploration, social preference (unfamiliar mouse versus object), and social novelty (familiar versus new mouse). Interaction times were recorded, and social/memory indices were calculated as follows: Sociability preference index was calculated from the following formula [(time exploring the social target − time exploring the empty target)/(time exploring the social target + time exploring the empty target)], whereas the social novelty preference index was [(time exploring the novel target − time exploring the familiar target)/(time exploring the novel target + time exploring the familiar target)].

## Tube test
The tube test, used to assess dominance, involved placing mice with different treatments at opposite ends of a 2.6-cm-diameter plexiglass tube. Mice interacted for up to 2 min, and the first to exit was considered subordinate. Each mouse was tested against two others with varying treatments.

## Hotplate test
The hotplate test (Panlab) assessed heat sensitivity at 55°C by measuring the latency for mice to jump or lick their paws.

## Object recognition test
Mice explored an open field with two identical objects for 10 min. After a 3-hour delay, one object was replaced with a novel one, and exploration continued for another 10 min. The percentage of time interacting with the familiar and novel objects was recorded, and the memory index was calculated as [(interaction time with new object − interaction time with familiar object)/(interaction time with new object + interaction time with familiar object)].

## Y-maze (working memory) test
Mice explored a Y-maze (arm dimensions, 6 cm by 30 cm) for 5 min, with movement recorded. Spontaneous alternation behavior was analyzed using SMART software (Panlab) (RRID:SCR_002852).

## Y-maze (spatial memory) test
The Y-maze test was used to assess spatial memory. Visual cues were placed to allow mice to distinguish between the arms. During the exploration phase, mice were allowed to explore for 10 min with one arm closed (randomly selected). After a 1-hour delay, the test phase began, where the mice were placed back in the maze for 5 min with all three arms open. The time spent in each arm was quantified using SMART software (Panlab) (RRID:SCR_002852).

## Startle response and PPI
The StartFear Combined system (Panlab) was used to assess the startle response (SR) and PPI, following a modified protocol ( ). Mice were placed in a restraint device with a 65-dB background noise. After a 5-min acclimation, a pseudorandom block of six pulse-alone trials (100, 110, or 120 dB) with intertrial intervals of 10 to 20 s was conducted. This was followed by 160 pseudorandom trials, including no stimulus, pulse alone (100, 110, or 120 dB), prepulse alone (71, 77, or 83 dB), and nine prepulse-pulse combinations. Pulses lasted 40 ms, prepulses were 20 ms, and intertrial intervals were 10 to 20 s. PPI was calculated as %PPI = [(mean SR to pulse alone − mean SR to prepulse-pulse)/mean SR to pulse alone] × 100. Data were analyzed using PACKWIN software (Panlab).

## Brain immunofluorescence
Whole brains were harvested and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours. After fixation, the brains were cryoprotected by immersion in a 30% sucrose solution for 24 to 48 hours. Following cryoprotection, the brains were embedded in OCT. The brains were then cryosectioned at 50 μm. Sections were blocked with blocking solution [10% (v/v) donkey serum in PBS/0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100 (PBST)] for 1 hour and incubated overnight with the chosen primary antibody in 10% blocking solution at 4°C (see table S3 for full list of antibodies). Sections were washed in PBST, then incubated with Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 568, or Alexa Fluor 647 antibody for 1 hour, washed three times with PBST, incubated with 4′,6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 15 min to visualize nuclear DNA, and mounted with ProLong Gold Antifade Mountant (P36930, Invitrogen). Images were acquired as z-stacks using a Zeiss LSM 900 confocal microscope and processed using Fiji (RRID:SCR_002285) and Zeiss ZEN Lite software. Scale bars are represented in the shown micrographs and correspond to 20 μm.

## Golgi-Cox staining
Golgi-Cox staining was performed as previously described ( ). The Golgi-Cox solution (1% K2Cr2O7, 1% HgCl2, and 0.8% K2CrO4) was prepared 5 days before use. Animals were anesthetized and decapitated, and their brains were extracted and hemisected (n = 5 to 16 per group). The hemispheres were immersed in the solution for 48 hours, refreshed, and incubated for an additional 3 weeks. Coronal sections (200 μm) were cut with a vibratome (Leica), incubated with ammonium hydroxide, and treated with sodium thiosulfate. Sections were dehydrated and mounted with DPX mounting medium. z-stack images (0.75-μm step size) were acquired using a BX-61 microscope (Olympus) with a 100× objective. Dendritic spines on segments of ≥10 μm were manually counted using Fiji (RRID:SCR_002285), and spine density was calculated and averaged for each neuron

## RNA isolation and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
Total RNA was isolated with TRIzol (Invitrogen). One to 2 μg of total RNA was treated with deoxyribonuclease (Invitrogen) and reverse transcribed into cDNA using Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus (M-MLV) reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using SYBR Select Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) and the Viia 7 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). The Ct values were extrapolated to a standard curve, and the data were then normalized to the housekeeping expression (Gapdh). Primer sequences are listed below: Wnt1, 5′-CATCTTCGCAATCACCTCCG (forward) and 5′- GCCTCGTTGTTGTGAAGGTT (reverse); Pcna, 5′-TACAGCTTACTCTGCGCTCC (forward) and 5′-TTGGACATGCTGGTGAGGTT (reverse); Cxcl1, 5′-AGTAGAAGGGTGTTGTGCGA (forward) and 5′-CGTGCGTGTTGACCATACAA (reverse); Cxcl2, 5′-GTTTCTGGGGAGAGGGTGAG (forward) and 5′-TGTTCTACTCTCCTCGGTGC (reverse); glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh), 5′-GGGTCCCAGCAGCTTAGGTTCT (forward) and 5′GCCGTGAGTGGAGTCATACT (reverse).

## Liver MRS
All MRI data were collected using a 11-T BioSpec 117/16 (Bruker, Ettlingen, Germany) equipped with a shielded gradient coil capable of delivering 700 mT/m. Animals were anesthetized by inhalation of a 2% isoflurane in 30/70 O2/N2 gas mixture and placed in a quadrature 40-mm transmit-receive volume coil. An MRI T1-weighted axial image of the liver was acquired as an anatomical reference. A voxel of 2 mm–by–2 mm–by–2 mm position was selected within the right lobe of the liver and localized spectroscopy acquired with the following parameters: Point REsolved SpectoScopy (PRESS) sequence, with and without VAPOR (variable pulse power and optimized relaxation delays) water suppression, time echo (TE) = 17 ms, repetition time that was synchronized with the respiration period around 3 s, number of averages = 128, bandwidth (BW) = 16 parts per million (ppm), and 2000 complex points. Indexes of fatty acid composition ( ) were extracted from processed spectra using LCModel (www.s-provencher.com/lcmodel.shtml).

## Brain MRS
All MRI data were collected using a 11-T BioSpec 117/16 (Bruker, Ettlingen, Germany) equipped with a shielded gradient coil capable of delivering 700 mT/m. Animals were anesthetized by inhalation of a 2% isoflurane in 30/70 O2/N2 gas mixture and placed in a quadrature 40-mm transmit-receive volume coil. An MRI T1-weighted axial image of the brain was acquired as an anatomical reference. A voxel of 2 mm–by–0.8 mm–by–2 mm (prefrontal cortex) or 1.2 mm–by–1.2 mm–by–1.2 mm (hippocampus) position was selected within and localized spectroscopy acquired with the following parameters: PRESS sequence, with VAPOR water suppression, TE = 17 ms, TR = 2 s, number of averages = 320, BW = 16 ppm, and 2000 complex points. Raw data were processed using LCModel (www.s-provencher.com/lcmodel.shtml) using a basis set created with TARQUIN ( ).

## Proteomics analysis
Protein was extracted by incubating the sample in a buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 4% CHAPS. Samples were incubated in this buffer for 30 min at room temperature under agitation and digested following the Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. ( ) with minor modifications. Briefly, the sample was deposited on Amicon Ultra 0.5 ml Centrifugal Filters (30-kDa cutoff) for buffer exchange and digestion. Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min for each buffer exchange step. Samples were reduced in 10 mM dithiotreithol and alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide, both prepared in a solution of 8 M urea and 100 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (UA solution). Samples were washed two additional times in UA solution before three washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC). Trypsin was added in 50 mM AMBIC to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. Peptides were dried out in an RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA), and further desalted and resuspended in 0.1% FA using C18 stage tips (Millipore) before acquisition.
Samples were analyzed in a timsTOF Pro with PASEF (Bruker) mass spectrometer coupled online to a Evosep One liquid chromatograph (Evosep). timsTOF was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, and the data were acquired using the default DDA PASEF-standard_1.1sec_cycletime method provided by Bruker. Data were acquired in positive mode. Scan range was established between 100 and 1700 mass/charge ratio, and 1/K0 between 0.60 and 1.60 V·s/cm3, with a total ramp and accumulation time of 100 ms (100% duty cycle). Collison energies applied were 20 and 59 eV for the lower and upper limits of the mobility range. Charge states between 0 and 5 were specifically selected for analysis. Total PASEF ramps were 10 to a final cycle time of 1.16 s.
A total of 200 ng was directly loaded onto the Evosep One (Evosep) and resolved using the default 30-sample-per-day protocol (44-min gradient and 48-min total cycle time). The analytical column (Evosep Performance, Evosep) was equilibrated at 1500 nl/min, and the gradient flow was 500 nl/min and increased to 1500 nl/min for washing. Solvents A and B were water with 0.1% FA and acetonitrile with 0.1% FA, respectively. Protein identification and quantification were performed using PEAKS X software (Bioinformatics Solutions). Searches were conducted against a database consisting of Mus musculus entries from UniProt SWISS-PROT, downloaded January 2023. Precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da were considered for the searches, respectively. Only proteins identified with at least one peptide at a false discovery rate of <1% were considered for further analysis. Total protein abundances were compared using a Student’s t test. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [1] partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD063321.

## IPA software
IPA (www.ingenuity.com, Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, USA) (RRID:SCR_008653) was used to identify pathways associated with the proteins identified in the mass spectrometric analysis.

## Chromatin immunoprecipitation
Dissected hypothalamus tissues were weighed and pooled from five mice for a total of 50 mg of tissue per group. The pooled tissue was then added to PBS with protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC) into a dish on ice and minced with scissors. The tissues were homogenized using glass douncers (2 ml) with 25 to 30 strokes. The homogenized tissues were cross-linked with 1% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min on a rocker at room temperature. Cross-linking was quenched with 1.25 mM glycine (rocked for 5 min) and then centrifuged (9500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C). The pellets were washed once with ice-cold PBS + PIC and centrifuged at 9500 rpm for 5 min at 4°C. Following this, the supernatant was removed, and cell pellets were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C overnight. Next day, cell pellets were resuspended in 2 ml of cell lysis buffer [1 M tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 2 M KCl, 10% NP-40 (Igepal), and PIC], briefly vortexed, and incubated on ice for 10 min. Samples were then centrifuged at 9000g for 5 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was carefully discarded. This lysis step was repeated a second time under the same conditions, and the supernatant was again discarded. Following this, the pellet was resuspended in 100 μl of nuclear lysis buffer [1 M tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 0.5 M EDTA, SDS, and PIC] and transferred to a prechilled dounce homogenizer. The sample was homogenized using 20 strokes and performed slowly to minimize bubble formation and preserve chromatin integrity. The homogenate was transferred to a clean microcentrifuge tube, vortexed briefly, and incubated on ice for 10 min. Last, the sample was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C. This rapid freezing step was found to be critical, as it facilitates nuclear disruption and improves the efficiency of downstream chromatin processing. Frozen nuclei were thawed on ice and resuspended in 400 μl of TE buffer per 200 μl of nuclear lysis buffer. Maintaining this dilution ratio was critical to reduce the concentration of SDS from the lysis buffer, which can interfere with the efficiency of sonication. The diluted lysates were then aliquoted into 100-μl volumes, transferred to 0.65-ml DNA LoBind tubes (catalog no. C30010011, Diagenode) for use in the Bioruptor Pico and sonicated separately before recombination. Sonication was performed at high power for 30 cycles of 30-s on/30-s off. Following sonication, samples were centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C. To reduce nonspecific binding, samples were incubated for 45 min at 4°C with gentle rotation in the presence of Protein A/G Plus agarose beads. After centrifugation at 200g for 5 min, the supernatants were collected and incubated overnight at 4°C with gentle rotation in the presence of a specific antibody against KLF3 polyclonal antibody (catalog no. PA5-18030, Invitrogen, RRID:AB_10982084) (3 μg per sample) or purified mouse immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1), and κ isotype control antibody (557273, BD Pharmingen, RRID:AB_396613). The following day, a new aliquot of protein A/G Plus agarose beads was added, and samples were incubated for 1 hour at 4°C with gentle rotation. Immunocomplexes were then collected by centrifugation at 2000g for 1 min at 4°C. The antibody-protein-DNA complexes were subjected to a series of washes (each for 5 min) with the following buffers: low-salt wash buffer [0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 120 mM tris-HCl (pH 8), and 150 mM NaCl], high-salt wash buffer [0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA, 120 mM tris-HCl (pH 8), and 500 mM NaCl], LiCl wash buffer [0.25 M LiCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.1)], and TE buffer [10 mM tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and 1 mM EDTA]. After the washes, DNA-protein complexes were eluted using elution buffer (1% SDS, 0.1 M NaHCO3, and 200 μl per condition) with agitation for 15 min, followed by centrifugation at 2000g for 1 min. The elution step was repeated once, and both eluates were combined in a single tube. To reverse DNA-protein cross-links and release DNA, samples were incubated for 4 hours at 65°C in 200 mM NaCl. At this stage, the input DNA samples were also processed. To remove residual proteins, samples were incubated for 1 hour at 45°C in a solution containing 10 mM EDTA, 40 mM tris-HCl (pH 6.5), and Proteinase K (40 μg/ml; Roche). Last, the immunoprecipitated DNA was purified using ChIP DNA clean and concentrator columns (Zymo Research), specifically designed for samples containing SDS. DNA-protein binding was quantified by real-time PCR using a StepOne instrument (Applied Biosystems) and region-specific primers targeting each analyzed promoter region. Results are expressed as a percentage relative to input DNA, subtracting the signal obtained under the no-antibody control condition. Sequence chip is as follows: Wnt1 promoter, 5′-TTTGCTCAGCCTACCCCTAC (forward) and 5′-CCTACGCTGTGGTCTCTTCT (reverse); Pcna promoter, 5′-ACCAACAACCTCCCAGAACA (forward) and 5′-GCAGGTATGAGTGAGCATGC (reverse).

## Statistical analysis
Statistical significance was determined using Prism 10 (GraphPad Software, RRID:SCR_000306). Different statistical analysis was performed to interrogate statistical significance. In case that two groups were compared, an unpaired t test with Welch’s correction was applied to examine the statistical difference. When three groups were compared, an ordinary one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used, and in case that significance was found, a post hoc Tukey test was used to detect differences between groups. Last, for the analysis of the ASR at different decibels, a two-way factorial ANOVA was used to find statistical differences, followed by multiple comparisons to compare column means. A P < 0.05 was considered statistically different. P values are represented in each graph where data are represented as means ± SEM, and each animal is represented as an individual point. At least five animals were used for each comparison.

## Acknowledgments
We want to acknowledge the valuable technical support of B. R. Iruretagoyena, laboratory technician at the Liver Disease Laboratory in CIC bioGUNE. GalNAc siRNA-Cnnm4 was provided from Silence Therapeutics GmbH, Berlin, Germany.
Funding:This work was supported by grants from Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades MICINN: CEX2021-001136-S (to M.L.M.-C.) and MICINN: PID2022-139395OB-100 (to M.L.M.-C.); integrado en el Plan Estatal de Investigación Científica y Técnica e Innovación, cofinanciado con Fondos FEDER; and Project funded by CIBEREHD; 2018 BBVA Foundation Grants for Scientific Research Teams- UMBRELLA (to M.L.M.-C., M.R.G., and B.C.-F.). T.C.D. is funded by “Ayuda RYC2020-029316-I financiada por MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 y por El FSE invierte en tu futuro.” This work was supported by grants from Ministerio de Ciencia, Innovación y Universidades MICINN: PID2020-117116OB-I00 (to T.C.D.). C.M.-C. was supported by CIBERSAM (G26) and the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (AC23_2/00034). A.C.S.H. received funding from CIBERSAM (G26) and the Consejería de Salud y Familias (RH-0063). V.D.R.H. was supported by the Agencia Estatal de Investigación (PID2019-109405R and PI-0014-2022). L.E.Z.-P. was supported by a PhD fellowship from the Provincial Section of Bizkaia from the Scientific Foundation of the Spanish Association Against Cancer PRDVZ233980ZAPA. C.M.R.G. was supported by Ayuda Juan de la Cierva JDC2023-052761-I from the MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033–Unión Europea NextGenerationEU/PRTR. V.M.-A. was supported by the Miguel Servet contract (CP23/00111) from the ISCIII. This project has also received funding from the European Horizon’s research and innovation program HORIZON-HLTH-2022-STAYHLTH-02 (agreement no. 101095679), Spanish Instituto de Salud Carlos III-FEDER Grant (FIS-PI22/01853) and European Union-NextGenerationEU (PMP21/00112) (to J.C.).

Competing interests: M.L.M.-C. advises for Mitotherapeutix LLC and is a founder of Gibela Therapeutics. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Author contributions: Conceptualization: T.C.D., C.G.-P., L.A.M.-C., V.M.-A., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Writing—original draft: T.C.D., R.N., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Writing—review and editing: T.C.D., J.L., L.E.Z.-P., R.N., J.C., V.M.-A., A.M.F., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Investigation: T.C.D., C.M.-C., A.C.S.H., A.G.G., C.M.R.G., J.L., R.G.D., N.G.-U., I.G.-R., C.G.-P., L.E.Z.-P., J.A.B.-B., C.C., V.D.R.H., M.A., F.E., V.M.-A., J.C., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Methodology: T.C.D., A.C.S.H., A.G.G., C.M.R.G., R.G.D., N.G.-U., C.C., V.D.R.H., M.A., F.E., A.M.F., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Formal analysis: T.C.D., J.L., J.C., C.G.-P., J.A.B.-B., L.A.M.-C., V.M.-A., A.M.F., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Resources: T.C.D., C.G.-P., R.N., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Validation: J.L., J.A.B.-B., J.C., V.M.-A., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Visualization: T.C.D., J.L., J.C., V.M.-A., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Data curation: B.C.-F. Funding acquisition: T.C.D., J.A.B.-B., L.A.M.-C., A.M.F., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Supervision: T.C.D., M.R.G., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C. Project administration: T.C.D., B.C.-F., and M.L.M.-C.

Data and materials availability: The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE [1] partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD063321 (www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD063321). All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.

## Supplementary Materials

## This PDF file includes:
Figs. S1 to S9
Tables S1 to S3