319nihpaCell reportsCell RepPMC127676071276760712767607NIHMS21258264121793310.1016/j.celrep.2025.116516Feedforward miR-181d degradation modulates population variance of methyl-guanine methyl transferase and temozolomide resistance
SinghGatikrushna SinghShilpi MohapatraIteeshree KimStefan SharmaMayur AkersJohnny NguyenThien WongEric MorenoMargot Martinez KokkoliEfrosini VasudevanShobha LawlerSean E El-DeiryWafik S GokaslanZiya ChenClark C 1Department of Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA2Department of Veterinary Biomedical Sciences, St. Paul, MN 55108, USA3VisiCELL Medical Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA4Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94304, USA5Department of Neurology, Warren Alpert School of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA6Department of Neurosurgery, Warren Alpert School of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA7Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA8Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA9Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Legorreta Cancer Center, Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA10These authors contributed equally11Lead contactAUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, G.S. and C.C.C.; methodology, G.S., S.S., and I.M.; investigation, G.S., S.S., I.M., and C.C.C.; writing – original draft, G.S. and C.C.C.; writing – review & editing, G.S., S.S., I.M., C.C.C., S.K., M.S., J.A., T.N., E.W., M.M.M.; contributed new reagents/analytic tools, E.K., S.V., S.E.L., W.S.E.-D., and Z.G.; funding acquisition, G.S. and C.C.C.; supervision, G.S. and C.C.C.
*Correspondence: gsingh@umn.edu
101120254411116516116516612026This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).The publisher's version of this article is available at Cell Rep

## SUMMARY
Intratumoral heterogeneity plays a pivotal role in cancer evolution, providing the substrate for adaptation to selective pressures, including chemotherapy treatment. Here, we demonstrate that miR-181d modulates variability in methyl-guanine methyl transferase (MGMT) expression, contributing to this heterogeneity in glioblastoma, the most common form of adult primary brain tumor. Treatment with standard-of-care temozolomide (TMZ) chemotherapy triggers a feedforward loop that accelerates polyribonucleotide nucleotidyltransferase 1 (PNPT1)-dependent miR-181d degradation. This degradation requires the activation of ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase. The degradation of miR-181d in glioblastoma cells increases the variance of MGMT expression in the cell population, contributing to acquired TMZ resistance. This resistance is suppressed by exogenously transfected miR-181d. These findings suggest that microRNA regulates intratumoral heterogeneity by modulating the transcriptional variability of key DNA repair enzymes, providing a compelling rationale for miRNA delivery as a platform for glioblastoma therapy.

## Graphical Abstract

 

## In brief
Singh et al. show that TMZ treatment in glioblastoma induces ATR- and PNPT1-dependent degradation of miR-181d. Loss of miR-181d de-represses PNPT1, establishing a feedforward loop that amplifies TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation. This circuit enhances MGMT expression and cell-to-cell variability, highlighting a mechanism driving resistance to alkylating chemotherapy.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptyesis-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednohas-published-versionnoIssue date 2025 Nov 25.

## INTRODUCTION
The concepts of mean and variance serve complementary roles in biological research. While the former captures the central tendencies of a trait in populations, the latter defines the degree of spread or dispersion of the data points relative to that central tendency. Studies that aim to compare population differences in particular phenotypes (e.g., the expression of a protein before and after a perturbation) often emphasize the differences in means, using variance as a mathematical tool to interpret these differences. However, the concept of variance holds independent biological meanings beyond this role. Variance is a key indicator of the complexity of the population and measures differences between the units of the population (e.g., cell-to-cell variability) and is a key determinant of intratumoral heterogeneity. Increasing gene expression variance within a population enhances phenotypic diversity to improve the overall fitness of a cell population in response to selective pressures, such as chemotherapeutic treatment.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small (19–24 bp), non-coding RNAs that play two key, post-transcriptional roles in modulating gene expression. miRNAs bind to complementary sequences on target mRNAs, which can accelerate their degradation and/or inhibition of translation. , These effects ultimately reduce the mean, steady-state expression of the target mRNA in a cell population. Because both RNA degradation and translational inhibition suppress the likelihood of stochastic bursts in transcription, , miRNA additionally decreases the variance in gene expression. – While such suppression enhances the robustness of a cell in maintaining constancy in gene expression, it also reduces the fitness of the population by suppressing transcriptional diversity. The impact on population fitness is amplified when the miRNA target genes, pivotal for cellular survival, respond to selective pressure, such as DNA repair genes in response to DNA-damaging chemotherapy. – 
The DNA repair protein, O6-methyl-guanine methyl transferase (MGMT), encodes an evolutionarily conserved DNA repair protein that confers resistance to DNA alkylating agents. Temozolomide (TMZ) is a DNA alkylating agent that serves as the standard-of-care chemotherapy for glioblastoma, the most common form of primary brain cancer in adults. TMZ exerts its anti-tumoral effect predominantly by alkylating the O6-position of guanine. , The presence of O6-modified guanine in DNA induces DNA replication arrest and accumulation of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) breaks, triggering DNA damage response (DDR) through activation of the ataxia-telangiectasia and Rad3-related (ATR) kinase. MGMT restores O6-alkylated guanine to undamaged guanine by transferring the alkyl group to itself. , Each MGMT molecule serves as an acceptor for a single alkyl transfer. , Thus, high levels of MGMT are associated with glioblastoma resistance to TMZ. , Of note, MGMT is post-transcriptionally regulated by a network of miRNAs; the principal among these regulators is miR-181d. – Suppression of MGMT expression is dependent on specific interactions between miR-181d and the 3’ untranslated region (3′ UTR) of MGMT, abolished by mutagenesis of the miR-181d binding sites. Moreover, this suppression is rescued by a miR-181d-resistant MGMT construct. In clinical glioblastoma specimens, high levels of miR-181d were associated with low MGMT expression and improved survival after TMZ treatment. , 
Cellular miRNA homeostasis is governed by the equilibrium between its biogenesis pathways and degradation mechanism. Relative to the available literature on miRNA biogenesis, – studies of miRNA degradation remain sparse. – The human polyribonucleotide nucleotidyltransferase 1 (PNPT1) encodes a phosphorylase essential for the degradation of select miRNAs. The encoded protein belongs to an evolutionarily conserved family of 3′-to-5′ exo-ribonucleases that use phosphate to catalyze RNA degradation. , All PNPase family members harbor two RNase-PH-domains (RPH), an S1-RNA binding domain, and a K-homology domain. The crystal structure of bacterial PNPases revealed that the six RPH domains of the PNPase trimer form a doughnut-like structure, with a central channel through which the RNA to be degraded is threaded. Beyond miRNA degradation, the human PNPT1 plays a pivotal role in the import of RNA into the mitochondria. Separate-of-function PNPT1 mutations have been reported for these distinct functions. , 
In this study, we demonstrate that TMZ treatment activates the ATR kinase to initiate a feed-forward PNPT1-miR-181d loop that expedites PNPT1-dependent degradation of miR-181d. The decreased miR-181d level triggered two independent mechanisms that contribute to acquired TMZ resistance: (1) increasing the population mean expression of MGMT, and 2) broadening the cell-to-cell variability in MGMT expression. Overexpression of miR-181d suppressed both resistance mechanisms and synergized with TMZ in tumoricidal activity against glioblastoma. These findings provide a compelling rationale for miRNA delivery-based therapy to suppress chemotherapy-induced genetic heterogeneity that underlies therapeutic resistance.

## RESULTS

## Decreased miR-181d expression following TMZ treatment
To characterize the changes in miRNA expression in response to TMZ therapy, two patient-derived glioblastoma lines BT-83 and CMK3 were treated with 500 μM TMZ or vehicle for 6 h. These cell lines were selected because their gene expression profile suggests they capture the two key glioblastoma cell states: BT-83 exhibits an expression pattern suggestive of the mesenchymal-like state, while CMK3 exhibits an expression pattern suggestive of the neural progenitor-like state. RNA was extracted and profiled by RNA sequencing ( ). In both cell lines, the TMZ treatment did not significantly alter the expression of >95% of the miRNAs ( and ). miRNAs exhibiting a >2-fold change in expression following TMZ treatment in both lines were individually assessed to determine whether their expression differed in matched pre- and post-TMZ-treated clinical glioblastoma specimens ( and ). Among the miRNAs evaluated, miR-181d was the only one consistently showing lowered levels in the post-TMZ specimens ( , left panel). This finding recapitulated our prior profiling experiment, where miR-181d was downregulated in post-TMZ-treated clinical glioblastoma specimens. 
 Since miR-181d downregulates MGMT expression, , we next characterized the MGMT mRNA expression in the matched pre- and post-TMZ-treated clinical glioblastoma specimen by quantitative reverse-transcription PCR (RT-qPCR). The lowered levels of miR-181d in the post-TMZ-treated specimens were associated with increased levels of MGMT expression ( , right panel). MGMT immunohistochemical staining was also performed using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sections derived from three pairs of matched newly diagnosed (pre-TMZ-treatment) and recurrent (post-TMZ-treatment) clinical glioblastoma specimens. Increased MGMT expression was consistently observed in the recurrent tumor sections relative to the newly diagnosed tumor sections in the three matched pairs ( ).
To further establish the clinical significance of TMZ-induced changes in miR-181d and MGMT, we interrogated data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Our analysis revealed that recurrent glioblastoma specimens exhibited lower levels of miR-181d expression compared to newly diagnosed glioblastoma specimens (p = 0.0275, , left panel). This decrease in miR-181d was associated with an increase in MGMT expression (p = 0.0001, , right panel).
To characterize the effect of TMZ treatment on miR-181d expression in a cell-based system, CMK3 cells were treated with TMZ and analyzed by RT-qPCR. This analysis revealed a time-dependent reduction in miR-181d levels ( , left panel), with a >50% decrease in miR-181d observed within 4 h of TMZ treatment. This observation was confirmed using the BT-83 glioblastoma line ( ). In both cell lines, the decrease in miR-181d level was associated with a concomitant increase in MGMT mRNA expression ( (right panel) and ). As a control, the expression of another miRNA, miR-21, remained unaffected by TMZ treatment ( ). TMZ treatment did not reduce the expression levels of other miR-181 family members, namely miR-181a, b, and c ( and ). Finally, exogenous expression of miR-181d mimic maintained miR-181d level after TMZ treatment ( [left panel] and ) and suppressed TMZ-induced increase in MGMT expression ( [right panel] and ). These findings support a key role for miR-181d in TMZ-induced MGMT upregulation. Notably, miR-181d transfection did not alter the MGMT promoter methylation status in CMK3 cells ( ).

## PNPT1 is required for miR-181d degradation
A decrease in the steady-state level of miR-181d following TMZ treatment could result from either suppressed biogenesis or increased degradation. To distinguish between these possibilities, the effect of TMZ on both precursor (pre) and mature (mat) miR-181d was examined. The level of pre-miR-181d remained unchanged in response to TMZ treatment in CMK3 cells. In contrast, the level of mat-miR-181d significantly decreased after treatment ( ). Similar results were observed in the BT-83 cells ( ). These observations suggest that the reduced level of miR-181d resulted from a degradative process rather than suppressed biogenesis. Supporting this hypothesis, inhibition of transcription by pre-treatment with actinomycin D1 , did not further reduce the miR-181d levels in response to TMZ ( ). As control, we show that actinomycin D at the applied concentration was sufficient to inhibit Myc mRNA biogenesis ( ).
 To elucidate the mechanism underlying TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation, a small interfering (si)RNA screen was conducted targeting RNases (ExoSC4, PNPT1, and XRN1) that have been previously implicated in miRNA degradation. Among these RNase-targeting siRNAs, only those directed against PNPT1 caused an increase in the steady-state miR-181d levels (a 4-fold increase, ). This effect was confirmed using silencing and CRISPR-Cas9 disruption of PNPT1. In both CMK3 and BT-83, PNPT1-silencing (using a siRNA distinct from that used in the screen) induced a 2-fold increase in steady-state miR-181d level ( and ) and suppressed TMZ-induced upregulation of MGMT ( and ). PNPT knockout (KO) ( and ) caused a >100-fold increase in miR-181d level ( ) and downregulation of MGMT ( ). PNPT1-KO ( ) also prevented the TMZ-induced reduction in miR-181d levels ( ) and MGMT upregulation ( ).
Additionally, ectopic overexpression of PNPT1 in both wild-type (WT) or PNPT1-KO CMK3 cells reduced the steady-state levels of miR-181d ( ), with an associated rise in MGMT mRNA expression ( ). Moreover, such overexpression enhanced TMZ-induced decrease in miR-181d ( ), with an associated increase in MGMT ( ). To investigate the interaction between miR-181d and PNPT1, CMK3 cells were transfected with biotinylated (Bi)-miR-181d or Bi-miR-NT mimic. A streptavidin-biotin pull-down assay was performed, followed by detection of PNPT1 using western blotting. The results demonstrated that PNPT1 co-precipitated with Bi-miR-181d in the streptavidin pull-down ( ).
To determine whether PNPT1 is required for miR-181d degradation, an in vitro miRNA degradation assay was performed. The PNPT1 protein was immunoprecipitated (IP) using an anti-PNPT1 antibody from CMK3 lysates ( ) and then incubated with either mat-miR-181d or miR-21 mimic. The miRNAs were subsequently isolated from the reaction mixture and analyzed by RT-qPCR. The results demonstrated a time-dependent decrease in miR-181d level ( ). Such a decrease was not observed with miR-21 mimic ( ). Moreover, the reduction in miR-181d level was more pronounced when incubated with affinity-purified PNPT1 derived from CMK3 treated with TMZ for 24 h than when using affinity-purified PNPT derived from CMK3 treated with the vehicle ( ).
PNPT1 is an enzyme localized to both the mitochondrial and cytosolic compartments. We next determined whether TMZ treatment alters the sub-cellular localization of PNPT1. Without TMZ treatment, PNPT1 localizes to both the cytoplasm and the mitochondria at a ratio of 70% mitochondria and 30% cytoplasm ( , lanes 1 and 2). After TMZ treatment, this ratio is flipped with a ratio of 30% mitochondria:70% in cytoplasm ( , lanes 3 and 4). These findings are consistent with a previous report demonstrating PNPT1 re-localization to the cytoplasm in response to environmental stress. This shift in sub-cellular localization was associated with a decrease in the cytoplasmic miR-181d level ( ). These findings suggest that TMZ-induced re-localization of PNPT1 into the cytoplasmic compartment facilitated the degradation of miR-181d (and subsequent de-repression of MGMT expression).

## PNPT1 modulates TMZ sensitivity through miR-181d and MGMT regulation
The effect of PNPT1 on TMZ sensitivity was evaluated by the limiting dilution neurosphere-forming assays. , CMK3 cells were transfected with PNPT1-siRNAs and treated with TMZ (500 μM) or vehicle to determine the clonogenic potential. The results demonstrated that silencing of PNPT1 ( ) caused a nearly two orders of magnitude increase in TMZ sensitivity ( , top panel). Similarly, transfection of miR-181d mimic or MGMT-siRNA into CMK3 caused an approximate two orders of magnitude increase in TMZ sensitivity ( , middle and bottom panel). siPNPT1-mediated increase in TMZ sensitivity can be blocked by an anti-miR against miR-181d ( , top panel) or MGMT overexpression ( , bottom panel). These results support a genetic pathway in which PNPT1 acts on miR-181d to regulate MGMT expression levels and modulate TMZ sensitivity.

## Mutations inactivating PNPT1 ribonuclease activity suppressed its effects on miR-181d
Next, we determined the expression of PNPT1 in clinical glioblastoma specimens. PNPT1 expression was elevated by 2- to 25-fold in tumor specimens relative to the adjacent brain tissue at the mRNA ( ) and protein levels ( ). PNPT1 is a multi-functional protein comprising two RNase-PH (RPH) domains, two COOH-terminal RNA binding domains: an S1-RNA binding and a K-homology domain. Separation-of-function mutations between its two key activities, mitochondrial RNA import and exo-ribonuclease activity, have been described. Specifically, mutations S135G, Q387R, and S484A disrupted PNPT1 mitochondrial function without significantly affecting ribonuclease activity, , , while mutations R445E, R446E, D538A, and D544G inactivated the exo-ribonuclease activity ( , top panel). To assess the impact of these mutations on miR-181d degradation, expression constructs of PNPT1-WT and mutants were transfected into CMK3 (as a control) or two independent clones of PNPT1-KO lines. Expression of WT-PNPT1 in the PNPT1-KO lines suppressed the steady-state miR-181d level by approximately an order of magnitude ( , bottom panel). Transfection of PNPT1 constructs bearing the S135G, Q387R, or S484A (mutations that do not affect the exo-ribonuclease activity) resulted in suppression of steady-state miR-181d level comparable to WT-PNTP1. In contrast, constructs bearing the R445E, R446E, D538A, or D544G mutations (mutations that disrupted the exo-ribonuclease activity) did not significantly affect steady-state miR-181d level ( , bottom panel).
 To further establish the involvement of PNPT1’s exo-ribonuclease activity in miR-181d degradation, GFP-tagged WT-PNPT1 or the D538A mutant was affinity-purified from stably expressing CMK3 PNPT1-KO cells and incubated with mature miR-181d mimic. The level of miR-181d remained unchanged when incubated with the affinity-purified fraction from PNPT1-D538A, while a significant reduction of miR-181d was observed when incubated with affinity-purified fraction from WT-PNPT1 ( ). These results suggest that PNPT1 exo-ribonuclease activity contributes to the degradation of miR-181d.

## PNPT1 is post-translationally regulated by miR-181d
Sequence analysis of the PNPT1–3′ UTR revealed three potential miRNA response elements (MREs) for miR-181d, depicted as MRE1 (705–729 bp), MRE2 (1250–1274 bp), and MRE3 (1464–1487 bp) ( ). This raises the possibility that PNPT1 is regulated by miR-181d in a feedforward loop, where PNPT1 expression increases following TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation. Supporting this hypothesis, PNPT1 expression increased in response to TMZ treatment at both the RNA ( ) and protein ( ) levels. Further supporting this hypothesis, increased PNPT1 mRNA expression was observed in matched pre- and post-TMZ-treated clinical glioblastoma specimens ( ).
 To further substantiate miR-181d regulation of PNPT1, CMK3 cells were transfected with miR-181d or miR-NT mimic. 48 h post-transfection, RT-qPCR detected ∼80% reduction in PNPT1 mRNA ( ) and protein expression ( ). In addition, transfection of anti-miR-181d into CMK3 cells (expressing high levels of miR-181d) increased PNPT1 protein expression. This effect was not observed after the transfection of a control anti-miR-NT ( ). Next, we determined whether PNPT1 mRNA binds to miR-181d. CMK3 cells were transfected with Bi-miR-181d or Bi-miR-NT mimic. A streptavidin-biotin pull-down assay was performed, followed by the detection of PNPT1 mRNA by RT-qPCR. The analyses detected approximately a 5-fold enrichment of PNPT1 mRNA with the Bi-miR-181d pull-down relative to the Bi-miR-NT pull-down ( ).
To confirm that PNPT1 is a target of miR-181d, each of the three miR-181d MREs was cloned into a pSiCheck-2 reporter construct. Luciferase activity of a pSiCheck-2 reporter construct bearing the first miR-181d MRE1 was unaffected by the introduction of miR-181d. However, the construct harboring the miR-181d MRE2 and miR-181d MRE3 exhibited ∼20% and ∼30% reduction in luciferase activity, respectively, upon introduction of miR-181d ( ). Mutations in these MRE sites (mut-MRE2 and mut-MRE3) that disrupted complementarity to miR-181d abolished these effects.
Our data suggested that miR-181d downregulates PNPT1 expression by direct binding of its 3′ UTR. Supporting this hypothesis, exogenous expression of a cDNA encoding a Myc-FLAG-tagged PNPT1 (lacking the PNPT1-3′ UTR) rescued the PNPT1 suppressive effect of miR-181d ( , compare lanes 3 and 2, Myc-PNPT1 transcripts). The expression of Myc-FLAG-PNTP1 was assessed using both RT-qPCR ( ) and FLAG western blotting ( ). Importantly, Bi-miR-181d pulled down only endogenous PNPT1 (with WT 3′ UTR) and not the Myc-FLGA-tagged PNTP1 (without the 3′ UTR, , comparing lanes 3 and 4). PNPT1 expression in a cell line that exogenously expressed Myc-FLAG-PNPT1 with MRE2 added to the 3′ UTR and transfected with miR-181d is lower than in a similarly treated cell line exogenously expressing Myc-FLAG-PNPT1 cDNA without the MRE2 sequence ( [compare lanes 4 and 3] and [compare lanes 4 and 3]). This finding suggests that the MRE2 sequence interacts with miR-181d to target the Myc-FLAG-PNPT1 transcript for degradation. PNPT1 expression is restored when MRE2 is mutated to abolish miR-181d binding ( [compare lanes 4 and 5] and [compare lanes 4 and 5]). Importantly, Bi-miR-181d pulled down only Myc-FLAG-PNPT1-MRE2 and not the Myc-FLAG-PNPT1-mutated-MRE2 ( ). A similar pattern of results was observed for MRE3. PNPT1 expression in a cell line that exogenously expressed Myc-FLAG-PNPT1 with MRE3 added to the 3′ UTR and transfected with miR-181d is lower than in a similarly treated cell line exogenously expressing Myc-FLAG-PNPT1 cDNA without the MRE3 sequence ( [compare lanes 6 and 3] and , [compare lanes 6 and 3]), suggesting that the MRE3 sequence interacts with miR-181d to target the Myc-FLAG-PNPT1 transcript for degradation. PNPT1 expression is restored when MRE3 is mutated to abolish miR-181d binding ( [compare lanes 6 and 7] and [compare lanes 6 and 7]). Bi-miR-181d pulled down only Myc-FLAG-PNPT1-MRE3 and not the Myc-FLAG-PNPT1-mutated-MRE3 ( ). These rescue and mutagenesis experiments support specific interactions between miR-181d and the 3′ UTR of PNPT1.
 

## ATR is required for TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation
TMZ treatment initiates DDR by activating the ATR kinase. To investigate whether ATR activation is necessary for TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation, CMK3 cells were pretreated with the ATR inhibitor VE-821, followed by TMZ exposure, and miR-181d expression levels were assessed. While TMZ treatment induced a time-dependent decrease in miR-181d, this reduction was suppressed by VE-821 ( ).
 Next, we tested the interaction between ATR and PNPT1 in their regulation of miR-181d. To this end, we generated a CMK3 line harboring the doxycycline-inducible ATR-silencing (shATR, short hairpin ATR) construct that overexpresses PNPT1. ATR-silencing suppressed TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation ( , lane 4 versus lane 3), while PNPT1 overexpression enhanced miR-181d degradation phenotype ( , lane 6 versus lane 2). Notably, ATR-silencing in the cell line that overexpressed PNPT1 showed no evidence of TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation ( , lane 8 versus lane 7), suggesting that ATR is required for PNPT1-mediated miR-181d degradation, with associated increased MGMT expression ( ). To further evaluate the genetic interaction between PNPT1 and ATR, CMK3, or CMK3-PNPT1-KO lines were transfected with siATR or siNT control. In CMK3 cells, siATR transfection resulted in an order of magnitude increase in miR-181d than in siNT-transfected cells, while such a difference was not observed in the PNPT1-KO line ( ). These results suggest that the effect of ATR on miR-181d requires PNPT1.
To determine whether ATR is required for binding of PNPT1 to miR-181d, the CMK3 line harboring the doxycycline-inducible shATR was transfected with Bi-miR-181d or Bi-NT and treated with TMZ or vehicle. Streptavidin pull-down was performed using lysate derived from doxycycline-treated or control-treated cells, followed by western blotting with an anti-PNPT1 antibody. Without doxycycline induction of ATR-silencing, PNPT1 was detected in the Bi-miR-181d pull-down, with or without TMZ treatment ( ). However, upon doxycycline treatment-induced ATR-silencing, PNPT1 was not detected in the Bi-miR-181d pull-down ( ), suggesting that ATR is required for PNPT1-miR-181d interaction.
To determine whether ATR is essential for PNPT1-mediated degradation of miR-181d, we treated CMK3 harboring doxycycline-inducible shATR and GFP-PNPT1 with either doxycycline or DMSO. After 24 h, the doxycycline or DMSO cells were subjected to TMZ or DMSO treatment. Extracts were then prepared from cells treated with these four conditions (DMSO+DMSO, DMSO+TMZ, doxycycline + DMSO, and doxycycline + TMZ), and GFP-PNPT1 was affinity-purified as described for . The affinity-purified GFP-PNPT1 was then incubated with synthetic miR-181d to determine its degradative activity. A lower level of miR-181d was detected after incubation with affinity-purified GFP-PNPT1 isolated from DMSO+DMSO-treated cells relative to the reactions incubated with IgG pull-down ( , lane 1: GFP versus IgG), suggesting that the PNPT1 immunoprecipitate harbored miR-181d degradative activity. The level of miR-181d was further lowered in the reaction with GFP-PNPT1 immunoprecipitate isolated from DMSO+TMZ-treated cells, suggesting that TMZ treatment enhanced the degradative activity of the PNPT1 immunoprecipitate ( , lane 2: GFP versus lane 1). In the reactions involving GFP-PNPT1 immuno-purified from doxycycline-treated cells (i.e., ATR-silenced), we did not observe a decrease in miR-181d level relative to the reaction with IgG pull-down ( , lane 3: GFP and lane 4: GFP), suggesting that ATR is required for PNPT1-mediated degradation of miR-181d.

## miR-181d degradation enhanced cell-to-cell variability and TMZ resistance
miRNAs suppress transcriptional variance in gene expression. To determine whether this suppression influences cell-to-cell variability, we treated BT-83 glioblastoma cells with TMZ or DMSO. Single-cell RT-qPCR was performed on approximately 80 cells per treatment group to assess miR-181d and MGMT. Consistent with our hypothesis that TMZ induces degradation of miR-181d, the population mean of miR-181d expression is reduced after TMZ treatment ( , top panel). This reduction is associated with an increased population mean of MGMT expression ( , bottom panel). Notably, while the variance in miR-181d expression remained unchanged in response to TMZ, the variance of MGMT increased by a factor of five after TMZ treatment (p = 0.001). Transfection of a control miRNA did not alter the distributional mean or variance of miR-181d expression ( , top panel). On the other hand, transfection of miR-181d mimic increased the distributional mean of miR-181d expression without significantly changing its variance ( , top panel). In terms of MGMT expression, miR-181d transfection reduced the distributional mean without affecting the variance of MGMT expression ( , bottom panel). Together, these results suggest that miR-181d modulates the population variance of MGMT expression.
 Next, we tested whether variability in MGMT expression translates to altered TMZ resistance. To this end, we isolated BT-83 subclones that varied in MGMT expression and pooled these subclones to generate populations with comparable MGMT expression but with either low- or high-variance in MGMT expression. For the low-variance group, we pooled seven clones exhibiting similar MGMT expression levels ( ). The high-variance group was created by pooling three clones with MGMT expression levels comparable to the low-variance group, along with two clones exhibiting higher and two clones with lower MGMT expression ( ). RT-qPCR analysis confirmed that the mean MGMT mRNA expression levels were comparable between the low- and high-variance pools ( ). However, western blotting shows that MGMT protein expression is slightly higher in the low-variance group ( ). The miR-181d expression in the two pools is comparable ( ). The baseline clonogenic potential of the high- and low-variance pool was comparable ( ). However, the high-variance pool showed increased TMZ resistance relative to the low-variance pool ( ).
To validate these results in vivo, the high- and low-variance pools were orthotopically implanted into nude mice. The mice were treated with TMZ to assess the impact of MGMT variance on therapeutic response. Without TMZ treatment, the mice bearing low-variance and high-variance MGMT expression pools exhibited similar median survival of 38 and 37 days, respectively ( ). After TMZ treatment, the median survival for mice implanted with the low-variance MGMT expression pool extended to 72 days. In contrast, those implanted with the high-variance pool demonstrated a significantly shorter median survival of 53 days (p < 0.0001), indicating increased resistance to TMZ in the high-variance group (hence prolonged survival) relative to the low-variance MGMT pool. This finding is notable given that the populational MGMT expression level in the low-variance group is slightly higher than that of the high-variance group ( ), supporting a role for MGMT expression variance in TMZ resistance.
The general survival pattern observed in closely correlated with that observed in bioluminescence studies of tumor burden dynamics ( ), low- and high-variance pooled BT-83 were transduced with a luciferase construct and orthotopically implanted. Tumor burden dynamics were followed using bioluminescence. Without TMZ treatment, the low- and high-variance pools exhibited comparable time-dependent increase in bioluminescence, suggesting a similar rate of growth in vivo. In response to TMZ treatment, the low-variance pool exhibited a slower rise in bioluminescence relative to the high-variance pool (p = 0.02195 on day 14 and p = 0.00043 on day 21), suggesting increased TMZ resistance of the high-variance pools.
Next, we tested the effect of miR-181d transfection on the TMZ sensitivity of the low-variance population ( ). Mice implanted with the low-variance pool transfected with miR-181d had a median survival of 52 days, significantly longer than in mice transfected with control miRNA (37 days, p = 0.00135). This finding supports previous reports that miR-181d suppressed gene expression required for survival and proliferation, including K-Ras and BCL-2. TMZ treatment of those mice transfected with miR-NT increased median survival to 68 days (p = 0.00118). TMZ treatment in the miR-181d-transfected group further prolonged survival, with all but one mouse surviving the planned study endpoint of 90 days (p < 0.0001 compared to TMZ-treated mice implanted with the miR-NT-transfected tumor).
Further, we assessed the impact of miR-181d transfection on TMZ sensitivity of the high-variance populations. Mice implanted with the high-variance pool transfected with miR-181d exhibited a median survival of 70 days, significantly longer than those transfected with miR-NT (42 days, p < 0.0001, ). TMZ treatment of those mice transfected with miR-NT increased median survival to 61 days (p < 0.0001). Notably, TMZ treatment in the miR-181d-transfected group further prolonged survival, with all but one mouse surviving the planned study endpoint of 90 days (p < 0.0001 compared to TMZ-treated mice implanted with miR-NT-transfected tumor).
Since the experiment using the low-variance pool was conducted separately from the experiment using the high-variance pool, a direct, quantitative comparison between the two experiments is not possible. However, it is notable that the median survival of the cohort with TMZ-treated low-variance population is longer than that of the cohort treated with miR-181d. In contrast, the median survival of the cohort with TMZ-treated high-variance population is approximately the same as that of the cohort treated with miR-181d. These results are consistent with our observation that the high-variance pool is more refractory to the cytotoxic effect of TMZ than the low-variance pool.
The observations made in the murine survival models closely correlated with those observed in bioluminescence studies of tumor burden dynamics ( and ). The time-dependent rise in bioluminescence observed in both low- and high-variance pools was attenuated by either TMZ treatment or miR-181d transfection. While the high-variance group exhibited a faster rise in bioluminescence relative to the low-variance pool, the combined miR-181d+TMZ intervention produced comparable inhibitory effects in both high- and low-variance pools.

## DISCUSSION
Transcriptional variability contributes to phenotypic diversity that underlies populational fitness to selective pressures, such as exposure of cancer cells to chemotherapy. miRNAs suppress such transcriptional variability. , , Results from this study demonstrate that DNA-damaging chemotherapy treatment induced a feedforward loop to expedite miRNA degradation, enhancing cell-to-cell variability in the expression of a critical DNA repair protein. Specifically, treatment of glioblastoma cells with the chemotherapy, TMZ, triggers an ATR and PNPT1-dependent degradation of miR-181d. Since PNPT1 is itself a target of miR-181d, miR-181d degradation de-repress PNPT1, leading to a feedforward loop that amplifies TMZ-induced miR-181d degradation, resulting in both an increased mean expression of MGMT as well as the cell-to-cell variability of MGMT expression. The importance of the former to TMZ resistance is well-established. Our study demonstrates that the latter also contributes to acquired TMZ resistance. This result is intuitive since the higher MGMT-expressing clones in the high-variance pool are more likely to survive TMZ treatment and proliferate subsequently. Moreover, our results indicate that both mechanisms of TMZ resistance (increased mean and variance of MGMT expression) can be suppressed by miR-181d overexpression, suggesting potential as a therapeutic strategy. As therapeutic resistance is multifaceted, the proposed strategy targets only one component of a broader regulatory network.
The varied levels of MGMT expression in glioblastoma cells bear implications for intratumoral heterogeneity. MGMT restores TMZ-induced O6-methylated guanine that accumulates due to the alkylating activities associated with TMZ. O6-methyl-guanine is both a cytotoxic and a mutagenic substrate. By mispairing with thymine, O6-methyl-guanine induces a G to A transition if the mispair is not corrected by the mismatch repair (MMR). This ubiquitous repair process corrects non-Watson-Crick paired duplexes. MMR involves an excision and resynthesis mechanism for correcting the DNA mismatch. When the quantity of O6-methyl-guanine exceeds the cellular capacity to complete this process, ssDNA and O6-methyl-guanine: thymine mispairs accumulate. The former lesion induces cytotoxicity, while tolerance of the latter leads to mutagenesis. Thus, cancer evolution in response to TMZ represents a dynamic balance between these two lesions. , Each MGMT molecule transfers the methyl moiety from O6-methyl-guanine into itself before the methylated MGMT is targeted for degradation, and the repair of O6-methyl-guanine by MGMT is stochiometric. Thus, MGMT expression level is a key determinant in this dynamic interplay. The variability in MGMT expression associated with miR-181d degradation broadens the range of this interplay, which increases intratumoral heterogeneity.
The stability of most miRNAs (typically exceeding 12–24 h) is primarily attributed to the binding of Argonaute (AGO), which protects the ends and the phosphate backbone of the miRNA from nucleolytic degradation. , While our understanding of miRNA degradation remains incomplete, the target-directed miRNA degradation (TDMD) mechanism proposes that the binding of miRNA to a highly complementary sequence, termed “trigger RNAs,” induces a ternary complex that recruits E3 ubiquitin ligase and an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. This process results in the proteasomal processing of AGO, releasing the deprotected miRNA for nucleolytic degradation. , Whether and how the roles of ATR and PNPT1 in miR-181d degradation interface with TDMD remains an intriguing area of future research.
Corroborating with our findings, a growing body of peer-reviewed studies employing matched clinical specimens has demonstrated elevated MGMT expression in promoter-unmethylated glioblastomas following TMZ treatment. – However, the temporal dynamics of this increase remain undefined, as clinical sampling within hours of TMZ administration is not feasible in standard practice. Instead, clinical samples are typically taken at the time of recurrence, which occurs months to years after the initiation of TMZ treatment. Our study suggests that TMZ exposure immediately initiates a race between glioblastoma kill and acquired resistance, and the relative kinetics of these two processes ultimately determine the clinical outcome. The feedforward loop between miR-181d and PNPT1 leads to rapid degradation of miR-181d, increasing the mean MGMT expression and the variance of MGMT expression. The increased variation in MGMT expression is expected to facilitate mutagenesis-related intratumoral heterogeneity, which enhances population fitness in response to selective pressures related to future therapeutics. This framework offers one explanation for the poor prognosis associated with patients afflicted with MGMT-expressing glioblastomas. , 
Our study suggests that the therapeutic delivery of miR-181d combined with TMZ should suppress the mean expression of MGMT and the variance of this expression, tilting the balance toward tumor kill and clinical efficacy. This strategy offers promise where other therapies have failed for MGMT-expressing glioblastomas. It is important to note that this approach is unlikely to apply to glioblastomas lacking MGMT expression, underscoring the need for genotype-specific therapies in future clinical translations.

## Limitations of the study
Our results suggest a complex regulatory mechanism for the ATR-PNTP1 axis. The finding that ATR-silencing abolished the binding of Bi-miR-181d to the PNPT1 mRNA ( ) suggests a potential regulatory mechanism. However, also suggests that ATR either directly or indirectly influenced the exo-ribonuclease activity of PNTP1. In interpreting these experimental results, it is worth noting that affinity-purified PNTP1 is limited in purity, and PNTP1-interacting proteins in the affinity pull-down may exert a more proximal effect on miR-181d than those discussed above. As such, the data presented in this study place ATR and PNPT1 only in a general pathway framework. While mechanistic interactions between ATR and PNTP1 may be inferred based on the data presented here, substantial work will be required to assess these inferences.

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

## Lead contact
Requests for further information, resources, and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact, Gatikrushna Singh (gsingh@umn.edu).

## Materials availability
All reagents generated in this study will be made available by the lead contact upon request.

## STAR★METHODS

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

## Cell lines
Human glioblastoma cell lines BT-83 and CMK3 were grown as neurosphere in NeuroCult media (Gibco) supplemented with heparin, human epidermal growth factor (EGF), human fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in ultra-low attachment flasks (Nunc). All cell lines were kept in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 and regularly tested for mycoplasma contamination using Mycoplasma detection kit (ATCC).

## Mice
Six-week-old healthy male and female wild-type nude mice (Strain #002019) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory. Mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free environment within the Research Animal Resources (RAR) accredited animal facility of University of Minnesota, under veterinary supervision and in accordance with Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines. These animals were not involved in any prior studies. All experimental procedures were performed under protocols approved by the IACUC, University of Minnesota.

## METHOD DETAILS

## Stable and CRISPR-Cas9 knockout cell line generation
Stable cell lines constitutively expressing miR-181d were established by transfecting pCMV6-Entry-miR-181d miRNA expression vector (OriGene) into CMK3 and BT-83 cells selected with neomycin as described previously. Single clones were isolated and named CMK3 (miR-181d), and BT-83 (miR-181d), respectively. The corresponding negative control cell lines were generated by transfecting an empty control vector (OriGene) into CMK3 or BT-83 cells and selected with neomycin.
PNPT1 CRISPR lentivirus was generated by the transfection of pLenti-CRISPR v2-sgPNPT1-2 lentiviral vector into HEK293T cells with psPAX2 and pCMV-VSV-G (Addgene) at a ratio of 10:9:1. Culture supernatant containing lentivirus was collected after 48 h of transfection, transduction to CMK3 cells and selection with puromycin. The single KO clones were isolated and confirmed by DNA sequencing. A negative control cell line was generated by transfecting the corresponding empty expression vector.

## TMZ-resistance clone generation
BT-83 (0.5 ×106) cells were seeded in a 6-well plate. The cells were treated with 500 μM TMZ or 1% DMSO for 48 h. Post-treatment, the cells were washed and replenished with fresh culture medium without TMZ. After 4 weeks, the live cells started forming colonies. The colonies were collected, single-cell suspension was prepared, serially diluted and inoculated into 96-well plates at one cell/well densities. Cells were allowed to grow for 4 weeks. Each well was then examined for the single cell clone, and the isolated clones were quantified for MGMT, miR-181d expression.

## Plasmids
PNPT1-MRE1 or MRE2 or MRE3 or mut-MRE2 or mut-MRE3 oligonucleotide fragment was inserted into psiCHECK-2-vector (Promega) using Sgf-I and Not-I. In addition, MRE2 or MRE3 or mut-MRE2 or mut-MRE3 oligonucleotide fragment was sub-cloned into the pCMV6-Entry-PNPT1 plasmid (OriGene) using Mlu-I and Not-I restriction sites. PNPT1 point mutations (S135G, Q387R, R445E, R446E, S484A, D538A and 544G) were generated by the site-directed mutagenesis of pCMV6-AC-GFP-PNPT1 plasmid using QuikChange Lightning Site-Directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent). ATR-shRNA oligonucleotide fragment was inserted into pINDUCER20_3xFlag vector (Addgene) using Sal-I and Xho-I. All clones were confirmed by DNA sequencing.

## RNA isolation and quantitative RT-PCR (RT-qPCR)
Total RNA was isolated from cells using miRNeasy Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA was synthesized using Omniscript RT kit (Qiagen). miRNA and mRNA transcripts were quantified using SYBR Green (Bio-Rad) and target-specific primers (Qiagen) on the Bio-Rad Chromo 4 DNA Engine Thermal Cycler.
Newly diagnosed or and at the time of recurrence from the same patients’ glioblastoma surgical specimens were subjected to RNA isolation, reverse-transcribed, and subjected to qPCR of miR-181a, miR-181b, miR-181c, miR-181d, miR-21, miR-939-5p, miR-3689d, miR-382-3p, miR-4513, miR-4519, miR-124-3p, miR-4323, miR-6657-3p, miR-6867-3p, miR-548aq-3p, miR-8071 and miR-5589-3p with miRCURY LNA primers (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

## miRNA, siRNA, or plasmid transfection
CMK3 cells were transfected with human miR-181d (Qiagen, MIMAT0026608) and miR-21 mimic (MIMAT0000076), Bi-miR-181d (Qiagen, MIMAT0002821) or the non-targeting (NT) control (Qiagen, MIMAT0000010) using HiPerfect transfection reagent (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
siRNA transfections were carried out by HiPerfect transfection reagent (Qiagen). ON-TARGETplus siRNAs (Dharmacon) targeting human genes were used: RRP41 or ExoSC4 (L-013760-00-0010), PNPT1 (L-019454-01-0010), XRN1 (L-013754-01-0010), and non-targeting control (D-001810-01-10).
CMK3 PNPT1-KO cells were transfected with the pCMV6-AC-GFP vector (OriGene) encoding human WT-PNPT1 or point mutants (RPH1 domain: D135G; RPH2 domain: Q387R, R445E, R446E, R484A and catalytic sites: D538A and D544G) or empty vector by lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen).

## RNA sequencing and data processing
BT-83 or CMK3 cells were treated with 500 μM TMZ or DMSO (1%) for 6 h. The cells were harvested, and RNA was isolated (miRNeasy Kit, Qiagen). The RNA integrity was determined by Bioanalyzer RNA 6000 Nano kit (Agilent). The RNA samples were submitted to the University of Minnesota Genomic Center (UMGC) for library preparation using TruSeq Small RNA Library protocol and short-read sequencing using HiSeq 2500 High Throughput Sequencer (Illumina).
All datasets were analyzed using a uniform processing workflow. Raw sequencing data (FASTQ files) underwent preprocessing and quality control with miRTrace. Reads were discarded if fewer than 50% of nucleotides had a Phred score above 20 nucleotides. Adapter sequences at the 3′end was trimmed, and sequences shorter than 18 nucleotides or consisting of repetitive elements were removed. Samples were excluded if fewer than 25% of reads were 20–25 nucleotides in length, more than 75% of reads were removed during QC, or fewer than 10% of reads were classified as miRNA. Studies were omitted if over half of their datasets failed these QC thresholds or if substantial contamination was detected. Following QC, read alignment and gene quantification were performed with miRge3.0, using MirGeneDB2.0. 

## Clinical glioblastoma specimen collection and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
The research protocol (STUDY00012599) was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the University of Minnesota. All the patients gave informed consent before the study commenced. Only specimens that harbored wtIDH and umMGMT were collected for this study. Newly diagnosed or at the time of recurrence from the same patients’ glioblastoma surgical specimens were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE). The FFPE sections were mounted on the slides and stained with MGMT antibody or Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E). For MGMT detection, 4 μm sections were placed onto positively charged glass slides. The slides were deparaffinized and rehydrated. Antigen retrieval was performed. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked using 3% hydrogen peroxide, followed by Dako Protein Serum Block. Primary MGMT antibody (Abcam cat# ab39253, 1:100 dilution) was incubated for 30 min at RT. Detection was achieved using Rabbit EnVision+ Kit (cat# K4003, Dako) and developed using diaminobenzidine (Dako) chromogen. Slides were counterstained with Mayer’s Hematoxylin. The IHC sections were evaluated and scored based on a previously published scoring system. In brief, for each MGMT stained section, ten random 400X fields were evaluated (5 random intratumoral and five random peri-tumoral fields). In each field, the density of MGMT positive cells was scored as No (no MGMT positive cells), Low (MGMT positivity in 1–33% of nucleated cells), Intermediate (MGMT positivity in 34–66% of nucleated cells), High (MGMT positivity in 67–100% of nucleated cells).

## Bioinformatic analysis of TCGA data
MGMT mRNA and miR-181d expression analysis from TCGA datasets were performed as previously described. In brief, preprocessed level 3 data were obtained from TCGA for 582 glioblastoma specimens. Specimens were categorized based on whether they were newly diagnosed or recurrent. A normalized expression value for MGMT and miR-181d were calculated by subtracting the gene’s mean expression value across the dataset and then dividing by its standard deviation (SD).

## Limiting dilution neurosphere forming assays
CMK3 cells were seeded in a 12-well plate at 10,000 cells per well. The cells were transfected with siPNPT1 or siNT. Twenty-four hours post-transfection, the cells were treated with or without 500 μM TMZ for 12 h. The cells were collected, single-cell suspensions were prepared, serially diluted, and inoculated into 96-well ultra-low attachment plates at specific densities. Cells were allowed to grow for 3 weeks. Each well was then examined for the absence or presence of a neurosphere (at least one aggregate of 10 or more cells was counted as one sphere). The frequency of sphere-forming cells was then calculated using Extreme Limiting Dilution Analysis (ELDA, http://bioinf.wehi.edu.au/software/elda/).

## Immunoprecipitation, affinity purification, and western blot analysis
Dynabeads Protein G (30 μL) (Invitrogen) were washed two times in 10-bed volume of IP lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40). The beads were incubated with anti-rabbit PNPT1 antibody (Proteintech, 14487-1-AP or Abcam, ab157109) or anti-mouse turbo GFP antiserum (OriGene, TA150039) or anti-mouse IgG (Santa Cruz, sc-2025) in 10-bed volume of IP lysis buffer containing 1 mM BSA (Thermo Fisher) for 45 min at room temperature. The bead-antibody complexes were washed once in a 10-bed volume of IP wash buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl [pH 7.4], 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40) and incubated with 300 μg of total cell lysate or C-terminal GFP tagged WT-PNPT1 or point mutant PNPT1 expressing cell lysate at 4°C for 2 h with rotation. The enriched immune complexes were washed four times in IP wash buffer and collected by boiling with 1x SDS sample buffer.
Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (25 μL) (Invitrogen, 11206D) were equilibrated with a 10-bed volume of 1x PBS containing 0.5% BSA. The beads were incubated with 300 μg lysate of the cells transfected with the biotinylated miRNA at 4°C overnight with rotation. The beads were washed four times in IP wash buffer and collected by boiling them with 1x SDS sample buffer.
Cell lysates or affinity-purified proteins collected in SDS-sample buffer were resolved in SDS/PAGE and transferred onto the nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad). Membranes were blocked using 5% BSA for 1 h at room temperature, followed by primary antibody incubation overnight at 4°C. After washing with 1x TBST buffer, membranes were incubated with species-specific secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature and developed in chemiluminescence reagent (GE biosciences) using Bio-Rad ChemiDoc MP Imaging System.

## MGMT promotor methylation analysis
Genomic DNA was extracted from CMK3 cells transfected with miR-181d or miR-NT according to the manufacturer’s protocol using DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen). 1 μg of DNA was used for bisulfite treatment using Epitect bisulfite kit, (Qiagen). The bisulfite treated DNA was amplified by methylation specific PCR using GoTaq green PCR mix (Promega) using un-methylated and methylated MGMT specific primers. , The primer sets target unmethlyated and methylated alleles covering the CpG island of MGMT promoter. The amplified PCR product was resolved on a 2.5% agarose gel.

## Mitochondrial isolation
Mitochondria were isolated from CMK3 cells (2 ×107) using a differential centrifugation protocol (Mitochondria Isolation Kit, Cat#89874, Thermo Fisher). Briefly, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 850 ×g for 2 min at 4°C, resuspended in Reagent A supplemented with protease inhibitors, vortexed, and incubated on ice for 2 min. Reagent B was added, followed by brief vortexing, and the suspension was incubated on ice for 5 min with intermittent mixing. Subsequently, Reagent C was added, and the mixture was centrifuged at 700 ×g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 12,000 ×g for 15 min at 4°C to pellet mitochondria; an intermediate centrifugation at 3,000 ×g was included to reduce lysosomal and peroxisomal contamination. The mitochondrial pellet was washed once with Reagent C at 12,000 ×g for 5 min and maintained on ice until downstream applications.

## Luciferase reporter assay
Luciferase reporters bearing the truncated sections of PNPT1 3′ UTR containing predicted miR-181d miRNA Response Elements (MREs) or mutated miR-181d MREs were constructed by subcloning into pSiCheck-2 dual luciferase vector (Promega). CMK3 cells were co-transfected with miR-181d mimic and MRE containing luciferase reporter using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Luciferase activity was measured 48 h post-transfection.

## Clonogenic assay
The cells were washed with 1x phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated in methanol (100%) for 30 min at room temperature. Methanol was removed, and cells were then allowed to dry at RT for 10 min and stained with methanol containing 0.5% crystal violet solution for 30 min. The cells were washed multiple times in tap water, allowed to dry at RT and the images were captured using the LASX-application suit in Lica-DMi8 microscope (Deerfield, IL).

## Xenografts development and survival studies
Animal studies were performed following the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, 8th edition National Research Council (US) Committee for the Update of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Washington (DC): National Academies Press (US); 2011. ISBN-13: 978-0-309-15400-0ISBN-10: 0-309-15400-6). The animal study protocol was approved by the IACUC Protocol 2206-40091A.
For intracranial xenograft experiments, patient-derived BT-83 glioblastoma cells stably expressing miR-181d or miR-empty controls were dissociated into single-cell suspensions. Mice were anesthetized via intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (100 mg/kg, Dechra) and xylazine (10 mg/kg, Dechra), and anesthesia was confirmed by loss of reflexes. The cells were stereotactically injected into the brains of an athymic nude mice at 6 weeks of age (The Jackson Laboratory) using murine stereotaxic system (Stoelting Co.). The coordinates used were: 1.8 mm to the right of the bregma and 3 mm deep from the dura. Following tumor implantation, mice were maintained until the onset of overt neurological symptoms, including weight loss, lethargy, and hunched posture. After 7-day of tumor implant, the mice were randomly assigned to treatment groups (10 mice/group), and 50 mg/kg/day TMZ was administrated intraperitoneally for 5-day followed by 23-day treatment interruption. The mice were maintained for up to 90-day and the Kaplan-Meier survival curve was calculated. p values were determined using the log rank test.

## Bioluminescence imaging
Mice were anesthetized by inhalation of 2% isoflurane and the dose was maintained throughout the imaging procedures. 150 mg/kg D-luciferin, dissolved in 1x PBS, was injected into the peritoneum, and the mice underwent sequential exposures in auto mode (IVIS50 imaging system) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The images were acquired on days 7, 14, and 21 post-tumor implantations. Bioluminescence intensity was assessed using the Living Image 3.2 software (Caliper Life Sciences, Hopkinton, MA). Total flux values (photons (p)/second (sec)) were determined by delineating the regions of interest (ROIs) of uniform size on each mouse.

## QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Three or more independent experiments were performed for each assay and results were combined to define as mean ± SD. Statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism software 10. The statistical significance was evaluated using an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA. Following ANOVA, post hoc multiple comparisons were conducted using Tukey’s or Dunnett’s test to identify statistically significant differences between specific group pairs. p value (*) of ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant.

## Supplementary Material
12SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental information can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.116516.

## Highlights
Feedforward microRNA degradation drives cell-to-cell gene variance and therapy resistance
TMZ triggers feedforward loop between PNPT1 and miR-181d, driving rapid miR-181d degradation
Degradation of miR-181d increases the cell-to-cell variability in MGMT expression
Cell-to-cell variability in MGMT expression contributes to acquired TMZ resistance

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Robert Galvin, Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, for generously providing the pLV-fLuc/puro plasmid used in this study. We thank Valya Ramakrishnan for her valuable technical support and for conducting key preliminary experiments that contributed to this study.

## Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.

## Data and code availability
RNA sequencing data of two patient-derived glioblastoma cell lines, BT-83 and CMK3, in response to TMZ therapy have been deposited at the “Mendeley Data” (https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/pdvttwws8m/1) and are publicly available as of the date of publication. “DOI:https://doi.org/10.17632/pdvttwws8m.1” is listed in the .
 All data reported in this manuscript will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
Full western blot image data will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## REFERENCES
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
12

## Data Availability Statement
RNA sequencing data of two patient-derived glioblastoma cell lines, BT-83 and CMK3, in response to TMZ therapy have been deposited at the “Mendeley Data” (https://data.mendeley.com/datasets/pdvttwws8m/1) and are publicly available as of the date of publication. “DOI:https://doi.org/10.17632/pdvttwws8m.1” is listed in the .
 All data reported in this manuscript will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
Full western blot image data will be shared by the lead contact upon request.
This paper does not report original code.
Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.