pmcCardiovasc ResCardiovasc Res725cardiovascrescardiovascresCardiovascular Research0008-63631755-3245Oxford University PressPMC13019689PMC13019689.113019689130196894155520310.1093/cvr/cvag011cvag0111Original ArticleAcademicSubjects/MED00200Eurheartj/8Eurheartj/27Eurheartj/28Mitoregulin supports mitochondrial membrane integrity and protects against cardiac ischaemia–reperfusion injury
SteinColleen S
Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USAZhangXiaoming
Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USAWitmerNathan H
Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USAPenningtonEdward Ross
Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health and School of Medicine, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USAHahnScott
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Heart, Lung, Blood and Vascular Medicine Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USAStraubAdam C
Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, Heart, Lung, Blood and Vascular Medicine Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USAhttps://orcid.org/0000-0003-1950-2521ShaikhSaame Raza
Department of Nutrition, Gillings School of Global Public Health and School of Medicine, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USAhttps://orcid.org/0000-0002-9800-5349BoudreauRyan L
Department of Internal Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA , given its localization to and broad influence on mitochondria. Mitochondria play critical roles in generating cellular ATP through oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) conducted via the electron transport chain (ETC) complexes (cI, cII, cIII, and cIV), as well as in Ca2+ buffering, lipid and amino acid metabolism, ROS generation, and redox signalling, an regulated cell death pathways. 
Mitochondria have distinct double-membrane arrangements, with a porous outer mitochondrial membrane (OMM) and a selectively permeable inner mitochondrial membrane (IMM) that separates the internal matrix compartment from the intermembrane space (IMS). The IMM is highly invaginated to form cristae tubules, studded with OXPHOS complexes. , Mitochondrial membrane lipid composition is distinguished from other cellular membranes by an enriched presence of the unique tetra-acylated phospholipid, cardiolipin (CL). The major lipids of the OMM are phosphatidylcholine (PC; 54%) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE; 29%). The IMM requires a high proportion (approximately 50%) of conical shaped lipids (PE and CL), concentrated at negative curvatures, forming and stabilizing cristae shape, , which is dynamically regulated to support efficient OXPHOS and meet varying metabolic demands. , 
Mtln shows a high correlation of co-expression with OXPHOS proteins, particularly accessory proteins necessary for ETC supercomplex assembly. In line with this, loss of Mtln impacts mitochondrial respiration and ROS production. , In addition, several studies support that Mtln affects various other pathways and phenotypes, including lipid metabolism, , , mitochondrial-ER contacts and ER stress signalling, cancer cell migration/invasion, skeletal muscle performance, , , myocyte differentiation or regeneration, , normal and diseased kidney phenotypes, and cell cycle progression in cancer cells ; however, the precise molecular action of Mtln remains unclear.
Mtln has been found to exist in both IMM , , and OMM, and several diverse Mtln interacting proteins have been reported. Pulldown of overexpressed epitope-tagged Mtln from cell or tissue lysates followed by mass spectrometric analyses has uncovered alpha and/or beta subunits of the fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO) trifunctional protein (Hadha and Hadhb), , the alpha subunit of mitochondrial F1F0ATP synthase (Atp5a), or cytochrome b5 reductase 3 (Cyb5r3) as proposed Mtln interactors. Most recently, carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1b (Cpt1b) was co-immunoprecipitated with endogenous Mtln. Additionally, biomolecular fluorescence complementation screening in HTC75 fibrosarcoma cells and HEK293T cells identified cI subunit Ndufa7 and N-acetyltransferase 14 (Nat14), respectively, as top hits. Despite these findings, a consensus Mtln protein interactor remains elusive. Given that Mtln is a small membrane protein devoid of annotated protein interacting/structural domains yet strongly binds CL, it is plausible that Mtln primarily serves to modulate mitochondrial membranes, potentially assisting in the formation or stabilization of lipid microdomains and cristae structure. In this way, Mtln could secondarily secure various proteins or protein complexes within these domains. This could account for broad, indirect protein interactions and effects of Mtln across diverse mitochondrial pathways, several of which have strong relevance to various disease conditions.
Mitochondria are vital to supporting the energy-demanding maintenance of normal cardiac function and heath. However, in the context of myocardial ischaemia and subsequent reperfusion (I/R), mitochondria contribute to driving pathological events. During the ischaemic phase, lack of oxygen shuts down OXPHOS, and cells rely on anaerobic glycolysis, leading to cytosolic acidification and rapid depletion of energy stores. With sustained ischaemia, cardiomyocyte cell death will occur in proportion to the degree and time of ischaemia, consequent to energy crisis and inability to sustain ion pumps. Restoration of blood flow, though necessary to salvage cardiac function, introduces Ca2+ overload, ROS, and inflammatory conditions that drive additional cardiomyocyte death, collectively referred to as reperfusion injury. Ca2+-induced, ROS-facilitated opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition (mPT) pore (mPTP) in the IMM results in mitochondrial swelling and rupture to trigger cell death pathways; mPT is widely accepted as contributing to mitochondrial damage and cardiomyocyte death during I/R. In addition, mitochondrial membrane damage early during I/R is marked by CL oxidation and loss and cristae fragmentation. Various cell death pathways working with or independent of mPT may be invoked; OMM release of pro-apoptotic factors and ROS-mediated events can intersect and contribute to apoptosis or regulated necrotic pathways such as necroptosis and ferroptosis. , 
Our previous observations show that Mtln overexpression enhances mitochondrial Ca2+ retention capacity and resistance to mPT in cells, whereas Mtln knockout (KO) mouse myofibers display reduced Ca2+ retention capacity. In addition, Mtln gain- and loss-of-function in cells led to decreased and increased mitochondrial ROS levels, respectively. Together, these data support that Mtln could help protect cardiomyocytes from I/R injury directly by supporting CL/cristae and/or indirectly by influence on Ca++ handling and ROS output.
In this current study, we took steps towards elucidating the influence of Mtln on mitochondrial membranes by (i) investigating mitochondria susceptibility to freeze/thaw damage in global Mtln-KO mice and in mice with conditional cardiomyocyte Mtln-KO or overexpression (i.e. rescue) and (ii) by evaluating Mtln’s influence on synthetic IMM-like lipid monolayers. Furthermore, we performed LC-MS lipidomic analyses to identify alterations in lipid profiles of Mtln deficient cardiac tissues and mitochondrial isolates. Finally, we examined the effect of Mtln loss on cardiac outcomes after surgically induced myocardial I/R injury. Together, our results support a model in which Mtln interacts with and protects mitochondrial CL pools to reinforce cristae structure, while Mtln loss enhances mitochondrial vulnerability to membrane insults and I/R injury.

2.

## Methods
2.1

## Mouse studies
Animal studies and procedures described herein have (i) local approval from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUC) at the University of Iowa and (ii) all procedures conform to the guidelines from the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Mice were housed in a controlled temperature environment on a 12 h light/dark cycle, with food and water provided ad libitum, unless otherwise noted. Mice were euthanized by performing cervical dislocation under 2.5% isoflurane anaesthesia inhalation or by heart collection while under deep ketamine/xylazine anaesthesia (intraperitoneal injection of 150 mg/kg ketamine and 15 mg/kg xylazine). Mtln knockout (Mtln-KO) mice were generated as previously described at the University of Iowa Genome Editing Facility using CRISPR/Cas9 technology, deleting the mouse short open reading frame (1500011K16Rik gene). Mtln-KO mice were backcrossed 9 or more generations to C57BL6/J or C67BL6/NJ (Jackson Laboratory stock numbers #000664 and #005304, respectively). The Myh6-Cas9-2A-TdTomato transgenic mouse (aMHC-Cas9), with Cas9 driven by the cardiomyocyte alpha myosin heavy chain (aMHC) gene (Myh6) promoter was kindly provided by Eric Olson, backcrossed for >9 generations to C57BL/6J, and heterozygous aMHC-Cas9 mice were used for conditional Mtln knock-out experiments. Procedures with floxed Cyb5r3 mice on a C57BL/6J background , and control non-floxed C57BL/6J control mice were performed at the University of Pittsburgh and approved by the IACUC at the University of Pittsburgh.

2.2

## Cell culture and transfection
Human A549 lung carcinoma cells (ATCC, CCL-185) were maintained in Gibco DMEM/F-12 (Thermofisher 11320033) with 100 U/mL penicillin, 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin and 10% FBS in a cell culture incubator in standard conditions (humidified, 37°C with 5% CO2). For Mtln silencing, a dicer-ready 27-mer RNA oligo pair targeting the human Mtln open reading frame, 5′rArCrUrGrCrArGrUrUrGrUrCrCrGrUrGrCrUrArGrUrArGCC3′ and 5′rGrGrCrUrArCrUrArGrCrArCrGrGrArCrArArCrUrGrCrArGrUrGrU3′, was generated from Integrated DNA Technology (IDT, Coralville, IA) using their dsiRNA design tool.
Cells were transfected with 50 nM Mtln-directed (siMtln) or negative control (siCtrl) (IDT cat# 51-01-14-03) dsiRNA oligos, using Lipofectamine Ltx (Invitrogen) according to product instructions. At 48 h post-transfection, cell monolayers were processed for either western blot or transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For western blot, media was removed, and lysis buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCL, pH 7.5 with 1% LDS) with 1x Halt protease inhibitors (ThermoFisher Scientific, TFS) added to monolayers. Lysed samples were collected to tubes on ice, and probe sonicated (Fisher Scientific, Sonic Dismembrator Model D100) for two rounds of 5 s each at intensity level 3. Protein concentrations of lysates were determined by BCA assay (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, TFS Ref# 23225), equilibrated, and western blot performed as described below. For TEM, media was removed, TEM fixative (2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.2) was added to monolayers and the plates were wrapped in foil and stored at 4°C till processing for TEM as described below.

2.3

## Mitochondria isolation
Reagents and tubes were ice-cold, tissue processing was performed on ice, and centrifugations were done at 4°C. Tissue samples were collected immediately following euthanasia, performed as described in Mouse Studies. Tissue samples (heart, with atria removed, or liver lobe) were finely minced in a small volume of isolation buffer (in mM, 250 sucrose, 5 Tris-HCL pH 7.4, 2 EGTA, 5 MgCl2, 1 ATP) with 0.5% fatty acid-free BSA (with final adjustment to pH 7.4 before use). Minced tissue was transferred to isolation buffer and pelleted by 1 min centrifugation at 800 × G. After discarding the supernatant, the minced tissue was resuspended in isolation buffer with 0.2% BSA (3–5 mL), transferred to an 8 mL Potter Elvehjem tissue grinder with PTFE Pestle (Kimble 886000–022) and homogenized manually for 6–9 passes. After pelleting debris at 800 × G for 10 min the clarified homogenate was transferred to a fresh tube and centrifuged at 8000 × G for 10 min to obtain the mitochondrial pellet. For some experiments, tissues were snap frozen in tubes by immersion in LN2, then stored at −80 until processing as described above for mitochondrial isolation. For freeze/thaw experiments with assay of the homogenate, the freezing step was done after 800 × G pellet of the minced tissue, and then the minced tissue was directly resuspended in isolation buffer post-thaw. In this way, loss of proteins at the mincing/washing steps was avoided. For these experiments, a small sample of the clarified homogenates (Hom) was removed before the 8000 × G mitochondrial pelleting step, and the BSA content in the isolation buffer was lowered to 0.01%, to enable accurate protein determination (BCA assay) of Hom samples. For thawing, tubes containing the frozen tissue or minced pellets were thawed for 60 s in a 37°C water then placed on ice. Mitochondrial pellets and Hom samples were snap frozen and stored at −80 until processing for BNGE or standard SDS-PAGE and immunoblot. For isolation of mitochondria for LC-MS lipidomics isolation buffer without BSA was used at the homogenization step.

2.4

## Blue native gel electrophoresis (BNGE) and transfer to PVDF
BNGE procedures were derived from published methods. , Mitochondrial pellets were resuspended in aminocaproic acid buffer (ACAB, 50 mM bis-tris, pH 7.0 with 0.75 M 6- aminocaproic acid) with freshly added protease inhibitors (Roche). After resuspension, a small aliquot was removed, lysed in 1% Triton X-100 and used for protein concentration determination by BCA. Resuspended mitochondrial samples were then brought to equal concentrations in ACAB buffer, and digitonin (high purity, Millipore) was added from a 10% stock to give a 4 g:G ratio of (digitonin:mitochondrial protein) and samples were solubilized on ice for 20 min, then centrifuged for 20 min at 20 000 × G at 4°C. Pelleted debris was discarded and supernatants (solubilized mitochondrial proteins or protein complexes) were transferred to fresh tubes and coomassie brilliant blue G (CBBG, Sigma B0770) was added from a 5% stock to give a 4 g:g (digitonin:CBBG) ratio. Glycerol was added to a final 5%, and equal volumes containing equal total protein were loaded into wells of precast NativePAGE Novex® 3–12% Bis-Tris 10-well Gels (TFS). High molecular weight (HMW) native markers (GE Healthcare) reconstituted in 100 µL ACAB plus protease inhibitors and 5 µL 5% CBBG, were loaded at 10–15 µL per lane. BNGE was run in an Invitrogen Novex mini-cell tank in a 4°C cold room. Cathode buffer (15 mM bis-tris, 50 mM tricine, ) and anode buffer (50 mM bis-tris) were pH 7.0 at 4°C. CBBG was added to the cathode buffer to a final 0.02% (dark blue) or 0.0005% (light blue). Electrophoresis was initiated at constant 150 V with dark blue cathode buffer, and after approximately 50 min the dark blue was replaced with light blue cathode buffer and electrophoresis resumed at 250 V for a maximum of 3 h total running time (until the dye front reached the end of the gel). Gels were transferred to 0.2 µm PVDF membrane using the Invitrogen Mini Blot Module and NuPAGE transfer buffer at 4°C at 30 V overnight in a BioRad mini-blot wet transfer system. After transfer, membranes were fixed for 10 min in 8% acetic acid, rinsed in water and air-dried. HMW marker lanes were cut off, and the remaining membrane was re-wet in methanol and washed in several changes of methanol to remove CBBG, equilibrated in water for 2 min, then blocking and immunodetection steps were followed as described below for standard western blot. The HMW marker lanes were re-wet briefly in methanol until bands were clearly visible, then transferred to water, and re-aligned with the blot during imaging.

2.5

## Standard denaturing PAGE and western blot
Mitochondrial pellets and Hom samples (as defined in Mitochondrial isolation) were thawed on ice. Protease inhibitors (Roche) and triton x-100 were added (to final 1x and 1% concentrations, respectively) to Hom samples. Mitochondrial pellets were resuspended and triturated for solubilization in lysis buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCL, pH 7.5 with 1% LDS with added protease inhibitors). Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay and equilibrated within each experiment. After addition of NuPage (TFS) sample buffer (denaturing and reducing), samples were heated for 10 min at 50°C and equal volumes were resolved on 4–12% bis-tris gradient NuPage gels with MES buffer or MOPS running buffer and transferred to 0.2 μm PVDF or Nitrocellulose membranes using 1× NuPAGE transfer buffer with added 10% ethanol and with 0.01% SDS for PVDF transfers and without added SDS for NC transfers. After transfer, membranes were rinsed in water and incubated for 10 min in Ponceau S (0.1% Ponceau s in 5% acetic acid) for total protein stain, rinsed and washed 2× for 2 min in water and imaged on an iBright imaging system. Membranes were destained by brief incubation in 0.05 M NaOH and rinsing in water, then blocked by 1 h room temperature incubation in tris-buffered saline with 0.1% tween (TBST) containing 5% milk (dissolved dry milk powder), then incubated overnight with primary antibodies at 4°C on an orbital shaker. Primary antibodies were diluted in either TBST with 2.5% milk or TBST with 1.0% BSA. Primary antibodies to specified proteins were Mtln (1/2000–1/3000, custom Proteintech specific for Mtln c-terminal amino acids 38–56), Ogdh (1/2000, Abclonal A6391), Acad9 (1/4000, Aviva OAAN02440), β-catenin (1:2000; Sigma-Aldrich, PLA0230), Dld (Abclonal A13296 or Proteintech 16431-1-AP). Aco2 (Abclonal A3716), Mtco2 (Abclonal A11154), Tom20 (Abclonal A6774 or A19403), Mdh2 (Abclonal A13516), Pcca (Abclonal A9486), and Cyb5r3 (Proteintech 10894-1-AP). Blots were washed in TBST and incubated with HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch) in blocking buffer, washed in TBST and developed using SuperSignal West (TFS) or Radiance Plus (Azure Biosystems) and chemiluminescent images captured and analysed using an iBright Imaging System and iBright Analysis Software (TFS). Some proteins were detected sequentially from the same membrane; after chemiluminescent imaging of the first protein, the membrane was stripped using Restore (TFS), re-blocked and immunoblotted for the second protein as described above.

2.6

## Transmission electron microscopy
For TEM of cardiac samples after freeze/thaw, Mtln-KO and WT mice were fasted for 4 h, and while under deep anaesthesia (intraperitoneal 150 mg/kg ketamine and 15 mg/kg xylazine), the heart apex was snipped and transferred to a metal block on ice with a few drops of mitochondrial isolation buffer (without BSA), and cut into <1 mm pieces. The pieces were transferred to a tube and flash frozen in LN2, thawed quickly by hand, and immediately transferred to TEM fixative (2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.2) and stored at 4°C protected from light. For TEM preparation, the fixed heart samples, or fixed A549 monolayers (prepared described in ‘Cell culture and transfection’, were washed with 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer and stained with 4% osmium tetroxide and 2.5% uranyl acetate. Samples were washed, dehydrated in graded ethanol washes (50 to 100%), and washed with 100% propylene oxide prior to embedding in EPON resin. Following ultramicrotomy, samples were post-stained with 5% uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead citrate and examined on a Hitachi HT7800 transmission electron microscope. Digital images were collected with an AMT NanoSprint15 camera (5056 × 2960 pixel sCMOS sensor).

2.7

## AAV vectors
AAV vectors were prepared at the UIOWA Viral Vector Core (VVC). AAV2/9CMVeGFP (AAV9:GFP) was purchased as an in-stock vector (VVC-U of Iowa-238). For custom-ordered AAV2/9CMV-NC116-IRES-GFP (AAV9:NC116), the human NC116 protein coding region was PCR amplified from genomic DNA using primers with added restriction enzyme sites and subsequently inserted into the VVC shuttle plasmid G0692 pFBAAVCMVmcswtIRESeGFPBgHpA using standard cloning techniques. For custom-ordered AAV2/9mU6-sgNC116.2-3-CMVeGFP (AAV9:gu-Mtln), synthetic DNA sequence encoding a validated Mtln-targeted RNA guide pair, purchased as a DNA g-block (IDT) was inserted into the VVC shuttle vector G0760 pFBAAVmU6mcsCMVeGFPSV40 pA using standard cloning techniques. For custom-ordered AAV2/9hsTNNT2-Cre-miR122b-WPRE-bGHpA (AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre), Cre recombinase was cloned into a custom designed cardiac-specific shuttle vector (hsTNNT2-MCS-miR122b-WPRE-bGHpA); TNNT2 promoter and miR122b binding sites serve to drive cardiomyocyte expression and de-target the liver, respectively. Shuttle plasmids carrying the transgenes of interest were provided to the VVC for triple transfection (3XT) or baculovirus (BAC) methods to generate AAV particles carrying transgenes flanked by AAV2-type inverted terminal repeats and packaged into AAV serotype 9 capsids. Vector particles were purified by iodixanol gradient followed by MustangQ Acrodisc ion exchange into biocompatible F68/PBS storage buffer. Vector titres (vector genomes per ml, vg/mL) were determined by digital droplet PCR.

2.8

## AAV injection
Mice (3–4 weeks old) were brought to a surgical plane of anaesthesia under 1.5–2% isoflurane and 1 litre/minute O2 inhalation (Harvard Apparatus Advanced Safety Ventilator). Hair was removed from the surgical site and standard surgical scrub applied and analgesic (2.5 mg/kg flunixin meglumine or 2 mg/kg meloxicam) was injected intraperitonially. A small incision was made through the skin to expose the jugular vein. Under view of a dissecting microscope, AAV particles or vehicle control were injected into the jugular vein using a 30G needle, delivering 1.0E + 10 vg per g mouse weight. The incision was closed with 6-0 prolene suture. For experiments with conditional KO of Cyb5r3, 5- to 6 week-old female floxed Cyb5r3 mice or WT C57BL/6J control mice were injected via the tail vein with 1.6E10 vg per g mouse weight in a total volume of 100 µL PBS.

2.9

## TBARS assay of heart and liver lysates
Immediately following euthanasia, performed as described in Mouse Studies, heart (minus atria) and a liver lobe were removed and placed in ice-cold PBS. Working ice-cold, samples were rinsed and coarsely chopped in PBS, and each divided to two 2-mL microcentrifuge tubes and pelleted by 2 min spin at 800×G, 4°C. Supernatants were discarded and wet weights recorded. One tube was kept on ice (fresh) and the other was snap-frozen by tube immersion in LN2 and thawed by swishing in a 37°C water bath for 60 s and placed on ice (frozen). Ice-cold RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich R0278) with protease inhibitors (Roche #11836170001) was added to tissue samples to 150 mg/mL (based on tissue wet weight). A stainless-steel bead was added to each tube and tissues were disrupted using a TissueLyser II (Qiagen) set at 30 cycles per s for 30 s (liver) or 60 s (heart). After 15 min incubation on ice lysates were clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 10 000×G, 4°C. Supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes, concentrations determined by BCA assay, and samples equilibrated to 5 mg/mL for TBARS reactions. The TBARS assay was based on a published method with modifications. Butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT, Cayman Chemical # 89910) antioxidant was added to inhibit lipid peroxidation during the reaction. A 3% stock solution of BHT was prepared in 100% ethanol and stored at −20°C. On the day of assay, 2-thiobarbituric acid (TBA, Sigma-Aldrich T5500) was dissolved to 5.3 mg/mL in 10% acetic acid with 0.35 M NaOH (final pH 4). The malondialdehyde (MDA) standard dilution series was made on the day of the assay by diluting malondialdehyde bis(dimethyl acetal) (Sigma-Aldrich 8.20756) 2-fold in ultrapure water, from 10 µM. TBARS reactions were set up in 1.5-ml microcentrifuge tubes by sequential addition of (in µL): 100 sample, 100 10% SDS, 600 TBA, and 2 3% BHT. Samples were RIPA lysates, lysis buffer (used for blank) and MDA standards. Tubes were vortexed and heated at 95°C for 1 h in a heat block (with a weight placed on top to prevent lids from opening). Reactions were cooled on ice for 5 min. Tubes were vortexed and 640 µL transferred to fresh 2-mL microcentrifuge tubes, and 640 µL of room temperature butanol:pyridine (15:1; v:v) was added and tubes were shaken in the TissueLyzer for 30 s at 30 cycles/s, then centrifuged for 5 min at 10 000×G, 23°C. Duplicate samples of 200 µL were carefully transferred from the butanol:pyridine-extracted top phase to a 96-well optical bottom black plate and fluorescence (ex/em 539/550) read from the bottom, using autogain (high-end, 50 000) on the 5 µM STD. The blank (lysis buffer alone) and zero MDA standard showed no visible colour and gave similar fluorescent readouts, indicating no interference from lysis buffer components. Concentrations of TBARS in RIPA lysates were determined from the MDA standard curve and are expressed as pmoles TBARS per mg protein.

2.10

## TBARS of mitochondrial from frozen heart
Immediately following euthanasia, performed as described in Mouse Studies, the heart (minus atria) was removed to ice-cold PBS, then processed in isolation buffer with 0.01% BSA as described above under Mitochondria Isolation to generate a minced-tissue pellet. Minced-tissue pellets were snap-frozen in LN2, thawed for 60 s at 37°C and placed on ice. Mitochondria pellets were generated as described above under Mitochondria Isolation, using isolation buffer without added BSA. To avoid sucrose interference (from the isolation buffer), 1 mL of ice-cold PBS was gently added to mitochondrial pellets, and tubes inverted and re-spun for 3 min at 8000×G, 4°C. Supernatants were discarded and pellets snap-frozen and stored at −80°C. For TBARS assay, pellets were solubilized by trituration in ice-cold lysis buffer (1% LDS in 50 mM TRIS, pH 7.4), protein concentrations determined by BCA. After equilibrating samples to to 2 mg/mL in lysis buffer, TBARS assay was performed using 100 µL of either mitochondrial lysates (200 µg), lysis buffer (as blank), or MDA standard as described above.

2.11

## Langmuir trough assays
Pressure-area isotherms were generated on a Mini Langmuir-Blodgett Trough (KSV NIMA, Biolin Scientific, Paramus, NJ) using a Wilhelmy plate as previously described. , Briefly, a lipid mixture representing inner mitochondrial lipid composition was generated by co-dissolving lipids [40 mol% 18:0–22:6 PC, 33 mol% 16:0–20:4 PE, 20 mol% (18:2)4CL, 5 mol% DOPS, 2 mol% cholesterol] in chloroform (10 µg/µL). Lipid monolayers were constructed by spotting 9.0 nmol lipid on a subphase of 10 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4). Synthetic human Mtln was synthesized by Biomatik USA, LLC with 95.58% purity, confirmed by the manufacturer with HPLC and mass spectrometry. When added to the subphase, Mtln was dissolved at 2 mg/mL in water and injected underneath the lipid monolayer to a final concentration of 0.28 µM or 2.8 µM. Excess chloroform was allowed to evaporate for 10 min prior to monolayer compression. Pressure-area isotherms were generated at a compression rate of 3.0 mm/min and were analysed at physiologically relevant surface pressures (i.e. 30 mN/m) as previously described. , Surface pressure-area isotherms were used to calculate the surface elasticity modulus (Cs−1): Cs−1 = (−A)(dπ/dA)π where A is the mean molecular area of the lipid mixture of interest at the indicated surface pressure (π).

2.12

## LC-MS lipidomics
Mtln-KO and WT mice were fasted for 4–6 h, and while under deep anaesthesia (intraperitoneal 150 mg/kg ketamine and 15 mg/kg xylazine), the heart apex was snipped off and immediately snap-frozen by LN2 immersion. Apex samples collected from male mice (6 WT and 6 Mtln-KO, 21–22 months old) and female mice (6 WT and 6 Mtln-KO, 21–22 months old) were crushed under LN2, weighed, and stored at −80°C. Mitochondria were isolated from hearts of six AAV9:GFP-injected and six AAV9:gu-Mtln-injected aMHC-Cas9 transgenic mice at approximately 7 weeks of age (4 weeks post-AAV injection) and mitochondrial pellets stored at −80. Protein content of mitochondrial pellets was determined by BCA assay of distinct, paired pellets (collected from the same homogenate) after detergent solubilization. Apex samples and mitochondrial pellets were shipped on dry ice to the University of Utah Metabolomics Facility for lipid extraction and mass spectrometry.
2.12.1

## Lipid extraction
Lipid extraction, based on Matyash et al. was performed as follows. All solutions were pre-chilled on ice. Tissues or mitochondrial pellets were transferred to labelled bead-mill tubes (1.4 mm, MoBio Cat# 13113-50) where lipids were extracted in a solution of 250 µL PBS, 225 µL MeOH containing internal standards, and 750 µL MTBE (methyl tert-butyl ether). Internal standards were Avanti SPLASH LipidoMix (Lot#12) at 10 µL per sample and Cambridge Isotope laboratories NSK-B and NSK-B-G1 (deuterated carnitines) at 10 µL per sample. The samples were homogenized in one 30 s cycle using the Omni Bead Ruptor followed by a rest on ice for 1 h. An addition of 188 µL PBS was made to induce phase separation. After centrifugation at 16 000 g for 5 min at 4°C, the upper phases were collected and evaporated to dryness under a gentle nitrogen stream at room temperature. Lipid samples were reconstituted in 500 µL IPA (isopropyl alcohol) and transferred to an LC-MS vial with insert (Agilent 5182-0554 and 5183-2086) for analysis. Concurrently, a process blank sample and pooled quality control (QC) sample was prepared by taking equal volumes (∼50 µL) from each sample after final resuspension.

2.12.2

## Mass spectrometry
Lipid extracts were separated on a Waters Acquity UPLC CSH C18 1.7 µm 2.1 × 100 mm column maintained at 65°C connected to an Agilent HiP 1290 Sampler, Agilent 1290 Infinity pump, equipped with an Agilent 1290 Flex Cube and Agilent 6545 (or 6540) Accurate Mass Q-TOF dual AJS-ESI mass spectrometer. For positive mode, the source gas temperature was set to 250°C, with a gas flow of 12 L/min and a nebulizer pressure of 35psig. VCap voltage was set at 3500 V, fragmentor at 110 V, skimmer at 65 V and octopole RF peak at 750 V. For negative mode, the source gas temperature was set to 250°C, with a drying gas flow of 12 L/min and a nebulizer pressure of 30 psig. VCap voltage was set at 3000 V, fragmentor at 100 V, skimmer at 65 V and octopole RF peak at 750 V. Samples were analysed in a randomized order in both positive and negative ionization modes in separate experiments acquired with the scan range m/z 100–1700. Mobile phase A consisted of ACN:H2O (60:40 v/v) in 10 mM ammonium formate and 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B consisted of IPA:ACN:H2O (90:9:1 v/v) in 10 mM ammonium formate and 0.1% formic acid. The chromatography gradient for both positive and negative modes started at 15% mobile phase B then increased to 30% B over 2.4 min, then increased to 48% B from 2.4 to 3.0 min, then increased to 82% B from 3 to 13.2 min, then increased to 99% B from 13.2 to 13.8 min where it was held until 16.7 min and then returned to the initial condition and equilibrated for 5 min. Flow was 0.4 mL/min throughout, injection volume was1 µL for positive and 5 µL for negative mode. Tandem mass spectrometry was conducted using the same LC gradient at collision energy of 25 V.
Data QC samples (n = 8) and blanks (n = 4) were injected throughout the sample queue to ensure the reliability of acquired lipidomic data. Results from LC-MS experiments were collected using an Agilent Mass Hunter (MH) Workstation and analysed using the software packages MH Qual, MH Quant, and Lipid Annotator (Agilent Technologies, Inc.). The data table exported from MHQuant was evaluated using Excel where initial lipid targets were parsed based on the following criteria. Only lipids with relative standard deviations less than 30% in QC samples were used for data analysis. Additionally, only lipids with background AUC counts in process blanks that were less than 30% of QC were used for data analysis. The parsed excel data was normalized to total lipid signal. For lipid classification visit, http://www.lipidmaps.org/data/classification/LM_classification_exp.php.

2.12.3

## Statistical analysis and pathway mapping
Data for each sample were normalized to sample weight to determine lipid concentrations (pmol per mg tissue). Log2-based fold-change of group means and P-values (using unpaired two-trailed t-test) were determined comparing KO vs. WT samples. Gender-combined analyses were done by setting the WT group means for males and female independently to a value of 1 prior to integrating the data. Lipidomes were subjected to unsupervised, multivariate partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), to reveal lipid features with significant contribution to group separation. Lipid Ontology (LION) enrichment analysis (LION/web; using 2-log local statistics and two-tailed KS-test settings) were done to identify upregulated and downregulated enriched LION terms for Mtln-KO relative to WT tissues or acute KO (AAV9:gu-Mtln) relative to control (AAV9:GFP) mitochondria.

2.13

## Mouse model of minimal myocardial ischaemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury
14- to 21-week-old male mice were anaesthetized via 1.5 to 2% isoflurane with 1–1.5 litre/minute O2 inhalation (Harvard Apparatus Advanced Safety Ventilator), directed through tracheal intubation. The ventilator parameters were adjusted to the body weight of the mouse, to maintain a surgical plane of anaesthesia. Prior to surgery, mice are administered analgesia (buprenorphine sustained-release 1 mg/kg, subcutaneous injection, lasting >48 h). The third intercostal space over the left chest of the mouse was exposed. Myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion injury was induced by ligation of the left anterior descending artery with 7-0 prolene suture for 60 min, followed by releasing the ligation for reperfusion. Sham-operated mice were treated with the same surgery without tying the left anterior descending coronary artery. Electrocardiography was performed 3 days after reperfusion to evaluate the successful generation of the I/R model. Mouse hearts were then excised for histological and molecular analyses.

2.14

## Echocardiography
Echocardiography was performed on conscious mice, with mild sedation (midazolam 5 mg/kg, subcutaneous injection), using a Vevo2100 imaging system (VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada). Mice were restrained in the left lateral recumbent position in the operator's hand. Two-dimensional, M-mode, and Doppler imaging were performed in both long- and short-axis views to acquire standard measurements of left ventricular structure and cardiac function according to the endocardial and epicardial area protocol.

2.15

## Statistical analyses
Statistical analyses were performed using Prism GraphPad and Microsoft Excel software. GraphPad was used to generate plots and to perform two-tailed t tests or one-way ANOVAs with Tukey’s post hoc to obtain the reported P values. The specific statistical tests for each experiment are indicated throughout the manuscript; for each, all data met the test assumptions and groups showed similar variance. Results were considered significant if P values were ≤ 0.05. Statistical significance is directly stated or indicated by convention (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001).

3.

## Results
3.1

## Mitochondria from Mtln-KO mice are more susceptible to freeze/thaw-induced membrane damage
For our first Mtln publication, we performed immunoblot after blue native gel electrophoresis (BNGE) of digitonin-solubilized mitochondria from mouse hearts and observed selective loss of matrix protein-containing complexes in Mtln-KO compared to wildtype (WT) samples, despite equal amounts of these proteins in total tissue lysates. At that time, we speculated the decline in matrix protein signals (but retained detection of transmembrane-anchored OXPHOS protein complexes) might be due to decreased membrane associations and subsequent leak of matrix complexes during isolation of crude mitochondria from tissues. For those experiments, tissues were collected and stored at −80°C prior to mitochondrial isolation, and we later wondered if freeze/thaw was a contributing factor. As a follow-up BNGE experiment in this current study, we compared mitochondria isolated from fresh vs. frozen heart tissue collected from the same mice. Immunoblot for matrix protein complexes (Ogdh complexes, Acad9 dimers) after transfer from blue native gels shows indistinguishable banding patterns for Mtln-KO and WT mitochondria from fresh tissue (Figure A); however, if heart samples were frozen prior to mitochondrial isolation, Mtln-KO samples showed reduced matrix protein signal compared to WT controls (Figure A). This is consistent with our previous observation and supports the notion that enhanced loss of matrix protein complexes from Mtln-KO mitochondria is a consequence of increased freeze damage to mitochondrial membranes.
 We investigated this freeze/thaw phenotype further by standard denaturing SDS-PAGE and western blot assay. For this, heart and liver tissue samples from WT and Mtln-KO mice (equal numbers of male and female per group) were processed for mitochondria isolation after snap-freeze and −80°C storage or without freezing (i.e. fresh). Mitochondrial isolates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and immunoblot to determine levels of representative proteins residing in matrix or membrane compartments. When isolated from fresh heart tissue, bands for all proteins were similar across WT and Mtln-KO samples, (Figure B, top graph). In contrast, when heart tissue was frozen prior to mitochondrial isolation, matrix protein levels (Aco2, Dld and Mdh2), but not membrane-integral proteins (Mtco2 and Tom20; inner and outer mitochondrial membrane proteins respectively), were significantly lower in Mtln-KO samples compared to WT (Figure B, bottom graph). This differential effect of enhanced matrix protein leak for KO vs. WT was similarly observed with mitochondria isolated from frozen liver tissue (see   ), demonstrating that this phenotype is not limited to heart. Ultrastructural examination of heart tissue by TEM after freeze/thaw revealed regions with swollen mitochondria and loss of matrix staining density for both Mtln-WT and KO (Figure C). Swollen mitochondria as well as mitochondria with severe membrane discontinuity and fracture were more pronounced in Mtln-KO samples (Figure C). Thus, mitochondria lacking Mtln are more susceptible to freeze/thaw-induced membrane damage and resultant release of matrix proteins.
Weakened mitochondrial membranes in Mtln-KO mice might arise from loss of a direct Mtln-stabilizing effect or may develop downstream of accumulation of lipid damage and compensatory remodelling that might occur during development or over time. For example, a recent report shows onset of kidney dysfunction and pathology in aged (∼2 years old) but not young Mtln-KO mice, and those authors propose that dysfunction develops after chronic CL oxidation and remodelling. To determine whether our phenotype could develop with inducible conditional knockout, we used the CRISPR-Cas9 system to establish Mtln-KO in cardiomyocytes in mice (Mtln-cKO). For this we delivered AAV9 encoding Mtln-targeted guide RNAs (AAV9:gu-Mtln) or controls (AAV9:GFP or saline) to αMHC-Cas9 transgenic mice, wherein the αMHC promoter drives cardiomyocyte-restricted Cas9 expression (Figure A). We first validated the effectiveness of this model and achieved a remarkable degree of Mtln elimination after AAV9:gu-Mtln injection (Figure A), with residual protein likely arising from non-cardiomyocyte cell types, given that Mtln is ubiquitously expressed across cells and tissues. With experimental cohorts, we isolated mitochondria from fresh vs. frozen heart samples collected at 12–15 weeks post-AAV9:gu-Mtln or control injection (saline or AAV9:GFP), and assayed samples by western blot. Akin to constitutive/global KO (Figure B), conditional Mtln-KO rendered mitochondria more vulnerable than controls to matrix protein leak upon tissue freeze/thaw; Mtln-cKO mitochondria displayed significant matrix protein loss compared to controls (Figure B, right). In contrast, differences were not apparent in mitochondrial isolates from fresh heart tissue (Figure B, left). Similar observations were made in an additional cohort with tissue collection done at an earlier timepoint (4 weeks post-injection of AAV9:gu-Mtln or AAV9:GFP;   ). Notably, the matrix protein leak phenotype was not observed in Mtln-cKO livers (see   ), which lack Cas9 expression and thus retain Mtln expression after AAV9:gu-Mtln injection. Together, these results indicate that membrane vulnerability in the absence of Mtln is not reliant on long-term accumulated damage and point to a more direct or proximal influence of Mtln on mitochondrial membrane integrity.
 To further address if this phenotype relates to more immediate Mtln actions vs. distal downstream consequences of prolonged Mtln deficiency, we tested if acutely restoring Mtln expression could protect mitochondria from freeze/thaw damage. For this, we used recombinant AAV9 to add back Mtln to Mtln-KO mouse hearts. We first tested the efficacy of this strategy to replenish Mtln and found that AAV9:Mtln restored myocardial Mtln protein to above WT levels (Figure C). We next assessed whether Mtln add-back would protect against exacerbated freeze/thaw damage. Notably, at 4 weeks post-AAV administration, we observed complete rescue of normal phenotype with AAV9:Mtln treatment, replicated in three separate mouse cohorts; matrix proteins (Aco2, Dld, Mdh2, and Pcca) were significantly diminished in non-restored mitochondria from AAV9:GFP-injected Mtln-KO mice but were remarkably preserved (to WT level) in mitochondria from Mtln-restored (AAV9:Mtln-injected) KO hearts (Figure D). We postulate that the newly synthesized Mtln inserts into membranes of existing mitochondria to generate membrane alterations that enhance resistance to freeze/thaw-induced membrane damage. We additionally assayed clarified homogenates, collected during processing of frozen heart from these add-back cohorts. These homogenates correspond to the cytosolic fractions used to generate the mitochondrial pellets shown in Figure D, frozen heart. Matrix protein levels in these homogenates were no different between WT controls and KO (see   ), arguing against matrix protein loss due to aggregation/degradation , and supporting mitochondrial membrane damage and leak as the basis for diminished recovery in KO/cKO mitochondrial pellets. We quantified the mean Mtln protein level in fresh isolates of add-back mitochondria to be 2.6-fold above WT (Figure E). Together, our conditional KO and add-back data provide further evidence that Mtln protein acutely confers strength to mitochondrial membranes in a manner that counters freeze/thaw stress.
Propagation of phospholipid oxidation can create deleterious membrane damage, for example in the execution of ferroptotic cell death. ROS or lipid peroxidation upon freeze/thaw of biological samples have been reported in sperm cryopreservation or meat storage studies. To examine the possibility that lipid peroxidation upon freeze/thaw is an underlying event in elevated matrix protein leak with Mtln-KO, we performed ‘TBA-reactive substances’ (TBARS) assay, commonly used as an indirect measure of lipid hydroperoxide content. We tested RIPA lysates from fresh and frozen tissue (heart and liver), and mitochondria isolated from frozen heart (see   ). Interestingly, the act of freeze/thaw had no measurable effect on TBARS content in lysates, indicating that a single freeze/thaw event does not trigger appreciable lipid peroxidation (see   ). When comparing WT and KO lysates, there was no evidence for increased TBARS in KO samples; to the contrary there was slightly less TBARS in KO heart lysates compared to WT, independent of fresh/frozen status prior to assay (see   ). TBARS in mitochondria isolates from frozen/thawed heart showed no significant difference between WT and KO (see   ). These findings suggest that lipid peroxidation is not a major contributor to (i) one-time freeze/thaw membrane damage or (ii) elevated membrane damage in KO vs. WT mitochondria isolated from frozen tissue. Together, our results suggest that Mltn provides local strength that helps sustain mitochondrial membrane integrity under freeze/thaw stress and likely influences mitochondrial architecture in other important ways.

3.2

## Cardiomyocyte restricted KO of Cyb5r3 does not impart mitochondrial susceptibility to freeze/thaw-induced membrane damage
Of the reported possible Mtln interactors, data supporting a functional relationship is perhaps strongest for the oxidoreductase protein Cyb5r3. , The membrane-associated (myristoylated) isoform of Cyb5r3 is expressed across somatic cells and operates at plasma, ER and mitochondrial membranes to facilitate Coenzyme Q and heme reduction reactions, lipid desaturation, cholesterol biosynthesis, and drug metabolism. Mutation of Cyb5r3 (to abolish membrane docking) in cell lines was shown to phenocopy Mtln KO for impaired cI activity and altered lipid composition (notably a significant drop in PC levels), and those authors hypothesized that Mtln supports Cyb5r3 roles in creating a phospholipid environment optimal for cI activity. Conditional KO of Cyb5r3 in adult cardiomyocytes was recently demonstrated to elicit heart disease associated with elevated oxidative stress and malfunctioning mitochondria. We thus considered that Mtln might operate via influence on Cyb5r3 to bolster mitochondrial membrane resilience under freeze/thaw stress. To address this, we assayed cardiac mitochondria from mice with acute cardiomyocyte-targeted KO of Cyb5r3 (Cyb5r3-cKO), achieved by injecting Cyb5r3-floxed mice with AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre, compared to AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre-injected WT C57BL/6J control mice (Cyb5r3-ctl). We chose to inject female mice, since conditional KO of Cyb5r3 elicits severe heart disease/death that might confound readouts. Our Mtln-KO mice are devoid of overt heart disease, and the matrix-leak phenotype shows no sex bias such that putative contribution from Cyb5r3 should be equally evident in females and males. At 4 weeks post-virus injection, despite significant KO of Cyb5r3 (Figure A), cardiac mitochondria from Cyb5r3-cKO mice exhibited no evidence of matrix protein leak above Cyb5r3-ctl (Figure B). In contrast, significant matrix protein loss was again observed in Mtln-KO vs. WT mitochondrial isolates processed in parallel (Figure B), whereas matrix protein levels were comparable in the fresh counterpart samples from these mice (Figure C). This outcome indicates that excessive IMM fracture in the absence of Mtln under freeze/thaw stress is not secondary to loss of a Cyb5r3 function.
 
3.3

## Acute loss of Mtln in cells disrupts mitochondrial cristae
To further assess if Mtln acutely influences mitochondrial membranes and ultrastructure, we performed TEM after Mtln knockdown achieved via siRNA transfection of A549 cells, which express high levels of endogenous Mtln. At 48 h post-transfection, Mtln protein levels are reduced by >90% in siMtln-treated cells, relative to siRNA control (siCtrl) and mock-transfected cells (Figure A). By TEM, mitochondria were characterized in blinded fashion as either healthy (abundant, aligned cristae tubules), unhealthy (few or disorganized cristae), or intermediate (Figure B, representative images). In cells with Mtln silencing, there was a clear and significant shift towards more unhealthy mitochondria with reduced cristae density (Figure B,C; P < 0.0001). Malformation of cristae within 48 h of Mtln loss in A549 cells boosts the supposition that Mtln provides direct modulatory effects on mitochondrial membranes and ultrastructural integrity.
 
3.4

## Mtln peptide directly modulates dynamics of mitochondrial-simulated lipid monolayers
To assess direct influence of Mtln on membrane properties, we applied synthetic Mtln to biomimetic mitochondrial-like monolayers generated in a Langmuir trough. With this instrument, nanomole amounts of defined lipid mixtures are dispersed onto an aqueous surface and a lateral barrier compresses the lipids until they interact to form a monolayer at the liquid-air interface (Langmuir film). As the film is further compressed, molecular packing proceeds and surface pressure rises (surface tension drops), with output profiles dependent on the lipid composition. For each compression run, a lipid mixture (mimicking the IMM) was dispersed onto the surface and Mtln was injected into the buffer subphase to final concentrations of 0.28 μM or 2.8 μM, or no protein was injected. The Langmuir pressure-area isotherms (Figure D) illustrate the relationship between surface pressure and the mean area per lipid molecule within the monolayer. The addition of 0.28 μM Mtln shifted the curve slightly to the right, towards a larger ‘area per lipid molecule’, and this effect was greatly pronounced with 2.8 μM Mtln. Notably, these were significant increases, shown at a physiologically relevant surface pressure of 30 mN/m (Figure E). This signifies interaction of Mtln with the monolayer in a manner that creates a less packed overall lipid arrangement. This could be a consequence of Mtln interacting with phospholipid head groups to create lipid conformational changes, and/or due to Mtln inserting more deeply into hydrophobic regions to alter lipid packing. With a polybasic C-terminal tail, Mtln is expected to interact electrostatically with headgroups of anionic lipids (especially CL), as described for cationic SS-31 peptide interaction with model membranes. Interestingly, cytochrome C (CytC), which localizes to the intermembrane space and is known to form stable structures with CL, behaves strikingly like Mtln in the Langmuir trough assay wherein CytC addition to the subphase of IMM-like monolayers also triggered a strong shift in lipid packing towards increased ‘area per lipid molecule’. As this effect of CytC was attributed to its ability to provoke segregation of lipid species, we speculate that Mtln could likewise assist in formation of lipid domains, supportive of membrane stability or structure.
The isotherm raw data was also used to evaluate Mtln’s influence on membrane dynamics by calculating the elastic modulus of area compressibility (Cs−1), which is the inverse of compressibility. At physiologic 30 mN/m surface pressure, Cs−1 decreased with addition of Mtln, indicating increased compressibility or elasticity of the lipid monolayer (Figure F). Together the Langmuir film analyses show that Mtln interacts with and/or adsorbs into IMM-like monolayers and imparts changes in lipid spacing and elasticity, which are fundamental aspects of IMM folding, cristae formation, and membrane lipid dynamics and would plausibly affect membrane response to freeze/thaw or other stresses.

3.5

## Mtln-KO mouse hearts have elevated triglycerides and decreased docosahexaenoic acid
To assess Mtln’s influence on lipid profiles, cardiac tissue collected from male Mtln-KO and WT mice (∼21-month-old) was subjected to comprehensive, untargeted high performance liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS). Use of positive and negative ionization modes for MS provided broad lipidome coverage, identifying 436 unique lipid species. Mtln-KO samples show a clear pattern of increased triglycerides (TG), particularly those containing saturated or lowly desaturated acyl chains of 14–20 carbons in length (Figure A and , ). Among the 42 significantly altered lipids identified (P ≤ 0.05, Mtln-KO vs. WT), 35 are elevated TG species. By contrast, lipid species containing 22:6(n-3) (docosahexaenoic acid, DHA) acyl chains, including 22:6-containing TG, are mostly reduced in Mtln-KO samples (Figure A).
 Subsequent lipidomic profiling was done on heart samples collected from aged WT and Mtln-KO female mice, once again revealing an enrichment of lipids with saturated or low desaturation level (including TGs, albeit to a lesser degree than males) in Mtln-KO samples, as well as a significant reduction in highly desaturated lipid species (acyl chains with desaturation ≥5, Figure B and , ), which is more pronounced than in males. Notably, among all lipids detected, TGs containing three (3x) or two (2x) 22:6 acyl chains show the strongest reduction (by magnitude) in both female and male Mtln-KO samples (Figure A,B). Gender-combined analysis shows that TG 22:6_22:6_22:6 is reduced by ∼65% in Mtln-KO samples (Figure C, P = 0.01). These general findings (decreases in 22:6 species and increase in other TG) were corroborated by both lipid ontology enrichment analysis (LIONweb, Figure D) and unsupervised, multivariate partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA, data not shown). Together, these lipidomic studies done on bulk cardiac tissue samples reinforce that Mtln loss causes a shift away from FAO , , towards increased TG lipid storage and highlight an accompanying selective broad reduction in lipids with highest desaturation levels.

3.6

## Acute cardiac-specific Mtln-KO causes cardiolipin turnover
To address specifically how loss of Mtln acutely influences mitochondrial lipids, we performed lipidomic profiling on crude mitochondrial pellets isolated from fresh cardiac tissue from conditional Mtln-cKO mice (αMHC-Cas9 transgenic mice injected with AAV9:gu-Mtln) or control mice (αMHC-Cas9 transgenic mice injected with AAV9:GFP), collected 4 weeks post-AAV) (model shown in Figure A). Among 544 individual lipid species quantified, few show significant differences between groups (see , ). Targeted examination of DHA (22:6)-containing lipids revealed weakly trending differences (P < 0.2), encompassing 15 unique lipids, all of which are notably down-regulated, consistent with our findings in bulk cardiac tissues. Interestingly, lipid ontology enrichment analysis (LIONweb, Figure E) indicated that acute Mtln-KO samples showed broad reductions in CL species, as well as accumulation of lipids having ‘head group with positive charge’, glycero-ethanolamines, and plasmalogens (vinyl ether phospholipids), the latter of which could represent an attempt to preserve IMM curvature, as these lipid classes encompass several alternative conical lipid species (like CL). Moreover, the sn-1 vinyl ether linkages of plasmalogens are highly reactive to ROS and serve as scavengers to prevent peroxidation of other lipids. , This is notable since prior observations indicate that mitochondrial ROS rises after Mtln knockdown in cells, , and the plasmalogen spike after acute Mtln reduction could serve as an early compensatory antioxidant defence. Acute Mtln-KO mitochondria showed additional signs of ROS-induced membrane damage, with lipidomics data indicating a weak trend towards increases in monolysocardiolipin (MLCL 18:2_18:2_18:2, P < 0.2), and notably, follow-up auxiliary analyses revealed that MLCL/CL ratios are significantly increased by ∼20% in acute Mtln-cKO samples (Figure F, P = 0.015, representing the ‘top hit’, most significant P-value in this lipidomics dataset). Such an increase in MLCL/CL ratio represents a classic hallmark of CL damage/turnover, as occurs in Barth syndrome. Along with this key finding, the overall mitochondrial-targeted lipidomics data provide complementary insights into the multimodal means by which Mtln may broadly influence lipid composition and integrity to maintain membrane stability through freeze/thaw, and this may translate further to relevant pathological insults that cause mitochondrial membrane damage and remodelling.

3.7

## Mtln-KO mice exhibit worse myocardial injury in response to ischaemia–reperfusion
As an initial step towards evaluating a possible protective role for Mtln in disease, we chose to investigate a mouse model of myocardial ischaemia-reperfusion (I/R), given that Mtln is cardiac-enriched and that I/R is known to elicit significant and pathologic mitochondrial membrane disruption. Ischaemia and/or reperfusion events can trigger mitochondrial permeability transition to promote cell death pathways. Moreover, mitochondrial swelling, loss of matrix staining density, and cristae fragmentation are detected in mouse hearts after I/R. We first assessed cardiac function of Mtln-KO mice compared to WT in the absence of stress and found that baseline cardiac function (determined by echocardiography) is normal, for both young (∼15–20 weeks old) and middle-aged (>1 year of age) mice (Figure A, , and ). To examine if absence of Mtln would affect I/R outcomes, mice were subjected to coronary artery ligation, blocking blood flow to the lower left ventricular wall for 1 h, after which the suture was removed to restore blood flow. Given that we hypothesized that Mtln-KO mice would exhibit exacerbated I/R injury, we performed surgeries using polypropylene suture, which in our hands (vs. nylon), limits the severity of ischaemia and tissue damage, providing a better window of opportunity to observe worse outcomes in mice that may be more susceptible to I/R injury. We performed surgeries on young male mice (Mtln-KO and WT littermates, ∼18 weeks of age), and at 3 days post-surgery, heart structure and function were measured by echocardiography (Figure B; summary data in , ). Among 13 WT mice, only 5 (38%) showed discernible infarcts in echocardiographic images, whereas 7 of 11 Mtln-KO mice (64%) had obvious infarcts, which on average were nearly twice the size compared to WT infarcts (Figure C, P < 0.05). Overall, Mtln-KO mice showed significantly worse outcomes, evidenced by increased dilation (larger end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes) and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, relative to WT mice (Figure C). These data provide initial evidence supporting a protective role for Mtln in I/R injury, though the complex and likely interrelated underlying mechanisms (involving combined influences on membrane stability, mitochondrial Ca2+ and ROS, and mPTP) will need to be resolved with extensive follow-up investigations.
 

4.

## Discussion
In this study, we demonstrate a striking exacerbation of matrix protein leak from Mtln-KO compared to WT mitochondria after isolation from tissue that has undergone freeze/thaw. TEM assessment of frozen/thawed cardiac tissue revealed regions with swollen or damaged mitochondria, which were in greater abundance and appeared more highly fractured in Mtln-KO tissues. These findings raise the interesting questions of (i) what is happening during freeze/thaw and (ii) how does lack of Mtln worsen the outcome?
It is well established that subjecting cells or tissues to freeze/thaw induces membrane breach. Without cryoprotectant compounds, substantial damage to membranes is expected, as membranes are sensitive to osmotic changes and dehydration effects of ice crystal formation. , Dramatic mitochondrial swelling after freeze/thaw is documented in mammalian cells and in cold-susceptible insect larvae. Mitochondrial swelling occurs after loss of the IMM barrier integrity and subsequent osmotic influx of water into the protein-rich matrix. Deleterious lipid rearrangements also occur. Theory asserts that with temperature drop/dehydration upon freezing, and with temperature rise/rehydration upon thaw, membrane lipids experience unregulated and asynchronous liquid-gel phase transitions and separations. This creates regions with increased tendency to form non-lamellar structures, such as reversed hexagonal phase and inverted micelles, that can ablate barrier function, , essentially creating pores. Transient formation of such non-lamellar structures is known to occur normally under physiologic conditions to promote membrane fusion or fission. , Lipids prone to non-lamellar arrangements are more abundant in organelles with tubular structure such as the ER and IMM. CL is one such lipid having well-known propensity to form transient reverse hexagonal phases. , , 
Mtln strongly binds CL, and our Langmuir analyses demonstrate that Mtln adsorbs onto (and/or into) mitochondrial-like lipid monolayers and alters monolayer properties, reducing lipid density and enhancing elasticity. We propose that one physiologic role of Mtln in vivo is to interact with CL in microdomains that support membrane folding and cristae structure. In the context of freeze/thaw, Mtln intercalation in CL rich regions could antagonize lipid phase transitions and CL propensity to form reverse hexagonal structures that create pore-like openings. Additionally, increased membrane elasticity imparted by Mtln may provide resistance to swelling-induced rupture. Other events, such as rise in Ca2+ concentration, due to water withdrawal into ice crystals and/or leakage from damaged ER, may contribute to formation of non-lamellar structures. In fact, when added to CL preparations or to CL-containing vesicles , or nanodiscs, Ca2+ promotes inverted hexagonal structures and vesicle leak. Importantly, drop in CL levels observed after acute Mtln KO were only slightly below WT such that CL would be of sufficient abundance to generate non-lamellar formations. Further investigation is necessary to better define the molecular mechanisms as to how Mtln concerts with CL, possibly to restrain transitions to reverse-hexagonal lipid arrangements and provide resistance to membrane break. We recently discovered that Mtln self-oligomerizes to form predicted hexameric pore-like structures, and it is tempting to speculate that Mtln incorporates CL into such oligomeric structures to impart membrane stability in CL-rich regions.
We cannot exclude the possibility that Mtln has indirect effects on mitochondrial lipids to impact vulnerability to temperature stress. Lipid composition influences tendency for phase separations. For example, a study in bacteria demonstrated that raising the content of saturated membrane lipids (tight packing, low fluidity) precipitated striking de-mixing and phase separation of the inner membrane lipids into low and high fluidity regions. Our lipidomic results show broad lipid alterations with Mtln loss, and one interesting finding is the drop in lipid species containing 22:6 in Mtln-KO. The 22:6 fatty acid, docosahexanoic acid (DHA), is an omega-3 fatty acid and is one of the most highly desaturated fatty acids. Phospholipids with 22:6 chains would enhance bilayer fluidity and perhaps lessen phase separations that contribute to freeze/thaw damage in highly unsaturated membranes. However, the drop in 22:6 species was more drastic at the tissue-level vs. mitochondrial-level lipidome. This could mean that loss of 22:6 from additional cellular compartments contributes indirectly to IMM damage, or that decline in 22:6 is not a key determinant of exacerbated mitochondrial membrane damage in Mtln-KO. Either way, the mechanism for how Mtln influences DHA-containing lipids remains unclear. Notably, two independent reports demonstrate that Mtln-KO cell lines exhibit elevated DHA or DHA-containing lipid species, , hinting at indirect effects of Mtln loss on fatty acid metabolism that are context-dependent (in vitro vs. in vivo) in terms of directionality.
An important translationally relevant finding in our current study is that Mtln supports cardiac resistance to I/R. The detrimental effects of I/R were heightened in the absence of Mtln; infarct zone was enlarged along with increasing cardiac dilation and impaired contractile performance. Widely accepted as a prominent contributor to reperfusion injury is mitochondrial permeability transition (mPT), which occurs at the onset of reperfusion during a critical period of high Ca2+ and mitochondrial ROS surge. Above a threshold, matrix Ca2+ triggers formation and opening of the mPTP, a non-selective, high conductance (up to 1500 Da) IMM pore of incompletely defined molecular identity. , Pore opening collapses the mitochondrial membrane potential, causing energy crisis, water influx into the matrix, mitochondrial swelling, OMM rupture, and trigger of cell death pathways. Recent studies support transition of either the Ant and/or the F1F0ATP synthase (or a subcomplex of the F1F0ATP synthase), from its normal structure/function into pathologic mPTP formation. , Ca2+ triggered pore opening is regulated by cyclophilin D, and threshold to opening is substantially lowered by ROS, , and by oxidized cardiolipin. Given that Mtln acutely enhances mitochondrial Ca2+ retention capacity (a measure of resistance to permeability transition), it is possible that Mtln antagonizes cardiac mPTP opening after reperfusion, to protect a proportion of at-risk cardiomyocytes from dying. We speculate that Mtln binding to CL may play a direct part in resistance to mPT. Though the field is still controversial regarding molecular events and protein components of mPTP, , both Ant- and F1F0ATP synthase-central models incorporate possible sensor roles for CL. CL is an integral component of these protein complexes , and CL shifts conformation when exposed to Ca2+ or when oxidized, and in this way may behave as a sensor to elicit mPTP configuration. , In line with this, Ca2+ alters CL packing in lipid bilayers and renders CL more susceptible to oxidation. CL loss occurs after cardiac I/R, , indicative of ROS-induced oxidation and subsequent turnover. By virtue of binding to CL, Mtln feasibly shields CL from Ca2+ effects and/or limits CL acyl chain exposure to I/R-induced ROS.
Recent 3D ultrastructural examination of cardiac mitochondria documents mitochondrial swelling, loss of matrix staining density, and fragmentation of cristae connectivity early after I/R. Intriguingly, cristae connectivity was significantly preserved by application of the therapeutic mitochondria-targeting cationic tetrapeptide, SS-31 (elamipretide) during reperfusion. SS-31 targets IMM CL, to stabilize CL-integral protein complexes , and demonstrates broad mitochondrial supportive effects under various pathologic conditions. Notably, SS-31 can protect against hypoxia-driven lipid peroxidation of CL. SS-31 benefits are reminiscent of Mtln, such that Mtln, which similarly contains ‘basic plus aromatic amino acid’ segments, may represent an endogenous SS-31-like counterpart, binding to CL to provide direct support against various stresses.
Our working model tying together freeze/thaw and I/R protective effects (Figure ), predicts that Mtln partners with CL to stabilize CL conformation in a manner that (i) limits propensity to form membrane-damaging, non-lamellar structures upon temperature stress and (ii) shields against oxidation and cleavage upon I/R stress. We found evidence for CL turnover in heart mitochondria after acute removal of Mtln, consistent with a role for Mtln in stabilizing CL in a manner that restricts acyl chain access to ROS damage and turnover. Concordant with this finding, CL decline and increased MLCL/CL ratio was recently described in skeletal muscle mitochondria from Mtln global KO mice. Unlike their observation in the soleus, our findings were less robust, and we found no significant drop in CL or rise in MLCL in heart tissue from our global Mtln-KO mice. We suspect that with sustained absence of Mtln, the heart adapts by introducing altered lipid species to provide some CL stability and/or by altering CL remodelling pathways. Once formed, CL-protein complexes, and CL-protein supercomplexes are particularly stable in cardiomyocytes , ; a mild change in CL turnover might go undetected in the non-stressed heart that has adapted to Mtln loss. With I/R stress, the rise in mitochondrial ROS is predicted to result in oxidation of CL, while ROS and Ca2+ directly stimulate iPLA2γ , to cleave CL/oxidized CL, generating MLCL. We predict that these events are exacerbated in the absence of Mtln (Figure ). Interestingly, when complexed with CL or MLCL, CytC acquires (per)oxidase activity , ; CL and MLCL are themselves targets of oxidation and serve to propagate peroxidation of additional polyunsaturated membrane lipids for extended membrane damage. Thus, we surmise that events downstream of I/R-induced CL turnover are intensified in the absence of Mtln and could include mPTP assembly, and MLCL-CytC association to perpetuate lipid peroxidation (Figure ). At this juncture, our finding that Mtln deficiency worsens I/R injury is of great interest and will steer our future efforts towards deeper interrogation of our model to better understand the molecular function of Mtln in I/R injury pathways.
 Our lipidomic analyses indicate a general increase in TG content at the tissue and mitochondrial level. Other investigators have reported increased TG or lipid droplets in Mtln KO cells, indicative of a diversion of lipids away from mitochondrial FAO and towards TG storage. This could reflect a direct involvement of Mtln in either lipolysis or FAO, , , the latter of which is consistent with reported Mtln interactions with FAO related proteins. , , Another thought is that OMM and IMM structural deformations in the absence of Mtln is poorly supportive of FAO, perhaps due to ineffective intersection of FA uptake and FAO enzymatic complexes at OMM-IMM boundaries. An alternative explanation is that diminished FAO is an indirect outcome as part of metabolic rewiring to compensate for impaired mitochondrial respiration, downstream of abnormal CL. Interestingly, metabolic re-wiring accounts for blunted FAO observed in cells deficient in tafazzin, the CL-remodelling transacylase mutated in Barth syndrome. These possibilities await more in-depth evaluations.
We expect that Mtln influence on IMM lipid dynamics, particularly involving CL, would have broad effects on metabolism and cell functions related to mitochondria and could explain the multifaceted outcomes of Mtln loss across studies. It is also possible that Mtln additionally functions in a key manner within defined protein complexes, for example, with trifunctional proteins and Cpt1b for FAO , or assisting Cyb5r3 oxidoreduction reactions, or with Nat-14 to mediate inflammation-triggered nuclear signalling. Mtln may perform diverse functions and localize to more than one mitochondrial subregion or protein complex, in a cell-type or tissue-specific manner and/or depending on metabolic demands. With respect to Cyb5r3, our data with mitochondria from Cyb5r3 conditional KO hearts (see   ) suggest that Mtln works independent of Cybr3 to stabilize the IMM against freeze/thaw damage and matrix protein leak. However, it’s entirely possible that Mtln and Cyb5r3 functionally intersect in ways that could explain other Mtln KO phenotypes such as suggested by others, , and we do not rule out the possibility that the altered lipidomic profiles or increased susceptibility to I/R damage observed herein could be at least in part due to diminished Cyb5r3 performance in the absence of Mtln. Our current study is limited in that our I/R experiments were performed only in male cohorts. Our IMM fracture/matrix protein leak phenotype was equally prominent across male and female samples, and we observed no overt sex differences in our lipidomic profiles. Nevertheless, future studies are needed to address potential sex bias of Mtln KO in disease models. Our study is also limited in that we have not narrowed down which pathways that Mtln influences are most relevant in the context of I/R. Given the chronological and molecular complexities of I/R events, in combination with Mtln’s multifaceted contributions to mitochondrial health and cellular metabolism, this task presents a major challenge. Future studies to address this might include comprehensive assessment of mitochondria structural, composition (including CL profiles), and functional changes with controlled I/R parameters introduced via Langendorff-infusion or in adult cardiomyocyte cultures.
Collectively, our study advances knowledge of Mtln influence on mitochondrial membranes, highlighting the importance of Mtln in direct interaction with IMM lipids, and a connection to CL turnover. Moreover, our findings reveal a role for Mtln in cardiac stress responses, specifically in blunting I/R injury. While the translational significance of this remains unclear, further studies could be warranted to better understand how environmental or physiologic influences affect Mtln expression in the heart, as well as assess whether Mtln overexpression in mouse heart confers protection in more severe cardiac I/R models. Our continued molecular and functional investigations will strive to provide enlightenment on the operational mechanisms of this intriguing microprotein. Resolving Mtln’s mode of action in promoting mitochondrial health has potential to inspire discovery of new targets for I/R therapy and likely other mitochondrial-related pathologies.

## Supplementary Material
cvag011_Supplementary_Data

## Acknowledgements
The transgenic aMHC-cas9 mouse line was graciously provided by Eric Olson (UTSW). This work utilized the Hitachi S-4800 Scanning Electron Microscope in the University of Iowa Central Microscopy Research Facilities that was purchased with funding from the NIH SIG S10 RR022498; the content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the NIH. We acknowledge the Metabolomics Core at the University of Utah and thank James Cox and John Alan Maschek for assistance and help with lipidomic analyses (service provided). Echocardiography was performed with the help of the University of Iowa Cardiovascular Phenotyping Core directed by Robert Weiss with technical support from Kathy Zimmerman, Alyssa Bosko, and William Kutschke.

## Supplementary material
Supplementary material is available at online.

## Authors’ contributions
R.L.B. conceived and designed the project, supervised the research, and analysed and interpreted the data. C.S.S, X.Z., N.H.W., and E.R.P. designed and executed experiments, curated and analysed data, and participated in data interpretation. S.R.S. assisted with experimental design and data interpretation. S.H. and A.C.H designed and executed experiments. C.S.S. and R.L.B. wrote the manuscript with contributions from X.Z., N.H.W., E.R.P., S.R.S., S.H., and A.C.H.

## Funding
This work was supported by the University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine (Distinguished Scholars Program to R.L.B.), NIH - National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (R01HL144717, R01HL150557, and R35HL177241 to R.L.B. and R35HL161177 to A.C.S.), NIH - National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (P30DK056350 to S.R.S), NIH - National Institute of General Medical Sciences (predoctoral fellowship T32GM067795 to N.H.W), and the American Heart Association (23PRE1011277 to N.H.W.).

## Data availability
All data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Detailed descriptions of the methods and materials, as well as raw uncropped blots and bulk LC-MS data, can be found in the manuscript and Supplemental Material.