pmcPLoS OnePLoS One440plosone101285081plosPLOS ONE1932-6203PLOSPMC10449225PMC10449225.110449225104492253761623110.1371/journal.pone.0275550PONE-D-22-259741Research ArticleBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryBioenergeticsEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaBiology and Life SciencesCell BiologyCellular Structures and OrganellesEnergy-Producing OrganellesMitochondriaBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryMetabolismMetabolitesBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodBlood PlasmaMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyBody FluidsBloodBlood PlasmaBiology and Life SciencesPhysiologyBody FluidsBloodBlood PlasmaBiology and Life SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyHeartMedicine and Health SciencesAnatomyCardiovascular AnatomyHeartMedicine and Health SciencesPulmonologyMedical HypoxiaAnoxiaBiology and Life SciencesBiochemistryMetabolismMetabolic PathwaysResearch and Analysis MethodsSpecimen Preparation and TreatmentStainingCell StainingResearch and Analysis MethodsSpectrum Analysis TechniquesSpectrophotometryCytophotometryFlow CytometryKynurenic acid, a key L-tryptophan-derived metabolite, protects the heart from an ischemic damage
Kynurenic acid and cardiac protection from ischemiaBigelmanEinatConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationMethodologyWriting – original draft Pasmanik-ChorMetsadaFormal analysisSoftware DassaBareketFormal analysisSoftware https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1348-2814ItkinMaximMethodology MalitskySergeyMethodology DorotOrlyFormal analysisMethodology PichinukEdwardFormal analysisResources KleinbergYuvalMethodology KerenGadResourcesSupervisionWriting – review & editing https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9909-5502Entin-MeerMichalConceptualizationData curationFormal analysisInvestigationSoftwareSupervisionWriting – original draftWriting – review & editing 1
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Research, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Affiliated with the Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel2
Department of Cardiology, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel3
Bioinformatics Unit, Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel4
Bioinformatics Unit, Department of Life Sciences Core Facilities, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel5
Metabolic Profiling Unit, Life Sciences Core Facilities, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel6
Bio-Imaging Core, Blavatnik Center for Drug Discovery, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, IsraelJohnsonDaniel M.Editor files.

## Data Availability
All relevant data are within the paper and its files.

## Introduction
Concomitant cardiac and renal dysfunction, termed cardiorenal syndrome (CRS), has gained significant attention in the recent decade and is characterized into 5 types [ ]. Type 3 and type 4 CRS, also known as renocardiac syndrome, are defined by acute or chronic kidney disease (AKI and CKD, respectively) and are associated with the development or progression of cardiac disease [ ]. Kidney disease may directly or indirectly produce an acute cardiac event triggered by the inflammatory surge, oxidative stress and secretion of neurohormons [ – ]. Other known triggers for mainly AKI- mediated cardiac injuries and dysfunctions include AKI-related volume overload, metabolic acidosis and electrolyte disorders such as hyperkalemia and hypocalcemia [ ]. Consequently, renal disease is considered a major risk for cardiovascular complications including acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and congestive heart failure. Recently, changes in cardiac mitochondrial dynamics and subsequent cardiac apoptosis have been suggested in a mouse renal ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) model. In this study, fragmented mitochondria in cardiomyocytes were observed after 30 min of bilateral renal I/R and reduction of fractional shortening was observed 72 h later [ ]. Likewise, in our recent work, we have shown that sustained CKD induced in a rat model by 5/6 nephrectomy results in major cardiac pathology, including increased interstitial fibrosis, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, induced expression of pro-apoptotic markers and massive spatial disarrangement of the cardiac muscle fibers. These changes were combined with significant mitochondrial damage as reflected by the swollen mitochondria in which the cristae density was reduced [ ]. The processes were associated with an induced expression of the fission-related protein DRP1, suggesting that cardiac mitochondrial fragmentation takes place upon kidney injury [ , ]. Interestingly, a recent study has demonstrated that AKI induces changes in 40% of the cardiac metabolites [ ]. In this study, the authors documented that the post-AKI cardiac metabolome was characterized by amino acid depletion, increased oxidative stress, and evidence of alternative energy production. In view of these data, in the current work, we wished to identify a key metabolite pathway whose expression is highly modified in both blood and cardiac lysates of Lewis rats induced with AKI in order to characterize a potential novel interventional tool for attenuating disease progression to CRS. Thorough metabolomics analysis revealed major changes in the L-tryptophan (TRP) metabolism pathway in general and a significant induction in kynurenic acid (kynurenate, KYNA), one of the major products of the TRP metabolism both in the blood and hearts of the experimental rats. Therefore we chose to focus in the current work on KYNA’s effects on cardiac structure and function. Several lines of evidence suggest that G protein-coupled receptor 35 (GPR35) may serve as KYNA’s receptor and that GPR35 can be activated and internalized into the cell by KYNA, which is found in the plasma in nano to micromolar concentrations [ ]. Knock-out mice lacking GPR35 expression have been reported to have increased systemic blood pressure [ ], but the mechanism is not known. In addition, high amounts of GPR35 were shown to be expressed in the wild-type mice hearts, and myocardial GPR35 gene expression was shown to be associated with human heart failure [ , ].
In the current study, we analyzed the potential effects of KYNA on cardiac cell viability following exposure to ischemia using in vitro and in vivo models and assessed the possible involvement of the cardiac mitochondria in mediating the metabilte’s effects. The data presented herein highlight the potential crucial importance of KYNA as a key metabolite that may offer cardiac protection under an ischemic event prevalent in patients suffering from renal dysfunction.

## Materials & methods

## Ethics statement
Animal studies were approved by The Animal Care and Use Committee of Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical-Center (6-1-18), which conforms to the policies of the American Heart Association and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals.

## Animals
Male Lewis rats (250–350 gr)/ 12-week old female BALB/C mice were purchased from Envigo, Israel. Male Lewis rats were used for AKI studies, as previously established in our laboratory for 5/6 nephrectomy models [ ]. Female mice were utilized in the AMI studies, in accordance with the extensive experience gathered in our laboratory [ , ] and the lower cardiac rupture rate of female compared to male mice following AMI induction [ ]. All animals were kept under optimal conditions (food and water provided ad libitum) at room temperature in a temperature-controlled facility with 12 hrs. light/dark cycle. Prior to all surgical procedures, animals were anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine/xylazine (100/10 mg/kg, respectively) and anesthesia was confirmed by loss of pedal reflex (toe pinch). During experimental periods, animals were monitored 2–3 times per week for potential signs of suffering, mainly weight loss of more than 15% and significant changes in animals’ behavior, mobility, or body posture. Should animals have met one of these criteria, euthanasia would have been warranted on the same day to prevent further suffering.

## Rat model for AKI
Rats (4-5/group) underwent 5/6 nephrectomy for induction of AKI as previously established in our laboratory [ ]. Briefly, 5/6 nephrectomy was performed in two consecutive surgeries: two-thirds of the left kidney was removed followed by removal of the right kidney a week later. Control animals underwent abdominal opening only (sham). The experiment was terminated one day or seven days following the second surgery. AKI-1d represents a potentially-transient disease as opposed to the 1w AKI that may represent a potentially- persistent acute renal disease.

## Mice model for AMI
Twelve week-old BALB/C female mice were randomized into two groups receiving tap water (control) or KYNA (250 mg/L) diluted in tap water (15 mice/arm) in accordance with previous reports [ ]. Three days later all animals were induced with AMI by permanent ligation of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) according to our established protocol [ ]. To alleviate pain, subcutaneous injection of carprofen (5 mg/kg) was given during the surgery as well as once a day during the next three subsequent days. Five animals from the control group and six animals from the experimental group were excluded from the analysis due to one of the following reasons: normal cardiac function according to echocardiography applied on day 1, suggesting that LAD ligation was unsuccessful (6 animals), animal’s death prior to endpoint (4 animals) or weight loss of > 15% (1 animal). Consequently, the control and the experimental arms included 10 and 9 animals, respectively. The drinking water with or without KYNA was replaced twice a week until the end of the experiment on day 30 post surgery. Cardiac parameters on day one and day 30 post-infarction were obtained by echocardiography (Vevo 2100, VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada), while heart rate was kept between 400–500 bpm in accordance with the guidelines for echocardiographic measurements in the murine heart [ ]. Stroke volume (SV) was calculated as the difference the LV end-diastolic and end-systolic volumes (LVEDV and LVESV) which were automatically calculated by the Vevo cardiac software. The cardiac output (CO) was derived from the SV and heart rate. Following the second echocardiography scan, mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation, and hearts were harvested and processed for histology.

## Histological staining for collagen content
After embedding in paraffin, the blocks were sectioned into 5 μm slices and stained with Picro Sirius Red (PR, Direct Red 80, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and hematoxylin to determine hypertrophy and the extent of left ventricular (LV) collagen scar.

## Metabolites extraction and profiling
The heart (LV) tissue was frozen in liquid nitrogen and then ground to powder using a mortar and pestle. The blood was withdrawn from the vena cava into blood collection tubes (BD Vacutainer). Prior to termination, urine samples were collected. The tubes were centrifuged for two minutes at 4000 rpm, and the plasma samples were collected. Extraction and analysis of lipids and polar/semi-polar metabolites was performed as previously described [ – ] with some modifications. Plasma (100 μL) or ground lyophilized LV samples (20 mg) were extracted with 1 ml of a pre-cooled (−20˚C) homogenous methanol:methyl-tert-butyl-ether (MTBE) 1:3 (v/v) mixture, containing following internal standards. The tubes were vortexed and then sonicated for 30 min in an ice-cold sonication bath (taken for a brief vortex every 10 min). Then, UPLC-grade water- methanol (3:1, v/v) solution (0.5 mL) was added to the tubes, followed by centrifugation. The upper organic phase was transferred into 2 mL Eppendorf tube. The polar phase was re-extracted as described above with 0.5 mL of MTBE. Both organic phases were combined and dried in speedvac and then stored at −80˚C until analysis.

## H9C2 cell viability assay
H9C2 myoblast cell line from rat myocardium (ATCC clone CRL-1446) was obtained as a generous gift from Dr. Gania Kessler-Icekson, Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petach Tikva, Israel. The cells were plated in 6 well plates (2.5 *105 cells/ well) in complete DMEM. A day later, the medium was replaced with serum-free DMEM with or without KYNA. Twenty-four hours later, the cells were exposed to normoxic or anoxic (0% oxygen) conditions for additional 48 hours by applying a mixture of 95% N2 + 5% CO2 into a modular incubator chamber (Billups Rothenber), as previously reported [ ]. The cells were then collected, and their viability was tested using the annexin-PI apoptosis detection kit (MBL, USA) followed by flow cytometry analysis (BD Biosciences FACS Canto II).

## Detection of cell surface GPR35
H9C2 were plated in 6 well plates (2.5 *105 cells/ well) in complete DMEM. A day later the medium was replaced with serum-free DMEM with or without KYNA followed by exposure to normoxia/anoxia for another 48 hours. The cells were then trypsinized and stained with GPR35-FITC antibody, which recognizes the native form of the extracellular portion of the receptor (Biorbyt, England, clone orb399781) followed by flow cytometry analysis.

## Cell staining and data analysis of mitochondrial morphology
H9C2 cells were plated in 96-well plates (10,000 cells/well). On the following day, the growth medium was replaced with serum-free DMEM, with or without KYNA. Following 24 hours, the plates were exposed to normoxia/anoxia for 48 hours. The cells were stained using an automated High Content Imaging pipline (Freedom EVO 200 robot, Tecan Group Ltd., Männedorf, Switzerland) and imaged using the INCell 2200 automated microscope (GE Healthcare, ILL, USA) at X20 magnification (15 fields per well, 30 wells per condition). Following image acquisition, high-content image stacks were analyzed using the InCarta software (GE Healthcare) producing comparative fluorescence intensity measurements. Cell and nuclei morphology were determined by cytoplasmic and nuclear staining using Calcein Red-Orange and Hoechst (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), respectively. In order to monitor the mitochondrial content and activity, the mitochondria were labeled with MitoTracker Green FM and MitoTracker Deep-Red FM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) which provide measurement of the mitochondrial mass and activity at the cellular level [ – ]. To assess the mitochondrial oxidative damage, the cells were stained with MitoSOX (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), Calcein Green and Hoechst, as previously reported [ , ]. The results obtained from the InCarta software were further analyzed by utilizing a custom python script developed at the Blavatnik center for drug discovery at Tel-Aviv university, Israel. Following Z-score-based normalization, the quantification of Mito Activity was done by dividing the MitoTracker Deep- Red intensity with MitoTracker Green intensity which was normalized with the cell intensity. Mito Fraction quantification was done by dividing the parameter of mitochondria organelles count of MitoTracker Deep-Red with MitoTracker Green ( ).

## Statistical analysis
SPSS (IBM® SPSS® Statistics; Version 22) was used for statistical analysis. All variables are expressed as means ± standard error of the mean (SEM). One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test was used to compare the three groups (sham, AKI-1d, AKI-1w) unless otherwise specified. In the metabolomics analysis, metabolite intensities were normalized to cardiac mass (cardiac samples) or to sample volume (plasma samples) and analyzed using one-way ANOVA following a multiple correction step (FDR step-up) using Partek Genomics Suite 7.0. The comparison included control samples, 1 day and 1 week time point samples for either heart, or plasma samples, separately. Metabolites were considered differential when detected in both groups, and had a linear |Fold-Change|>1.5, and FDR <0.05. For the specific analysis of the metabolites affiliated with the TRP catabolism pathway ( ), the differences in raw intensities of these metabolites among the 3 groups (sham, AKI-1d, AKI-1w) were analyzed by ANOVA. For the AMI study, two-way paired- Student’s T-test was utilized in analyzing the differences between day 1 and day 30 in each treatment group. In all tests, p< 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Significance was at p<0.05 (*p<0.05; p<0.01;***p<0.001).

## Results

## Model validation
In order to validate that 5/6 nephrectomy results in renal dysfunction in the acute phase, the levels of plasma creatinine and urea obtained from the complete metabolomics analysis were compared between the three experimental groups. The data indicate that plasma creatinine was significantly elevated both on day 1 (1790 ± 4.7) and day 7 (1018 ± 94.0) post AKI induction relative to vehicle-control animals (257 ± 4.7); p< 0.001, .I. Likewise, the levels of urea were markedly increased in the plasma from 156.1 ± 27.2 in control to 468.0 ± 70.0 and 293.7 ± 41.4, on day 1 and day 7, respectively, following AKI (p<0.05, .II). The data point that an acute renal dysfunction takes place, shortly after AKI induction by 5/6 nephrectomy.
 

## Metabolomics analysis
The metabolomics analysis identified a total of 468 metabolites in the heart, which include both polar and semi-polar metabolites (276 metabolites) as well as lipid metabolites (192 metabolites) ( ). Out of which, 71 and 68 metabolites were differentially expressed in the heart at 24 h and one week time points, respectively, relative to sham (FC ≥ 1.5; one-way ANOVA, p≤ 0.05). Forty-one of these metabolites were differentially expressed at both time points relative to sham (listed as "Differential" in ). In the plasma, 440 metabolites which include both polar and semi-polar metabolites (245 metabolites) as well as lipid metabolites (195 metabolites) were identified ( ). Out of which, 125 and 104 metabolites were differentially expressed at 24 h or 1 week, respectively, compared to sham (FC ≥ 1.5; one-way ANOVA, p≤ 0.05). Eighty-one of these metabolites were differentially expressed at both time points relative to sham (listed as "Differential" in ). A Venn diagram analysis between the 41 cardiac common metabolites and the 81 plasma common metabolites revealed 26 overlapping metabolites whose expression was up/down-regulated relative to sham ( ). Out of which, we chose to focus on kynurenate (kynurenic acid, KYNA)- a side-chain product of the TRP metabolism, highly secreted to the blood following AKI [ , ] that may also be involved in cardiovascular physiology and pathology [ , , ] (. An ANOVA-analysis-based fold-change in the cardiac and plasma levels of the TRP pathway metabolites relative to sham is given in . Cardiac KYNA levels were increased by 4.4-fold on day 1 and by 3.1-fold on day 7 following AKI induction relative to sham animals. Likewise, in the plasma, KYNA levels were elevated by 22.6- fold and 17.8-fold on the same two time points, respectively (p< 0.05; ). Concomitantly, TRP levels were reduced by 2.0-fold and 1.5-fold in the LV samples on day 1 and day 7, respectively (p< 0.05), and by 2.7 and 2.1-fold in their plasma samples (p< 0.05; ). Further analysis confirmed that kynurenine (KYN) -the major source key product of the TRP catabolism pathway, is also increased in the cardiac lysates and in the plasma of the AKI animals at both time points (8.7 and 4.1-fold increase in the heart, 2.7 and 2.0-fold increase in the plasma on 1 day and day 7, respectively, p< 0.05; ). A similar increase was measured in the levels of a downstream product of the KYN pathway, Quinolinate, that was detected in cardiac samples on day 1 and day 7 post AKI, but not in the sham animals and therefore the exact fold-change could not be determined. A marked increase of this metabolite was detected also in the plasma samples on day 1 and day 7 relative to sham; (9.0-fold and 4.4-fold, respectively, p< 0.01; ). Altogether, the results suggest that the TRP metabolism pathway in general and the KYNA metabolite, in particular, may play an important role in the pathological changes that take place in the heart in the AKI setting ( ). The raw data for KYNA, TRP and KYN induction in the cardiac lysates and the plasma samples relative to sham-operated controls are given in .
 

## Cardiac cell protection
To assess the potential effects of KYNA on the viability of cardiac cells, we first tested the viability of H9C2 myoblast cells in the presence of increasing concentrations of KYNA by flow cytometry with annexin-FITC-PI, as demonstrated in . As expected, in the absence of KYNA, the viability of the cells was significantly reduced under anoxia (60.3 ± 3.7%) compared to normoxia (91.7 ± 0.4%) (p = 0.01). KYNA administered at a concentration of 5 mM or 10 mM resulted in a minor reduction in the viability of the cells grown under regular normoxic conditions (86.2 ± 0.7% and 82.4 ± 1.3%, respectively; p<0.05). Surprisingly, however, preincubation with 5 mM or 10 mM KYNA significantly protected the cardiac cells from a proceeding anoxic damage (77.5 ± 1.9% and 84.2 ± 1.0% in the presence of 5 mM or 10 mM KYNA, respectively; p< 0.05). H9C2 cell viability was not affected at all when KYNA was administered at lower doses, neither under normoxia, nor under anoxia relative to control cells grown without KYNA. In view of the observed dramatic effect of KYNA when given at 10 mM concentration, we chose to use this dose in all our subsequent in vitro experiments. Representing flow cytometry captures demonstrating the viability of H9C2 cells grown with or without KYNA (10 mM) followed by exposure to normoxia or anoxia are given ( ). Altogether, the data indicate that while KYNA given at a concentration of 10 mM slightly minimizes the viability of H9C2 under normoxic conditions, the metabolite salvages the cells from anoxia-related cell death.
 

## GPR35 receptor internalization
The flow cytometry data presented herein ( ) demonstrate that anoxic conditions result in a significant increase in GPR35 surface expression relative to normoxia from 9.5% to 99.7% (P2+P3 gates), as previously suggested [ ]. Exposure to KYNA (10 mM) leads to reduced GPR35 expression from the cell surface under normoxic conditions (1.0%- P2 only) as well as under anoxic conditions (16.9% versus 0.0% in the P3 gate which represents the highest-GPR35 expressing cells), probably due to receptor internalization as previously reported [ ]. The data suggest that the KYNA-GPR35 interaction may initialize an intracellular signaling cascade that results in H9C2 cell salvage upon exposure to anoxia.

## Protection from anoxia-driven mitochondrial damage
H9C2 cells were grown under normoxia or anoxia, with or without prior exposure to KYNA (10 mM). The cells were labled with Hoechst (nuclei), Calcein Red-Orange (cytoplasm), MitoTracker Green (FITC), FM, which is recognized to represent mitochondrial mass, and MitoTracker Deep Red FM- a known mitochondrial potential-dependent indicator that reflects the mitochondrial function [ – ]. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) analysis confirmed that the combination of mitochondrial features capture 73% of the total variance in the data and displays a clear separation between the experimental conditions: normoxia-medium, normoxia-KYNA, anoxia-medium and anoxia- KYNA ( ). Representative captures for single stainings and merged staining for each experimental arm as well the box plot analyses are given in . As expected, relative to standard normoxic conditions, exposure to anoxia significantly reduces the total cell count (1442.00 [1293.50–1596.25] vs 4937.50 [4827.5–5163.25]; p = 3.6*10−45), the mitochondrial fraction (0.419 [0.293–0.639] vs 0.845 [0.798–0.876]; p = 2.6*10−29) and the mitochondrial function (0.192 [0.081–0.287] vs 0.578 [0.529–0.601]; p = 2.3*10−20). In the presence of KYNA, the stainings confirm that this metabolite reduces the cell number under physiological conditions (3382.5 [3042.50–3529.50] vs 4937.6 [4827.50–5163.25]; p = 1.3*10−22, with or without KYNA respectively); however, KYNA slightly increases the cell number upon exposure to anoxia (1670 [1584.00–1795.00] vs 1442 [1293.50–1596.25]; p = 0.002).
 Interestingly, staining with the two MitoTracker dyes, demonstrated that KYNA enhanced the mitochondrial content (MitoTracker Green: 0.879 [0.841–0.904] vs 0.845 [0.798–0.876]; p = 6.2*10−11) and function (MitoTracker Deep-Red: 0.818 [0.772–0.864] vs 0.578 [0.529–0.601]; p = 3.65*10−22) under normoxia. A more pronounced mitochondrial protective effect was evident when KYNA was administerd prior to exposure to anoxia: MitoTracker Green: 0.575 [0.481–0.645] vs 0.419 [0.293–0.639]; p = 1.56 *10−18 and MitoTracker Red: 0.505 [0.370–0.626] vs 0.192 [0.081–0.287]; p = 3.99*10−9. Altogether, the statistical analysis of the cell count, mitochondrial fraction and mitochondrial activity in the four groups confirms that administration of KYNA prior to exposure to anoxia results in an increased median cell number, increased mitochondrial fraction and increased mitochondrial activity relative to cells exposed to anoxia only.
Next, since oxygen deprivation is known to stimulate mitochondrial reactive species (mROS) which could be detected in various live cells including cardiomyocytes via MitoSOX staining [ , ], we sought to assess the potential effect of KYNA on mROS production under normoxia and anoxia. As expected, MitoSOX staining revealed a significant superoxide increase in anoxic cells relative to normoxic ones, as indicated by the representative captures ( ) and the quantitative analysis ( ). The median MitoSOX intensity was 0.455 [0.415–0.496] in normoxia versus 1.684 [1.336–2.086] in anoxia; (p = 2.4*10−13). However, preincubation with KYNA, moderately reduced the superoxide levels in the anoxic cells (1.3 [1.101–1.631]; p = 0.0025 relative to anoxia only), but not in the normoxic cells-where a moderate increase was documented in the presence of the metabolite (0.602 [0.525–0.661]; p = 0.58*10−7). The data indicate that KYNA may protect cardiac mitochondria from ischemic damage, at least in part, by ameliorating the anoxic-mediated oxidative damage.
 

## Cardiac protection in a murine model for AMI
Based on the in vitro data pointing to cardiac protection by KYNA upon O2 restriction, and due to the known significantly increased risk for cardiac ischemic events in patients suffering from renal failure [ ], we sought to assess the effects of KYNA in an in vivo model for AMI induced by a permanent LAD ligation. The echocardiography, presented in , shows that the mean LV ejection fraction (EF) in the vehicle-treated animals was reduced between day 1 and day 30 (39.9± 5.2% vs 28.3± 4.9%, p = 0.0001, two-tailed paired Student’s T-test;). Interestingly, the calculated EF of the animals treated with KYNA was significantly higher on day 30 relative to day 1 (55.7± 2.0% vs 41.6 ± 3.0%, p = 0.02, two-tailed paied Student’s T-test; ). Likewise the mean cardiac stroke volume was reduced in the control group between days 1 and 30 (22.5± 1.9 μl vs 15.9± 1.1 μl, p = 0.001) and was significantly increased in the KYNA-treatment arm (22.1± 2.0 μl vs 34.0±1.0 μl, p = 0.001; ). In line with these finding the cardiac output value was reduced in the control arm (10.0± 0.6 ml/min vs 7.0± 0.5 ml/min, p = 0.03) and markedly increased following treatment with KYNA (9.3± 0.7 ml/min vs 13.6± 0.4 ml/min, p = 0.008; ) following KYNA treatment. No statistical differences were observed between the control and the KYNA groups on day 1 in all three tested cardiac parameters (p> 0.2). The histological staining for collagen content further supports the beneficial effect of KYNA on the cardiac scar size and interstitial fibrosis, as shown in the representative captures ( ) as well as in the quantitative analysis (4.0± 0.5% and 0.7± 1.1% in control vs KYNA arms, respectively, p = 0.03; ). Altogether, the in vivo data strongly suggest that KYNA protects cardiac function following an ischemic event, compared to post-AMI animals which are not treated with this metabolite.
 

## Discussion
In recent years there is an increasing appreciation of the role of amino acids in general and of TRP in particular both in CKD [ ] and in cardiovascular metabolism [ ]. In line with the known TRP metabolism pathway and the reported data from human and rodents [ , ], our analysis demonstrates that in both cardiac and plasma samples the metabolites’ levels are: TRP > KYN> KYNA, so that TRP levels are higher than KYNA by at least 3-order of magnitude ( ). Moreover, it has been suggested that in CKD patients the plasma levels of TRP decrease from 96.3± 18.3 to 62.9 ± 22.8 μmole/L, while KYNA levels are increased from 24.2± 7.8 to 43.3 ± 18.2 nmole/L; p< 0.001) [ ]. The data presented herein suggest that the TRP metabolism pathway in general and kynurenic acid, in particular, are significantly modified following AKI ( ) and that KYNA may play a significant role in mediating cardiac protection from an ischemic damage (Figs – ). The marked elevation in TRP catabolites in the plasma concomitantly to their induced levels in cardiac sections following AKI, may, represent a compensatory mechanism aiming to ameliorate cardiac insult in case of an ischemic event following AKI. Indeed, previous reports suggest that the TRP catabolism products might hold a role in mediating cardiovascular physiology and pathology [ – ], in addition to the regulation of the cardiac immune system functions and inflammation [ , ].
TRP metabolic pathway is activated during inflammatory conditions such as viral invasion, bacterial lipopolysaccharide or interferon-γ stimulation [ , ]. TRP metabolism is well-controlled under physiological conditions but altered as part of the activated immune response. Indeed, dysregulated TRP catabolism has been linked to various diseases including neurodegenerative disorders, multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia, depression, diabetes, cancer, inflammatory bowel disease [ – ] and to an increased risk for AMI in patients with suspected angina pectoris [ ].
Emerging evidence suggests that the reduced plasma concentrations of TRP concomitantly to the induced concentration of its metabolites may serve as vital biomarkers in the monitoring of several heart diseases, including AMI, atherosclerosis, and endothelial dysfunction as well as their risk factors [ – ]. Alteration in TRP catabolites was monitored in atherosclerosis and an elevated expression of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO)-1/2, the first and rate-limiting enzyme catabolizing both D and L-tryptophan to KYN was observed in the macrophage-rich cores of human advanced atherosclerotic plaques [ ]. Moreover, several reports suggest that the cytokine interferon-gamma, which is released during the cell-mediated immune responses that take place in coronary heart diseases, induces IDO-1 activity [ , ]. Likewise, the potential involvement of metabolites derived from TRP catabolism in general and of KYN/KYNA, in particular has been demonstrated in the sera of patients with coronary heart disease (CHD). One study has shown that a significant proportion of patients with CHD present with decreased plasma TRP concentration which coincided with increased KYN/TRP ratio and also with increased neopterin concentrations indicating an activated immune response [ ]. In addition, abnormal KYN/KYNA was found to be highly associated with endothelial dysfunction, which accounts for a significant portion of all cardiovascular diseases [ ].
An elevated expression of metabolites derived from TRP catabolism was also reported in the plasma of patients suffering from kidney injury. One report showed an increased expression of the TRP catabolites L-KYN and quinolinic acid in the serum of both rat and human with renal insufficiency [ ] and another one pointed to KYNA elevation in the sera of CKD patients, mainly in those suffering from polycystic kidney disease [ ]. Likewise, recent findings suggest that the plasma concentrations of TRP and its catabolites might serve as biomarkers for the monitoring of AMI [ ]. Yet, according to our knowledge, this is the first report that shows a marked elevation in TRP catabolites in the sera following AKI, concomitantly to their reduced expression in cardiac sections. In this respect it is worthwhile to note innovative observations suggesting that plasma KYNA may promote remote ischemic preconditioning by binding to GPR35 expressed on cardiomyocytes [ ]. GPR35 bound to KYNA can bind to the mitochondrial protein ATP synthase inhibitory factor subunit 1 (ATP1F1), thus regulating the ATP synthase complex, leading to its subsequent dimerization. The activation of ATP synthase potentially overcomes the overall loss of ATP levels, which contributes to cell death upon ischemia. In addition, it has recently been reported that KYNA may enable an enhanced recovery and functionality of an injured ischemic/reperfusion aorta, potentially by promoting reactive oxygen (ROS)- dependent tissue repair via acting on oxidant enzymes [ ].
The data presented herein demonstrate that KYNA somewhat decreased the cellular viability, induced some degradation of the mitochondria, reduced the mitochondrial membrane potential and induced marginal oxidative damage under physiological conditions, as indicated (Figs – ), in line with other reports [ ]. Interestingly, however, under anoxic conditions, KYNA significantly increased the viability ( ), reduced the clearance of damaged mitochondria, and increased the mitochondrial membrane potential and their resistance to oxidative stress in H9C2 cells (Figs and ). Moreover, KYNA enhanced cardiac recovery from an ischemic AMI in vivo ( ). In line with these data, several reports point that KYNA is an important endogenous antioxidant and that its protective effects in diverse toxic models may stem from its redox characteristics [ , ] in addition to its agonist activity on its putative receptor, the previously orphan G-protein coupled receptor 35. There is evidence that KYNA may modify heart function, yet it is debatable whether these effects are beneficial or detrimental. On the one hand, KYNA was reported to decrease respiratory parameters, mainly the respiratory control index of glutamate/malate respiring heart mitochondria, and thus lead to the development of cardiomyopathy symptoms [ , ]. On the other hand, cardio-protective effects of KYNA have also been proposed. For instance, KYNA was proven successful in decreasing the heart rate of spontaneously hypertensive rats without affecting the mean arterial pressure and thus it is suggested that KYNA may offer therapeutic potential as opposed to most drugs used to decrease heart rate that have strong adverse inotropic or hypotensive effects [ ]. Recent reports show that KYNA may exert anti-inflammatory effects through GPR35 internalization and activation which in turn inhibits the release of TNFα by macrophages under LPS-induced inflammatory conditions [ ]. In the heart, the expression of GPR35 may correlate with heart failure. Indeed, GPR35 was identified among the top 12 genes whose expression correlates with the severity of heart failure and adenoviral overexpression of GPR35 was shown to cause hypertrophic-like morphology changes and reduced cellular viability of cardiomyocytes [ ]. Interestingly, in line with our data ( ), recent reports suggest that the plasma membrane expression of GPR35 in cardiomyocytes is significantly induced under hypoxia and that application of an alternative GPR35 ligand, KYNA or zaprinast, induces GPR35 internalization and subcellular accumulation in the myocytes [ , ]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that an in vivo administration of a siRNA to GPR35 enhances cardiac function following an acute MI through reduction of reactive oxygen species activity and mitochondria-dependent apoptosis [ ]. The data presented herein suggest that KYNA administration prior to the induction of an ischemic event, leads to GPR35 intracellular internalization concomitantly to reduced cell death. We thus assume that the receptor internalization or downregulated expression may protect the cardiomyocytes from cell membrane GPR35-mediated cell death and LV dysfunction. Previous studies have demonstrated that the KYNA-GPR35 interactions can inhibit N-type Ca2+ channels in sympathetic neurons [ ] and reduce the plateau phase of ATP-induced calcium transients in astrocytes [ ]. Therefore it is yet to be clarified whether the elevated levels of GPR35 upon exposure to hypoxia result in increased detrimental Ca2+-influx into the injured cardiomyocytes and whether the KYNA-mediated GPR35 internalization reduces these pathological enhanced Ca2+ transients. Thus, in line with these reports and data from our in vitro and animal studies, several mechanisms can be proposed to explain the dual-effect of KYNA that can potentially be harnessed for medical purposes. KYNA was shown to have antioxidant effect, it has effect on calcium ion influx and efflux and importantly on membranous presentation of GPR35 receptor and mainly internalization of the receptor upon exposure to high levels of the metabolite.

## Study limitation
The effect of KYNA in our study was performed in a model of LAD complete ligation and not in a reperfusion injury model. Likewise, the beneficial effect of KYNA should also be validated in an AMI model in male rats, in line with the in vitro beneficial effect demonstrated herein for anoxic H9C2 rat myocytes and in view of the entire metabolomics analysis that was conducted in a male rat AKI model. In addition, the in vivo efficacy experiment involved only one dose of KYNA: 250 mg/ L which corresponds to 1.3 mM, whereas the physiological concentration of KYNA in the plasma is within the nM range. Though, the current dose was not toxic, lower doses should also be attempted in further studies. Furthermore, the mitochondrial analysis performed in H9C2 cells should be repeated in primary cardiomyocyes due to the different characteristics between the two cell types. In addition, future studies should include measurements of the actual KYNA levels in the heart and the plasma via targeted-metabolomics analysis.

## Conclusions
The data presented herein shed light on the tryptophan catabolism product, KYNA, which may represent a key metabolite absorbed by the heart following AKI. The data highly suggest that KYNA can enhance cardiac cell viability following an ischemic event both in vitro and in vivo in a mechanism which is mediated, at least in part, by the protection of the cardiac mitochondria from oxidative stress. Further research is warranted in order to determine whether KYNA can be developed into a therapeutic drug or a supplemental agent to be utilized in the multimodality treatment of post-AMI patients and in patients who are at high risk for experiencing an ischemic event, while minimizing its toxicity to cardiomyocytes under physiological conditions.
In addition, the exact mechanism of action of the KYNA-GPR35 axis which leads to cardiac protection following ischemia is yet to be deciphered.

## Supporting information
S1 Fig

## Parameters which exhibit the rescue of H9C2 cells grown under anoxia in box plots graphs.
(A) Quantification of Mito Activity and Mito fraction as documented in . (B) Box plots graph representation of MitoTracker Deep Red intensity, MitoTracker red intensity, and cell intensity. (C) Box plots graph re-presentation of mitochondria elongation and area (24–30 replicates per arm).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Fig

## Cardiac and plasma levels of KYNA, TRP and KYN following AKI (raw data).
(TIF)
Click here for additional data file.
S1 Table

## List of all metabolites detected in cardiac lysates of the experimental animals (arbitrary units).
N/A- not applicable = below detection. Metabolite intensities of both polar and semi-polar metabolites were normalized to cardiac mass (cardiac samples) or to sample volume (plasma samples) and analyzed using ANOVA following a multiple correction step (FDR step-up), using Partek Genomics Suite 7.0. Differential metabolites whose levels are significantly modified in both 24h and 7 day- time points relative to sham are listed in the right column.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.
S2 Table

## List of all metabolites detected in plasma samples of the experimental animals (arbitrary units).
N/A- not applicable = below detection. Metabolite intensities of both polar and semi-polar metabolites were normalized to cardiac mass (cardiac samples) or to sample volume (plasma samples) and analyzed using ANOVA following a multiple correction step (FDR step-up), using Partek Genomics Suite 7.0. Differential metabolites whose levels are significantly modified in both 24h and 7 day- time.
(XLSX)
Click here for additional data file.

We thank Prof. Atan Gross, Dr. Smadar Levin-Zaidman and Dr. Nili Dezorella from the Weizmann Institute of Science for carefully reading the manuscript and their fruitful advice.
 10.1371/journal.pone.0275550.r001Decision Letter 0
JohnsonDaniel M.Academic Editor© 2023 Daniel M. Johnson2023Daniel M. Johnsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version0
6 Feb 2023

PONE-D-22-25974Kynurenic acid, a key L-tryptophan-derived metabolite, protects the heart from an ischemic damagePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Entin-Meer,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Please have a look at all the comments brought up by the reviewers, especially regarding methodological descriptions. Also please ensure there is a clear flow of the manuscript.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 23 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.

If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Daniel M. Johnson, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf

2. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section.
3. We note that you have included the phrase “data not shown” in your manuscript. Unfortunately, this does not meet our data sharing requirements. PLOS does not permit references to inaccessible data. We require that authors provide all relevant data within the paper, Supporting Information files, or in an acceptable, public repository. Please add a citation to support this phrase or upload the data that corresponds with these findings to a stable repository (such as Figshare or Dryad) and provide and URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers that may be used to access these data. Or, if the data are not a core part of the research being presented in your study, we ask that you remove the phrase that refers to these data.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The present manuscript authored by a group of investigators reported effects of kynurenic acid on cardiac cell viability or contractile function following exposure to in vitro hypoxia or in vivo myocardial ischemia. Possible involvement of cardiac mitochondria in mediating these effects was also investigated in vitro. They demonstrated an important role played by kynurenic acid as a key metabolite after acute kidney ischemia (AKI) that may paradoxically induce cardioprotection. Overall this is an interesting and elaborated study that has provided some new findings and insights. Please consider the following concerns or suggestions of mine:
1) Page 6, Line 119: Why 6 mice were excluded due to “normal cardiac function” on Day 1 after LAD ligation? Was this a surgical technical issue or due to resistance of female mice to myocardial ischemia? If so, why the authors chose female mice not male rats for AMI studies, considering the AKI studies were performed in male rats? Why used different animal species and genders?
2) Page 6, Line 130: Please correct “into 5 µM slices” with “into 5 µm slices”.
3) Page 7, Line 146 to 154: The description of statistical analysis should be removed here and merged to Page 9, Line 189 to 195, in order to avoid redundancy.
4) Page 9, Line 165 and 171: How the sole concentration of 10 mM kynurenic acid was selected for the H9C2 experiments? Is 10 mM a physiologically achievable concentration that reflects tryptophan degradation in vivo? Please justify.
5) In Discussion section, it would be helpful to refer the particular figure(s) or table(s) to justify each of your claims or reasoning, based on the results of the current study.
6) Page 19, Line 427-428: The paragraph of “Study Limitation” seems to be quite superficial and needs to be expanded with further details and/or explanations. For example, why did the authors use two different species and genders, male rats versus female mice in AKI and AMI studies? Also mitochondrial study was done only H9C2 cells, which have different cellular characteristics from primary cardiomyocytes. This should be discussed as a study limitation.
7) Do you think the release of cardioprotective substances to circulation after AKI may potentially explain the phenomenon of “remote preconditioning”? If so, please add some discussion on this possibility.
8) Page 25, Ref. 42: The journal volume/page numbers are missing for this reference.
9) Figure 6 should use scatter dot plots, instead of bar graphs, in order to reveal all individual data points. Also please report the heart rate data for all groups of mice, since previous study (Ref. 22) showed that in vivo treatment of kynurenic acid significantly reduced heart rate in rats. Please discuss if such heart rate reduction contribute to the cardioprotective effects of kynurenic acid in the present study.
Reviewer #2: 1. In Fgireu 1, the authors used 26 differentially-expressed cardiac and plasma metabolites at both time points: 1 day and 1 week relative to sham. However, the reviewer cannot understand the reason underlying the time point selection.
2. It requires to further evaluate the concentration of KYNA in the tissue and serum.
3. Although the authors reported that KYNA is able to reduces ischemia-mediated H9C2 damage, the molecualr mechanisms undelrying cell death has not been addressed.
4. The 5/6 nephrectomy is actually a chronic renal failure model but not acute kidney injury.
5. Acute hypoxia exposure cannot stimulate the model of cardiac injury after AKI.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Lei Xi
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0275550.r002Author response to Decision Letter 0
Submission Version1
23 Feb 2023

February, 2023
To: Dr. Daniel M. Johnson, Academic editor
Re: Revision to manuscript PONE-D-22-25974:
Dear Dr. Johnson,
We would like to thank the reviewers and the editor for the in depth analysis of our work and for raising several important points that needed clarification. We appreciate the time and effort expended on our behalf. We have made significant modifications to the manuscript accordingly, and out point-by-point responses are listed below.
We hope that our revised manuscript will now be found suitable for publication in PLOS ONE.
Sincerely,
Dr. Michal Entin-Meer and Prof. Gad Keren
General comments:
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf- Done.
2. We note that the grant information you provided in the ‘Funding Information’ and ‘Financial Disclosure’ sections do not match. 
When you resubmit, please ensure that you provide the correct grant numbers for the awards you received for your study in the ‘Funding Information’ section. Done.
3. We note that you have included the phrase “data not shown” in your manuscript. Unfortunately, this does not meet our data sharing requirements. PLOS does not permit references to inaccessible data. We require that authors provide all relevant data within the paper, Supporting Information files, or in an acceptable, public repository. Please add a citation to support this phrase or upload the data that corresponds with these findings to a stable repository (such as Figshare or Dryad) and provide and URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers that may be used to access these data. Or, if the data are not a core part of the research being presented in your study, we ask that you remove the phrase that refers to these data. Corrected
Reviewer 1: 
1. Page 6, Line 119: Why 6 mice were excluded due to “normal cardiac function” on Day 1 after LAD ligation? Was this a surgical technical issue or due to resistance of female mice to myocardial ischemia? If so, why the authors chose female mice not male rats for AMI studies, considering the AKI studies were performed in male rats? Why used different animal species and genders?
"Normal cardiac function" on day 1 post AMI induction means that the LAD ligation was technically unsuccessful (i.e., MI was not induced in these animals), therefore these animals were excluded from the experiment. In order to clarify the issue, we modified this sentence under "Materials & Methods" which now reads: Five animals from the control group and six animals from the experimental group were excluded from the analysis due to one of the following reasons: normal cardiac function according to echocardiography applied on day 1, suggesting that LAD ligation was unsuccessful (6 animals), animal's death prior to endpoint (4 animals) or weight loss of > 15% (1 animal) (lines 119-123).
The strain and gender for each experimental procedure (AKI and AMI) was chosen based on practical reasons per se. We added an explanation as follows: "Male Lewis rats (250–350 gr)/ 12-week old female BALB/C mice were purchased from Envigo, Israel. Male Lewis rats were used for AKI studies, as previously established in our laboratory for 5/6 nephrectomy models (9). Female mice were utilized in the AMI studies, in accordance with the extensive experience gathered in our laboratory (15, 16) and the lower cardiac rupture rate of female compared to male mice following AMI induction (17) (lines 95-99). We agree that this issue may be confusing, therefore we also added the following sentence under "Study limitation: "Likewise, the beneficial effect of KYNA should also be validated in an AMI model in male rats, in line with the in vitro beneficial effect demonstrated herein for anoxic H9C2 rat myocytes and in view of the entire metabolomics analysis that was conducted in a male rat AKI model" (lines 456-459).
2. Page 6, Line 130 (currently 134): Please correct “into 5 µM slices” with “into 5 µm slices”-done.
3. Page 7, Line 146 to 154: The description of statistical analysis should be removed here and merged to Page 9, Line 189 to 195, in order to avoid redundancy
Corrected. The explanation regarding the statistical analysis is currently merged (lines 184-196).
4. Page 9, Line 165 and 171: How the sole concentration of 10 mM kynurenic acid was selected for the H9C2 experiments? Is 10 mM a physiologically achievable concentration that reflects tryptophan degradation in vivo? Please justify.
As the reviewer noted, when reading the "Materials & Methods" section which precedes the Results section, it is unclear why 10 mM dose of KYNA was used in the in vitro experiments. Therefore, we omitted the dose from "Materials and Methods", while further clarifying the issue in the Results as explained in lines 266-266: “In view of the observed dramatic effect of KYNA when given at 10 mM concentration, we chose to use this dose in all our subsequent in vitro experiments”, as also shown in Figure 3A. The 10 mM dose was then mentioned in the description of the subsequent in vitro experiments and the observed results (lines: 267, 274, 287).
5. In Discussion section, it would be helpful to refer the particular figure(s) or table(s) to justify each of your claims or reasoning, based on the results of the current study- Done.
6. Page 19, Line 427-428: The paragraph of “Study Limitation” seems to be quite superficial and needs to be expanded with further details and/or explanations. For example, why did the authors use two different species and genders, male rats versus female mice in AKI and AMI studies? Also mitochondrial study was done only H9C2 cells, which have different cellular characteristics from primary cardiomyocytes. This should be discussed as a study limitation. 
 We thank the reviewer for this important comment. The suggested remarks were added to "Study limitations (lines 456-465).
7. Do you think the release of cardioprotective substances to circulation after AKI may potentially explain the phenomenon of “remote preconditioning”? If so, please add some discussion on this possibility.
 We thank the reviewer for raising this important issue. We indeed believe that the excess release of KYNA to the plasma following AKI may represent (at least in part) remote ischemic preconditioning. A newly-released Science paper as well as additional recent study point to this phenomenon. We added the data to the Discussion: "In this respect it is worthwhile to note innovative observations suggesting that plasma KYNA may promote remote ischemic preconditioning by binding to GPR35 expressed on cardiomyocytes (45). GPR35 bound to KYNA can bind to the mitochondrial protein ATP synthase inhibitory factor subunit 1 (ATP1F1), thus regulating the ATP synthase complex, leading to its subsequent dimerization (44). The activation of ATP synthase potentially overcomes the overall loss of ATP levels, which contributes to cell death upon ischemia. In addition, it has recently been reported that KYNA may enable an enhanced recovery and functionality of an injured ischemic/reperfusion aorta, potentially by promoting reactive oxygen (ROS)- dependent tissue repair via acting on oxidant enzymes (46)"(lines 407-415).
8. Page 25, Ref. 42: The journal volume/page numbers are missing for this reference- corrected.
9. Figure 6 should use scatter dot plots, instead of bar graphs, in order to reveal all individual data points. Also please report the heart rate data for all groups of mice, since previous study (Ref. 22) showed that in vivo treatment of kynurenic acid significantly reduced heart rate in rats. Please discuss if such heart rate reduction contribute to the cardioprotective effects of kynurenic acid in the present study.
 We rearranged Figure 6 so that it currently uses box plots (instead of bar graphs).
 The heart rate in all echocardiographic analyses was set to 400-500 bpm, prior to taking the measurements. Due to the isoflurane anesthesia and the chest pressure inflicted by the catheter, we could not achieve a heart rate of over 500 bpm. However, a heart rate between 400-500 bpm is actually the standard of our echocardiography measurements, as presented in our earlier PLOS ONE papers (Entin-Meer et al, 2017, Bigelman et al, 2018, Cohen et al, 2020). It is also considered an acceptable rate according to Lindsey et al., Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, 2018. We added this clarification under "Material and Methods-Echocardiography" as follows: "Cardiac parameters on day one and day 30 post-infarction were obtained by echocardiography (Vevo 2100, VisualSonics, Toronto, Canada), while heart rate was kept between 400-500 bpm in accordance with the guidelines for echocardiographic measurements in the murine heart (19)" (lines 125-128).
Reviewer 2:
1. In Figure 1, the authors used 26 differentially-expressed cardiac and plasma metabolites at both time points: 1 day and 1 week relative to sham. However, the reviewer cannot understand the reason underlying the time point selection.
 We chose two time points in AKI- 1d and 7d, which may represent potentially-transient vs potentially-persistent AKI. We added this explanation in lines 112-113 ("Materials & Methods"). Only the metabolites which were modified at these two time points relative to control were considered significant in our metabolomics analysis (Figure 1, Figure 2).
2. It requires to further evaluate the concentration of KYNA in the tissue and serum.
 We added Fig S4 (supplementary material) showing the raw data obtained for KYNA, KYN and TRP in the global metabolomics analysis (AU). As expected according to accumulated published data, we could see that the metabolites' levels both in the blood and the cardiac sections are as follows: TRP> KYN> KYNA. We added the following explanation to the beginning of the Discussion (lines 366-371): "In line with the known TRP metabolism pathway and the reported data from human and rodents (29, 31), our analysis demonstrates that in both cardiac and plasma samples the metabolites' levels are: TRP > KYN> KYNA, so that TRP levels are higher than KYNA by at least 3-order of magnitude (S4 Fig). Moreover, it has been suggested that in CKD patients the plasma levels of TRP decrease from 96.3± 18.3 to 62.9 ± 22.8 �mole/L, while KYNA levels are increased from 24.2± 7.8 to 43.3 ± 18.2 nmole/L; p< 0.001) (29). Yet, we agree that the actual concentration of KYNA should be evaluated via targeted-metabolimcs analysis (as opposed to the global analysis presented in the current manuscript). We added the relevant statement to "Study limitation" as follows: "In addition, future studies should include the measurements of the actual KYNA levels in the heart and plasma via targeted- metabolomics analysis" (lines 463-465).
3. Although the authors reported that KYNA is able to reduce ischemia-mediated H9C2 damage, the molecular mechanisms underlying cell death has not been addressed.
In accordance with a recently-published Science paper (Wyant et al, Mitochondrial remodeling and ischemic protection by G protein-coupled receptor 35 agonists), as well as by Lima et al, 2021- we added a paragraph to the discussion that describes the potential molecular/intracellular mechanisms underlying the cell death rescue by KYNA (lines 407-415): " In this respect it is worthwhile to note innovative observations suggesting that plasma KYNA may promote remote ischemic preconditioning by binding to GPR35 expressed on cardiomyocytes (45). GPR35 bound to KYNA can bind to the mitochondrial protein ATP synthase inhibitory factor subunit 1 (ATP1F1), thus regulating the ATP synthase complex leading to its subsequent dimerization. The activation of ATP synthase potentially overcomes the overall loss of ATP levels, which contributes to cell death upon ischemia. In addition, it has recently been reported that KYNA may enable an enhanced recovery and functionality of an injured ischemic/reperfusion aorta, potentially by promoting reactive oxygen (ROS)- dependent tissue repair via acting on oxidant enzymes (46)" In addition, we have demonstrated that the ischemia-mediated cell-death salvaged by KYNA is partly achieved by reducing the oxidative stress (Figure 5).
4. The 5/6 nephrectomy is actually a chronic renal failure model but not acute kidney injury.
We agree that 5/6 nephrectomy is a known model for CKD. Yet, the metabolomics analysis performed on the plasma samples of the experimental animals revealed a significant increase in both creatinine and urea levels relative to sham-operated control animals, implying to renal dysfunction occurring as early as 1d post model induction. We added box plots showing these data to Figure 1 (Fig1A) and a paragraph regarding model validation in the beginning of the Results section (lines 202-209).
5. Acute hypoxia exposure cannot simulate the model of cardiac injury after AKI.
We agree. Nevertheless, since AMI is an unfortunate prevalent phenomenon following renal injury, we thought to assess the potential effect of KYNA should an ischemic event occurs. We added this statement on line 334-335 as follows: "Based on the in vitro data pointing to cardiac protection by KYNA upon O2 restriction, and due to the known significantly increased risk for cardiac ischemic events in patients suffering from renal failure (28), we sought to assess the effects of KYNA in an in vivo model for AMI induced by a permanent LAD ligation." In addition, it is worthwhile to mention that an exposure of cardiac cells to anoxic/hypoxic conditions was already utilized by our group to simulate cardiac infarction (though obviously not necessarily due to AKI) as reported in Entin-Meer et al, PLoS One, 2014.
We hope that you will find the corrected manuscript entitled: "Kynurenic acid, a key L-tryptophan-derived metabolite, protects the heart from an ischemic damage" interesting for the readers of PLoS ONE.
Sincerely,
Dr. Michal Entin-Meer
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Revision letter 23022023.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0275550.r003Decision Letter 1
JohnsonDaniel M.Academic Editor© 2023 Daniel M. Johnson2023Daniel M. Johnsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version1
2 May 2023

PONE-D-22-25974R1Kynurenic acid, a key L-tryptophan-derived metabolite, protects the heart from an ischemic damagePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Entin-Meer,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Although myself and the Reviewers appreciated your response to the previous comments, there is some further comments regarding the use of the different dyes for mitochondrial structure and for mitochondrial function. Therefore, there should be some discussion regarding the use of these different dyes in a revised version of the manuscript. Additional information regarding this can be found in the comments of Reviewer 3.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jun 16 2023 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Daniel M. Johnson, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #3: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: In this revised manuscript, the authors have carefully answered all my previous concerns and suggestions. I am glad to see the substantial improvement and have no further concern.
Reviewer #3: The manuscript by Bigelman et al. reports the identification by metabolic profiling of kynurenic acid as a differentially expressed metabolite in cardiac lysates and plasma samples of male rats subjected to acute kidney injury (5/6 nephrectomy). The authors show that kynurenic acid enhanced cardiac recovery after acute myocardial infarction (permanent LAD artery ligation) in female mice, as determined by histology and echocardiography, and rescued viability and mitochondrial structure and function in H9c2 cardiac cells grown in anoxia. Even though there are some issues related to the methodology such as the different species and genders used for the studies or the supra-physiological kynurenic acid dose administered in in vivo experiments, in general the methodology is adequate. My main concern relates to the use of MitoTracker Green for mitochondrial structure and MitoTracker Deep Red for mitochondrial function (page 13, line 288-289). How do the authors justify this? MitoTracker fluorescent probes are useful for mitochondria localization. Also, an increase in superoxide production in anoxia, as the increase reported in H9c2 cells, seems counterintuitive, since superoxide is generated from oxygen. How did the authors achieved anoxia, i.e. 0% oxygen? Even though the authors did not explore the molecular mechanisms for kynurenic acid protection, but they propose the one described by Wyant et al. (Science, 377: 621-629, 2022), the results of the study contribute to reinforce the cardioprotective role of kynurenic acid against ischemic damage. Most questions of the original reviewers have been answered in a reasonable manner. Taking all of the above into consideration, and with the caveats stated above, the manuscript is informative and relevant in the field of acute kidney injury and associated ischemic cardiac events.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Lei Xi
Reviewer #3: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0275550.r004Author response to Decision Letter 1
Submission Version2
16 May 2023

May 16th, 2023
To: Dr. Daniel M. Johnson, Academic editor
Re: Revision to manuscript PONE-D-22-25974R1:
Dear Dr. Johnson,
We would like to thank the reviewers and the editor for the in depth analysis of our work and for raising an additional point that needed clarification. We appreciate the time and effort expended on our behalf. We have modified to the manuscript accordingly, as listed below.
Reviewer #3: My main concern relates to the use of MitoTracker Green for mitochondrial structure and MitoTracker Deep Red for mitochondrial function (page 13, line 288-289). How do the authors justify this? MitoTracker fluorescent probes are useful for mitochondria localization. Also, an increase in superoxide production in anoxia, as the increase reported in H9C2 cells, seems counterintuitive, since superoxide is generated from oxygen. How did the authors achieved anoxia, i.e. 0% oxygen
Response: We thank the reviewer for raising this issue. We agree that the term "Mitochondrial structure" with respect to MitoTracker Green is not accurate and should be changed to "Mitochondrial content/mass". Yet, even though fluorescent MitoTracker probes are successfully utilized for mitochondrial localization/co-localization experiments as the reviewer rightfully noted, they could also be applied as a useful tool in evaluating mitophagy (MitoTracker Green which selectively accumulates at the mitochondrial matrix) and alterations in the mitochondrial membrane potential (MitoTracker Red whose levels of accumulation in the mitochondria depend on the membrane potential) in live cells (added Ref 24-26).
As for the MitoSOX staining: it is reported to successfully detect mitochondrial ROS production due to oxygen deprivation in various cells including cardiomyocytes, as previously reported (added Ref 27, 28). 
In view of the above-mentioned:
1. We changed the term "Mitochondrial structure" to "Mitochondrial content" or "Mitochondrial mass" when discussing the data obtained with MitoTracker Green.
2. We added several references to justify the use of the MitoTracker dyes for the assessment of mitochondrial content and activity (Ref 24-26) as well as the use of MitoSOX dye for the assessment of ROS production (Ref 27, 28) in live H9C2 cells following oxygen deprivation.
3. We added clarification regarding the utilization of the dyes to "Materials & Methods (lines 175-179) and "Results" (lines 291-292 and 315-317). We also added the following sentences under Discussion (lines 422-427): "The data presented herein demonstrate that KYNA somewhat decreased the cellular viability, induced some degradation of the mitochondria, reduced the mitochondrial membrane potential and induced marginal oxidative damage under physiological conditions, as indicated (Fig 3-5), in line with other reports (52). Interestingly, however, under anoxic conditions, KYNA significantly increased the viability (Fig 3), reduced the clearance of damaged mitochondria, and increased the mitochondrial membrane potential and their resistance to oxidative stress in H9C2 cells (Fig 4-5).
4. Per the reviewer's request, we provided more details regarding the anoxia methodology (lines 155-156 in "Materials & Methods"), and- as listed above, two references pointing that oxygen deprivation can indeed lead to MitoSOX accumulation (27, 28).
We declare that the funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
We hope that our revised manuscript will now be found suitable for publication in PLOS ONE.
Sincerely,
Dr. Michal Entin-Meer and Prof. Gad Keren
AttachmentSubmitted filename: Revision letter 16052023.docx
Click here for additional data file.
10.1371/journal.pone.0275550.r005Decision Letter 2
JohnsonDaniel M.Academic Editor© 2023 Daniel M. Johnson2023Daniel M. Johnsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.Submission Version2
20 Jun 2023

Kynurenic acid, a key L-tryptophan-derived metabolite, protects the heart from an ischemic damage
PONE-D-22-25974R2
Dear Dr. Entin-Meer,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice for payment will follow shortly after the formal acceptance. To ensure an efficient process, please log into Editorial Manager at http://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/, click the 'Update My Information' link at the top of the page, and double check that your user information is up-to-date. If you have any billing related questions, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Daniel M. Johnson, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions

Comments to the Author

1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. 
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? 
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: The authors have made some modifications and improvements to the manuscript and I have no further comments.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #3: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0275550.r006Acceptance letter
JohnsonDaniel M.Academic Editor© 2023 Daniel M. Johnson2023Daniel M. Johnsonhttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
14 Aug 2023

PONE-D-22-25974R2 
Kynurenic acid, a key L-tryptophan-derived metabolite, protects the heart from an ischemic damage 
Dear Dr. Entin-Meer:
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now with our production department. 
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at plosone@plos.org. 
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access. 
Kind regards, 
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Daniel M. Johnson 
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE