1472neurotherNeurotherapeuticsNeurotherapeuticsElsevierPMC1299665312996653129966534182522610.1016/j.neurot.2026.e00867Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3) is an agonist of the Alzheimer's disease–associated immune receptor TREM2
DeanHunter B TuckeyRyan A GreerRory A GrevenJessica A YangShan-Zhong ElstonDaniel S EastepGunnar N SongYuwei BrettThomas J SongYuhua RobersonErik D aAlzheimer's Disease Center, Killion Center for Neurodegeneration and Experimental Therapeutics, Department of Neurology, Heersink School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35295, USAbDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, Heersink School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35295, USAcMedical Scientist Training Program, Heersink School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35295, USAdDepartment of Dermatology, Heersink School of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35295, USAeDivision of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, 63110, USA⁎Corresponding authors. yhsong@uab.edueroberson@uabmc.edu
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
1232026232e00867e008671932026© 2026 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Abstract
Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells 2 (TREM2) is one of the strongest genetic risk factors for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). Several TREM2 ligands are known, including charged lipids and AD-associated proteins like apolipoprotein E and amyloid-β, but the full range of endogenous ligands for TREM2 remains unknown. Here we combined virtual screening of the Human Metabolome Database with molecular dynamics simulations, binding free energy estimation, and biolayer interferometry to identify novel TREM2 ligands and map their binding sites. Cholecalciferol, the unmodified parent form of vitamin D3, emerged as a top candidate. Structural modeling indicated that cholecalciferol binds TREM2 at hydrophobic residues in an apical site previously associated with TREM2's ability to bind apolipoprotein E, and in biophysical studies cholecalciferol enhanced TREM2–apolipoprotein E binding. Functionally, cholecalciferol induced TREM2-dependent signaling in human, rat, and mouse cells. As expected with TREM2 activation, cholecalciferol stimulated phagocytosis in cultured macrophages and microglia, and induced resistance to multiple cytotoxic agents, including pathologic amyloid-β species. These findings identify a novel TREM2 ligand that may inform therapeutic strategies for AD, and a previously unrecognized receptor for cholecalciferol that provides a potential mechanistic link between vitamin D3 deficiency and increased AD risk.
Keywords: Alzheimer's disease, TREM2, Vitamin D3, Virtual screening, Microglia

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 May 21; Revised 2025 Dec 31; Accepted 2026 Feb 20; Collection date 2026 Mar.

## Introduction
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a complex neurodegenerative disorder characterized by pathologic buildup of extracellular amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides and intracellular hyperphosphorylated tau proteins. Together these pathologies drive a strong neuroinflammatory response and, ultimately, damage and kill surrounding neurons. Effective treatment options for AD remain elusive, in part due to difficulties in translating information from studies of disease risk in patients into a better understanding of cellular functions that are both relevant to disease in humans and suitable as drug targets.
One promising avenue involves targeting proteins that have roles in converging pathways implicated in AD risk, such as Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid Cells 2 (TREM2). TREM2 is an innate immune receptor which in the brain is primarily expressed on microglia, the brain's resident myeloid cells. TREM2 activation contributes to the disease-associated microglia phenotype characterized by decreased expression of homeostatic markers and upregulation of genes involved in cell damage responses [ ]. These genes include other cell surface receptors, integrins, cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors, as well as genes controlling lipid metabolism, phagocytosis, and lysosomal functions, among others. Altogether, this phenotype of disease-associated microglia involves many of the same pathways implicated by human genetic studies as having a role in the response to AD pathology. This makes TREM2 a promising target for small molecule therapeutics that could regulate many different factors involved in AD pathogenesis.
Despite this promise, the ability to target receptors like TREM2 is limited by our understanding of their mechanisms of activation in disease. Three potential ligand-binding sites have been described on the surface of TREM2, each with distinct surface characteristics: one site consisting primarily of hydrophobic residues in apical loops analogous to the complementarity-determining regions (CDR) of antibodies that binds Aβ and Apolipoprotein E (ApoE), one site of basic residues on the lateral surface (contiguous to the hydrophobic site) that binds IL-34, and one site on the lateral surface opposite the basic site that plays a role in TREM2 multimerization [ , , , , ]. Each of these three TREM2 binding sites—hydrophobic, basic, and multimerization—is in some way affected by the AD-associated rs75932628 genetic variant in TREM2, which encodes the R47H substitution [ , , , , ]. However, without a better understanding of the diversity of ligands for these binding sites on TREM2, it is difficult to determine the exact mechanism by which variants like R47H disrupt TREM2 binding and/or signaling, thereby leading to increased risk of AD.
In this study, we used a combination of computational, biophysical, and cell biological approaches to identify small molecule activators of TREM2. One of the hits identified in this screen, cholecalciferol, is the unhydroxylated parent form of vitamin D3. Cholecalciferol is an endogenous small molecule that is protective against AD in humans [ ]. We tested whether cholecalciferol could directly bind TREM2, whether cholecalciferol could activate TREM2 in cells, and whether the cholecalciferol-TREM2 interaction could play a role in microglial responses to AD pathology. Results from our screening and validation of cholecalciferol as a TREM2 agonist have implications for better understanding the mechanisms by which vitamin D3 reduces AD risk and TREM2 variants increase it.

## Materials and Methods

## TREM2 model generation
The success of virtual screening depends strongly on the conformation of the receptor used in the screen, with models of proteins that are already in a ligand-bound conformation consistently having the highest enrichment of true ligands [ ]. Thus, we used the immunoglobulin domain of CV human TREM2 bound to PS from a 2.2 Å crystal structure (PDBID 6B8O) [ ] for screening and simulations. As the initial PS-bound crystal was generated in a hexamer conformation, we isolated the structure of the first molecule of TREM2 without its associated PS molecule as our initial model. The map of surface electrostatic potential in the cholecalciferol binding site was generated using the Adaptive Poisson-Boltzmann Solver [ ] package in PyMOL [ ].

## Virtual consensus screen
Many programs are available that can virtually screen medium-to-large libraries for protein–small molecule binding using structure-based docking. We chose three well-validated programs that are freely available for academic use and specifically favored those that have published source code available, as this allows researchers additional freedom to replicate and modify our methods in future studies. Because the three selected virtual ligand docking programs—AutoDock 4, AutoDock Vina, and RosettaLigand—use non-equivalent scores to rank their results, we aggregated their results by separately assigning preliminary ranks to the ligands from 1 to 2462 based on the results of each program. These three ranks were then averaged to generate a final score for prioritization of the ligands, a procedure termed rank-by-rank scoring [ ], to reduce the effects of biases from individual docking programs.
Structural representations of the Human Metabolome Database v1.0 [ ] in SMILES or SDF format were obtained from the ZINC website [ ]. These structures were converted to PDB format for use with RosettaLigand or PDBQT format for use with AutoDock 4 and Vina using OpenBabel 2.4.0 [ ], which also generated initial 3-dimensional coordinates for structures obtained in SMILES format. Individual PDBQT files were prepared for docking in AutoDock 4 and Vina using the prepare_ligand4.py script from MGLTools 1.5.4 [ ] with the maximum allowable 32 rotatable bonds used for flexible docking.
AutoDock 4 uses a genetic algorithm to generate random conformations of the flexible ligand and stochastically search for the most energetically favorable docked conformation. AutoDock Vina uses similar initial conditions but saves search time by calculating an energy gradient for its docked ligands, which it uses to bias toward a local energy minimum. The binding site in TREM2 was defined as a cubic box of 40 Å length centered at xyz coordinates of [75.0 18.0 46.0] with spacing of 0.375 Å for AutoDock 4 or 1 Å for Vina. The grid box thus contained the entire immunoglobulin domain to guarantee unbiased consideration of the entire surface of the ligand binding domain for docking. Docking in AutoDock 4 was run with default parameters except for allowing up to 50 runs of its genetic algorithm. Docking in Vina was run using an exhaustiveness parameter of 32. Docking with RosettaLigand was performed according to the protocol developed by DeLuca et al. [ ].
Following rank-by-rank rescoring, the top 2 % of ligands were prioritized and filtered to identify those that were predicted to be soluble at >10 μM in either water or DMSO, purchasable commercially from vendors, and either known to be present in human brain or cerebrospinal fluid or predicted to cross the blood-brain barrier based on octanol/water partition coefficient calculated using ALogPS (or experimentally determined, if available) which is provided as ligand metadata in HMDB.

## Protein purification and biolayer interferometry
TREM2 immunoglobulin domains were expressed, purified, and biotinylated for immobilization on streptavidin-coated BLI probes as described previously [ ]. Assays for binding of cholecalciferol, including vehicle controls, used running buffer with an additional of 5 % DMSO for solubility. Data were processed using double-reference subtraction with protein-binding signal corrected by subtracting signal of both immobilized protein into buffer and biotin-loaded pin into ligand.

## MD simulations and MM-PBSA binding free energy analyses
MD simulations were performed using AMBER18 with the ff14SB force field for the protein [ ], tip3p water and ions [ ], and the generalized amber force field to parameterize ligands [ ]. This combination of simulation toolkit and force fields was chosen for its well-validated accuracy in free energy–based protein–ligand binding affinity estimation as well as for its ability to parameterize the wide variety of organic and non-organic small molecule ligands needed for generalizable ligand screening. It also allows for comparison with our previous MD-based analyses of TREM2 structure and dynamics [ , , ], though YAMBER3 [ , ] and CHARMM36 [ ] force fields have more recently been shown to give similar results in MD simulations of TREM2. For MD utilizing cholecalciferol, models from AutoDock Vina of cholecalciferol bound to TREM2 were used for initialization. Additionally, a cholecalciferol force field that was compatible with the general AMBER force field was generated as previously described for use in these simulations [ ] and is detailed in Supplemental Materials ( and ). The MD simulations and MM-PBSA binding free energy calculation for all models were performed as previously using snapshots at a time interval of 150 ps for enthalpy calculations and of 1.5 ns for normal mode analysis used in entropy calculation [ , ]. Additional details on the MD simulations and MM-PBSA binding free energy analysis procedure, as well as on the determination of cholecalciferol's charge parameters, are described in the Supplemental Materials.

## Rodents
All rodent breeding and experimental procedures were approved by the University of Alabama at Birmingham Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and follow guidelines set by the National Institutes of Health. Mice for this study were equal numbers of male and females from isogenic C57BL/6J or Trem2-KO lines. Rats were Sprague-Dawley albino pups at E19 collected from isoflurane-euthanized timed-pregnant females. Rodents were housed in a pathogen-free barrier facility on a 12-h light/dark cycle with ad libitum access to water and food. Rodents were genotyped by PCR from tail tissue collected at weaning and at death. For postmortem collection of bone marrow for culture, mice were anesthetized by injection of Fatal-plus prior to cervical dislocation. Prior to perinatal collection of brain cells for culture, rodent dams for embryonic day 19 collection of neurons or pups for postnatal day 1–3 collection of microglia were anesthetized with inhaled isoflurane prior to decapitation. Our study utilized cells from both male and female animals in equal numbers. Sex was not considered as a biological variable for this study.

## Human embryonic kidney cells
HEK293T cells of low passage number were counted and plated at 750,000 cells/well in 6-well plates for culture in 5 % DMEM with 10 % FBS at 37 °C and 5 % CO2 then allowed to proliferate for one to two days. Cells were then transfected for 36–48 h using PolyJet (SignaGen Laboratories) with one of the following combinations of plasmids depending on the experiment: 0.5 μg of human TREM2 and 0.5 μg of human DAP12 (for TREM2/DAP12 complex), 0.5 μg of human TREM2 and 0.5 μg of mouse DAP12 (for DAP12 phosphorylation, because the kit was mouse-specific), or 1 μg of mouse DAP12 (as a control to show that DAP12 phosphorylation was TREM2-dependent). After incubation the cells were treated with vehicle or 100 nM cholecalciferol for 20 min before being harvested for downstream analysis using lysis buffer with 1:100 protease and phosphatase inhibitors.

## Primary bone marrow–derived macrophage culture
Primary monocytes were isolated from adult 4–10-month-old C57BL/6 or Trem2-KO mouse femurs and differentiated to macrophages for culture. Briefly, bone marrow cells were flushed from the femur with cold DMEM and transferred through 70 μm nylon cell strainers. Cells were centrifuged at 500 g for 5 min at room temperature, dissociated by manual trituration, counted and plated in 10 cm dishes with DMEM media supplemented with 10 % FBS, 1 % penicillin/streptomycin, and 10 % L929-cell conditioned DMEM to differentiate in a 37 °C humidified incubator with 5 % CO2 for 7–10 days. After differentiation, cells were dissociated with Trypsin-EDTA, spun down at 500 g for 5 min, resuspended in fresh DMEM with FBS and penicillin/streptomycin, and passaged to plates based on the assay being performed. For flow cytometry, cells were transferred directly to fresh 10 cm dishes without counting. For western blotting, cells were plated in 12-well plates at 1 × 106 cells/mL. For phagocytosis and toxicity assays, cells were plated in 96-well plates at 500,000 cells/mL.

## Primary microglia culture
Primary microglia were isolated from postnatal day 0–2 pups according to previously published protocols [14] with a few modifications. Briefly, brains from E19 Sprague-Dawley rat, C57BL/6 mouse, or Trem2-KO mouse embryos were harvested on ice in 4 °C Hibernate E, meninges were removed, and whole cortical tissue was isolated for digestion with 20 units/mL papain for 10 min at 37 °C. Cells were then dissociated to form a single-cell suspension by manual trituration in Neurobasal medium with 10 % FBS, 1 % penicillin/streptomycin, 1 % l-glutamine, and 10 ng/ml M-CSF. Mixed brain cells were plated at 500,000 cells/mL in T75-flasks and maintained in a 37 °C humidified incubator with 5 % CO2. 50 % medium changes were performed weekly with Neurobasal supplemented as above. At DIV 10–14, microglia were isolated from the astrocyte bed by mechanical shaking at 140 rpm for 1 h at 37 °C and were counted and replated in Neurobasal supplemented as above. For western blotting, cells were plated in 12-well plates at 500,000 cells/mL. For phagocytosis and toxicity assays, cells were plated in 96-well plates at 250,000 cells/mL. For neuronal co-culture, cells were plated in 96-well plates containing differentiated neurons at 50,000 cells/mL as part of their weekly medium change (see below).

## Primary neurons for microglial co-cultures
Primary hippocampal culture protocols were performed as previously described [ ]. Briefly, brains from E19 Sprague-Dawley rat or C57BL/6 mouse embryos were harvested on ice in 4 °C Hibernate E, meninges were removed, and hippocampal tissue was isolated for digestion with 20 units/mL papain for 10 min at 37 °C. Cells were then dissociated to form a single-cell suspension by manual trituration in Neurobasal supplemented with 1x B-27, 2 mM l-glutamine and 10 % FBS. Mixed brain cells were plated at 200,000 cells/mL in 96-well plates for and maintained in a 37 °C humidified incubator with 5 % CO2. 24 h after plating, 75 % of the medium was exchanged for serum-free Neurobasal supplemented with B-27 and l-glutamine, with 5 μM cytosine β-d-arabinofuranoside to inhibit glial proliferation. 50 % medium changes were performed weekly with Neurobasal supplemented as above until microglia were added at DIV 12–14. Once in co-culture, cells were allowed to incubate in Neurobasal supplemented as above for 24 h before treatment with ligands and use in MTT assay.

## Immortalized microglia culture
BV2 immortalized mouse microglial cells (a gift from Talene Yacoubian) of low passage number were counted and plated at 50,000–100,000 cells/mL in 96-well plates for culture in DMEM with 10 % FBS and 1 % penicillin/streptomycin at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. These cells were treated with siRNA immediately after plating for use experiments.

## siRNA treatment of cells
For TREM2 knockdown experiments in BMDMs and BV2 cells, an equal number of wells per group were transiently transfected with siRNA targeting TREM2 or scrambled non-targeting controls using Lipofectamine for 48–92 h prior to experiments (Dharmacon, ON-TARGETplus Trem2 siRNA). siRNA were given as cocktails of four siRNA targeting TREM2 or non-targeting controls at 25 nM. siRNA was removed by change to fresh media immediately before introduction of ligand for assays.

## Flow cytometry
Single cell suspensions of BMDMs for flow cytometric analysis were obtained by gentle dissociation of cells with accutase prior to treatment with conjugated primary antibodies. Cell viability following the flow staining procedure was determined according to kit instructions. All cell suspensions were fixed and run via acoustic-assisted flow cytometer and all cytometer acquired data were analyzed using FlowJo. TREM2 expression was determined per mouse in BMDMs as geometric mean fluorescence intensity of APC signal from all singlet events that were live, CD45+, and CD11b+.

## Liposome preparation
Liposomes of Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) for BLI assays and 1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-l-serine for TREM2 activation in cells were prepared according to a published protocol [ ]. Briefly lipids were dissolved in chloroform in a flat bottom glass tube and the solvent evaporated off using rotary evaporation under vacuum to generate a thin lipid film. After an additional 30 min of vacuum at RT to complete drying, the film hydrated with sterile PBS and vortexed to generate a 1 mg/mL solution of multilamellar lipid bodies. The tube was then sonicated in an ultrasonic bath for 20 min at room temperature until cloudy and dispersed. This mixture was then sonicated again with a 200W immersed probe tip ultrasonicator at 25 % output and 4 °C for 30s pulses with 30s between pulses until emulsified.

## AlphaLISA immunoassays
Three AlphaLISA immunoassays (Revvity) were used: TREM2-DAP12 complex (Revvity: ALSU-TTRMDP-A500), total DAP12 (Revvity: ALSU-TDAP12-B500), and phosphorylated DAP12 (Revvity: ALSU-PDAP12-C500). Protein lysate was collected from HEK293T cells transfected with human TREM2 and human DAP12, human TREM2 and mouse DAP12, or only mouse DAP12 treated with vehicle or 100 nM cholecalciferol for 20 min. We added 5 μg of protein per well and standard protocols for each of the AlphaLISA™ SureFire® assay were followed, loading 10 μL of sample and 5 μL of donor/acceptor mix at each respective step. The measurements were taken after 1 h for the TREM2-DAP12 kit, however, the antibodies in the pDAP12 kit required a longer duration to bind and were given 16-h incubation at room temperature prior to measurement. Both assays were measured using the Synergy™ 2 plate reader using 680/30 nm filter for excitation and 570/100 nm filter for emission using Revvity's Health Sciences HTRF 96-well, white low volume plates (Revvity: NC1286224).

## Immunoblotting
Cells plated as above were incubated for 30 min with 100 nM cholecalciferol or PS liposomes prepared as above prior to lysis for immunoblot. Cells were harvested for immunoblotting in lysis buffer with 1:100 protease and phosphatase inhibitors added immediately before use. Lysate was normalized by BCA to allow loading equal amounts of total protein and denatured via reduction and heating for 10 min at 70 °C. Then equal amounts of protein (10–15 μg/well) were loaded and separated on 4–12 % bis-tris gradient gels with MOPS running buffer for 75 min at constant 150 V. Protein was then transferred to fluorescent stable PVDF membrane, blocked for 1 h at room temperature with constant rocking, and probed overnight with primary antibody. After primary antibody treatment, membranes were washed three times in TBS with 0.1 % Tween, followed by incubation for 1 h at room temperature, protected from light, with species-targeted fluorescent secondary antibody at 1:20,000 dilution. All antibodies were prepared in a mix of equal parts TBST and blocking buffer with 0.01 % SDS. Stained membranes were then washed three times in TBST, imaged, and quantified using Image Studio Lite.

## Preparing fibrils and toxic oligomers of Aβ
Toxic oligomers of Aβ were prepared at previously published [ ]. Briefly, lyophilized recombinant Aβ 1–42 peptide or FAM-labeled Aβ 1–42 was dissolved in 1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoro-2-propanol and allowed to dry under air flow in a chemical fume hood overnight before freezing at −20 °C for storage. Aβ was redissolved in fresh, anhydrous DMSO to 1 mM, vortexed and incubated for 5 min at room temperature, and diluted to 100 μM in PBS on ice. To prepare fibrils of FAM-labeled Aβ for phagocytosis assays, this PBS dispersion was allowed to incubate undisturbed overnight before being vortexed and added directly to experimental wells. To prepare toxic oligomers, the solution of unlabeled Aβ in PBS was instead sonicated in an ice bath at 30 s-on, 30 s-off increments for 15 min and left at 4 °C on ice for 24 h to oligomerize. Immediately before use in toxicity assays, oAβ1–42 was centrifuged at 4 °C for 5 min at 5000 g. As a control, a vehicle solution was prepared in identical fashion, starting from 1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoro-2-propanol, except lacking Aβ peptide.

## Phagocytosis assays
Cells plated as above were incubated for 2 h with stated concentrations of cholecalciferol or PS liposomes prepared as above prior to assaying phagocytosis of fluorescent E. coli bioparticles, briefly sonicated in serum-free media using a water bath according to manufacturer's instructions, or FAM-labeled Aβ prepared as described above. As a positive or negative control, M-CSF or CytochalasinD was added to wells 30 min prior to start of phagocytosis assay. Phagocytosis of E. coli bioparticles was induced by incubating cells in serum-free media containing dispersed particles for 1 h before washing off particles. Phagocytosis of Aβ fibrils was induced by incubating cells for 12 h in serum-free media containing fibrils before washing off. For both procedures, cells were washed once with ice cold PBS, extracellular fluorescence quenched for 2 min in trypan blue, fresh PBS added, and plates immediately read on a plate reader at 385 excitation and 488 emission. For representative microscopic images, cells were then fixed for 20 min using 4 % paraformaldehyde and fluorescently imaged the next day.

## MTT assays
Cells plated as above were incubated for 24 h with stated concentrations of cholecalciferol added with or without 1 % DMSO or 1 μM oAβ1–42, prepared as above, as a toxin prior to assaying cell viability by MTT. After 24 h exposure to toxin, media was removed, cells were washed, and wells were refilled with appropriate culture medium containing 100 μM MTT but without FBS and phenol red. Cells were then incubated at 37 °C for 4 h before culture medium was removed and 15 μL of isopropanol containing 4 mM HCl and 0.1 % Nonidet-P40 was added to the plate. The isopropanol containing plates were incubated at room temperature with mild shaking for 20 min to dissolve formazan crystals and absorbance at 590 nm was read on a plate reader with absorbance at 660 nm used as the reference wavelength. Normalized values are presented as absorbance in well containing toxin divided by absorbance in matched well containing PBS control to give a relative measure of cell viability change caused by the toxin and by any associated experimental groups.

## TUNEL assay
Cells plated as above were incubated for 24 h with stated concentrations of cholecalciferol added with or without 50 μg/mL LPS as a toxin prior to assaying apoptosis by TUNEL according to manufacturer's instructions. After 24 h exposure to toxin, media was removed, cells were washed with PBS and fixed for 20 min at room temperature in 4 % paraformaldehyde. Cells were then permeabilized using 0.25 % Triton X-100 in PBS, washed twice, and incubated 10 min with TdT reaction buffer. TdT reaction cocktail was added for 60 min at 37 °C, followed by Click-iT reaction cocktail for 30 min, protected from light. Once the reaction was complete, DAPI nuclear stain was added to for total cell quantification and wells were imaged by fluorescence microscopy. Images were processed using a gaussian blur filter to remove noise and the number of TUNEL- or DAPI-positive maxima were quantified using the particle counter module in ImageJ [ ]. Normalized values are presented as number of TUNEL positive maxima divided number of DAPI positive maxima in each field of view to give a relative measure of apoptosis caused by LPS and by any associated experimental groups.

## Statistics
Comparisons throughout the study were performed using one sample t-tests, unpaired t-tests, and one/two/three-way ANOVAs, depending on the number of relevant comparisons present. For the AlphaLISA assays, treatment effect was summarized as a D3/vehicle ratio (one ratio per independent experiment) to account for batch-to-batch variation. One-sample t-tests (two-tailed) were performed on the log-transformed D3/vehicle ratios to test if the mean fold-change differed significantly from 1. Estimates and 95 % CIs were back-transformed to original scale. ANOVAs were evaluated with a 95 % confidence interval, followed by Tukey HSD post-hoc analysis for comparison between groups. Other study designs were built with consideration of different ligands, siRNA, and genotype, each of which can introduce unequal effects on variance into the ANOVA, all data were transformed using generalized least squares estimation prior to means comparisons. In cases where additional controls are included in study design but compared outside the primary ANOVA (e.g. CytochalasinD controls for phagocytosis assays) these tests were included for multiple comparisons corrections in the Tukey HSD procedure to prevent introduction of new Type I error associated with the additional comparisons. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.
The mean and standard error of each component of the binding free energy over the equilibrated portion of the trajectory was calculated by bootstrapping mean values from randomly isolated, statistically independent intervals along the trajectory, according to a method we have described previously [ ]. For the TREM2-CV model bound to cholecalciferol, the last 250 ns of the 500 ns trajectory was used for determining bootstrap parameters. For dissociating TREM2-R47H and TREM2-F74D models with cholecalciferol, bootstrap parameters were generated using only 100 ns immediately prior to dissociation.
Steady-state affinities from BLI were determined by curve fitting the equilibrium responses in GraphPad Prism. All other statistical analyses were performed using R [ ] with the ggplot2 plot package for data visualizations [ ].

## Availability of data and materials
All input commands and protein coordinate and topology files required to replicate MD/MM-PBSA simulations can be found in the public GitHub repository (https://github.com/robersonlab-uab/TREM2-Cholecalciferol-2026). Larger files such as the virtual consensus screening, including databased ligand parameters and unprocessed results from the virtual screen, and raw MD trajectories in binpos format (not including water and ions due to file size limitation), are available in an Open Science Framework repository (https://osf.io/d2ka4/). All other relevant data for this study are included within the main manuscript and its .

## Results

## Virtual screening with biophysical validation identifies small molecule ligands of TREM2
To identify ligands of TREM2 found endogenously in the human body, we virtually screened the 2462 small molecules found in the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) version 1.0 ( a) [ ]. For our TREM2 screening, we used the extracellular immunoglobulin domain of TREM2. To minimize bias from focusing on any single binding site or from individual docking programs, we allowed docking across the entirety of the immunoglobulin domain of TREM2 (residues 19–131) and scored using a rank-by-rank consensus method [ ] between three docking programs: AutoDock 4 [ ], AutoDock Vina [ ], and RosettaLigand [ ]. From these, we selected the top 2 % of molecules (approximately the proportion expected to be 2 standard deviations from the mean if binding affinities are assumed to be normally distributed) for a total of 49 hits to be manually examined for favorable features ( b). Examining the raw energy values between the molecules screened in the three programs revealed only moderate correlation between the programs with notable nonlinearity in the high affinity (i.e. low energy score) regions of each program, further supporting the use of the rank-by-rank method ( c).
 From the 49 initial hits, we identified ten that were predicted to be soluble at ≥10 μM in either water or DMSO, purchasable from vendors, and would have bioavailability in the human brain or CSF. These ten were then experimentally validated using biolayer interferometry (BLI) to examine direct binding to recombinant immunoglobulin domains of TREM2 immobilized on a streptavidin biosensor ( d). Of the ten virtual screening hits, eight bound to TREM2 by BLI with moderate affinity, five of these having affinity below 10 μM, a commonly used cutoff in traditional high throughput screening [ ]. HMDB version 1.0 contains some small molecule drugs not produced endogenously in humans, including half of the 8 experimentally validated hits: the antihistamine fexofenadine, the folate-derived antineoplastic aminopterin, the synthetic steroid danazol, and the antidiarrheal opioid agonist loperamide. The endogenous compounds were all steroid derivatives, including the sex steroids estrone sulfate and 16-dehydroprogesterone, the atherosclerosis-associated oxysterol 7-ketocholesterol, and cholecalciferol (unhydroxylated vitamin D3). Of these, estrone sulfate and cholecalciferol are both already in use as drugs in humans, and both decrease rates of developing AD in cross-sectional studies or targeted interventional trials [ , , , ]. Representative BLI sensorgram traces confirmed reversible binding of both estrone sulfate and cholecalciferol to TREM2 with micromolar affinities ( f and g).
For additional validation of our consensus screening, we examined deoxyadenosine monophosphate (dAMP) for binding to TREM2 as an example of a compound ranked highly by a single docking program (rank 2 by AutoDock 4) that nevertheless failed consensus screening due to unfavorable binding in the other programs (rank 1872 by RosettaLigand and 352 by AutoDock Vina; final rank 607 by consensus). No binding could be detected between dAMP and TREM2 in BLI ( h).

## Binding free energy analysis and biophysical validation identifies the apical hydrophobic loops of TREM2 as the binding site for cholecalciferol
An advantage of virtual docking over conventional high-throughput experimental screens is the automatic prediction of potential binding sites for the screened ligands. Follow-up analyses using these predicted sites can refine the rough initial pose and binding energy estimates from docking, generating more accurate structural models that are useful for follow-on mechanistic studies. In unbiased docking with a flexible ligand structure, cholecalciferol ( a) docked to the apical hydrophobic loops of TREM2 ( b; red). Based on the initial docked pose of cholecalciferol on TREM2, we ran 500 ns molecular dynamics (MD) simulations followed by molecular mechanics Poisson-Boltzmann surface area (MM-PBSA) binding free energy analysis to identify which residues on TREM2 contribute to binding of cholecalciferol. During the simulation, cholecalciferol bound to a relatively neutral electrostatic surface consisting of mostly hydrophobic residues from the three CDR loops ( b–d). Decomposing results of the MM-PBSA binding enthalpy analysis by residue further showed the binding was driven almost entirely by van der Waals interactions between cholecalciferol and hydrophobic residues ( e). Notably, this same set of apical hydrophobic residues is also known to regulate TREM2's ability to bind ApoE [ ].
 We also repeated the MD/MM-PBSA binding free energy analysis, this time using models of TREM2 containing either R47H, the major AD-associated variant in the basic site, or F74D, a mutation designed to introduce a negative electrostatic charge in the center of the hydrophobic binding site where cholecalciferol binds. Both R47H and F74D caused cholecalciferol to dissociate prior to the completion of the simulation (R47H at 230 ns; F74D at 490 ns), suggesting that cholecalciferol binds less strongly to these TREM2 variants. In addition, average binding free energies from the 100 ns prior to dissociation of the two models showed that TREM2 variants may decrease affinity compared to the equilibrated model of common variant (CV) TREM2. However, the binding energy of the R47H model was not statistically different from that of CV in the limited simulation time that could be examined ( f).
To experimentally validate the cholecalciferol–TREM2 interaction, we used biolayer interferometry (BLI). Cholecalciferol bound to both human and mouse TREM2, with higher affinity for human TREM2 ( ). To verify the computationally predicted binding site for cholecalciferol, we used a set of previously described TREM2 constructs [ ] that contain mutations in predicted binding residues from the hydrophobic site (L71D, F74D), nearby residues in the hydrophobic site (L69D), as well as one disease-associated residue each in the basic (R47H) and multimerization (T96K) sites ( b, green). We also compared constructs with mutations that add multiple charged residues to the hydrophobic site to see if these would further decrease binding affinity. Compared to TREM2-CV, the T96K multimerization site variant had only a modest effect on binding affinity by BLI, while both R47H and F74D largely decreased binding ( g and h). The allosteric effects of R47H and T96K are consistent with previous computational [ ] and crystallographic [ ] analyses, which indicate that these variants may act in part by destabilizing the CDRs underlying TREM2's hydrophobic site. In contrast, the hydrophobic site mutations ablated binding between cholecalciferol and TREM2 in BLI, regardless of whether one, two, or three charged residues were introduced to the site ( g and h). Altogether, these results strongly support that binding between cholecalciferol and TREM2 is driven primarily by residues at the hydrophobic site and can also be disrupted by allosteric effects of AD-associated variants outside the hydrophobic site.

## Cholecalciferol increases TREM2's binding affinity for the AD-associated protein ApoE
We previously showed that residues in the hydrophobic site of TREM2 control binding of another AD risk protein, the lipid carrier ApoE [ ]. Major isoforms of ApoE are the strongest population-level genetic risk factors for AD, with one copy of the protective ApoE2 isoform decreasing a carrier's risk by nearly half and one allele of the deleterious ApoE4 isoform increasing risk by over 3 times compared to the common ApoE3 isoform [ ]. Since both TREM2 and ApoE bind similar sets of hydrophobic lipids, we first examined whether cholecalciferol could bind ApoE directly using BLI with immobilized ApoE2 ( a). In contrast to dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC), a phospholipid cell membrane component used as a positive control for its ability to bind both ApoE and TREM2 ( b and c), cholecalciferol showed no detectable binding to ApoE2.
 We previously showed that ApoE and oligomeric Aβ compete for binding to the hydrophobic domain of TREM2 [ ], so we next determined whether cholecalciferol would compete with ApoE. Surprisingly, rather than competing with ApoE, preincubating with cholecalciferol caused a concentration-dependent increase in binding between TREM2-CV and ApoE, regardless of ApoE isoform ( d–f). This enhanced binding is consistent with a pattern of cooperativity, wherein binding of cholecalciferol at the TREM2 hydrophobic site increases the affinity for ApoE binding at the same site.
We then examined whether this effect of cholecalciferol could compensate for loss of TREM2-ApoE binding caused by TREM2 variants. Cholecalciferol again strongly increased ApoE binding to TREM2-CV ( g), but only slightly increased ApoE binding to R47H ( h) or L69D ( i) variants and the effect was not concentration-dependent above 5 μM cholecalciferol. Altogether these findings indicate that cholecalciferol binds TREM2 directly and induces cooperative binding between TREM2 and ApoE.

## Cholecalciferol increases TREM2 signaling
To determine whether cholecalciferol activates TREM2 in cells, we first asked if it engages TREM2 signaling. TREM2 activation leads to formation of a complex with DAP12, leading to DAP12 phosphorylation and then to Syk phosphorylation [ ]. We began with HEK293T cells expressing different combinations of human TREM2, human DAP12, and mouse DAP12 using AlphaLISA immunoassays to measure human TREM2-DAP12 complex formation and mouse DAP12 phosphorylation ( a). Cholecalciferol increased TREM2-DAP12 complex formation ( b). We then measured downstream DAP12 phosphorylation in the presence and absence of TREM2. Cholecalciferol increased DAP12 phosphorylation in a TREM2-dependent manner ( c).
 Next, we asked if cholecalciferol activates TREM2 signaling in myeloid cells. We isolated monocytes from the femurs of adult C57BL/6 mice and differentiated them into bone marrow–derived macrophages (BMDMs) for TREM2-dependent signaling ( d). To confirm that any identified effects of cholecalciferol required TREM2, we transiently knocked down TREM2 using siRNA. In BMDMs, cholecalciferol induced Syk phosphorylation at tyrosine 519/520 (equivalent to 525/526 in humans) to a similar level as a known TREM2 ligand, phosphatidylserine (PS), and this effect of cholecalciferol on Syk phosphorylation was lost when TREM2 was knocked down ( e–g). Analysis of TREM2 protein levels in cultured BMDMs by Western blot ( g) and flow cytometry ( ) showed effective knockdown of TREM2.
We further verified that cholecalciferol activates TREM2 signaling in microglia ( h). In primary rat microglia, 100 nM cholecalciferol activated TREM2 signaling as measured by increased Syk phosphorylation, again to a similar degree as PS ( i and j). Together these data indicate that cholecalciferol activates TREM2 signaling in human, mouse, and rat cells.

## Cholecalciferol induces TREM2-dependent phagocytosis in myeloid cells
Increased phagocytosis is a consistent effect of TREM2 activation in myeloid cells, so we asked if cholecalciferol causes a corresponding shift toward a phagocytic phenotype in myeloid cells. First, we examined whether cholecalciferol could drive TREM2-dependent responses to Aβ peptides in cultured mouse microglia. Primary microglia are often resistant to siRNA-based knockdown, so we first used immortalized BV2 microglial cells derived from C57BL/6 mice to confirm whether cholecalciferol could induce TREM2-dependent phagocytosis of fluorescently labeled Aβ fibrils ( a). Increasing concentrations of cholecalciferol promoted phagocytosis of Aβ fibrils in cells treated with scrambled siRNA but not in those treated with siTREM2 ( b). Cholecalciferol-induced uptake was similar in magnitude to PS-induced uptake ( c) and was driven by increased uptake per cell of Aβ rather than by changes in cell number ( ). Cytochalasin D (CytoD), an actin polymerization inhibitor, was used as a negative control to prevent phagocytosis.
 We next determined whether cholecalciferol could induce phagocytosis in BMDMs ( d). Cholecalciferol dose-dependently increased phagocytosis of labeled E. coli bioparticles ( e). This effect was TREM2-dependent, prevented by TREM2 knockdown ( e). To demonstrate that siTREM2-treated BMDMs were still capable of phagocytosis, we used macrophage colony-stimulation factor (M-CSF), a positive control that acts independent of TREM2. M-CSF still induced phagocytosis after TREM2 knockdown ( f), verifying that siTREM2-treated BMDMs retain phagocytic capacity and that the prevention of cholecalciferol-induced phagocytosis by siTREM2 is not a non-specific effect. These data indicate that cholecalciferol can stimulate myeloid cell phagocytosis in a TREM2-dependent manner.
Next, we assayed phagocytosis of E. coli bioparticles in primary microglia, comparing PS and cholecalciferol at the same concentrations in both mouse ( g) and rat ( ). For both species, cholecalciferol activated phagocytosis in a concentration-dependent manner that peaked at 100 nM, with a magnitude of activation similar to or greater than PS ( i, ). Representative images of the stimulated mouse microglia showed that changes in phagocytosis rates were driven by changes in uptake on a per-cell basis rather than by a change in overall cell number ( h).
Finally, we asked whether cholecalciferol promotes microglial phagocytosis of Aβ. Cholecalciferol increased phagocytosis of fluorescently labeled Aβ fibrils in primary microglia from wild-type C57BL/6 mice, but not in microglia from Trem2-KO mice ( j). Together, the studies in BV2 cells, BMDMs, and primary microglia support a TREM2-dependent effect of cholecalciferol on phagocytosis, consistent with it being a TREM2 activator.

## Cholecalciferol increases TREM2-dependent cell survival and resistance in myeloid cells
In addition to phagocytosis, TREM2 activation induces a proliferative, cytoprotective response primarily through the PI3K/Akt pathway [ ]. We began by determining if cholecalciferol also increased viability in BV2 cells treated with oligomeric amyloid-β1–42 (oAβ1–42) ( a). Cholecalciferol dose-dependently protected BV2 cells from oAβ1–42, with an EC50 of 63 nM ( b).
 Next, we tested for cytoprotection in BMDMs following 24 h exposure to 1 % DMSO, compared to PBS sham ( c). Addition of cholecalciferol to cell culture media for the duration of the DMSO incubation was cytoprotective ( d). The cytoprotective effect of cholecalciferol was smaller when TREM2 was knocked down, although the difference did not reach significance, so we confirmed the cytoprotective effect of cholecalciferol in another assay. We measured apoptosis in BMDMs treated with LPS (50 μg/mL) using a TUNEL assay ( e and f). Cholecalciferol strongly protected against LPS-induced apoptosis in BMDMs. In BMDMs pre-treated with siTREM2, cholecalciferol no longer prevented LPS-induced apoptosis. This suggests that the cytoprotective effects of cholecalciferol can be attributed, at least in part, to TREM2-dependent suppression of cell-death mechanisms.
Finally, we determined whether cholecalciferol could induce TREM2's cytoprotective immune response against Aβ oligomers in co-cultures of microglia and neurons, both rat and mouse ( g). In rat neuron/microglia co-cultures, cholecalciferol prevented oAβ1–42-induced decreases in cell viability in a dose-dependent manner, with concentrations at and above 100 nM reducing oAβ1–42 toxicity ( h). To further establish TREM2 dependence of these cell survival assays, we used mice so we could compare wild-type and Trem2-KO. We co-cultured primary hippocampal neurons from embryonic C57BL/6 mice with primary microglia from either C57BL/6 or Trem2-KO mice and determined the effects of cholecalciferol on their resistance to oAβ1–42 toxicity ( g). Again, cholecalciferol protected against oAβ1–42 toxicity when neurons were co-cultured with C57BL/6 microglia, but not when co-cultured with Trem2-KO microglia ( i). Together, these experiments provide evidence that cholecalciferol's ability to activate TREM2 can promote uptake of, and protection against, toxic Aβ species by microglia.

## Discussion
In this study, we used a combination of computational and biophysical techniques to identify novel small molecule ligands of the AD-associated immune receptor TREM2 and then validated a top hit, cholecalciferol, in a variety of experimental cellular models. We chose cholecalciferol for this initial validation study because of its known association with AD risk and prior studies of its potential therapeutic use. We found that cholecalciferol binds reversibly at the apical hydrophobic loops of TREM2 ( ), a location that is destabilized by AD-associated TREM2 variants [ , ]. Cholecalciferol induced TREM2-dependent immune activation at nanomolar concentrations. This included engaging TREM2 signaling: TREM2-DAP12 complex formation, DAP12 phosphorylation, and Syk phosphorylation ( ). Cholecalciferol also induced phagocytosis of both E. coli and Aβ in a TREM2-dependent manner ( ). Finally, cholecalciferol was cytoprotective in a TREM2-dependent manner, protecting BMDMs from both DMSO and LPS toxicity, and BV2 cells and both rat and mouse primary neuron/microglia co-cultures from oligomeric Aβ toxicity ( ). Altogether, results of this work establish cholecalciferol as a TREM2 ligand with capacity to activate cytoprotective signaling.
As the unhydroxylated form of vitamin D3, cholecalciferol is metabolized in the body into several vitamin D3 derivatives that have different receptors. Classically, cholecalciferol is considered inactive until being twice hydroxylated [ ]. It is first hydroxylated in the liver to the 25-(OH) form, calcidiol, and then to the active 1,25-(OH)2 form, calcitriol, primarily in the kidney, though this final step can also occur at lower levels in other cell types, including myeloid cells [ ]. Calcitriol is the primary ligand for the nuclear vitamin D receptor (VDR), and cholecalciferol has one-million-fold lower affinity for VDR [ ], which is why it is often regarded as inactive. Our study identifies a novel role for cholecalciferol as a ligand for TREM2. Despite cholecalciferol's very low affinity for VDR, we cannot rule out the possibility that cholecalciferol has some activity through VDR or another unspecified receptor in our experiments. However, the immune activating and cytoprotective effects of cholecalciferol that we observed were consistently and substantially reduced by knocking down or knocking out TREM2 in myeloid cells. It will be important for future studies to explore the ability of other vitamin D3 metabolites to activate TREM2.
We observed a difference between the binding dissociation constant (Kd, ∼6 μM, e) and the functional effective concentration (EC50, 63 nM, b) for TREM2-cholecalciferol interactions. It is not uncommon for EC50 to be orders of magnitude lower than Kd for ligand-receptor interactions [ ]. One common reason for this is signal amplification, when one receptor-ligand interaction triggers multiple phosphorylation events, with each step in the cascade multiplying the effect. Another common reason is receptor reserve, where the levels of receptor are high enough that even low levels of ligand occupancy at individual receptors are sufficient to trigger the downstream cascade.
Our finding that cholecalciferol is an agonist for TREM2 is consistent with observations that, in addition to both being risk factors for AD [ , , ], TREM2 and vitamin D3 are known to converge on similar signaling pathways. In myeloid cells, both TREM2 and vitamin D3 signaling activate PI3K [ , , ] and suppress NFκB [ , , , , ] and Toll-like receptor [ , , , ] signaling. Both TREM2 and vitamin D3 signaling shift myeloid cells toward an anti-inflammatory phenotype as measured by CCR7 and CD206 [ , , , ], decreasing production of inflammatory cytokines such as TNFα and IL-1β [ , , , , , , , , ] and inducing Th2 cell recruitment [ , , ]. In addition, both overexpression of TREM2 [ ] and supplementation of vitamin D3 [ ] decrease early Aβ deposition in mouse models. Conversely, deficiency of either TREM2 [ ] or vitamin D3 [ ] increases Aβ seeding and plaque formation, with greater effects as pathology progresses. While it is unclear whether TREM2's ability to protect against Aβ toxicity in culture is driven more by induction of phagocytosis to clear the toxic Aβ species, by reduction of pro-inflammatory signals that lead to neuronal apoptosis, by induction of anti-inflammatory pathways that promote neuronal resilience, or by other mechanisms, it is likely that multiple mechanisms play synergistic roles that can be enhanced by other TREM2 agonists including cholecalciferol. Our findings establish TREM2 and cholecalciferol as binding partners that lie in a shared molecular pathway, suggesting a direct mechanism by which they alter AD risk.
While our study interrogates direct binding between cholecalciferol and TREM2, there are several additional mechanisms through which cholecalciferol, or its metabolites, could influence AD pathology or TREM2 signaling. Cholecalciferol signaling, or VDR activation, can transcriptionally regulate TREM-family genes [ ] and there is evidence that cholecalciferol levels directly correlate to levels of TREM2 expression in humans and animal models [ , , , ]. Cholecalciferol and its metabolites regulate pathways influencing Aβ deposition, including Aβ production and catabolism [ , ]. Cholecalciferol metabolites also signal in a VDR-independent manner through Pdia3 [ ], also called GRP58 or MARRS [ ], which may act counter to downstream TREM2 signaling by activating protein kinase C [ , ]. Our study does not rule out the possibility that cholecalciferol may act in AD by multiple mechanisms. However, we provide biophysical evidence for direct TREM2–cholecalciferol binding and increased TREM2-dependent immune activation following treatment with cholecalciferol. Cholecalciferol therefore emerges as a safe and commonly used supplement that can be used to target multiple AD-related disease mechanisms, including TREM2 signaling.
Vitamin D3 deficiency has been associated with increased risk of AD in cross-sectional studies [ ]. Clinical trials to date have failed to show a benefit of vitamin D3 supplementation [ ], but many have been small studies, often targeting individuals who are not vitamin D3 deficient or who are in later stages of AD when it is unlikely to be reversed. There remains a lack of consensus on how and when to supplement vitamin D3, what patient populations to target, and which forms of vitamin D3 are most beneficial [ ]. Our findings suggest that individuals carrying TREM2 variants associated with reduced signaling might benefit from supplementation with an activating ligand like cholecalciferol. They also suggest that treatment in the early presymptomatic stages of AD, when amyloid plaque formation is just beginning, may be optimal, as this is the window when reduced TREM2 activity is believed to contribute [ , , , ].
TREM2 has been considered an intriguing target for AD given the strong genetic link and connection to neuroinflammation. Initial approaches included TREM2-activating antibodies [ ], although the failure of the INVOKE-2 trial of AL002 has led to some rethinking [ ]. Small molecule TREM2 therapeutics have also been proposed, and other groups have used different approaches to screens for small molecule ligands [ ]. At least one small molecule TREM2 therapeutic, VG-3927, has advanced to human clinical trials (NCT06343636).
Here, we identified multiple novel potential TREM2 ligands from a relatively small screen of ∼2400 compounds, and focused on cholecalciferol for rigorous experimental validation in this initial study. The success of this approach emphasizes the power of combining virtual screening with biophysical and functional experiments. Larger screens with advancing technology are likely to further expand our understanding of TREM2 biology and to help identify small molecule modulators with potential utility for AD.

## Author contributions
Hunter Dean: Conceptualization, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing. Ryan Tuckey: Conceptualization, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing. Rory Greer: Conceptualization, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing. Jessica A Greven: Investigation, Formal analysis. Shan-Zhong Yang: Investigation. Gunnar Eastep: Investigation. Daniel Elston: Investigation. Yuwei Song: Investigation. Thomas Brett: Resources, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing – Review & Editing. Yuhua Song: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – Review & Editing. Erik Roberson: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing.

## Declaration of competing interests
E.D.R. is an inventor on patents and patent applications related to the neurodegenerative disease-associated protein tau. The authors declare that they have no other conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

## Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank UAB Research Computing and the Alabama Supercomputer Authority for access to high performance computing hardware, resources, and technical support. We would like to thank Talene Yacoubian and Jay Stone for the generous gift of BV2 cells for this study and thank Garrett Lepkowski and Afsana Mehrab for preparation of BMDMs for experiments. We would also like to thank members of the Song and Roberson labs for helpful discussions and critiques.
This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health (nih.gov) under grant numbers T32GM008361 (to H.B.D. and R.A.T), T32NS095775 (to H.B.D.), F30AG092080 (to R.A.T.), T32EB023872 (to R.A.G.), R01AG068395 (to Y.H.S., E.D.R., and T.J.B.), and R01AG081228 (to Y.H.S., E.D.R., and T.J.B.), P20AG068024 and P30AG086401 (to E.D.R.); by Alzheimer's of Central Alabama (to H.B.D.) and the Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation (to E.D.R. and Y.H.S.; alzdiscovery.org), Alzheimer's Association AARG-16-441560 (to T.J.B.) and Bright Focus Foundation
A2022032S (to T.J.B.). This work was supported in part by using hardware maintained with funding from the National Science Foundation (nsf.gov) under grant number OAC-1541310, the University of Alabama at Birmingham (uab.edu), and the Alabama Innovation Fund (alepscor.org). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official views of the funding sources. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

## Footnotes
Appendix ASupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurot.2026.e00867.

## Contributor Information
Yuhua Song, Email: yhsong@uab.edu.
Erik D. Roberson, Email: eroberson@uabmc.edu.

Appendix A.

## Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

## Multimedia component 1
Multimedia component 1

## Data Availability Statement
All input commands and protein coordinate and topology files required to replicate MD/MM-PBSA simulations can be found in the public GitHub repository (https://github.com/robersonlab-uab/TREM2-Cholecalciferol-2026). Larger files such as the virtual consensus screening, including databased ligand parameters and unprocessed results from the virtual screen, and raw MD trajectories in binpos format (not including water and ions due to file size limitation), are available in an Open Science Framework repository (https://osf.io/d2ka4/). All other relevant data for this study are included within the main manuscript and its .