379blackwellopenFebs LettersFEBS LettPMC1296724512967245130757634160588410.1002/1873-3468.70290NIHMS2146576Inhibiting stearoyl‐CoA desaturase suppresses bone metastatic prostate cancer by modulating cellular stress, mTOR signaling, and DNA damage response
WilsonAlexis HerroonMackenzie K MeccaShane GarmoLaimar C LindquistJacob RajendranShrila PatrickSteve M PodgorskiIzabela 
1
Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA
2
Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA*

Correspondence
, 
I. Podgorski, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, 540 E. Canfield, Rm 6312, Detroit, MI 48201, USA, 
Tel: (313) 577‐0514, 
E‐mail: ipodgors@med.wayne.edu

✉Corresponding author.
2812026600710431043–10611442026© 2026 The Author(s). FEBS Letters published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Federation of European Biochemical Societies.This is an open access article under the terms of the http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/ License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.Previous version available: This article is based on a previously available preprint posted on bioRxiv on June 12, 2025: "
Targeting SCD in SCD-amplified prostate cancer inhibits growth in bone by modulating cellular stress, mTOR, and DNA damage pathways
".

## Abstract
The mechanisms supporting progression of metastatic prostate cancer (PCa) in adipocyte‐rich bone marrow remain unclear. We hypothesized that stearoyl‐coenzyme A desaturase (SCD) promotes PCa survival in bone by modulating stress responses and regulating lipid peroxidation. We show that SCD‐high PCa cells are sensitive to SCD loss, showing smaller spheroids, reduced mTOR signaling, and elevated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. SCD expression is further augmented by adipocytes, and SCD loss induces DNA damage and repair activation only with adipocyte exposure. In vivo, pharmacological SCD inhibition reduces tumor size and increases ER stress and DNA damage in SCD‐high‐expressing bone tumors. These findings suggest SCD plays a role in redox regulation and DNA repair sensitivity, with therapeutic potential for targeting DNA repair pathways in combination with SCD inhibition.

## Impact statement
This study reveals that stearoyl‐CoA desaturase (SCD) supports prostate cancer growth in adipocyte‐rich bone by regulating redox balance and DNA repair responses, uncovering a metabolic mechanism linking lipid metabolism to genomic stability and suggesting therapeutic potential for combining SCD and DNA repair pathway inhibition.

Keywords: bone marrow adipocytes, bone metastasis, DNA damage, ER stress, lipid desaturation, prostate cancer, stearoyl CoA desaturase

Bone metastasis in prostate cancer (PCa) patients is a clinical hurdle due to the poor understanding of the supportive bone microenvironment. Here, we identify stearoyl‐CoA desaturase (SCD) as a tumor‐promoting enzyme and potential therapeutic target in bone metastatic PCa. We report that SCD inhibition causes cell death, increased lipid peroxidation, and DNA damage, along with decreased mTOR signaling.
 
statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-in-collection-domainyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoRevised 2025 Oct 10; Received 2025 Aug 5; Accepted 2025 Nov 17; Issue date 2026 Apr.

## Abbreviations

3D, three‐dimensional

4EBP1, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E‐binding protein 1

AKT, protein kinase B

AR, androgen receptor

ASNS, asparagine synthetase

ATF4, activating transcription factor 4

ATM, ataxia telangiectasia mutated

BIP, binding immunoglobulin protein

CD36, cluster of differentiation 36

DDR, DNA damage response and repair

DEG, differentially expressed genes

ER, endoplasmic reticulum

ERK, extracellular signal‐regulated kinase

EVO, everolimus

FABP4, fatty acid binding protein 4

FERMT1, FERM domain containing kindlin 1

GADD45A, growth arrest and DNA damage inducible alpha

GO, gene ontology

H2AX, histone H2A

HFD, high‐fat diet

HPRT1, hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase 1

LPO, lipid peroxidation

mBMSC, primary mouse bone marrow stromal cells

mTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin

MUFAs, monounsaturated fatty acids

MYC, MYC proto‐oncogene

NDRG1, N‐myc downstream‐regulated 1

P70S6K, ribosomal protein S6 kinase B1

PARP, poly(ADP‐ribose) polymerase

PCa, prostate cancer

PI3K, phosphoinositide 3‐kinase

PRAS40, proline‐rich AKT substrate 40 kDa

PSMA, prostate‐specific membrane antigen

PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog

PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acid

rBM, reconstituted basement membrane

ROS, reactive oxygen species

SCD, stearoyl‐coenzyme A desaturase

SFAs, saturated fatty acids

SOD2, superoxide dismutase 2

TW, transwell

Alterations in lipid uptake and metabolism have been recognized as some of the most prominent adaptive mechanisms in cancer, contributing to proliferation and rapid tumor growth [ ]. Certain lipid species are particularly advantageous for cancer cells and play tumor‐supportive roles in promoting growth, survival, and progression. Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), specifically, are known to make up cell membrane composition and play role(s) in reducing membrane sensitivity to polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA)‐dependent oxidation [ ]. Higher MUFA levels have been found in cancerous tissues and have been shown to modulate tumorigenic pathways, such as activating PI3K and ERK signaling via G‐coupled protein receptor 40 [ ]. Stearoyl coenzyme A desaturase (SCD) is the primary endoplasmic reticulum (ER)‐resident enzyme involved in the conversion of saturated fatty acids (SFAs) to MUFAs. We have reported SCD gene amplification in metastatic prostate cancer, and others have demonstrated increased SCD expression across several other cancer types [ , ]. SCD has been suggested to play critical roles in tumor formation, progression, and survival of cancer cells [ ]. This underscores SCD activity as a possible major contributor to tumor progression, especially in harsh microenvironments abundant in lipids, such as bone.
Bone is a major site for metastatic prostate cancer (PCa), and its ability to adapt and thrive in the lipid‐rich bone marrow poses a major clinical challenge. Adipocytes constitute a major cell type in bone, and previous studies from our laboratory and others have shown that tumor cells disseminated to or originating from bone promote lipolytic behavior in marrow adipocytes, which then release lipids that are absorbed by the tumor cells [ , , , , ]. We previously reported that adipocyte‐supplied lipids disrupt redox balance and induce cellular stress pathways in PCa cells, yet allow them to survive and progress within the harsh bone metastatic niche [ , ]. SCD expression has been shown to be induced by SFAs, possibly as a mechanism to support ER homeostasis, prevent membrane oxidation, and promote a cellular adaptive response to stress‐inducing lipid species [ ]. However, the molecular mechanisms that drive this adaptive response are poorly understood.
This study aimed to investigate the molecular mechanisms by which SCD promotes the adaptive response to stress in metastatic PCa. Using in vitro models, we investigated the protein expression of SCD across several PCa cell lines and employed 3D culture methods to determine whether SCD expression levels correlate with PCa growth and survival following SCD loss. RNA‐seq analyses and functional assays were used to examine molecular pathways dysregulated by SCD deficiency. In vivo methods included intratibial experimental bone tumors to evaluate the effect of SCD inhibition on PCa growth and survival. Collectively, our studies explored a novel molecular mechanism involving SCD in the tumor cell adaptive response to stress in the bone metastatic niche, highlighting therapeutic opportunities for bone metastatic PCa and other cancers that reside in skeletal sites.

## Materials and methods

## Materials
DMEM, RPMI‐1640, MEMα, insulin, and other chemicals, unless otherwise stated, were obtained from Sigma‐Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). HyClone FBS, TaqMan reagents, and RNAiMAX were from ThermoFisher Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA). Trypsin–EDTA was from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). PureCol® collagen type I was from Advanced Biomatrix (San Diego, CA, USA). Transwell cell‐support systems were from Corning (Corning, NY, USA). β‐tubulin (#E7‐C) antibody was from Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank (Iowa City, IA, USA). Antibodies to HSPA5 (BIP; #3177), ATF4 (#11815), γ‐H2AX (#9718), p‐AKT (#4060), Total AKT (#9272), p‐p70S6K (#9205), Total p70S6K (#34475), p‐PRAS40 (#13175), Total PRAS40 (#2691), p‐NDRG1 (#5482), Total NDRG1 (#9485), p‐4EBP1 (#9459), and Pan‐Keratin (Type I; #83957) were from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MA, USA). Antibody to SCD (#28678‐1‐AP) was from Proteintech (Rosemont, IL, USA) and Bioss (#3787R, Woburn, MA, USA). StemXVivo Adipogenic Supplement and Cultrex were from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA). RNeasy Mini Kits were from Qiagen (Valencia, CA, USA). QuantSeq 3′ mRNA‐Seq Library Prep Kit FWD was from Lexogen (Vienna, Austria). Luminata Forte Western HRP substrate was from MilliporeSigma (Burlington, MA, USA). Rosiglitazone was from Cayman Chemical (Ann Arbor, MI, USA).

## Cell lines
PC3 (RRID:CVCL_0035), 22Rv1 (RRID:CVCL_1045), and C42B (RRID:CVCL_4784) cells were purchased from ATCC (Manassas, VA, USA). ARCaP(M) cells (RRID:CVCL_4830) were purchased from Novicure Biotechnology (Birmingham, AL, USA). PC3 and C42B cells were cultured in DMEM with 10% FBS, ARCaP(M) cells were cultured in RPMI‐1640 medium with 5% FBS, and 22Rv1 cells were cultured with RPM1‐1640 with 10% FBS. All media were supplemented with 25 mm HEPES and 100 U·mL−1 penicillin–streptomycin. Primary mouse bone marrow stromal cells (mBMSC) were isolated from tibiae and femurs of 6‐ to 8‐week‐old FVB/N mice and differentiated into adipocytes according to previously established protocols [ , ]. The human cell lines used in this study were authenticated by the WSU Genomics facility. All cell lines are routinely tested for mycoplasma using LookOut Mycoplasma PCR Detection Kit (Sigma‐Aldrich).

## Animals
All experiments involving mice were performed in accordance with the protocol and study approved by the Institutional Animal Investigational Committee of Wayne State University (IACUC‐21‐12‐4269). All animal experiments complied with the ARRIVE guidelines and followed the National Research Council's Guide for the Care of Use of Laboratory Animals. In vivo, xenograft studies were performed in 8‐ to 10‐week‐old male mice in the FVB/N background with a homozygous null mutation in the Rag‐1 gene (FVB/N, Rag‐1−/−). All mice were bred in‐house.

## Pharmacological SCD and mTOR inhibition in Transwell coculture
The mBMSC cells were embedded in Collagen I, plated in 6‐well plates, and differentiated into adipocytes according to our previously published protocols [ , ]. PC3, ARCaP(M), C42B, or 22Rv1 cells were seeded in 6‐well plates or Transwell filters and cultured overnight. SCD inhibitor treatment with 1 μM CAY10566 (Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; concentrations determined experimentally) or 250 μM A‐939572 (Cayman Chemical; concentrations determined experimentally), or mTORC1 inhibitor treatment with Everolimus (EVO) (Cayman Chemical; concentrations determined experimentally) at 10 or 50 nM was applied the next day upon merging adipocyte and tumor cell cultures into the Transwell system. After 48 h of coculture, tumor cells were collected and processed for RNA extraction and protein analysis as we described [ , , , ].

## 
siRNA approaches
Tumor cells were seeded on 6‐well plates or on Transwell filters and grown overnight. The following day, a unique 27mer siRNA duplex targeting SCD transcripts (OriGene‐SR321692; OriGene, Rockville, MD, USA) or Trilencer‐27 Universal scrambled negative control (OriGene‐SR30002) was added using RNAiMAX transfection reagent at a final concentration of 25 pmol (based on the manufacturer's protocol). After 6 h, the media were replaced, and Transwell filters containing transfected tumor cells were merged with bone marrow adipocytes. After 48 h, cells were collected and processed for RNA and protein analyses as described above. Three unique 27mer siRNA duplexes that efficiently knocked down SCD transcripts were used.

## 
TaqMan RT‐PCR analyses
The cDNA was prepared from 1 to 2 μg of total RNA using the High‐Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA). Gene expression analyses were performed using TaqMan® Individual Gene Expression assays for Human SCD (Hs01682761), FERMT1 (Hs00916793), GADD45A (Hs00169255), SOD2 (Hs00167309), CD36 (Hs01567185), and FABP4 (Hs010086177). Assays were conducted on at least three biological replicates using TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR Master Mix and 50 ng of cDNA/well, and all reactions were run on an Applied Biosystems StepOnePlus™ system. All genes were normalized to hypoxanthine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT1; Hs02800695). The DataAssist™ Software (Applied Biosystems) was used for all analyses.

## Immunoblotting
Lysate and media samples were loaded based on DNA/protein concentrations and the corresponding lysates were electrophoresed on Novex WedgeWell 4–20% Tris‐Glycine Gels (Invitrogen), transferred to PVDF membranes, and immunoblotted for SCD, HSPA5 (BIP), ATF4, p‐AKT, Total AKT, p‐p70S6K, Total p70S6K, p‐PRAS40, Total PRAS40, p‐NDRG1, Total NDRG1, and p‐4EBP1, all at 1 : 1000. All horseradish peroxidase‐labeled secondary antibodies were used at 1 : 10 000. Quantification and analyses of bands were performed using Fiji 2 (ImageJ, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).

## Lipid peroxidation assay
PC3 or ARCaP(M) cells were seeded on glass coverslips in a 24‐well plate at a density of 50 000/coverslip overnight and then transferred to the top of a Transwell filter over adipocytes (Transwell) or into an empty 6‐well plate (Control) (2 coverslips/well) and cultured for 24 or 48 h. For SCD inhibition experiments, cells were treated with 1 μM CAY10566 or siRNA against SCD as described above. On the day of imaging, cells were incubated with 10 μM BODIPY 581/591 C11 (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA, USA; D3861) for 30 min at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Following three washes with Live Cell Imaging Solution, pH 7.4 (Life Technologies Corporation, Eugene, DR, USA), images (excitation of 581/488 nM and emission of 591/510 nM) were captured with a Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss AG, Göttingen, Germany) using a 40× immersion lens. Integrated density of green (510 nM) fluorescence/cell number, indicative of probe oxidation, was calculated using Fiji 2.

## Immunofluorescence analyses
For assessment of lipid droplets in response to adipocyte exposure, PC3 or ARCaP(M) cells were grown on glass coverslips in Transwell coculture for 48 h as described above and stained with BODIPY 493/503 (1 : 1000) (ThermoFisher, D3922) for 1 h after fixing with 3.7% formaldehyde. Nuclei were stained by Hoechst dye (Invitrogen). Following three washes with Live Cell Imaging Solution, images were captured with a Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope using a 40× immersion lens. Lipid droplet count/cell number was calculated using the analyze particle function using Fiji 2. For γ‐H2AX, ARCaP(M), PC3, 22Rv1, or C42B cells were grown on glass coverslips under control or Transwell conditions in the presence or absence of 1 μM CAY10566 for 48 h. Cells were fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde and stained with anti‐γ‐H2AX antibody (1 : 100) at 4 °C overnight. Alexa Fluor 488‐conjugated goat anti‐rabbit IgG (1 : 1000) was used as a secondary antibody, and DAPI was used as a nuclear stain. Coverslips were mounted with Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Newark, CA, USA) and imaged on a Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope using a 63× oil immersion lens.

## Alkaline comet assay
An alkaline comet assay was used to analyze DNA damage upon SCD inhibition using CAY10566. ARCaP(M) cells in alone conditions or Transwell coculture were treated with 0.1% DMSO or 1 μM CAY10566 as described above. ~20 000 cells were embedded in 0.5% low‐melting agarose (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA; BP165‐25) and spread on slides coated with 1.5% Standard Low—mr Agarose (BioRad, 162‐0100; Hercules, CA, USA) and allowed to solidify. Slides were placed into 4 °C lysis buffer (2.5 m NaCl, 100 mm EDTA, 10 mm Tris Base, 1% Triton X‐100, pH 10) for 1 h. Slides were removed from the lysis buffer and placed in the electrophoresis tank with 4°C electrophoresis buffer (0.3 m NaOH, 1 mm EDTA) to incubate for 20 min, and slides were electrophoresed for 25 min at 300 mA (~22–26 V). Slides were then incubated with neutralization buffer (0.4 m Tris Base, pH 7.55) for 10 min at room temperature. Slides were fixed in 95% ethanol for 10 min and allowed to dry at room temperature. Cells were then stained with SYBR gold (Invitrogen), and images were captured with a Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope using a 63× lens. ~50–100 cells were analyzed per slide using the OpenComet plug‐in for Fiji 2. DNA damage was measured using the olive moment, which is the percentage of DNA within the tail multiplied by the length of the tail of the CAY10566‐treated samples compared to the untreated samples [ ].

## Live/dead assays in 3D cultures
Assays were performed on live ARCaP(M), PC3, 22Rv1, and C42B cells using Molecular Probes™ Live/Dead Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit (Invitrogen). Three‐dimensional (3D) cocultures of tumor cells were established as we described previously [ , ] and cultured alone or on Transwell inserts and treated with either CAY10566 (1 μM), EVO (50 nM), or vehicle (0.1% DMSO) for 72 h, re‐treated and cultured for an additional 48 h. For SCD knockdown experiments, spheroids were treated with scrambled siRNA or SCD siRNA for a minimum of 6 h prior to combining with adipocyte cultures. For all experiments, coverslips were stained with 2 μM Calcein AM and 5 μM Ethidium homodimer‐1 (Live/Dead Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit) for 30 min at room temperature, placed in PBS, and immediately imaged by capturing z‐stacks through the depth of structures using a Zeiss LSM 780 confocal microscope with a 40× water immersion objective. Live cells (green; Calcein AM) were captured using excitation at 488 nM and emission at 507 nM. Dead cells (red; Ethidium homodimer‐1) were recorded using excitation at 488 nM and emission at 730 nM. 3D reconstruction and the sum of channel intensity were quantified using the Volocity Software (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA). For each spheroid, the volume of live signal was obtained and shown as percent control of untreated cells.

## 
RNAseq and pathway analyses
3′ RNA‐seq (QuantSeq 3′ mRNA) was performed at the Wayne State University Genome Sciences Core. RNA was collected from three biological replicates of PC3 and ARCaP(M) cells cultured alone or in Transwell with adipocytes, treated with 0.1% DMSO or 1 μM CAY10566, as described above, and run on an Agilent TapeStation 2200 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) for quality control. Lexogen's QuantSeq 3'mRNA‐seq Library Prep Kit (FWD for Illumina) was utilized to build RNAseq libraries. The barcoded libraries were multiplexed at equimolar concentrations and sequenced with 50 bp single reads on an Illumina HiSeq‐2500 run in rapid mode. Data were demultiplexed using Illumina's CASAVA 1.8.2 software and reads were aligned to the human genomes [ ]. Bioconductor package ‘edgeR’ was used to determine the differential gene expression during SCD inhibition in R [ ]. ‘Enhanced Volcano’ package was used to create volcano plots representing the differentially expressed genes. LogFC cutoff was determined to be 1.5, and the P‐value cutoff was determined to be 0.05 to show the significant differentially expressed genes (https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano). Significant differentially expressed genes (P < 0.02 and log FC > 1) were analyzed using the ‘enrichGO’ function in the ‘cluster profiler’ package in R to identify enriched pathways after FDR control using the MSigDB biological process (BP) gene set [ ]. The top 20 BP pathways were shown on the dotplot after using ‘ggplot’ in R.

## Intratibial injections and SCD inhibitor administration via oral gavage
Mice (minimum N = 5/group) were placed on a high‐fat diet (HFD; D12492i, Research Diets, New Brunswick, NJ, USA) for 8 weeks. Mice were then intratibially injected with 5 × 105 of ARCaP(M) or PC3 cells in PBS (20 μL, right tibia) or PBS alone (control, 20 μL, left tibia) under isoflurane inhalation anesthesia according to previously published procedures [ ] and maintained on the diet for the duration of the study. For SCD inhibition, stock solutions of CAY10566 (TargetMol, Boston, MA, USA) were prepared in sterile DMSO at 10 mg·m−1. Mice with confirmed ARCaP(M) or PC3 bone tumors (N = 5/group) were administered CAY10566 (in 95% corn oil, 5% DMSO) at 5 mg·kg−1 via oral gavage daily. The experiment was repeated two more times. At the end of each study, mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation, and control and tumor‐bearing tibiae samples were fixed, decalcified, and embedded in paraffin.

## Immunohistochemistry
Longitudinal sections (5 μM) thick from the DMSO‐treated and CAY10566‐treated tumor‐bearing tibiae were deparaffinized and examined by immunohistochemistry for expression and localization of ATF4 (1 : 200), ASNS (1 : 400), and γ‐H2AX (1 : 200). Human metastatic bone prostate cancer samples from de‐identified patients were obtained from the Biobanking Core at Karmanos Cancer Institute and sections examined for expression and localization for SCD (1 : 200, Bioss) and pan‐Keratin (Type I; 1 : 500, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA). ImmPRESS Anti‐Rabbit Peroxidase Polymer Detection systems, along with a NovaRED kit (Newark, CA, USA) (Vector Labs) as a substrate, were used for the peroxidase‐mediated immunostaining reaction.

## Statistical analyses
For all analyses, data were presented as a mean of at least three experiments ± SD and statistically analyzed using an unpaired Student's t‐test.

## Results

## 
SCD expression varies across PCa cell lines and correlates with the effects of SCD inhibition on PCa growth and survival in 3D cultures
We have reported that SCD and its transcriptional regulators SREBP1 and SREBP2, along with several other genes in the desaturase pathway, are upregulated in patients with metastatic PCa and multiple myeloma [ ], two cancers highly regulated by marrow adiposity [ , , ]. Based on this, we sought to determine whether SCD is specifically present in metastatic tumor cells and whether its levels are modulated by exposure to adipocytes. Taqman RT‐PCR analysis of four PCa cell lines revealed differences in their baseline SCD levels. Specifically, ARCaP(M) and 22Rv1 cells showed significantly higher SCD mRNA expression than PC3 and C42B cells (Fig.  ). Similar trends were observed in SCD protein levels across the four cell lines grown in monoculture, as determined by western blot analysis (Fig.  ). Interestingly, SCD levels in “SCD‐high” ARCaP(M) and 22Rv1 cells showed a moderate increase upon Transwell coculture with adipocytes (Fig.  ), whereas protein expression of SCD in ‘SCD‐low’ PC3 and C42B cells appeared to be reduced following adipocyte exposure (Fig.  ). Immunohistochemical staining of bone metastatic lesions from PCa patients for SCD and epithelial marker pan‐Keratin (type I) confirmed that SCD is indeed readily expressed by the majority of the metastatic tumor cells (Fig.  ). However, the level of SCD expression varies among patients, as indicated by the differences in staining intensity and the results of TaqMan RT‐PCR analyses of bone metastatic cores (Fig.  ).
 To determine whether the level of SCD expression directly impacts sensitivity to SCD inhibition, we cultured ARCaP(M), 22Rv1, PC3, and C42B 3D spheroids alone or with adipocytes in the absence or presence of SCD‐targeting siRNA or SCD‐selective inhibitor CAY10566 (1 μM) and performed the Live/Dead assay (Fig.  ). A significant decrease in live volume (calcein AM; green fluorescence) was observed in ARCaP(M) (Fig.  top panels) and 22Rv1 spheroids (Fig.  top panels) cultured alone following siRNA‐mediated knockdown (SCD KD, verified in Fig.  ) or in the presence of SCD inhibitor (CAY). Severe disintegration of the spheroid upon SCD inhibition or knockdown, and the resulting loss of the majority of ethidium homodimer‐labeled red cells, prevented accurate quantification of dying cells under these conditions. Notably, even when grown in Transwell coculture with adipocytes, which we have shown to diminish response to therapies, such as docetaxel [ , ], ARCaP(M), and 22Rv1 spheroids, remained sensitive to SCD inhibition (Fig.  bottom panels). However, although siRNA‐mediated SCD knockdown mimicked the effects of pharmacological SCD inhibition and reduced the volume of ARCaP(M) spheroids cultured alone, it had no significant impact on spheroid size when cultured in the presence of adipocytes. Since SCD is also expressed in adipocytes and is essential for de novo lipogenesis [ , ], our results suggest that inhibiting SCD in both tumor cells and adipocytes may be necessary for a robust tumor response. Interestingly, in contrast to ARCaP(M) spheroids, PC3 and C42B 3D spheroids cultured in alone conditions (Fig.  top panels) or in the presence of adipocytes (Fig.  bottom panels) showed no significant change in live volume following the pharmacological inhibition with CAY10566. No change in live volume was also demonstrated in PC3 spheroids cultured alone or in the presence of adipocytes during siRNA‐mediated SCD knockdown.

## Prostate cancer cells control lipid peroxidation induced by bone marrow adipocytes through SCD activity
Cancer cells often rewire lipid metabolism to fuel their proliferation and adapt to stress [ , ], producing various lipid species that serve as substrates for lipid peroxidation (LPO) [ ]. We have previously determined that PCa cells stimulate lipid hydrolysis in adipocytes and subsequently utilize the released lipids to fuel their growth and survival [ ]. To determine whether bone marrow adipocyte‐derived lipids affect LPO levels in SCD‐high PCa cells differently than SCD‐low cells and, in turn, rely on SCD to adapt to LPO, we utilized the LPO sensor BODIPY C11. Lipid radical formation in ARCaP(M) and PC3 cells alone and in Transwell conditions with bone marrow adipocytes was measured based on the shift from red (561/590 nM) to green (488/510 nM) fluorescence. Our results showed significant induction of LPO levels, as indicated by increased green fluorescence in both ARCaP(M) and PC3 cells exposed to adipocytes for 24 h compared to monoculture (Fig.  ). Intriguingly, a reduction in LPO levels was observed in ARCaP(M) (Fig.  ) and PC3 (Fig.  ) cells exposed to adipocytes for 48 h, as compared to the 24 h time point, suggesting the activation of a potential adaptive response in PCa cells to mitigate harmful lipid peroxides. Notably, the magnitude of the adaptive response differed between the two cell lines, with PC3 cells demonstrating a more significant drop in LPO levels at 48 h, almost to the levels of PC3 cells in alone culture (Fig.  ).
 To examine whether SCD may have a direct role in modulating LPO levels in PCa cells during adipocyte exposure, we pharmacologically inhibited SCD activity using CAY10566 and monitored changes in LPO using the BODIPY C11 sensor. The quantification of BODIPY C11 fluorescence following 24 h exposure to CAY10566 revealed that LPO levels, which are already increased in ARCaP(M) and PC3 cells by 24 h adipocyte exposure (Fig.  ), were not further affected by SCD inhibition (Fig.  ). However, treatment with CAY10566 for 48 h not only prevented the adaptive decrease in peroxidation levels we typically observe at this time point but also significantly increased the amount of green BODIPY C11 fluorescence, indicating elevated lipid peroxide levels with prolonged SCD inhibition (Fig.  ). ARCaP(M) cells in monoculture exhibited no change in LPO levels during SCD inhibition by CAY10566 at 24 or 48 h (Fig.  ). However, PC3 cells in monoculture had a slight increase in LPO levels at 24 h but not at 48 h when treated with CAY10566 (Fig.  ). siRNA‐mediated knockdown of SCD in PCa cells exposed to adipocytes led to similar increases in BODIPY C11 fluorescence (Fig.  ). Notably, PCa cells cultured in the absence of adipocytes exhibited minimal changes in LPO levels following either pharmacological inhibition or siRNA‐mediated knockdown of SCD (Fig.  ), underscoring the role of SCD in promoting an adaptive response within a lipid‐rich environment.
Consistent with these findings, SCD inhibition led to upregulation of genes encoding proteins involved in cellular defense mechanisms against damaging stress. Specifically, mRNA levels of Superoxide Dismutase 2 (SOD2), FERM Domain Containing Kindlin 1 (FERMT1), and Growth Arrest and DNA Damage Inducible Alpha (GADD45A) were significantly higher in ARCaP(M) cells treated with CAY10566, as compared to cells treated with vehicle control, both under monoculture and co‐culture conditions (Fig.  ). Intriguingly, unlike in ARCaP(M) cells, SOD2 levels in PC3 cells remained completely unaffected by either coculture with adipocytes or SCD inhibition. Moreover, FERMT1 and GADD45A levels increased in PC3 cells cocultured in Transwell with adipocytes, but there were no additional changes in the expression of these stress‐related genes during SCD inhibition (Fig.  ). 22Rv1 cells, which responded to SCD inhibition in 3D culture similarly to ARCaP(M) cells, showed increased GADD45A expression during SCD inhibition, mirroring the impact on this gene in ARCaP(M) cells (Fig.  ). This effect was absent in C42B cells (Fig.  ), which, like PC3 cells, exhibited limited sensitivity to SCD inhibition in 3D culture. Similar to PC3 cells, C42B cells showed increased GADD45A expression upon exposure to adipocytes, yet displayed minimal transcriptional changes in response to SCD inhibition. These findings suggest potential cell‐line‐dependent differences in adaptability to adipocyte‐mediated LPO, cellular stress, and the loss of SCD activity.

## 
SCD inhibition induces distinct changes in the transcriptome of PCa cells
To investigate the molecular mechanisms responsible for the differential responses of PCa cell lines to SCD inhibition, we conducted RNAseq analyses on ARCaP(M) and PC3 cells cultured alone in the presence or absence of CAY10566. Our results showed that pharmacological SCD inhibition significantly altered the transcriptome of ARCaP(M) cells with a substantially larger number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) identified (Fig.  ) as compared to PC3 cells (Fig.  ), which we have shown to be unresponsive to SCD inhibition in 3D culture. Through gene ontology (GO) analysis, we determined that in ARCaP(M) cells under alone conditions, SCD inhibition predominantly affected pathways involved in endoplasmic reticulum stress, the unfolded protein response, and apoptosis (Fig.  ). Furthermore, a significant enrichment for mTOR signaling was also observed, although it did not rank among the top 20 pathways displayed in the dotplot in Fig.  . In contrast, PC3 cells under the same conditions exhibited enrichment of pathways primarily involved in oxidative stress and hypoxia response following SCD inhibition (Fig.  ).
 

## 
SCD inhibition alters distinct pathways in PCa cells exposed to adipocytes compared to PCa cells in monoculture
Given that adipocytes dampened the response of ARCaP(M) spheroids to SCD inhibition, we next investigated how SCD inhibition alters the transcriptome of PCa cells in Transwell co‐culture with adipocytes. RNAseq analysis revealed that ARCaP(M) cells treated with CAY10566 in the presence of adipocytes exhibited a significant number of DEGs compared to ARCaP(M) cells treated with CAY10566 alone, suggesting that distinct transcriptional programs are engaged under Transwell coculture conditions (Fig.  ). GO analysis showed enrichment in pathways related to DNA damage, cell cycle, and the unfolded protein response in ARCaP(M) cells exposed to both adipocytes and CAY10566 compared to cells exposed to CAY10566 alone (Fig.  ). By contrast, exposure to adipocytes alone primarily induced genes involved in the unfolded protein response (Fig.  ), indicating that the observed enrichment in DNA damage response arises specifically from SCD inhibition.
 In contrast to ARCaP(M) cells, PC3 cells in Transwell coculture with adipocytes displayed an enrichment in cell cycle and DNA replication pathways (Fig.  ). However, when treated with CAY10566, PC3 in Transwell coculture with adipocytes displayed only a small number of DEGs relative to CAY10566‐treated monocultures (Fig.  ), with GO analyses indicating limited enrichment, primarily within ER stress‐related pathways (Fig.  ). Together, these findings suggest that SCD inhibition alters the transcriptome of PCa cells in an adipocyte‐dependent manner, with a more pronounced effect in SCD‐high cell lines such as ARCaP(M).

## Differential impact of SCD inhibition on ER stress and mTOR signaling in SCD‐high and SCD‐low cell lines
Since our RNAseq analyses exposed ER stress signaling as a highly enriched pathway in ARCaP(M) cells in alone and Transwell conditions following SCD inhibition, we examined protein expression of a major ER stress regulator, activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4), in ARCaP(M) and PC3 cells grown in alone conditions and Transwell coculture with adipocytes in the presence or absence of SCD inhibitor (Fig.  ) or siRNA targeting SCD (Fig.  ). Our results revealed major differences in the effects of SCD inhibition on ATF4 expression between the two cell lines. Specifically, consistent with our previously reported results [ ], Transwell coculture with adipocytes led to a significantly greater increase in ATF4 levels in PC3 cells compared to ARCaP(M) cells (Fig.  ). Notably, in PC3 cells, treatment with CAY10566 or siRNA‐mediated SCD knockdown further elevated ATF4 levels in the presence of adipocytes, with minimal impact under monoculture conditions. In contrast, SCD inhibition in ARCaP(M) cells resulted in highly augmented ATF4 levels regardless of the presence or absence of adipocytes (Fig.  and Fig.  ). These notable increases in ATF4 levels, especially in ARCaP(M) cells, were accompanied by a decrease in the protein expression of binding immunoglobulin protein (BIP), indicative of active unfolded protein response signaling [ , ]. Interestingly, 22Rv1 cells, which displayed sensitivity to SCD inhibition in 3D culture similar to that of ARCaP(M) cells (Fig.  ), also showed comparable changes in ATF4 and BIP protein levels upon SCD inhibition or siRNA‐mediated knockdown (Fig.  ). In contrast, the effects on ATF4 and BIP levels in C42B cells resembled those observed in PC3 cells (Fig.  ). These findings highlight the potential importance of ER stress response in mediating sensitivity to SCD inhibition.
 In addition to a strong ER stress response, gene ontology enrichment analysis of ARCaP(M) cells exposed to SCD inhibition revealed a significant enrichment of the mTOR signaling pathway, which is crucial for cancer cell growth and survival [ ]. We therefore next examined the impact of SCD inhibition on mTOR pathway activity. Western blot analyses revealed a marked reduction in phosphorylation of downstream mTOR proteins AKT, p70S6K, PRAS40, and NDRG1 in ARCaP(M) cells treated with either SCD inhibitor CAY10566 or siRNA targeting SCD (Fig.  ). This effect was also evident in ARCaP(M) cells treated with another SCD inhibitor A‐939572 (Fig.  ). In contrast to ARCaP(M) cells, there was no observable impact on downstream mTOR proteins in PC3 cells treated with SCD inhibitor CAY10566, SCD siRNA (Fig.  ), or SCD inhibitor A‐939572 (Fig.  ), a result that aligns with the limited effect of SCD inhibition on PC3 viability in 3D assays (Fig.  ). We have shown previously that adipocyte exposure can increase expression of lipid transporters such as fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4) and cluster of differentiation 36 (CD36) in PCa cells [ ]. Given that lipids and the upregulation of lipid transporters can modulate cell growth and survival via the mTOR pathway [ , , ], we used BODIPY 493/503 dye to assess whether lipid droplet accumulation or lipid transporter expression could account for differences in viability and mTOR signaling between ARCaP(M) and PC3 lines. Upon exposure to adipocytes, PC3 cells accumulated significantly more lipid droplets than ARCaP(M) cells (Fig.  ). Additionally, Transwell coculture with adipocytes induced the expression of CD36 and FABP4 in PC3, but not ARCaP(M) cells (Fig.  ), and this expression was further increased with SCD inhibition in PC3 cells, with no significant change observed in ARCaP(M) cells (Fig.  ). These findings suggest that increased lipid uptake and transporter expression in PC3 cells may help sustain mTOR activity and cell viability, thereby reducing sensitivity to SCD inhibition.
To determine whether inhibiting mTOR signaling could sensitize PC3 cells to SCD inhibition, we performed a Live/Dead assay on PC3 spheroids treated with either scrambled control siRNA or SCD siRNA, in the presence or absence of mTORC1 inhibitor, Everolimus (EVO). Our results showed that PC3 cells are highly sensitive to mTOR inhibition alone and that the combination treatment with SCD inhibition does not provide additional benefit (Fig.  ). Immunoblot analysis revealed a strong reduction in the levels of pAKT and mTOR proteins following treatment with EVO, regardless of SCD knockdown (Fig.  ), a result consistent with constitutive activation and dependence on mTOR signaling in PC3 cells [ ].

## Inhibition of SCD activity increases the expression of DNA repair genes and induces DNA damage
Given the known links between lipid‐driven metabolic stress, ER stress, and genomic instability [ , , ], and our RNAseq results indicating enrichment in DNA damage response pathways upon SCD inhibition in ARCaP(M) but not PC3 cells (Fig.  ), we next investigated whether SCD inhibition elicits DNA damage response in CAY10566‐sensitive PCa cells. To determine if the transcriptome changes in ARCaP(M) cells following SCD inhibition were a direct consequence of DNA damage, we performed immunofluorescence staining for γ‐H2AX, a marker of DNA double‐stranded breaks. SCD inhibition by CAY10566 significantly increased γ‐H2AX fluorescence intensity in ARCaP(M) (Fig.  ) and 22Rv1 (Fig.  ) cells exposed to adipocytes with no detectable increase in PC3 (Fig.  ) and C42B cells (Fig.  ). Interestingly, ARCaP(M) cells exposed to adipocytes in the absence of SCD inhibition exhibited fewer γ‐H2AX foci compared to cells in monoculture (Fig.  ), highlighting a protective effect from adipocyte interaction. This observation was further supported by an alkaline comet assay, which detects both single‐ and double‐stranded DNA breaks. Specifically, ARCaP(M) cells co‐cultured with adipocytes and treated with vehicle control displayed fewer comet tails, indicative of reduced DNA damage compared to ARCaP(M) cells cultured in alone conditions (Fig.  ). ARCaP(M) cells subjected to SCD inhibition via treatment with CAY10566 showed a significant increase in DNA strand breaks, as evidenced by a higher olive moment in the comet assay (Fig.  ).
 

## 
SCD inhibition suppresses growth and induces ER stress and DNA damage in prostate bone tumors
To examine the in vivo response to SCD inhibition in a lipid‐rich environment, we utilized our well‐established intratibial model of tumor growth and induced marrow adiposity through HFD feeding [ , , , , ]. Mice with established intratibial ARCaP(M) or PC3 tumors (3 weeks postinjection) were treated with the SCD inhibitor (CAY10566, 5 mg·kg−1) or vehicle (5% DMSO) via oral gavage for 4 weeks. Histological analyses of resulting bone tumor sections revealed a significant decrease in ARCaP(M) bone tumor area in CAY10566‐treated mice compared to vehicle controls (Fig.  ). In contrast, no significant effect of SCD inhibition on PC3 bone tumor area was observed (Fig.  ), consistent with in vitro data demonstrating insensitivity of PC3 cells to SCD inhibition (Fig.  ). Interestingly, despite the HFD‐induced marrow adiposity prior to tumor implantation, both ARCaP(M) and PC3 tumors showed loss of marrow adipocyte content regardless of treatment (Fig.  ), a result in line with previous studies demonstrating tumor‐driven adipocyte lipolysis in bone [ , , ].
 Notably, an increase in γ‐H2AX foci staining was observed in ARCaP(M) but not PC3 bone tumors following CAY10566 treatment (Fig.  ). Additionally, ARCaP(M) tumors from treated mice showed elevated expression of ER stress marker ATF4 and its downstream target asparagine synthetase (ASNS), compared to vehicle‐treated controls (Fig.  ). Together, these results support our in vitro findings and highlight the role of SCD in PCa survival and progression in bone.

## Discussion
There is an unmet clinical need to identify molecular drug targets for metastatic prostate cancer in bone, primarily due to the limited understanding of the mechanisms that promote tumor growth and survival within the bone microenvironment. The aim of the present study was to gain a deeper understanding of the adaptive mechanisms that drive metastatic progression in the lipid‐rich bone marrow niche. For the first time, we show that tumor cells adapt to the harsh bone microenvironment and overcome lipid peroxidation induced by bone marrow adipocytes by upregulating the lipid desaturase SCD. We also uncovered that dependence on SCD activity to mitigate lipid peroxidation in the harsh bone microenvironment varies across PCa cell lines, and that cell lines with higher SCD dependence may be more sensitive to DNA‐damaging agents. In PCa cell lines that respond to SCD inhibition, we observe reduced mTOR signaling and transcriptomic alterations in DNA repair pathways, consistent with DNA damage induced by SCD deficiency. We also demonstrate that SCD inhibition significantly reduces the size of experimental bone tumors in mice, supporting its potential as a therapeutic strategy for patients with bone metastatic PCa. This is the first report to present evidence that SCD is a tumor‐promoting enzyme in bone that regulates lipid peroxidation levels in the hostile bone microenvironment.
An increasing number of studies highlight the role of LPO in promoting tumor progression [ ]. SCD has been implicated in tumor cell evasion from lipid peroxide‐induced cell death, specifically by protecting cells against ferroptosis [ , ]. Lipid peroxides are thought to arise from ROS species targeting PUFAs [ ]. Notably, MUFAs are believed to be key players in safeguarding PUFAs from peroxidation [ ]; however, SCD's direct role in this process has yet to be established. Here, our findings suggest that expression of SCD in PCa cell lines may help mitigate adipocyte‐induced LPO levels, consistent with our observation that SCD inhibition leads to elevated LPO levels. Interestingly, even the SCD‐low cell lines such as PC3 exhibit elevated LPO following SCD inhibition without a corresponding effect on their 3D growth. It is possible that inhibiting SCD activity in these cells alters membrane unsaturation sufficiently to increase LPO but not to a level that compromises cell viability or proliferation. This could reflect compensatory mechanisms or engagement of alternative lipid remodeling pathways that warrant further investigation. We found that increased LPO levels robustly induce ER stress in PCa cell lines exposed to adipocytes, and this effect is more dramatic in SCD‐low cell lines such as PC3 or C42B. These cell lines, which also exhibit higher expression of oxidative stress genes upon adipocyte exposure, appear to mount a stronger adaptive response to fat cells, and this preemptive adaptation may render them more resistant to SCD inhibition. In contrast, SCD‐sensitive lines show minimal induction of ER stress proteins and oxidative stress genes under adipocyte exposure, but drastically increase these genes during SCD inhibition to what we believe is an attempt to regain cell homeostasis. One of these genes, GADD45A, is robustly increased by adipocyte exposure in SCD‐insensitive cell lines and by SCD inhibition in SCD‐sensitive cell lines. GADD45A is often induced by DNA damage and other stress signals [ ] and, more recently, has been shown to sustain low levels of reactive oxygen species, thereby safeguarding leukemia cells for self‐renewal [ ]. Therefore, GADD45A may help mitigate the high LPO levels in PC3 cells while also sustaining the activation of DNA damage and repair pathways, likely induced during adipocyte exposure by high LPO levels in cells insensitive to SCD inhibition. The induction of GADD45A and ER stress response, as evidenced by increased ATF4 protein expression, may enable these cells to adapt to oxidative stress in the harsh bone marrow microenvironment independently of SCD activity, rendering them less sensitive to SCD inhibition.
One notable characteristic of PC3 cells, which exhibit low sensitivity to SCD inhibition, is their high expression of lipid transporters FABP4 and CD36, along with increased uptake of adipocyte‐derived lipids. Unlike SCD‐sensitive ARCaP(M) cells, PC3 cells do not show increased DNA damage or decreased mTOR signaling following SCD inhibition. Instead, they further increase the expression of FABP4 and CD36, proteins shown to promote cancer progression by activating the PI3K/mTOR pathway [ , , ]. This suggests that the enhanced lipid uptake and transport may be helping sustain mTOR signaling in PC3 cells, thereby preventing the antitumor effects observed in SCD‐sensitive cell lines. It should be noted that our studies also demonstrated that, although direct inhibition of mTOR signaling with Everolimus significantly reduces PC3 spheroid growth, combining it with SCD deficiency does not produce an additive or synergistic effect. These results suggest that SCD‐insensitive cell lines, with higher expression of CD36 and FABP4, depend on mTOR signaling for survival and maintenance of redox balance, but cannot be sensitized to SCD inhibition via mTOR blockade. This further indicates that intrinsic characteristics or dependencies of cancer cells may underlie their sensitivity or resistance to SCD inhibition, and these attributes cannot always be artificially induced by targeting the downstream pathways.
Prior studies by others have demonstrated that oncogenic activation of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway confers resistance to ferroptotic cell death through SCD activity [ ]. Our results align with these data and demonstrate that SCD reduces phosphorylation of AKT and downstream mTOR proteins, but only in PCa cell lines that do not harbor PTEN genomic aberrations (ARCaP(M), 22RV1) and have low lipid transporter expression and uptake. PTEN loss is one of the most common genomic aberrations in prostate cancer [ ] and is strongly associated with poor clinical outcomes [ ]. Our study showed for the first time that SCD‐high (SCD‐sensitive) cell lines, which have decreased lipid uptake and wild‐type PTEN, show reduced DNA strand breaks during adipocyte exposure, a phenotype that is reversed by SCD inhibition. Notably, PTEN has been found to suppress fatty acid accumulation in goat mammary epithelial cells, and liver‐specific knockout of PTEN was shown to result in triglyceride accumulation [ ]. The increased expression of lipid uptake proteins CD36 and FABP4, along with PTEN loss, might serve as a protective mechanism against DNA damage, rendering these cells less sensitive to SCD inhibition. Indeed, the formation of lipid droplets has been demonstrated in cancer cells, shielding them from oxaliplatin‐induced DNA damage [ ]. Although SCD inhibition has been previously linked to DNA damage, particularly in the context of temozolomide resistance in glioblastoma [ , ], no studies to date have suggested that the induction of DNA damage during SCD inhibition could be driven by increased lipid transporter expression, enhanced lipid uptake, and genetic aberrations in PTEN. PTEN deficiency often cooperates with MYC overexpression to drive proliferation and PCa progression [ , ]. MYC is a major player in the metabolic regulation of lipid metabolism and SCD activity, especially in the context of lipid‐induced ER stress [ ], and is also a key driver of genomic instability and the DNA damage response [ ]. Although our RNAseq results revealed no significant changes in MYC expression following adipocyte exposure or SCD inhibition, future studies should investigate how MYC and its downstream targets influence the response of SCD‐high and SCD‐low cells to lipid exposure and SCD inhibition, particularly in relation to DNA damage response.
Bone metastatic PCa typically shows resistance to DNA‐damaging agents such as platinum‐based therapies or PARP inhibitors when used as monotherapies [ ]. Our results demonstrate that SCD inhibition in SCD‐sensitive cell lines interacting with adipocytes leads to upregulation of several genes within the HRR pathway. This suggests that targeting lipid metabolism in combination with DNA‐damaging agents could be a promising therapeutic strategy for bone metastatic PCa. One potential candidate for combination therapy with SCD inhibitors is the PSMA‐specific, beta particle‐emitting peptidomimetic lutetium‐177 (177Lu‐PSMA‐617). Given that introducing DNA strand breaks is the primary mechanism of 177Lu‐PSMA‐617 cytotoxicity and that improved overall survival with 177Lu‐PSMA‐617 has been reported in metastatic PCa patients who progressed on taxane therapy [ , ], combining this with SCD inhibition could significantly enhance tumor response, which warrants further investigations. Another potential strategy is to combine SCD inhibition with an inhibitor of Ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM), particularly in tumors that are PTEN‐deficient or harbor PTEN mutations. Loss of PTEN has been associated with increased oxidative stress, a greater reliance on ATM for redox homeostasis, and heightened sensitivity to ATM inhibition [ ]. Given our finding that PTEN‐null cells (PC3, C42B) show limited sensitivity to SCD inhibition alone, the combination with an ATM inhibitor may offer a more effective therapeutic approach.
Lipogenic and lipid‐modifying enzymes, including SCD and its transcriptional regulators SREBP1 and SREBP2, are known to be regulated by androgens [ ]. SCD activity has also been previously linked to the proliferation of androgen receptor (AR)‐positive and androgen‐dependent LNCaP cells [ ]. One observation from our study is that the cell lines that were not responsive to SCD inhibition are either AR‐null (PC3 cells) or AR‐positive but androgen‐independent (C42B). This suggests that SCD function may be linked to AR activity and that AR signaling may be required for SCD‐dependent growth or stress adaptation in PCa cells. Whether SCD inhibition would have the greatest impact in earlier disease stages or in tumors that retain AR signaling warrants further investigation.
We acknowledge several limitations in our in vivo study. First, we performed SCD inhibition studies only in mice fed an HFD. We selected the HFD model of marrow adiposity based on its relevance to our in vitro findings, which demonstrated a cell type‐dependent effect of marrow adipocytes on SCD expression and sensitivity to SCD inhibition. Additionally, our studies were conducted in immunocompromised mice, which prevented us from assessing the immune response to SCD inhibition. Given the role of SCD in regulatory T‐cell differentiation [ ], targeting the immune microenvironment in bone may potentially enhance the antitumor response during SCD inhibition, which will be a subject of future studies. Lastly, CAY10566, used in our study to pharmacologically inhibit SCD activity, has shown some undesired side effects, specifically eye dryness and squinting associated with the depletion of essential lipids needed for eye lubrication, symptoms previously reported in other preclinical models [ ]. However, newer inhibitors, such as SSI‐4 [ ], have demonstrated better safety profiles in vivo and are expected to move into the clinical setting. Nonetheless, the toxicity of current systemic SCD pharmacological inhibitors remains a significant challenge [ ].
Studies presented herein identify SCD as a modulator of cellular stress and a promising molecular target in metastatic PCa. We show that SCD inhibition in sensitive cell lines results in lipid‐induced stress that leads to DNA damage, ER stress, and reduced survival. Importantly, we also reveal that lipid uptake and transport mechanisms, genomic aberrations in DDR genes, and PTEN status may influence tumor response to SCD inhibition, highlighting the need for further investigation. Collectively, the results from our study underscore the role of SCD as a key metabolic regulator of adipocyte‐tumor crosstalk in the bone metastatic niche and emphasize the importance of exploring the molecular mechanisms underlying tumor cell resilience and survival in the lipid‐rich bone marrow niche.

## Author contributions
AW was involved in conceptualization, methodology, investigation, validation, formal analysis, visualization, writing—original draft preparation and review & editing; MH was involved in investigation, validation, writing—review & editing; SM was involved in investigation, formal analysis, writing—review & editing; LG was involved in investigation, writing—review & editing; JL was involved in investigation, writing—review & editing; SR was involved in investigation, formal analysis, writing—review & editing; SP was involved in investigation, resources, writing—review & editing; IP was involved in conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, resources, writing—original draft preparation and review & editing; supervision, funding acquisition.

## Supporting information

Fig. S1. SCD is expressed in bone metastasis samples from PCa patients.

Fig. S2. SCD knockdown by individual siRNA duplexes.

Fig. S3. SCD pharmacological inhibition does not increase lipid peroxidation in PCa cells grown in the absence of adipocytes.

Fig. S4. siRNA‐mediated SCD knockdown increases lipid peroxidation levels in PCa cells in Transwell co‐culture with adipocytes.

Fig. S5. SCD pharmacological inhibition does not increase lipid peroxidation in PCa cells grown in the absence of adipocytes.

Fig. S6. SCD inhibition induces expression of GADD45A only in 22Rv1 cells.

Fig. S7. Differential gene expression and GO Enrichment Analysis of PCa cells in monoculture compared to in Transwell co‐culture with marrow adipocytes.

Fig. S8. SCD knockdown/inhibition increases ER stress levels in PCa cells.

Fig. S9. Inhibition of SCD decreases mTOR signaling in ARCaP(M) but not PC3 cells.

Fig. S10. PC3 cells exposed to adipocytes have increased lipid uptake and expression of lipid transporters, which are further increased by SCD inhibition.

Fig. S11. Loss of adipocytes during tumor progression in bone.

Fig. S12. SCD inhibition in vivo increases ER stress and expression in ARCaP(M) bone tumors.

## Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by NIH grants R01CA251394 (IP), T32CA009531 (AW), F31CA284576 (AW), and P30CA22453 (MICR). Pilot funds were provided by the Karmanos Cancer Institute (KCI SRIG) (IP). The Microscopy, Imaging and Cytometry Resources Core (MICR) and Biobanking and Correlative Sciences Core (BCSC) were supported, in part by NIH Center grants P30 CA22453 to the Karmanos Cancer Institute. R50 CA251068 to Dr. Moin, Wayne State University, provided additional support for MICR.

Edited by Lukas Alfons Huber

## Data accessibility
RNAseq data have been deposited into the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository (GSE312077).

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials

Fig. S1. SCD is expressed in bone metastasis samples from PCa patients.

Fig. S2. SCD knockdown by individual siRNA duplexes.

Fig. S3. SCD pharmacological inhibition does not increase lipid peroxidation in PCa cells grown in the absence of adipocytes.

Fig. S4. siRNA‐mediated SCD knockdown increases lipid peroxidation levels in PCa cells in Transwell co‐culture with adipocytes.

Fig. S5. SCD pharmacological inhibition does not increase lipid peroxidation in PCa cells grown in the absence of adipocytes.

Fig. S6. SCD inhibition induces expression of GADD45A only in 22Rv1 cells.

Fig. S7. Differential gene expression and GO Enrichment Analysis of PCa cells in monoculture compared to in Transwell co‐culture with marrow adipocytes.

Fig. S8. SCD knockdown/inhibition increases ER stress levels in PCa cells.

Fig. S9. Inhibition of SCD decreases mTOR signaling in ARCaP(M) but not PC3 cells.

Fig. S10. PC3 cells exposed to adipocytes have increased lipid uptake and expression of lipid transporters, which are further increased by SCD inhibition.

Fig. S11. Loss of adipocytes during tumor progression in bone.

Fig. S12. SCD inhibition in vivo increases ER stress and expression in ARCaP(M) bone tumors.

## Data Availability Statement
RNAseq data have been deposited into the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository (GSE312077).