4419bbadvaBBA AdvancesBBA AdvElsevierPMC1272117012721170127211704143825210.1016/j.bbadva.2025.100176CEMIP promotes gefitinib resistance in lung cancer with EGFR-mutation possibly through forming a stable complex CEMIP/c-MYC
LiLi XieJiaxiu LiangJinxing SuHua ShenXiaoju MoXiaoxiang LinXinli TanWeidan WuKun ZhuFucui WangLi LiuYing aResearch Center of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Ethnic Medicine, Guangxi Institute of Chinese Medicine & Pharmaceutical Science, Nanning, 530001, Guangxi, PR ChinabGuangxi Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Quality Standards, Guangxi Institute of Chinese Medicine & Pharmaceutical Science, Nanning, 530001, Guangxi, PR ChinacDepartment of Pharmacy, Wuzhou Red Cross Hospital, Wuzhou, 543099, Guangxi, PR ChinadDepartment of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning 530021, Guangxi, PR ChinaeDepartment of Pharmacology, Maternal and Child Health Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning 530021, Guangxi, ChinafDepartments of Hepatobiliary and Gastrointestinal Surgery, Minzu Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Nanning 530021, Guangxi, PR ChinagDepartment of Pharmacy, Chongqing University FuLing Hospital, 408000, Chongqing,PR China⁎Corresponding authors. lili@stu.gxmu.edu.cnliuying@gicmp.ac.cn
1Co-authors equally contributed their work in this study.
25112025910017610017623122025© 2025 The Author(s)This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

## Highlights
•Exploring the role of CEMIP/c-MYC-mediated EMT progression in acquiring resistance to Gefitinib in lung cancer.
•Illustrating that CEMIP directly bond to c-MYC with its 1–177aa domain.
•Formation of CEMIP/c-MYC mutually stabilizing their expression and biological function.
Keywords: LUAD, CEMIP, c-MYC, Gefitinib, Chemo-resistance

## Abstract
While gefitinib greatly improves the prognosis of lung cancer patients with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation, its inevitable resistance severely diminishes therapeutic efficacy. Cell migration-inducing protein (CEMIP) might interact with cellular MYC proto-oncogene (c-MYC) to synergistically drive gefitinib resistance. However, the mechanism by which CEMIP/c-MYC regulates gefitinib resistance in LUAD remains unknown. The gefitinib-acquired resistance (AR) cell line PC9GR was established by gradual dose-escalation induction. CEMIP expression was up-regulated in PC9GR cells, suggesting the positive corelationship might exsit between CEMIP expression and gefitinib resistance. Similarly, overexpressing CEMIP in PC9 cells not only increased IC50 value of gefitinib but also enhanced the proliferation, migration and tolerance to gefitinib. In contrast, downregulating the expression of CEMIP in PC9GR cells partially restored gefitinib sensitivity and reduced malignant phenotypes. Furthermore, c-MYC promoted transcriptional activity through binding to the promoter region of CEMIP. Rescue assays demonstrated that reducing the expression of c-MYC downregulated the IC50 value of Gefitinib, migration and tolerance of gefitinib in PC9 OE cells, while overexpressing c-MYC reversed these malignant phenotypes in PC9GR shCEMIP cells. Subcutaneous xenograft model also supported that the expression of CEMIP positively correlated to c-MYC in tumor tissues. Mechanistically, protein docking simulations and Co-IP assays indicated that CEMIP directly interacted with c-MYC via its 1–177aa domain to form the CEMIP/c-MYC complex. Furthermore, CHX chase assays showed that CEMIP and c-MYC mutually stabilized the expression of both proteins. The elevated CEMIP/c-MYC axis accelerates EMT to enhance cell migration, thereby contributing to the acquisition of gefitinib resistance in LUAD.

statusreleaseddisplay-pdfyesis-olfnois-manuscriptnois-preprintnois-journal-matternois-scannednois-retractednoReceived 2025 Jul 31; Revised 2025 Nov 13; Accepted 2025 Nov 24; Collection date 2026.

1.

## Introduction
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the most common type of lung cancer, accounting for approximately 85 % of cases, and remains a heavy burden on human healthcare. Over the past few decades, the incidence of NSCLC in China has shown a gradual upward trend [ ]. The three main subtypes of NSCLC are lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD), lung squamous carcinoma (LUSC), and large cell lung cancer [ ]. More than half of NSCLC originate from mucus gland cells, termed LUAD, wherein the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mutant is the most prevalent molecular classification among Asian populations [ ]. The incidence of EGFR-mutant LUAD is approximately 16.6 % of the total incidence of all lung cancer types and has a low survival rate for patients if the tumour progresses to an advanced stage [ ]. EGFR mutation allows for persistent activation at the tyrosine site, where a binding pocket of ATP is located, resulting in activation of downstream signalling pathways and uncontrolled tumour growth.
Considering EGFR-mutated oncogene addicted NSCLC, the strategy for chemotherapy in EGFR-addicted LUAD relies on tyrosine kinase receptor inhibitors (TKI). The first approved EGFR-TKI reagent, gefitinib, achieved a milestone in clinical chemotherapy for patients with advanced LUAD carrying EGFR mutants, such as the L858R mutation of exon 21 and exon 19 deletion,which dramatically attenuated tumour progression and extended survival time in these patients [ ]. The mechanism of action of gefitinib relies on impeding the binding of ATP to the phosphorylation site, which inactivates EGFR and its downstream signalling. Currently, gefitinib still remains a promising first-line therapeutic strategy [ ]. Although drug efficacy of gefitinib attenuated the tumor progression in LUAD, chemoresistance invariably developed because long-term exposure largely forced tumour cells to undergo multiple mutations to avoid being inhibited by gefitinib. Clinical observations indicate that resistance typically develops within 9–12 months after treatment initiation. Additionally, some patients may experience bypass signal activation or cellular phenotype transformation [ ], in such cases genetic testing may be needed to guide adjustment to the treatment regimen. Once chemoresistance developed, it hindered the therapeutic benefit of gefitinib and shortened the overall survival of patients with LUAD.
The resistance due to long-term exposure to gefitinib can be categorised as “on-target” and “off-target” resistance. “On-target” resistance is characterised by a secondary mutation occurred in EGFR, such as T790M (accounting for 50 %), C797S, and amplification of wild-type EGFR, resulting in decreased sensitivity to ongoing treatment [ , ]. On the contrary, “off-target” resistance occurs due to the activation of bypass signalling pathways or activation of other driver genes. Although the second or third-generation EGFR-TKI agents could restrict tumour progression to some extent against “on-target” resistance, it showed negligent improvement against the “off-target” subtype [ , ]. Therefore, discovering the underlying crucial pathway or key factor and the mechanism that drives the process of chemoresistance may enable the discovery of new drugs for LUAD.
Cell migration-inducing hyaluronidase 1 (CEMIP; also known as KIAA1199 or HYBID), encoded by the gene KIAA1199, is a newly discovered hyaluronidase (HYAL) that differs from the HYALs family, such as HYAL1 and HYAL2. CEMIP was initially identified as an innerear-specific protein associated with non-syndromic hearing loss [ ]. Current literature indicates that CEMIP has multiple functions as an oncogene and adaptor protein that facilitates tumor proliferation, metabolic reprogramming, metastasis, and chemoresistance in numerous malignancies [ , ]. High expression of CEMIP has been widely found in lung cancer. For example, our previous study indicated that high CEMIP expression facilitated the invasion and migration of SCLC cells [ ]. Specifically, CEMIP increases the pre-metastatic signal of slow molecular weight hyaluronan (HA) to enhance metastasis via hydrolysing the extracellular matrix in SCLC [ , ]. Accumulating evidence has revealed that CEMIP is associated with chemoresistance based on its oncogenic properties. Duong et al. reported that CEMIP-activated wingless-related integration site (WNT) signalling bridged to mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MEK1)-extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) leads to selumetinib resistance in colon cancer [ ]. Recently, Gao et al. found that inhibiting the CEMIP-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) process recovered the sensitivity of NSCLC to paclitaxel [ ]. Dr. Shen et al. discovered that CEMIP reduced the treatment response of cisplatin and etoposide (Etoposide) in SCLC as it sustained auto-activation of proto-oncogene tyrosine-protein kinase Src (SRC) to adapt p-SRC/Yes1 associated transcriptional regulator (YAP) formation and stabilised the transcriptional function of YAP [ ]. However, whether CEMIP functions as a gefitinib resistance regulator in LUAD remains unknown.
Previous studies have demonstrated that high CEMIP expression is vital for promoting tumor malignancy and served as a potential clinical outcome index in NSCLC [ , ]. This study explores how CEMIP promotes gefitinib resistance and sustains malignant phenotypes in a gefitinib-treated environment by promoting EMT progression and enhancing cell migration. Moreover, our research team illustrates that CEMIP binds to c-MYC with its 1–177aa domain thereby forming the CEMIP/c-MYC complex, this complex might work in sustaining their high expression possibly via positive feedback loop at protein level. The elevated CEMIP/c-MYC axis accelerates EMT and migration, thereby contributing to the acquisition of gefitinib resistance in LUAD.

2.

## Methods
2.1.

## Reagents and antibodies
Antibodies and chemicals used in this study are listed in .
 
2.2.

## Cell lines and culture
LUAD cell lines PC9 and HEK293t cells were purchased from the Shanghai Cell Bank, National Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures (Shanghai, China). The culture conditions for each cell line are described in .
 
2.3.

## Establishment of gefitinib-resistant cell lines by growing cells in incremental concentrations
Based on the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50), PC9 cells were exposed to 0.01 μM gefitinib medium for 48 h; the gefitinib medium was then withdrawn and replaced with normal medium for 2–3 days. When the cells recovered and reached 90 % confluence, gefitinib treatment was repeated at the same concentration. The IC50 value was re-evaluated using the cell counting kit-8 (CCK-8) assay when <10 % dead cells were observed in the induced panel. Gefitinib exposure concentration was subsequently elevated to tolerate IC50 until the resistant variants emerged. The exposure concentration of gefitinib was gradually increased from 0.01 μM to 10 μM, and induction of resistance lasted 15 months. Gefitinib-resistant cell line PC9GR was obtained when up to 90 % viable cells acquired resistance when induced with 10 μM gefitinib for at least 48 h. The threshold of the gefitinib resistance index (IC50resistant / IC50parental) was calculated.

2.4.

## CCK-8 assays
Evaluation of IC50: The toxic effects of gefitinib on cells were measured using a CCK-8 assay. Cells were grown in 96-well plates at a density of 5 × 103 cells/well. After they were adhered to the well, cells were treated with serial concentrations of gefitinib from 0 to 50 μM (0, 0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1, 5, 10, 20, 50 μM). After a 24, 48 h or 72 h incubation period, 100 μL CCK-8 working reagent (10 %, diluted in phosphate-buffered saline[PBS]) was added to each well for incubating for 1 h at 37 °C. The optical density (OD) values were recorded at 450 nm using a microplate reader (Synergy2, BioTek Co., California, USA), and the cell inhibition rate ( %) was calculated. The inhibition rate curve was drawn to determine the IC50 value by fitting the logarithm of the gefitinib concentrations and the cell inhibition rate.
For proliferation: PC9 NC, PC9 OE, PC9GR shNC, and PC9GR shCEMIP cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at a density of 3 × 103 cells/well. After 24 h of cultivation, the cell medium was used for the control group and gefitinib treatment group. The concentration of gefitinib medium was 0.01 μM for PC9 NC and PC9 OE cells and 10 μM for PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP cells. The replacement of the gefitinib conditioned medium was performed at a total volume of 100 µL, whereas the cell medium in the control group was replaced with the normal medium. The starting point was set once the normal or gefitinib medium was added. At the end of 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 h, the original medium was discarded and 100 µL of 10 % CCK-8 working solution was added. The plate was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. The OD density of each well was recorded at a wavelength of 450 nm using a microplate reader (Synergy2, BioTek Co., California, USA).

2.5.

## Flow cytometry for detecting cell apoptosis
The cells were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 5 × 105 cells/well. The original medium was replaced by either the gefitinib treatment medium (0.02 μM for PC9 and 10 μM for PC9GR; 0.1 μM for PC9 NC, PC9 OE, and PC9 OE-siMYC; and 10 μM for PC9GR shNC, PC9GR shCEMIP, and PC9GR shCEMIP-OEMYC) or normal medium for 48 h for proliferation. Cells were digested with 0.25 % trypsin without ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-free supplement and were resuspended in 500 μL of 1 × binding buffer. Subsequently, 5 μL of Annexin V-APC dye and 5 μL of 7-Aminoactinomycin D (7AAD) dye were added stepwise into each cell suspension tube, which were incubated at 25 °C for 15 min in the dark for dyeing. Cell suspension was filtered through a 400-mesh nylon sieve and detection was performed using a flow cytometer (GUAVA, Millipore Co., Massachusetts, USA).

2.6.

## PI/4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) staining for detecting cell death
Cell suspension was adjusted to 1 × 105cells/mL, and 1 mL of different cell suspensions were then transferred to each well of a 6-well plate. Once the cells adhered, the medium of each well was replaced with either gefitinib treating medium (0.1 μM for PC9 and 10 μM for PC9GR, 0.1 μM for PC9 NC and PC9 OE, and 10 μM for PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP) or normal medium for 24 h. Cells were fixed with 4 % polyformaldehyde for 30 min and sequentially stained by adding a 500 μL mixture of PI (5μg/mL) working solution and DAPI (10μg/mL) for 10 min. Fluorescent images were obtained using a fluorescence microscope (EVOS Flt, Life Co., Massachusetts, USA).

2.7.

## Bioinformatics analysis of IC50 value of gefitinib and expression of CEMIP in LUAD cell lines
Data on gefitinib sensitivity and CEMIP expression in lung cancer cell lines were acquired from the Genomics of Drug Sensitivity in Cancer (GDSC2) database (https://www.cancerrxgene.org/) [ ]. From the GDSC2 database, the IC50 values of lung cancer cell lines and the corresponding gene expression for CEMIP were obtained and exhibited as scatter plots. Correlation analysis was performed using the Pearson’s correlation coefficient analysis.

2.8.

## Lentivirus and plasmid transfections
Lentivirus transfection: PC9 cells were transfected with lentivirus packing with the OE-CEMIP sequence (pcSLenti-EF1-BSR-CMV-CEMIP-3xFLAG-WPRE) or vector (pcSLenti-EF1-BSR-CMV-3xFLAG-WPRE) to establish stable overexpressing PC9 OE strains or negative control PC9 NC, respectively. PC9GR cells were transfected with lentivirus packaging with pSLenti-U6-shNC—CMV-EGFP-F2A-Puro-WPRE or pSLenti-U6-shCEMIP-CMV-EGFP-F2A-Puro-WPRE sequence to establish PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP stable knockdown strains, respectively. The sequences are shown in . Ninety-six hours after transfection with lentivirus, culture media containing either 10 μg/mL blasticidin (for LV-OE CEMIP) or 5 μg/mL puromycin (for LV-sh CEMIP) were used to eliminate untransfected cells with a 14-day selection period. CEMIP mRNA and protein expression in PC9 NC, PC9 OE, PC9GR shNC, and PC9GR shCEMIP cells was verified using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and Western Blot assay.
 For c-MYC rescue assay: A total of 2.5 μg siRNA (si-MYC) was added to 125 μL culture medium, respectively. Meanwhile, a volume of 5 μL Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent was added to another 125 μL of culture medium. After incubating at 25 °C for 5 mins, the diluted DNA solution was mixed with diluted lipofectamine 2000 reagent solution to form liposomes and was allowed to react for 30 mins at 25 °C. The above mixture was then added to 5 × 105 PC9 OE cells, and the complete medium was replaced after 24 h. Transfection was terminated at 48 h, and the cells were harvested for further validation. Transfection of the full-length c-MYC (OE-MYC) plasmid packaging was conducted in PC9GR shCEMIP cells followed above procedures.
Construction of truncated CEMIP plasmids: Plasmid packaging with full-length CEMIP and four truncated CEMIP, pcDNA3.1(+)-CEMIP-A (1–177aa)-3xFLAG, pcDNA3.1(+)-CEMIP-B (1–30aa & 178–572aa)-3xFLAG, pcDNA3.1(+)-CEMIP-C (1–30aa & 573–819aa)-3xFLAG, and pcDNA3.1(+)-CEMIP-D (1–30aa & 820–1361aa)-3xFLAG, were co-transfected with full-length c-MYC plasmid pcDNA3.1(+)-c-MYC into HEK293t cells, respectively. After 48 h cultivation, the cells were harvested and lysed for protein extraction. Western Blot and Co-IP assays were used to detect the expression and binding effect of CEMIP and c-MYC fragments in each sample.

2.9.

## RNA extraction and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) assay
Various LUAD cells were seeded in a 6-well plate, each well contained 5 × 105 cells. When cell confluence reached 95 %, the medium of each well was discarded and 800 μL of RNAisoplus (TAKARA, Japan) was added for cell lysis. RNA was extracted by chloroform, and was precipitated by isopropanol and purified by cold 75 % ethanol. Synthesis of cDNA was conducted by mixing 1 μg RNA and reverse transcription reagent as the manufacturer’s instruction (TAKARA, Japan). According to the manufacturer instruction, RT-qPCR was performed in a 20 μL volume of the reaction system, wherein loading 100 ng cDNA templates and specific leading primers into fluorescent dye (SYBR Green, TAKARA, Japan) mixture, then reactions were processed by thermal cycler (LightCycler 480Ⅱ, Roche, USA). Primers are listed in .

2.10.

## Plate colony formation assay
A total of 5 × 103 cells were seeded in each well of a 6-well plate with 1 mL medium per well and cultivated for 48 h. The original medium was disposed of, and 2 mL of normal medium or gefitinib (0.1 μM for PC9 NC and PC9 OE and 10 μM for PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP) was added into the corresponding wells. The conditioned medium was replaced with the normal medium after 48 h, and the cells were cultured and incubated for 10 days. At the end of the experiment, cells were fixed in 4 % polyformaldehyde solution for 30 min, followed by staining with 0.1 % crystal violet for 10 min. Colony formation was photographed, and colony counts were statistically analysed.

2.11.

## Wound healing assay
A guiding line was drawn across the centre of the well at the back bottom of a 96-well plate before commencing the experiment. Cells were harvested and seeded in each well at a density of 2 × 104 cells/well. When the cells exhibited as monolayers and reached 95 % confluence in each well, scratches were created at the centre of the well, perpendicular to the guiding line, using a sterile pipette. PBS solution was used to wash the spare cells, and a new medium containing 1 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) with or without 0.1 μM (PC9 NC and PC9 OE) or 10 μM (PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP) gefitinib, was added to the corresponding wells. The wounds were evaluated at 0 h and 24 h using an optical microscope at 100 × magnification. The relative wound healing rate ( %) was calculated using the following equation: (reduced distance24h of riversides/original distance0h of riversides) × 100 %.

2.12.

## Transwell assay
A total of 5 × 104 cells suspended in 100 μL medium were added into specific upper chambers, respectively, while the lower chambers were filled with 650 μL of either normal medium or 0.1 μM (PC9 NC, PC9 OE, PC9 OE-siMYC) or 10 μM (for PC9GR shNC, PC9GR shCEMIP, PC9GR shCEMIP-OEMYC) gefitinib medium. Transwell progression lasted 16 h at 37 °C incubator. At the endpoint, cells in the inner layer of upper chamber were removed by cotton sticks. Cells attached to the outer layer of upper chambers were fixed by 4 % polyformaldehyde for 15mins and were stained by 0.1 % crystal violet for 10mins. Five images of bright fields were randomly captured and statistically analyzed. Migrated cells of each chamber were captured by optical microscope with 200 × magnification.

2.13.

## Western Blot assay
Cell sample preparation: Cells were seeded in a 6-well plate at a density of 2 × 105 cells/mL, followed by cultivation for 16 h for cell adhesion. Subsequently, the medium in each well was changed to either normal medium or 0.1 μM (PC9 NC and PC9 OE) or 10 μM (PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP) gefitinib medium for 48 h, and cells were lysed for protein extraction. A volume of 100 μL radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) lysis buffer containing 1 % protease and phosphatase inhibitors was added to the cell sample containing approximately a total of 106 cells. The protein solution was collected after separating the cell lysis buffer by centrifugation (12, 000 × g, 30 mins, at 4 °C).
Protein quantification of the cells and tissue samples was conducted using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit. A loading protein sample was prepared containing 1–3 μg/μL protein concentration. A loading sample containing 10–30 μg total protein was added to each lane of sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). Separated proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (0.22 μm) under electrophoretic conditions of 100 V for 100–150 min. The membrane was blocked with 5 % non-fat milk and incubated with a specific diluted primary antibody solution overnight at 4 °C ( ). Sequentially, the diluted secondary antibody was added and incubated for 1.5 h at 25 °C, and the protein band was detected using the electrochemiluminescence method (Vazyme E412, Nanjing, China). The Tanon 4600 imaging system (Tannon, Shanghai, China) was used to capture specific protein bands for further analysis.
 
2.14.

## Cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA)
CETSA assay was used to detect changes in the binding of EGFR and gefitinib in PC9GR and PC9 cells. A total of 2 × 107 cells were cultivated in a 10 cm cell Petri dish. When the confluence reached 90 %, 10 μL of 50 mM gefitinib or the same volume of dimethyl sulfoxide was added to each petri dish to obtain a final concentration of 50 μM gefitinib or solvent group. Cells were exposed to gefitinib treatment or solvent for 1 h at 37 °C and were then collected and divided evenly into various 0.2 mL PCR tubes. Each tube was placed at different lines in the PCR instrument for the thermal process, involving heating at 37 °C, 40 °C, 45 °C, and 50 °C for 3 min and subsequently cooling at 4 °C for another 3 min. After the thermal process, all tubes were frozen using liquid nitrogen and re-thawed at 25 °C, this procedure is repeated 3 times. Supernatant from cell lysis in each sample was separated by centrifuging at 16,000 g, at 4 °C for 15 min. And then, the entire supernatant (50 μL) was mixed with 25 μL reducing loading buffer and immersed in boiling water bath for 10 mins. Samples from the solvent- and gefitinib-treated groups were subjected to SDS-PAGE. Sequentially followed by transferring, immunoblotting, and analysis steps as performed for Western Blot assay.

2.15.

## Co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay
A total of 30 μL Protein A/G magnetic beads were diluted using 200 μL PBS with Tween 20, and 1 μg primary antibody (Anti-MsIgG-CEMIP, Anti- MsIgG-c-MYC, and Anti- RbIgG-Flag) or MsIgG or RbIgG was added to diluted beads ( ). The mixture solutions were incubated on a rotary shaker for 4 h at 4 °C for pre-treatment binding, followed by the addition of 300 μg protein solution of each sample into the pre-treated solution and incubated with rotation for 16 h at 4 °C. Then, all tubes were placed on a magnetic bar to separate unbound proteins and the washing buffer was used to elute the antibody-antigen complex from the magnetic beads. The eluted complex was then mixed with 30 μL of 2 × loading buffer. After pipetting the complex and loading buffer, the tubes were placed in boiling water for 10 mins to elute the antibody-antigen complex from the magnetic beads. The presence or absence of a primary antibody against the target protein was detected using Western Blot assays.

2.16.

## Protein half-life detection with cycloheximide (CHX) chase assay
The protein turnover rate was determined using the CHX chase assay. Altogether, 1 × 106 LUAD cells were seeded in a 3.5 cm petri dish. After the cells adhered, the culture medium was replaced with a blocking medium containing 75μg/mL CHX. Gefitinib was also added at the same time to obtain a final concentration of 0.1 μM (PC9 NC and PC9 OE) or 10 μM (PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP). Cells were harvested and lysed at 0, 10, 30, 45, and 60 mins after adding the CHX medium. Western Blot was performed to detect protein expression. The turnover rate of specific proteins was analysed by calculating the decreased ratio of expression between each time-point and the blank counterpart.

2.17.

## Dual luciferase reporter gene assay
The binding site of c-MYC in the promoter region of CEMIP sequences were predicted by using JASPAR (https://jaspar.elixir.no/). The predicted region (wild-type or mutant type) were embedded into the luciferase reporter vector pMIR-REPORT Luciferase-CEMIP-MUT or pMIR-REPORT Luciferase-CEMIP-WT, respectively (OBiO Biotechnology Co., Shanghai, China). HEK293t cells were grown in the 96-well plate, and then were co-transfected with either c-MYC or NC and vector, CEMIP-MuT or CEMIP-WT fragment, using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent , as described in the 2.8 section. Cells were lysed after transfection in 48 h and luciferase activity was detected by using Dual Luciferase Reporter Gene Assay Kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China), according to the manufacturer's protocol.

2.18.

## Orthotopic lung xenograft in nude mice
Twenty male nude mice were used in the present study. All 4-week-old nude mice weighed approximately 12–14 g. After adaptive feeding for 5 days, mice were randomly divided into two groups: PC9GR shNC and PC9GR shCEMIP. Mice were subcutaneously injected with 100 μL of a mixture of Matrigel and either 1 × 106 of PC9GR shNC or PC9GR shCEMIP cells. The nude mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free room at the Experimental Animal Centre of the Guangxi Institute of Chinese Medicine & Pharmaceutical Science. After 5 days, each group was divided into two subgroups, wherein one group received gefitinib treatment (20 mg/kg, oral gavage, daily), the other group received the same volume of solvent (PBS). The body weight of each mouse and the length and width diameters of each xenograft tumor were recorded every 2 days. At the terminal time-point, the mice were euthanised by inhalation of an overdose of isoflurane within the R500 Small Animal Anaesthesia Machine (R500IP, EWD Life Science Co., Texas, USA), and the xenograft tumors were removed for embedding in paraffin and protein extraction. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines for the ethical review of animal welfare (GB/T35892–2018). The experiments were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the Guangxi Institute of Chinese Medicine & Pharmaceutical Science (No. 2024062101).

2.19.

## Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining
Tissue slides from the animal xenograft tumor were sequentially soaked in xylene, gradient ethanol (100 %, 95 %, 90 %, 75 % and 50 %), and a water jar, each soaking procedure lasted 15 mins. After being washed by PBS solution for 2 times, the deparaffinisation and rehydration of tissue slides were completed, followed that the prepared tissue slides were soaking into haematoxylin for 30 mins of nuclear staining, and were soaking in eosin for 10 mins for cytoplasm staining. The coverslips were sealed with glycerin using a slider. The staining results were then observed and the morphological images were captured by using an optical microscope (Evos AutoFL, Life Co., Massachusetts, USA) at 200 × magnification.

2.20.

## Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL) assay
Slides of xenograft tissues were deparaffinised and rehydrated as described in the haematoxylin and eosin staining section. Protease K (20μg/mL) was added to each slide dropwise for digestion at 37 °C for 30 min. For preparing the TUNEL probe mixture, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase enzyme and biotin labelled-dUTP solution (1:9, v/v) were mixed together and incubated with tissues for 1 h at 37 °C. Streptavidin-horse radish peroxidase (HRP) working solution and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) developing solution were prepared and added to each slide in a step-by-step manner. After DAB staining, all slides were soaked in haematoxylin for 30minfor nuclear staining, following which all slides underwent fast dehydration and were sealed with neutral resin. TUNEL staining of all slides was observed under a microscope (Evos AutoFL, Life Co., Massachusetts, USA) at 200 × magnification.
The criteria for the immunohistochemistry (IHC) scores were integrated using the scores for staining and positive areas. The staining scores based on the intensity of staining were as follows: negative-0, weak positive-1, positive-2, strong positive-3. Positive areaswere scored based on the percentage of positive area to the total area: 0–5 % positive score 0; 6–25 % positive score 1; 26–50 % positive score 2; 51–75 % positive score 3; 76–100 % positive score 4; according to our previous report [ ]. Information of the antibodies used is provided in .

2.21.

## Immunohistochemistry (IHC) assay
Details of IHC for the tissues were obtained from our previous study [ ]. Paraffin-embedded tissue slices were deparaffinised and rehydrated. All the rehydrated slides were soaked in citrate buffer, followed by heat-induced epitope retrieval. Goat serum solution (5 %) was used for blocking. Diluted primary antibodies were added dropwise to each slice and were placed at 4 °C overnight for incubation. For the IHC assay, HRP-labelled secondary antibodies (HRP-Rb-IgG or HRP-Ms-IgG) were used to label the primary antibodies ( ), followed by a brown-precipitate reaction. The results were evaluated and analysed as described previously [ ]. The intensity of positive staining was evaluated according to the standard described in the scoring method of the TUNEL assay.

2.22.

## Protein docking via hDOCK
The crystallized c-MYC protein structure (PDB ID: 5I4Z) was obtained from the Protein Data Bank (PDB, https://www.rcsb.org/), the predicted structure of CEMIP was generated from AlphaFold (https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/). And then PyMOL (OSE version) was used for preprocessing two proteins, including removal of heteroatoms, non-protein components, and water molecules. Two preprocessed proteins were designated as ligand and receptor, respectively, before docking process. The preprocessed proteins were uploaded to hDOCK (http://hdock.phys.hust.edu.cn/) for protein-protein docking. The conformation with the lowest score was selected and visualized using PyMOL. The visualization showed the information of potential binding amino acid residues, binding bonds and bond length.

2.23.

## Statistical analysis
The statistical results of each figure were indicated as the mean value ± SD with triplicates. Statistical significance was determined using the regression analysis for fitting IC50, the Student’s unpaired two-tailed t-test was used for two-group comparisons, one-way ANOVA multiple comparison test was used for analyzing independent or multiple groups more than three groups, and Pearson correlation for correlation analysis, statistical significance for each analysis as indicated in the legend.(*,#, %,$ P < 0.05, and **,##, P < 0.01).

3.

## Results
3.1.

## CEMIP might be the key factor lead to bypass activation in gefitinib-acquired resistance (AR) cells
Although gefitinib treatment achieved significant clinical responses in LUAD patients with EGFR-addicted mutations, acquired resistance (AR) inevitably developed in 9–12 months after initiation of administration [ ]. However, the high somatic heterogeneity of LUAD cells results in complicated mechanisms of gefitinib AR, thereby reducing drug efficacy and increasing toxic side effects. To discover the underlying molecular mechanism of gefitinib-AR, we established a cellular AR model by mimicking clinical AR progression in gefitinib-sensitive PC9 cells. During AR induction, PC9 cells were exposed to increasing concentrations of gefitinib for 15 months to successfully generate the AR strain model PC9GR ( A). As shown in B, the IC50 values of gefitinib in PC9GR cells were much higher than those of in PC9 cells, in a time-dependent manner. The resistant indexes (RI) of 24 h, 48 h and 72 h in PC9GR cells were 224.47, 677.39 and 952.14 respectively ( B). C and D showed that fewer cell deaths were observed in PC9GR cells, compared with that of in PC9 cells after treatment with gefitinib at different exposure time periods. One of the prerequisites for gefitinib to function as an inhibitor is its ability to bind to EGFR and inhibit the phosphorylation of EGFR. However, Western blot results indicated that gefitinib treatment reduced the expression and phosphorylated activation of EGFR in PC9 cells, but mildly affected them in PC9GR cells ( E). Moreover, we used the CETSA to determine whether the binding ability of gefitinib to EGFR changed in PC9GR cells. As shown in F, after incubating with gefitinib, the decrease in EGFR expression was lower in both PC9 and PC9GR cells, compared to their solvent-treated counterparts, with increased thermal treatment (from 40 °C to 50 °C). These results indicated that gefitinib still could bind to EGFR in PC9GR cells, but failed to inactivate the phosphorylation of EGFR. Taken together, these results validated that resistant strains of PC9GR cells were successfully established, and the activation of EGFR might came from bypass activation which lead by some key factors in resistant cells.
 CEMIP is a novel oncogenic protein that promotes tumourigenic progression, including proliferation, invasion, metastasis, and chemoresistance. We previously found CEMIP-associated malignant phenotypes, including invasion, migration, proliferation, and gain of chemoresistance in SCLC [ , , , ]. Therefore, we hypothesized that CEMIP might also facilitate gain of chemoresistance in PC9GR cells. G showed that the generated gefitinib-AR cell line PC9GR had higher expression of CEMIP than the gefitinib-sensitive PC9 cells. Based on the database records, CEMIP expression was positively correlated with a higher IC50 value of gefitinib in lung cancer cell lines ( H). We then performed a rescue assay by overexpressing or knocking down CEMIP in PC9 or PC9GR cells to explore whether alterations in CEMIP expression affected the sensitivity of gefitinib. Lentivirus-encapsulated full-length CEMIP or shCEMIP sequences were used to establish the stable overexpressing strain PC9 OE and the stable knockdown strain PC9GR shCEMIP. I and J show that CEMIP mRNA and protein level were successfully upregulated in PC9 OE cells compared to their NC counterparts, whereas the mRNA and protein expression of CEMIP was downregulated in PC9GR shCEMIP compared to that in PC9GR shNC. The sensitivity assay of gefitinib ( K) demonstrated that the IC50 value (48 h) of gefitinib in PC9 OE was 34.62 times higher than that in PC9 NC, indicating that the upregulated expression of CEMIP facilitated resistance to gefitinib treatment. In contrast, knocking down the expression of CEMIP in PC9GR led to reduced IC50 value of gefitinib to 0.53-fold of that of PC9GR shNC, suggesting that downregulated CEMIP expression in AR cells could partially recover their sensitivity to gefitinib. In addition, re-expression of CEMIP assays (Supplemental Figs. S1A-C) indicated that CEMIP re-expression in PC9GR shCEMIP cells could restore gefitinib resistance, as both gefitinib IC50 values and cell viability were elevated compared to those in PC9GR shCEMIP cells.
In summary, up-regulated expression of CEMIP positively correlated to the gain of gefitinib resistance, indicating CEMIP possibly worked as vital factor in acuqisition of gefitinib resistance period.

3.2.

## CEMIP facilitated proliferation, migration and gefitinib resistance in vitro
Current literature indicates that CEMIP promotes chemoresistance and malignant tumour phenotypes in various cancers [ ]; therefore, we further determined whether CEMIP exhibited similar functions and elevated tolerance under gefitinib exposure. In accordance with other reports, the change in CEMIP expression positively correlated with the promotion of malignant phenotypes in terms of proliferation and migration ( A, B, and F-I). Because the IC50 value varied greatly, the gefitinib treatment were seted differently. As shown in A and B, short-term and long-term proliferation assays indicated that CEMIP overexpression promoted colony formation under both normal and gefitinib exposure conditions, whereas CEMIP knockdown showed downregulated cell proliferation and decreased their tolerance to gefitinib. When treating cells with 0.1 μM or 10 μM gefitinib, the morphological changes of cell death at a late stage, such as dramatic shrinkage, chromatin condensation, and cell edge retraction, and reduced cell counts were found in a majority of PC9 NC and PC9GR shCEMIP cells ( C). However, in PC9 OE and PC9GR shNC cells, less reduced cell counts and early-stage cell death changes (cytosolic vacuolisation and swelling) were observed ( C). Flow cytometry and PI/DAPI staining assays indicated that lower cell death rates and a reduced positive rate of PI staining were detected in PC9 OE and PC9GR shNC cells, compared to their counterparts, at different time points of gefitinib treatment ( D, and E). Moreover, CEMIP promoted cellular migration ability both with and without gefitinib treatment in PC9GR cells. As shown in F–I, the number of migrated cells increased when overexpressing CEMIP under normal and gefitinib treatment conditions. In contrast, knockdown of CEMIP in PC9GR cells rapidly decreased their migratory ability compared to that in shNC cells. These results revealed that CEMIP increased the tolerance of gefitinib, proliferative and migrated phenotypes of AR cells, relative high expression of CEMIP maintained these phenotypes in cells when exposed to gefitinib.
 
3.3.

## CEMIP and c-MYC exerted mutual reinforcement in developing gefitinib resistance
Research has demonstrated that c-MYC acts as a vital factor that is associated with drug resistance by regulating oncogene addiction genes [ , ]. Reportedly, c-MYC can target the promoter region of CEMIP and increase its transcriptional and protein levels [ ]. Firstly, the potential target site of c-MYC is located within the promoter region of CEMIP, spanning positions 1178–1189, which is predicted by using JASPER ( A, left panel). The luciferase activity results were significantly elevated when the CEMIP promoter wild-type plasmid (CEMIP-WT) was co-transfected with the c-MYC plasmid ( A, right panel). Based on the above results, we assumed that the up-regulated expression of CEMIP might be due to its increased transcriptional activitys by c-MYC regulation. Therefore, we performed rescue assays by modulating c-MYC expression to determine whether c-MYC can associate with CEMIP to gain gefitinib resistance. Western Blot and qPCR assays ( B and C) were applied to verify the transfection efficacy of downregulated c-MYC in PC9 OE or overexpressed c-MYC in PC9GR shCEMIP. Downregulation of c-MYC expression by si-MYC RNA reduced the expression of CEMIP and c-MYC at both the mRNA and protein levels, whereas upregulation of c-MYC expression by transfecting the full-length MYC plasmid significantly increased c-MYC expression in PC9GR shCEMIP cells. Regarding the change in gefitinib sensitivity, downregulated c-MYC expression in PC9 OE cells reduced the IC50 value of gefitinib, whereas upregulated c-MYC expression increased the IC50 value of gefitinib, compared to their counterparts ( D). The RI value of gefitinib in PC9 OE-siMYC was decreased compared to that of in PC9 OE cells (7.77 vs 3.37), while the RI value in PC9 shCEMIP- OEMYC was increased, compared to that of in PC9GR shCEMIP cells (0.53 vs 0.85). Under gefitinib exposure, cellular migration and viability ( E-H) were declined when c-MYC expression was downregulated in PC9 OE cells. In contrast, cell migration and viability increased when the expression of c-MYC was upregulated in PC9GR shCEMIP cells ( E-H). In summary, CEMIP expression might be transcriptionally regulated by c-MYC, and CEMIP associated with c-MYC to synergistically promote malignancy and the acquisition of gefitinib resistance in cells.
 
3.4.

## The direct interaction between CEMIP and c-MYC results in stabilizing the expression of the CEMIP/c-MYC complex and promoting EMT
Above data demonstrated that the expression of CEMIP and c-MYC showed a positive correlation, indicating that CEMIP might directly or indirectly interact with c-MYC. In this part, we focused on descripting the interaction of CEMIP and c-MYC, and the potential downstream regulation in promoting gefitinib resistance. The results of Co-IP assay ( A and B) showed that higher expression of CEMIP increased the binding amount of c-MYC, while downregulation of CEMIP expression reduced the binding amount of c-MYC, indicating that CEMIP could directly interact with c-MYC. Furthermore, C showed the binding effect of c-MYC was investigated when co-transfecting full length c-MYC plasmid with CEMIP truncated plasmid A (1–177aa domain) in HEK293t cells, but not in the other truncated plasmids B, C nor D. According to the hDock simulation, the potential interaction sites between CEMIP and c-MYC (lowest docking score of −469.52) basically were found in 20–70aa domain. D displayed a favorable state for the simulated structure of CEMIP/c-MYC complex. And then pymol was introduced to visualize the binding region, there were 7 hydrogen bonds between 20–70aa domain, with bond lengths ranging from 1.9–2.9 Å. In accordance with Co-IP results, these hydrogen bonds, involving several critical amino acid residues, collectively form the structural basis for the stable binding between CEMIP and MYC, supporting that CEMIP/c-MYC could form a complex within 1–177aa domain. In addition, the half-lives of CEMIP and c-MYC were longer in PC9GR cells than in PC9 cells under exposure to gefitinib ( E-G). CEMIP overexpression also extended the half-life of CEMIP and c-MYC in PC9 OE cells compared to that in PC9 NC cells, whereas CEMIP expression knockdown shortened the half-life of CEMIP and c-MYC in PC9GR shCEMIP compared to that in PC9GR shNC cells ( E-G).
 Numerous studies have reported that CEMIP, as a migration-inducing protein, usually induced chemo-resistance in tumor cells through promoting their epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [ , , ]. As shown in H, overexpressing CEMIP or c-MYC can promote cellular EMT transformation, as being displayed in up-regulating the mesenchymal markers, N-cadherin, Vimentin, and Twist1, to different extents, but down-regulated the expression of epithelial marker, E-cadherin in PC9 cells or PC9GR shCEMIP cells at mRNA level, respectively. While knocking down with CEMIP or c-MYC expression can reverse EMT in PC9GR cells or PC9 OE cells. The change in expression of EMT markers at protein level showed the similar trend as that of mRNA expression ( I). These results suggest that CEMIP and c-MYC might synergistically promote the EMT progression. Furthermore, the regulation of gefitinib resistance is likely attributed to CEMIP/c-MYC-mediated EMT progression, which mediates this process in a bidirectional manner.

3.5.

## CEMIP and c-MYC collaboratively promoted gefitinib resistance in vivo
Based on in vitro results, we established subcutaneous xenograft tumour model in nude mice as an in vivo model to determine whether CEMIP exhibited properties of resistance-driver genes during in vivo progression. Twenty male nude mice were used to establish the subcutaneous xenograft model via the injection of 106 cells in the left forelimb axilla ( A), followed by administering either gefitinib or PBS solution 5 days after injection. Among the solvent and gefitinib treatment groups, the size and weight of xenograft tumours in PC9GR shCEMIP groups showed a tendency to decrease compared to that of PC9GR shNC ( B and C). But in two PC9GR shNC groups, gefitinib treatment barely attenuated the subcutaneous xenograft in mice. D displayed the weight changes of individual mice varied little. As shown in E, morphological changes in tissue necrosis, such as structural collapse and increased cell death, were observed in the PC9GRshCEMIP groups after gefitinib treatment. F showed that the average score of Ki67 staining was higher in PC9GR shNC groups than in PC9GR shCEMIP groups, respectively. With regard to gefitinib treatment, the Ki-67 staining score was dramatically lower in PC9GR shCEMIP groups, but was relatively equal to that of PC9GR shNC when compared to their non-treated counterparts. G shows negative or weak positive TUNEL staining among the solvent treatment groups. Gefitinib treatment induced strong positive staining in PC9GR shCEMIP groups, but very weak positive staining in PC9GR shNC groups. In addition, as shown in H, the scores of CEMIP and c-MYC staining were higher in the PC9GR shNC groups, nevertherless treating with gefitinib or not. Both CEMIP and c-MYC staining scored lower scores in the PC9GR shCEMIP groups, compared to the PC9GR shNC solvent and their gefitinib treating counterparts, respectively. The in vivo results demonstrated that down-regulated CEMIP expression could slow down tumor growth and mildly recover the efficacy of gefitinib. These results from in vivo model suggest that CEMIP-induced gefitinib-AR progression might be associated with c-MYC regulation, and high expression of CEMIP/c-MYC sustained enhanced tumor growth and gefitinib tolenrance.
 To sum up, this study revealed that CEMIP and c-MYC may synergistically drive gefitinib resistance by promoting EMT progression to enhance cellular migration, wherein the molecular mechanism might rely on the formation of a CEMIP/c-MYC complex that mutually stabilized the expression of both proteins.

4.

## Discussion
Lung cancer is the most prevalent and lethal type of cancer worldwide. The annual incidence of lung cancer accounts for approximately 10 % of all cancers over the past few decades, but its mortality rate has nearly doubled [ ]. The high mortality rate maybe due to late diagnosis, as few symptoms alert the patients to seek medical intervention at an early stage [ , ]. The early stage of NSCLC can achieve a good prognosis if surgical treatment is a timely intervention, but a large proportion of lung cancer patients have already progressed to the advanced stage when diagnosed; therefore, therapeutic strategies mainly rely on chemotherapy or radiotherapy [ ]. According to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines, the predominant choice of chemotherapy relies on the histological and oncogenic subtypes of patients [ ]. LUAD with EGFR mutations is the most vulnerable subtype, particularly among Asian women without a history of smoking. Gefitinib intervention greatly improved the prognosis of LUAD patients with EGFR mutation; however, most patients who received gefitinib treatment invariably experienced AR, resulting in rapid progression and tumour relapse within 1 year [ ]. Once patients develop resistance to gefitinib, the choice of second-line treatment was guided by the different mechanisms of resistance [ ]. For patients harbouring ‘on-target’ types, second or third generation of EGFR-TKI are optimal, while those harbouring the ‘off-target’ types require cytotoxic therapy or other targeted reagents if the lead bypass activation factor is identified. Therefore, identifying the key factors underlying the resistance of LUAD cells to current chemotherapeutic agents has a great impact on subsequent therapeutic decisions [ ].
To verify the pervasiveness of the promotion of gefitinib resistance by the high expression of CEMIP, bioinformatics tools were approached to analyze the relationship between the co-expression of CEMIP and gefitinib resistance. At cell lines level ( H), the expression of CEMIP positively correlated to the IC50 value of gefitinb among 48 LUADs cell lines. Indeed, analyzing CEMIP and c-MYC expression in a large cohort of tumour tissues from individuals at both sensitive and resistant stages could provide the rigorous and solid evidence in aspect of how CEMIP/c-MYC complex promoted gefitinib resistance in LUAD. However, during gefitinib treatment, the evaluation of resistance relies on imaging examination rather than invasive biopsies to dynamically track the response of patients to chemotherapy. The main limitation is that the number of paired samples was very small from the retrospective collection, and it would have taken a long time to obtain a suitable number of samples from the prospective collection. As the development of chemoresistance is also one of the index for predicting poor prognosis in primary LUAD patients, the highly co-expression of CEMIP and c-MYC might indicate the relatively high possibility for developing gefitinib resistance in primary LUAD patients. In addition, we also explored that CEMIP and c-MYC were highly co-expressed in primary LUAD tissues (Supplmental Figs. S1D, S1E and S1H-J, Table S1), compared to their adjacent counterparts, and high expression of CEMIP and MYC was also associated with shorter overall survival (Supplmental Figs. S1F and S1G). Furthermore, the expression of CEMIP and c-MYC had positive co-relationship at the clinical level in LUADs (Supplmental Fig. S1K). Based on these clinical evidence, high expression of CEMIP and c-MYC tightly related to malignant progression of LUAD. These results suggest that LUAD patients with high expression of CEMIP and c-MYC may be more prone to developing resistance to gefitinib treatment.
Because of the difficulty in clinical sample collection, establishing a cellular model is fundamental for discovering the mechanisms of action of specific molecules and genes [ ]. Therefore, we first introduced incremental concentration screening to generate the gefitinib-AR cell line, PC9GR, from the sensitive strain PC9. Starting from low dose induction, this method mimicked the representative patients with LUAD who received long-term gefitinib treatment from recommended low dose to gradient increase in its concentration until the IC50 value of resistant intermediates exceeded 10 μM. This method, which could avoid colony formation by single cell during induction period, is widely used to cultivate AR cell lines. Another method, high-dose shock induction, was also approachable which was reported by Nishihara et al. [ ]. Once the intermediates-resistant cells survived in 1 μM gefitinib concentration, colony selection combined with single-cell sequencing and single nucleotide polymorphism sequencing analysis could further reveal the different substrains with specific oncogene mutations [ ]. The separation and purification of the gefitinib-AR substrain could provide an in vitro model for drug design of new targeted reagents and their validation. We also established an in vivo model to evaluate that the changes in CEMIP expression affect malignancy and gefitinib sensitivity. In mouse models, xenografts with higher CEMIP expression levels showed a relatively faster growth rate and reduced efficacy of gefitinib in shrinking tumor volume.
Since the first report that dysfunctional mutation of CEMIP caused hereditary hearing loss in adults, researchers from different fields have discovered that CEMIP is involved in HA degradation [ ], metastatic colonisation [ , ] and is an oncogene and adaptor protein [ ]. CEMIP is a macromolecular protein with complicated structure. CEMIP contains four types of vital domains: a G8 domain (44–166aa), two GG domains (176–317aa and 1227–1361aa), B domains (259–591aa), and four PbH1 domains (572–594aa, 595–617aa, 719–741aa, and 798–819aa). G8 domain was widely recognized as a protein-binding module that participated in the assembly of complexes or the regulation of signaling pathways [ , ] In CEMIP protein structure, G8 domain, located at 1–167aa region, interacted with other proteins to sustain tumour malignancy, HA enzyme activity, and signal transduction [ , ]. Zhang et al. reported that CEMIP degrades HA to induce rheumatoid arthritis owing to its adherence to annexin A1 (ANXA1) via its G8 domain [ ]. One of our authors recently reported that CEMIP promotes chemoresistance in SCLC cells by bridging SRC and YAP with G8 domains and GG domain respectively to form a CEMIP/SRC/YAP complex and increasing the nuclear translocation of YAP, thus maintaining relatively high transcriptional activity and chemoresistance [ ]. Thus, the G8 domain of CEMIP might exert a chemoresistance-promoting function through interactions with other factors. Similarly, the protein docking simulation indicated that the best interaction pocket located at 20–70aa domain, which further was identified the G8 domain of CEMIP as its binding region for c-MYC via using Co-IP assay. These researches together with our data indicated that the 1–177aa region of CEMIP might endow new potential in promoting chemo-resistance. In this study, we validated that: 1). c-MYC targeted the promoter region of CEMIP, and 2). manipulating the expression of c-MYC positively regulates the expression level of CEMIP, and 3). binding stabilisation of c-MYC by CEMIP, confirmed its transcription factor activity. Additionally, CEMIP overexpression upregulated the binding amount of c-MYC while extending the half-life of both CEMIP and c-MYC under exposure to gefitinib. The interaction between CEMIP and c-MYC, together with the extended half-lives of both proteins, suggests that the CEMIP/c-MYC complex stably persists in resistant cells. Indeed, our study has not been yet pinpointed the specific amino acid residues. In our future projects, precise identification of the binding position in the G8 domain will be performed using artificial intelligence prediction and plasmid harboring different point mutants.
A large proportion of patients with “off-target” resistance are different from each other since the driver genes vary widely, such as anaplastic lymphoma kinase, MET proto-oncogene, and rat sarcoma oncogene, and their complicated interactions occur over multiple downstream signalling pathways [ , ]. To date, several studies ( ) have revealed that CEMIP promotes chemoresistance towards both targeted reagents (sorafenib [ ], lenvatinib [ ], and selumetinib [ ]) and cytotoxic reagents (cisplatin [ ], paclitaxel [ ] and 5-Fluorouracil [ ]). Most of reports illustrated that CEMIP faciliated acquired chemoresistance through stabilizing oncogene expression, malignant characteristics and promoting EMT progression. Few studies have investigated the mechanism of action of CEMIP in promoting tumour cell resistance to EGFR-TKIs. In this study, our validation extended the chemoresistance promoter function of CEMIP and discussed how CEMIP associates with c-MYC to form a positive loop to induce acquisition of gefitinib. Besides, our results also found out that CEMIP/c-MYC promoted the EMT progression and cell migration, which also facilitated the acquisition of gefitinib resistance. Further research should be performed to determine whether the level of circulating CEMIP predicts the low response rate of gefitinib in patients with LUAD, and whether patients with high CEMIP expression in primary tumour tissue tend to develop chemoresistance. The design of novel reagents to inhibit the expression or accelerate the degradation of CEMIP might overcome the similar “off-target” type of gefitinib-AR in patients with LUAD.
 4.1.

## Conclusion
In this study, CEMIP may drive gefitinib resistance both in vivo and in vitro by promoting EMT progression to enhance cellular migration , which is facilitated by c-MYC. The underlying mechanism might involve CEMIP directly interacting with c-MYC via its 1–177aa domain to form CEMIP/c-MYC complex thereby potentially stabilizing the expression of both proteins. Taken together, the elevated CEMIP/c-MYC axis accelerates EMT and migration, thereby contributing to the acquisition and maintenance of gefitinib resistance in LUAD.

## Ethics statement
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the guidelines for the ethical review of animal welfare (GB/T35892–2018 & NC3Rs (2017) Non-human primate accommodation, care and use, 2nd edition.). This study was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Guangxi Institute of Chinese Medicine & Pharmaceutical Science (NO. 2024062101).

## Funding
This study was funded by the Project of central government guided local funds for scientific and technological development, Free orientation subclass - fundamental research (GKZY23055029), National Natural Science Foundation of China (82460790, 82460786), Guangxi Training Program for Promising Young Professionals in Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangxi Key Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Quality Standards Independent Research Project (ZZZZ2024010) and the Guangxi Traditional Chinese Medicine Key Discipline Construction Project (GZXK-Z-20–75).

## CRediT authorship contribution statement
Li Li: Writing – original draft, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Jiaxiu Xie: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis. Jinxing Liang: Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis. Hua Su: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Methodology, Data curation. Xiaoju Shen: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Xiaoxiang Mo: Writing – review & editing, Resources. Xinli Lin: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Investigation. Weidan Tan: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Investigation. Kun Wu: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Investigation. Fucui Zhu: Writing – review & editing, Methodology. Li Wang: Writing – review & editing, Resources, Investigation. Ying Liu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

## Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

## Acknowledgments
We express our sincere gratitude to Prof. Hou Huaxin, Prof. Wei Guining and the members of their research teams who provided countless help during experiment process.

## Footnotes
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.bbadva.2025.100176.

## Contributor Information
Li Li, Email: lili@stu.gxmu.edu.cn.
Ying Liu, Email: liuying@gicmp.ac.cn.

Appendix.

## Supplementary materials

Image, application 1

## Data availability
Data will be made available on request.

## References
 

## Associated Data

## Supplementary Materials
Image, application 1

## Data Availability Statement
Data will be made available on request.